ies p THE DEVELOPMENT
=o Fil OTAL WARFARE
: ete — ~ SARAJEVO
STO, HIROSHIMA


E as: P. VEALE


e w a


ADVANCE TO
BARBARISM


The Development of Total Warfare From Serajevo to
Hiroshima


by F.J.P. Veale


PROFESSOR HARRY ELMER BARNES


A TIRELESS EXPOSER OF HISTORICAL MYTHS


Contents


Foreword by The Very Rev. William Ralph
Inge Foreword by The Rt. Hon. Lord Hankey
Author’s Introduction

Chapter


Primeval Simplicity

Organized Warfare

Europe’s Civil Wars

“Civilized Warfare” (The First Phase)


“Civilized Warfare” (The Second Phase)
The Splendid Decision

The Nuremberg Trials

The Last Phase

Postscript

10. Bibliography

11. Index


er ey ot


The Devin-Adair Company, New York 1968 Copyright ©


F. J. P. Veale, 1953, 1968


Note: An earlier version of this book was printed by the C. C. Nelson Company in 1953. The present
edition is an extensive revision of that text.


“Civilized Warfare” (The Second Phase)
The Splendid Decision

The Nuremberg Trials

The Last Phase

Postscript

10. Bibliography

11. Index


SA i ON yI


The Devin-Adair Company, New York 1968 Copyright ©


F. J. P. Veale, 1953, 1968


Note: An earlier version of this book was printed by the C. C. Nelson Company in 1953. The present
edition is an extensive revision of that text.


FOREWORD
By The Very Rev. William Ralph Inge, Dean of St. Paul’s


An early version of this book was first published in England in 1948. A second
revised and greatly enlarged version appeared in the United States in 1953.
This version was then translated into German and published in Hamburg in
1954; and a second edition was published in Wiesbaden in 1962. The present
edition is a major revision of the earlier versions.


I am glad that a new edition of Advance to Barbarism is called for. In this
book, first published in England in 1948 under the nom de plume “A. Jurist”,
the author, Mr. F. J. P. Veale, said, and said very well, what needed to be said
by someone, and, we may add, what in 1948 in most countries nobody would
have been allowed to say.


I disliked the Nuremberg Trials for three reasons: First, trials of the
vanquished by the victors are never satisfactory and are generally unfair.
Secondly, the execution of the political and military leaders of a beaten side by
the victors sets a most dangerous precedent. The Germans were certainly
guilty of “crimes against humanity”; but war is not a humane business and it
would always be possible for the victors in any way to find enough examples
of atrocities to justify vindictive punishments. After the next war, if there is
one, trials and hangings will follow as a matter of course. We may go further.
One of the indictments of the German leaders was not that they waged war
inhumanly, but that they made war aggressively. They did; they desired large
annexations of territory in the East. But have we not heard of other nations
who have acquired extensive empires without consulting the wishes of the
inhabitants? Thirdly, one of the judges—Russia— ought certainly to have
been in the dock and not on the bench.


The main object of Advance to Barbarism is to call attention to the terrible
retrogression of civilized humanity towards the worst cruelties of barbarism.
The so-called Wars of Religion were sometimes savage, but in the eighteenth
century it was possible to talk of civilized warfare, in which certain humane
conventions were observed. Gibbon notices this advance in decent behaviour
with complacency. A writer in the eighteenth century might reasonably speak


of war as a relic of barbarism which might soon be abolished altogether. The
Napoleonic Wars, except the guerilla fighting in Spain, were not fertile in
atrocities; the decadence came later.


I comforted myself at one time by thinking that these horrors were confined to
three nations, Germany, Spain and Russia. Nothing can be said to extenuate
the excesses practised by the Germans. The only fair questions were, who were
the culprits? and who ought to be the judges? It is not usual to hang officers for
obeying cruel orders. The citizens in a police state in abdicating their rights as
men have ceased to admit the duty of obeying conscience. As for Spain, it is
high time to resume friendly relations with a noble people. But it must be
admitted that there is a strain of cruelty in the Spanish character. In the country
of the Inquisition and the bull-ring, civil war was not likely to be gentle. In
speaking of Russia, one cannot do better than quote what Amiel, whose
perspicacity is never at fault, wrote as early as 1856: “The harsh gifts of late
have left their stamp on the race of the Muscovites. A certain sombre
obstinacy, a sort of primitive ferocity, a background of savage harshness,
which under the sway of circumstances might become implacable and even
ruthless, a coldly indomitable force that would rather wreck the world than
yield, the indestructible instinct of the barbarian horde still persisting in a half-
civilized nation.... What terrible masters would the Russians be if ever they
should spread the might of their rule over the southern countries! A polar
despotism, a tyranny such as the world has not yet known, silent as the
darkness, keen as ice, unfeeling as bronze, a slavery without compensation or
relief.”


Perhaps in times to come, not so far distant, it may not be so readily forgotten
that this was the enemy against whom the Germans fought.


But are there only three culprits, two of whom may plead some excuse? What
of the destruction of Hiroshima by the Americans, of Dresden by the British,
when the war was practically over? It is not pleasant to think of these things.


We must not speak too positively of retrogression. There was another side to
European humanity before the insanity of nationalism. In dealing with
“inferior races” the record was not good. The Irish have not forgotten the
Tudors and Oliver Cromwell. Or listen to this horrible extract from the Daily


Journal of March 1737: “They write from Antigua that they continued
executing the Negroes concerned in the plot to murder all the inhabitants of
the island: sixty-nine had been executed, of whom five had been broken on the
wheel, six were hung upon gibbets and starved to death, of whom one lived
nine nights and eight days and fifty-eight were chained to stakes and burnt.”
Or think of the tortures inflicted on the assailant of Louis XV, which were
gleefully witnessed by at least one English gentleman. Our ancestors were not
all saints.


Some of us hope that now that war has been divested of all romance and
chivalry, it may soon go the way of cannibalism and human sacrifice. It is a
matter of life or death for civilization.


W. R. INGE 26th
March 1951.


Journal of March 1737: “They write from Antigua that they continued
executing the Negroes concerned in the plot to murder all the inhabitants of
the island: sixty-nine had been executed, of whom five had been broken on the
wheel, six were hung upon gibbets and starved to death, of whom one lived
nine nights and eight days and fifty-eight were chained to stakes and burnt.”
Or think of the tortures inflicted on the assailant of Louis XV, which were
gleefully witnessed by at least one English gentleman. Our ancestors were not
all saints.


Some of us hope that now that war has been divested of all romance and
chivalry, it may soon go the way of cannibalism and human sacrifice. It is a
matter of life or death for civilization.


W. R. INGE 26th
March 1951.


FOREWORD


By The Rt. Hon. Lord Hankey, P.C., G.C.B., G.C.M.G., G.C.V.O.


In the Introduction of my book, Politics: Trials and Errors, published in 1950,
I wrote, “I am indebted for inspiration and suggestion to Advance to
Barbarism by F. J. P. Veale who wrote as “A. Jurist”; it displays great
knowledge of the military art and profound research into the historical aspects
of all that relates to War Crime Trials.”


Advance to Barbarism was first published in England in 1948. It was a
noteworthy little book because it dealt for the first time with such then recent
innovations as the indiscriminate bombing of civilian populations and the trial
of prisoners of war by their captors as symptoms of a world-wide development
which had begun in 1914.


At the time of its publication this point of view was considered so wilfully
perverse that no British newspaper with a national circulation would review
this book.


Fortunately, however, this book did not pass unnoticed. Among those who
praised it was the Very Rev. William Ralph Inge, formerly Dean of St. Paul’s,
who later contributed a Foreword to the revised and greatly enlarged Edition
which was published in the United States in 1953. This American edition was
translated into Spanish and published in Spain under the title “El Crimen de
Nuremberg” in 1954, and later in the same year into German and published in
Germany under the title “Der Barbarei entgegen”.


Since the publication of the first edition in 1948 many new facts have come to
light and public opinion has changed. Few now maintain that an accuser is a fit
person to act as judge of his own charges, in fact many now remember that
they were always opposed to the Nuremberg Trials, although they omitted to
make public their opinion at the time. The publication of The Strategic Air
Offensive against Germany, 1939-45 by H.M. Stationery Office in September
1961 confirmed officially with a wealth of detail the view expressed in this
book concerning the character of the air attack on Germany during the Second
World War.


I recommend this new edition to the reader.


HANKEY, 7th February 1962


I recommend this new edition to the reader.


HANKEY, 7th February 1962


AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION


Tardily professional historians have at last begun to realise that the events of
the first half of the 20th century have presented them with a problem of unique
difficulty.


From the first it was apparent that 1914 was certain to be a memorable date in
history because in that year began a war in which a vast number would be
doomed to die violent deaths and which would certainly lead to sweeping
changes to the map of Europe if only for the worse. For a decade historians
limited themselves to investigating the origins of this struggle which they
explained to their own satisfaction by attributing it to the chance that Germany
was ruled by an emperor who was obsessed by an insane ambition to conquer
the world. From patriotic motives, at first to assist the war effort and later to
justify the dictated terms of peace, professional historians, many of them men
of great eminence and learning, laboured to confirm and endorse the Wicked
Kaiser Myth. Once however this had been exposed as an impudent propaganda
fiction, they failed to find any generally acceptable explanation for the blind
homicidal frenzy which seized the nations of Europe during the period, 1914-
1918, and ultimately they became resigned to leaving the problem for solution
to the psychologists and psychiatrists. Thus the First World War came to be
regarded as a bizarre episode of history, mainly of significance as a grim
warning to posterity of the consequences of allowing greed and pugnacity to
overcome reason.


The conclusion that the great struggle which broke out in Europe in 1914
resulted from a pathological wave of hysteria which afflicted the most
advanced nations of mankind in that year is now held up for admiration as the
most remarkable achievement of modern historical research. But this diagnosis
was first put forward over thirty years ago by Field- Marshal Lord Allenby
who bluntly declared, “The Great War was a lengthy period of general
insanity.” The view that the beginning of this struggle in 1914 and still more
that its continuation after 1916 were essentially the result of an irrational and
compulsive urge was accepted as self-evident and undeniable throughout the
thirty-nine weekly televised programmes entitled ‘The Great War’ broadcast
by the B.B.C. in 1965.


Not until after 1939 when another world war broke out, rendered inevitable by
the terms of peace imposed on the vanquished after the First World War, was
it realised how profound were the effects which the latter struggle had had on
the character, outlook and ethics of the average Western civilized man. Since
the times when the Dark Ages had gradually evolved into the Middle Ages,
the story of civilization in Europe had been one of slow but steady upward
progress. The advance of civilization apart from occasional fluctuations
remained continuous until the beginning of the 20th century, by which time it
had come to be regarded as an established law of nature that progress was an
automatic process of unending duration. As the late Dean Inge observed, belief
in Progress became a kind of religion with most educated men. Apart from the
steady accumulation of scientific knowledge, arbitrary violence had gradually
become controlled by the rule of law, manners had become milder and in
warfare primitive savagery had become modified by the tacit adoption at the
end of the 17th century of an unwritten code of restrictions and restraints
which later codified at the conventions of Geneva and the Hague, became
known as the Rules of Civilized Warfare. The fundamental principle of this
code was that hostilities should be restricted to the armed and uniformed
forces of the combatants, from which followed the corollary that civilians
must be left entirely outside the scope of military operations. It was widely
believed that war, being an essentially barbarous method of settling
international disputes, was bound ultimately to die out. With seemingly full
justification the outlook at the beginning of the 20th century was one of
unclouded optimism.


As early as 1770, by which time the horrors of the Thirty Years War had
become generally forgotten, the Comte de Guibert could express the already
prevailing complacency by writing:—


“Today the whole of Europe is civilized. Wars have become less cruel. Save
in combat no blood is shed; prisoners are respected; towns are no more
destroyed; the countryside is no more ravaged; conquered peoples are only
obliged to pay some sort of contributions which are often less than the taxes
they pay to their own sovereign.”


In the 19th century this happy state of affairs was taken for granted: no one
dreamed that it would shortly come to an abrupt end. To us it seems


Ffantactinally; anranl nas that nricnnnre nf ura, nrn fannd wurith tha nenacnact af


idlitaouictally ULILTAL, HUW LLIGL PLisVvLelys UL Wdl dLE 1ACCU WILL UIC PLUYSpPCee UL
being subjected to war-crimes trials at the pleasure of their captors, or of being
sent to work indefinitely as slave labour; towns with their inhabitants are
obliterated by terror bombing; conquered peoples are uprooted from their
homelands and mass-deported abroad; and the property of the vanquished is
either appropriated as a matter of course by the victors or systematically
destroyed.


The war which broke out in Europe in 1914 seemed at first indistinguishable
from the civil wars which previously had periodically devastated that
continent. During the struggle, however, quite unforeseen by any one,
civilization began a retrograde movement without a parallel in history. While
the struggle lasted this retrograde movement was not generally perceived but
after the wave of optimism generated by the creation of the League of Nations
had faded, the realization dawned that somehow the times had become out of
joint. Working below the surface a profound psychological change had been
taking place. Many of the men then living in obscurity who in the next decade
were to rise to power and fame—for example Yagoda, Stalin’s chief of the
G.P.U. during the Great Purge, Heinrich Himmler, the S.S. leader, and Adolf
Eichmann, the organiser of systematic genocide—might have been
reincarnations of men who had flourished in the times of the Merovingian
Kings. Even the outlook of so irreproachable a character as Air Marshal Sir
Hugh Trenchard with his then novel recipe for victory— “bomb the enemy
civilian population until they surrender”—was nearer akin to that of an
Iroquois war chief than to that of a professional European soldier of the 19th
century.


Hardly perceptible for twenty-one years, when hostilities were resumed in
1939 the reversion to primitive practices in warfare soon became headlong
until at last all pretence of complying with the Rules of Civilized Warfare was
abandoned and both sides tacitly adopted the principle that any act was
justifiable if it held out even a remote hope that it might stave off the frightful
consequences of defeat.


An explanation is clearly needed to account for the fact that governments
composed of educated men, reared in the 19th century and brought up to
accept as a matter of course the standards of conduct then accepted by
everyone, should have so quickly and easily overcome their natural


repugnance and adopted and carried out such enormities as the systematic
extermination of a defenceless minority on account of its racial Origin, the
mass-deportation of enemy populations numbering millions, and the
deliberate slaughter of enemy civilians by terror bombing in order to generate
among the survivors a disposition to surrender unconditionally.


It was many years after hostilities had ceased in 1945 before historians
realized that this problem existed. In Germany the thinking powers of
historians were for long paralysed by the ruthless brainwashing to which they
with the rest of their countrymen were subjected in 1945 to force them to
accept the propaganda fictions of the victors. In Britain and the United States
historians were so preoccupied investigating the crimes against humanity
committed by the vanquished that they overlooked the background of
concentrated terror bombing against which these crimes had been committed.
They failed to realize that genocide and terror bombing were not isolated
phenomena but symptoms of the same retrograde movement which had
mysteriously overtaken Western civilization.


It is commonly assumed that genocide and terror bombing were accepted
respectively by the governments of Germany and Britain without protest or
opposition from those they ruled who, it is assumed, were as completely
subject to the spirit of the times as their rulers. The facts as now disclosed do
not support either assumption but the subject remains uninvestigated.


Taking first the case of Germany, a strict censorship enforced by drastic
penalties controlled the publication of news and the expression of opinion. It is
impossible to determine the number of those who expressed opposition to the
regime as any who so ventured came to an untimely end. One cannot protest
effectively in secret and to protest publicly was equivalent to suicide. It is
doubtful also whether any specific information was available concerning what
was taking place behind barbed wire in the concentration camps, most of
which were in remote occupied territory, inaccessible to civilians. It has been
contended that it would have been impossible to put to death millions of
persons without some facts about it becoming generally known. Estimates of
the number of victims vary from ten millions to less than a quarter of a
million, and the larger the estimate accepted the stronger this contention
becomes. It will always be a subject for regret that the victorious Allies did not


put the question beyond dispute by appointing in 1945 a commission
composed of impartial judges selected from neutral countries to investigate the
facts. The findings of such a body would have been accepted by posterity as
final. The Allies however deliberately rejected this obvious course. The
findings of the Nuremberg Tribunal are of course worthless: a court which
convicted Admiral Dönitz against whom the prosecution had failed to produce
even the shadow of a prima facie case was clearly incapable of disposing even
of the simplest problem. After the kidnapping of Adolf Eichmann in 1961
another opportunity arose to dispose of this question by an enquiry by an
impartial tribunal. Once again this course was emphatically rejected, a fact
which in itself is highly significant. It remains therefore impossible to say with
confidence whether the German people consented without protest to the
departures from civilized standards, by its rulers during the Second World
War.


Recently indeed several books have appeared disclosing that throughout the
war there was an active underground resistance movement in Germany.
Those who participated however seem to have been mainly political rivals of
Hitler, jealous of his rise to power and intent on bringing about the downfall
of his regime so as to be able to replace it by a regime of their own. His
crimes against humanity do not seem to have greatly concerned them.


The situation in Britain was very different. There was no official prohibition
on expressions of opinion as such, but persons who ventured to express
opinions which the authorities deemed might hamper the war effort were put in
prison without a trial or even without a specific complaint against them. With
regard to the bombing of the enemy civilian population, everyone knew that
civilians in Germany were being slaughtered wholesale but it was believed that
this was an unavoidable by-product of an air offensive against military
objectives. The comforting reflection was accepted that the German civilian
population could at any moment bring its sufferings to an end by surrendering
unconditionally.


It would not indeed be correct to say that what was officially termed “the
strategic bombing offensive” was carried out to the last day of the war without
opposition, protest or misgivings. Questions were asked in Parliament as to
the character of this air offensive which were fully reported in the Press with


the answers given. Certainly it cannot be said that the Ministers of the Crown
upon whom fell the duty of answering these questions, resorted to evasion or
equivocation. In accordance with the British tradition they kept a stiff upper
lip and gave clear and emphatic replies, without any signs of embarrassment
such as might have been expected from them having regard to the fact that as
recently as March 1942 Mr. Churchill’s War Cabinet had accepted the plan
laid before it by Professor Lindemann by which ‘top priority’ as an objective
for air attack was in future to be given to “working-class houses in densely
populated residential areas.”


This decision of the War Cabinet was kept a closely guarded secret from the
British public for nearly twenty years until it was unobtrusively revealed in
1961 in a little book entitled Science and Government by the physicist and
novelist, Sir Charles Snow, in which occurred the following oft-quoted
passage which was immediately translated and published in every language in
the world:


“Early in 1942 Professor Lindemann, by this time Lord Cherwell and a
member of the Cabinet, laid a cabinet paper before the Cabinet on the strategic
bombing of Germany. It described in quantitative terms the effect on Germany
of a British bombing offensive in the next eighteen months (approximately
March 1943-September 1943). The paper laid down a strategic policy. The
bombing must be directed essentially against German working-class houses.
Middle-class houses have too much space round them and so are bound to
waste bombs; factories and “military objectives” had long since been
forgotten, except in official bulletins, since they were much too difficult to find
and hit. The paper claimed that—given a total concentration of effort on the
production and use of aircraft— it would be possible, in all the larger towns of
Germany (that is, those with more than 50,000 inhabitants), to destroy 50 per
cent of all houses.” (Pages 47-48).


Terror bombing as proposed in the Lindemann Plan was a novelty in warfare
rendered possible by the conquest of the air during the first two decades of the
20th century.

Genocide, on the other hand, was only the revival of an ancient practice, once
probably worldwide, which had long been abandoned in Europe and which
barely survived, in company with cannibalism, among the savages of Africa. It


han narran nnamnannler haan nnntandad Aer anerann that nithan nnnananida nn tarnas


Ha’ HEVEL SELIUUSLY VEEL! CULILEHIUCU DY dGILYULIE Uldt CLUE PEMULIUE UL LELLUL
bombing were in accordance with the moral standards accepted at the time by
all civilized peoples.


We do not know what were the thoughts in private of Hitler’s colleagues
concerning his “final solution of the Jewish Problem.” Some of them surely
must have found it at least disturbing that the Führer should have recourse to a
practice which had only recently been stamped out in Africa by European
Colonialism as the first step towards introducing civilization into that
continent.


We know however that the members of the British War Cabinet who accepted
the Lindemann Plan fully realized its enormity because concurrently with its
acceptance it was decided that on no account must any inkling of its terms
reach the public. The following extracts from the parliamentary reports of
Hansard are set out verbatim here immediately after the passage quoted above,
not to suggest that British politicians are exceptionally mendacious—
politicians whatever their nationality have never been renowned for veracity—
but to establish that those responsible for the acceptance of the Lindemann
Plan were conscious of a feeling of guilt. They instructed those entrusted with
the task of answering questions on the subject to give emphatic and
unambiguous denials designed to stifle all further enquiries, as the following
passages from Hansard show.

Some or indeed most of them may have replied in the innocence of their hearts
without personal knowledge of the truth but credulously believing what they
were told by their departments.


On the 11th March, 1943 (a year after the acceptance of the Lindemann Plan)
in the House of Commons, Mr. Montague, a Labour Member, having
expressed the hope that our air raids on Germany were still being
concentrated, as he believed they were, on military and industrial objectives,
Captain Harold Balfour, Under-Secretary for Air, replied that he could give
the House “an assurance that our objectives in bombing the enemy were
industries, transport and war potential. There is no change in our policy. We
were not bombing women and children wantonly for the sake of so doing. It is
not for us to turn back. If innocent people, women and children suffer in the
execution of our policy in Germany the remedy lies with the German men and
women themselves.” (Hansard, 12 March 1943.)


On the 30th March, 1943, in reply to the Labour Member, Richard Stokes, the
Secretary for Air, Sir Archibald Sinclair, replied blandly that, “The targets of
Bomber Command are always military but night-bombing of military
objectives necessarily involves bombing the area in which these are situated.”
(Hansard, 31 March, 1943.)


On the 9th February, 1944, in the House of Lords, Dr. Bell, the Bishop of
Chichester, in a memorable speech demanded a statement of the Government’s
policy “in regard to the bombing of enemy towns with special reference to the
effect of such bombing on civilian life.” Viscount Cranbourne, Secretary of
State for Dominion Affairs, replied for the Government that he was “very ready
to give an assurance that the aim of our intensive attacks on German cities was
to hamper and, if possible, to bring to a standstill enemy war production and no
aimlessly to sprinkle bombs with the object of spreading damage among the
enemy population. The R.A.F. had never indulged in purely terror raids.”
(Hansard, 10 February, 1944.)


The last and most illuminating debate on the subject of terror bombing took
place in the House of Commons on the 6th March, 1945, only three weeks
after the ghastly mass air raid on Dresden on the 13th February, 1945.


This debate was initiated by the irrepressible Richard Stokes who demanded to
be told the truth concerning an authorised report, issued regarding this raid by
the Associated Press Correspondent from Supreme Allied Headquarters in
Paris which gloatingly described “this unprecedented assault in daylight on the
refugee-crowded capital, fleeing from the Russian tide in the East,” and
declared it showed that “the long-awaited decision had been taken to adopt
deliberate terror-bombing of German populated centres as a ruthless expedient
to hasten Hitler’s doom.”


Mr. Stokes began by reading this report which he reminded the House had
been widely published in America and had been broadcast by Paris Radio. In
Britain on the morning of the 17th February it had been released by the
Censor but in the evening of that day it had been suppressed from publication,
presumably as a result of the indignant protests which it had aroused.


We - (Oe 2 Vee te eae I a AR, EEES -SERTE Os a ee EEA E E E E Se ea SB eS TS


MIT. STOKeS insisted ON DEMME Ola, “1S terror DOMDINE Now part OF Our pouicys
Why is it that the people of this country who are supposed to be responsible
for what is going on, the only people who may not know what is being done in
their name? On the other hand, if terror bombing be not part of our policy,
why was this statement put out at all? I think we shall live to rue the day we
did this, and that it (the air raid on Dresden) will stand for all time as a blot on
our escutcheon.”


Here a private member, Rear-Admiral Sir Murray Sueter, interposed with the
fatuous observation that “all targets are very carefully planned by the Bombing
Committee. The Committee go into each target which is of military

_ importance, necessitating the carrying out of this bombing.”


Commander Brabner, Joint Under-Secretary for Air, then spoke on behalf of
the Government. “May I conclude on a note of denial,” he observed
apologetically. “The report which has just been read stated that the Allied
Commanders had adopted a policy of terror bombing. This is absolutely not
so. This has now been denied by Supreme Allied Headquarters and I should
like to have an opportunity of denying it here. We are not wasting our
bombers or time on purely terror tactics. Our job is to destroy the enemy. It
does not do the Hon. Member justice to come to this House and try to suggest
that there are a lot of Air Marshals or pilots or anyone else sitting in a room
trying to think of how many German women and children they can kill. We
are concentrating on war targets, and we intend to remain concentrated on
them until Germany gives up.”


Quite unabashed by this expression of official disapproval, Mr. Stokes asked
two supplementary questions, “If the report issued with the authority of Allied
Headquarters in Paris was untrue, why when protest was made against it was
this not stated at once, and why was it said at first that it was impossible to
suppress a report approved by Allied Headquarters stating its official policy,
although in fact it was immediately afterwards suppressed?”


Sir Archibald Sinclair, the Secretary for Air, had pointedly left the House
when Mr. Stokes began to read this report so imprudently approved by
Supreme Headquarters in Paris. No doubt by this time he knew the contents of
this compromising production by heart. Realising that Commander Brabner’s


rambling evasions of the questions put to him, instead of disposing of them,

would be more likely to arouse curiosity as to the truth and so lead to further
enquiries, he decided to dispose of the subject finally himself. “This report,”
be declared, “is certainly not true. The Hon. Member can take that from me.

How it was handled, what newspapers published it, and whether publication
was authorised, are matters which the Hon. Member had better discuss with

the Ministry of Information.” (Hansard, March 7th, 1945.)


In passing it may be noted that this denial was in a sense true. No decision,
long-awaited, had just been reached to adopt deliberate terror bombing of
German main centres of population. The decision to do this had been reached
three years before when in March 1942 the Lindemann Plan was accepted by
the British War Cabinet. Ever since then it had been ruthlessly carried into
effect: the Dresden massacre was merely the culmination of this policy.


Referring to the above quoted report issued from Allied Headquarters, the
subject of the above debate, David Irving in his book, The Destruction of
Dresden, published in 1963, observes complacently, “What might be termed the
‘mask’ of the Allied Bomber commands for one extraordinary moment appears
to have slipped.” It was however only a brief moment. “The debate on the 6th
March, 1945,” he writes proudly, “was the last wartime debate on Bomber
Command’s policy: the British Government was able to preserve its secret from
the day when the first area raid had been launched on Mannheim, the 16th
December, 1940, right up to the end of the war.”


The apparent indifference of the British public to the adoption of terror
bombing as a method of waging war may be explained by the fact that the
emphatic denials of the Ministers of the Crown were almost universally
accepted as true. Officially this problem did not exist, hence the public apathy
which certainly contrasts strangely with the frenzied moral indignation
professed in Britain and elsewhere in 1966 when the Americans began to
bomb communist troop concentrations, oil depots and ammunition dumps in
Vietnam on the ground that bombs which missed their mark might endanger
civilian life. The distinction between these cases is that the outcry in 1966 was
perhaps more an expression of anti-American feeling than of a humanitarian
regard for human life. In 1945 the death of German civilians troubled few
people in Britain simply because the victims were Germans.


to


—


Be this as it may, the worldwide outcry of 1966 certainly tends to support the
view that Winston Churchill and his colleagues were justified in fearing in
1942 that if the terms of the Lindemann Plan were made known to the public,
an outcry, similar to that which arose in 1966, was to be expected.


Long afterwards in 1961 H.M. Stationery Office described in four volumes
with a wealth of horrifying details the terror bombing offensive against
Germany carried out from March 1942 to May 1945 in accordance with the
Lindemann Plan.


Immediately after hostilities had ceased in 1945, various aspects of the Second
World War began to be subjected in print to unqualified condemnation. With
regard to terror bombing, the eminent military critic, Captain Liddell Hart, in a
little book entitled The Evolution of Warfare, published in 1946, declared that
victory had been achieved “through practising the most uncivilized means of
warfare that the world had known since the Mongol devastations.” Adverse
criticism was at first mainly directed to the adoption of the novel system of
‘war-crimes trials’ as a method of disposing of enemy prisoners of war.
Widely reported with gusto in the Press these so-called trials were soon in
progress all over Europe and in the Far East. With regard to them therefore no
question arises, as in the cases of genocide and terror bombing, whether an
innocent public was kept in ignorance of what was happening. It cannot be
denied that this particular reversion to barbarism was accepted by the public
with astonishingly few misgivings.


Nevertheless there were occasional faint and disregarded protests. A booklet
written by the present author twenty years ago provides the core of this book.
Much of it is reproduced here in the same words in which it was written except
that what was then put forward as daring and, in the opinion of most people,
perverse speculation, is here stated as undeniable and long established fact.
This booklet was published in 1948 under the pseudonym ‘A. Jurist’, under the
title Advance to Barbarism. The word “Advance” was chosen in preference to
“Retreat” or “Reversion” in deference to the belief, then still widely held, that
progress was an unending and automatic process, from its essential nature
advancing ever upwards. It was the first book which attempted to deal with the
retrograde movement into which civilization entered in 1914, of which terror


bombing, genocide and war-crimes trials were the principal symptoms, as a
single phenomenon.

From the lack of authoritative information available, much of this booklet
consisted of speculations. In 1948 no one had ever heard of the Lindemann
Plan, or for that matter of Lindemann himself except as a professor of physics
who was known to be an adviser of Mr. Churchill on scientific subjects.
Terror bombing was not a recognised term since officially it had never taken
place. The term used in this booklet was “indiscriminate bombing” which
means of course something quite different: terror bombing was not
indiscriminate, being directed, as we now know, against working-class
houses. With regard to war-crimes trials, the present author briefly pointed
out the objections to trials in which the accusers of a prisoner of war acted as
judges of their own charges, objections which were as obvious in 1948 as
they are now.


This little book is cited here as an example of a small group of books
published within a few years of the end of hostilities in 1945 which prove that
the main features of the retrograde movement which had begun in 1914 were
not accepted entirely with out opposition or comment as is so generally
believed. Probably numerous similar books were written at the same time
which failed to find publishers bold enough to defy the rigid taboo then in
force on all mention of the subjects with which they dealt.


Outstanding among the few books fortunate enough to find publishers
immediately after the War was a little book entitled Epitaph on Nuremberg,
by the influential man of letters, Montgomery Belgion, in which for the first
time were examined the flimsy arguments put forward to justify the trial at
Nuremberg of the captured leaders of the vanquished side. To this day this
book, published in 1946, remains one of the most outspoken and boldest
examinations of the nature of the Nuremberg Trials. After a brief but lucid
outline of the circumstances leading up to the decision at the Yalta Conference
to adopt an entirely novel method of disposing of captured enemy leaders, and
a careful analysis of the legal principles involved, the author found himself
driven to the conclusion that the Nuremberg Trials were not inspired by any
overwhelming passion for justice and by a righteous determination that crime
should not escape punishment. In essence, he pointed out, a trial is a means by
which an existing law is enforced, and that at Nuremberg there was no


existing law to enforce. The Tribunal merely invented the law as it proceeded
and adjudicated accordingly. “The hands may have been the hands of Justice,”
Mr. Montgomery Belgion wrote, “but the voice was Propaganda’s voice.” In
short, the purpose of the trials was purely political. “The giving of a delusive
appearance that Germany had caused the War,” he declared, “was an act of
high policy which the Tribunal was entrusted to perform when it was given
the job of passing sentence on most of the accused.” (Page 86.) It had soon
been recognised, he pointed out, that “Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles
which declared Germany solely guilty for the First World War had neither
moral weight nor judicial validity,” and so the victors of the Second World
War decided to hold trials of the vanquished that would, they hoped,
conclusively establish for all time Germany’s guilt. “That”, he submitted,
“was the real object of the Nuremberg Trial; it was a gigantic ‘put up show’, a
gigantic piece of propaganda.” (Page 88.) “The Trial was decked out to look
like an authentic judicial process: the victors showed a really astonishing
contempt for justice and truth and a really pathetic faith in sophistry.” (Page
74.)


The conclusions of the author of this little book are remarkable if only because
it was published three years before these conclusions were confirmed beyond
any possible doubt by the publication in 1949 by the U.S. State Department of
the short hand transcript of the deliberations held in London in 1945 to make
arrangements for the so- called trials in Nuremberg during which General
Nikitchenko, who later acted as one of the two Russian judges on the Tribunal,
clearly disclosed the real nature of the trials. “We are dealing here,” General
Nikitchenko declared, “with the chief war criminals who have already been
convicted and whose conviction has already been announced at both the
Moscow and Yalta Conferences by the heads of State.... The fact that the Nazi
leaders are criminals has already been established. The task of the Tribunal is
only to determine the measure of guilt of each particular person and to mete
out the necessary punishment.”


The publication of such books as Epitaph on Nuremberg and Advance to
Barbarism within a few years of the end of hostilities proves conclusively that
the reversion to barbarism which began in 1914 and reached its culmination in
1946 was not accepted entirely without at least some opposition or protest as
is so commonly believed.


It must be admitted however that such books at the time exercised no
perceptible influence on public opinion. So far as war-crimes trials were
concerned the man in the street naturally preferred to rely on such weighty
authorities as Professor Arthur Goodhart, Professor of Jurisprudence at
Oxford University, who emphatically pronounced that war-crimes trials were
an admirable innovation which would facilitate the speedy administration of
justice, and Lord Justice Wright, one of the greatest English lawyers of his
generation, who declared that so long as accused persons did in fact receive
justice, it was immaterial that the court which tried them was composed of
their accusers.


It is indeed hard to account for the equanimity with which the vast majority of
lawyers accepted this view. For thousands of years in all civilized countries
the principle has been accepted that criminal prosecutions and civil actions
could only be decided by the decision of a strictly impartial court. “The very
essence of a fair trial is a third-party judgement,” as Victor Gollancz pointed
out in 1961 with regard to the trial of Adolf Eichmann by Jewish judges. For
lawyers to dispute this was no less astonishing than if a conference of eminent
surgeons unanimously passed a resolution that no example could be found of
anyone having benefited by a surgical operation, or as if a synod of leading
Christian ecclesiastics approved a declaration that prayer could never be
anything but a waste of time.


Had the Council of Nicaea, for example, passed such a resolution, historians of
the Christian Church would have been set a difficult task reconciling this
resolution with Christian thought and practice both before and since. Future
historians of the development of jurisprudence will have similar difficulty in
explaining how it came about that the Nuremberg Trials were approved by so
many leading jurists from the most highly civilized countries in the world.


With regard to terror bombing which ranks with genocide and war-crimes
trials as one of the three culminating features of the retrograde movement of
civilization which began imperceptibly in 1914, it must be admitted that this
innovation was accepted by public opinion without opposition or misgivings.
The reason was that officially terror bombing was merely a figment of the
imagination of the mendacious Dr. Goebbels. As previously stated, on the 7th


February, 1944, two years after the Lindemann Plan had been put into
operation, Viscount Cranborne solemnly declared, “The R.A.F. has never
indulged in purely terror raids.” Also the British public first heard of this
infamous plan when its adoption by Mr. Churchill’s War Cabinet in March
1942 was casually disclosed in the paragraph quoted above from the little
booklet entitled Science and Government, by Sir Charles Snow, published in
1961. Some six months afterwards voluminous details of the air offensive
launched in accordance with this plan were published by H.M. Stationery
Office in the four massive volumes referred to above. Nothing also was
generally known to distinguish the mass air raid on Dresden as the crowning
atrocity of this campaign. When the character of this air raid was disclosed in a
book written with official approval and assistance in 1963, it was presented
and widely accepted as an original discovery by an enterprising and
industrious author.


With the wealth of information now available, it is hard to realise how little
was known in the years immediately following the end of the Second World
War of the nature of that struggle. Such booklets as Epitaph on Nuremberg
and Advance to Barbarism mentioned above, whatever merits or shortcomings
they may have possessed, at least demonstrated the possibility of making
bricks without straw. They also expressed in print the misgivings and
suspicions felt by many at the time, hitherto only expressed in Parliament by
such upholders of earlier standards of conduct as Dr. Bell, the Bishop of
Chichester, and Richard Stokes, M.P.


The British authorities, while the “strategic air offensive” was going on, were
under no delusions as to what would be the reaction of a wide section of the
public if its true nature was allowed to become known. Thus, in a minute dated
the 28th February, 1943, Sir Archibald Sinclair explained to Sir Charles Portal,
Chief of the Air Staff, that it was necessary to stifle all public discussion on the
subject because if the truth had been disclosed in response to the enquiries
being made by influential political and religious leaders, their inevitable
condemnation would impair the morale of the bomber crews and consequently
their bombing efficiency.


For nearly two decades it remained possible to do little more than speculate
concerning the so-called Allied strategic air offensive against Germany. The


particulars given in Advance to Barbarism were derived from the disclosures
made in a little book entitled Bombing Vindicated by J. M. Spaight, Principal
Assistant Secretary of the Air Ministry, published in 1944, perhaps the most
illuminating book written during the Second World War, as confirmed by Air
Marshal Harris’s book, Bomber Offensive, published in 1947.


It is not in the least remarkable that Hitler and his adherants were able to keep
hidden from their countrymen the crimes against humanity being committed in
Germany: anyone who ventured to protest at what was taking place faced
death or being sent to a concentration camp which not seldom amounted to the
same fate. When the war came to an end and the victims of the Nazi regime
were released, a flood of information poured forth concerning the iniquities of
the vanquished: nothing however was revealed concerning the conduct of the
victors which remained as shrouded as ever by a cloak of silence. It may seem
strange that it was considered necessary to maintain this cloak of silence for so
long after victory had been won when the Government was in a position to say
like Lady Macbeth, “What is done cannot be undone.” It is even stranger that
it was found possible to do so after the emergency war legislation designed to
suppress all expression of opinion deemed likely to hamper the successful
conduct of the war had been allowed to lapse. In contemporary Russia or
Spain this would have been an easy matter as in these countries functioned an
official censor whose duty it was to censor the publication of all books and
newspapers. But in Britain no censor had existed since the times of the Stuart
kings. After 1945 everyone in Britain enjoyed the right once again to express
any opinion they liked which was not libellous, seditious, blasphemous or
obscene.


Nevertheless it was found possible to keep the truth from leaking out
concerning terror bombing for upwards of two decades, although no legal
machinery existed to control public expressions of opinion.


In no other country in the world would this have been possible. The British
however are politically the most advanced people in the world, with unique
powers of self-discipline when it is made to appear to them that national
interests are at stake. These powers had first fully bloomed in 1936 when all
the European and American newspapers were freely discussing an alleged
association between King Edward VIII and a Mrs. Wallis Simpson. Yet for


many months the entire British Press, as if edited by one man, preserved an
unbroken silence. Naturally there was much verbal speculation and gossip in
Britain but only those who read the Press knew any details, and as those
British newspapers that specialised in scandalmongering remained silent with
regard to l’affaire Simpson most people discounted as mere rumours what the
foreign Press was saying. Few realized in Britain that a grave constitutional
crisis was threatening which was causing the Government the gravest anxiety.


It was not until after the abdication that it became known how the Prime
Minister, Mr. Stanley Baldwin, had dealt with the matter. Fortunately the
leading national newspapers had recently fallen under the control of a few
wealthy men, the so-called Press Barons of Fleet Street. Mr. Baldwin
approached them personally, explained the situation frankly and appealed to
them not to report |’affaire Simpson in the newspapers controlled by them and
to bring pressure to bear on the smaller newspapers to ignore the subject until
he had had time to ascertain the King’s intentions and to decide what had best
be done. He stressed that the Crown was the link which bound together the
British Empire and if this link was weakened, the unity of the Empire would
be in peril.


Mr. Baldwin did not appeal in vain. The British Press remained silent. It was
not until he had consulted at length with the Prime Ministers of the Dominions
that he gave the signal to his stooge, the Bishop of Bradford, to give public
expression to the heartfelt misgivings felt by the latter concerning the King’s
mode of life and in particular the erring monarch’s resolve not to follow the
example of his grandfather, Edward VII, when involved in an affaire de coeur,
but to marry the lady in question. The taboo of silence was lifted. Edward VIII
abdicated and retired into exile. Before the bulk of the British public had
realised the gravity of the situation, this unique episode of British history was
over with a minimum of excitement, scandal and recrimination.


In 1945 the Baldwin technique was adopted to prevent facts from being
disclosed concerning two outstanding features of the war which had just been
brought to a victorious conclusion. A taboo of silence was imposed on editors
and publishers similar to that imposed so successfully nine years before in
regard to l’affaire Simpson. In some ways this taboo was even more
remarkable than the earlier taboo because no national interests seemed to be


involved and yet it was found possible to maintain it, practically unbroken,
for upwards of two decades.


An explanation still remains to be found why in 1945 the British authorities
should have considered it necessary or even desirable to impose a taboo of
silence on all mention of terror bombing and war-crimes trials.


Except that they were both, like genocide, symptoms of a world-wide
tendency to revert to primitive practices in warfare, they were otherwise quite
unconnected. They became linked entirely by a chance circumstance. The
conception of terror bombing can be traced back to as early as the 1920s when
Air Marshal Trenchard recommended the construction of large, long-range
bombers designed for attacks on the civilian population of an enemy. The
conception of war-crimes trials had originated as recently as November 1943,
from an unconsidered suggestion by Mr. Winston Churchill at an alcoholic
orgy held to celebrate the conclusion of the Teheran Conference. Without
seemingly premeditation, the communist dictator, Stalin, proposed that when
victory was achieved 50,000 German officers and technicians should be
massacred. This proposal could not be dismissed as merely a result of drinking
numerous toasts in vodka because everyone present knew that as recently as
the spring of 1940 Stalin had carried out such a massacre of 15,000 Polish
officers in the Katyn Forest where their bodies were subsequently found.
President Roosevelt made the suggestion the subject for one of his tasteless
jokes but Mr. Churchill indignantly declared that “the British public will never
stand for mass-murder!” adding, probably as an afterthought, “No one, Nazi,
or no, shall be dealt with summarily without a legal trial.”


An open breach between these ill-assorted allies was ultimately averted by a
makeshift compromise. In deference to the strange susceptibilities of his
British guest, Stalin agreed to forego his massacre and consented to “a legal
trial” taking place before the prisoners were put to death. Later this
compromise was formally confirmed at the conferences held in Moscow and in
Yalta.


It was not until after the unconditional surrender of Germany in 1945 that the
difficulties of carrying out in practice this novel idea became apparent. At the


Yalta Conference it had been agreed that a score of the most prominent
nalitianl and militar landana Af tha rrnnaninhad ahawld ha aalantad lahallad


PULLLUICM! dHU HILLY LedUeLS UL UIE VdLIQUISIICU SIIUUIU VE SELELCLEU, IdVeLIeU
‘war-criminals’ and subjected to a trial before a court composed of British,
American, French and Russian judges. According to the Russian judge,
General Nikitchenko, the only duty of the court would be to rubberstamp the
decision of the politicians at the Yalta Conference that the prisoners were
guilty. All seemed plain sailing. This view of the matter was naturally
acceptable to Russian judges as being in accordance with communist theory
and practice, but many were doubtful if Western judges could be found who
would be equally accommodating. This difficulty was eventually surmounted
by agreeing that the facts upon which the charges were based should be laid
before the court in the usual way for adjudication, each judge being left free to
reach his own conclusions on the facts placed before him.


This solution however immediately aroused widespread consternation. Most
of the victorious Powers had skeletons in their national cupboards and were
determined that no evidence should be produced to the court which would
reveal these skeletons. To meet these objections, it became necessary to sift
the evidence carefully beforehand. In addition, the court was directed, as it
saw fit, to exclude any evidence submitted by the defence as irrelevant, by
which was meant any evidence which would not support a conviction.


Britain had a particularly gruesome skeleton in her cupboard in the shape of
her terror bombing campaign. In popular estimation in 1945 the most obvious
of Hitler’s crimes was his initiation of what was then known as indiscriminate
bombing, that is to say, bombing unrestricted to military objectives.
Nevertheless, to the general astonishment, no charge relating to German
bombing was preferred against any of Hitler’s surviving colleagues. “To have
done so,” Mr. Justice Jackson, the chief American prosecutor at Nuremberg,
later declared frankly, “would have been to invite recriminations which would
not have been useful at the trial.”


In short in 1945 the British Government found itself in a painful dilemma. A
verdict based on carefully selected facts would not accomplish the purpose the
trial was intended to serve, namely, to act as a substitute for Article 231 of the
Treaty of Versailles by establishing Germany’s war-guilt for all time. As the
trial proceeded it would soon become clear to all that it was a mere bizarre
farce, to use the description applied to it by the Oxford historian, Dr. Alan
Taylor, twenty years afterwards.


Yet although it had become clear that the trial would serve no useful purpose
of any kind, it was impossible for the British Government to refuse to take part
because the proposal that a trial of the vanquished leaders should take place
after victory had come in the first place on behalf of Britain from Mr.
Churchill himself.


To preserve their secret the British authorities realized that it would not be
sufficient to provide that evidence of British terror bombing should be
excluded from consideration by the court at Nuremberg if concurrently the fact
that terror bombing had taken place was allowed to become common
knowledge as a result of free discussion in Britain of the subject. The court
might then be tempted to take judicial notice thereof and enquire further, with
the result the veracity of H.M. Ministers would ultimately be called in
question.


It was therefore decided to impose a stringent taboo on all discussion of terror
bombing. But it was realised that if free discussion were permitted of the
nature of the Nuremberg trials and the other similar war-crimes trials then
going on, the question was bound to be asked why had it been considered
necessary to sift the evidence before it was laid before the court, thereby
rendering worthless any verdict it might give, and why no charge of having
initiated indiscriminate bombing had been included in the indictments. It was
soon realised that too many people knew the answer to the latter question and
if free discussion on the subject was permitted the truth would soon leak out.
A similar taboo to that on discussion on terror bombing was therefore
imposed on discussion of war-crimes trials.


Scores of memoirs, books and articles have made familiar to all every detail of
the Abdication: the taboo of silence imposed by Mr. Baldwin is remembered
with unstinted admiration by foreigners as an outstanding example of British
self-discipline in a national crisis.


This taboo of 1936 remained in force for only a few months and was limited
to newspaper editors. The taboo imposed in 1945 extended not only to editors
but to authors, reviewers and historians: it remained in force for upwards of
sixteen years. Only persons personally affected by this taboo realised that it


eo aa 2S 2. ey es Se AO BES ee Ta AY te es ee Se et ee ee ee, ee ee


existed: wnen 1N 1901 It Was urtea Surprise was expressed tnat no one unt
then had heard of the Lindemann Plan.
Except for Air Marshal Harris, terror bombing found few defenders.


Although the British public seemed outwardly indifferent to this belated
revelation, it may be that the vehement outcry in Britain when the American
air force began to bomb military objectives in Vietnam in 1966 was a retarded
expression of the horror subconsciously felt in 1961.


Those upon whom fell the task of enforcing the taboo of 1945 were no
respecters of persons. They suppressed not only would-be authors striving to
express their views for the first time in print but authors of long established
repute and men of international fame. For example, the memorable book
Politics: Trials and Errors by the late Lord Hankey was accorded ‘the silent
treatment’ because it revealed the truth concerning the invasion of Norway in
1940 and denounced the conviction as a war-criminal of the former Japanese
ambassador to London, Shigemitsu. Fortunately Lord Hankey’s appeal for
rectification of this glaring miscarriage of justice won the support of General
MacArthur and Shigemitsu was shortly released. Of all the books published in
the post- war period, this book alone can be said to have definitely influenced
the course of events.


Another distinguished victim of the taboo was Dean Inge, from 1911 to 1933
Dean of St. Paul’s. Not only was he the author of many learned works on
philosophy and mysticism but he was also one of the most gifted journalists of
his time. Among contemporary writers he had no rival in expressing a point of
view lucidly, adequately and in the fewest possible words: his epigrammatic
sayings, terse, stimulating and uncompromising, were quoted in the Press
throughout the world. Editors competed eagerly for his articles: he
commanded the highest rates of pay in journalism. Although a tireless critic of
the shallow optimism, muddled thinking and the catchwords of democracy
accepted by all but a few in the years after the First World War, the possibility
that his articles needed censorship had never before 1945 occurred to anyone.


Naturally great was the Dean’s surprise and indignation when after the Second
World War he found that his articles when they appeared in print had been
drastically revised. His protests were vain. Fortunately a copy of the booklet


by the present author entitled Advance to Barbarism published in 1948 came
into his hands and he wrote at once, “In this book you have well said what it
was high time was said by someone.” His efforts to review the book were
politely rejected. “I had intended to write a book on similar lines to yours,” he
remarked to the present author, “but at my age (he was then in his eighties) I
cannot undertake the labour of finding a bold enough publisher.” Another
effort to give public expression to his views on the Nuremberg Trials was
again foiled by a watchful editor. “I hardly recognised my article when I saw it
in print. It had been shamefully mutilated,” he lamented. “All mention of your
book had been carefully omitted. My protests to the editor of the Evening
Standard were politely evaded.”


Finding himself deprived of the right of free speech in his own country, the
Dean at once complied with a request that he should contribute a preface to a
revised and greatly lengthened edition of Advance to Barbarism which was
awaiting publication in the United States. Within three days he supplied an
admirable preface of some nine hundred words in his own handwriting. Thus
supported, the American edition appeared in 1953 and aroused wide attention
in the United States, receiving no less than thirty-nine favourable reviews. Its
appearance was ignored in Britain except by Encounter, a publication,
subsidised with foreign money by an organization labelled grandiloquently the
Congress for Cultural Freedom, which denounced it hotly, presumably on the
ground that a breach of the taboo was detrimental to ‘cultural freedom’.


An amusing sequel to Dean Inge’s vain efforts to defy the taboo occurred
after his death in February 1954 when a valiant attempt was made to clear his
memory of the stigma of having held opinions conflicting with the
convictions of those considered right-thinking people. A certain Rev. C.
Magraw wrote at once to The Times to say that although the Dean might at
time have expressed regrettable doubts concerning the legal validity of war-
crimes trials, yet his final conclusion was these doubts were baseless. “In the
summer of 1947,” he wrote, “the Dean told me that he had changed his mind
and he considered the Nuremberg Trials scrupulously fair.”


A brief correspondence in The Times, initiated by the present author, followed,
but was ended abruptly on the 9th March, 1954 by a letter from Mr. W. C.
Inge, the Dean’s son, who pointed out that whatever his father may have said


to the Rev. Magraw in a casual conversation in 1947, his final and considered
views had been clearly set in the preface which he had contributed to Advance
to Barbarism in 1953. Mr. Inge added that he himself had often discussed the
subject of war-crimes trials with his father who, while considering that the
Nuremberg Trials had been fairly conducted, “never changed his opinion that
they set a dangerous precedent and that the necessity for justice appearing to
be done had been vitiated by the presence of the Russians on the Nuremberg
Tribunal.”


One of the essential characteristics of a taboo is that even when innocently
infringed an irrational feeling of guilt is engendered not only in the mind of the
culprit but also in the minds of his relations and friends. Even as late as 1960
this feeling of guilty shame persisted with regard to the Dean’s unorthodox
views which, it was felt, he had only been saved from expressing by watchful
editors. When in that year his friend and former pupil, Canon Adam Fox,
published what purported to be a complete biography of Dean Inge, with the
aid and approval of the Dean’s family, he not only avoided all mention of the
Dean’s views on the Second World War and its aftermath but pointedly
excluded from reference in the voluminous bibliography in his book mention
of the preface which the Dean had contributed to the American edition of
Advance to Barbarism. This omission could hardly have been accidental as
this preface was the last production of the Dean’s pen.


When in the following year the true nature of what was then still known as “the
strategic bombing offensive” was casually revealed by Sir Charles Snow in his
little book, Science and Government, no attempt was made to maintain the
taboo of silence on the subject.

The exact contents of the Lindemann Plan came as a surprise to everyone who
had not had access to official sources of information. No one was deeply
disturbed to learn of a decision of the British Government so long before as
1942. As the war had been won, it did not seem to matter very much how it
had been won. It is perhaps significant that less concern was expressed that
terror bombing should have been formally adopted than that

H.M. Ministers should have lied to conceal this guilty secret. Long before 1961
all inclination to discuss war-crimes trials had disappeared, and now it was felt
that the question of terror bombing was also an unpleasant subject about which
the less said the better.


In short, the taboos imposed in 1945 triumphantly fulfilled their essential
purpose which was to gain time until the British public could regard terror
bombing and war-crimes trials dispassionately as happenings of long past
history which were best forgotten.


Both taboos were based on the principle so well expressed by the lines of the
Victorian poet, Coventry Patmore, in his poem Magna est Veritas:


“When all its work is done the lie shall
rot; The truth is great, and shall prevail,


When none cares whether it prevails or not.”


In short, the taboos imposed in 1945 triumphantly fulfilled their essential
purpose which was to gain time until the British public could regard terror
bombing and war-crimes trials dispassionately as happenings of long past
history which were best forgotten.


Both taboos were based on the principle so well expressed by the lines of the
Victorian poet, Coventry Patmore, in his poem Magna est Veritas:


“When all its work is done the lie shall
rot; The truth is great, and shall prevail,


When none cares whether it prevails or not.”


Chapter I — Primeval Simplicity


Once the theory of evolution had during the 19th century become generally
accepted, a belief in human progress, automatic and ceaseless, naturally
followed. The record of the rocks seemed conclusive: in the lowest and most
ancient strata were to be found fossils of simple and primitive forms of life and
above them the fossils of ever increasing complexity, culminating in the
evolution of man. The story of life on this planet was a story of steady
improvement, of better adaptations of each species to its environment.

The most fitted survived.


The survival of the fittest became popularly interpreted as the survival of the
strongest. As applied to mankind this was held to mean that the strongest

races survived, their superiority being demonstrated by success in war.
Naturally this view found favour among the leading nations of Europe who
since the days of Marathon had repeatedly on the battlefield proved their
military superiority to the oriental and coloured peoples.

Down to 1914 White Supremacy by this or any other test seemed indisputable.
Warfare was accepted as a characteristic of human life consistent with the
irrevocable laws of nature. As the British economist Walter Bagehot (1826-77)
wrote in his Physics and Politics, “war is the most showy fact in human
history.” It was generally assumed that war was as old as mankind, expressing ¿
fundamental human instinct. In his International Law the famous jurist Sir
Henry Maine refers casually to “the universal belligerency of primitive man,”
and adds clearly without fear of contradiction, “It is not peace which is natural
and primitive but war.”


Since the war of 1914-18, the so-called War to end War, the truth of this
assumption has been widely disputed, in particular by the psychologist,
Havelock Ellis. The life of early man in the remote past, he argued, can best be
determined from the mode of life of the most primitive of modern races living
at the present day. “When Australia was first visited by Europeans,” he
pointed out, “war in the sense of a whole tribe taking the field against another
tribe had no existence among the Australian aborigines.” Undeniably for
thousands of years the aborigines of Australia lived in conditions of contented
and peaceful stagnation. Some indeed find it hard to believe that this
exceptional state of affairs provides an example of conditions probably widely


prevailing elsewhere in the world. They regard the case of the aborigines of
Australia as evidence that when no struggle for survival has to be fought, no
progress takes place. In Europe, Asia and Africa, man had to contend with
dangerous beasts of prey, thereby developing daring and courage, qualities for
which he found an outlet later in warfare with his fellow man.

Notoriously the descendents of the original inhabitants of Australia lack
ambition, enterprise and initiative, qualities necessary in a struggle for
survival, qualities which some maintain are generated and stimulated by
warfare.


The contrary view that war is an unmitigated evil of comparatively recent
origin is well expressed by Dr. R. L. Worrall in his Footsteps of Warfare who
contends that, until mankind began to settle in communities depending on
agriculture for support, warfare was unknown. “In those days of savagery,” he
writes, “men and women lacked every feature of modern life including all the
savageries of civilization. Only with the passing of the Stone Age and of
primitive communism did there come the supreme savagery of war.” He
pictures the sparse population of the hunting period wandering freely through
country abounding with game of every kind and dismisses as baseless the
view that clashes must have occurred between the various groups of hunters
since no subject for conflict would exist in such conditions. There is, he points
out, an entire lack of evidence of warfare in primitive times, although he
admits that had warfare occurred it is difficult to imagine what evidence of it
could have survived so vast a length of time.


From time to time in certain areas, no doubt, such idyllic conditions may have
persisted for long periods and we are at liberty to imagine that during these
periods man may have come dimly to resemble the Noble Savage of Rousseau.
Thus, on the Australian continent, for tens of thousands of years mankind
lived undisturbed by intrusive neighbours and probably by any major changes
of climate. In such static conditions, occasions for warfare would seldom if
ever arise: the Australian aborigines were certainly peaceful if not noble
savages, and so they remained until modern times. On the other hand in
Europe, Central Asia, and in North Africa, major changes of climate occurred
during the Pleistocene Period with great frequency according to geological
standards. At one period Europe enjoyed a temperate climate as far north as
Lapland; southern Europe was tropical. Later began a succession of ice ages


separated by mild periods lasting thousands of years. During the ice ages the
climate of all Europe north of the Alps may be compared to that of Greenland
at the present day. How did the hunting communities of northern Europe,
during the oncoming of a glacial period, deal with the communities already
occupying the lands to which they gradually withdrew as their own hunting
grounds became less and less habitable? They had been accustomed, no doubt,
to act summarily when, for example, they found a desirable cave already
occupied by cave bears or wolves. Can it be doubted that in comparable
circumstances they dealt with human obstructors by similar methods? And can
it be doubted that the original inhabitants of these more habitable lands took
up the natural attitude that changes of climate were no concern of theirs and
that these intruders ought to have been content to die resignedly and quietly of
hunger and cold in their own home lands without disturbing their neighbours?
Surely, points of view so different and so irreconcilable could have only one
outcome. One party had been doomed by nature to perish and each frankly
preferred this fate should be suffered by the other.


Probably every major change of climate in the Stone Ages resulted in a series
of minor wars—minor because in each only a few hundred individuals or less
would be involved, but other wise presenting the essential characteristics of a
modern war. It is a popular delusion that man in prehistoric times was a
stupid, half-animal creature altogether different from modern man. Some
types of man as long ago as 30,000 years—the Cro- Magnon man who
inhabited southern France in the Aurignacian Epoch—had a brain of equal or
even of greater capacity to that of the average modern European. (The average
cubic capacity of a Cro-Magnon skull was 1590 c.c.: that of a modern
European is 1480 c.c.) From this we can deduce that, as modern European
brains have proved capable of grasping the fact that it is less trouble to
dismantle and remove to one’s own country a factory belonging to a
conquered people than to build a factory for one’s self, it should not have been
beyond a Cro-Magnon brain to have grasped the fact that it was less laborious
to appropriate the stone axe of a vanquished enemy than to chip out a new
one. By the same argument, this much vaunted achievement of modern
reasoning should not even have been beyond modern man’s cousins in the
Stone Age, the celebrated Neanderthal species of the human race which, in
spite of a shambling gait, great beetling ape-like eyebrow ridges and massive
chinless jaws, possessed a capacious brain of a far from simple type. In fact,


nartain cnanimananc af Nanndarthal man nnccncecnd hrainc chain tha ayraridan in


CELLAL SPCULNTLIS UL INCALIUTILLIGL Lildit pysstsstu VIACILLISD AVUVE UIT avtlapye dil
size—the skull found at La Chapelle had a capacity of over 1600 c.c., at least
120 c.c. above the modern average, according to Sir Arthur Keith. We are
justified in believing, therefore, that the La Chapelle man, in spite of his
unprepossessing simian appearance, would have been fully capable of
grasping all the motives for a modern war, of conducting warfare in entirely
the contemporary spirit, so far as his limited resources permitted, and of
dealing with a defeated enemy in accordance with the same principles and
with precisely the same objects in view as were applied to a defeated enemy
in that Year of Grace, 1945.


One fact relating to Neanderthal man, established beyond question but
otherwise inexplicable, makes it possible to say that the first major European
war took place during the Old Stone Age at a date which experts have
estimated to have been approximately between thirty and fifty thousand years
ago. For tens of thousands of years preceding this approximate date
Neanderthal man was in occupation of a vast area stretching from Gibraltar in
the West to Palestine in the East and extending southward from the great ice
fields which then covered the northern half of Europe. Having been in
undisturbed possession of this area for an enormous length of time,
Neanderthal man disappeared, apparently rather suddenly. In strata of a later
date his remains are no longer found; thereafter are found only traces of men
of the same type as now occupy Europe.


What brought about the extinction of Neanderthal man will probably always
remain a matter of speculation. All that is known for certain is that above a
certain level all traces of his culture—known as the Mousterian—abruptly
disappear and are replaced by traces of a distinct culture known as the
Aurignacian. It is, of course, possible that Neanderthal man died out through
some unknown natural cause so that his vacated hunting grounds were
peaceably occupied by his successors, the men of the Aurignacian Epoch.
Dismissing this vague possibility, Sir Arthur Keith writes: “Those who
observe the fate of the aborigines of Australia and Tasmania will have no
difficulty in accounting for the disappearance of Homo Neanderthalensis.”


It is hard to believe, however, that the Neanderthals passively allowed
themselves to be dispossessed of their means of subsistence. Through


hundreds of centuries they had successfully adapted themselves to a most
rigorous climate and had succeeded in the struggle for survival in competition
with some of the most formidable carnivores that have ever existed—sabre-
tooth tigers, lions, and cave bears. To quote Sir Arthur Keith again:
“Neanderthal man’s skill as a flint-artist shows that his abilities were not of a
low order. He had fire at his command, he buried his dead, he had a distinct
and highly evolved form of culture.” He was a fearless and skilful hunter of
big game. He was confronted by no such superiority in weapons as that which
made it impossible for the aborigines of Australia to resist the firearms of the
European invaders. The conclusion reached by Professor Henry Fairfield
Osborn in his Men of the Old Stone Age is that the Aurignacian invaders
“competed for a time with the Neanderthals before they dispossessed them of
their principal stations and drove them out of the country or killed them in
battle.”


There is, thus, good ground for believing that the Mousterian Period ended as
a consequence of a struggle which conforms with the definition of warfare
accepted by Havelock Ellis—‘War is an organised attack of one community
on another.” The outcome of this struggle was ultimately the complete
extermination of that distinct species of the human race, Neanderthal man.
Regarding this grim outcome Professor Osborn observes:


“In the racial replacements of savage as well as of historic peoples the men are
often killed and the women spared and taken into the families of the warriors,
but no evidence has thus far been found that even the Neanderthal women
were spared or allowed to remain in the country, because in none of the burials
of Aurignacian times is there any evidence of the crossing or admixture of the
Aurignacian peoples with the Neanderthals.”


There is no need for us to explain the fate which overcame the Neanderthals
by stressing the superior intelligence of their conquerors or by attributing to
the latter the possession of more effective weapons. It seems probable that
Neanderthal man lived in small, isolated communities, each community quite
unconcerned with the fate and perhaps unaware of the existence of other
Neanderthal communities. Each community no doubt defended itself
desperately—to quote Professor Osborn—“with wooden weapons and with


stone-headed dart and spear,” probably each such isolated struggle was finally
Aannidnd Wer erat aht Af nya hana


UELIUCU Vy WEIPIIL UL LIULIIVELDS.


If the conclusions of the authorities quoted above be accepted, it becomes
possible to say with confidence that there took place in Europe in the Old
Stone Age, according to the experts more than thirty thousand years ago, a
decisive struggle between the representatives of two distinct branches of the
human race, the Neanderthals and a tribe or tribes of men similar in all
physical respects to modern man. Such a struggle would certainly merit the
title of the First Great European War since its results were infinitely more
momentous than the results of any of the tribal and civil wars which have
occurred since in Europe—including any of the celebrated European wars of
modern times.


It is probable also that some of those features of contemporary warfare which
are popularly regarded as unprecedented innovations were a normal feature of
warfare in the most remote times. What is now regarded as the old distinction
between uniformed combatant forces and the civilian population is, judged on
the scale of time by which man’s history on this planet is recorded, an
innovation of yesterday—a matter of a mere couple of centuries. In prehistoric
warfare, every member of the whole hunting community would be equally
involved with no more regard to age or sex than in warfare to-day. In the
event of defeat, all would suffer the same fate. Often, no doubt, during
hostilities the women and children left behind in a settlement were in greater
danger than the able-bodied males of the community away on a hunting
expedition to collect food. It would surely not have been beyond brains with
120 c.c. greater capacity than the modern average to realize the tactical,
material, and psychological benefits which would result from a sudden and
devastating raid on “the enemy’s main centres of population.”


Even a recent innovation regarded as especially without any kind of precedent
may not have been lacking in the earliest warfare. In the Stone Age men lived
by hunting the herds of wild horses, deer, and wild cattle then living in
profusion on the great Eurasian plains which were also the prey of various
carnivorous animals, such as the sabre-tooth tiger and the cave bear. No
doubt, these dangerous animals were bitterly hated as rivals for the available
supplies of food, and feared owing to their taste for human flesh when
occasion offered. Opportunities for reprisals would from time to time have
occurred. We can only deduce the nature of these reprisals from what occurs


at the present day in primitive lands. In parts of Indo-China, for example, the
chief enemy is the tiger whose depredations are, as a rule, endured with
resignation by the natives. Occasionally, however, a tiger blunders into a trap
or is found overcome by old age, accident, or disease. A formal act of
retribution is then staged in which the whole village community, men,
women, and children, takes an enthusiastic part. The victim is first reduced to
complete helplessness by being deprived of food and is then mocked, baited to
frenzy, terrified by fireworks, and finally finished off in a slow and painful
manner amid general rejoicings. The same custom prevails in far-off Tibet,
where the chief enemy is the wolf. The Swedish traveller, Sven Hedin, tells us
that, when the herdsmen manage to catch one of the wolves who live by
preying on their flocks, they first blind the victim and then beat it to death
with their knouts.


By analogy we can safely assume that the men of the Stone Age acted in the
same way when chance placed at their mercy so dangerous and hated a rival as
the cave bear. Upon one individual animal would be inflicted a kind of
symbolic punishment for all the offences committed by the whole species to
which it belonged. And, if the men of the Stone Age were accustomed to deal
with animal enemies in this way, is it not probable that, on occasion, they dealt
with particularly feared and hated human enemies in the same way? It follows
that, if the above reasoning is justified, the practice of mock-trials recently
introduced solemnly as an epoch-making innovation is nothing but a revival of
a practice so long abandoned by civilized peoples that its origin in the remote
past has become forgotten.


Although, as has been repeatedly demonstrated of late, a mock-trial can be
carried out more or less in the form of a judicial trial, the origin and purpose
of a mock-trial is entirely distinct from the origin and purpose of a judicial
trial. The former, an act of symbolic vengeance in which the victim suffers for
the misdoings of his species or nation, dates from remote antiquity, from the
dawn period of humanity when the shadowy border line between the
subhuman and the human had barely been passed. The judicial trial is
obviously of much later origin, originating at the time when human
communities had begun to adopt customs and taboos and the necessity arose
of deciding whether these had been infringed. The person condemned at a
judicial trial suffers not as a symbol but for personal acts of which he has


mannan alle Kane Caa wt lee


persolldiy VEEN LOULIUW Ully.


It is assumed that the reader is sufficiently familiar with the details of the
Nuremberg proceedings of 1945-1946, so that there is no need to point out
how closely primitive precedents were unconsciously followed in them. The
underlying spirit will be further examined later in these pages. One indication
of this spirit may, however, be given here. The announcement was actually
made in the British Press that three British housewives were to be selected and
sent to Nuremberg at public expense to attend these proceedings as
representatives of the British housewives who had endured the Blitz.


Incredible as it now appears, the likelihood of some such arrangement being
adopted was at the time widely discussed in responsible and influential circles.
A variation of the idea, specifically reported not as a vague possibility under
consideration but as a serious arrangement being actively carried into effect,
will be found in the Daily Mail of November 29, 1945, under front page
headlines, “Blitz Housewife to Face Goering & Co.” Beneath is printed a
report from “our special correspondent in Nuremberg, Rhona Churchill,”
which begins, “‘Mrs. Jones,’ typical British housewife, who has stood in the
fish-queue, been through the Blitz, and had her whole domestic life turned
upside down by the war, is to be invited to come to Nuremberg and see in
court the men who caused her troubles.”


Rhona Churchill cites as her authority for this announcement, Major Peter
Casson, whom she describes as an “officer in charge of V.I.P.s” (Very
Important People). This military gentleman, she states, assured her that plans
already existed to carry into effect this proposal, and that he himself “was
asking Lord Justice Lawrence’s Marshal to make the necessary arrangements,
because technically ‘Mrs. Jones’ will come here as a guest of the British
judges.”


Unfortunately, it is not known what was the reaction of Lord Justice Lawrence
when he was informed by his Marshal that the V.I.P. Officer had appointed
him to act the part of host to the fish-queueing “Mrs. Jones”. We can but
hazard the guess that it was both dignified and vigorous. Until definite
information on this point comes to hand, Rhona Churchill’s message will
remain incomplete. Nevertheless, as it stands, this message is of unique
interest to historians and anthropologists, although clearly neither Rhona


Churchill nor Peter Casson had the least comprehension of its significance.
That there could exist any reasonable objection to such a proposal evidently
occurred to neither of them although the sapient Major expressed fears that
red-tape might cause some delay.

As “Mrs. Jones” would “travel here as a V.I.P., possibly by air, live ina V.I.P.
hotel, and use one of the V.I.P. gallery seats,” Major Casson had no doubt that
there would be keen competition for the post, but he added, “We are hoping
there will be no wire-pulling and the woman who comes here will really be a
typical housewife.” He gathered that the Home Office would make the
selection and that the housewife selected would be accompanied not by two
female companions but by an A.R.P. warden and “a rank and file soldier who
had won the V.C.” He concluded by telling Rhona Churchill that he
understood that Lord Justice Lawrence had sent Mr. Winston Churchill a
cordial invitation to come to Nuremberg, not as a member of “Mrs. Jones’”
troop but as his personal guest. A close personal friend had reported, however,
that the Prime Minister was hesitating to accept “for fear that he might give a
false impression of gloating over his defeated enemies.”


It will be observed that both Rhona Churchill and the democratically-minded
Major Casson assumed as a matter of common knowledge that “Goering &
Co.” were, in fact, the men who had caused “Mrs. Jones’” troubles. Yet, only
eighteen months before, an authoritative book had been published by a former
Principal Secretary of the British Air Ministry, Mr. J. M. Spaight, C.B.,
C.B.E., for the express purpose of establishing the fact that the origin of the
Blitz could be traced to a brain wave which came to British military experts as
long before as 1936. Mr. Spaight made it clear that “Mrs. Jones” and everyone
else who experienced the Blitz had endured it not as helpless and passive
victims but as a result of “a splendid decision” to make them endure it which
the British experts themselves had come to. This most remarkable book,
Bombing Vindicated, will be examined in detail later in these pages: it is only
necessary here to note that its conclusions were accepted by all informed
persons without question at the time of its publication in April, 1944. In fact,
no attempt has been made since by anyone to contradict or refute its claims.
The British public gladly accepted Mr. Spaight’s contentions as a well
deserved compliment, but at the same time remained as firmly convinced as
ever that “Goering & Co.” were entirely responsible for the Blitz.


To social psychologists, also, Rhona Churchill’s message to the Daily Mail is
of the greatest interest because it provides a classic example of that system of
thought which George Orwell has analysed in his startling book, Nineteen
Eighty-four, under the name, doublethink, the system which turns to practical
account the philosophical proposition that truth is what best serves the interest
of the community. Now, clearly, in 1945 it was in the interests of the
community that the belief should be maintained that the Blitz had been
endured as a result of a splendid decision to endure it by the British public. It
was desirable that “Mrs. Jones” should remain convinced that she had
voluntarily elected to undergo this ordeal as a result of her intellectual
conviction that only by undergoing it could Right and Justice triumph.
Therefore, Mr. Spaight’s facts were true and his contentions justified. But, at
the same time, for the purposes of the trial at Nuremberg, it was desirable—
and therefore true—that “Mrs. Jones” should be an entirely helpless victim.
Not only was “Mrs. Jones” a symbol: “Goering & Co.” were also symbols.
They symbolized, of course, evil overcome. The trial at Nuremberg was not
what James Whistler would have called an “Arrangement in Grey.” It was an
arrangement in black and white, jet Black and dazzling White. The Blitz was
undeniably an evil.


For the purposes of the trial no limitations of the evil symbolized by “Goering
& Co.” could be admitted. It was, therefore, necessary—and, therefore, true—tc
maintain that “Goering & Co.” were responsible for the Blitz, or as Rhona
Churchill puts it, “they had caused ‘Mrs. Jones’ troubles.”


Acceptance of the plans disclosed by Major Casson to Rhona Churchill would
thus have imposed on the British public the task of believing simultaneously
two contradictory and utterly irreconcilable assertions. This, in itself, however,
would have been no obstacle to their acceptance since, during the war years,
the British public had been carefully trained in doublethink as an essential part
of the war effort. The gallant Major himself only apprehended difficulty from
official red-tape in arranging details. Nevertheless, after that first triumphant
announcement of these plans in the Daily Mail, nothing further was heard of
them. No alternative plans were put forward by anyone. For a reason or
reasons unknown, discussion of the matter ceased and the whole subject as
quickly forgotten.


A hharnah nhmintler mit Ghat nnd nnnninnnd ta AhAlixtan thina anianda nunwidaad


JAILHUUPIT AVIUPUY CUL SHULL AHU CULSISHEU LU UDITVIUII, UNS CPISUUE PLUVIUES
an invaluable starting point for inquiry. The mere fact that it was possible
without causing general astonishment to announce the existence of plans to
carry out such a purpose, indicates that the British public in 1945 was ina
frame of mind which it is impossible to describe as judicial in any accepted
sense of the word. But the underlying idea is so entirely in accord with
primitive tradition that the possibility is at once suggested that it might have
been inspired by what Dr. Jung would call a dim racial memory. Among
primitive peoples of the present day and, by inference, among those of the
remote past, an essential feature of the symbolic act of retribution was the
formal mocking of the victim. Whether a modern tiger, a prehistoric cave bear,
or a captive human enemy, the preliminary part of the ceremony consists of
reminding the captive of his past power and strength, contrasted with his
present helplessness, and followed by a description of the torments which he
must shortly endure. It seems also to have been a general practice to leave this
part of the ceremony to the women of the community, probably with the idea
that this would add to the humiliation of the victim.


A ceremony of this kind, carried out in accordance with prehistoric ritual is
clearly indicated in the story of the downfall of King Agag in the first Book of
Samuel. In a few terse, vivid sentences we are told how the gallant Saul
defeated and captured Agag but spared his life contrary to ancient tradition
and to the outspoken annoyance of the prophet Samuel, who strongly
disapproved of what has now come to be called “pampering”. By threats of
revolution, Saul is reduced to admitting that he had sinned in not acting in
accordance with traditional ferocity and, to prevent any possibility of the
captive escaping death by what we should call a “wangle”, Samuel undertook
the role of judge- executioner himself, and “hewed Agag in pieces before the
Lord in Gilgal”—clearly the form of execution called by the Chinese “death
by a thousand and one cuts.” Before this gruesome work was commenced,
however, the fallen King of Amalek is recorded as observing to the prophet,
“Surely the bitterness of death is past.”


As it stands in the text this observation is utterly incomprehensible. Brought
forth suddenly from honorable captivity as a prisoner of war to find himself
arbitrarily condemned to a horrible and lingering death by a self-appointed
judge-executioner, this is surely the last comment one would expect the
unfortunate monarch to make to the bloodthirsty old prophet awaiting him,


knife in hand.


If, however, we assume that the ancient ritual had been strictly followed—as a
matter of course, and therefore not worth recording—the significance of
Agag’s remark becomes clear. For some hours previously, Agag would have
stood tied to a stake surrounded by the daughters of Zion screaming insults,
enlarging on his shortcomings, and describing with a wealth of oriental
imagery the details of the treatment which he would shortly endure at the
hands of the prophet. Even if this ordeal had only been a matter of hours—
and not twelve months—it is easy to understand how Agag could have reached
the state of mind of exclaiming to Samuel, “I realize what you are going to do
with me, but for pity’s sake begin it at once without any further waiting!”


Passing through space and time from Gilgal, in 1079 B.C., to Nuremberg, in
A.D. 1945, it is interesting to speculate why ancient practice was not followed
in this respect at Nuremberg. Perhaps it was feared that the presence of three
housewives performing the symbolic act of gloating would prove
embarrassing to the eminent members of the English Bar, who had been
prevailed upon to take part in the proceedings on the assurance that these
would partake strictly of a judicial character? Or perhaps the problem of
deciding what exactly should be the role of these three females proved
insoluble—should their participation be limited to one ladylike stare directed
at each of the captives, or should certain sounds and gestures, strictly in
accordance with the most ancient tradition, be barred because these had
become associated in the modern mind with the music hall? A suitable attire
for the ceremony would also not have been easy to find—traditional attire
might have suggested fancy dress or a Hawaiian chorus, while umbrellas and
handbags would have been an obvious anachronism for participants in so
ancient a ceremonial. Most probably, however, the idea was abandoned
owing to the stage managers despairing of being able to find three females
who, however carefully selected and trained, could be trusted to act the role
decided upon in such unfamiliar surroundings. Women of whatever class
would to-day find it difficult to assume to order the manners of their remote
ancestresses and in which ever way their deportment failed— whether it was
too theatrical or too wooden—the result would introduce an atmosphere of
farce or even of burlesque which, beyond all else, it was desired to avoid so
far as it was possible.


To summarize the conclusions which we may arrive at with regard to warfare
in prehistoric times, we may say that, in essentials, it in no way differed
markedly from warfare to-day. It will be found that neither in causes,
conduct, nor results do fundamental distinctions exist.


With regard to causes, in prehistoric times warfare probably usually arose as a
result of a change of climatic conditions causing a shifting of population from
an area which had become uninhabitable to another already populated. In
modern times, one of the commonest causes of war is an over-populated
country seeking to find by violence an outlet for its surplus population.


With regard to conduct, the spirit in which warfare was conducted in
prehistoric times was probably exactly similar to that in which warfare has
come to be conducted during the last three decades. In both, the main
characteristics are directness, simplicity, and an entire lack of artificial
restraints. In both, the only rule is to damage the enemy in any way physically
possible. Above all, in neither will any trace be found of that perhaps
arbitrary distinction between combatants and non-combatants, that is to say
between the enemy’s armed forces and the enemy’s women and children. In
both, democratic principles are followed: no privilege of immunity is granted
to anyone—however weak and defenceless.


With regard to results, certain distinctions appear, but these cannot be termed
fundamental. In prehistoric times, wars were wars of extermination: one killed
all the enemies one could and took away or destroyed all enemy property upon
which one could lay one’s hands. In present-day warfare, to date at any rate,
only distinguished enemy leaders are done to death, although it must not be
forgotten that, in 1945, many quite minor German political leaders and
officials were summarily murdered. The fact remains, however, that the bulk
of the enemy population is not at present deliberately exterminated. Still,
much the same result however is achieved when an industrial population is
dealt with by dismantling and removing the factories on which it depends for
subsistence, by cutting imports, forbidding exports, and leaving the population
to starve. The consequence of this procedure will be realized if one can
imagine the fate of the inhabitants of Birmingham or Coventry if all their
factories were dismantled, and the essential machinery removed to some


foreign land. Prehistoric warfare created a desert and called it peace
—solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant—warfare to-day creates a slum and
calls that peace.


If the Second World War be taken as an example of contemporary warfare, the
consequences to the vanquished are not merely the unintentional result of
wholesale plundering inspired by simple greed and carried out regardless of the
subsequent fate of the victims such as so frequently followed victorious wars in
classical and mediaeval times. What the victors in 1945 intended should be the
fate the vanquished was clearly set out in the infamous Morgenthau Plan,
formulated by Henry Morgenthau, the Secretary of the U.S. Treasury, under
the influence and guidance of a fellow Jew, Harry Dexter White (alias Weit),
Assistant Secretary to the Treasury, and later unmasked as a Communist

spy. This plan was accepted by President Roosevelt and the British Prime
Minister, Winston Churchill, at the Quebec Conference on the 15th September,
1944. Under this plan Germany was to be transformed into a pastoral country
by the simple process of blowing up the mines and demolishing the factories.
With regard to the existing population, numbering some seventy millions,
mostly relying on industry for support, reliance was placed on starvation
reducing their number to a level which could be supported by agricultural and
pastoral pursuits.


It was only owing to an unforeseen change in the political situation which
began soon after the conclusion of hostilities, that the Morgenthau Plan was
not carried out in its entirety. Still extensive sabotage operations, as distinct
from systematic looting, were undertaken, for details of which the reader is
referred to Freda Utley’s memorable book, Kostspielige Rache (Hamburg,
1950, Nélke Verlag). An enormous amount of wanton destruction was
systematically carried out and this campaign was only reluctantly abandoned
when the “Cold War” broke out between the United States and the Soviet
Union. The memory of this campaign of planned destruction has been
obscured by the “Wirtschaftswunder” which to the amazement of everyone
began in Western Germany some ten years after the conclusion of hostilities
and brought unprecedented prosperity and wealth to a land which so shortly
before had consisted mainly of ruins and slums.

This astonishing outcome of defeat was of course in no way connected with the
intentions of the victors, so dearly propounded by them at the Quebec


Canfannnan in Cantambhann TOMA Tt rirnan in fant in nrrnner citar tha nawrnnt nnnananita


WUVLILELELICe III DEPLlellvel L344. LL Wad» ILI Id Ct LI every way ule CAALL UppUsSILe
to what Morgenthau and his sinister satellite Harry Dexter White, alias Weit,
had so carefully planned and intrigued to bring about.


In summation it may be said that prehistoric and contemporary warfare share
the same essential characteristics. The main distinction between them is that in
prehistoric warfare all prisoners are killed as a matter of course, while in
contemporary warfare only the leaders are done to death. The employment of
captive enemies for forced labour for the benefit of their captors and of course
mass-deportations are characteristics of present-day warfare which have been
adopted from warfare as it developed after mankind had formed settled
communities, a development which will be considered in the next chapter.


WULILELeLICe III DEPLlellvel L344. LL Wd» ILI Id Ct It every way LIC CAALL UppUsSILLe
to what Morgenthau and his sinister satellite Harry Dexter White, alias Weit,
had so carefully planned and intrigued to bring about.


In summation it may be said that prehistoric and contemporary warfare share
the same essential characteristics. The main distinction between them is that in
prehistoric warfare all prisoners are killed as a matter of course, while in
contemporary warfare only the leaders are done to death. The employment of
captive enemies for forced labour for the benefit of their captors and of course
mass-deportations are characteristics of present-day warfare which have been
adopted from warfare as it developed after mankind had formed settled
communities, a development which will be considered in the next chapter.


Chapter 2 — Organized Warfare


Wars in prehistoric times were unplanned, unrelated, and probably rare
happenings. They might be what we should term wars of aggression, but they
were certainly not wars of planned aggression.


A community living somewhere in northern Europe, let us say on the shores of
the Baltic, would find their hunting grounds becoming less and less able to
support them owing to the gradual advance of icefields from Scandinavia. In
desperation, they would trek southward in search of less rigorous conditions
and would find such in, say, some river valley in southern France. The
inhabitants of this valley would resent this trespass on their hunting grounds.
A clash—quite unintended by both sides—would result. One side would be
wiped out or scattered, and for the victors life would proceed as peaceably as
of yore.


All this was changed when mankind began to practise agriculture and to form
settled communities. In the first place, this permitted a great increase in the
density of populations. Secondly, it led for the first time to the accumulation in
one spot of stores of food and desirable articles, such as weapons, tools,
pottery and jewellery—that is to say, wealth, or to use military nomenclature,
loot.


From this early period at the dawn of history, wars of conquest must be dated.
The hunters, and, after the domestication of animals, herdsmen and shepherds
of the surrounding country, were inevitably filled with covetousness when
they visited those early agricultural settlements in the valleys of the Nile and
Euphrates. It is no accident that the composer of the Ten Commandments
included covetousness among those sins under the particular displeasure of the
Almighty. Perhaps, as he wrote, he had just seen in the eyes of some half-
savage visitors to his native city the feelings which they could not disguise
when they contrasted the wealth and comfort which they saw around them
with their own poverty and precarious mode of life.


From the earliest times, the settled agricultural communities along the Nile
and Euphrates were subjected to periodic raids and invasions by the savage
tribes inhabiting the desert or mountain hinterland. These alternated with


preventive wars undertaken in self- protection by the agricultural
communities. The news would come in that the tribes were planning another
attack and, to forestall this attack, a punitive expedition would be sent forth.


Thus, as early as the times before the first dynasty in Egypt, and in the days of
the Sumerian Kings of Southern Mesopotamia, two of the commonest
varieties of warfare had arisen—the war of conquest undertaken to acquire the
property of others, and the preventative war designed to frustrate an expected
attack. These two varieties of warfare together form one of the two main
divisions into which warfare may be divided, namely primary warfare, that is
warfare between combatants at different stages of civilization.

Most of the really important wars of history have been primary wars.


The second of these two main divisions of warfare may be labelled secondary
warfare. Secondary wars are wars between combatants at the same or
approximately the same stage of civilization. In this division are included all
civil wars and, in fact, all the wars in this division are in essence only civil
wars. Although often extremely protracted and sanguinary, their results are
generally far less important than those of primary wars.


The question of primary and secondary wars will be dealt with in more detail
later in this book. It is only necessary here to make clear the distinction
between them since they are often confused. From the standpoint of world
history, the political and cultural results of a war between states at different
levels of civilization are always important, even though the bloodshed may be
small. In wars between states having similar or identical civilizations, the
institutional changes are often unimportant although the loss of life may be
very great.


It is a curious fact that, although the civilized inhabitants of the Nile Valley
lived under the constant menace of primary warfare in the shape of devastating
invasions by the savage tribes of Syria, Nubia and the Libyan desert, they
seemed to have indulged with enthusiasm in secondary warfare, that is to say,
in minor wars between the various principalities into which Egypt, in pre-
dynastic times, was divided. What an attack by savage nomadic tribes upon a
civilized agricultural community could entail, we can ascertain from the


glowing description of such an attack contained in the Book of Joshua. There
varn nand that tha Linhuansira wethan tharr inern dnd tha land Af Canann nlar. Chath


WE ledu Uldl UE FICVIE WS, WIIEL! WEY HIvdueUu UE IdllU UL Udliddll SIE W DVUUI
man and woman, young and old, and ox and sheep and ass with the sword ...
the young man and the virgin, the suckling also and the man with grey hairs.”


In view of this ghastly performance in which the holy men of Israel evidently
took great pride, it is certainly remarkable that the prophet Samuel should
have had the effrontery to chide King Agag because “his sword had made
women childless.” One cannot help wondering why it did not occur to the
King of Amalek to make the obvious retort. It may be in fact that he did so
retort, but the Hebrew scribe in attendance did not think his words worthy of
record. Alternatively, it must be remembered that Samuel had appointed
himself judge-executioner and, therefore, it is likely that, in his role of judge,
he ruled any defence or objection by the prisoner as per se irrelevant. We are
required to assume that Samuel throughout acted on inspiration from On High
which, if the case, satisfactorily explains how he managed to grasp the most
novel discovery of recent international jurisprudence, namely, that the most
assured method of securing a conviction is to permit the accuser also to act the
part of judge.


Returning to the times when civilization first dawned in Egypt, we find
evidence in plenty of primary wars in the shape of periodic invasions by
various barbarous peoples alternating with preventive wars, leading to
punitive expeditions penetrating far into Sinai, Nubia, and, even Syria. At the
same time, secondary wars were frequent in the shape of civil wars between
the native Egyptians.


The inhabitants of the lower Euphrates Valley were even more exposed to
attack by barbarous neighbours than their contemporaries living in the Valley o
the Nile. Precisely the same conditions existed there, however. Invasions were
sometimes victoriously repulsed and at other times they led to massacres,
devastation and the enslavement of the survivors. Invariably, however, the
victorious nomads ended by adopting the civilization of the vanquished, so that
in a few generations life proceeded very much as before.

Energetic rulers waged preventative wars and led punitive expeditions far into
the mountains of Elam and Armenia and even into the plains of Syria. The
ancient inhabitants of the Euphrates Valley were more warlike than the
inhabitants of the Valley of the Nile and frequent civil wars occurred between
the leading city states, Ur, Kish, Akkad, Lagash, Umma and Eridu.


One of the earliest records of those distant times which have survived is the
famous Stele of the Vultures, now in the Louvre, dating from about 2700 B.C.
On it King Eannatum of Lagash commemorates his defeat of the men of the
neighbouring city of Umma. He proudly claims to have killed 3,500 of them
and the stele takes its name from one of its panels portraying vultures
partaking of the bodies of the slain. King Eannatum shows himself to have
been a civilized opponent. The citizens of Umma were granted an honourable
negotiated peace by which they ceded to Lagash certain fields lying between
the two cities, the new frontier being marked by a newly dug ditch,
safeguarded, no doubt, for all time by the invocation of the curses of the gods
upon the head of anyone who should presume to vary this settlement by
unilateral action. From the terms of peace it is clear that no demand for
unconditional surrender was made; the gentlemanly Eannatum would no doubt
have considered this bad form as between neighbours. A mock-trial of the
leaders of the citizens of Umma apparently did not appeal to him: probably he
would have found it an embarrassing farce. Eannatum was satisfied with the
annexation of some fields, and the payment of an indemnity in grain by annual
instalments. Realizing that the prosperity of his subjects was dependent on the
prosperity of their neighbours, he did not insist that a valuable market for the
goods of Lagash should either be destroyed or turned into a slum. Altogether,
warfare in those remote times in Mesopotamia seems to have attained much
the same stage of reason and restraint as warfare between civilized European
Powers during the nineteenth century.


Such moderation would, of course, only have been practised in secondary
wars; in wars that is to say between states of similar culture such as Lagash
and Umma. It would not have been practised in primary warfare, even by so
enlightened a monarch as King Eannatum, against the mountaineers of Elam or
the nomads of Arabia. But, with regard even to primary warfare, an entirely
new and potent factor was beginning to make its influence felt as a
consequence of the introduction of agriculture and the establishment of settled
communities.


To a hunting community, a prisoner of war is merely an extra mouth to feed. He
is an encumbrance to be retained, if at all, only long enough to provide
diversion by torturing him to gaeat Generally, prisoners taken in battle would


Lee AS eet 2 E EEE A ee ee Se a R eee Sek


tv


be disposed OT summary with a stone CluD.


But as soon as a state of civilization had been reached in which there were
fields to be tilled, walls, temples, palaces and tombs to be built, and mines to
be worked, a prisoner of war ceased to be merely an extra mouth to feed, and
came to possess a definite economic value as a slave.


Professor M. R. Davie expresses the opinion that “the mitigation of war
received its greatest impetus from the institution of slavery which put an end
to slaughter and alleviated torture in order not to impair the efficiency of the
captive as a worker.”


The direct, and still more the indirect, consequences of this innovation were
far reaching. Portable loot ceased to be the only glittering prize, or, in fact, the
chief of the glittering prizes, offered by a successful war. Punitive expeditions
undertaken by civilized communities against barbarous neighbours ceased to
be arduous and costly measures only to be undertaken to frustrate an attack,
but became profitable slave collecting expeditions. In wars of conquest
between civilized states, frequently the proceeds of the sale of prisoners of
war was the most satisfactory feature of victory in the eyes of the victors. This
was always the case in preventative wars, waged by civilized states to
safeguard their frontiers—such, for example, as the wars of the Romans in
Gaul and Germany.


An equally important consequence of the introduction of slavery was that it
relieved a section of the community from the necessity of taking part in any
form of manual labour. Thus arose, for the first time in the history of mankind,
a leisured class not dependent on its own exertions for maintenance and with
little to do except when called upon to take part in war. Since slaves performed
manual labour, there gradually became implanted in this class the idea there
was something degrading about taking part in any form of labour. In short, to
work was equivalent to sinking to the level of a slave. The only form of work
which a member of the leisured class could undertake without loss of dignity
was work connected with warfare, since from such work slaves were naturally
debarred. Once implanted, this idea continued to flourish unchallenged in
influential circles in most countries down to 1918.


The establishment of a leisured class, the members of which could only justify
their existence even to themselves by taking part in or preparing for war,
gradually introduced an entirely new variety of warfare. Hitherto, wars had
been waged as a means to an end— for example, to find additional territory for
a surplus population, to collect loot, whether portable property or slaves, to
extort tribute from a weaker neighbour, or to forestall an expected attack. But,
from the rise of a leisured class onward there will be found numerous
examples of wars in which such objects play quite a secondary role. These
considerations served merely as excuses for war. Such wars, for want of a
better term, may be labelled wars for glory.


Wars for glory are the natural expression of the need of a ruling military caste,
cut off by an oppressive sense of its own dignity from taking part in activities
open to civilians, to find an outlet for its energies. Brought up to regard
military exploits as alone worthy of admiration, only in warfare can the
members of such a caste prove themselves worthy of their ancestors and of the
traditions of the service which is their sole pride. Only on the battlefield can
they escape boredom and find fulfilment. In days when warfare was conducted
in accordance with rules which controlled and kept within limits the
destruction and suffering inseparable from warfare, this attitude of mind
enjoyed considerable respect. To regard warfare as a means of self-expression
was formerly considered picturesque and romantic, whereas now it appears
only grotesque or exasperating. It depended, of course, on the unquestioned
belief that success in a war demonstrated the superior courage and general
manliness of the victors, where as now, as Captain Liddell Hart has well
pointed out, it merely demonstrates that the victors possess greater resources
or superior technical equipment. During the last decade, the idea of making
war for honour or glory has become completely obsolete and may soon
become incomprehensible. Perhaps it was always more readily associated with
Don Quixote than with St. George. Still there may be something to be said for
the obsolete view which esteems fighting in order to prove oneself worthy of a
tradition of which one is justly proud. It is certainly a higher motive than
inducing others to fight so that by their fighting one can obtain possession of
an oil field or eliminate a trade rival.


In the earliest times, no dominant military caste seems to have arisen in


Mesopotamia. On one panel of the Stele of the Vultures above-mentioned,
Wind Dannntim had himanlf nantunera A oat than hand af n nhalanw AF Kanes


INI Edad LUILE LIdU LHHLHSELL pul udayceu dl LIC LItdU ULI d pHdldlix UL litdvy
infantry armed with large square shields and copper-tipped spears. To fight in
this formation would have required some peacetime training and leadership by
officers who had studied the art of war. Judged by their own accounts of their
achievements, there was no lack in those days of able generals.

Eannatum tells us that he waged successful wars from Elam in the East to Ur
in the West. A later monarch, the famous Sargon of Akkad (2360-2305 B.C.),
boasts that he conquered “all lands from the rising to the setting of the sun.”
One of the latter’s successors, Naram-Sin (2280-2242 B.C.), considered his
conquests entitled him to adopt the title of “King of the Four Quarters of the
World.” When Babylon rose to supremacy in Mesopotamia, a widespread
Empire was consolidated by the famous Hammurabi (1728-1676 B.C.) and his
SuUCCeSSOTS.


But the inhabitants of lower Mesopotamia, whether of Sumerian or Semitic
stock, were not primarily a military people. Their main concerns were
agriculture and trade. To find a state created by and existing for successful
warfare, we must pass over some nine hundred years which followed the reign
of King Hammurabi, and come to the beginning of the ninth century B.C.,
when the Kings of Assyria had established themselves as the most powerful
rulers in Western Asia.


The Empire of Assyria demands consideration in some detail as the
outstanding example of a state which existed mainly by warfare for warfare.
Other nations which have excelled in warfare have excelled also in other
activities. The Romans were not only soldiers but statesmen, law makers and
builders. The Normans produced great rulers, builders and ecclesiastics. The
Germans of modern times have excelled in science, music and literature. But
the Assyrians were interested in and were solely pre-eminent in warfare.
Many of their rulers were, indeed, indefatigable builders of huge palaces, but
they used the vast wall spaces chiefly for bas-reliefs which depicted their
glorious military achievements. Assyrian artists reached very high levels of
achievement, but their work was usually limited to portraying battle and
hunting scenes. Apart from the art of war and the science of imperial
administration the Assyrians adopted almost entirely the civilization of their
neighbours and kinsmen, especially the Babylonians, though they did make
noteworthy contributions to sculpture and to literature, particularly in the


compilation of the royal annals.


Like Prussia in the seventeenth century, the greatness of Assyria can be traced
to her original natural weakness. Of all the German states, Prussia had the
longest and most exposed frontiers: to put a stop to repeated invasions by
predatory neighbours, the Great Elector established a strong army, the
victories of which laid the foundations of a great military tradition. In the same
way, Assyria, in part a wide plain lying between the upper Euphrates and the
upper Tigris, was exposed to attack by the mountain tribes of Kurdistan and
Armenia to the East and North, to invasions by the powerful princes of Syria
to the West, and to tribute-collecting expeditions by the kings of Babylon to
the South. For centuries, invasions and raids had been patiently endured, but at
length there arose less patient rulers who began to lead more and more
frequently punitive expeditions against the most troublesome of Assyria’s
enemies, the fierce mountain tribes of Armenia. In these petty wars in most
difficult country, a standing army of veteran troops was gradually established
which lay ready to hand when a ruler should arise capable of realizing the
possibilities which the possession of such a weapon offered. It was perhaps
inevitable that this army, originally created for defence, would sooner or later
be employed for aggrandizement.


As a consequence of this employment, the fact has been long overlooked that
Assyria performed a real service to the civilized nations of the Middle East by
providing a barrier between them and the wild nomadic tribes of Central Asia.
In recognition of this service, Professor A. T. Olmstead has preferred to call the
Assyrians the “shepherd dogs of Mesopotamian civilization” rather than the
“wolves” they have been called by earlier historians. From their
contemporaries, however, the Assyrians received no such recognition. They
were regarded with unqualified fear and hatred. Not until after three centuries
of security from external foes, when the Sythian hordes broke through the
Assyrian barrier and carried fire and sword throughout the Middle East, was the
fact realized that there could exist an even greater evil than subjection to the
Assyrian yoke.


Perhaps the nearest parallel to the role of Assyria in the affairs of the ancient
Middle East is the role of Prussia in the affairs of modern Europe. Relying on
the possession of a splendid army originally created as the price of survival,


tha milana Af DNminnin nanma A fan thain nanminter anannannl annanulawter and ill xl


LIC LULCLS UL FLUSSId Cd LLICU LUL LLICIL CUULILLY Heel dl ULIDUPUId LILY qaliu LiI-WwIll,
not only among foreigners but among their German fellow countrymen, by
their high-handed and aggressive dealings. As a consequence, few in Germany
now care to remember that German unity was first achieved by Prussian
efficiency, self-sacrifice and discipline; few in Western Europe yet realize the
fact that only so long as the army created by the Prussian Kings existed could
the possibility of attack and subjugation by enemies from the East be safely
disregarded.


For many centuries the history of Assyria seems to have been that of a minor
oriental state. At times, she rose to power under able rulers—such as Tiglath
Pileser I (1120-1100 B.C.)—and then under feeble rulers sank into obscurity
again.


The military potentialities of the Assyrian veterans were fully realized by
Asshurmazirpal who ascended the throne of Nineveh in 883 B.C. He began by
chastising in eight consecutive campaigns the mountaineers of the North with
unprecedented severity. He then turned his attention westward and reached the
Mediterranean where the rich Phoenician cities of Tyre and Sidon purchased
safety by a payment of “gold, silver, tin and copper, woollen and linen
garments and much strong timber from Lebanon.” His successor,
Shalmaneser, extended his dominions from Syria to the Persian Gulf, and for
nearly three centuries we find an unbroken record of conquests which carried
the arms of Assyria over the entire Middle East as far as the banks of the Nile.


~ Probably, no other state in world history can compare with Assyria as the
incarnation of implacable, untiring, efficient militarism. In a later age, in the
Greek state of Sparta, all the comforts and amenities of life were sacrificed for
the benefit of military efficiency, but the Spartans made no contributions
worth mentioning to the art of war. A Spartan army was only a large
commando force composed of highly trained athletes fighting on foot and

-~ equipped like other Greek soldiers of the time. On the other hand, no other
people until the twentieth century so revolutionized the technique and methods
of warfare as did the Assyrians. An Assyrian army was composed of
specialists in every branch of warfare. There were regiments of heavy infantry
armed with shields and spears, regiments of archers and slingers, a chariot
corps, and light cavalry. There was a corps of sappers skilled in undermining


the walls of a town and in working the various types of movable battering
rams and siege towers, some with six wheels and some with four.

There was a pontoon section able to throw a bridge across a river or to supply
bladders upon which, when inflated, the infantry was trained to cross a stream
by swimming.

There was a transport section with camels to carry baggage and even field
kitchens for use during campaigns. Last, but not least, there were execution
squads, expert in disposing of prisoners of war in a score of ingenious and
painful ways.


When the records of the Assyrian warrior kings were first discovered and
deciphered in the mid-nineteenth century, our worthy Victorian forefathers
were filled with uncomprehending horror when they read the awesome details
of atrocities so proudly described therein. In their eyes, Asshurnazirpal and his
successors on the throne of Assyria appeared as sadistic monsters, the subjects
of a pathological obsession. But we, more fortunately placed to understand
their mental processes, can see that they might have given a plausible
explanation of their conduct. One reason why the Assyrians so horrified
readers of their history a century ago was that less was then known about the
military excesses and massacres of their predecessors and contemporaries


When the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima in 1945, whereby a
civilian population of some 70,000 was wiped out, it was explained that this
act in fact saved the lives of many soldiers, who would otherwise have been
sacrificed in costly landings on the Japanese mainland. Justification along the
same lines can be urged with regard to the British terror bombing campaign
waged against Germany from after the adoption of the Lindemann Plan in
March 1942 until the end of hostilities in May 1945, with the exception only
of the bombing of Dresden in February, 1945, which took place after victory
had become certain and the war had ceased to be a military operation. Could
not King Asshurnazirpal have said in reply to his critics: “When I impaled,
blinded, flayed alive, burned and otherwise tortured to death my prisoners, the
terror of my glorious name spread through the surrounding lands. As a result,
valuable human life was saved. Thereafter, when I desired to capture a city,
my gallant troops had no longer to storm it, suffering cruel losses; since the
inhabitants came forth straightway to kiss the dust at my feet. Thereby the
precious lives of my brave soldiers were spared.”


That there is some substance in this argument cannot be denied. It fails,
however, to account for the fact that Asshurnazirpal and other monarchs
preferred bas-reliefs portraying these horrors to most other decorations for the
walls of their palaces.

Evidently, therefore, they must have taken pleasure in being reminded of them.
It is upon this predilection that the charge of sadism can be based, and not upon
their method of dealing with prisoners of war in itself, which was only the
traditional method inherited from their prehistoric forefathers, carried out by
the Assyrians on a larger scale and in a more spectacular manner. Many
peoples, it is true, have dealt with captive enemies in accordance with this
venerable tradition both in ancient and modern times. The reputation of the
Red Indians of North America is particularly black in this respect, although
some have contended that they only adopted such practices, along with warlike
and predatory habits, from the European settlers. This charitable view is,
however, at variance with the evidence of Samuel de Champlain, one of the
earliest French pioneers in Canada, who professes to have been horrified by the
treatment meted out to some Iroquois prisoners by the Huron allies of the
French after a skirmish in which, thanks to the firearms of Champlain and his
men, the Hurons were successful. It speaks volumes for the skill and ingenuity
of untutored savages that they should have been able to shock a Christian
European of the sixteenth century.


Until restrained by more civilized or at any rate more powerful neighbours
professing different and perhaps more artificial standards of conduct, most
savage peoples have observed the ancient traditional practice in their dealing
with enemies taken captive in war. Among some peoples an interesting
variation of traditional practice is met with. The actual work of disposing of
prisoners is handed over to the women, the men merely acting as spectators.
The authorities differ as to whether this custom was due in the first place to
masculine indolence, to the longer persistence of malice in the female mind, or
to recognition of the superior dexterity of the feminine hand in achieving
artistic results. At all events it is certain that prisoners in the hands of the
Apaches of Arizona, of many nomad tribes of Arabia and the Sahara, or of the
Druses of Syria have never had much occasion for thankfulness that their
captors had adopted this strange custom.


Thana ta na tunnan that nner man h mnntam awitatand amana tha Annrminna VATA harra


LUCILE 1S WU ULE Uldtl dilly SUCH CUSLUILT CAXISLEU dILIUIIP LIE ASS YLIdLIS. VVE Lidve
no evidence that a woman ever secured admission to the military execution
squads. There seem to have been in the Assyrian army no regiments of lady
warriors such as were a dread feature of the army of old Dahomey, the
powerful West African state founded in the early 18th century. In the latter
native African kingdom, which in some respects bore a crude resemblance to
Assyria, there existed a crack corps of virgin warriors, whose virginity, it may
be added, was safeguarded by the infliction of a horrible death in the case of
moral lapses. Dahomey also provided a novel variation with regard to the
treatment of prisoners of war. The Assyrians, as we have seen, executed
enemy leaders publicly in various ingenious ways and enslaved the survivors.
The negro kings of Dahomey trained their schoolboy subjects in the use of
weapons and accustomed them to the sight of bloodshed by handing prisoners
of war over to them for execution.


Original variation from accepted practice did not appeal to the Assyrians.
Strictly practical and conservative in outlook, they believed that the activities
of women should be limited to bearing future warriors, to solacing the leave of
warriors at home from the various fronts, and to taking part with due
enthusiasm in the annual “V Day” rejoicings. Executions of prisoners of war,
they considered, should be carried out with proper pomp and ceremony
without regard to utilitarian considerations unfitting to the solemnity of the
occasion. Another item which does credit to the Assyrians is that their victory
massacres were restricted mainly to males. There was little of the
indiscriminate massacring of women and children—even young babies—
which was so common among many ancient oriental peoples.


The collection of trophies has, in all ages, exercised a singular fascination
over the military mind. After the war of 1870, every public square in
Germany had its display of weapons captured at Worth, Sedan or Metz;
similarly, after 1918, every town and village in Great Britain had pieces of
artillery prominently displayed as mementoes of the “War- to-end-war”’—
from which disfigurements they were, by the irony of fate, only rescued by
another war following shortly which made it necessary to melt down these
mementoes for munitions.


As one might expect, the Assyrians had a passion for trophies, a passion no
doubt inherited from their prehistoric forefathers. Bulky chattels such as


cannon not being available, savages are limited to a twofold choice. Most
savages, peoples as widely separated as the Maoris of New Zealand, the
Indians of northern Mexico and the Negroes of Dahomey, have selected the
human skull as the memento or symbol of victory. The weapons of a primitive
enemy may be stolen or reproduced, but an enemy’s skull is conclusive proof
of his defeat. While warfare remained on a small scale, skulls of deceased
enemies served only for display: individual heroes erected them on poles
before their front doors. But when slaughter on a more extensive scale began,
more elaborate collections became possible. In popular belief the credit has
been given to the medieval Tartar Conqueror, Tamerlane, for originating the
idea of erecting pyramids composed of the skulls of fallen enemies. But, more
than two thousand years before the days of Tamerlane, we find the Assyrians
proudly erecting pyramids of skulls. Thus King Tiglath Pileser records that
while campaigning “by the shores of the Upper Sea” (probably the Black Sea),
he captured a city and “piled high the heads of the inhabitants before the gates
thereof.” The only credit for originality which can justly be given to
Tamerlane is that he erected pyramids of skulls of outstanding size—or at least
such was the firm opinion of his contemporaries.


As an alternative to collecting heads, some savage peoples have preferred to
collect the private parts of their enemies. In modern times this predilection has
been displayed by the Sumalis and Gallas of Northern Africa, certain tribes of
Arabia and Syria, and the Kaffirs of South Africa, not forgetting, of course, our
gallant allies in the last war, the Abyssinians. The immoderate gratification of
this taste after their great victory of Adowa over the Italians in 1896 aroused
such intense horror throughout Italy that some forty years later it greatly
facilitated Benito Mussolini’s efforts to rouse his countrymen to undertake the
reconquest of Abyssinia. Tastes vary in this as in so many other matters, and fo
reasons unknown the Assyrians seem to have limited themselves to skull
collecting.


The Assyrians would have had nothing to learn from the most up-to-date
technique with regard to despoiling a vanquished country and to insuring that
it should be open to attack for the future. A Reparations Commission and a
Disarmament Commission both military and industrial, must have functioned
as permanent state departments. One of the most interesting of the bas-reliefs
now in the British Museum shows in the background the walls of a captured


city being demolished with pick and spade by Assyrian sappers lest they
should become a menace to Assyrian security. In the foreground is shown a
procession of soldiers in military formation marching along a path by the bank
of a stream, each man carrying some article of plunder. Contrasted with this
unit, clearly acting under the orders of the Reparations Commission, is a
straggling line also composed of soldiers laden with plunder, but in this case,
scampering along through a wood. The small size of the figures and their
hurried unobtrusive progress screened by trees, obviously symbolizes the
appropriation of the goods of the vanquished by individual plunderers,
doubtful of the full approval of the authorities, but relying upon the repeated
official exhortations not to pamper the vanquished. The whole, masterly in
composition and execution, must be regarded as the earliest example of the
recruiting poster.


With regard to warfare in all its varied aspects, the Assyrians maintained a
rigid sense of proportion; they never permitted one aspect to become so
exaggerated as to distort the whole. A religious people, they never sacked a
city nor executed an enemy war criminal without piously associating God with
the deed and, in all circumstances, they acted strictly in accordance with
traditional religious practice; on the other hand, they never allowed their
warlike activities to become subservient to religion like the Aztecs of Mexico
whose wars were fought mainly for the purpose of making prisoners for use as
human sacrifices in honour of their god, Huitzilopochtli. The Assyrians felt a
proper pride in collecting military trophies and carefully recorded the erection
of any pyramid of skulls of outstanding size but they never, like the Dyaks of
Borneo, permitted warfare to degenerate into simple head-hunting. No doubt,
the Assyrians derived keen satisfaction from the gruesome rites of their “V
Days”, but such remained to them merely an enjoyable ceremony fitly
marking the end of a campaign. A very different attitude this, for example,
from the attitude of the Iroquois of North America to whom a campaign was
but an irksome, if necessary, preliminary to the customary orgy round the
torture stake.

To the Assyrians, religion, the collecting instinct, and even the gratification
of sadistic impulses remained subsidiary emotions, adorning warfare but in
no way essential to its conduct. To them, as in the opinion of Nietzsche, a
good war was its own justification.


No practice of the Assyrians can be of greater interest to the present
generation than their method of dealing with the survivors of a vanquished
population by mass-deportation.


Whether the Assyrians originated this practice is not known with certainty, but
they certainly adopted it as a routine procedure and carried it out on a scale
unprecedented until the present day.


In defence of the Assyrians, it is only fair to point out that there are
fundamental differences between the mass-deportations carried out by them
and those of recent times. In the first place, the intent in the two cases was
quite different. The purpose of the Assyrian rulers was to create a
homogeneous population and, to this end, it was their custom to transfer the
surviving population of a recently conquered country to some distant part of
the empire, at the same time filling their vacant places with the inhabitants of
another conquered district intermingled with voluntary settlers from Assyria
itself, so as to provide the new population with a loyal core. Such shiftings of
population can better be termed mass-transfers. They are obviously totally
different from recent mass- deportations which served the simple twofold
purpose of wreaking vengeance on the outlying members of a vanquished race
by robbing them of all they possessed.


Again, the methods adopted in the two cases are totally different. The
evidence of the Assyrian bas-reliefs indicates that the people forcibly
transferred from one country to another were allowed to take with them to
their new homes their portable property and cattle. Brutality may not have
been lacking, but it would not have had official approval since the intention
was that the peoples transferred and their descendants should ultimately
become loyal subjects and supporters of the King of Assyria. There can be no
real comparison between this procedure, drastic though it may have been, and
the contemporary practice of collecting droves of defenceless persons, men,
women, and children, to the number of several millions, against whom no
personal charge of any kind is made (any so charged would now be summarily
murdered), selected merely because their native language is the same as that
of the inhabitants of the state over the border which happens to have been
defeated in a war, robbing them of all they possess, and then dumping them in
a strange country already overcrowded and short of food, there to live or die


na Fata miaht danenn Linen in naan Aner tha mantien naf mnnn dAnananntntiana in


d> Idle HMUSHUL UELLEe, MLELE M VUL Udy UIC LMULIVE UL HIdSS-UCPULLGULULIS 15
mainly greed, combined with a desire for revenge on the vanquished state, if
only, as it were, by proxy.


A further point may be urged in extenuation of the Assyrians. The latter were
generally, dealing with semi-nomadic peoples, or peoples who had only
recently acquired by conquest the lands from which they were forcibly
deported. The injustice and suffering involved must, in consequence, have
been far less than in such mass-deportations as those recently carried out by
the Czechs and Poles in the case of the inhabitants of Pomerania, Silesia, and
the Sudetenland, who were expelled from lands which their ancestors had
occupied for many centuries. Probably the mass transfers of the Assyrians
generally amounted to little more than the rounding up of the primitive
agriculturists, herdsmen, and shepherds of a thinly-populated country and
transferring them to a distant but equally desirable country made vacant for
their reception. There is no real comparison between this and the expulsion,
for example, of the population of Silesia, a population whose right consisted
of undisturbed possession since the days when Plantagenet Kings ruled
England and the greater part of France, when Moscow was the capital of a
small principality paying tribute to the Tartar Khans, and only Red Indians
wandered where New York was long after to be built. The three million
despoiled victims of the Sudetenland could claim an even longer possessory
title since their ancestors were in occupation of this corner of Bohemia before
the first Anglo-Saxon pirates landed in England and long before the rest of
Bohemia was occupied by the Czechs.


For three centuries, the Assyrian shadow lay like a dark cloud over all
Western Asia. Striking first in one direction and then in another, their armies,
splendidly organised and equipped, never found an enemy able to resist them
in the open field when the odds were anything like equal. In turn, they
overthrew the famous chariotry of Syria, the heavy infantry of Babylonia, and
the archers of Egypt. Widespread revolts were crushed and powerful alliances
shattered. In 645 B.C., King Asshurbanipal, after a victorious campaign in
which the powerful state of Elam was crushed and systematically devastated,
celebrated a triumph of particular splendour. Three captive kings walked in
chains behind his chariot. It must have seemed on that proud “V Day” that the
Assyrian Empire might well endure for ever.


Within less than forty years of that day the Assyrian Empire was blotted out so
completely that it soon became nothing but a hazy memory kept alive only by
mention in the Jewish scriptures and stray references preserved in the writings
of later Greek authors. It was not until the mid-nineteenth century when the
records of the Assyrian Kings were discovered and deciphered, that their
achievements became more than legendary.


The comparison has often been made between the Assyrian Empire and the
Second Reich founded by Bismarck. Such comparisons may not be odious, but
they are often difficult to establish. Any such comparison is hardly
reconcilable with the fact that the Reich, after its foundation in 1871,
preserved unbroken peace with its neighbours until 1914, a period of forty-
three years period during which these neighbours all under took aggressive
wars, Great Britain in Egypt and South Africa, France in Tunis and Indo-
China, Russia in the Balkans against Turkey and in Manchuria against Japan,
the United States against Spain, and even Italy against Turkey in Tripoli. On
the other hand, in its swift and dramatic downfall at least, the Assyrian Empire
certainly offers some scope for comparison with the Third Reich established
by Adolf Hitler.


When, in 645 B.C., King Ashhurbanipal celebrated the last great “V Day” of
Assyrian arms, the military strength of the Empire, seemingly unshakable, was
spread out over a vast area from the Nile to the mountains of modern Persia.
Suddenly, without warning, there issued from the far and unknown North one
of those great hordes of nomads such as in historic times the plains of Eurasia
have periodically sent forth. This horde of nomads, known to their victims as
Sythians, was no less formidable than the similar hordes of Huns, Magyars,
Mongols, Tartars, and Turks destined to follow them. They swept in an
irresistible flood over the entire Middle East as far as the borders of Egypt.
Resistance in the field was overwhelmed by weight of numbers: only strongly
fortified cities escaped devastation and pillage. Then, after a decade of blood
and rapine, the Sythians withdrew as suddenly and mysteriously as they had
appeared.


All the states of Western Asia suffered from this visitation, but the Assyrian
Empire, the largest and most complex political structure of the time, was


chalran ta ita FArndntiana Tt rirnan n nt tha nnunntinn nf tha AN aaerinan Litah


SLdKEL LU ILS LOULIUGUULIS. LL WaS HUL WE PpldaClice UL UIE /ASSYILId1 T111
Command to record disasters and we have no details of the fate of the Assyrian
armies which tried to withstand in battle the rush of the wild horsemen of the
steppes. Only the great cities were safe behind their walls: the countryside was
devastated. Immediately the wave of barbarians had withdrawn laden with
plunder to their northern homes, the peoples of the Middle East joined together
to end the Assyrian menace for ever.


The United Nations of the 7th century B.C. were united only in their hatred of
the Assyrians. We may be sure that the shattered remnants of the Assyrian
army resisted to the last and, when the odds against them were not too
fantastic, continued to win splendid but profitless victories. Finally, however,
only the capital, Nineveh, held out behind the vast and scientifically planned
fortifications erected by King Sennacherib. After a long siege, the Medes
broke into the doomed city in August, 612 B.C., and the last Assyrian King in
despair heaped up his treasures in one vast funeral pile and perished in the
blaze with his wives, chief officers of state, and the surviving generals of his
army.


We may not feel surprised, perhaps, that, having thus triumphed, the United
Nations immediately turned upon each other. The Medes attacked the Lydians,
and the Egyptians came into conflict with the Babylonians. The latter, under
Nebuchadnezzar, defeated the Egyptians and established a short-lived empire
which faithfully reproduced all the characteristic features of Assyrian rule—
wars of conquest, mass deportations, massacres and mutilations, as the Second
Book of Kings bears eloquent witness. Within a few decades, the Babylonians
had been conquered by the Medes, who, in their turn, were overthrown by the
Persians under Cyrus, who established an empire of unprecedented extent
which realized in essentials the aims towards which the later Assyrian Kings
had been striving.


Thus was swiftly and utterly blotted out the great Assyrian Empire, leaving to
our Victorian forefathers a memory which to them seemed to symbolize
bestial force, cold- blooded ferocity, and ruthlessness systematized. We,
however, with our wider experience of such matters, should be ready to grant
to the Assyrians the credit of having expressed warfare in terms which, for
simplicity and purity, have never been surpassed. In their wars may be found
all the essentials of warfare without a trace of scruples or restraints.


The rules and restrictions by which warfare later became entangled and
cramped would have seemed to the generals of King Asshurbanipal just as
artificial and vexatious as they now seem to an air marshal of to-day.


It is not only because the Assyrians were a people chiefly interested in war, but
because they were so rigidly orthodox and conventional in their attitude to, and
dealings with, anything connected with war which makes a study of them
almost sufficient in itself for a student of warfare. Until the present generation,
the course of wars in modern times has been influenced by many extraneous
influences, moral, ethical and religious. The Assyrians acknowledged the
existence of little except military considerations. If they were extreme, it was
only because they carried to its furthest limits conventional military practice.
One feels that, if one knew all there was to know about the Assyrians, there
would remain nothing essential to learn about the nature of warfare.


The rules and restrictions by which warfare later became entangled and
cramped would have seemed to the generals of King Asshurbanipal just as
artificial and vexatious as they now seem to an air marshal of to-day.


It is not only because the Assyrians were a people chiefly interested in war, but
because they were so rigidly orthodox and conventional in their attitude to, and
dealings with, anything connected with war which makes a study of them
almost sufficient in itself for a student of warfare. Until the present generation,
the course of wars in modern times has been influenced by many extraneous
influences, moral, ethical and religious. The Assyrians acknowledged the
existence of little except military considerations. If they were extreme, it was
only because they carried to its furthest limits conventional military practice.
One feels that, if one knew all there was to know about the Assyrians, there
would remain nothing essential to learn about the nature of warfare.


Chapter 3 — Europe’s Civil Wars


As pointed out in the last chapter, the first great step towards the amelioration
of the cruelties and crudities of primitive war fare arose from the institution of
slavery which bestowed on prisoners taken in war an economic value to their
captors as slaves.


What produced the next important step forward in this direction?


The answer seems obvious. Suppose a stranger to this planet were first asked
to peruse the Sermon on the Mount and was then informed that a religion
professing to be based on its teaching was within three centuries accepted as a
state religion by the most civilized section of mankind. Would not this stranger
immediately decide that the effect of this must have been completely to
transform the conduct of war if not, as between Christians at any rate, to
abolish war altogether?


A priori this is certainly what might reasonably be expected. Still, as we all
know, after nearly two thousand years, Christianity has not abolished war,
neither has Christianity to any very marked extent, even as between
Christians, transformed it. To what extent and at what date it began to exercise
an ameliorating influence is a matter of dispute. It is also a matter of dispute to
what extent it was a case of cause and effect that its acceptance by the rulers
and peoples of the Roman Empire and the decline and fall of the Roman
Empire were concurrent events. Be this as it may, the dissolution of the
Roman Empire was followed by the so-called Dark Ages, during which period
warfare was conducted with the most primitive savagery, although
Christianity was professed in the various barbarian kingdoms into which
Western Europe became divided.


If it be complained that the bloody doings of the Frankish and Gothic kings
cannot fairly be taken as representative of Christian conduct, in general, or of
warfare, in particular, we can turn to the Byzantine Empire where a
Christianized variety of Roman civilization survived down to the close of the
Middle Ages. The result, it is to be feared, will be disappointing. The
Byzantine emperors conducted their wars strictly in accordance with ancient
oriental tradition and, in spite of the fact that most of them were devout


Christians, little distinction can be detected except by the eye of faith between
their methods and those of the warrior kings of Assyria a thousand years
before. The principal claim to fame of one of the most successful rulers of the
Byzantine Empire, Basil the Bulgar-Slayer, is that he made it a practice in his
campaigns with the Bulgarians to put out the eyes of his prisoners, on one
occasion to the number of 15,000.


It is also an unfortunate fact, impossible to deny, that those European wars
which have been waged with special ferocity have been those waged in the
name of religion. As an early example, the famous Albigensian Crusade of
1209, inspired and directed by one of the greatest of the Popes, Innocent II, to
root out heresy in southern France, may be cited. A contemporary estimate
puts the total number of those who perished at 500,000. Exact statistics are
lacking, however, since the Crusaders, immersed in their pious labours, had
probably little more idea of the number of persons whom they had done to
death than have the crew of a modern bombing unit returning from an
operational flight over a densely populated residential area. At Béziers, the
entire population, to the number of some 20,000, men, women and children
were slaughtered “by reason of God’s wrath wondrously kindled against it.”
After the capture of Minerve, in place of the usual massacre, 140 leading
heretics were burnt together in one huge bonfire.


The Thirty Years War (1618-1648) supplies a late example of warfare between
Christians. Reliable, if incomplete, statistics are available in this instance, and
it is generally agreed that, as a result of this protracted struggle, one-third of
the population of Central Europe perished. It has been calculated the
population of Bohemia was reduced from three millions to 800,000. At the
beginning of the war, the important city of Augsburg had 70,000 inhabitants
and at the end only 18,000. For more than a generation after the war, one-third
of the arable land in North Germany remained uncultivated. Such appalling
massacres as that of Magdeburg in 1631 will bear comparison with similar
happenings in ancient or modern times. In brief, the preference expressed by
the Emperor Ferdinand to rule over a desert rather than a country filled with
heretics, was very substantially realized.


The evidence of sixteen centuries thus clearly demonstrates that, whatever
consequences might have been expected in theory, the acceptance of


Chrictianityy had na nareantihla nractical influanca in miticaatina tha harharnainc


M4LILLOULGLLILy HAU HU pel Lepuvuict PL QGULLLLGAL LILIIUTILILEG Lit LIU AUIS, ult VALVaALVUUD


conduct of war.


On the other hand it is a fact that what, for want of a better term, is called
“civilized warfare” originated in Europe, and Christianity is, and for many
centuries has been, the religion of Europeans.


It cannot be too strongly stressed that what is called “civilized warfare” is a
European product and has never been practised outside Europe or in countries
not under European influence. In the East, warfare continued to be conducted
precisely as the Assyrians conducted their wars. When Nadir Shah invaded
India, in 1739, he acted exactly as Asshurbanipal acted when he invaded Elam.
When the Turks set about repressing the revolt of the Greeks in 1821, or the
revolt of the Bulgarians in 1876, they applied exactly the same methods as the
Persians of Darius’ time would have applied in the same circumstances.


Civilized warfare may, therefore, be defined as warfare conducted in
accordance with certain rules and restrictions subject to which the nations of
Europe became accustomed to wage their wars with each other. When they
had achieved military predominance, they also insisted that these rules and
restrictions should be observed by non-European States in wars with
Europeans.


It certainly requires explanation why the peoples of Europe, alone among the
peoples of the earth, should gradually have evolved a code of conduct
governing the waging of warfare, a code of conduct which, most ancient and
many modern authorities agree, is totally contrary to the whole spirit of war.
Why could not they have been content to wage war in the good old simple
way, as their forefathers had waged it, and with which so many great military
peoples of other Continents have remained content?


To answer this question regard must be had to the unique political
development of Europe. The following is a simple statement of facts, many of
which have never been wholly or even partly explained.


At the time of the birth of Christ, there existed on the largest continuous land
surface of the globe (divided by geographers into the continents of Europe,
Asia and Africa) three main centres of settled population, living independently


of each other, each of which had recently crystallized into an empire. The
first, known as the Roman Empire, centred round that unique geographical
feature known as the Mediterranean Sea and comprised some hundred million
inhabitants. The second great centre of population was centred in the valleys
of the Indus and the Ganges in Northern India. No statistics have survived
from which the number of its inhabitants can be estimated, but this area is
very large and has always been extremely fertile, so it may be safely assumed
that its population was comparable to that of the Roman Empire and to that of
the third great centre of population situated far away to the East in the valley
of the Yellow River in Northern China, which, as statistics show, even at that
early date, numbered not less than sixty millions.


The political development of these three main centres of population was
curiously different. In India, the Empire known as the Mauryan Empire,
established in the third century B.C., and reaching its zenith under the famous
Buddhist Emperor, Asoka (264 to 228 B.C.), soon dissolved into a number of
conflicting fragments. It had no successor for some eighteen hundred years
when the Mogul Empire was founded by the Mongol conqueror, Barbar. This
empire also dissolved within a century, leaving India the prey of invaders from
Europe, of whom the English, after a hard struggle with the French, ultimately
achieved supremacy.


In China, on the other hand, the Han Dynasty (202 B.C. to A.D. 220), after
flourishing for four hundred years, broke up approximately at the same time
as the contemporary Roman Empire. After a period of civil war and anarchy,
it was succeeded by the T’ang Dynasty, which flourished for three hundred
years. From the earliest times to the present day, Chinese history has consisted
of a succession of long periods of strong central government, separated by
relatively short periods of disunity and internal disorder. In 1933, Adolf
Hitler’s slogan—“Ein Volk, ein Reich, ein Fiihrer’—came as a novel and
stirring appeal to the peoples of Central Europe. To the Chinese, from the
beginning of their long history, the proposition “One people, one empire, one
emperor” seemed self- evident, although they frankly recognised that
incursions by barbarians or the shortcomings of an individual emperor might
now and then bring about an unwelcome but temporary interlude of disorder.
As a consequence, in China, unity has been regarded as a normal and natural
condition, subject only to temporary periodic lapses into anarchy, whereas, in


Tandin lana nnd hittan nawvnnamnnnann hanan nnaman tawsand tha nannla ta lanl nnan


ALUId, LULIE AHU VILLEL CAPELICLICE Hdd dLCUSLUILICU WE PEUPLE LU LOUK UPUIL
anarchy as normal. Thus, when Indian unity was re-established by the Mogul
emperors it was regarded as a unique achievement, Indian unity under the
Buddhist Emperors having passed away so long before that it had become
merely a dim memory of the learned.


In a nutshell, the settled populations of both India and China early crystallized
into strong centralized empires: but, whereas, in the case of China, the state
thus formed has survived apart from temporary eclipses to the present day, in
India, this crystallization had but a brief existence and amorphous political
conditions have prevailed, except for relatively short periods.


In Europe political development took a third and entirely different course. As
in India and China and at approximately the same time, Europe (or that part of
it bordering on the Mediterranean) crystallized into a strong centralized state.
Like the Mauryan Empire in India and the Han Empire in China, the Roman
Empire declined and broke up. But unlike the Han Empire, the Roman Empire
was never restored. Its downfall was final. And, unlike the case of India,
amorphous political conditions did not continue indefinitely. The peoples of
Europe soon began to crystallize into small independent states, each generally
(but not always) based on a more or less clearly defined geographical area.
This local crystallization is the distinctive characteristic of the political
development of Europe.

Europeans have for so long been accustomed to this local crystallization that
they find it hard to realize what an extraordinary development it is. In India,
until the establishment of British supremacy, civil wars went on without
cessation, but they were haphazard and disconnected happenings. One local
ruler or another, abler or more ambitious than his neighbours, would establish
his authority over an area of greater or lesser extent, and his successors would
maintain the state so formed for several generations. When, however, they
were ultimately overcome, the subjects of this state had never come to regard
this area as their “motherland”. Amid general indifference, it would become
divided up or merged in another equally arbitrarily formed area, and its exact
boundaries would soon be forgotten. Men fought for the love of fighting, from
personal ambition, for loot, or from loyalty to a certain leader, family or clan,
but never for the glory or aggrandizement of a geographical area personified as
a distinct entity such as Britannia, La France, or Germania. Even such a well-


marked geographical area as the Punjab, “the Land of the Five Rivers,” never
developed “a national consciousness.” Similarly, in China, the world has never
been troubled by the conflicting territorial ambitions of Sze-chwan and
Kweichow, the rights and wrongs of brave little Honan, or the integrity of the
frontiers of Shan-tung. No foreign prime minister has ever been moved to
acclaim Honan as “sublime in the jaws of peril” and no disinterested foreign
ecclesiastic has ever been inspired to pray, even for the briefest period, for Hu-
peh as “a beacon of religious freedom.”


In Europe, on the other hand, such states, with as little geographical
justification as Portugal and Holland, have arisen and survived with
practically unchanged frontiers for centuries. In Switzerland, three distinct
races, speaking three distinct languages, have long come to consider
themselves “a nation,” while, more remarkable still, the artificial union, so
late as 1830, of the Flemings, speaking a dialect of Dutch, and the French-
speaking Walloons, has blossomed forth into the national consciousness of
Belgium.


It is agreed that the Walloon-Fleming compound, under the name of Belgians,
“joined the European family of Nations” in 1850. There is no agreement,
however, as to precisely what is a nation in the special sense it has come to
mean in Europe. “Nationalism,” admits Sir John Marriott, “is a singularly
elusive term.” He proceeds to define it as “the sentiment which binds together
a body of people who have certain things in common and not infrequently
induces antagonism between one body of persons so connected and another.”
This antagonism, often violent and always quite irrational, is generally its
most outstanding characteristic. Professor Alfred E. Zimmern insists that it is
always “related to a definite home country.” But this “home country” need
have no natural boundaries, he admits, and may indeed be inhabited by
foreigners.


Although enjoying in essentials the same civilization and professing the same
religion, the peoples of Europe have gradually lost their sense of unity
inherited from the days of the Roman Empire. This sense of unity, so strong in
China, has been replaced by “national consciousness” linked with
geographical areas. Once national consciousness had developed in England,
France, and elsewhere, civil wars ceased to be haphazard and disconnected


happenings. Defeats had to be avenged while victories inspired ambitions to
achieve even greater victories. In this way, whatever its result might be, each
war paved the way to the next.


Unlike their contemporaries in India and China, the inhabitants of Europe were
able to indulge in civil wars with each other with relative impunity. In China,
any weakening of the central government through internal disorder was
inevitably followed by invasion by the wild nomadic peoples ever waiting
beyond the Great Wall for an opportunity to attack. In India, the penalty for
continual civil war was a succession of invasions through the Himalayan
Passes by the warlike peoples of Central Asia, each of which resulted in orgies
of slaughter and rapine. It was not until 1945, however, that the inhabitants of
Europe paid the natural penalty for civil war. Only three times after the
downfall of the Roman Empire had Europe been menaced by primary warfare
on a grand scale. Each time, the danger was averted, not so much through the
efforts of Europeans themselves as by good fortune.


The first occasion was at the close of the Dark Ages, when Europe was
threatened by invasion and conquest by the Saracens. Spain was conquered and
France invaded, but the Saracens were repulsed at Poitiers by Charles Martel,
and, more as a result of dissensions among the Saracens themselves than as a
consequence of this setback, the danger passed.


The second occasion was in the middle of the thirteenth century, at the very
time when European medieval civilization had reached its peak. This time, the
danger came from the formidable military machine that the great Mongol
conqueror, Genghis Khan, had recently created out of the wild horsemen of the
Steppes and with which he had overthrown, in turn, the great Empires of China
and Persia. After his death, his grandson, Batu, set forth in 1237 with a great
army, mainly composed of mounted archers, but supported by a corps of
Chinese engineers, equipped with portable catapults for hurling not only great
stones but masses of flaming naphtha, material for creating artificial smoke
screens, and probably, gunpowder for use in mines in siege work. Against this
highly- organized barbarian host, the peoples of Europe could put in the field
only feudal armies, individually brave but totally without discipline. In
addition, they were, as usual, divided amongst themselves by a dozen petty
civil wars, and, in particular, by the long-drawn-out conflict between the Holy


Roman Emperor and the Pope which had just reached a climax.


The great campaign of 1241-1242 is of particular interest at the present time
since it was fought over precisely the same area as the recent campaign of
1944-1945 between the Wehrmacht and the Red Army, was aimed at the same
objectives, and came to rest approximately on a line along which now runs the
so-called “Iron Curtain” that marks the present boundary between Europe and
Asia. It provides also a classic example of primary warfare, the issue at stake
being whether the extremely complex Christian medieval civilisation should be
replaced by the simple nomadic culture of an Asiatic khanate. Upon the one
side were the clansmen of High Asia, wonderful horsemen and splendid
archers but otherwise illiterate barbarians, and upon the other the civilization
that had already produced such men as Hildebrand and Innocent III, Frederick
II and St. Louis, Dante and St. Francis of Assisi, and from which the
civilization of the Modern World was destined to evolve.


The Mongol plan of campaign was Napoleonic in conception, design and
execution. First, the powerful Russian principalities were crushed in one great
battle and Kiev was razed to the ground. Then, the chivalry of Germany and
Poland under the Duke of Silesia, including a strong contingent of the famous
Teutonic Knights under their Grand Master himself, was annihilated at
Liegnitz, chiefly through the scientific use of an artificial smoke screen
throwing the Christian chivalry into confusion. Breslau, which held out so
heroically seven hundred years later against the Red Army, was taken and
sacked. Next, another wing of the Mongol host overthrew a great crusading
army with a backbone of veteran Knights Templars under the King of
Hungary near Tokay on the Sayo River.

Like the Teutonic Knights, the Knights Templars, mostly French, perished to a
man on the field, but in vain. Buda was stormed and sacked. City after city
was captured and their inhabitants methodically massacred. Advanced units of
the invaders had reached Neustadt on the Danube and had penetrated to the
Adriatic within a day’s march of Venice, when the death of the Great Khan in
far off Karakoram on the edge of the Gobi Desert caused the recall of the
Mongol armies. Thus was European civilization saved from destruction before
the gravity of the peril had become generally known. “There can be no doubt,”
writes Harold Lamb, “that the Mongols could have destroyed the Emperor
Frederick and his armies and the French chivalry led by the hapless St. Louis


might have fared no better. The European monarchs had proved themselves
incapable of acting together. The Europeans had shown themselves helpless
before the manoeuvring of the Mongol cavalry divisions directed by a
strategist like Subotai.”


It was indeed a fortunate miracle for the peoples of Europe, that the death of the
Great Khan caused the recall of the conquering Mongol army which, in the
space of two years, had not merely defeated but annihilated three great
European armies and had overrun nearly all Europe east of the line now markec
by the Iron Curtain.


It is noteworthy and, perhaps, significant that the foreign policy of the
medieval Mongols aimed at surrounding their dominions with a zone of
devastated and depopulated territory, broken up into helpless satellite states,
an aim which has become the most prominent feature of the foreign policy of
their successors, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. With this end always
in view, the Mongols dealt with conquered populations in accordance with an
unwavering procedure. When a city was taken, whether it was situated on the
shores of the Yellow Sea or on the banks of the Oder, the inhabitants were
brought forth, tied together with ropes, and were then divided into three
groups, the men in one group, the women in another, and the children in a
third. Skilled craftsmen and attractive women were then carefully selected for
dispatch to Central Asia, there, if they survived the frightful journey, to labour
as Slaves or serve as concubines. Lastly, the remainder were forced to kneel
with outstretched necks in rows down which the Mongol soldiers proceeded,
expeditiously slicing off with their long sabres the bent heads which were then
gathered in neat pyramids, not in a spirit of vainglory, but to facilitate the
work of the scribes whose duty it was to supply the Great Khan with accurate
Statistics of the carnage.


It was this procedure, methodical, deliberate, and businesslike, rather than the
scale on which the Mongol massacres were carried out, which filled
contemporary Christians with speechless horror. In medieval Christian
Europe, wholesale homicide on an unlimited scale was considered justifiable,
in fact meritorious, if religious issues were involved— witness the
Albigensian Crusade above mentioned. Wholesale homicide was also
considered excusable, if committed on the lower orders by a high-spirited


we


—


prince in a temporary fit of irritation—witness the sack of Limoges by the
Black Prince, later to be mentioned. In other words, pious zeal was held to
justify anything, including every variety of gratuitous cruelty, in which to do
them justice, the Mongols seem rarely to have indulged. Brutal actions, prima
facie crimes, were also held to be pardonable lapses in Christian Europe, if
committed by persons of gentle birth in a frenzy of blind emotion, or as Field
Marshal Montgomery would express it, when “seeing red.” But the
coldblooded slaughterings of these terrible pagans from High Asia were
beyond the comprehension of the medieval Christian. He could no more
understand such passionless wickedness than he could withstand the
disciplined sweep of those slit-eyed Oriental horsemen in their armour of
lacquered leather, shooting with their deadly bows. Good fortune and not his
own exertions saved him, but not until all Europe between the Volga and the
Oder had been devastated with ruthless efficiency.


Not until seven centuries had elapsed was their fatal passion for civil war
again to bring the European peoples so close to the brink of irreparable
disaster. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Europe was menaced by
the Ottoman Turks, since their conquest of the Byzantine Empire, in 1453,
firmly established at Constantinople. The Turks succeeded in conquering the
whole of the Balkans, Greece and Hungary, and twice besieged Vienna. The
peoples of Europe were as hopelessly divided against each other as ever; at
moments of particular peril, the Sultans generally found the Kings of France
happy to render them assistance and support so that the Emperor might be
distracted from French aggression on the Rhine. The Turks possessed a
formidable army—thanks to the help of Christian renegades, their artillery was
the best in the world at the time—but the resources of the Turkish Empire
were never adequate for the task of conquering Europe, although with but a
slight variation of fortune the area overrun and devastated by their armies
might have been very much greater. In fact, it probably would have been but
for the strategic ability and courage of John Sobieski, King of Poland, who
turned back the Turkish army at the gates of Vienna in 1683.


From one point of view, it is perhaps a pity that the Sultans’ armies failed to
penetrate deeper into Europe. The appearance of a corps of janissaries at
Magdeburg in 1631 might have served, as nothing else would have done, to
bring the frenzied and fratricidal Catholics and Protestants to their senses.


Apart from these unrelated and isolated examples of primary warfare most of
the wars which have been waged in Europe since the Dark Ages must be
classified as secondary wars. Under this general heading must be grouped the
innumerable petty local wars such as that in the fifteenth century in the West
of England between Lord Bonville and the Earl of Devon, or that in the North
of England between the Percies and the Nevilles, and such a great civil war as
that of the Roses; the struggles of the Guelphs and Ghibellines in Italy, and the
various civil wars of religion from the Albigensian Crusade to the Thirty
Years War. In the same group must be included such so-called nationalist wars
as the Hundred Years War (according to Professor Trevelyan “the first
European war that can be called National”) which arose from the resolve of
the half-French Kings of England to assert their claim to the throne of France.
Except for the numbers engaged, the amount of bloodshed, and the extent of
the devastation and suffering caused, there is no real distinction between this
long-drawn-out feud between Edward III and his successors with their
cousins, the Kings of France, and the local broils of the Nevilles and the
Percies.

Both, for example, are utterly distinct from the wars of the kings of Castile,
undertaken to drive the Moors out of Spain, or the ceaseless campaigns of the
Teutonic Knights to defend the Eastern frontiers of Christendom from the
Slavonic heathen.


After the Thirty Years War ended in 1648, religion ceased in Europe to be a
reason—one is tempted to write a pretext—for civil war. In many respects,
this great struggle is remarkable, apart from the special barbarity with which it
was waged by both sides. Long before its outbreak in 1618, it was widely felt
that a great political explosion was imminent. It began inconspicuously in
Bohemia, so inconspicuously that it was not at first realized that the expected
upheaval had at last begun. Once started, the original issues were quickly
forgotten. In the history books, the Thirty Years War is labelled a war of
religion, a war between the Roman Catholics and the Protestants. Yet, the so-
called Protestant cause derived its main inspiration and support from the
leading Catholic Power, France, then ruled by that great Prince of the Catholic
Church, Cardinal Richelieu; throughout, the two chief Catholic potentates in
Europe, the Pope and the Emperor, were at bitter enmity and most of the
fighting was done by godless mercenaries drawn from every country in


Europe. The result achieved, after thirty years’ fighting, during which some
fifteen million people perished by violence, starvation or disease, was an
agreement that the belief of each individual concerning the eternal truths upon
which his or her salvation depended should be decided by the predilections or
whims of the prince whose subject he or she should happen to be—a very
commonsensical practical solution, but one difficult to justify by any system
of theology. The best that can be said for the Thirty Years War is that is ended
more or less in a status quo settlement, so that Europe was spared the orgy of
revenge which would have inevitably followed a complete triumph by either
side.


Far more important than the actual terms of settlement was the fact that this
futile and murderous struggle brought about the tacit conclusion that,
thenceforth, religious differences must never again serve as a reason for civil
war. This conclusion did not, indeed, prevent civil wars continuing to break
out, but it profoundly altered their character. In the Thirty Years War had
finally perished that sense of European unity, inherited from the days of the
Roman Empire, which had persisted throughout the Middle Ages. Europe had
by now become permanently broken up into a number of more or less self-
contained national territorial entities, sovereign and irresponsible. The old
practice of electing a ruler from the supposedly ablest members of a governing
family had died out: even the imperial crown of the Holy Roman Empire had
become, in fact if not in theory, subject to the lien of the House of Hapsburg.
The various crowns of Europe passed by heredity and with them the right to
rule various territories, the title to many of these being subject to dispute.
Since no court or means of arbitration existed to settle such disputes, the only
means of settlement was by war. By a curious reasoning process, it was
universally agreed that the prince who went to war and won had established
his hereditary right while the prince who proved not strong enough to retain
the territory in question thereby lost his right to inherit it. Thus, when the
Prussian Army proved stronger than the Austrian Army, Frederick the Great
was held to have established his right to Silesia; when the British Fleet proved
stronger than the French Fleet, Britain’s claims to Cape Breton or St. Vincent
were considered to have been placed on a proper legal footing.


Although “national consciousness” was developing gradually all over Europe,


in general the inhabitants of disputed territories still took but a languid interest
na ta rarhinh nvinnn hnd inhanitad An nnhinrrnd Aer AnH Aan + tha maht ta anrrnnn


dS LU WIUCH PLCE ldU HHUECLHLCU UL dine ved DY CULIQUEDSL UE LAHUL LU UVELI
them. Thus, the German population of Alsace soon settled down contentedly
under Louis XIV, and the inhabitants of Silesia seemed to have raised no
objection to transferring their allegiance from the House of Hapsburg to the
House of Hohenzollern.


A ruler who disturbed the peace of Europe by asserting by force of arms some
real or imaginary claim incurred thereby no general odium. Shakespeare
expresses the public attitude very clearly when he makes Hamlet soliloquize
concerning the war started by the Norwegian prince “to gain a little patch of
ground” from Poland not worth five ducats a year. Far from condemning
Fortinbras as a public nuisance, a warmonger, a Kriegshetzer, Hamlet meditates
complacently that he is:


“A delicate and tender prince

Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff’d, Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure

To all that fortune, death and danger dare,

Even for an egg-shell.”


Until very recently, a unique importance was attached to the civil wars of
Europe. It was agreed that even those European civil wars, the causes of which
were more than usually inadequate and that most signally failed to achieve
lasting results of any kind, were nevertheless momentous and glorious in a
way no wars between Asiatic peoples or between American states could
possibly be. At the end of each, everyone was certain that its glorious memory
would go down the ages undimmed to eternity—and, in fact, the glorious
memory of each endured undimmed until the outbreak of the next. Looking
back, it is now possible to realize these civil wars of Europe were important
for only two reasons. Firstly, they led naturally and inevitably to the present
plight of Europe.

Secondly, during the last two centuries of their course, they gave rise to an
entirely novel method of warfare which has come to be known as “civilized
warfare.”


Now that disaster, to a greater or lesser extent, has overtaken all the peoples of
Europe, there is no longer any interest in the details of these civil wars. So
naturally did each follow its predecessor that they hardly merit individual


ws


study. Probably a new nomenclature will ultimately be adopted to indicate
their essential unity. From the Dark Ages down to the end of the Thirty Years
War in 1648, civil war in Europe was continuous, local wars and private feuds
never ceasing and large scale political explosions, such as the Hundred Years
War and the Hussite War, taking place from time to time. After 1648, minor
warfare gradually ceased, but a series of general upheavals began, each
separated from the other by several decades of uneasy tranquillity.


First came the series of wars waged to frustrate the ambition of Louis XIV to
dominate Europe. These may be grouped together as European Civil War No.
1. There followed the War of the Austrian Succession—European Civil War
No. 2. The Seven Years War may be labelled as European Civil War No. 3,
and the War of 1775-83, in which Great Britain survived an attack by a
European coalition but lost her American Colonies, European Civil War No. 4.
The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars were European Civil Wars Nos. 5a
and 5b, respectively. The Crimean War, although it did not involve all Europe,
may be counted as European Civil War No. 6, because it had the important
result of bringing to an end the military supremacy which the Czars had
achieved in 1815. The group of wars between 1864 and 1871, which
established the German Empire as the leading European Military Power, may
be labelled European Civil War No. 7. If the Balkan Wars of 1877 and 1912 be
dismissed as minor European conflicts with Asia, represented by the decadent
Turkish Empire, Europe may be said to have enjoyed peace for the
unprecedented spell of 43 years after the establishment of the German Empire
in 1871.


The adoption by historians of a nomenclature such as this would be no
startling innovation. It would express what was once the universally
recognized distinction between primary warfare, that is to say, warfare
between rival civilizations, and warfare between peoples sharing a common
civilization, that is to say, in essence, civil warfare. Throughout the Middle
Ages, the essential unity of Christendom was acknowledged without question.
The feuds of the Hohenstaufen, Valois, Plantagenet, and other princely houses
were never seen out of proportion: they aroused interest and excitement which,
however, rarely prevented a feudal army from disbanding when the fixed
period of military service due from each vassal to his lord had expired. Such
conflicts were internal affairs, never to be confused in importance with the


wie sae nes Ate AE AREA Ate we Hn LL Ren AF Tse nmn fone shan nttnalen Af A


prillidry UuLy OL uelenudllg ule DOTUEIS OL Gurope LTFOLL Ule dlldCKS OL Ule
enemies of Christendom.


At the present time, it appears to many to be a minor outcome of the 1939-
1945 War that the old university city of Königsberg, the former capital of East
Prussia, and the birthplace and home of that great European thinker Immanuel
Kant, should have become the submarine base and arsenal of Kaliningrad. But,
to his contemporaries, the most creditable episode in the life of Henry of
Bolingbroke, afterwards King Henry IV of England, was the term he served in
1390 as a volunteer with the Teutonic Knights defending East Prussia from the
Lithuanian and Polish heathen. At best, warfare between Christians was
considered a regrettable happening, attributed by theologians to man’s fallen
nature. Such warfare the Popes and Church Councils did their best to
discourage, restrict and humanize. Regulations, seldom observed it is true,
were laid down from time to time for the conduct of the civil wars of
Christendom. Thus, in 1139, the Lateran Council denounced the newly-
invented crossbow as a weapon “hateful to God and unfit for Christians.” But
this prohibition only extended to the killing of fellow Christians. The Council
expressly permitted the use of the crossbow for the killing of infidels, a
meritorious work in which even weapons “hateful to God” were permissible.


Faint traces of this outlook are perceptible even at the present day and account
for the fact that the hanging of Field Marshal Keitel appears to be a more
regrettable event than the hanging of General Yamashita, and the bombing of
the refugees at Dresden more repugnant than the dropping of the atomic bomb
on Hiroshima.


Popularly, and even officially, the war of 1914-1918 has come to be known as
the First World War. This is a plain misnomer. It began as a European civil
war in no essential way different from any of its predecessors. On the one side
were the peoples of Central Europe and on the other side the chief Atlantic
Powers, Great Britain and France, allied to the Russian Empire. It remained a
civil war although two non-European Powers joined in: the Japanese Empire
at the beginning in order to seize the opportunity to acquire without resistance
the German overseas possessions in the Pacific, and the United States at the
end mainly for the purpose of safeguarding the huge loans which she had
made to Great Britain and France to buy munitions. The participation of Japan


remained throughout strictly limited, while as soon as the interests of the Wall
Street financiers had been secured by victory, the American public turned
violently against all intervention in European affairs, disowned President
Wilson and all his works, and insisted on the passing of neutrality legislation
expressly designed to prevent the United States from again being drawn into
another European civil war.


The so-called First World War should, therefore, be classified as European
Civil War No. 8. The war which broke out in 1939, after a precarious interval
of twenty-one years, was really only a continuation of the struggle which it
was believed had ended on the 11th of November, 1918. It is submitted,
therefore, that the war 1914-1918 should be labelled European Civil War No.
8a, and the war 1939-1940 European Civil War No. 8b.


It is the war 1940-1945 which really merits the title of the First World War
since during it, for the first time in history, continents came into conflict
rather than mere countries. On the one side were arrayed the British Empire,
North America and the great Eurasian Power, first established in the Middle
Ages by the Mongol Conqueror, Genghis Khan, and recently re-established
by Lenin under the name of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. On the
other side was arrayed the greater part of Europe led by the Third Reich,
joined, in 1941, by the Japanese Empire.


The war of 1940-1945 was not conducted in accordance with the code of
warfare subject to which for the preceding two centuries Europeans had been
accustomed to wage war upon each other. Neither the Americans nor the
Eurasians of the Soviet Union had any regard for what Europeans of past
generations had been pleased to consider permissible in warfare. Throughout,
they fought in accordance with their own views on this subject. Further, when
the end at last came, there was no select gathering of European statesmen such
as had met together after every European civil war to decide with dignity and
decorum the form the latest peace settlement should take in accordance with
(in Europe) long recognized principles. For the first time in history, the
peoples of Europe found themselves saved the trouble of coming to decisions
concerning their own affairs since everything of importance had already been
decided for them in Washington and Moscow.


Thin haal ta nat ARAN AAR A rarnith tha rarnana nf tha nennannt nnnnnntinn anf


LIUS VUUK 15 HULL CULICELLICU WILL WE WUE UL WE PLEselit Peer auUll UL
Europeans. The existing situation is merely the natural consequence of
reckless indulgence in civil war. The penalty came near to being claimed
when the Saracens overran Spain and invaded France in the eighth century.
The danger was yet more acute in the thirteenth century, when the Mongols
conquered all Europe up to a line now marked by the “Iron Curtain.” Finally,
during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Turkish Sultans were a
serious menace to European civilization; their armies twice penetrated to
Vienna and their fleets commanded the Mediterranean. All these dangers
passed away, but in 1939 Nemesis was heedlessly mocked once too often.


The civil wars of Europe are of interest here because, during their final phase,
there was gradually established a code subject to which it was tacitly agreed
Christian neighbours should wage war upon each other. The code won general
acceptance in Europe about the beginning of the eighteenth century—that is to
say, little more than two hundred years before 1939, the date of the outbreak
of Europe’s latest and possibly last civil war.


The fundamental principle of this code was that hostilities between civilized
peoples must be limited to the armed forces actually engaged. In other words,
it drew a distinction between combatants and non-combatants by laying down


that the sole business of the combatants is to fight each other and, consequently, that non-
combatants must be excluded from the scope of military operations.


The credit for formulating the code based on this fundamental principle cannot
be attributed to any one statesman or political thinker or, in fact, to any one
nation in particular. With surprising rapidity, we find that it had become tacitly
accepted by the nations of Western and Central Europe in the conduct of their
wars with each other around the beginning of the eighteenth century. Warfare
conducted according to this code became known as “civilized warfare.” Its
acceptance never extended beyond Europe or countries not under European
influence, but for two hundred years it was acknowledged by all the European
States. In the main it was complied with and, when infringed, was paid the
tribute of indignant denials. After holding sway for two centuries, it was
repudiated more swiftly and more mysteriously than it had been accepted.


Here, then, are two facts requiring explanation. How was it that the European
nations so quickly and easily at last came to a belated decision to accept a code


limiting the brutalities of warfare, after having for so many centuries practised
warfare in its most primitive and unrestrained shape? And how was it that the
European nations, after having practised warfare in accordance with this code
for two hundred years and having scorned all peoples who refused to
acknowledge it as self-confessed barbarians, reverted, in the space of a decade,
without apparent hesitation or misgiving, to what was, in the opinion of
Captain Liddell Hart “the most uncivilized method of warfare the world has
known since the Mongol devastations.”


limiting the brutalities of warfare, after having for so many centuries practised
warfare in its most primitive and unrestrained shape? And how was it that the
European nations, after having practised warfare in accordance with this code
for two hundred years and having scorned all peoples who refused to
acknowledge it as self-confessed barbarians, reverted, in the space of a decade,
without apparent hesitation or misgiving, to what was, in the opinion of
Captain Liddell Hart “the most uncivilized method of warfare the world has
known since the Mongol devastations.”


Chapter 4 — Civilized Warfare (The First Phase)


As above remarked, the introduction of Christianity and its acceptance by the
peoples of Europe did not have that immediate influence on the conduct of war
which, theoretically, one would expect. It was not, indeed, until the rise of
chivalry many centuries after the peoples of Europe had become Christian that
any amelioration in the conduct of war became perceptible.


The origins of chivalry may be traced back to those dark times when Europe
was being ravaged by various barbarian invaders after the collapse of the
Roman military system. Originally, the orthodox attitude of the devout
Christian to the horrors taking place around him was to withdraw from the
world and pray, since it was agreed the Last Day was near at hand and Christ
himself has forbidden resistance to evil. When, however, it appeared that the
Last Day was being unaccountably delayed, while prayer seemed to have
surprisingly little influence on the doings of the Huns, Magyars, Saracens,
and Vikings who were devastating Europe, the idea naturally dawned of
opposing the onslaught of these invaders which was inspired only by a love of
fighting or a desire for loot by a resistance inspired by an unselfish resolve to
defend the suffering Christian faithful. There thus gradually arose the ideal of
the Christian Warrior. Naturally and logically, the duty to defend weak and
helpless Christians from infidel oppressors gradually became extended to
include a duty to defend the weak and helpless generally from oppression.
“Chivalry had two outstanding marks,” says Professor R. B. Mowat, “two
things that were as its essence: it was Christian and it was military.”


Chivalry, as it ultimately developed, became a collective term embracing a
code of conduct, manners, and etiquette, a system of ethics and a distinctive
“Weltanschauung” (philosophy of life) as the Germans call it. For our
purpose, its principal importance is that, when the code of chivalry was
adopted as the code of the military caste in all the European states, it provided
a common bond between them. Whatever his nationality, the European knight
professed the code of the Christian warrior. With his reputation as such to
maintain, a European knight could not afford to use the capture of a prisoner
of the same class as himself as an opportunity to indulge his resentment
against a helpless enemy either in the manner of an Assyrian King, by flaying
or impalement, or, in the present-day manner, by a mock-trial followed by


hanging. Sadism could no longer freely masquerade as moral indignation, as
in the brave days of Samuel the Prophet: a prisoner whatever his nationality,
so long as he was a member of the European ruling class, had to be treated
when a prisoner with honour and courtesy.


From nursery days, everyone is familiar with Froissart’s account of the capture
of King John of France by the Black Prince at Poitiers, in 1356. To-day, the
story seems so wildly incredible that it reads more like a fairy story for
children than an event of sober history. Having described with characteristic
gusto the details of the fighting, Froissart tells us the Black Prince made
inquiries of those about him, asking whether anything was known of the fate
of the King of France, and was informed that he must either be slain or
captured “since he had maintained his place in the forefront of the battle.” The
Prince, therefore, sent the Earl of Warwick and Lord Cobham to discover the
truth, and at last they found the King of France surrounded by a crowd of
warriors angrily disputing which one had actually captured him. “The two
barons, dismounting, advanced to the royal prisoner with reverence and
conducted him in a peaceable manner to the Prince of Wales.” Thus brought to
the Prince, the latter “made a low obeisance to him and ordered wine and
spices to be brought which, as a mark of his great affection, he presented to the
King himself.” After being treated with every honour and consideration, the
King was brought in due course to England where “mounted on a white horse
richly caparisoned he rode through the streets of London with the Prince of
Wales on a little black payfrey by his side. The Palace of the Savoy was first
appropriated to his use; but soon after his arrival he was moved to Windsor
Castle, where he was treated with the greatest possible attention and hunting,
hawking, and other amusements were provided for him.”


One can well imagine how King Asshurbanipal would have piously evoked,
“Asshur, Belit and Ishtar, the great gods, my lords” at such sinful weakness.
An Iroquois war chief would have deplored in picturesque language the folly
of letting slip such an opportunity for time-honoured recreation at the torture-
stake, while a modern editor would certainly declaim volcanically in headline
English: “Black Prince Goes Soft: War-Criminal Escapes Trial.”


Such criticisms, however, inflict a grave injustice on the memory of the Black
Prince who can be taken in all respects as fairly representing the chivalrous


idaal Ta anathar mamhar af tha Burnanaan militar eacta ha wrc avar a madal


Jucar LU anG CUCL UL WE WULUpCal HUILA y Caste, ue was EVEL a MIUUTI
of unfailing generosity and courtesy. But he was never soft: those not of gentle
blood could expect little indulgence at his hands. When he lost his temper,
which he did not infrequently, the consequences were terrible. In 1370, for
example, after he had worked his will in a fit of temper on Limoges, the
unfortunate city must have looked as if “strong formations of our Bomber
Command” had recently visited it.


To summarize, it can be said that the general acceptance of the ideals of
chivalry had considerable influence on the conduct of warfare in the Middle
Ages, although this influence was generally restricted in practice to dealings
of the ruling classes with each other. At the least, it made impossible such
demonstrations of primitive crudity as that, for example, of Sapor I, King of
Persia, who having taken prisoner the gallant but thick- headed Roman
Emperor, Valerian, used his unfortunate captive as a portable footstool to
assist him in mounting his horse. Chivalry, as a code of behaviour and
courtesy, survived the Middle Ages and even persisted during the Wars of
Religion, as witness Velasquez’s famous picture “The Surrender at Breda.”


Some may, perhaps, be unable to repress a cynical doubt whether any human
being ever succeeded in appearing quite as gracious and courtly as Velasquez
has represented the Spanish Commander-in-Chief, Ambrose Spinola, as
appearing on that celebrated occasion in 1625. Spinola was a fervent patriot
and a devout Catholic, and, in his eyes, the Dutch Governor of Breda and his
officers were obstinate heretics and national enemies. At this moment of
triumph, which was to prove to be the final episode of a ferocious war that
had lasted an entire generation and had been waged with almost unparalleled
brutality by both sides, could Spinola have really greeted his defeated
enemies with such amiability and courtly grace?


The point is quite without significance. Admittedly, Velasquez was not an
eye-witness: he painted the scene twenty years later on instructions. Very
possibly, he idealized the bearing of Spinola. What is significant is that this
picture proves how the Spanish Government preferred that this triumph of
Spanish arms should be remembered by posterity. Clearly, neither Spinola nor
the Spanish Government were obsessed with dread lest their memory should
be stained by the charge of having pampered a defeated enemy. Velasquez’s
picture proves conclusively how Spinola liked to imagine he appeared on this


memorable occasion. It may not portray exactly what occurred, but it certainly
portrays what contemporary opinion considered should have occurred. In the
same way, some of the happenings proudly described in the Press and on the
radio at the downfall of the Third Reich in 1945 may not have occurred
exactly as described, or may have been offset to some extent by individual
acts of courtesy and chivalry, report of which was deliberately suppressed.
Here again, these descriptions have a significance quite independent of their
veracity or accuracy; they prove what the British and American leaders of
opinion and their publics desired to believe was taking place.


Unfortunately it has become increasingly difficult as the years pass by to adopt
the charitable view that most of the accounts of the ill-treatment of prisoners of
war by their captors in 1945 described at the time with gusto, were baseless
fictions by self-slanderers.


Alas, numerous photographs exist which make the truth clear beyond dispute
that the victors at the end of the Second World War, far from striving to win
with grace like Ambrose Spinola, if they did not consciously model their
behaviour on the Persian monarch, Sapor I, seem often to have regarded
victory as an opportunity to force their captives to act with them a sort of
burlesque, a variation of the children’s game “Robbers and Cops”. One of the
most frequently reproduced of these photographs shows a British soldier
strutting along behind an elderly man in a great coat walking with bowed head,
at whose back this warrior is pointing a sub-machine gun, presumably loaded.
From the captions attached we learn that this photograph shows Field Marshal
von Blaskowitz, the German C-in-C in Holland, after his surrender at
Appeldoorn, being marched to captivity—a captivity which was to last until
the Field Marshal in despair took his own life shortly afterwards in a French
prison.


It can hardly be denied that the effect of Velasquez’s masterpiece would have
been marred if he had shown the Governor of Breda being prodded into
Spinola’s presence by a Spanish soldier with a halbert: likewise the well-
known picture of Lord Nelson at the battle of Cape St. Vincent receiving the
swords of the captain and officers of the San Josef, would not have been
improved if the artist had had the bad taste to portray one of Nelson’s tars
brandishing a cutlass over the heads of the vanquished Spaniards.


Chivalry may be described as the product of Christian idealism. Or it may be
described as the product of belated common sense. What has become known
as “civilized warfare” arose quite independently. At long last the fact dawned
on the human understanding that it would be for the benefit of all in the long
run if vindictive passions were restrained and if warfare could be conducted
according to tacit rules, so that the sufferings, loss and damage inevitable in
warfare might be reduced so far as possible. At times no doubt the stronger
side in a war might feel aggrieved at having to overcome the weaker side by
slow and costly methods, because an obviously swift and easy method had
been debarred as uncivilized: at times a victor might feel frustrated of the full
enjoyment of victory by being precluded from dealing with complete freedom
with a prostrate enemy. But it was realized that such acts of self-restraint
contributed to the establishment of a general security shared by all, since no
European state was so supremely strong that its people could feel indifferent
to the possibilities which a change of fortune or a shift of the balance of power
might bring about.


Civilized warfare, as waged in Europe for some two hundred years down to
the present generation, cannot be dated earlier than the beginning of the
eighteenth century, but a somewhat similar form of warfare had arisen in Italy
in the fifteenth century and flourished for a short time. In one of his essays
Macaulay describes at length how this came about. In brief, the rich burghers
and merchants of medieval Italy were too busy making money and enjoying
life to undertake the hardships and dangers of soldiering themselves. So they
adopted the practice of hiring mercenaries to do their fighting for them, and,
being thrifty, business-like folk, they dismissed these mercenaries
immediately after their services could be safely dispensed with. Wars were,
therefore, fought by armies hired for each campaign. Writing in the security of
Victorian England, Macaulay pours scorn on the result. “War,” he says,
“completely changed its character. It became left to the conduct of men who
neither loved whom they defended nor hated those whom they opposed. Every
man came into the field impressed with the knowledge that, in a few days, he
might be taking the pay of the power against which he was then employed.
The strongest interest and the strongest feelings concurred to mitigate the
hostility of those who had lately been brothers in arms and who might soon be
brethren in arms once more. Their common profession was a bond of union.


Hence it was that operations, languid and indecisive beyond any recorded in
history, marches and countermarches, bloodless capitulations and equally
bloodless combats make up the military history of Italy for nearly two
centuries.”


To the reflective reader to-day, this result seems wholly excellent. For the first
time, soldiering became a reasonable and comparatively harmless profession.
The generals of that period manoeuvred against each other, often with
consummate skill, but when one had won the advantage, his opponent
generally either retreated or surrendered. It was a recognized rule that a town
could only be sacked if it offered resistance: immunity could always be
purchased by paying a ransom fixed according to its importance. As a natural
consequence, no town ever resisted, it being obvious that a government too
weak to defend its citizens had forfeited their allegiance. Civilians had little to
fear from the dangers of war which were the concern only of professional
soldiers. The latter, however, continued to run considerable risks since,
although deaths by weapons of war were happily rare, yet complete ignorance
of the rudiments of camp sanitation often brought disaster. An army which
was compelled to remain stationary for any length of time ran the risk of being
decimated by plague.


This relatively satisfactory state of military affairs was brought to an abrupt
end by the invasion of Italy by Charles VIII of France, in 1494. Thereafter,
Italy became the prey of armies of foreign invaders, French, Germans, Swiss,
and Spaniards, who recognized no rules of warfare of any kind. Thereafter, a
succession of wars raged throughout the Peninsula, waged with the most
primitive ferocity and resulting in enormous loss of life and causing
irreparable damage.


For roughly two hundred years (1500 to 1700) unrestricted civil wars
continued to rage throughout Europe, on occasion attaining new levels of
barbarity and ferocity, as during the revolt of the Netherlands against Philip of
Spain or during the Thirty Years War in Germany. The evolution of civilized
warfare was roughly concurrent with the long reign of Louis XIV of France; at
least, no traces of it can be detected at the beginning of his reign in 1643, and
it appears fully established at his death in 1715. No credit for this
development, however, can be attributed to Louis personally. On the contrary,


one of the most deliberate and least excusable barbarities in European history
was perpetrated by his armies as late as 1689 when the Palatinate was
systematically devastated in order to create an Odlandsgiirtel (waste-land-
zone) along the French frontier. “Brûlez bien le Palatinat” (“Burn the
Palatinate thoroughly”), ordered his Minister of War, Louvois, and, from the
old imperial city of Spryer on the upper Rhine as far north as the Moselle, a
thickly populated area 100 miles long and 50 miles wide was first pillaged and
then laid waste with fire and sword.


But already a great and mysterious change had come over public opinion: a
new spirit was abroad. Forty years before, any of the generals of the Thirty
Years War would have carried out the work of devastation according to orders
as lightheartedly as a modern air marshal but, in 1689, the French general
ordered to loot and destroy Heidelberg reported to Louvois, “I must represent
to His Majesty the bad effect which such a desolation may make upon the
world in respect of his glory and reputation.”


Condemnation of the devastation of the Palatinate was, indeed, general and
the indignation it aroused contributed not a little to the ultimate frustration of
Louis’ ambition to dominate Europe with his armies. Yet, strange to say, it
was largely the domination achieved by France over European civilization—in
art, literature, dress, manners and thought—which indirectly brought about the
acceptance of new standards in warfare.


Fundamentally, this development probably originated as a reaction to the
Thirty Years War, popularly regarded as a war of religion. It was as if men
said, “We have seen the consequences of religious enthusiasm: to fanatical
zeal we owe the massacres of Magdeburg and Drogheda and Central Europe
being depopulated by a third. It is trying to be saints which has led us to
commit all these horrors. Let us, as an alternative, now strive to be
gentlemen!”


Having experienced in the seventeenth century the consequences of religious
ardour and unreflective credulity, mankind in the eighteenth century inclined
naturally towards restraint, moderation, and doubt. The eighteenth century
styled itself the Age of Reason. Poise, balance, and urbanity were the qualities
most admired. The new code of polite manners forbade a gentleman from


becoming unduly excited about anything. Even in religion, extreme fervour
was condemned: “enthusiasm” became a term of reproach as John Wesley was
later to discover. Muddled thinking was despised: clarity was preferred to
profundity. A limitless capacity to believe without a reason and to hate without
a cause was not then, as at present, prized as an essential quality of the good
citizen. Above all things, a gentleman was required to maintain his sense of
proportion. From this, it followed naturally that wars ceased to be waged for
vague undefined objects in a frenzy of emotion, regardless of whether the
suffering and loss occasioned were grotesquely out of proportion to any
benefit that could possibly result. The wars of the eighteenth century were
fought for limited objects—for example, a border province or a colonial
possession—and they were fought with limited means, that is to say, the
means employed to wage them were limited in accordance with a for long
unwritten but generally recognized code. Warfare conducted in accordance
with this code has come to be known as civilized warfare.


As stated in the last chapter, this code was based on one simple principle,
namely that warfare should be the concern only of the armed combatants
engaged. From this follows the corollary that non-combatants should be left
entirely outside the scope of military operations.


From the acceptance of this principle, all later developments followed naturally
and logically. If non-combatants must be treated as outside the scope of military
operations, it necessarily followed that an enemy civilian did not forfeit his
rights as a human being merely because the armed forces of his country were
unable to defend him. So long as he took no part in the hostilities, he became
entitled to claim from the enemy combatant forces protection for his life and
property. If he suffered as a consequence of hostilities, it must be only
indirectly owing to regrettable and unavoidable mischance—for example, as
when the inhabitants of a town are killed by missiles fired to compel its garriso1
to surrender. The sufferings of civilians must never be made a means by which
the course of hostilities can be influenced—for example, when, in accordance
with the common practice of barbarous warfare, a country is deliberately laid
waste to induce its rulers to surrender.


Other and important developments following from the acceptance of the above
principle are, first, that a combatant who surrenders, by so doing ceases to be a


nambatant and nana nanninan tha atntiina Af n nan nnmhantant nnhinant Antler ta n


CULLIDdLdlIt dHU 1E- dCYULLES UE SLGLUS UL d HUL-HCULIIDALdLIL, SUVUJECL ULILY LU d
liability to be detained by his captors during the continuance of hostilities.
Secondly, a combatant who has become incapacitated through wounds or
disease ceases to be a combatant and acquires certain privileges—privileges
which were accorded by civilized states long before they were formulated and
formally recognized at the Geneva Convention.


In regard to prisoners of war, in 1785, in a treaty between the United States
and Prussia, the principle was first expressed and formally confirmed that a
prisoner of war should be treated by his captors as a person under military
discipline transferred by his capture from the command of his own
countrymen to the command of his captors. This treaty expressly provided that
the captor should treat prisoners of war as troops transferred to his command.
It follows from the acceptance of this principle that (to quote Article 27 of the
Brussels Declaration of 1865 which formally confirmed what had long been
the established practice): “A prisoner of war shall be subject to the rules and
regulations in force in the captor’s army.” Article 45 of the Geneva
Convention re-affirms the principle in practically the same words. “Rules and
regulations” includes, of course, all regulations in force in the captor’s army
relating to trials by court-martial. In short, a captor is bound in all cases to
give a prisoner of war a fair trial, the definition of “a fair trial” being what the
captor himself considers a fair trial for his own personnel.


In passing, it may be noted that this principle was the principle which, beyond
all others, was most flagrantly violated by the war-crimes trials which began in
1945.


Obviously, the principle that non-combatants must be left outside the scope of
operations was capable of different interpretations. Admittedly, a commander
was justified in refusing to permit the presence of civilians to impede his

- Operations against the enemy armed forces; consequently, a town could be
bombarded regardless of the safety of the inhabitants in order to prepare an
attack upon its garrison. On the other hand, it was admittedly barbarous to
bombard a town outside the theatre of war, in the hope that the suffering of the
inhabitants would affect the morale of the enemy combatant forces. In every
case, the test was what was the real intention behind the act in question.
Inevitably, occasions arose when genuine differences of opinion could exist.
But the code was safeguarded by the knowledge that violation, even if


profitable at the moment, would bring ultimate retribution and the weakening
of the general security enjoyed by all.


So long as the civil wars of Europe remained the private business of
Europeans, evasions of the code supported by pettifogging pretexts were rare.
Repeatedly, the question arose whether future security should be sacrificed to
immediate advantage. What triumphed on each occasion was not sentimental
humanitarianism, as an ancient Assyrian war lord or a present-day air marshal
would contend, but farsighted realism. It was not until 1940 that this question
was answered with an emphatic affirmative.


The inhabitants of Great Britain have long been convinced that not the least of
the many virtues which raise them above their neighbours on the European
mainland is an inborn devotion to “playing the game.” Waging war by
terrorizing the enemy civilian population is equivalent to hitting below the belt
in boxing. It is, therefore, remarkable that the only persistent refusal to comply
with the new code of civilized warfare should have come from the British
Admiralty. Long after civilized methods had been accepted in land warfare, in
sea warfare the British insisted upon using their naval superiority to bring
pressure on an enemy by bombarding coastal towns. Beginning with Dieppe,
virtually destroyed in 1694 by a ruthless bombardment, few French ports
escaped attack by British fleets during the next hundred years, although no
large scale invasion in any case followed. In the war of 1812-1814, the coasts
of America were similarly ravaged and several important towns, notably
Washington and Baltimore, burned by landing parties, the openly expressed
intention being to instil into the American people “a will to peace.” Again, in
the Crimean War, British fleets in pursuance of the same policy bombarded
Russian ports not only on the Black Sea, as ancillary to the military operations
going on round Sevastopol, but on the Baltic and White Seas.


The official justification for these acts, which in land warfare would have been
regarded as incontestably barbarous, was that Great Britain, lacking the
military resources to fight on land great continental states like France or
Russia, could only carry on a war by coastal raids. Britain’s war aims were
strictly limited and, once the enemy had been sufficiently inconvenienced, a
frame of mind was created which resulted in a peace being negotiated on
reasonable terms.


The underlying reason, however, for the refusal of Great Britain to conform
with the code of civilized warfare adopted on the Continent was that, so long
as the British Navy commanded the sea, the British people had no reason to
fear a reversion of warfare to the methods of primitive times. If defeated in a
war, a continental people faced the prospect of being dealt with in accordance
with the standards then prevailing. To a continental people, therefore, it was a
matter of vital concern whether these standards were civilized or barbarous.
The people of Britain on the other hand, enjoyed the comforting knowledge
that, so long as the British Navy ruled the waves, defeat at the worst would
only mean a withdrawal for the time being from the Continent. In fact, until
the conquest of the air, Great Britain could hardly be regarded politically as a
part of Europe; as a consequence of her sea supremacy, she enjoyed the
position of a sixth continent. So happily situated, there was lacking any urgent
reason to sacrifice the convenience of the moment to ensure security.


Few episodes in the life of Queen Victoria are better known than the story of
how she cut short Mr. Balfour when he was describing to her the dismay
caused by the initial reverses sustained by British arms at the commencement
of the South African War. “Please understand,” said the Queen, “there is no
one depressed in this house. We are not interested in the possibilities of defeat:
they do not exist.”


The story is generally quoted as an example of the indomitable spirit of the old
lady, or as an example of British tenacity in adversity, or as an example of
British arrogance. But the Queen was being neither brave, boastful, nor
arrogant. She was merely reminding the cabinet minister of a plain political
fact which had existed from the time Great Britain had achieved naval
supremacy. Until the time, some fifteen years later, when mankind won final
mastery of the air, the possibilities of defeat for Great Britain, in the sense
these possibilities existed for every other European state, simply did not exist.


Other European nations less happily situated resolutely resisted the temptation
to revert to primitive methods of war, a temptation at times almost irresistible.
For example, in the long and doubtful struggle, known as the Seven Years
War, a swift and easy triumph was offered by such a reversion. On the one
side in this war was Prussia, a small state exposed to attack from every


direction across its straggling artificial frontiers. On the other side, were
ranged the three great military powers, France, Austria and Russia. In
accordance with the accepted principle of civilized warfare that hostilities
must be directed solely against the combatant forces of the enemy, the armies
of the Allies crossed the Prussian frontier and, relying on great numerical
superiority, offered battle in turn to the Prussian army moving swiftly from
one threatened point to another. Taking advantage of interior lines and the fact
that his enemies neglected to act together, Frederick the Great managed to
achieve a succession of brilliant victories and wonderful recoveries until, after
seven years, war-weariness at last put an end to the unequal struggle.


From the start, however, it must have been obvious to the able leaders of the
Allied armies, the Austrian Generals Daun and Loudon and the Russian
General Soltikov, that Frederick the Great could be easily overcome without a
single major battle with the Prussian army. The Allies were possessed of
numerous and highly trained forces of light cavalry. All that was necessary to
bring about Frederick’s speedy downfall was to pour across the open and
exposed frontiers of Prussia small units of Hungarian hussars and Russian
cossacks with instructions to destroy everything which could be destroyed by
means of a torch or a charge of gunpowder. The Prussian army would have
been helpless in the face of such tactics, designed to turn Prussia into a desert.
Without supplies of food and material for the manufacture of munitions and
the whole country overrun, except for the ground actually occupied by the
Prussian army, no other course would have been open to Frederick but
submission within the space not of seven years but of seven months.


The advantages of such tactics were as apparent in 1756 as they were to be in
1940. The drawbacks were equally apparent. On both occasions, the question
was whether a swift and easy triumph would be too dearly purchased at the
price of creating a precedent which, once created, would inevitably be
followed in later wars with the result that mankind would live again under the
shadow of a possible outbreak of primitive warfare, with all the horrors this
entails.


In 1756, when the memories of the Thirty Years War and devastation of the
Palatinate were still comparatively fresh, it was decided this price was too
great. In 1940, after civil war in Europe had been conducted by civilized


mathada fan narran tern Laan daend weranunn tha AAntunens danininn rirnan nmr A nt


HEULIUUS LUL UVEL LWU LIULIULEU Yedls, WE CULILIdLy UECISLIUL Wd dlliveu dl.
When, in the fullness of time, the penalty of this latter decision can be assessed
from experience, it will be possible to express an opinion whether greater
wisdom and foresight was displayed in 1940 than in 1756.


In the Middle Ages, the code of chivalry had been readily accepted throughout
Europe because the ruling classes in all countries accepted the teaching of the
Catholic Church and acknowledged the spiritual supremacy of the Pope.
Except politically, Europe was a single unit, subject to the same movements
and developments. In the same way, in the eighteenth century the new code
governing the conduct of warfare was readily accepted because the ruling
classes in the leading European countries had become linked by a similar
outlook—by similar tastes, manners and standards—originating at the Court of
Louis XIV. Edward Gibbon, the historian, thus speaks of “universal
politeness” radiating from France. No other European nation could attempt to
challenge the leadership of the French—the Germans at the time were
backward, disunited, and impoverished as a consequence of the Thirty Years
War, the English were insular in outlook and divided against each other by
political and religious differences, the Spaniards were hidebound and
decadent, the Italians degenerate, and the Russians barbarous. Although the
French political dominion over Europe was brief—the French fleet was
virtually destroyed at Cape La Hogue and the French army suffered a series of
crushing disasters, being driven headlong out of Germany at Blenheim, out of
Italy at Turin, and out of the Netherlands at Ramilles—the ruling classes of
Europe continued to model themselves in all but military matters on French
standards of taste and conduct. A member of the European ruling class,
whatever his nationality, prided himself first and foremost on possessing the
outlook and manners of a European gentleman—which in practice meant the
outlook and manners of a French gentleman. As such, he acknowledged an
obligation to treat those whom he regarded as his social equals, irrespective of
their nationality, as gentlemen and expected to be so treated by them in return.
In Germany, and still more in Russia, members of the ruling class felt
themselves far more closely bound to the ruling classes of the other European
countries than to their own countrymen who were their social inferiors.


Frederick the Great, for example, prided himself far more on his capacity to
write French verses and on the fact that he was welcomed on an equal footing
in intellectual circles in Paris than for his military achievements. The fact that


one of the most brilliant of these— his victory at Rossbach—was won over a
French army in no way disturbed on either side the friendship which existed
between himself and a number of leading French poets, philosophers,
mathematicians and scientists. Macaulay speaks disparagingly of Frederick’s
contemporary Horace Walpole as “the most Frenchified Englishman of the
18th century,” and complains that even his literary style was “deeply tainted
with Gallisms.” The interest which Walpole took in “the fashions and scandals
of Versailles” particularly arouses Macaulay’s indignation. In all this,
however, Walpole was only characteristic of his time. His social equals in
Germany habitually spoke French, using German only to give directions to
underlings. In Russia, a veneer of French culture completely separated the
ruling class from the bulk of the population.


From this it naturally followed that the officers of the various European
armies, when they came in contact, should treat each other with elaborate
courtesies in accordance with the manners of the time. A capitulation,
especially, was an occasion for an exchange of courtesies. Thus, as early as
1708, when the citadel of Lille was surrendered by Marshal Bouffiers after a
terrible and costly siege, not only was the French army permitted to withdraw
with the honours of war, but the gallant Marshal, before being allowed to
return to France, was entertained at a dinner given in his honour by his
conquerors, the Duke of Marlborough and Prince Eugene. Already, therefore,
a stage had been reached in the conduct of civil warfare in Europe as far
removed, on the one hand, from King Sapor mounting his horse from the back
of a captive emperor as, on the other hand, from Field Marshal Keitel being
handed over to a hangman and then buried, rather shamefacedly, in a nameless
grave. A sense of unity, irrespective of nationality, created by a common
pride in the profession of arms, made exhibitions of barbarous primitive
emotion unthinkable. Far from seizing an opportunity to inflict vengeance for
a defeat, it became a point of honour to pay generous recognition to the
courage and skill of an enemy in adversity. Frederick the Great’s plan of
campaign in 1762 was completely disarranged by the unexpectedly obstinate
resistance of the minor fortress of Schweidnitz, due to the skill of a French
engineer named Gribeauval serving in the Austrian army who, we are told,
“understood countermining like no other.” The siege cost the Prussians the
lives of 3,000 men and occasioned Frederick himself the greatest personal
hardship. But when the fortress at last surrendered, Frederick’s first act was to


invite Gribeauval to dinner in order to compliment him on the superiority
which he had shown to the Prussian engineers.


“No terms are too good for you!” was Admiral Keith’s reply, in 1800, when
Marshal Massena at last indicated his willingness to surrender Genoa after
having held the city against over whelming odds until complete exhaustion of
his supplies made further resistance impossible. It seems to have occurred to
no one that this defence, which largely contributed to the final outcome of the
campaign, deserved personal retribution. Marshal Davout, indeed, in 1814, was
threatened with a trial after his surrender of Hamburg for having “rendered the
name of French man odious” by his brutal treatment of the inhabitants during
the siege. This threat, however—which was never seriously pressed— came
from his own countrymen and political enemies, the French Royalists. Had this
trial taken place, the court would, of course, have been French. Whatever may
have been his deserts and in spite, no doubt, of the views of the inhabitants of
Hamburg, Davout received nothing but courtesy from his foreign enemies.


The story is well known of how, at the opening of the battle of Fontenoy in
1745, the French officers greeted their advancing enemies with the polite
invitation, “Gentlemen of the English Guards, fire first!” In the same strain is
the story of how Captain Savage of the Hercules, at the battle of the Iles des
Saintes, stood upon his quarter deck, solemnly raising his cocked hat as each
French ship drew abreast to deliver her broadside. These stories and many
similar may be fictions, but at least they prove what public opinion at home
desired to believe took place on the battlefield. Even if acts of courtesy took
place in war to-day, the report of them would be suppressed for fear of
outraging public opinion.


Perhaps the most significant of these stories is that of James Wolfe,
afterwards the conqueror of Canada. When serving as a Major in the army of
the Duke of Cumberland in 1746, Wolfe was ordered at the battle of Culloden
by his superior officer, none other than the commander-in-chief himself, to
pistol a wounded Highlander on the ground. He could refrain only at the peril
of his military career to which he was wholeheartedly devoted. Wolfe,
nonetheless, indignantly refused, with the remark that he was a soldier and not
an executioner!


Cama marr minnnnt thin ntamr Aviainntad nn n ninnan naf Tannhita nunannnnndana haat


DULE Liidy SUSPELL UHS SLULY ULIPITIGlLeU dds d PLELE UL JGLUVDILE PlLUPpdpPdlIUd, VUL
it was at once widely accepted and repeated, not as a tribute to the invincible
repugnance rightly felt by His Royal Highness, the Duke of Cumberland, for
(as we should say) pampering the enemy, but as demonstrating how firmly
James Wolfe maintained his high standard of professional honour. It is hard to
believe that the sentiments which animated James Wolfe and most of his
European contemporaries in 1746 could have died out entirely by 1940.

At the latter date, of course, the spiritual descendants of the Duke of
Cumberland abounded in all the belligerent armies and, in particular, in the air
forces. It would be interesting to learn whether they were often embarrassed
by the scruples of the spiritual descendants of James Wolfe? If so, by what
means were such scruples, so prejudicial to good order and discipline,
overcome? In the Mongol invasion of 1241, enormities were perpetrated by
barbarous nomads of High Asia, and in the Thirty Years War by godless
mercenaries; in the War of 1940-1945, enormities were frequently committed
by young gentlemen of sheltered upbringing and blameless character. That
incidents prejudicial to good order and discipline of the kind associated with
the name of James Wolfe have now become seemingly so rare speaks volumes
for the efforts of the emotional engineers working behind the scenes. The
attitude towards James Wolfe’s conduct held by his contemporaries contrasts
strangely with the present-day view that it merely indicates that his reactions
had not been scientifically conditioned by effective propaganda before he set
forth for the campaign.


The obedience demanded from a professional soldier in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries was by no means unqualified, so far as officers were
concerned. The respective roles of the soldier and the politician were then
clearly distinguished. The definition of war as “an extension of policy by
force” later formulated by Clausewitz, had already won general acceptance,
and policy was admittedly the sole concern of the politicians. A gentleman
who had accepted a commission in the army or navy was, consequently, held
in honour bound to take part in any war upon which the executive government
might decide to embark. He could not pick and choose: the rights and wrongs
of a war were not his concern. As Macaulay put it, “A man who belongs to the
army only in time of peace—who appears at reviews in Hyde Park, escorts his
Sovereign with the utmost valour and fidelity to and from the House of Lords
and retires as soon as he thinks it likely that he may be ordered on an
expedition—is justly thought to have disgraced himself.” James Wolfe, of


course, no more concerned himself with the ethics of the various campaigns in
which he took part than did in our own day Lord Roberts, when he planned
and directed in 1900 the operations to bring about the subjugation of the Boer
Republics, or did Admiral Raeder, when he planned and directed the
occupation of Norway in 1940. It was without the least sense of personal guilt
that Sir Charles Napier reported cheerfully to his government in 1843 the
successful conclusion of a war of naked, unashamed aggression against the
Ameers of Scinde with the single word “Peccavi”—“T have Scinde.”


On the other hand, the manner of conducting a war, whether just or unjust, was
recognized to be the sole concern of the professional soldiers conducting it. A
soldier did not feel himself bound to commit promiscuous homicide as and
when directed—like a modern blockbuster or underworld gunman. So long as
warfare in Europe continued to be warfare between Europeans, it was
conducted in accordance with a recognized code, in the interpretation of which
no civilian interference was tolerated.


How jealously the exclusive right to interpret this code was guarded may be
illustrated by one episode from the career of General Charles George Gordon.
In 1863, he had been lent to the Chinese Imperial Government to direct the
repression of the Tai-Ping Rebellion and, having captured Soo-chow, had
accepted the surrender of a number of rebel leaders. To his horror, these were
promptly beheaded by the Chinese civil authorities. It is recorded that General
Gordon, beside himself with rage, went in search of the mandarin whom he
considered responsible, revolver in hand, declaring that his own professional
honour and reputation had been indelibly stained by the execution of his
prisoners of war.


It need hardly be remarked that latitude to exercise private judgment was only
conceded to officers. Among the rank and file what may, for convenience, be
labelled the Light Brigade spirit, prevailed. The attitude of the gallant Six
Hundred which so aroused Lord Tennyson’s admiration arose from the fact
that the least disposition to ask the reason why was discouraged by tricing the
would-be inquirer to the triangle and flogging him into insensibility. The same
spirit prevailed in the ranks of all the European armies and was the product of
the same simple but effective treatment.


DE ee RR ea nan Seem aetna tha, thon AA AA AF WAR A mene nen wish Ahk f4 Senn nnn


VIL more prdCliCdl WIPOtdlce Wal WIE COUWE OL BOOU Manners WITCH It UUpOSEU
on the combatants was the security given to civilian life and property by the
introduction of civilized methods of warfare. Not only was the massacre of
civilians no longer left to the judgment of individual commanders, but pillage, <
recognized practice in the seventeenth century, was gradually replaced by
requisitions for which payment was made. “The Austrian armies,” writes
Captain Liddell Hart, “were particularly restrained, even to the point of
handicapping their own operations by extreme scrupulousness in abstaining
from any demands on the civilian population.” In the Prussian Army, the
regulations against looting were so strict that, after the disaster at Jena in 1806,
it is recorded that the retreating Prussians endured without fires the bitter cold
of an October night in central Europe rather than seize civilian stores of wood
which lay to hand but for which they were unable to pay.


Civilized warfare reached its furthest extension during the last half of the
eighteenth century. The principles and practice of civilized warfare were
worked out by a number of writers during this period and, in particular, by the
Swiss jurist, Emeric de Vattel, in 1758, in his famous work The Law of
Nations, or the Principles of Natural Law as Applied to the Administration of
National Affairs and of Sovereigns. At the time he wrote, much of what he said
must have seemed platitudinous to a degree, but to us it has come

to appear grimly prophetic. Not only does Vattel point out that, if barbarous
methods of warfare are adopted, the enemy will do likewise, so that the only
ultimate result will be to add to the horrors of war; not only does he argue that
“harsh, disgraceful and unendurable peace terms” will only be fulfilled as long
as the defeated enemy lacks the means to repudiate them; Vattel actually
condemns the use by rulers at war of “offensive expressions indicating
sentiments of hatred, animosity and bitterness” since such expressions must
ultimately stand in the way of a settlement on reasonable terms.


At a first glance, this would appear a condemnation of the whole system of
modem war propaganda. But, of course, Vattel had no means of conceiving
even dimly one of those imposing collections of fabrications and calumnies
which it has now become the first business of nations at war to concoct and
broadcast concerning each other. Probably, he merely had in mind one of
those witty but ill-advised jibes which Frederick of Prussia was in the habit of
circulating against his brother monarchs, and which, later, he so often had
cause to regret as being unnecessary impediments in the way of negotiations


_


for a new understanding.


Vattel would have been astonished to learn how exasperating a later
generation of Europeans would find his book. In justice to him, it should be
said that from his style it is clear that he was under no illusion that he was
propounding anything original or profound. When his contemporary, Hogarth,
drew the “Idle and Industrious Apprentices” series, he did not imagine that
they illustrated a new discovery that thrift and diligence (aided by marriage to
the only daughter of one’s employer) are more likely to lead to prosperity than
indolence and improvidence! In the same way, Vattel realized that he was only
stating what everyone who troubled to think about the subject knew as well as
himself. His modest ambition, when he took his pen in hand, was to set forth a
number of recognized truisms more clearly and concisely than they had ever
been set forth by anyone else previously.


It is only when read in the light of the developments which the future held in
store, that Vattel’s book seems so ominously prophetic. But in no passage is
there indicated any apprehension of such developments. On the contrary, the
great progress which had been made towards establishing a code of civilized
warfare not only filled him with complacency, but clearly inspired in him the
hope that this progress would lead finally to the abolition of civil warfare in
Europe altogether. Civil warfare being the prized prerogative of the European
kings, it would have been dangerous for most of Vattel’s contemporaries to
have expressed the opinion that warfare in any form was barbarous. But as a
Swiss subject, Vattel was able to deal with the question frankly. He is prepared
to admit that war may at times serve the useful purpose of settling disputes
between nations. Nevertheless, he points out that war can only serve this
purpose if, in the first place, it be conducted by methods which do not leave
behind a legacy of hatred and bitterness, and, in the second place, if the victors
be not so carried away by their success as to impose by violence harsh and
unreasonable terms, since this inevitably prepares the way for another war.


Vattel’s complacency may be found exasperating by many readers to-day, but
it cannot be said to have been unjustified by the circumstances of the time
when he wrote. The progress made by European civilization during the
preceding hundred years had been truly amazing. Already, the times of the
Thirty Years War seemed remote when soldier and bandit were practically


synonyms and every civilian knew that good fortune alone protected him from
being overtaken by horrors and indignities of every imaginable kind. The fate
of Magdeburg might have been the fate of any European city in 1631. True,
civil warfare still continued to burst forth at intervals in Europe, but, like the
practice of duelling, it had become so circumscribed by rules that its worst
consequences were eliminated or reduced to a minimum. The possibility that
civil warfare might entail the penalty of invasion and conquest by a non-
European power seemed to have passed away for ever. The Turkish Empire
now only gave cause for alarm lest its dissolution might disturb the European
balance of power; the formerly semi-Asiatic state of Muscovy appeared
successfully to have adopted European civilization—the court of Catherine the
Great was to all outward appearances a reproduction of Versailles; the recent
exploits of the English and French in India seemed to indicate that a wise
Providence had ordained a special law of nature by which the smallest number
of European troops was superior to an Oriental army however numerous; and
across the Atlantic, there seemed no reason to doubt that the European
colonists in America would always follow submissively European precept and
example in all things—did not such men as George Washington and Benjamin
Franklin comply in all respects with the highest European standards in
conduct and outlook?


To such an eminently reasonable representative of the Age of Reason as
Emeric de Vattel, it would barely have occurred as a conceivable possibility
that the inhabitants of Europe, having once adopted the standards of civilized
warfare, would ever again revert to the standards of the Thirty Years War
which permitted any enormity to civilian life and property while still
maintaining a sort of rough code of professional etiquette between the
opposing leaders. A reversion to the even more barbarous standards of a far
more remote time, when the primary objective of warfare was to attack the
enemy civilian population and when captured enemy generals would be
slaughtered as such by their captors, would have seemed to him utterly
inconceivable. When Vattel wrote, the nations of Europe had achieved such
pre-eminent military supremacy that non-European nations seemed only to
count in world affairs as subjects for exploitation by Europeans. The
occasions when European civilization was threatened with destruction by
invaders from Central Asia, who had penetrated unchecked to the Oder and
the Adriatic, were so far past as to have become unreal and mythical. Russia,


DPaaranannicnd hwr Datar tha Crant had haan ananntad nc n mambar nf tha


LuLuprdaluzcu Uy TELL LIC WIiCatl, HAU VCCI accepteu ad d LLICTIIVE! UL UIC
European family of nations, and had spread her sway across Asia to the
Pacific Ocean. In the latter half of the eighteenth century, the most perverse
pessimist could not have foreseen that the Europeanized Russia of Peter was
doomed to vanish utterly and to be replaced by the long dissolved Eurasian
Empire founded by Genghis Khan, resurrected in a new but even more
formidable shape, not only non-European in origin, outlook and organization,
but avowedly hostile to traditional European civilization.


No such nightmares disturbed reasonable men in the Age of Reason. The
rising tide of complacency in that happy period reached its high-watermark
in the passage written in 1770 by the Comte de Guibert quoted in the
introduction to this book.


“Save in combat,” declares the Comte proudly, “no blood is shed: prisoners are
respected.” In short, a temporary mid-way position had been reached between
Gilgal and its Prophet sharpening his knife, on the one hand, and Nuremberg
with its collection of foreign hangmen, on the other.


“Towns are no more destroyed,” continues the Comte, “the countryside is no
more ravaged.” Again, the contrast is striking between, on the one hand,
Magdeburg in 1631, with Tilly’s soldiers rushing through the streets, hacking
down men, women and children in a frenzy of slaughter, and, on the other
hand, Dresden, that night in 1945, when an enemy air fleet arrived over the
city “at the timely moment” when it was crowded with refugee women and
children.


“Conquered peoples,” concludes the Comte, “are only obliged to pay some sort
of contributions which are often less than the taxes which they pay to their own
sovereign.”


For countless generations, the civilian population of Europe had patiently
borne the consequences when “some delicate and tender prince whose spirit
with divine ambition puff’d” decided to battle with some equally delicate and
tender prince across the frontier, occasionally at the risk of his own skin, but
invariably of theirs. For the first time, the result of such wars could be awaited
with indifference. The actual fighting would be done by long-service


professional soldiers recruited from the dregs of the population—the scum of
the earth as the Duke of Wellington frankly described them—guaranteed from
acting otherwise than as machines by a ferocious discipline enforced by
repeated flogging, led by officers who under no circumstances would forget
they were gentlemen first and officers afterwards. If one’s prince managed to
win, one could applaud his glorious triumph loyally, even if one derived no
benefit therefrom. If he lost, there was no occasion for despair. Even a change
of rulers would make little practical difference to the average citizen, who
generally transferred his allegiance in such circumstances without perceptible
emotional disturbance.


If the Age of Reason did not endure long enough to bring about the abolition of
civil warfare in Europe, it at least bestowed for a few decades upon the civilian
population of Europe a very passable substitute for peace.


We have now described the manner in which warfare lost much of its barbarism
and took on civilized traits. In the following chapters will be traced the steps by
which it degenerated into the brutalities of the Second World War in which the
imagined atrocities alleged by hate-propaganda during the First World War
were enacted in grim fact. Three main steps in this process may be noted, each
following naturally from the one preceding it.


This political chain reaction was set in motion by the French Revolution.
Deprived of the services of the professional army officered by aristocrats of
the Monarchy, the revolutionary government had recourse to a levée en masse
of the population. The people of the countries overrun by the French armies,
after their own professional armies had been shattered, achieved liberation by
means of similar armies of conscripted civilians.

The European wars waged between 1792 and 1815 were the first of the
Peoples’ Wars, so called because they were fought between peoples in arms anc
not as hitherto by professional armies maintained in peacetime by the rulers to
enforce their wishes.


At first appeals to simple patriotism proved sufficient to inspire conscripted
civilians with military ardour. Later the discovery was made that conscripted
civilians fought better if they had been induced to hate the enemy against
whom they were fighting. So gradually was evolved and perfected the modern


aniannan nf amatiannl ananainannina tha naammnan nf x.rhinh ta ta nanninannan tha


SCLCLICe UL CLILULLULIdL CLPIICeliiip, ule pupuse UL WLILHULI IS LU CULHVHHICE UIC
average citizen that the citizens of the state against which it has been decided
to wage war were monsters of depravity, barbarous, perfidious and cruel, with
whom any thought of peace was impossible, to overcome whom no personal
sacrifice would be too great.


Inevitably warfare conducted in an artificially inspired frenzy of fear and
hatred changed its character. Thus began the period of so-called Total War to
use the term adopted to describe hostilities waged regardless of the Rules of
Civilized Warfare. Naturally the average civilian serving as a soldier, knowing
nothing and caring less of military traditions, and having been taught that it

_ was his patriotic duty to believe that the enemy was committing atrocities of
every description, felt himself free to act as he had been assured the enemy
was acting. Hate propaganda always lays the greatest stress on the contention
that the enemy is solely responsible for the outbreak of hostilities in order to
generate in the mind of every individual soldier a personal grievance against
_ the enemy for having wantonly forced him to leave home and endure the
hardships and dangers of a campaign.


The act which may be cited as marking the end of the age of civilized warfare
and the beginning of the age of Total War was the acceptance of the Lindemanr
Plan on the 30th March 1942.


The last stage of the chain reaction was the adoption of war-crimes trials as a
method of disposing of captured leaders of the vanquished side which
inevitably must make the future conduct of warfare more ruthless than ever.
Now that every general knows that in the event of defeat he will assuredly be
done to death by the victors if he falls into their hands, he can hardly be
expected to hesitate to order the commission of any enormity which seems to
him to offer some hope of staving off defeat.


In the next chapter will be considered the characteristics of Peoples’ Wars, the
first stage of the chain reaction which initiated the gradual rebarbarization of
warfare.


SCLICLICe UL CLILULLULIdL CLPIICelIiip, ule pupuse UL WLIHUL IS LU CULIVITICe WE
average citizen that the citizens of the state against which it has been decided
to wage war were monsters of depravity, barbarous, perfidious and cruel, with
whom any thought of peace was impossible, to overcome whom no personal
sacrifice would be too great.


Inevitably warfare conducted in an artificially inspired frenzy of fear and
hatred changed its character. Thus began the period of so-called Total War to
use the term adopted to describe hostilities waged regardless of the Rules of
Civilized Warfare. Naturally the average civilian serving as a soldier, knowing
nothing and caring less of military traditions, and having been taught that it
was his patriotic duty to believe that the enemy was committing atrocities of
every description, felt himself free to act as he had been assured the enemy
was acting. Hate propaganda always lays the greatest stress on the contention
that the enemy is solely responsible for the outbreak of hostilities in order to
generate in the mind of every individual soldier a personal grievance against
the enemy for having wantonly forced him to leave home and endure the
hardships and dangers of a campaign.


The act which may be cited as marking the end of the age of civilized warfare
and the beginning of the age of Total War was the acceptance of the Lindemann
Plan on the 30th March 1942.


The last stage of the chain reaction was the adoption of war-crimes trials as a
method of disposing of captured leaders of the vanquished side which
inevitably must make the future conduct of warfare more ruthless than ever.
Now that every general knows that in the event of defeat he will assuredly be
done to death by the victors if he falls into their hands, he can hardly be
expected to hesitate to order the commission of any enormity which seems to
him to offer some hope of staving off defeat.


In the next chapter will be considered the characteristics of Peoples? Wars, the
first stage of the chain reaction which initiated the gradual rebarbarization of
warfare.


Chapter 5 — Civilized Warfare (The Second Phase)


With the outbreak of the French Revolution civil warfare in Europe entered
upon a new phase.


The epoch of Kings’ Wars ended that happy interlude when wars were
undertaken by kings against kings with small professional armies for objects
which their subjects were neither expected to approve nor to understand. Then
began the epoch of Peoples’ Wars, that is to say wars which, if rarely
undertaken from any genuine regard for the peoples’ benefit, were waged by
an increasingly large proportion of the adult male population.


The introduction of Peoples’ Wars produced two marked changes in the
character of warfare: 1. the appearance of huge hastily collected armies,
raised by conscription, thus making wars much more savage and lethal; and 2.
the rise of the science of propaganda or “emotional engineering” needed to
induce these conscripted armies to fight with enthusiasm and with the hearty
support of the populace at home.


The best treatment of the first phase or result of this change is presented by the
eminent American expert on warfare, Mr. Hoffman Nickerson, in his book,
The Armed Horde. The loss of life, even as early as the wars of the French
Revolution and Napoleon, vastly exceeded those of any previous wars, at least
so far as those killed on the field of battle are concerned. Only 5,000 English
had been killed during the whole year 1704, during which the decisive battle
of Blenheim had been fought. By the time of Dumouriez and Napoleon, wars
had become mass-murder on the battlefield. Napoleon was especially prodigal
of men in battle. He lost about 40,000 in the Battle of Borodino alone.
Moreover, disease in these mass-armies, with little provision for sanitation and
medical treatment, killed even more than gunfire. While, at first, the rules of
civilized warfare were continued in Peoples’ Wars, there is no doubt that this
new type of war contributed greatly to the increase of unrestrained savagery
and mortality in warfare. One reason for the increase of ferocity was the
necessary parallel development of propaganda.


Kings’ Wars were fought by small armies of professional soldiers obeying
orders: Peoples’ Wars were fought by huge armies of conscripted civilians


who, in order to fight with enthusiasm, had to be led to imagine that they knew
for what they were fighting.

The production, quickly and effectively, of a war psychosis thus became an
imperative necessity. To meet this need the modern science of emotional
engineering, as Aldous Huxley has labelled it, was gradually evolved.


In the Kings’ Wars of the eighteenth century, the man in the street was not
required to fight and he was preserved from suffering therein more than a
minimum of loss and inconvenience. There was no occasion, therefore, to
trouble him with explanations of the reasons for such wars. In the Peoples’
Wars, which began in 1792 and have lasted to the present day, the man in the
street was compelled to do the fighting and it became, therefore, no longer
impudent presumption on his part to inquire the reason. As a consequence, it
became necessary to work out a technique by which plausible reasons could be
found on short notice to meet any contingency, or, as an alternative, a
technique by which a condition of public hysteria could be created in which
any reason would be accepted as plausible. Thus was evolved the science of
emotional engineering. To wage war, it had become necessary to generate
hatred. Fear begets hatred. If the reasoning powers of the man in the street
could be paralysed by a sufficiently vivid portrayal of a real or imaginary
danger, not only would his natural but inconvenient curiosity as to his rulers’
doings be stifled but he would fight the better in a state of blind hatred. It soon
became recognized that neither professional military pride nor an intelligent
conviction of the justice of a cause was sufficient inspiration. Every man must
“see red,” as Field Marshal Montgomery frankly told his troops before they
landed on the Normandy beaches on “D-Day.” Carnot’s levée en masse, in
1793, and the Dresden holocaust of 1945 are linked together by a series of
developments, each following naturally and logically from the other.


During the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars (1792-1815) the standards of
European civil warfare suffered a marked decline. The citizen soldiers of the
new French Republic who invaded the Rhinelands, Belgium, and Italy were
inspired by official proclamations about the prospect of riches as well as
glory: in exchange for the blessings of liberty, the armies of France
shamelessly plundered the countries which they overran. On the other hand, it
must be admitted that a wide gulf exists between the looting of churches and
art galleries, as during Napoleon’s campaign in Italy, in 1796, and the


systematic dismantling of factories, leaving a highly skilled industrial
population dependent on them to starve in accordance with the Potsdam
Agreement of a century and a half later.

Stealing pictures and statues for the adornment of the victors’ art galleries is
one thing, but the stealing of essential machinery in order to impoverish the
vanquished is quite another.


After the restoration of order and discipline under the Napoleonic Empire, a
marked return set in towards the high standards of the eighteenth century.
Lapses, however, were not infrequent. Thus, in 1806, after the victory of Jena,
the city of Lübeck was pillaged by the pursuing French troops; in 1808,
Cordova was ruthlessly sacked by Dupont’s army.

On the other side, the most outstanding lapse was the celebrated sack of
Badajoz in 1812, described with shame by an eye-witness, Sir William
Napier. But from the perspective of nearly 150 years, something can be said in
extenuation of the orgy of robbery, rape, and murder with which Wellington’s
troops sullied the laurels they had won in one of the most heroic and costly
assaults in the annals of the British Army. The outrages were limited to the
rank and file, were committed in hot blood by troops who had just sustained
terrific losses, and stern repression swiftly followed. It is absurd to compare
this comparatively isolated incident with either the habitual pillage and
homicide in which European armies had been wont to indulge during the
Thirty Years War, or with the systematic and wholesale plundering of
Germany after the Second World War which in extent and thoroughness
stands without a parallel in history since it included in every part of Germany
the official looting of public property and the equipment of factories in
accordance with the Morganthau Plan and the appropriation of portable
private property of every description by individual members of the occupying
forces: in the eastern provinces the inhabitants who escaped with their lives
considered themselves fortunate, everything they possessed being
appropriated with the express approval of the Potsdam Conference.


In Napoleonic times, the nearest parallel to such doings is to be found in the
campaigns of the French armies in Spain. Even in these, however,
depredations seem to have been generally limited to churches and
monasteries; civilians, except in exceptional circumstances, were rarely
molested. The primitive theory that, on defeat, all the property of the


vanquished is vested automatically in the victors had not yet been re-affirmed.


What is most important about any war is the peace which it brings about. From
this point of view, the wars of 1792-1815 maintained the highest standards.
The moderation of the victors in 1815 appears to modern eyes simply
superhuman. In accordance with Vattel’s argument that only a peace based on
reason and justice could be lasting, France was neither penalised nor
humiliated. Not only was no French territory annexed, but France was left in
possession of the German territory on the left bank of the Rhine which had
been conquered by Louis XIV. No restrictions were imposed on the French
army or navy, and the indemnity demanded was paid without difficulty within
a decade.


The shooting of Marshal Ney after Waterloo is considered by many as a blot
on the memory of the Duke of Wellington, and it has even been suggested that
it will even bear some comparison with the doing to death of various enemy
commanders in 1946. This suggestion is, of course, too absurd to consider, but
in justice to the Duke of Wellington it should be remembered that Marshal Ney
was shot by the Bourbon Government after a conviction by a French Court on
a charge of treason against Louis X VIII—of which he was undeniably guilty.
The most that can justly be said against the Duke of Wellington is that he did
not bestir himself—as much as his admirers could with—to save a gallant
opponent from the spite of his political enemies by interfering with the course
of French justice.


Throughout the nineteenth century civil wars in Europe continued to be waged
in accordance with the rules of civilized warfare without any noteworthy
lapses. European Civil War No. 6, otherwise known as the Crimean War, may
be taken as representative of European warfare during this period in its least
harmful aspect. Characteristically, at its commencement, there was general
bewilderment as to the aims for which it was to be fought: once fairly started,
however, this difficulty was quickly remedied by declaring that “the
continuance of the war was essential to the vindication of the national
honour.” In the peace treaty which concluded it, there is not a single reference
to the question of the Holy Places in Palestine, the ostensible cause of the war.
On the other hand, during its course each side had abundant opportunity to
display the greatest courage and self- sacrifice: in fact, one episode, the


Charge of the Light Brigade, has become symbolic of unreasoning heroism.
The scope of the hostilities was strictly limited, damage to civilian life and
property was negligible, and the casualties among the combatants, amounting
to about a quarter of a million lives, was well below the average. No
noteworthy or enduring political results were achieved and, consequently,
European civilization as a whole sustained no serious setback. No legacy of
bitterness was left behind: the terms of peace, if read carefully, merely
indicate that Russia had had the worst of the fighting. In the Crimea itself, “a
spirit of amity and relief prevailed when a salute of 101 guns denoted the end
of the war. Reviews and races took the place of battles, the troops of the allies
and the Russians mingled in friendly intercourse—or at least in the common
delight of cheerful inebriation.”


It must, however, be again stressed that the rules governing civil warfare in
Europe were held to have little or no application to warfare between Europeans
and non-Europeans outside Europe. Thus, Canton was savagely bombarded by
a British fleet in 1841: the famous Summer Palace in Peking was deliberately
sacked and burned by a Franco-British army in 1860; and, in 1863, the Japanes
city of Kagoshima was ruthlessly destroyed by

a fleet under Admiral Kuper as the readiest means of extorting trade
concessions from the Japanese. In the Indian Mutiny, all restraints were
quickly forgotten in a blaze of moral indignation and racial hatred. Colonel
Neill hanged his prisoners wholesale; John Lawrence ceremoniously blew his
captives from the mouths of cannons; and John Nicholson, while practising
both methods of disposal on the widest scale, was so oppressed by their
inadequacy that he urged “the flaying alive, impalement or burning” of the
mutineers and quoted the Old Testament copiously in support of inflicting on
them “the most excruciating tortures.”


In passing, it should be noted that there was abundant precedent for the doing
to death of a number of distinguished Japanese prisoners of war after the
overthrow of the Japanese Empire with the aid of the atom bomb in 1945. The
mock-trial in 329 B.C. of Bessos the Persian governor, who attempted to
maintain the Persian resistance to the Macedonian invaders, affords perhaps
the earliest precedent. Having undergone various tortures as a pre-conviction
punishment, Bessos was condemned to a formal trial, Alexander the Great
himself assuming the role of prosecutor. After delivering an eloquent speech


demanding conviction, Alexander then assumed the role of judge, convicted
the unfortunate Oriental and sentenced him to death by torture. Throughout the
ages which have passed since the days of Bessos down to the present day,
Europeans have always in practice refused to admit that any rules which might
exist governing European civil wars had any application to Asiatics. The
hanging, therefore, of a number of Japanese generals and admirals in 1946,
was not so revolutionary a departure from recognized practice as was the
doing to death, during the same year, of professional European soldiers at
Nuremberg.


In Asia, methods of warfare have remained completely unchanged throughout
the ages. In Africa, the native races have remained entirely uninfluenced by
European rules and conventions, as the French from experience in Algeria,
the British in the Sudan, and the Italians in Abyssinia, can eloquently testify.
Only in South Africa, in the wars between the Dutch settlers and the British
Empire, have European traditions in the main been followed although Captain
Liddell Hart considers that the plan adopted by Lord Kitchener, in 1900, “of
laying waste the countryside, burning the Boers’ farms and removing the
women and children to concentration camps in which some 25,000 died may
be regarded as the inauguration of total warfare.” Reluctantly granting this
and admitting that similar charges could have been brought against Lord
Roberts and Lord Kitchener for their treatment of the Boer partisans as those
brought forty-five years later against Field Marshal Kesselring for his
treatment of Italian irregulars and banditti, it must be conceded that the peace
terms imposed on the Boers at Vereeniging complied in most respects with
the requirements laid down by Emeric de Vattel in 1758 for a just and,
therefore, lasting settlement. The subsequent careers of General Botha and
General Smuts may be cited as conclusive proof of the wisdom of the great
Swiss jurist’s contentions.


In spite also of virulent hate propaganda, quite in the modern style, which
raged in the British Press against the Boers, and in the Press of the rest of the
world against Great Britain, the struggle itself was conducted on the whole in
accordance with European traditions. In fact, some of the episodes of this war
have come to appear well nigh unbelievable. Thus when on March 6, 1902,
Lord Methuen was defeated and captured at Tweebosch, his captor, De la Rey,
at once sent him in the charge of his chief medical officer to the nearest British


nant ninnan narirnna ta laal- Af wandianl auannling ha rirnan nnn hla ta nanarrida tha


POSLE SUCE, UW LUMIS LU IdCK UL HICUIUd! SUPPLIES, UE Wa UlIdVIE LU PLUVIUE Le
attention which the British general’s wound seemed to need. However useful
Lord Methuen might have been to the Boers as a hostage, the health of a
prisoner of war was too sacred to imperil by retaining him in captivity. The
idea of making this capture an opportunity to avenge the deaths of Scheepers,
Lotter, and other Boer partisan leaders, recently executed by the British, does
not seem even to have occurred to De la Rey’s ingenuous mind.


In America, methods of warfare have varied roughly in accordance with the
extent of European influence. In South America, with its large Indian and half-
caste population, this influence has been weakest and, as a consequence,
warfare has been little influenced by restraints. Thus, in the great war waged
in 1865 against Paraguay by the Argentine, Uruguay, and Brazil, no pretence
was long maintained of distinguishing between combatants and the civil
population—the essential characteristic of civilized warfare as it had evolved
in Europe—with the result that, after five years of desperate conflict, two-
thirds of the inhabitants of Paraguay had perished.


In North America, European influence had always been predominant and one
would therefore expect to find warfare conducted there more or less in
accordance with European standards. The facts, however, do not confirm this
reasonable expectation. Thus, the crowning episode of the war of 1812-14
between Britain and the United States was when a British column of some
4,000 men was landed in Chesapeake Bay, marched inland to Washington and
there burnt the Capitol, the White House and various other public buildings. It
is difficult to reconcile this exploit with the European code, or many similar
British raids on the American coasts and the American raids across the
Canadian border, in all of which the destruction of enemy property was the
sole aim. Compare, for example, General Haddick’s raid on Berlin during the
Seven Years War when the Austrians carefully refrained from all violence to
persons and property and withdrew after collecting a ransom from the City
Council so moderate that Frederick was able to reimburse it at once out of his
own private funds.


Inasmuch as the settlers in the English colonies in America and who later
became citizens of the United States had experienced little contact with
European civilized warfare as it had developed during the 18th century, but


had undergone long experience of primary warfare against the American
Indians, it is not strange that the first serious departure from the European
code by a people of European descent should have taken place in the United
States.


Most of the wars in which the white settlers in North America had been
involved before 1861 were with the Red Indians and these may be cited as
classic examples on a small scale of harsh and rudimentary primary warfare.
No unqualified interludes were provided by the wars waged by the British and
French settlers in America with each other as colonial militia fighting loyally
in the service of the King of England and the King of France respectively,
alongside the professional troops of these monarchs. Neither side scrupled to
enlist the Red Indians who continued as auxiliaries of their European allies to
wage war in the manner of their remote ancestors. Lapses into barbaric
practices were consequently frequent. The only true exception to be found is
the War of Independence which was conducted in accordance with European
standards. The Mexican War of 1845 was a brief and relatively trivial conflict
between the United States and a people on a much lower mechanical and
military level. Thus the inhabitants of the United States at the middle of the
19th century had had no experience nor any tradition of a major war conducted
according to the European code which required that hostilities be limited to the
military forces and that non-combatants and private property be respected. But
they had a long background of experience and tradition of primary warfare in a
most savage form.


Hence, it is not surprising that the first great historic break with European
practice should have taken place in the sanguinary American Civil War (or
“The War Between the States”, as the Southerners still prefer to designate it).
The military precedents in the United States were nearly all in the pattern of
primary warfare. Even President Lincoln himself had fought briefly in his
youth against the Red Indians and he exerted a dominant influence on
Northern military policy and strategy.


It was the Northern or Federal armies which produced this historic reversion
to primary or total warfare. The North had endured much more bellicose
contact with the Red Indians and was much less influenced by Europe than the
South. The latter was culturally a European colony until after the Civil War,


CAuthawn AhAildAwan rarnana ndiinntad in Diranna and tha Carsthawn nmntannn anrr


OUULLIELL CHUUW ELH WELE CUUCMLEU 1 CULUPE, dHU WUE QOUULLICLI dLISLUCLACY
travelled widely in Europe. Southern professional soldiers were very familiar
with European military ideals. General Robert E. Lee, the military leader of
the South, was the perfect example of Southern military chivalry in complete
accord with the European ideals of civilized warfare. It is for this reason that
Professor T. Harry Williams accurately calls Lee “the last of the great old-
fashioned generals.” His “old-fashioned” trait was his fidelity to the European
code of civilized warfare. While General John H. Morgan and other Southern
raiders reverted to primary warfare in their attacks on the countryside, Lee
was generally able to keep the Southern strategy in harmony with the
European code.


There has been a traditional habit of saddling the responsibility for the
Northern departure from civilized warfare on General William Tecumseh
Sherman who conducted the famous march through Georgia from Atlanta to
the sea, and continued it along the Atlantic seaboard. This is quite unjust.
Sherman only executed the most dramatic and devastating example of the
strategy which was laid down by President Lincoln himself and was followed
faithfully by General Ulysses S. Grant as commander-in-chief of the Northern
armies. That Lincoln determined the basic lines of Northern military strategy
has been well established in such books as Collin R. Ballard’s The Military
Genius of Abraham Lincoln and T. Harry Williams’ Lincoln and His
Generals. Grant only efficiently applied Lincoln’s military policy in the field.
Professor Williams calls Grant “the first of the great moderns.” He goes on to
say that the “modernity of Grant’s mind was most apparent in his grasp of the
concept that war was becoming total and that the destruction of the enemy’s
economic resources was as effective and legitimate a form of warfare as the
destruction of his armies.” Hence, it is apparent that Sherman was only
carrying out effectively the military policy which Lincoln and Grant had
adopted. The exploit upon which his fame rests opened a new epoch in
modern warfare.


In the Spring of 1864, General Sherman was in command of the Tennessee
sector far from the northern theatre of war in Virginia. Unexpectedly taking
the offensive, he pushed forward and captured Atlanta, one of the most
important industrial centres of the South upon which the Confederates greatly
relied for supplies of all kinds. According to the accepted rules of civilized


warfare in this exposed position two simple alternatives lay before him, either
to retreat to his base before he was cut off or to prepare to withstand a siege in
Atlanta. Sherman, however, saw no reason why he should be fettered by rules
which it had pleased the European nations to adopt in their wars with each
other. His first act was to expel the inhabitants of Atlanta from their homes.
His second was systematically to destroy the factories and mills of the city so
that they could never again serve the enemy. His third was to abandon the
devastated city and to push on to the Atlantic coast across Georgia, laying
waste the country as he went. “Until we can repopulate Georgia, it is useless to
occupy it,” he wrote to headquarters. “I can make this march and make
Georgia howl!”


Some of the richest lands of the South were devastated. Having captured and
looted Savannah, Sherman turned northwards along the Atlantic coast to
Charleston. He made no secret of his intentions: “I sincerely believe,” he
wrote General Halleck in Washington, “the whole United States would rejoice
to have my army turned loose on South Carolina, to devastate that state in the
manner we have done in Georgia.” To which Halleck replied with admiring
approval and the expression of a hope that “should you capture Charleston, by
some accident the place may be destroyed.” To this, Sherman responded with
charming simplicity that the division assigned to occupy Charleston had a
reputation “of doing their work pretty well.” “The truth is,” he added, “the
whole army is burning with insatiable desire to wreak vengeance upon South
Carolina.”


To do him justice, Sherman was no simple-minded barbarian carried away by
the heat of the moment; nor was he vindictive against a people who practised
Negro slavery. Before the Civil War he had criticized the extremists on both
sides of the slavery question. On the eve of the War he wrote his brother that:
“I recoil from a war when the Negro is the only question.” Sherman was
capable of formulating his principles and defending them on logical grounds.
With regard to the destruction of Atlanta he wrote to General Halleck, “if the
people raise a howl against my barbarity and cruelty, I will answer war is
war. If the enemy wants peace, they and their relatives must stop the war.” In
answer to the protest of the Mayor of Atlanta, Sherman said: “You cannot
qualify war in harsher terms than I will. War is cruelty, and you cannot refine
it.”


The crisp argument that war is war, which Sherman propounds with the pride
of a discoverer, as justification for the destruction of Atlanta, is of extreme
antiquity. On the Assyrian bas-reliefs the complaint often occurs, made more
in sorrow than in anger, that the inhabitants of this or that city had “hardened
their hearts” when threatened by an Assyrian army. Peace could so easily have
been purchased by prompt surrender followed by payment of tribute
consisting of all they possessed. Instead, it is recorded sorrowfully, they
decided to resist and naturally suffered the consequences. The following
passage from King Asshurbanipal’s annals illustrates what these consequences
normally were: “The wells of drinking water I dried up: for a journey of a
month and twenty-five days the districts of Elam I laid waste: destruction,
servitude and drought I poured over them. The passage of men, the treading of
oxen and sheep and the springing up of good trees I burnt off the fields.”


In short, probably quite as justifiably as General Sherman, King Asshurbanipal
could claim that his warriors had a reputation for doing their work pretty well.


But the discovery which Sherman may have regarded as original in 1864, was
of immemorial antiquity even in the days of King Asshurbanipal. The
procedure which he advocated is neatly set forth in the Book of Deuteronomy.
The ancient Hebrews invading Canaan were directed “when they came nigh to
a city to fight against it, to proclaim peace unto it.” (Ch. 20. v. 10.) If the offer
of peace were accepted, the inhabitants were to be made slaves but not
otherwise maltreated. But if they were so presumptuous as to refuse peace and
“to make war on thee” (i.e., defend themselves), “thou shalt smite the males
thereof with the edge of the sword but the women and little ones and the cattle
and all that is in the city even all the spoil thereof, thou shalt take unto
thyself.”


Here is set out concisely the exact purport of Sir Arthur Harris’ verbose
broadcast to the German people on July 28, 1942, except, of course, the gallant
Air Marshal naturally refrained from informing his hearers that slavery would
be the price of accepting his offer of peace, while, as a herald of unrestricted
bombing, he could not, like the ancient Hebrews of the 12th century B.C.,
profess any intention to discriminate between the adult male population and
“the women and little ones.”


Though the Northern military policy of Lincoln, Grant and Sherman marked
the first great example of the reversion to primary or total warfare and set a
precedent for the “Splendid Decision” of the British on May 11, 1940, it
provided no precedent or example for the liquidation of conquered enemy
leaders by massacre, mock-trials, or war-crimes trials which followed the
Second World War. In this respect, Lincoln and Grant followed faithfully in
the chivalrous European tradition, a procedure best exemplified by Grant’s
treatment of Lee after the Southern forces had surrendered at Appomattox.


The story of Grant’s famous meeting with Lee to discuss the terms upon which
the Southern Army would surrender reads to-day like a fairytale fit to be
placed alongside Froissart’s story of the capture of the French King by the
Black Prince at Poitiers. The terms were expressly framed to provide for the
termination of hostilities with as little humiliation for the vanquished as
possible. In brief, they stipulated that the Southern Army should simply
disband and each man return to his home, the officers giving their parole for
themselves and their men and retaining their side arms and horses.
Characteristically, Lee requested only that all ranks be permitted to retain their
horses and, equally characteristically, Grant made this concession without
haggling. Later, when the politicians at Washington began to scream wildly
against the “pampering” of a defeated enemy and to demand that Lee should
be tried for treason, Grant pointed out that the Southern Army had surrendered
on definite terms and that, so long as these terms were observed, Lee could not
be tried for treason. “Good faith as well as true policy dictate that we should
observe the conditions of the convention,” Grant wrote scathingly to those
who demanded a legalized lynching of Southern military leaders.


The Federal methods of total warfare and the arguments which were used to
justify them aroused curiously little interest at the time in Europe. Naturally,
supercilious eyebrows were raised in professional circles in Aldershot,
Potsdam, and Longchamps. But, after all, they reasoned, what better could be
expected of colonials led by militia officers whose only training had been wars
with Red Indians. Von Moltke dismissed the American Civil War as “a
colossal conflict between two armed mobs chasing each other around in a
wilderness.” No lesson was to be learnt by European professional soldiers
from such disorderly proceedings, least of all the hoary truth that one way of


urinnina n urar urac ta tarrnarian tha nnnm civilian namilatinan Tn tha fiillnnce af


W LIT qa Wal WAD LU LOLIVIIAT UIC CHULLy LCivilldil PpUpulauull. 111 UIC LULLHICDD UL
time, this hoary truth was to be impressed upon Europeans, not by observing a
distant campaign between armed mobs on the far side of the Atlantic, but by
personal experience.


Fortunately for their peace of mind, no vision of the future was vouchsafed to
the military panjandrums of Europe. To them, the possibility would have
seemed grotesque that within a few decades the descendants of the “armed
mobs” fighting under Grant and Lee in Virginia should have the presumption
to intervene decisively in a European civil war. Even if Eisenhower’s men
could hardly be dismissed, like their ancestors, as an armed mob, yet, by
European professional standards of the 1860’s, they would have been classed
less as soldiers than as specialists in the use of various new mass-produced
instruments for taking human life. Their whole outlook on warfare—which
was precisely that of General Sherman—would have been considered in the
1860’s as the exact opposite of all that was meant by the word soldierly.


General Sherman’s views on war were shared and applied by his dashing
colleague, General Philip H. Sheridan, one of whose claims to fame was his
merciless devastation of the Shenandoah Valley in the campaign of 1864. In
1870, General Sheridan visited Europe and, as the guest of German
Headquarters, was a favoured eye-witness of the memorable campaign in
France in that year—for the night after the battle of Gravelotte he shared the
bare boards of an abandoned house within range of the forts round Metz with
Count Bismarck and the Grand Duke of Mecklenburg, and he was one of the
distinguished gathering on the Hill of Cheveuge which witnessed General
Reille hand to King Wilhelm the letter from Napoleon III announcing the
surrender of the French Army encircled in Sedan. The fighting capacity of the
German troops and the skill of their leaders filled General Sheridan with
boundless admiration but their lack of enterprise in allowing themselves to be
cramped and hampered by the rules of civilized warfare then prevailing in
Europe, aroused his contemptuous amusement. Having by a swift and
unbroken series of victories destroyed or captured the bulk of the French
regular forces, the Germans were experiencing great difficulty in defending the
communications of their armies blockading Paris from the raids of irregulars
working behind the German lines and from the attacks of the new French
armies being gathered in the provinces for the relief of the capital. “You know


how to hit an enemy as no other army does,” Sheridan remarked to Bismarck,
“but you have not learnt how to annihilate him. One must see more smoke of
burning villages, otherwise you will not finish off the French.”


Bismarck did not, of course, need to have it pointed out to him that France
could be quickly brought to her knees by sending forth punitive expeditions to
lay waste the countryside. To sully the glory of their victories over the French
armies by a barbarous campaign against the French civilian population did not
appeal to the German leaders. The smoke of burning villages seemed to
Europeans of that generation more in keeping with fighting Red Indians in the
Wild West than with orderly warfare between civilized European nations. In
spite of Sheridan’s doubts, they remained confident that the war could be won
by civilized methods of warfare in accordance with European traditions. This
confidence proved fully justified. The war was at length crowned by a
victorious but negotiated peace and Europe enjoyed a respite from civil war
which lasted for forty-three years.


An interesting sidelight on the thought and manners of those ethically
inconceivably remote days of the Franco-Prussian War is given by a long out-
of-print and forgotten book, Im Grossen Hauptquartier 1870-71, which
recently came by chance into the present writer’s possession. Published in
1910 as filial tribute by the author’s daughter, this book consists of the
collected articles contributed to a long defunct Berlin paper by its special war
correspondent, Hermann Salingré.


From a literary point of view little merit can be claimed for these articles. In
them Salingré shows himself to have been a simple-minded man, unassuming,
diffident, and prosaic. No one can be imagined further removed than he from
that flamboyant militarism which characterized so conspicuously many of the
next generation of Germans and French. While rejoicing naively in the
succession of German victories, he neither glorifies nor idealizes a soldier’s
life. On the contrary, he dwells continually on the deprivations of the men
compelled by the call of duty to leave their homes in Germany to undertake a
few months campaigning in France. In fact, his lamentations over the cruel
fate of the troops, prevented by the unexpectedly prolonged resistance of Paris
from rejoining their dear ones for Christmas, strikes a modern reader as little
short of comic in their extravagance. Accepting without question or argument


that his country was entirely in the fight, he expresses no bitterness against the
French, presumably, in his view, entirely in the wrong. The sight of damaged
property merely fills him with thankfulness to God that his country had been
spared the horrors of war. While repeating all the stock chestnuts of war
reporting of the kind which no doubt delighted Assyrian readers in cuneiform
characters and certainly delighted the British public in 1945—for example,
that while the enemy was tenacious in fighting at long range, he could not
withstand attack at close quarters with the bayonet—he regales his readers
with no enemy atrocity stories.


The supreme moment of Salingré’s experiences was after the surrender of
Sedan when he was privileged to witness from a distance of twenty paces the
meeting of the Emperor Napoleon HI with Count Bismarck at Donchery. His
reflections on this epoch-making occasion were as ever platitudinous, but he
describes vividly enough the sight of this “once so powerful man” waiting
patiently, seated on a peasant’s chair outside the cottage of a Belgian weaver
named Fournaise, the arrival of his conqueror. He naively comments that he
found the Emperor’s appearance very different from what he had been led to
expect by the German comic papers. His natural jubilation, he tells us, was
quickly replaced by “a sad, heartrending impression” at so complete a
downfall. Upon the Emperor happening to glance in his direction he felt that
one could not “tread so unfortunate a man deeper in the mud”—“T respectfully
removed my hat and experienced a thrill of satisfaction when I saw that the
Emperor had noted my greeting and thanked me.”


Salingré was an entirely conventional and commonplace individual. He was
not only a typical German but a typical journalist of his generation. Herein lies
the whole significance of this incident. In no circumstances would his natural
diffidence have allowed him either to rise far above or sink much below the
accepted standards of his time. Even if one can imagine a present-day war
correspondent being moved to such an act, it is impossible to imagine him
reporting it and still less his editor accepting and printing it. One trembles to
think of the fate of anyone who had committed such an act of courtesy to Field
Marshal Keitel during the proceedings at Nuremberg! Whether he would have
been instantly committed for contempt of court turns, of course, on the knotty
legal point whether it is possible to commit contempt of court to a court sitting
without jurisdiction. Probably one of the non-European jailors posted


menacingly at the back of each prisoner would have settled the matter
summarily by a blow with his club. At the least, immediate expulsion from
occupied territory would have resulted, followed by instant dismissal on the
culprit’s return to Fleet Street.


Judged by what is the only valid test, the battle of Sedan must be assigned a
unique position among European battles. War is not a sporting event in which
victory is an end in itself: it can only be justified as a means by which an
equitable and lasting peace is achieved. A century before, the Swiss jurist,
Emeric de Vattel, had convincingly argued that only an equitable peace could
be lasting and that an equitable peace must conform to certain specified
principles. Although it contravened several of the most vital of these
principles, the peace which followed Moltke’s triumph at Sedan endured for
no less than forty-three years. Relieved from the waste and destruction of civil
war for a period longer than any in the history of Europe, civilization
throughout Europe made enormous strides between 1871 and 1914. Within a
few decades of its close, this period began to appear in public memory as a
remote and semi-mythical epoch of universal contentment and security, of
unbroken tranquillity and prosperity. Prosperity, in fact, seemed to flow
naturally from peace. Never before had the rich been so rich and never before
had there been such opportunities to enjoy riches. With only colonial wars and
few social services to be paid for, taxation was incredibly light. As wealth
increased, the standard of living rose: new discoveries and improvements
brought comforts and luxuries within the reach of ever widening circles of the
population. In most European countries, measures of social reform improved
to a greater or less extent the lot of those who depended on their daily
earnings. A belief in inevitable and unending progress became universal: there
was a general feeling of security. It appeared incredible that European
supremacy would ever be challenged: the rest of the world seemed created by
a kindly Providence for exploitation by one or other of the European Powers.
There was the best reason for thinking this happy state of affairs would
continue indefinitely, since it was utterly impossible to conceive any issue
arising between the European Powers important enough to tempt any sane
statesman to run the risk of a general disaster by plunging Europe into another
civil war.


It rarely happens that even the victors in a modern war derive any lasting


hanafit fram thain eriatane and nner awnmnlan Af manlind in Annan 1 hanafitina


VDELICLIL LLULIL UIEIL VICLUL Y, dllu dally CAALLIPLES UL ILId LIKITIIU It SELIEL dl DELICLIUIIS
from warfare are rare indeed. The fact that the peoples of Europe benefited by
the German victory over France in 1870 was assuredly not due to any strain of
altruism in the German character, still less that it was one of the aims of
Bismarck’s policy to confer benefits on mankind.

Bismarck’s altruism was a by-product of his realism and his nationalism.
Fundamentally, his aims were as selfish as those of any later statesman. But
his selfishness was intelligent selfishness. He was no lover of peace in the
abstract: he had no more moral scruples against resorting to war, if policy
required it, than had Franklin D. Roosevelt. Down to 1870, his aims could
only be achieved by war, while, thereafter, his aims could only be achieved by
peace. Having saved the German people by three victorious wars from that
condition of disunity and political impotence which for centuries had made
their country a battle field for their neighbours, Bismarck realized that a long
period of peace was essential for recovery and development. If Germany’s
neighbours began to fight each other, Germany was certain to become
involved. Therefore, he devoted himself, from the downfall of France in 1870
to his dismissal by the young Kaiser Wilhelm in 1890, to making Europe safe
for Germany. This he achieved by negotiating a series of defensive alliances
and treaties designed to preserve the peace of Europe. As Esme Cecil
Wingfield-Stratford puts it:


“Bismarck had gone about his task of establishing German unity with a skill
and finesse never surpassed, if ever equalled, in the records of diplomacy. So
far as the world could be made safe for peace and for Germany he made it so.
He was no philanthropist. He had no scruples, and no ideals beyond that of a
simple loyalty to his country. He was never more sincere than when he
described Germany as a saturated Power. Now that all was German from the
Vosges to the Vistula, he had no sentimental dreams of expansion, even in the
colonial field.”


One of the indirect consequences which followed from Bismarck’s peace
policy was that Europe became for nearly half a century little short of an
Utopia for its ruling classes, and particularly for its royalties. The kings and
princes of Europe whose grandfathers had lived in dread of the guillotine and
whose grandsons were mostly destined to die violent deaths or become
forgotten exiles, enjoyed unparalleled security, prestige and esteem. In public,


they were regarded with awe and reverence when they went forth to attend
each other’s weddings and funerals, to review their own or each other’s troops
and navies, or to pay state visits on each other. In private, there was frequent
bickering among them and occasionally antipathies such as that between
Queen Victoria’s eldest son, Edward, Prince of Wales, and her grandson, the
young German Kaiser, but, publicly, the most cordial sentiments were always
expressed. The European royal families were all more or less nearly related by
blood or marriage to each other and to that strong-minded old lady who
resided in Windsor Castle and who exercised over them a matriarchal
influence which few ventured to defy.


Happy were kings in those days and happy the subjects whom kings delighted
to honour. It might well be thought that the ruling classes in the leading
European states, for whom the various royalties acted as leaders or
figureheads, would at least refrain from conduct which would endanger this,
for them, ideal state of affairs. Had only the ruling classes of Germany,
Austria, and Russia held together in mutual self-protection, the established
order might have continued indefinitely. The Haves had nothing to fear from
an uprising of the Have-nots: a dozen Lenins could have achieved nothing
more than the stirring up of local disturbances, easily suppressed. So long as
peace was preserved, the Haves were secure. The Haves in all the states of
Europe were thus linked by one paramount interest, the preservation of peace.
As all effective political power was vested in the Haves, it is hard to imagine
how peace could have rested on a securer foundation.


In fact, however, the peace of Europe rested on nothing more substantial than
the political life of one old man. So long as Bismarck remained Chancellor,
the German Empire served as a mighty makeweight for a stable equilibrium.
Once he had gone, his successors were free to join with zest in that time-
honoured game of European diplomacy which in the past had always been the
prelude to the outbreak of European civil warfare. The other great Powers
joined with equal zest in the game. In the circumstances then existing, this was
not a difficult game in which to take part.


Europe was covered by a network of alliances, treaties, secret agreements,
guarantees, ententes, and understandings and there was ready to hand a
profusion of unsatisfied claims, concessions, spheres of influence, grievances,


and prescriptive rights. It was an easy matter, therefore, to find, for example,
an ambiguous clause in a treaty and then, having secretly purchased in advance
the support of neighbouring Powers by promises of concessions, to put
forward a claim, based on a novel interpretation of this clause, against some
other Power, either a weaker Power or a Power distracted at the moment by
some similar activity. If the diplomatist in charge played his cards so well that
this other Power felt compelled to give way, he was held to have scored a
diplomatic triumph and his grateful sovereign would reward him with titles
and honours. On the other hand, if he played his cards so badly that the other
Power felt itself strong enough to reject his claim, his country was held to have
received a diplomatic rebuff. In that case, he would probably be dismissed, and
his successor would be entrusted with the task of vindicating the national
dignity, it being an inflexible rule of the game that the losing side must take
immediate steps to avenge a diplomatic rebuff, a rule which ensured that the
game went on ad infinitum.


Seen in retrospect, the issues at stake in the periodic crises which distracted
Europe after Bismarck’s dismissal seem indescribably trivial. For example, the
outstanding diplomatic triumph of the epoch 1870-1914 was when Austria, in
1908, succeeded, by a masterpiece of sharp practice, in scoring off against
Russia by formally annexing the former Turkish province of Bosnia, a
province she had administered with the consent of all the Powers, entirely as
she saw fit, for upwards of thirty years. This achievement, from which Austria
derived no practical benefit and from which no one suffered any material
harm, imperilled the whole structure of capitalist civilization in Europe and
proved to be an important step towards the final catastrophe six years later.


The behaviour of the ruling caste in Europe during the first years of the
twentieth century can only be compared with that of the inhabitants of a
beautiful and comfortable house who persist in descending into the basement
in which a store of gun powder is kept for the purpose of letting off fireworks.
The fact could not be disguised that there was an acute danger of war every
time a crisis occurred. It was, indeed, one of the inflexible rules of the
diplomatic game that if the parties involved in a crisis muddled themselves
into a position so that neither side could withdraw “with honour” there was no
alternative open to them but to go to war. Reliance seems to have been placed
on the assumption that when another war came it would be a strictly limited


war similar to those of the eighteenth century—after the generals had fought a
few battles, the diplomatists would again resume control and negotiate a
settlement by which existing treaties would be varied slightly in favour of the
side which on the whole had had the best of the fighting.

No one seems to have realized that conditions had changed markedly since the
eighteenth century or suspected that new and potent forces would be released
on the outbreak of war.


The power of one of these new forces, namely the power of the Press, should
at least have been foreseen, since in peace time it had already developed a
disastrous influence over international relations. By the rules of the
diplomatic game, double-dealing and sharp-practice were permissible within
certain ill-defined limits. If these limits were exceeded, a formal “sharp note
of protest” was sent to the offending party. Such notes, couched in
stereotyped diplomatic language, gave no offence. It was a recognized move
in the game to profess indignation on occasion at the doings of the other side.
But to the Press these protests possessed news value: they served as a means
of arousing public interest, and, if well handled, of increasing sales. The
offending Power was, therefore, roundly denounced for trickery and perfidy,
and, needless to say, its Press retorted in the same strain. The language
employed, although moderate compared with the language now habitually
employed by the Press on such occasions, served to accustom the publics of
the various European countries to regard certain groups of foreigners as
gallant allies and certain groups of foreigners as treacherous enemies.
Wingfield-Stratford puts the matter in a nutshell where he writes:


“A disease was infecting the whole of civilization, causing the international
temperature to rise to a fever heat, with danger of ultimate collapse. The whole
system by which the world was governed was hopelessly, fatally, out of date.
With civilization becoming every year more international, with the world
drawing together into a single economic unit, the last resort of human wisdom
was to set up an uncontrolled anarchy of nations and nationalisms, and to
employ all the resources of science to make that anarchy more deadly. Hatred
was now engendered by scientific mass-suggestion, commerce was choked by
scientific tariffs, “backward peoples” were bled white by scientific
exploitation, and the ultimately inevitable suicide of war would be rendered
scientifically complete. Even the best that Bismarck could do, by the


Ainlawniatia finannn Af xarhinh ha wiran manntan rirnan ta nanintnin an amatahla


ULPLUINIAGUE LESSEE UL WIUUH He Wa» LIIdSlelL, WAS LU MIdAHILAL dil ULISLADIE
equilibrium, and the worst that Wilhelm II could do, by an almost incredible
series of diplomatic blunders, was to hasten the catastrophe that was bound to
come sooner or later, and would be worse later than sooner.”


Outwardly, in 1914, no great change had taken place in the structure of
civilization during the respite of forty-three years which followed Sedan. This
is the best apology which can be made for the men who so lightheartedly
embarked on war in that memorable year. At the outset of the First World
War, all the belligerents were actuated by strictly limited objects and all
probably quite honestly intended to achieve them by limited means. The
Allies were paying a quite undeserved compliment to his intelligence when
they attributed to Kaiser Wilhelm vast Machiavellian schemes of world
conquest; comparable was the intricate plot to encircle Germany which the
Germans attributed to their enemies. All parties blundered helplessly into war
with minds singularly innocent of ideas, good or bad. All, to a greater or lesser
extent, had been striking attitudes in shining armour until a situation had
arisen in which hallowed tradition and national honour could only be
preserved by war.


No other explanation is tenable on the facts except on the assumption that a
sudden wave of insanity swept the governments of Europe. Mr. Wingfield-
Stratford’s final conclusion indeed seems to be that the utter irresponsibility of
the European ruling classes in the decade preceding 1914 was tinged by actual
madness. Writing in 1933 he declares:


“T am aware that a plain, unvarnished account of the years immediately
preceding the War reads rather like the chronicle of a vast lunatic asylum.... If
a number of prosperous gentlemen were to start cutting each others’ throats,
and wrecking all the luxurious furniture of their common abode, we might
fairly assume that when, ten minutes before, they had sat politely glaring at
each other and fingering their knives, they were not quite right in the head.”


After the passage of another thirty years it is hardly possible to say more with
any confidence than that we shall fully understand the root causes of the First
World War when we know exactly why the Gadarene Swine rushed down a
steep place into the sea. St. Mark tells us that the whole herd perished and so in


that case this was the end of the matter. But if any members of the herd had
been swimmers and so had escaped drowning, we may be sure that an
acrimonious controversy would have started among the survivors as to which
particular pig was mainly responsible for leading that fatal headlong rush down
the steep place into the sea.


In 1914, life on this planet had become exceedingly pleasant for the ruling
classes. For those who already had much, more was being given abundantly,
the amenities of life were being constantly increased, and absolute security
was assured, providing only that the ruling classes would refrain from suicidal
civil war. Conquest from without was out of the question—even Kaiser
Wilhelm knew in his heart that he was talking melodramatic nonsense when
he made the flesh of his contemporaries creep by warnings of the Yellow
Peril. Revolution from within could easily have been repressed—even in
Czarist Russia only a disastrous foreign war could seriously imperil the
security of the established order. The two main immediate causes of the First
World War—the Russian desire for the Straits leading out of the Black Sea
and the French desire for the return of Alsace Lorraine—could surely have
been handled by diplomacy. Britain and Sir Edward Grey were the main
obstacles to awarding Russia the Straits, and Germany was willing to discuss
the extension of considerable autonomy to Alsace-Lorraine.


From all conceivable external dangers the established order was, indeed,
absolutely secure. Danger came from within. As early as 1900, certain
symptoms might have been detected by acute observers which suggested that,
in the next European civil war, the belligerents might not be disinclined to
hearken to tempting counsel of the kind that General Sheridan had offered
Bismarck in 1870. A new spirit was abroad or, perhaps to put it more
correctly, an old spirit dating from the times of King Sennacherib was showing
signs of reviving. One of the earliest spokesmen of the new age which lay
ahead was the young German emperor, Wilhelm II, whose true spiritual home,
it can now be seen, was not, as he imagined, at the Round Table of King
Arthur in the remote past, but at the Yalta Conference half a century later.


By most of his contemporaries Wilhelm was regarded as an ill-balanced
neurotic, obsessed with his own perfections and the unqualified wickedness of
anyone who opposed him. As a consequence, his most outrageous assertions


Antwan A nathinag mann than ambhassnnamanant nt hama and namiinnmnnt nhennd


causeu HULLS IHULE Uldll CLLIVALIGSSILICLIL dt HULE GLIU GLILUSCILICIIL GULUdU.
Even his appeal to his troops embarking at Bremerhaven to take part in the
Boxer Campaign that they should emulate the doings of King Attila and his
Huns, aroused no general apprehensions as to what the future might hold in
store. It was felt that such sentiments could at any rate have no possible
application to warfare between European nations. Had not the existing
standards of European civilization endured for two centuries and survived
even so severe a test as the Napoleonic Wars? When another test came,
everyone, including Queen Victoria’s grandson, could be trusted to act like
gentlemen.


Another symptom which might have given ground for reflection came from
across the Atlantic where President Theodore Roosevelt was carrying out his
“policy of the big stick” with characteristic vigour. Although by many,
including his fellow-countryman, Henry James, the President might be
dismissed as “a mere monstrous embodiment of unprecedented resounding
noise”, the small states of Latin America found it perilous not to treat him
seriously. When Colombia failed to come to terms with him in regard to the
building of a canal across the Isthmus of Panama, a mysterious revolution
immediately broke out in the canal zone, the Colombian Government was
peremptorily forbidden to send troops to restore order and a treaty providing fo!
the building of the canal on terms most favourable to the United States was
promptly concluded with the newly-established provisional government of
Panama. No more workmanlike job can be attributed to Hitler or Stalin. It is
significant that Theodore Roosevelt’s brusque rejection of the German demand:
at the time of the Venezuelan crisis of 1902 won for him the lasting respect and
admiration of Kaiser Wilhelm. Although unlike in many ways, the two men
were linked by a fellow-feeling arising from the lack of appreciative
understanding which they both found in their contemporaries.


Perhaps, however, the dawning spirit of the days which were to come most
clearly revealed itself in Admiral Lord Fisher who, with the possible exception
of Lord Haldane, was probably the ablest of the men who surrounded King
Edward VII. Speaking to the journalist, W. T. Stead, in 1900, Admiral Fisher
declared:


“T am not for war, I am for peace. If you rub it in, both at home and abroad,
that you are ready for instant war with every unit of your strength in the front


a


line, and intend to be first in, and hit your enemy in the belly, and kick him
when he is down, and boil your prisoners in oil if you take any, and torture his
women and children, then people will keep clear of you.”


Of course, no one in 1900 was prepared to believe that any civilized man
could really hold such an opinion, still less that within half a century this
opinion would become a commonplace. For this reason only, the expression of
such sentiments did the speaker no harm professionally or socially: they were
dismissed as mere examples of quarterdeck humour. The Admiral’s favourite
maxim, “Hit first, hit hard and hit anywhere” was considered rather stirring
but without any particular significance. Writing, in 1912, to Lord Esher, Lord
Fisher defended his views by insisting that “It’s quite silly not to make war
damnable to the whole mass of your enemy’s population. When war comes,
might is right, and the Admiralty will know what to do.”


It not, of course, known at the time that Admiral Fisher had no hesitation it
urging that his views should be carried into practice. When it became clear
that the naval building programme commenced by Admiral Tirpitz was
becoming a menace to British naval supremacy, Admiral Fisher begged for
permission to end summarily the armament race by taking his battleships over
to Kiel and sinking the German High Seas Fleet in harbour. This proposed
operation he picturesquely termed “Copenhagening the lot”—a reference to
the British attack on Denmark in 1807, an episode which might have provided
the framers of the London Agreement of 1945 with a classic example of an
aggressive war. It well illustrates how dominant the nineteenth century code
still remained that Edward VII was neither shocked nor angry at the Admiral’s
proposal but merely dismissed it with a brief, “Fisher, you’re mad!”


In retrospect however it is hard to accept King Edward’s view that the
opinions Admiral Fisher expressed were intended by him merely to startle and
shock his hearers. In the Age of Security, talk of “boiling your enemies in oil
and torturing his women and children” seemed like the stories to amuse
children which adults tell them about man-eating ogres and fire-breathing
dragons. Admiral Fisher died in 1920 leaving a memory unsullied by any of
the atrocities which he professed to justify in theory. As an alternative to King
Edward’s view that this was merely flamboyant talk not to be taken seriously,
it may be suggested that Admiral Fisher during the First World War may have


restrained his natural instincts by an enormous exercise of will power. It
should however be pointed out that whatever his natural instincts may have
been, they were circumscribed by the fact that the weapons of war in his time
were relatively limited in range and in destructive power. It is perhaps
fortunate for his reputation and for the enemies of his country that he did not
have at his command a fleet of long-range bombers, still less the means to
despatch a salvo of rockets armed with atomic war-heads. His remarks to W.
T. Stead in 1900 quoted above would have served Professor Lindemann
admirably for use as a sort of preamble to the infamous plan which he laid
before the British Cabinet in 1942, a preamble which would certainly have
appealed to the literary-minded Prime Minister, Winston Churchill.


Admiral Fisher expressed in words the spirit of the times to come: his
contemporary, Field Marshal Lord Kitchener, the perfect example of the
Strong Silent Man idealised by the poet Rudyard Kipling, said little but
expressed that spirit by deeds. Although it was his strange fate to be selected
in 1914 to serve as the figurehead for a crusade against Imperialism and
Militarism, Lord Kitchener’s whole life was devoted to extending and
strengthening the British Empire by warfare and he earned a well-deserved
reputation of being a ruthless soldier. His conquest of the Sudan in 1898 made
him the idol of the British public. The campaign began with his victory of
Atbara after which he made a triumphal march through the town of Berber (to
quote his most recent and not unsympathetic biographer, Sir Charles Magnus),
“Kitchener rode in front on a white horse while behind him the defeated
Dervish general, Emir Mahmoud, dragging chains riveted to his ankles and
wearing a halter round his neck, was made to walk and sometimes to run by
his guards who lashed him with whips when he stumbled.” When Kitchener
soon after captured Khartoum, he had the Tomb of the Madhi blown up and
the body of the Madhi thrown into the Nile. The Madhi’s skull he retained as a
trophy and was only dissuaded from having it exhibited in the museum of the
College of Surgeons in London by the strongly expressed disapproval of
Queen Victoria herself.


Such exploits were indeed rather a reversion to the military practices of the
ancient Assyrians than a foretaste of the military practices of the times to
come. But the proposal which Kitchener put forward in 1901 to solve the
problem of the Dutch-speaking majority in South Africa was identical with the


proposal which Stalin was to put forward at Yalta in 1945 to solve the problem
of the German inhabitants of Silesia and Pomerania. His policy of farm-
burning and concentration camps having failed to break the objection of the
Boers to their country being annexed by the British Empire, Kitchener
proposed that the whole Boer population should be deported from South
Africa and settled in various remote parts of the world such as Sumatra,
Borneo, the Fiji Islands and Madagascar, their property being confiscated
without compensation. He attributed the rejection of this plan by the British
Government to that sentimental weakness so characteristic, in his opinion, of
all civilians. There can be no doubt that if he had been given permission,
Kitchener would have carried out his plan ruthlessly and efficiently.


Lord Kitchener was a professional soldier. He acted always in what he
considered were the interests of the British Empire without troubling himself
to find explanations or excuses, a task he left to the politicians whom, like all
civilians, he heartily despised. He was contemptuously indifferent to public
opinion. Only subconsciously was he influenced by the spirit of the age. His
contemporary, Admiral Fisher, on the other hand, understood exactly the
spirit of the age and expressed openly what so many at the time were thinking
but were ashamed to admit.


In one respect only may Admiral Fisher be regarded as old-fashioned in his
outlook. Although he foresaw the principles upon which the wars of the future
would be fought, he had no conception of the enormous power which would
come to be wielded by scientific propaganda. He never realized that, to
achieve victory under contemporary conditions, a well selected and
maintained moral pose was not less indispensable than the skilful use of
unfettered violence. Thus, when in 1917, Germany adopted unrestricted
submarine warfare, Lord Fisher had no patience with the frantic outcry which
followed. Being from the German point of view a necessary step towards
winning the war, no other justification seemed to him to be needed by the
German Government, and he flatly declined to join in the chorus of
denunciation. As his proposal “to Copenhagen the lot”, proves, Lord Fisher
had no scruples about starting a war which he considered desirable. There is
no reason to think that moral or humanitarian scruples would have restrained
him during a war from applying his maxim: “Hit first, hit hard and hit
anywhere.” On the other hand, after a war had been won it is hard to believe


that he would have countenanced a brother admiral being hypocritically
condemned to life imprisonment for doing just what he himself would not
have hesitated to have done.


The decisive role destined to be played by propaganda in warfare was,
however, a development which no one, not even Lord Fisher, could
reasonably be expected to have foreseen. Once hostilities had started, two
factors left out of account by everyone operated to bring about a quite
unexpected result. In the first place, after a respite of forty-three years
Europeans had become unaccustomed to war; consequently, the sufferings
and loss inseparable from war, even when waged in accordance with the
strictest rules, aroused quite genuine horror. In the second place, there had
long been growing unnoticed the power of the popular Press to which the
gory details of any war, however petty, served as a welcome change from
accounts of crimes, accidents, and earthquakes. A major war was an
opportunity for sensational embellishment not to be missed. Reacting each
upon the other, these factors created a frame of mind which was quickly
turned to account by the belligerent governments—and in particular by the
British Government—at first seriously embarrassed by the problem of
supplying the man-in-the-street with a plausible explanation of what the war
was about. The answer to this problem lay ready to hand: “The enemy is
committing atrocities: to commit atrocities is uncivilized: we are fighting the
enemy: therefore we are fighting to save civilization!”


But when hostilities first commenced in August 1914 there was no need for any
of the belligerent governments involved to seek for any such far-fetched
explanation of the reasons for which the war was being fought.


In Germany, most people from the Kaiser downwards welcomed the war as an
opportunity to prove that they had inherited the martial virtues displayed by
their ancestors at Leipzig and Sedan: in France, the war was regarded as a
heaven-sent opportunity to resume the war of 1870 and with the aid of
powerful allies to regain Alsace-Lorraine: in the Austro-Hungarian Empire the
outstanding characteristic of the Edwardian Age, frivolity, was more strongly
marked than anywhere else in Europe, the ruling classes still lived mentally in
the eighteenth century when periodic outbreaks of warfare were regarded as
unavoidable incidents of normal political life: the aged Emperor and his


ndkxtanna nnctanndler tanl- thain nart in tha warnan naf 101A nenhohles ve tthauit waaanh


GUVISELS LESIpIICULy LUUK LICH palt I UE Wdl UL LI14, PLUVDGVILY WILLIUUL LUC
hope that the outcome would be any more successful than that of any of the
other wars of his long reign, but without apprehension that the outcome would
in this case lead to complete disaster.


In Russia, hostility to Germany was widespread among the illiterate masses for
no other reason than that so many members of the hated bureaucracy were of
German extraction. That this hostility was also strong in court circles is
certainly hard to explain since the Romanovs had generally chosen their
consorts from one or other of the German princely families, and there was
much German blood also in the Russian aristocracy. It happened, however,
that Czar Alexander III had departed from the usual practice by marrying
Princess Dagmar of Denmark, a sister of Princess Alexandra who had married
the Prince of Wales, afterwards King Edward VII. For both these beautiful, but
feather-brained women, history had remained stationary since 1864. The
family feud between the Danish royal family and the House of Hohenzollern
generated in that year through the incorporation of Schleswig-Holstein with
Prussia remained for them the central event of European politics. The
antipathy of Edward VII for his German relations constantly fanned into flame
by the prejudices of his frivolous wife was a minor factor in bringing about the
situation which culminated in the First World War. Her sister as the Empress
Marie of Russia, contributed her minor part in the same direction, first by the
influence she exercised over her husband; Alexander II, and later over her
son, Nicholas II.


In Great Britain there was at first little difficulty in obtaining acceptance of the
explanation that British treaty obligations to Belgium compelled her to enter
the war in defence of Belgian neutrality. To the British man-in-the-street the
role of Knight-errant going to the rescue of a small nation attacked by a
ruthless aggressor seemed both honourable and profitable. It was honourable
because Britain was entering the war in fulfilment of her plighted word: it
promised to be profitable because while Germany was vainly striving to halt
the irresistible advance of “the Russian steam-roller” (the popular name at the
time for the Czar’s countless hordes), her colonial possessions scattered
throughout the world would lie exposed to easy occupation by Great Britain
with her unchallengeable command of the sea. To a generation brought up on
the poems of Rudyard Kipling, this was indeed a stirring prospect: “Wider still


and wider should the bounds of the British Empire be set!” To the great
industrialists of Britain the war offered a chance to eliminate (for many years
at any rate) a dangerous trade rival. But the most spontaneous and
wholehearted of all in their enthusiasm for the war were the clergy of the
Church of England. Ever since the middle years of the nineteenth century
when the dogmas and beliefs of Christianity had been challenged by Science,
the influence of organised religion had been rapidly declining. From the
moment war was declared, the pulpits of the country became in effect
recruiting platforms. In the forefront of the drive to attract volunteers for the
victorious march to Berlin was the boyishly romantic Arthur Foley
Winnington-Ingram, Bishop of London, the idol of the most exclusive society
drawing-rooms, who declared: “This is the greatest fight ever made for the
Christian Religion: the choice lies between the Nailed Hands and the Mailed
Fist.” For his services to recruiting, the Bishop received a special letter of
thanks from the War Office. It was perhaps a little unfortunate that a similar
letter of thanks for his ardent recruiting activities was also sent to Horatio
Bottomley, a notorious company promoter, who after the war received a well-
deserved sentence of penal servitude for swindling ex-servicemen of their
savings.


The Knight-errant explanation of the nature of the war had the great merit of
simplicity and it did not conflict too glaringly with the known facts. For the
first six months it served excellently to explain the participation of Britain in
the struggle. But by the Spring of 1915 it had become inadequate. By that time
expectations of a swift and spectacular triumph had everywhere been
disappointed. The German advance had been held on the Marne, the French
had failed to conquer Alsace, the picked troops of the Czar had received a
crushing defeat at Tannenberg and the Austrians had suffered disaster at
Lemberg and in Serbia. To many, peace by agreement began to seem
attractive. The appeals of the Pope for the opening of peace negotiations at last
began to find hearers.

What was referred to in Britain as the danger of a separate peace began to cast
a shadow over many minds besides those of Horatio Bottomley and Arthur
Foley Winnington- Ingram.


It thus became no longer a question of putting forward a plausible explanation
of why Britain had entered the war. It became urgently necessary to explain


wither Deitain chawld unafaran ta nnnnidan mnlina nanan Tha nanathiliter hanad ta ha


WHY DILLA SHUULIU LELUSE LU CULISIUEL IHAKUIS PEACE. LUE PUSSIDILILY LidU LU DE
faced that the Germans would become so disheartened by lack of success that
they would offer to evacuate Belgium and pay full compensation for all the
damage which they had done. If Britain was fighting merely as a Knight-errant
in defence of “brave little Belgium”, how could she reject such an offer? If the
wrongs of Belgium were rectified, what reason could she have to continue to
fight?


Although trivial in comparison with the wholesale slaughter which was to
follow, the British casualties during the first six months of the struggle had far
exceeded those in any war since the Crimean Campaign. Was all this shedding
of precious blood, it was indignantly asked, to lead merely to a restoration of
the old faulty political system which had led to disaster in the previous August.
Of course, thanks to the labours of a group of professional historians who had
fabricated “the Wicked Kaiser Myth”, no one doubted entire responsibility for
this disaster rested upon one supremely evil man but the enforced abdication of
Wilhelm II seemed an inadequate result for a national effort on so gigantic a
scale. Only by breaking completely with the past and by creating an entirely
new social order which would endure for all time, could justification be found
for this terrible sacrifice of life and expenditure of wealth. To achieve this aim,
the war must be continued regardless of losses, without a thought of
compromise.


Assertions by well-meaning clerics that the war was a struggle between Good
and Evil were based on religious conceptions which had become meaningless
to the average man- in-the-street. The problem was solved by dealing with it
from an entirely different angle of approach:—


Belgium was indisputably a little country; the British Empire, allied to the
Russian Empire, was fighting for Belgium and also for Serbia; another little
country. Therefore, the British and Russian Empires were fighting for the
liberty of little countries. Now, all over the world were little countries which
did not enjoy liberty. Their inhabitants were clearly as much entitled to liberty
as the Belgians and Serbs. There were, for example, those parts of Poland so
fortunate as to have escaped annexation by Russia by being annexed by
Prussia or by Austria. The inhabitants of these parts of Poland were entitled to
be liberated from their Prussian and Austrian rulers. Similarly the Czech
majority in Bohemia must be liberated from the oppression of the Hapsburg


Emperors and given the right to oppress the German and Slovak minorities in
that province. As Turkey had allied herself to Germany her Arab subjects had
clearly become eligible for liberation. In all the German colonial possessions
in Africa and the Far East were various tribes of savages who must be deemed
to be yearning for liberation from German rule. Justice demanded that their
claims should not be overlooked, particularly as all of them would need a long
period of education to render them fit for freedom during which time their
self-appointed tutors would be in a position to exploit the labours of the
expelled German colonizers. A Knight-errant could not of course demand
payment for his services but there could be no objection if his altruism should
turn out to be profitable to him. Similarly, if a crippling indemnity was
extorted from Germany when victory was achieved, this should not be
regarded as an expression of greed but merely as a wise precautionary
measure designed to prevent Germany again becoming strong enough to
endanger her peace-loving neighbours.


In this way finally emerged the political dogma that every people in the world
was entitled as of right to self-government. In default of any other available
definition, self- government was defined as the rule of the majority in each
self-governing country. The Kaiser had been violently denounced as an
autocrat and gradually the Allies found themselves committed to upholding, in
words at least, the cause of democracy. Autocracy was held to be responsible
for bringing about the war and all its attendant evils and it was natural,
therefore, to attribute to democracy all the virtues which autocracy was held so
obviously to lack.


The view generally accepted by historians is that during the early part of the
First World War there took place a complete transformation of outlook
unparalleled in the previous history of mankind. Democracy in one form or
another was accepted as the only proper form of government and militarism
and aggression were condemned in any form. It was agreed that it was plainly
contrary to justice that Germans or Turks should rule over any other peoples
and from this a general principle could be deduced which might be possible of
extension with proper safeguards until in theory at any rate it had general
application.


There is no reason for surprise that this transformation of outlook took place


without articulate opposition in France where any novel political views,
however absurd or repugnant, were acceptable providing acceptance would
facilitate the recovery of Alsace- Lorraine. Similarly in Russia, to the ruling
class any theoretical views were acceptable provided they would help the Czar
to carry out far-reaching annexations and in particular to occupy
Constantinople and to establish a great naval base on the shores of the
Mediterranean. But it is truly astonishing that in Great Britain this
transformation of outlook took place so swiftly without the least apparent
opposition. Down to the outbreak of war on the 4th August, 1914, the
favourite boast of the British public had been that Britain ruled an empire over
which the sun never set: no one doubted that “the lesser breeds without the
law,” as Kipling called them, had been created by Providence to be ruled by
Britons. The ready acceptance of democracy as the only defensible form of
government was equally remarkable. In Great Britain had long flourished a
caste system only less elaborate and irrational than that which flourished
among the contemporary Hindus. Society was divided and subdivided into
innumerable classes, each regarding the one above it with awe and envy and
despising heartily the one below it. Yet the proposition was accepted without
demur that to spread democracy throughout the world was a cause for which a
man ought to be willing gladly to lay down his life. There was no opposition,
or at least no articulate opposition, when Lloyd George finally proclaimed that
in essence Great Britain was fighting to make the world safe for democracy.
With regard to the somewhat earlier claim that the war was being fought to
ensure the liberty of small nations, it may be said that acceptance was only
general because the implications of this policy were not realized. Everyone
was agreed that the Arabs and the Czechs and the various negro tribes under
German rule were entitled to self-government: it did not at the time occur to
anyone that if this were true the subject peoples of the British Empire must
possess a similar right. Inevitably much misunderstanding and confusion
resulted.


Most confused of all were the Irish who jumped to the conclusion that their
right to freedom from British rule, for which they had struggled in vain for
centuries, had at last been admitted. Sternly admonished not to obstruct a
crusade for the liberty of small nations by putting forward selfish claims, the
Irish broke into revolt. The ruthless crushing of the Easter Rebellion proved
beyond question that in practice the methods and outlook of British


Tmnarinlicm ramoainnad anita nninfhinnnand hwr thana nannantanan in thane nf ant


TLIVPCLIGHOSL LCUIAHICU YULE WHHLHUCHCECU VY UIT GALLTPLALILE Lil UITULYy UL ally


new political conceptions.


In fact, it may be maintained that no real transformation in outlook of any kind
took place in Great Britain during the First World War. The outbreak of war
quickly generated a frenzy of self-righteousness and pugnacity in which though
of any kind was impossible. The British public learnt and repeated parrot-wise i
succession of political slogans because the politicians assured them that these
would embarrass the Germans and so pave the way for ultimate victory. If these
slogans achieved this purpose, their meaning was of no importance. When at
last peace came and the frenzy gradually ceased, the British public discovered
that it had been committed to an entirely novel political outlook which was in
every way the opposite to the outlook of the Kipling age. Seen in this new light
the ideals which had inspired the founders of the British Empire seemed
obsolete and even discreditable conceptions inherited from a remote past.


Outwardly, indeed, the British Empire emerged from the First World War
greater in extent and more powerful than ever.


“We have got most of the things we set out to get,” declared Mr. Lloyd George
in a rare moment of candour. “The German Navy has been handed over, the
German merchant shipping has been handed over, and the German colonies
have been given up. One of our chief trade competitors has been most
seriously crippled and our Allies are about to become Germany’s biggest
creditors. This is no small achievement!”


In fact, however, the British Empire had received a mortal blow. No longer
could the possession of an empire be regarded as a subject for pride. The
ideals proclaimed during the war for the purpose of bringing about the
downfall of the German Empire could not be reconciled with the existence of
any empire. As far as Great Britain was concerned the history of the next fifty
years may be summarised by saying that it consisted of the story of the gradual
dissolution of the British Empire as the natural and inevitable consequence of
the acceptance of these ideals. In 1960 Mr. Harold Macmillan caused a
sensation by a speech in which he declared, “the wind of change” was blowing
through Africa, but it had been blowing with destructive force throughout
Europe and Asia ever since the First World War. Only the empire of the Czars,


iw


newly labelled a proletarian dictatorship, survived the storm. The successors
of the Czars, Lenin, Stalin, Khrushchev and Kosygin, all cheerfully adopted in
turn democracy, anti-militarism, self-determination and the other catchwords
of the First World War as useful slogans for the embarrassment of their
opponents, in short for the simple purpose for which these slogans had
originally been designed. Whereas the British Government felt compelled to
attach a meaning to these slogans, and only acted in defiance of them with
reluctance and shame, the Soviet Government used them only as a standard by
which could be denounced the conduct of their opponents, a standard having
not the least application to their own conduct. In consequence the Soviet
Government was able wholeheartedly to repress the revolts of subject peoples,
to carry out mass-deportations and to wage a series of aggressive wars with
the result that the empire of the Czars, far from breaking up, gradually evolved
into a communist empire far stronger than its imperial predecessor had ever
been. The British Empire, on the other hand, simply crumbled to pieces, the
spirit which had created it being no longer in existence to inspire its defence.


Men like John Nicholson or Lord Kitchener never doubted for an instant the
right of the British Empire to subjugate and rule weaker peoples or their own
plain duty to crush ruthlessly any attempt by them at revolt. In exactly the
same spirit when the Soviet generals dealt with the heroic attempt of the
Hungarian people in 1956 to free themselves from the Russian yoke, a doubt
never crossed their minds as to the justification of repressing ruthlessly a little
people venturing to oppose the will of a Communist dictatorship. But from the
Sinn Fein revolt in Ireland in 1919 to the terrorist campaign of EOKA in
Cyprus in 1955, the efforts of the armed forces of the British Empire were
paralysed by the subconscious conviction that their opponents had right on
their side. In 1848 General Cavaignac declared that a social order which
permits its principles to be examined and rejected is already lost. The British
Empire was doomed during the First World War when to obtain a temporary
political advantage it expressly repudiated the principles upon which its
existence depended.


Seen in perspective it is now clear that the First World War was an unqualified
disaster for the White Race. The first and greatest sufferers were the German
people who after passing through a decade of humiliation and acute economic
distress entered a decade of feverish activity and reckless political ambitions


nulminntina in TOA in n fan nnnantan nnd mann nnamnlata Atanatan than that af


CULLLIALLS MU LJ49 LMI d idl BIEALEL AHU LIIULE CULUPIELE ULSdGSLEL Uld Uldl UL
1918. The Nazi regime of Adolf Hitler was in essence a natural reaction to the
flagrant injustice and hypocrisy of the Versailles Treaty.


Sooner or later all the peoples of Europe were destined to suffer from the
consequences of the First World War. The military, moral and economic
supremacy of Europe over Asia and Africa was lost for ever. The Yellow Race
and Black Race no longer regarded the White Race as a distinct kind of
superior being, invincible on the battlefield and guided by higher moral
standards than those of coloured peoples. After 1945 the intelligence of the
White Man was assessed by reference to his indulgence in two suicidal world
wars for no rational purpose and in which victors and vanquished were
obviously both bound to be losers: the White Man’s claim to be guided by
higher moral standards was judged by reference to the abominable atrocities
which White peoples had committed on each other during two world wars. To
an impartial observer whether an Asiatic or an African it was clear from the
joint testimony of both sides that the White peoples had behaved to each other
with ruthless cruelty and reckless perfidy and it was hard for onlookers to say
which group of antagonists was the worst.


Only in regard to the gigantic scale on which it was fought did the First World
War surpass all previous conflicts. No leader of genius arose on either side to
direct the fighting. Huge masses of men, mostly hurriedly trained civilians,
were blindly hurled against each other supported by an unprecedented
expenditure of ammunition. Naturally the loss of life resulting from the
employment of such tactics was on a scale hitherto unimaginable. On the first
day of the great Somme Offensive in 1916, the casualties of the British alone
amounted to 60,000. After four months of continual and furious fighting both
sides were utterly exhausted but no noteworthy advantage had been gained. Sir
Douglas Haig complacently reported that the powers of resistance of the
German Army must have been substantially reduced by such a slaughter, and
set about preparing for a similar mass-offensive next year. It is estimated that
during the Somme Offensive, three million men, the flower of the young
manhood of the three leading European races, took part and over a million of
them became casualties.


It can hardly be said that the First World War led to any fundamental


developments in the art of war. The recently invented aeroplane was rapidly
improved in order to serve as a weapon of war; the invention of the tank
restored to the attacking side the advantage it had enjoyed over the defence
before the introduction of quick-firing weapons and barbed wire. Surgery
made great advances; those injured by the new scientific methods of
destruction were patched up by new scientific methods of treatment. Only in
one respect did the First World War initiate an entirely novel development and
this was a political and not a military development. Until 1914 wars had been
fought to secure some specific and limited aim. War propaganda had consisted
of little more than vague assertions of the essential justice of this aim and
haphazard abuse of the leaders of the enemy state.


Although officially encouraged and inspired, it entirely lacked official
planning and direction. It was intended merely to intensify normal patriotic
feeling. The actual fighting was of course done by professional soldiers who
obeyed their orders and needed no propaganda fictions to stimulate their zeal.
But in 1914 an entirely novel situation arose. It was not only necessary to
work out a plausible explanation of Britain’s participation in the war. It was
imperative to develop a technique of presenting this explanation so skilfully
and convincingly that nation-wide enthusiasm for the war would be generated.


In due course the Fourteen Points were propounded to an admiring world. The
method of presentation adopted was an entirely new departure in international
politics but the principles upon which this presentation was based had long
been partially understood.

For many years before 1914, a mass of empirical knowledge concerning the
reactions of the human mind to certain astutely applied stimuli had been
gradually accumulating and had been frequently turned to account for personal
gain by various gifted individuals. As long before as the time of Charles II,
Titus Oates had achieved results which in their way have never been
surpassed. No emotional engineer of modern times can be compared with that
French woman of genius, Madame Therese Humbert, who, at the end of the
nineteenth century, for nearly twenty years kept the most astute bankers and
financiers of Paris under her spell to her own great profit and their great loss.
The celebrated Tichborne case of 1872 and the equally remarkable Druce case
of 1907, the two most celebrated English fraud cases, both promoted by
publicity, demonstrated how limitless is the credulity of the general public and


what an imposing structure can be erected from a scientific blending of
distorted facts and skilful fabrications. It was not, however, until 1914, that it
was realized that what could be achieved by Orton the Wagga Wagga butcher
and by Druce the Melbourne carpenter for their own personal advantage could
be achieved on a far wider scale for the national good by persons of the
highest integrity employed by the State and with all the resources of the State
behind them. As so frequently happens in contemporary life, the haphazard
lessons learned by private enterprise were adapted, systematized, and
developed by the community. In this instance, at least, nationalization was
triumphantly vindicated by the decisive results achieved.


It was the opinion of two such dissimilar observers as Lord Northcliffe and
Adolf Hitler that the war of 1914-1918 was won by the war propaganda of the
Allies. On the one hand, the peoples of the Allies were inspired in their war
efforts by loud professions of genuine, if vague, ideals. On the other hand, the
German people were never clear for what exactly they were fighting. When
hostilities were progressing favourably they were told their reward would be
the annexation of some foreign territory; when hostilities took an
unfavourable turn, they were told that they were fighting for their existence—
although their enemies were pledged to conclude a peace to which no
reasonable objection could be made.


By winning the war, Allied propaganda can be said to have fully justified
itself and yet it entailed serious drawbacks, the full effects of which were not
experienced until afterwards. Obviously, this propaganda campaign violated
two of the principles upon which Emeric de Vattel had been most insistent. In
the first place, as we have seen, he had laid down that “all offensive
expressions indicating sentiments of hatred, animosity and bitterness” must be
avoided so that the way to a negotiated settlement might not be closed.
Secondly, he had insisted that war aims must be limited and specific and
should “not be mixed up with Justice and Right nor any of the great passions
which move a people.”


In support of these contentions, Vattel had, in brief, argued that the only
justification for any war is that it will lead to a lasting peace. Now a lasting
peace can only arise from a freely negotiated settlement. Emotion in any form
is an impediment to negotiation.


Or1Vffanaixern nawrnnanninnn an A annwnannla ta nhatenatiana nnmiinna amatian Thasunfaun


VLIELISIVE CAPLESSLULIS AHU AppEdIS LU dUSUAGLUUHIS dLUUSE CLLIIULLULTL, LHELELULC,
offensive expressions and appeals to abstractions must be avoided in warfare.


The war of 1914-1918 may be said to have been won by copious and adroit
use of offensive expressions and appeals to abstractions. In accordance with
Vattel’s argument, it did not lead to a lasting peace. Further, Vattel contended
that a harsh dictated peace must inevitably rouse a determination in the
defeated side to reverse it. Adolf Hitler can best be interpreted as the
incarnation of this determination.


During the course of the struggle, one final opportunity was vouchsafed the
peoples of Europe by indulgent destiny to escape the natural penalty of
disunity and disorder. In European Civil War No. 8a, the belligerents proved
so equally matched that after three years of desperate conflict no decisive
advantage had been gained. Truculent self- confidence had been everywhere
abashed; the German Army had achieved no second Sedan at the Marne and
no second Trafalgar had been achieved by the British Navy at Jutland; far
from reconquering Alsace, the French Army had failed to protect Northern
France from enemy occupation; the Russian Army and the Austrian Army had
each sustained a series of humiliating defeats; and the Italian Army had
recently demonstrated at Caporetto how far and how fast panic-stricken human
beings can run. In every country and among all classes, realization had come
that war was no longer the polite orderly sport of kings as it had been in the
eighteenth century, but had become a tedious, costly, and murderous business;
in every country and among all classes war-weariness and disillusionment had
become predominant. To those who objected that three years of frantic
endeavour and terrible slaughter must not be wasted, it could be answered that
the best and, in fact, the only justification of so much toil and bloodshed
would be not some petty territorial annexations or frontier adjustments but an
enduring peace, securely based on the realization by all concerned that in a
present-day war no one benefits. Had peace been concluded in 1917, for
several generations at least the militarists and armament manufacturers would
have striven in vain to banish the memory of such an experience.


The golden opportunity to establish a lasting settlement must have been
obvious to many at the time. It was left, however, to the Marquess of
Lansdowne alone to draw public attention to it. Representing not merely sane


public opinion in Great Britain or even sane contemporary opinion in Europe,
but voicing the protest against futile squabbling which had been so often
expressed by isolated European thinkers since the dawn of the Middle Ages,
on November 27, 1917, Lord Lansdowne wrote a letter to The Times urging
that negotiations for peace should be commenced. “The prolongation of this
war will spell ruin for the civilized world,” he wrote. “If the war is to be
brought to a close in time to avoid a world-catastrophe, it will be because on
both sides the peoples realize that it has already lasted too long.”


In attempting to influence a public suffering from acute paranoia by an appeal
to reason, Lord Lansdowne displayed the highest moral courage. He also
displayed keen political foresight, although we may not be able to credit him
with vision of all that was at stake. If a peace without victors and without
vanquished had been concluded in 1917, it would have been a peace primarily
the work of and, consequently, there would have been no occasion to pay
humble homage to President Wilson and his gospel of “self- determination”
which inevitably entailed an early dissolution of the British Empire;
Germany’s Unknown Soldier would have remained merely one of the obscure
millions who had fought in the front line for their fatherland; the return of
Alsace by Germany to France would have removed the principal subject for ill-
feeling between the two chief European states; the ruling classes in Russia
would have quickly regained the upper hand; Russia would have remained a
member of the European family of nations and Lenin’s attempt to restore the
Eurasian Empire of Genghis Khan in the shape of a militant communist
commonwealth would have been stifled at its inception; and unthinkable would
have remained such features of contemporary life as the indiscriminate killing
of civilians by terror attacks from the air, the mass deportations of populations
numbering millions, the official looting of private property, the systematic
sabotage of enemy industries, and the consignment of prisoners of war to the
gallows or to slavery of indeterminate duration. Perhaps of even greater
interest to many in the future will be the fact that Asia would have remained a
vast but remote area beyond the Urals and not, by swallowing half Europe,
have extended to the banks of the Oder within four flying hours of London. No
date in human history suggests more pregnant might-have-beens than the date
of Lord Lansdowne’s letter.


But habits engrained during a thousand years are not easily overcome. The


editor of The Times, before falling into a swoon, consigned the letter, albeit it
was the letter of a peer and an ex-cabinet minister, to his wastepaper basket.
The editor of The Daily Telegraph was, however, made of sterner stuff:
greatly daring, he published the letter. Before writing it, Lord Lansdowne had
disclosed his intention to a number of prominent statesmen— including Mr.
Balfour, Lord Hardinge and the American, Colonel House— who had
whispered approval of his views. But when the storm broke, these gentlemen
preserved a discreet silence. The British Government expressed horror at the
mere suggestion that the objects of the war should be disclosed; the emotional
engineers were given their orders and, in a few days, Lord Lansdowne was
the most unpopular man in the country. Thereafter, those who continued to
fight for European sanity were fighting a battle finally lost.


In retrospect, the decline in the standards of warfare during the war of 1914-
1918 appears less than might have been expected under all the circumstances.
There was a marked but not a headlong decline. In essence, this conflict
remained a European civil war and the traditions of European civil warfare
which had then existed for two centuries were, on the whole, maintained. This
is best seen by contrasting the behaviour of the troops who entered Germany
in 1918 with that of those who invaded the country in 1945. Cut off by four
years’ service at the front from the home population, the troops of Foch and
Haig had acquired, to a great extent, the outlook of professional soldiers. In
contact with facts, they were little influenced by the fictions of propaganda,
and sympathy and respect had grown up between them and their opponents as
between men facing the same dangers, enduring the same hardships, and
performing the same duties. Their discipline, when they entered enemy
territory in 1918, was not undermined by official exhortations to refrain at all
costs from “pampering” the enemy. Looting of civilian property by soldiers
was still a major military crime—as it remained until it was announced, that
after hostilities enemy civilian property would be officially looted. They had
not before them the example of the troops of non-European Powers,
indifferent to the rules of European civil warfare, nor of the gangs of
auxiliaries from the underworld of countries recently under German
occupation, bent on paying off old scores. Their leaders were men of strong
character—it is recorded that, soon after the Armistice, General Plumer
informed Whitehall that he must decline to remain responsible for discipline in
Cologne if his troops continued to be followed by bands of starving children


for whom no provision had been made by the politicians. With complete
disregard for the feelings of propaganda-befuddled civilian opinion at home,
General Plumer did not disguise his sympathy with the attitude of his men.


Admittedly, episodes of this kind were not frequent. The reception accorded to
the German peace delegates at Compiégne was without precedent in the long
annals of European civil war for its chilly severity. Marshal Foch was an
unamiable personality, cold, precise, and stern. His attitude throughout was
harsh and unbending. But he never forgot that he was a professional European
soldier, familiar since youth with the rules and etiquette of the European civil
war game. After the Armistice, a noisy clamour was raised in civilian circles
that a number of distinguished professional soldiers, including Marshal von
Hindenburg, should be penalized. The usual complete unanimity between the
military and the civilian outlook was, of course, preserved: But the clamour
mysteriously subsided and died away. One can but suspect that a heavy foot or
feet was or were put down by a person or persons unknown.


There were during the struggle few deliberate breaches of the Rules of Civilizec
Warfare: the fighting was limited to the uniformed armed forces of the
combatants, prisoners and wounded were treated with humanity, the rights of
enemy civilians in occupied territory were preserved and enemy civilian
property was not wantonly destroyed. There were no organised campaigns of
murder and sabotage behind the enemy lines carried out by armed civilians and
consequently no savage reprisals by the security forces. The Germans
temporarily terrorized Paris by firing a few shells into the city by use of an
improvised long range cannon, but the damage to life and property was slight.
Much damage was, of course, done to French and Belgian cities as a result of
artillery bombardment during the advance of the German armies westward but
this occurred only in connection with direct military operations, as was
sanctioned by the European code of civilized warfare. The main onslaught upor
civilian life was a product of the British blockade of Germany, which was
continued for nearly a year after the Armistice and led to the starvation of
nearly a million German non-combatants. On the whole, however, the old
European code of civilized warfare dominated military strategy and operations
during the conflict.


Few would now have the hardihood to deny that the peace settlement of


VWoananillan in 1010 warn n nnmnlata nnd tunain fnihina Tt Fatlad anwintlataler Fan


—-


VELSdIHeS MUI LILI Wad d CULLIPIELE AHU Udpit 1ALHULE., Lt Idlieu CULIPIELELY LUL
precisely the reason so lucidly set forth and explained by Vattel 150 years
before. Its failure was tragic because the principles upon which it was
professedly based justified the highest hopes.

Admittedly, it is impossible to reconcile the terms of the Treaty with the
Fourteen Points in accordance with which the Allied pledge was given at the
time of the Armistice. But we are not, therefore, compelled to accept the view,
so passionately urged by Adolf Hitler, that the Treaty of Versailles was merely
the culmination of a gigantic swindle intended from the start. The Fourteen
Points were not a collection of dishonest verbiage like the Atlantic Charter.
Certainly they were used later for propaganda to beguile the German people,
but they were not designed for this purpose by their author, President Wilson.


It is a curious fact that the Versailles Treaty actually came to grief upon the
very point on which it followed most strictly orthodox practice. For centuries,
it had been the accepted principle of European civil warfare that the
vanquished side should pay to the victors the cost of the war. The same
principle is adopted in the legal systems of all countries in litigation between
individuals. Costs follow the event. The man who goes to law and fails must
pay the cost of the proceedings. With equal reason the country which goes to
war and is defeated should be called upon to pay the cost of hostilities.


So long as warfare was waged on a small scale and was comparatively
inexpensive, this principle was so obviously reasonable that the payment of
war indemnities gave rise to little difficulty or ill-feeling. In litigation, a
taxing master sees to it that the successful side does not give free rein to its
imagination when drawing its bill of costs. In warfare, indeed, there has never
been an international taxing master. Still, the war indemnities demanded in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries do not seem to have been extortionate.
It was once the custom to denounce the indemnity demanded by Bismarck
after the defeat of France in 1870 as severe. To our eyes it seems moderate in
the extreme. Surely, this is proved by the fact that France was able to pay the
whole sum demanded within five years and, within ten years of Sedan, was
once again a rich and prosperous state and one of the three great military
powers of Europe.


By 1919, however, warfare had become so fabulously costly that, even if the
expenses of the Allies had been assessed by a fair-minded tribunal, the sum


payable would have been utterly beyond the capacity of the vanquished to pay
and, further, if by some miracle it had been paid, the entire economic
structure of the world would have been upset.


Payment in full—although everyone admitted this to be impossible—was
insisted on. Of course, promiscuous looting of public and private property, as
provided by the Potsdam Agreement of 1945, would have been unthinkable to
the mind of President Wilson who had formerly been a professor of
jurisprudence. Not one single penny must be taken from Germany, he
repeatedly insisted: all that could be required of Germany was that she should
comply with the principle that costs follow the event. That compliance would
mean the payment of vastly more than the total wealth of Germany must not
be allowed to disturb this well-established legal principle.


The result was a succession of futile conferences, each conference leading to a
settlement of the “reparations problem” which everyone knew to be
impossible. The only result was that war-time bitterness was repeatedly
aggravated and perpetuated. At long last, the Allies grew weary of insisting
upon performance of the impossible, and tacit cancellation of one section of
the treaty naturally encouraged the Germans to go on to repudiate the balance.


For a brief spell, round about 1925, it seemed possible that, once again, Europe
would escape the natural penalty for indulging in civil war. The United States
had ostentatiously repudiated further interest in European affairs. Few believed
that Lenin’s successors would succeed in keeping together the Soviet State
which he had created out of the ruins of the Empire of the Czars. At Locarno,
M. Briand, Herr Stresemann, and Sir Austen Chamberlain met together and
cordially agreed henceforth to work together for the common good. The lamps
which, in 1914, Sir Edward Grey had watched being extinguished one by one
were to be re-lit, contrary to his lugubrious prediction, and the prosperity and
happiness of the Edwardian Age was to return.


But habits dating back a dozen centuries are not so easily shaken off. In
Europe, in the past, political differences had always led ultimately as a matter
of course to civil war. Never before had there existed in Europe so many and
so acute political differences. As Vattel in the Age of Reason had pointed out,
a treaty imposed by force can only be maintained by force. The Treaty of


NTanwanntTWan Lad tn. nnn A bane At antntnd AAR AA tavewnn wen Awe Hh cen nt nbn


Versd Les nau HWIpPOSeU Hars ULCtdled pedce tenus upon we VdlIGuisued,
thereby inevitably arousing in them a determination to reverse its decisions,
regardless of the risks involved. Between 1933 and 1938, Adolf Hitler, the
incarnation of this determination, by threats of force set aside one by one the
main provisions of the Versailles Treaty. Throughout this time the Soviet
Union continued to consolidate into a great military Power, with all the far-
reaching territorial ambitions of the Czars combined with the political and
economic ambitions of Karl Marx. Between Western Europe and the Soviet
Union lay the newly re-created state of Poland. To Germany, in particular,
Poland served as an invaluable buffer state. Self-preservation linked Poland
with Germany, since the Polish ruling classes depended for their existence on
being able to keep Communism in check. But among the major absurdities of
the Versailles Treaty had been the creation of the so-called Polish Corridor. To
rectify this wrong, of much greater emotional than practical importance, Hitler
was prepared to sacrifice the protection of this buffer state. For their part, the
Polish ruling classes were prepared to defend the Corridor by force, although
the price of victory would inevitably entail the ultimate absorption of Poland
by the Soviet Union and their own ruthless liquidation.


The preservation of peace was so obviously of paramount importance to both
the German and Polish Governments that each, quite naturally, became
convinced that the other must be bluffing. Accordingly, in September, 1939,
the first steps were taken which were finally to lead Hitler to suicide in the
ruins of the burning Reich Chancellery and the Polish ruling classes to that
systematic extermination which was destined to begin less than a year later in
the Katyn forest.


Undeniably in 1939 by risking another world war leading the possible
complete destruction of all he had achieved over relatively so small an issue as
the liberation of Danzig, Hitler displayed a lack of any sense of proportion
well justifying the odium in which his memory is now held by mankind in
general and by his countrymen in particular. He acted, however, strictly in
accordance with one of the most firmly established principles of traditional
European diplomacy, which, as we have seen, laid down that if a statesman
muddled himself into a position from which withdrawal was impossible, he
was bound to resort to war to preserve his country’s honour. It has been argued
that this principle in 1939 had become obsolete because the conscience of
mankind had ceased to recognise warfare as a means of settling international


disputes. With regard to what was then and is now the current attitude to
warfare, it is hardly possible merely to appeal to higher authority than that of
the leading contemporary champion of non-violence and conciliation, the
disciple of the saintly Ghandi, the late Pandit Nehru. In 1961 Pandit Nehru,
finding himself unable verbally to coerce the Portuguese Government to cede
to India the port of Goa, a Portuguese possession on the Malabar Coast for
four hundred and fifty years, ordered his troops to occupy Goa by force. The
two cases are exactly parallel except that in 1939 Hitler had an undeniable
moral claim to Danzig, and Pandit Nehru in 1961 had no claim at all to Goa,
moral or otherwise. At a Press conference held shortly after the resistance of
the tiny Portuguese garrison had been overcome, Pandit Nehru justified his
action by declaring blandly, “The use of force was of course open to us
according to suitability and opportunity.”


According to this weighty authority, therefore, Hitler’s offence in 1939 was not
that he ordered his troops to occupy Danzig by force, but that he did so at a
moment lacking suitability and opportunity.


In the final analysis the outbreak of war in 1939 will be found to be the last
and culminating episode of a political chain reaction which had been set in
motion in August 1914. Between these dates each successive development
followed naturally and inevitably from the one before it.


The Treaty of Versailles, almost from the date it was signed, was condemned
by many as a compound of injustice, perfidy and stupidity: the statesmen
responsible for it have been derided as self-satisfied charlatans who, for
motives of greed and spite, betrayed the hopes of mankind for a just and
lasting peace settlement.


Few can now be found to defend the Treaty of Versailles. On the other hand,
it was exactly the peace settlement which might have been expected to result
from the spontaneous irrational frenzy of pugnacity which led to the outbreak
in 1914 of a war which was continued for four years in an equally irrational
frenzy of obstinacy. To us it may seem clear that the poet Rupert Brooke was
in urgent need of expert psychiatric treatment when he wrote in 1914, “Now
God be thanked who has matched us with this hour!” but all over Europe
hundreds of thousands of young men were expressing the same thankfulness


1 -1 r ci. 1 T T 1 aa‘


althougn rew of them had any Clearer 1dea than Kupert Brooke what the war
was about.


Surely if all this blind, hysterical activity had led to the conclusion of a sane,
balanced and just peace settlement it could only have been because a sudden
and miraculous change of heart took place in 1919. No such miracle,
however, took place. The struggle which was long known as the Great War
led inevitably to the Treaty of Versailles.


Equally inevitably the Treaty of Versailles led to a period of growing tension
as the vanquished, gradually recovering their strength, began to agitate for the
redress of their wrongs. If, between the Treaty of Locarno in 1925 and the
assumption of power by Hitler in 1933, the victors could have brought
themselves to make reasonable concessions, it is possible that the Treaty of
Versailles might have been replaced by a lasting peace settlement. But this
again could only have come about through a belated change of heart in the
victorious countries. Such a development would have been so entirely contrary
to the natural trend of events as to have required some supernatural
intervention. No such intervention took place.


It followed naturally as part of the political chain reaction that frustration
brought militant nationalism to power in Germany. Thereafter the chain
reaction proceeded with ever increasing speed. Not one of Hitler’s demands
taken alone seemed worth going to war about. One propaganda delusion after
another concerning the so-called Great War had had to be abandoned, but the
belief was still held with pathetic insistence that a struggle lasting four years
and costing ten million lives had at least banished warfare for ever from the
world. Few were ready to demonstrate that this belief was also a delusion by
resorting to war over an issue which in itself was not of vital importance to the
victorious Powers.


Once the process had started, the shackles imposed on Germany by the Treaty
of Versailles were broken one by one in rapid succession. But this process
could not go on indefinitely: as Shakespeare says, even time must have a stop.
Hitler gave a classic example of “brinkmanship”, but his success made it
inevitable that ultimately his opponents would adopt the same dangerous
policy. The last phase of the chain reaction occurred in 1939 when Hitler
ordered his troops to cross the border of the Polish Corridor.


4


No difficulty arose in 1939 about finding a convincing war aim such as had
arisen in 1914. The necessity for preserving the integrity of Poland was not a
war aim likely to arouse much enthusiasm in either Britain or France, but this
explanation for the outbreak of war was quickly superseded by attributing to
Hitler precisely the same plans for world conquest which had been attributed
to Kaiser Wilhelm. To make plausible this charge against the latter elaborate
fictions had had to be invented, but in the case of Hitler it was only necessary
to stress the undeniable fact that he had repeatedly disturbed the status quo by
unilateral action.


So closely interlocked are the First and Second World Wars that it seems
likely that future historians will regard them as merely episodes of the same
struggle. The interval of twenty-one years between them will be dismissed as a
period of feverish but futile activity during which it proved to be impossible to
control the irrational passions which had been released in 1914. If this view be
ultimately accepted, the Armistice signed on November 11th, 1918, which at
the time seemed an epoch-making event in the history of mankind will be
regarded as a mere truce which allowed the victors to despoil the vanquished
to their heart’s content for a limited time: when the German troops crossed the
border of the Polish Corridor in 1939 they were merely resuming a struggle
which exhaustion had brought to a halt in November 1918.


The immediate outcome of this resumption of hostilities was the first break in
the political chain reaction which had started in 1914. When Great Britain and
France declared war on Germany in 1939, professedly to preserve the integrity
of Poland, they did so confidently believing that the task before them would
be swiftly and easily accomplished. Facts and figures were produced in
abundance proving that Germany lacked money and supplies of essential war
materials; the Reichwehr was said not only to lack equipment and training, but
a fighting spirit. The German people were said to be groaning beneath the
tyranny of the Nazi regime and to be waiting impatiently for a favourable
opportunity to revolt. The slightest set-back would provide such an
opportunity by shattering Hitler’s prestige for ever. On the face of it, was it
possible to believe that the hastily trained and unwilling conscripts of the
Third Reich could defeat the combined armies of Great Britain and France, a
task which had been beyond the strength of the magnificent Imperial Army of


r7 œ (aie ai a ore.


the Kaiser? We now know that several ot the ablest ot Hitler’s military
advisers shared this doubt. In British and French military circles there seems
to have been no doubts at all as to the outcome. No serious fighting was to be
apprehended; it was merely a question of putting the clock back to the 11th
November, 1918.


This indeed would have been the only outcome which would have been
consistent with the political chain reaction which had begun in 1914. Contrary,
however, to all expectation, the issue was not simply decided by such factors
as more numerous and better weapons, superior organization and vastly
greater resources. These factors were outweighed by a factor which had been
overlooked, although perhaps Napoleon’s oft- quoted dictum should have
provided a warning. The outcome proved that a decision by politicians to
resort to war to preserve an admittedly unsatisfactory status quo does not
produce a fighting spirit equal to that generated by a blind fanatical
determination to avenge at all costs past defeats and humiliations.


the Kaiser? We now know that several ot the ablest ot Hitler’s military
advisers shared this doubt. In British and French military circles there seems
to have been no doubts at all as to the outcome. No serious fighting was to be
apprehended; it was merely a question of putting the clock back to the 11th
November, 1918.


This indeed would have been the only outcome which would have been
consistent with the political chain reaction which had begun in 1914. Contrary,
however, to all expectation, the issue was not simply decided by such factors
as more numerous and better weapons, superior organization and vastly
greater resources. These factors were outweighed by a factor which had been
overlooked, although perhaps Napoleon’s oft- quoted dictum should have
provided a warning. The outcome proved that a decision by politicians to
resort to war to preserve an admittedly unsatisfactory status quo does not
produce a fighting spirit equal to that generated by a blind fanatical
determination to avenge at all costs past defeats and humiliations.


Chapter 6 — The Splendid Decision


The war which began in September, 1939, and ended in June 1940, was in all
essentials a typical European civil war. Of absorbing interest to students of
strategy and tactics, it offers no exceptional features of any kind except that the
point at issue was rather more frivolous than usual; its duration was
unprecedentedly brief; and it caused comparatively little loss of life and
damage—in the Battle of France the Germans lost 27,074 killed and 129,418
wounded and missing, in all therefore some 150,000 casualties. In 1914 the
Kaiser’s armies had overrun Northern France and Belgium at the cost of
638,000 casualties, including 85,000 killed. The total casualties of both sides
in the great Somme offensive in 1916 reached nearly 1,000,000 men: on the
first day of this offensive Sir Douglas Haig sacrificed over 60,000 men.


Because the Battle of France ended so quickly—the actual fighting lasted only
two months—a war psychosis had no time to develop. Before the emotional
engineers could work up their respective publics into a frenzy of hatred, it was
all over. The decision of 1918 had been reversed, the French Army had
surrendered and the B.E.F. had withdrawn, minus its tanks, artillery, stores and
equipment, across the Channel.


Intoxicated by the speed and completeness of their triumph, the victors were in
no mood to set about paying off old scores. Clemenceau’s deliberate
humiliation of the German delegates at Versailles, the garrisoning of German
towns with negro warriors, and M. Tirard’s campaign to annex the Rhinelands
by violence and intrigue were forgotten. With his highly developed sense of
historical fitness, Hitler indeed insisted that the famous railway coach in the
Forest of Compiègne, in which Marshal Foch had dictated terms of surrender
so harshly some 22 years before, should be the scene of the surrender of the
Army which Foch had then led to victory. All the forms of military etiquette,
however, were again punctiliously observed. Marshal Pétain was treated with
the respect which his record as a soldier deserved. In spite of the boasted
modernity of their outlook, it does not seem to have occurred, even to the most
extreme of the Nazis that Pétain’s heroic defence of Verdun in 1916 justified
his condemnation as a war criminal. Not until five years later, and then at the
hands of his own countrymen, was the gallant old Marshal to experience what
Dante called “the horrid art of justice”.


It is, of course, the unchallengeable right of every sovereign state to deal with
its own citizens according to its own ideas of justice. The administration of
justice in France is the exclusive concern of Frenchmen. Still, the spectacle of
the Hero of Verdun (alias the Prisoner of Yeu), the man who saved France and
the cause of the Allies when the French army mutinied after the failure of the
offensive on the Chemin des Dames, and the general whose strategy defeated
Ludendorff in 1918, dying at the age of 95 after enduring six years of rigorous
imprisonment on a bleak little island off the Atlantic coast, is a matter of
general interest. It is not open to question that Marshal Pétain took command
in France in 1940 entirely from a soldierly sense of duty, and in a completely
constitutional manner. It is equally unquestionable that he did his best to serve
France in hopeless circumstances. When disaster came, he considered it his
duty to remain at the helm of state. In 1919, Field Marshal von Hindenburg,
like Marshal Pétain a soldier of the old school, had come to the same decision
and won thereby universal respect. Both acted in accordance with the ancient
tradition that the captain should be the last to leave a sinking ship. This
traditional role has often been contrasted with the behaviour of rats who,
according to a popular belief of equal antiquity, will leave a ship which they
know by instinct is about to sink. It is curious that these traditions seem never
before to have been combined in a single legend of a captain going down with
his ship and later surviving to be traduced and reviled by those who judged it
more prudent or less unpleasant to make a timely departure.


The role played by Marshal Foch, in 1918, was played in 1940 by the Chef des
Oberkommandos der Wehrmacht, General-oberst Wilhelm Keitel, shortly
afterwards promoted to Field Marshal. An unknown captain in the Artillery
commanding a battery in 1914 but shortly transferred to the General Staff,
Keitel had progressed steadily and inconspicuously thenceforth from one staff
appointment to another until, while still practically unknown outside military
circles, he had reached the front rank of his profession. At that historic spot in
the Forest of Compiègne on June 22, 1940, Keitel crowned his military career
by accepting the surrender of the beaten French Army, thereby securing an
assured place in the annals of modern warfare alongside Grant, Moltke, and
Foch.


For the leading role which he played in the Forest of Compiégne in 1940, the


nama af Tinlad Marchal W aital urill Ksa in hictars Gar thic rancan anly if far


HALIC UL Piciu 1VLALDLHALIL INCILCL WII LIVE Lit AMOLULY. LULL ULD LCGSVILI Ullly, ll LUL
no other, it has become a subject for regret that destiny had reserved for him a
grim sequel, a sequel which was enacted some six years later on a scaffold at
Nuremberg, in accordance with a decision reached shortly before the end of
the war by the heads of state attending the Yalta Conference. From all
accounts it would seem that Keitel was neither a strong personality nor a
gifted soldier like his colleagues, Field Marshal von Runstedt or Field Marshal
von Manstein. He was widely despised in German military circles as Hitler’s
“Yes-man” on the General Staff and there is no doubt he gave his formal
approval to a number of crimes against humanity committed on the Eastern
Front. His defence to the charges later brought against him, he himself
summarised in a single sentence, “The struggle against the Red Army was not
a knightly combat (em ritterlicher Krieg): at stake was the entire way of life of
one side or the other.” It is a matter for speculation what his fate would have
been if he had been tried by an impartial court. Still at least it cannot be said
that his death by hanging was an example of judicial murder like the hanging
of General Yamashita, the gallant conqueror of Singapore.


Whatever view be taken of Keitel’s fate, it certainly marked a turning point in
history. Unsuspected by him and by his contemporaries in 1940 Nemesis was
about to overtake the nations of Europe after so many centuries of indulgence
with impunity in civil strife. The old standards, the old restraints, the old
decencies, with so much else, were destined to disappear. Being done to death
upon being taken prisoner was not included among the legitimate risks of
soldiering at the time Keitel joined the army in 1901—unless, of course, one
served against savages like the Dervishes or the Abyssinians. By, suffering
death as a prisoner of war, Keitel achieved a far wider historical significance
than he had achieved during his career. If and when the art of war becomes
obsolete, his military achievements will be of interest only to antiquarians: his
death by violence when a prisoner of war at Nuremberg in 1946 will be
remembered as an event marking an important deviation in the development of
human civilization.


As remarked above, the war of 1939-40 had, in itself, no outstanding
characteristics. From outside, however, its course was dominated by an
entirely new factor. Across the eastern frontier of Poland had arisen the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, a gigantic quasi-Asiatic totalitarian
military power with unlimited natural resources and a rapidly developing


industrial system, “profoundly” (to quote General J. F. C. Fuller) “anti-
Occidental in outlook.”


With this military colossus watching and waiting so near, civil war was no
longer a domestic concern to be conducted at leisure, a mere matter of
adjusting some frontiers and paying off a few old scores. Even the briefest
civil war entailed serious consequences. Immediately hostilities had started,
the U.S.S.R. set about realizing far- reaching plans for expansion at the
expense of Europe. First, about one-third of Poland was annexed with bland
indifference to the fact that Great Britain and France professed to be fighting
to preserve the integrity of Poland. Then Finland, “sublime in the jaws of
peril”, to quote Mr. Churchill, was attacked and subdued. Next, Esthonia,
Latvia and Lithuania were overrun and the leading members of the bourgeois
classes liquidated or deported to the interior of Russia. With the collapse of
France and the withdrawal of the British across the Channel, two urgent
problems arose for the consideration of all Europeans—first, whether
domination of Europe by the Soviet Union was too heavy a price to pay for
the continuance of the civil war, and secondly, if this price was not too
heavy, by what means was the war to be continued. Germany with a navy
negligible in size could not send an army across the sea to invade Great
Britain; single-handed Great Britain could never hope to invade Europe with
an army strong enough to avoid its being immediately attacked and
overwhelmed.


To put the problem in a nutshell: the essential rule of civilized warfare laid
down that hostilities must be limited to the combatant forces. But, as from June
25th, 1940, the combatant forces were separated by the sea. How in such
circumstances could hostilities be continued?


Hitler’s solution of this problem was an offer to negotiate peace. We need not
consider whether this offer was sincere, since any other course from his point
of view, would have been madness. He had achieved all and much more than
all he had set out to achieve and Germany lay under the shadow of the Red
Army. Nor need we consider what terms he would have been willing to offer
since his proposal was not even accorded a reply. In their speeches to the
House of Commons justifying the silent rejection of Hitler’s peace offer both
the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, and the Foreign Minister, Lord


Halifax, followed the precedent set by the British Government during the First
World War, and gave no indication of any basis upon which a peaceful
settlement could be discussed.


But a sulky silence by Hitler’s opponents offered no solution to the problem as
to how hostilities were to be continued and the war prevented from stagnating
until boredom should overcome public opinion. Half a century before, the only
means available would have been to launch a series of tip-and-run naval raids
on the coasts of Europe. Now, however, the conquest of the air had provided a
new method by which not only could boredom be combatted but a war
psychosis created. The indiscriminate dropping of bombs at night on enemy
centres of population would be bound, sooner or later, to call forth reprisals of
a similar nature, and the resulting slaughter of innocent civilians could not fail
to inflame warlike passions on both sides.


Certainly it is hard to imagine any other course of action which would have
produced the result desired. The only drawback to this course was that the
Luftwaffe at the moment was numerically much superior to the R.A.F. Hitler
was threatening that, if the British air attacks on the German civil population
continued, he would drop ten bombs on Britain for every bomb dropped on
Germany. Consequently, the trials of the British civilian population would
temporarily, at least, be severe if this policy were persisted in.


It is one of the greatest triumphs of modern emotional engineering that, in
spite of the plain facts of the case which could never be disguised or even
materially distorted, the British public, throughout the Blitz Period (1940-
1941), remained convinced that the entire responsibility for the sufferings it
was undergoing rested on the German leaders. Faith is prized by theologians
as one of the three cardinal virtues and accepting the definition that “faith is
believing what one knows isn’t so”, it can truly be said that never before had
this cardinal virtue been displayed so steadfastly by so many for so long. The
practical value of this steadfast faith for the war effort can hardly be
exaggerated: the Blitz was unanimously accepted as proof positive of the
innate wickedness of the Nazi regime and, as such, endured as something
inescapable. General recognition of the fact that it could be brought to an end
at any moment might well have had a decisive influence on the public
attitude. Too high praise cannot, therefore, be lavished on the British


amatiannal anainnanre far tha infinita clall writh wrhich tha nihlia mind wrie


CLLUULULVLIAL CLUPUICCLS LUL UIC MILLUIHLLC ONL WIHILEE WILILTT LIT puvilic ilu was


conditioned prior to and during a period of unparalleled strain.


It was not until April, 1944, by which time the Luftwaffe had become
paralysed from lack of petrol and the issue of the struggle was no longer in
doubt, that the strict taboo on all mention of the facts was lifted in favour of
Mr. J. M. Spaight, C.B., C.B.E., former Principal Secretary of the Air
Ministry, who was permitted to publish a book entitled Bombing Vindicated.
The title in itself came as a surprise, since few until then had any idea that any
vindication for bombing was needed. In this book the man in the street learned
for the first time that he had made an heroic decision on May 11, 1940. The
man- in-the-street had, of course, no recollection of having made any
decision, heroic or otherwise, on this particular date; in fact, he could not
recall having made a decision of any kind for a very long time, since in a
democracy decisions are not made by such as he, but by international
financiers, Press barons, permanent officials and even, occasionally, by
Cabinet Ministers. No wonder the man in the street was perplexed.


Mr. Spaight, C.B., C.B.E., resolved this perplexity in the following lyrical
passage:

“Because we were doubtful about the psychological effect of propagandist
distortion of the truth that it was we who started the strategic bombing
offensive, we have shrunk from giving our great decision of May 11th, 1940,
the publicity which it deserved. That, surely, was a mistake. It was a splendid
decision. It was as heroic, as self-sacrificing, as Russia’s decision to adopt her
policy of ‘scorched earth’. It gave Coventry and Birmingham, Sheffield and
Southampton, the right to look Kiev and Kharkov, Stalingrad and Sebastopol, i1
the face. Our Soviet Allies would have been less critical of our inactivity in
1942 if they had understood what we had done.”


In passing, the comment must be made that Mr. Spaight in this passage does
much less than justice to the services rendered to him and his colleagues of the
Air Ministry by the emotional engineers of the Ministry of Information.
Without their aid, this splendid decision might well have led to disastrous
consequences; it was entirely thanks to what he is pleased to term
“propagandist distortion” that the inhabitants of Coventry, for example,
continued to imagine that their sufferings were due to the innate villainy of
Adolf Hitler without a suspicion that a decision, splendid or otherwise, of the


British War Cabinet was the decisive factor in the case. Had this suspicion
existed, their reaction might have been somewhat different. Is it fair for the
famous surgeon to sneer at the contribution of the humble anaesthetist which
alone renders possible his own delicate operations? Without previous
conditioning by the emotional engineer would the activities of the “block-
buster” have been tolerated by public opinion?


Contemporary publications on the war may be scanned in vain for a clue why
the date May 11, 1940, is in any way memorable. A very close search will,
however, bring to light the fact, at the time obscured by far more sensational
news, that on the night of May 11th, “eighteen Whitley bombers attacked
railway installations in Western Germany.” Naturally this announcement when
made aroused little interest since it was only claimed these installations had
been attacked; it was not suggested that they suffered any injury thereby.


The full significance of this announcement, first disclosed nearly four years
afterwards by Mr. Spaight, only appears after further investigation and
reflection. Western Germany in May 1940 was, of course, as much outside the
area of military operations as Patagonia.

Up to this date, only places within the area of military operations or such
definitely military objectives as the German air base on Sylt or the British air
base on the Orkneys had been attacked. This raid on the night of May 11,
1940, although in itself trivial, was an epoch-marking event since it was the
first deliberate breach of the fundamental rule of civilized warfare that
hostilities must only be waged against the enemy combatant forces.


? In default of any further details it must be left to the imagination to picture the
eighteen bombers setting forth on the night of May 11th from their base with
instructions to drop their bombs when they found themselves over Western
Germany in the hope that some of them might land on railway installations. To
achieve this modest purpose they would have to cross the battlefront,
extending from the North Sea to Switzerland, which had suddenly blazed into
frantic activity as the German armies hurled themselves to the attack from the
Zuider Zee to the Maginot Line in Lorraine. As nothing to the contrary has
been recorded, it may be assumed that the eighteen bombers all returned safely
and that some of their bombs damaged something somewhere. To the crews of
these bombers it must have seemed strange to fly over a battlefield where a


life and death struggle was taking place and then on over country crowded
with columns of enemy troops pouring forward to the attack, in order to reach
the peaceful countryside of Westphalia on the off-chance that some of their
bombs dropped there would land on railway installations. The value of their
contribution to the great battle in which the fate of France was being decided
must indeed have seemed to them obscure. Yet without realising it they were
turning a major page of history. Their flight marked the end of an epoch which
had lasted for two and one-half centuries.


How many times during this long period must Mars have sadly reflected on
the words of King Draco the Great in Anatole France’s Penguin Island: “War
without fire is like tripe without mustard: it is an insipid thing.” What use the
great conquerors of the past could have made of these new-fangled flying
machines. They themselves had achieved much certainly, but how sadly they
had been hampered by the limited powers of destruction at their disposal. We
may picture the shadowy figures of the great conquerors in the days when war
had really been war as admiring and envious spectators of the doings of those
eighteen bombers on that memorable May night: against a background of
prosaic twentieth century railway installations we can imagine the grim forms
of Asshurnazirpal and Sennacherib stroking their square-cut, curled and
scented beards with dignified approval; the squat figure of Attila, the King of
the Huns; the awe-inspiring shape of the great Mongol conqueror, Genghis
Khan, and the forms of his successors, Hulagu, whose destruction of the
irrigation system of the Euphrates Valley was so thorough that what for
thousands of years had been one of the most prosperous parts of the earth
became a desert, the mighty Tamerlane, and a score of others. To these men, at
least, the limitless possibilities of this new method of achieving an ancient
purpose would have been clear.


These possibilities, however, were at the time realized by few. It was not until
much later that it became necessary to find justification for such horrors as
took place on that night when the most densely populated parts of Hamburg
became a roaring furnace in which thousands of men, women and children
were throwing themselves into the canals to escape the frightful heat. The
stock apology then put forward was that it was only a reprisal for the German
bombing of Warsaw and Rotterdam. Mr. Spaight dismisses this argument with
the contempt it deserves. “When Warsaw and Rotterdam were bombed,” he


. . . .
nainte mit CO nrman nrminc urarn nt thnir antac Tha nir hambhardmant urine nn


pY UUL, WUCLHHALH GALLIILITS WEL AL MICIL paled. L11C ALL VULLIVALUILITIIL WAD dll
operation of the tactical offensive.” Captain Liddell Hart accepts the same
view. “Bombing did not take place,” he writes, “until the German troops were
fighting their way into these cities and thus conformed to the old rules of siege
bombardment.”


“Bombing Vindicated” is a remarkable book: in fact, an amazing book having
regard to the date when it was written. Mr. Spaight is not content merely to
admit that upon Britain rests the responsibility for starting the practice of
bombing civilian populations, but insists that to Britain must be awarded the
entire credit for conceiving and carrying into effect this practice. He derides
(p. 149) the suggestion rather half-heartedly put forward at the time by the
Ministry of Information that “the whole majestic process had been set in
operation” because an unidentified plane had dropped some bombs on a wood
near Canterbury. Nor will he admit the splendid decision of May 11, 1940,
“was unpremeditated”. On the contrary, he insists hotly (p. 38), that this
decision can be traced “to a brainwave which came to British experts in
1936,” when the Bomber Command was organized—“The whole raison d’étre
of Bomber Command,” he tells us (p. 60), “was to bomb Germany should she
be our enemy”. Further, he says it was obvious that Hitler realized that this
was Britain’s intention in the event of war, and that he was, in consequence,
genuinely anxious to reach with Britain an agreement “confining the action of
aircraft to the battle zones”. Finally, he agrees that Hitler only undertook the
bombing of the British civilian population reluctantly three months after the
R.A.F. had commenced bombing the German civilian population, and
expresses the opinion (p. 47) that after it had started Hitler would have been
willing at any time to have stopped the slaughter—“Hitler assuredly did not
want the mutual bombing to go on.” The reader will find the facts of the case
set out with frank jubilation by Mr. Spaight in the above- mentioned book, and
with the objective detachment of a veteran historian by Captain Liddell Hart in
his Revolution in Warfare. They are repeated by Air Marshal Sir Arthur Harris
in his book, Bomber Offensive (1947) by that time much tinged by a marked
petulance arising from the dawning realization of the far-reaching
consequences of the precedent created by “the splendid decision of May 11,
1940”. And truly it is a disturbing precedent for the inhabitants of a small,
densely populated island, now that all the military might, air prowess, and
boundless resources of Asia have become no further distant than the Oder.


Air Marshal Harris joins with Mr. Spaight in pouring contempt on the
shortsightedness of professional soldiers throughout the world, and in
particular in Germany, for not perceiving in the years before 1939 that the
heavy bomber would be a far more effective weapon against civilians than
against combatant forces. The issue for what purpose an air force should be
designed to serve was hotly debated in Britain immediately after the First
World War. Germany had been disarmed but France had emerged from the
struggle with the largest air force in the world and was bitterly aggrieved at
British opposition to her plans for annexation in the Middle East. The question
was, what type of plane would Britain need in the event of another war? The
professional soldiers in the War Office naturally took the traditional view; the
chiefs of the newly created air force, unhampered by tradition, took an entirely
novel view. In 1923 Air Marshal Sir Hugh Trenchard, Chief of the Air Staff,
exactly summarized the point at issue when he wrote, “The Army policy was
to defeat the enemy army; our policy was to defeat the enemy nation.”


Far from planning a Blitz, Air Marshal Harris declares that Germany lost the
war because, when compelled in September 1940 to carry out the Blitz, she
found that the generals who dominated the Luftwaffe and regarded the bomber
as merely a form of long-range artillery for use in battle, had neglected to
equip the Luftwaffe with heavily armed bomber planes designed for a Blitz.
“The Germans,” writes Air Marshal Harris, “had allowed their soldiers to
dictate the whole policy of the Luftwaffe which was designed expressly to
assist the army in rapid offensives.... Much too late in the day they saw the
advantage of a strategic bombing force ... the outcome was the German Army
had to be deprived of air cover and air support on every front to provide some
defence for Germany against independent strategic action in the air.”


Mr. Spaight puts the matter in a nutshell when he writes (p. 144): “In Germany
and in France the air arm never cut adrift from the land arm: it was tethered to
the Army in these countries. In Britain it was free to roam.” To this it may be
replied that orthodox military opinion holds that it is the duty of a soldier to
fight and not to roam. “For Germany,” Mr. Spaight continues, “the bomber
was artillery for stationary troops dug fast into the Maginot Line; for Britain, it
was an offensive weapon designed to attack the economic resources of the
enemy deep within his country.”


It is important to note that the “splendid decision of May 11, 1940” was put
into effect “General Gamelin notwithstanding”. “The French General Staff,”
remarks Mr. Spaight sadly (p. 70), “had all along a conception of air warfare
broadly similar to that of the German General Staff and divergent from that of
the British Air Staff. They viewed with the greatest misgivings any plan by
which bombers were to be used for attacks on German industry, and did not
hesitate to say so. In their considered opinion the main, indeed the only, use to
which a bombing force should be put was to extend the range of artillery
supporting armies in the field.”


From every point of view Air Marshal Harris’ book, Bomber Offensive, is a
much less illuminating work than Mr. Spaight’s Bombing Vindicated. Writing
in the same spirit, his tone is much more subdued. Substantially, however, he
is in complete agreement with Mr. Spaight. He also attributes the failure of the
Blitz to the shortsightedness of the Luftwaffe chiefs in not providing
themselves in peace time with long-distance bomber planes designed for
attacks on an enemy civilian population, an omission, he declares, which lost
Germany the war. Had the Germans been able to persist in their attacks, he
writes, London would unquestionably have suffered the terrible fate which
over took Hamburg two years later. But in September 1940 the Germans
found themselves “with almost unarmed bombers ... so that in the Battle of
Britain the destruction of the German bomber squadrons was very similar to
shooting cows in a field.”


Only with regard to the justification of attacks from the air on civilians can the
Air Marshal be said to go one better than the Principal Air Secretary. When
reproached for the inhumanity of this form of warfare, he tells us
complacently, it is his practice to confound his critics by quoting to them a
British Government White Paper which estimates that the blockade of Europe
by the British Navy between 1914 and 1918 “caused nearly 800,000 deaths,
mainly women and children,” while, on the other hand, indiscriminate
bombing by the R.A.F. between 1940 and 1945 probably did not in his
opinion kill more than 300,000. He assures us that this retort invariably left his
critics dumfounded and abashed.


Certainly this is a novel line of argument which, if it ever secured acceptance


in amiminal laser nranld land ta atennan nnannnminnnan Tan axramnla n nannan


AL) CO ULUUIdAL IAW, WUULU LEdU LU SU dlIpe CULISCYUECLICES, FUL CAALIIPIe, d PELSULI
accused of a single murder could by this argument claim acquittal on the
ground that there have been cases of persons guilty of wholesale murder.


In passing it may be noted that the Air Marshal’s estimate of the civilian
casualties resulting from the British air offensive against Germany is far
below the figure now generally accepted. At the Manstein Trial in Hamburg
in 1949 the figure of 250,000 was put forward as the probable total of
casualties from one air raid, that on Dresden on the night of February 13th,
1945. While declaring that the casualties in this raid will probably always
remain a subject for speculation, General Hans Rumpf, after a careful
examination and analysis of all the available evidence, comes to the
conclusion that in Germany between 1940 and 1945 some 600,000 were
killed and 800,000 were wounded in air attacks—see his Das war der
Bombenkrieg, (Gerhard Stalling Verlag, Oldenburg, 1961, page 114).


Messrs. Spaight and Harris speak with the authority of a Principal Secretary to
the Air Ministry and of an Air Marshal respectively. The facts which they set
forth are not open to question by persons who lack the expert and inside
knowledge which they possess. Yet some may find it hard to credit their
interpretation of these facts. According to their joint testimony, prior to 1939
the General Staffs of Great Britain, Germany and France were composed
entirely of elderly professional soldiers whose brains, rendered senile by
routine and red tape, were in capable of grasping so obvious a fact that if
bombs were showered from the air upon an enemy power’s chief centres of
population, its war effort would be affected. Only in the British Air Ministry,
and then only thanks to a memorable “brain-wave” in 1936, did this fact dawn,
with the result that for three years before the outbreak of war Britain alone was
planning accordingly. As a result of the opposition of the French General
Staff, it was not until May 11, 1940, that the Bomber Command was permitted
to fulfil the purpose for which it was built. Thereafter it was free “to roam”—
with consequences with which we are all familiar.


It may seem presumptuous but, it is submitted, there is an alternative
interpretation which has escaped the attention of Messrs. Spaight and Harris.
The men who had risen to the leadership of the General Staffs of Great
Britain, Germany and France may not have been congenital idiots unable to


perceive the obvious; they may have fully realized the effect which could be
produced by bombing an enemy civilian population and yet have deliberately
ruled out the adoption of this policy as contrary to the first principle of
civilized warfare. In taking up such an attitude they would only have been
following the example of the statesmen of all the nations of Europe for the
preceding two hundred years. Frequently tempted to depart from it to gain
manifest but temporary advantage, European statesmen since the time of
Louis XIV had consistently maintained the principle that hostilities must be
confined to the combatant forces of the belligerents.

They did so because they realized that civilization is a fragile structure,
inevitably subjected to severe strain even by a war limited by strict rules—by
mere “fooling with war” as Mr. Spaight calls it. The exclusion of non-
combatants from the scope of hostilities is the fundamental distinction between
civilized and barbarous warfare. All other restraints had followed naturally
from acceptance of this first principle. If it were abandoned, all else would
quickly disappear. Subconsciously, at any rate, it may have been realized by
them how thin and fragile was the partition separating civilized man from the
passions of the jungle: how civilization itself might not survive the release of
the dark forces which would be set free by warfare waged in the manner of
primitive times. Victory would then indeed be barren.


At all events, rightly or wrongly, wisely or unwisely, the fundamental
principle of civilized warfare was repudiated on May 11, 1940—according to
Mr. Spaight, as a result of a “brain-wave” in the British Air Ministry in 1936
—and, with the keystone removed, the whole structure of civilized warfare as
it had been gradually built tip in Europe during the preceding two centuries
collapsed in ruins. The assumption became general that a war waged by
barbarous methods must inevitably end in a barbarous peace. Faced with this
appalling prospect, each side felt any act was justified, provided only that it
served even remotely to stave off defeat. As the war proceeded and the
prospects darkened, this became more and more openly the German attitude.
The entry of the United States and the Soviet Union accelerated the head long
decline of civilized warfare, since, as non- European powers, neither felt in
any way bound to observe the rules of civil war adopted by the European
aborigines. In happier days, Europeans had cheerfully disregarded their own
rules in warfare outside Europe with non-Europeans; now, for the first time in
Europe, Europeans found these rules disregarded by non-Europeans. The entry


of the Soviet Union into the war, of course, completely transformed its
original character. In a marginal note which was fatuously brought up against
him at Nuremberg, Field Marshal Keitel drew attention to the obvious fact that
the struggle with the Red Army was not “ein ritterlicher Krieg” —“Hier
handelt es sich um die Vernichtung einer Weltanschauung.” (“This is no
knightly combat: it involves the destruction of the whole life philosophy of
one side or the other.”) It is characteristic of primary wars that they are never
“ritterlich” (knightly) or at most only superficially. The campaigns on the
Eastern Front were primary warfare in its grimmest aspect.


The above outline of the facts relating to the Bombing Campaign during the
Second World War summarises all that was known on this subject in 1953
when the first edition of Advance to Barbarism (from which these paragraphs
are reproduced) was published. After what Mr. Spaight had disclosed in 1944
it was impossible for anyone, however credulous, to accept the repeated and
solemn assertions of His Majesty’s Ministers in Parliament that the bombing
of Germany was being carried out with strict regard to the dictates of
humanity in accordance with the rules of civilized warfare. But only those
who had actually taken part in this bombing campaign or those having had
access to official documents knew exactly what had taken place. Serious
students of the subject indeed had no doubt that “unrestricted” or
“indiscriminate” bombing (these terms were regarded as synonyms) had been
deliberately adopted as a means of winning the war. The full truth was not
disclosed until 1961: it far surpassed the worst suspicions of those who at the
time condemned what Mr. Spaight has called “the splendid Decision” as a
relapse into barbarism.


As stressed earlier in these pages the essential principle, of the Rules of
Civilized Warfare was that military operations should be restricted to
overcoming the uniformed armed forces of the enemy, and on no account
should the enemy civilian population be attacked or molested.


As we have seen, the main difficulty which arose from the start with regard to
the application of this simple principle was in connection with siege
operations. Everyone was agreed that places on a battlefield held by enemy
troops could be attacked without regard to the lives of civilians living in them,
and besieged towns could be bombarded in order to force their garrisons to


surrender. Differences of opinion soon arose whether it was justifiable to use
a defended town itself, as distinct from its fortifications, as a target for
bombardment, as Copenhagen was used by the British Navy in 1807, or
Strasburg was used by the German Army in 1870. But it was generally agreed
that this was justifiable provided that the town in question was within the
theatre of military operations, that it was defended and that it contained
military objectives. In theory the projectiles were aimed at these military
objectives even if the chance of hitting them was small and it was certain that
those which missed would kill innocent civilians. Casualties so caused were
dismissed as deeply regrettable happenings unavoidable in warfare.


Such were the recognized conditions of warfare from the beginning of the 18th
century down to and including the First World War. A commander who
ordered his men to destroy a hospital or a school in preference to a fort or a
barracks would have been regarded not only as a sadistic monster, but as a
fool. A belated echo of this point of view was expressed by Air Marshal Harris
in his notorious broadcast to the German people on the 28th July, 1942, when
he said, “Obviously we prefer to hit factories, shipyards and railways. But
those people who work in these plants live close to them. Therefore we hit
your homes and you.” Until shortly before this contention would have seemed
such obvious common sense that it would have carried instant conviction with
everyone. Of course, at the time it was spoken Air Marshal Harris knew that he
was expressing the attitude of a bygone age. Four months previously, the
British Government had accepted the Lindemann Plan by which the killing of
civilians was made a military objective which henceforth was to be given, to
use the official jargon of the time, “top priority”.


Although throughout the First World War the Rules of Civilized Warfare were
observed in so far as attacks were always directed against recognized military
objectives, yet these attacks were delivered with an ever increasing disregard
for the safety of civilian life. The outstanding example of this disregard was
the Zeppelin Air Offensive against Great Britain in 1915-17. Examining this
offensive Sir Charles Webster and Dr. Noble Frankland, the joint authors of
the officially published work The Strategic Air Offensive against Germany,
1939-45 (H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1961), admit frankly these raids
were all aimed at military objectives, but comment soberly, “The Zeppelin
commanders often did not know where they were and their bombs were


dropped largely at random. They did on occasion, more by luck than
management, cause some damage.” (Page 34.)


It is no subject for surprise that the civilian casualties resulting were relatively
slight. What is surprising is that military objectives were so frequently hit.
Thus, for example, on the night of June 17th, 1917, the Fish Market at
Ramsgate in which were stored mines swept up by the mine-sweeping flotilla
operating from Ramsgate was hit by a bomb and widespread damage was
caused: another bomb from a Zeppelin made a direct hit on a crowded naval
dormitory at Chatham Barracks causing great loss of life. Such results were
made possible by the slow speed at which the airships flew and the low
altitude at which they were able to fly owing to the ineffective anti-aircraft fire
of the time. But far more, such results were due to luck, if luck be the right
word. The Kaiser and his advisers were like children with a new toy. They
were justifiably proud of the Zeppelin Airship, the product of Count
Zeppelin’s inventive genius. There were undeniably numerous military
objectives in Britain, the destruction of which would serve a military purpose.
So they ordered the Zeppelin commanders to fly over Britain and destroy with
bombs these military objectives. They callously ignored the fact that not one
bomb in a hundred, dropped at night by crews with no experience of bombing
and using primitive instruments, was likely to hit a military objective and that
bombs that missed would endanger civilian life. The Zeppelin commanders no
doubt did their best to carry out their orders. When they returned they
reported, no doubt in good faith, that they had achieved the missions assigned
to them. Their will to believe being strong, the Kaiser and his advisers
accepted these reports as true. Similarly, for eighteen months after the
“Splendid Decision” to bomb industrial targets in Germany had been taken,
Winston Churchill and his advisers were kept happy by the reports of the
R.A.F. pilots announcing in perfect good faith the destruction of the targets
assigned to them. Aerial photography had by that time, however, been brought
to a high state of perfection. All doubts on the subject were laid to rest by the
Bensusan-Butt Report dated the 18th August, 1941. The British Cabinet were
horrified to learn that aerial photographs taken of the targets described as
having been completely demolished disclosed that most of them showed no
signs of damage; of all the aircraft credited with having bombed their targets,
only one-third had, in fact, bombed within five miles of them.


TIntil A weil 1001 nmernamrnnn halinn that xarhnt raran nnlla dA tha atuntadia nin


UNMUL AAPL LIVOL EVELYULIE DELLEVEU Uldt Wildl Wa Cdlltu LIE SULdLe pit dll
offensive” against Germany which started in May 1940 was an offensive
carried out in a spirit similar to that of the Zeppelin offensive of 1915-17
against Britain. Both offensives were directed against military objectives with
the same callous disregard for the lives of the civilian population. The fact that
the British offensive was carried out on a vastly greater scale and owing to the
enormously improved aircraft and bombs employed incomparably greater
destruction was caused, made no essential distinction between them. It was
maintained that because the R.A.F., like the Zeppelins, directed their bombs
against specified targets, the use of the term “indiscriminate bombing” was a
slanderous misnomer. Some maintained, however, that the official use of the
term “saturation bombing” to describe the dropping of enormous quantities of
bombs on a selected area justified the use of the word “indiscriminate” with
regard to R.A.F. bombing. Within this selected area, often of considerable
extent, such bombing was certainly both indiscriminate and unrestricted.


One essential distinction, however, existed between these air offensives. When
the British air offensive was launched against Germany in May 1940 Winston
Churchill and his advisers extended the definition of “military objectives”
which had been accepted for two and a half centuries, to include factories, oil
plants, public buildings and any structure which contributed or was of use, if
only indirectly, to the war effort of the enemy.


This extension was the essence of “the Splendid Decision” which filled Mr.
Spaight with such pride. Many maintained that this extension rendered the
definition of “military objectives” meaningless, since there was not a city, town
or village in the industrial areas of Western Europe which did not possess a
building of some kind which came within this definition—a railway station, a
post office, a police station, a bridge or an electrical power plant. The existence
of any of these in a place rendered that place with all its inhabitants liable to be
obliterated by bombs. Thus, accepting the definition which included all public
buildings as military objectives, if a bomb was aimed at a village which
contained for example a police station, missed its mark and killed people in that
village, no breach of the Rules of Civilized Warfare would take place, because
it had long been agreed that when a missile which had been aimed at a military
objective caused civilian casualties, such casualties could be attributed to a
regrettable, but in no way blameworthy, accident.


ir


Not unreasonably, it is submitted, many people maintained that bombing
carried out in accordance with this novel definition of military objectives was,
in fact, unrestricted bombing. No part of the enemy civilian population was
excluded from the scope of the military operations, and therefore the Rules of
Civilized Warfare were in practice, although not expressly, repudiated.
Apologists for the Air Offensive argued that as the definition of “military
objectives” had always been somewhat vague and elastic, the British
Government was entitled to amend the current definition as it pleased, and
anyway there had been no express repudiation of the Rules of Civilized
Warfare.


All arguments concerning the British bombing of Germany during the Second
World War were brought abruptly to an end in April 1961 by a single
paragraph in a little book with the uninspiring title Science and Government.
The author was Sir Charles Snow, scientist and novelist. His purpose in writing
it was to assess the respective achievements of two rival physicists, Professor
Lindemann and Dr. Henry Tizard. The book was primarily concerned to show
that when the opinions of these two men conflicted, Dr. Tizard always proved
to be right and Professor Lindemann always wrong. To do this he was
compelled to disclose the truth concerning one of the principal issues which
arose between them.


This paragraph will be found quoted verbatim on page 18 in the Introduction to
this book. In a nutshell Sir Charles Snow disclosed that early in 1942—the

` exact date, it now appears, was March 30th, 1942—Professor Lindemann
submitted a Minute to the War Cabinet in which he urged that bombing
henceforth should be directed against German working-class houses in
preference to military objectives, which were much too difficult to hit. He
claimed that given a total concentration of effort on the production of aircraft
suitable for this work, 50% of all the houses in the cities and towns in
Germany with over 50,000 inhabitants would be destroyed. Sir Charles
declared that the Lindemann Plan to initiate terror bombing against Germany
was adopted by the British Government “and put into action with every effort
the country could make.”


It was everywhere expected that these assertions of Sir Charles Snow would


at once be rebutted by categorical and emphatic denials. No attempt at
denial was made, however. Lord Birkenhead indeed hurriedly produced a
biography of Professor Lindemann in which he rebutted at length and with
indignation the popular belief that Lindemann was a Jew, a point of no
relevance or interest to anyone, but he had nothing to say with regard to the
suggestion that Lindemann was a war criminal responsible for a ghastly
crime against humanity. In October, 1961, six months after the publication
of Sir Charles Snow’s book, the full truth was disclosed in the above
mentioned official publication, The Strategic Air Offensive against Germany
(H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1961).


It has thus now become possible to trace in detail the development of air
bombing during the Second World War.


This development took place in three clearly marked stages, during the first of
which starting with the outbreak of war on the 3rd September 1939 and lasting
until the 11th May 1940, the air forces of both sides attacked only military
objectives strictly in accordance with the Rules of Civilized Warfare.


The second stage began on the 11th May, 1940, when the R.A.F. launched its
first attack on industrial areas in Germany, the British Government having
adopted a new definition of military objectives so that this term included any
building which in any way contributed, directly or indirectly, to the war effort
of the enemy. The R.A.F. attacked “military objectives” as so defined in
accordance with the orders of the War Cabinet, but very soon the Air Staff
chiefs began to permit themselves greater and greater latitude in carrying out
their orders. Thus, as early as the 16th December, 1940, a moonlight raid by
134 planes took place on Mannheim, described in the above mentioned official
British history of the air offensive as “the first ‘area’ attack of the war.” The
object of this attack, as Air Chief Marshal Peirse later explained, was “to
concentrate the maximum amount of damage in the centre of the town.” As
early as this therefore, all pretence of attacking military, industrial or in fact
any particular targets was in practice abandoned.


The British air offensive launched on the 11th May 1940 against industrial
objectives in Germany continued without retaliation for nearly four months.
During May and June the Luftwaffe was fully occupied taking part in the


campaign in France. After the surrender of France on the 22nd June, for a
month Hitler clung to the delusion that the struggle could be brought to an end
by a negotiated peace. Realising at last this hope was vain, Hitler launched a
massive air attack on Britain in order to win command of the air preparatory to
an invasion. This was a purely military operation, carried out mainly in
daylight, against airfields, docks and shipping. The Battle of Britain ended
with a defeat for Germany as decisive as the Battle of Stalingrad. It was not
until September that the Luftwaffe was ordered to cease its costly efforts to
win command of the air over the English Channel, and to launch a reprisal air
offensive against Britain exactly similar to the British air offensive against
Germany which had been going on ever since May 11th. On the 6th
September London was subjected to a mass attack by 270 bombers, the
greatest concentration of air power collected up to that time, and great damage
and many casualties were caused. Thereafter every night favourable for
bombing the chief industrial cities of Britain suffered the same fate. Until the
following Spring when the Luftwaffe was withdrawn to take part in the
invasion of Russia, the two air offensives continued concurrently. The British
air offensive during this period must be set down as a failure to the extent that
it achieved nothing towards crippling the war production of Germany but as a
success to the extent that it prevented the war stagnating and it generated a
frenzied war psychosis. The German air offensive, on the other hand, must be
dismissed as a complete failure since it did not achieve its only purpose,
namely, to induce the British Government to discontinue the air offensive
against Germany.


Throughout this period the British public believed without question that the
British air offensive against Germany was a reprisal for the attacks of the
Luftwaffe on Britain which, it was said, began with the dropping of bombs by
an unidentified plane on a wood near Canterbury. A faint echo of this belief
will be found in the official history of the air offensive where it is stated that
the destructive raid on Coventry on the 14th November, 1940, decided the
chiefs of Bomber Command to launch the attack on the centre of Mannheim
above mentioned. Indisputably, of course, both Coventry and Mannheim
possessed “military objectives” according to the new definition of this term
adopted by the British Government in the previous May.


In passing it may be observed that the question which air offensive was a


reprisal for which has now long ceased to be a subject for dispute. As early as
1953 H.M. Stationery Office published the first volume of a work The Royal
Air Force, 1939-1945 entitled The Fight at Odds, a book described as
“officially commissioned and based throughout on official documents which
had been read and approved by the Air Ministry Historical Branch.” The
author, Mr. Dennis Richards, states plainly that the destruction of oil plants
and factories was only a secondary purpose of the British air attacks on
Germany which began in May 1940. The primary purpose of these raids was to
goad the Germans into undertaking reprisal raids of a similar character on
Britain. Such raids would arouse intense indignation in Britain against
Germany and so create a war psychosis without which it is impossible to carry
on a modern war. Mr. Dennis Richards writes: —


“Tf the Royal Air Force raided the Ruhr, destroying oil plants with its most
accurately placed bombs and urban property with those that went astray, the
outcry for retaliation against Britain might prove too strong for the German
generals to resist. Indeed, Hitler himself would probably head the clamour. The
attack on the Ruhr, in other words, was an informal invitation to the Luftwaffe
to bomb London.” (Page 122).


This passage, of course, merely confirmed what Mr. Spaight had so
incautiously disclosed in 1944 in his by then forgotten book Bombing
Vindicated. The popular belief that Hitler started unrestricted bombing still
persisted and is, in fact, widely held even at the present day.


The third and last phase of the British air offensive against Germany began in
March 1942 with the adoption of the Lindemann Plan by the British War
Cabinet, and continued with undiminished ferocity until the end of the war in
May, 1945. The bombing during this period was not, as the Germans
complained, indiscriminate. On the contrary, it was concentrated on working-
class houses because, as Professor Lindemann maintained, a higher percentage
of bloodshed per ton of explosives dropped could be expected from bombing
houses built close together, rather than by bombing higher class houses
surrounded by gardens. Neither was it unrestricted bombing, except, of course,
in the sense that it was not restricted to military objectives as originally
defined by the Rules of Civilized Warfare, which in practice had been found
difficult to hit and therefore wasteful of bombs. The bombing during this


namnd rarnana nimnla tamanan hamhina dantann Ata nhnttan tha wmannla af tha nienlinn


pELLUU Wdds Sipe LELLUL DULIIDILLS uecsigutu LU SlidLLEL UIE LILULGIe UL UIC CIVILId II
population and so to generate an inclination to surrender.


The adoption of the Lindemann Plan produced no startlingly obvious changes
in bombing tactics perceptible even to the German civilian population. Ever
since the first “area” bombing, the above mentioned raid on Mannheim in
December 1940, the British air chiefs on their own initiative had been carrying
out their orders to reduce German industrial production by an easier method
than by dropping bombs through the roofs of factories. They argued that the
desired result would be more readily achieved if the homes of the workers in
the factories were destroyed: if the workers were kept busy arranging for the
burial of their wives and children, output might reasonably be expected to fall.
Thus the adoption of the Lindemann Plan merely gave express government
sanction to tactics which had long been adopted with semi-official approval.


The Lindemann Plan was first carried into effect on the 28th March, 1942,
when Lilibeck was attacked by 234 aircraft of Bomber Command. This
beautiful old Hanseatic port had no military or special industrial importance
but was chosen because, as Air Marshal Harris subsequently described it, the
city was “built more like a firelighter than a human habitation.” The focus of
the attack was the Altstadt composed of medieval houses with narrow,
tortuous streets; some 30,000 people lived in an area of two square kilometres.
Photographic reconnaissance showed the raid had been “a first class success.”
From 45% to 50% of the city was totally destroyed, together with the
Cathedral and the Market Hall.


During the last seven years full particulars with copious official statistics have
been published concerning the subsequent course of the great Air Offensive.
The grisly story can be read elsewhere. Here it will be sufficient to say that
one “first class success” followed another. The climax of the offensive was
reached on the night of February 13th, 1945, when a mass raid by several
thousand heavy bombers was directed against Dresden. The result of this air
raid was indisputably a first class success, far surpassing all previous first
class successes. Naturally there was jubilation at Supreme Allied Headquarters
in Paris which approved a despatch from the Associated Press correspondent
announcing that “Allied war chiefs have made the long awaited decision to
adopt deliberate terror bombing of German population centres as a ruthless


expedient to hasten Hitler’s doom.... The all-out air war on Germany became
obvious with the unprecedented assault on the refugee-crowded Saxon capital
two weeks ago.” The text of this sensational announcement will be found
quoted more fully earlier in this book. (See page 20.)


Almost at once, however, it was realised that if the decision to adopt ruthless
terror bombing was held up for public glorification, the question would be
asked, When had this decision been reached? Remembering that this was not,
as stated, “a long-awaited decision”, but a decision taken nearly three years
before, which had been repeatedly and solemnly denied by Ministers of the
Crown in Parliament, Commander Brabner, Under Secretary of State for Air,
was instructed to repeat these denials and to assure the House of Commons
that the statement approved by the Supreme Allied Headquarters in Paris was
incorrect. Officially no crime against humanity had been committed. A
stringent taboo prevented the publication of details and the matter was
quickly forgotten by the public. Indisputably, the destruction of Dresden was
not only an outstanding event of the Second World War but an outstanding
event of European history, an event which was the culmination of that fatal
addiction to civil war in which the nations of Europe had been indulging for
centuries. Those at the time who desired information concerning the
destruction of Dresden naturally consulted the monumental work in four
volumes of Sir Winston Churchill which purported to give a complete record
of the events of the Second World War, and found what they sought on page
470 of Volume IV, Triumph and Tragedy. They had however to be content
with twenty-two words—“Throughout January and February 1945 our
bombers continued to attack, and we made a heavy raid in the latter month on
Dresden.” Sir Winston has nothing further to say on the subject.


The following account of the bombing of Dresden was first published in 1953
in the American edition of the present book. For ten years, until the
publication of a book entirely devoted to this subject and based on British
official records (The Destruction of Dresden by David living, Kimber,
London, 1963), it remained the only account in the English language of the
Schreckensnacht of February 13th, 1945. It was mainly based on Der Tod von
Dresden by Axel Rodenberger (Das grüne Blatt, Dortmund, 1951) the first
German writer to collect all the then available facts concerning this holocaust.
No material facts have come to light since 1951 which make revision


necessary of what the present author wrote in 1953.


Reverting to the authoritative work of Air Marshal Harris, Bomber Offensive,
it is noteworthy that even the gallant Air Marshal’s hardihood falters in regard
to the mass bombing by some two thousand heavy bombing planes of Dresden
on the night of February 13th, 1945, when the normal population of “this large
and splendid city” was swollen by a horde of terrified women and children
from the eastern provinces of Germany in flight from the most dreadful fate
which had ever confronted a large European population since the Mongol
invasion of 1241. In February, 1945, the war had, of course, long ceased to be
a military operation and had become merely the breaking of the desperate but
hopeless resistance of a defeated people, the leaders of which faced death and
the remainder slavery. Selecting his words with obvious care, the Air Marshal
writes, “I will only say that the attack on Dresden was at the time considered a
military necessity by much more important people than myself.”


It will be noted that the Air Marshal pointedly refrains from endorsing the
opinion of these important people. He leaves it open to speculation whether
this was due to a modest shrinking from associating himself with so much
importance or whether, after reflecting on the facts and circumstances, to sheer
horror. It is further to be noted that he attributes this opinion to these important
people as held by them only “at the time”, from which it may be deduced that
he cannot bring himself to believe that any sane person could still hold such an
opinion. Finally, it will be noted that he loyally refrains from disclosing the
identity of these important people.


An examination of the situation existing at the time of this great mass air raid
will provide an explanation of the Air Marshal’s studied reticence. In
February, 1945, the war had been won and no military purpose remained to be
served by indiscriminate bombing. From the East, the Russian hordes were
advancing steadily and irresistibly. In the centre, they had reached the Oder on
a wide front on each side of Frankfurt-an-der-Oder, only 50 miles east of
Berlin; on the right wing, the greater part of East Prussia which for seven
hundred years had served as an advanced bastion of Europe against Asia, had
been subdued; on the left wing, Lower Silesia had been overrun, although the
capital, Breslau, closely surrounded, continued to offer a resistance as heroic
as this city had offered the Mongol hordes of Batu almost exactly seven


hundred years before. In the West, the armies of General Eisenhower were
advancing on a wide front to the Rhine. The surviving German armies in the
field continued to resist, not from any lingering hope that defeat could be
averted but because their enemies’ insistence on unconditional surrender made
it seem preferable to a people brought up for generations on the tradition of
Frederick the Great to go down fighting to the last. The publication of the
infamous Morgenthau Plan had left it in no doubt what were the conqueror
intentions whether Germany surrendered at once or a final stand was made.
The only military problem remaining in February, 1945 (if such it can be
called) was the question along what line running North and South across
Germany the invaders of Germany from the West would meet the invaders of
Germany from the East. In fact, the campaign which had commenced on the
Normandy beaches in the previous summer had become a mere race with the
Soviet hordes, a race in which anything which the Germans could do to retard
the progress of the latter, although of no practical benefit to themselves, would
be of enormous political value to the Western Powers. Nevertheless, the
British and Americans decided to launch a mass air attack on Dresden: then
about 70 miles behind the scanty German forces resisting desperately the
Russian advance across Lower Silesia.


Very little authoritative information has been available until very recently
concerning this mass air raid. In the earliest books which dealt with the last
stage of the war, the course usually adopted was to refer airily to the bombing
of Dresden as the last of a long series of mass air raids in which it happened
that an exceptionally large number of people were killed. As a result of this
general reticence little could be added for a long time to the following
reference to this air raid published in The Times three days after it had taken
place:


“Dresden, which had been pounded on Tuesday night by 800 of the 1,400
heavies sent out by the R.A.F. and was the main object of 1,350 Fortresses
and Liberators on the following day, yesterday received its third heavy attack
in thirty-six hours. It was the principal target for more than 1,100 United
States 8th Army Air Force bombers.”


Other British newspapers reported similarly. In none of them was any attempt
made to explain why Dresden should have been selected as the target for such


n tamifin annnaAnnteuntinn nf fannan Dafannanan ta na wida haab vA] Anawnida na


d LELLILIC CULICCLIL GLLULT UL LULLCE, NELELCHICE LU d BUIUE DUUK WII PLUVLUE HU
clue. The modern city of Dresden has grown up round the medieval town, now
known as the Altstadt which lies at the southern end of the bridge crossing the
Elbe. In the eighteenth century Dresden became one of the great show cities of
the world through the construction of a number of magnificent public
buildings, all of which were erected in the Altstadt district of the city. Within a
radius of half a mile from the southern end of the Augustus Bridge was built a
unique group of palaces, art galleries, museums and churches—the Schloss,
containing the famous Grünes Gewölbe with its priceless art treasures; the
beautiful Brühl Terrasse extending along the left bank of the Elbe; the
beautiful Catholic Cathedral; the domed Frauen Kirche; the Opera House; the
Johanneum Museum and, above all, the famous Zwinger Museum containing
one of the finest collections of pictures in the world, including among its many
treasures Raphael’s Sistine Madonna, purchased by the Elector, Augustus II,
in 1745, for 20,000 ducats. Within this small area, so well known to British
and American travellers on the continent, there were, and could be, no
munition factories or, in fact, industries of any kind. The resident population
of this district was small. The main railway station of Dresden is situated a
mile away to the South and the railway bridge which carries the main line to
Berlin is half a mile away down the river.


The following brief details of this raid, which are now well established, are
added in amplification of the contemporary report from The Times set out
above.


On the morning of the fateful February 13, 1945, fast enemy reconnaissance
planes were observed flying over the city. The inhabitants of Dresden had had
no experience of modern air warfare and the appearance of these planes
aroused curiosity rather than apprehension. Having been for so long outside
any theatre of war, the city lacked anti- aircraft defences and these planes were
able to observe in complete safety all that they desired. No doubt, they
observed and reported that all the roads through and around Dresden were
filled with dense throngs moving westward. It is impossible, however, that
these throngs could have been mistaken for troop concentrations. It was
common knowledge that the German High Command had thrown in its last
reserves to reinforce the crumbling battlefronts and consequently there existed
no troops which could possibly be massing so far from any fighting. It was
also common knowledge that a frantic orgy of murder, rape and arson was


taking place in those districts of Silesia which had been overrun by the Soviet
hordes. It should not have been difficult to deduce in these circumstances that
many people in districts threatened by the Russian advance would decide to try
to escape westwards.


Some hours after night had fallen, about 9.30 p.m., the first wave of attacking
planes passed over Dresden. The focus of the attack was the Altstadt. Terrific
fires soon broke out which were still blazing when the second wave of
attackers arrived shortly after midnight. The resulting slaughter was appalling,
since the normal population of the city of some 600,000 had been recently
swollen by a multitude of refugees, mostly women and children, their menfolk
having remained behind to defend their homes. Every house in Dresden was
filled with these unfortunates, every public building was crowded with them,
many were camping in the streets. Estimates of their number vary between
300,000 and 500,000. There were no air raid shelters. There were, in fact no
air raid defences of any kind, unless we so regard the enormous cloud of
stifling black smoke which, after the first attack, covered the city and into
which the second and third waves of attackers dropped their bombs. Adding a
unique touch to the general horror, the wild animals in the zoological gardens,
rendered frantic by the noise and glare, broke loose; it is said that these
animals and terrified groups of refugees were machine-gunned as they tried to
escape across the Grosser Garten by low-flying planes and that many bodies
riddled by bullets were found later in this park.


Long after the bombing crews had comfortably eaten their breakfasts and
retired to rest, having carried out their orders without the loss of a single plane,
Dresden remained completely hidden by a vast cloud of black smoke. Parts of
the city continued to burn for days. Not one of the famous buildings in the
Altstadt mentioned above escaped destruction. Fortunately some time before
the raid the priceless art treasures in the Zwinger Museum, including
Raphael’s masterpiece of the Virgin and Child, had been removed and hidden
in a place of safety.


A few weeks after the raid the Russian forces occupied the ruins of Dresden. It
is possible to claim that this raid achieved the result of accelerating by a few
days the progress of the Russian advance. This is satisfactory to some since,
otherwise, the painful admission would be unavoidable that the raid had no


influence whatever on the contemporary course of events.


The number of casualties will probably always remain a subject for
speculation. Most of the victims were refugee women and children escaping
from Silesia. The homes which they left behind them have since been
confiscated and are now occupied by foreign squatters. The circumstances
made it impossible for the authorities to undertake the task of trying to identify
the victims. So enormous were the number of bodies that nothing could be
done but to pile them on timber collected from the ruins and there to burn
them. In the Altmarkt one funeral pyre after another disposed of five hundred
bodies or parts of bodies at a time. This gruesome work went on for weeks.
Estimates as to the total number of casualties vary between very wide limits.
Some put the figure as high as a quarter of a million, and this figure was put
forward as the probable total at the Manstein Trial in 1949, when the court was
solemnly considering the charges of inhumanity brought against the German
Field Marshal. The Swiss paper, Flugwehr und Technik, writes, “In the three
great attacks on Dresden the number of dead from reliable sources is reported
at 100,000.” Air Marshal Sir Robert Saundby in his preface to David Irving’s
above- mentioned book accepts the estimate of 135,000. Having regard to the
fact that there were at the time over a million people crowded into the city and
to the complete lack of air raid shelters, this would appear an absurdly
conservative estimate. Generalmajor Hans Rumpf mentions an estimate of
250,000, but says that “we do not know and never shall know how many
perished.” At that time hundreds of thousands of families living in Silesia and
Pomerania disappeared without trace and are no doubt dead, but it is
impossible to say whether they were massacred in their homes by the
advancing Red Army, were butchered on their flight by the Polish and Czech
partisans operating behind the German lines, or were slaughtered in Dresden
by the bombs of the R.A.F.


The late Father Ronald Knox once confessed himself somewhat disturbed by
the thought that the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima sent thousands to their
death without an opportunity to offer a prayer. To the secular mind it may
seem that the best that can be said for the dropping of the first atomic bomb is
that sudden death literally fell from a blue sky on the doomed city. What took
place there may seem far less “disturbing” than what had taken place a few
months before in Dresden, when dense crowds of homeless women and


children had surged this way and that for hours in search of a place of safety in
a strange city amid bursting bombs, burning phosphorus and falling buildings.


In his above cited preface to David Irving’s book Air Marshal Saundby writes,
“T am still not satisfied that I fully understand why it happened.... That the
bombing of Dresden was a great tragedy none can deny; that it was really a
military necessity few, after reading this book, will believe. It was one of those
terrible things that sometimes happen in wartime, brought about by an
unfortunate combination of circumstances. Those who approved it were
neither wicked nor cruel, though it may well be that they were too remote from
the harsh realities of war to understand fully the appalling destructive power of
air bombardment in the Spring of 1945.”


All very true, no doubt, except, of course, the Dresden Massacre was not one
of those terrible things which are brought about by an unfortunate combination
of circumstances. It was the final outcome of a policy deliberately chosen
three years before when the Lindemann Plan was adopted: a great number of
working-class homes were indeed destroyed in this mass air raid in accordance
with the plan. The origin of the Dresden Massacre can, however, be traced
back for another two decades when what was regarded as a novel conception
of warfare was put forward by the chiefs of the newly established Air Force,
relatively youthful men who were intoxicated by the military possibilities of
the heaver-than-air flying machine, an invention dating only from the
experiments of the Wright brothers at the beginning of the century. This novel
conception of warfare which was, in fact held and practised by the ancient
Assyrians, was well expressed by Air Marshal Sir Hugh Trenchard in 1923
when he wrote: “The Army policy is to defeat the enemy army: our policy is
to defeat the enemy nation.”


The Dresden Massacre was the result of the gradual conversion by the Air
Force chiefs of the politicians to this primitive conception of warfare. During
the period between the world wars little progress had been made, but
immediately war broke out in September 1939 the Air Staff began to clamour
for leave to carry their ideas of warfare into practice. When Winston Churchill
became Prime Minister in May, 1940, they obtained his permission to adopt a
definition of military objectives so wide as to render the term in practice
meaningless: their final triumph came two years later with the adoption of the


T indammļmnnn Dlan rarhinh initintad tawnaniam nn n manna ta wintard tamnmnmwm nn


LIHUCLHHALUH Fidh WICH MUG lteU LELLULISIIT ds d IHEdIHS LU VICLULY, LELLULISIII, ds


employed by King Sennacherib.


Although one of his first acts when he took office was to give way to the
frantic entreaties of the Air Staff for a free hand, there is some evidence that
Churchill gave way with some reluctance, and thereafter was never free from
twinges of conscience This is not really surprising. Churchill had started his
career in the Victorian Epoch as a professional soldier, and never lost the
traditional outlook of the professional soldier of his youth. He had an
unrivalled knowledge of every campaign fought in the civil wars of Europe
during the previous two and a half centuries, all of which had been fought in
accordance with the Rules of Civilized Warfare. Regarding history from an
early age as a drama in which it was his ambition to play a leading role, he
was deeply concerned with what view future historians would take of him,
unlike so many of his colleagues who were indifferent to the judgment of
posterity so long as they successfully performed the task which at the moment
they had in hand.


Strange as it may seem, Churchill appears to have been one of those of whom
Air Marshal Saundby speaks who were too remote from the harsh realities of
war to realise exactly what the adoption of the Lindemann Plan entailed. The
Australian diplomat Lord Casey, who was sent to Washington in December,
1940, to sabotage in advance any attempt it was feared Lloyd George might
make to induce President Roosevelt to support a negotiated peace, in his
memoirs entitled Personal Experiences (Constable, London, 1962) records the
following entry in his diary for the 27th June, 1943, on which day he visited
Chequers where a film of the bombing campaign was shown for the
entertainment of the Prime Minister and his guests: “In the course of the film
showing the bombing of German towns from the air, very well and
dramatically done, W. C. suddenly sat bolt upright and said to me: ‘Are we
beasts? Are we taking this too far?’ ”


Of the innumerable anecdotes told of Sir Winston Churchill, this is likely to
become the most frequently quoted by his admirers. There is no reason to
question its authenticity since its narrator, Lord Casey, was clearly surprised
that “a very well and dramatically done” film should disturb the Prime
Minister’s equanimity. It is consistent also with the minute dated the 28th
March 1945, which Sir Winston Churchill sent to the Chief of the Air Staff,


Sir Charles Portal, six weeks after the mass raid on Dresden:


“Tt seems to me that the moment has come when the question of bombing of
German cities simply for the sake of increasing the terror, though under other
pretexts should he reviewed. The destruction of Dresden remains a serious
query against the conduct of Allied bombing. I am of the opinion that military
objectives must henceforth be more strictly studied in our own interests rather
than that of the enemy. I feel the need for more precise concentration upon
military objectives, such as oil and communications behind the immediate
battle-zone, rather than on mere acts of terror and wanton destruction,
however impressive.”


Naturally, Air Marshal Portal, one of the foremost champions of the bombing
policy which had been carried out for the previous three years with the
Government’s entire approval, expostulated at the frank wording of this
minute. The Prime Minister withdrew it and substituted one tactfully worded,
but nevertheless referring to “the question of so- called ‘area bombing’ of
German cities.” In fact, as Sir Charles Webster and Dr. Noble Frankland say
in their official history of the Air Offensive, that immediately after victory
became certain, “The Prime Minister and others in authority seemed to turn
away from the subject as though it were distasteful to them and as though they
had forgotten their own recent efforts to initiate and maintain the offensive.”


No shorthand notes are taken of the proceedings at British cabinet meetings
and consequently we are dependent on the memory and the veracity of those
ministers taking part who later see fit to disclose their recollection of what
occurred. We do not know therefore what took place at that momentous
cabinet meeting in March 1942 when it was decided to adopt the plan
submitted by Professor Lindemann to win the war by terror bombing: we do
not know what objections, if any, were raised to the adoption of this plan and
by which ministers present. It has all along been certain that Winston
Churchill, the Prime Minister, overcame his natural scruples and supported the
adoption of the plan, otherwise of course it would not have been adopted.
Since the publication in 1961 of the official history of terror bombing, The
Strategic Air Offensive against Germany, 1939-45, it has become clear that
adoption was also supported by the Foreign Secretary, Sir Anthony Eden. On
the 15th April, 1942, only a month after its adoption, Sir Anthony wrote to the


Air Minister, Sir Archibald Sinclair, expressing the view that “the
psychological effects of bombing have little connection with the military and
economic importance of the target.” He went on to suggest that the
psychological effects of attacking a medium-sized town were greater than
those of attacking, with equal force, a larger town, and added:


“I wish to recommend therefore that in the selection of targets in Germany,
the claims of smaller towns of under 50,000 inhabitants which are not too
heavily defended, should be considered, even though those towns contain
only targets of secondary importance.”


“There is no reason to suppose,” comment the joint authors of this
authoritative work, “that Sir Archibald Sinclair found these views morally
repugnant.” Quite the contrary in fact! They proceed to quote a letter written
the following month by Sir Archibald declaring that he was “in full
agreement” with the views of an unnamed M.P. who had written him
emphatically supporting terror bombing and proclaiming that he was “all for
the bombing of working-class areas in German cities. I am a Cromwellian—I
believe in ‘slaying in the name of the Lord’.”


One is left wondering what was the reaction of this Honourable Gentleman
when on the 30th March, 1943, he heard Sir Archibald Sinclair, in reply to a
question by Mr. Richard Stokes, solemnly assure the House of Commons, “The
targets of Bomber Command are always military.” Presumably he regarded this
ministerial departure from the truth as relating to mere “operational details”,
which according to David Irving was the attitude of the hundred thousand
airmen who ever since the great raid on Mannheim on the 16th December 1940
had known that night after night aircraft had been despatched against German
civilian centres.


In a letter to the Daily Telegraph of the 1st March 1963 Dr. Noble Frankland
put forward what seems to be the only plausible justification for terror
bombing. He pointed out that in 1914 the submarine, and in 1939 the long-
range bomber, were recently perfected but hitherto untested weapons of war.
The British adopted the unrestricted use of the long range heavy bomber in the
Second World War for exactly the same reasons as the Germans had adopted
the unrestricted use of the submarine in the First World War, because they


realised that the employment of this novel weapon would ultimately be of
greater use to them than to their opponents. “Naturally,” he writes, “the
Germans detested the idea of ‘strategic bombing’ in 1942 just as the British
deplored the unrestricted submarine warfare of 1917.”


Probably in default of anything more convincing, a defence along these lines
will finally be adopted by apologists for terror bombing. Reflection will show,
however, that an important distinction can be drawn between the two cases.
The Germans torpedoed merchant ships in the First World War, not for the
purpose of drowning their civilian crews, but in order to enforce a blockade of
the British Isles as a countermove to the blockade of Germany which the
British, thanks to their command of the sea, were successfully enforcing with
ultimately decisive results. The intention of terror bombing during the Second
World War, on the other hand, it is now officially admitted, was to kill as
many civilians as possible until the survivors had been terrorised into
unconditional surrender. Everything here turns about the intention. In all such
cases the true test is to decide whether the act in question was contrary to the
accepted standards of conduct at the time it was committed. With regard to
terror bombing it is difficult to maintain that terror bombing was in
accordance with the standards accepted in 1942, otherwise obviously it would
not have been necessary to carry out terror bombing behind a screen of
indignant and mendacious official denials.


_ Exposure of the truth, firstly by Sir Charles Snow in March 1961 and then ina
voluminous official record published in September of the same year, naturally
caused a sensation throughout the civilized world and particularly in Great
Britain. The subject of the terror bombing of Germany which came to an end
in May 1945 had been driven from the minds of the British Public by the
dropping of the first atomic bomb on the Japanese on the 5th August, 1945. At
first the news of the devastation of Hiroshima was received with gloating
satisfaction as a fitting retribution upon the presumptuous Yellow people who
had challenged White Supremacy in the Far East. But after the secrets of
nuclear fission had been betrayed to Stalin by the Communist espionage
network in the United States, the spy ring led by Julius and Ethel Rosenberg
taking the leading part, misgivings concerning the use of the atomic bomb to
terrorise the Japanese into surrender became widespread. No one could doubt
that Stalin would without hesitation drop an atomic bomb on Great Britain if it


hannanod ta onit hic nlane Tha mihlin anncaiannan hanama danni ctirend: tha


llagppriucu tU DULL IHD p:a. 111t puviic LCULIDLITIILGT VCCAILIITC uccply DULLCU. UIC
use of atomic weapons was declared to be morally wrong, even for so worthy
a cause as the defence of Colonialism in Asia. Overshadowed by the horrible
possibility that London might one day suffer the fate of Hiroshima, the terror
bombing of Germany a few years before quickly came to be regarded as an
episode of the remote past. The great four-engine bombers with their loads of
high explosives which had devastated Dresden in 1945 began to seem as
obsolete and out-of-date as the mighty galleons which Philip I had despatched
against England in 1588.


Disclosure of the truth concerning this episode of recent history had been
delayed for nearly two decades during which public opinion had undergone a
complete change. In 1942 when the Lindemann Plan was adopted by the
British Government, terror bombing was unquestionably contrary to the
accepted standards of the time. Enlightened opinion would have dismissed it
as unthinkable. After twenty years, however, enlightened opinion had grown
accustomed to the idea. By 1962 terrorism as an instrument of policy had
gradually become accepted by public opinion as a natural method by which
one state could impose its will upon a rival state. A long-range bomber could
indeed be used for terrorism as Professor Lindemann had pointed out, but it
could also be used as a weapon for use against the armed forces of the enemy
strictly in accordance with the Rules of Civilized Warfare. An atomic bomb,
on the other hand, was simply an instrument of terror: it would be useless on a
battlefield against the armed forces of the enemy: it was designed solely to
blot out the enemy civilian population. Everyone in 1962 knew that the United
States and Russia were collecting huge stock piles of atomic bombs, and no
one could be in any doubt that in the event of war they would adopt terrorism
as a means to victory. Public opinion everywhere had become resigned to this
assumption. In 1962 it was assumed by everyone that if President Kennedy
persisted in his declared intention of stopping by armed force Khrushchev’s
convoy transporting atomic missiles and reinforcements to the rocket bases
which he had secretly established in Cuba, the inevitable result would be an
exchange of salvoes of rockets with atomic warheads across the Atlantic.


Owing to this change of outlook, in the violent and protracted controversies
which raged in the British Press following the disclosure of the truth
concerning the terror bombing of Germany during the Second World War
twenty years before, hardly any reference was made to the ethical aspects of


the subject. The leading Socialist politician and Labour

M.P. Richard Crossman who in 1964 became Minister for Housing in Harold
Wilson’s Labour Cabinet, indeed spoke severely of the screen of lies behind
which the terror bombing campaign was carried out. “One of the most
unhealthy features of the bomber offensive,” he wrote, “was that the War
Cabinet—and in particular the Secretary for Air Sir Archibald Sinclair (now
Lord Thurso)—felt it necessary to repudiate publicly the orders which they
themselves had given to Bomber Command.”


Some may think that a lack of a sense of proportion on the part of the future
Labour Minister for Housing is shown in this observation. No doubt mendacity
was an unhealthy feature of the so-called “strategic air offensive against
Germany” and as such deserving of censure, but surely to a less extent than the
ruthless savagery, unnecessarily protracted to the end of the war, which
resulted in the death of 600,000 innocent people, an aspect of the matter which
seems to have escaped Mr. Crossman’s attention.


Although this is an age in which so many loudly profess deep concern over
such moral questions as social justice and racial discrimination, the majority
remain content to judge every action by applying the simple test, whether or no
it has achieved its purpose.


The essential nature of the terror bombing campaign escaped the attention of
the British public because the moral aspect was obscured by the outburst of
dismay aroused by the considered opinion expressed by the joint authors of
the official history of the campaign, Messrs. Charles Webster and Noble
Frankland, that the campaign must be regarded as a failure since it did not
justify its nature by bringing the war to an early end; it neither succeeded in
paralysing German war production nor in breaking the morale of the German
people.


Many bitterly resented the official publication of facts and figures indicating
that more useful results could have been achieved if the enormous
concentration of industrial output and the sacrifice of highly-trained personnel
had been expended, not on terror bombing but on attacking such military
objectives as the U-Boat bases from which the submarines of Admiral Donitz
were causing devastating losses to Allied shipping. “We were in danger of


LAnteene hon oir ere ntn AN Amante] Olu VATS Swen, Tame nn LA Teale Af BTR an tA Fist


LOSI WE Wdl, WIOLle AUT d! DIF VV UHAINI JAMES, LOL ldCK OL plalles LO LEUL
the submarines in the Atlantic. These planes were made available only just in
time.”


In the opinion of Albert Speer, the brilliant German Minister of War
Production, the terror bombing of the British caused less dislocation of
German industry than the “precision bombing” of the Americans which was
directed against specific targets. The astonishing fact was only disclosed long
after the end of the war that throughout the bombing offensive the production
of German armaments continued to increase steadily until the last year of the
war; thus, after the frightful air raid on Hamburg in July 1943 which caused
the death of over 50,000 of its inhabitants, war production was cut to half for
only a month and was soon restored to its former level.


This issue is important because only if it succeeded in shortening the war could
some sort of justification for the policy of terror bombing be found. In the
opinion of the authors of the official record of the terror bombing campaign it
failed to achieve this purpose.


Perhaps the most hotly disputed issue of the controversy aroused by the
publication of the official history of the terror bombing campaign was whether
Air Marshal Sir Arthur Harris, Commander-in-Chief of Bomber Command,
was unjustly treated by the British Government after victory had been
achieved. At the end of the war Winston Churchill made no attempt to
disguise the distaste which he had come to feel for the subject of terror
bombing of which the Air Marshal had been a fanatical advocate; his
successor, Clement Attlee, who had been a member of the War Cabinet at the
time of the adoption of the Lindemann Plan, naturally felt the same distaste for
the subject as Winston Churchill. As a consequence, a peerage was not
conferred on Air Marshal Harris in 1945 as one of the successful war leaders;
he was not even awarded a special medal for his services; he was even
prohibited from using official records when writing his account of the
campaign. Conscious of official disapproval, unobtrusively within a year of
the end of the war he left England to take up a commercial appointment in
South Africa.


On the one hand it seems clearly unjust to hold Air Marshal Harris responsible


for terror bombing. Certainly he strongly advocated it, like most of the other
leaders of the R.A.F., but he carried it out in accordance with the orders of the
executive government. In 1960, Mr. Clement Attlee, when challenged on the
subject, observed that in his opinion a more effective use could have been
made of his bombs by Air Marshal Harris if he had directed them against
military targets instead of devastating German cities. This observation stung
the Air Marshal into pointing out acidly that “the decision to bomb industrial
cities for morale effect was made, and in force, before I became C.-in-C.,
Bomber Command.” That this is true there can be no question. On the other
hand, after he obtained command Air Marshal Harris conducted the campaign
with ruthless zeal, and strongly opposed any relaxation of the attack. By sheer
force of character he dominated the politicians, so that, as one critic puts it, the
official history of British bombing during the Second World War is less the
story of Bomber Command than the story of Harris’ campaign against the
German civilian population. Yet, as the authors of the official history observe,
in terms of his own strategy, Harris is proved wrong on almost every major
decision.


A comparison between Air Marshal Sir Arthur Harris and Field Marshal Sir
Douglas Haig is irresistibly suggested. Both were men of the strongest
character; neither enjoyed the confidence of the politicians from whom they
received their orders. Both advocated policies which they guaranteed would
bring swift and complete victory. Haig was certain in 1916 that his great
offensive on the Somme would break through the German front and drive the
enemy in rout back to their own frontier: Harris in 1942 was equally confident
that if he were given a free hand and a sufficient number of long-range
bombers he could break the morale of the German people and bring the war to
a victorious conclusion in a few months. Neither man was able to fulfil his
assurances and when they failed, neither of them had any new suggestions to
make but merely asked permission to try again and the politicians were afraid
to dismiss them. Haig repeated his performance on the Somme by a similar
attempt in 1917 to break through at Passchendaele and with the same result.
Harris was allowed to continue his destruction of German working-class
dwellings until the very end of the war. Both were prodigal of the lives of their
men.


Perhaps no revelation of Messrs. Charles Webster and Noble Frankland more


shocked the British public than the disclosure that the Terror Bombing
Offensive cost the air crews of the R.A.F. no less than 58,888 lives, nearly the
same number of casualties as those suffered by British junior army officers
during the First World War. Attention has often been drawn to the fact that the
pick of an entire generation perished in the trenches in France as junior
officers under the command of Sir Douglas Haig; we now know that
approximately the same number perished over Germany during the Second
World War, an even more calamitous loss since the standard of health and
intelligence required for the men of Bomber Command was far higher than
that of the junior officers who served in the trenches in France twenty years
before.


The question whether the tremendous concentration of men and material for
the purpose of bombing the German civilian population during the Second
World War could otherwise have been more effectively employed will
probably always remain a matter for speculation. We now know exactly what
this great air offensive achieved in the form of destruction of human life and
property and the price which had to be paid for this achievement, but we can
only speculate as to what would have been achieved if this great effort had
been directed against military objectives in accordance with the rules of
civilized warfare, or if it had been employed to carry out a campaign of
“precision bombing” of selected targets on the lines successfully adopted by
the American Air Force.


Naturally the conclusion of Messrs. Charles Webster and Noble Frankland that
nearly sixty thousand young and valuable lives were sacrificed to carry out a
policy which failed in its declared purpose, namely to bring about a collapse of
the morale of the German people, seems intollerable to many. Yet the most
that can be claimed for the Lindemann Plan is that it contributed to some
indefinable extent to the final outcome of the war although it was certainly not
the decisive factor or perhaps even a decisive factor. Terror bombing however
was a logical and perhaps inevitable extension of the “Splendid Decision” by
the British Government in May 1940 to repudiate the rules of civilized warfare
and to adopt the policy advocated by Air Marshal Trenchard in 1923 when he
declared that the purpose of war was not merely to defeat the armed forces of
the enemy but to defeat the enemy nation. Terror bombing was a logical
application of this view of warfare which is in complete conformity with the


mooawimn anaf Olẹlannanrianta SVATAn in nn nnt nf enanlanan manhad ta ita ntmanant limit


Hd AIL UL UIGUSEWILZ, = VVd! Id dll ACL UL VIVIELICE PUSIIEU LU ILS ULLLIUSE LHLILL.


The “Splendid Decision”, carried out to its utmost limit in the form of terror
bombing, failed to defeat the enemy nation by bringing about a collapse of its
will power to resist. It had nevertheless decisive consequences not only on the
course of the Second World War but on subsequent world history. Its
immediate effect was to keep alive the conflict which had started in 1939 as a
European civil war of the usual type and to prevent it from petering out in
stagnation and general boredom, so that Roosevelt was given time to involve
the United States and transform it into a global conflict.


This momentous result has been closely studied by many historians from
various conflicting points of view. It is a strange fact however that no one has
yet drawn attention to the decisive influence, if only a negative influence,
which the “Splendid Decision”, within a week of its being taken, had on the
course of the Second World War. Although hundreds of books have been
written concerning that great conflict yet not one of them has drawn attention
to the 14th May 1940, as a date on which Hitler’s triumphal progress which,
thanks to the outcome of events on that day he was able to continue for the
following two years, came so near to being brought to an abrupt and final halt.
The facts are not in dispute, and it is submitted, only one conclusion can be
drawn from them.


The following dates should be carefully noted. On the 10th May 1940, the
Germans launched a great offensive along the whole front in the West from
the North Sea to Switzerland. On the 13th May, troops belonging to the army
group commanded by General von Kleist, having occupied Sedan on the right
bank of the Meuse the previous day, crossed the river in pneumatic boats,
stormed the French pill-boxes on the left bank, and by the evening had
established a bridgehead south of Sedan, about four miles deep and about four
miles wide. During the night of the 13th the work of repairing the bridge at
Gaulier, a mile west of Sedan, and building pontoon bridges, was pushed
forward in desperate haste in order to reinforce with tanks and artillery the
infantry precariously holding the bridgehead. Obviously it was a vital matter
for the Allies to prevent this being carried out: a critical situation for both sides
had arisen.


While this great conflict was raging along the Meuse, another conflict of a
different kind was raging between the French and British High Commands.
The breakthrough south of Sedan had been so swift and so unexpected that no
concentration of heavy artillery was at hand to cut off the bridgehead with a
barrage of shell fire. Regarding the primary purpose of the heavy bomber to be
that of long-range artillery, the French clamoured for an immediate
concentration of bombers for a mass attack on the crossings of the Meuse.
They found however the chiefs of the R.A.F. were reluctant to cancel the plans
which they had made for large scale air attacks on German industrial centres in
accordance with Air Marshal Trenchard’s conception of the role of the heavy
bomber in warfare.


The situation which existed on the 14th May is best described by Dennis
Richards in his previously cited book, The Fight at Odds. He sets out the facts
and the points of view of the disputants fairly and lucidly although, writing
thirteen years after the event, he remained completely oblivious to the fact that
the outcome proved that the French High Command was completely right in
their contentions and chiefs of the R.A.F. were completely wrong. Having
outlined the decisive results which the British air chiefs expected to follow
from air attacks on the main centres of German industry, he complains bitterly,
“The French however remained obstinately unconvinced. Whatever might be
the merits of bombing German industry, they entirely doubted whether the
correct time to begin was the opening of a great land battle. And as for the idea
that an air attack on the Ruhr would impose any immediate or material delay
on the advancing enemy (which after all was the main point) seemed to them
fantastic.”


“Our air leaders,” Mr. Richards comments, “could hardly take these views at
their face value, for they were painfully aware that the views of the French
were coloured by an apprehension which was sometimes expressed and
sometimes concealed, but never absent. Not to put too fine a point on it, our
Allies were desperately afraid of the Luftwaffe.” (Page 111).


If Dennis Richards is justified in ascribing to the R.A.F. chiefs this ungenerous
attitude to their French allies, it is hardly surprising that they acceded to the
French appeal for help reluctantly and, as he later disclosed in his book, to a
very restricted extent.


Reverting to the progress of the great battle raging south of Sedan, during the
night of May 13th, the German pioneers working with frantic haste, finished
repairing the Gaulier Bridge over the Meuse, and on the 14th the heavy tanks
of the 1st Panzer Division under General Guderian crossed the river and then
with incredible and, some would say, reckless daring, swung westward in that
headlong drive which was to take them to the English Channel, leaving their
exposed left flank to be protected by a screen of infantry. Facing this screen
was the French 3rd Armoured Division of heavy tanks, hitherto unengaged,
ready poised for a counter stroke which would have cut the supplies crossing
the river for Guderian’s tanks. Obviously until the bridgehead had been
consolidated, the German tank spearhead would be in acute danger. It was
imperative for the Allies that Guderian’s communications should be cut by the
destruction of the bridge over the Meuse.


“Upon the destruction of Gaulier Bridge depends victory or defeat,” declared
General Billotte in a frantic message to General d’ Astiere de la Vigerie
imploring that every available bomber should be assigned this vital task.
Throughout the 14th May desperate efforts were indeed made to destroy the
bridge by bombing. Protected by French fighters, 170 French and British
bombers, of which about 100 were Blenheims, swept in waves over the Meuse
Valley at Sedan and plastered the area of the bridge with bombs in order to cut
the panzers’ vital artery.


The attack failed. The German anti-aircraft fire proved to be unexpectedly
accurate; 85 bombers were shot down of which 35 were British. “The British
and French airmen attacked heroically,” writes General Guderian, “but did not
succeed in hitting the bridge. Flak had its day of glory.”


Great credit is no doubt due to the German anti-aircraft gunners, but obviously
the Germans were amazingly lucky on this occasion. With so many bombers
unloading their bombs in the neighbourhood of the bridge, it is astonishing that
no direct hit was made. And obviously every additional bomber which had
joined in the attack would have made the chances of scoring a hit more likely.


We now know that 96 heavy bombers were at this vital moment available to
join in the attack. While this supreme effort was being made to cut the


nammnninn tinna nf tha Cannan tanl annnshanad ndernannina tariran da tha TDnalinh


CULLITIULIICALIULIS UL UIC UELllldll ldliKk Speal uedu qadUV ALICE LUWdLUS LIC Dp
Channel, these 96 heavy bombers were waiting passively on nearby airfields
in preparation for a mass attack on the factories and oil plants in the Ruhr
which had been planned to take place on the evening of the following day.


This mass attack, the greatest air raid which had ever taken place down to that
time, duly took place. Concerning it, Dennis Richards writes:


“After the intensity of the struggle to persuade the British War Cabinet, the
Army and the French that heavy bombers would be best employed against the
Ruhr, the result of the operations came as something of an anti-climax. On the
night the 15th/16th May, 96 heavy bombers took off for objectives east of the
Rhine: 78 were directed against oil plants. Only 24 of the crews ever claimed
to have found them.”


With regard to the results in practice of the application of Air Marshal
Trenchard’s views of the role of the heavy bomber in warfare, Dennis Richards
concludes as follows:


“In sum, the heavy bombers achieved none of their objects. Industrial damage
was negligible; whatever delay was inflicted on the German Army was
insignificant; not a single German fighter or anti-aircraft gun was withdrawn
from the Western front to protect the Reich; and not a single German bomber
was diverted from attacking the French armies and their communications to
reply to the provocation from England. The assault on the Ruhr, most
cherished of all Air Staff projects, was a failure.” (Page 124).


No doubt the great air offensive against industrial objectives in Germany which
the

R.A.F. chiefs insisted on launching at the most vital moment of the Battle of
France, was a failure in the sense that it failed to achieve the results which
according to Air Marshal Trenchard’s theories concerning air warfare it

should have had. Nevertheless it had decisive results in a negative sense on

the course of the campaign in France and on the whole course of the war for
the next two years. A heavy price had indeed to be paid for the granting by

Mr. Churchill to the R.A.F. of that “freedom to roam” of which Mr. Spaight
speaks with such pride. One extra load of bombs on the crossing over the


Meuse by Sedan—let alone ninety-six loads—might have made all the
difference between victory and defeat as General Billotte pointed out at the
time. Had the supplies of Guderian’s Panzers been cut off, he would soon
have been brought to a halt from lack of petrol and then forced to surrender
when his ammunition was exhausted. The great German offensive in the West
upon which Hitler had staked the survival of his regime would have ended
with a humiliating disaster. Hitler’s prestige, the product of an unbroken
succession of diplomatic successes, would have been ruined. The German
General Staff which had undertaken this offensive with many dire
forebodings would have compelled his retirement: the National Socialist
movement would have collapsed. Britain and France would then have been in
a position to dictate terms of peace. No doubt these terms would have been a
repetition of the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, but at least the war would
have ended in a peace settlement in which some regard would have been paid
to the lofty principles of justice and humanity which the victors professed.


In short the clock would have been put back two decades if the first military
campaign launched by Hitler had ended in early and complete disaster.
Europeans would have been able to make a fresh start as from 1919 without
interference by non-European Powers.

Neither the Soviet Union, the United States nor the Japanese Empire would
have been involved in what would have remained a European civil war. The
discovery of the atomic bomb might have been postponed indefinitely or at
least delayed until the outbreak of another war since it is unlikely that any
country in peace time would have undertaken the enormously expensive tests
necessary to establish that it was a practicable possibility, as distinct from a
theoretical possibility, to bring about a nuclear explosion. There would have

-~ been no terror bombing, no extermination campaign against the Jews, no mass-
deportations, no mock-trials of prisoners of war by their captors. Last but not
least the British Empire, instead of collapsing from exhaustion, might have
gradually evolved into a federation of self-governing states, admission to
which would have been dependent on the attainment of a certain level of
civilization.


The Battle of France must rank as one of the decisive battles of history because
it so transformed the character of the conflict which had broken out in 1939 thai
it led to an outcome five years later which was equally disastrous to the victors


ne ta tha wanaiiichnad


ad tU UIT VALIYULLITU.


The Battle of France indeed ended in a complete German victory. Hitler took
enormous risks—some would say insane risks—and his gamble succeeded.
But a slight change in the fortunes of war—in particular, by a lucky bomb hit
on the Gaulier Bridge—and the result might so easily have been a complete
German disaster. If the Allied bombers had concentrated on the enemy armed
forces, their proper function according to orthodox military opinion, the
outcome might have been very different.


Only gradually, it seems, did Mr. Churchill become converted to the
Trenchard conception of warfare. After the failure of the great mass attack by
Bomber Command on the Ruhr on the night of May 15th, he at first accepted
the French view that bombing should be concentrated against the crossings of
the Meuse. “From then onwards however,” writes Dennis Richards, “the
efforts of the heavy bombers were either divided, or else pursued in uneasy
alternation, between the objectives east of the Rhine favoured by the Air Staff
and the objectives nearer the battlefield proposed by the French.”


A month later however Mr. Churchill had gradually reverted to the Trenchard
conception of warfare. On the 12th June he visited French Headquarters at the
Chateau du Muguet. At that time the military situation had become most grave
but not desperate. German tank spearheads were advancing on each side of
Paris; on the right General Rommel had trapped the remnants of the B.E.F.
under General Fortune at St. Valery on the Normandy coast; and on the left
General Guderian was striking south-westwards towards Chalons- sur-Marne
with the intention of isolating the Maginot Line. Nevertheless we hear that
Churchill was furious at the refusal of the French to allow the R.A.F. to use
their airfields in the south of France for an attack on Genoa as a reprisal for
Italy’s entry into the war.


Admittedly Italy deserved retribution in 1940 for stabbing France in the back
in her hour of desperate need—-as much as Italy had deserved retribution in
1915 for stabbing in the back her ally, Austria—but the doubt may well be felt
whether it was a moment to indulge in killing Italian civilians when every
bomber was needed to hold up the advance of the German armies in France.


Probably future historians will agree with the learned authors of the official


history of the British strategic air offensive that the Second World War was not
won by British terror bombing. On the other hand, terror bombing, officially
adopted in March 1942, was only the logical outcome of Churchill’s “Splendid
Decision” of May 1940. Future historians may well reach the conclusion that
although the “Splendid Decision” did not bring victory, it protracted the
struggle for five years and transformed it from an orderly European civil war
into a global conflict conducted by both sides with unrestricted barbarity and
ending, as Churchill himself described it, in tragedy.


As long ago as 1948 General J.F.C. Fuller summarised this view of the subject
in his authoritative study The Second World War (Eyre and Spottiswoode,
London, 1948) in which on page 89 he commented on Air Chief Marshal
Dowding’s assertion that the lesson to be drawn from the victorious outcome
of the Battle of Britain was that in long- range aerial warfare “the defence has
a basic advantage which increases with the distance between the attackers and
the target.” General Fuller wrote:


“This lesson was lost on the British Air Force which continued to hold that
‘strategic bombing’ was the be all and end all of air power. This fallacy not
only prolonged the war, but went far to render the ‘peace’ which followed it
unprofitable to Britain and disastrous to the world in general.”


history of the British strategic air offensive that the Second World War was not
won by British terror bombing. On the other hand, terror bombing, officially
adopted in March 1942, was only the logical outcome of Churchill’s “Splendid
Decision” of May 1940. Future historians may well reach the conclusion that
although the “Splendid Decision” did not bring victory, it protracted the
struggle for five years and transformed it from an orderly European civil war
into a global conflict conducted by both sides with unrestricted barbarity and
ending, as Churchill himself described it, in tragedy.


As long ago as 1948 General J.F.C. Fuller summarised this view of the subject
in his authoritative study The Second World War (Eyre and Spottiswoode,
London, 1948) in which on page 89 he commented on Air Chief Marshal
Dowding’s assertion that the lesson to be drawn from the victorious outcome
of the Battle of Britain was that in long- range aerial warfare “the defence has
a basic advantage which increases with the distance between the attackers and
the target.” General Fuller wrote:


“This lesson was lost on the British Air Force which continued to hold that
‘strategic bombing’ was the be all and end all of air power. This fallacy not
only prolonged the war, but went far to render the ‘peace’ which followed it
unprofitable to Britain and disastrous to the world in general.”


Chapter 7 — The Nuremberg Trials


Regarded as an isolated phenomenon the initiation in 1945 of the practice of
disposing of prisoners of war by charging them with “war-crimes” and then
finding them guilty at trials in which their accusers acted as judges of their
own charges, was one of the most astonishing developments in the history of
mankind.


Regarded, however, merely as the last link in a chain of developments all
entirely consistent with each other and all displaying the same general trend, the
initiation of trials for “war-crimes” seems the natural and inevitable outcome of
a war in which one side had officially adopted a policy of systematically
slaughtering a hostile racial minority without regard to age or sex and the other
side had officially adopted a policy of slaughtering the enemy civilian
population by dropping bombs on the most densely populated residential areas
in order to terrorise the survivors into unconditional surrender. A struggle
conducted in such a spirit could have no other sequel.


Hitler’s “Final Solution of the Jewish Problem” seems horrifying to civilized
minds. It was, however, simply a reversion to primitive practice. In ancient
times the extermination of a racial minority whose survival was inconvenient
to its rivals was considered the obvious and natural method of dealing with a
source of future trouble and danger.

Possibly the Assyrian Kings regarded their policy of mass-deportation a
humane innovation to traditional practice which generally they continued to
follow. Down through the ages nomadic peoples have conformed strictly
without such deviations from primitive custom. The Huns of Attila and the
Mongols of Ghengis Khan and Tamerlane slaughtered wholesale the
populations of the countries which they overran. In more recent times the
Zulus as they advanced southward across the Zambesi from their homelands
in what is now Kenya exterminated the aboriginal tribes whom they found in
their path: in 1915 the Turks, an essentially conservative people, set about
ridding the Turkish Empire of its troublesome Armenian racial minority by
officially organised

massacres in which some three quarters of a million people perished. Primitive
practice in its most primitive form still survives in Africa. In 1963, after the
withdrawal of the Belgians from the Congo under pressure from U.N.O., the


an a>)


Hutu tribe in the province of Rwanda proceeded to eliminate the hitherto
dominant but less numerous Watutsi tribe, not indeed by means of gas
chambers, but by hacking to death the victims to the number of thirty
thousand.


Enough has already been said in these pages concerning terror bombing. In
essence it also was merely a reversion to ancient practice. In savage warfare
no tactics are more frequently adopted than sending out raiding parties to
attack the women and children of the enemy in order to engender a
disposition to surrender.


It would indeed be a subject for surprise if a war conducted in accordance with
the most ancient traditions had ended without a reversion to primitive practice
in regard to the disposal of captured enemy leaders. To the savage mind the
natural and proper way to deal with a captured enemy in one’s power is to kill
him.


If the “advance to barbarism” examined in these pages proves to be only a
temporary fluctuation in the course of human progress followed by a return to
civilized standards, no doubt historians will express surprise and indignation
at the depths to which mankind sank during the fifth decade of the 20th
century. It was, however, a case of chain reaction; each lapse from accepted
standards of conduct led inevitably to the next. Finally a stage was reached
when moral indignation became irrelevant because all moral standards had
disappeared. The penalty of defeat had become so frightful that the leaders on
both sides considered that any act was justifiable that might in any way,
directly or indirectly, help to avoid defeat. Viewed in this way, even the plans
associated on the one side with Eichmann and on the other side with
Lindemann can be said to be justified on the ground that they were bona fide
designed to aid the war effort.


On reflection it will become obvious that a struggle waged in this spirit could
end in no other way, whichever side won, but with a massacre of the leaders
of the defeated side. What is far from obvious, however, is the reason why it
was decided that this inevitable massacre should be preceded by the
performance of trials for alleged war-crimes. At first sight it is hard to see
what purpose this entirely novel deviation from primitive practice was


intended to serve. The obvious course for the victors was to publish a list of
their leading opponents and to announce that everyone whose name was on
this list was hors la loi and as such liable on capture to immediate execution
on proof merely of identity. It would then have been easy later to have
excused such summary treatment by saying it was a natural if perhaps
excessive expression of emotions inflamed by a protracted and sanguinary
conflict.


Among the simple-minded the explanation has won wide acceptance that
Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill did not adopt this summary procedure because
they were so overcome by sincere moral indignation at the shortcomings of
their captive opponents that they determined that the full facts should be
disclosed at a trial as a warning to posterity. Cynics, on the other hand, have
suggested that the real purpose of the trial was to divert attention from the
conduct of the victors by a public investigation of the conduct of the
vanquished.


Neither explanation, however, offers an answer to the question why, when it
was decided to put the leaders of the vanquished side on trial, the obvious
course was not adopted of establishing an impartial court to try them, whose
verdict would carry weight with posterity. It would have been an easy matter
to have created an impartial court consisting of leading jurists, men of
integrity and repute, known to be without personal political bias, from the
countries which had been neutral during the war, such as Switzerland,
Sweden, Spain, Turkey and the Argentine. Such a court would probably have
convicted most of the accused on one charge or another, and its findings of
fact would have been readily accepted by future historians.


The only possible objection to having the charges against the accused decided
by a court composed of neutral jurists was that such a court could not have
been relied on to bring in exactly the verdict the victors required and could not
have been precluded from investigating the surrounding circumstances of the
offences alleged which would obviously entail an investigation of the conduct
of the victors. Having decided that before execution the prisoners should be
subjected to “a form of trial” (to quote the Soviet judge,

General Nikitchenko), the victors realised that the only way out of their
difficulties was to create a special court composed of their own nationals to


tense Hh A nanian rirnan Antiemingala af tha Darnannannn Awin anianteinn” Tt rirnan n aunnd


uy ule IlidJUL Wdl CLILIIIIdis UL UIC DBulUupedis AXIS CUULIULLICES . Ll Wdd dpiecu
that minor war criminals should be tried and disposed of in whatever manner
might be decided by their captors in the country in which they were held as
prisoners of war.


This novel deviation from primitive practice certainly achieved its purpose to
the extent of providing for the disposal of captured enemies with a minimum
of friction between the victorious Powers. “The major war criminals” (so
described months before any specific charge was made against them) were
duly liquidated after a trial at Nuremberg lasting a year; the fate of all the
other captives numbering many hundreds of thousands, depended entirely on
chance, speaking, generally, those who found themselves on the western front
at the time of Germany’s unconditional surrender, had reason to consider
themselves relatively fortunate as compared with those who found themselves
on the eastern front.


No prisoner charged with a war-crime by the Czechs, Poles, Serbs or Greeks
ever survived to describe the trial to which he was subjected and consequently
posterity has been spared numberless gruesome stories.


The subject of war-crimes can be dealt with from a number of distinct aspects.
To historians war-crimes trials are of particular interest as an aftermath of a
great war without a parallel in civilized times. To sociologists they are also of
special interest as a unique variation in the development of human relations.
To students of the science of war propaganda they are a novel and daring
experiment designed to befuddle public opinion. To politicians they are of
deep personal concern since, however insignificant and inoffensive a state
may be, there is always a possibility that it may be drawn against its will into a
war between its neighbours when, if it finds itself on the losing side, its rulers
become, ipso facto, war-criminals in accordance with the law laid down in
effect at Nuremberg that being on the losing side is the supreme international
crime. Finally, to jurists war-crimes trials offer a wide variety of legal
problems never before raised, such as, for example, whether an accuser ought
to be debarred as such from acting as the judge of his own charges; whether it
is just that a person should be convicted of an act which was not declared to be
a crime until after its alleged commission, and whether the rules of evidence
for so long regarded by all lawyers as indispensable for ascertaining the truth


can, on occasion, be entirely disregarded without injustice resulting.


In this book we are dealing with that abrupt reversion of the course of human
progress which began in 1914 and which the present author writing in 1946
labelled “the advance to barbarism”. From this point of view the introduction
of war-crimes trials in 1945 was only the last phase of this reversion, a phase
which followed naturally from the phase of wholesale terror-bombing and
genocide which preceded it. It would be out of place to attempt to describe
here the course of the Nuremberg Trials or of the other war-crimes trials which
followed them. Voluminous details of these proceedings can be found in the
official records and several books have already been written devoted to one or
other of these so-called trials. Less horrible indeed, but owing to the smug
self-satisfaction of those who conducted them, war-crimes trials described in
detail make almost as repulsive reading as accounts of the doings in such
concentration camps as Auschwitz or descriptions of one of the terror raids
carried out in accordance with the Lindemann Plan. War-crimes trials,
genocide and terror-bombing were alike symptoms of the same world- wide
reversion.


Indisputably a war conducted in the spirit in which the Second World War was
waged was bound to end in the putting to death of the leaders of the
vanquished in the event of either side succeeding in forcing the other to
surrender unconditionally. This putting to death might well have been a swift,
crude and informal process. The method actually adopted was the result of the
combined effect of a number of quite fortuitous circumstances. For reasons of
political expediency no spectacular mass war-crimes trial of the Italian leaders
was ever staged, and if Stalin immediately after the Yalta Conference had
dropped the pretence of being a loyal ally and disclosed his real ambition to
subjugate the whole of Europe, it is most unlikely there would ever have been
a mass trial of the surviving German political and military leaders. At most,
prosecutions would probably have taken place of prisoners notoriously
responsible for specific crimes against humanity. Guilt in such cases would
have been proved in accordance with the accepted rules of evidence. There
would have been no occasion to invent new crimes in order to provide an
excuse to punish them retrospectively. And, of course, it would have occurred
to no one to bring obviously fictitious charges such as those brought at
Nuremberg against the German naval leaders, Grossadmiral Raeder and his


SULLESSUVUL, ULUSS-“dULINId! VULIILZ.


Apart from the attempt made by the present writer in the little booklet entitled
Advance to Barbarism published in 1948, no attempt has ever been made to
explain why such elaborate and cumbrous means were adopted in 1945 to
dispose of captured enemy leaders. Investigation will show that war-trials were
initiated as a compromise between two entirely irreconcilable points of view.


When, at last, the end of the war came in sight, there was naturally worldwide
speculations as to the conditions of the coming peace. In 1918, the question
had been merely how exactly certain well-defined principles should be carried
into effect: a quarter of a century later, all principles had been specifically
repudiated, so that the public imagination had an absolute free rein. It was
generally agreed that a demand for reparations based on the legal maxim
“costs follow the event” would be out of place at the end of an orgy of
violence, and that the victors should act on the assumption that victory had
automatically vested all enemy property in them. There was also general
agreement that Adolf Hitler and the members of his Government should be
punished by death, although the expectation was that, when further resistance
became impossible, they would follow the advice of Brutus:


“Our enemies have beat us to the pit:
It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
Than tarry till they push us.”


In primary warfare between civilized states and barbarian invaders, this course
has usually been adopted. Thus, in the thirteenth century when China was
being overrun by the Mongol hordes of Genghis Khan and his successors, the
Chinese leaders invariably killed themselves and their families rather than fall
into the hands of the savages. The Chinese persisted in this practice long after
the unrestrained ferocity of Mongol methods of warfare had become
considerably tempered by contact with civilized nations. It is recorded that
Kublai Khan, the grandson of Ghengis Khan, resenting his troops being still
regarded as savages, ordered his generals, when a city was captured and the
Chinese leaders were found to have committed suicide, personally to visit the
bodies in order to demonstrate by a public act of respect that the Mongols had
become a civilized people.


The question of the treatment to be accorded to prominent Germans after the
downfall of the Third Reich, seems first to have been mentioned publicly at
the Teheran Conference in November 1943. Elliott Roosevelt, the son of the
American President, was present at a banquet given by Stalin at the conclusion
of the Conference and, three years later, published a very frank account of
what passed in his presence between his father, President Roosevelt, Mr.
Stalin and Mr. Winston Churchill.


According to Elliott Roosevelt, this topic was first broached to everyone’s
surprise by Stalin at the end of a magnificent banquet at which, Elliott tells us,
Stalin had partaken of vodka, “100% proof”, while Mr. Churchill “had stuck to
his favourite brandy”. Rising to propose “the umpteenth toast” Stalin said, “I
propose a salute to the swiftest possible justice for all of Germany’s war
criminals—justice before a firing squad. I drink to our unity in dispatching
them as fast as we capture them, all of them, and there must be at least 50,000
of them.”


These words appear to have roused something in Mr. Churchill—perhaps a
remembrance that he was a European and the only prominent European
present. “The British people,” he declared roundly, “will never stand for such
mass murder! I feel most strongly that no one, Nazi or no, shall be summarily
dealt with before a firing squad, without a proper legal trial!”


Thus began the first exchange of views on the then startling and seemingly
original suggestion that, after a victory, there ought to be a grand massacre of
the vanquished. It must be stressed that Elliott Roosevelt does not suggest or
hint that one of Mr.

Churchill’s eyelids flickered humorously when he used the word “trial”. On the
contrary, he says that Stalin’s proposal caused Mr. Churchill to lose his temper
hopelessly. The warmth of the British Prime Minister’s feelings, he says,
amused Stalin, who seemed “hugely tickled”, and surprised everyone present
including Anthony Eden. In fact, so exaggerated did his reaction seem over a
suggested mass murder of 50,000 persons, that Elliott is reduced to hinting in
his book at an extraneous cause for Mr. Churchill’s “mounting fury”. Far from
suggesting Mr. Churchill’s indignation was simulated, the whole incident is


narrated expressly to contrast the antiquated, pedantic, unreasoning prejudices
nf tha Drettiah Netenn NAiniatan ve ntth tha henndesindnd mnn af tha veranda avatlaanl,


UL UIC DLHUSH FLUE IVILUHSEL WILT UIC DILUGUILIIIUCU, LIdLIm-UL-ULC-WULIU VUULLUUK
of his father, the President, the crude simplicity of Stalin, and his own
consummate tact in an awkward moment.


According to his son, the American President had hidden a smile when this
proposal to mass-murder 50,000 Europeans was made. “Perhaps,” he
remarked genially, “we could say that instead of summarily executing 50,000
we should settle on a smaller number. Shall we say 49,500?”


Elliott Roosevelt hoped that, with this delightfully humorous observation, the
subject of mass murder would be allowed to drop, but Stalin stuck to his point
and appealed to Elliott for his own views, thus presenting him with a golden
opportunity to display his diplomatic tact.


“Isn’t the whole thing pretty academic?” Elliott tells us that he replied.
“Russian, American and British soldiers will settle the issue for most of those
50,000 in battle, and I hope that not only those 50,000 war criminals will be
taken care of, but many hundreds of thousands more Nazis as well.”


Elliott’s answer pleased Stalin: “Stalin was beaming with pleasure. Around the
table he came, flung an arm around my shoulders. An excellent answer! A toast
to my health! I flushed with pleasure.” It failed, however, to please Churchill.
“He was furious, and no fooling.”


There is, of course, no obligation to accept Elliott’s story as an accurate
objective account of what took place that evening at Teheran, since it is
obviously written to glorify President Roosevelt’s statecraft, urbanity, and tact
at the expense of Mr. Churchill, whom Elliott evidently disliked heartily. Still,
in its main outlines, no doubt, Elliott’s story should be accepted as
approximately accurate. The contrast which he draws between the European
attitude and the American attitude rings true. Mr. Churchill’s alleged behaviour
would have been quite natural in the circumstances in which he found himself
—as a European, he was in a false position, knew it, and the knowledge frayed
his nerves.

Intending to caricature Mr. Churchill, Elliott Roosevelt has drawn a picture of
him which will be much more acceptable to Mr. Churchill’s admirers in the
future than the picture which Elliott at the same time drew of his own father
will be to the latter’s admirers, or to the latter’s European admirers at least.


What Elliott Roosevelt says took place at Teheran is entirely consistent with
what we all know took place later. At Nuremberg, the proceedings were
outwardly European, but throughout the driving force behind them was Russia.
At Teheran, Stalin proposed a mass murder of 50,000 persons—a round figure.
President Roosevelt suggested that Mr.

Churchill’s objection might be overcome by reducing the mass murder by five
hundred— another round figure. Elliott Roosevelt, thereupon, expressed the
hope that the number of victims would, in fact, be increased to hundreds of
thousands—that is to say, substituting an indefinite figure for a round figure.
Finally, the subject was dropped as “academic”.

So long as a sufficient number of victims died, preliminary procedure was not
worth quarrelling about. The result was a compromise by which all three
parties carried their points. Ultimately, the American solution was carried out;
Mr. Stalin had his mass murder and Mr. Churchill his trial.


When the first edition of this book was published in July, 1948, no other
record of this memorable episode of the Teheran Conference existed than that
of Elliott Roosevelt. In the British Press at the time his version was by

_ common consent dismissed as inherently improbable. In 1948, the illusion was
~ still rigidly maintained in Great Britain that Stalin was inspired by the same
lofty principles by which Mr. Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill were supposed to
be inspired. It was therefore held to be unpatriotic even to mention that Elliott
Roosevelt had attributed so outrageous a proposal to a hero who was
considered to have atoned for a murky past by his noble conduct during the
war. Although Stalin had of late been acting strangely, as one of the leading
figures in the great and glorious anti-Nazi crusade, he was still entitled to
claim that his loyal allies should disbelieve any facts to his discredit.


Six years after the publication of Elliott Roosevelt’s version, however, an
alternative account of this episode has become available from the pen of Mr.
Winston Churchill himself, in the installment of his war memoirs entitled
Closing the Ring (1952). True, Mr. Churchill complains that Elliott’s version
is “highly coloured and extremely misleading”, but, in fact, his own version
confirms Elliott’s account of the essential point of the story. At this banquet at
Teheran, Mr. Churchill says that Stalin pointed out that Germany’s strength
depended upon 50,000 officers and technicians and, if these were rounded up


and shot, “German military strength would be extirpated.” In spite of Mr.
Churchill’s indignant protest, however, these 50,000 must be shot, Stalin
insisted.


The two versions therefore agree that a massacre of 50,000 persons when
victory was achieved was proposed by Stalin at the Teheran Conference but,
whereas Elliott says these 50,000 were to be “war criminals”, Churchill says
they were to be the officers and technicians upon whom Germany’s strength
depended.


On the latter detail—a significant detail certainly—Mr. Churchill’s version is
greatly to be preferred. What Stalin clearly had in mind was a massacre
similar to the Katyn Forest Massacre which the Soviet authorities had carried
out only three and a half years before. Except that it would have been on a far
greater scale, what Stalin proposed when German resistance should be
overcome, was a massacre which would have served the same purpose and
have had the same justification as the Katyn Massacre—these German officers
and technicians, like the Polish victims at Katyn, were members of a class
which was unassimilable by Communism. As a Marxist it was natural that
Stalin should frame his proposal in the way in which Mr. Churchill says he
framed it. It was equally natural that Elliott Roosevelt, knowing nothing of
Marxian ideology, should quite guilelessly have assumed that Stalin must have
intended to propose the mass execution of criminals, and so, without intending
to mislead, he interpreted Stalin’s words in his own bourgeois phraseology.


Although conflicting in several other details, the version of Elliott Roosevelt
regarding the issue which caused such sharp dissension at Stalin’s alcoholic
orgy at the Teheran Conference is in essence confirmed by the version of Mr.
Churchill. His habitual surly reticence mellowed by drinking repeated toasts
in neat vodka, Stalin proposed that victory should be celebrated by an initial
massacre of 50,000 Germans. Mr. Churchill, speaking as a civilized
European, retorted indignantly that such a massacre would be mass murder to
which he would never consent unless the victims wet first given a trial.


It is fortunate that this incident has been recorded in such detail by two
independent witnesses whose testimony is on the essential point so exactly in
agreement. From their joint testimony it is possible to state with certainty that tc


thin hetanf Raat nnar nltannantinn hatr.rnnn tern aldanuler manan nanna AF e.rhamwm hnd hanar


ULUS DIIEL VUL AHLY ALLELCAUUL DELWEEL! LWU CLUELLY LHI, UHE UL WHULI LidU DEEL
drinking “umpteen toasts” in vodka and the other in brandy, can be clearly
traced the first conception of war-crimes trials, a conception later solemnly
upheld and defended by many leading jurists of learning and renown as the
most brilliant innovation in the administration of swift and certain justice
conceived in modern times.


No doubt Stalin spoke without due regard to the bourgeois prejudice against
mass murder, and it happened that this bourgeois prejudice was particularly
strong in the British delegation to the Teheran Conference owing to the fact
that a mass murder of outstanding enormity had recently been engaging the
attention of the British Foreign Office. When Hitler invaded Poland from the
west in September 1939, Stalin immediately invaded Poland from the east.
Over 200,000 Polish troops surrendered to the Russians and were sent to
various prisoner of war camps in the interior of Russia, the officers to the
number of some 15,000 being sent to three camps near Smolensk. When Hitler
invaded Russia in June 1941, it was naturally decided to arm and equip these
Polish prisoners and to form a Polish army under Russian command. The
discovery was then made that the officers had disappeared without trace;
nothing had been heard of any of them since April 1940. The Soviet
Government was, however, blandly reassuring; the missing men would be
quickly found and released. For nearly two years the British Foreign Office,
under constant pressure from the indignant Poles, sent repeated appeals to the
Soviet Government to expedite this pretended search. Stalin, appealed to
personally, declared that the search was being extended to the remotest parts
of the Soviet Union including Nova Zembla in the Arctic Ocean. At last, in
April 1943, the bodies of 5,000 of the missing men were found by the
Germans in a huge grave in the Katyn Forest near Smolensk, an area by that
time in German occupation. Each had been murdered by a revolver shot in the
back of the head. The circumstantial evidence as to their fate in the possession
of the British Foreign Office was overwhelming; they had been in Russian
custody when last heard of alive in April 1940, and the Russian authorities had
shown guilty knowledge of their fate by giving lying and contradictory
explanations of what had occurred. When, therefore, the British delegates set
forth for the Teheran Conference in November 1943, only six months after the
discovery of the bodies, the subject of the Katyn Forest Massacre was fresh in
; their minds. When Stalin found himself an ally of Great Britain as a result of


t the German invasion, they had done their best to convince themselves that as a
consequence his character and the character of his regime had undergone a
miraculous reformation. This delusion was abruptly shattered when, at the
Teheran Conference, Stalin announced his intention to massacre 50,000
German soldiers and technicians. Obviously he had not changed in the least
since the days when he had taken a leading part in the Red Terror following
the Russian Revolution in 1917.

Naturally Mr. Churchill who for thirty years, had been exposing in the stronges
terms the character of the Communist regime in Russia, reacted strongly to
Stalin’s proposal.


In passing it may be noted that the memory of Katyn Forest Massacre which
had caused such heated dissension at the Teheran Conference two years later
acutely embarrassed the Nuremberg Tribunal. With breathtaking effrontery the
Soviet Government insisted that among the charges brought against the
captured German leaders should be a charge that the Katyn Forest Massacre
had been perpetrated by the Germans!


Vainly Stalin’s allies expostulated with him, pointing out that it would make
the judges on the Tribunal look ridiculous if they were forced to consider
charges which everyone in court would know were fictitious, since the real
culprits had long been known by everyone. Stalin remained adamant for
reasons which to this day are obscure. Probably to the Red Dictator’s macabre
sense of fun those who for a year had to sit through the Nuremberg
proceedings are indebted for one episode which certainly had a humorous side,
however exasperating it must have been to the presiding judges.


It was, of course, extremely tactless of Stalin to recall to the minds of the
British delegation to the Teheran Conference the painful subject of the Katyn
Forest Massacre by proposing a similar massacre on a much larger scale of
German prisoners. Presumably he had forgotten that only a couple of years
before he had personally assured the Polish Ambassador and General Anders,
the Polish Commander-in-Chief, that the intensive search for the missing
Polish officers had been extended to Nova Zembla. Stalin should surely have
assumed that the British delegates, and particularly the Foreign Secretary,
Anthony Eden, must feel some resentment for being duped so long and so
outrageously. For nearly two years the British Foreign Office had been kept


hiarr nnanninna nan rrnamnimnnn mandaninminn Awrnlanntinana nannirrind Funan tha Wunanilin ta


vbUSYy Passllp ULL VdLLUUS LLICLIUGLIUUS CAPIdLdllULIS LCCELVECU LULH UIC INLOLIIIIIE LU
the Polish exiled Government in London. Anthony Eden had had to profess a
belief in these explanations so that when at last the truth came to light he knew
that he must be set down by the Poles as a credulous fool. In the circumstances,
therefore it is difficult to maintain that this unnecessary reference to the Katyn
Forest Massacre reflects less credit on Stalin’s diplomacy than on his sense of
humour.


On the other hand, infamous as Stalin’s artless proposal seemed to Mr.
Churchill, it was strictly in accordance with orthodox Marxian theory. As the
main driving force throughout the proceedings at Nuremberg came from the
Soviet Government, to understand these proceedings it is imperative to
understand the Marxian viewpoint with regard to the liquidation of political
opponents. A great deal of nonsense has been talked in capitalist circles, partly
deliberately and partly from ignorance of Marxian ideology, concerning the
liquidation of individuals and classes by Communist authorities. The raison
d’étre of a Communist government, according to Kari Marx, is to build up a
proletarian system of society. When persons or classes of persons are found
who cannot be fitted into such a society, they are “liquidated”, that is to say,
put to death. No more question of justice enters into the matter than when, for
example, a botanist who is trying to establish a new variety of flower with
certain qualities of colour, height, shape of petals, etc., by selecting specimens
possessing the desired qualities, ruthlessly throws aside those specimens
lacking those qualities. If he is seeking a variety with, say, a long stem, he has
no intention of punishing short-stemmed specimens when he tears them up
and discards them. Now, obviously, a man like Hermann Goring could not be
made to fit into a proletarian system of society. What else, therefore, could be
done with him but eliminate him? No question of punishing him enters into
the matter. In fact, in the abstract, a Communist might even admire him as an
individual in the same way as one might admit that a lion roaming about
Piccadilly Circus was a noble animal, a masterpiece of nature produced by
ages of evolution which was only devouring people in accordance with its
perfectly natural instinct. One might become lyrical concerning its courage
and beauty and yet quite reasonably maintain that there was no alternative to
removing by violence a creature which would obviously be a disturbing
influence to the human life around it. In this entirely passionless spirit, Lenin
and Dzerzhinsky had eliminated the aristocratic and plutocratic classes of
Czarist Russia together with tens of thousands of Orthodox bishops and priests


after the Revolution of 1917. To complain that many innocent persons
perished in the Red Terror is entirely to miss the point. The great majority
perished, not because they were deemed guilty of any particular offence, but
because they could not be assimilated by the new proletarian state then being
created.


It must surely be conceded that Hermann Goring and his colleagues had
demonstrated that they were opponents of Communism. This being so, no
further argument or justification was needed. How could they expect a
different fate from that which, for example, had recently overtaken the anti-
communist classes of such tiny and inoffensive states as Esthonia, Latvia, and
Lithuania, when these states were overrun by the Soviet armies in 1939?


When, therefore, Mr. Stalin suggested at Teheran that the German leaders
should be shot by a firing squad, as and when captured, he was speaking with
the strict orthodoxy which might be expected from one upon whom the mantle
of the great Lenin had descended. As an Asiatic, Stalin was also, of course,
following faithfully in the tradition of Genghis Khan, Hulagu, and Tamerlane.


Unfortunately, from the point of view of the ultimately predestined victims,
this simple, logical, expeditious and even humane solution did not appeal to
Mr. Stalin’s allies. If Hermann Goring would be an anachronism in a
proletarian paradise, so, equally, would Mr. Churchill and Mr. Roosevelt.
These gentlemen could hardly subscribe to the view that the liquidation of
Hermann Göring was merely a matter of biological selection—the elimination
of an unwanted type. Possibly, it was this humorous aspect of the matter which
caused Mr. Stalin’s eyes to twinkle so merrily. Further, in capitalist societies,
the conventional practice demands that before a man can be done to death, he
must be accused of something, tried, and pronounced guilty. The Soviet
Government proved most accommodating: so long as liquidation was reached
in the end, it was of no consequence what preliminary judicial fooleries were
indulged in to satisfy capitalist susceptibilities.


An obvious alternative to the carrying out of Mr. Stalin’s proposal for a
summary mass- slaughter on the lines carried out by the medieval Mongols,
was a mock-trial along the lines which may be said to have originated, or at
least to have been perfected, during the preceding twenty years in Soviet


Tirena a est e EN WV EOE Ae et E O S EO G i PREA A wane we ne


KUSSId. DUL UlSpOUSd! DY WOCK-LIdl Wadas d COLICEPLLOL! DOLL HOVE! AHU repugHalll
to contemporary. European juristic thought. Finally, as a compromise, it was
decided that the prisoners should be charged with certain specific offences,
that the changes should be heard by a tribunal composed of representatives of
the four chief victorious Powers, and that the prisoners should be heard in their
own defence in accordance with normal practice, excepting only they should
be debarred from challenging the jurisdiction of this tribunal to try them, and
at their trial the rules of evidence should be suspended.


As supremely able opportunists, neither Mr. Roosevelt nor Mr. Churchill was
interested either in the theoretical justification for this solution or in the
consequences which, in the fullness of time, must inevitably flow from it. His
cheerful acceptance of the Morgenthau Plan shows that Mr. Roosevelt felt no
compunction at the idea of reducing, by systematic looting and sabotage, a
prosperous industrial state of eighty million inhabitants to a defenceless and
poverty-stricken agricultural community. Why then should he shrink from the
proposal to put out of their misery by shooting some 50,000 individuals, some
of whom may not have deserved much of their fellow-men? As a practical
politician, his natural inclination was towards ruthless measures which, it
might be safely assumed, would be welcomed by several very powerful
sections of the American electorate as a reprisal for the ruthless anti-Jewish
and anti-democratic policies of the Nazi Government. He was also deeply
concerned to prevent any difference of opinion between his cantankerous allies
standing in the way of victory.


On his part, Mr. Churchill’s sole concern was to avoid anything which might
weaken the joint war effort. Unlike the President, he entertained no fatuous
illusions concerning the Communist rulers of Russia: for over twenty years he
had been denouncing them as “bloody baboons”, “crocodiles with master-
minds”, and as “the foul, filthy butchers of Moscow”. But not least among his
many gifts was a remarkable capacity to dismiss from his mind previously
expressed opinions, if the occasion and expediency required it. Two years
before he had convinced himself that no price—not even the dissolution of the
British Empire—was too high to pay to achieve victory. This unsatisfactory
compromise with Stalin seemed in comparison a very small concession. His
mind had always been the exact opposite to the judicial: he knew nothing and
cared less about the legal difficulties in the way of a trial in which the victors
would sit in judgment and decide their own charges against the vanquished.


No doubt, he had genuinely convinced himself at the moment that Hitler and
his colleagues were guilty of abominable crimes. Should they escape
punishment through the lack of a court with jurisdiction to try them? With a
score of urgent problems demanding his immediate attention, was it not
natural that Mr.

Churchill should dismiss the subject with the reflection that, when the time
came, it should not be beyond the capacity of his legal advisers to work out a
scheme for the proposed trials which would be free from technical objections
and, while upholding the proud traditions of British justice, would satisfy Mr.
Stalin by providing for the liquidation of many prominent opponents of
Communism, and would satisfy Mr.

Roosevelt by assuring for him and the Democrat Party a solid bloc of gratified
voters in doubtful states at the next Presidential Election?


It need hardly be added that it occurred to no one at Teheran to suggest that all
persons, whatever their nationality, accused of committing crimes during the
war, should at its conclusion be put on trial. How Mr. Churchill would have
flared up at any such suggestion can be deduced from his heated reaction at
Yalta on February 9, 1945, when the question arose of establishing
trusteeships for backward peoples. According to notes taken then by Mr.
James F. Byrnes, Mr. Churchill declared:


“After we have done our best to fight in this war and have done no crime to
anyone I will have no suggestion that the British Empire is to be put into the
dock and examined by everybody to see whether it is up to their standard. No
one will induce me as long as I am Prime Minister to let any representative of
Great Britain go to a conference where we will be placed in the dock and asked
to justify our right to live in a world we have tried to save.”


It should not be overlooked that, when the term ‘war-criminal’ was used at the
Teheran Conference in 1943, it was a legal term long recognised with a
precise and definite meaning. A ‘war criminal’ was one who had committed a
‘war crime’, and a ‘war-crime’ as defined in the military manuals of all
civilized countries, was a breach of the rules of civilized warfare, that is to say,
a breach of those rules adopted at the end of the seventeenth century by the
European nations for the conduct of their wars with each other. It comprised
such matters as the ill-treatment of prisoners, hostilities committed by


Soo SV ERE, EE E E ES oS ee Ms ee Sa eee ee Bete ee ee ee ee et SD Tee


individuals Not being Members or tne armed Iorces, espionage, ana Looting.
The term was strictly limited to specific acts committed in the conduct of a
war; it was never applied to the aims and objects of those responsible for
commencing a war, however indefensible these might be.


Eighteen months were to pass before the compromise agreed upon at Teheran
could be put into effect but, in due course, the Law Officers of the Crown
received instructions to consult with the American, Russian, and French legal
authorities, in order that a plan might be prepared for the trial of the German
leaders after unconditional surrender had taken place. For learned and
experienced lawyers, the task was both invidious and thankless. It was
invidious because it entailed setting at naught the principles in which they had
been trained throughout their professional lives. It was obvious that only a
small proportion of the prisoners were war-criminals according to the accepted
definition of the term. The only way out of the difficulty was to create new
offences and then to assert that anyone who had in the past committed these
new offences should be deemed a war- criminal. Retrospective legislation has
always been abhorrent to lawyers and it must, in consequence, have been
particularly distasteful to the learned Law Officers of the Crown to frame
charges alleging that criminal acts had been committed before these acts had
been declared crimes. Even more distasteful must have been the necessity of
giving effect to the decision of the politicians that at the coming trials “the
tribunal should not be bound by technical rules of evidence” but could admit
“any evidence which it deemed to have probative value,” that is to say, might
help to support a conviction.


Obviously, this innovation, if regarded otherwise than as a temporary
expedient to secure convictions, would place lawyers generally in an
embarrassing dilemma. The accepted rules of evidence had been gradually
established through the centuries with the express purpose of arriving at the
truth of a charge with as much certainty as was humanly possible. Regarded in
this light, the rules of evidence had, for hundreds of years, been jealously
guarded by the courts of law in England and America. Did this decision to
dispense with the rules of evidence entail an admission that these rules did not
really help in arriving at the truth? But, in that event, these rules should
obviously be declared obsolete and abolished henceforth in all courts of law.
The only possible alternative to this far-reaching and, to lawyers, painful
conclusion was that, although the rules of evidence were still necessary for


arriving at the truth in all judicial trials, yet in a trial of a prisoner of war by his
captors they were out of place, since in such a trial the object was not to
ascertain the truth but to secure a conviction.


Naturally, no professional lawyer is willing to admit that the truth in a normal
judicial trial could just as readily be ascertained without the rules and
safeguards which centuries of experience have proved so necessary. On the
other hand, it was imperative to repudiate at all costs the suggestion that there
was a fundamental distinction between a judicial trial and the trial of a prisoner
of war by his captors.


For months, the eminent lawyers instructed to prepare for the trial of the
German leaders struggled with their task which, as above remarked, was not
only invidious to them as lawyers but entirely thankless, since in the eyes of
the man-in-the-street the task presented no difficulties whatever. Who could
doubt the guilt of the German leaders when the Press and the Radio
unanimously asserted it! That the persons whom it was proposed to try were
criminals, even before the charges against them had been decided, was as
clear to the man-in-the-street as it was to Dr. Garbett, the Archbishop of York,
who on March 20, 1945, in an outburst of enthusiasm, explained to the House
of Lords: “It is for the sake of justice, for the vindication of that underlying
sense of the difference between right and wrong, which makes us demand that
these criminals should receive their punishment.”


What need was there, in such circumstances, for complicated arrangements
and technicalities? What better precedent could be adopted, slightly adapted
perhaps to comply with present-day susceptibilities, than that provided in 1539
by that great English man King Henry VIII, equally distinguished as a pious
defender of the faith, and as a tireless wielder of the sword of justice. Having
detained the aged Richard Whiting, Abbot of Glastonbury, in the Tower for
many months without preferring any charge against him, Henry at length
decided it was time that “the criminal should receive his punishment” for
which purpose he should be returned to his native Somerset. The order to His
Majesty’s judges has been preserved; it is in the handwriting of Henry’s chief
minister, Thomas Cromwell, and reads:


“The Abbot of Glaston to be tried at Glaston and also executed there with his


1 a al £} 1 11 a 1 1.7 * 3 a 11 1 a9


complycys. see the evidence De well sorted and the indictments well drawn.”


It must be acknowledged that this direction is a model of brevity and lucidity.
The stupidest judge could have been in no doubt as to what was required of
him. A slight but unmistakable note of menace may be detected in the last
sentence and we may be sure that the evidence was “well sorted” and that
there was no slipshod work in the drawing of the indictments. In fact no hitch
of any kind delayed the fulfilment of the royal wishes.

Very shortly afterwards, on a grey November morning, the underlying sense of
the difference between right and wrong was vindicated by the hanging,
disembowelling and quartering of Abbot Whiting “and his complycys” on
Glastonbury Tor.


Possibly the promoters of the Nuremberg trials were unfamiliar with this
striking Tudor precedent: or perhaps they rejected it as too simple for service at
the present day. At all events, the unfortunate lawyers were directed to ransack
the pages of history for more modern precedents. No doubt in their search they
came across and noted with approval the dictum of Oliver St. John, the
Solicitor-General, during the debate in the Commons preceding the judicial
murder of Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, in 1641: “No evidence is
necessary if each man feels in his mind that the accused is guilty.” And St. John
provided a precedent for the Nuremberg distinction between the victors and
losers in the war by his statement that: “We give law to hares and deer because
they be beasts of chase, it was never accounted cruelty or foul play to knock
foxes and wolves on the head as they can be found, because they be beasts of


prey”.


The only really recent precedent which existed for the proposed proceedings
at Nuremberg were the various political mock-trials which had taken place in
Russia from the Revolution in 1917 onwards. It is, therefore, necessary to
glance briefly at these mock-trials in Russia in order to realise how widely
they departed from judicial trials in other countries and to consider to what
extent they differed from the procedure later adopted at Nuremberg.


In a normal judicial trial, the result depends on the impartial judgment of
independent third parties no more connected with the prosecution than with
the defence. In a political trial in Soviet Russia, on the other hand, the judges


and the prosecuting counsel together form a team; the proceedings are an act
of state, and the result is a foregone conclusion. Neither the victim nor the
prosecution are concerned with the figures duly arrayed as judges on the
bench. The role of the latter is purely ornamental: their only active part is to
read, when all is over, the judgment and sentences previously decided upon by
the executive government. The speeches for the prosecution are political
manifestoes, designed to justify the action of the government in instituting the
proceedings and are directed, not to the Court, but to the outside public. At
times, even a communist dictatorship must justify its actions to its subjects.
Thus, in 1936, when it was decided to liquidate Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov,
and other prominent Soviet leaders whom the Russian public had long been
taught to revere as heroes of the revolution, some kind of explanation for a
political somersault of this magnitude had to be offered to the man-in- the-
street. It was found that the most convenient manner of putting forward such
an explanation was in the form of a speech for the prosecution, delivered after
dictated confessions of guilt had been recited by the accused and before the
death penalty had been recited by the Court. In normal mock-trials, all other
roles are ancillary to that of the public prosecutor. The judge is a mere lay
figure who recites a few set words when all is over. Occasionally, as at the
mock-trial of the G.P.U. chief, Henry Yagoda, charged with the murder by
poison of the novelist Maxim Gorky, the judge enlivens the proceedings by
what in the parlance of the music halls is termed “gagging”. But “gagging” by
judges in a normal mock-trial is exceptional and irregular and is tolerated only
as a relief from the tedium of long proceedings or when the public prosecutor
fails to put over the Government manifesto as well as might be desired.


It would be futile to attempt an enquiry whether Stalin really believed, for
example, that Yagoda was guilty of the crimes of which he was accused. That
Yagoda was guilty of countless crimes there can be no doubt—Mr. Stephen
Graham calls him “the worst villain of the Revolution”—but it is difficult to see
what motive Yagoda could have had to finish off by poison a septuagenarian
novelist already dying of senility. Probably Stalin troubled himself very little or
the point, on which he may have had no definite opinion. To him it was merely
a matter of routine practice that a G.P.U. chief, discarded as no longer useful to
the regime, should be liquidated.


In Russian Purge the authors, themselves prominent Soviet citizens who were


iw


~


victims of the Great Purge of 1936-1938 but escaped with their lives, express
surprise that the delusion should persist in the West that, in Soviet Russia,
there exists any necessary connection between a man’s arrest and any
particular offence alleged against him. In the vast majority of cases, persons
were arrested during the Purge for having “objective characteristics” which
means, in Marxian legal jargon, that they belonged to one or another of a
dozen categories which the executive government had decided “as a measure
of social security” to eliminate or suppress. The precise charge, bringing these
unfortunates within the Soviet Criminal Code and on which, in due course,
they would be sent to a term of forced labour or to execution, was decided
much later. In the United States and in Great Britain, the functions of the
judiciary and the functions of the executive are kept rigidly distinct. But, under
Soviet law, the executive exercises the widest judicial powers. The vast
majority of political prisoners are dealt with by the executive; only one case,
here and there, is passed on to the judiciary for what is called in the above-
mentioned book “a show trial”. In these cases, the duty of the judiciary is
limited in practice to rubber-stamping, for propaganda purposes, the judgment
of the executive government.


Handicapped, on the one hand, by their own legal learning and, on the other,
by their profound ignorance of Marxian ideology, the English and American
judges were pained and puzzled by the Alice-in-Wonderland atmosphere
which, as a result of the dual character of the proceedings, prevailed at
Nuremberg and which they strove in vain to dispel. Yet nothing, in fact, could
have been simpler or more logical than the Marxian attitude to the trial. The
prisoners were members of a political party established by Adolf Hitler for the
express purpose of combatting Communism. Their “objective characteristics”
could not, therefore, be in dispute. No punishment was called for in such a
case but the exercise of “the supreme measure of social security”, which in
Marxian terminology means the carrying out of a sentence of death.


It was easy enough for the politicians to agree that the war should end with a
liquidation, in accordance with Marxian ideology, of all persons with
undesirable objective characteristics, preceded, however, by a trial in
accordance with established principles of justice. It would, however, be hard to
exaggerate the difficulties which faced the lawyers entrusted with the task of
devising a procedure which would carry out this agreement.


T narirmrnann Inatinativrales tam ta nunnndanta Fan ceavidnnan haat intannirrn annsnhina


LdaWYELS LISULICLIVELY LULH LU PLCCCUERLILS LUL BUIUGIICE, VUL LILELISIVE Sed LULU
of the legal records of ancient and modern times disclosed no exact
precedents, but only a few cases containing helpful suggestions. Of these it
could at least be claimed that the prosecution, conviction and execution of the
Persian satrap, Bessos, by Alexander the Great at Zariaspa in Bactria in 329
B.C. was a precedent of classical antiquity.


Bessos was a Persian patriot who led the last resistance to the victorious
Macedonians after the overthrow of King Darius at Arbela. Having been
subjected to various tortures, and having had his nose and ears cut off as a pre-
conviction punishment, Bessos was condemned to a formal trial. Alexander
the Great assumed the role of prosecutor and delivered an eloquent speech
demanding conviction. He then assumed the role of judge, declared himself
convinced by his own arguments and sentenced the unfortunate Oriental to a
death by torture. In A.D. 1945, the case of Bessos in 329 B.C. was
triumphantly cited by eminent jurists as an authority for the contention that an
accuser was a fit person to act as judge of his own charges. Until the close of
the Second World War it had not indeed occurred to anyone to attach
significance to this episode in the life of the great soldier and conqueror which
had been generally regarded by his biographers as a discreditable lapse
revealing the latent streak of savage cruelty in his character. Admirers of
Alexander have always contended that he was prone to histrionic gestures and
that there is no reason to doubt that he sincerely believed Bessos was a villain
richly deserving severe punishment. With complete sincerity and characteristic
vanity he was convinced that no one could plead for a conviction more
forcibly than himself, and no one could more ably discharge the duties of a
judge or find a penalty more neatly fitting the crime.


Whether or not the trial of Bessos can be regarded as a precedent justifying the
trial of the German leaders after the Second World War, it must be conceded
that it contained all the essential characteristics of the “war-crimes trial” as
practised in recent times. It is distinguishable on the one hand from the ancient
mock-trial in which the victim suffers as a symbol for the shortcomings of his
race or party, and on the other hand, from the mock- trial of the type which
evolved in Russia after the Bolshevik Revolution and which, as explained
above, is in essence a political manifesto by the party in power expressed for
convenience or effect in the form of a trial at law.


Having discovered a trial in the year 329 B.C. which could be plausibly cited
as a precedent for the trial which the chiefs of state at the Yalta Conference
had decided should take place before the liquidation of the captured German
leaders, the eminent British, French and American lawyers entrusted with the
task of making the necessary arrangements searched in vain the records of the
following two thousand years for another helpful precedent.


In deference to French public opinion it was clearly inexpedient to cite the
trial of Joan of Arc in 1431. In any case the nature of this trial and the form in
which it was conducted distinguished it sharply both from a symbolic mock-
trial and from a war-crimes trial of the Bessos type, although the English
Government had undoubtedly decided beforehand that the outcome of the
proceedings must be the death of the prisoner. The question which faced the
English Regent, the Duke of Bedford, was in fact exactly the same as that
which faced the chiefs of state at Yalta five hundred years later. Three courses
were open to him. A majority of the Great Council of England recommended
that when she had been purchased from her captor, the Duke of Luxembourg,
she should be sewn in a sack and surreptitiously dropped in a river. If that
course had been adopted Joan would now only be remembered as a peasant
girl who, according to popular belief at the time, had played the leading part in
the relief of Orleans in 1429. Alternatively he could have ordered her to be
tried on a charge of war-crimes by a selection of the disgruntled warriors who
had fled before her at Patay. The Regent, however, decided to take advantage
of Joan’s capture to stage what would now be called a propaganda stunt. In the
20th century it has become customary to regard a successful political
opponent as a criminal; in the 15th century it seemed natural to ascribe one’s
defeats to the use of witchcraft. So the Regent decided to hand Joan over to an
ecclesiastical court presided over by the Bishop of Beauvais in whose diocese
she had been captured, there to be tried on charges of “divers superstitions,
false teachings and other treasons against the Divine Majesty.”


Although useless as a precedent, the trial of Joan of Arc provided the team of
lawyers preparing in 1945 for the trial of the captured German leaders with
many valuable lessons. In 1431 the Regent decided that the prisoner should be
tried by an independent tribunal over which he could exercise no direct
control. The ecclesiastical court which tried Joan of Arc was in theory at least


fan nharrna manana nalitinanl AnRaidanuntinna and nntad in nnannndnananan rarnth an


idl QUUVE MELE PULILICd! CULISIUPLAGUULIS AHU dCLEU LMI dLCULUdLICe WILL dll
elaborate and well-established system of law, clarified by copious precedents,
which for centuries had been accepted by every Christian country. No question
arose, therefore, as at Nuremberg in 1945 of inventing a novel system of law
in order to establish breaches thereof. Also the jurisdiction of the court to try
her on charges of offences against God, and the accepted beliefs and morality
of Christendom could not be challenged. It is unnecessary to speculate here as
to what the English Government might have done if this ecclesiastical court
had acquitted her and ordered her release. The court convicted her, largely on
her own admissions, on the charges brought against her.

As Bernard Shaw says in Saint Joan: “She was condemned after a very careful
and conscientious trial.”


While it convicted the accused, however, the ecclesiastical court did not bring
in exactly the verdict which the Regent’s policy required. In place of public
burning as “a Heretic, Relapsed, Apostate, Idolatress”, she was sentenced to
life imprisonment. As Lenin once said: “Who troubles about imprisonment
when a change of fortune may bring swift release?” As a result of his decision
to have Joan tried by an independent court, the Regent Bedford failed to get
the judgment he desired. In order to achieve his purpose he had to exercise
strong pressure behind the scenes to have the sentence of imprisonment passed
by the ecclesiastical court on Joan replaced by a sentence of death by burning
at the stake. Evidently the War Crimes Commission in 1945 took this lesson to
heart and so avoided the mistake made in 1431. Probably at Nuremberg an
impartial court, composed of neutral judges, would have convicted most of the
prisoners on one charge or another. Most certainly, however, they would not
have rubber-stamped the verdict of guilt already pronounced by the chiefs of
state at the Yalta Conference.


One lesson, however, from the records of the past was overlooked by politician:
and lawyers in 1945. Almost without exception trials of which the main object
is political, whether they be grotesque mock-trials or “careful and
conscientious” judicial trials, fail dismally in their two main objects. Instead of
discrediting the accused in the eyes of posterity, they bestow on them fame,
publicity, interest and sympathy. Not her actual achievements, but the decision
of the English Government to bring about her death in a strictly legal, orderly
and public manner, established the fame of Joan of Arc, enriched the history of
the Middle Ages with their most picturesque figure, gave France a national


heroine and ultimately added her name to the Calendar of the Saints.


Similarly, political trials designed to establish for all time the victors’ point of
view have the opposite result. If they do not always arouse sympathy for the
vanquished, distaste and resentment is inevitably generated against the victors.
Self-satisfied rectitude, even when justified, is rarely an attractive spectacle,
and moral indignation, when clearly not disinterested, is very liable to be
mistaken for hypocrisy.


The latter drawback to political trials was demonstrated in 1648 by the trial of
King Charles I by a court composed of his political enemies and having not a
shadow of jurisdiction to sit in judgment on him. Few can now read an account
of this trial without becoming insensibly influenced in Charles’ favour. The
verdict itself, of course, has not the faintest weight with historians. Opinions
are still divided concerning Charles; some consider him, in the main, a well-
meaning monarch, more sinned against than sinning; others consider him, on
the whole, a weak and irresponsible tyrant. No one would dream of quoting the
verdict of John Bradshaw and his fellow regicides as having decided the
matter.


It had no doubt been hoped that a diligent search of the annals of the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars would provide authority for the
contention that civilized victors have recognised an unescapable duty placed
upon them by their victory to punish the shortcomings of the vanquished. But,
as pointed out in the chapter of this book dealing with civilized warfare, the
victors in 1815 recognised no such duty. Their forbearance, which seems so
astonishing at the present day, was certainly not due to any lack of deeds of
violence by the vanquished French which could have been made the subject of
criminal charges. Marshal Bliicher, remembering the ruthless treatment of
Prussia by Davout after the battle of Jena, urged with soldierly directness that
Napoleon should be shot on capture and the traitor Talleyrand heartily
approved. The victorious allies, however, not only refused to countenance
such summary treatment of a fallen foe but rejected the demand of the restored
Bourbons that Napoleon should be put on trial by a French court for the
shooting of the Duc d’Enghien in 1804. During the twenty-three years during
which the struggle had raged French armies had overrun all Western Europe
from Cadiz to Moscow, and had committed wholesale every variety of violent


mnie EE I A EEEE $e Dasani nee wetness lawless te OR BS ase net Ta hind ban


Crue. M GWeribdhy, Ll FUSSId, dHU PdlUCUld rly Ll Opdlll guera DdllUs Hau
harried the French troops with a ferocity hardly surpassed even by the gangs
of Partisans which harried the German troops during the Second World War,
with the result that equally savage reprisals had been provoked. In particular,
Marshal Suchet had made himself notorious while in command in Aragon by
the severe methods which he employed to protect the lives of his men from
treacherous attacks by armed Spanish civilians. Evidence for a dozen charges
against him of having been responsible for war-crimes could easily have been
collected and his conviction by a Spanish court would have been a certainty.
Nevertheless no action of any kind was taken against him and he was allowed
to end his days in honourable retirement.


Between 1815 and 1918 no European war ended with the victorious side
finding itself in a position to dictate the terms of peace entirely as it suited
them, regardless of the rights of the vanquished. Excessive demands might have
provoked intervention by neutral Powers: world opinion had to be taken into
account by the victors. All the wars between these dates were wars between
individual Powers like the Franco-German war of 1870 or small groups of
Powers like the Crimean war of 1854. They all ended with negotiated peace
treaties which, because they were negotiated treaties, proved lasting. No
precedents for the disposal of captured enemies even of the most shadowy kind
were to be found in the records of the wars of the 19th century. It is amusing to
note however that if Queen Victoria had been allowed to have her way in 1882
the lawyers planning the Nuremberg trials in 1945 would have been provided
with a really helpful precedent. Seventy years before Nasser’s seizure of power
in Egypt, another junior officer, Colonel Ahmed Aribi, led a similar revolt
against the corrupt rule of the Khedive Ismail, but which ended very differently
To protect the interests of the Christian holders of Egyptian bonds, Alexandria
was bombarded, a British army was landed and Aribi Pasha’s troops defeated ai
Tell-el-Kebir. Aribi Pasha became a prisoner of war and the question then arose
what should be done with him.


The Khedive insisted strongly that the prisoner should be handed over to him
so that his fate might serve as a lesson for all time to mutinous junior officers
—a lesson indeed which, if administered, might have helped three quarters of
a century later to keep in order a certain junior officer named Nasser. The
decision rested with Mr. Gladstone.

Although, as he characteristically expressed it, he “was almost driven to the


conclusion that Aribi Pasha was a bad man”, Mr. Gladstone hesitated to hand
over the captured officer to the Khedive. Queen Victoria, however, had no
doubts whatever on the subject. She was, as she herself put it, “distressed and
alarmed” at the mere possibility that “the arch-rebel and traitor Aribi” should
escape the fate which he deserved which she “believed everyone, including
Mr. Gladstone himself, wished him to suffer.” In the end Mr. Gladstone, in
spite of her expostulations, decided to send Aribi into exile in Ceylon. When
she was asked to send a personal message to the Khedive to help him soothe
the ladies of his harem who were “frantic with indignation” at this leniency,
she flatly refused, declaring that the Khedive’s wives “show a right feeling in
being frantic” at this display of weakness by the British Government of which
she herself “so highly disapproved”.


The lawyers entrusted with the task of preparing for the Nuremberg Trials had,
of course, very clear and recent precedents ready to hand in the various “show-
trials” (to use Marxian terminology) staged by Stalin during the Great Purge
(1936-38). Unfortunately in 1945 it was impossible for them to cite these
precedents because a stringent taboo was in force prohibiting all mention of
the Great Purge, which, at the time it was carried out, had aroused worldwide
surprise, consternation and horror, especially in those Leftist circles in Britain
and the United States which regarded the Russian Revolution as a great
landmark in the course of human progress. That Stalin should order the death
of his closest colleagues, the men who had helped Lenin to Confer the
blessings of Communism on the Russian people, was of course entirely
consistent with all that was known concerning his personal character.
Nevertheless the Great Purge came as a shock to all those who cherished


` delusions concerning the nature of the Soviet Regime. When Hitler’s invasion


iw co


of Russia in June 1941 transformed Stalin from a confederate of Hitler into an
ally of Britain, it became imperative to expunge from public memory all
recollection of what was known concerning him and the grim police state
which he had established in Russia. This was successfully accomplished by the
invention of the Great Stalin Myth. In place of the ruthless tyrant whose
character was finally revealed to the world in 1956 by his successor, Nikita
Khrushchev, there was held up for public admiration the benign figure of
“Uncle Joe Stalin”, the champion of liberty and lover of all mankind, the loyal
ally who was inspired by the same lofty ideals as Churchill and Roosevelt. To
preserve public belier in the Stalin Myth it was abzohitely imperative that no


ei ioe eM a SS I EEEE E Ee ee De a e E a AE TN asus.


mention OT any KINA snould De Made OT te Great Purge.


Deprived of the only set of useful precedents for the coming trials of the
captured German leaders, the group of international lawyers preparing for
these trials had no choice but to present them as a completely novel departure
in the administration of justice. They received with shocked silence General
Nikitchenko’s unwelcome assertion that the coming trials to be held in
Nuremberg would be merely an adaptation of the show-trials carried out
during the Great Purge, and they proceeded to make arrangements which
would disguise this fact so far as it was possible. The result of their intensive
labours was the production of the London Agreement which was made public
on the 8th August, 1945. The details of this remarkable production require
brief examination here.


The London Agreement was an agreement between the British, American,
French and Russian Governments to establish a body to be called the
International Military Tribunal for the trial of “the major war criminals whose
offences have no particular geographical location.” No definition was given of
the term “major war criminals” except that the right was reserved by each
victorious state to try, according to its own laws, any war criminal in its hands
for offences committed on its own territory. Attached to the Agreement and
forming an integral part of it was a sort of schedule, grandiloquently labelled
“The Charter”, which purported to define the powers of the Tribunal and the
procedure which it was to adopt.


On the face of it, therefore, the London Agreement was nothing more than a
private arrangement between four sovereign states to put on trial captured
subjects of another sovereign state. Had the contracting parties been, say,
Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras and Salvador, such an agreement would only
have been of interest as an indication of how little the elements of
jurisprudence were understood in these countries. The fact that the four parties
to the London Agreement happened at the time to be the four most powerful
states in the world, clearly could have no bearing on the question whether its
terms were in accordance with international law. The tribunal which it created
was not an international body, except in the sense that more than one state was
represented on it. It was simply a gathering of legal officials appointed by four
states in accordance with a private arrangement between themselves.


The most important part of the so-called Charter is Article 6, which purports to
create two new crimes against international law. The first is labelled, “Crimes
against peace”, which it defines as “planning, preparing or waging a war of
aggression or a war in violation of international treaties.” The second is labellec
“Crimes against humanity”, which it defines as “inhumane acts against any
civilian population before or during the war and persecutions on political, racial
or religious grounds.”


With regard to the first of these novel creations, the framers of the Charter had
abandoned in despair a desperate attempt to define “a war of aggression”
without impliedly condemning Russia for her numerous unprovoked attacks on
her neighbours, beginning with her attack on Finland in 1939 and ending with
her declaration of war on Japan in 1945 in defiance of the Non-aggression Pact
which she had signed with the latter country. The chiefs of state at the Yalta
Conference had cheerfully convicted their captured enemies of having plotted
and waged a war of aggression and set the framers of the Charter the utterly
impossible task of defining this alleged offence. Of course they failed. As long
before as 1933, Edwin M. Borchard, the famous professor of international law
at Yale University, had dismissed the word “aggression” as “an essentially
dishonest and mischievous term calculated to mislead the uninformed.”


With regard to the second novel crime created by the London Agreement
precise definition was obviously equally impossible at a moment when the
victors were carrying out mass-deportations of populations totalling some
fourteen millions and entailing indescribable misery. In most cases these
deportations followed wholesale mass-murders carried out in the homelands of
the populations condemned to deportation.


It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to comment on the fundamental injustice of
inventing an ad hoc law and then bringing charges alleging acts in breach of
this law committed before this law existed. In the United States this injustice
was widely recognised. As the leading Republican Senator, Robert A. Taft, a
politician respected by all parties, pointed out, “It is completely alien to the
American tradition of law to prosecute men for criminal acts which were not
declared to be so until long after the fact. The Nuremberg Trials will for ever
remain a blot on the escutcheon of American jurisprudence.”


—


men


However grave and however numerous may be the technical objections which
can be raised against it, the London Agreement from a practical point of view
was undeniably a very workmanlike production, admirably devised to carry
out the purpose which it was intended to fulfil. It left the judges of the
International Military Tribunal in no possible doubt as to what was expected of
them. It gave them an absolutely free hand.


Thus the vitally important Clause 18 of the Charter empowered the Tribunal
“to rule out irrelevant issues and statements of any kind”. By reference to this
clause, the Tribunal could not only reject any evidence or submission by the
Defendants simply by declaring it “irrelevant”; it entitled the Tribunal to
refuse to hear any evidence concerning the background against which the
alleged offences of the Defendants were committed. In short, it precluded the
Defendants from proving that the acts, now declared criminal, of which they
were accused, were concurrently being committed by their opponents. Thus,
as we shall see later, Grossadmiral Raeder, in answer to the charge that he had
planned the invasion of neutral Norway, was prevented from calling evidence
to prove that at precisely the same time the British Admiralty was taking
active steps to invade Norway.


Clause 19 released the Tribunal from any obligation to enforce “the technical
rules of evidence.” It expressly directed the Tribunal “to admit any evidence
which it deemed to have probative value”. To bolster up any charge which
could not be proved by admissible evidence, the Tribunal was directed to
accept hearsay evidence. In accordance with this clause a quantity of second
and third hand statements, documents the authenticity of which no attempt was
made to prove, and other inadmissible evidence was cheerfully accepted by the
Tribunal. For the first time in legal history, the mere fact that an allegation was
made or suggested was held to have “probative value” of its truth.


The Tribunal saw fit to exercise rigorously the powers given by Clauses 18
and 19. On the other hand the Tribunal to a great extent ignored Clause 21
which directed them “to take judicial notice of facts of common knowledge”
and to dispense with formal proof. That this clause might cut both ways was
probably overlooked by the framers of the Charter. On several occasions the


Tribunal was caused grave embarrassment by Clause
91 Thana nannndina tha twncranian Af nmntnnl N am.rnrr NAw CChaananhill had tald tha


41. LHUS LOA US WIE HIVASLIUL UL HeULLd! INULWaY, IVIL. CLIULCIITI Lidl LULU UE
Commons on the 11th April 1940 that Britain had infringed Norwegian
neutrality before the German invasion was launched, and his speech had been
reported in full in the Press. By the time of the Nuremberg Trials in 1945 the
truth had become common knowledge. The Tribunal, however, insisted on
being judicially ignorant of what they could have read in Hansard.


Naturally the peculiarities and eccentricities of the London Agreement were of
interest only to lawyers. The general public accepted its provisions
complacently, regarding it merely as a formal direction setting out the
preliminaries to be observed before the execution of the prisoners. This
complacency was not disturbed by objections of mere lawyers, an appearance
of apparently unanimous approval by the legal profession being created by the
policy adopted by the Press not to report any expression of dissent.
Occasionally, indeed, adverse opinions reached the public; for example in the
little book by Montgomery Belgion previously cited entitled Epitaph on
Nuremberg, and again when Serjeant Sullivan was roused to indignant protest
by a ruling of the Bar Council that it was “undesirable” that a member of the
English Bar should appear for the defence before the Nuremberg Tribunal. “Tf
indeed the Tribunal and its task”, wrote the veteran barrister, “are such that
self-respecting Counsel should not lend himself to the proceedings, it is
undesirable that an English judge should sit and an English law officer as such
should prosecute”. Naturally, however, the lay public disregarded such lonely
protests at the adoption of novel legal conceptions which were supported by
legal opinion of the greatest weight. Foremost among the eminent lawyers
who defended the practice of holding war trials of captured enemies was Lord
Justice Wright, unquestionably one of the ablest lawyers of his generation.
After a distinguished career at the Bar during which he is said to have earned
£25,000 a year, he was made a judge in 1925, a Lord of Appeal in 1932 and
presided at many famous trials. After the War he accepted the appointment of
chairman of the War Crimes Commission and later defiantly defended the
arrangements for war-crimes trials made by himself and his colleagues. The
essence of his contentions was that if an accused person was, in fact, guilty no
injustice could be done by convicting him. In the memorable debate on the
19th May 1949 in the House of Lords, following an attack by Lord Hankey on
the Tokyo War-Crimes Trial, Lord Wright complained bitterly, “It was very
unfair and irrelevant to criticise war-crimes tribunals as conqueror’s law. The


only question was, did the accused have a fair trial?”


Looking back on the subject unclouded by the war-time passions which still
survived in 1949, the fallacy of this argument is apparent. Of course a guilty
man, that is to say, a man who in fact is guilty and admits that he is guilty, has
no ground for complaint if he is convicted. But if an accused person, whether
guilty or innocent, elects to deny the charge, how are his fellow citizens to
decide what is the truth? The essential question then is, how and by whom is it
to be decided whether he is guilty or not? A fair trial means a trial before an
impartial court at which the rules of evidence are observed. No man living
knew better than Lord Justice Wright the meaning of the term ‘a fair trial’:
when presiding in the Court of Appeal he had unhesitatingly reversed
judgments given in lower courts following trials in which inadvertently had
been infringed the principles which Clauses 18 and 19 of the London
Agreement authorised the Nuremberg Tribunal to disregard. Another stalwart
upholder of the validity of war-trials was Professor Arthur Goodhart,
Professor of Jurisprudence at Oxford University. This may now seem not less
astonishing than would be a declaration by the Astronomer Royal that he had
become convinced that the earth was flat. Naturally however the lay public in
1945 was gratified to hear that an innovation that seemed on the face of it a
flagrant repudiation of the fundamental principle of jurisprudence had the
emphatic approval of so many eminent judges and learned jurists.


Whatever shortcomings may now be obvious to everyone in the London
Agreement, it cannot be denied that the procedure which it laid down
succeeded in achieving one of the main objects of its framers: it provided for
the disposal of the captured enemy leaders with a minimum of friction
between the victorious Powers. Although the British, French and American
judges on the Nuremberg Tribunal considered that the task of the court was to
decide whether the accused were guilty of the offences alleged against them
and the Soviet judges considered that the task before the court was simply to
order the elimination of a group of avowed opponents of Communism, yet this
complete divergence of outlook never during the hearing became obtrusively
apparent. In public at any rate complete harmony prevailed. There was never
unseemly bickering between the members of the Tribunal, although in fact the
only link between them was a common determination that no hitch should
arise from their irreconcilable outlooks. Later, this determination was


strengthened by the personal goodwill and respect which grew up between the
members of the Court. It is no matter for surprise that the proceedings ended
with a mass-hanging of the prisoners, but, in view of the composition of the
Court, it is remarkable that there was so little friction during the trial, there
being at the end a perfect crescendo of mutual congratulation. The Judges,
Marxian and non-Marxian, praised each other and Counsel; Counsel thanked
the Judges and each other. The British representatives paid the time-honoured
tributes to British Justice and generously admitted the merits of the various
foreign legal systems, and the foreign representatives praised British Justice
and each spoke favourably of his own country’s system of administering
justice. To the extent, at least, of the four countries taking part, rarely has there
been such a demonstration of international amity.


Nevertheless, there is reason for doubting whether the non-Marxian members
of the Tribunal ever comprehended the distinctive outlook of their Soviet
colleagues. How genuine was the goodwill and how complete this
incomprehension were strikingly demonstrated some three years after the
close of the Nuremberg trials. Although, by this time, public opinion in Great
Britain and in the United States with regard to the Soviet Union had
completely changed, we find Lord Justice Lawrence, now become Lord
Oaksey, who had acted as President of the Tribunal, hotly resenting an attack
on Russia’s participation in the proceedings as a reflection not only on himself
but on his Soviet colleagues. Speaking in the House of Lords on May 5, 1949,
Lord Hankey had declared that “there was something cynical and revolting in
the spectacle of British, French and American judges sitting on the Bench with
colleagues representing a country which before, during and since the trials had
perpetrated half the political crimes in the calendar.” Speaking in reply, on
May 19th, Lord Justice Lawrence declared that Lord Hankey’s observations
were “insulting to my Soviet colleagues, to Mr. Justice Birkett and myself.
The Soviet judges demonstrated their ability and fairness.”


The relevance of this reply may appear obscure. Lord Hankey had merely
expressed the surprise, long felt by many, that the Soviet Union, having so
recently wantonly attacked Finland, conquered and annexed Esthonia, Latvia
and Lithuania, and deprived Roumania by force of Bessarabia, should,
nevertheless, have been considered eligible to participate in a trial of the
leaders of another Power, charged with having waged a single war of


3


nanraccinn T ard Thictian T nanumanannan’c ranli virne that thara virne na aAraind far


aApslCoolull. LULU JUSLILET LaGwictlitt D itply Wadd LUIdt ULTLE Wad LLU Blvuuu LUL
surprise, because the individuals sent to represent the Soviet Union at the trial
turned out to be able and fair-minded.


We may, of course, readily accept Lord Justice Lawrence’s testimony that his
two Soviet colleagues impressed him as able and fair-minded men. Lord
Hankey had, in fact, expressly admitted that they may have been “impeccable
as individuals”. For all we know to the contrary, they may also have been
excellent husbands and fathers, profound students of botany, expert
mountaineers, or ardent philatelists. But what bearing could their personal
gifts, virtues and tastes have on Lord Hankey’s contention that the
participation in the Nuremberg Trials of a state with the record of the Soviet
Union was “cynical and revolting”? Even Lord Justice Lawrence must surely
have become gradually conscious of the Alice-in-Wonderland atmosphere that
the participation of the Soviet Union conferred on the proceedings, and which
platitudes about humanity and denunciations of aggressive warfare as the
supreme international crime, however impressively and pompously expressed,
failed utterly to dispel.


It is hard to believe that Lord Justice Lawrence had never heard of that series
of political trials which began in Russia, in 1936, known to history as the
Great Purge. Apparently, however, he was not aware that these trials were
conducted in accordance with a novel and distinctive system of law, of which
the only effective principle familiar to jurists in the rest of the world was the
Roman maxim, Salus populi est suprema lex, adapted to mean, “What in the
opinion of Joseph Stalin is necessary for the safety of the Communist Party is
the paramount law.” In the years following 1936, Joseph Stalin came
repeatedly to the opinion that the safety of the Communist Party necessitated
the liquidation of one or other of the famous men who had helped Lenin to
bring about the Russian Revolution twenty years before. Included among them
were Lenin’s personal assistant Gregory Zinoviev; Leo Kamenev, the
president of the Moscow Soviet and, like Zinoviev, one of the original
members of the Politbureau; Ivan Smirnov, once acclaimed “the Lenin of
Siberia”; Nikholai Bukharin, the editor of “Izvestia”; the once powerful
journalist, Alexei Rikov; Marshal Mikail Tukhachevsky, the most successful
leader of the Red Army during the Civil War; Karl Radek, once director of
Bolshevik foreign propaganda; and even the dreaded chief of the G.P.U.,


Henry Yagoda. The trial and execution of these men duly followed. There is
no reason to think that the judges who condemned them were not able and
fair-minded; in accordance with their legal training they accepted the guidance
of the Marxian legal maxim quoted above.


Similarly, at the Teheran Conference, Joseph Stalin, in the name of the
executive government of the Soviet Union, expressed the opinion that certain
German opponents of Communism, to the number of 50,000, should be
liquidated “as fast as we capture them before a firing squad.” As a concession
to the bourgeois scruples of his Allies Stalin, indeed, agreed that a trial should,
in each case, precede execution, but his decision that these men must die
remained unaltered. Did Lord Justice Lawrence imagine that the Soviet Judges
who tried any of these cases in Moscow or in Nuremberg were at liberty to
reverse Joseph Stalin’s decisions on this subject or on any other? His speech in
the House of Lords, quoted above, clearly indicated that this was his belief,
since otherwise the importance which he attached to the fairness of his Soviet
colleagues is quite incomprehensible.


In one sense, of course, the learned English judge may have been right in his
belief. In the same sense no doubt, Henry VIII’s judges may be said to have
been at liberty to reverse the decision of their royal master that “the Abbot of
Glaston should be tried at Glaston and also executed there with his
complycys”. There is no reason to think that the judges who condemned
Abbot Whiting to the lingering horrors of an English execution for high
treason were not able and fair-minded men. But, as loyal and obedient
servants of His Majesty, they would have had little difficulty in convincing
themselves that the opinion of their sovereign lord, the king, was well
founded. Similarly, a Soviet judge would, naturally, feel it presumptuous on
his part to investigate too deeply the grounds upon which “our great wise
Leader, Lenin’s true pupil and successor,” had formed an opinion. Soviet law
gives the widest judicial powers to the executive government, and the duty of
a Soviet judge is to administer, not to reform, Soviet law. Joseph Stalin, like
Bluff King Hal, was notoriously impatient with subordinates who failed on
any pretext to carry out his instructions, and was very likely to regard anyone
who disagreed with him as a self- confessed counter-revolutionary. In Tudor
times, those who had the honour to serve Bluff King Hal lived under the
shadow of the Tower, just as those who, four hundred years later, served


Joseph Stalin, lived beneath the shadow of the Lubianka Prison.


“Stuff and nonsense,” exclaimed Alice when the Queen demanded, “Sentence
first— verdict afterwards.” The members of the International Military
Tribunal at Nuremberg can be divided into two distinct groups, according to
their attitude to this celebrated passage in Lewis Carroll’s classic story. To the
Soviet judges, the Queen’s demand for “Sentence first—verdict afterwards”
was a perfectly rational requirement supported by numerous weighty
precedents. To Lord Justice Lawrence and his non-Marxian colleagues, as to
Lewis Carroll’s contemporaries, it was nothing but brilliant nonsense, a
whimsical extravagance so wildly fantastic as to be humorous. Neither group
had the slightest comprehension of the legal concepts of the other. Lord
Justice Lawrence’s tribute to the fairness of his Soviet colleagues proves, for
example, that no less than three years after the Nuremberg Trials the leading
British representative on the tribunal had still not grasped the Marxian
significance of the word “fairness”. In Marxian legal ideology, the word
“fairness” means fairness to the proletarian state; fairness to an unrepentant
opponent of Communism is simply a contradiction in terms. All the occupants
of the dock were undeniably guilty of being anti-Communists and, as such,
required elimination. Whether they deserved execution for certain specific acts
was a question of no practical importance. When a majority of the Tribunal in
a fleeting spasm of self-assertion decided to acquit von Papen, the Soviet
Government lodged a strong protest. His acquittal might have been “fair” in a
non-Marxian sense, meaning that he was not guilty of the acts of which he was
accused, but it was obviously “unfair” to Communism that an outspoken
opponent of Communism should be allowed to survive.


Some may think that the above protest of Lord Justice Lawrence showed
undue touchiness to reasoned and moderately expressed criticism. Full credit
should, however, be given him for the loyalty displayed by him to his foreign
colleagues who, no longer seated on the Bench at Nuremberg secure from
challenge or objection, were, like himself, standing before the bar of history
awaiting judgment. But what is really significant in the episode is that the
English judge should assume that Soviet judges should need or desire any
defence from charges of having outraged established principles of justice
which he himself, of course, accepted without question but which had long
come to be regarded as obsolete bourgeois prejudices in the Soviet Union.


Concerning Lord Justice Lawrence, afterwards Lord Oaksey, it can at least be
said of him that he stood out head and shoulders above the motley team of
judges, barristers, investigators, warders and executioners, which gathered
among the ruins of the beautiful medieval city of Nuremberg in October 1945.
It was entirely owing to the fact that he was chosen to act as Chairman of the
so-called International Military Tribunal that the proceedings were conducted
with decorum and decency. His gifts and limitations combined to make him
the ideal man for the post. His dignity was never shaken even when the most
embarrassingly absurd situations arose, and his unquestionable integrity and
sincerity cast a much needed cloak of respectability over the protracted
proceedings.

Thanks entirely to the unruffled courtesy and firmness with which he
conducted the trials, it can be said without fear of contradiction that if a
stranger, say, from Patagonia, who knew nothing of the circumstances and
spoke no language but his own, had happened one day to visit the Justizpalast
in Nuremberg during a hearing, he might well have imagined a normal judicial
trial was in progress—providing, of course, that he did not tarry too long.


Some of Lord Justice Lawrence’s colleagues may have equalled him in legal
learning and judicial experience, but none could rival his guileless sincerity.
His outstanding characteristic was simplicity. His mind was one that might
have been cited by propaganda specialists as a perfect example of what the
well-conditioned mind of a patriotic citizen ought to be. Having accepted
without question at its start the contention that the Second World War was a
conflict between Good and Evil, nothing that happened later disturbed this
conviction. It may seem strange that travelling about Germany for over a year
and seeing everywhere scenes of ghastly devastation, his faith remained
unshaken in the official explanation that it was all a reprisal for a bomb said to
have been dropped five years before by an unidentified plane near Canterbury.
It must be remembered, however, that relatively few people in Britain at that
time had ever heard of the Lindemann Plan and there is no reason to think
Lord Justice Lawrence was in possession of what was then inside information.
A busy man with many responsible duties, he seems to have taken little
interest in current affairs and so it may well be that his recollection of what he
had read in the Press at the time concerning the Great Purge in Russia had
become dim. Consequently he found no difficulty in believing even the


ridiculous Stalin Myth. He accepted the appointment to represent Britain on
the International Military Tribunal as a patriotic duty. He envisaged the task
before him as in no way different in essentials from that of presiding over a
trial of some criminal at the Old Bailey. All he imagined he would have to do
was to listen to the evidence laid before the court by the prosecution and then
to decide whether the charges had been established. The praise which the
representatives of the Press lavished upon him for his dignified bearing filled
him with surprise and irritation. Did these journalists imagine that he would sit
with his feet on his desk, exchanging wisecracks with the gorilla-faced guards
surrounding the prisoners in the dock! Naturally he behaved on the Bench like
an English gentleman: it was regrettable that so many found his accent
affected and irritating but he spoke like anyone else educated at Haileybury
and who for twenty years had been a member of the Inner Temple. The reason
why he never showed embarrassment when awkward situations occurred was
that he never noticed anything which could embarrass him. Thus he listened
with unwearied patience to the evidence which the Communist chief
prosecutor laid before the court concerning the Katyn Forest Massacre. He
repressed the least sign of surprise that such transparent rubbish should be put
forward as evidence. Unfortunately, however, the matter could not be disposed
of simply by acquitting the prisoners of this charge. As no doubt his
colleagues pointed out to him, if the Germans had not murdered these
unfortunate Polish officers, then the Russians must have murdered them, since
clearly these Poles could not have committed suicide and then buried
themselves in a mass grave. An acquittal of the Germans would therefore be
equivalent to a conviction of the Russians. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal was
strictly limited by the Charter “to crimes committed in the interest of the Axis
Powers”. If the Tribunal by implication convicted the Russians of this crime,
Stalin would undoubtedly regard it as a flagrant breach of the London
Agreement and would withdraw his representatives from the Nuremberg
Trials. The result would assuredly have been an acute international crisis: the
Trials which had been designed to demonstrate the unshakable unity of the
Grand Alliance would have shown that unity to have been a propaganda
fiction. The situation would have come about which did not in fact come about
until 1948 when Stalin ordered the blockade of West Berlin.


For the first time probably it then dawned upon the mind of Lord Justice
Lawrence that the proceedings over which he was presiding with such dignity


had nothing to do with the administration of justice but were simply a political
gesture, a move in the game of high international politics. The fate of the
Nuremberg Trials hung in the balance. In spite of the (to him) unfamiliar
circumstances Lord Justice Lawrence rose grandly to the occasion. Perhaps
indeed the brilliant solution of what had seemed a hopeless predicament did
not originate in his decidedly unoriginating mind; probably it was suggested to
him by one of his colleagues, possibly by his British colleague, the far from
guileless Mr. Justice Birkett. True, this solution entailed defiance of the
elementary principle of justice that when the prosecution fails to establish a
charge, the defendant is entitled as of right to have the charge dismissed. Such
considerations of elementary justice, however, never troubled the International
Military Tribunal. From the start they had acted in accordance with principles
of justice which they invented in accordance with the requirements of the
moment. When the time at last arrived to deliver judgment, Lord Justice
Lawrence with unshakable dignity avoided all mention of the charge relating
to the Katyn Forest Massacre. The Tribunal left this charge in the air and acted
as if it had never been brought!


The judgment of the International Military Tribunal which was delivered on
the 1st October 1946 after a hearing lasting a year, was a truly remarkable
production. No doubt all the members of the Tribunal, each assisted by his
team of legal advisers, took a hand in drafting it. It may be that Lord Justice
Lawrence did not take a leading part in this delicate work, but the duty of
reading it fell upon him as chairman of the Court, and it was universally
agreed that he performed this duty with an awe-inspiring gravity which almost
carried conviction amongst those who heard him. The principal charge against
the accused was the commission of the newly invented crime of planning and
waging a war of aggression, to which charge all the other charges made were
ancillary. As previously stated, the Tribunal had utterly failed to find and
agree upon a definition of “war of aggression” which would on the one hand
include Hitler’s invasion of Poland in 1939 and, on the other hand, would
exclude the half dozen invasions launched by Stalin against the territories of
the states bordering the Soviet Union. The Tribunal had given up the task of
finding a definition in despair. “Aggressive war has not been and perhaps
never will be adequately defined,” brazenly declared Whitney R. Harris, the
assistant American prosecutor at Nuremberg, “and it may be contended that
the very indefiniteness of the concept makes difficult its prohibition. But it


does not follow that so elusive a concept may not afford an adequate judicial
basis for criminal prosecution.” Without indicating what this judicial basis
was, the Tribunal decided that in view of the conviction recorded against the
defendants by the chiefs of state at the Yalta Conference the defendants were
clearly guilty of the offence alleged, although they were unable to say exactly
what this offence was. The Tribunal was unanimously agreed that whatever
this offence exactly might be, it was a very grave offence. With a solemnity
which held the Court spellbound, Lord Justice Lawrence declared:

“The initiation of a war of aggression is not only an international crime, it is
the supreme international crime, differing only from other war crimes in that it
contains within itself the accumulated evil of the whole.”


With unruffled dignity the learned chairman of the Tribunal then proceeded to
deal with other matters, leaving “a war of aggression” undefined. No better
example can be cited of the preeminent services rendered by Lord Justice
Lawrence to the promoters of the Nuremberg Trials than the fact that this
passage from the judgment of Tribunal as read by him was received at the time
with general approbation as marking a memorable advance in the development
of international law.


In 1962 the Oxford University historian and leading anti-German publicist, Dr.
A. J. P. Taylor, sixteen years after the close of the Nuremberg Trials, ventured
to express his opinion as to their nature. He described the Nuremberg Tribunal
as “a macabre farce” and expressed surprise that an English judge should have
been found to preside over it, and that English lawyers, including the then Lord
Chancellor, should have pleaded before it. Many may now think “a macabre
farce” an apt description of what actually took place.

But for Lord Justice Lawrence’s firm and dignified handling of this macabre
farce, however, it would have quickly degenerated into a sordid burlesque.


Lord Justice Lawrence’s outstanding services at the Nuremberg Trials were
rewarded by a well-deserved peerage. How vital to the outcome of these
proceedings were these services was not generally recognised at the time, and
particularly by his colleague, Mr. Justice Birkett, who failed to understand that
Lawrence had not been made a baron merely for spending a year among the
ruins of Nuremberg, taking part as a judge at the trials. He felt strongly that he
also was entitled to a peerage since, as he recorded in his diary, he, just as


much as Lawrence, had had “to sit in suffering silence listening to clouds of
verbiage, mountains of irrelevance and oceans of arid pomposity.” When he
learned that Lawrence had been made a baron, Birkett remained silent in
public but he wrote privately to Lord Chancellor Jowitt: “I spent a day nursing
my most grievous hurt, for it is idle to deny that I am hurt, deeply and
grievously.” One may sympathise with his outraged feelings while
remembering that it is a common experience of many people in this world to
receive less than the justice which they think they deserve. At the time Birkett
was “nursing his most grievous hurt” in comfortable retirement, others
concerned in the Nuremberg trials were suffering far more acutely from
injustice, as for example Grossadmiral Raeder who had been condemned to
nurse the grievous hurt of having been condemned as a criminal on a
transparently frivolous charge to spend the rest of his life in the gloomy
horrors, humiliations and hardships of Spandau Prison.


In a nutshell the business of the International Military Tribunal was to
investigate and punish war-crimes, and one may pause here to consider briefly
what meaning the Tribunal at length came to attach to the term, war-crime.
They made no attempt to define it and no one has attempted to define it since.
Originally, as we have seen, the term meant breaches of that unwritten code of
civilized warfare which was adopted by the European nations in their wars
with each other towards the end of the 17th century. The deliberate bombing
of an enemy civilian population was obviously a breach of this code but the
promoters of the Nuremberg Trials decided not to prefer charges of
indiscriminate bombing against the captured enemy leaders. This omission
caused great astonishment at the time since in popular opinion this was the
crime of which the Germans were most flagrantly guilty. We now know why
no such charge was preferred. The Chief American Prosecutor at Nuremberg,
Robert H. Jackson, many years later explained the mystery.

The decision not to prefer any such charges, he tells us, was reached after
long and anxious deliberation because of the difficulty of distinguishing
between “the military necessity” which was accepted as justification for the
destruction by British and American airmen of the cities and towns of
Germany and “the military necessity” for similar destruction by German
airmen. Raising this subject, he tells us naively, would have been “to invite
recriminations which would not have been useful at the trial.”


Nain namlt AF thina Anntatan nann had nftan lana and anxwitauia Anlihauntinan tha


JAS d LESUILL UL ULUS UCLISIVUILT LEGLCIICU GLLEL LUIS AHU dIIAIUUS UCLIVEIGUULI, LIC
Tribunal was spared any mention of the Lindemann Plan and was not
therefore compelled to give any ruling on terror bombing. With regard to
unrestricted submarine warfare, however, the Tribunal gave an important
ruling. Grossadmiral Dönitz was charged with waging unrestricted submarine
warfare, and the Tribunal reluctantly admitted that in assessing this crime an
order of the British Admiralty, dated 8th May 1940, directing that all ships in
the Skagerrak should in future be sunk without warning, combined with the
admitted fact that the United States had waged unrestricted submarine warfare
from the first day the United States had entered the war, could not be left out
of account.


This ruling established the novel principle that, whether a particular act was a
crime or not depended on whether the victors could be shown to have
committed it. If the victors had committed it, it could not be a crime.


In order to discover what meaning the Tribunal ultimately came to attach to the
word “war-crime”, several other factors have to be taken into consideration.
First and foremost, the London Agreement made it clear that to render a person
liable to punishment for a “war-crime” he must be a citizen of a state on the
vanquished side. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal was strictly limited to
offences committed in the interests of the Axis Powers.

The moment it appeared that the offence had been committed in the interests
of the victorious opponents of the Axis Powers—as happened in the case of
the charges relating to the Katyn Forest Massacre—the Tribunal was

forbidden to consider the subject any further. In all trials for “war-crimes”
therefore, the prosecution had first of all to prove the accused was on the
losing side and then, having done this, proceed to prove the accused
committed the act in question.


Secondly, it is agreed that political expediency may qualify the guilt of an
accused person. Thus, for example, Italian subjects admittedly committed acts
which have been labelled “war crimes” and for which Germans and Japanese
have been done to death. No international mass-trial of Italian subjects on the
lines of the Nuremberg and Tokyo mass- trials ever took place.


Taking into account the above-mentioned exclusion of Italian subjects from
prosecution for war-crimes, and the omission to include the indiscriminate


bombing of civilians as a war-crime even when committed by German
subjects, the following definition of a war- crime is reached:


“A war-crime is an act committed by a member of a vanquished state but not a
vanquished state wholly or partially absolved from war guilt for political
expediency, which in the opinion of the conquerors of that state is a war-crime,
but which act is not an offence which has been so flagrantly and openly
committed by the conquerors themselves that mention of it would cause them
embarrassment.”


A further amendment may be considered necessary, if one weighty obiter
dictum be accepted. In the war-trials at Tokyo, in 1947-1948, the Indian
representative, Mr. Justice Rahabinode Pal, delivered a brilliant dissenting
judgment in which he laid down that “the farce of a trial of vanquished leaders
by the victors was itself an offence against humanity”, and was, therefore, in
itself, a war-crime.


With due respect to that profound student of international law, Mr. Justice
Rahabinode Pal, it is submitted that this contention would only become true if,
later, the members of the tribunal found themselves on the losing side. All the
authorities are agreed that being on the losing side is an essential element in a
war-crime. The trial of prisoners of war by their captors may be, and generally
is, a crime against humanity, but, according to the definition laid down in the
London Agreement and accepted at Nuremberg, a crime against humanity is
only a war-crime if it be committed “in the interests of the vanquished side”.


No passage in the Nuremberg Judgment had been more frequently quoted than
the passage describing the initiation of a war of aggression as “the supreme
international crime, differing only from other war-crimes in that it contains
within itself the accumulated evil of the whole.” Standing by itself with the
words “a war of aggression” undefined, this description means nothing
whatever and it is hard to explain how it came about that two experienced and
learned English High Court judges were brought to endorse such pompous and
meaningless verbiage. Can it, however, be a coincidence that the fundamental
principle upon which the Nuremberg war-trials was based and by which the
International Military Tribunal was guided, is exactly defined if the wording
be altered to, “Being on the losing side is the supreme international crime,


ALLO nwa ew Aes Fenn, S nwa At mann, See th nb th mA mente oth se Senn 4k.


ULLLerily OLLLY LPOLL OUI Wd Cries LHH Uldt LL COLLALIS WILLIE SELL Ule
accumulated evil of the whole”?


It would be consistent with the terms of the Charter, the rulings of the
Tribunal, and all the surrounding circumstances, if, as originally drafted, the
judgment had in fact contained this illuminating definition. It is, however,
easy to understand why, to the majority of the members of the Tribunal, it
appeared on consideration much too illuminating. No doubt, proud of his own
eloquent phraseology, the author of this particular passage, whichever
member of the Tribunal it may have been, strongly objected to its elimination,
and his colleagues at last came to accept the view that the passage could do
no harm, provided that it was deprived of all meaning. In fact, this celebrated
passage in the judgment reads equally well if the words “To initiate a war of
aggression” be substituted for the words “Being on the losing side”.


Except that all twenty-one accused were undeniably guilty of being on the
losing side, there was no connecting link between them. The charges brought
against Ernst Kaltenbrunner, the head of the Security Forces, were entirely
different from those brought against Julius Streicher, the anti-Semitic editor
of Der Stuermer and neither group of charges was even remotely connected
with the charges, such as they were, brought against Grossadmiral Raeder, the
commander-in-chief of the German Navy. Each day the twenty-one accused
were forced to sit in the dock to listen to all the evidence collected by the
prosecution, although only a small fraction of it had any bearing on any of the
charges brought against any individual. Mr. Justice Birkett, as we have seen,
complained bitterly at having, day after day, “to sit in suffering silence
listening to clouds of verbiage, mountains of irrelevance and oceans of arid
pomposity.” He was a trained lawyer, accustomed to listen to involved
evidence and legal argument; he could doze when he was bored. The accused
were laymen and much of what went on must have been completely
incomprehensible to them. Nevertheless, being on trial for their lives they
could not afford to miss any point which might possibly have a bearing,
however remote, on the charges made against them personally.


To disentangle the twenty-one cases from each other and then to sketch the
course of each even in outline would be a lengthy and profitless undertaking;
to sketch in outline the course of the proceedings as a whole would be


impossible, since the Tribunal gave no indication as to what evidence they
accepted and what they rejected. All that can be done here is to trace the
course of one trial so as to show how the procedure laid down by the Charter
to the London Agreement worked in practice. The trial of Grossadmiral
Raeder is chosen as illustrating this most clearly. The charge against
Grossadmiral Raeder was under Article 6 of the Charter. It was alleged that he
had committed a crime against peace by planning and directing the invasion of
Norway in 1940. Undeniably as commander-in- chief of the German Navy he
had taken a leading part in planning and directing this invasion. Admittedly no
quarrel of any kind existed between Germany and Norway. On the face of it,
therefore, this invasion was plainly an aggressive war and the London
Agreement had declared that to wage an aggressive war was a crime. If it be
admitted that this declaration had retrospective effect, conviction after a
hearing lasting only a few hours would seem inevitable.


The case, however, was not so simple as this. No one suggested that Germany
had any grievance against Norway. In a nutshell Grossadmiral Raeder’s
defence was that the invasion of Norway which admittedly he had planned and
directed, was not undertaken as a result of any quarrel with Norway, but in
order to forestall a British invasion of Norway which was on the point of being
launched.


The business of the Tribunal was to punish various acts, hitherto regarded as
innocent but which had been pronounced criminal by the London Agreement.
In theory the Tribunal had the right to interpret the London Agreement as they
pleased and to hold any act criminal subject only to the express limitation of
their jurisdiction to punishing only such acts as were committed in the interests
of the European Axis Powers. The Tribunal interpreted this limitation of its
powers as imposing on it a duty to act on the assumption that the victorious
Powers were, one and all, incapable of committing war crimes. From this as it
followed logically that if one of the victorious Powers could be proved to have
committed a certain act, the Tribunal had no power to declare that act a crime.
The act in question received, as it were, a certificate of innocence. With
remorseless logic the Tribunal decided that an act which must be regarded as
innocent as having been committed in the interests of the Victors could not at
the same time be pronounced a crime if committed in the interests of the
vanquished.


The promoters of the Nuremberg Trials had foreseen that the Tribunal might
take this view and consequently, as we have seen, no charges of
indiscriminate bombing were preferred against the captured enemy leaders.
Rather incautiously, however, charges of waging unrestricted submarine
warfare were preferred with the result the Tribunal held that as both the
Americans and British had undeniably waged unrestricted submarine warfare,
it was entitled to a certificate of innocence and consequently Admiral Dönitz
was entitled to be acquitted on this charge.


Upon this ruling of the Nuremberg Tribunal in the Dönitz Case the fate of
Admiral Raeder depended. The main charge against him was that he had
planned the invasion of Norway in 1940. If he was allowed to prove that this
invasion was launched to forestall a British invasion of Norway, he would be
entitled to an acquittal. By the same reasoning as had led to unrestricted
submarine warfare being granted a certificate of innocence, an invasion of
Norway in 1940 would have to be pronounced innocent.


During the first month of the war the suggestion was made and freely
discussed in the British Press that a British army should be landed on the
northern coast of Norway and from there should strike across northern
Sweden to the port of Lulea on the Baltic, from which port the Swedish iron
ore upon which the Germ armament industry was largely dependent, was
exported to Germany. If supplies from the Gallivare iron mines were cut off,
Germany’s output of munitions would be dealt a paralysing, perhaps
ultimately a fatal, blow. To many this seemed a promising way of winning the
war, far less costly than a mass attack on the Siegfried Line. The prospect of a
repetition of the Somme Offensive appalled everyone. It occurred to no one at
the time that there would be anything unethical, much less criminal, in
invading two small neutral countries. Many felt, as Mr. Churchill put it in a
Memorandum to the War Cabinet dated the 16th December, 1939, that small
neutral countries ought to be glad to put up with some temporary
inconvenience in order that a war being fought to preserve the rights of small
countries could be won. “Humanity, not legality, should be the guide,”
declared Mr.

Churchill. When, twenty-four hours before the German invasion of Norway
was launched on April 9th, 1940, the news arrived that British minefields had


been laid in Norwegian territorial waters, it was generally assumed—and, as it
later proved, rightly assumed— that this was a prelude to the long discussed
Norwegian invasion. In a speech on April 9th Mr. Churchill told the House of
Commons that just before the German invasion British mine-fields had been
laid in Norwegian territorial waters and so this fact at least could be proved by
reference to Hansard.


It was not indeed known at the time of Raeder’s trial that some units of the
British expeditionary force had actually been embarked when the German
expeditionary force left for Norway, but it was common knowledge that the
British Government was planning an invasion and as a preliminary step had laic
mine-fields near Narvik. The Tribunal reluctantly admitted that laying mines in
Norwegian territorial waters was an infringement of Norwegian neutrality, but
refused to accept as a fact of common knowledge that this was an overt act
indicating an intention to invade Norway. Abundant evidence as to British
intentions in regard to Norway of course existed but Admiral Raeder, a closely
guarded prisoner in a country in enemy occupation, had no possible means of
obtaining it. There were scores of highly placed persons in Britain who knew
the full truth, but there was no way of forcing them to attend the trial at
Nuremberg to tell it. The Tribunal insisted on being judicially ignorant of what,
as Lord Hankey wrote afterwards, “had long been a matter of public
knowledge”. The Tribunal dealt with the German invasion of Norway as if it
had been a single isolated act without regard to current events or to the
surrounding circumstances. Admiral Raeder was convicted and sentenced to lift
imprisonment.


It was not until he had endured for several years the carefully devised
humiliations, hardships and deprivations of Spandau Prison, that the full truth
gradually began to come to light. Following a brilliant outline of the events
leading up to the German invasion of Norway, Lord Hankey, in his book,
Politics: Trials and Errors summarises the facts as follows:


“By the beginning of April 1940 the preparations for the major offensive
operation in Norway had been completed both by the British and the Germans.
Neither side had given the other an easy excuse for launching their expedition,
and by a coincidence the two operations were launched almost simultaneously
without any pretext having been found. The actual German landing did not


talen nlanana aintil Anml Ath Te.ranter fanin harina hafana that namaler hatr.rnnn


—


ldKE plate ULILLE AAPIIT JUL LWELILY-LUUL HUULS DELULE Uldl, LidlIelLy VELWEEIL


4.30 and 5.00 a.m. on April 8th, the British minefields had been laid in the
West Fjord near Narvik.”


Lord Hankey then proceeds as follows:


“From the start of planning to the German invasion, Great Britain and
Germany were keeping more or less level in their plans and preparations.
Britain actually started planning a little earlier, partly owing to Mr. Churchill’s
prescience, and partly perhaps because she had a better and more experienced
system of Higher Control of the War than Germany. Throughout the period of
preparations the planning continued normally. The essence of the British plan
was to stop the German supplies of Gallivare ore during the winter. Both plans
were executed almost simultaneously, Britain being twenty-four hours ahead
in this so-called act of aggression, if the term is really applicable to either
side.”


Only two years after the publication of Lord Hankey’s memorable work the
full truth was disclosed in the first volume of a series of military histories of
the Second World War entitled The Campaign in Norway. The author, Dr. T.
K. Deny, from official sources presumably not available to Lord Hankey,
disclosed that as early as November 1939 the British Admiralty began to push
forward in earnest plans for an invasion of Norway as a result of a report by the
Ministry of Economic Warfare that if Germany’s supplies of Swedish iron ore
were cut off, within twelve months Germany would be unable from lack of
munitions to wage active warfare. When the Soviet Union launched an
unprovoked attack on Finland in November 1939, to the original purpose
which an invasion of Norway and Sweden was intended to serve was added the
quite distinct purpose of providing help to the gallant Finns, “sublime in the
jaws of peril”, as Mr. Churchill put it. On February 6th, 1940, the Supreme
War Council approved detailed plans to land an army in Norway which “on its
way to rescue the Finns” as Dr. Derry demurely expresses it, would seize the
Swedish ore fields and the Baltic port of Lulea. The most startling revelation in
this official record of the Norwegian Campaign is best summarised in the
following passage from a remarkable review of this book by “Our Special
Correspondent” published in The Times of December 10th 1952 under the title,
A Gallant Fiasco:


“Britain was dickering with a modified version of the original scheme for
securing Narvik and some troops had actually been embarked in warships
when, in the early hours of April 9th, Hitler struck.

“With the exception of Oslo, which had never figured in our plans, the
immediate German objectives in Norway were precisely (and inevitably) the
same ports whose seizure the Allies had been assiduously plotting for many
months.”


The cool cynicism of this reference to “plotting for many months” will only be
realised if it be remembered that when these words were written Admiral
Raeder had for six years been enduring the horrors of Spandau Prison after
condemnation as a criminal for exactly the same plotting.


No doubt the Special Correspondent of The Times when he wrote this review
had forgotten completely the conviction of Admiral Raeder. By the British
public in general Admiral Raeder was remembered, if at all, as one of the
German leaders who had been convicted at Nuremberg. Although the trials
had started in the full glare of publicity, the proceedings each day being fully
reported in the Press, public interest quickly faded in spite of desperate efforts
to keep it alive. After the first couple of months reporting became more and
more brief. Few readers attempted to work out what exactly were the charges
being brought against each defendant individually. At the end Admiral
Raeder’s name was just one on a list of names of defendants who had been
convicted of something or other. Consequently when the full truth concerning
the intended British invasion of Norway was published, there was no public
outcry over what was now clearly a gross miscarriage of justice. Admiral
Raeder remained in Spandau Prison until the 25th September 1955 when he
was released on the ground of ill-health, having spent almost exactly nine
years there “in very hard and inhumane conditions”, to quote Mr. Churchill.
Far more than Mr. Justice Birkett he had reason to consider himself a victim of
grievous injustice since, as it has now been disclosed, he was only included in
the list of major war-criminals because, as Whitney R. Harris, the assistant
American prosecutor at Nuremberg, long afterwards cynically explained,
“Raeder was a not illogical defendant- counterpart to Field Marshal Keitel”.


While the trial of Admiral Raeder was in progress the British politicians who


had “plotted” the invasion of Norway and the generals and admirals who had
been given the command of the Norwegian Expeditionary Force left the
International Military Tribunal to deal as best they could with the carefully
selected facts produced in evidence by the prosecution. If some consciences
were disturbed during this time or at Admiral Raeder’s conviction, no outward
sign of this disturbance was given. In fairness to the Tribunal, the extreme
delicacy of the task given them should be pointed out. How delicate this task
would be was clearly overlooked by Whitney R. Harris and his colleagues
when they decided to prosecute Admiral Raeder as “a not illogical defendant-
counterpart to Field Marshal Keitel. It was one thing for the Tribunal to grant
certificates of innocence to indiscriminate bombing and to unrestricted
submarine warfare on the ground that both these forms of warfare had been
waged by the victors. It was quite another thing to grant a certificate of
innocence to an unprovoked invasion of Norway by Germany on the ground
that this invasion was to forestall an unprovoked invasion of Norway by
Britain. Such a ruling by the Tribunal would have been universally denounced,
especially in small countries, as the aggressors’ charter! Thenceforth every
great Power would have had a ready excuse for an attack on a small state by
alleging that it was intended simply to forestall an attack by another great
Power. It is perhaps not entirely irrelevant to note that without any ruling by
the Nuremberg Tribunal this excuse was put forward by Anthony Eden in
1956 when he claimed that the Franco-British invasion of Egypt in that year
was intended to protect Egypt from an invasion by Israel.


The Tribunal could of course have resolved their difficulties by accepting
Admiral Raeder’s evidence that the German invasion of Norway was a
countermove intended to forestall a pending British invasion, no evidence
contradicting the Admiral’s testimony having been tended by the prosecution,
and then to have ruled that there was a fundamental distinction between the
two invasions, the British invasion being intended to further a just cause and
the German invasion an unjust cause. Admiral Raeder in accordance with this
ruling could then have been convicted of planning and directing an invasion in
an unjust cause.


Having failed however to define ‘a war of aggression’, the Tribunal foresaw
that the same difficulty would arise in distinguishing between a just cause and


an unjust cause. In fact the difficulty would be essentially the same. It would
nheriarvialer ha im|mnananihla ta Anfimnn an nninot nnmnnn nrithant teanlindlser


UVDVIUUSLY VE LIUIPUSSIVIE LO UELLE dil ULIUSLE CAUSE WILIUUL MUpPHEULY
condemning the invasion of Finland by Soviet Russia in November 1939 and
thereby arousing Stalin’s dreaded anger. Very prudently the Tribunal decided
to take no such risk.


In all criminal trials there is invariably one outstanding figure upon whom all
interest centres. Generally this is the accused person in the dock. In the “Great
Business” in Westminster Hall in 1649 all attention centred on “The Grand
Delinquent” standing trial for his life. Few now remember anything in
particular about the pack of vindictive weasels which conducted the
prosecution of Charles I. The promoters of the trial, Oliver Cromwell and his
“grim colonels”, preferred to lurk unobtrusively in the background. In the dock
at Nuremberg in that year of grace, 1945, there were twenty-one persons
alleged to be delinquents, but only one who could be regarded as a Grand
Delinquent. The figure of Field Marshal Herman Goring towered not only
above all the other accused, but over everyone else taking part in the
proceedings. This was not simply due to his recognised position as, next to
Hitler, the most influential leader in the Nazi Party, the only one of the
accused whose name was known throughout the world. The other occupants of
the dock had little to say for themselves. The generals and admirals, men
brought up from youth in the traditions of European civilized warfare, found it
hard to believe that their captors really intended to put them to death. They
were prisoners of war and as such were entitled to be treated in accordance
with international law codified by treaties to which the victorious Powers had
been parties. But long before the Geneva Convention it had been the custom in
Europe for two and half centuries to treat captured enemy military and naval
leaders with respect and honour. Any act of violence against their persons
would cast an indelible slur on the profession of arms. Probably they relied on
their professional brethren serving in the armies and navies of the victorious
Powers to veto any secret plan for their elimination which the politicians
might have arranged. Anyway the novel charges probably seemed so fantastic
to them as to be incomprehensible. The other German political leaders in the
dock with Göring were demoralised by the completeness of the disaster which
had overtaken them and sought to meet the charges brought against them by
denials, explanations, excuses and regrets. After the trial Göring is reported to
have commented on Ribbentrop’s appearance in the witness box, “I was sorry
to see Ribbentrop break down. If I had been Foreign Minister I would have


said, “That was my foreign policy and I stick to it. If you want to put me on
trial for it, go ahead. You’ve got the power: you are the victors!’”


Whether this observation is authentic or not, it exactly expresses Goring’s own
attitude to the Nuremberg Trials. As an intelligent man he knew that whatever
he said, he was doomed. He had not followed the example of Hitler, Goebbels
and Himmler and escaped the ordeal of “a form of trial” (once again to quote
General Nikitchenko’s description of the proceedings) by committing suicide,
because he was determined that at least someone should put on record the
defence of the German people to the charges of their enemies. In his evidence
he was speaking not to the Tribunal but to posterity. Whether or not posterity
will find it convincing, it was without question a masterly presentation of the
German point of view. The chief American prosecutor, Robert H. Jackson,
began his cross-examination with a series of carefully prepared questions,
which he imagined Goring would meet with blunt denials, and so would soon
entangle himself with damaging contradictions. But Göring frankly admitted
the suggestions made to him. Of course from the first he had set out to bring
about the downfall of the Weimar constitution. Certainly he had planned to
free Germany from the unjust restrictions imposed by the dictated Treaty of
Versailles. Obviously his re-creation of the Luftwaffe was a breach of the
clauses of that Treaty.


So, of course, also was the re-occupation of the Rhinelands. Yes, he had been
prepared to use armed force to recover the German city of Danzig, annexed by
Poland in 1939. Yes, in common with statesmen of all countries in all ages, he
had been willing to resort to war to achieve a political purpose. Completely
baffled, Jackson lost his temper, but soon found that bullying could not shake
the witness’s iron self-control. In the end he was driven to appeal to the
protection of the Tribunal from his intended victim.


Mr. Justice Birkett noted in his diary, “the cross-examination of Göring had
not proceeded more than ten minutes before it was seen that Göring was the
complete master of Justice Jackson. Suave, shrewd, adroit, capable,
resourceful, he quickly saw the elements of the situation and, as his confidence
grew, his mastery became more apparent. For almost two days he held the
stage without interruption of any kind.”


Diwlatte than mnda tha inaanmninmnn FAM Ant nntaninhina fram ann niiemanntina ta


DIKE WEN Maute WHE LI BeCMUUUS CULLUTICIIL, ASLULISIUHS LUL ULNE PULVULLIIITE LU
sit in a judicial capacity, that the Tribunal should have intervened to protect
bullying Counsel from this unyielding witness. Intervention, he notes, would
have had the happy result of restoring Jackson’s lost confidence and so would
have been “for the ultimate benefit of all concerned in the trial”.


Writing nearly twenty years later, the chief British prosecutor at Nuremberg, Si
David Maxwell Fyfe, in his book Political Adventure expresses the opinion that
on this point “Birkett’s judgment was seriously at fault. If Göring could run
rings round prosecuting Counsel, that was a matter for Counsel to put right
without assistance from the Tribunal”. He himself then adds a glowing tribute
to what he calls “G6ring’s insolent competence” and declares that Göring was
“the most formidable witness I have ever examined.”


From his book, cited above, it is clear that Sir David Maxwell Fyfe looks back
with complacent satisfaction on the humiliating discomfiture of his American
colleague, Jackson, as providing him with an opportunity to pay himself a
glowing tribute for what he describes as his own masterly cross-examination
of the fallen Nazi leader. Resolutely ignoring Göring’s “jibes and insolence,
his sallies, his wit and sneers,” he concentrated on the charge which most
deeply interested the British public, the charge that Goring was personally
responsible for the shooting of some fifty British airmen who had effected a
mass escape from a prison camp known as Stalag Luft III. He suggests that he
succeeded in establishing this charge although not apparently to the Tribunal’s
satisfaction, judging from the fact the Tribunal followed the practice they had
adopted in the case of the Katyn Forest charges and omitted all reference to
this charge in the judgment, the accused on this charge being neither convicted
nor acquitted. Perhaps the failure of the Tribunal to recognise that he had
succeeded where Jackson had so signally failed may account for Sir David’s
rather tart references to the British judge, Birkett. He consoled himself for this
disappointment by claiming that he extracted damaging admissions by Göring
with regard to the treatment of captured Allied airmen, shot down when
carrying out the Lindemann Plan, of partisans operating behind the German
lines, and of the inhabitants of the countries in German occupation. And even
Sir David, with his unlimited capacity for self-congratulation, could not claim
that Géring’s conviction was due to his brilliant cross-examination since the
judgment of the Tribunal, read with special solemnity by Lord Justice


Lawrence, stressed that Göring was being convicted on the charges which he
himself had contemptuously admitted. The wording of the judgment is as
follows:


“Goring was often, indeed almost always, the moving force, second only to his
leader. He was the leading war aggressor both as political and as military

i leader; he was the director of the slave-labour programme and the creator of
the oppressive programme against the Jews and other races, at home and
abroad. All of these aims he has frankly admitted. On some special cases there
may be conflict of testimony, but in terms of the broad outline his admissions
are more than sufficiently wide to be conclusive of his guilt. His guilt is unique
in its enormity. The record discloses no excuses for this man.”


The objections to the Nuremberg Trials as a whole are so many, so grave and
so unanswerable that if an international court of appeal composed of judges
from neutral countries had been in existence in 1946, before which the doings
of the International Military Tribunal could have been brought, no doubt the
judgments delivered at Nuremberg would have been quashed in toto, including
the conviction of Hermann Göring. Without going into the details of particular
charges against particular individuals, an impartial court of appeal would have
declared the proceedings void ab initio as based on contentions repugnant to
the fundamental principles of justice.


That the Tribunal’s findings of fact, apart from findings of guilt, carry no
weight has now become generally recognised. How utterly discredited the
Nuremberg Trials have become was strikingly demonstrated during the heated
controversy which arose in 1961 between the rival Oxford University
historians, Trevor Roper and A. J. P. Taylor, following the publication of the
latter’s book in which he refuted the propaganda fiction that Hitler was solely
responsible for the outbreak of the Second World War. Trevor Roper had
declared that this exposure of the truth would do “irreparable harm”, and on
the 9th July, 1961, the

B.B.C. arranged a televised debate between these two learned gentlemen.
Taylor in his book had not troubled to mention the findings of the Nuremberg
Tribunal on the subject of war guilt and it was confidently expected that
Trevor Roper would summarily dispose of his opponent’s contentions by
drawing his attention to these findings and pointing out that the questions dealt


with in Taylor’s book were res judicata, having been settled once and for all
by the judgment of the Tribunal. To the general surprise, however, Trevor
Roper did not once refer to the judgment. Tacitly, therefore, he accepted
Taylor’s view that the unanimous findings of the eight learned judges reached
after what purported to be an investigation of the facts lasting a year, were not
worth citing even as a pointer in the direction of the truth.


Unquestionably any conviction following a trial conducted on the lines of the
Nuremberg Trials would in any civilized Western country be quashed without
hesitation by a court of criminal appeal. Unquestionably also many of the
convictions pronounced by the International Military Tribunal were in
themselves undeniably gross miscarriages of justice: perhaps of these the
conviction of Admiral Raeder may be cited as the most indefensible. On the
other hand it does not necessarily follow from this that all the accused
convicted at Nuremberg were wrongly convicted. Several of them were clearly
guilty of abominable crimes against humanity. When condemning a lynching
one is apt to regard the person done to death as the victim of lawless violence
although probably in the majority of cases the victims of lynching deserve
their fate. Similarly in regard to many of the accused at Nuremberg. The case
of Field Marshal Hermann Göring is one in which it can be reasonably argued
that on the facts proved his conviction was wrong, while it is possible also to
argue that no injustice resulted from his conviction and that he richly deserved
his fate.


The principal charge on which Goring was convicted was that he had planned
and waged an aggressive war. This admittedly was not a crime when allegedly
he had committed it but was declared to be a crime by the London Agreement
of the 8th August 1945, a declaration which was treated as having
retrospective effect. Göring frankly admitted planning and waging a war for a
political purpose and since as we have seen the Tribunal deliberately refrained
from defining an aggressive war, we are left without guidance as to the nature
of the war for which Goring was admittedly partly responsible. Of course if
one accepts the view that any resorting to war to achieve a political purpose is
per se a crime, then clearly Göring’s conviction was justified. One hesitates to
accept this view since it entails the admission that Anthony Eden was a
criminal in 1956 when he ordered a British army to invade Egypt in alliance
with France and Israel, the saintly Pandit Nehru was a criminal in 1961 when


he invaded and annexed the four hundred year old Portuguese possession of
Goa, and the Sectariat of U.N.O. were criminals in 1963 when they ordered
their forces in the Congo to invade the province of Katanga!


Apparently the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the prosecution had failed
to establish Goring’s personal responsibility for any of the specific crimes
against humanity brought against him or for any of the specific war-crimes as
defined under the unwritten code of European civilized warfare, as for
example the alleged shooting of the British airmen escaping from Stalag Luft
III. Very reasonably however they held that Göring as a leading member of a
government which had authorised wholesale crimes against humanity of the
most frightful description must be deemed to bear a share of the burden of the
collective guilt. They rejected his claim that the Air Ministry of which he was
the head was not concerned with the doings of Himmler and the S.S., and that
although he knew of the existence of the concentration camps to which Jews
and others were being sent, he had no knowledge of what was going on in
these camps. It was as if a member of the British Cabinet in 1942 who was
able to prove that he had not been present at the cabinet meeting at the end of
March of that year when the Lindemann Plan was adopted, subsequently
maintained that he had no personal knowledge that a terror bombing campaign
in accordance with this plan was being conducted against the German civilian
population. For once taking up a position on firm ground, the Tribunal
convicted Goring, as the judgment expressed it, “in terms of the broad
outline.”


The trial of Field Marshal Hermann Göring owes its unique interest among the
trials of modern times not certainly to the legal technicalities which arose
during its course, most of which indeed arose during the concurrent trials of
the other twenty defendants, nor to the discomfiture of the bullying
prosecutor, Robert H. Jackson, nor to the demonstration, to his own
satisfaction, of Sir David Maxwell Fyfe’s gifts as a cross-examiner, nor even
to the unruffled dignity of the president of the Tribunal, but to the colourful
personality and unflinching courage of the defendant.


Success, political power and wealth had brought all the faults and weaknesses
of Goring’s character uppermost. Those who remembered the handsome


young flying officer who in 1918 had taken over the command of Baron von
Dinhthafania Taawdananhe.randan T af tha fama 6STletna inmin? An tha Ananth af


INICLIUNIULEL! > JGBURESLIIWdUEL L UL UE LIALHUUS PLYS UICUS ULM UE Ud UL
the Red Baron, hardly recognised as the same man the corpulent figure,
bedecked with medals, of the most powerful man in the Third Reich next to
the Führer himself. He had in the course of twenty years become self-
indulgent, vulgar, unscrupulous and ruthless, a braggart and a bully. Disaster
brought about an equally astonishing transformation. The semi-starvation to
which like all the other prisoners he was subjected during his captivity—the
reader will remember the pre-conviction punishment inflicted on Bessos
before his trial—worked a miracle on his appearance and in his character. He
faced his accusers with the same dauntless spirit with which during, the First
World War he had set forth in his plane against the overwhelming air strength
of the Allies. In June 1918 he knew that the war was lost but at least he could
bring down a few more enemy planes: in October 1945 he knew that he was
doomed and that nothing he could do or say would avert his fate but at least
he could score a few last triumphs, if only verbal ones, over his captors.


As a youth Göring had been prone to making defiant gestures. In 1918 after
the signing of the Armistice he received orders to fly his squadron to some
airfield in France and there surrender it: risking a well-deserved court martial,
he refused to obey and led his squadron back to its base in Germany as a
protest, a rather futile protest, it must be admitted, against fate. In 1946 after
he left the dock in Nuremberg for the last time it must have seemed that there
remained nothing further for him to do but to wait until the hangman was
ready to deal with him. Ever since his arrest at Kitzbuhel his enemies
throughout the world had been gloating over the prospect of his execution as
some compensation for their disappointment over the suicide of Hitler about
which they could only comfort themselves by pious reflections on the sanctity
of human life and the enormity of the sin of self-destruction. The execution of
Göring was to have been a sort of sacramental act: it was intended that in his
person the whole National Socialist Party should expiate its shortcomings,
follies and crimes by an ignominious death on a gallows. Extraordinary and
most stringent precautions were taken to make it absolutely certain that Göring
possessed no means of committing suicide and that no such means should
reach him.


How Göring, shortly before midnight and less than an hour before the time
fixed for his execution, succeeded in committing suicide remains after over


twenty years a mystery. Charles Bewley in his biography of Göring assures us
that all the guesses made to date as to what happened have been baseless and
that the truth has not been disclosed by the surviving members of Goring’s
family because the essential role was played by “a non- German in the prison”
whose identity must be kept secret. It seems indeed scarcely believable that
among Goring’s carefully selected guards was a foreign sympathiser with the
Nazi movement. On the other hand we know that the accused when they were
removed from the dock to the cells beneath were subjected to the harshest, if
not brutal, treatment. This fact is made clear by the complaint made in open
court by Julius Streicher to the Tribunal that he had been violently assaulted by
his jailers who among other indignities had forced him to drink his own urine.
The truth of this complaint finds some confirmation in the fact that not only
did the Tribunal refuse to order an investigation but on the application of Rob
H. Jackson, the chief American prosecutor, they ordered that this complaint
should be deleted from the record of Streicher’s evidence, so that future
historians, studying the Nuremberg Trials, and imagining the shorthand notes
of the proceedings were complete, would not know that this complaint had
been made. It is not unlikely that this incident suggested to George Orwell the
periodic re-writing of history to suit the political requirements of the moment
which he describes in Nineteen Eighty- four. Whether Streicher’s complaint be
accepted or not, it is at any rate certain that no control was exercised over the
treatment of the prisoners and it is therefore just conceivable that some witness
of this treatment may have been inspired by disgust and sympathy to intervene.


Whatever the motives of this unknown person may have been, the Grand
Delinquent of Nuremberg found himself literally at the eleventh hour in
possession of what before anything else in the world he desired to have. His
jailors found him lying on his plank bed as if asleep with an amused smile on
his lips and an empty file of cyankali on the floor beside him. Even many who
attributed their wrongs to him have come to the conclusion that this was a
fitting end to the career of the famous fighter pilot for which the most
hackneyed lines in literature might well have been expressedly written,
“Nothing in his life became him like the leaving it.”


twenty years a mystery. Charles Bewley in his biography of Göring assures us
that all the guesses made to date as to what happened have been baseless and
that the truth has not been disclosed by the surviving members of Goring’s
family because the essential role was played by “a non- German in the prison”
whose identity must be kept secret. It seems indeed scarcely believable that
among Goring’s carefully selected guards was a foreign sympathiser with the
Nazi movement. On the other hand we know that the accused when they were
removed from the dock to the cells beneath were subjected to the harshest, if
not brutal, treatment. This fact is made clear by the complaint made in open
court by Julius Streicher to the Tribunal that he had been violently assaulted by
his jailers who among other indignities had forced him to drink his own urine.
The truth of this complaint finds some confirmation in the fact that not only
did the Tribunal refuse to order an investigation but on the application of Rob
H. Jackson, the chief American prosecutor, they ordered that this complaint
should be deleted from the record of Streicher’s evidence, so that future
historians, studying the Nuremberg Trials, and imagining the shorthand notes
of the proceedings were complete, would not know that this complaint had
been made. It is not unlikely that this incident suggested to George Orwell the
periodic re-writing of history to suit the political requirements of the moment
which he describes in Nineteen Eighty- four. Whether Streicher’s complaint be
accepted or not, it is at any rate certain that no control was exercised over the
treatment of the prisoners and it is therefore just conceivable that some witness
of this treatment may have been inspired by disgust and sympathy to intervene.


Whatever the motives of this unknown person may have been, the Grand
Delinquent of Nuremberg found himself literally at the eleventh hour in
possession of what before anything else in the world he desired to have. His
jailors found him lying on his plank bed as if asleep with an amused smile on
his lips and an empty file of cyankali on the floor beside him. Even many who
attributed their wrongs to him have come to the conclusion that this was a
fitting end to the career of the famous fighter pilot for which the most
hackneyed lines in literature might well have been expressedly written,
“Nothing in his life became him like the leaving it.”


Chapter 8 — The Last Phase


The mass-trial of the leading German politicians and service chiefs at
Nuremberg was the natural outcome of a war in which one side had adopted
terror bombing and the other genocide as part of their war effort. No other
outcome was to be expected. It was just one stage of the chain reaction which
had started in 1914. The Nuremberg mass-trial however was only one episode
of this stage in the chain reaction which included not only the equally
significant mass-trial of the Japanese leaders at Tokyo, but many thousand
war- crimes trials of prisoners of war which took place in widely separated
places in Europe and Asia and continued for a period of half a dozen years.
The Nuremberg War-crimes Trial overshadows all other war-crimes trials held
after 1945 because, when it started, all the manifold resources of the science of
modem propaganda were concentrated upon it in order to implant in the public
mind the conviction that the disposal of the leaders of a defeated and
discredited political party was an event of unique significance for all mankind.
In itself of course it mattered nothing whether these ill-fated men died on a
scaffold or were allowed to die a natural death in their beds, but the promoters
of the trial had determined to represent their disposal as a symbolic act which
could be made the subject for worldwide jollification. Consequently no pains
were spared to give the proceedings the widest publicity. While at first the
reaction of the public was all that could have been desired, the arrangements
made were so clumsy and elaborate that the proceedings dragged on for nearly
a year and the public became bored with so protracted a performance. One
cannot remain in a state of joyful ecstasy for eleven months!

Nevertheless the conviction was successfully planted in the public mind that
the Nuremberg War-crimes Trial was of unique importance.


No comparable attempt was made to give publicity to any of the other war-
crimes trials which took place from 1945 onwards. Not one of these war-crimes
trials, even the great Tokyo War-crimes Trial, was reported in any detail in the
British Press. Every few days over a period of half a dozen years the execution
of some prisoner of war was announced unobtrusively as an item of news on thi
back pages of the newspapers but the victim was merely described as a war-
criminal and rarely was any mention made of his alleged offence. The vast
majority of war-crimes trials were never reported at all.


It will be remembered that the Nuremberg Tribunal was created by Article I of
the London Agreement to try “war-criminals whose offences had no particular
geographical location.” This Article referred only to prisoners who before
their trial were labelled ‘major war-criminals’. In the preamble to the
Agreement reference was made to the Moscow Declaration of the 30th
October 1943 by which it had been agreed that prisoners who were
responsible for crimes committed in a particular country should be sent back
to that country “to be judged and punished according to the laws of that
country.” It was assumed that prisoners already in captivity in the country
where they were alleged to have committed crimes would be dealt with by
their captors as the latter saw fit and so no international agreement was needed
to provide for their liquidation.


So long as Germany remained able to resist, fear of reprisals offered
protection to German prisoners of war. The moment unconditional surrender
had taken place, this protection was removed and the work of disposal was
gleefully undertaken in all the victorious countries. Not only did executions
commence but in accordance with the Moscow Declaration a brisk traffic of
prisoners of war began. It frequently happened as had been foreseen at the
Moscow Conference in 1943 that several of the victorious Powers would
claim the right to bring to trial and to liquidate the same prisoner of war. Keen
bargaining then often resulted. Thus, for example, it might happen that Czechs
held some officer of high rank as a prisoner of war against whom they had no
particular grudge but against whom both the Poles and Serbs had laid distinct
sets of charges. Each claimant would then make an offer for the victim. Thus
the Poles might offer to hand over in exchange to the Czechs an officer of
equal rank whom the Czechs wanted to hang while the Serbs would offer to
hand over a dozen S.S. men of a unit upon whom the Czechs particularly
desired to lay their hands. Like antique dealers, the victorious Powers

_ exchanged lists of the human commodities which they had for barter. Once a
claim had been laid the victim was handed over unless the Power whose
prisoner he was happened to have charges of its own against him. The
principle upon which the Moscow Declaration was based was that the
accusers of a prisoner were not only eligible to try their own charges against
him but were the parties most eligible to try these charges. It was argued that
as conviction and justice were in practice synonymous, the swiftest and surest
way of ensuring a conviction must also be the swiftest and surest way of


dispensing justice. None of the victorious Powers acknowledged any
obligation to investigate any charge made by one of its allies against a

prisoner of war in its custody.

The fact that a charge was made was accepted as evidence of sufficient
‘probative value’ to indicate the victim’s guilt. The only obligation admitted
once a claim had been laid for the surrender of a prisoner of war was to take all
necessary precautions to prevent the victim from committing suicide.


The official attitude in such cases is well expressed in the following extract
from a letter dated the 19th December 1960 from a high official in the British
Foreign Office in reply to an appeal for intervention by Britain to secure the
release by Italy of Major Walter Reder, a German prisoner of war who after
being in British custody for over a year had been handed over to the Italians so
that they could try their own charges against him. An outline of the facts of
this remarkable case will be given later in this chapter. This illuminating
extract reads as follows:


“When you wrote in March 1958, Mr. David Ormsby-Gore said in reply that
we were afraid that we were unable to help; that Reder had been handed over
to Italian jurisdiction and from that moment the case had become one for
Italian penological and clemency procedures; and that the fact that we had
handed Reder over did not give us any say in these procedures. I am afraid
that the situation is unchanged. At the end of the war, there were, as you
know, a great number of war-Criminals whom two or more countries wanted
to try, and the decision in each case had to be taken on an ad hoc basis. It was
of course very much a matter of chance whose forces originally captured any
particular war- criminal, and the fact that Reder was originally in our hands
does not, I am afraid, give us any right to intervene on his behalf with the
Italians. Once he had been handed over, he was removed entirely from our
jurisdiction.”


This letter left unanswered the question why the British military authorities in
Italy handed Major Reder over to the Italians in order that they might try their
own charges against him instead of putting him on trial before a British
military tribunal as they had done with his superior officers, Field Marshal
Kesselring and General Max Simon, under whose orders Major Reder had
acted. To this day the reason why this extraordinary procedure was adopted


MAM AIAG n mrrntanamr. tn thin Aner nlan nftan Aran teeranter weranna NAnian Dadan


LELALIS d HIYSLELY. LU UHS Udy diSU dLLEL UVEL LWELILY YEdLS IVidjJUL REUEL
remains in captivity.


War-crimes trials took many different forms. In fact the only characteristic
common to all of them was that they were all based on the principle that an
accuser is a fit person to act as judge of his own charges. In accordance with
the Moscow Declaration, each country dealt with its prisoners of war
according to its own notions of justice, however vague these notions might be.
The procedures adopted even by the civilized Powers varied greatly. Thus the
Americans followed to a large extent the terms of the Charter of the London
Agreement and in accordance therewith prosecuted Field Marshal Sperrle and
eleven other generals for the ‘ersatz’ crime of planning, preparing and
initiating aggressive warfare: they also prosecuted a group of German Foreign
Office officials on the same charge. Most grotesquely of all they even
undertook the prosecution of the directors of Krupps in an effort to establish
by a judicial decision a factual basis for the Krupp Myth, the most celebrated
myth of the First World War. The British, on the other hand, very wisely
ignored the creation of such newly invented crimes and prosecuted their
prisoners of war only for “violations of the laws and usages of war,’—that is
to say, of breaches of that code of civilized warfare first tacitly adopted at the
end of the 17th century which was examined at length in Chapters IV and V of
this book. This course was possible without blatant absurdity at the time
because the adoption of the Lindemann Plan by the British Government in
March 1942 was not disclosed until 1961, long after the last war-crimes trial
had ended. The adoption of terror bombing as a means of winning a war was
of course the most flagrant breach conceivable of “the laws and usages of


”


Wd.


War-crimes trials carried out in the years immediately following 1945 may be
roughly classified into four main groups under the following headings, The
Spectacular War- crimes Trial: the Informal War-crimes Trial: the Show War-
crimes Trial and the Routine War-crimes Trial.


In the previous chapter a description was given of the first and most celebrated
Spectacular War-crimes Trial, the mass-trial of the captured German leaders at
Nuremberg. In a war-crimes trial of this type the leaders of a vanquished
Power are disposed of with the maximum publicity. The view that the aim of
such a war-crimes trial is to wreak vengeance on hated national enemies is


inadequate and superficial. The immediate purpose is to establish conclusively
the fact that the vanquished Power had been completely defeated so that no
question of this could possibly later arise as it did after the First World War
when many Germans persuaded themselves that Germany had not been
overcome by force of arms but had been beguiled into signing the Armistice
on the promise that the peace treaty would be based on the Fourteen Points.
The ultimate purpose of a Spectacular War-crimes Trial is to stifle future
investigation by historians of the rights and wrongs of the struggle in question
by a formal verdict by a Court appointed by the victors which lays the entire
blame on the vanquished. After the First World War it was hoped to achieve
the latter purpose by inserting an admission of guilt by the vanquished in the
peace treaty which they were compelled to sign without discussion. It was
soon found, however, that Clause 231 of the Versailles Treaty had become
generally dismissed as worthless as having been extorted under duress. After
the Second World War the victors decided to achieve the same object by
staging a lengthy investigation of carefully selected evidence leading to a
solemn verdict proclaiming the guilt of the vanquished. After the passage of
twenty years, however, it has become open to doubt whether the verdict of the
International Military Tribunal will carry any greater weight with posterity
than the notorious Clause 231 of the Versailles Treaty.


The only other Spectacular War-crimes trial which has taken place since 1945
was the great mass war-crimes trial held in Tokyo of the vanquished Japanese
leaders. It was an even more grandiose affair than the Nuremberg Trials;
whereas at Nuremberg there were 21 defendants and the trial lasted 331 days,
at Tokyo there were 27 defendants and the trial lasted 417 days. “At Tokyo,”
commented Lord Hankey, “most of the weaknesses of the Nuremberg Trials
were repeated and exaggerated”. The Tokyo mass-trial was presented to the
American public as a subject for rejoicing but by the time it started the British
public had become utterly bored by war-crimes trials in general and no attempt
was made in Britain to arouse interest in what purported to be legal
proceedings in far-off Japan. It happened that while the trial was in progress
Stalin abandoned the pretence of being a friendly ally by establishing by force
a Communist dictatorship in Czechoslovakia and by blockading West Berlin,
and with the prospect of a third world war starting at any moment, few
interested themselves in the liquidation of the Japanese leaders. Dr. Bell, the
Bishop of Chichester, who, during the war, alone among the prelates of the


Church of England, had raised a voice in protest against terror bombing,
dismissed the proceedings in one short sentence, “As at Nuremberg, so at
Tokyo, the victors tried and condemned the vanquished.”


Summarising this mass-trial in more detail and from an American point of
view, Mr. George F. Blewitt writes:


“The basic fact of this war-trial is that the victorious Powers tried twenty-seven
leaders of the defeated nation for violation of ex post facto law. Because the
charter of the Tribunal was issued by a General of the U.S. Army; because the
defendants were in the custody of the U.S. Army; because the Chief of
Prosecution was a prominent American; because the costs of the trial were met
by funds from the U.S. Treasury; and because the seven found guilty by a
majority verdict were hanged by Americans—for all these reasons—the long-
run effects of the trial are likely to be far more damaging to the prestige of the
United States than to any other Nation represented on the Tokyo Tribunal.”


Some have even maintained that the conviction of Mamoru Shigemitsu at the
mass-trial in Tokyo was an even grosser and less excusable miscarriage of
justice than the conviction of Admiral Raeder at the mass-trial at Nuremberg.
This may seem to be putting the matter impossibly high but there are facts to
support it. At the outbreak of war Shigemitsu was the Japanese Ambassador in
London. All his life he had opposed the dominant group of militarist
politicians which plunged Japan into war in December 1941, and it was not
indeed alleged at his trial that he was in any way responsible for this disastrous
decision. After the outbreak of war he returned to Japan, but it was not until
after the tide of war had definitely turned against Japan that he joined the
Japanese Cabinet, by which time no other course was open to him or any other
Japanese politician than to do everything possible to maintain so stout a
resistance that reasonable terms of peace would be offered. Unconditional
surrender was, however, demanded. Shigemitsu was charged with the crime of
being a member of the Japanese Cabinet at the time of Japan’s surrender after
the explosion of the first atomic bombs. The French and Dutch judges on the
Tokyo Tribunal delivered dissenting judgments acquitting him on all counts,
but the majority judgment found him guilty and he was condemned to seven
years’ imprisonment.


T+ in nnmn nnnnanlatinan fan tha Fant that tha Duttiah nannnannntntirrnan an tha


AL 1S SULLIC CULISUIGLIUIT LUL WE LACl Uldt UIE DLHUSH LEPLEse€lldtives ULM UE
Tribunal were among the majority of the judges which reached this absurd
conclusion, that the speedy rectification of this glaring miscarriage of justice
was mainly due to the efforts of Lord Hankey, who crowned his long career of
outstanding public service by devoting his tireless energies to obtaining justice
for the victims of war-crimes trials. In a memorable speech in the House of
Lords on the 19th May 1949 Lord Hankey delivered a scathing attack on the
condemnation of Shigemitsu, making public for the first time the details of his
so-called trial. These details were then quite unknown in Britain; only three
weeks before the debate in the House of Lords the transcripts of the Tokyo
war-crimes trials had arrived in London consisting of “a pile of double-spaced
foolscap 30-feet high, including 48,000 pages of evidence, the Majority
Judgment of 1,600 pages and the Minority Judgments of 1,500 pages.”


In reply for the Government the Lord Chancellor, Viscount Jowett, expressed
serene confidence that everything had been done in accordance with the high
standards of British justice and was at pains to defend the integrity of the
judges conducting the trials at Tokyo, in particular the British judge, Lord
Patrick, although, of course, in fact no one had called their integrity in
question. The House of Lords however languidly declined to interest itself in
the question of justice to war-criminals. To break down this indifference,
Lord Hankey then proceeded to set out the facts in his book, Politics: Trials
and Errors, a work memorable as the only book written after the war which
had a definite influence on the course of contemporary events. As a direct
result of the publicity given to his case by this book, combined with the
support of General MacArthur which Lord Hankey managed to enlist,
Mamoru Shigemitsu was shortly released.


In passing it may be observed that the attitude of Viscount Jowett to the
question of tempering justice with mercy was, to say the least, peculiar. “He
did not say in so many words that he supported the conviction of Shigemitsu,”
writes Lord Hankey, “but he gave that impression.” On the other hand,
Viscount Jowett later wrote a book concerning the conviction of the
communist spy Alger Hiss in which, while carefully avoiding saying that he
believed Hiss was innocent, he urged that if only the Americans had been wise
enough to have adopted the same rules of evidence as those in force in
England there was a good chance that Hiss would have escaped justice, an
outcome of the trial he clearly thought would have been very desirable. While


strenuously defending the belated trial of Field Marshal von Manstein on
transparently frivolous charges, he supported the great communist propaganda
campaign to secure a reprieve for Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, the New York
Jews who betrayed the secrets of the atomic bomb to the Soviet Union.


The most outstanding feature of the Tokyo war-crime trials was the brilliant
dissenting judgment of Mr. Justice Radhabinode Pal, the representative of
India on the Tribunal, who was, says Mr. Blewitt, “the only deep student of
international law on the Bench”. In a 1,900-page judgment Mr. Justice Pal tore
in shreds one by one the various charges against the accused. “A mere
declaration of intent,” he declared “could not give the Allies any legal right to
define war-criminals in a manner which suited their policies at the moment.”
He held that there was no evidence to show that any of the accused were war-
criminals according to the previously accepted definition of the term, and
declared, regardless of the feelings of his colleagues on the Bench, that “to
purport to put on trial and then to hang prisoners of war was in itself a war-
crime of peculiar gravity.”


Nothing illustrates more vividly how complete has been the reversal of public
opinion which has taken place during the past twenty years concerning racial
equality than the reference in the charges against the defendants at Tokyo to
the war commenced by Japan in December 1941 as “an aggressive war
conducted for the purpose of securing military and political domination of East
Asia.”


Few at the present time would venture so to describe this war because they have
been subconsciously conditioned by the now widely accepted axiom of so-
called progressive thought that in any conflict between the White Race and the
Black or Coloured Races, the White Man is always in the wrong, and they feel
it would somehow be disgracefully “reactionary” to dispute this axiom.
Certainly no responsible politician in any country would now dare to brave the
wrath of the Afro-Asian bloc in the Assembly of UNO by referring in such
terms to a struggle which brought about the downfall of Colonialism in Eastern
Asia and led to independence being achieved by half a dozen coloured nations
from the bondage of Western Imperialism. Contemporary opinion, however,
regarded the Tokyo war-crimes trial as well-merited retribution on a race of
presumptuous yellow dwarfs for daring to challenge we supremacy in the


Tham Thant nee eR thn Ae ena Awe teen Re nal tases Law nen ew


ty


Frar East dlld, WHE ule SUUgg1E rellldllleud Oll equdl LETIS, LOL provilly
themselves more than a match for the White Race.


Informal war-crimes trials, the second of the four classes into which war-
crimes trials may be divided, are the exact opposite of Spectacular War-crime
trials. War-crimes trials of this kind seem to have been particularly common in
the Soviet Union. The first step in such a trial is a decision by the officials of
the government department which had been entrusted with the task of
disposing of prisoners of war, that a particular enemy unit should be held
responsible for the commission of a certain alleged crime. Once this decision
had been reached nothing remained to be done but to order that parades should
be held of the inmates in all the prisoner of war camps in the country so that
the members of this unit could be picked out. The unfortunates in each camp
so picked out would then be paraded separately from their comrades when
they would be informed that they had been collectively judged guilty of the
offence in question and had been sentenced to a long term of forced labour in
Siberia.


It may perhaps be argued that Informal War-crimes Trials are not really trials
at all. The decision of a government department cannot be described as a
judicial verdict. To this objection the reply can be made that in a rough and
ready way this procedure followed the august precedent established at
Nuremberg where “the major war criminals of European Axis Powers” had
already been adjudicated and found guilty (to quote once again the Russian
judge at Nuremberg, General Nikitchenko) by the Chiefs of State at the Yalta
Conference. The only distinction which can be drawn between the two cases is
that the decision to convict the prisoners at Nuremberg was reached by a
group of powerful politicians representing their respective countries, while in
cases of Informal War-crimes Trials a similar decision to convict is reached by
a committee of obscure bureaucrats. It can at least be said in favour of
informal War-crimes Trials that the victims are spared the ordeal of having to
listen to pompous speeches, and no pretence is made that strict justice is being
meted out to individuals.


For the third class of war-crimes trials the name Show War-crimes Trial has
been suggested. This procedure seems to have been most frequently adopted
in Czecho- slovakia. The prisoner is taken to the place where he is alleged to


have committed his crime and the trial takes place there publicly before a jury
composed of the relations and friends of his alleged victims and is followed by
his execution amid general rejoicings. This procedure has in recent years been
employed in an elaborated form in Cuba by Fidel Castro for the disposal of
adherents of the fallen Batista regime, following the precedent already set in
China after the establishment of a communist regime by Mao Tse Tung. In
China, after 1949, persons accused of being anti-Communist were tried in the
place where they resided by a mass jury composed of their neighbours. All the
forms of a judicial trial are strictly observed. The proceedings are commenced
by a speech by the prosecuting official in which the offences of the accused
are graphically described at length amid great applause. The accused then
recites his confession amid demonstrations of popular indignation and anger.
The judge then solemnly announces his verdict which is of course loudly
cheered. The execution then follows amid a general jollification that the
punishment should so satisfactorily fit the crime. This class of war trial puts
into practice the suggestion of W. S. Gilbert in The Mikado that each prisoner
pent should provide the community with innocent merriment.


The vast majority of war-crimes trials form a distinct group which, for want of
a better term, may be labelled Routine War-crimes Trials. Outwardly most of
them took the form of normal criminal prosecutions. The two Spectacular
War-crimes Trials which followed the Second World War were essentially
political demonstrations in the form of a legal trial in accordance with the
principle adopted in the Yalta Conference which was well summarised by
Field Marshal Montgomery in a speech he made in Paris on June 9th, 1948,
“The waging of an unsuccessful war is a crime; henceforth generals on the
defeated side will be tried and then hanged.” As we have seen, to date only
two examples of this type of trial have taken place; the murder of Benito
Mussolini by a communist liquidation squad “at least spared the world an
Italian Nuremberg,” to quote Winston Churchill’s comment in his book,
Triumph and Tragedy, and Stalin disposed of the leaders of the other
vanquished Powers, Hungary, Roumania and Bulgaria, without inviting the
participation of his allies. The practice of disposing of prisoners of war after
Informal War-crimes Trials does not seem to have been widely adopted
outside the Soviet Union while only in semi-civilized countries were Show
War-crimes Trials carried out and no statistics are available to provide a basis
even for a guess as to the total number of victims. On the other hand, many


thousands of prisoners of war were done to death in Europe and Asia after
Routine War-crimes Trials.


War-crimes Trials of this type were all conducted on the lines of a court-
martial in accordance with the military law of the country in which they were
held. Generally they concerned such undoubted criminal acts as robbery,
looting, or the murder or maltreatment of prisoners or civilians, acts which
would be criminal if committed by anyone but are dealt with under military
law when the alleged offenders happen to be soldiers and who, as prisoners of
war, remain under military discipline. The same military courts also dealt with
alleged breaches “of the laws and usages of war”, to quote the phrase adopted
by the British military authorities. Occasionally, as we have seen, the
American authorities brought to trial before their military courts enemy
prisoners of war and even enemy civilians charged with the commission of one
or other of the newly invented “ersatz” crimes, such as planning or waging a
war of aggression.


Unlike the so-called International Military Tribunal which sat at Nuremberg,
most of whose members were civilians, the adjudicating body in Routine War-
crimes Trials was invariably composed of three or more army officers
generally assisted by a lawyer who advised the court on military law. Rarely in
cases of this type was an attempt made to interest the general public in the
proceedings, and only in cases when the accused was a well known enemy
leader did the British Press, at any rate, spare more than a few lines to record
that the prisoner had been tried and executed. Particulars of his alleged offence
were rarely supplied. Naturally, the treatment accorded to the accused at the
hearing varied widely according to the standard of civilization reached in the
country in which the trial took place, the extent to which that country had
suffered during the war, and to the national temperament. British military
tribunals carried out their duties in a brisk, business-like way, carefully
avoiding the appeals to emotion and flights of eloquence in which, for
example, French military tribunals indulged. A routine procedure, more or less
based on the Charter of the London Agreement, was soon established and
thereafter punctiliously observed. Conviction before British courts was not
automatic as it was in Routine War-crimes Trials conducted beyond the Iron
Curtain. The issues to be decided by the military tribunals were simple issues
of fact: should the evidence for the prosecution be accepted or the denials of


the accused? Objections raised to the jurisdiction given to the Tribunals by a
Royal Warrant to try foreign subjects were curtly dismissed: it was not until
one of the last war-crimes trials, that of Field Marshal von Manstein in
Hamburg in 1949, that these objections were permitted to be urged at length
with the result that prosecuting counsel in this trial was reduced to arguing that
as it had long been the established practice to reject these objections, to admit
them now would amount to admitting that all the many hundreds of
convictions recorded by British military tribunals of prisoners of war were
invalid. Naturally the Hamburg tribunal recoiled from coming to so far-
reaching and distressing a conclusion, and therefore decided to dispose of the
matter by acting on the assumption that the Warrant of King George VI. had
somehow conferred on them jurisdiction to adjudicate on charges brought
against foreign subjects. They tried and convicted Field Marshal von Manstein
accordingly.


No doubt the great majority of the British officers called upon in the course of
their duties to serve on war-crimes tribunals were fair-minded men who did
their best to dispense justice and at the same time to carry out what they
conceived to be the wishes of their superiors. How often and how grossly they
failed in the general run of the unrecorded cases which came before them can
only be deduced from the glaring miscarriages of justice which resulted from
carefully recorded prosecutions as that of Field Marshal Kesselring and Field
Marshal von Manstein. Having regard to the state of public opinion at the time
it was inevitable that when forced to choose between the evidence for the
prosecution and the evidence for the defence, they invariably accepted the
former. In brief, their attitude to the prisoners of war brought before them was
similar to that of a bench of sporting country magistrates in England a century
ago when forced to choose between the evidence of a gamekeeper and the
evidence of an alleged poacher.


It might well be imagined that the course of all war-crimes trials would be
governed by the provisions of the Geneva Convention of 1899 and the Hague
Convention of 1907 which (inter alia) laid down clearly defined rules as to the
treatment of prisoners of war. In brief it had been solemnly agreed by all
civilized countries that prisoners of war had a right to be treated similarly to
the members of their captors’ armed forces: that offences committed by them
when in captivity should be dealt with in accordance with the military law of


the country holding them captive: and that they were entitled to release as soon
as practicable after hostilities ceased. During the Manstein Trial, defending
counsel for the accused, Mr. R. T. Paget, clearly summarised Article 63 of the
Geneva convention as follows, “The Convention provides that when a prisoner
is tried by his captors, he shall have a fair trial, and defines a fair trial as a trial
which the captor himself considered fair for his own troops.” When these
international treaties were ratified they were acclaimed as outstanding
landmarks in the course of human progress: no longer would the rights of
prisoners of war be based on a mere tacit understanding between civilized
peoples: these rights had become defined and codified by treaty and
consequently these rights would henceforth be unassailable.


It is distressing to record that when in 1945 the matter was first put to the test
it was found that rights granted by international treaties were illusory if the
will to disregard them existed. By a pettifogging quibble which would have
delighted the hearts of those astute legal practitioners, Dodson and Fogg, late
of Freeman Court, the obligations imposed at Geneva and the Hague were
summarily set aside. It was pointed out that a prisoner of war was a captured
enemy soldier and therefore if he ceased to be a soldier he would lose the
unassailable rights of a prisoner of war. All that the captors of a prisoner of
war had to do was to declare that he had become a civilian by announcing that
he had been ‘demobilised’, a transformation which was carried out by
formally depriving him of his uniform or by simply depriving him of his
insignias of rank: Once he had become a civilian, his captors could treat him
as they pleased. All the victims of war-crimes trials were tried and condemned
as civilians.


It only remains to illustrate by examples how in practice a Routine War-crimes
Trial was conducted. Five examples have been chosen, two British, one
American, one Italian and one French. It cannot be claimed that any of these
five trials can be regarded as representing the average Routine War-crimes
Trial. In all of them the adjudicating military tribunal took its duties seriously
and listened carefully to the evidence placed before it both by the prosecution
and by the defence. In the American example chosen, the Trial of General
Yamashita, the judgment of the military tribunal was reviewed by the Supreme
Court of the United States. Although this trial resulted in what was perhaps the
most flagrant miscarriage of justice of the five trials selected, it can at least be


said that the accused was given a right of appeal from the military tribunal
which condemned him to the highest civilian court of the country of his
captors. None of the other victims of military courts enjoyed any such right of
appeal. The details of this case are well known because, as in the case of Field
Marshal von Manstein, defending counsel was moved to express his
indignation with the verdict by writing a book describing the trial. A White
Book has been published by the Italian Ministry of the Interior on the facts of
the Italian example chosen, the trial of Major Walter Reder, while the French
example, the trial of General Ramcke, has been brilliantly described in a book
by the victim himself. Only the details of the trial of Field Marshal Kesselring
remain obscure. None of the promoters of these war-crimes trials, nor counsel
for the prosecution in any of them, have felt impelled to write books justifying
what took place, no doubt feeling that the sooner the subject was buried in
oblivion the better.


The average Routine War-crimes Trial was very different in practice, but not
in theory, from the five celebrated trials described below. Except in the case of
these five trials no details have been published and no records have been made
public concerning any of these prosecutions before military tribunals. Most of
the victims were obscure individuals whose fate was of no interest to anyone
but their relations and friends. The verdicts carry no weight and would be
promptly quashed by any court of appeal reviewing them judicially in
accordance with established legal principles because in all these proceedings
hearsay evidence had been freely admitted in reliance on the authority given in
the London Agreement. Only if and when the records are made available for
investigation will it be possible to form an opinion as to the proportion of these
cases where it can be claimed that a sort of rough justice was probably done.


said that the accused was given a right of appeal from the military tribunal
which condemned him to the highest civilian court of the country of his
captors. None of the other victims of military courts enjoyed any such right of
appeal. The details of this case are well known because, as in the case of Field
Marshal von Manstein, defending counsel was moved to express his
indignation with the verdict by writing a book describing the trial. A White
Book has been published by the Italian Ministry of the Interior on the facts of
the Italian example chosen, the trial of Major Walter Reder, while the French
example, the trial of General Ramcke, has been brilliantly described in a book
by the victim himself. Only the details of the trial of Field Marshal Kesselring
remain obscure. None of the promoters of these war-crimes trials, nor counsel
for the prosecution in any of them, have felt impelled to write books justifying
what took place, no doubt feeling that the sooner the subject was buried in
oblivion the better.


The average Routine War-crimes Trial was very different in practice, but not
in theory, from the five celebrated trials described below. Except in the case of
these five trials no details have been published and no records have been made
public concerning any of these prosecutions before military tribunals. Most of
the victims were obscure individuals whose fate was of no interest to anyone
but their relations and friends. The verdicts carry no weight and would be
promptly quashed by any court of appeal reviewing them judicially in
accordance with established legal principles because in all these proceedings
hearsay evidence had been freely admitted in reliance on the authority given in
the London Agreement. Only if and when the records are made available for
investigation will it be possible to form an opinion as to the proportion of these
cases where it can be claimed that a sort of rough justice was probably done.


THE TRIAL OF FIELD MARSHAL
KESSELRING


When the Nuremberg Trials commenced on the 20th November 1945, all the
manifold resources of propaganda were mobilised to focus public attention on
this great Spectacular War-crimes Trial. In consequence the numerous
Routine War-crimes Trials which were taking place contemporaneously were
allowed to pass unnoticed. Only occasionally was space on the back pages of
the newspapers spared for a brief announcement that some war-criminal had
been tried and executed somewhere or other. After a few months however the
British public became heartily bored by the slow progress of the mass war-
crimes trials going on at Nuremberg. When desperate efforts to retain public
interest in these proceedings had failed the promoters wisely decided to
discontinue their intensive propaganda campaign. Finally, when after some
eleven months it could be announced proudly that the Nazi war-criminals had
been at last convicted, it was decided in deference to the growing public
distaste to withdraw unobtrusively the subject of the disposal of the prisoners
taken in the late war behind an Iron Curtain of Discreet Silence. War crimes
tribunals continued to function as briskly as ever but no details of their doings
were published and the British public gradually forgot what was going on and
turned its attention to more pleasant subjects.


The Iron Curtain of Discreet Silence remained unbroken in Britain until May
1947, when it was casually disclosed in the Press that Field Marshal Albert
Kesselring, the commander-in-chief of the German forces in Italy, had been
sentenced to death by a British military court in Venice, after a hearing lasting
three months, for being responsible for the shooting of certain hostages and
various Italian partisans and bandits who had been caught operating behind
the German lines.


The storm of protests which this unobtrusive announcement aroused seems to
have filled the British authorities with genuine surprise. Other generals of
equal standing to Field Marshal Kesselring had been quietly liquidated by
courts having no more jurisdiction to enquire into their doings than the court in
Venice which had condemned this particular prisoner of war. Field Marshal
Kesselring was unquestionably a general on the defeated side. Why then, it


was asked plaintively, should he, contrary to all democratic principles, be
treated as an exception? Why should he alone be allowed to enjoy the rights of
a prisoner of war?


Certainly no fault can be found in this reasoning. Besides, it was pointed out,
into this particular case political considerations entered; it was known that
Italian public opinion would be favourably influenced if the German general
who had defended Italian soil so long and so gallantly were hanged. The fact
was overlooked that many people in Great Britain, both influential and obscure,
were extremely proud of the campaign in Italy, a campaign waged by both side:
with but few lapses from the highest standards of civilized warfare—apart, of
course, from the numerous outrages committed on prisoners and wounded by
the Italian partisans and the ruthless reprisals of the German security police,
similar to those of the Black-and-Tans in Ireland, in 1920. In fact, apart from
that one “tragic mistake”, the wanton destruction of the Monte Cassino
Monastery—the blame for which still remains a subject of dispute between the
American, General Mark Clark, and the New Zealander, Lieut.-General
Bernard Freyberg—the campaign in Italy was one of which both sides might be
justly proud. It was felt in wide circles in Great Britain that if Field Marshal
Kesselring were hanged, the laurels of his victorious opponents would be
irredeemably sullied. It was realised that, in the eyes of posterity, so monstrous
an act of barbarism would cast a shadow over the whole allied campaign in
Italy.


As the result of a single official indiscretion there collapsed that Iron Curtain
of Discreet Silence behind which Britain’s enemies in Germany were being
quietly liquidated without too great a strain being placed upon the famed
British love of justice and fair play. Lieut.-General Sir Oliver Leese, the
commander of the Eighth Army, declared in an interview in the Press that had
it been his fate to have been on the defeated side, the same charges as those
brought against Field Marshal Kesselring could have been established against
himself. “Kesselring was a very gallant soldier who fought his battles well and
squarely,” General Leese declared. “With regard to the treatment of prisoners,
I think that Kesselring, like Rommel, set a very good example—a far better
example than the Italians.” In support of this opinion, the General quoted
Viscount Alexander as saying, “I think that the warfare in Italy was carried out
fairly, and from a soldierly point of view, as well as it could have been done.”


wi


These and similar protests were from persons so eminent and influential that it
was impossible to dismiss them summarily by neither publishing nor
commenting on them. The British authorities had brought this storm on
themselves by their own blunder but it must be admitted that they succeeded
in extricating themselves from an awkward situation with considerable skill.
No attempt was made to justify the trial of the German field marshal; no
attempt was made to defend the unfortunate military court at Venice which,
after all, had only administered what they were assured was the new law
governing the matter before them. The unanswerable denunciations of Field
Marshal Kesselring’s trial at Venice applied equally, of course, to war-crimes
trials generally, but few of those who denounced this particular war-crimes
trial were in the least interested in Kesselring personally, still less in abstract
questions of justice. British public opinion had been roused simply because
the honour and reputation of the Eighth Army had been made dependent on
the saving of Field Marshal Kesselring from the hangman.


The obvious solution of the difficulty was to grant the Field Marshal a
reprieve. But an unexpected difficulty then arose. The Field Marshal declined
to lodge an appeal. His resolution was only overcome by appeals from brother
professionals of the highest rank among his captors not to allow the military
profession to be discredited by the carrying out of the sentence. It is not known
what assurances were at the same time given him that he would receive
honourable treatment if he went to reside in a British military prison: if given,
these assurances were certainly not carried out. In due course, the British
public learned with relief that the Field Marshal had lodged an appeal and had
been duly reprieved; it was cheerfully assumed, but quite erroneously as it
later proved, that the faces of the British military authorities would be saved
by a short detention as a nominal prisoner. The whole subject was dismissed
thankfully from mind, the Iron Curtain of Discreet Silence descended once
more, and the work of “putting to death our enemies in Germany” continued,
as before. England is a land of many creeds but whatever his creed may be,
every Englishman firmly believes that what is not discussed or thought about
has no existence: Quod non apparet non est.


Nevertheless, it is most remarkable how easily and quickly the Kesselring
war-crimes trial was completely dismissed from mind immediately after it was


announced that it had been decided not to hang the Field Marshal.
Unquestionably this war-crimes trial was one of the most memorable of all
that long series of such trials which began after the conclusion of hostilities in
1945. The facts of this case have since attracted little or no attention and
remain curiously little known. During the hearing, only brief, disconnected
and generally inaccurate details were published in the Press. Only when the
astonishing verdict was announced was public attention aroused. Four years
later, no book giving even an outline of this war-trial had been published so
that when in June, 1951, an appeal was made to Field Marshal Viscount
Alexander to give his support to an agitation which had started in Germany to
obtain belated justice for his gallant opponent in the campaign in Italy,
Viscount Alexander was forced to admit, “I cannot make any statement on
Field Marshal Kesselring’s court-martial as I don’t know the facts.” All he
could do in response to this appeal was to confirm “what I have already said,”
namely, “I fought against the Field Marshal for a considerable period, both in
North Africa and Italy, and I never had anything to complain of in his conduct
of operations. He was a very able opponent and he and his troops fought a
perfectly straight forward and fair fight against us.”


So much at least is common knowledge to those familiar with the facts of the
campaign in Italy. Less well known is the fact that the “pro-Italian sentiment
of Kesselring” (“italophile Gesinnung Kesselrings”) frequently aroused angry
comment at the Fithrer’s headquarters where Kesselring’s disposition to forgo
military advantages rather than bring destruction upon the irreplaceable
historical, architectural, and artistic treasures of Italy was regarded with little
favour by Hitler and his entourage. Thus, thanks to his express orders, Rome
was evacuated without resistance, with the consequence that the Allied tanks
and mechanised columns were able to sweep through the city, unhampered by
ruins and broken bridges, in pursuit of his hard-pressed troops. It must be left
to future historians to decide whether General Mark Clark or the jaunty
General Bernard Freyberg must bear the chief responsibility for that “tragic
mistake, psychologically and militarily”, which led to the destruction of the
Monte Cassino Monastery, but it is at least certain that Kesselring did all in
his power to prevent this “tragic mistake” by refraining from occupying this
famous shrine of Christendom with his troops, having previously arranged for
the removal of its most precious treasures to a place of safety in the Vatican
City.


Posterity will undoubtedly acknowledge a debt of gratitude to Field Marshal
Kesselring for the preservation of so much which would otherwise have been
destroyed when the allied war chiefs saw fit, as Mr. Churchill cheerfully puts
it, “to drag the hot rake of war up the length of the Italian peninsula.” Like
Hitler and his advisers at German G.H.Q., the Allied military leaders regarded
the campaign in Italy from an entirely military point of view. Had not
Kesselring been one of the few who, in the general frenzy then prevailing,
retained some sense of proportion, who can doubt that many other “tragic
mistakes” would have taken place? There is one good reason for thinking that,
in regard to this subject, even Italian public opinion will change in time. If
only ruins could be shown to foreign tourists where Milan Cathedral, St.
Peters, and the Uffizi Galleries now stand, the Italian tourist trade would
suffer enduring and incalculable loss. Even future generations of Italians may
thus be led to recall Kesselring’s memory with gratitude.


The facts which led up to this war-crimes trial are not in dispute and make the
attitude of the British authorities even more inexplicable. Italy had entered the
war, in 1940, with no more justification or excuse than when, in 1915, she had
declared war on her ally, Austria. On both occasions, she was undeniably
guilty of embarking on a war of aggression, defined by Lord Justice Lawrence
as “the supreme international crime”. In 1940, as in 1915, her motive was
simply to be found among the victors at the end of the war. In 1915, her guess
as to which side would be victorious proved right, and she was rewarded by
being permitted to annex the Austrian Tyrol; in 1940 her guess proved wrong
and, with a naiveté not lacking a certain charm, Italy then set about doing her
best to change sides. Unfortunately, large forces of German troops had already
entered Italy as allies, at the invitation and request of the Italian Government.
This circumstance was, however, turned to account since it provided an
opportunity to demonstrate by acts of violence to the men who had recently
been allies and who had now become unwelcome guests, that Italy had
changed, or desired to change, sides.


The spectacle of German troops defending Italian soil from invasion, a task
from which he and the Italian Army had ingloriously retired, seems to have
filled Marshal Badoglio with violent emotions, among which was possibly
shame. At all events, from the security of Brindisi, this Italian “warrior”


nnminind himanlf anndinag farth wittenlana nnnanla ta tha Ttalinn Aixrilingn


ULCLUPIEU LILLIS@CLL SCHULTE LULLUL WILELESS dppedis LU UIC Ildlidl! CIVILId II
population, calling upon them to murder every German within reach whenever
possible and without mercy. When the probability that Germany would
ultimately be defeated became a certainty, the response to these appeals, at
first timid, rapidly gathered strength, although less, apparently, among
Badoglio’s own political supporters than among his bitterest opponents, the
Italian Communists. Thousands of German soldiers were stabbed or shot in the
back, bombed or blown up by land-mines.

All the time-honoured practices of the Spanish guerillas in their campaign
against Napoleon’s armies were adopted by the Italian partisans, together with
such innovations as the construction of grim booby-traps consisting of the
severed heads of slaughtered prisoners fixed on stakes in such a way that if
touched a hidden land-mine would be exploded. The German regular forces
reacted to this campaign in precisely the same way as regular forces in the
past had reacted when subjected to similar attacks by a civilian population. As
in Spain during the Peninsular War and in Ireland during “the Troubles” of
1920, the troops frequently got out of hand, in modern terminology, “saw
red”, and savage reprisals unquestionably took place. At the same time, the
German authorities carried out official reprisals: hostages were taken and,
after each outrage, a number were shot.


Two charges were made against Field Marshal Kesselring. First, he was
accused of supporting drastic measures by his subordinates, and against him
was quoted a general order issued by him authorising local commanders to take
such measures as, at their discretion, they might consider necessary to protect
the lives of their men. Secondly—and this seems to have been regarded as the
main charge against him—he was accused of approving an order from Hitler
himself that, following the explosion of a land-mine in the Via Rasella in
Rome, by which 32 German soldiers were killed and 68 wounded, besides ten
Italian civilians killed, including six children, a number of Italian hostages,
held in custody as supporters of Badoglio, should be shot in the ratio of ten for
every soldier murdered.


Had the court which tried Kesselring been composed of civilians, it would be
easy to understand why it should appear outrageous in any circumstances that
an innocent person should be executed for the crime of another. But the court
was composed of experienced soldiers and the execution of hostages is


unanimously upheld by the military authorities of all civilized countries as a
coercive measure. Articles 453 and 454 of the British Manual of Military Law
are explicit on the subject. Article 454 explains that “the coercive force of
reprisals arises from the fact that in most cases they inflict suffering on
innocent individuals.” Article 358 of the American Military Manual also
authorises the execution of hostages as a necessary measure to safeguard the
lives of combatant forces. If it be thought that Kesselring was condemned
because the tribunal considered the ratio of 10 to 1 excessive, it becomes
necessary to state that, when the French occupied Stuttgart in April, 1945, it
was announced that hostages would be shot in the ratio of 25 to 1 for every
French soldier murdered by the German civilian population; and that when the
Americans entered the Harz district, execution was threatened in the ratio of
200 to 1 for every American soldier murdered.


The reason why it was considered so desirable to hush up the facts of this war-
crimes trial are sufficiently obvious. The verdict was quite indefensible. The
reason why it was possible to keep the facts from the public so long is also
open to a very simple explanation. At his war-crimes trial at Manila in the
previous year, General Tomoyuki Yamashita was provided with a team of
American lawyers who not only ably defended him but carried his appeal to
the Supreme Court of the United States. While they failed to save his life, one
of his lawyers, Mr. A. Frank Reel, cleared his memory by writing a classic
study of the case in which the full facts are set forth. Similarly two years later,
Field Marshal Fritz Erich von Manstein was provided with English Counsel to
defend him at his trial at Hamburg in 1949; to their efforts he owed his life,
and one of them, Mr.

R. T. Paget, Q.C., has since written an account of the proceedings which leaves
in no doubt the grounds upon which and the methods by which a conviction
was obtained.


Field Marshal Kesselring, in contrast, was denied the services of English
lawyers to defend him before the English military court instructed to try him.
He was forced to rely on German lawyers quite unfamiliar with English legal
conceptions and English military legal procedure. As citizens of a defeated
state, his defenders were not free, like Mr. Reel and Mr. Paget, to carry on the
struggle for justice after their professional services were completed.
Victimisation for what the occupying authorities might consider excessive zeal


rirnan AW AIAN RENAANt NAH lites Tt in af Andaman n nhnannantamntin anaf All xiran


Wa» dll EVEL-“PLESELIL PUSSIVILILY. LL 15, UL CUULSE, d ClIdIdLLELISULC UL dll Wdl-
crimes trials that, usually, only those concerned with the defence show any
disposition to dwell afterwards on the facts. In the Kesselring war-crimes trial,
those concerned with the defence lacked the means to make known the facts, at
least to the world outside Germany; and those concerned otherwise than with
the defence have ever since rigidly preserved a prudent silence.


Unlike in most Routine War-crimes Trials, those dealing with the prosecution
of Kesselring seem to have regarded a conviction as a necessary formality, a
mere repetition of what had already been decided. The reason for this attitude
was that three months before two of Kesselring’s colleagues, General von
Mackensen and General Mälzer, had been sentenced to death in Rome on the
same charges arising from the same facts as those now brought against
Kesselring Although the military tribunal which assembled in Venice to try
Kesselring was not the same as that which had so recently adjudicated in
Rome, the Advocate General, the functionary whose role it was to advise the
tribunal on points of law, was the same. It was obvious, of course, to everyone
in court that an acquittal of Kesselring would amount to an admission that the
Rome tribunal had erred— a simply unthinkable conclusion. Having advised
on the same evidence once, the Judge Advocate saw no reason to change his
mind. “His prejudice” writes Kesselring, “was glaring.” Comparing him with
the official prosecutor, a Swiss newspaper commented tersely, “The Judge
Advocate was the second, and the better, prosecutor.”


From one point of view, in particular, the Kesselring war-crimes trial is far
more remarkable than the Nuremberg war-crimes trial. The tribunal which
purported to adjudicate at Nuremberg was composed of lawyers sitting only
six months after the termination of hostilities. Inevitably, their minds were still
under the influence of wartime passions, and, if they erred deplorably in the
case of Admiral Raeder, it can at least be said they meted out a sort of rough
justice to some of the accused. As lawyers, they had no reason for feeling any
particular understanding or sympathy for sailors like Admiral Raeder or
Admiral Donitz, or for soldiers like Field Marshal Keitel or General Jodl.


On the other hand, the military court at Venice which tried Field Marshal
Kesselring, was composed of soldiers of standing and repute, sitting two years
after the conclusion of hostilities. They had before them a brother professional,
not only a soldier of the highest rank but the hero of one of the greatest


fighting retreats in military annals. At any other period of history, the minds of
such a body would have been dominated by sympathy for a commander who,
faced by an enemy superior in numbers, vastly superior in equipment, and
enjoying undisputed command of the sea and air, had maintained an unbroken
resistance, step by step, from the southern shores of Sicily to the foothills of
the Alps, until his gallant troops, deprived of air support by lack of petrol and
hampered at first by cowardly and later by treacherous allies, were engulfed,
still undefeated, in the general ruin.


What is so particularly remarkable is that the charge against Field Marshal
Kesselring was the one least likely to appeal to military minds—the charge
that he had adopted severe methods to protect his hard-pressed troops from
treacherous attacks from the rear by gangs of armed civilians. Most of the
members of the Court were aware from personal observation of the nature and
methods of the Italian underground movement against which Kesselring had
had to contend. In similar circumstances they themselves would have adopted
similar measures, measures which were, in fact, adopted without hesitation by
the Americans six years later in the campaign in Korea in 1950, when their
lines of communication were being raided by communist irregulars.


Very different had been the reaction of British officers in the past when the
same circumstances had arisen. Thus, for example, Professor Charles W. C.
Oman, in his Peninsular War, complains that, as a consequence of having
witnessed the atrocities of the Spanish guerillas, many of Wellington’s
officers developed a distinctly pro-French bias. In particular, he complains
that one of Wellington’s officers, Sir William Napier, in his military classic,
War in the Peninsula, became so biased that he was “over-hard on the
Spaniards and over-lenient to Bonaparte ... he invariably exaggerates Spanish
defeats and minimises Spanish successes.”


There was nothing exceptional or unique in the situation which led to Field
Marshal Kesselring finding himself at the disposal of the foreign enemies
occupying his country. Thus, France, in 1814, was as completely at the mercy
of her conquerors as was Germany in 1945, and most of the French Generals
had, at one time or another, faced the task of coping with the Spanish guerillas
during the Peninsular War. But, although he had been much assisted in his
operations by their activities, the Duke of Wellington felt himself under no


AAT! Hatin 2. neta Hhn EE E OOE AL sha Ann AAS wea nm Anh Atassen esha Lad


ODILPAtLOL! LO dvelipe WE EXCCULIOL OL UE ddSd5SI1LIS AHU SdDOLEULS WHO Hau
occupied themselves behind the French lines sniping isolated detachments,
stabbing sentries, torturing prisoners, and mutilating the wounded. On the
contrary we hear of him, only two years after the termination of hostilities,
when commander-in-chief of the army of occupation in France, paying
Marshal Massena a friendly visit at the house of another “war-criminal”,
Marshal Soult, and exchanging with him reminiscences of the campaign in
Spain. The idea that either of these famous soldiers ought to be put on trial for
their handling of the Spanish “underground movement” apparently never
entered Wellington’s mind. Even Marshal Suchet, who had particularly
distinguished himself by the energy by which he had repressed the gangs of
Spanish civilians which had harried his troops in Aragon, was permitted to end
his days in honourable retirement in Paris without molestation by the foreign
occupiers of his country.


Perhaps the most fitting concluding observation on the subject is that, although
Field Marshal Kesselring was unfortunate not to have lived in earlier and more
civilized times, he was, on the other hand, fortunate to have lived before the
reversion to barbarism had proceeded so far that it had become a universal rule
(to quote, once more, Field Marshal Montgomery): “after a war, generals on
the defeated side are tried and hanged.”


In the autobiography which Field Marshal Kesselring wrote in retirement after
his release in 1952, he deals with his treatment as a prisoner of war in British
hands with remarkable reserve and moderation. When possible he pays tribute
to the conduct of his captors, in particular to the officer to whom he
surrendered, General Taylor, afterwards commander- in-chief in the Korean
War, and to Colonel Scotland, the commandant of the notorious ‘Kensington
Cage’ in London in which he was subjected to “interrogation”. He discloses
that before his trial started in Venice in February 1947 he endured a period of
solitary confinement lasting five months in Nuremberg waiting to be called to
give evidence at the mass-trial there taking place, and refutes the comfortable
belief held in Britain that after the sentence of death passed on him in Venice
had been commuted to a sentence of imprisonment for life, he was detained in
nominal detention for a short period as a face- saving measure to preserve the
credit of the British military authorities. In fact, however, he was treated as a
common criminal in Werl Prison where he spent his time, he tells us, gumming
paper bags: he was not set free until the 24th October 1952 by what was called


“an act of clemency.” He died on the 15th July 1960.


It must be confessed that in few respects can the Kesselring Trial be regarded
as a typical Routine War-crimes Trial. Its purpose was entirely political,
although it may at first be hard to see what political purpose could be served
by paying attention to the complaints of the Italians against the Field Marshal.
No one indeed was concerned to placate Italian public opinion but the very
powerful Communist Party in Italy enjoyed the special patronage of Stalin
whose menacing figure then overshadowed Europe. The trial took place
during the early months of 1947 when the Stalin Myth was still almost
universally believed and the British and American Governments still clung to
the hope that by continued subservience to the wishes of the communist
dictator he could be induced to act as a loyal and friendly ally in the crusade
for the liberty and welfare of mankind. It was not until the following year that
this pathetic delusion was shattered by the establishment by force of
communist rule in Czecho-slovakia and the blockade by the Red Army of
West Berlin. When in 1948 the grim prospect had to be faced that at any time
Europe might be invaded and occupied by the Red Army, the scandal of
Kesselring’s conviction was quickly driven from the attention of the public
and the victim soon became a forgotten prisoner, gumming paper bags, in
Werl Prison.


“an act of clemency.” He died on the 15th July 1960.


It must be confessed that in few respects can the Kesselring Trial be regarded
as a typical Routine War-crimes Trial. Its purpose was entirely political,
although it may at first be hard to see what political purpose could be served
by paying attention to the complaints of the Italians against the Field Marshal.
No one indeed was concerned to placate Italian public opinion but the very
powerful Communist Party in Italy enjoyed the special patronage of Stalin
whose menacing figure then overshadowed Europe. The trial took place
during the early months of 1947 when the Stalin Myth was still almost
universally believed and the British and American Governments still clung to
the hope that by continued subservience to the wishes of the communist
dictator he could be induced to act as a loyal and friendly ally in the crusade
for the liberty and welfare of mankind. It was not until the following year that
this pathetic delusion was shattered by the establishment by force of
communist rule in Czecho-slovakia and the blockade by the Red Army of
West Berlin. When in 1948 the grim prospect had to be faced that at any time
Europe might be invaded and occupied by the Red Army, the scandal of
Kesselring’s conviction was quickly driven from the attention of the public
and the victim soon became a forgotten prisoner, gumming paper bags, in
Werl Prison.


THE TRIAL OF MAJOR WALTER REDER


The trial of Major Walter Reder before an Italian military tribunal at Bologna
in the autumn of 1951 may be regarded as a belated sequel to the trial of Field
Marshal Kesselring before a British military tribunal in Venice in the spring of
1947, that is to say, four and half years before. Major Reder was charged with
offences alleged to have been committed by him when commanding the
Reconnaissance Panzer Unit No. 16 of the 16th Panzer Division, forming part
of the German forces in Italy of which Field Marshal Kesselring was
commander-in-chief.


This trial was one of the last of the series of war-crimes trials which began in
1945 immediately after the unconditional surrender of Germany. After the
passage of six years wartime passions had to a considerable extent subsided anc
the trial in itself may be considered as a very favourable example of a Routine
War-crimes Trial. The Italian army officers who composed the military tribunal
in Bologna took their duties very seriously and listened carefully to all the
evidence, not only for the prosecution but for the defence. Unfortunately, an
acquittal was impossible owing to the political situation existing in Italy at the
time. The trial took place in Bologna, a stronghold of the Italian Communist
Party, and throughout the hearing angry mobs demonstrated outside the court
house demanding the blood of the accused. An acquittal would have been
widely resented in Italy as a deliberate affront to the Italian Partisan movement
and might well have so aroused popular feeling as to have brought about the
downfall of the weak coalition government then in power. Had a communist
government then taken office, the officers composing the tribunal would
probably have been charged with acquitting the accused owing to their secret
sympathy with Fascism. In these difficult circumstances the tribunal did their
best to administer justice: probably they thought that by condemning Reder to
imprisonment they were saving his life by putting him out of harm’s way for a
time, assuming that when he had been forgotten by his communist enemies, he
would be surreptitiously set at liberty.


No doubt this would have been the ultimate outcome of his conviction but
unfortunately for Major Reder, Marzabotto, the place nearest to the scene of
his alleged offences, was chosen by the Communist Party as a place of
pilgrimage at which Communist Partisans could gather annually to honour the


memory of that heroic Resistance fighter Mario Musolesi (alias ‘Major’ Lupo)


~ and his Red Star Brigade of Communist Partisans who died fighting to the last


—


man against troops commanded by Major Reder, and at the same time to
mourn the abominable massacre of the said Mario Musolesi and his gathering
of unarmed, peace loving Italian civilians, known as the Red Star Brigade, by
the troops of the said Major Reder.


Accounts of the war-crimes trials which followed the Second World War are
rendered tedious by the fact that precisely the same issue arose in so many of
them. Exact statistics are not available but probably in at least three quarters of
these prosecutions the complaint against the accused was that he had dealt
harshly with civilian irregulars and terrorists who had been attacking his
troops in the rear. In all these cases there was generally only one issue to be
decided: were the victims of the accused in offensive civilians so unfortunate
as to have found themselves in the midst of hostilities or were they really
combatants in civilian dress? War-crimes tribunals invariably accepted the
former contention.


The Italian war-crimes tribunal which tried the Italian charges against Major
Reder adopted the novel course of accepting both contentions. The gallant but
muddle-headed officers who composed this tribunal held as a fact that the
inhabitants of a few tiny villages in the mountains south of Marzabotto in
which a gang of communist terrorists was surrounded and annihilated by
troops some of whom were under the command of Major Reder, were
ruthlessly slaughtered as a reprisal for the atrocities previously committed by
this gang of terrorists. At the same time the tribunal held that the inhabitants of
these mountain villages had well earned the Gold Medal for Valour
collectively awarded them posthumously “for heroically resisting the Fascist
attack.”


Major Reder was born in Freiwald in Bohemia in 1915, a subject of the
Austro- Hungarian Empire. He had a distinguished career in the German
Army as leader of front- line troops, serving in France in 1940 and later in
Russia where at the battle of Kharkov in March 1943 he was so severely
wounded that his left forearm had to be amputated. For his services in Russia
he was awarded the Knight’s Cross of the Iron Cross. In May 1944 he was
sent to Italy and there took part in the desperate battles in Tuscany, fought to


hold up the advance northward of the Allies. The division to which he
belonged was signalled out for special and generous praise by Field Marshal
Lord Alexander in his report on the operations between the 3rd September
1943 and the 1st July 1944. (See the Supplement to the London Gazette dated
the 4th June 1950, No. 38937). In particular, speaking of the fighting at Cecina
on the 29th June to the 1st July 1944, the British commander-in-chief
observes, “The 16th Panzer Division had been brought in here to strengthen
the German defence and fought with skill and fanaticism.” Later, referring to
the struggle for Rosignano during the first week in July, Lord Alexander
records, “the town was defended by the 16th Panzer Grenadiers against the
34th United States Division with the same stubbornness as they had shown at
Cecina.”


As winter approached the desperate attempts of the Allies to achieve a
breakthrough were intensified. Nevertheless at this critical moment Major
Reder and his unit of crack troops had to be withdrawn from the front line
facing the 34th U.S. Division in order to deal with a strong group of
Communist Partisans called the Red Star Brigade which from a stronghold in
the mountains south of Marzabotto was threatening the main road and railway
communications between the front and the German headquarters at Bologna.
Major Reder performed his mission brilliantly and swiftly. The Red Star
Brigade, numbering over 2,000 civilians armed with heavy machine guns and
mortars, under the command of the celebrated Communist Partisan leader who
called himself ‘Major’ Lupo, was encircled and annihilated. It was with
reference to this operation on the 29th September 1944 that the main charge
against Major Reder was brought. Upon it was based the notorious propaganda
myth called the Marzabotto Massacre.


Major Reder remained in Italy throughout the following autumn and winter. In
February 1945 he was transferred to Hungary across which Stalin’s hordes
were then sweeping in overwhelming strength. He was again severely
wounded. After the general capitulation of the Axis Powers, he returned to his
mother’s home in Salzburg. Here he was arrested by the American occupying
forces on complaints lodged with them against him by the Italians.


For two years—from September 1945 to September 1947—-Major Reder was a
prisoner in an American concentration camp at Glasenbach in which were


detained some 7,500 men and 500 women kept prisoner on one pretext or
another. Presumably the lengthy task of investigating so many distinct cases
provides the reason why the Americans took so long in reaching a decision
with regard to the charges against Major Reder. When at last his captors found
time to investigate his case they decided that he had no case to answer. As
however the charges had been lodged by the Italians and the British were in
military occupation of Italy, they rid themselves of responsibility for his fate
by handing him over to the British.


The British military authorities investigated the Italian charges against Major
Reder with praiseworthy care. At first his interrogation was carried out by a
Major J. E. McKee.


Later his interrogation was completed by a Major W. G. Aylen. Neither of
these gentlemen spoke German so that the services of an interpreter, a Dr.
Hans Susseroth, was necessary. At Major Reder’s trial in Bologna, this man
Susseroth gave evidence that he himself had interrogated the accused who had
denied taking part in any operations against the Italian Partisans.


In affidavits sworn for Major Reder’s appeal to the Supreme Italian Military
Court in Rome, both Major McKee and Major Aylen swore that Susseroth had
given false evidence. He had been employed, they both testified, only as an
interpreter, never as an interrogator. Further, they both testified that Major
Reder had freely admitted having directed the operations against the Red Star
Brigade south of Bologna in which its commander, ‘Major’ Lupo was killed.
In fact Major Reder had claimed that his detachment had borne the brunt of the
fighting on that occasion.


Major McKee concluded his affidavit by stating:


“Throughout his interrogation by me, Major Reder behaved with dignity. He
repeatedly affirmed his innocence. He denied ordering excesses against the
Italian civilian population or having received orders from his superiors to
carry out excesses. On one occasion Major Reder could without difficulty or
danger have escaped from British custody. He explained that he had refrained
from escaping as he was quite prepared to face a trial on the charges made
against him.”


As we have seen, the British military authorities had already brought to trial
and convicted Major Reder’s commander-in-chief, Field Marshal Kesselring.
They had also afterwards disposed of his immediate superior, the divisional
commander, General Max Simon, at a war-crimes trial at Padua in January
1948 at which he had been sentenced to death and then sent to join Field
Marshal Kesselring in Werl Prison. With regard to Major Reder therefore two
obvious courses were open to the British military authorities. If they came to
the same conclusion as the American authorities that he had no case to answer,
their plain duty was to release him at once. If however they were satisfied that
a prima facie case against him had been made out, they could put him on trial
before a British military tribunal as they had done with his superior officers,
Field Marshal Kesselring

and General Max Simon.


Neither of these courses were adopted. On the 13th May 1948 Major Reder
was handed over by the British military authorities to the Italians so that the
latter might try their own charges against him.


The present writer regrets that he has been unable to find any clue suggesting
an explanation for this extraordinary procedure. In itself, this is not perhaps
remarkable. The working of the British military-legal or legal-military mind
during the post-war years is generally quite beyond mere human
comprehension. Possibly closer investigation of the political situation in May
1948 would disclose that there was some special reason at that moment for
making a gesture which would conciliate Italian public opinion. Some cynical
politician in London may have decided that an obscure German officer would
conveniently serve as a subject for such a gesture. But a simpler but adequate
explanation would be that the British authorities in charge of Major Reder’s
case had got themselves in a muddle and therefore decided that the easiest way
out of it was to follow the precedent set by Pontius Pilate long ago. It was at
any rate clear that the Italians were convinced of Major Reder’s guilt. If
therefore the case was handed over to the Italians so that they could act as
judges of their own charges, the British could wash their hands of the matter
with the confident assurance that it would be quickly disposed of by the
prisoner’s death.


Uran fun n otetatler tanhninnl laani naint Af erin.: tha nennndaasn ndantad in tha


Evel LULH d SUICUY LEUUUCAL Le pdl PULLIL UL VIEW WE PLULCCUULE GUUPLEU LH Ue
case of Major Reder seems utterly indefensible. It is true that by the Moscow
Declaration of the 30th October 1943 the victorious Powers had conferred on
themselves the right to swop prisoners of war between each other in disregard
of their treaty obligations under the Hague and Geneva Conventions. Even
assuming this swopping of prisoners of war was justified as between the
victorious Powers, no authority existed for handing prisoners of war over to a
defeated Power. In October 1943 Italy was an ally of Germany and the fortunes
of war had turned finally against them. Shortly afterwards Italy abjectly
surrendered and her efforts to join the winning side were coldly rebuffed. It is
not easy to define what exactly was her status when Reder was handed over to
the Italian authorities in 1948 but by no stretch of imagination can it be said
that Italy emerged from the Second World War as a victorious Power!


Earlier in this chapter a letter dated the 19th December 1960 written by a high
official of the British Foreign Office was quoted verbatim. It sets out clearly
what is the official attitude of the British Government to this distressing
subject. It may be summarised as follows: “No doubt our military authorities
in Italy in 1948 made a grave and deplorable error of judgment when they
handed over this prisoner of war in British hands to our former enemies, the
Italians. No doubt Major Reder was treated with callous indifference as to his
fate: probably his surrender by us to the Italians was contrary to international
law. But this regrettable error having been made, no good purpose would be
served now by investigating it because once this prisoner of war had passed
out of our hands we ceased to have any rights concerning him. The Italians
found their own charges proved against him and if they had shot him we could
not have complained. In that case he would by now be entirely forgotten and
we should not now be troubled to find excuses for the inexcusable. As it is, he
unfortunately still lives, a prisoner in an Italian prison, but as we can do
nothing to secure his release, there is no good talking about the subject.”


That Major Reder is not now a completely forgotten prisoner in an Italian
prison is owing to a fortunate chance. It happened that the present writer was
instructed professionally by Reder’s legal advisers to trace and obtain
affidavits from the two British officers above mentioned who had interrogated
him while he was in British custody, for the purpose of an appeal against
conviction which was being made to the Supreme Italian Military Court in
Rome. In this way the present writer learned the facts of this case which he


later set out in a chapter of a book which received wide publicity not only in
Britain and the United States but in Germany and Spain. Many influential
people have since interested themselves in securing Reder’s release—including
in Britain, the late Lord Hankey and Field Marshal Lord Alexander, and in
Italy, the late Pope Pius XII. So far the only result of these appeals for justice
has been repeated soothing assurances that Reder would be released
immediately a propitious moment arrived. Having waited in captivity for
twenty years, Major Reder is still waiting for this propitious moment to arrive.


The above mentioned book, published in 1958, gave the first outline of the
facts of Major Reder’s case, hitherto entirely unknown outside Italy.
Necessarily it was a one-sided account since it was based entirely on
information supplied by the lawyers who had defended him at his trial. In 1961
however the Italian Ministry of the Interior took the unparalleled step of
publishing a White Book setting out in full the judgment of the military
tribunal in Bologna which convicted Major Reder in 1951 and the judgment of
the Supreme Military Court in Rome in 1954 which rejected his appeal.


By publishing this White Book the Italian Government conferred on Major
Reder a unique distinction: in his case, alone of all the thousands of cases of
prisoners of war subjected to trials for alleged war-crimes, was it considered
desirable by his captors to issue an official statement justifying their treatment
of him. However contradictory the facts found by the tribunal and muddled its
reasoning from these facts, the publication of this White Book at least shows
that the Italian legal authorities, unlike the legal authorities of other countries
responsible for showing that justice had been done, felt in this case they had
nothing to hide. It had long been the invariable practice of war-crimes
tribunals at the end of the hearing simply to announce that the accused had
been found guilty, leaving this conclusion a subject for guesswork. Often
when the indictment contained a number of distinct charges the victim was left
in complete doubt whether he had been convicted on all or only some of them.
The verdict in fact merely intimated that the adjudicating tribunal had reached
the opinion that he deserved to be hanged. The Italian military tribunal which
tried Major Reder, on the other hand, stated clearly in their judgment their
findings of fact and the reasons which had led them to convict him. Their
painstaking and conscientious judgment contrasts strikingly with the vague
and slipshod judgment delivered in the relatively well-conducted war-crimes


et nT Rafnnn 2 Tratin L 2.i lisa wee 4th) Af T2411 A Akh AI aa NAAR HAA: ~


Uidl DELOLe d DOUSHU MUHLALCY WIDUIId! OL PLelU IVidPSidl VOL Wid LISLeLI L


Hamburg in 1949.


A judgment which merely pronounces a defendant guilty without stating the
facts upon which this conclusion is reached is immune from adverse criticism.
It reflects therefore the highest credit on the Italian military authorities that
they have dealt with the charges against Major Reder, if belatedly, in so
judicial a manner. On the other hand, by conducting his trial in a judicial
manner and later publishing the findings of fact and the reasoning of the
tribunal which led them to convict him, they exposed the weakness of the
case against him.


As is usual in war-crimes trials, a number of ancillary charges were made
against Reder, such charges being generally intended to make the indictment
seem more formidable.

The main charge against him upon which his fate depended related to the
encirclement and annihilation of the above mentioned group of Communist
Partisans known as the Red Star Brigade. The headquarters of this group of
heavily armed civilians was at Caprara, a tiny village on the upper slopes of
Monte Sole, a mountain, 2,190 feet high, on a ridge between two mountain
streams, the Reno and the Setta, running parallel with each other about four
miles apart north-eastward from the Apennines into the Po Valley. From this
stronghold the Red Star Brigade struck at the German lines of communication
by road and railway along the valleys of the Reno and the Setta. Convoys were
continually ambushed, railway bridges and tunnels damaged by sabotage,
isolated German garrisons attacked. The methods of Red Star Brigade were
similar to those of other Communist bands operating in Italy in the rear of the
German armies: in order to shake the morale of the regular troops opposed to
them, individual soldiers caught unawares were shot or stabbed, prisoners were
tortured and then murdered, the bodies of the dead were mutilated.


On the 29th September 1944 the stronghold of the Red Star Brigade was
attacked by converging columns. The attack was under the general direction of
General Max Simon: Major Reder directed the attack from the east from
across the Setta. The Partisans to the number of some two thousand armed
with machine guns and mortars offered a desperate resistance which was
quickly broken. The Red Star Brigade was annihilated: its leader “Major”
Lupo was killed.


In its findings of fact the adjudicating military tribunal, as the White Book now
discloses, accepted two contradictory contentions. The tribunal held that
Reder’s men ruthlessly slaughtered the unarmed and inoffensive inhabitants of
three small villages, Caprara, Casaglia and Cerpiane, lying on the upper slopes
of Monte Sole. It had been pointed out by the defence that the inhabitants of
these places had afterwards been collectively awarded the Gold Cross for
Valour in recognition of their heroic resistance “to the Fascist invaders”. With
the howls of the communist mob demonstrating in the street outside the
courthouse, the tribunal could hardly be expected to disparage this award. The
tribunal held, therefore, that the inhabitants of the three villages had defended
themselves heroically, while at the same time they had allowed themselves to
be butchered like helpless sheep.


A half-hearted attempt was indeed made to reconcile these contradictory
findings by holding, without a shred of evidence in support, that a complete
separation took place between the local inhabitants and the civilian warriors
of the Red Star Brigade. They declared that “Major” Lupo, finding himself
surrounded, withdrew his men from the three villages above mentioned to the
summit of Monte Sole for a last stand, leaving the inhabitants of these places
“to the chivalry and humanity of the enemy:”


Examination of a large scale map will immediately disclose that this
contention is nonsense. Caprara, the headquarters of the Red Star Brigade, is
only 548 yards from the summit of Monte Sole, from which the other two
places mentioned are less than half a mile away. No separation of the civilian
warriors of the Red Star Brigade from the local inhabitants of the area, as
found by the tribunal, was therefore possible. Also the suggestion is fantastic
that an experienced guerilla fighter like Lupo would withdraw his men from
the shelter of these places in order to concentrate them on the bare summit of
Monte Sole, where they would have been quickly obliterated by artillery fire.


There can be no reasonable doubt the last stand of the Red Star Brigade took
place in Caprara and the two neighbouring villages, Casaglia and Cerpiane. It
may well be believed that the German troops took little trouble to distinguish
between civilians using their weapons and civilians who had thrown away their
arms. There is no reason to doubt also that when the Partisans in houses in


al 11 a a u 1 al aa A) oe _ ii al 1 al a


these villages rerused to surrender tne attacking forces threw grenades tnrougn
the windows regardless of any women and children who might be sheltering
therein.


The tribunal expressed horror at such ruthlessness. No doubt some women and
children lost their lives although the number must have been small since these
places near the summit of Monte Sole, described in the White Book as
villages, were in fact mere clusters of huts inhabited by goatherds and
shepherds who browsed their flocks on the barren mountainside. A prominent
feature, it may be noted, of the Marzabotto Myth was the burning of
Marzabotto Church to which “the entire population of the town to the number
of 1,700 had fled, and there perished, including the priest.” The White Book
makes it clear that no fighting took place in Marzabotto: in the judgment of
the tribunal the Church of Marzabotto reappears as the tiny shrine or chapel at
Cerpiane in which, so the tribunal held, fifty persons lost their lives.


Judging from the White Book the tribunal took no account of the surrounding
circumstances existing at the time, and the methods by which warfare had
come to be waged in Europe. It was no doubt a dreadful thing that on the 29th
September 1944 women and children should have lost their lives from bombs
thrown into their homes in order to compel the defenders of the village in
which they lived to surrender. But in that year and during the previous two
years, on every night suitable for air attack, hundreds, and often thousands, of
civilians, men, women and children, had been killed throughout Germany not
by mere hand grenades but by “block-busters”, deliberately dropped on
crowded working-class areas in accordance with the Lindemann Plan adopted
by the British Government in March 1942. The story of what took place in the
mountains south of Marzabotto should be judged against the background of
contemporary events.


In conclusion, it was proved at the trial that whatever excesses might have
been committed on the upper slopes of Monte Sole, Major Reder took no
personal part in them. Owing to a recent wound, throughout the action he
remained on a hillside on the other side of the Setta and directed the advance
of his men by wireless.


No admissible evidence that he personally had directed, ordered or
countenanced reprisals against civilians was proved against him. As a one-


armed man he would have been easily identifiable. No evidence of such
identification was given.


The claim is often made that this is a Humanitarian Age in which not only the
thought of capital punishment is repugnant but also long terms of
imprisonment. Thus in 1962 the British public was shocked to learn that a
Greek communist terrorist, Tony Ambatielos, still remained in captivity after
sixteen years. The fact was ignored that the reason for his continued detention
was his refusal to give an undertaking not to resume his efforts to establish a
communist dictatorship in Greece. The general view, even in circles hostile to
Communism, was well expressed by The Times which declared that, however
heinous this man’s crimes may have been, sixteen years was too long to keep a
criminal in captivity.


In response to public opinion in Britain at the present time, sentences of
imprisonment for life are carefully reviewed after only twelve years and the
culprit, however conclusive his guilt, is released. Major Reder has been in
prison now for over twenty-two years after a war-crimes trial in which his
accusers acted as judges of their own charges.


It may perhaps seem that the attention paid here to the case of Major Reder is
disproportionately long. It has been dealt with in some detail, partly because it
is a favourable example of a Routine War-crimes Trial, but more because it
happens the victim is still alive and is still suffering from the miscarriage of
justice committed against him. Nearly all the other victims of war-crimes trials
are either dead or have long ago been released. Responsibility for his fate rests
fairly and squarely on the British Government. In a professedly humanitarian
age, a further recital of the facts should lead to belated rectification of an
indefensible miscarriage of justice.


armed man he would have been easily identifiable. No evidence of such
identification was given.


The claim is often made that this is a Humanitarian Age in which not only the
thought of capital punishment is repugnant but also long terms of
imprisonment. Thus in 1962 the British public was shocked to learn that a
Greek communist terrorist, Tony Ambatielos, still remained in captivity after
sixteen years. The fact was ignored that the reason for his continued detention
was his refusal to give an undertaking not to resume his efforts to establish a
communist dictatorship in Greece. The general view, even in circles hostile to
Communism, was well expressed by The Times which declared that, however
heinous this man’s crimes may have been, sixteen years was too long to keep a
criminal in captivity.


In response to public opinion in Britain at the present time, sentences of
imprisonment for life are carefully reviewed after only twelve years and the
culprit, however conclusive his guilt, is released. Major Reder has been in
prison now for over twenty-two years after a war-crimes trial in which his
accusers acted as judges of their own charges.


It may perhaps seem that the attention paid here to the case of Major Reder is
disproportionately long. It has been dealt with in some detail, partly because it
is a favourable example of a Routine War-crimes Trial, but more because it
happens the victim is still alive and is still suffering from the miscarriage of
justice committed against him. Nearly all the other victims of war-crimes trials
are either dead or have long ago been released. Responsibility for his fate rests
fairly and squarely on the British Government. In a professedly humanitarian
age, a further recital of the facts should lead to belated rectification of an
indefensible miscarriage of justice.


THE TRIAL OF GENERAL YAMASHITA


The trial of General Tomoyuki Yamashita was in several important respects
very unlike the trial of Field Marshal Kesselring. The issues in the trial of “the
Tiger of Malaya” were not overshadowed by the knowledge that an acquittal of
the accused would discredit the previous judgment of a tribunal of brother
officers, dealing with the same facts, in an earlier prosecution.


Field Marshal Kesselring was at least tried by a court composed of fellow
Europeans belonging to a nation which only since 1914 could be described as
national enemies: General Yamashita, on the other hand, was a member of the
Yellow Race and he was tried by a court composed of members of the White
Race by which at the time the Japanese were regarded as presumptuous
Oriental dwarfs who had dared to challenge White supremacy. Although
during recent years, beginning with the trial of the two anarchists Sacco and
Vanzetti in 1927 down to the trial of the communist traitor, Alger Hiss, in
1949, American methods of administering justice have been subjected to
much patronising criticism by British lawyers, the trial of General Yamashita
in many ways compares very favourably with the trial of Field Marshal
Kesselring. Under the American legal system this distinguished Japanese
prisoner of war was provided by his accusers with American Counsel to
defend him, lawyers familiar with American legal procedure, and it was made
possible for him on conviction to appeal to the American Supreme Court.
Kesselring, on the other hand, had to rely on German lawyers who knew
nothing about British military legal procedure. No possibility existed for him
to appeal against conviction to the House of Lords, since, by an amusing legal
fiction, British military tribunals, so far as prisoners of war are concerned, are
deemed infallible.


These trials are alike in that they both ended in grave and indisputable
miscarriages of justice, Yamashita being hanged and Kesselring being
condemned as a result of his conviction to gum paper bags in the company of
common criminals until after five years he was released by what was called
“an act of clemency”. The ultimate consequences of the conviction of
Yamashita, however, are certain to be graver and far more enduring than the
conviction of Kesselring. By posterity Kesselring will be remembered merely
as one of a number of able European soldiers who were wrongly convicted by


courts composed of other European soldiers during a period of acute mental
disturbance following a European civil war which was conducted by both
sides with hitherto unparalleled barbarity. Yamashita, on the other hand, will
be remembered as a member of the Yellow Race who was wrongly convicted
by a court composed of members of, at that time, dominant White Race. In a
world which has come to profess abhorrence of racial discrimination in any
form, his trial will long be cited, rightly or wrongly, as an example of the
methods by which Western Imperialism strove to keep in subjection the
coloured peoples of Asia.


Without question General Yamashita was one of the most gifted military
leaders who fought in the Second World War. It has been customary to
attribute the disastrous outcome of the Malayan Campaign to the mistakes of
Yamashita’s British opponents. This is unfair both to them and to him. The
task entrusted to him at the outbreak of war by the Mikado might reasonably
have been dismissed as impossible by the British High Command. In brief, he
was ordered to land an army of some 50,000 men on the north- eastern coast
of the Malay Peninsula, a distance of 1,700 miles from the nearest Japanese
territory, the island of Formosa, in spite of the fact that he enjoyed no assured
command of the sea; then to advance southward down the entire length of the
peninsula, a distance of over 350 miles, along roads through dense jungle,
overcoming on the way the resistance of the defending forces, numbering
nearly 100,000 men; and finally to capture the great fortress of Singapore on
an island separated from the mainland by a deep channel half a mile wide. It
only remains to add that the Malay Peninsula at its widest part is only 150
miles across from east to west and the main road running southward crosses
half a dozen streams, each one of which offers a good defensive position to a
defending army. No blame therefore attaches to General Percival and his
advisers if they dismissed this operation as too hazardous for any sane general
to undertake.


Nevertheless General Yamashita achieved what might reasonably have been
regarded as the impossible. On the seventieth day after the first landing of
Japanese troops on the coast of Malaya; the fortress of Singapore, after an
assault lasting eight days; surrendered. 90,000 British, Indian and Australian
troops laid down their arms.


This astonishing triumph shattered for ever the legend of the invincible
military supremacy of the White Race which dates from the days of Marathon.
The consequences of this were not expunged by the fact that four years later
the Japanese were forced by the overwhelming military and industrial strength
of Great Britain and the United States, aided by a stab in the back by Soviet
Russia and the dropping of the first atomic bombs, to sign humiliating terms
of surrender. No triumph, however spectacular, could restore the prestige of
the White Man upon which Western Imperialism in Asia had for so long
securely rested. As a consequence of Yamashita’s campaign in Malaya the
peoples of India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, Cambodia, South
Vietnam, North Vietnam, Laos and Indonesia now enjoy—if enjoy be the
right word—independence. Only the inhabitants of Japan have failed to
benefit from their own achievements. Like the German troops who invaded
Russia in 1941, and who were first received with joy as liberators from the
tyranny of Stalin, the Japanese soon made themselves hated by the inhabitants
of the countries which they overran by their arrogance and brutality. In
consequence, although the peoples of Asia owe their present freedom from
Western Imperialism to General Yamashita’s victories, they entertain no
gratitude or kindly feelings for the Japanese. The Japanese Empire, deprived
of all its overseas possessions, is now a Satellite state of the United States.


The trial of General Yamashita in Manila in the autumn of 1945 was fully and
lucidly recorded in a book written shortly afterwards by his leading Counsel,
A. Frank Reel. It begins with a brief outline of Yamashita’s career. He was the
son of a country doctor in a remote district of Japan and although without
wealth or family influence he won a place in the Cadets’ Academy after a
brilliant career at school. Yamashita owes his place in history entirely to his
epoch-making campaign in Malaya which culminated after ten weeks with the
capture of Singapore on the 15th February 1942. For two and a half years
thereafter, during which the fate of Japan was decided, his career was
uneventful. Owing to the jealousy of his rivals at Army headquarters in Tokyo,
and in particular of the all- powerful General Togo, he was removed from the
direction of active operations and sent to command the Japanese forces in
garrison in Manchuria. It was not until the fortunes of war had irrevocably
turned against the Japanese that Japan’s most brilliant general was sent to take
command in the Philippines, by then threatened by an American invasion in


overwhelming strength. Yamashita arrived in the Philippines on the 7th
O—”07->7tanhar 104A


VYULUVTIL Lott.


Ten days after his arrival the American landing took place.


The charges brought against General Yamashita did not relate to his direction
of the Malayan Campaign, although no doubt the resentment felt for the
humiliation of the dominant White Race by an upstart people of yellow dwarfs
inspired these charges. Neither was it suggested that he was in any way
responsible for the enormities committed during the building of the Burma
Road or in the Japanese prisoner-of-war camps. The charges related solely to
happenings in the Philippines between the 7th October, 1944, and the 3rd
September, 1945, when Yamashita on the express command of the Emperor
surrendered.


There is no dispute concerning the situation which existed in the Philippines
when Yamashita took over the command of the 14th Army Group garrisoning
this American overseas colonial possession. After the fall of Corregidor on the
5th May, 1942, and the surrender of the American regular troops, resistance
was continued by irregular units of Filipinos armed and financed by the
Americans. Most of the aboriginal inhabitants of the Philippines were what
was then described by their White rulers as heathen savages, a term which has
fallen into disuse as wounding to the susceptibilities of the Afro-Asian bloc in
U.N.O. For centuries down to 1899 they had waged guerilla warfare against
the Spaniards, and for four decades after that against their new American
masters. After 1942 they continued this struggle, this time against the
Japanese invaders and now armed with modern weapons. Their methods of
waging guerilla warfare were those which might be expected of heathen
savages but which, it must be confessed, were not fundamentally different
from those being employed by those Christian peoples of contemporary
Europe who were subject to enemy occupations. Japanese units were
ambushed and massacred; prisoners and wounded were tortured and
murdered. The Japanese, as might be expected, retaliated with energy and
enthusiasm. For two years one horrible atrocity was matched by another;
terrorism was met by terrorism. After years of inconclusive guerilla fighting in
China, the Japanese had become accustomed to dealing drastically with
partisan irregulars. Like the French ten years later when faced with
insurrection in Algeria, the Japanese regularly employed torture when
interrogating suspects, burned villages and massacred their inhabitants. When


it became clear that Japan’s defeat was certain, the irregulars intensified their
ferocious attacks and the Japanese reprisals became even more wholesale and
savage.


This admittedly was the situation in the Philippines which Yamashita found
when he arrived there in October 1944. He was handicapped from the outset
by the fact that he had never even set eyes on the Philippines before, and knew
nothing of the inhabitants or the geography of these islands. He was further
handicapped by contradictory and often impossible orders from the Japanese
army headquarters in Tokyo, and by the fact that the naval forces and the air
force units defending the Philippines were under separate commands. When,
ten days after his arrival, the American invasion began, the combined effect of
intensive bombing by the American Air Force which held undisputed
command of the air and sabotage of the roads and railways by the irregulars,
quickly led to Yamashita being completely cut off from most of the units
under his command. In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that the
discipline of many of the Japanese troops gave way. They defended
themselves blindly and savagely. Undeniably horrible atrocities were
committed. There is no reason to reject the allegation that 25,000 unarmed
non- combatant civilians were slaughtered. Yamashita was gradually driven
back into the mountainous northern end of the island of Luzon. He continued
to resist stubbornly until Japan’s surrender in September 1945.


General Yamashita surrendered on September 3rd. On September 25th he was
charged with being a war-criminal: two weeks later he was arraigned and
served with an indictment with sixty-four particulars. His trial was fixed for
October 29th, so his defenders were given less than three weeks to study this
lengthy document and to prepare his defence. It is thus hardly surprising that
Mr. Justice Rutledge of the United States Supreme Court in his dissenting
judgment commented that “the accused had been rushed to trial with needless
and indecent haste.” Mr. Frank Reel does not hesitate to attribute the refusal
of the tribunal to grant proper time to prepare the defence to express orders
sent them by General MacArthur, the supreme Military Authority in the Far
East, to proceed with the work of liquidating the prisoners without delay.


It was not suggested by the prosecution that General Yamashita had been


personally present at any of the numerous atrocities which were commited in
wrnwtAA Ane ta nf tha Dhilinninan hatr.rnann Ontahan 1TOAA and Cantanshann TAAL an


VdlLIUUS palt UL WE FIUpPpPHIES DELWEEL ULLUDEL 1944 dLIU OCPLeElIVeEL LIF), UL
that he had ordered or incited their commission. The prosecution maintained
that as he was commander-in-chief in the Philippines he was responsible for
everything his troops did during the period he commanded them.


The Tribunal convicted General Yamashita of having “failed to provide
effective control over his troops”, a crime hitherto unknown in the annals of
jurisprudence. He was not convicted of having done anything or ordered or
incited anything to be done: he was convicted of failing to do something. The
Tribunal did not find that it was within his power to do what they found he
had failed to do, namely to control his troops. So it would be more accurate to
say he was convicted not for doing or failing to do anything, but for being the
commander of demoralised troops who, without his knowledge or approval,
committed crimes.


To do them justice the Tribunal made no pretence of being an impartial body.
Their duty was to carry out the wishes of the American Commander-in-Chief,
General MacArthur. Several times, Mr. Reel tells us, he and the other defence
counsel were rebuked behind the scenes for being obstructive. “You men are
not knights in armour jousting,” General Reynolds told them, “You are
officers of the Army and of this court and you are detailed to help us find the
facts, not score points over the prosecution”.


General Yamashita’s calm dignity seems to have aroused the personal hostility
of the prosecuting counsel. Contrary to the accepted practice in war-crimes
trials, the prisoner appeared in court in his uniform as a general of the Japanese
army with four rows of campaign ribbons. Colonel Meek, one of the
prosecuting counsel, said to Mr. Reel, “Damn it, it makes me mad, seeing him
decked out in uniform. He steals the show: he dominates the court room! If I
had my way I’d put him in prison overalls and put chains on him.”


Mr. Reel observes, “Even in overalls and chains General Yamashita would
have stolen the show and dominated the court room. He personified dignity
and serenity.”


So outraged were Mr. Reel and the other counsel for the defence at the way
the trial had been conducted that they determined not to give up the fight as


lost after the verdict and the sentence, death by hanging, had been pronounced.
Nominally, there is no right of appeal from a verdict of a court martial to a
civil court. In this case, however, the court had convicted the prisoner of an
offence for which no one had ever been convicted before. Further, the court
had admitted hearsay evidence which made it possible to maintain that the trial
was a breach of the Fifth Amendment of the American Constitution which
guarantees a fair trial to any person accused of a crime by the Federal
Government. It was decided, therefore, to apply to the Supreme Court of the
United States for its ruling on these and other objections and for a stay of the
execution until this ruling had been obtained.


A frantic race against time ensued. Application had first to be made to the
Supreme Court of the Philippines and then when this application was
inevitably rejected, to appeal against the rejection to the Supreme Court in
Washington. The prosecution was deliberately obstructive, evading service of
notices and omitting to supply copy documents. In the end the Supreme Court,
which grants on an average only one application made to it out of seven, was
induced to act. As General MacArthur refused point-blank to postpone the
execution, the Supreme Court ordered a stay of further proceedings. Thereafter
the War Department granted every assistance. Air transportation—”No. 1
priority”—was given to Mr. Reel and two of his colleagues. On December
25th, 1945, they set off on a flight half way round the world from the
Philippines to Washington. On January 7th, 1946, General Yamashita’s appeal
was heard by the Supreme Court.


It is often said the Supreme Court upheld the verdict of the Manila military
tribunal. This is incorrect. Seven judges adjudicated and five of them held they
had no jurisdiction to enquire into the findings of a court martial. The court,
they maintained, could not concern itself “with the guilt or innocence of
General Yamashita”. If a wrong decision had been made on disputed facts,
correction was the duty of the superior military authority, that is to say, of the
Commander-in-Chief, General MacArthur. In the majority judgment the
objection was evaded that the fundamental legal rights guaranteed by the Fifth
Amendment had been disregarded by the admission of hearsay evidence. “It is
unnecessary to consider here what in other situations the Fifth Amendment
might require. Nothing we have said here is to be taken as indicating any
opinion on the question of the wisdom of considering such evidence.”


Only an American lawyer is competent to express an opinion whether this
majority judgment of the Supreme Court was technically justified. Mr. Frank
Reel maintains strongly that it was not. In his brilliant book, however, he gives
no indication that he realised that far more was at stake than the life of a single
Japanese general. To have granted the appeal would have led to the most far-
reaching and most serious political consequences. One member of the Court
was Mr. Justice Felix Frankfurter who was no mere learned lawyer, but as the
intimate friend and confidant of the late Franklin D. Roosevelt, had for many
years advised the President on the latter’s tortuous foreign policy, and knew
all there was to know concerning the international political situation. Although
Frankfurter took no active part during the hearing of the appeal in court, we
may be sure that he dominated his colleagues in their deliberations behind
closed doors afterwards. To him it would have been clear that expediency
demanded that the Supreme Court should reject General Yamashita’s appeal
and above all refrain from expressing any opinion on the legality and
advisability of ignoring rules of evidence and admitting hearsay testimony.
The contention of Yamashita’s defenders that by ignoring rules of evidence
and admitting hearsay testimony the military tribunal at Manila had failed to
give Yamashita the fair trial to which he was entitled under the American
Constitution might be described as veritably political dynamite. The tribunal
had admittedly done this in accordance with the regulations for the disposal of
Japanese prisoners of war drawn up by General Douglas MacArthur on the
authority conferred on him by the President. Now MacArthur, a professional
soldier with no knowledge of law, had merely adopted the innovations laid
down for the trial of the major Nazi war-criminals at Nuremberg in the Charter
of the London Agreement. Naturally he felt himself justified in assuming that
the team of eminent jurists who had drafted the Charter knew their business.
No doubt he felt he could hardly go wrong if he adopted the conclusions
reached by such legal experts as Lord Justice Wright, one of the most
distinguished members of the British Court of Appeal, and Ivan Nikitchenko,
whose knowledge of Soviet law had so won him the esteem of Joseph Stalin
that he had entrusted him with the task of preparing for the trial of the major
Nazi war-criminals and had later sent him to represent the Soviet Union at the
Nuremberg Trials in order to ensure that the verdict reached would confirm
the verdict of guilt already pronounced by himself and the other chiefs of state
at the Yalta Conference. No blame certainly could attach to General


NAna A rthiir far Alindls+7 fallavsing minh aminnant ladnl aitharitinc


IVLGALSALULIUL LUL ULIULY LULU WLIS DUGH CLUICH ICAL AULLIVIILITS.


The consequences, nevertheless, were extremely embarrassing, as no doubt
Mr. Justice Frankfurter pointed out to his colleagues. In the circumstances, can
it be doubted that he urged his learned colleagues not to waste their time
debating whether one Japanese general should be hanged or should be allowed
to end his days in retirement. They should realise, he no doubt pointed out, that
it would be impossible to condemn MacArthur’s regulations for Yamashita’ s
trial without condemning the almost exactly similar regulations laid down in
the Charter to the London Agreement under which at that very moment the
mass trial of the major Nazi war-criminals was taking place at Nuremberg.
Their distinguished colleague, Mr. Justice Jackson, was at Nuremberg acting
as chief American prosecutor. Would he not regard it as an undeserved affront
if he was told that the Supreme Court, of which he was a member, had ruled
the proceedings in which he was taking a leading part was not a fair trial
within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment because of the rules under which
it was being conducted. Far more important, however, was what would
America’s mighty ally, Joseph Stalin, think of such a finding. Already he was
showing a disposition to be hostile. If they accepted Yamashita’s appeal a
grave international crisis would result, the consequences of which no man
could foresee.


To avoid precipitating an international crisis, five of the seven judges of the
Supreme Court hearing Yamashita’s appeal very prudently held that if the
Manila tribunal had been at fault in convicting him, it was not within their
jurisdiction to set matters right, which was the business of the supreme
military authority in the Far East, in other words, of the Commander-in-Chief,
General MacArthur.


As so often happens in war-crimes trials, the dissenting judgments delivered
are the most memorable features of the proceedings. Thus the dissenting
judgment of the Indian representative on the Tokyo War-crimes Tribunal, Mr.
Justice Rahabinode Pal, will be remembered long after the majority judgment
delivered at that notorious war-crimes trial has been forgotten. Similarly the
dissenting judgments which Mr. Justice Murphy and Mr. Justice Rutledge
delivered regarding General Yamashita’s appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court
will always be honoured as emphatic re-assertions of long established legal
principles.


Mr. Justice Murphy in his judgment declared:—


“The Fifth Amendment guarantee of due process of law applies to ‘any
person’— American citizens, aliens, alien enemies or enemy belligerents—whc
is accused of a crime by the Federal Government or any of its agencies.


General Yamashita was therefore entitled to a fair trial as to any alleged crimes
and to be free from charges of legally unrecognized crimes that would only
permit his accusers to satisfy their desires for revenge.


General Yamashita was, however, rushed to trial under an improper charge,
given insufficient time to prepare an adequate defence, deprived of the benefits
of some of the most elementary rules of evidence and summarily sentenced to
be hanged. In all this needless and unseemly haste there was no serious attempt
to charge or to prove that he committed a recognised violation of the laws of
war. He was not charged with personally participating in the acts of atrocity or
with ordering or condoning their commission. Not even knowledge of these
crimes was attributed to him. It was simply alleged that he unlawfully
disregarded and failed to discharge his duty as commander to control the
operations of the members of his command.”


With regard to General Yamashita’s alleged failure to control the operations
of the members of his command, Mr. Justice Murphy summarised the case for
the prosecution in the following scathing and oft-quoted passage:


“The charges amount to this, “We, the victorious American forces, have done
everything possible to destroy and disorganise your lines of communication,
your effective control of your personnel, your ability to wage war. We have
defeated and crushed your forces. And now we charge and condemn you for
having been inefficient in maintaining control of your troops, during the
period when we were so effectively besieging and eliminating your forces and
blockading your ability to maintain effective control. Many terrible atrocities
were committed by your disorganised troops. Because these atrocities were so
wide spread we will not bother to charge or prove you committed, ordered, or
condoned them. We will assume that they must have resulted from your
inefficiency and negligence as a commander. In short, we charge you with


~~


inefficiency in controlling your troops. We will judge the discharge of your
duties by the disorganisation which we ourselves created in large part. Our


3.39


standards of judgment are whatever we wish to make them’;


Mr. Justice Rutledge then read his dissenting judgment which confirmed and
amplified the conclusions of Mr. Justice Murphy. He was particularly scathing
regarding the complete disregard of the rules of evidence. “The tribunal has
accepted,” he declared, “every conceivable kind of statement, rumour, report,
at first, second, third, or further hand, and even one propaganda film as
evidence.” He proceeded:


“A more complete abrogation of the customary rules could hardly have been
made. So far as the admissibility and probative value of evidence was
concerned, the directive (of General MacArthur) made the tribunal a law unto
itself and it acted accordingly.”


Mr. Justice Rutledge concluded by declaring that so flagrant were the
tribunal’s departures from justice that “it was without jurisdiction from the
beginning, and if it acquired jurisdiction, then its power to proceed was lost in
the course of what was done before and during the trial.”


In passing, regret may be expressed that no means were available to bring the
doings of the so-called International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg to the
attention of the Supreme Court of the United States. Of course the majority of
the Court would have timidly declined to express any opinion as they had
done in the case of General Yamashita, but we may be sure that Mr. Justice
Murphy and Mr. Justice Rutledge would have delivered dissenting judgments
exposing with devastating logic and clarity the absurdities and iniquities
committed at that macabre farce.


Although two judges of the Supreme Court had condemned the conduct of
Yamashita’s trial by the Manila tribunal in the most scathing terms and the
other five judges had merely said that if the tribunal had erred it was the duty
of the military authorities to rectify any wrong it had done, General MacArthur
did nothing. On February 23rd, 1946, General Yamashita was hanged.
Needless to say, he met his fate with stoical courage and dignity.


Mb none ON EEE e ne Ae TAN nme enter fa nee Senthil khai nem thn nth nave et nn


Lue Cxe€CululOll OL Gellerdl Y dilidSllitd IS dll LIUeLDLE DIOL OL] ULE OLIeErPWIse
stainless career of General Douglas MacArthur, the last of that long line of
Western empire-builders and colonial administrators who created, extended
and maintained that White supremacy in Eastern Asia which had begun with
the great naval victory of the Portuguese Viceroy Dom Francisco d’ Almeida at
Cannanore on the west coast of India over the Arab and Indian fleets in 1506.


When MacArthur died at an advanced age in 1964 the Eastern Asia he had
known, dominated by Western Colonialism, had become a faded and
discredited memory, a subject for the quite unjustified shame for many
members of the formerly dominant White Race and for the equally unjustified
hatred of the formerly subject Coloured Races. It may be true that White
Supremacy in East Asia was bound to disappear in the course of time. White
Supremacy, however, depended less on actual military strength than on White
morale. No man contributed more to the shattering of White morale than
General Tomoyuki Yamashita by his epoch-making capture of Singapore.


Lue Cxe€CululOll OL Gellerdl Y dllidSllltd IS dll LIUeLIDLE DIOL OL] ULE OLULeErPWIise
stainless career of General Douglas MacArthur, the last of that long line of
Western empire-builders and colonial administrators who created, extended
and maintained that White supremacy in Eastern Asia which had begun with
the great naval victory of the Portuguese Viceroy Dom Francisco d’ Almeida at
Cannanore on the west coast of India over the Arab and Indian fleets in 1506.


When MacArthur died at an advanced age in 1964 the Eastern Asia he had
known, dominated by Western Colonialism, had become a faded and
discredited memory, a subject for the quite unjustified shame for many
members of the formerly dominant White Race and for the equally unjustified
hatred of the formerly subject Coloured Races. It may be true that White
Supremacy in East Asia was bound to disappear in the course of time. White
Supremacy, however, depended less on actual military strength than on White
morale. No man contributed more to the shattering of White morale than
General Tomoyuki Yamashita by his epoch-making capture of Singapore.


THE TRIAL OF GENERAL RAMCKE


A brief outline of the trial of the famous leader of paratroops, General
Bernard Ramcke, is included here because it illustrates so vividly the
hardships and injustice inflicted on prisoners of war by the Moscow
Declaration of the 30th October, 1943, by which, it will be remembered, the
victorious Powers conferred on themselves the right, in defiance of the
Geneva Convention, to swop prisoners of war with each other.


Secondly, it demonstrates, if this really requires any demonstration, that a
prisoner of war on trial before a war-crimes tribunal had a negligible chance of
being acquitted, however threadbare the case for the prosecution. In this war-
crimes trial the absurdity of the charges against General Ramcke was obvious
to everyone in court long before the case ended. Nevertheless the Tribunal
decided to convict in accordance with the principle that a war-crimes trial
ought to end with a conviction, although this particular tribunal upheld the
credit of French justice by imposing a nominal penalty which resulted in the
release of the prisoner after the elapse of only a few months.


This trial also confirms the view that war-crimes tribunals often adopted one
of the principles on which trials before the Inquisition were conducted. A
person charged with heresy before a court of the Holy Office who
conclusively proved his complete innocence was indeed acquitted of heresy
but was convicted of having incurred the suspicion of heresy for which a
relatively mild punishment was imposed. War-crimes tribunals like the courts
of the Holy Office could not believe that a prisoner brought before them could
be completely guiltless of any offence.


This case cannot be regarded as a typical Routine War-crimes Trial, since the
belated decision to put General Ramcke on trial was reached in order to serve
a political purpose. By, for him, a fortunate chance, his name had been put at
the end of the long list of prisoners of war in French custody awaiting trial for
war crimes. Had his name been put at the beginning of this list his case would
have been dealt with as a simple Routine War- crimes Trial and his life would
no doubt have come to a violent end without any particular attention being
attracted. But although the French tribunals and firing squads worked with
untiring zeal, the year 1951 arrived and General Ramcke was still awaiting


v


trial. By then wartime passions had considerably abated: many prisoners were
being released without being put on trial. Probably this would have been his
fate also but for a stroke of ill-fortune. The Stalin Myth had been exposed as a
propaganda fiction; no longer was it possible even for the most stupid to
believe the Communist dictator was a loyal ally after his subjugation of
Czechoslovakia and his blockade of West Berlin. To defend Western Europe
from the threatened invasion by the Red Army it had become necessary to win
the goodwill of the German people and to start re-creating the German Army.


Naturally the prospect of having to deal with a re-armed Germany aroused
widespread alarm. Nowhere was this alarm more strongly felt than in France.
The French Communists were filled with indignation that the advance of the
Red Army to the Atlantic Coast should be obstructed by German troops, and
their loud protests were supported by all those in France who regarded
Germany as the national enemy. It was decided to compel the rest of the world
to understand the gravity of the peril by staging a trial of one of the surviving
German prisoners of war in French captivity, so that at this trial the full story
of all the cruelties committed during the German occupation of France could
be retold and then broadcast to the world.


It happened that the only surviving German prisoner of war in French
captivity whose name was at all widely known to the general public was
General Ramcke. Not much in fact was known about him except that he had
stoutly defended Brest from the Americans and no one knew what offences he
was supposed to have committed. The Communist Press, quickly followed by
the Left-wing Press, took up the question of his misdeeds with enthusiasm.
Very soon all France was ringing with the crimes of “The Butcher of Brest”.


The French Government acceded reluctantly to the popular demand. The
papers relating to General Ramcke were hastily brought from some official
pigeon hole where they had been collecting dust for years, charges were
framed, and “The Butcher” was brought to a trial without a moment’ s
unavoidable delay in the court room of the Prison Cherche-Midi in Paris on
the 19th March, 1951.


An outline of General Ramcke’s distinguished career must here be given
briefly. Having served in the campaign in France, in 1941 he took a leading


part in the conquest of Crete, the most spectacular and, from the losses
incurred, the most ruinous exploit by paratroops of the Second World War. He
next served as a leader of front-line troops in North Africa, Russia and Italy.
He then returned to Germany to supervise the reorganisation of the 2nd
Paratroop Division which had been decimated in the recent fighting in Russia.
On the 12th June, 1944, he was ordered to take command of this Division
which had been sent on ahead of him to France to reinforce the German forces
there awaiting the long- expected Anglo-American invasion. He entered
France on that date and proceeded to Brittany. On the 20th September he
surrendered to the Americans at Brest. The dates are important because all
General Ramcke’s offences were alleged to have been committed during this
short period of three months, during the first part of which until the 31st July
he was fully occupied organising the defence of the coast of Brittany and
during the second part of which he was engaged in attempting to hold up the
American forces after their break-through at Avranches.


Cut off in the Breton Peninsula from the main German forces retreating
eastward towards the Rhine, General Ramcke maintained resistance in Brest
for thirty-nine days. When at last he was forced to surrender he was treated
with every courtesy and honour by the American commander, General Troy H.
Middleton. He was first sent to a prisoner-of-war camp near Cherbourg; then
transferred to a prisoner-of-war camp in England, and finally flown across the
Atlantic to Washington, whence he was taken by train to the great prisoner-of-
war camp at Fort Clinton, near Jackson, Mississippi.


Conditions in this camp seem to have been excellent until Germany’s
unconditional surrender in May 1945, when a campaign was immediately
started in the American Press in protest against the “coddling of prisoners, all
of whom were undeniably guilty of what Lord Justice Lawrence was later to
describe as the supreme international crime, namely of being on the losing
side. In order to draw attention to the spiteful deprivations and restrictions
imposed on the prisoners in response to this Press campaign, General Ramcke
crawled beneath the barbed wire fence surrounding the camp, and posted a
letter to army headquarters in Washington. He then returned to the camp.
When, however, the camp authorities were ordered by headquarters to
investigate General Ramcke’s complaints, his escape, of course, came to light
and he was put under arrest for a breach of prison discipline.


This incident is important in the light of subsequent events. No doubt the
knuckles of a number of prison officials were deservedly rapped and General
Ramcke in this way made a number of vindictive enemies. In accordance with
the Moscow Declaration to which the United States was a party, a prisoner of
war held by one victorious Power had to be handed over to any other victorious
Power which alleged he had committed a war-crime. Down to this time it had
occurred to no one that General Ramcke was a war-criminal. It would
obviously have been easy for a personal enemy to have conveyed a hint to one
of the Allied commissions in Washington that a demand for the surrender of
General Ramcke as a war-criminal would be favourably received. At all

events, shortly after the above incident he was told that he was being sent back
to Europe. Naturally he assumed that he was about to be released in accordance
with the requirements of international law. To his surprise the ship stopped at
Antwerp in order to put him and one of his comrades ashore. What followed is
best described in his own words:


“Hardly had the ship made fast at Antwerp when we were informed by an
American officer that we were to be handed over to the British. A British
officer of police, a sergeant and six men, took us in charge. Their manners
were brutal. With rough cuffs and pushes they fastened Kochy and I together
with handcuffs and chains and thrust us with kicks (“mit Fusstritten”) into a
waiting lorry. We were then driven through Antwerp, under the Scheldt by the
celebrated Scheldt Tunnel, via Bruges, to P.O.W. Camp No.

2226 near Ostend.”


This deplorable incident took place in March 1946. After spending some time
in appalling sanitary conditions in the prison camp near Ostend, General
Ramcke was taken for interrogation to the notorious “London District Cage”
in Kensington Gardens, London. The British then decided that they had no
complaints against him. They did not set him free, however, but sent him over
to Paris where, on the 4th December, 1946, he was handed over to the French
by whom he was taken in handcuffs and chains, first to the Prison Cherche-
Midi, and then to the prison at Rennes in Brittany.


It is only possible to speculate as to the reason for this extraordinary
procedure. General Ramcke was unquestionably what prison governors would


nlannifer na 6n AFF mlt Awa Anne Ua rirnan nat Antler n rnam Aenean man i+


Cidsslly d> d ULLIICUIL PLISULICL . FIC Wdd HUL VILY d VELY VDIdVE IHdAli— Ie
demands courage to drop with a parachute over enemy territory—but he was
remarkably lacking in tact, as several anecdotes which he tells in his
autobiography show. He was well aware of the rights given him as a prisoner
of war by international law and never hesitated to inform his captors when
these rights were being infringed. They on their part took the view that the
only proper relationship between a prisoner of war guilty of the supreme
international crime of being on the losing side was humility and deference on
his part and generous magnanimity on theirs. General Ramcke was totally
unable to fill the role which his captors, whether American, British or French,
expected of him. It seems likely, therefore, that he offended his British captors
in the London District Cage in exactly the same way as he had offended his
captors in Fort Clinton, Mississippi. Probably personal ill-will towards him
accounts for his being handed over by the British to the French in December
1946.


For the next four years General Ramcke was kept in close confinement in the
prison at Rennes. The sanitary arrangements of the prison were appalling and
discipline was maintained by such penalties as solitary confinement in chains. I
was not until 1951 that any charge was brought against him, by which time, as
mentioned above, the political situation had been transformed by the outbreak
of the “Cold War” between the United States and the Soviet Union. The French
Communists and their leftist allies then decided to re-awaken anti-German
feeling by staging a trial of some well-known German prisoner of war. The
“Hero of Brest” was the only prisoner still in French hands who fulfilled the
necessary requirements. Labelled “The Butcher of Brest” in the French Press,
General Ramcke was served with a hastily prepared indictment and for the first
time learned what offences he was supposed to have committed. On the 19th
March, 1951, over six and a half years after his surrender at Brest on the 20th
September, 1944, he was brought before a French military tribunal in the court
house of the Prison Cherche-Midi in Paris.


The trial of General Ramcke is only of interest if regarded as an example of
the fate to which German prisoners of war were subjected when tried for war-
crimes before French military tribunals. It is the only one of these trials which
was fully reported at the time in the French Press—it even received some
mention in the British Press—and in addition it has been described in detail by
General Ramcke himself in his autobiography. The lawyers entrusted with


framing the indictment had a difficult task to perform since it was only
possible to charge General Ramcke with offences committed between the 12th
June, 1944, the date he entered France, and the following 20th September
when he surrendered in Brest. Naturally a makeshift document was the result
since no one knew why the British had handed him over to French custody. He
had only remained in French custody because, long hidden behind the walls of
the prison at Rennes, he had become gradually forgotten.


As a makeweight to the main complaint against him, his obstinate resistance in
Brest, his accusers brought against him the stock charge brought in most war-
crimes trials that before the siege commenced men under his command dealt
severely with partisan activity. Hurried investigation disclosed that after
General Ramcke had taken command of his division in June 1944 three Breton
peasants, all of them members of La Resistance, had been arrested by a patrol
of men of a unit of his division for being in possession of weapons, and of
being concerned in the murder of three German ambulance-men, whose
bodies, horribly mutilated, had been found nearby. They were subsequently
executed by the Security Police. General Ramcke declared that no such
incident had ever been reported to him, but if the facts were as stated by the
prosecution he would heartily have approved of the execution of the
murderers. The charge against him in fact amounted to the charge on which
General Yamashita had been convicted at Manila, of failing to control the
troops under his command. The prosecution did not press the charge, but went
on to deal with General Ramcke’s alleged offences during the thirty-nine days
during which the siege of Brest lasted.


In a nutshell General Ramcke was charged with causing the death of French
citizens and damage to civilian property during the siege.


Unfortunately for the prosecution but most fortunately for the inhabitants of
Brest, before the American attack began General Ramcke proposed a truce so
that the population of the fortress could be evacuated. The humane and
chivalrous General Troy H. Middleton commanding the besieging army readily
agreed, and the entire population was allowed to leave Brest with the exception
of certain units of Partisans who remained behind in order to harass the
Germans from the rear.


Mh moan narsttaem. Salad) aan le tbe ann An Danetiinnss Tan das mnewein AT a Dass ek


Lille prosecCuuoll caleu dS d WIUESS d Fdllisdll leduer ldlned Le KOY WHU
testified that he himself had prudently left Brest before the siege began, but he
had left behind four of his men in a secret “hide-out”. After the siege no trace
of this “hide-out” or of the men he had left in it could be found. It was open
therefore to the court to adopt the assumption that it had been discovered and
burnt by the Germans who had shot the Partisans found lurking therein.


This indeed might have happened: probably the men were dead and certainly
the “hide- out” had ceased to exist. But no evidence of any kind was produced
that General Ramcke’s troops had been in any way concerned. The siege of
Brest was the first example of what may be termed a siege by obliteration. The
Americans not only bombarded the besieged city with numerous guns of every
calibre but they continuously bombed it from the air. Between August 7th and
September 20th there were no fewer than thirty-nine major air attacks by
heavy bombers on Brest: in the raid on September 12th no fewer than six
hundred bombers took part. Brest was systematically destroyed, district by
district; as in the battle for the Monte Cassino in the spring of that year, the
defenders found excellent cover in the ruins and long resisted successfully the
American infantry attacking behind a screen of phosphoros bombs and liquid
fire. At the end of the siege Brest did not consist of a collection of heavily
damaged buildings; it consisted of masses of brickwork and masonry which
had been repeatedly churned over by shells and bombs. It was not only
impossible to distinguish one building from another but even to guess where
the main streets had been. In his memoirs General Ramcke records, “Brest
looked like a crater on the moon.”


Forming part of this wilderness of debris was no doubt the Partisan “hide-out”;
it might indeed have been discovered and destroyed by the garrison, but it was
obviously far more likely to have been obliterated by the hurricane of shells anc
bombs which for the thirty- nine days rained down on Brest.


The prosecution added two supplementary charges. First, that the troops under
General Ramcke’s command had themselves set fire to Brest during the siege;
secondly, they had indulged in plundering the city while the assault was in
progress.


Why troops should set fire to a city in which they themselves were, the
prosecution did not explain. Even more absurd was the charge of plundering,


—


since every member of the garrison knew that surrender was inevitable in
either a few days or a few weeks when the survivors would become prisoners
of war and of course any loot found on them would be taken from them. In
these circumstances a regiment composed of professional burglars might
safely be depended on to behave themselves if surrounded in Hatton Garden!


The prosecution finally collapsed when the defence read two affidavits, the one
sworn by General Troy H. Middleton himself and the other by his second in
command, General Robinson.


General Middleton began by disposing of the charge of plundering by testifying
that no articles of plunder had been reported to him as having been found on the
captured members of the garrison when they were searched after the surrender.


General Middleton was then asked: “What impression did you form of the
methods of conducting war of the German soldiers in Brest and particularly of
the 2nd Paratroop Division?” General Middleton replied: “During my entire
professional service in two world wars I have never come across better fighting
soldiers than the German troops in Brest. This applies particularly to the men
of the 2nd Paratroop Division. They impressed me as well disciplined, well
trained and remarkably obedient to orders.”


In reply to the question: “Have you any knowledge of brutal acts or criminal
behaviour on the part of the garrison of Brest?” General Middleton replied:
“No acts of brutality or of unlawful methods of warfare were reported to me
by my troops. Those of our men who became prisoners of the German troops
in Brest were as well treated as one can expect in war. I consider that the
measures taken by General Ramcke for the prisoners in his hands were better
than I have ever before observed in warfare.”


Finally General Middleton was asked: “Have you any observations to make
concerning General Ramcke?” To this question he replied: “Of the many
German commanders I have met in war and of the round dozen German
generals who fell into the hands of my troops, I rank General Ramcke as the
most outstanding soldier. I consider that he conducted the defence of Brest in
accordance with the best soldierly traditions.”


owt | om tear d. ar om Te


wW vm


‘The evidence ot General Walter M. Robinson, also taken on commission, was
then read to the Court. It confirmed General Middleton’s evidence. In
particular General Robinson testified that when the American troops entered
Brest, there were numerous fires blazing caused by the phosphoros shells used
in the bombardment which, in his opinion, were quite beyond the power of the
garrison to master. The Court heard this unwelcome evidence in resentful
silence.


This unexpected evidence put the military tribunal trying General Ramcke in
an extremely difficult position. Almost the entire French Press had worked
itself up into a state of hysteria over the crimes of the “Butcher of Brest”. To
acquit the accused was therefore impossible. But for the evidence of General
Middleton the usual course adopted by war-crimes tribunals might have been
adopted, that is to say, the accused might have been convicted and sentenced
to death, with no other result than that tension would have been caused
between France and Germany, an outcome much desired by Communist and
Leftist opinion in France as it could have been used as an argument against the
proposed re-arming of Germany.


To hang General Ramcke however in the face of the evidence in his favour
given by General Middleton would be resented as an affront in American
military circles. Great pride also was felt by the general public in the United
States in the story of the capture of Brest, not only as an example of American
prowess but of American chivalry; Americans could hardly be expected to
welcome the addition of a footnote to that story recording that the gallant
defender of Brest was done to death by his French enemies seven years after his
surrender to the Americans. But, most important of all, the judicial murder of
General Ramcke would have been regarded with the strongest disapproval by
the American Government, then striving desperately to enlist German public
opinion to the side of the Western Powers. Ever since the end of the War,
France had depended on American financial and economic support. If an
“agonizing re-appraisal” took place in Washington and the flow of dollars
ceased, where could France turn for benevolent support? Would not the loss of
the American pension be a high price to pay for the death of one more German
general?


There is no reason to think that the French military tribunal trying General


Ramcke was any more perceptive of the grave political issues at stake than the
average war-crimes tribunal. Fortunately, the tribunal had the guidance of a
civil judge, Monsieur Ménéquaux, upon whom, on this occasion at least, the
wisdom of Solomon clearly descended. He succeeded in persuading his
military colleagues to disregard entirely the evidence given at the trial and to
bring in a general verdict of guilty, thus satisfying French public opinion, and
then to sentence General Ramcke to five years’ imprisonment. As the General
had already spent only three months short of five years in rigorous
confinement awaiting trial, this sentence entitled the accused to release at the
expiration of three months.


Except for the French Communists and their Leftist allies whose stunt had
miscarried, and General Ramcke himself, who strongly resented being
labelled a criminal for crimes which the court carefully refrained froth
specifying, this celebrated war-crimes trial ended to the satisfaction of
everyone concerned. On the 23rd June, 1951, General Ramcke was released
from the Cherche-Midi Prison and was immediately driven by car to the
German frontier. His long ordeal which had begun on the quay at Antwerp in
March 1946 was over.


Ramcke was any more perceptive of the grave political issues at stake than the
average war-crimes tribunal. Fortunately, the tribunal had the guidance of a
civil judge, Monsieur Ménéquaux, upon whom, on this occasion at least, the
wisdom of Solomon clearly descended. He succeeded in persuading his
military colleagues to disregard entirely the evidence given at the trial and to
bring in a general verdict of guilty, thus satisfying French public opinion, and
then to sentence General Ramcke to five years’ imprisonment. As the General
had already spent only three months short of five years in rigorous
confinement awaiting trial, this sentence entitled the accused to release at the
expiration of three months.


Except for the French Communists and their Leftist allies whose stunt had
miscarried, and General Ramcke himself, who strongly resented being
labelled a criminal for crimes which the court carefully refrained froth
specifying, this celebrated war-crimes trial ended to the satisfaction of
everyone concerned. On the 23rd June, 1951, General Ramcke was released
from the Cherche-Midi Prison and was immediately driven by car to the
German frontier. His long ordeal which had begun on the quay at Antwerp in
March 1946 was over.


THE TRIAL OF FIELD MARSHAL VON
MANSTEIN


This chapter dealing with the final development of the “advance to barbarism”,
the introduction of war-crimes trials at which the victors tried their own charge:
against the vanquished, may be fittingly concluded by an examination of what
was in many respects the most noteworthy of all the war-crimes trials which
followed the Second World War.


This trial was noteworthy for three reasons. Firstly, because the accused,
Field Marshal von Manstein, was without question one of the greatest of the
military leaders who took part in that struggle; secondly, because the
proceedings were not only fully reported in the newspapers at the time, but
were afterwards described in detail in a book written by the leading English
counsel for the defence, a book which is entitled to rank with Mr.

Frank Reel’s The Trial of General Yamashita; and thirdly, because the
fundamental points at issue were fought out by the prosecution and the
defence on comparatively equal terms.


It will be remembered that by the time the Nuremberg Trials had at last
reached the conclusion preordained at the Yalta Conference, the British
public had become utterly weary of the subject of the disposal of enemy
prisoners of war. An Iron Curtain of Discreet Silence was then drawn
over the question. Interest was temporarily revived in 1947 by the
sentencing of Field Marshal Kesselring to death, but once his reprieve had
been arranged behind the scenes, the British public soon forgot that war-
crimes trials were still going on all over Europe. Great care was taken to
prevent the British public being reminded of this fact; discussion in print
concerning the legality and ethics of these so-called trials was made the
subject of a strict taboo. No one, and particularly those who had taken
part in them, wanted to hear war-crimes trials mentioned again.


It appears that the British authorities innocently mistook the indifference of the
British public to what was taking place for wholehearted approval. In the
summer of 1948, it was casually announced that three famous generals, Field
Marshal Gerd von Runstedt, Field Marshal Fritz Erich von Manstein, and


Colonel-General Strauss, who had spent the previous three years in honourable
captivity in England as prisoners of war, were to be sent back to Germany in
order to stand their trial as war-criminals.


A storm of protests at once broke forth, far exceeding the outcry which had

_ arisen over the condemnation of Field Marshal Kesselring. What was the
reason, it was asked, for bringing these belated charges? “If these men were
guilty of war-crimes,” wrote Professor Gilbert Murray to The Times, “they
should have been promptly accused and punished. Nothing can justify keeping
these men in prison for three years without a trial.”


The Government had no reply to make to this question and the controversy in
the columns of the Press and the debates in Parliament were entirely one-
sided. In vain the Lord Chancellor, Lord Jowitt, reiterated that he was satisfied
in the depths of his heart that the prisoners had a case to answer and that the
trials really should take place. The storm continued. At last, on May 5, 1949,
Lord Jowitt announced that the charges against Field Marshal von Runstedt
and Colonel-General Strauss were to be dropped. But the case against Field
Marshal von Manstein must, he insisted, proceed. “The whole matter for the
last six months has been a source of great worry to me,” Lord Jowitt declared
plaintively.


The solution decided on to put an end to Lord Jowitt’s six months of worry
can only be regarded as most unfortunate from any point of view. Of the three
distinguished soldiers threatened with prosecution as war-criminals, only
Field Marshal von Runstedt, the hero of the famous winter-battle of the
Ardennes, at the end of 1944, was generally known to the British public. The
names of his two comrades, if known at all, were unassociated with any
particular event. The reason officially given for the decision not to put him
and Colonel-General Strauss on trial was their advanced years and declining
health. An excellent reason in both cases, no doubt. But it was a reason that
applied equally well in the case of Field Marshal von Manstein who was also
elderly and in bad health; he had always been delicate and was now
threatened by blindness. The age of all three men was in the neighbourhood of
seventy.


So unconvincing an official explanation inevitably invited speculation as to


the true reason. Inquiry showed that, although Manstein had spent the last
four years of the war on the Eastern Front, he had taken a leading part in the
Campaign of France, in 1940, and to his brilliant strategy was generally
ascribed the great breakthrough near Sedan on May 13th, which led in a few
weeks to the withdrawal of the B.E.F. from Dunkirk and the capitulation of
France at Compiègne. In his book, The Other Side of the Hill, Captain Liddell
Hart writes:


“The ablest of all the German Generals was probably Field Marshal von
Manstein. That was the verdict of most of those with whom I discussed the
war, from Runstedt downwards. He had a superb strategic sense and a great
understanding of mechanized warfare.... From him came the brain-wave that
produced the defeat of France—the idea of a tank-thrust through the
Ardennes.”


A triumph so swift, so complete and, above all, so unexpected must inevitably
have produced widespread psychological reactions. When, on May 10th,
1940, two million German troops began the long-awaited attack on the
Western Front defended by some three and a quarter million men, confidence
reigned supreme that this attack would be victoriously repulsed. No other
result indeed seemed possible. On the one side were hurriedly trained German
conscripts, many of whom were believed to hope for defeat as the only means
of bringing about the downfall of Hitler’s regime which they were supposed to
hate. Their organisation had been hastily improvised; owing to shortage of
raw material their equipment was of poor quality, and they were outnumbered
by three to two. On the other side were the famous Maginot Line, constructed
at such vast cost and considered by the experts as impregnable; the French
Army the same instrument which Marshal Foch had led to victory twenty
years before, re-equipped and reorganised in accordance with the lessons of
the 1914—1918 War; and the B.E.F. made up of 350,000 long-service soldiers,
the best trained and equipped army that Great Britain had ever despatched to
fight in a European war. Under such circumstances, it is not surprising that
few paid attention to the poet Rudyard Kipling’s warning against indulging in
“frantic boast and foolish word”. Thus, on April 5th, 1940, in the apparent
security of British G.H.Q., General Sir Edmund Ironside, Chief of the
Imperial General Staff, “with the full consent of Mr. Oliver Stanley, the War
Minister” gave the following “frank interview on the war,” proudly described


as being “one of the most outspoken statements ever made by a British
military leader in wartime.” As reported in the Daily Mail the following day,
the gallant general said:


“Hitler has ‘missed the bus’ in not attacking us during the last seven months.
We have turned the corner. Having seen the British Army over in France, what
we have got in this country, and also the French army, I feel that everything is
going on well.


The spirit of the young men is something that has to be seen to be believed. As
an actual fact there is no officer in the German Army opposed to us who
served in the last war above the rank of captain. We have generals and
colonels galore, and so have the French Army—men still in the pink of
condition—who commanded in the last war and know what it means.


I know most of the German commanders personally. I should say that most of
these men are now feeling very exercised about what they should do if the
order was given to ‘go’.


In this country today there is no doubt about the reasons for which we are
fighting. There is a great silence in Germany. German propaganda is full of
lies and this must be bad for morale.


It seems to me that one reason why the German troops are kept in position at
the front is that they can be much better controlled there.”


Within less than two months of this speech—a verbose and authentic variation
of Kaiser Wilhelm’s entirely fictional reference, in 1914, to Sir John French’s
“contemptible little army”—the B.E.F. was embarking at Dunkirk in order to
return to Britain. It was leaving behind it all its guns to the number of 2,300;
120,000 vehicles, including all its tanks, armoured cars and lorries; and all its
equipment, ammunition and stores. That the bulk of the troops succeeded in
escaping at all was due entirely to Hitler’s delusion that the dark menace of
Asia overshadowing Europe would induce Great Britain to come to an
understanding with Germany in joint self-protection. Few members of the
B.E.F. returned to England with more than the clothes which they were
wearing.


Anyone but a British Foreign Office official would have foreseen that the
decision to single out as a war-criminal the general to whom, it is agreed, was
due the credit for this amazing triumph was bound to give rise to regrettable
misconstruction. In this speech, General Ironside was only expressing views
universally held at the time in the highest military and political circles. We are
assured he spoke “with the full consent of Mr.

Oliver Stanley, the War Minister.” Sudden realisation of the truth must have
come as a terrific shock. Resentment at the time must have been widespread in
political circles. Inevitably, the trial at Hamburg, in 1949, of Field Marshal von
Manstein came to be widely regarded as retribution for his achievements in
1940 which have secured for him a sure place in world history.


It is quite certain that the true explanation of the persistence with which the
demand for the trial of Field Marshal von Manstein was pressed is that, if he
had been released, it might have been difficult to resist a demand by the Soviet
Union for his surrender as a war criminal, in view of the Moscow Declaration
of October 1943 and the reciprocal undertakings exchanged in 1945. In
accordance with these undertakings, a number of prisoners of war had, in fact,
been handed over to the tender mercies of the Poles, Greeks and Serbs. But, in
default of a reasonable explanation or, better, of an explanation which could
be frankly stated, it was inevitable that untrue and unjust explanations should
have been suggested in foreign quarters critical of Great Britain.


Neither the danger of misrepresentation nor any other objection succeeded in
shaking for an instant the iron determination of the British Government to
proceed unflinchingly with this belated war-crimes trial, an iron determination
all the more remarkable since determination of any kind had been
conspicuously absent from British foreign policy in regard to every other
matter since the War. Hope of appeasing Russian hostility having long since
been abandoned, there was no object or advantage to be gained by the trial;
public opinion in Great Britain was quite indifferent; a small but influential
minority was extremely outspoken in opposition; and those who desired to
hear that another German general had been hanged considered it the best
policy to remain silent in the hope that the outcry would die down if left
unopposed. As a result, the debates in Parliament on the matter were entirely


one-sided, but the order to the army authorities to proceed with the trial
nam ninnd ameunrraAlsnd


LCLUId ICU ULINCVUKCU.


But, although the opposition aroused by the decision to put Field Marshal von
Manstein on trial as a war-criminal failed utterly to shake the resolve of the
British Government, it led to other important results. It was strongly urged
that, if this war-crimes trial must take place, it should at least be conducted
with fairness. The Field Marshal’s trial would take place before an English
military court and, therefore, he ought to be represented by English counsel.
Possibly, because the effects of such an innovation were not at first realised,
this proposal was not openly opposed. Probably, reliance was placed on the
fact that, the Field Marshal was practically penniless, since all his property
being situated in the eastern provinces of Germany annexed by Poland, had
been summarily confiscated.

In order to deprive him of legal assistance therefore, it only appeared necessary
for the British authorities to refuse him adequate funds to pay for his defence.
The Bar Council did not even trouble to repeat the ruling, which it had given
before the Nuremberg war- crimes trials began that it was “undesirable” that a
member of the English Bar should appear for the defence. It remained,
therefore, possible to contend that the accused was free to employ any lawyer,
English or German, whom he pleased. The fact that he had been robbed of all
his money by the allies of Great Britain and, consequently, could not pay for
legal aid was plainly no concern of the British Government.


It had, however, been wrongly assumed that the Field Marshal’s sympathisers
would be content with protesting. The necessary funds to pay for his defence,
amounting to some

£2,000, were quickly raised by public subscription. The British authorities
would, no doubt, have foiled this move by prohibiting the export of British
currency for such a purpose but for the fact that one of the subscribers to the
fund was no other than Mr. Winston Churchill. After six months worry, Lord
Jowitt was in no mood to bring down on himself the formidable wrath of Mr.
Churchill. The opposition ignominiously collapsed. Mr. R. T. Paget, K.C.,
M.P., generously offered his services without a fee.


Field Marshal von Manstein was formally charged on January 1st, 1949, the
farce of confiscating his uniform having been solemnly enacted whereby he

was deemed to have become a civilian. The trial commenced in Hamburg on
August 22, 1949, and dragged on until December 19 following.


It would be outside the scope of this book to examine the details of the trial of
Field Marshal von Manstein. The only real issue in the case is, however, so
simple that it can be explained in a few words. The Field Marshal was in
command of the army group on the southern wing of the Eastern Front. Facing
him were the Russian armies with a numerical superiority of seldom less than
four to one. Behind his lines raged a ceaseless and furious struggle between
the German security forces and the communist commandos in which the
unfortunate civilian population, willingly or unwillingly, joined. This struggle
had commenced on the first day that the German armies crossed the Russian
frontier when Stalin announced that the war “was not only a war between two
armies but at the same time a war of the entire Soviet people against the
Fascist German troops”.

According to Russian official reports, in the Crimea alone, 18,910 German
soldiers were killed by the partisan bands, 64 troop trains were blown up, and
1,621 lorries destroyed. Prisoners and wounded were murdered, generally after
mutilation; horrifying deeds took place whenever a German hospital was seized
by the guerillas.


As has been previously repeatedly stressed, the essential characteristic of
civilized warfare is the drawing of a distinction between the enemy combatant
forces and the enemy civilian population. But, in the fighting on the Eastern
Front, no such distinction could be drawn; any Russian civilian who
maintained his civilian status was liable to be executed by his own
countrymen as a traitor. The task of combatting this campaign of terror behind
the German lines fell mainly on units of the S.D., the intelligence branch of
the Geheime Staatspolizei, otherwise known as the Gestapo. These units
operated quite independently of the army. They were not subject to military
discipline. Their orders came direct from Hitler via Heinrich Himmler, the
chief of the Schutzstaffel, (the S.S.), the Gestapo and the S.D. There is no
question that their orders were to combat terror by terror; there is no reason to
think that they did not do their utmost to obey their orders.


In a nutshell, the charge against the Field Marshal was that he knew or should
have known what was taking place. There is no question that horrible
atrocities were committed by both sides in the struggle. Under the ruling laid
down in the London Agreement the atrocities committed by the German


nin mrsittes: EEN A AAs meAA Aa Mera. Ate? nSeenn. y wpa aA ene Seta 66s thn


SeCurilLy LOrceS COULILEU dS Wadi- Crimes , SINCE wey were COLIMIMNILEU I Lue
interest of the Axis countries”. On the other hand, the atrocities committed by
the partisans were not “war-crimes”, since the perpetrators ultimately found
themselves on the winning side. The Communist atrocities, therefore, were not
the concern of the Field Marshal since they were not technically
“war-crimes”, but he should have been concerned with the atrocities of the
German security forces, since these were “war-crimes” committed by the
ultimately losing side in an area of which he was in military command
although, admittedly, he had no authority or power to prevent them. It was
contended, further, that the Field Marshal should have been able to foresee the
retrospective law which, some three years later, the victors would become
minded to lay down and he should, therefore, have complied strictly with its
requirements.


Even since war-crimes trials began in 1945 the British legal Press had been
publishing from time to time letters enquiring what exactly was the legal
principle or doctrine under which British officers stationed in Germany had
acquired the right to sit in judgment on German subjects for offences which
they were alleged to have committed when they were subject to the law of
their own country. It is a remarkable fact that none of the learned contributors
to the legal Press ever wrote supplying the answer to the question, whence
these military courts acquired their authority. Yet the answer, first brought
clearly to light during the Manstein Trial in 1949, was in fact very simple. At
this trial the general public learned that the British officers entrusted with the
duty of adjudicating on the charges brought against the Field Marshal for acts
committed by him during the War were empowered by a Royal Warrant dated
June 18th, 1945, which directed that prisoners of war in British hands charged
with war crimes, defined as “violations of the laws and usages of war,” should
be tried by British military courts.


For four years, every war-crimes trial before a British military court had
begun with a formal challenge of the jurisdiction of the court which the
prosecution immediately brushed aside by a brief reference to the terms of the
Royal Warrant. Rarely, it seems, was the point seriously argued. The lawyers
for the defence were foreigners, themselves liable to be sent to a concentration
camp if they displayed inconvenient zeal, and the challenge was made by
them pro forma and generally argued through an interpreter or in halting


English. Because, in every case, the trials proceeded, the British public
assumed this challenge to the jurisdiction had been adequately refuted.


How baseless was this assumption only became apparent, at least to the British
public, at the trial of Field Marshal von Manstein. On the first day of the trial,
Mr. Paget challenged the jurisdiction of the court to sit in judgment on his
client. The accused, he pointed out, was a prisoner of war. A state of war still
existed between Great Britain and Germany.

Prisoner of war status is the right of every prisoner taken in war; it does not
depend in any way upon the discretion of the captor. The Geneva Convention,
to which of course Great Britain and all civilized states were parties,
reaffirmed and laid down the long- established principle that a state detaining
prisoners of war must deal with them in accordance with its own laws and
regulations in respect of its own armed forces. Among the rights of a prisoner
of war was the right to a fair trial. A fair trial is what a captor himself
considers a fair trial for his own personnel. The prosecution was relying on
the terms of the Royal Warrant of June 18th, 1945. But this document
deprived the accused of many important rights which he would have enjoyed
under British military law. In particular, he was deprived of the right to be
tried by officers of rank equal to his own; the right to demand a precise
statement of the offences with which he was charged; and the right to claim
the protection of the rules of evidence, that is to say, he was not to be
convicted on hearsay evidence. Finally, Mr. Paget appealed to the court not to
be overawed by the fact that the document of June 18th, 1945, was labelled a
Royal Warrant. In 1916, the House of Lords, in the famous Zamora case, had
held that the seizure of a ship under a Royal Warrant was illegal because the
seizure in that case was contrary to international law. The Royal Warrant was
nothing but a government order.

Responsibility for its terms rested on the government; as a constitutional
monarch the King signed Royal Warrants on the advice of his Ministers.


Exceptional interest attaches to the reply of Sir Arthur Comyns Carr, K.C.,
leading Counsel for the prosecution. He began by declaring that he had
listened to Mr. Paget’s submission “with considerable astonishment”. It went,
he declared, to the root of this trial, a circumstance which he seemed to think
was in itself an objection against it. Rather naively, he pointed out that it had
become the practice of war-crimes tribunals to reject this submission; it had,


in fact, always been rejected. He paid a tribute to the majority judgment of the
American Supreme Court in the Yamashita case which sent that gallant soldier
to his death. He argued that the right to a fair trial given to a prisoner of war
by the Geneva Convention only applied to offences committed by the accused
after he became a prisoner of war. In any event, the Field Marshal was no
longer a prisoner of war since the British Government had seen fit to
discharge him from the German army. Perhaps it might seem that much time
and trouble had been wasted at Geneva in defining the rights and privileges of
a prisoner of war if a prisoner only remained a prisoner of war at the
discretion of his captors. The fact remained that if his captors decided to make
a prisoner of war a civilian, they could then do as they pleased with him. Sir
Arthur said that he had listened with regret to a King’s Counsel speaking
slightingly of a Royal Warrant. This document has not been designed to
prevent the accused from having a fair trial. It was perfectly right and proper
that hearsay evidence should be admissible before a war-crimes trial tribunal
because war-crimes are “of such magnitude that it would be impossible to
apply to the proof of them the rules by which we are bound in a small case.”


It would be interesting to know what impression, if any, the latter argument
made on the members of the Court. Even to Sir Arthur himself it must have
sounded weak. If sound, it would logically follow “that evidence that would
justify a conviction for murder might be insufficient to support a conviction for
riding a bicycle at night without a lamp.


Mr. Paget admits, however, that he had little hope that the court would uphold
his submission. It was, of course, rejected. To have decided otherwise would
have been a reflection on every war-crimes tribunal which had adjudicated on
the point during the previous four years. The court would have had no option
but to dissolve itself; the prisoner would have left the dock and gone home;
and the gallant officers assembled on the Bench would have returned to their
military duties. Was it to reach so rapid and lame a conclusion that Lord
Chancellor Jowitt had endured six months’ worry? It would have needed the
combined strength of will of a tribunal composed of supermen to have
reached so startling a conclusion. And the Tribunal before which the Field
Marshal had been brought was not composed of supermen. It was composed
of one Lieutenant- General, one Major-General, two brigadiers and three
Colonels.


The composition of the court which decided that it possessed jurisdiction to
try him was one of the three main disabilities imposed on the Field Marshal by
the terms of the Royal Warrant. Under international law, as confirmed and
laid down by the Geneva Convention, he was entitled to be tried by court-
martial in accordance with British military law by officers of his own rank.
All the officers appointed to try him under the Royal Warrant were of very
inferior rank. This was a serious disability, since not one of them had held an
independent command of an army or group of armies and, therefore, had had
no experience of the difficulties with which he had been compelled to cope.


The second disability deliberately inflicted on the accused was that, in
accordance with the Royal Warrant, he was denied any precise statement of
the charges he would face when the trial began. The result is described by Mr.
Paget as follows:


“When it came to the trial, the charges against von Manstein were 17 in
number. They were summarized by a reporter who said that the prosecution
had collected everything that occurred in the Eastern war and thrown it at
von Manstein’s head.


What the prosecution appeared to have done was to list every incident
which might contravene any law or usage of war and which had occurred in
any area in which von Manstein had served. As this covered huge areas
over a period of 4% years of particularly ruthless war, the prosecution were
able to list some hundreds of incidents. These incidents, or particulars as
they were called, were then divided into 17 groups, and before each group
some order or orders generally issued by the high command were referred
to, and the allegation made that the particulars were the result of the orders.
Then in front of the orders appeared a statement in varied terms, but to the
general effect that von Manstein was responsible for the results of the
orders, and finally, at the commencement of each charge appeared the
words ‘contrary to the laws and usages of war’.


What von Manstein was actually supposed to have done and what law or
customs were alleged to have been contravened was left quite vague. The
result was an enormous document which took well over two hours to read


in court.


We asked for detailed explanations of what the charges meant, and submitted
to the prosecution some 20 foolscap pages of questions. These questions the
prosecution refused to answer. When we objected to the charges in court, the
reply of the prosecution was that at Nuremberg and Tokyo the charges had
been vaguer still! The real answer was that the Royal Warrant gave to the
accused no right to know what charges were brought against him, and we had
to be content with whatever the prosecution gave us.”


The third disability was even more grave. By the express terms of the Royal
Warrant, the accused was deprived of the protection of the rules of evidence.
At a more famous and equally unsatisfactory trial, two thousand years ago, the
high priest, Caiaphas, was in a position to exclaim, “Answerest thou nothing?
What is it which these witnesses witness against thee?” But, apart from one
witness so unsatisfactory that his evidence was withdrawn by the prosecution
with the consent of the court, not a single witness testified anything against
Field Marshal von Manstein. So far as the prosecution was concerned, the
court house need not have been provided with a witness box. Reliance was
placed entirely upon some 800 documents which took twenty days to read to
the court. They were accepted en bloc by the court at their face value without
proof of authenticity, authorship, or issue.


The defence strove vainly to insist that, when oral evidence was readily
available to support a charge, an affidavit should not be accepted. In particular,
Comyns Carr blandly produced three statements incriminating the Field
Marshal, purporting to have been made by three S.S. officers who had been
sentenced to death by the American authorities.

These three men were still alive, but the American authorities refused to allow
them on any account to go into the witness box to give sworn evidence in
support of their alleged statements. Mr. Comyns Carr professed indignation at
the suggestion that the refusal of the American authorities was due to fear that
the condemned men might disclose what means had been employed to induce
them to sign these statements, or that they might seize the opportunity to
describe publicly the treatment which they, themselves, had received from
their American captors.


Thana nnaild ha na Ataniita na ta tha mnthada nnanmantler amļ|mnlarrnd her tha


LUCILE CUULU VDE HU ULSPULE dd LU ULE LHeUIUUS CULUHUULLY ElLlIployeu DY UIC
American authorities to obtain confessions, since a report of a special
commission appointed by the Secretary of the U.S. Army, Mr. Kenneth C.
Royall, had just been published, which described and denounced these
methods. From this report, it appeared that, apart from unrestricted physical
violence—most of the German victims of the Malmedy war-crimes trials at
Dachau were found to be rendered impotent from blows or kicks—the
commission found that confessions had frequently been obtained by staging
mock-trials. This procedure was adopted in cases where there was no evidence
at all against the prisoner, so that even a military tribunal might hesitate to
convict. Such an unsatisfactory state of affairs was remedied by bringing the
prisoner before a court composed of investigators dressed as judges, who
pretended to sentence him to death. He was then informed that, if he would
confess, he would be reprieved. If he then signed the confession placed before
him, he was immediately brought before the real military tribunal authorised to
try his case which, relying on his confession, would sentence him to death. The
commission reported that this trick had been successful in many cases.


Nevertheless Comyns Carr argued that the court might safely accept the
statements of the

S.S. officers and their presence in the witness box was quite unnecessary.
Readers of Charles Dickens will remember that at the trial of Bardell v.
Pickwick, Sam Weller was told by the judge that what the soldier said was
not evidence. At Hamburg, it was maintained that although what the soldier
said might not be evidence, what the S.S. man said was evidence which could
be accepted without hesitation. The fact was apparently overlooked that Lord
Jowitt, in his memorable speech on May 4th, 1949, had given the House of
Lords a solemn assurance that the trial of the Field Marshal “would be
conducted in accordance with our great traditions.” For hundreds of years it
has been a tradition of English criminal law that hearsay evidence is
inadmissible. It is unthinkable that, when he gave this assurance, the Lord
Chancellor did not know what were “our great traditions.” We are bound to
accept the alternative assumption that he was unfamiliar with the terms of the
Royal Warrant under the provisions of which the Field Marshal’s trial would
take place.


It is a relief to turn from such speculations in order to justify the claim made


above that the trial of Field Marshal von Manstein must be regarded as a
model war-crimes trial. During the four years which had passed since the
introduction of war-crimes trials, several noteworthy reforms had been
effected. For example, the accused was no longer referred to in the Press as a
war-criminal even before the charges were read, as had previously been the
custom, and he was no longer subjected to flagrant bad manners by the court.
Although, in the indictment, he was simply described as Erich von Manstein,
this was treated throughout merely as a convenient legal fiction in pursuance
of the principle laid down at Nuremberg that the rights of a prisoner of war
are lost if, somehow, he is deprived of his rank by his captors. Throughout the
trial, Field Marshal von Manstein was treated with the respect and
consideration due to his rank and brilliant military achievements, When he
entered the witness box, the members of the Court quickly forgot that they
were supposed to by trying a war-criminal and settled down to hear,
understand and profit by a five-hour lecture on strategy which they were
privileged to receive from one of the greatest soldiers of his generation. No
doubt, at the back of their minds was the thought that, one day, they
themselves might be called upon to cope with similar difficulties in a
campaign against the same foe with whom “this benign, white-haired, half-
blind old man had fought.” To quote the correspondent of the Daily Mail,
when Manstein entered the witness box, “the court room was immediately
changed into a lecture hall of a staff college. Leaning forward to catch every
word, the red-tabbed British officers heard him give a five-hour lecture on
military strategy and full details of his Russian campaigns without reference
to a note.” If, as is to be hoped, these British staff officers benefited by the
instruction given to them, this part of the trial, at any rate, was not an entire
waste of time.


There is no interest whatever in the last phase of the average war-crimes trial.
All accounts agree that, after weeks and perhaps months of indescribable
tedium, the only emotion felt by anyone at the end, including probably the
accused, is profound relief. Some have compared a war-crimes trial with a
bull-fight. Others consider the comparison unfair, to which subject of the
comparison there is a difference of opinion. But the Manstein trial was not a
typical war-crimes trial. Mr. Paget’s final speech for the defence made a deep
impression on the Court. It ended with the solemn warning, “It is not within
your power to injure the reputation of Manstein, you can but injure your own.”


Mr. Paget admits that, at the conclusion of the case, he had become confident
of an acquittal. One of the prosecuting team was heard offering odds of two to
one on a clear acquittal but found no takers. In the usual war-crimes trial, the
odds in favour of a conviction could only be expressed by some astronomical
figure. The Manstein trial was a model war-crimes trial.


The reply of the prosecution was long but, compared with the opening,
moderate and subdued. The most effective argument employed was the
undeniable assertion that “acquittal of von Manstein would make nonsense of
all other trials.”


Every possible allowance should be made for the difficulties which faced the
members of the tribunal. They were officers of very inferior rank to the
accused, and not one of them had had any experience with primary warfare.
They possessed no personal knowledge of the difficulties of a commander-in-
chief engaged in a campaign against a powerful enemy, in numbers greatly
superior to his own, who finds his long lines of communication attacked by
the civilian population. They were in the position of a committee of the boxing
board of control called upon to enquire whether an all-in wrestling champion
had infringed certain of the Queensbury Rules. Their only desire was to do
their duty. The charges were based on a haphazard collection of some 800
disconnected documents in a foreign language which it had. taken twenty days
to read.

What facts could be deduced from this wild chaos? Mr. Paget’s arguments
appeared conclusive and were supported by common sense. But Mr. Comyns
Carr could point to the undoubted fact that every war-crimes trial tribunal,
British and foreign, had, to date, accepted his contentions without hesitation.
The complete lack of any admissible evidence such as would justify a
conviction for petty larceny would appear to have made their task easy. But
could it be believed that the Lord Chancellor would have worried for six
months about a case which could only end in an outright acquittal?
Concerning the law governing the subject, the only thing certain about it
seemed to be that the authorities contradicted each other on every point at
issue.


For guidance on the difficult points of international law which were bound to
antan damna tha teinl tha tethiinnl had haan nenkidand «ith tha indan anaf tha


alist UULLIS UIE Uldi, WE LIIDUIId! HAU VEEL! PLOVIUCU WIWU UE JUUSE UL WIE
Surrey County Court acting as Judge Advocate General. The task of this
functionary, Judge Collingwood, could hardly have been more onerous. With
no staff to assist him, he had to marshal some 800 documents and to prepare a
summing-up which would cover all the points at issue raised in the seventeen
charges. It is agreed that he performed this task admirably; nothing could have
been fairer than his handling of the facts.


But questions of international law rarely, if ever, arise in county courts, the
jurisdiction of which is limited to claims in which the amount in dispute does
not exceed £400. Judge Collingwood had made no special study of
international law. Further, in the Surrey County Court, litigants dissatisfied
with his rulings on breach of contract, running-down actions, the provisions of
the Rent Restriction Acts, and other subjects on which he had wide experience,
had a right of appeal to the High Court. But, at this war-crimes trial at
Hamburg, the mantle of infallibility which the Nuremberg Tribunal had
assumed had been draped round Judge Collingwood’s shoulders. From his
rulings on international law the accused had no appeal.


Suffice it to say, Judge Collingwood rejected every important contention of
the defence. He advised the tribunal that neither superior orders nor acts of
state were any reply to the charges and that the accused was responsible for
the full exercise of executive power within the area of his command, whether
this power had been given solely to him or whether he had shared it with
others. He laid down that the accused was bound to comply with the rules of
civilized warfare whether his opponents complied with these rules or not. This
latter ruling was particularly remarkable as the British Manual of Military Law
declares just the opposite, as follows:


“The rules of international law apply only to warfare between civilized nations
where both parties understand them and are prepared to carry them out.”


Most remarkable of all, however, was Judge Collingwood’s ruling that the
execution of prisoners as a reprisal was illegal, under all circumstances. On this
point the British Military Manual is most explicit. Article 453 lays down:


“Reprisals between belligerents are retaliation for illegitimate acts of warfare
for the purpose of making the enemy comply in future with the recognized laws


of war. They are not a means of punishment, or arbitrary vengeance, but of
coercion.”


To remove any possible doubts on the matter, Article 454 adds:


“Reprisals are an extreme measure because in most cases they inflict suffering
upon innocent individuals. In this, however, their coercive force exists and
they are indispensable as a last resource.”


It is not clear whether Judge Collingwood thought that the authors of the
British Military Manual went astray in this exposition of international law or
whether he considered that reprisals were permissible to British generals but
illegal in all circumstances to foreign generals or, at any rate, to German
generals. It is certain, at least, that a British general who acted strictly in
accordance with the directions of the British Military Manual would have no
reason to fear a British court-martial. It is, no doubt, equally certain that he
would now find this little protection in the event of his discovering himself on
the losing side and being subjected by his captors to a war-crimes trial. In a
letter to The Times, written immediately after the trial, Captain Liddell Hart
concludes:


“T have studied the records of warfare long enough to realise how few men
who have commanded armies in a hard struggle could have come through
such a searching examination, of their deeds and words, as well as Manstein
did. His condemnation appears a glaring example of either gross ignorance or
gross hypocrisy.”


Some may think that this opinion makes insufficient allowance for the
enormous difficulties of the task which the tribunal had had to face. They had
nothing to do with the decision to charge the Field Marshal as a war-criminal:
this decision was entirely the responsibility of the British Government. They
had nothing to do with the framing of the seventeen charges: two of the charges
had been brought by the Communist Polish Government, and fifteen by the
Communist Russian Government. The purpose of the trial must have been as
obscure to them as to everyone else. They were asked to find as

proved facts which the prosecution admitted could not be proved in

accordance with the recognised rules of evidence. On difficult points of


S ee ee Pa: aoe te IS Ie ie ae oe Sa I S ESEE Ey ee eee ak


international law, Upon wnicn even tne experts aisagreea, tney were unaer tne
guidance of a county court judge. Thoroughly fuddled and confused, who can
doubt that they did their best?


Everyone knows the story of how, during the Crimean War, an aide-de-camp
galloped up to the Light Brigade with the order to charge the enemy’s guns.
“What enemy, Sir, what guns?” enquired Lord Lucan testily. “There are the
enemy, my Lord, there are the guns!” replied the aide-de-camp, slightly
scandalised by the question, with an airy wave of his hand towards the
enemy’s positions. Lord Lucan did not condescend to ask further questions:
his duty was to command the British Cavalry Division in the Crimea and not
to try to make sense of the commander-in- chief’s orders. Clearly, the
commander-in- chief wanted the Light Brigade to charge the enemy’s guns.
So, he communicated the order personally to the commander of the Brigade,
Lord Cardigan. The latter was equally bewildered. Still, his duty as a soldier
was to Carry out orders, not to try to interpret them. He was bound to assume
that his superiors knew what they were doing. Drawing his sabre, he led his
squadron in a charge in what proved to be the wrong direction down a valley
destined to become immortal as the Valley of Death.


Neither at Balaclava, in 1854, nor at Hamburg, in 1949, it a soldier’s duty to
ask questions about orders. “Theirs not to reason why “—particularly on
subjects about which the experts contradicted each other. The gallant band
composed of one Lt. General, a Major-General, two Brigadiers, and three
Colonels figuratively straightened their shakos, drew their sabres, exclaimed
“Hurrah!” in unison and led each other to the charge. That “someone had
blundered” was obvious in both cases, but in neither did this affect the simple
duty of a soldier. At Balaclava the result was dismissed as magnificent but not
war; at Hamburg, the result may be dismissed as far from magnificent and
certainly not law.


The findings of the tribunal can be briefly summarised. There were seventeen
charges in all, two from Polish sources and fifteen from Russian. Field
Marshal von Manstein was acquitted outright on eight charges, including the
two Polish charges which, as Mr. Paget says, “were so flagrantly bogus that
one was left wondering why they had been presented at all.” He was held
accountable on seven charges, after the prosecution had been permitted by the
court to modify them after the close of the case for the defence—a very


questionable procedure. So modified, the upshot may be regarded as f
equivalent to an acquittal. On two charges, only, was the Field Marshal held to
be guilty.


The two charges upon which he was held guilty were, first, that he had
permitted Russian prisoners to be used in clearing mine-fields; the Allies after
the war made it a common practice to use German prisoners of war for mine-
clearing. Secondly, that he permitted Russian civilians to be deported from his
area for work in Germany; at the time the tribunal was deliberating on this
charge, it was common knowledge that in Russia and Siberia there were tens of
thousands of civilians deported for forced labour, not only from Eastern
Germany but also from the Baltic countries overrun and annexed by Russia in
1939, and from Hungary, Finland and Roumania.


The Field Marshal’s conviction on the charge that he had permitted Russian
civilians to be deported from his area for work in Germany is particularly
remarkable because, at the time it was alleged he committed this offence, the
Allied leaders were formulating and approving the Morgenthau Plan which
specifically approved the use of “forced German labour outside Germany” as a
form of reparations. It should also be observed that, at the time of von
Manstein’s trial, it was very widely known that several millions of prisoners of
war were being detained by the Soviet Government for forced labour in
Russia.

According to estimates prepared by the information section of NATO, these
prisoners included 2,000,000 Germans, 370,000 Japanese, 180,000
Roumanians, 200,000 Hungarians, and 63,520 Italians. According to the
NATO estimates, 40 per cent of these could in 1952 be reckoned as dead. The
surviving 60 per cent were still working as forced labour.


Compared with the gravity of the original charges, as outlined in Comyns
Carr’s opening speech, the offences of which the Field Marshal was found
guilty may be dismissed as trivial. Nevertheless, the “sixty-two year old, white-
haired, half-blind soldier” was solemnly informed that he “must serve eighteen
years in prison to start from today: the period of four years which you have
already spent in custody has been taken into consideration.”


Having regard to the tributes paid by the defence to the courtesy and humanity


ot the tribunal, ıt 1s regrettable that the phrasing ot the judgment gives so
unpleasant an impression. Obviously, it could make no difference to an elderly
invalid whether the four years he had spent as a prisoner of war were taken into
account or not. Assuming that it was really intended that he should serve his
sentence, his chances of emerging a free man amounted to nil, whether his
sentence was eighteen years or eighty. Equally unpleasant is the impression
made by the subsequent reduction of the sentence from eighteen to twelve
years.


This ostentatious display of anxiety that the length of the sentence should
exactly fit the crime appears such transparent humbug that it is difficult to
consider it with patience. It must be left for persons with a mathematical turn
of mind to work out what would have been a suitable penalty to inflict, had
the accused been found guilty on all seventeen charges, assuming that a
sentence equivalent to a life sentence was a fitting penalty for two of the least
serious of these charges—charges of which the accusers themselves were
notoriously guilty. The court gave no indication of the grounds upon which
they had accepted certain charges and rejected the others; whether they had
accepted the principles of international law as laid down in the British
Military Manual or whether they had preferred to be guided by the views on
international law accepted in the Surrey County Court; or to which charge
they attached particular gravity, or by what calculation they had arrived at the
penalty of eighteen years. There was, in fact, no apparent connection between
the findings and the sentence.


The most charitable view is that the tribunal was, at the conclusion of the case,
so completely befuddled by the ordeal through which they had passed that they
overlooked the fact that their verdict amounted to an acquittal, and proceeded
to pass a sentence of life imprisonment as the obvious alternative to the death
penalty. Having decided not to acquit, they probably imagined that they were
being lenient. A complete disappearance of all sense of proportion is
commonly a symptom of a general paralysis of the reasoning powers resulting
from prolonged mental exertion along unfamiliar paths.


British foreign policy has often greatly puzzled foreigners. Frequently it has
appeared an insane compromise designed to serve conflicting aims; not
seldom, it has appeared to be directed to no apparent aim of any kind. But the
gradual acduisition of an Empire which. bv 1919. had come to include more


than 11,500,000 square miles, that is to say, about a fifth of the land surface of
the globe, with a population of over 400,000,000, about a fourth of the world’s
inhabitants, appeared to establish that “Though this be madness, yet there is
method in’t.” Hence rose the legend of perfidious Albion.


Mr. Paget expresses the opinion that the Manstein trial “was a political as
opposed to a judicial process.” It was, in fact, an act of policy by the British
Government, decided upon deliberately, according to Lord Jowitt, after he had
been given six months worry. The question, therefore, naturally arises as to
what was the precise political object which this act of policy was intended to
serve. In spite of ingenious and widespread speculation outside Great Britain,
this question has remained unanswered to this day.


In order to solve this mystery two very material facts must be taken into
consideration; first the obligations into which the British Government had
entered to hand over any prisoner of war in British custody accused by an ally
of Britain of a war-crime, and secondly the indignant opposition aroused in
British military circles at the prospect of a distinguished European soldier
being handed over to his communist enemies to be slaughtered in accordance
with the ancient traditions of primary warfare. In the British Army, at least, the
traditions of civilized warfare survived.


The real struggle concerning Manstein’s fate took place behind the scenes
before his trial began. On the one side were his military opponents in the great
campaign in France in 1940, all the more determined by their defeat in that
year to vindicate the traditions of European civil warfare. On the other side
were the politicians, fearful of giving the Communist tyrant Joseph Stalin
technical ground for complaint. The struggle ended with a characteristically
British compromise. It was decided that a British military tribunal should be
assigned the fantastic task of deciding whether certain alleged acts committed
in ferocious primary warfare were reprehensible if judged by the standards of
civilized warfare.


Foreign critics should note that the outcome of this irrational compromise
ultimately achieved the two-fold purpose intended: the British traditions of
civilized warfare were outwardly maintained; Stalin was given no pretext for
repudiating his treaty obligations with his allies; and Field Marshal von


Manstein’s life was saved trom his vindictive Russian and Polish enemies.


Manstein’s lite was saved trom his vindictive Russian and Polish enemies.


Postscript


Now that the truth is no longer obscured by the myths of propaganda, only one
question of universal interest remains conceming that unique period of history
labelled in this book “the advance to barbarism”. There can be no question that
this retrograde movement of civilization began in 1914. Historians will long
find in the distinctive characteristics of this period, genocide, terror bombing,
mass-deportations of populations and war-crimes trials, numberless problems
for investigation and dispute. But only one problem remains of personal
interest to everyone.


Has the series of chain reactions which began with the outbreak of the
European civil war in 1914 come to an end?


No one dreamed in 1914 that the war which had just broken out would cause
any more lengthy and violent reaction than any previous civil war, although
the furious passions which it generated from the start puzzled many
observers. Within a year of the outbreak of hostilities, in explanation of the
boundless enthusiasm which inspired his troops, mostly volunteers, setting
forth on the Dardanelles expedition, General Sir Ian Hamilton wrote in his
diary, “Once in a generation a mysterious wish for war passes through the
people.” He offered no diagnosis of this mysterious wish. No doubt the
subject will be cleared up one day in the usual way by giving it a Latin name.
Looking back after nearly twenty years at a time when the Wicked Kaiser
Myth was still accepted by most professional historians, Field Marshal Lord
Allenby declared, “The great War was a period of lengthy insanity.” Looking
back after the passage of another thirty years it is clear that the so-called
Great War was a relatively mild preliminary symptom.


The mysterious periodic wish which found expression in 1914 had been
generated among the leading members of the White Race during the latter end
of the 19th century, a period to them of such absolute security and boundless
prosperity that war had come to seem a relief from boredom. For a decade an
explosion had been inevitable. The fatal spark was provided on the 28th June,
1914, by a moronic student named Gavril Princep successfully carrying out
the mission entrusted him by certain leading members of the Serbian
Government to murder at Serajevo the Austrian Archduke Francis Ferdinand.


Are there reasonable grounds for thinking that the chain reaction set in motion
by the murder of the heir to the Austrian throne has at last come to an end?


It is difficult to keep this question distinct from the question so often asked,
what will be the consequences to the human race of the invention of the
atomic bomb?


In origin the discovery of the secrets of nuclear fission and of the retrograde
movement in human affairs which began in 1914 are quite unconnected.


The atomic bomb was the practical application for the purpose of destruction
of the discoveries by the physicists in the mid-19th century of the nature of the
atom. By the end of the century it had become established that enormous
forces were locked up in the atom and the possibility was dimly realised that it
might be possible to use these forces to cause an explosion of unprecedented
violence. By the commencement of the Second World War, the means by
which this aim might be achieved had been realised and Albert Einstein
appealed to President Roosevelt to spare no pains or expense to test whether
the theoretical knowledge obtained by laboratory experiments could be used
for constructing a contraption which would be able to blot out human life on a
gigantic scale.


It was an unhappy chance that the secrets of atomic structure should have been
finally mastered in 1945. It is without question the greatest tragedy in human
history that mankind should have become possessed of unique powers of self-
destruction just at a time when mankind had never before been less fitted to
use these powers sanely.


It is certainly arguable that the atomic bomb would never have been constructec
except during a ferocious war when nothing seemed to matter but the
attainment of victory.

Laboratory experiments in peacetime could only have confirmed a theoretical
possibility of making an atomic bomb: in peacetime no government could have
undertaken the fabulously costly tests which were necessary to establish this
theoretical possibility was practical. Also in peacetime no government could
have faced the general opprobrium which it would have incurred from an


nttanant An tan minnntin n annla ta ha Lant annent ta nnnntmint n nnantnnntinn


GLLELIIPL, UL LUU PIPAIUL d SUdIE LU VE KEPL SeCLLel, LU CULISULUCL d CULILLGPUULL
designed not for use on the battlefield but to blot out civilian populations.


It is arguable also that the atomic bomb when constructed would not have been
tested by dropping it on a defenceless city had not the conscience of mankind
been previously paralysed by a long series of crimes against humanity.


Certainly the dropping of the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima may be regarded
as a natural sequel to the adoption three years before of the Lindemann Plan to
initiate a terror bombing campaign against Germany. It was inspired by the
same spirit and it may fairly be regarded as the final and supreme example of
terror bombing without disguise and excuse.


There is a remarkable similarity between the mass air raid on Dresden and the
attack on Hiroshima six months later. No one protested when in 1967 Lord
Boothby described the air raid on Dresden as “a dastardly act”, not because of
the number of victims but because it served no military purpose. The dropping
of the first atomic bomb was also an act of pure terrorism. It fulfilled no
military purpose of any kind. Belatedly it has been disclosed that seven months
before it was dropped, in January 1945, President Roosevelt received via
General MacArthur’s headquarters an offer by the Japanese Government to
surrender on terms virtually identical to those accepted by the United States
after the dropping of the bomb: in July 1945, as we now know, Roosevelt’s
successor, President Truman, discussed with Stalin at Bébelsberg the Japanese
offer to surrender.


The motivation behind the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima may be
said to be still a subject of dispute. It is certain that Truman did not give the
order for it to be dropped on the insistence of his military advisers. Some of
the scientists concerned in its construction opposed this step on humanitarian
grounds: others including the famous Jewish physicist Dr. Robert
Oppenheimer were in favour because, they urged, only by a test in war
conditions could it be demonstrated that their long and costly efforts had
succeeded in creating a weapon of unique power for taking human life. In
short the Japanese people were to be enlisted as human guinea-pigs for a
scientific experiment.


Although no military or political purpose existed to be served, President
Truman gave the necessary order to drop the bomb: some seventy thousand
men, women and children were killed in a fraction of a second.


Reverting to the question, “Are there reasonable grounds for thinking that the
chain reaction triggered off in 1914 by Princep’s crime has at last petered
out?”, the invention of the atomic bomb has made it possible to give an
optimistic reply.


Each stage of this chain reaction was the natural consequence of the one which
preceded it. Throughout the process the next stage was long beforehand
plainly discernible. The furious passions aroused by the First World War led
inevitably to the Versailles Diktat which in turn led inevitably to the Second
World War during which all restraint was in the end abandoned. When
hostilities ceased in 1945 the next stage of the chain reaction seemed obvious.
Roosevelt’s blind subservience to Stalin at die Teheran Conference in 1943
foreshadowed the subjection of Western Europe by force to Communism. It
appeared only a matter of time before Stalin would feel himself strong enough
to abandon the pretence of being a loyal ally in a crusade for democracy when
he would of course order the Red Army to advance. This time seemed to have
arrived when Stalin in 1948 threw off the mask of friendship and ordered West
Berlin to be blockaded. But the crisis passed and what seemed inevitable did
not take place. The only reason was Stalin belatedly realised that the United
States alone possessed a stock pile of atomic weapons and prudently decided
to postpone the use of force. As a consequence the Morgenthau Plan, the
projected next step along the road to barbarism, was cancelled in order to
enlist the aid of the German people for the defence of Europe.


Thus occured the first break in the chain reaction which had been proceeding
without interruption for over three decades.


Another reason for optimism is that the invention of the atomic bomb has
entirely transformed the conditions and prospects of warfare. The poet Rupert
Brooke expressed the outlook to war of a generation bored by uneventful years
of peace and prosperity when he wrote in 1914, “Now God be thanked who
has matched us with His hour!” The mere existence of atomic weapons makes
it impossible for anyone now to feel as Rupert Brooke felt when in a letter he


wementan hafana anttina nant an tha Nandanallan nwennditiann T+ in tan ver nnAanrfaal Fan


WILULE VDELULE SELULIS VUL ULI WE Dd UdHIELIeS CEXPCULLIVIT, LL IS WUU WULIUELLUL LUL
belief: I had never imagined Fate could be so kind. I have never been so happy
in my life, so pervasively happy! I suddenly realise that the ambition of my
life has been—since I was two—to go on an expedition against
Constantinople!”


The prospect of strutting in a victory parade through Constantinople or some
other capital has ceased to be alluring now that it must be clouded with the
knowledge that concurrently one’s own homeland might be being turned into a
radio-active rubbish heap.


Finally, leaving out of account the changes brought about by the invention of
nuclear weapons, the conditions of warfare with conventional weapons have
reverted to conditions similar to those which existed in the 18th century. A
modern army no longer consists of hordes of hastily-trained conscripts. The
military strength of a country now consists of long-service soldiers trained in
the use of complicated weapons, transport and equipment. Such troops will
fight in accordance with the orders of their executive government: they do not
need to be inflamed by mendacious hate-propaganda.


To intensive hate-propaganda can be traced all the unique features of the
period labelled in this book “the advance to barbarism”—genocide, terror
bombing, mass-deportations and war-crimes trials.


Now that the necessity no longer exists for rulers to employ hate-propaganda
as a Stimulus to sustain the martial spirit of their subjects, it appears reasonable
to hope that the chain reaction which began in 1914 has come to an end and
that a new period of history has commenced in which will be absent the
characteristics which are the products of hate-propaganda.


WLULE VDELULE SELULIS VUL ULI WE Dd UdHIELIeS CXPCULLIULI, LL IS WUU WULIUELLUL LUL
belief: I had never imagined Fate could be so kind. I have never been so happy
in my life, so pervasively happy! I suddenly realise that the ambition of my
life has been—since I was two—to go on an expedition against
Constantinople!”


The prospect of strutting in a victory parade through Constantinople or some
other capital has ceased to be alluring now that it must be clouded with the
knowledge that concurrently one’s own homeland might be being turned into a
radio-active rubbish heap.


Finally, leaving out of account the changes brought about by the invention of
nuclear weapons, the conditions of warfare with conventional weapons have
reverted to conditions similar to those which existed in the 18th century. A
modern army no longer consists of hordes of hastily-trained conscripts. The
military strength of a country now consists of long-service soldiers trained in
the use of complicated weapons, transport and equipment. Such troops will
fight in accordance with the orders of their executive government: they do not
need to be inflamed by mendacious hate-propaganda.


To intensive hate-propaganda can be traced all the unique features of the
period labelled in this book “the advance to barbarism”—genocide, terror
bombing, mass-deportations and war-crimes trials.


Now that the necessity no longer exists for rulers to employ hate-propaganda
as a Stimulus to sustain the martial spirit of their subjects, it appears reasonable
to hope that the chain reaction which began in 1914 has come to an end and
that a new period of history has commenced in which will be absent the
characteristics which are the products of hate-propaganda.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


C. R. Ballard, The Military Genius of Abraham Lincoln, Cleveland: World
Publishing Co., 1952.


Maurice Bardéche, Nuremberg, Les Sept Coleurs,

1948. Harry Elmer Barnes,
In Quest of Truth and Justice, National Historical Society, 1928.
The Genesis of the World War, Knopf, 3rd Ed., New York, 1929.
Blasting the Historical Blackout, Privately printed, 1961.


F. Beck and W. Godin, Russian Purge, Hurst & Blackett London, 1951.
Montgomery Belgion,

Epitaph on Nuremberg, Falcon Press, London, 1946.

Victors’ Justice, Regnery, Chicago, 1949.


Charles Bewley, Hermann Goring and the Third Reich, Devin Adair, New
York, 1962. James F. Byrnes, Speaking Frankly, Harper, New York, 1947.
Lord Casey, Personal Experiences, Constable, London, 1962.
William Henry Chamberlin, America’s Second Crusade, Regnery,
Chicago, 1950. Sir Winston Churchill,
Closing the Ring (Vol. 5 of The Second World War), Cassel, London, 1952.
Triumph and Tragedy (Vol. 6 of The Second World War), Cassel, London,
1954.
Michael F. Connors, Dealing in Hate, Britons Publishing Co., London, 1966.
Maximilian Czesany, Nie wieder Krieg gegen die Zivilbevélkerung,
Selbstverlag des
Verfassers, Graz, 1961.
T. K. Derry, The Campaign in Norway, H.M. Stationery Office, London,
1952. Charles Foley, Commando Extraordinary: The Exploits of Otto
Skorzeny, Longman,
Green & Co., London, 1956.
General J. F. C. Fuller,
Armament and History, Eyre & Spottiswoode, London, 1946.
The Second World War, Eyre & Spotiswoode, London, 1948.
David Maxwell Fyfe (Lord Kilmuir), Political Adventure, Weidenfeld &
Nicholson, London, 1964.


Victor Gollancz, The Case of Adolf Eichmann, Gollancz, London, 1961.


Colonel A. Goutard, The Battle of France, 1940, Frederick Muller, London,
1958. Stephen Graham, Stalin, Hutchinson, London, 1939.
Lord Hankey, Politics: Trials and Errors, Pen-in-Hand, Oxford, 1950 and
Regnery, Chicago, 1950.
Sir Arthur Harris, Bomber Offensive, Collins, London,
1947. Capt. B. H. Liddell Hart,
The Revolution In Warfare, Faber & Faber, London, 1946.
The Other Side of the Hill, Cassell, London, 1948.


Sisley Huddleston, Pétain: Traitor or Patriot, Andrew Dakers, London,
1951. France: The Tragic Years, 1939-47, Devin-Adair, New York,

1955.

David Hoggan, Der erzwungene Krieg, Tiibingen, 1961.

Ernrys Hughes, Winston Churchill in War and Peace, Unity Publishing Co.,
Glasgow, 1950.

David Irving, The Destruction of Dresden, Kimber, London,

1963. Harold Lamb, The March of the Barbarians, Hale, London,

1941.

Dr. Paul Leverkiihn, Verteidigung Manstein, Nölke Verlag, Hamburg,
1950. Joseph Mackiewicz, The Katyn Wood Murders, Hollis & Carter,
London, 1951. Philip Magnus, Kitchener, John Murray, London, 1958.
Viscount Maugham, U.N.O. and War Crimes, John Murray, London, 1951.


R. T. Paget, Manstein, Collins, London, 1951.


Arthur Ponsonby, Falsehood in War-time, Allen & Unwin, London,
1928. General H. B. Ramcke, Fallschirmjdger, Lorch-Verlag, Frankfurt
am Main, 1951.
A. F. Reel, The Case of General Yamashita, University of Chicago Press,
1949. Dennis Richards, The Fight at Odds (Vol. 1 of The Royal Air Force
1939-45), H.M.

Stationery Office, London, 1953.
Axel Rodenberger, Der Tod von Dresden, Das Griine Blatt, Dortmund,
1951. Elliott Roosevelt, As He Saw It, Duell, Sloan & Pearce, New York,
1946.
Hans Rumpf, Das war der Bombenkrieg, Gerhard Stalling Verlag, Oldenburg,
196L Hermann Salingré, Im Grossen Hauptquartier, Hoffmann, Berlin, 1910.
J. M. Spaight, Bombing Vindicated, Bles, London, 1944.


Sir Charles Snow, Science and Government, Oxford University Press, London,


1961.
C. C. Tansell, Back Door to War, Regnery, Chicago, 1952.
A.J. P. Taylor, The Origins of the Second World War, Hamilton,
London, 1961. Freda Utley, The High Cost of Vengeance, Regnery,
Chicago, 1949.
F. J. P. Veale, Crimes Discreetly Veiled, Cooper Book Co., London and
Devin-Adair, New York, 1958.
Sir Charles Webster and Dr. Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive
against Germany, 1939-45, H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1961.
E. Wingfield Stratford,
The Victorian Sunset, Routledge, London, 1932.
The Victorian Aftermath, Routledge, London, 1933.


1961.
C. C. Tansell, Back Door to War, Regnery, Chicago, 1952.
A.J. P. Taylor, The Origins of the Second World War, Hamilton,
London, 1961. Freda Utley, The High Cost of Vengeance, Regnery,
Chicago, 1949.
F. J. P. Veale, Crimes Discreetly Veiled, Cooper Book Co., London and
Devin-Adair, New York, 1958.
Sir Charles Webster and Dr. Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive
against Germany, 1939-45, H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1961.
E. Wingfield Stratford,
The Victorian Sunset, Routledge, London, 1932.
The Victorian Aftermath, Routledge, London, 1933.


Contributed to the American version of this book published by the Nelson
Publishing Company, Appleton, Wisconsin, U.S.A., 1953.


Contributed to the second edition of the German translation of this book entitle
Der Barbarei entgegen, published by Verlag Karl Heinz Priester. Wiesbaden,
1962.


See Lord Allenby’s Rectorial Address to Edinburgh University on the 28th
April, 1936, three weeks before his death.


“Sir Hugh Trenchard, Chief of the Air Staff from 1919 to 1929, had a decisive
influence on the future of the R.A.F.” write Sir Charles Webster and Dr. Noble
Frankland, the joint authors of The Strategic Air Offensive against Germany
(H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1961, Vol. 1, p. 42). They explain that the
essence of his policy was that “future wars would be won by producing such
moral effect on the enemy civilian population that its government would have
to sue for peace. The advantage of destroying military installations and factorie:
was recognised but he maintained that it was easier to overcome the will to
resist among the workers than to destroy the means to resist” (p. 86).


The Destruction of Dresden by David Irving, London, Kimber, 1963.
The Strategic Air Offensive, H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1961.


The Evolution of Warfare, by B. H. Liddell Hart, London, Faber & Faber, 1946
Page 75.


Advance to Barbarism, by A. Jurist, London, Thompson & Smith, 1948.
Another noteworthy book written from the same standpoint is The Law and
Custom of the Sea, by Dr. Herbert Arthur Smith (London, Stevens, 1948)
which condemns the conviction of Admiral Dönitz by the Nuremburg Tribunal
as a gross miscarriage of justice.


Epitaph on Nuremberg by Montgomery Belgion, London, The Falcon Press,
1946. Three years later a revised and amplified version of this book was
published in the United States under the title Victors Justice (Chicago,
Regnery, 1949).


=


wn


~“


See the Report of the International Conference on Military Trials, London,
1945, published in 1949 by the Washington State Department, Pages 104-106
and Page 303.


Emphatic disapproval was however expressed by no less weighty a legal
authority than Viscount Maugham, formerly Lord Chancellor of England. See


his book with a postscript by Lord Hankey, U.N.O. and War Crimes, London,
John Murray, 1951.


The Trial of Adolf Eichmann, by Victor Gollancz, London, Gollancz, 1961. p.
21.


Science and Government by C. P. Snow, Oxford University Press, London,
1961, pages 47-51.


Bombing Vindicated, by J. M. Spaight, London, Bles, 1944.
Bomber Offensive, by Sir Arthur Harris, London, Collins, 1947.


Politics: Trials and Errors, by Lord Hankey (Oxford, Pen-in-Hand, 1950).


A German translation of this American Edition was published in 1954 and a revised version in 1962. A
Spanish translation was published in 1954.


Dean Inge, by Canon Adam Fox, London, Murray, 1960.

Selected Essays by Havelock Ellis, London, Dent & Sons, 1936, p. 195.
Footsteps of Warfare, by R. L. Worrall, London, Davies, 1936, p. 2.

Sir Arthur Keith, The Antiquity of Man, London, Williams & Norgate, 1925,
Vol. 1, p.


175. It is recognised, of course, that the intellectual faculties of Neanderthal
man were less developed than those of modern man.


Ibid., p.136.


H.F. Osborn, Men of the Old Stone Age, London, Bell & Son, 1926, p. 258.
Ibid., p. 272.

J.M. Spaight, Bombing Vindicated, London, Bles, 1944.

George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-four, New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1949.


See America’s Second Crusade by William Henry Chamberlin, Chicago,
Regnery, 1950, pp. 303 to 310 and Roosevelt’s Road to Russia by George N.
Crocker, Chicago, Regnery, 1959, pp. 229 to 240.


The ancient attitude toward a prisoner taken in war was well expressed in the
definition recently given by Mr. Winston Churchill in the debate on the
Korean War on July 1, 1952. “What is a prisoner of war? A prisoner of war is
a man who has tried to kill you and, having failed, asks you not to kill him.”


M. R. Davie, The Evolution of War, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1929,
p. 194.


Captain Liddell Hart, The Revolution in Warfare, London, Faber, 1946, p. 81.


For a revision of the earlier view that the Assyrians had no interests, or made nc
achievements, outside the field of warfare, see A. T. Olmstead, History of
Assyria, Scribner, 1923, Chap. XLIX.


Champlain, writing in 1613, accepts the latter explanation of this practice in
the case of the Hurons and Algonquins of the St. Lawrence. He writes, “The
rest of the prisoners were kept to be put to death by the women and girls who
by their subtlety invent more cruel tortures than the men and take pleasure in
it.” The opinion of this eye-witness, considered in relation to the proposal
put forward in the Daily Mail of the 29th November, 1945 (see p. 15), raises
the possibility of sensational developments in the mock-trials which will
inevitably follow the next war.


There is recent evidence that this primitive female characteristic has survived


w


to the present day among backward peoples even of modern Europe. Thus
Island of Terrible Friends by B; Strutton (Hodder, London 1961), is based on
the experiences of Major James Rickett, a British army doctor who served with
Tito’s Communist Partisans. He declares that the female Partisans took the
lead in torturing and murdering German wounded and prisoners.


Some 25,000 people were butchered in this massacre, “not one in fifty of
whom was armed,” Francis Watson, Wallenstein, London, Chatto & Windus,
1939, p. 326. Nearly ten times this number of victims are believed to have
perished in the bombing of Dresden three centuries later on February 13, 1945.
Certainly not one in fifty of the women and children refugees killed on this
occasion was armed.


Harold Lamb, The March of the Barbarians, London, Hale, 1941, p. 162.


It is interesting to note that Henry took part in 1390 in the first recorded siege
of Vilna, the scene of so much subsequent fighting between the peoples of
Europe and the inhabitants of the Eurasian hinterland. The same issues were at
stake when Charles X of Sweden captured the city in 1702, when Napoleon
fought near here in 1812, when Hindenburg won his great victory of Vilna in
1915, and when Manstein made his famous tank thrust though the city in
1941.


The celebrated recruiting poster would have been more aptly worded, “What
did you do in E.C.W. 8a, Daddy?”


The Revolution in Warfare, by F. H. Liddell Hart, London, Faber, 1946. When
this book appeared many people thought this passage unreasonably harsh. We
of course know that Liddell Hart was referring to terror bombing carried out in
accordance with the Lindemann Plan which in 1946 and for nearly twenty
years afterwards was a jealously guarded state secret. This opinion could not
however even then be dismissed out of hand. The author was a recognised
authority on military matters. Lloyd George described Liddell Hart as “the
highest and soundest authority on modern warfare.” Similar tributes have been
paid him by Field Marshal Wavell, by Sir Winston Churchill and by Field
Marshal Montgomery.


See comment in J. U. Nef, War and Human Progress, Cambridge, Harvard
University Press, 1950, pp. 139-140.


See the Weekend Telegraph of the 2nd July, 1965, in which Major General
Jack Churcher tells an anecdote which he evidently regards as amusing
concerning the “arrest” of Admiral Dönitz at Flensburg in May 1945. The
distinguished prisoner, he tells us, was told “to collect the minimum of luggage
to take to his confinement quarters. When D6nitz’s batman appeared with the
luggage packed, the arresting officer said, “You are not going on holiday but
going to prison: you have the choice of one suitcase.’ The Admiral was quite
upset but had to choose one. He chose badly: when his luggage was examined
at Luxembourg, it contained nothing but pants and vests.”


As a result of the introduction of plate armour in the 15th century the
combatants suffered little danger in the actual fighting. As King James I once
observed with his pawky Scotch humour armour conferred two great benefits
on those wearing it—“It preserves one from injury and prevents one from
injuring other people.”


In a church at Edgware, Middlesex, is a memorial tablet to a lady who died in
1705. Among the many virtues ascribed to her is, “She was religious without
Enthusiasm.”


Sir Charles Napier was under no illusion as to this war. Previously he had
recorded in his diary, “We have no right to seize Scinde, yet we shall do so, anc
a very advantageous, useful, humane piece of rascality it will be.” See B.
Thompson and B. T. Garratt, British Rule in India, London, Macmillan, 1934,
p. 356.


The Revolution in Warfare, p. 44.
New York, Putman, 1940.
See Freda Utley, The High Cost of Vengeance, Chicago, Regnery, 1949.


In Montgomery Belgion’s Victors’ Justice, Chicago, Regnery, 1949, will be
found a collection of the facts relating to this subject disclosed down to the date
of its publication. See also, Freda Utley, op. cit.


—


Yet it must be confessed that much more has been said. See for example A.
G. Macdonell, Napoleon and His Marshals, London, Macmillan, 1934, pp.
327-330.


C. E. Vulliarmy, Crimea, London, Cape, 1939, p. 349.
See Hesketh Pearson, The Hero of Delhi, London, Collins, 1939, p. 211.


It is, perhaps, noteworthy that in place of paying a tribute to Alexander for
proving himself two thousand years in advance of his time, his recent
biographer, Arthur Weigall, comments on the trial of Bessos: “The fact that
Alexander did not pause to consider what cultured Athens would think of his
action is sufficient evidence of his unbalanced state of mind at this time.”—
Arthur Weigall, Alexander the Great, London, Butterworth, 1933, p. 262.


Hart, The Revolution in Warfare, p. 60.


Contemporary public opinion in Britain regarding this exploit was divided. The
Annual Register condemned it roundly as “a return to the times of barbarism.”
The Times, on the other hand, commented complacently, “That ill-organized
association (i.e. the United States) is on the eve of dissolution, and the world is
speedily to be delivered of the mischievous example of the existence of a
government founded on democratic rebellion.” Few predictions, even of The
Times, have remained more signally unfulfilled!


On the contrary the Air Marshal informed the German people—“I will speak
frankly to you about whether we bomb single military targets or whole cities.
Obviously we prefer to hit factories, shipyards and railways. But those people
who work these plants live close to them. Therefore we hit your homes and
you.” This was certainly frank although as we now know it was untrue. Four
months before, in March 1942, the Lindemann Plan had been adopted by the
British Government by which working-class houses had been given priority
over factories, shipyards and railways as objectives for air attack.


' The worthy Salingré’s description of this memorable incident deserves record


in his own words: “Napoleon III. sah verhältnismässig gut aus, nur die


Situation, in der er sich befand, machte einen traurigen, herzbeklemmenden
Eindruck, und man mag es mir verzeihen, wenn ich gestehe, dass er mir in
diesem Augenblicke leid tat. Ich fühlte in diesem Moment so etwas, als dürfe
man diesen ungliicklichen Mann nicht noch tiefer in den Kot treten, ich zog
respektvoll den Hut, da er gerade auf mich blickte und empfand eine Art
Befriedigung, als ich sah, dass er meinen Gruss bemerkt hatte und dankte.” (Im
Grossen Hauptquartier, p. 68).


E. C. Wingfield-Stratford, The Victorian Sunset, London, Routledge, 1932, p.
164.


Wingfield-Stratford, op. cit., p. 268. On the manner in which the press
stimulated diplomatic tension, see O. J. Hale, Publicity and Diplomacy, New
York, Appleton- Century, 1940.


The Victorian Aftermath, by E. C. Wingfield-Stratford, London, Routledge,
1933, page

XIX. Field Marshal Lord Allenby neatly expressed this view of the subject
when he declared, “The Great War was a lengthy period of general insanity.”


In 1914 British professional historians and gutter journalists combined
together in an unholy alliance to represent Kaiser Wilhelm IT as a man of
unparalleled wickedness, unspeakable cruelty, boundless ambition and
conscienceless perfidy who had spent his life plotting the conquest of his
peace-loving neighbours. This propaganda fiction won worldwide acceptance.
It was not until the centenary of the year of his birth, on the 15th July 1959,
that the “Wicked Kaiser Myth” was formally repudiated by a semi-official
broadcast by the B.B.C. Many leading men who had known Kaiser Wilhelm
took part and paid tributes to his memory. With regard to war-guilt, it was
admitted that “Wilhelm’s responsibility was unquestionably small in
comparison with that of Isvolski and of Count Berchtold.” Wilhelm was, in
fact, “a clever man who thought he understood the vulgar, bustling,
aggressive, competitive age in which he lived and who utterly misjudged it.”
(See the article by the present author entitled “The Wicked Kaiser Myth” in
the American quarterly SOCIAL JUSTICE REVIEW, St. Louis, April 1960.)


Lord Kitchener: Portrait of an Imperialist by Sir Charles Magnus, Murray,


London, 1958, at page 122.


See An Intimate Diary of the Peace Conference and After by Lord Riddell,
Gollancz, London, 1933.


Both these celebrated legal actions concerned great fortunes which were claimed by impudent impostors.
In both the claims were supported by reckless perjury. With enormous expense and trouble both claims
were finally conclusively disproved.


Nevertheless, in both cases a numerous section of the British public remained
unshakably convinced that the impostors had been unjustly treated.


See Sisley Huddleston Pétain: Traitor or Patriot, London, Andrew Dakers, Ltd
1951.


General J. F. C. Fuller, Armament and History, London, Eyre and
Spottiswoode, 1946, p. 182


In the opinion of Mr. James F. Byrnes, “Molotov’s two conferences with
Hitler on the 12th and 13th November, 1940, marked the turning point of the
war.” As the price of a pledge by the Soviet Union to honour the pledge given
the previous year by the Soviet Union not to attack Germany, Molotov
demanded a protectorate over the whole of the Balkans, and the right to
establish a military, naval and air base on the Dardanelles, which would
dominate the Mediterranean and turn the Black Sea into a Russian lake.
“Molotov’s demand for a definite and immediate answer on November 13th
was his worst blunder,” writes Mr. Byrnes. (See James P. Byrnes, Speaking
Frankly, New York, Harper, 1947, p. 288.) Convinced that the pledge which
had been obtained from the Soviet Union the previous year was worth
nothing, and unwilling to pay such a price for another pledge of equal value,
Hitler rejected Molotov’s demand. Thenceforth, he regarded a Soviet attack
on Germany as merely a question of time and, nine months later, wisely or
unwisely, decided to forestall this attack before the United States was ready to
take an active part in the war.


J. M. Spaight, Bombing Vindicated, London, Bles, 1944, p. 74.


J. M. Spaight, op. cit., p. 43.


Hart, The Revolution in Warfare, p.72.


Yet this book attracted amazingly little attention. As we have seen, in
November, 1945, eighteen months after the truth had been disclosed in this
book, the Daily Mail could refer casually to “Goering and Co.” as the parties
responsible for the sufferings of British housewives in the Blitz. See page 44.


Article in The Star, December 12, 1946, by Air Marshal Harris.


Science and Government by Sir Charles Snow, London, Oxford University
. Press, 1961.


Advance to Barbarism by F. J. P. Veale, Appleton, U.S.A., Nelson Publishing
Company, 1953.


Air Marshal Sir Arthur Harris, Bomber Offensive, London, Collins, 1947, p.
242.


The Times, February 16, 1945.


It has now been established beyond question that the British air chiefs knew
before the raid that Dresden was full of refugees. As part of the so-called Air
Offensive on Germany the R.A.F. dropped not only bombs but propaganda
leaflets entitled “Nachrichten fiir die Truppen”. The issue of February 13th,
1945, the date of the raid, contained an article entitled “Partei flieht aus
Dresden” in which it was alleged that all the schools in the city had been
closed to provide shelter for “an army of refugees” arriving from the east.
David Irving comments, “Having dropped this leaflet on the burning city, it ill
becomes the

R.A.F. to claim afterwards to have known nothing of the refugees.”


Graphic accounts of this great mass air raid are given by survivors in Der Tod
von Dresden by Axel Rodenberger, published by instalments in the weekly
paper, Das grüne Blatt, beginning February 25, 1951.


The Strategic Air Offensive against Germany, 1939-45, by Sir Charles Webster


and Dr. Noble Frankland, H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1961, p. 115.
See the Introduction of this book, page 20.
The Destruction of Dresden by David Irving, London, Kimber, 1963.


Sunday Telegraph, October 1st, 1961. See also the quotations from Hansard
cited on pages 19-22 of this book.


Until the secret correspondence in code between Churchill and Roosevelt,
which was revealed by Tyler Kent and which remains a closely guarded state
secret, has been published and proved the contrary, it is reasonable to assume
that in it Roosevelt pledged himself to involve the United States in the war
provided he was given time to do so. See Back Door to War by Dr. C.C.
Tansill, Regnery, Chicago, 1952, pages 587-8.

See The Battle of France by Colonel A. Goutard (Miller, London, 1948,
page 145). For example, The Case of General Yamashita by Frank Reel
(University of Chicago

Press, 1949) and Manstein by R. T. Paget (Collins, London, 1951). The details
of the trial of Field Marshal Kesselring remain, after twenty years, safely
buried in an official record.


Elliott Roosevelt, As He Saw it, New York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1946,
pp.188-191, previously published in Look (see issue of October 1, 1946). Mrs.
Eleanor Roosevelt, the widow of the President, supplied the foreword to her
son’s book, so that his account of what took place at Teheran must be regarded
as the authorised version of the Roosevelt clan, whatever versions others may
later see fit to give us.


Eden’s unruffled demeanour certainly contrasts strongly with Mr. Churchill’s
uncontrollable indignation. Their attitude to terror bombing was similarly
different. Churchill never quite overcame his misgivings—see page 194: Eden’:
only criticism of the Lindemann Plan was that it excluded from attack working-
class houses in cities with less than 50,000 inhabitants—see his letter to Sir
Archibald Sinclair quoted on page 195.


` Not until the Iron Curtain is lifted shall we know how Tian Germans


EE ee I. OS E ae ee E E E EE S EE ee Sata es Bd See Ta Le


wn


Captured on tne nea OT Dattie or arrested arter the termination OT nostiities Dy
the G.P.U. were done to death either summarily or after some form of trial.
Including those liquidated in Prague and Warsaw, and those lynched in
remote districts, the total probably vastly exceeded Mr. Stalin’s stipulated
figure of 50,000.


In a nutshell the Morgenthau Plan was designed to bring about, artificially, in
Germany the conditions of poverty, distress, and degeneration existing at that
time in parts of the American South as a result of natural economic causes,
which have been so graphically described by Erskine Caldwell in Tobacco
Road. Mr. William Henry Chamberlain, in his book America’s Second
Crusade (Chicago, Regnery, 1950, p.306) writes as follows: “It is no
exaggeration to say that the Morgenthau Plan, accepted by Mr. Roosevelt and
Mr. Churchill at the Quebec Conference in September 1944, if applied would
have been an indiscriminating sentence of death for millions of Germans. The
area in which it was proposed to forbid all heavy industries and mining is one
of the most urbanized and thickly populated in Europe.”


See Article 19 of the Charter attached to the London Agreement.

Mr. Montgomery Belgion points out, in his Victors’ Justice, p. 76, that at
Nuremberg “the chief Russian prosecutor was a lieutenant-general but the
senior of the two Russian judges was only a major-general.” The former was
the spokesman of the Soviet Government; the latter had a no more active role
to play than Henry VIII’s judges at Glastonbury.

Stalin, by Stephen Graham, Hutchinson, London, 1939, p. 37.


Russian Purge, by F. Beck and W. Godin, Hurst and Blackett, London, 1951, p
87.


See the article, The Wrong Road to Peace, in the New Republic, June 28, 1933,


= pp. 171- 174.


[Philately is the study of postage stamps.—Ed. ]


Even the great Lord Mansfield spoke with approval of “the trite maxim of the
constitutional law of England that private mischief had better be submitted to


than that public detriment should ensue.”


See Dr. Taylor’s review of Rudolf Hess: The Uninvited Envoy by James
Leasor (Allen and Unwin, London, 1962) in the Observer of May 6th, 1962.


Not only beneath the dreaming spires of Oxford but among the untutored
savages of Africa the proceedings at Nuremberg have soon become a byword
of disrepute. This was shown in 1967 when Moise Tshombe was kidnapped by
his enemies when travelling on a British plane and taken a prisoner to Algeria:
reports from the Congo, published in the British and American newspapers
explained that his political rivals in the Congo intended to demand his
extradition from Algeria in order that he might be executed for treason “after a
Nuremberg trial.” For example, see the report of the correspondent of the
Sunday Express, July 9, 1967.


This ruling of the Nuremberg Tribunal was dutifully followed subsequently
by lesser war-crimes tribunals. For example in August 1947 at Dachau before
an American military tribunal this ruling saved the life of Otto Skorzany, the
most famous commando

leader of the Second World War, known in the popular press as “the most
dangerous man in Europe” on account of his daring rescue of Benito
Mussolini and his kidnapping of the Hungarian Regent, Admiral Horthy. For
want of any more plausible charge, Skorzany was accused of conducting
warfare with troops wearing captured enemy uniforms contrary to the code of
civilized warfare. Everyone knew of course that this had long been routine
practice of commando leaders on both sides. But Skorzany was being kept in
strict confinement and was thus unable to call evidence to establish this fact,
well known to the members of the court who exercised their legal right to

` profess judicial ignorance of what could not be proved by sworn evidence laid
before them. Skorzany’s fate appeared sealed.


It happened however that the news of this prosecution came to the ears of the
most celebrated British leader of the resistance movement in France, Wing
Commander Yeo- Thomas, whose nom de guerre was the White Rabbit. To hin
judicial ignorance in the circumstances seemed blatant hypocrisy, and he
volunteered to give evidence for the defence. He told the tribunal that it had
been his frequent practice to lead resistance units dressed in captured German


=)


uniforms on sabotage raids against the occupying forces. In these raids, he said,
enemy uniforms were in the first place obtained by French civilians, secret
members of the resistance movement, catching German soldiers off-duty
unawares, killing them and appropriating their uniforms and papers.


In view of this unwelcome evidence, judicial ignorance became impossible and
the court followed the ruling of the Nuremberg Tribunal in the Donitz case and
granted the practice of conducting warfare in enemy uniforms a certificate of
innocence. Skorzany was acquitted without further argument.


See Commando Extraordinary by Charles Foley, London, Longmans, 1954,
pages 161- 177.


Politics: Trials and Errors by Lord Hankey, Pen-in-Hand, Oxford, 1950, page
78.


The Campaign in Norway by Dr. T.K. Derry, H.M. Stationary Office, 1952.
Political Adventure, Weidenfeld and Nicholson, London, 1964.


Hermann Goring and the Third Reich by Charles Bewley, Devin-Adair, New
York, 1962.


See the articles by the present writer, The Great Krupp Myth in Social Justice,
June 1963, and A War Myth on Trial in Social Justice, January 1964.


See the article The Tokyo War Crimes Trials by George F. Blewitt in American
Perspective, Summer 1950.


See Politics: Trials and Errors by Lord Hankey, Pen-in-Hand, Oxford 1950,
page 80.


[“My object all sublime / I shall achieve in time / To let the punishment fit the
crime / And make each prisoner pent / Unwillingly represent / A source of
innocent merriment!”

—Chorus to the song “A more humane Mikado”—Ed. ].


In a photograph described as “the last of the Nuremberg trials” which opened
on February 5th 1948, published in the Illustrated London News of March 6th
1948, it was noted with surprise that all the thirteen occupants of the dock,
three Field Marshals, nine Generals and one Admiral, were attired in civilian
clothes. This was an essential feature of the proceedings in accordance with
the theory that a soldier ceases to be a soldier and loses all his rights as a
soldier if he be stripped of his uniform. By the same reasoning, of course, a
king must be deemed to abdicate every time he retires for the night unless he
takes the precaution of wearing his crown in bed as a nightcap.


See the interview with General Lesse, reported by Major Redman in the
Sunday Pictorial, May 11, 1947.


See the speech of Lord Justice Lawrence (then recently created Lord Oaksey)
in the House of Lords on the 27th April 1948, in which he said, referring to
the Nuremburg Trials, “We have just been joining with other countries in
putting to death our enemies in Germany.”


See the articles “Nicht Gnade sondern Recht” published by Der Stern. The
issue of August 5, 1951 contains a photostatic copy of Viscount Alexander’s
letter, dated July 26th, 1951, reproduced in the Daily Express of August 9,
1951.


It was no doubt in contemplation of further “tragic mistakes” being
perpetrated that the Bishop of Monmouth justified the destruction of the
Monte Cassino on the ground that “Jesus Christ came to save souls and not
to preserve the Temple of Jerusalem.” This is, perhaps, the most perfect
example of a non sequitur in the English language!


A. Frank Reel, The Case of General Yamashita, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1949.


R. T. Paget, Manstein, London, Collins, 1951.


The Peninsular War, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1902-1922, Volume I, p
XI.


The soldier, Sir William Napier, refers to Suchet’s methods as “vigorous and prudent measures” while th
civilian, Professor Oman, refers to them as “a series of atrocities”. Quat homines, tot senteniae! [“Ther
are as many opinions as there are men.”—Ed.]


In Crimes Discreetly Veiled, published by Cooper Book Coy, London, and
Devin-Adair, New York, in 1958. A German translation entitled Verschleierte
Kriegsverbrechen was published by Priester Verlag, Weisbaden, in 1959 and a
Spanish translation entitled Crimenes Discretamente Ocultados by Editorial
Nos, Madrid, in 1961.


So described in an official reply dated the 26th June, 1953, by Senor Scelba,
Italian Minister of the Interior, to an appeal for clemency for Major Reder by
the Austrian State Secretary, Graf.


The Case of General Yamashita by A. Frank Reel, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1949.


The annexation of the Philippines from Spain in 1899 inspired Rudyard
Kipling to write his famous poem, “Take up the White Man’s burden” in
which is enshrined the very spirit of what is now called “Colonialism”.


Article 19 of the Charter (See page 240 of this book) should be compared with
Section 16 of MacArthur’s regulations, which reads: “The Commission shall
admit such evidence as in its opinion would be of assistance in proving or
disproving the charge, or such as in the Commission’s opinion would have
probative value in the mind of a reasonable man.” In particular the court was
authorised to accept (1) any document which appears to have been issued or
signed without proof of the signature or the issuance of the document; (2) all
affidavits, depositions or other statements and any diary, letter or other
document appearing to the Commission to contain information relating to the
charge; (3) a copy of any document or other secondary evidence of its
contents, if the Commission believes that the original is not available or
cannot be produced without undue delay.


Fallschirmjdger by General H. B. Ramcke, Lorch-Verlag, Frankfurt am


* Main, 1951, page 101.


Capt. Liddell Hart, The Other Side of the Hill, London, Cassell, 1948, pp. 70-


e 71.


e


The Daily Mail, April 6, 1940.
R. T. Paget, Manstein p. 81.
R. T. Paget, Manstein p. 72-73.


Daily Mail, October 22, 1949.
Paget, op. cit., p.192.


The Times, January 11, 1950.


See William Henry Chamberlin, America’s Second Crusade, Chicago,
Regnery, 1950, pp. 210, 307.


See Time, July 7, 1952.


See Lord Boothby’s letter to the Sunday Express published on the 15th January
1967.


At the enquiry before the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission in the Spring of
1954 to investigate his alleged communist associations, Dr. Oppenheimer
explained, “When you see something which is technically sweet, you go ahead
and do it.... We always assumed that if the bombs were needed, they would be
used.... We wanted to have it done before the war was over and nothing more
could be done.”


His colleague Dr. Alvarez testified more tersely. “We wanted some method of
testing the effectiveness of the bomb over enemy territory.”


See the article The Oracles are Dumb by Isabel Paterson in the National
Review of May 23, 1956, page 12.


71.

The Daily Mail, April 6, 1940.
R. T. Paget, Manstein p. 81.

R. T. Paget, Manstein p. 72-73.


Daily Mail, October 22, 1949.
Paget, op. cit., p.192.


The Times, January 11, 1950.


See William Henry Chamberlin, America’s Second Crusade, Chicago,
Regnery, 1950, pp. 210, 307.


See Time, July 7, 1952.


See Lord Boothby’s letter to the Sunday Express published on the 15th January
1967.


At the enquiry before the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission in the Spring of
1954 to investigate his alleged communist associations, Dr. Oppenheimer
explained, “When you see something which is technically sweet, you go ahead
and do it.... We always assumed that if the bombs were needed, they would be
used.... We wanted to have it done before the war was over and nothing more
could be done.”


His colleague Dr. Alvarez testified more tersely. “We wanted some method of
testing the effectiveness of the bomb over enemy territory.”


See the article The Oracles are Dumb by Isabel Paterson in the National
Review of May 23, 1956, page 12.
