3/16/71


Dear Bud and ^in.


Jin will remember that last 'Thursday, 3/ll* when he was with me and I put my car
in the L St parking lot near your office, I went to the ticket window to report to the
manager the theft from ray car of a set of 8 new sparkplugs and the long-handled ice
scraper and snow brush the previous time I'd loft the car there. He signalled me to go
through a doorway to where we could talk face to face. Jim will recall that ones one
opened this door, there was an unmarked step down and that because I was unaware of it,

I stumbled. It turns out that thi3 caused me to sprain ay left foot.

To this moment, it is getting steadily more uncomfortable. Jim knows 1 liaa trouble
walking yesterday. Last night was sleepless. You know what is ahead of me beginning
tomorrow, and that bias will slow sut down to the point where much of what I'd planned
doing in NYC will be impossible and all, like ..very thing I now do, painful. I can't
wear shoes, for example, and will have to kep overlargo ones for wh.ch I'll have: no
other use, special bedroom slippers, -perhaps sandals to relieve the pressure, etc. I
do not know how long this will las - c, or how long it will continue to interfere with my
work, how lomg now painful, or what exceptional expenses will be required. If I am
tomorrow a.m. as I was tills a.m. , I may have to consider renting a wheelchair. It is
quite disagreeable, aside from being annoying and painful.

So, I'm asking that as soon as you can, you both go there, ascertain for your-
selves unless they've added it) that there is no warning, and tell the manager so that
he can tell his insurance comapny. If I have no intention of trying to held them up,

1 also do not believe that these costs, this pain aria this interference with my work at
a time whan have so much to do should be at my cost when it comes from their
negligence.

You might also tell hin, as ^ira will recall, tliat a set of three rather good
stainless-steel teaspoons, each individually wrapped, which I'd intended to give someone,
disappeared from my car while in that lot 3/ll»


Thanks
