55113 70001
THE NAFTA SHOWDOWN JFK: 30 YEARS LATER
CANADA'S WEEKLY NEWSMAGAZINE
"• NOVEMBER 22, 1993 $2.95
On Trudeau
His Impact
Now
v
m
ft,

--- PAGE BREAK ---55113 70001
THE NAFTA SHOWDOWN JFK: 30 YEARS LATER
CANADA'S WEEKLY NEWSMAGAZINE
"• NOVEMBER 22, 1993 $2.95
On Trudeau
His Impact
Now
v
m
ft,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JQ
U
Modem's
CANADA S WEEKLY NEWSMAGAZINE
NOVEMBER 22, 1993 VOL106 NO 47
CONTENTS
4 EDITORIAL
6 LETTERS
12 OPENING NOTES/PASSAGES
15 COLUMN: DIANE FRANCIS
16 CANADA
The new Liberal government
in Ottawa prepares to tackle
the thorny issues of influence
peddling and political ethics;
Reform Leader Preston Manning
vows to “change the way Ottawa
does business."
22 COVER
32 WORLD
A Doomsday cult draws
thousands of devotees to Kiev
to witness the end of the world;
the case of a Virginia woman who
cut off her husband’s penis has
come to symbolize an assault on
male power.
36 BUSINESS
Consumers’ groups fear that the
interests of ordinary' telephone
users will be brushed aside in
new hearings convened by the
Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission
(CRTC) to ease the telephone
industry into a new era of
deregulation.
42 THE NATION'S BUSINESS:
PETER C. NEWMAN
43 SPORTS
Canadian university football gears
up for the Vanier Cup even as the
game struggles to survive budget
cuts and the Americanization of
the CFL
44 SPECIAL REPORT
67 BOOKS
Jeffrey Simpson explores the
forces reshaping Canada; a
biographer plumbs the depths of
novelist Malcolm Lowry’s misery.
72 FILMS
The Ptatio is an exhilarating work
of art; a Canadian movie explores
delusion and repression through
the story of a man posing as a cop.
76 FOTHERINGHAM
POSTMASTft Undofxarobk rno«i ond d*ong» a# odd’eii
'4,°° fWl
' A T»on®
Onf W5W 2B8 '‘vbi'cobon* irrail ’•gufraMjo <v„mb*r IJ60
Trudeau’s
back
J J With the publication of Memoirs,
his account of his life in and out
of politics, Pierre Trudeau reappeared
on the public stage. And as usual, his
timing was perfect With a new Liberal
government in Ottawa, his disciples
and descendants are once again moving
into the cabinet offices that he vacated
more than nine years ago.
An American tragedy
X/ The murder of president
IT John F. Kennedy 30 years ago has
become America’s greatest whodunit
The origins of the mystery are preserved
in the memories of those who were in
Dallas on Nov. 22,1963—the fateful day
that Camelot vanished in the crack of a
rifle shot and America began to grieve.
Down to ;
the wire [
As the clock ticked down
towards a crucial Nov. 17 vote
in the U.S. House of Representatives,
the battle over the North American
Free Trade Agreement degenerated
into a political three-ring circus,
Washington-style.own
towards a crucial Nov. 17 vote
in the U.S. House of Representatives,
the battle over the North American
Free Trade Agreement degenerated
into a political three-ring circus,
Washington-style.

--- PAGE BREAK ---al Nov. 17 vote
in the U.S. House of Representatives,
the battle over the North American
Free Trade Agreement degenerated
into a political three-ring circus,
Washington-style.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kennedy with daughter Caroline
(lop); in the motorcade minutes
before tragedy; in the film by amateur
photographer Zap ruder (right): the
leader of the free world was dead,
Camelot had vanished in the crack of a
rifle shot and, for a shaken America,
the grieving had only just begun
BY RAE CORELLI
History, after all, is the memory of a nation.
—John F. Kennedy, 1917-1963
He moved west along Main Street in an open con-
vertible, basking in the late-autumn Dallas sun-
shine, smiling his movie-star smile and waving to
the cheering lunch-hour crowds. President John
F. Kennedy had come to Texas to reconcile feud-
ing Democrats and make a speech at the Dallas
Trade Mart Beside him sat his glamorous wife.
Jacqueline. Ahead of them on the jump seats were
their hosts—Texas governor John Connally and his wife.
Nellie. At 12:29 p.m., the motorcade turned north off Main
onto Houston Street. Nellie Connally, raising her voice
over the noise of the crowd and the police motorcycles,
said: “Mr. President, you can't say Dallas doesn’t love
you.” At 12:30 p.m., as the procession swung around
Dealey Plaza towards the Stemmons Freeway on-ramp,
shots were fired from a sixth-floor window of the nearby
Texas School Book Depository. The president was hit and
so was Connally. A Secret Service agent flung himself pro-
tectively over the slumping Kennedy and stayed there,
sprawled on the convertible’s rear deck, as the motorcade
sped to Parkland Memorial Hospital. There, Kennedy was
pronounced dead at 1 p.m.
Around the world, the news of America’s fourth presi-
dential assassination in a century froze millions in disbe-
lief and seemed almost to suspend reality. Crowds stood
vigil at U.S. embassies in Europe, Asia and Latin Ameri-
ca. In the United States and Canada, people in thousands
of shops, factories and offices quit working and gathered
around radios and TV sets. Tears ran down the face of
CBS anchorman Walter Cronkite and viewers cried with
him. Prime Minister Lester Pearson offered condolences
and prepared to join global dignitaries in Washington for
the funeral. The leader of the free world was dead.
Camelot had vanished in the crack of a rifle shot and, for
a shaken America, the grieving had only just begun.
Ahead lay the murders of Bobby Kennedy and Martine leader of the free world was dead.
Camelot had vanished in the crack of a rifle shot and, for
a shaken America, the grieving had only just begun.
Ahead lay the murders of Bobby Kennedy and Martin

--- PAGE BREAK ---Luther King, the appalling torment of Vietnam, Kent State, riots and
burning cities.

For the Dallas police, there was no time for mourning.

An hour and
15 minutes after Kennedy was pronounced dead, they barged into a
movie theatre showing War is Hell and arrested a luckless one-time de-
fector to the Soviet Union called Lee Harvey Oswald, wanted for the fa-
tal shooting moments before of patrolman J.

D.

Tippit.

When police re-
traced Oswalds flight from the book depository where he worked, they
decided they had Kennedy’s assassin as well.

But less than 48 hours
later.

Jack Ruby, a small-time hoodlum and strii>club owner, shot and
killed Oswald in the basement of Dallas City Hall.

Convicted and sen-
tenced to death, Ruby died in jail of cancer.

In September, 1964, the
Warren Commission concluded that Oswald, acting alone, had killed
both Kennedy and Tippit and had not known Ruby.

But as the years passed, millions of Americans grew profoundly
skepticaL Some 200 books, dozens of TV docu-
mentaries and the blockbuster 1991 movie
JFK have alleged conspiracies or coverups:
Oswald was not the only shooter, Oswald was
a scapegoat; Oswald was in the pay of Cuba’s
Castro, the CIA, the FBI.

the Pentagon, the
Mafia, the Soviets, left-wingers, right-wingers;
Oswald was not really Oswald but a shadowy
somebody else; Ruby, who claimed to be
Jacqueline Kennedy’s avenger, was really
hired by the people who hired Oswald and did
not want him to testify.

Repeated official de-
nials and rebuttals have not discouraged the
conspiracy theorists or reduced public fascina-
ft* V ** j*.the Pentagon, the
Mafia, the Soviets, left-wingers, right-wingers;
Oswald was not really Oswald but a shadowy
somebody else; Ruby, who claimed to be
Jacqueline Kennedy’s avenger, was really
hired by the people who hired Oswald and did
not want him to testify.

Repeated official de-
nials and rebuttals have not discouraged the
conspiracy theorists or reduced public fascina-
ft* V ** j*.

j  -
THIRTY YEARS
LATER, JFK’S
ASSASSINATION
LIVES ON IN
MEMORY
ine the Secret Service nervous, but the people were reaching over
the fence to shake his hand, to touch him, and he was reaching out
l° shoriiy after the presidential motorcade left for downtown Dallas,
Ewell was on the freeway heading back to his office when Dallas Police
Chief Jesse Curry sped past in die opposite direction.

Then, 1 saw the
open Kennedy limousine and I knew something was out of order be-
cause there was this man stretched across the turtle deck.

At police
headquarters, a detective hurried past him to a waiting patrol car.

I
said, ‘Gerry, what the hell’s going on?’ His exact words were, ‘Some
son of a bitch just shot Kennedy.’ I jumped in the back seat and went
with them." 4 _ n
The schoolbook building was like a disturbed anthill, Ewell says in
his flat Texas drawl.

There were squad cars and cops everywhere,
cops still training shotguns up at the windows.

A few minutes later,
Gerry leaned out of the window on the sixth
floor and said.

‘Well, we know what he had for
lunch—fried chicken.’ You know what?

All this
time, I’m not sure just what the hell I'm doing.

Tm not taking any notes.

I’m just kinda, you
know, in a twilight"
When word came that a policeman had
been shot in the city’s Oak Cliff district, Ewell
joined police who were tracking his assailanL
“So I end up in the Texas Theatre when they
catch him.

As I looked over the balcony rail-
ing, it was at that moment that the cops
reached Lee Harvey.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I’m just kinda, you
know, in a twilight"
When word came that a policeman had
been shot in the city’s Oak Cliff district, Ewell
joined police who were tracking his assailanL
“So I end up in the Texas Theatre when they
catch him. As I looked over the balcony rail-
ing, it was at that moment that the cops
reached Lee Harvey. When he tried to shoot
one of them, there was a scuffle and they fell
Uon. The murder of John Kennedy has become America's greatest
ever whodunit, its origins preserved in the memories of those who
were in Dallas that fateful day. between the seats and the rest of the cops rushed up and piled in. I will
always remember that somebody was trying to poke the barrel of a
shotgun down among all the heads and arms and shoulders of those
cops fighting Lee Harvey."
By 10 a.m., hundreds of people had gathered along the chain-link se-
curity fence at Ijove Field in a light rain, hoping to catch a glimpse of
the Kennedys. Moments before Air Force One came into view, the rain
stopped and as the plane landed, the sun came out
“I still to this day remember Jackie getting off that plane.” says
Jim Ewell, then The Dallas Morning News police reporter and now
the public relations spokesman for the Dallas County Sheriffs De-
partment. “Kennedy went up to the fence, and I’m sure it was mak-
Henry Wade, former FBI agent and Second World War U.S. navy
veteran, was Dallas County district attorney from 1950 to 1987 and. by 1963. had successfully prosecuted 25 murder cases. Now 79. he
has been a widower for six years, has switched from smoking to-
bacco to chewing it and is counsel to a law firm in north Dallas. He
was in the crowd awaiting Kennedy at the Dallas Trade Mart when
word came that the president and governor Connally. a longtime
MACLEAN'S/NOVEMBER 22, 1993 45

--- PAGE BREAK ---» ft* K € Z I A I.

H ft* O 1ft
At about 5 p.m., he
went to Parkland hospi-
tal where he sat for a
time with Nellie Connal-
ly while her husband un-
derwent surgery.

‘Then,
I went homeWade re-
calls, “and shortly after, 1
got a call from Cliff Carter, who was a right-
hand man of |vice-president Lyndon 1 John-
son’s and he said it’s come over the television
that /all are going to claim the Russians con-
spired to kill the president I said 1 didn't know
where that came from because as far as I knew
we had no evidence that there were any Rus-
sians involved.

Johnson apparently was hung
up on that and was scared to death the Rus-
sians were going to release the atomic bomb.”
At Carter’s insistence, Wade drove to police
headquarters at city hall to meet Oswald.

“I
asked him if he had a lawyer,” Wade says.

“He
said he did and named a New York City
lawyer prominent in the civil liberties move-
ment who called back and said that he did not
know Oswald and had no intention of repre-
senting him.

Oswald was defianL I asked him
questions about where he was at the time of the
shooting.

He answered practically everything
■ Johnson taking the oath of
office; the old Texas School
Book Depository and its infamous
window (left); Leavelle, then
and now (below): 7 saw Ruby
standing there with a gun.

About
then, he made two short steps and
double-actioned that .38 into
Oswald's stomach'
with *1 want a lawyer' and ‘Police brutality.’"
Henry Wade believes he could have won a
conviction and that Oswald would have been
sentenced to death.

But death, as it turned
out, was imminent
Jim Leavelle is 73 and comes from a village
called Detroit in Red River County, Texas.

“I
think my wife married me because she
thought I’d take her to the big city.’’ he chuck-
les.

Their children grown and long gone, they
live beside Lake Ray Hubbard in the Dallas
suburb of Garland.

In 1963, Leavelle was a Dal-
las police detective and on Sunday, Nov.Their children grown and long gone, they
live beside Lake Ray Hubbard in the Dallas
suburb of Garland.

In 1963, Leavelle was a Dal-
las police detective and on Sunday, Nov.

24,
was about to become one of the most widely
recognized players in the assassination drama.

That morning, police were preparing to
transfer Oswald from the city hall police lock-
up to the better-equipped and more secure
cells at the Dallas County Courthouse across
town.

Chief Curry, an-
gered by rumors that Os-
wald had been beaten,
was determined to move
him publicly so that the
TV cameras would display
him undamaged.

Shortly
after 11 a.m., Secret Ser-
vice, FBI and other law en-
forcement agents had fin-
ished questioning Oswald.

“He had two different
sweaters there and he said
he wanted the black one, a
pullover, so we let him put
it on,” Leavelle says.

“I put
two sets of handcuffs on
him, one set on both his
wrists and then I hand-
cuffed his right arm to my
left.

I was kind of kidding
him.

I said, 'Well, Lee, if
anybody shoots at you, I
hope they’re as good a
if shot as you are.’ He kind
I of laughed, the only time I
* saw him smile or laugh
g when he was in custody.

£ He said, ‘Aw, ain’t nobody
| going to shoot at me.

| You’re just being overdra-
| matic or something.’ I
* said, ‘Well, if anybody does
shoot at you, you know what to do.’ And he
said, The captain said to follow you so I’ll go
wherever you go.’ I said, ‘In that case, you’ll
be on the ground pretty quick if anyone starts
shooting.’"
Oswald and Leavelle, wearing a pale gray
Stetson and his only Neiman Marcus suit,
rode the elevator from the third floor to the
basement and walked along a short corridor
to the parking garage.

“All the floodlights from the TV cameras
came on and we were blinded momentarily,
couldn’t see a thing,” Leavelle recalls.

“Out of
the comer of my eye, I saw Ruby standing
there with a gun at his side.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“All the floodlights from the TV cameras
came on and we were blinded momentarily,
couldn’t see a thing,” Leavelle recalls. “Out of
the comer of my eye, I saw Ruby standing
there with a gun at his side. About that same
instant, he made two short steps and double-
actioned that .38 into Oswald’s stomach. I had
Oswald by the belt in addition to being hand-
cuffed to him, and I tried to jerk him behind
me but all I succeeded in doing was turning
46

--- PAGE BREAK ---REUTH,'BeTTM‘-.NN
■ Clockwise, from left,
Jackie today, a book
editor in New York City;
son John, a lawyer, cycling
with actress Daryl Hannah;
daughter Caroline, a
lawyer and mother of three,
with husband Edwin
Schlossberg; Jackie and
her children on the Capitol
steps the day of the funeral:
America's royal family
his body a little bit so that instead of hitting
him dead centre, it hit him about four inches
to the left of the navel."
Leavelle grabbed Ruby with his free hand
and shoved him backward.

Other policemen
seized both the gun and Ruby.

An ambulance
took Oswald to Parkland hospital, where he
was put in the same emergency operating
room that had received Kennedy, and Dr.

Malcolm Perry, part of the team that had tried
to save the president, operated in vain on the
accused assassin.

At 1:07 p.m., Oswald was
pronounced dead.

Leavelle had had enough of televised police
work.

The next day, Monday the 25lh, he
whisked Ruby from City Hall to the county
courthouse without telling even his lieu-
tenant—“and he got huffy about that.”
Ruby was badly frightened.

“On the way
down in the elevator," Leavelle remembers,
“he was wanting to wear my hat and my coat
and everything because he was afraid some-
body was going to shoot him.

I said, ‘Jack, you
ain’t worth killin’, nobody’s going to shoot you.’
Then.“On the way
down in the elevator," Leavelle remembers,
“he was wanting to wear my hat and my coat
and everything because he was afraid some-
body was going to shoot him.

I said, ‘Jack, you
ain’t worth killin’, nobody’s going to shoot you.’
Then.

I said, ’In all the years I’ve known you,
you’ve never done anything to hurt the police,
but you didn’t do us any favor on this.’ And he
said, ‘All 1 wanted to do was be a hero.’ He’d
figured we’d charge him with murder but the
grand jury would say, ‘Jack, that’s a bad thing
you done shootin’ Oswald, but since he needed
killin’ anyhow, we going to excuse you this
time but don’t do it again.’ And he could stand
at the front door of his club and people would
come from far and wide to shake the hand of
the man who shot the assassin.”
That same day, while kings, emperors and
prime ministers bowed their heads in homage
to the memory of a murdered president at Ar-
lington National Cemetery near Washington,
Lee Harvey Oswald was buried in Rose Hill
Cemetery at Arlington.

Texas, between Dallas
and Fort Worth.

There were five mourners—
Oswald’s wife, Marina, his brother Robert, his
mother and his two infant children.

The Rev.

Louis Saunders, secretary of the Fort Worth
District Council of Churches, says that he had
called five different clergymen to perform the
service but all had made excuses.

Saunders,
who had not conducted a funeral service in
eight years, nervously recited scripture from
memory: “The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall
not want; he makelh me to lie down in green
pastures.

.

.

Now 84, retired and living in
Dallas, Saunders says that he eventually got
more than 1,000 letters and postcards, only
one of them critical
But Lee Harvey Oswald
did not stay buried.

In 1981,
British author Michael
Eddowes, who had written
a book contending that
the body in the Arlington
grave was tliat of a Soviet
spy, got a court order for
exhumation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now 84, retired and living in
Dallas, Saunders says that he eventually got
more than 1,000 letters and postcards, only
one of them critical
But Lee Harvey Oswald
did not stay buried. In 1981,
British author Michael
Eddowes, who had written
a book contending that
the body in the Arlington
grave was tliat of a Soviet
spy, got a court order for
exhumation. Fort Worth
< funeral director Paul
| Groody, who had put
d Oswald into the ground
I 18 years before, returned
*- to dig him up. Now 74, Groody says that he found some-
body had been there ahead of him. The steel-
reinforced concrete vault containing the casket
had been broken, probably when it fell while
being lifted from the grave. Groody surmises. In any event, he delivered the body to die Bay-
lor Medical Center in Dallas where, two years
later, a pathologist confirmed that the teeth
were indeed those of Lee Harvey Oswald. However, says Groody, the body he collect-
ed from Parkland hospital in 1963 had under-
gone an autopsy that included a craniotomy-
opening the skull. “But when we dug him up,
he says. “1 didn’t see any evidence that the
skull had been autopsied.”
“You think the guy wasn’t Oswald?”
“Yup, I’m kind of convinced of that."
“So what did they do, replace the teeth?"
“Replaced the head. Somebody went in,
changed heads and put the head of the real
Lee Harvey in there."
“So who did you originally bury?"
“Some guy who was groomed to look like
him, but remember, it’s only a dumb old un-
dertaker talkin’."
For years after Kennedy’s murder. Dallas
was reviled across America. Some newspaper
stories called it “Murder City" and dwelled on
MACLEAN'S/NOVEMBER 22, 1993 47

--- PAGE BREAK ---SPECIAL REPORT
its crime and violence and loony right-wing extremists.

People from Dallas told tales of being refused service in
other cities if they mentioned where they were from.

“You know what I think cured that?” says Henry Wade.

“When they killed Bobby Kennedy in Los Angeles and
Martin lather King in Memphis.

People began thinking,
‘Why, this can happen in any city.’"
On the drive in from the airport, the city's soaring,
sculpted skyline—made famous by the Dallas TV se-
ries—appears suddenly in the distance, like a mirage on
the north Texas plain.

But it is more a colossal monu-
ment to fading oil-fed prosperity than to progress—Dal-
las is a troubled community.

As happened in other big
U.S.

cities following desegregation, most of the white
population fled to the suburbs; in 100 square blocks of
downtown, there are, by and
large, only office buildings
and hotels.

No shops, no
movie houses, no grocers, no
department stores, only one
apartment building.

‘There's
a lot of racial strife—more so,
I would say, than in the late
Sixties,” says Darwin Payne,
a journalism professor at
Southern Methodist Universi-
ty in Dallas.

“There’s a lot of
fear about what’s happening.

Dallas, for years, felt it was
immune to all the problems
of the big cities of the East.

But now, we have all the
problems and I can’t see a
turnaround."
No matter where the future
takes the 152-year-old city on
the Trinity River, it will never
quite shake its past.

In the
history of high-level murder
and intrigue, Dealey Plaza has joined the senate steps of
Caesar’s Rome, the Ford Theatre of Lincoln’s Washing-
ton, the streets of Archduke Ferdinand’s Sarajevo.

And
the tourists come to stare at the grassy knoll and the
triple underpass, to take pictures of the old Texas School
Book Depository—now the Dallas County Administra-
tion Building.

On the sixth floor, there is a broadloomed museum
called simply The Sixth Floor.And
the tourists come to stare at the grassy knoll and the
triple underpass, to take pictures of the old Texas School
Book Depository—now the Dallas County Administra-
tion Building.

On the sixth floor, there is a broadloomed museum
called simply The Sixth Floor.

There are huge wall-
mounted photographs of the Kennedys in Washington,
in Berlin, in Dallas, driving, waving, smiling.

In the
gloom, people watch videos of the fateful motorcade, of
the president’s 1961 inaugural address (“Ask not what
your country can do for you, ask what you can do for
your country.

...")• The corner containing the window
from which Oswald is said to have fired the fatal shots
has been boxed off behind glass, and people stare at the
original bare wooden floor inside.

Downstairs, a tasteful souvenir shop sells a huge as-
sortment of books about Kennedy and the assassination,
plastic-wrapped front pages of 1963 newspapers, and au-
dio and video tapes—JFK in Ireland; JFK: The Day the
Nation Cried; Camelot The Kennedy Years.

Outside, there is a metal plaque on the front of the
building that reads, in part: “On Nov.

22.1963, the build-
ing gained national notoriety when Lee Harvey Oswald
allegedly shot and killed president John F.

Kennedy
from a sixth-floor window as the presidential motorcade
passed the site." Over the years, the word “allegedly”
has been underlined by repeated gouging.

□
The second-floor reading room at the U.S.

National Archives in Washington is
crammed most days with conspiracy buffs, poring over papers that, in some
cases, consist of nothing more than newspaper clippings that the CIA inexplica-
bly stamped “secret." There are 800,000 pages of documents in all, including
120,000 from the CIA.

Released in August in accordance with a 1992 act of Con-
gress, they amount to the largest disclosure ever of material related to the assas-
sination of president John F.

Kennedy; more papers are still to be made public.Released in August in accordance with a 1992 act of Con-
gress, they amount to the largest disclosure ever of material related to the assas-
sination of president John F.

Kennedy; more papers are still to be made public.

Those re-
leased so far—yellowing, creased, often dog-eared and contained in 1,053 cardboard file
boxes—reveal much evidence of official incompetence and coverups of wild schemes.

But there is no smoking gun—nothing that proves the Warren Commission wrong in its
basic assertion: that lone gunman Lee Harvey Oswald killed the president
Still, recent polls show that between 72 and 80 per cent of Americans believe there
was a conspiracy.

The major arguments for that view:
• One gunman fired three shots from a sixth-floor window of the Texas School Book De-
pository.

One missed the motorcade, the other two hit the president.

However, at almost
the same instant that Kennedy was hit, so was Texas governor John Connally, sitting in
front of him.

If Connally was struck by a separate bullet, there had to be a second gunman
and thus a conspiracy.

For one bullet to pass through Kennedy’s neck, zigzag through the
car, hit Connally in the back, exit
AMERICA’S
ENDURING
MYSTERY:
WAS
OSWALD A
LONE
the front of his chest, smash
through his right wrist and come
to rest in his left thigh, it had to
change course several times.

It
had to be a “magic bullet."
• Autopsy notes were inex-
plicably destroyed almost im-
mediately after Kennedy’s body
was first examined.

However,
doctors and nurses testified to
the Warren Commission that
they saw an exit-type wound in
the back of the president’s
head.

Such a wound could only
have been caused by a gunman
shooting from in front of the
motorcade.However,
doctors and nurses testified to
the Warren Commission that
they saw an exit-type wound in
the back of the president’s
head.

Such a wound could only
have been caused by a gunman
shooting from in front of the
motorcade.

That ties in with a
frame from the famous film,
shot by amateur cameraman
Abraham Zapruder, which
shows the president’s head
snapping backwards, as though
being hit from the front And at
least half a dozen serious witnesses say they heard a shot
coming from the grassy knoll ahead of the motorcade.

• The Zapruder film indicates that all the shots were
fired in less than eight seconds.

Oswald’s Mannlicher-
Carcano bolt-action rifle, fitted with a telescopic sight,
was hardly a precision, fast-action weapon.

Whoever
fired it that day was an expert; most of the crack snipers brought in by the Pentagon
have failed to reproduce the feat.

But in the U.S.

marines, Oswald was remembered as a
poor shot, and friends who hunted with him say he was mediocre.

• The Warren Commission worked under such time pressure and bureaucratic con-
straint that it was often sloppy.

Chief Justice Earl Warren told his colleagues that it was
important to world peace that the American public not believe that the Soviet Union or
Cuba were involved.

He was predisposed to find a lone assassin.

On the other hand:
• The most recent and thorough investigation of the “magic bullet" included a com-
puterized reconstruction.

Unlikely though it seems, the investigation concluded that one
bullet could indeed have passed through the president and continued on to hit Connally.

• In recent years, panels of doctors have examined the autopsy photographs and X-
rays of Kennedy's body.

All but one of the doctors said the shots came from the rear.

• The Zapruder film, and still photographs taken at the time, have been computer en-
hanced.

They show the grassy knoll in detail.--- PAGE BREAK ---

• The Zapruder film, and still photographs taken at the time, have been computer en-
hanced. They show the grassy knoll in detail. Not only is there no sign of a second gun-
man, but many of the witnesses who claim to have been on the knoll and heard shots
coming from behind them were not where they said they were. • Nearly aJI the conspiracy theories point to at least one more gunman and a backup
force of plotters and planners. And yet, in the 30 years since the shooting, no one has
produced proof that anyone other than Oswald was involved. If there really had been a
conspiracy, something would almost certainly have leaked by now. Either Oswald acted
alone, or it is the best coverup in history. WILLIAM LOWTHER in Washington
■ Oswald: polls
show that as many
as 80 per cent of
Americans believe
there was a conspiracy
48

--- PAGE BREAK ---Charles Lynch retired a decade ago as chief of 'Southern News and is now
an Ottawa-based freelance columnist, author and broadcaster.

u& Piisisisa?

chancellor of the University of
New Brunswick, Lord Beaver-
brook.

It was 1957, and Kennedy
was introduced by Beaverbrook
as “the next president of the
United States.” Kennedy re-
sponded with what came to be
known as the “good fences
make good neighbors" speech.

So Canada wept, too, when
Kennedy was shot.

It may be
that had he lived and become
engulfed in failure, as all subse-
quent presidents except Ronald
Reagan have been, the reaction
to him would have turned sour
long since, and there would be
no honoring his anniversaries.

Vietnam might have sunk him
as it did his successor.

Today’s
media would have finished him,
on his private peccadillos alone.

But he fulfilled one of the
prime conditions for remem-
brance, be it fair or foul, by dy-
ing young.

And dying spectacu-
larly, with controversy thrown in
that bubbles and boils with mys-
tery to this day.

My youngest daughter was in
her Grade 5 classroom in an Ot-
tawa school the day Kennedy
was shot, and the teachers
wheeled in a TV set so the kids
could watch history being made,
something they would remem-
ber all their lives.

And they have,
more vividly than they remem-
ber any of our prime ministers,
even the Kennedy-esque Pierre
Trudeau.

More than they re-
member our prime minister of
the day, Lester Pearson, whom
Kennedy admired above all
Canadians, as intensely as he de-
spised Pearson’s predecessor,
John Diefenbaker.

My own experience on the
day of Kennedy’s assassination was unique, in that I was led to believe
it was either Pearson or Diefenbaker who had been shot.

I was in
Jakarta on a round-the-world journalistic junket and had arranged an
interview with the Indonesian dictator Sukarno, at his mountain re-
treat in Bogor.My own experience on the
day of Kennedy’s assassination was unique, in that I was led to believe
it was either Pearson or Diefenbaker who had been shot.

I was in
Jakarta on a round-the-world journalistic junket and had arranged an
interview with the Indonesian dictator Sukarno, at his mountain re-
treat in Bogor.

During the drive up-country, the Indonesian conducting officer
turned to me and said, “Your leader has been shot.”
Startled, I said: “Lester Pearson shot?”
The man shook his head.

“John Diefenbaker?" I blurted.

The name “John" must have rung a bell, because the man nodded as-
sent, and I spent the rest of the 100-km drive mourning Diet and won-
dering who could have shot him, and why.

It was only on arrival in Bogor that I found the Sukarno cabinet as-
sembled, hailing Kennedy’s death as a victory for freedom (the Red
Chinese also celebrated it as a bright day), and pondering whether
Sukarno should go to Washington for the funeral The answer was no
and my interview was cancelled.

I asked to be taken back to Jakarta,
□ Visiting Parliament Hill
in 1961: aggravating an
old wartime back injury
RT
BY CHARLES LYNCH
Two United States presidents have meant as much to Canadians as
to Americans.

It may be that both were more popular in Canada
than in their homeland.

Franklin D.

Roosevelt was the first, John
F.

Kennedy the second and most vividly remembered of the two,
though his achievements were minuscule beside FDR’s.

Canada’s prolonged love affairs with these two men may have
been rooted in the fact that Down East Canadians knew them both be-
fore they became the most powerful leaders in the world—Roosevelt
through his ties with Campobello, N.B., Kennedy as the complete
Bostonian, harking back to the days when “the Boston States” meant
more to Maritimers than Montreal, Toronto or points west
When Kennedy grew up in Massachusetts, one in five families there
had roots in the Atlantic provinces.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kennedy the second and most vividly remembered of the two,
though his achievements were minuscule beside FDR’s. Canada’s prolonged love affairs with these two men may have
been rooted in the fact that Down East Canadians knew them both be-
fore they became the most powerful leaders in the world—Roosevelt
through his ties with Campobello, N.B., Kennedy as the complete
Bostonian, harking back to the days when “the Boston States” meant
more to Maritimers than Montreal, Toronto or points west
When Kennedy grew up in Massachusetts, one in five families there
had roots in the Atlantic provinces. Kennedy’s maternal ancestors, the
Fitzgeralds, landed from Ireland in New Brunswick before moving on
to Boston. To this day. Saint John calls itself the most Irish city in Cana-
da, a smaller version of the Massachusetts capital
Jack Kennedy himself came to Fredericton at the invitation of the
MACLEAN'S/NOVEMBER 22, 1993 51

--- PAGE BREAK ---SPECIAL lll'POKT
Where the only refuge from the festive re-
action to Kennedy’s death was the United
States Embassy.

So I went there, and joined in the shedding of tears.

My first sight of Kennedy liad been at the Los Angeles Democratic
convention that nominated him for the presidency in a bitter fight with
Lyndon Johnson.

It was a close-run thing, as was the subsequent election
against Richard Nixon, and to be near to it was to know how important
the Kennedy money was.

and how hungry for power was Kennedy’s
younger brother, Bobby.

Without Bobby, there would have been no
Kennedy in the White House, and yet watching him l developed a dislike
that lasted until he, too, fell to an assassin’s bullet The recruiting of John-
son as vice-presidential candidate, and the marketing of Jack and Jackie
as the dawning of a new age for America, overcame the public prejudice
against a Roman Catholic, and cancelled the momentum of the popular
presidency of Dwight Eisenhower, the hero of the Second World War.

Kennedy ran as a war hero, too, and the voters fell for it.

Even in
Canada, where we put down
our own war heroes, we liked
Ike, and even named our most
famous mountain after him,
though the name didn’t stick
and it reverted to Castle Moun-
tain.

Our mountain named for
Kennedy, in the Yukon, has had
better luck.

Canadians were no strangers
to Roman Catholics in office,
though religious prejudices
were as deep here as in most of
the United States.

But there, the
election of a Roman Catholic
president was revolutionary, and
it got Kennedy off to a roaring
start with echoes of hope and re-
newal heard around the world.

The Canadian connection
was special, from the time
Kennedy came to Ottawa on his
first foreign visit as president
and aggravated his old wartime
back injury planting a tree in
the grounds of Government
House.But there, the
election of a Roman Catholic
president was revolutionary, and
it got Kennedy off to a roaring
start with echoes of hope and re-
newal heard around the world.

The Canadian connection
was special, from the time
Kennedy came to Ottawa on his
first foreign visit as president
and aggravated his old wartime
back injury planting a tree in
the grounds of Government
House.

Diefenbaker took an instant dislike to “the young whippersnap-
per,” and it was heightened when Kennedy addressed Parliament and
called on Canada to accept her responsibilities and join the Organiza-
tion of American States.

Diefenbaker regarded it as a command to
“jump through the hoop,’’ and said no.

The best anecdote on the Diefenbaker-Kennedy feud followed
the discovery of a White House working paper in an East Block
wastebasket, the paper listing the things the United States should
“push" Canada to do.

Diefenbaker kept the paper as a reminder to
resist all pressure from Washington.

The legend is dial Kennedy
had scribbled in the margin: “What do we do with the s.o.b.

now?’*
Kennedy subsequently denied it, reportedly saying he couldn't
have called Diefenbaker an s.o.b.

when he didn’t know he was one
at the time.

His opinion jelled during the Cuban missile crisis, the globe’s clos-
est brush with a Third World War.

Canada was part of the North
American Air Defence Agreement, along with the United States.

Washington deemed that Soviet missiles on Cuban bases were a threat
to continental security and put its forces on combat alert, expecting
Canada to do likewise.

Diefenbaker said no.

Canadian defence minis-
ter Douglas Harkness sided with Kennedy and ordered a partial alert
of Canadian forces, without informing Diefenbaker.

The result was a
split in the Canada-U.S.

defence alliance that would not be healed as
long as either Diefenbaker or Kennedy remained in office.

Diefenbaker, with a shove from Kennedy, was the first to go.defence alliance that would not be healed as
long as either Diefenbaker or Kennedy remained in office.

Diefenbaker, with a shove from Kennedy, was the first to go.

Things came to a head in the Canadian election of 1963, when a
key issue was whether Canada was committed to taking U.S.

nuclear
warheads for Bomarc anti-aircraft missiles.

Diefenbaker saying no,
Lester Pearson saying yes.

Kennedy backed Pearson, and a letter
 was circulated from U.S.

ambassador
Walton Butterworth congratulating Pear-
son on his nuclear stand (the stand that caused Trudeau to call Pear-
son “the unfrocked prince of peace.")
Pearson won the election and ordered an investigation that led to
the Butterworth letter being branded a forgery.

Diefenbaker dubbed
Butterworth “Butterballs" and kept copies of the “forgery" handy for
the rest of his life.

Kennedy’s influence in the 1963 Canadian election may have swung
die balance, because pro-U.S.

feeling was strong here and Kennedy
was more popular with Canadians than any homegrown leader.

Pearson’s grappling with the English-French question was reminiscent
of Kennedy’s approach to racial divisions in the United States, though
both problems remain 30 years later.

And there were traces of Kennedy
in Dalton Camp's campaign to unseat Diefenbaker as Conservative
leader in 1967.

Camp enlisted the youth wing of the party in his cause
HE FULFILLED
A PRIME
CONDITION FOR
REMEMBRANCE
BY DYING YOUNG
and it has always been my belief that he
aimed for the leadership himself, believ-
ing he could rouse the same emotions in
Canada that Kennedy had.

But Diefen-
baker was too tough for Camp & Co.

to
swallow, and though they unseated him
they had to settle for Robert Stanfield as
his successor.

Diefenbaker’s farewell
speech to the parliamentary press gallery
included what must have been the tough-
est attack ever voiced by a Canadian
prime minister about a U.S.to
swallow, and though they unseated him
they had to settle for Robert Stanfield as
his successor.

Diefenbaker’s farewell
speech to the parliamentary press gallery
included what must have been the tough-
est attack ever voiced by a Canadian
prime minister about a U.S.

president,
and Diefenbaker carried the Kennedy
grudge to his grave, leaving subsequent
PMs to grapple with the ups and downs of
relations with the United States.

Stanfield was billed as “the man with
the winning way," but the trouble was he was a slow mover—and what
there was of the Kennedy magic in the northern air moved to the Liber-
als and Pierre Trudeau.

The story of Trudeaumania is one of the
strangest and most unlikely in Canadian political history, but much of the
flair displayed so suddenly by this shy, introverted man was on the
Kennedy pattern, including the sexy side that was totally new, happening
right in the open with women of all ages throwing themselves at his feet
Part of the Kennedy inheritance was to complete the swing of Cana-
da’s attention from British politics to American.

The Second World
War and FDR had led Canada away from British ways to a perceived
role as honest broker between London and Washington.

With
Kennedy, Washington became predominant in Canadian foreign and
even domestic affairs, and has remained so ever since.

Like Pierre Trudeau, he haunts us stilL His memory diminished the
presidencies of all who followed him, just as the memory of Trudeau
has taken its toll of Joe Clark, John Turner, Brian Mulroney and Kim
Campbell, and casts a shadow over the prime ministry of Jean Chre-
tien.

It is Pierre and Maggie that we remember, just as we remember
Jack and Jackie, almost as though the brave new world they promised
actually had come to pass.

It didn’t in either country, but in a cold climate, the memories stay
warm, along with the expectations that there must be a better way of
doing politics.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is Pierre and Maggie that we remember, just as we remember
Jack and Jackie, almost as though the brave new world they promised
actually had come to pass. It didn’t in either country, but in a cold climate, the memories stay
warm, along with the expectations that there must be a better way of
doing politics. □
■ Kennedy and
Pearson at
Hyannis Port in 1963:
the Canadian he
admired most