y


6/4/72

Mr, Ed Baldwin

Attorney at Law. : .

deMontluzia Bldg.

254 Loyola Ave.,

Hew Oriels, La,

Dear Mr, Baldwin,

Pers h i n g Gervais should remember me* Although it has not been reported
around here^ I am generally familiar with his current situation, have read the
affidavit in the case in which he is involved with some care, know what has been
reported and aired in Hew Orleans until a few days ago, and I have been writing
a magazine article.

As a matter of fact, if there were any purpose in it, this could rapidly
become a book (that would not displease the Pershing I knew).

When the news of the charges first broke, I did not believe what Pershing
had done was voluntary. My own correspondence and many conversations of that
period with lawyers and others in Mew Orleans will confirm this* I had a reason
in particular that may at some time interest Pershing and you as his lawyer.

Long before any of the affair began, or at least I think before it began,
in Deoember 1968 or January 1969, in the presence of a friend of mine, Pershing
adzed a small favor of me that in ny non-lawyer's view very much addresses his
alleged reason for doing what he did and discredits it.

In addition, I have been researching a book I intend to write at some t^mn
in the future, tentatively titled "I, Spy'*, What Pershing now claims is not
nearly as farout as it may seem. And there are oases where the FBI went to more
trouble and expense than they did with Pershing,

The essence of all of my recent research, investigation and Writing is
the integrity of government, particularly the Department of Justice and the
FBI, False swearing, even perjury, has become the norm, as has the destruction
and the m a nuf ac t ure of evidence. If Pershing has become the victim of any such
impropriety, as has been my belief from the first, I think he knows that if I
'yean help Mm. I will.

I wish I could now get to Hew, Orleans and. talk to him, I understand there is
to be a hearing on the 12th, However, if one of the people with whom he dealt is
Joseph Taf e, perhaps something in my files may interest you and help accredit M-nu

Please wish him good luckmfor me.

Sincerely,


•3


I


Harold Weisberg


Mr. Baldwin- Afterthought

If Pershing mentions any more names, I'd be interested in knowing them. Those
that have been attributed to him and of which I know include one of what to me is
special significance and all are in the right place to credit what he says.


It will take some time, but I'll probably get copies of what appears in the
New Orleans papers. I'll also probably get transcripts of what is on TV news. I
have every reason to expect more on TV. In fact, I know there will be more.

If there are others of which he can think, I'd like to be able to check them.
Although Pershing is by no means backward, when he is interviewed he may not be
asked questions relating to all those with whom he dealt hence he may have no
occasion to reoall or mention some names.
