AT THE TEXAS THEATRE

Statements of Witnesses - Johnny Calvin BREWER

Deposition - April 2, 1964, 7 H 1-8

He is a 22-year-old manager of the Hardy's Shoe Store, 213 West
Jefferson St. branch. He has since been transferred to the downtown
store, a considerable advancement.

He olaims he was listening to all of the details of the Kennedy
killing on a transistor radio and apparently in the sequence, before
anything happened, heard over the radio that a policeman had been shot
in Oak Cliff.

Now at the rate the Commission has estimated Oswald traveled,
either this couldn't have happened or Oswald was really traveling; in
that event, why did it take him so long tofrfget to the theatre?

After hearing of the shooting of the policeman, he heard a siren
coming down Jefferson headed west, (p.2)

His store is located on the north aide of Jefferson. He was in

the shop, looked up and out toward the street and the polk: e cars and

has

"saw the man enter the lobby." His store an area of about 15 feet
recess between the door and the edge of the sidewalk. There are show
windows on each side.

After the polioe car, which by this time had already become plural,
made a U-turn, "Oswald looked over his shoulder and turned around and
walked up West Jefferson towards the theatre." Belin asked him if he
at that time knew the man was °swald, and he said he didn't. He de-
scribed him as 5 , 9 H and weighing about 1$0 pounds, S 0 far he is the
only witness who has oome this close, and if he didn't appear at a
lineup, it*s pretty clear why he came this close. He doesn't remember
the color of the trousers, but says the man was wearing a brown sport
shirt with the shirt-tail out, no Jacket, and he had brown hair. He
also says the man had a T. shirt on. (p.3)


2 - Brewer

As the man walked away. Brewer went out and watohed him. Appar-
ently here we have the first "brave" man. Brewer’s exact words are,

"and I walked out the front and watohed him, and he went into the theatre.

Then: "Mr. Belin. Why did you happen to watch this particular Man?

Mr. Brewer. He just looked funny to me. Well, In the first place,

I had seen him some place before. I think he had been in my store before.
And when you wait on somebody, you recognize them, and he just seemed
funny. His hair was sort of massed up and looked like he had been run-
ning, and he looked scared, and he looked funny.

M r. Belin. Did you notice any of ;£hls actions when he was stand-
ing in p your lobby there?

Mr. Brewer. No; he just stood there and stared." (p.<+)

Belin then asks: "Well, would you state than what happened? You said *

that you saw him walk into the Texas Theatre? ft

Mr. Brewer. He walked into the Texas Theatre and I walked up to
the theatre, to the box office and asked Mrs. Postal if she sold a ticket
to a man who was wearing a brown shirt, and she said no, she hadd’t.

She was listening to the radio herself. And I said that a man walked in
there, and I was going to go inside and ask the usher if he had seen him.
So I walked in and Butch Burroughs -

Mr. Belin. Who was Burroughs?

Mr. Brewer. He was behind the counter. He operated the concession
and takes tickets. He was behind the concession stand and I asked Mm if
he had seen a man in a brown shirt of that description, matching that
description, and be said he had been working behind the counter and hadn't
seen anybody. And I asked him if he would come with me and show me
where the exits were and we would check the exits. And he asked me why.

I told him that I thought the guy looked susplolous.


3 - Brower

Mfr. Belin. Could you toll whether or not he bought a ticket?

Mr. fcrewer. No; he Just turned and walked right straight In.

Mr. Belln. When he walked right straight in, could you see the
box office?

Mr. Brewer. Well, the box office is right in the middle of the
front of the theatre, and he turned right at the corner and went in.

You oould see him if he was buying a ticket, because the box office is
flush with all the other buildings." (p. 4 )

A picture of a man with a sublime faith In the Impossible. He
not only expects to g*t past the cashier, but expects to get past the
ticket taker. And It may even have happened, but who in the world would
ever expect to get away with it? And why should Oswald have tried with
almost $11}. in his pocket? (p.4)

Brewerjkeesn't know why he asked Julia Postal, the cashier, if she *
had seen the man. Belin asks Brewer if he asked Julia Postal and:

"Mr. Brewer. M»±±yxjauritxt»fmTwxth«yxEsaa Just asked her whether
he had bought or she had seen him go in.

Mr. Belin. She - did she say whether wha had seen him, or don't
you remember?

Mr. Brewer. She said she couldn't remember a man of that descrip-
tion going in." (p.£)

With no more people in a theatre than would fit in a very small

sh had

seotion of a small room, she ^ould have/no trouble recalling any man
who had just gone in, unless, of course, she just wasn't looking and
his walk was a silent one.

He and Butch Burroughs, the ticket taker who also has a concession
(and as we have seen, in an almost entirely empty theatre, just happened

to be busy behind the counter), checked all the exits and found because

1


1; - Brewer

of the unusual nature of the closing mechanism that none of the exits
had bean recently used. They then checked the Balcony. Belin prompts
him, saying, "Now you first looked on the bottom floor and you did not
see him?” and of course. Brewer agreed.

Brewer's estimate of a maximum of 15 to 20 patrons In the theatre
altogehter. After all of this, tfulia Postal oalled the polloe. Brewer
took the back exit and Burroughs the front, and they each stood guard,
according to Brewer's description. The account resumes with what hap.
pened prior to the arrival of the police;

"Mr. Belin. Then what happened?

Mr. Brewer. Well, just before they came, they turned the house
Rights on, and I looked out from the curtains and saw the man.

Mr. Belin. Where waB he when you saw him? *

Mr. Brewer. He was In the center section about six or seven rows,

*

from the back, toward the back.

1 Mr. Belin. Toward the back? Are you nure? Mr. Brewer, do you

which

know xMxxxSxuoccx exactly jgh±x)i row he was in from the back?

Mr. Brewer. No; I don’t know which row.

Mr. Belin. Then what did you see?

Mr. Brewer. He stood up and walked to the aisle to his right and
then he turned around and walked back and sat down and at this time there
was no place I could see." (p.5>)

What Brewer meant by "At th&s time there was no place I could See"

I don't know; but either Belin did or didn't care. Brewer's aecount
then described how, when he heard a noise outside, he opened the door,
was grabbed and searched by the police, after which he relayed his sus-
picions to them. He continued: "And I said, yes, I Just seen him. And

he asked me if I would point him out. And I and two or three other


5 - Brewer

officers walked out on the stage and I pointed him out, and there were
officers coming in fmim the front of the show, I guess, coming toward
that way, and officers going fran the back.

Mr. Belin. Then what did you see?

Mr. Brewer. Well, I saw this policeman approach Oswald, and Oswald
stood up and I heard some hollering, I don't know exactly what he said,
and this man hit Patrolman McDonald." (p.6)

Having Just said, "there was no place I could see," Brewer then
said, "i and two or three officers walked out on the stage ..." Why

V

should he have told the officers that he could point the man out, as I
understood his previous statement, when he couldn't see him? And what
kind of lunk-head cops do they have^in Dallas - or are they Just that
brave - to walk out on the stage with the lights on while looking for
a man they knew to be armed? This may all have happened, but it sure “ .
is crazy as hell.

His narrative of events continues locti with a description of the
man knocking McDonald down, following which McDonald got up and then "I -
saw qthis gun oome up and - in Oswald's hand, a gun up in the air."

j may be wrong, but 1 believe this version is not that of the
other witnesses, but if it is true, either Oswald didn't want to shoot
anybody, or he knew his f gun wouldn* t work. But if he was already a
murderer and perhaps a murderer twice, why should he worry about shooting
again?

Brewer gives it a dramatic touch by quoting one of the cope as
hollering, "Kill the President, will you." This is a rather strange
remark from a policeman who was looking for the killer of a policeman.

W£19 1

There/as’y*** certainly, no connection between the killer of the Presi-
dent and the killer of Tippit.


6 - Brewer

Brewer also said he heard Oswald say, "i am not resisting arrest",
about twice, (p.6)

Belin then takes him through a recapitulation of the story. He

said the man was walking a bit faster than normal when he left the

that

window of the shoe store, /at the time he saw him he was in front of a
furniture store the name of which he couldn’t recall until reminded,
the man was walking "just a little faster than usual" (odd how he knew
how the man usually walked). Although Brewer knew how rapdily the man
had walked, he didn*t know how rapidly he himself had.

Shown Exhibit l£0 he said it looked like the shirt the man was
wearing. He didn’t notice if it had any holes in the elbows, (p.7)
Brewer was fast at picking up what he thought might be cues:

"Mr. Belin. Bid you hear this man as he was in the theatre say
anything ether than *1 am not resisting arrest*?

Mr. Brewer. Np.

Mr. Belin. Bid he say anything, or could you not understand it?
Mr. Brewer. He said something, but I couldn’t understand what it
was." (p.8)
