UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COUIMHIA 
HAROLD WEISDERG, 
Plaintiff, 
v. 
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION, 
Defendant. 
AFFIDAVIT 
My name is Harold Weisbcrg. I am the plaintiff in this instant cause. 
I reside at 7627 Old Receiver Road, Route 12, Frederick, Md. 
1. My prior experiences include those of reporter, investigative reporter, 
SenaLt? investigator and intelligence analyst. My experience as an intelligence 
analyst was in the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and in 
the Department of State. 
2. Tn addition Co these prior experiences, t have devoted 16 years to 
acudy of the assassination of President Kennedy and its official investigation. 
I atu responsible for bringing to light u.uch of what did not come to public atten- 
tion as a result of Che Warren Commission's (the Commission) work. The first of 
my seven books was the first definitive analysis of the work of that Commission. 
It and my subsequent books also analyzed the functioning of Che various police, 
investigative and intelligence agencies involved in the 'investigation of the 
assassination. I have made extensive use of the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). 
obtaining and studying an enormous volume of records of the various agencies. I 
know of no one who has examined as many formerly secret records relating to the 
crime and its investigation. My knowledge is such chat in C.A. 75-226 the 
Department of Justice stated that I know more about the assassination of President 
Kennedy and its official investigation chan anyone in the FBI. 
3. I have read the November 26 affidavit of Robert E. Owen (the Owen 
affidavit), of the Directorate of Operations of the CIA. 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts official investigation chan anyone in the FBI. 
3. I have read the November 26 affidavit of Robert E. Owen (the Owen 
affidavit), of the Directorate of Operations of the CIA. 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Although misleading and dissembling are prized and well-developed 
skills in all intelligence agencies, in the CIA these are most highly prized - 
and practiced - in the component of which Owen is part. In less polite language, 
it is known as "dirty tricks." 
5. To my knowledge there is nothing in the Owen affidavit that could not 
have been alleged in his and other prior government affidavits in this instant 
cause. 
6. Based on my knowledge and experience, I believe that the reason the 
statements in this affidavit were not made earlier is because of the risk, 
known to the defendant, defendant's counsel and the CIA, that I would prove them 
to be deceptive, misleading and untruthful. 
i / fo/iurr di 
ii/ 7. Because the Court *at the October 17, 1979, calendar call that 
the Court does not read all the affidavits and because of the length required 
for a paragraph-hy-paragraph rebuttal of the Owen affidavit, I state at the 
'outset that it is the purpose of this affidavit to show that the Owen affidavit 
is deceptive, misleading, inaccurate and untruthful in ways that are not acci- 
dental and that part of the proof is the attachments, most of which are of CIA 
documents that were disclosed by it long before the two Commission executive 
sessiop transcripts in question (the transcripts) were disclosed. 
8. In Paragraphs 2 and 3 Owen presents a version of what he refers to as 
the "rationale" and "circumstances" of the classifcicacion of the transcripts in 
question. He does not state that the transcripts were properly classified, and 
they were not. The Commission had no power or authorization to classify. These 
records were "classified" by the court reporter, as a means of avoiding careless- 
ness in his office. This was established in court in my C.A. 2052-73. • 
9. The "circumstances" set forth in Paragraph 3 are not relevant. They 
also are a careful rewriting of "cold war" history from which essentials are 
eliminated. This Owen account of the state of the world at the time of the 
assassination concludes with, "One of the most distnrbing questions at the time 
was whether Lee.Harvey Oswald was a Soviet agent." From this, in Paragraph-3, 
he inferred Soviet involvement. 
2the 
assassination concludes with, "One of the most distnrbing questions at the time 
was whether Lee.Harvey Oswald was a Soviet agent." From this, in Paragraph-3, 
he inferred Soviet involvement. 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---concludes with, "One of the most distnrbing questions at the time 
was whether Lee.Harvey Oswald was a Soviet agent." From this, in Paragraph-3, 
he inferred Soviet involvement. 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10. Except among a few entrenched political paranoids, the CIA knew and 
seated in contemporaneous records f have obtuined that Oswald was not a Soviet 
agent and that the Soviets had no connection with the crime. A few samples of 
these records, disclosed by the CIA itself, follow below. At the time of 
Watergate, the CIA got rid of these officials of paranoidal view and preconcep- 
tion, those responsible for the fictions Owen now resuscitates. (Because there 
is overlapping of subject matter in the Owen paragraphs and in the records, 
there is overlapping in the paragraphs of this affidavit and its exhibits have 
relevance to other portions of the Owen affidavit than the parts to which they 
are initially addressed.) 
11. Owen's revisions of history ignore the fact that the Soviets prey 
ferred President Kennedy overhia unsuccessful opponent at the time he was 
elected and over his successor. It is not reasonable to suspect that the Soviet 
Union would assassinate the American President of its preference only to have, 
him succeeded by one it did not prefer. There is no factual basis for the 
suspicion now and there was none at the time. As the CIA itself stated, the 
assassination was opposed to Soviet theory and practice. 
12. Owen does refer to the Bay of Pigs, one of a still unended series of 
great disasters engineered by the CIA (one he does not mention is Iran), and to 
the "Cuban Missile Crisis," but he fails to state their conclusion. The "Crisis" 
ended with assurances that there would be no war over or in Cuba and with the 
beginning of what is now called "detente." The first step in this after the end 
of the crisis was the limited test ban agreement initiated by President Kennedy. 
13. President Kennedy took other steps toward reducing tensions with the 
USSR, such as canceling an agreement to provide Great Britain with "Blue Streak" 
missiles and withdrawing American missiles near the USSR, beginning with those 
in Turkey. These changes in American policy for which President Kennedy was 
responsible, wanted by the Soviet Union, were clearly enunciated in his speech 
at American University the summer before he was assassinated. So while there were 
tensions in the world, to a large degree brought to pass by the excesses of 
agencies like the CIA, under President Kennedy's leadership and to the liking 
and agreement of the USSR, they were being reduced. 
3n the world, to a large degree brought to pass by the excesses of 
agencies like the CIA, under President Kennedy's leadership and to the liking 
and agreement of the USSR, they were being reduced. 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---rge degree brought to pass by the excesses of 
agencies like the CIA, under President Kennedy's leadership and to the liking 
and agreement of the USSR, they were being reduced. 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14. At the time President Kennedy was assassinated, he had ordered the 
liquidation of United States involvement in Viet Nam. This was to be accom- 
plished by monthly withdrawals of "advisers" and to be completed by the next 
election. The process was begun. It ended a few days after he was killed. 
Earlier he had ordered the end of our intrusions elsewhere in Southeaat Asia. 
This was circumvented by the CIA, which continued those subordinate undeclared 
wars with proxy armies of its creation and financing. This is thoroughly docu- 
mented in The Invisible Government, by David Wise and Thomas B. Ross, first 
published in June 1964. 
15. The baseless question of "whether Oswald was an agent of the USSR" 
waB created by a few CIA political paranoids and others of the same mindset. The 
CIA pressed this at best dubious theory on President Johnson with such vigor it 
is a wonder World War III was not launched as a result. The CIA rushed to the 
White House known fabrications alleging Oswald was a "red" agent. The CIA's 
Mexico City station pushed this hard. When the CIA continued this campaign with 
the Warren Commission, the FBI castigated Director John McCone for his irresponsi- 
bility in chis regard. The fabrication the CIA pressed upon the new President, 
who was immersed in the tragedy, in preserving tranquillity and in the problems 
of succession an<j transition, had the known purpose of using the assassination of 
the President as . the justification for an attack on Cuba, which really meant 
launching World tyar III. 
16. After the CIA disclosed the documents in which the foregoing is explicit 
it suspended its POIA disclosure of records relating to.the assassination. I still 
await compliance with my 1975 requests and repeated appeals. 
17. This fear of World War III and the holocaust it would have meant is 
the argument by which President Johnson persuaded Chief Justice Warren to head the 
Presidential Commission as Warren informed his staff at its first meeting with him 
on January 20, 1964. One of several Commission records relating to this that I 
published in 1973 states: "When the position had first been offered to him he 
declined it, on the principle that Supreme Court Justices should not cake this 
kind of role.'1 After referring to widespread rumors the President said that some, 
4had first been offered to him he 
declined it, on the principle that Supreme Court Justices should not cake this 
kind of role.'1 After referring to widespread rumors the President said that some, 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---red to him he 
declined it, on the principle that Supreme Court Justices should not cake this 
kind of role.'1 After referring to widespread rumors the President said that some, 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“if noc quenched, could conceivably lead the country into a war which would cost 
40,000,000 lives. No one could refuse to do something which might help prevent 
such a possibility. The President convinced him that this was on occasion on 
which the actual conditions had to overrule general principles.11 
18. One of the fabricated reports of Oswald as a pai “red" assassin, 
referred to in Paragraph 15 above, was concocted by a Nicaraguan, Gilberto 
Alvarado Ugarte, then in Mexico City. It was immediately identifiable as a 
fabrication. Nonetheless, the CIA hawked it immediately to the White House and 
then to the Commission, notwithstanding the fact that it had been disproven. An 
FBI internal memorandum denouncing this, of December 19, 1963, from its head- 
quarters “Oswald" file is attached as Exhibit 1. (The unnamed source referred 
to in the concluding sentence is Cerald Ford, who was an FBI informant on secret 
Commission matters, according to FBI records I obtained in C.A. 77-2155.) 
19. Twelve days earlier, according to FBI cable No. 214 from its Mexico 
City Office (file 105-82555-242), Alvarado, who made up this story to get the 
United States to attack Cuba, was to be deported the next morning. TJhe cable 
concludes, “CIA HERE ADVISED..." 
20. About Owen’s “most disturbing" question (Paragraph 3), “whether Lee 
Harvey Oswald was a Soviet agent," the CIA knew better and its records say other- 
wise. One, of the time prior to Nosenko's defection and reporting of the Russian 
belief that Oswald wa9 an American agent, i3 CIA Document Number 376-154 (Exhibit 
2). The CIA released this before shutting down all compliance. It debupks any 
Soviet involvement in the assassination. 
21. Parenthetically, I note that this CIA disclosure also holds the kind 
of information Owen now claims, in Paragraph 5 and elsewhere, must withheld 
in the interest of national security, wha^the CIA knew about Soviet intelligence. 
22. Each of the six numbered sections of this record dated December 11, 
1963, states the opposite of what Owen now states. The first section says that 
. .V fh <r 
the definitive FBI reports ordered by the President 
f -ic/ / 
f 11/ * if 4 r * 
chat “Oswald was the agent of any foreign government." The second states that 
what is known of Oswald is contrary to what is known of the KGB's practice, thate President 
f -ic/ / 
f 11/ * if 4 r * 
chat “Oswald was the agent of any foreign government." The second states that 
what is known of Oswald is contrary to what is known of the KGB's practice, that

--- PAGE BREAK ---/ 
f 11/ * if 4 r * 
chat “Oswald was the agent of any foreign government." The second states that 
what is known of Oswald is contrary to what is known of the KGB's practice, that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Long standing KGB practice generally forbids" what Oswald is known to have done, 
including when he mode contact with the American Communist Party and Soviet 
embassies. The third begins, "Certain facets of Oswald’s activities in the USSR 
also argue strongly that the KGB would never have recruited him for a mission of 
any kind... As a re-defector from the USSR he would immediately be suspect ..." 
The fourth rules out Oswald as the kind of person the USSR would have used in any 
"executive action" or assassination. (Interestingly, the concluding sentence 
confirms in advance what Yuri Nosenko later id the KGB concluded about Oswald: 
"Even if the KCB had not earlier noted signs of mental aberration, the suicide 
try presumably furnished convincing evidence that Oswald was not agent material.") 
The fifth cites Oswald's activities in Dallas prior to the assassination "as one 
more negative indication of KGB involvement." It also states of this that "It is, 
of course, most unlikely that a KGB agent on on executive action mission would be 
permitted (or would permit himself) to" behave publicly as Oswald was reported to 
have behaved - attracting considerable attention to himself by bad conduct on a 
shooting range. Six begins, "The evidence presently available to us seems fairly 
conclusively to rule out any Soviet involvement in the President's assassination." 
None of this information was ever refuted. Most of it is axiomatic in the craft 
of intelligence, (Another axiom is that the intelligence agencies do not assassi- 
nate agents of hostile agencies or the heads of other states for to do so is to 
start an endless, self-defeating bloodbath. One of the few exceptions is the CIA, 
which plotted to kill Castro and other heads of state.) 
23. Subsection 6.c is another of the many troubling indications cited 
below that suggest Oswald was not alone and may have had unknown domestic connec- 
tions. It notes accurately that sometimes Oswald misspelled and was ungrammatical 
while at other times he was "rather surprisingly literate." Where he was so 
"surprisingly literate" is in letters later used to pin a red .label on him, his 
efforts that are consistent with what is known in intelligence as, establishing 
a cover. 
24. Throughout, the Owen affidavit is skilled in its Orwellian practice. 
In Paragraph 4 it takes doctrine from "Through the Looking Glass," in Alice In 
Wonderland. It begins misleadl ingly’: "In February of 1964 Yuriy Nosenko 
defected to American intelligence." Actually, Nosenko went to the CIA, notine from "Through the Looking Glass," in Alice In 
Wonderland. It begins misleadl ingly’: "In February of 1964 Yuriy Nosenko 
defected to American intelligence." Actually, Nosenko went to the CIA, not

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Looking Glass," in Alice In 
Wonderland. It begins misleadl ingly’: "In February of 1964 Yuriy Nosenko 
defected to American intelligence." Actually, Nosenko went to the CIA, not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"American intelligence," earlier. Records disclosed by the CIA establish this 
was the preceding month. (For example, see CIA Document 498, Exhibit 5.) Then 
Owen slates, "Among other tilings, lie indicated lie possessed information about 
Lee Harvey Oswald's contacts with the KGB while Oswald was in the Soviet Union." 
This is essential to Owen's and the CIA's present purposes and therefore is 
stated. But it is contrary to fact, to what the FBI reports say and to what the 
CIA itself gave as a basis for its long abuse and illegal captivity of Nosenko, 
Nosenko's statement that the KGB made no contact with Oswald, considering him 
unstable. John L. Hart's testimony for the CIA to the House Select Committee on 
Assassinations (the committee) is quite explicit on this. Hart, too, found it 
hard to believe chat the KGB made no contact with Oswald. 
25. These formulations also serve to obscure the CIA's real problem with 
what Nosenko said. This is stated in my prior affidavits and is undenied - the 
Russiuns suspected that Oswald was an American "agent in place." This pointed 
at che CIA, although not it alone, but it did not point at the FBI. 
26. The Nosenko or June 23 Commission transcript holds no indication that 
che Commission Members were informed of this by the CIA. 
27. "As Nosenko was debriefed," the Owen revision of actuality continues, 
"it became clear that Oswald was not an agent of the KGB/ Owen is careful not 
to say when "it became clear." This is because it "became clear" enough prior 
to the CIA's writing of Exhibit 2, which is dated 1963, or some weeks 
before Nosenko defected. 
28. Ignoring Exhibit 2 and an abundance of other records and proofs, Owen's 
newest and long-delayed explanation of alleged need to withhold continues with 
"The problem then became one of establishing Nosenko's bona fides. If Mr. Nosenko 
could be proven to be honest and his information to be believable, it would be 
possible to conclude" what had already been concluded, "that Oswald had no connec- 
tion with the Soviet KCB and that the Soviet Union had nothing to do with President 
Kennedy's death." Otherwise, Owen states, it would mean that Nosenko was "pro- 
grammed by the KCB to provide false information to establish the 'innocent' 
nature of Oswald's" nonexisting "contacts with the KGB." And horror of horrors, 
thus "it would have been possible to conclude that Oswald may have been an agent 
of the KGB when he shot President Kennedy." 
29. All of these fictions, all of these "possible" conclusions thators, 
thus "it would have been possible to conclude that Oswald may have been an agent 
of the KGB when he shot President Kennedy." 
29. All of these fictions, all of these "possible" conclusions that

--- PAGE BREAK ---have been possible to conclude that Oswald may have been an agent 
of the KGB when he shot President Kennedy." 
29. All of these fictions, all of these "possible" conclusions that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

disregard and are contrary to the official conclusions already reached and 
published on exactly those points, are essential to the newest of these constantly 
cluing flip, CTA t*x< mien for I lie* linjuiit I fitibln withholding: "Establishing Nosenko*s 
bona fides was a critical element in making any judgment on the possibility of 
Soviet involvement in President Kennedy’s death.” 
30. Owen's conjectures are neither logical nor reasonable. If Nosenko 
were not being "honest,” there could be other explanations. Those provided by 
Mart include the physical and emotional consequences of the severe punishment and 
the exceptional strain of three years of isolation in a vault, broken only by 
interrogations and efforts to break Nosenko down. Moreover, there was no need 
for the Soviet Union to "program" Nosenko with "false information" and dispatch 
him "to establish the 'innocent' nature of Oswald's contacts with the KGB” or to 
leud this country to believe that the KGB had no connection with the assassination 
once the official conclusions stating this were published. This was on and after 
December 5, 1963. 
31. Even if relevant to the continued withholding of the transcripts, as 
it is not, "establishing Nosenko's bona fides,” Owen's formulation, was no great 
problem. If he provided valuable information that was hurtful to the KGB and 
I 
helpful to the United States, he was bona fide. 
32. He exposed a number of KGB agents and operators, which is hurtful to 
the USSR and helpful to the CIA. He also "pinpointed the location of forty-four 
microphones built into the walls of the American Embassy (in Moscow) when it' was 
constructed in 1952. They were outfitted with covers that shielded them from 
electronic sweeps...” (quoted from John Barron's book, KGB, for which both the 
CIA and the FBI provided information.) Hart's testimony on behalf of the CIA 
confirmed this. The importance and value of such information cannot be exaggerated, 
nor can the harm it did to the KGB's anti-American intelligence gathering. Even 
if it had been assumed for 12 years that the building was bugged, until Nosenko 
'pinpointed the location" of these 44 bugs, nobody knew what parts of the embassy 
were bugged and what were not. Knowing rather chan merely suspecting the bugging 
also was important information. 
8'pinpointed the location" of these 44 bugs, nobody knew what parts of the embassy 
were bugged and what were not. Knowing rather chan merely suspecting the bugging 
also was important information. 
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---ation" of these 44 bugs, nobody knew what parts of the embassy 
were bugged and what were not. Knowing rather chan merely suspecting the bugging 
also was important information. 
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

33. Nosenko's subsequent career as a well-paid CIA consultant, lecturer 
and text writer on intelligence leaves no doubt about his bona Tides. Only those 
who had motive lor destroying him - and literally planned to do it - could believe 
the irrational and unbelievable, what Owen conjectures and Hart testified was 
without foundation. 
34. The method by which the CIA undertook to establish Nosenko's "bona 
fides” - torture and unprecedented abuse according to Hart but."model" treatment 
according to the CIA s affidavits in this instant cause — is the one way guaranteed 
not to accomplish that end. On its part the Fill had no doubts about Nosenko's 
bona fides. Otherwise, as my uncontested prior affidavits state, it would not 
have arranged for him to testify before the Commission without consulting either 
the Commission or the CIA. 
35. Owen's dissertation on "establishing the bona fides of a defector," 
his Paragraph 5, acknowledges that this can be accomplished by "independent 
verification of a substantial portion of the intelligence information received 
I I 
from ihe defector." Instead of stating whether or not the CIA was able to do 
this, as it was ^nd did, Owen goes into but a single means, CIA agents inside the 
hostile service. He implies there are no other means. He describes verification 
* 
capability as "normally a well-guarded secret, since public acknowledgment usually 
prompts hostile action to negate such sources." His big point is that "the public 
acknowledgment of u lack of such capabilities can be very effectively used against 
an intelligence service by hostile foreign intelligence services." Carried away 
by his mixture of irrelevant truth and untruth, Owen reaches the newest excuse 
l0r withholding the transcripts: "... when the defector is an intelligence officer 
(and) the independent verification requires other sources knowledgeable of the 
daily, inner workings of the defector's intelligence service." Owen leaves no 
doubt that he really means only CIA agents inside the KCB with "acknowledgment of 
the CIA's ability to provide independent verification of information received from 
a KGB defector would establish the likelihood that the CIA had sources inside the 
KCB." And such a CIA agent inside the KCB, without whom no verification of flosenko 
would be possible, had to be of high rank, able to "influence KGB intelligence 
activities." 
9sources inside the 
KCB." And such a CIA agent inside the KCB, without whom no verification of flosenko 
would be possible, had to be of high rank, able to "influence KGB intelligence 
activities." 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---KCB." And such a CIA agent inside the KCB, without whom no verification of flosenko 
would be possible, had to be of high rank, able to "influence KGB intelligence 
activities." 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36. All of this typifies CIA efforts to intimidate the courts. Without 
doubt, the CIA is expert in intelligence matters. The courts, like all concerned 
AUMTicUII8, do I’IIH* about pccueiv ing t-UHcnLial intelligence functions and do tend 
to accept CIA representations. Few people outside of agencies like the CIA 
understand the actualities of intelligence or have specific knowledge of the 
matters in question. In this particular case the CIA representations are untrue. 
It can be and in the Nosenko matter it was simple to establish his bona fides by 
"independent verification" and this did not require any CIA agents inside the KGB. 
If Nosenko did provide valuable information not previously known, what is regarded 
as other than "throw away" information, his bona fides were established. The two 
matters cited above, identification of active KCB agents and operations and of 
the 44 bugs in the Moscow embassy, where "independent verification" required ' 
American, not KCB, probing of the embassy wallB, are more than enough to establish 
Nosenko's bona fides. 
37. With’regard to the alleged question of Nosenko's bona fides, it should 
be remembered that the conjectured purpose of dispatching Nosenko as a KCB disin- 
formation operatpr in the investigation of the President's assassination did not 
exist. It is a CIA-manufactured fiction. 
I| 38. Owen then seeks to terrify the Court again with still another horror 
that, even if it were true, has no applicability in this case, that "if it became 
clear to the KCB that the CIA lacked the means of independently verifying certain 
information about the KGB," whatever "certain" may mean, "it might mean that the 
CIA had no source inside the KCB which could in turn signify that the CIA had no 
way of knowing about any KGB agents operating inside of the CIA ..." 
39. Taking the last part first, there was, after this case was in court 
and prior to the Owen affidavit, intense public discussion of just this, whether 
the KGB had penetrated the CIA. CIA people were on both sides. The debate centered 
around former Director William Colby and his efforts to cleanse th$ CIA. There 
was the suspicion that James Jesus Angleton, long-time head of counter-intelligence, 
was such a KGB "mole" because his activities were construged as wrecking. There 
is also the information provided by the CIA and the FBI to Edward J. Epstein, 
10g-time head of counter-intelligence, 
was such a KGB "mole" because his activities were construged as wrecking. There 
is also the information provided by the CIA and the FBI to Edward J. Epstein, 
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---er-intelligence, 
was such a KGB "mole" because his activities were construged as wrecking. There 
is also the information provided by the CIA and the FBI to Edward J. Epstein, 
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

detailed in my prior affidavits and not refuted. Epstein then identified such 
a KGB "mole" by the code-name "Fedora," with enough description to make his 
ith'iiC i ficut ion by Hu* KGB milmiuilic. (Angletoii is one of those who raised phony 
questions about Nosenko's bona fides.* The alleged doubts resulted in the long 
abuse and illegal captivity of Nosenko and denied the CIA the dependable use of 
some of his information and his services which the CIA has since found so 
valuable. Angleton was an F.pstein source. Whether or not related, immediately 
after Epstein's "Fedora" disclosure, Arkady N. Shevchenko, highest ranking Russian 
on the United Nations staff, was first ordered home and then defected to the 
United States. The lurid details of the CIA's financing of his extravagant life 
thereafter, including an expensive call girl, have been on the front pages and 
are in a book by that woman. 
AO. Moreover, it does not require a "source inside the KGB" to know of 
"KCB agents working inside of the CIA." There are other means of making the 
determination. In the recent case of the convicted former CIA man, William P. 
Kampiles, there was no "source inside the KGB" to identify him. Internationally, 
there are many similar illustrations. 
Al. Because "independent verification" of Nosenko did not require a 
"source inside t|ie KCB," the KGB would not assume either of Owen's alternative 
postulates, that-acknowledged confirmation of Nosenko meant the CIA had penetrated 
the KCB or that acknowledged failure to make independent confirmation meant that 
the CIA had not penetrated the KCB. The tpost obvious additional disproof of the 
first postulate is that it was done without aid from any CIA agent inside the 
KCB, according to the CIA's own testimony, given by Hart. The most obvious of 
the disproofs of the alternative postulate is that it was contemporaneously admitted 
that the CIA did not immediately make verification. With the CIA's approval, 
the 196A Warren Report says this. 
A2. Along with his claim that to establish Nosenko's bona fides the CIA 
required sources within the KCB, Owen also alleges in Paragraph 6 and thereafter 
a CIA inability to conduct investigations inside the Soviet Union. He qualifies 
this in Paragraph 7, where he cites Hart as authority for saying the CIA "did 
11lleges in Paragraph 6 and thereafter 
a CIA inability to conduct investigations inside the Soviet Union. He qualifies 
this in Paragraph 7, where he cites Hart as authority for saying the CIA "did 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---6 and thereafter 
a CIA inability to conduct investigations inside the Soviet Union. He qualifies 
this in Paragraph 7, where he cites Hart as authority for saying the CIA "did 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not have any assets capable of making an investigation within the Soviet Union." 
This is not the same as saying that the CIA had no "assets" or "capabilities" 
within flu* USSR. 
43. The most obvious additional proof of Owen's wrongful intent in all 
of this, his allegations beginning in Paragraph 5, is the fact that the CIA and 
the FBI disclosed records holding the identical information Owen now swears to 
this Court had to be withheld. Owen's new allegations supposedly account for 
Lhe withholding of the transcripts until the day the government's brief was due 
at the appeals court. The exhibits I provide in disproof of these Owen allega- 
tions were provided to me by the FBI and by CIA before it suspended all compliance 
with my FOIA requests more than two years ago, which was prior to Hart's testimony. 
44. In addition, much such information was provided to the Warren Commission 
and was disclosed by the defendant with the CIA's approval. One of these records, 
of 111 pages, is titled "Oswald's Foreign Activities." This is precisely what 
Owen and the CIA now claim it could not investigate. It is the kind of information 
Owen now claims had to be withheld lest the nation's security be endangered.. 
These records, long readily available to the public, abound in citations of the 
CIA and in confirmation of whut Nosenko said. 
45. Although Owen represents that the CIA had no "assets" inside the: 
Soviet Union, the consular official to whom Oswald pretended to renounce his 
citizenship - while being careful to preserve it - was Richard Snyder. Snyder 
ft 
is acknowledged to have been a CIA man. The Embassy doctor, who met with Oswald 
and gave Oswald his mother's name and United States address, also was an intelli- 
gence operative. He was involved in the Penkovsky case and trial. He serviced 
Colonel Oleg Penkovsky's "drops." The executed Penkovsky was an extraordinarily 
valuable CIA asset. 
46. Exhibit 3, CIA Document 151-60, discloses the CIA's ability to check 
"landing cards and hotel registers." Unnecessary withholdings make it impossible 
to pinpoint Che country of origin, but if it was Finland then the fact of CIA 
operations and investigations there was published by the Warren Commission. 
Publication includes the CIA's check of landing cards and hotel registers there. 
12f it was Finland then the fact of CIA 
operations and investigations there was published by the Warren Commission. 
Publication includes the CIA's check of landing cards and hotel registers there. 
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the fact of CIA 
operations and investigations there was published by the Warren Commission. 
Publication includes the CIA's check of landing cards and hotel registers there. 
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'k-J 
The CIA also conducted USSR investigations relating to Oswald from there. 
Exhibit 3 also indicates the opposite of reason for the CIA to suspect Soviet 
iiivulvt’tiuMit in flu* iiHiuiHuinut i«m. 
47. Another Soviet source is used in Exhibit 4, CIA Document 350-140. 
The CIA's source, identification withheld, met with "SOVIET EMB. REP.," which is 
substituted for identification. The information confirms Nosenko, "SOVIET SAID 
ACT INCOMPREHENSIBLE BECAUSE COULD NOT EFFECT CHANGE IN U.S., ESPECIALLY FOREIGN 
POLICY..." It states that "OSWALD'S STAY RUSSIA HAD NO BEARING ON CRIME BECAUSE 
OF CP DIRECTIVE SINCE TIME OF LENIN CONSIDERED OPPRESSION OPPONENTS ONLY DAMAGING 
COMMUNIST MOVEMENT." Meager as is this information, it could enable the KGB to 
identify the CIA's source. This disclosed record, which confirms some of what 
Nosenko said, that foreigners could work inside the USSR, illustrates that the 
CIA did not require agents inside the KGB for independent verification. 
48. Exhibit 5, CIA Document 498, is one of the earliest records relating 
to the assassination disclosed by the CIA. The subject includes Nosenko's name. 
The record itself discloses that he was "queried on the OSWALD affair on 23 
(> 
January 1974." This is earlier than Owen acknowledges in his Paragraph 4. 
Exhibit 5 is the CIA's response to an FBI "memorandum ... in which you requested 
information which would tend to corroborate or disprove NOSENKO's information 
concerning Lee Harvey OSWALD." This is precisely what Owen swears to this Court 
could not be disclosed. However, the CIA did not try to con the FBI. In fact, 
. t 
it did not even pother to classify the record. Contrary to the Owen affirmation, 
that national security required secrecy for 15 years, until the CIA had domestic 
i 
political need to dispense with some of its false pretenses, its 1964 answer at 
the bottom of page 3 states explicitly what Owen swears could not be.disclosed: 
"This agency lias no information that would specifically corroborate or disprove 
NOSENKO's statements regarding Lee Harvey OSWALD." 
49. There is much information about which Nosenko was asked other chan 
"regarding" Oswald. This had to do with what Oswald could and could not do within 
the USSR, applicable Soviet law, regulations, custom and practice and the manner 
of their observance, treatment of people like Oswald and much else. That the CIA 
13ld could and could not do within 
the USSR, applicable Soviet law, regulations, custom and practice and the manner 
of their observance, treatment of people like Oswald and much else. That the CIA 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---ot do within 
the USSR, applicable Soviet law, regulations, custom and practice and the manner 
of their observance, treatment of people like Oswald and much else. That the CIA 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

did confirm Nosenko in these areas is reflected in readily available Warren 
Commission records. However, most of the information Nosenko provided, many 
Itundrtuls of pag»M» of it in the CIA's files, had nothiug to do with Oswald or the 
assassination. 
50. There is similar revelation of what Owen states could not be disclosed 
in the CIA's partial but nonetheless fairly extensive releases of its questioning 
of Nosenko and the responses he made. Any informed intelligence agency could 
easily interpret these many pages, like those attached as Exhibit 6.titled 
"QUESTIONS FOR NOSENKO." This discloses to a subject expert less than it would 
have disclosed to the KGB, but it leaves little doubt that the CIA had a mindset 
and bad information. It also reflects the CIA preconception that Nosenko lied 
or a determination to lead him to say that he lied to the FBI, whose released 
records I have and have studied. An intelligence analyst's study of this released 
record, particularly along with those of the FBI, would disclose precisely what 
Owen pretends the CIA was trying not to disclose by withholding the transcripts 
in question. * 
51. If the KGB had the interest, as Owen pretends, and if it did not 
obtain the CIA's releases, it could have gotten the CIA's questions from Edward 
Jay Epstein's book, Legend, pages 357 ff. 
52. The CIA's draft of questions to be addressed to the Soviet Government 
(CIA Document 489-196A, Exhibit 7) contains the same kind of disclosures. Even 
more, these questions were guaranteed to be counter-productive. This may not be 
apparent to nonexperts, but the State Department and the Commission staff perceived 
this immediately. 
53. In June of 1978 the CIA disclosed a copy of the Commission's February 
1964 internal memo on this as CIA Document 513-199B. (Page 1 only attached as 
Exhibit 8) 
54. Contrary to the Owen representation that the Soviet Government was 
suspected of complicity in the assassination, the Commission recommendation was 
that it be told that Oswald was a neurotic loner and he and the assassination 
were "not connected with the Russian Government." 
55. Of the CIA's draft the memorandum begins with: 
14mmendation was 
that it be told that Oswald was a neurotic loner and he and the assassination 
were "not connected with the Russian Government." 
55. Of the CIA's draft the memorandum begins with: 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---it be told that Oswald was a neurotic loner and he and the assassination 
were "not connected with the Russian Government." 
55. Of the CIA's draft the memorandum begins with: 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ScuCe Department feels that the CIA draft carries an inference 
that we suspect that Oswald might have been an agent for the Soviet 
Government and that we are asking the Russian Government to document 
our suspicions. The State Department feels that the Russian Govern- 
ing n I will nut answer a lrflrr of Littu kind, at least not truthfully, 
and that it will also do positive harm in that they will take 
offense at our sending it to them. 
56. Why the sophisticated CIA would undertake to turn off any cooperation 
from the Soviet Government is one of many perplexing aspects of all of this, 
particularly of the CIA’s continuing withholdings and its continuing refusal to 
comply with my information requests after many years. Despite the Owen repre- 
sentations, of alleged disclosures because of review and declassification for 
the House committee, my Nosenko requests, which date to 1975, remain without 
compliance. The appeals are not acted on, not even responded to. There has been 
no satisfactory explanation for the name of the embassy officer who service 
Penkovsky's intelligence information "drops" appearing in Oswald's address book. 
Another troubling fact is the CIA's inability to show that Oswald could have 
reached Helsinki on his way to Moscow by the time he did if he had used any 
known commercial carrier, as my previous affidavits show. I cite these among 
/ 
a number of such troubling considerations because they can bear on motive for 
this latest in a series of palpably unfaithful CIA representations to this Court. 
57. Owen totully ignored the 10 pages of the January 21 transcript and 
all the information relating^to it provided in my prior affidavits until compelled 
to justify that withholding. He still ignores all I stated about it. He does not 
attempt to refute it because he cannot. From what Owen says of this transcript, 
it cannot be recognized. He 9ays that it "reveals a discussion of the problems 
of how to verify information concerning activities in the Soviet Union related to 
Lee Harvey Oswald's personal experiences as a defector." Such information was 
disclosed, long before the transcript was denied, in the agendas of the executive 
sessions, which the defendant made available to me and to others. Owen says that 
"It is clear that CIA representatives had briefed the Commission staff on the 
Agency'8 capabilities." This is a large exaggeration. There is reference only 
to consultation with the two defectors and then only to consulting them "in 
drafting questions to be put to the Soviet government and in reviewing the 
14/1rge exaggeration. There is reference only 
to consultation with the two defectors and then only to consulting them "in 
drafting questions to be put to the Soviet government and in reviewing the 
14/1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere is reference only 
to consultation with the two defectors and then only to consulting them "in 
drafting questions to be put to the Soviet government and in reviewing the 
14/1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

documents (sic) written by Oswald." It is obvious that the CIA had many other 
capabilities. 
58. Owen does not state that nothing is reasonably segregable. This is 
because, even if all he suggests were true, which it is not, then most of the 
transcript would still be reasonably segregable. 
59. The Oswald "documents," his writings, were all in the public domain 
long before this transcript was withheld. The Commission published them in 
facsimile. That they were examined by the various executive agencies, including 
for codes, also was disclosed by the Commission. That they were unclassified is 
in the transcript itself. 
60. Because he cannot, even at this late date, contrive any other expla- 
nation for the unjustifiable withholding, Owen claims the transcript discloses a 
secret about these defectors, "the status of their relationship with the CIA and 
the manner in which they were proposed for use in support of the Warren Commission." 
This, he states, "suggested a great deal about the level of confidence the CIA 
had in those defectors." 
61. This, obviously, is not true. The CIA, the State Department and/or 
the Commission could have ignored any and all suggestions made by the defectors 
in their "support," recommending questions to be asked of the Soviet Government. 
62. Likewise it is not true that "Conversely, the fact that no other 
intelligence capabilities were discussed to support the same" unspecified 
"objectives of the Commission suggested strongly that other assets (sic) were 
either not available or not considered appropriate or reliable." This is an 
invention that has no basis. The Commission's agenda was disclosed and this part 
of the transcript is limited to whether the Commission wanted the CIA to consult 
these two defectors for suggestions on the questions to be asked, no more. The 
absence of Commission, not CIA, reference to other "capabilities" or "assets"-is 
enrirely immaterial to whether or not the CIA had others, ae it did in any event. 
63. However, still without naming them, as I have from what is in the 
public domain, Owen now does admit that "The fact that two officers had defected 
from the KGB was obviously not a secret to the Soviet RGB.
1* In this he admits 
that the withholding served no national security end. 
15now does admit that "The fact that two officers had defected 
from the KGB was obviously not a secret to the Soviet RGB.
1* In this he admits 
that the withholding served no national security end. 
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---"The fact that two officers had defected 
from the KGB was obviously not a secret to the Soviet RGB.
1* In this he admits 
that the withholding served no national security end. 
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64. Owen does noc show how anything would have been disclosed by not 
withholding the transcript. He seeks to suggest it with the characteristic 
overblown generalttie* of the intelligence agencies, which would stamp a recipe 
for chicken soup "secret." There would not have been any disclosure of "the 
status of their relationship with the CIA." 
65. Consulting these two did not disclose the "level of confidence" 
imparted because their suggestions could have been ignored and because it is an 
obvious assumption that, once they defected to the CIA, it would ask them questions 
based on their knowledge and prior experiences. 
66. However, because Owen raises these false questions, I address them 
with what had been disclosed, particularly by the CIA, while it withheld the 
transcript. This is to show that Owen's representations are spurious and that 
the CIA knew them to be spurious. 
67. The nitty-gritty, Lhe questions to be asked of the USSR, in part is 
addressed in preceding paragraphs of this affidavit. Long ago the CIA itself 
disclosed two different copies of proposed questions from one of these defectors. 
The CIA typed and then retyped this memorandum, practicing different withholdings 
on the two versions and by this inconsistency demonstrating that it practices 
unjustifiable withholdings. CIA Document 413-76A consists of a copy of a carbon 
copy of one version, with a covering memo from which the dace was first removed 
and then added by hand, "16 Dec 63." At the top of the first page of the 
defector's memo, after "Subject," ull identification of the one who provided the 
"Comments on President Kennedy's Aasasainatiori'is withheld. (These two pages are 
attached as Exhibit 9.) Nothing else remains in the heading. But in the other 
and clearer copy released by the CIA, from which in xeroxing the document number 
was eliminated, the date of November 27, 1963, not 16 Dec 63, remains and "Soviet 
Defector" is written in near the obliteration of the name. The CIA's stamp reflects 
its FOIA disclosure in May 1976. (This copy is attached as Exhibit 10.) 
68. Because of Che time gap between the two defections, although the CIA 
withholds the name from what it released, it nonetheless identifies this particular 
defector by giving the time of his defection. The KGB, obviously, knew when each 
16defections, although the CIA 
withholds the name from what it released, it nonetheless identifies this particular 
defector by giving the time of his defection. The KGB, obviously, knew when each 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---h the CIA 
withholds the name from what it released, it nonetheless identifies this particular 
defector by giving the time of his defection. The KGB, obviously, knew when each 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

defected. This one is Petr S. Derjabin (the FBI's spelling). 
69. It cannot be claimed in late 1979 that there had to be withholding to 
kci’p secret tlu* "level of confidence" or luck of it that was reposed in Derjabin 
when the CIA had already disclosed this by having him translate the published 
Penkovsky Papers, about which, over hi6 name, Derjabin boasted in a letter to 
the editor of the Washington Post of November 19, 1965. (Derjabin also published 
two books, The Secret World in 1959 and Watchdogs of Terror in 1972.) Other ways 
in which his identification and career were public, including by Congressional 
testimony, are set forth in my earlier affidavits in this instant cause. That 
the CIA used Derjabin to translate the Penkovsky papers and permitted him to 
testify to a Congressional committee reflects the CIA's "level of confidence" 
in him. 
70. The covering memo in Exhibit 9 includes the disclosure of what Owen 
claims had to be kept secret, "We have decided to pass on his views without 
editing, und this Agency docs not specifically endorse his conclusions or 
recommendations." 
71. That the CIA retyped and also distributed the memo does not suggest 
any lack of confidence or any belief that Derjabin's comments are worthless. 
It a|so does not suggest any lack of confidence in Derjabin when the CIA proposed 
to the Commission that questions be asked of the Soviet Government after it 
received Derjabin's November 27, 1963, recommendation Chat "the Soviet Government 
... should be requested to furnish information" about Oswald in the Soviet Union, 
followed by indication of the information to be sought. (Interestingly enough, 
Derjabin postulated precisely what Nosenko later said, that Oswald "was considered 
unstable" by the KGB and that he was "allowed to leave the Soviet Union as an 
undesirable.") 
72. For the most part Derjabin's memo is paranoidal and inaccurate. It 
reflects a strong bias and personal prejudices. Civing credence to Derjabin 
discloses much about "the level of confidence" chat can be vested in the CIA 
itself. 
73. Beginning long before my first request for the withheld records, 
Derjabin's identification and past were public domain. Long before this instant 
cause was filed, the FBI disclosed records in the Warren Commission files relating 
to him without withholding his identification. Some disclose that, the FBI imposed 
a zero level of confidence in him. On£ FBI record, compared with Exhibits 9 and 
nWarren Commission files relating 
to him without withholding his identification. Some disclose that, the FBI imposed 
a zero level of confidence in him. On£ FBI record, compared with Exhibits 9 and 
n

--- PAGE BREAK ---les relating 
to him without withholding his identification. Some disclose that, the FBI imposed 
a zero level of confidence in him. On£ FBI record, compared with Exhibits 9 and 
n

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10, adds justification of the Fill's opinion. 
74. In the FBI headquarters "Oswald" file, 105-82555, there is a long 
n»porr by tin* Wmiliington Fii*l«l Office, Serial 1079. I attach as Exhibit 11 the 
cover page, which discloses that the record was never classified, and page 41, 
which refers to an interview with Derjabin on November 26, 1963. Thia is the day 
before the date on his CIA memo. 
75. The FBI reported that "DERJABIN does not believe the Soviet Government 
had any knowledge of OSWALD'S plan to assassinate President KENNEDY." However, 
his next day's memo to the CIA states the opposite, that Oswald "was specifically 
dispatched to murder our President." 
76. This discloses more than "the level of confidence" that could be 
vested in Derjabin. That the CIA did not convey this to the Commission also 
discloses much about the "level of confidence" that can be placed in the CIA and 
in any representation it makes regarding the withholding of the transcript. The 
transcript dues nut disclose this serious question about "the level of confidence" 
the Commission could safely have had in Derjabin or in the CIA that proposed 
consulting him about questions to be asked of the Soviet Government. 
77. In my| prior affidavits, from what was within the public domain, I 
identified the other KCB defector as Anatoly M. Golitsin. Owen still does not 
provide identification to the Court. However, what Owen withholds from this 
Court in late 1979 the CIA did not withhold in May 1976, for on the second page 
of the Derjabin jnemo he refers to "GOLITSIN's defection." Thia also discloses 
"the level of confidence" that can be placed in the Owen affidavit and any other 
CIA representations having to do with withholding attributed to "national 
security." 
78. In Paragraph 6 Owen also seeks to convey the false notion that these 
two defectors were the only meuns available "to verify information concerning 
activities in the Soviet Union related to Lee Harvey Oswald's personal experiences 
as a defector." He states that the CIA "briefed the Commission staff on the 
Agency's capabilities" and proposed only to use these two defectors as consultants 
on the questions and in reviewing Oswald's largely anti-Soviet writings. He 
states also that "the fact that no other intelligence capabilities were discussed"use these two defectors as consultants 
on the questions and in reviewing Oswald's largely anti-Soviet writings. He 
states also that "the fact that no other intelligence capabilities were discussed"

--- PAGE BREAK ---tors as consultants 
on the questions and in reviewing Oswald's largely anti-Soviet writings. He 
states also that "the fact that no other intelligence capabilities were discussed"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by the Commission, not the CIA, “suggested strongly that other assets were either 
not available or not considered appropriate or reliable." This is a deception. 
IVspict* Ow4*n1 a gmiTiilil ii*n mut vagueness, il is not true. 
79. Anyone who has examined the disclosed records of the Warren Commission 
at the Archives knows very well that the CIA had and used many other means of 
verification and of obtaining and providing information relating to Oswald and 
the USSR. To reflect this I attach as Exhibit 12 an early CIA record of the extent 
to which, contrary to Owen's representations, the CIA was able to render services 
and provide information to the Warren Commission. This record, CIA Document 647- 
824, is dated April 8, 1964. It states that as of that early date the CIA had 
“prepared and forwarded" to the Commission a large number of papers and other 
intelligence materials. This is one of many records showing the CIA was able to 
do more than talk to two defectors. 
80. This record also indicates that the CIA had many means of establishing 
Nosenko4s bona fides other than by access to KC11 records and particularly as it 
related to Oswald's life and treatment in the USSR. 
81. In Paragraph 7 Owen forgets that in his earlier affidavit, in which 
he could have alleged what he does in this one, he was content to attach merely 
the beginning of an unofficial transcript of Hart's testimony before the House 
committee. Now he cites books and pages. But at no point does he state that 
Hart's testimony related in any way to the Commission's Nosenko or June 23 
transcript. It does not, as without contradiction my prior affidavit states. 
Owen's references to classified materials and their alleged declassification are 
entirely irrelevant. He makes no effort to show any relevance. 
82. Similarly, he here refers to the January 21 transcript by quoting 
Hart on the intimidating but irrelevant, that the CIA “did not have any assets 
capable of making an investigation within the Soviet Union." (emphasis added) 
No such question exists. It is not germane to the transcript or any of its content, 
which deals with whether or not the two defectors would be consulted in the 
preparation of questions to be sent to the Soviet Covemment, not investigating 
in the Soviet- Union. There thus also is no relevance, except as another CIA 
19wo defectors would be consulted in the 
preparation of questions to be sent to the Soviet Covemment, not investigating 
in the Soviet- Union. There thus also is no relevance, except as another CIA 
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---e consulted in the 
preparation of questions to be sent to the Soviet Covemment, not investigating 
in the Soviet- Union. There thus also is no relevance, except as another CIA 
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

attempt to frighten this Court, in "public acknowledgement of CIA's limitation: 
on intelligence activities in the Soviet Union in 1964 could still, in 1978, be 
iiard by the Soviet KC5 to the cHsmlvontage of the CIA and in a manner in which 
identifiable damage could result." 
83. Magically, this hazard has since vaporized, ostensibly because of 
the political necessity posed by the Congressional investigation." Within my 
experience political necessity" is a new protection against hazard to national 
security. 
84. Obviously, this is another false pretense. If the committee's 
inspection did not reveal that the transcripts were improperly classified, they 
would still be classified, as is much else made available to the committee. 
85. At the time in question the CIA's "limitations" were not nearly as 
great in the Soviet Union as Owen would have believed. When the CIA had other 
"political necessity," it was disclosed that the top Soviet leaders had been bugged 
in Moscow, even when they were driving around, and their conversations were 
recorded. It also obtained a copy of Khrushchev's secret denunciation of Stalin, 
the entire lengthy text. 
86. Among defectors, the CIA was not limited to these two former KGB 
officers, as Owen represents. Another is the former Soviet naval officer who 
took the name Nicholas Shadrin when he defected in 1959. Shadrin disappeared in 
Europe while serving as an American agent. (Contrary to the CIA's representations 
relating to its treatment of defectors, Nosenko in particular, retired CIA Deputy 
Director, Dr. Kay Cline, is quoted in the Washington Post of December 9, 1975, as 
saying that "After ... what happened to Nosenko and Shadrin we may have trouble 
encouraging other defectors." Shadrin's wife - or widow - is quoted in the same 
article as saying, "The Swedes warned us not to come to the U.S. They use you 
and dump you.") 
87. On his initiative and after several phone calls to me, one claiming 
a KCR background and CIA connection met with me in a public place in February 1975. 
He had a pathological hatred of Nosenko and resented very much that Nosenko was 
trusted by the'CIA. He also disclosed that other defectors were employed in the 
20n a public place in February 1975. 
He had a pathological hatred of Nosenko and resented very much that Nosenko was 
trusted by the'CIA. He also disclosed that other defectors were employed in the 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---February 1975. 
He had a pathological hatred of Nosenko and resented very much that Nosenko was 
trusted by the'CIA. He also disclosed that other defectors were employed in the 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Washington area. He identified one as working as a translator for the National 
Institutes of Health. I know of no way in which this man could have known of 
my inrerear in Noarttko except from HOIIIO official source and of no way any official 
source could have known other chan by eavesdropping because this was prior to my 
first request of any agency for any Noaenko information. This man, who used the 
name MMr. Martin" (Golitsin's middle initial is "M"X undertook to destroy any 
confidence I could hove placed in anything Nosenko said. This incident, along 
with the CIA's making Noaenko available to John Barron and Edward J. Epstein, as 
detailed in my prior affidavits and referred to again below, is quite inconsistent 
with Owen's and the CIA's representations relating to defectors and alleged dangers 
to them. 
88. At Che beginning of Parsgraph 8 Owen interprets the June 23 transcript 
as meaning the Commission's primary concerns were an alleged inability "to estab- 
lish the bona fides of Nosenko" and "the negative consequences of this uncertainty 
for the Commission's hope to use Nosenko's information." Others reading the 
transcript and knowing the subject matter may draw other conclusions, as I do. 
Jt reflects the CIA's successful befuddlement of the Commission. With regard to 
establishing Nosenko's "bona fides," as my prior Paragraphs show, the information 
Nosenko provided was not throw-away information, was important, and did establish 
that he was an authentic defector. Hart testified that the question was not even 
one of bona fides; that with regard to what Nosenko said about Oswald and the KGB 
the question rather was one of his memory, which Hart testified was severely 
impaired by the CIA’s abuse and isolation of him; and chat despite his high 
intelligence, scientific testing showed that Nosenko did not have a good memory. 
89. Owen scares chat while some information was disclosed earlier, "None 
of che documents released prior to the report of the House Committee in its Volume 
II contained details concerning the problems involved in establishing Nosenko's 
bona fides." This is a careful phrasing intended to deceive by misstating what 
is at issue in the June 23 transcript and what was disclosed prior to its release. 
In fact, the transcripts themselves were disclosed prior to che publication of 
Volume IX. The June 23 transcript is not concerned with "the problems involved 
21was disclosed prior to its release. 
In fact, the transcripts themselves were disclosed prior to che publication of 
Volume IX. The June 23 transcript is not concerned with "the problems involved 
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---to its release. 
In fact, the transcripts themselves were disclosed prior to che publication of 
Volume IX. The June 23 transcript is not concerned with "the problems involved 
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in establishing Nosenko's bona fides." By this tueana Owen seeks to deceive and 
mislead by suggesting that Nosenko's bona fides had not been established or 
disclosed and Lhat Lhere was no disclosure of Lhis prior to the release of the 
transcript. This is false. 
90. Owen represents a Commission concern over the "negative consequences" 
of uncertainty about Nosenko for its "hope to use Nosenko's information." He 
shows no such negative consequences and there were none for the Commission. It 
expressed no such hope. It concluded otherwise, as the transcript reflects. 
The Commission's records show that virtually all Nosenko said was available to 
it from other sources except for what the CIA wants ignored, his report that the 
KGB suspected Oswald served American intelligence. 
91. Because of the CIA, the Commission did not use Nosenko's name in its 
Report. The Report was altered prior to publication, again in response to the 
CIA's request. The original draft of the pertinent passage was released by the 
defendant in this instant cause on June 22, 1973. It states of Nosenko exactly 
what Owen would have believed was not known prior to the disclosures to the House 
committee, "his reliability cannot be assessed at this time." This means that 
what Owen swears had to be kept secret from the KCB was available to it in this 
formulation for more than five years before the transcript was disclosed and for 
two years before this lawsuit was filed. 
92. There is a less specific formulation but one that would have been 
correctly understood by the KGB in a Commission staff memo on a March 12, 1964, 
conference with the CIA. The first paragraph reads, "The first topic of conver- 
sation was Yuri Nosenko, the recent Soviet defector ... the CIA's recommendation 
being that the Commission await further developments." Ambiguous as this is, it 
would have cold the KGB that the CIA was discouraging the Commission's interest 
in Nosenko and that it questioned the dependability of what he said. This also 
is what Owen claims had to be and was kept secret. It also was npt withheld until 
1979. It was disclosed by the defendant on January 24, 1975, which is prior to 
the filing of this instant cause. 
93. Although it is true that the CIA misled the Commission about 
Nosenko's bona fides, it is not true that its alleged doubts were kept secret 
until the House report appeared. The KGB would not have had to consult public 
22at the CIA misled the Commission about 
Nosenko's bona fides, it is not true that its alleged doubts were kept secret 
until the House report appeared. The KGB would not have had to consult public 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Commission about 
Nosenko's bona fides, it is not true that its alleged doubts were kept secret 
until the House report appeared. The KGB would not have had to consult public 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

records. All it had to do is road the papers. The CIA's own disclosure was 
dispatched around the world by an Associated Press story. I quote from a San 
Ft line i sro nrwnp/ipiT' it publication of a Washington story of March 25, 1976, to 
reflect the widespread publication within this country: 
A recently released CIA memo shows that James Angleton, then head 
of CIA counterintelligence, told the (Warren) Commission that the 
CIA had no information that would either prove or disprove 
Nosenko's story. 
This was more than three years before the time Owen swears the information was 
first made public. 
94. On May 9, 1975, on the coast-to-coast CBS-TV Evening New9, John 
McCone, who was Director of Central Intelligence at the time of the Commission, 
was interviewed by Daniel Schorr. I attach as Exhibit 13 the transcript I 
obtained from CBS. McCone 9tated: 
It is traditional in the intelligence business that we do not accept 
a defector's statements until we have proven beyond any doubt that 
the man is legitimate and the information is correct. It took some 
time to prove the bona fidca of the man, which were subsequently 
proven. 
95. This disclosure of even OWBO'S formulation, of establishing and 
acknowledging Nosenko's bona fide9, also was more than three years prior to the 
time until which Owen alleges it was kept secret. 
96. In Paragraph 9 Owen states that the House committee's staff report 
in its Volume II is "based, in part, on classified material made available by 
the CIA and the FBI." If there was any classified FBI material included, this 
means that the FBI withheld from the Commission because the Commission's staff 
report of June 24, 1964, the day after the Nosenko executive session, represents 
that the Commission received only two reports from the FBI, those cited in my 
prior affidavits. They were made available by the defendant on April 7, 1975. 
This, too, is more than three years earlier than Owen represents as the first 
disclosure. This Commission record is the one cited above, as stating that "Most 
of what Nosenko told the FBI confirms what we already know from other sources." 
97. In Paragraph 10 Owen refers to portions of the Hart testimony he 
represents as describing the CIA's effort to establish Nosenko's bona fides and 
as what Che CIA told the Commission about this. However, his quotations relate 
23o portions of the Hart testimony he 
represents as describing the CIA's effort to establish Nosenko's bona fides and 
as what Che CIA told the Commission about this. However, his quotations relate 
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---rt testimony he 
represents as describing the CIA's effort to establish Nosenko's bona fides and 
as what Che CIA told the Commission about this. However, his quotations relate 
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not to the CIA's effort to establish Nosenko's bona fides but to its attempt to 
destroy him, thus confirming my prior affidavits: "*The question of how to deal 
with Nosenko has breti carefully rxumincd, .and '"The Agency's activity was 
devoted to breaking Nosenko, who wa9 presumed, on the basis of supposed evidence 
given by Mr. X, that Nosenko was a "dispatched KGB agent" sent to mislead the 
United States.
1" The Hart statement that the Commission was told that Nosenko 
' was not a bona fide defector" is not reflected in any Commission records I have 
seen and Owen cites none. 
98. "Mr. X" is Hart's reference to the paranoid CIA official who toyed 
between the choices of driving Nosenko permanently insane and killing him without 
leaving a trace. He is one of the CIA officials who would have had an interest in 
Oswald if Oswald had had any American intelligence connections and who would have 
been involved with KGB defectors. 
99. In Paragraph 10 Owen swears to the opposite of the CIA's earlier 
deceptions and misrepresentations in this instant cause, that its treatment of 
Nosenko was of a nature to attract other defections because he was used a9 a 
"model" to make defection attractive to potential defectors. "Breaking" a man 
is hardly "model" treatment. Both affirmations cannot be true. The other of the 
pair responsible for creating baseless doubts about Nosenko is Angleton. (Prior 
to heing forced out of the CIA, Angleton himself was suspected of being a KGB 
"mole" within the CIA. He also accused Director William Colby of being a KGB 
"mole" within the CIA.) The CIA's attitude and belief prior to the beginning of 
its campaign against Nosenko is reflected in Exhibit 12. This was released in 
June 1976 by the CIA. This CIA memo says of "certain aspects of the Soviet phase 
of the OSWALDs' careers" that "NOSENKO's testimony has probably eliminated the 
need for some" of the outlined work the CIA was to do for the Commission. This, 
therefore, discloses that as of April 8, 1964, the CIA credited what Nosenko said, 
regardless of what it told the Commission in March, quoted above in Paragraph 92. 
The superior official's evaluation of this reference to Nosenko's dependability is 
that it has "merit." 
100. Owen's longest quotation of Hart's testimony in Paragraph 10 is not 
24in Paragraph 92. 
The superior official's evaluation of this reference to Nosenko's dependability is 
that it has "merit." 
100. Owen's longest quotation of Hart's testimony in Paragraph 10 is not 
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---e superior official's evaluation of this reference to Nosenko's dependability is 
that it has "merit." 
100. Owen's longest quotation of Hart's testimony in Paragraph 10 is not 
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

supported by my reading of Che available records of the Warren Commission. This 
begins, "It is my understanding that the Nosenko information was made available 
to the Warren Commission but it was made available with the reservation that this 
probably was not valid ..." In fact, "the Nosenko information" was not made 
available to the Commission by the CIA until after the Commission informed the 
CIA chat it had received this information from the FBI. The FBI did not attach 
any "was not valid" stipulation. I have seen no record indicating that the CIA 
told the Commission that Nosenko's information "was not valid." 
101. The generalities with which Owen begins his eleventh and concluding 
Paragraph are not careless phrasing. They are necessary to avoid overt false 
swearing and as a prelude to his tag line, that Che "transcripts were declassified 
because of the declassification of material necessary for the release of Volume II, 
not because of plaintiff's litigation." Owen shows no relevance of the concent 
of Che transcripts to "... the problems that the U.S. Government had in 1964 in 
confirming the details of events taking place in the Soviet Union and in estab- 
lishing the details of activities of the Soviet KCB ..." Nor does he say what events 
or activities. This is because there were none. Morever, the CIA had no diffi- 
culties in establishing the details of some events in the Soviet Union, 6uch as 
the firings, global circumnavigations and landings of Soviet satellites. Long 
before the time in question, we had the capabilities of photographing from space 
"events in the Soviet" Union with such "detail" that, as President Eisenhower 
informed the nation, Che painted stripes on parking areas were clearly visible 
and, as stated above, bugging the most intimate conferences of top Soviet officials. 
If by "activities of the Soviet KCB" Owen means but for some reason fails to state 
"dispatching" Nosenko to provide disinformation relating to the assassination of 
the President, Chen he fails to state this because he cannot. He does not contest 
my prior affidavits which state that no such need existed because the conjectured 
need was eliminated weeks earlier by the disclosure of the conclusion of the 
investigation the President directed the FBI to make, that there had been no 
conspiracy. 
102. ’ Owen is not vague about these unspecified "events" because of any 
25losure of the conclusion of the 
investigation the President directed the FBI to make, that there had been no 
conspiracy. 
102. ’ Owen is not vague about these unspecified "events" because of any 
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---sion of the 
investigation the President directed the FBI to make, that there had been no 
conspiracy. 
102. ’ Owen is not vague about these unspecified "events" because of any 
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

intelligence need requiring secrecy. He iB vague because he cannot state what 
does not exist at this point in this litigation without too great a risk. If he 
does not continue the CTA's long record of mini cading, deceiving and stating 
untruths in this matter, he makes public acknowledgment of them, and that the CIA 
is not about to do or permit. 
103. Even Owen's representation of what transpired at the June 23 executive 
session is not faithful. The transcript does reveal that the Commissioners were 
intimidated by the mystique of secrecy and the CIA's threat that it might disclose 
intelligence secrets and thus harm the nation. But neither is new. They abound 
in the Commission's and other records that have been public^available and for 
years have been admitted by the Commission members and its staff. This, however, 
is not what Owen represents. His allegation that, even after more than a decade, 
releasing the transcripts would provide secret information to the KGB about the 
CIA and its capabilities hinges on the alleged disclosure of uncertainty about 
Noseuko'8 bona fides. This, as foregoing Paragraphs of this affidavit show, is 
not an existing or a real question but is a contrivance that is at variance with 
the facts and with the CIA's own prior disclosures. Neither the transcripts nor 
the Commission'S| report provides any comfort for the CIA contrivance. 
104. What Nosenko knew and could have told the CIA was well known to the KGB. 
None of this appears in the Warren Report, which the KGB could have bought anywhere 
for a| dollar. TJiere is no possibility that the KGB did not know from this omission 
that there existed at least a question relating to Oswald and Nosenko. The most 
! 
likely conclusion within the KGB, from this alone, is precisely what Owen claims 
had to be hidden from it - that there was some doubt about what Nosenko said 
relating to Oswald. Doubt could not relate to other matters, like hia disclosure 
of those 44 KCB microphones hidden in the walls of the United States Embassy, for 
the KGB knew when they were immobilized, even touched. Thus, what the CIA 
persuaded the Commission to omit from its Report did inform the KGB of precisely 
what Owen now claims had to be "withheld" from it all these years, thanks to the 
spurious and fabricated questions raised by a few influential political paranoids 
in the CIA. * 
26KGB of precisely 
what Owen now claims had to be "withheld" from it all these years, thanks to the 
spurious and fabricated questions raised by a few influential political paranoids 
in the CIA. * 
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---at Owen now claims had to be "withheld" from it all these years, thanks to the 
spurious and fabricated questions raised by a few influential political paranoids 
in the CIA. * 
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105. What the transcript actually says is that the Commission would not 
use Nosenko's information under any conditions, not even "if he is subsequently 
proven to be a bona fide defector." (Pagp 7641) The Chief Justice himself said, 
"I am allergic to defectors, and I just think we shouldn't put our trust in any 
defectors." (Page 7643) 
106. While this does reflect that someone had raised a question about 
Nosenko's bona fides by June 1964, the CIA decided Nosenko was bona fide more than 
a decade ago and this fact was within the public domain. 
107. In this regard I reiterate that the CIA has not made any effort to 
dispute my prior affidavits which state this or my allegations with regard to its 
having provided Nosenko in person and Nosenko information to writers John Barron 
and Edward J. Epstein, both long before the alleged declassification for the House 
committee or the release of these transcripts to me. 
108. The degree of attempted CIA intimidation of the Commission is also 
disclosed by the June 23 transcript, as is its successful deception of the 
Commission. General Counsel J. Lee Rankin informed the Members that "I just 
received a call from Mr. Helms this morning about it." (Richard Helms was then 
head of CIA dirty works, the component of which Owen is now part.) Helms' 
alleged fear was of letting the Members of the Presidential Commission read the 
Nosenko information provided to it by the FBI: "He'd learned that we even had 
papers that the Commissioners were looking at." (Page 7645) Helms did not trust 
any American with what the KGB knew, not even a Member of a Presidential Commis- 
sion: "And Mr. Helms said that he thought it even shouldn't be circulated to 
the Commissioners, for fear it might get out, about the name Mesenko," the way 
the court reporter misspelled Nosenko. (Page 7645) According to Commissioner 
Gerald Ford, Helms worried for naught about this because Ford said at the outset 
(Page 7641) that his first knowledge came from some staff drafts he had just 
received but he had not "seen any F.B.I. or C.I.A. reports on him." This was more 
then three months after the Commission received those FBI reports. In turn, this 
means that the Commissioners did not know that the KGB suspected Oswald had been 
an American "sleeper agent," which would have fingered the CIA. 
27mission received those FBI reports. In turn, this 
means that the Commissioners did not know that the KGB suspected Oswald had been 
an American "sleeper agent," which would have fingered the CIA. 
27

--- PAGE BREAK ---se FBI reports. In turn, this 
means that the Commissioners did not know that the KGB suspected Oswald had been 
an American "sleeper agent," which would have fingered the CIA. 
27

--- PAGE BREAK ---

109. The only "insight into the CIA that the transcripts could provide," 
Owen’s words, is not the baseless and often unfactual conjectures he swears to 
but That it could and did mislrml a Presidentiol Commission and did hide from it 
and from the country the KGB's suspicion that the officially designated Presidential 
assassin served American intelligence. Nothing else was of consequence or not 
known to the KGB at the time these transcripts were withheld from me and there- 
after and Owen shows nothing else that was of consequence. 
110. In this and in misleading and misrepresenting to a Court and in 
making untruthful representations, Owen and the CIA are consistent with what 
former Director Allen Dulles told his fellow Commisaoners on January 27, 1964. 
At pages 153 and 154 of the transcript of that executive session, Dulles described 
perjury as the highest manifestation of intelligence agent patriotism, along with 
not telling the truth to his own government. Dulles said that he himself would 
tell only the President - and even that is not borne out by his record; and that 
he might even withhold information from the Secretary of Defense. If Oswald had 
been a CIA agent, the subject of the January 27 session, Dulles said (Page 152), 
"The record might not be on paper," but if it were there would be only "hiero- 
glyphics that only two people knew what they meant" and they would not tell the 
truth. (I have previously provided the entire transcript of this session.) 
111. Wh^t the staff withheld from the Commissioners, as the CIA wanted, 
the FBI's Nosenko information, it let Helms know immedi.3£ly. (CIA Document 582- 
249A, attached as Exhibit 14) This CIA record also makes it clear that .the CIA 
had not informed the Commission about Nosenko or any of the information it had 
received from hfm. By then Dulles, personally, knew about Nosenko. This is 
established in Exhibit 15, CIA Document 657-831. Exhibit 15 shows bow Dulles 
connived with the CIA to tell it how not to inform the Commission of which he was 
a member; how not to volunteer information it should have had; and how to hold 
off on responding to its inquiries, which the CIA did. Of all things the CIA 
refers to a "reply," and that on a "priority basis," to the FBI’s two Nosenko 
reports. When it expected perpetual secrecy, the CIA did not refer to a commentary 
or an analysis but to a "reply," os to charges, and this when, according to Owen, 
it had no means of "independent verification" of anything at all. 
28secrecy, the CIA did not refer to a commentary 
or an analysis but to a "reply," os to charges, and this when, according to Owen, 
it had no means of "independent verification" of anything at all. 
28

--- PAGE BREAK ---not refer to a commentary 
or an analysis but to a "reply," os to charges, and this when, according to Owen, 
it had no means of "independent verification" of anything at all. 
28

--- PAGE BREAK ---

112. Dulles did not tell the CIA that his fellow Commissioners knew of 
reports that Oswald had been a CIA agent from Nosenko's statements to the FBI. 
He limited this, on page 1 of the second memo, to what Marguerite Oswald and her 
then attorney, Mark Lane, had said in public. 
113. This record, disclosed in June 1976, is still another CIA disclosure 
of exactly that which Owen swears required withholding of the transcripts, "the 
practical circumstances which made it impossible for the CIA to andertake such 
an investigation inside the USSR." (Page 2, paragraph 5) 
114. The 1ast paragraph reads, in full, "At no time during these discussions 
(that is, with Dulles, at his home on April 11, a Saturday) did Mr. Dulles make 
any inquiries about Nosenko and I volunteered no information on this score. 
115. There was disagreement within the CIA over its policy of having as 
little as possible to do with the Presidential Commission's investigation of the 
assassination of the President. CIA Document 583-814, Exhibit 16, is an excised 
copy of a brief dissenting memo. It protests that questions "would not be asked • 
and that "it had been decided 'that the FBI would handle the matter and our 
questions would not be asked.'" The author had "no confidence in the FBI's ability 
to cover the Soviet phase," whatever this may have meant or included. He states, 
"it would not be possible to complete our job on the Oswald case if we could not 
get the pertinent information." (Emphasis in original.) While this also is 
amhiguous, thej KCB could have interpreted it as saying exactly what Owen swears the 
CliJ had to withhold from it. The CIA disclosed this document in June 1976. 
116. In earlier affidavits and in preceding Paragraphs of this affidavit 
I refer to the providing of information held secret from me and others to John 
Barron and Edward J. Epstein and to Nosenko's being made available to both by 
the CIA. Barron and Epstein both credit the CIA and the FBI in their books. 
Barron also reports that the sources and resources of other intelligence services 
were available,something Owen does not mention. On page xiv of Barron’s KGB, 
first published in January 1974, which is after I made the information request 
involved in this lawsuit and more than a year before it was filed, Barron states, 
"There are two primary sources of original data about the KGB: (1) former Soviet 
citizens who had been KGB officers or agents; (2) security services who know most 
29re it was filed, Barron states, 
"There are two primary sources of original data about the KGB: (1) former Soviet 
citizens who had been KGB officers or agents; (2) security services who know most 
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---ron states, 
"There are two primary sources of original data about the KGB: (1) former Soviet 
citizens who had been KGB officers or agents; (2) security services who know most 
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

about the KGB ... We felt that we could nof rely upon evidence proffered by 
any one KGB officer or security service in the absence of independent corrobora- 
tion from other officers or services ..." Two of these services are the CIA and 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Of the FBI Barron states at this 
point, "The late J. Edgar Hoover allowed the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
to answer many of our questions. Cartha DeLoach, then Assistant to the Director 
of the FBI, briefed u9 about significant KGB operations ...M Of the CIA Barron 
states at this point that it "fulfilled most of our requests for addresses through 
which we were able to write former KCB personnel and negotiate arrangements for 
interviews. We further profited from the expert counsel of two retired CIA 
officers, William King Harvey and Peer de Silva." 
117. Nosenko was a CIA consultant. He, Harvey and de Silva were required 
by the CIA to sign secrecy oaths. This means they cannot speak without CIA 
approval. CIA approval was necessary for the Barron interviews of Nosenko 
(page xv) and later those of Epstein, referred to in my prior affidavits. With 
regard to these matters and to my allegations that the CIA made the kind of 
information it withheld from me available to Barron and Epstein, there is not 
even pro forma CIA denial. From the Barron and Epstein boastings, no denial is 
possible. 
118. I do allege bad faith and deliberate deception, misrepresentation 
and false swearing. I do this in part because honesty, decency and justice 
require it and in part because, until the courts face the reality of this 
official misconduct, which taints all of the many FOIA lawsuits of which I have 
personal knowledge, the aborting of the Act and the burdening of the courts 
and requesters will not end. There is no time when I have stated.and proven 
these charges under oath that there has been even pro forma denial under oath 
and there has never been direct confrontation or rebuttal. In this case also 
that is not dared. In this case also, from the time of the first representation 
to the appeals court that the transcripts were being disclosed because so great 
an amount of Nosenko information was disclosed to and by the committee, repeated 
in the Owen affidavit, these offenses are blatant. That inevitably these offenses 
would be obvious to me may account for the CIA's failure earlier to risk what it 
dares in this Owen affidavit. 
30in the Owen affidavit, these offenses are blatant. That inevitably these offenses 
would be obvious to me may account for the CIA's failure earlier to risk what it 
dares in this Owen affidavit. 
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---vit, these offenses are blatant. That inevitably these offenses 
would be obvious to me may account for the CIA's failure earlier to risk what it 
dares in this Owen affidavit. 
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

119. In my earlier responses under oath to this misrepresentation, I 
stated that, if it were other than bad faith and if this bad faith were other 
than deliberate, there would have been compliance with my Nosenko and other 
related information requests going back to 1975. Zhere has not been. I have 
received neither a single piece of information nor any communication promising 
it at even the most remote date in the future. 
120. When I wrote the CIA on November 9, 1979, about its eight years of 
noncompliance (attached as Exhibit 17), I had no way of knowing what would be 
in the affidavit the CIA was to provide. The concluding sentence of Exhibit 17 
is, 'In particular I would like to know when to expect the Nosenko information 
your affidavits in one of my cases claim was declassified for the House Select 
Committee on Assassinations." I have had no response, not even an acknowledgment. 
121. On August 5, 1976, the CIA acknowledged my first Nosenko request, 
among others. (Attached as Exhibit 18) The attachment to this letter shows how 
the CIA first stalled, by renumbering my 1975 Nosenko request (75-4765) as a 
1976 request. In the last paragraph of the first page, it then refused to comply, 
instead including this separate request in my request for other materials relating 
to the investigation of the assassination of President Kennedy. Its Catch 22 
claim is that would comply when it provided other JFK assassination records, 
which it then did not do. (It even renumbered my 1971 request for information 
relating to me to list it as a 1975 request. It has not complied and it has not 
acted on the appeals.) It is public knowledge that the CIA did declassify and 
disclose information relating to the assassination of the President for the use 
of the House committee, as Owen states. The committee's report credits and 
thanks the CIA. This information is within my request, but the CIA has not 
provided it, despite the fact that ray request is of almost five years ago and 
the fact of the committee's publication. Some of it was telecast from coast to 
coast. 
122. The CIA continues to deny me information it disclosed to Epstein, 
who was regarded, with ample justification, as a sycophant. This is particularly 
true of Nosenko information. When I learned of what had been disclosed to 
Epstein, I again appealed the CIA's denials and requested separately that which 
31on, as a sycophant. This is particularly 
true of Nosenko information. When I learned of what had been disclosed to 
Epstein, I again appealed the CIA's denials and requested separately that which 
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---

had been made available to him and to Barron. Providing me with copies 
required no more than xeroxing file copies already processed. From the 
February 20, 1978, dote of that letter to now, the CIA has not provided me 
with a single page of what it disclosed exclusively to Epstein, despite my 
unmet prior request. 
123. Bad faith could not be more obvious or more deliberate. The 
information made available to the committee for its use and to Epstein for 
his use i£ disclosed and has been processed. Despite the Owen affidavit, none 
has been provided to me. This also underscores the fact that the CIA/Owen 
representation that the release of what waa disclosed and only this required 
giving me the transcripts is spurious, a contrivance with which to deceive and 
mislead this Court and to continue to deny me ray rights under the Act. 
FREDERICK COUNTY, MARYLAND 
I 
Before me this j<**'»^-day of December 1979 deponent Harold Weisberg 
haa appeared and signed this affidavit, first having sworn that the statements 
made therein are true. 
My commisaion expires July 1, 1982. 
* 
HAROLD WEISBERG 
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---Harold Weisberg 
haa appeared and signed this affidavit, first having sworn that the statements 
made therein are true. 
My commisaion expires July 1, 1982. 
* 
HAROLD WEISBERG 
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EXHIBITS 
Exhibit No. 
Paragraph No. 
Page ] 
1 
18 
5 
2 
20 
5 
3 
46 
12 
4 
47 
13 
5 
48 
13 
6 
50 
14 
7 
52 
14 
8 
53 
14 
9 
67 
16 
10 
67 
16 
11 
74 
18 
12 
79 
19 
13 
94 
23 
14 
111 
28 
15 
111 
28 
• 16 
* 115 
29 
♦. 17 
» 
120 
31 
* 18 
121 
31 
12-19-63 FBI memo 
CIA Document No. 376-154 
CIA Document No. 151-60 
CIA Document No. 350-140 
CIA Document No. 498 
3-3-64 CIA "QUESTIONS FOR NOSENKO" 
CIA Document No. 489-196A 
CIA Document No. 513-199B 
CIA Document No. 413-76A 
11-27-63 CIA Document 
FBI File 105-82555-1079 
CIA Document No.647-824 
CBS-TV transcript, 5-9-75 
CIA Document No. 582-249A 
CIA Document 657-831 
CIA Document No. 583-814 
11-9-79 letter to CIA 
8-5-76 CIA letter

--- PAGE BREAK ----82555-1079 
CIA Document No.647-824 
CBS-TV transcript, 5-9-75 
CIA Document No. 582-249A 
CIA Document 657-831 
CIA Document No. 583-814 
11-9-79 letter to CIA 
8-5-76 CIA letter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

»M M* M« mm M S7 
UNITED STATES C;0\\^ MENT 
Memorandum■ 
C 4 75“-/vy/ 
m .: 
Ur. V. C. Sullivan 
_;L DATE: 12/19/63 
MU.« ; 
• ROM x 
Mr. D., J. Brennan, J T J\) ,!"^/ 
T w — — 
T.U. hi*-    
UHJfcCT: 
RELATIONS 
• v . 
V.’ITll CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE 
AGENCY (CIA) 
Information developed by Ur. DcLoach has indicated that 
John McCone, Director, CIA, has attacked the Bureau in a^vicious. 
and underhanded nanner characterized with cheer dishonesty. I'2 
the Tacts are true, v.*e can safely assume that McCone will continue 
such tactics to the point of seriously Jeopardizing Bureau prestige 
and reputation. \fe can sit by and take no action or bring this v;:> ;; 
“matter to a head. Over tlio years, we have hod.numerous conflicts 
with all CIA Directors. Many of these problems have arisen froa 7 * 
jf McCone is involyed in such nefarious activity, there is a way of 
putting a stop to this. 
The charges against McCone can be described as follows: 
(1) lie allegedly informed Congressman Jerry Ford 
that CIA had? mteOyered a plot in Mexico City indicating 
thnt Lee Harycv~~0^walcl had received $6,500 to assassinate 
President kepneCy.. 
(?.) McCone allegedly made this same statement to Drew 
Pearson. ... • ... „ . .,3,^-...* 
(3) In both instances, the statements were false and-;- • 
McCone should have known that they were false since his V';~ 
agency was fully informed that the story concerning the 
receipt of money in Mexico Y/as completely discredited^ .r 
l Vo warn ~ - * 
    KOV lV.2C33t>3I> • 
If aoproved, the Liaison Agent will ^confront McCone 
with the allegations. ConGressman Ford will not be identified out 
will be referred to as a hicb.-rankin6 Government-of flow*. Bureau 
Ap 
(, 
[»• 
ACTIO?!: 
1 - Ur. Belmont 
1 - Mr. DcLoach 
.1 - Mr. Sullivan 
• 1 - Mr. Dranigan, 
1 - Liaison 
1 - Mr. Papich 
SJl’:chs 
U .‘ 1 
(7) 
> 
w. 
>. 
it 
\ / " 
aa oec OIiSQk 
~/%SS&L • 
■ .....U-u. K*-'/«? - /$?£. ..Ur. Belmont 
1 - Mr. DcLoach 
.1 - Mr. Sullivan 
• 1 - Mr. Dranigan, 
1 - Liaison 
1 - Mr. Papich 
SJl’:chs 
U .‘ 1 
(7) 
> 
w. 
>. 
it 
\ / " 
aa oec OIiSQk 
~/%SS&L • 
■ .....U-u. K*-'/«? - /$?£. ..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/>-X 
U' 
I 
Memorandum t!r. Brennan to Mr. Sullivan 
He: PJ2I^TIOIC3 V.‘ITIt CENTRAL XWTKLUGIIHCE 
AGENCY (CIA) 
V-^rrff V 
iiv- - 
; i 
.;<» ,yrvti vi: ? not be identify ei.. McCone v/i31 bo told that inforran- 
;i. i received by the bureau indicates: that he has Liade false state- 
and it will be pointed out to Iiiai that his own agency was 
iiiiorijcc; that tJie story regarding Oswald's receipt of money 
crcico City was completely discredited. He will further be told 
:.;aw we can only characterize his actions as a vicious and unwarranted 
••tiro!: against the Bureau. 
If ricConc did make the referred statements, we can expect 
-Ain to make a denial. However, it is believed that we will have 
nade our point and he certainly will know where he stands, will-*r..■ • 
undoubtedly have a profound respect for our capabilities to be 
informed, and he certainly will bear all of this in mind in the 
event ho gets any ideas of making similar statements in the future. 
k'i 
tfb' 
t'

--- PAGE BREAK ---pect for our capabilities to be 
informed, and he certainly will bear all of this in mind in the 
event ho gets any ideas of making similar statements in the future. 
k'i 
tfb' 
t'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

K/S'-6/T 2 
11 Secswbor I96iV 
\£ 
i 
fw_ 
rr 
<n 
J3 
E 
.c 
P 
E n o o 
G 
*rs^cxA2i2U» i?ca: 
TIZ1CCCH : 
1 
FIU3.M : 
SC32J2CT : ^'''kdditioaal Mot ^3 a-sxd Cogent3 oa tba 
/*.r */*/* en/eMj*: * -& 
u,TH #<>**'* *-* 
i c ^ ^   ,__ 
~ ^, - r-/v i *"* '" ' 
to 
?n 
r: a 
> 
r _0 
> o 
tr 
O 
u. 
1 According to tba Ha-. *orS Tisea for 10 Ceca^r, 
tfca 131 r-ortefthe asaa^Tn^n oi ^^eat^onnsdy 
Cate"
<slaC^i»t3fc“tnt^aalan»/^d6tbat tiara is co evi- 
govern. The** discloa^ea prsauMbly 
nos^ibil"* ty of furtbar confrontations 9it. 
pos3iaii-u7 * -j-K-it ^lr- Slusser continues co 
Slasher. In tm* event '4Ur* , . . >u. .c^v', 
aad observations cay be of oo=e /a_ue. 
9 Tom standing -X3 practice generally forbids 
agents* serving -tal^xbe » g S'** 
domestic coaauals* parties or TVI—» 
consulates./ ^ . ■> 
bin-zed a trail to tha Sovriats vhica ms 
, ilo J£e IScoSa^nLd eitb the.national headquarter 
of"tha Cocaunist Party t^SA—apparently wiCb sose r^a-- 
*Z * Soviet Coasuxato in -oalco -itj* 
iglSS ^ hl^^U- ^oiu l.«l»e politico 
w (,:

--- PAGE BREAK ---IScoSa^nLd eitb the.national headquarter 
of"tha Cocaunist Party t^SA—apparently wiCb sose r^a-- 
*Z * Soviet Coasuxato in -oalco -itj* 
iglSS ^ hl^^U- ^oiu l.«l»e politico 
w (,:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

he r.lco :;ubacribcd to tko Dally flerher and a Tro fairy it- 
publication, allegedly receiver newspapers from the Sov- 
iet Union, and asked la3t June that hi3 passport be 
re-validated for travel to the u'3S2. 
3. Certain facets of Oswald’s activities in the 
USSR also argue strongly that the £G3 rsould never have 
recruited bin for a mission of any hind. First, there 
i3 no doubt that Oswald TTSLS debriefed by the secret 
police sheart 17 after hi3 arrival in Moscow. They ware 
interested in hi a not only because he vas a political 
defector, but also because be boasted publicly in th* 
Embassy on 31 October 1959—that ho intended to tell 
the Soviats ’’everything he knerar’ about 2iariae Corps  - 
radar installations on the 7ast Coast./ According to 
Oswald * a former core wand lag officer, this included the 
locations of all radar units and their secret call signs, 
authentication codes and radio frequencies—all of which 
knowledge was gri3t for the Soviet intelligence mill. • • 
/it is extremely ^ 
unliksly that Oswald—with his Russian wife—was even 
seriously considered for subsequent repatriation to the 
United States as a aG3 asset. As a re-defector from 
the USSR ho would immediately be suspect and tuns undar 
surveillance by the 731. Furthermore, any indication 
•f h^t ha had made good on his boast about the radars 
could easily lead to. arrest and indictment on a charge 
of treason.   r‘ - • • . . / 
\ 
4. Secondly, Soviet "executive action7* agents 
(assassins, saboteurs and terrorists) are carefully 
selected by the" AG3 and specifically trained for their. / 
missions. Oswald very probably ruled hansel- our o* 
any consideration for this hind of operation. Cn 
14 November 1959, Uoscow refined his request for Sov- 
iet citizenship. ; Shortly thereafter, ho became^das- 
pondeat and reportedly attempted to kill uiaselx by 
slashing his wrists. 2ven if the 5G3 had not earlier 
noted signs of Dental aberrations, the suicide try pre- 
sumably furnished convincing evidence that Oswald was 
not agent material. 
5. Cswaldfs activities bn a Dallas rifle range oa 
17 Kov<!?aber ar9 of some interest both a3 circuastnut-al 
evidence of prior planning to assassinate the President 
aad as one mors negative indication of *\G3 involvement.bn a Dallas rifle range oa 
17 Kov<!?aber ar9 of some interest both a3 circuastnut-al 
evidence of prior planning to assassinate the President 
aad as one mors negative indication of *\G3 involvement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nge oa 
17 Kov<!?aber ar9 of some interest both a3 circuastnut-al 
evidence of prior planning to assassinate the President 
aad as one mors negative indication of *\G3 involvement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/ 
-3- 
Cswald was firing at a range of 100 yards* Ka was as9ij>ac*d 
to target number 3, but according to witnesses, was actu- 
ally firing at targets 7, 3, and 9* 3s was thus firing 
through an arc ot approximately 15 degrees and obviously 
to have been simulating i'irs at a moving targwt* 
It is, of course, aost unlikely that a HC3- agent on an 
executive action mission mould be permitted (or 'would 
permit himself) to practice, fixing under such obvious and 
public circumstances, 
•;* ‘ 
6. The evidence presently available to us soeas 
fairly conclusively to rule out any Soviet involvement in 
the President's assassination* There are, hoover, 
several ratkacr fascinating inconsistencies, loose ends 
and unanswered questions about Oswald. Soma, if not all. 
Day be treated in the 7BI report* Pending its publica- 
tion, they are listed below for •whatever they nay be -worth*. 
a) In an intarvisv last August, Oswald stated 
that his father-in-lav was a Soviet amy colonel v/ho 
taught him to drink vodka when he came to court Karina. 
After the assassination, however, iJrs* Ruth Paine (some- 
time Oswald friard and landlady) stated that 2Jarinafs 
father, a colonel, had died when Marina was an infant* 
b) To the tune of so^e $437, the U3 picked 
.up the tab for Oswald's return to this country. This 
loan was repaid between October 1963 and January 1963* 
During this period, Oswald was earning $50 per week* 
Thus, over half of h±3 total earnings went to the govern- 
ment and be supported hiaself, Ms wife and child on 
sonevhat les» $35-weekly• ££L% rent at that time'* .* 7;- 
was $39 pear month* Tha possibility that ha received out- 
side help in repaying the government apparently hasnnot 
been raised in the press* \ ' 
c) lu contrast to the letters Oswald wrote 
to Ms mother. Governor Co anally and Senator Tower, bis 
letters to the Pair Play for C.uba Committee are rather 
surprisingly literate* They do not appear to contain 
his frequent misspellings and ungrammatical language* 
There have been no suggestions that he received help in 
framing the letters, and ha told the JSPCC that he was 
financing Ms activities on its behalf out of Ms own 
pocket*d ungrammatical language* 
There have been no suggestions that he received help in 
framing the letters, and ha told the JSPCC that he was 
financing Ms activities on its behalf out of Ms own 
pocket*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

—J- 
d) ibera is in»:r«.iaia3 that 
,ril Mrj „,nra act fcapcily a^rrl^O. i.t» wis Trail- 
UVof-nd bo v/;va unpopular. S’oo BoaaiB-*7 -oaa 
It tLSultuU Sinico, did not »b««. 
viuand sos>-e tin** spoke oX he_ 
lot Union. C3^1d rioted ^ toU 
M one occaaiop. oJLruje *-* couj.a 
Hlamwd aiisaaaiaation ol tfc* ?rasid*a= PrioJ -° 
plUHWtl ^ x. rv_ I in M A.i . *njj nnf>UG£t)d—CQUld 
26 Sopl*»««y—9b*» w naiisocrt {without, one 
s.'is&'z srs=“s 
ffttLSMSwaa: ss s ?=££?<=- 
hi3 -Aia and seek roioge in tt» Lnioo 
o) Dssptta yxs. PitJw’a taaiiinony tbaV ^ •, 
srs £3L33 
attcwpt—evidently by CBMIM—Co snoot Gen^rnl -nl^ar 
Xa3t £pril~ * 
Distribution;

--- PAGE BREAK ---=- 
hi3 -Aia and seek roioge in tt» Lnioo 
o) Dssptta yxs. PitJw’a taaiiinony tbaV ^ •, 
srs £3L33 
attcwpt—evidently by CBMIM—Co snoot Gen^rnl -nl^ar 
Xa3t £pril~ * 
Distribution;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

<J. A 7S~y^S 
£‘XA//&/T V 
rr- 
•U 
. ciASSiriso ;ACSSAGG_ 
£T 1 
TO * D: R^aoa ! 
* *• * 
FROM 1 
. 
/ 
ACTION* 
INFO 1 /vy. 
M  _Z7t?f-5 6Z 1/ \ 
r;>i;v 
JLL 
i i 
J -t i 
jvr 
i i 
DIF! IMFO 
.1 
7 DEC 63 IH 755=4 
. + , 
**-•’* V ’ 
O' 
<t\ 
RF.F./’ ’ . . 
1 rat RESULTS * SWRC^S 'FEET V IT ijSWCTEM8^g.4 DgCEyTE? 
ft. RE AS=ASSI«‘AT ION FP.ESIOEKT ^E^NED^»VlffT^AlD ACT 
I.VCCMFREHEMslrL£ BECAUSE-CpW.0 NsyiEflr^; C3AH(£S: Uf O'. S-j 
ESPECIALLY FCREJCN pa ICY P BENE FIT «»** CPPHUKLST 
TENDENCIES, IF TRUE, CR STAY RUSSIA HAD NO HEARING CHIEF 
SECAUSE CP DIRECT IVE SINCE TINE OF LENIN CONSIDERED OPfUESSICM 
OPPONENTS ONLY DAKAGED COM UNI ST KOVEKENT. ' 
3. CONTRADICTIONS ABOUT CRINE: USE 3 DIFFERENT TYPES . 
lb OF AR«S, INABILITY ACCCUNT_ FCR Oa-ALD APrREHENSIONJARJSCT: 
to 
; o 
0 
■O _ 
iC~ i«5 
^ASSASSINATION, SOKE BULLETS EXPLOSIVE OTHERS HOFSWO. 
J.CPD LATELY DISCONCERTED SYS^gWSTIONS RE OSPALD ENTRY £Xh_ 
1 ^T^AGEtmi^^ EXR^ T HAT ALT HOUGH NOT , 
pg;-,,:. 
IC o»-nU’PJT«0 CoErV l iO. 
. RJP800UCTION.V OTHE3 THAN THS liStAs-JO OfHCS.^f P?OK:.e«TCD __ • , Co?y Ko. 
; . __ - ./• w.-i;-* 4—V- 5: .***.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

■ •MSI 
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE 
7 £J I M-Psa-'r/c:-?- 
I FCRF.l CMEP S CA'J VOHK S OVIST U>!1 CM. f SEN STATED A lO R EPEATSD BE 
|n>n -or KNOW DF.TA ILS ^ur D3U7TLF.ES TM^PE VEPE SPECIAL CIRCUMSFAHCSS 
/ '-• OSWALD'S CASE. RE F.KICRAT IOJF RUfSlAK VIFE, \'0 REST!? ICT 3 -rfs 8Ur FEW 
LEF~r~SO'^FT H\-1 ON HE CAUSE PSYCHJ.OGICALL Y ATTACKED SOVIET SOIL. . 
?*l 
' ‘V-.; •'.•j 
•. * - ;.;vn: 
' • .' • • l

--- PAGE BREAK ---E F.KICRAT IOJF RUfSlAK VIFE, \'0 REST!? ICT 3 -rfs 8Ur FEW 
LEF~r~SO'^FT H\-1 ON HE CAUSE PSYCHJ.OGICALL Y ATTACKED SOVIET SOIL. . 
?*l 
' ‘V-.; •'.•j 
•. * - ;.;vn: 
' • .' • • l

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C A 7S-/W& 
£A'tf/G/T $ 
\ _ 
\ \ 
1. £2* ^tuVMS^Ti roa: Sire-ifa* 
fe*&sra2 ScTeo^i oi isyeJtSe^Fiad 
ajgjiCT 
: Tuarl iraaovlca KCSX:i*CT Sapasau^* - . 
». ~Lsf*rrsvc/» la srTajirt ta y«f ^gcofr»-«^o fioisa J» !_'a="ei 19s4, 
subjeeTa* aba**, iUa ?S) 35-*432G. la oiich yoo r=<?»*«4<» i=i4.r=»ii=a 
-r^-s vi-ould tsrpd ta eorrsoarata oa elaprswrs S'tC3.id?G2C!* iaiorrcau-sa 
 >„, 1^, lUmr CS.WA.LO. £ur Ota* c«uia ci* 
iy«n HC3231SO M W#*AUS *M& 3^?UXy ax Matted 
the isisdraiaiicsi ia c^rcac*: .. * 
' .,. a,..^j • £sor«-» •«»-» «t»«*4cd aatt» C»*AU2aC«4r o» J3 Jaao-ry 
:;*4. Soorea roparfcH* that i« DaparttjMtal 3aJ iavalw-U 
Tn- ii» *,.;>=-i P-S’Vil.a be<2>!i» CSWAU mrrrj to Cve a* a 
taM4pl’ia >959. He b»«i oai cans » ajxciai. aits*tic= in 
•ax,* -w7 w»iai iww'j ihrsartscoa* «<=iv«i i ssport CS.W A_a 
•. i-jd OEiri ja bectsci 9 a 3avi«t dUjee. It waa Itnyiiaa ihac Scares 
j-:— ^-.-■-tM •,'^SVT.^123*3 xa<nwsi. Tis iCS. tlcciiih to 
istt> CS^f Ai_D’a case to sea 12 Uaaro 9**e any oMiratt awl iai«T«t» 
tilicS part ci taa .<52 auxit save -449 Iw bie» ane. -^stte ■**» bttoiaa 
• Ii '•Vi* d^eicea Uai CS’A AiX( MS =2 s=> iatares* 
'Sj&ta=mT*T sa tie KC22 ««a=y«d=a las* Sw rzns^j J® 
♦jjg 57.s. sa a rciwnAag tsasritt sob tiesrw &s» tiransb tie sirs^u -~a 
• \»l& tab ivnasxt: £=abaj»y o» T«vr=a»lis-j t» io-ea=e a -ioviat cadsea. 
/ .^7, A IL a g>ea =ad» tau caaatati* a»a<ara ei «xcida »ieo h« 
rtvtsi*-'* resoense- Hi iah beaa auptrsaed ta 5° “ * tel? 
„T>v Other i=tirf«3 •«! £=ii*d to aioe, rr? *** »* S^*V- AS iio -iUcx 
U iiiai Iai3 kar/ l>^d -c^t tuTirr^i d«s=c^ 30 w 
-*a3 pT*sncx*i Uas io o-ii i*iU is aio wca-' is» =cvi®ia ’=w,=s i5> 
/tl>a roivn,.

--- PAGE BREAK ---£=ii*d to aioe, rr? *** »* S^*V- AS iio -iUcx 
U iiiai Iai3 kar/ l>^d -c^t tuTirr^i d«s=c^ 30 w 
-*a3 pT*sncx*i Uas io o-ii i*iU is aio wca-' is» =cvi®ia ’=w,=s i5> 
/tl>a roivn,.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/ ‘ ^ * * i i( 
i-cur rmwi, VMCSUIU \J» jus JO sW**r -o ilaaUy ta**r 
cioor d*** and iaumi :«'VA^ i?i=* ^ Art*ih* 
**** *«* 3**M-W« s; uii5 ubaj* oi S^» op^rxuja 
iUi roorjiy 7rr*d 2 riport 04 it. j “ 
U) *tOn \»o«d*d about Lh** pgSMU jility ts*u G5WAJLD ootid 
do tbia A£Ola If a«7iuj3. th-o bowses decided ca ^i»tt :->^ 
a l«so«jr7 resi^ce? ofcraui alia^a, in«y ~u£ jd 
^viajt Series ctaiimH?. \5» *jk=sd ^aT be -^=3 ;o 
*“ /nab and icwrc® repii« tarn taU «aa awdy by caac^ Taw 
ba^i ifi4 tbdjrLad Cb ** Ab-3 to stay ia ksa<9Q asd .Sauzsiz 
artsUrarily. 
C3) A:*«dai>cc* Marias C5VALD* Sonjrca ts-u abo av* 
a coqaarrs^d Cormavtciai aad oad b*ea CIX^Q oi tiaa  -t 
fflr a»t nor oti*s. Sb* bad no sagoa* thoughts ;o ilva a 
gTMpd Ltfo* iiaT^ b^iiiar -30^9-9 and suca tiiia?3« ibd ‘aaa 2 otocid 
»ftnaaaad i2od aa latests* is. i^joraads* fc<wrieifk ‘‘Trsta tiV3 Sort**, 
poiai <M ri*sTi csa* already dad aao-Ci^rie^ caaracceriaHca. Sir •»** 
c« to* ittA-n npry-way n=d not aa adu«iu«d peeaiwa, *• 
(4) finally CSy MJJ $ot tir-d o£ livtag is »iaaJc sod wsLtsd 
tr 30 i^aca; io tbs- 'J .3* :£« l^na aarxiad karsn OJSX na*rr-^ ^ ta jo 
hf ? bam» Tie Soweto decided to list thA**? *3 ocd -oncxi biA-mas* o 
xa«I« *0 taii «o tsss anai poaraaadn C3 % AL5 sot to spread satf-Sort** 
pr»*gar*Li after iii^-^^artera. Xbe poisrad out ci 
Sswt GOTTOseai had niie^sd CS'A'AJLD io iio* hsr^* tbU jnd 
o^arriod b^re and Ibe uc^^r=i«5d r»so goiag-co* 2«t tun ^ii^iaava 
wilis him, aU« 
{5} Aaied ^7 tno Cov^rms^cat bad nii^=»od 3-iariea to loav9v 
Scorets replied iia: tbia 'sas pcjlaotiy oatami. Sa^t l^*<guly 
£DArxdtsd and febpraaaad £2^ chains ca inavr 'iica ier snabaad^ 
1ST. >M2n la a» cjs^adoa but iot wa ot>^Us. *w nilffrwrd to 
{S> Tho tlarunt if SfcarcaJ3 Aascnnst n.^AitS^y CSvTAJLD 
nor bin vsii^ end si any tisaa bnea of‘any isxrrrdt v>intao^n;r to 
' /SswistavtborittM^ 
2la a» cjs^adoa but iot wa ot>^Us. *w nilffrwrd to 
{S> Tho tlarunt if SfcarcaJ3 Aascnnst n.^AitS^y CSvTAJLD 
nor bin vsii^ end si any tisaa bnea of‘any isxrrrdt v>intao^n;r to 
' /SswistavtborittM^ 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---ot wa ot>^Us. *w nilffrwrd to 
{S> Tho tlarunt if SfcarcaJ3 Aascnnst n.^AitS^y CSvTAJLD 
nor bin vsii^ end si any tisaa bnea of‘any isxrrrdt v>intao^n;r to 
' /SswistavtborittM^ 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* u    
  - 
1 
to* l.!>rie|j ^tod 2 a /,*t ri4 js taera ‘*-»^, 
4. “ '.- * 
'H 
S. {!) ZnTiag <xn LcUrvi*-* ca January i?cd* Source 
tfocao^isLrd tbii d^cior* -ccaotistfd [ OSlwAlJS} , • *r~l # 
,t&««ro ircdirafcicnA L^£ bo TVO* a, psycso*'* ^aria.5 
aa crtaiti=3 'IL*«oi**iiai «' fia* psaeiaio isvsxvazoooi of tire ZaviJt 
jWfTamot la too 3 ai hrcoidesr ooaiway, ooarc* 
stnLad, 'Ha ~A3r4?r bo* I 02&7 bal-a* aay^sd* bit I *—s-^sak. 
a.ymmi zr»7 craryi^iicca icd 3u»o 1 bauva toio I coaisi 
’iah*9fiCacia^i7 si^a M is ta* £ac± that to* Soviet Coin iarmot 
bo tied isio ibis [sj^^eioa-dsa] ioaay r**-/.’ He cotaLftoed 
Ural ^ke i:-C3 wa tri^bieoed ai C5 AIID, and xfrcuitLsc* bav^ 
5wa a Teaser -eiis biaa_ r/hea to* ^o^&abiUry os 
raersidai C3*AU3 tro, tb* tcaoLsias t*ao ’ahaoLataiy 
HOC.rt Tba u*Uy Lrrairvzsmi wrssdiied -=*as la .xi-rzsryra for 
^HUSAI&JY^ aacia ia u^-ib j Cot. II7a P5L4J3A1W7] to o« 
05 «ALL OJ>* LO sc=r=od. auUl«£efui ^wi^Aatla ia wd irs yia-a 
oi Lb# bci that bo bad 5<w» alioaed Co ir-cay io ibo nioSLt a»vi ^3 
b<dia* allo^-ed to leave* \oajroe coreim-isoicd Hs« b« ^34 a'^-ajre 
tbai tbo bod 23 3>jbo<*iiia&s. ia£«sre*U. la, CS^AZJ} Secaijao * - 
aihrr tbe ^^^daiaaiica ca too irresides*, £ou*sr» bad ;o susks a 
1 la-ax a a gotten aao «svea a«± c-irexal JT.S2 sroif Mrsaa-ul 
t» b*ia&b to iarexiisota aa tito spei, ^act isTsaiia^ d2.^hal papers.* 
(2} ^Tioo weakfo.* z£ CSVAUZ** wci^it to retard to fcbu& C3SIL. 
Sotireo 7*tt22a;rbzd tbit Co't*AiJ5 A<s*ni to I^esico to Apply for 
persiaaiaa to 50 :© too -JILSli. Car ?*opfo o#x*d bsacoo 
£3.ki tUoiaUiy no* uittaw ao is c»sr*piotetiy uAiioeir^blo — 
itu ao iotarajaz is ^iio ‘^ivats^eror- * 
f 
1 * 
i, 
{3} AiW bis apL'iiss ess Cabas imroi^scoai La ;bo 
Soirrea stated tbit ao bad OB iaf srmAtioa -as* this but bo did 
• ftSH boUors loot too Cabas ^^v»?r=r:oai Lavoi>eti, lie aa 
a t«Jia tbai ii asy *y=rri as s^cb isryoiyessoat bad ioaJoad ox»t, 
Cabo TiouldL haTo ban erssiod •>/ tbo JS« 
2, This a^erwrv ba* ao isfors^aiioa ^aich ^onla 3p>cifi roily corroj>orr.io 
or disprove I‘i*I^£^t2RC,a JtUecwLa rs3racis5 i-ee Ha^ye/ t^5:>»AL-D. 
/3. ill a la£arn:aUra 1a 
/ 
t -rssiod •>/ tbo JS« 
2, This a^erwrv ba* ao isfors^aiioa ^aich ^onla 3p>cifi roily corroj>orr.io 
or disprove I‘i*I^£^t2RC,a JtUecwLa rs3racis5 i-ee Ha^ye/ t^5:>»AL-D. 
/3. ill a la£arn:aUra 1a 
/ 
t -

--- PAGE BREAK ---2, This a^erwrv ba* ao isfors^aiioa ^aich ^onla 3p>cifi roily corroj>orr.io 
or disprove I‘i*I^£^t2RC,a JtUecwLa rs3racis5 i-ee Ha^ye/ t^5:>»AL-D. 
/3. ill a la£arn:aUra 1a 
/ 
t -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C /) 7S--SW& 
£*/*/&/T £ 
3 
i# Did you handle the OSWALD case yourself? If not, to what 
crctent were you involved in it? Did you ever see or hVf to OSWALD? 
During what period were yon in clou* touch with the case? How did you 
keep up with it after it was no longer in your field of responsibility? 
Initial KGB involvement . * 
2. When and how did OS WALD first come to KGB attention? Was 
his visa application in Helsinki processed by the KG3 in Helsinki? In 
Moscow? Describe routine handling procedure cf US tourists to the Soviet 
Union* Was OSWALD'S trip handled any differently? 
• • OSWALD'S citizenship request • 
3- When and how did the KGB hear of OSWALD'S request for Soviet 
citizenship? Did Co WALD caxo a written request? Did you enamino this 
written request? Can yon describe its contests in full? (To vwham addressed* ■*’ 
how dated, tent as closely to verbatim as possible - what asked, what off a red, 
vhat reasons given). How long had OSWALD been in Moscow before he made * 
his request? Was it sent immediately to the KGB? Was it ever sent to the 
Supreme Soviet? 
Preliminary KGB assessment • , * * 
4. What steps aid the KGB Cake to investigate the request? At whose 
direction? How was OSWALD'S oona fides established? How was the sincerity 
of hi3 request tasted? How was hi3 operational potential investigated and » 
evaluated? Did the KGB ever think that OSWALD might be an agent ox American 
intelligence? If so, how did it go about investigating this possibility? Describe 
as fully as possible the KGB elements involved, tho KGB personnel involved, 
the progressive steps taken, the time required. * 
5. When and by whom was it decided that tho KGB bad no interest In 
OSWALD? Was this the decision of the Second Chief Directorate alone, or 
was tho First Cluef Directorate consulted. Which element of the Second 
Chief Directorate was responsible for OSWALD after the decision had been 
made to grant him a residence permit? 
I. 
sn^jitY 
L 
/s tho First Cluef Directorate consulted. Which element of the Second 
Chief Directorate was responsible for OSWALD after the decision had been 
made to grant him a residence permit? 
I. 
sn^jitY 
L 
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

\ 
i 
Citiaenahip denied 
A vvh.il ho,. and by -.mom ,as OSWALD apprised of ths decision 
ssr^ssr: ;asi£2M:s£rL.di~ 
did ta. KG3 havo in this docision? 
Suicide attempt 
:7. Wl» found OSWALD Ue^ling to death in hia room? Police, hotel 
employe«>> Intnrist personnel? v, 
3 To -meat hoeoital was OSWALD taina? Asprsataattly v,h»t «i 
3* 1 : , . Ho- IOSLC did bo reman* la th* hospital? 
9. Whit action did the KC3 taha oa di^^7 ^^IcTtho KG1 
to commit aruidde? Whit racommoanaticas 3toy after this? 
consider it ,i.« for the Soviet Union to alio, ^ OSWALD* 
«r ~ <***“ r ‘°rd-£: zsxsr&zsz&z ^ 
uli*. a. *—Wttr - i»«—a«s- - “• 
case? • 
' l 
Controls • , 
,0. >V„ csvAJJ-.f™? ** 
11 V/na OSWALDS American passport held at the htetropoli Hotel? 
U ^J^S. d^h. Jet it hacU in order to tahe it to the American 
Embassy arrd tarn it in? 
FsychologioLl aasaasioent 
12 Did the KGB xmlea a psychological assessment of OS JALD deac 
. It !wL detail aa possible. What v-ere the professional 
the methods usen - Were theT professional 
Sualiacatitma of those mating this assessmeat? Wore they proiass 
/psychologists, phychiatridt: 
/ 
- 2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. What v-ere the professional 
the methods usen - Were theT professional 
Sualiacatitma of those mating this assessmeat? Wore they proiass 
/psychologists, phychiatridt: 
/ 
- 2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 
/ 
I 
psychologists, phychiatrists, intelligence officers, or what? Wore 
non-p?afosaional observers employed to report on the activities of 
OSWALD and the results evaluated by psychologists, for example? 
13. What was the Soviets1 opinion of OSWALD'S personality? 
Exploitation 
H. Was the KG3 interested in OSWALD'S positive intelligence 
potential, -r>rxl was he interrogated or debriefed on his Knowledgcability or 
ca substantive military or ocher matters? Did OSWALD ever offer to 
give information on the US Maxine Corps or other matters to the Soviets? 
If the KGB did not try to get such information from him, why not? 
15. V/as any attempt made to exploit OSWALD for propaganda 
purposes (Radio Moscow broadcasts, or material for them; TV interviews; 
lectures; public appeaxaacos)? t . .1 
Residence permit _ ■" 
16. How long was it Defore OSWALD was given permission to reside in 
(the USSR? When n^d by whom was he notified that permission had been 
granted? What did he do while awaiting the decision? 
17. What level of the government decided that OSWALD should be 
sent to Minsk? 
KGB control ia Minsk * 
13. Did OSWALD receive any money from the Soviet government at 
any time, ether than bis salary at the factory where ho worked in Minsk? 
How much? Why? By whose decision? Is this a standard practice? From 
the budget of what organization would these funds be allotted? 
19. Did the KGB actually have iro further interest in OSWALD after 
he moved to Minsk, or did it continue to monitor his activities and to assess 
his potential from time to time? ... 
20. Describe controls the KG3 exercised over OSWALD. Was he 
physically ourveillcd? His apartment bugged? His mail monitored, etc.? 
Cthar? Compare this with controls exercised over other defectors. 
/Initial efforts 
- 3 -he KG3 exercised over OSWALD. Was he 
physically ourveillcd? His apartment bugged? His mail monitored, etc.? 
Cthar? Compare this with controls exercised over other defectors. 
/Initial efforts 
- 3 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

initial effort* to return to U5 
• , . n,.t leira tilt OSWALD ws 
21. When and how did Cio Sofia » aware of CSWALXI’a 
1,61 te ^ 
this v»i»b? f  , . _ 
• r.k^rv 1961. OSWALD referred to a 
* T 
orD»Ai*yi - , ... 
chaaua^la? . 
i “ 
Marina PB.USAKOVA 
lUSAKUV^ 
How did OSWALD — *— —°VA? “ “ 
inveixod in hoil^ with 
. 24. Your statement indicated that*eX ^^on available before 
• a hneicround and character. * .Heated? How extensively? 
Manna ocu?LD? U uot, whan was soa “ve g tin,lar the iaiormati 
she mat OSWALD? L »«• —nUon on Manna, in particular 
What were the sources ited." She ’**3* aftor **** * 8raduat*- ' 
that aha was ‘’stupid and not educate 
* . v^r^na. aa an imoriner on Ub 
25. Did tha KGB consider recruiting M ^ aot roCrait»d, v*»t «a 
OMt alter bar arrival ia tao US7 Df a rocrcutaaent o£ 
^-sr=sr,3-r . _ 
27 Can you explain the fact that she was 
inther ^“^o^rs the i^onymic .‘Niholayevna.” 
SSJSSSti-w.--* . 
1 / 28. To v»nat 
- 4 - 
/ 
<►

--- PAGE BREAK ---o US7 Df a rocrcutaaent o£ 
^-sr=sr,3-r . _ 
27 Can you explain the fact that she was 
inther ^“^o^rs the i^onymic .‘Niholayevna.” 
SSJSSSti-w.--* . 
1 / 28. To v»nat 
- 4 - 
/ 
<►

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28. -To what V.arina surveilled. or othor.ise observed 
brier. a ad after her marriage to OSWALD? 
». O. grouada did ta. KOB •tZgZ 
S ZXX2Z £ Lr^e^rriage. Wh, *U 
allowed? 
30. What W» «»*• aaSSac^'yo/^dfL hie 
.13 hie reiatianaai? to tno ING3 ' fa ^ under what arnmaScc 
sxckground. ^waU3 re3a*ding CSWALD-e 
“.to“ tlhT.l'SS after Ida retira ta the US? What .a. the •»»» 
a£ tha briaiiag give® *® ^ 1X110107 . 
. . »Q fe%, difficrddea in the vr»y 
31. How did It happen that era rtu-a from the country -with 
of Mariaa’a marriage ta *u,Jally reaalted la prelaaged 
hi~? Ihri at tirih. ..1-” »^.d, What level 
ttZZZZZSSr —; ^ a-^™4rSa^’ 
eoa L. ^rl r,f OSWALD and Marina, way 
32. U the Soviets were glad (^y . fle„abar 19&1)? . 
did it tain so loos »ctioa 011 e:Qt ‘ 7 
KGB presence and activities 
M- '’“^OSWALD™. to SSImlriM.f?''olf.“eriiI=a .her. 
“ tars—. 
iadlridaal. he talied ta •''*1'®mV| „ .eareaeatativea ai .am. other erg 
viho worked on any aspect »-k uu- 
. , t os\VMTi had retained his Am a ri can 
34. Did the KGB ca^^OSXIX^ ^ Dericd in which the KGB 
citir-enship while he was in « - considered it important that he 
was.assessing OSWALD would the Ku3 have c 
/retain US 
- 5 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---34. Did the KGB ca^^OSXIX^ ^ Dericd in which the KGB 
citir-enship while he was in « - considered it important that he 
was.assessing OSWALD would the Ku3 have c 
/retain US 
- 5 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

. .. „ . . the KGB had decided whether to 
ctiin US citi=*n=hip untU sues Lm ensure this. »»«* »* 
3^Sm? Would the KGB have£xom the Smhaoay? Did 
aterceptiag aad o ' A q£ Novomber 1959 to OSWALD 
ae KGB rLuacUtian of hi* US mtixensoip? ■ 
aviting Simla to formaline dia ren 
OSWALD'* contacts 
 OSWALD'S personal contacts 
35. Can you 3^® ^“fftha^e oeoula "planted" on OSWALD, 
in the Soviet Union? Were any \„t', or agents? 
r» were they KGB employs®*. mio-i=i« 
, _ith *iom OSWALD cam* in 
M. 11 i *• ■«""* 
KC3 »J~i» 1“ “l^** 1 • • 
KGB P”"d°” „ .. OSWAU, —— » 
37. la what way*. “ v~ _ 
from other American defector ca . ^ regarding 
Wao tho First Chie£ Dirsctora-e 3 Was any interest 
OSWALD7 “ «• Chief Directorate? Would snch 
S,‘“Jca'“1 
OSWALD in the US 
39. Were you awaro of any efforts 
S3. in 1962 or 1963? 
with regard to these requests? 
, by OSWALD or his v,ifa to retom 
to the USSK in 1962 or 1963? 
40. If so. what did the KGB do 
41 Do yon tL*va an'/ — . , 
September 1963? Whom he saw an4 « 
aoid at the Soviet Embassy? 
Information on OSWALD'S trip to Merico ^ 
Lnd v*bs 
42. Eid a,. KGB h»« "Ki 
-r. -■—“ -us? 
/43. What was 
6 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

...

« What «. the reaction in the KG3 whan it was learned that 
OSW \S had ’.ailed President Kennedy? Did the KG3 undertake any 
CSWALJJ naa 3“ ,«..„41ni, activities in the Soviet Union attar 
further investigation of Oe ./ADD a aca/iue additional 
me assassination? Was there a review ot aia iUe, vaa uw* 
field lave saga ti on? Was any additional information developed? 
44 Toe Soviet Embassy in Washington turned over to the O.S. 
government certain documents which it caid were its .C“*^ Sw^_D - 
-.y’aai other files did the Soviet Sovemment have cn OSWALD 
“ *•=■ *-« — th.KCS1.oU in 
this rolsa^t* of liles?ed over to the O.S. 
government certain documents which it caid were its .C“*^ Sw^_D - 
-.y’aai other files did the Soviet Sovemment have cn OSWALD 
“ *•=■ *-« — th.KCS1.oU in 
this rolsa^t* of liles?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20 January 1964 
Tha Commission o£ Investigation Into ths facta and clrcoxn- 
stances of the a3sa«alnatlon of President John F. Kennedy. 
22 November 1963, has; 
taken note of the Consular materials kindly available 
by the Government of the USSR on November 30* 1963, 
pertaining to the activityof l^e Harvey Oswald and hie 
wife in the United States during the period Jana 1962 to 
- November 1963u "  ^ 7* 
. • X „<# 
Th* Commission is keenly deairons to attempt to secure as 
zrsch detail as possible regarding Mr. Oswald's stay and activity in 
the-USSH itself. That would cover, rashly, the ported October 
1959 to May 1962*. The Commission, therefore, requests the 
assistance of.the USSB-Governmetit-Lr^making-aTailable to it does* 
mentation and details regarding Mr. Oswald's residence in the 
Soviet Union. • J ‘ ^ «. 
From the study of the currently available record of this 
parted - which U fragm<tirtary - w« lndlcat*b*iaw broad topic* cm 
which th* USSS GoYommimt'a favorable resptnt** to thl* request 
* . * f"* * * • ,**•* . *. 
would be of particular utility to the Commission: * ’ 
• *1# To assist in the assessment cf Oswald's mental • 
*** * # * / 
physical condition daring hi* aojcnrn in ths HSSH, the follow- 
Log Information La desired; 
a. Documentary records of all hospitalizations and 
1 • 
medical examinations or treatment La ths USSH, including; 
(I) details of his treatment in October I959 La 
Moscow (when he was allegedly found unconscious La 
his hotel room by Intourist guide, RLma Shirokova, 
and was taken to a hospital); 
Draft prepared by\ (based in part on/ draft). Forwarded 
to Commission (Mr. Rankin) with covering note from DDP, 
21 January 1964. (To be submitted to Govt of USSR) 
J.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hospital); 
Draft prepared by\ (based in part on/ draft). Forwarded 
to Commission (Mr. Rankin) with covering note from DDP, 
21 January 1964. (To be submitted to Govt of USSR) 
J.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 
V 
(2) reccxda, ox record s abatracts, cf any 
commiasioca ox other organa which deliberated 
tlia qvwstion ox asylum acd perm is a Loa to reside 
in the USSR; 
(3) documents ox reports of appropriate’ 
authorities on the Question: why and how Hir.sk 
was chosen for his place o£ sojourn* 
b. Documents and records pertinent to Oswalds 
stay in the USSR* including: 
• % 
(1) city registrations fear hia stay in 
Moscow^ Minsk c? ether places; 
(2) hotel registrations cx any ether records 
pqrtsimrg to Iras da oar moremeuta octaida the 
. places when h* was registered as a resident; 
(3) oigpSoyiaeotr records,. Inglrrdirrg: 
(a) his pwracaal file at his place (s) 
• . / 
1 o£ wtaphr. . *J . .. * • ‘ . * !•: • . 
(b) day tmlna membership booklets 
other than booklet #01311655 issued by the 
Electrical Industry W oarhera Union; * 
(c) any work booksp .* - *’ * >. .• 
t • % * 
• : # 
(d) Ms participation La the social aad • 
other activities, of his union acd at his plans 
c£ work.. . 
(4) records of ether central ox local authorities^ 
Ixscladfccg OVTR and Militia^ 
(5) ether basic personal documents* passes, 
etc., Lssuod to Oswald^ 
-.^r. v-t *;. 
—3—

--- PAGE BREAK ---ork.. . 
(4) records of ether central ox local authorities^ 
Ixscladfccg OVTR and Militia^ 
(5) ether basic personal documents* passes, 
etc., Lssuod to Oswald^ 
-.^r. v-t *;. 
—3—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

( 
(6) records of the marriage of Oswald 
• and Marina PrusakoYa; 
(7) statement, preferably menfch-by-moaih, 
of Oswald's salary, bis additional income, if any, 
/ 
and any other Bums ho may have received La 
USSR, 
c. Description o± Oswald's official citinorahip 
. rooidcnce status La the USSR, with any pertinent documents, 
d« Correspondence and documents pertaining to * 
: ' . . . • . 
Oswald's departure from the USSR, including: 
. (1) Oswald's own written recusants cr state— •- 
- * ■ * • i( * • 
marts of bSaexrtioa to denart; . .**..*• -v 
(2) records of any argons or crrrm-rrri^mijKmm . ' 
• • :* 
which deliberated on the question of 'bi* departure;. 
(3) a chronological narrative account of his 
departure, . ? »# * **».** 
* *•#.** * • 
e. Any ether correspondence of Oswald with Soviet 
authorities in the USSR, * ' V 
U A description of Gatrail's personal, social .v’ 
emplo7iD«c± gitaarica and acti-rttien iatha USSR, IsstadixQ - • . 
any lafarrcstion which might assist fliia Cosamiaaioa better 
to undexatarri ids motivation far entering are? later leaving 
the USSR, . * * 
Did Oswald have any record at activity in the USSR 
such as drunkenness, disturbing the peace, th.^±9 black- t 
Dfl pe'^So^l- VIOI_€“MC^ 
marketeexing.^etc, ? If so, infarmadoa and documents 
pertinent to such activity would be appreciated, 
5. Copies of any statements, before or since the assassination 
af President Kennedy, volunteered by Soviet citinena who knew or ’ 
£.*+ 
-nV 
\ 
'i3?£r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.V 
i .. 
may have bean associated with Oswald during his residence La 
tlio USSR that would have a bearing on the questiona above 
stipulated or might be cd use to Comm^ainr), 
‘ ! 
-ZS • 
. * 
’•: • J'Y '-f. .*/ - 
\ i+.Sj -g.^*f. 
•; - 'X 
f 
‘. .• j *: 
-5- 
■rr
1:a 
tlio USSR that would have a bearing on the questiona above 
stipulated or might be cd use to Comm^ainr), 
‘ ! 
-ZS • 
. * 
’•: • J'Y '-f. .*/ - 
\ i+.Sj -g.^*f. 
•; - 'X 
f 
‘. .• j *: 
-5- 
■rr
1:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

( 
K" 
KHXOnAXDUM 
VO: 
Mr./Howard P. Willens 
o 4 7^* 
EX/S/6/T X 
.' Y^T1/^ 
' fUFTICIAL VILE COi'i. • 
PROM: Mr/"VI. D.ivla Slawr.cn /w* | ^ C 
SUBJECT: Letter to the Russian Government 
Background 
Lee Oswald spent almost three years in Russia. Almost 
our sole sources of information on these years are his own 
writings and correspondence and Marina's testimony. V/e .are 
therefore preparing a letter to be sent to the Russian 
Government asking for additional information. 
On 21 January 1954 the CIA sent us a draft of such a 
letter. The State Department has commented that in its 
opinion the CIA draft would probably have serious adverse 
diplomatic effects. The State Department feels that the 
CIA draft carries an Inference that we suspect that Oswald 
might have been an agent for the Soviet Government and that 
we are asking the Russian Government to document our 
suspicions. The State Department feels that the Russians 
will not answer a letter of this, kind, at least not truth- 
fully, and’ that it will also do positive harm in that they . 
will take offense at our sending it to them. The State

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SHU*!—***-, it if fPri-i rti«i«ir~ri» III .-nt^.hart jaaWja>~Tj4iai^««n jf»

--- PAGE BREAK ---ositive harm in that they . 
will take offense at our sending it to them. The State

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SHU*!—***-, it if fPri-i rti«i«ir~ri» III .-nt^.hart jaaWja>~Tj4iai^««n jf»

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C /? 75-/¥¥% 
Ex/Z/6/T /O 
>^tCElA!»
rCUIl FOR: 
SUBJECT: 
CoieT; 
27 November 19^3 
'-^o e AcTo/ 
or 
’Comments on President Kennedy1 s 
Assassination 
1. We should understand that ray comeat3 which follow ere not 
based solely on the thesis that OSWALD was specifically diopatched to 
curder our President* The very real possibility also exists that 
OSWALD was cent here on enother mission by the KGB and subsequently 
cccoroliched the deed on his own initiative. However, such a possibility 
does not cake the KGB less culpable Q3 the seeds for OSWALD1 s act 
must have been planted while he was being trained in .the USSR for his 
other nil S3 ion. We right fir at examine the question uppermost in the 
minds of coat Americans, "What did the USSrfhave to gain by killing 
the President?" I believe we can make a good case a a to the precise 
gains acerasing to the USSR and cere specifically accrusing to * 
KHRUSHCHEV. Xn preface let me admonish my readers not to play down 
the political aspects .of Soviet intelligence operations. The American 
intelligence cervices1 apolitical approach to interpreting and . 
countering Soviet intelligence operations frankly frightens me at 
tines. But core specifically the assassination of President Kennedy 
would accomplish the following for KHRUSHCHEV personally: 
a. Western pressure behind the leadership of the USA would S* 
automatically ease Tip. Witness President Johnson* s immediate 
conciliatory telegram to KHRUSHCHEV, after the murder. We might 
mention that the USA vaa the chief proponent for not extending 7 • 
long range credits to the USSR. Extension of long range credits Is 
vital to the USSR at this Juncture. „ .. 
b. This leads us into the most pressing problem within the 
USSR. The West persistently underrates the extent of the Soviet 
internal situation. It was my prediction that as a result of the 
mismanagement cf the 1563 harvest and the CHI COM arguments that .* 
KERUSHCnZV would resign during the up coning December plenum of the 
Coxrniiist party cf the USSR. Cur president's death thus effectively ' 
divert a the Soviets* attention from their internal problems. It 
directly affects KHRUSHCHEVA longevity. #> . - : * # ; 
c. In the Cuban situation any USA or Cuban expatriate * - 
actions against Cuba will now be tainted by the.fact that these are 
vengeful acts against Cuba because of OSWALD*a "Fair Play for Cuba" 
associations. Obviously the Soviets properly interpret our situation 
in that President JOHNSOH will restrain any planned interventions in 
Cuba for a long time.- 
-n 
O 
> 
30 
O 
5 
to 
■*^4 
CO 
/. 
tannin** uim'innnnsly the Soviets properly interpret our situation 
in that President JOHNSOH will restrain any planned interventions in 
Cuba for a long time.- 
-n 
O 
> 
30 
O 
5 
to 
■*^4 
CO 
/. 
tannin** uim'innnn

--- PAGE BREAK ---erly interpret our situation 
in that President JOHNSOH will restrain any planned interventions in 
Cuba for a long time.- 
-n 
O 
> 
30 
O 
5 
to 
■*^4 
CO 
/. 
tannin** uim'innnn

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t.,nr,t..TH,l>iftrlif ' l irr '^■nurrrt, fc< tifr* 
/ 
/ 
cl. A more amenable Africa will strengthen KliRUSECIIEV's 
hnncl in hin rmoir^ battle with the CIUCoC-lS* He wlU thua have 
finother reason to coy his form of peaceful coexistence io superior 
to that of the CiHOUXs1. 
e. Conceivably* any* of President KEKZZEST's planned actions 
to get even mere firm with the Soviets during the pre-election year 
ore thus sabotaged by the President's murder. 
f. The Soviets obviously* understood that the death of President 
KEGEDZ would result in the emergence of DeGAULLS as a strong Western 
leader. DeGAULLS of course says "what's good for France is not necessarily 
bad far the USSR." *. .. . . 
g- The death of President KENKEDX removes a popular rallying 
point for cur allies. Furthermore, and mere pertinent, bin death 
removes a qycbal for Soviet intellectuals who have inevitably made 
invidious comparisons between their own intellectual desert and the 
flowering of the arts under the KEEJEDIs. The problem of the intellectuals 
la the USSfl should not be interpreted as the least of KEHUSZCHEV'a 
Internal problems. We.*must recall that beginning with Lenin, intellectuals . 
have provided the impetus for revolution in the USSR and they comprise 
gne of the* three balls KERUSEC2ZV cast constantly Juggle—the intellectuals, 
the Party and the KUltary. 
b. If the USSR has ary ambitious aims in manipulating U.S. 
public opinion their murder of President KEIEEDr would nerve to . V 
exacerbate the present differences between the radical left and * i 
right in- America» In fact the USSR propaganda machine began to say • .* 
the- murder was cazzoitted by the radical right es soon as the deed was 
done and before OSWALD was captured* • 
% 
i. Finally, the death of President KEGffiZDT, whether a planned 
operation or not, will serve the most obvious purpose of providing 
preef of the power and omniscience of the HUB. This application of 
cheer terror could be interpreted as a warning to Russia's own citizens, 
ua the Soviet Intelligence cervices have suffered seme very real 
revere es recently with FZnX07SSr, 001115321's defection, their ignominious 
expulsion from the Congo, etc. I have long predicted that the USSR 
would take some drastic action to halt' the rauid erosion of their 
security. 
2* Can ve briefly view the OSWALD operation as a mounted KGB 
operation to kill the President? What are the essential ingredientsT 
a. The KGB had scree three years to assess OSWALD in the USSR, 
^aycea will deprecato the value that the KGB attaches to such on theeration to kill the President? What are the essential ingredientsT 
a. The KGB had scree three years to assess OSWALD in the USSR, 
^aycea will deprecato the value that the KGB attaches to such on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"CT 
1 
spot assessment. They -y'aleo^y IKS 
'SZt^rTy hno^iS^MhtorW M «—*• ■— *«“ 
saludjustcd typea. . - 
b. jn ouch on operation the KGB could not use ^Soviet citizen 
r^efLlSl^^ffiB^th S^rtnS' °£u*££ essentials— 
Xt was o pood, •plnn that. did succeed* \ *, • 
c. OSWALD did escape from the bock building* . _.• ‘ 
V * ^ c.t do . tdd,y vgct oogd •' 
of contact with his illegal case officer. C-rtclnUr we «o .. 
penchant for using theaters for rseting places.- • _ .....- ,,. . 
the behavior of Col. ABZL was his behavior in this r.gsra. _ . 
3. jano the very real ^^tin^in^lw^^Mter 
to liquidate OSWALD after he did the J*. ^ tbe Bceae. 
was prohahly for Just such a _icui - . the possibility tbat 
In RW'S part in the operation V^n^E^nOT essentials of . 
RUBI was also a KGB hatchet can. f00—r 
his part in the pperatioa we^ see the following. . .• 
a. BUBX bad access to the police station. Reports say he 
personally knew most policenen. • • v"?•> ‘ -• 
h. He successfully silenced OSWALD. ■:■. ■,. ■>. '■'< ■ i." ‘■ 
c. ’ RDBT reralna silent and his cover ia holding «P* .. - __; 
d. He haa a good legend of temporary insenl^T* . ... . . 
e. He haa a reasonable chance to escape the death sentence. 
4. The undersigned night he at^t^hi^actlvitiea 
OSWALD espects cf this case if we.knew the m three 
prior to hia departuretotheDSSR.^c-^-^ tQ Koaco„r 
possible cusuera to e'ceS^de terxist or Canonist who 
°* ^ *bat ia. he cade this decision by hicself 
decided to go ca his own, -hat is, lQakinK far a better life 
and prompted by no one. He possibly was losing for 
without knowing what the Soviet Union really.- * ' 
/ 
T—sn 
t~*T'

--- PAGE BREAK ---decided to go ca his own, -hat is, lQakinK far a better life 
and prompted by no one. He possibly was losing for 
without knowing what the Soviet Union really.- * ' 
/ 
T—sn 
t~*T'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. 
/ 
■b. Second, efter OSWALD'c discharge no an "undesirable" 
fro, the Marinos, he found himself in a difficult and unplcaaant ' 
,i n c it possible that in thli; situation he van noticed by . 
n ^ nnotter or recruiter for the Illegals or none other department and 
vna^conoidcred as n possible candidate for uoe or recruitment? The 
full information about OSWALD wan sent to Moscow, and on Moscow 8 
order on investigation of OSWALD was trade end there followed e decision 
°o "invite" him to Moscow. Using the word "invite", the undersigned 
has in mind that seme egenta or recruiters threugb conversations with. 
OSWALD, but without actually suggesting the trip itself, inspired 
OSWALD to travel to the USSR. And, in this case, it is possible that 
corecne gave him some financial assistance and some advice on how to .. . 
do tuia- . • . . • - i •• * . 
c. Third, OSWALD vent to Moscow, or was sent to Moscow, * - 
by come pro-Soviet, pro-Ccz=unlst, pro-Cuban organization(s}^ ' / 
having in mind tb-t he would stay in the Soviet Union for a:few yea- , 
learning more about the Soviet Union and receiving instructions xcr * 
future operations, activities, etc. • * / ^ V * . 
5. Knowing far sure that the Soviets never give a visa without 
dicing en investigation of the person caking the application, we have . 
to sake our own investigation of the following questions: .. _ ‘ : 
a. When did OSWALD first begin to express hia wish, to go 
to the Soviet Union? *.•**•*. *••.**.* *. * 
b* To whom did he tali, whom did he contact at this early ^ # 
time, and how much time elapsed between these talks and contacts and 
his oppllcation? ^ . *. ' 
c. How, when and through whcoi did OSWALD get his Soviet visa* 
a. HOW long did it take for bin to get the visa? . ^ ^.. / - ; - 
e. Who personally gave the visa to OSWALD? We must know ±Z > 
the person at the Embassy who talked to OSWALD was a KUB employee* v 
f. When and how did OSWALD travel to the USSR (air, sea; 
through which countries; in which countries, if any, did he make stops; 
bow long were such stops)? . • *• 
6£l Together with the above, it is very important to know of 
OSWALD1 D circumstances before hie trip to the USSR* Who knew in advance 
that he was going and who knew that he had gone: Mother, pother, 
relatives, friends, neighbors, girl friends,-boy friends, old buddies, etc*?stances before hie trip to the USSR* Who knew in advance 
that he was going and who knew that he had gone: Mother, pother, 
relatives, friends, neighbors, girl friends,-boy friends, old buddies, etc*?

--- PAGE BREAK ---rip to the USSR* Who knew in advance 
that he was going and who knew that he had gone: Mother, pother, 
relatives, friends, neighbors, girl friends,-boy friends, old buddies, etc*?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.■—-• =»■>■ kuitU -"■* 'StMxihsiatabi 
/ 
i 
1 ....••'• 
v ^.,1 n-WALD coy goodbye before be left for the USSR: peraonally 
or by°tclepboce, by call? lid. be ever act anyone any questions on 
traveling to the USSR? Whoa? . ' _ 
,L' OSWALD in Moscow. When OSWALD arrived in Moscow, he vea 
, 6 K.^ntlon investigation end complete control by the KCB. In 
tu c^artiru^r «cC^efthe Second Chief Directorate (Cl). Being 
thlc pnrticuio ' KRB at the cece tine he was under heavy 
investigation directed at answering the. question of why this stupid 
Investigation . doesn't make any difference whether 
American had cn=e to the USSR (it doe» * aa* ny wculd conduct 
thc-y knew iSormtlca was taken 
fr£ S-SS e^ecially about hie service in the ferb» r: 
etc ' At the cere tine, OSWALD was under constant observation 
M?Btu£for possible future use by the Soviet InteVUgence and Cl ^ 
oervicea. . ’• / V* .^*V 
j 7. Tt should be noted here that any foreigner, especial^ TO 
ir-rican, vtio arrives in the USSR for peresnent or prolonged stay 
fcS^ in asunlned by the Soviet State Security aa a posai^e csndidate 
tZr future, use (special training end recruitment)within ^e USA “ 
other countries'(but against the USA). After a good study and lnvcs- 
tlsation which continues about six nonths in]Moscow, ita 
financial oupnort and niniaann ccnfort from the KGB, the KGB_ cakes its 
coacluaiona: that OSWALD is clear and ia who he clalns to Tie and. • 
that ho night ucsolbly be used or useful for Sovie^ ^te^ee°^°? N 
ClLrvlcc! h'OTE: the undersigned believes that during his (OSttLD's) 
first fev Dosths in I-fescov, additional .inquiry and investigation cr 
OSWALD waa going cn through the Soviet Embassy in '*shff 
through Soviet agent network in the USA and possibly through pro- 
Govict end pro-<kr==uiiist organisations within the USA. ^ . t * 
8. After being a few weeks or months in Moscow, OSWALD expressed 
o wish to stay forever in the Soviet Union and to be a Soviet citizen. 
Then the KGB eaid to him "If you really want to bea Soviet citizen 
and cerve the Cccmnist cause, you must denounce American IirperlaJJU^a _ 
nnd Ars=r±can citizenship. u Therefore, somewhere in this PexiOCi # 
OSWALD vent to the US Ezbassy and renounced his US dtizensnap. 
After this act State Security decided to give OSWALD 3cce kind cf J 
in accordance vith his knowledge snd capabilities, at tha^ 
continuing to otudy bin as a potential agent. _#* ’/ . .. # * 
9. Because to make a good agent .’takes a long tine and because 
OSWALD vas inpatient—«nd because he had not yet been given Soviet 
citizenship—*the KGB decided not to cake of bin a good agent, but did • 
not break relations with bin and decided to use hin in a mare or less 
open way. • . • •.use he had not yet been given Soviet 
citizenship—*the KGB decided not to cake of bin a good agent, but did • 
not break relations with bin and decided to use hin in a mare or less 
open way. • . • •.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6.

/ 
10.

Wncn GEmALD showed come ul^atiafactica about the Soviet vny 
c f life (it io ucuel for Americans)—and by this tir.c OSWALD had already 
i.rl hie girl friend (the KGB probably helped bin to find her—to zsske 
)»lrn 1 mnay and to uzike cure that he would not leave the Soviet Union)— 
the KGB at the came tine continued to train him, probably in the way _ 
of an old-fashioned Marxist, telling him that he would be a Good 
lighter against imperialists and against American millionaires, such 
tia I'OCrXFELLHt, KEMKHDf and others ^ And somewhere here, while in this 
hind of training, a low level case officer of State Security told hin 
tint to have o better life in the US you have to fight very hard to 
b’.iry capitalism, as our Nikita Sergeyevich says; together with 
cue Italian, you have to bury all the millionaires, including yctn?

flrct beast and blood-sucker, KENNEDY (NOTE: this is not a tell 
story; it is the way In which State Security operates with the stupid ...

.* 
Marxists and with naive followers of the Communist movement).

If on -'.fr..* 
Marxists and with naive followers of the Communist movement).

If on -'.fr.

S-; 
n high level within the KGB it was decided that there is nothing good 
in OSWALD end that he is just a naive American and that he could not *• 
be relied upon fully, but that nonetheless he could be used because 
he io for our cause and is against capitalism in general, then the 
folia wing would have been suggested—after OSWALD already had asked 
pemlcoion to return to the USA: OSWALD was toll to be a good 
fighter against capitalism and to secure your Soviet citizenship, you 
must chew yourself as a good fighter for the Communist cause inside 
the USA; then, we give you permission because we believe you are a 
strong Marxist to return to the USA and to do something for cur 
co.xon cause, cuch as to help any American pro-Soviet organisations 
or, for instance, become a member of a Free Cuba Ccrnaittee or in case 
of crisis to do come thing outstanding—that will be noticeable everywhere— 
that will prove that you are a real Communist* Then, somewhere here, if 
he vna already a Soviet agent cr not*-, the girl showed up, or she was 
there before, but by this time Bhe was pregnant and OSWALD decided to 
go to the USA.

Then he was told* After this talk, OSWALD shouted— 
where ic your freedom?

She is rcy wife, we have a child, and I would 
like to go.

If he did cake a big noise, they decided to let him and 
her go; or if he already was a trained egexrt, then without any kind 
of noioe on h±3 part, but with some difficulties, permission was granted 
far her to go with him* • .* 
11.

looking at the wife of OSWALD, we should have in mind that -T -.*• 
che was and otill is an eg ant or at least a low-level informant of the 
KGB.

If she was not before she met OSWALD, she became so after the ; " 
second day she net him* This is the regulation in State Security on 
how to handle foreigners—it mokes no difference whether they ere V' 
Communists or not* ./ • 
12.--- PAGE BREAK ---

looking at the wife of OSWALD, we should have in mind that -T -.*• 
che was and otill is an eg ant or at least a low-level informant of the 
KGB. If she was not before she met OSWALD, she became so after the ; " 
second day she net him* This is the regulation in State Security on 
how to handle foreigners—it mokes no difference whether they ere V' 
Communists or not* ./ • 
12. Investigation of OSWALD1 o wife should be undertaken as - 
noon as pensible, with special attention being paid the questions to follow: 
• • e •

--- PAGE BREAK ---re V' 
Communists or not* ./ • 
12. Investigation of OSWALD1 o wife should be undertaken as - 
noon as pensible, with special attention being paid the questions to follow: 
• • e •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7. I 
a. First, who is she? Her education, profession, age, family 
■background. Party affiliation (Kcnsonol membership). If che was a 
member of the Kurspnol, then the Kuasoiol organization will take any^ 
steps possible Gainst her traveling to the US. Also, she must he 
expelled fren the Koascaol, und then she automatically would he 
considered a rasher of the Inperialist Camp. Then, if she was a member 
of the Komsomol end this action did not take place, it was because of 
KGB interference against such action. The same action would relate 
to eny of her relatives—father, mother', hr others.. ..if they were 
members of the CPSU or Kcnsoaol. ' . , • 
h. To which offices was she invited before and after* their 
carriage? If she was invited to some official Soviet offices, and if 
these offices asked her not to carry a foreigner and not to go with 
him, then probably she was not a member of the Kcmsamal and ahe did 
it on her ovn will; hut if she answers that no one invited her to 
such offices, then the whole Job was done by the KGB—smoothly and 
quietly, with no talk going around about it. . . 
c. Who helped her and how many times to write papers far 
the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs to say that she had carried 
an American citizen, and would like to go with him to the USA? If 
It was done a few tines and with great difficulties, then probably 
It was done only with a little help from the KGB. If» however, the 
papers were prepared only once and permission was granted after only 
a few months1 wait, then everything was done by the KGB • (According 
to the American newspapers, her application for permission to cane to 
the US was processed very easily and quickly.) • v * • # *.*•r 
d. When and where did they register their carriage? Who were 
the witnesses to that marriage? Eow many relatives and friends (of 
wife) were present at the wedding and celebration. -What kind of 
gifts did they receive at the time of marriage and from whom? Where - 
did they take up residence efter marriage2 Were they given an apartment, 
or a roan? And in what neighborhood? • . • • 
Cm Where did her husband, OSWALD, work? In what factory? • 
What were his hours of work? Eow long did he spend in Moscow before 
he vent to Minsk? Who chose Minsk—did he or did someone else? ^ * 
. * 
f. Who were her husband's friends? From what circles? . ..t 
Workers? Intellectuals? / # * * 
g. Eow many times were she and her husband—while they lived 
together — Invited to the police stations or any other Soviet 
government offices, together or separately? _(NOTE: There ia no other 
office than the KGB which would make such on invitation. It makes 
no difference if they were agents or not.)r any other Soviet 
government offices, together or separately? _(NOTE: There ia no other 
office than the KGB which would make such on invitation. It makes 
no difference if they were agents or not.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---government offices, together or separately? _(NOTE: There ia no other 
office than the KGB which would make such on invitation. It makes 
no difference if they were agents or not.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gee 
8. 
... . f 
l 
h. How sioirt (intelligent) is che7 Does she really apeak 
r.o English? Ic her English better than she chows or better than it • 
should be after being here only two years? Or worse? 
i. What dees she suy about life in the Soviet Union? 
j. pld her husband have a gun while he was in the Soviet 
Union? If co, how does she know about it? When did he get it? Did he 
have special permission to carry a gun?-* Did he bring this gun with 
him across the border? For your information, nobody carries a gun 
in tbs USSR without the KGB eventually learning of it* least of all ^ _ 
en American.! . ... • ' '• * *-•. - *• ’ 
* i i. • . * ‘ 
k. l;Who gave financial help to then before they left the 
Soviet Union]? (HOZE: For a regular worker in the Soviet Union, it is 
1 . impossible to save enough money to buy a ticket end mke any kind of 
preparations to go ebroad.) . 
1* Who gave Instructions to OSWALD to ask far financial 
assistance at the American Embassy upon his return to the USA? 
a. Was their first child bom in Bussia—baptized in the USSR? . 
If so, in what church? Whose idea was it? Did they baptize their 
second child, bora in the US? . . .. , • 
n. If OSWALD never had a permanent Job here in the USA, then 
'• who was going to finance his nart trip to the USSR? How much did his 
wife know about hie plan to return to the USSR via Cuba? 
V" 
f. 
13. The investigation cf the wife should he made step by step, 
• keening in mind and never forgetting that OSWALD as well as she 
herself were under constant observation and with constant contacts 
with organa of the KGB. Without such observation and contacts with 
organa of the KGB, no foreigner can "live within the Soviet Union. 
li{-. In ecy i-rrestigatlon or this esse ve should sot lo'se the 
vltw of the extraordinary circunstances surrounding tl^ case 
e DaDsrtEiQt or State, could loslcally enoush request .hat th_USSB provi^.*1. 
siltble lnTo on OSWALD'S story la the IBSS and the purpose of his.h- 
Soviet Embassy In Mexico City. A friendly nation don he expected to such 
are guest. He nleht learn a ereat deal fron the Soviet reply. .lnTo on OSWALD'S story la the IBSS and the purpose of his.h- 
Soviet Embassy In Mexico City. A friendly nation don he expected to such 
are guest. He nleht learn a ereat deal fron the Soviet reply. .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

+ intfi iMNII 
i 
'\r 
FEDERALvdUREAU OF INV 
C 4 75"-/vy<f 
CTORTINC QfftCM. 
orraof amain • 
OATS 
IMVKSTIGATIVC PSJUOO 
WASHINGTON FIELD 
DALLAS 
12/2/63 
11/18 - 30/63 
• FL£ OF CASE 
ncroirr MAOC ar 
rv«o«r 
o 
LEE HARVEY' OSWALD 
CARL E. GRAHAM 
/ \ 
CHARACTER OF CASE 
IS - R 
6lW 
d 
REFERENCES: Bureau teletype 11/30/63. 
Bureau teletype 12/1/63. 
• - P - 
ADMINISTRATIVE DATA: 
Investigation conducted by WFO that was known to 
be of evidentiary significance was previously submitted to 
•the Dallas Officp in appropriate FD 302s. This material 
forwarded by airtel to Bureau dated 11/26/63 under caption 
''Assassination of President- JOHN F. KENNEDY, 11/22/63, 
Dallas.j Texas." This information is not being repeated in 
this report. It is noted this information pertained to 
the transportation of evidence, collection of handwriting 
specimens of OSWALD, delivery of bullet obtained from 
Secret Service, and the obtaining of a U.S. Postal Money 
Order used to purchase rifle used in the assassination. 
Also included int this material was an insert reflecting 
the results of review of USMC personnel record for LEE/' 
HARVEY OSWALD. //Mf 
   !  ( U j 
w 
IN CHAR&K A J I ' 
nciH.cc, 
,10/- Bureau (105-82555) (,L \l 
“3 - Dallas (100-10461) 
3 - Washington Field (105-37111) 
(1 - 89-75) 
! cc. vzsrsnr 
DO NOT WRITS II 
-Hf 
 i£lf 
’D OEC Si-T-C? 1 
— 
— — 
/ 
34 
PllUnliUllM Rocord of AllocK.d Report 
n*cd. 
F-d. 
~7- 3 
tprr 
1 
'JLfcL 
pcl’O*' 
\ w yJ JAl 
i .>■ 
J 
"V • 
DEC 2«6:

--- PAGE BREAK ---NOT WRITS II 
-Hf 
 i£lf 
’D OEC Si-T-C? 1 
— 
— — 
/ 
34 
PllUnliUllM Rocord of AllocK.d Report 
n*cd. 
F-d. 
~7- 3 
tprr 
1 
'JLfcL 
pcl’O*' 
\ w yJ JAl 
i .>■ 
J 
"V • 
DEC 2«6:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 uC * is-'*** 
■ £x H- /&>T 2. /J 
WFO 105-37111 *. V - . 
6 * 
% 10
X JV • i ^ * 
OEL Bone TV program on November 23, 1963, or ; ’ 
1 November 24, 1963, it was reported that the Dallas Police 
I Department had questioned a . JOSRODRIGUEZ, a fellow employee 
of OSWALD, at the book warehouse from which assassination 
of President KENNEDY occurred. Office of Security had 
check made of visa files of Department of State regarding 
this name and located following information regarding one 
JOS^MIGUIU/^RODRIGUEZ^yXMOLINAj possibly identical. • 
». 
On March 6, 1959, latter individual was issued 
B-2 visa at Embassy, Havana, Cuba, valid through March 5, 
1961, for one month's visit to a cousin in .New York City,, 
not {identified and no;: address given. He was warned not 
to accept wor^ or overstay period of admission. Visa Number.... 
1490477 was issued. Following description was given: ^•. 
\ Date_oX-birth: 
Place of birlh: 
Height:" 
Weight: 
•• ! • Hal,r: 
Eyes: 
Complexion: 
Marital status: 
Home address: 
On November 26, 1963, PETR S ./.DERJABIN, an ^ f 
admitted former .Soviet intelligence., off leer, furnished 
the following1Information concerning LEE HARVEY OSWALD 
and his wife: 
1 
1/27/36 
‘HavanaCuba . _ . 
5* 6"  
180 pounds 
Brown 
Brown 
Fair ^ 
Married . /it 
Calle 15 #201 Lawton, Havana 
DERJABIN does not believe the Soviet Government •* 
had any knowledge of OSWALD'S plans to assassinate President 
KENNEDY; however, he does believe that OSWALD and his wife 
had some connection with the Russian intelligence service. 
He Baid the Soviet Government undoubtedly has a file on 
OSWALD and feels that it should be requested to furnish 
.. information regarding OSWALD’S activities while in the 
Soviet Union. Normally, when an individual leaves the 
Soviet Union and has been working for the government, he 
would be furnished some clothes and transportation expenses 
to his destination. Since this was not done, DERJABIN "* 
- 41 - -V-f’ 
“V- .*V*cvv .to 
-  \ >< v • • • .y. -king for the government, he 
would be furnished some clothes and transportation expenses 
to his destination. Since this was not done, DERJABIN "* 
- 41 - -V-f’ 
“V- .*V*cvv .to 
-  \ >< v • • • .y. -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i 
wro 105-37111 
7 
i feels that OSWALD'S departure from the Soviet Union was 
J planned by the. Intelligence service. OSWALD must have been 
1 investigated upon his arrival’in the Soviet Union and 
probably lived in Moscow while he was undergoing 
investigation prior to his going to Minsk* Also, DERJABIN 
feels that OSWALD muBt have been indoctrinated into the 
Soviet system prior to his being permitted to return to 
the United States, or he was considered unstable and allowed 
to leave as an undesirable. He said OSWALD'S wife must 
have been an uneducated peasant type and considered safe 
to leave the Soviet Union or had connections with the Soviet 
intelligence service. « * 
DERJABIN believes that the wife* of OSWALD should 
be observed closely and thoroughly interrogated. DERJABIN 
suggested that amr-g others, the following questions should 
be asked: > * 5 * 
1. When was it that she first met OSWALD and 
the details concerning such circumstances. 
f DERJABIN said that if she was not working 
for intelligence service at the time of 
the meeting, she would have been contacted 
within two days. 
2. Where they lived in Minsk and details 
regarding the type of apartment. 
3. Details regarding OSWALD'S activities 
while in Minsk during non-working hours. 
4. Where did he go and how long was he gone 
during the evenings. 
5. How well did he learn the Russian language. 
6. Was she a member of the Komsomol, and were 
any of her family members of the Communist 
Party. 
7. What station in life did they occupy and 
were any of them officials of the Soviet 
Government. • * . /* 
s 
- 42 - 
■Wi    
Lv* f — v.’ ■.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ily members of the Communist 
Party. 
7. What station in life did they occupy and 
were any of them officials of the Soviet 
Government. • * . /* 
s 
- 42 - 
■Wi    
Lv* f — v.’ ■.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WFO 105-37111 ‘‘*Av’v . 
8 . • * .• - . . 
j 
8. Details regarding their securing permission 
| to leave the Soviet Union. .’.v 
9. Details concerning events leading to their 
marriage. 
By communication dated November 26, 1963, information 
was received from the Savannah FBI Office that one "BOBO" SMITH 
had telephonically advised an employee of a television 
Btation in Columbia, South Carolina, on November 9, 1963, he 
knew President JOHN F. KENNEDY was going to be killed. This 
same individual again contacted the employee on November 26, 
1963, and 6aid he had tried his best to keep the President A 
from being shot but was too busy. This caller also claimed 
he had "protected WILSON with his life as far as he could go" 
** and indicated he was a good friend of DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER 
and had written many letters to him. The caller indicated 
he goes by the name of "HOBO" SMITH but this is not his real 
name. • . 
The above information was furnished to SAC ROBERT I. 
BOUCK, Protective Research Section, U. S. Secret Service, 
on November 27, 1963. SAC BOUCK advised his files reflect 
no record of "HOBO" SMITH. 
r' 
tA'review of information in WFO files reflects 
one "808p*SMITH,..also, known_as JAMES LEWig^NSMITH, _2S3-^ 
Oakland Avenue! Spartanburg? South, Carolina# was known' 
as a chronic complainant in i946. 
By communication dated Novembep^'26, 1963, Los.Angeles 
FBI Office, advised Lieutenant MICHAJp>'riEPADRO, who was 
formerly assigned to U. S. Marine Corps,Air Control Squadron 
Number 5, Marine Corps Air Facility, Santa Ana, .Califqrniaj 
in 1958, had been upset by literature received by LEE 
HARVEY OSWALD ,who was a member of this unit in early 
1958 . OSWALD reportedly told DEPADRO such literature was 
being received so he could practice Russian. 
On November 27, 1963, IC MICHAEL VERNON DEVOL 
determined from U. S. Marine Corps files the service record 
for DEPADRO, which would contain his home address^*® 
presently stored at the Military Personnel Records Center, 
St. Louis, Missouri*VOL 
determined from U. S. Marine Corps files the service record 
for DEPADRO, which would contain his home address^*® 
presently stored at the Military Personnel Records Center, 
St. Louis, Missouri*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0. ft 75- /¥*$ 
V 
Ext/'&T /z 
8 April 1964 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Plans 
SUBJECT: 
Status Report on Work for 
the Warren Commission 
1. Paras 1 and 2 of the attached memorandum reflect 
work already done and forwarded to the Warren Commission* 
Para 3 indicates material now in process. Items a and c 
will be completed by IS April. Item b is dependent upon 
an answer from the FBI which as late as this morning is 
not forthcoming. 
2. Regarding the other suggestions made by| 
, I do not believe he should discuss any aspect of 
this case alone on any basis with members of the Commission 
staff. If this is done, he should be accompanied either 
by | orJ who is working on the case. 
As for the questioning of Marina, I would be reluctant 
to have| or anyone else from Clandestine Services 
figure directly in this. 
3. The suggestions made in para 6 have merit and 
if you agree, we will tell him to proceed with these. 
Attachment 
f*. FCIA Review on JUH 1Q7R 
«

--- PAGE BREAK ---vices 
figure directly in this. 
3. The suggestions made in para 6 have merit and 
if you agree, we will tell him to proceed with these. 
Attachment 
f*. FCIA Review on JUH 1Q7R 
«

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 
I 
i 
MEMORANDUM FOR:J 
SUBJECT : Status Report on| 
Warren Commission. 
8 April 1964 
Work for the 
1. To date,| has prepared and forwarded through 
appropriate channels to the Warren Commission the following papers: 
a. Chronology of OSWALD in the USSR, October 1959 - 
June 1962 
1 b. Questionnaire for Mrs, Marina OSWALD 
c. Biographic Information on Mrs. OSWALD and Her Relatives 
d. Name List with Traces 
- a revised list of approximately 160 persons known to 
the OSWAJLDs, with traces, was submitted in March. 
e. Soviet Use of Assassination and Kidnapping 
(a background paper) 
f. Soviet Press Reaction to the Assassination of President 
Kennedy, 23 November - 31 December 1963 
2. In addition, we have prepared and forwarded several other items * 
including the following: 
a. A letter to the Commission providing information on OSWALD*s 
Soviet weapon (February). 
b. Answers to the Commission's questions concerning information 
in State Department files (April). 
/c. Pictures and biographic

--- PAGE BREAK ---information on OSWALD*s 
Soviet weapon (February). 
b. Answers to the Commission's questions concerning information 
in State Department files (April). 
/c. Pictures and biographic

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c. Pictures and biograpliic summaries concerning two Soviet 
officials stationed in Mexico. (Providedj for forwarding 
to the Commission). 
3. At the present time we have the following items in progress: 
a. Additions to the chronology based on material recently 
made available by the FBI. 
b. A picture of OSWALD in Minsk which was found in CIA 
Graphics Register. (This is not to go to the Commission until the 
results of an FBI check with the source of the picture becomes availabl 
|c. A brief summary of the OSWALDS* contacts with Soviet officia 
and 9llit;r citizens after their arrival in the United States. 
4. f!have reviewed Marina OSWALD*s testimony before the Commissi 
and plan tq return to the Commissions offices for a further examination of 
pertinent transcripts and exhibits next week. Mr. David Slawson of the 
Commission's staff has indicated a desire to discuss the Soviet aspects of 
the case informally with me after his return from a field trip. With your 
approval, I shall do so. 
5. Mr. Slawson also stated that Marina is to return to the Commissio 
for further questioning and that he would advise us of the date that this would 
occur 30 that we might submit more questions for her if we wished. He 
voiced his desire to have someone from CIA (he implied Lhat it might be rnc) 
present when Marina is again testifying. 
) 
6. I believe that we should not conclude our work for.the Warren 
Commission without preparing a brief analysis of certain aspects of the 
Soviet phase of the OSWALDS* careers. NOSENKO*s testimony has probably 
eliminated the need for some of this, but I think that we should do a brief 
essay on Marina and on OSWALD too, drawing together what we believe to be 
the significant features of their life and activities in the USSR. This should 
include a comparison of OSWALD'S experiences with those of other defectors 
to the USSh, going beyond the information already provided the Commission 
on this subject. . * 
r •the USSR. This should 
include a comparison of OSWALD'S experiences with those of other defectors 
to the USSh, going beyond the information already provided the Commission 
on this subject. . * 
r •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. /f 7S- /</¥ 2 
£XM/6;T /3 
Program Transcripts 
SPECIAL PROJECTS DEPARTMENT 
CBS News 
CBS TELEVISION NETWORK 
CBS EVENING NEWS WITH WALTER CRONKITE 
Friday, May y, 1975 
6:30 - 7:00 PM, HUT 
7:00 - 7:30 PM, EDT 
ANNOUNCER: From CBS News headquarters in New York, this is the 
CEO EVENING NEWS WITH WALTER CRONKITE} and Peter Collins in 
Vientiane, Laos; Randy Daniels in Detroit; Robert Schakne in' 
New York; David Culhane in New York; SUarron Lovejoy in Lan3ing, 
Michigan; Daniel Schorr in Washington; and Barry Serafin in 
Washington. 
©1975 CBS Inc. 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n' 
New York; David Culhane in New York; SUarron Lovejoy in Lan3ing, 
Michigan; Daniel Schorr in Washington; and Barry Serafin in 
Washington. 
©1975 CBS Inc. 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EVENING NEW” Wl'l'lt WALTER CRONKITE 
5/9/75 
CRONKITE: New question, are being asked about the assassination °f ^ 
Kc-nnedy and about Lee Harvey Oswald, the man who killed him. Daniel Scho 
ha, annual some «V,.U1cunl details about the Russian phase of Oswald 
life. 
DANIEL Lb'UuKR: In February, >G4, ten weeks after the Kennedy assassination. 
Lieutenant Colonel Yuri Nosenko of the KGB - the Soviet secret po ce - 
defected to the U.S. with details of the KGB file on Lee Harvey Oswald 
his existence and his FBI interrogation report have been disclosed, a er 
eleven years. Nosenko told the FBI the KGB considered Oswald mental^ 
abnormal, possibly an American agent, decided not to ^recru to; 
The report wasn't cited when CIA Director John McCone and his dep y. 
Helms, testified before the Warren Commission. Today, McCone explain • 
JOHN MCCONE [former CIA Director]: It is traditional in the intelligence 
business that we do not accept a defector's statements until we have proven 
beyond unv doubt that the man is legitimate and the information is co^c"‘ 
TL* s;„e tl„ 10 P~ve the hone tides or the which subsequently -ere 
proven, however, but were not known at the time of the testimony. 
SCHORR: Nosenko said the KGB had decided to refuse Oswald So i 
citLnship, tried to get rid of him, and only after he slashed his wrists 
tn a Moscow hotel, permitted him to go to Minsk, with instructions that 
be watched but not recruited. Russians who hunted rabbits with Oswald 
reported he wa3 a very poor shot. 
When Oswald turned up at the Soviet embassy in Mexico in September, '63, said 
Noticnko, the KG 11 vetoed a visa tor him. 
Alter the assassination, in November, the KGB found in Oswald's file an entry 
that the KGB in Minsk had tried to influence Oswald in the right direction, 
••uggosting a possible assignment. But a crash report to Nikita Khrushchev 
concluded that was a bureaucratic, self-serving statement and wrong. 
-Daniel Schorr, CBS News, Washington.ight direction, 
••uggosting a possible assignment. But a crash report to Nikita Khrushchev 
concluded that was a bureaucratic, self-serving statement and wrong. 
-Daniel Schorr, CBS News, Washington.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t C rf 75- 
Ex/s/6'T /5" 
13 April 196U 
ISMSU1DUH FOR THE RECCHD 
X 
'A 
1. f called ns in at 0900 and shewed ns in draft a cemorandci* 
recording h-i ^ conversation with Allen Dulles on Saturday H April re ClX y 
assistance to the Warren Commission. In essence, the conversation dealt 
with questions vh^ch the Warren Connission will direct to CIA. Copy 
follows? •••**.* 
2. | has suggested that nothing further be done re preparation 
of an analysis of the OSWAID affair pending receipt of the questions froa 
the Coamission. Answering these questions night nake it unnecessary to 
prepare an analysis. 
3. | asked that we prepare, on a priority basis, a reply to 
the FBI c ornneunic at ion containing two reports on the OSWALD case from 
N'osenko. j is handling. | and | are to see it in 
draft. 
P.S. | also returned to me the several items of Oswald production 
borrowed on 11 April. 
Ducunreftt Nu;rib#f (.57-831 
for FOJA Ravi aw og JUN 1976

--- PAGE BREAK ---and | are to see it in 
draft. 
P.S. | also returned to me the several items of Oswald production 
borrowed on 11 April. 
Ducunreftt Nu;rib#f (.57-831 
for FOJA Ravi aw og JUN 1976

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c~> 
13 April 1964 
MEMORANDUM FOR 
SUBJECT:^ 
Deputy Director far Plans 
J cri Discussions with Mr, Allan W. Dulles 
on trie Uswaid Case \\ Apni* ' 
1. At the instructions of the DDP, I visited Mr. 
Dulles on 11 April to discuss with hia certain questions v. 
which Mr. Dulles feels the Warren Ccaaission nay pose to 
CIA. Mr. Dulles explained that while the Ccaaissioa. r-W^.-. 
wished to clarify certain aspects of the Oswald case in. '**J. 
which a response frca CIA soeaed necessary it was not sura 
how the questions should be posrd nor how CIA should responds 
Mr. Dulles hoped that our discussions would, enable hiavto- 
fedvise the Ccaaission on this natter. He first raised the .1 
allegation that Oswald was a CIA agent. Ho aentioned.two J 
sources for this accusation. One was Mrs. Marguerite -• 
Oswald> Lee Harvey Oswald’s mother, and the other was- Mr.: 
Mark Lane, Mrs.. Oswald’s attorney. He suggested that the 
Coamission, in asking us this question, night well forward 
a summary or pertinent excerpts of the testiaony concerning * 
this matter. He noted, however, that Mrs. Oswald’s testi- 
mony was so incoherent that it would be difficult to find 
pertinent oxcorpts, thus it would be better for the Cca- 
raission to suauaarisa the testiaony. .^vy' 
• V: 
2. Mr. Dulles then suggested that the response to thisV 
quostion could be in the fora or sworn testiaony before the 
Comnission by a senior CIA official or a letter or affidavits 
He recalled that the Director of the FBI had replied by 
latter to a siailar question. In any event, Mr. Dulles * 
felt the reply should be straightforward and to the points 
He thought language which made it cloar that Lee Harvey .. 
Oswald was never an employee or agent of CIA would suffico. 
We should also state that noithor CIA nor anyo® acting 
on CIA*s behalf was ever in contact or coanunication with * 
Oswald. Mr. Dulles did not think it would, be a good idea 
to cite CIA procedures for agent assessaent and handling 
to show that it would have been unlikely for Oswald to have 
boon chosen as a CIA agent to enter Russia. There are always 
exceptions to every rule and this night be aisunderstood by 
members of the Coaaissicn.with little background in activity* 
of this sort. I agreed with hia that a carefully phrased 
denial of the charges of involveaent with Oswald seeaed 
most appropriate. 
—--*i 
Document Number tShsi] 
for FO!> r>yi9W 4 JW 1375 
/ 
/y* 
of this sort. I agreed with hia that a carefully phrased 
denial of the charges of involveaent with Oswald seeaed 
most appropriate. 
—--*i 
Document Number tShsi] 
for FO!> r>yi9W 4 JW 1375 
/ 
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---agreed with hia that a carefully phrased 
denial of the charges of involveaent with Oswald seeaed 
most appropriate. 
—--*i 
Document Number tShsi] 
for FO!> r>yi9W 4 JW 1375 
/ 
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

- 2 - 
/ 
3. The next question concerned the possibility of 
Oswald1s having been a Soviet agent* Mr. Dulles suggested 
that the Commission's question on this natter be phrased 
somewhat as follows: "In the knowledge or judgment of CIA 
was Lee Harvey Oswald an agent of the Soviet intelligence 
services or the intelligence services of other communist 
states at any tino prior to 22 Noyeabar 1963, or was Oswald 
solicited by these intelligence services to become such an 
agent.?'* After considering this question, it becaaa apparent 
that the problem of making a "judgaent” as to whether Oswald 
gj.^ht have become an agent of a coaaunist power was subject 
to' the same difficulties we would have encountered if we . 
had tried to answer the allegation of CIA affiliated by 
citing CIA's own procedures. If CIA, ia responding to-the 
"judgaent" portion of the question, were to say that ia 
light of its knowledge of Soviet Bloc procedures iv was *•* 
unlikely that Oswald would have beccae their agent, we -v*V • 
would haye to admit that exceptions are always possible. 
Mr. Dullqs and I felt that* it would bo better to avoid this 
f\and confipa our responso to a precise statement of fact. 
This statement, in Mr. Dulles1 view, could note that CIA 
possessed.! no knowledge either gained independently or* fro* 
its study of the matarials suppliad by tho Commission 
tending tlo show that Lae Harvey Oswald-was an agent of 
the Soviet intelligence services, or the services of any 
other Communist country, or for that natter of any other. 
Country, j : . 
4. Both questions were discussed individually but * 
later Mr* Dulles suggested that because they were inter- . 
connected it would be better if the Commission posed them 
in one letter to CIA. I agreed that this sight be simpler. 
5. After covering these questions of direct interest 
to CIA, Mr. Dulles mentioned other issues which concerned 
the Commission. He remarked that members of the Commission 
could not understand why CIA had not begun an investigation . 
of Oswald as soon as it received word that ha had defected. 
I noted that this question had bean discussed with Mr. 
Rankin and his staff and thero s-eemed to be considerable 
_underxtand.ing_of the practical circumstances which made it 
impossible for CIA to undertake such investigation inside 
the USSR. I expressed the hope that it would not be necessary 
for vClA to placo natters of this sort in the public record. 
Mr. Dulles agreed.possible for CIA to undertake such investigation inside 
the USSR. I expressed the hope that it would not be necessary 
for vClA to placo natters of this sort in the public record. 
Mr. Dulles agreed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i 
< Mr Dulles then asked if it were normal for 
ch. ssrjffyiss* 
Os«ld “““ .*g5*{ “* 5J?Sd“h.t th. host n.r to Obtain 
S?#5- «J5t constituted ■».»•» 
cases ia the USSR would be to question the Department o* 
State. Mr. Dulles agreed with this. 
7- “r- ;s”:r»“%s?”Sl:Uu mm ** 
irmm mitnimmm i«b *..bi»«, »oaig, 
13“pril. At tSls point I did SgtaTtS* 
regard to the way in which CU gould reap dlfficolt to 
. SSa^rJiri?: 
can beaade at that time. 
8 At no tine during these discussions did Mr. Dulles 
aake any inquiries about Nosenko and I volunteered no in^. 
nation on this score.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/ 
O *'“ 
• ^ T-* 
9 March 1964 
C /) 7s--/4-?-& 
\ 
J , o J/•*»/ v . # 
„ ausuwi« 
" ;;r,r«rj rr“" « 
I Paul Dillon stated that tt 9 , stated that the 
Vuo Oswald case "wouid not ^ ^ spen(]ing a good deal 
KBt was covering die wnw« 
oC time on it. / 
/ briefly on this matter 
2. On Monday. 9 March, I saw/ egCicms. He reiterated 
and protested A. decision not handle the .atter and 
that it had been decided thought, however, that they 
out questions would not b.> ashed -J** ^ 1 had no confidence 
would be covered eventually- goviet phase. I indicated that it 
in the FBI's ability to cover ^ b Qn ehe Oswald case if we 
would not be possible to c Pn£omation- later that same day I 
.coulil not get the pertinen agreed to raise question anew 
ser-cioned all this to j * « 
with! - * s 
Document Number. - 
for FOIA Review ort . JUH ^975 
RECORD C0PV_

--- PAGE BREAK ---same day I 
.coulil not get the pertinen agreed to raise question anew 
ser-cioned all this to j * « 
with! - * s 
Document Number. - 
for FOIA Review ort . JUH ^975 
RECORD C0PV_

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C4 75V W/ 
/7 
vrffluu -ii' AUA *T*niiu..tV-‘P. ««tla I1/9/TO 
Carttrul Intt/Hl^xiooo .q.-uncy 
y«^hJLttftoii9 )J»C« 
huor ulr» 
lou L»vo not 00tod on :zy ap )Bul for a waiver of cJjtrgoa# I have iruvldod proof 
that my uorit uiui in to root are juhllo rather tlicn for personal gnixu Tta ocurta (ted 
the ^oiJartskuu of Juutioe iiuve 00 found ami tha i>epartecnt baa waived feeo and 
reitt ui.nl ulut I lukl puad« .low 1 huVu ruud ttmt a court hue hold that under theca 
condition the CIA alno cmy not UO*JOOJ churfjeiu I therefore write to pesdnd ycu cf 
this «iui other apieale on which you have not actad, BOBS relating to requaata 
now aiiout «icht yearts old* 
If you require uoro i.foimtxon that I have provided ploaee oak for it# 
I would 11K . to Jqjow when you expect to cot on these quite old apneala* 
I n i.m would liku to know whan to expsot the balance of tha JTL g/mannl nation 
oataxlol* 
• x 
In ixu-tiuulur 1 would Uka to tou whoa to expect tip ttoocako luforaatiaa your 
afli. invito in one ofx my c&oao alalia vao declnaaiflod for tho houce Select Cesfcdtte* 
on Aa^aoxkinatiomu 
Jincoreiy, 
Harold tfaiobarg

--- PAGE BREAK ---to expect tip ttoocako luforaatiaa your 
afli. invito in one ofx my c&oao alalia vao declnaaiflod for tho houce Select Cesfcdtte* 
on Aa^aoxkinatiomu 
Jincoreiy, 
Harold tfaiobarg

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 
WASHINGTON. D.C. 20505 
C A 
5 AUG 1976 
Mr. Harold Wcisbcrg 
Route 12 
Frederick, MD 21701 
Dear Mr. Weisberg: 
This responds to your letter of 21 July. 
ill-LS j. v,     ' 
Enclosed you will find the list ns^se^by^us1! ^ote 
Yuri Nosenko*currently 
under F-76-143. 
In regard y°fot^fepart°frfm the^I^Ae? of 1949, 
of this Agency, we quote in part t 
Section 6: . 
••...the Agency shall be ^^^“oS'oFMy’othar 
of section 654 of Title 5, and t P disclosure 0f the 
law which require the pulblicati ial titleS , salaries, 
°or
rg£fiS“i personnel * emp loyed by the Agency.... 
As you can see from this Freedom of 
In'formatio^Act^'ashbeing1 specifically exempted by statute. 
Request number P-75-6669 # 
viously over lap”3 and^duplicates some 
in^part^hat^as^ecently^een -quested^y MaxhMlen^ Ho.- 
coverednbyJth^broadr^d°comprehensive wording^of^your^reques 
finder F-75-6669 and are part of the r®.^;£ore we have not 
s&s contiMe “ 
trlat it under F-75-6669.

--- PAGE BREAK ---^y MaxhMlen^ Ho.- 
coverednbyJth^broadr^d°comprehensive wording^of^your^reques 
finder F-75-6669 and are part of the r®.^;£ore we have not 
s&s contiMe “ 
trlat it under F-75-6669.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

You again refer to the "the Borsages request." If you 
mean Borosage, we do not have a request from him on the 
Kennedy assassination topic. We reiterate our belief that 
you were possibly confusing the name Borsage with Belin who 
did make a similar request and who did receive exactly the 
same documents released to you-, nothing more. 
Regarding the name Hugh McDonald, first raised in your 
letter of 2 March 1976, we were given insufficient biographi- 
cal information with which to make any positive identification. 
In light of your language, "If you can confirm or deny that 
McDonald was ever an Agency employee of any kind....So, if 
there is any information you can let me have I would appreciate 
it. I will not contest a negative decision....", we did not 
record this as a formal request warranting a separate nipber. 
However, you should understand that under the same provision 
of the CIA Act of 1949 quoted above, we would have to provide 
a formal denial under FOIA (b) (3) of any document responsive 
to such a request. 
Finally, although not raised by your letter of 21 July, 
we must advise you that certain of the documents found re- 
sponsive to your F-76-382 on Martin Luther King, Jr., have 
necessarily been referred to another component for review. 
We shall not be able to get our response to you on this re- 
quest by the end of this month as earlier projected, but shall 
do our best to expedite it when the materials reach our hands. 
Sincerely 
Gene F. Wilson 
Information and Privacy Coordinator 
Enclosure

--- PAGE BREAK ---his month as earlier projected, but shall 
do our best to expedite it when the materials reach our hands. 
Sincerely 
Gene F. Wilson 
Information and Privacy Coordinator 
Enclosure

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Requests of Harold Weisberg 
F-75-004 Personal (subsumed under F-75-4927) 
F-75-4765 Yuri Nosenko, etc. (subsumed under F-76-143) 
F-75-4927 Personal 
F-75-6669 Kennedy assassination 
F-75-6838 Materials given to FDR 
F-76-105 Heine affidavits 
F-76-143 Yuri Nosenko, etc. 
F-76-149 Olson papers 
F-76-219 ' Rocca source material 
F-76-382 Martin Luther King, Jr. 
F-76-405 1967 CIA review of Kennedy assassination info 
F-76-437 CIA's use of Rocca 
F-76-438 
Behavior modification