Statements of Witnesses - Capt. W. B. FRAZIER, 19 H 770-2 
Thh Oswald killing - Security: 
Fraaier is captain of the Radio Patrol. There are 2 FBI statements 
here reporting interviews with him. The first is dated December 9, 1963, 
and sets forth Frazier's admission that at about 3:45 a.in. November 24, 
1963, he was informed at the Danas Police Department by FBI Agent 
Newsom^, of threatening calls received by the FBI and the sheriff from 
an unknown individual "indicating that a group jiji was going to kill 
Lee Harvey Oswald that day, that,night, or the following day.” There- 
after Frazier, at about 5-5:30 a.m. called Capt. J. W. Fritz at his 
S 
home and reported the FBI call. Fritz”told him that Chief Jesse Curry 
was handling the transfer of 0swaid and suggested that he (Frazier) 
call Chief Curry.” 
- > - - 
Between 5:30 and 5:45 a deputy sheriff phoned f and reported 
Sheriff Decker’s instructions that he request Chief Curry to call 
Decker about the transfer. "Captain Frazier added that the Deputy 
Sheriff indicated Sheriff Decker wanted Oswald transferred to the 
County Jail as soon as possible.” 
Frazier called Fritz and advised him of the Sheriff’s desires, 
and Captain Fritz again told him that he (Frazier) would have to con- 
tact Chief Curyy as he (Curry) was handling it.” 
Frazier attempted this at about 6 a.m. when, for about 15 minutes, 
the line was busy. A check with the telephone company resulted in the 
report the line was out of order. It was then about 6:l5 and Capt. 
Cecil E. Talbert arrived to relieve Frazier. Frazier "said he advised 
Captain T^bert of the facts relating to the above threat and also of 
his attempts to contact Chief Curyy and the fact that Chief Curry's 
telephone was out of order. Captain Frazier said he also advised Talbert 
that Sheriff Decker wanted Chief Curry to call him.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---contact Chief Curyy and the fact that Chief Curry's 
telephone was out of order. Captain Frazier said he also advised Talbert 
that Sheriff Decker wanted Chief Curry to call him.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 - Frazier 
Frazier quoted Talbert as saying "he would send a squad car by 
Chief Curry's residence and have Chief Curry call him (Talbert)." 
This statement seems to be signed by Frazier. The interrogation 
was by Agents James W. Bookhout and George W. H. Carlson. The inter- 
view was on December 6, 1963. 
A statement dated November 25, 1963, and elicited on November 24, 
in wfeich the questioning was by FBI Agent Milton L. Newsom, is also 
signed by Frazier. 
In it Frazier is quoted as saying that at 3:20 a.m. the morning 
of the 24th he was advised by the FBI Dallas office of a threat to kill 
Oswald. He told the FBI he would check through the Police Department, 
which to the best of his knowledge had received no suhh calls, and 
"would give this Information to Chief of Police Jesse E. Curry iramedi- 
ately." This statement says Frazier "was advised that the Daiias 
Sheriff’s office received a similar call." 
There follow 2 one-sentence paragraphs. In the left-hand margin 
opposite each the word "incorrect" is written, in each case with the 
initials "WBF" written beside them. The first is, "Frazier said that 
plans to transfer Oswald to the County Jail may be changed in view of 
this threat, and the Daiias ^olice Depart® nt will keep the FBI advised. 
The second says, "Frasier stated that Oswald's planned transfer 
had been publicized primarily as a form of cooperation with the press 
and news agencies of the press, and other news agencies." 
Whether or not these were. In fact, incorrect statements, the 
first paragraph represents what should have been a normal reaction and 
a normal condition and was certainly in keeping with the wishes of the 
sheriff. The second paragraph is quite consistent with the findings 
of the Commissio n in its report and with the statements of other offic- 
ials who knew Chief Curry.