18H.St.,#
Weshingten.D.o.
November16.1942
M.RreBellPrayeur
maitor,Spot
1501 Btoedvay
MewYozE，.Y.
Dear Prank,
Im sorryI aenldn'twrlte you sooner,Among other things,I wasn't well
wediseuseed severalstorieswhen lastIspoke to you,ana Iagreed to
wrlte yona letter withbriefoutlines o!eaoh.Herethey.are
Astory on Willians Power Maloney,Speclal Aasintant to the Attorney General
sneharge of proseentions for sedition and palated conspiracies.In sevoral
mentheMaloney'gnamewill again beverymuch in thenews Atthephesent
time he 1s preparingmore then 28 seaitioncases for trial.He was in
ehargo of developing the casesand preaented thea to & grand jury with
marked sueeess.Maloney ls a devout Catholie,a dynanie sort of guy
Batlonal headliues when, aB connsel, he ran the U.S.Senate investigation
Justice,where he has been conducting the investigations of seditionists,
the vermin press and other un-Ameriean peonle and things that will reach
aclimaz in several monthswhen the firstof the cases goes to trail and
makes roally sensational headlines.Hany picturos available at servlees
and others should beeasy.
The United Statos informution SarvieeInformation fora Demoeracy.This

--- PAGE BREAK ---s to trail and
makes roally sensational headlines.Hany picturos available at servlees
and others should beeasy.
The United Statos informution SarvieeInformation fora Demoeracy.This

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
well Mxed inyour own mina.It is the etory ofthe servicas rendered
Americe'ssmaller citizens by their government.Like Maloney,this servieo
touched it. From the most unimportant eitizen who wants some information
tomanufaeturerswhocannotmintainveshingtonoffioesandrepresen-
tatives come & steady ssream of inquiries which keep a large starr in one
floor o! this building is nretty,well psnellea snd doeoreted.In the
center is% lsrge information booth, staffed by good-looking girls. To
Work, looking for friends they cant find, or even looking for a bed to
slesp in. The Uols takas care of all. surrounding this large room are a
soriesofofficeswith giasssides.ntheseofficesartheontactmen
who hndle theoroblens of snrller business men.Theyare caijedhe
Gold Fish Bowl Boys" because, undike lobbyists and the lfke,they do every
xraus jo froaus ou4 pue fosafud ou aasu fout ·uedo aus ul 4no Burut
USIS had been seattored all around Taahington, in holes and'high up in
variousbuildings.Thay answered only written aad telephojed inouiries.
As soon as the omergency, homever, President Roosevelt deeidedy it could be
lmportant inthedefense（andwar,o:course)effort.On/hlsAnitiative
it was located on one of the "best" corners in town, l4th. 8nd Fenna.
Ave., nw.The usis is one of the cheapest, most efficiant knd least
ublicized agencies among the war sfencies. It is now, at /least tochnically
pastoftheow1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---town, l4th. 8nd Fenna.
Ave., nw.The usis is one of the cheapest, most efficiant knd least
ublicized agencies among the war sfencies. It is now, at /least tochnically
pastoftheow1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
ment Training Center,the irmy and individual soldiers,in a denocratic
way, have built a cemp second to none in the worli in the ovportunities
t offera the men to make their krmy lives as comforteble as rossible.
Most of the barreoks have large "living rooms", frequently vith mezzanines.
pua saur4u1nc Tautatro u41a pe4aroo8p 1ra 'peftauod arg aseu4 50 omog
thelike.?hey hcve comforteble furniture,and themen havejrivete
dences (supervised, ofourse).They have pewder rooms for the visiting
girls,and lots oother things like that.when these barrackswerebuilt
connected in yirs,end,if the men desire,they can build bunks in
oneroom and use theother as gnrivatecitting room.Manyofthemenhsve
done this,and they bave unusuallynice quartors.Among the thinys done
themaelves)thet baveimproved thelots oftbe men was theconstruction
of an ampithestor, larger then sny around here for hundreds of miles,
stleaetso:larger numberofmen cen enjoytheplentifulentertain-
ment.Most of thetop-notehersgoing to weshington try and make a show
at the Fort.At this csmp,too,thore is much"cultural" recroation
avallable.Someof the soldiers have renroducedrmy life st the camp
in oils,andthereare severalgood pictures avallable.I think this
story has several values today,and 1 knowI can get a lot ofcooperatoon
on at hare,probably including the services of a photagrapher for the
excellentcamp magazine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ble.I think this
story has several values today,and 1 knowI can get a lot ofcooperatoon
on at hare,probably including the services of a photagrapher for the
excellentcamp magazine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

oftieesand faetorias.They havesolvad mejor problems,streanlined
and storias you might want to consider.They are both men snd wonen,
Negros and foreign bcrn, end enough will be located ciose en.ugh to
you to solve ang picture croblem that might arrise. There are sone
V
pactures available.lere inashington,asinthefactories,therehave
boen major problems thut employeas have solvea.The Havy has swarded
clerical workers x强 comnendations and about:750o.u0 i cesh for
their Auegestions,which h:ve s.ved lots ofwork.
How the rost office ishelpine to win the g.r.Tharu are hundreds of
thousands.of post-office anployees all owhom,overy day.orforia
sone war duty bosides carrying the n:ils,in itseifan iaportant wur
sarvico. They heve hcndled major problens for tho government, like
alien gegistratlon. They have haniled the coliection of many ailiions of
dollars in war bonds nnd stamps.Fost ofrice invoutipations h.ve been
ofcutstanding iaportance incounter-aspionage Ithouchtbey iauy obect
to the use of this fact).Thore arehundredsof ways in shich the
mail carriers and clasks are quiatly, but daliy. doinc their bit.
The Troasury income-tar story I sugsested is ono ve should get busy on
into it.i believe.ahat I heve in mind is s story the averae selary
worker could use to fill cut his blsnk.ue could set it,officiaily. from

--- PAGE BREAK ---I sugsested is ono ve should get busy on
into it.i believe.ahat I heve in mind is s story the averae selary
worker could use to fill cut his blsnk.ue could set it,officiaily. from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
Navyheros.Youwillreeall thatins:oakinoftais storyIsaidthere
might be pictire troubles. I stiil antieipate this difficulty. Howevor,
sketchesmirht even work out better,butunfortunstely,itis notoften
possible under the strees of action to shcot a sn meking a hero of
born and first-generation americxns in theNavyuave discharged their
responsibilities tothoir new homeland withvalor andcourage"ovsr:nd
above the call of duty". The stories of heroic conduet &ro of a Swede,
a Frenchmn,a Fawaiian,& Chinese,an Italian end perhaps xnother.
Neywrlareiy
of uncovefing "unsung heros" and giving them the credit tbet is their do.
Isaggested anAmeriean and a United Mation beroer story.such stories
can be cbtained here from our cwn Armed ervices,to hom 1 have alreauy
spoken, :nd from rerresentatives of the various Uaited Nations gov rnnento,
with whom I have gosd conmeetlons.I know of several good Czech,Horwegian
Polish and Fussian stories,:hd thepicture probrem will not be
Insurmountable.In half thecoses theyshonld be svailable.
Combatcorrespondents,or fighesrwriters.I'm surprised that none of
the larger magezines has found this story.Most of the front-line stordes
we are getting, and as the war progresses, parhens all of them, will be
writtenbymembersofshevarioisAmaedServices.TheMarinesmakethe
their comparatively sedentary jobs on newspapers, &iven them marine
trainingandsentthom intoaction.Fighting inthevanguara,theymust
wait until theyhave established a beach-head bfore they drop their guns

--- PAGE BREAK ---dentary jobs on newspapers, &iven them marine
trainingandsentthom intoaction.Fighting inthevanguara,theymust
wait until theyhave established a beach-head bfore they drop their guns

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
Facifiehes been writtenby the combat corresvondents who were first
toleuvetheinvasionbergesenawhofoughtuntiltheyhadenovghroom
to write.Good pictures of these men in training ..t : Marine Corns
base are available,and there may,vithin a short whil:,be good sction
pictures of then th.t aro the McCoy.
I believe this covers sll the ideas you wanted me to put on bcer. There
flcodine you.
Bythe way,how @id the pictures of the OPA party last 3aturday nizht
turn out:Ihope you got enough.If youidn't,there will probablybe
abetter storyofsimilar nature in the neer future.
klso,will you please speek to"illixms for me and remind him I was to
heve heard from hin :bout the mythe mtter,one rsy o:the other,xx
about 10 days ogo.If he doesn't want the story, 2lese sk kim to return
the stuff to me ss soon as he can,becuuse i can use it.That ishis
first name,Frank-Bil! or Eob I couidn't remember,and that's why I
dian'twritehimdireetty.
Sincerely,
Harold weisberg