1

i


/l| 31 lh^'- ^lb


MEDIA ALLIANCE

Fort Mason • San Francisco


In Recognition Of

. Meritorious Service To The Community
Media Alliance Hereby Awards

JAhjus SMacQenqieS
With The * .

Media Alliance Meritorious Achievement

Award In

Tn^Defcrtse cf Sxccdomcf-


Presented This 2nd Day of October, 1982.


Award presented by Media Alliance, the 2,000-member journalists organization in San Francisco,
to Angus Mackenzie, author of the articles in this booklet, for his Meritorious Achievement In Defense
of Freedom of Information.


I would like to acknowledge the support of Fund for Investigative Journalism Director Howard
Bray; Freedom of Information Service Center Director Tonda Rush; Reporters Committee
for Freedom of the Press Executive Director Jack C. Landau; Kevin Brosch, esq., of Steptoe
& Johnson; Jay Peterzell, Monica Andres and John Marks of the Center for National Security
Studies; Chip Berlet, Scott Chricton, Rob Warden, Heartland, San Francisco Public Library
Science and Government Documents Department, and more than 100 underground writers who
gave their documents for study and their couches for rest. Thanks to Anna DeCormia, Cameron
Mackenzie and my family who have shouldered the burden of this project.

© Angus Mackenzie 1983, 1982, 1981. Printing donated by Playboy Foundation.


Contents

Introduction 4

ON THE TRAIL OF THE SECRET WAR 5

Introductory comment from the editors of the Columbia Journalism Review.

SABOTAGING THE DISSIDENT PRESS 5

It can’t happen here? A report on the U.S. Government’s years-long campaign to
put anti-war publications out of business. Columbia Journalism Review.

FIEFDOMS OF INFORMATION 13

The CIA and FBI refuse to release their files on dissident newspapers. Columbia
Journalism Review.


WHEN ENOUGH IS ENOUGH 14

Introductory comment from the editors of the Columbia Journalism Review.


t


WHEN AUDITORS TURN EDITORS 15

The IRS is leaning on the non-profit press— and a First Amendment fight is
building. Columbia Journalism Review.

DARKER CLOAKS, LONGER DAGGERS 21

A new law threatens to imprison writers who expose spies, even those spies who
may be watching publishers and editors. The Progressive.

C.I.A. DEMANDS $30,000 TO START FILE SEARCH 24

The CIA wants $61,501 for searching its files on the underground U.S. press, but
will not guarantee to find any releasable files. The Society of Professional
Journalists annual report, FOI ’82.

COVERING UP DOMESTIC SPYING 26

The American Civil Liberties Union agrees to the CIA's New Information Act
exemption. The Nation.


How to order more of these booklets 30
How you can help 31
About the author 32


3


Introduction


H ere are five important articles by Angus Mackenzie that document how the U.S.

Government controls the press. The introductory comment to "Sabotaging the
Dissident Press” by Columbia Journalism Review editors notes the debt of gratitude the
press owes Mackenzie for doing as a free-lance writer what news organizations might
well have undertaken. When "Sabotaging” appeared in the Review March 3, 1981, few,
if any, journalists knew that the U.S. Government had set out on a years-long campaign
to destroy the smallest newspapers in the nation. The sidebar to that story, "Fiefdoms
of Information,” outlined the intelligence agencies’ refusal to release under the Freedom
of Information Act records of that campaign against the press.

"CIA Demands $30,000 to Start Search for Files” describes Mackenzie’s efforts to
sue the CIA for production of its documents on the underground press. It appeared in
the Society of Professional Journalists annual report FOl ’82 and was distributed to 28,000
Society members in January, 1983. An update: the CIA is now releasing to Mackenzie
some of its files on the underground press, but is withholding most records for "national
security” reasons. V ' *

The Internal Revenue Service, which was used as a tool by the CIA in its efforts
against publications like Ramparts, has regulations of its own that exert subtle but
powerful control over the editorial content of thousands of periodicals from National
Geographic to Ms. to Mother Jones. Mackenzie broke that story, "When Auditors Turn
Editors,” in the November /December, 1981, Columbia Journalism Review. A year later,
on November 11, 1982, Mother Jones protested that its IRS audit was, after all, politically
motivated. The IRS audit in 1983 still hangs over the heads of Mother Jones editors.

1982 brought more disturbing news. On June 23, President Reagan signed the Intel-
ligence Identities Protection Act, a law which provides for the imprisonment of writers
and publishers who expose certain secret agents of the FBI, Defense Department and
CIA. "Darker Cloaks, Longer Daggers” in the June, 1982 Progressive examined the back-
ground and congressional debate on that law which at the very least has kept silent
those intelligence operatives who had talked to journalists.

One intelligence official who did talk to Mackenzie after the Intelligence Identities
Protection Act became law was the FBI’s Assistant Director in Charge of Press and
Congressional Affairs, Mr. Roger Young. Young summoned Mackenzie to FBI
Headquarters February 8, 1983, and acknowledged the accuracy of "Sabotaging the
Dissident Press.” Young wanted to know how he could ameliorate journalists’ fears that
the FBI still infiltrates their newspapers. Mackenzie asked Young to tell the nation that
the FBI doesn’t penetrate the dissident press anymore. Young replied he could not say that.


William L. Rivers, Stanford University
Author of 27 journalism texts

August 1, 1983


p

I

&


£■

m


h

I-


On tlie
Secret

THE EDITORS OF THE


Trail of a

War COMMENTARY FROM

COLUMBIA JOURNALISM REVIEW


On June 19, 1970, police in Beloit, Wisconsin, kicked in
the door of a house in which Angus Mackenzie and his
brother James were living, and in which they were putting
out an antiwar monthly called People's Dreadnought .
Claiming to be looking for an awol army private, the police
searched the premises. Although they found no private, nor
anything else that might incriminate the Mackenzies, they
continued to harass the brothers by, for example, stationing
plainclothesmen in the street outside their house. The Mac-
kenzies believe that such tactics were largely responsible for
a loss of revenue so severe that they were soon forced to
fold their newspaper.

Reflecting angrily on what had occurred, and putting it
together with stories he heard over the years about the
harassment of other publications. Angus Mackenzie became
obsessed with the idea that there had been a secret govern-
ment campaign to stamp out the antiwar and countercultural
press that sprang up during the Vietnam War. In 1978, with
the help of a small grant from the Fund for Investigative
Journalism, and with the encouragement of the Review's


then-editor, James Boy lan, he set out on a long search for
evidence. Crisscrossing the United States and at times so
hard up that he had to hitchhike, he combed through tens of
thousands of pages of government documents obtained by
other journalists under the Freedom of Information Act. He
also interviewed such former CIA, FBI, and Army coun-
terintelligence people as he could persuade to talk to him.
While he found no proof that the People's Dreadnought had
been the victim of anything more than local police animos-
ity, he did find irrefutable evidence that agencies of the
federal government had indeed done their best to put hun-
dreds of other publications out of business. The story of that
campaign is told, for the first time, in the article by Mr.

Mackenzie; ^ •.

We mention this not to blow our own horn, but to em-
phasize the debt of gratitude that the press owes Mr. Mac-
kenzie for doing a job that news organizations, with their far
greater resources, might well have undertaken on their own.


Sabotaging the

Dissident

Press


The American public has learned in the last few years a
great deal about the government’s surveillance of the left
during the Vietnam War era. The report of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence (the Church committee) first sug-
gested how widely the government had been involved in planting
informants inside New Left groups, propagating false infor-
mation about these groups, and using a variety of tactics to
disrupt their activities. That such tactics were also used on a
vast scale against dissenting magazines and the underground
press, however, has not been reported in a comprehensive
way. The story has lain scattered in a hundred places. Now,


8


documents obtained by editors and writers under the Free-
dom of Information Act, and interviews with former intelli-
gence agents, make it possible, for the first time, to put to-
gether a coherent— though not necessarily complete— account
of the federal government's systematic and sustained viola-
tion of the First Amendment during the late 1960s and early
1970s,

The government’s offensive against the underground press
primarily involved three agencies — the CIA, the FBI, and the
Army. In many cases, their activities stemmed from what
they could claim were legitimate concerns. The CIA’s Opera-
tion CHAOS, for example, was set up to look into the foreign
connections of domestic dissidents; however, it soon exceeded
its mandate and became part of the broad attack on the left
and on publications that were regarded as creating a climate
disruptive of the war effort. At its height, the government’s
offensive may have affected more than 150 of the roughly 500
underground publications that became the nerve centers of
the antiwar and countercultural movements.

A telling example of this offensive was the harassment of
Liberation News Service, which, when opposition to the Vietnam
War was building, played a key role in keeping the disparate
parts of the antiwar movement informed. By 1968, the FBI
had assigned three informants to penetrate the news service,
while nine other informants regularly reported on it from the
outside. Their reports were forwarded to the U.S. Army’s
Counterintelligence Branch, where an analyst kept tabs on
LNS founders Ray Mungo and Marshall Bloom, and to the
Secret Service, the Internal Revenue Service, the Navy, the
Air Force, and the CIA. The FBI also attempted to discredit
and break up the news service through various counterintelli-
gence activities, such as trying to make LNS appear to be an
FBI front, to create friction among staff members, and to
burn down the LNS office in Washington while the staff slept
upstairs. Before long, the CIA, too, joined the offensive; one
of its recniits began filing reports on the movements of LNS
staff members while reporting for the underground press to
establish his cover as an underground journalist.

The CIA was apparently the first federal agency to plan
actions against domestic publications. Its Operation CHAOS
grew out of an investigation of Ramparts magazine, which
during the late 1960s was perhaps the leading national publi-
cation of the left. In early 1967, Ramparts was preparing to
publish an expose on the CIA’s funding of the U.S. National
Student Association and on various foundations the agency
used as conduits for that funding. The CIA got wind of the
article in January 1967, two months before the planned
March publication date. Viewing the article as “an attack on
CIA in particular and the administration in general,” the
agency started to monitor the activities of Ramparts editors,
ostensibly to ascertain whether they had contacts with hostile
intelligence services. The CIA’s Directorate of Plans (its “dirty
tricks” department) assigned to counterintelligence agent


6


Richard Ober the task of “pulling together information on
Ramparts , including any evidence of subversion [and] devis-
ing proposals for counteraction.” While those proposals remain
secret, several details relating to the Ramparts operation have
become known.

On February 1, an associate of Ober’s met with Thomas
Terry, assistant to the commissioner of the Internal Revenue
Service, to request that the IRS review Ramparts ’ corporate
tax returns to determine who the magazine’s backers were.
Terry agreed to do so. Subsequently, Ober’s office provided the
IRS with “detailed informant information” about Ramparts
backers, whom the IRS was requested to investigate for pos-
sible tax violations. Ober's investigation of the magazine
uncovered no “evidence of subversion” or ties to foreign
intelligence agencies. By August, however, it had produced a
computerized listing of several hundred Americans, about
fifty of whom were the subject of detailed files.

In August, too, Ober’s mandate was expanded as the CIA,
responding to pressure from President Johnson, initiated a
massive and largely still-secret program of spying on and ana-
lyzing political protest — that is. Operation CHAOS. The under-
ground press was one of its targets, the others being antiwar
groups, radical youth organizations, black militants, and
deserters and draft resisters. CHAOS, of course, raised spe-
cial problems because it violated a clause in the agency’s
charter prohibiting the CIA from performing any “internal
security function.” To give a semblance of legality to the
operation, the same justification was used as in the Ramparts
investigation — namely, that the motive was to search out pos-
sible foreign funding or control.

In tracking the press, the CIA was able to count on help
from the Army, with which, CHAOS files state, “Direct opera-
tional discussions on joint agent operations have been held.”
Ralph Stein directed the “New Left” desk for the Army’s
Counterintelligence Analysis Branch in Arlington, Virginia.
The branch kept track of underground periodicals and main-
tained a microfilm crossfile on writers and editors affiliated
with them. Stein got most of his information from public
sources, but some of it came from classified intelligence re-
ports which, he says, were provided by FBI and Army
infiltrators. “Their information was too good, too inside,” to
have come from public source material, Stein recalled in a
recent interview.

In late 1967, Stein was dispatched to CIA headquarters
to brief liaison officer Jim Ludlum and others (presumably
from Ober’s office) on underground and student publications.
He found, however, that the CIA men already knew a great
deal about the subject. Two questions were foremost in their
minds. They wanted to know all about “the ideas and beliefs of
the individuals who produced these publications,” Stein recalled,
and about foreign financing of such prominent publications as
Ramparts and a host of small underground papers. Stein’s
response to the latter question was, presumably, unsatisfac-


7


tory. "Far from being financed by any hostile power abroad,"
he commented recently, "the people who were putting out
these papers were actually using their lunch money, and we
were able to prove this." After his briefing session at the CIA,
Stein returned to his Arlington office, where he remarked that
he thought the CIA was not supposed to engage in domestic
surveillance. Shortly thereafter, he was relieved of his liaison
duties with the agency, which were taken over by a superior.

Like Stein, Ober found no evidence to support the suspi-
cion that domestic dissidents were being financed or controlled
by foreign powers. And, to Ober's credit, his office consistently
reported that the antiwar and black nationalist movements
were, in fact, responses to domestic political and economic
frustrations. But the White House could not abandon what
had by now become an titte fixe and— particularly after Richard
Nixon's election in 1968— it pushed the CIA to probe further
into domestic politics. The collection of names continued
apace. (By 1973, when CHAOS was converted into the CIA’s
International Terrorism Group, the computerized list of Ameri-
cans that Ober had begun to compile in 1967 had grown to
include 300,000 names.)

In May 1969, as surveillance activities increased, then-
CIA director Richard Helms stated in a memo to field offices
that "Operational priority of CHAOS activities in the field is
in the highest category, ranking with Soviet and Chicom
[Chinese Communis tj." While the agency had formerly relied
on FBI personnel, it now began recruiting outsiders for CHAOS
undercover work. One such recruit was Sal Ferrera, mentioned
in a December 27, 1977, New York Times article as having
worked as a CIA operative in Washington, D.C., and Paris.
The details of Ferrara's association with Operation CHAOS
are reported here for the first time. They provide a glimpse
into just how the CIA spied on the American press.

Ferrera grew up in Chicago, studied revolutionary theory
at Loyola University, and in 1969 moved to Washington,
D.C., where he made contact with local journalists writing for
underground publications. He attended early meetings of the
newly founded Quicksilver Times , which quickly became the
city *8 leading crusader against the Vietnam War. When the
first issue came out on June 16, 1969, Ferrera 's name was on
the masthead. He participated in editorial decisions and repre-
sented the paper at various functions, and he continued to
work in the underground press at home and abroad until 1974.

At some point not yet known he also went to work for
CHAOS, his underground press connections providing him
with impeccable "radical credentials." Wherever there was
radical activity, Ferrera seemed to be there. Between January
and April 1970, he interviewed Abbie Hoffman, Jerry Rubin,
and other members of the Chicago Seven, as well as their
lawyer, William Kunstler. In Washington, he became acquaint-
ed with Karl Hess, who worked for The Libertarian magazine,
and soon took to dropping in to visit Hess’s office in the base-


8


ment of the Institute for Policy Studies, a center for antiwar
activities.

During the 1971 May Day antiwar demonstration in
Washington, Ferrera took photographs and reported on the
event for College Press Service, an antiwar syndication serv-
ice; he may well have been the agent mentioned in the Rockefeller
Commission's hearings on the CIA as having covered the
demonstration for the agency. He also appears to have been
the source of two reports to the CIA regarding staff members
of Liberation News Service. In late April, when Ferrera was
still working in the Quicksilver office, an LNS editor stopped
in to ask if LNS staff members who planned to come down
from New York for May Day could lodge there. A CHAOS in-
formant's report, dated April 25 and released to LNS editor
Andrew Marx under the FOIA, refera to this visit. A second
report lists all LNS staff members who attended the May Day
demonstration.

Ferrera subsequently went to live in Paris, where he
wrote articles on radical student politics for LNS and College
Press Service. In 1972, the CIA assigned Ferrera and another
agent to monitor the activities of Philip Agee, who was then
living in Paris and writing Inside the Company , his expose of
CIA operations in Latin America. Ferrera returned to the
U.S. (and legally changed his name) in 1975, the year Agee’s
book appeared. When interviewed for this article, he denied
his relationship with the CIA.

Ferrera 's activities were not unique, as documents ob-
tained by the Center for National Security Studies, a public-
interest group based in Washington, D.C., make clear. In one
memorandum a former CIA case officer for domestic CHAOS
agents is quoted as saying that several such agents were
active in this county "anywhere from months to years.” Their
activities belie the contention of the Church committee report,
based on the claims of the CIA itself, that CHAOS agents
operated in the U.S. primarily for training and cover purposes.

Four months after CHAOS was set up, the CIA initiated
another domestic spying program. Run by the agency’s Office
of Security, it was dubbed Project Resistance— and it soon
came up with a novel and quite effective means of shutting
down dissident publications. Created in the wake of a program
begun in February 1967 and designed narrowly to protect
CIA recruiters on college campuses, Resistance soon became
a nationwide probe of campus and non-campus dissident groups,
paying special attention to the underground press. The Church
committee report stated that Project Resistance was "a broad
effort to obtain general background for predicting violence,
which might have created threats to CIA installations, re-
cruiters or contractors. ...” Files obtained by the Center for
National Security Studies, however, make it clear that Project
Resistance’s main purpose was to infiltrate the underground
press, and that it did so routinely, sometimes through local
police informers.


9


had suddenly evaporated. Columbia Records has declined to
comment.

Throughout the country, other FBI offices employed simi-
lar tactics to silence the dissident press. When headquarters
ordered the Detroit office to “neutralize” the South End and
the State News , the student papers at Wayne State and
Michigan State universities respectively, the office sent
anonymous letters of protest to local businesses that adver-
tised in them. A more limited campaign was waged against
The Tech , the student paper at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

Another bureau ploy used against college papers consisted
of anonymously mailing their most controversial articles to
funding sources and other influential persons, including state
legislators, college trustees, and “friendly news media.” “Items
submitted should be extremely radical on their face, use
profanity or be repulsive in nature,” J. Edgar Hoover stated
in a directive to fourteen field offices in May 1968.

The FBI also enlisted the assistance of local banks. In
Cincinnati, the branch office obtained transaction records for
two underground papers, the Independent Eye and the Queen
City Express , helping it to identify advertisers and contribu-
tors. “As information is gathered,” a memo dated July 8, 1970
stated, “it is believed there will be opportunities to suggest
counterintelligence action against individuals and groups who
are giving financial support to these publications.”

Showing initiative, in 1970 the El Paso office proposed a
“possible counterintelligent [sic] action” designed to silence
the editor of the underground The Sea Turtle and the Shark;
the idea was to publicize his alleged past criminal activities
and “dependence upon various welfare programs.” Eventually
the editor was arrested for selling an “obscene newspaper” to
a minor after the FBI had supplied information to local author-
ities.

In addition to these comparatively restrained strategies,
the FBI also instigated violent acts. In San Diego, for instance,
the paramilitary Secret Army Organization, led by FBI infor-
mant Howard Godfrey, assaulted the offices and staff of the
Street Journal on December 25, 1969. By January of 1971, the
commune that published the Journal had broken up. FBI
documents released under the FOIA show for the first time
that the Secret Army Organization's operations extended as
far east as Wisconsin, where the organization threatened to
kidnap Mike Fellner, editor of the radical Madison paper
Takeover .

In some cities, when direct attacks proved unsuccessful,
the government set up its own phony news service which, so
long as it was unexposed, provided a means of penetrating the
left; once exposed, it cast suspicion on legitimate underground
reporters and helped to create a feeling of paranoia. The Army
started Midwest News in Chicago, according to former intelli-
gence officer Ralph Stein; in San Francisco, the FBI set up
Pacific International News Service. The head of the FBI's San


11


Francisco office at the time, Charles Bates— he is now a
reporter for KGO-TV in San Francisco— said recently that he
did not specifically recall Pacific International, but added
that front operations of that kind “would have been fine if it
weren’t put down in writing.” A spokesman for the San Francisco
field office refused to confirm or deny the bureau’s use of the
news service. Meanwhile, on the East Coast, the FBI operated
New York Press Service under the direction of Louis Salzberg.
NYPS offered its services to left-wing publications at attrac-
tive rates, soliciting business with a letter that read, in part:
'The next time your organization schedules a demonstration,
march, picket or office party, let us know in advance. We’ll
cover it like a blanket and deliver a cost-free sample of our
work to your office.” NYPS’s cover was blown when Salzberg
surfaced as a government witness in the Chicago Seven trial,
during which it was disclosed that he had been an FBI infor-
mant.

The New York field office shrewdly turned this setback
into a means of casting suspicion on Liberation News Service.
The office prepared an anonymous letter, copies of which were
sent to newspapers and antiwar groups, accusing LNS of
being an FBI front. “Lns [sic) is in an ideal position to infil-
trate the movement at every level,” the letter stated. “It has
carefully concealed its books from all but a select few. Former
employees have openly questioned its sources of operating
funds. I shall write to you further on Lns for I (and several
others) are taking steps to expose this fraud for what it really
is— a government financed front.”

Such, then, were the techniques used by the U.S. govern-
ment to stifle freedom of expression in the late 1960s and early
1970s. These and other violations of American civil liberties,
as publicized in the Church committee report, together with
the public revulsion that attended its publication, resulting in
restrictions on domestic surveillance by the CIA and FBI.
Now the removal of those safeguards seems a distinct possi-
bility, at least to judge by the recent report on intelligence
issued by the Heritage Foundation and embraced by the
Reagan transition team. That report claims that “The threat
to the internal security of the Republic is greater today than
at any time since World War II” and recommends resurrecting
the standing internal security committees in Congress and,
once again, permitting the FBI and CIA to spy on dissidents,
including journalists.

If Reagan officials do go ahead and propose such measures,
they will undoubtedly argue that guarantees can be established
to prevent surveillance from getting out of hand. But if the
experience of the Johnson and Nixon years is any guide, even
programs which begin quite modestly can expand far beyond
their original mandate.


IS


Fiefdoms of
Information

In my two-year-long effort to obtain federal agency files
on underground publications, I learned almost as much about
how the Freedom of Information Act works— or doesn’t work—
as I did about the means by which the government sought to
suppress dissent in the 1960s and 1970s. I found, above all,
that while some agencies were quite cooperative, the CIA and
FBI proved adept at keeping their information to themselves.

In requesting FBI counterintelligence files and the entire
“New Left Publications’’ file under the FOIA, I was able to
supply the bureau wi th seventy-eight file numbers relating to
forty-seven periodicals (obtained from heavily censored files
previously released to editors of publications that no longer
exist). Since the most difficult element in any request is
identifying documents specifically enough so that the agency
can locate them, this should have facilitated a quick response.
Instead, the FBI demanded an advance deposit of $1,100 for
more than 1,100 hours of search time. My appeal of that pay-
ment is still pending.

In the case of the CIA, I was able to supply the agency
with four file numbers. After twenty-six days a letter came
stating that I would have to agree to unspecified search fees.
Nothing then happened until fourteen months later, when a
second letter said I would have to deposit $30,000 on a search
they estimated would cost a total of $61,501.

The Secret Service, by contrast, waived search-and-copy
fees and complied with my request within seventeen days,
sending forty censored pages dealing with nineteen news-
papers— even though I had been unable to supply any file
numbers to the service. Likewise, the Department of Defense
attempted to comply with the intent of the act, although,
again, I was unable to supply file numbers. Within thirty-two
days of my request, the department waived $445.50 in search-
and-copy fees. After a search, its Defense Investigative Serv-
ice determined that it might have records on seventeen of the
500 newspapers on my list.

Supposedly, new teeth were put in the FOIA in 1974. At
the time, a House-Senate conference report said that agencies
must comply with requests within thirty days, that “fees
should not be used for the purpose of discouraging requests,”
and that withheld files must concern activity within the agency’s
legal authority. My experience shows that the CIA and the
FBI refuse to comply with both the intent and letter of the
amended act.


13


• • *


When Enough. Is

Enough commentary from :

THE EDITORS OF THE COLUMBIA JOURNALISM REVIEW


In the course of researching this issue's cover article on the
IRS and the nonprofit, tax-exempt press (“When Auditors
Turn Editors,’’ page 29), reporter Angus Mackenzie at-
tempted to interview the new commissioner of the Internal
Revenue Service, Roscoe L. Egger, Jr. Mr. Egger declined
to be interviewed because, a spokesman explained, “this
area of IRS regulation is highly technical and extremely
complex.’’ If we rush in where commissioners fear to com-
ment, it is only because Mr. Mackenzie and we believe that
the problems that have arisen in “this area” — the legal
jungle that, in the course of more than half a century of
luxuriant growth, has grown out of Section 501 (c) (3) of the
Internal Revenue Code — require attention and debate.

Under the provisions of that code, nonprofit periodicals
that qualify for tax-exempt status enjoy what is, in effect, a
federal subsidy. In return, certain things are required of
such periodicals — of which the Review, published under
the auspices of an educational institution, is one. Among
other things, it is required of us when publishing articles on
“subjects useful to the individual and beneficial to the
community,” to present “a sufficiently full and fair exposi-
tion of the pertinent facts.” If we fail to do so, or if the IRS
perceives that we have failed to do so, our tax-exempt status
might be challenged.

Well, to be candid, we’re not sure that “When Auditors
Turn Editors” does present a sufficiently full and fair ex-
position of the pertinent facts. For one thing, we don’t have
Commissioner Egger's viewpoint on the matter under dis-
cussion. Then, too, Mr. Egger’s revenue agents are forbid-
den, under a section of the Internal Revenue Code, to com-
ment on individual audits, so readers may be getting a lop-
sided view of the Mother Jones field audit described by Mr.


Mackenzie. And then there’s that hair-raising adverb
“sufficiently.” Mr. Mackenzie’s exposition of the facts
strikes us as being sufficiently full and fair, but we are
merely editors, not auditors.

There are other aspects of our cover article that may cause
the IRS to raise its eyebrows: many problems and facts that
may be regarded as pertinent are not touched upon, much
less explored. The article does not, for example, deal with
the serious question of whether some tax-exempt publici-^
tions unfairly compete with commercial publications of a
similar nature. Nor does it deal with the question of what
commercial publishers often call “phony foundations” —
those set up expressly to enable publications to qualify for
reduced postal rates, among other benefits.

What it does deal with is the controversy over whether the
conditions under which the IRS grants tax-exempt status to
nonprofit publications conflict with constitutional guaran-
tees of press freedom and equal protection. That, to us, is
currently the heart of the matter. And, for us, that suffices.


1

1


When Auditors

Turn Editors THE I.R.S.

AND THE NON-PROFIT PRESS November , 981


F or many publications, qualifying as tax exempt under
Internal Revenue Code 501 (c) (3) is a matter of life
or death. Those that qualify are eligible to receive
contributions which donors can write off as deductions.
Another boon for those who pass the IRS test is lower post-
age rates. Mark Dowie, who served as publisher of Mother
Jones until August 1980, estimates that in recent years its
exempt status saved the muckraking magazine roughly
$200,000 annually on postal solicitations alone.

Now Mother Jones is one of a group of nonprofit publi-
cations, of varying political persuasions, that have reason to
fear that the IRS will put them out of business, or at least
make it very hard for them to survive, by withdrawing their
tax-exempt status. Meanwhile, both the language of the tax
laws and the close scrutiny accorded some of these publica-
tions by revenue agents have, in effect, already abridged
freedom of the press in this country: there are limits to what
• a nonprofit periodical can say; there are proscribed ways of
dealing with subject matter. Auditors have become editors.

Mother Jones's troubles with the IRS started last year —
five years after its parent, the Foundation for National Prog-
ress, was granted tax-exempt status as a nonprofit charitable
and educational entity. On March 27, 1980, then-publisher
Dowie received a phone call from IRS agent Lee Junio.
Junio said she was starting a “routine* ’ audit of the founda-
tion, including its magazine, and would like to visit its
offices on Third Street in San Francisco to lake a closer look
at how it operated.

Junio turned up on April 17 and for a week settled into the
magazine's editorial conference room. Her field audit exam-
ined the year 1978. She wanted everything: editorial and
financial records; contracts between the magazine and its
writers; information about the qualifications of its writers;
and every 1978 issue of Mother Jones, as well as all the
publications put out that year by the. foundation's six other
projects. (The six are: The New School for Democratic
Management, The Energy Project, The Solar Energy Proj-
ect, The Rent Control Project, The Mental Health Project,
. and The TV Project.) After she had selected and photo-
copied key documents, Junio returned to her office in the
San Francisco Federal Building, where she continued her
analysis.

In the summer of 1980, Dowie stepped down as publisher
and was replaced by Jacques Marchand. Marchand asked
the foundation’s tax attorney, Thomas Silk, to handle the
legal response to any questions Junio’s audit might raise.
Silk, who had formerly worked with the Tax Division of the
Department of Justice, subsequently met with Junio who


did, indeed, raise several questions. The prickliest was:
How is Mother Jones distinguishable from a commercial
publication? Since, according to IRS Revenue Ruling 67-4,
a nonprofit publishing venture must be distinguishable in a
variety of ways from a commercial one, the question posed
the threat that Mother Jones would be taxable. “It was the
first indication,” Silk recalls, “that there might be some
doubt as to the favorable resolution of the audit.”

I n a detailed memorandum — Junio had asked for a reply
in writing — Silk spelled out the differences between
Mother Jones and commercial publications: the maga-
zine did not want to make a profit, and it had never made a
profit; its economic survival, he wrote, ”is possible only
because of charitable contributions and low-interest loans
made by its supporters.” Moreover, the foundation’s
charitable and educational principles brought Mother Jones
into “frequent conflict with big business,” thus drying up a
potential source of ad revenue: corporate advertising. Au-
tomobile manufacturers also shunned the magazine. Silk
pointed out, as a result of its articles on the Ford Pinto.

During the audit, Mother Jones happened to be preparing
for publication — in its February/March issue — just the
sort of piece that revenue agents might be expected to study
with special care. Publishing articles that attempt to
influence legislation may be grounds for challenging an or-
ganization’s tax-exempt status. “The Trenchcoats Re-
trench,” by Jeff Stein, dealt with the Intelligence Identities
Protection Act, which would jail reporters and publishers
for exposing the identities of intelligence agents. “If Stein
had submitted a piece opposing that legislation,” comments
Marchand, “we couldn’t have run it. We cannot say it ought
to be opposed. We’ve got to be very cautious.”

Silk and Marchand had arranged to meet with Junio, at
the foundation’s headquarters, on March 18 of this year.
When she arrived they were surprised to see that she was
accompanied by her supervisor, Lester Stepner, group man-
ager of the exempt organizations audit section of the San
Francisco district. They braced themselves for bad news.
The news was worse than they had expected. Stepner an-
nounced, according to Silk, that the IRS had tentatively de-
cided to revoke the tax-exempt status of the Foundation for
National Progress. “We were shocked,” says Silk. “We
never had an indication that the entire exemption of the
foundation might be revoked.” (Stepner and Junio cannot
comment on the case or on the accuracy of these recollec-
tions because, under Section 6103 of the revenue code, they
are forbidden to discuss individual cases.)


18


Silk asked Scepner if the tentative decision to deny tax
exemption to the foundation was based on Mother J ones' %
content. No, said Stepner, according to Silk; he had no
quarrel with the description of its contents as educational.'
Rather, like Junio before him, he could not see how Mother
Jones was distinguishable from a commercial publication.
Silk protested that many nonprofit magazines — such as
Smithsonian , Ms., Audubon, and Natural History — were
produced and distributed in the same fashion as Mother
Jones : all, for example, are sent to member/subscribers ob-
tained primarily through direct-mail solicitations. Stepner's
reply, says Silk, was that those publications weren't in his
district; if they were, he would raise the same question with
them — a reply that points up the discretion allowed district
administrators. (As it happens, Smithsonian's tax-exempt
status is being reviewed, too. According to Christian
Hohenlohe,. treasurer of the Smithsonian Institution, "the
question of unrelated business income from advertising is
the main question the IRS has about our magazine." Asked
whether the IRS had raised questions about Smithsonian's
distribution methods and contents or about the qualifications
of its contributors, Hohenlohe said it had not — further evi-
dence of the discretion allowed revenue agents.)

Seven months have elapsed since Stepner and Junio met
with Marchand and Silk. Silk has provided additional in-
formation to the IRS regarding the noncommercial, edu-
cational nature of Mother Jones. Nevertheless, its editors
are apprehensive that any day now they may receive a
thirty-day notice confirming Stepner’s preliminary decision.
(Such decisions are sometimes overturned at administrative
levels.) Marchand, who retired as publisher on September
1, likens the loss of the foundation's exempt status to an
earthquake: “Totally destructive." Certainly, Mother
Jones would be badly shaken. From its inception, the mag-
azine has operated at a loss — 5235,654 in 1978, for
example — which has been made up by charitable contribu-
tions and low-interest loans. A drop in donations, coupled
with a steep rise in postal rates, could be fatal.

A second IRS field audit that began shortly after the
Reagan administration took over involves the North Ameri-
can Congress on Latin America (NACLA), an exempt or-
ganization, based in New York City, which publishes the
bimonthly, left-wing Report on the Americas, as well as
books, research guides, and comic books. The audit started
last March. On August 10, says NACLA president Steven
Volk, IRS field auditor David Levine told NACLA 's ac-
countant that, while the organization's finances were consis-
tent with 501 (c) (3) status, he would perhaps challenge its
exemption because of the contents of NACLA publications,
which he had reviewed during the audit. Then, on Sep-
tember 14, according to Volk, Levine called to say he was
recommending that the IRS revoke NACLA 's exempt status
on the ground that the government should not be subsidizing
organizations that indulge in "name calling" against fami-
lies like the Rockefellers — a reference to The Incredible
Rocky, a scathing comic-book history of "Those Fabulous


Rockefeller Brothers." Says NACLA attorney Victor
Rabinowitz, "If 501 (c) (3) is going to be based on political
content, then, by God, the number of publications that is
going to be affected, both right- and left-wing, is very, very
great."

A third magazine whose future will be decided by the
IRS is Harper's. In the spring of 1980, the maga-
1 zinc, which had been losing more than $1 million
annually for several yean, nearly went under. At the last
minute, it was rescued by the John D. and Catherine T. •
MacArthur Foundation, which subsequently set up the
Harper's Magazine Foundation, so that Harper's would be
eligible to receive tax- deductible contributions. The IRS is
reviewing the fledgling foundation's application for tax-
exempt, nonprofit status. If the exemption is granted, the
MacArthur Foundation, which now holds title to the maga-
zine, will transfer the magazine's assets and liabilities to the
Harper's Magazine Foundation and give to it what remains
of a total gift of $1.5 million, some of which has been paid
out to keep the magazine alive. If the IRS denies the appli-
cation, this transfer cannot take place. "Under the federal
tax laws," explains Joseph A. Diana, secretary treasurer of
the Harper's Magazine Foundation, "it is not possible for a
foundation to make a gift of money to an organization which
does not have tax-exempt status. "


16


Historically, it was the removal of taxes imposed on news-
papers as a means of controlling them, together with the
freedom to report on and criticize Congress, that distin-
guished the U.S. press from the press of many other na-
tions. The passage of successive revenue laws from 1913
through 1954, incorporating reformulations of section 501
(c) (3), which exempts a wide range of organizations,
marked the start of a new era. The Internal Revenue Code
drawn up by Congress is defined by IRS regulations, which
are, in turn, defined and clarified by revenue rulings. The
code, the regulations, and the rulings constitute the huge
body of law that gives the IRS the power to scrutinize the
editorial content, the advertising policies, and the business
practices of the nonprofit press, and to render its crucial
judgments. Having derived its powers from Congress, the
IRS now controls how nonprofit publications, if they wish
to remain tax exempt, may report the votes of members of
Congress, how they may report on legislation, and how they
may report on candidates for public office.

To qualify for tax-exempt status, an organization's pur-
pose must be primarily educational, charitable, literary, or
religious. The editorial content of its publications must be
limited to "subjects useful to the individual and beneficial
to the community." Articles must present a "sufficiently
full and fair exposition of the pertinent facts." Thus, au-
ditors have become arbiters of what is useful, beneficial,
and fair. The IRS has other criteria on the basis of which it
hands down its verdicts. Not only must the distribution of
tax-exempt periodicals be distinguishable from that of their
commercial counterparts — a point raised in the Mother
Jones case — but the skills and abilities of the people who
work for such periodicals must be "other than those that are
generally found on the staff of commercial publications, to
cite the language of a 1977 revenue ruling that denied
exemption to a nameless newspaper. (Under Section 6103,
the IRS is forbidden to divulge the names of organizations
to which it has denied exemption.)

How many nonprofit periodicals there are today is not
known. About 177,000 tax-exempt organizations list their
purpose as educational; many of them publish periodicals,
but the IRS does not have a figure for this specific category.
There must be several thousand — right-wing. left-wing,
middle-of-the-road, religious, anti-religious, ranging in size
from National Geographic (circulation: 10,768,125) to
Mother Jones (circulation: 218,000) and on down to papers
like Rig Mama Rag (circulation: 2,000), all educating their
readers according to their own lights.

N ow, singly or in clusters, like the papers belonging
to the Catholic Press Association, the nonprofit
press is learning how hard it is to live with a fed-
eral agency whose powers are vast and whose authorizing
legislation is couched in broad terms. The Internal Revenue
Code states, for example, that "no substantial" part of the
activities of an exempt organization can be devoted to "car-
rying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence
legislation." Thus, publishers and editors, second-guessing


the auditors, must take pains to determine when articles go
beyond educating and become influential — a determination
that might seem best left to philosophers. To resolve the
question of what "no substantial" part may mean, Congress
and the courts have come up with a sliding scale that, in the
case of most publications described here, sets 5 percent of
an organization’s budget as the maximum that may tyc used
to directly influence legislation. Wary nonprofit editors keep
this figure in mind. At Ms. magazine, which has been tax
exempt since 1979, throughout the year editors keep a rough
count of the number of pages that might be construed as at-
tempting to influence, rather than merely inform, readers
regarding various pieces of legislation; at the end of the
fiscal year, they calculate what percent of the total cost of
production these pages constitute. (If, about halfway
through the year, the page count seems to be mounting too
fast, everyone is put on alert — one of the many forms of
self-censorship that have become standard operating proce-
dure as a result of existing regulations.)

The revenue code contains another prohibition that, par-
ticularly as defined by a recent ruling, has created more se-
rious problems. Exempt organizations, the law states, can
"not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing
or distributing of statements), any political campaign on be-
half of any candidate for public office." This appears to be
an absolute ban; it isn't. Voter- education material is permit-
ted; only material that "intervenes" in elections is banned.
Three years ago, in Revenue Ruling 78-160, the IRS clar-
ified the concept of intervention in these words: "A non-
profit educational organization that sends to candidates for
public office in an upcoming election a questionnaire on top-
ics of concern to it and publishes the responses received,
without editorial comment ... is engaged in . . . interven-
tion in a political campaign and . . . does not qualify for
exemption under 501 (c) (3)."

The ruling came under such sharp attack, notably from
the League of Women Voters, that within a month the IRS
rescinded and replaced it with Revenue Ruling 78-248,
presumably designed to mollify critics. The new ruling, the
IRS explained in a press release, "emphasizes that whether
an activity constitutes such prohibited participation or inter-
vention [in an election] depends on the facts and circum-
stances in each case." In short, the IRS would henceforth
determine on a case-by-case basis whether publication of
candidates’ replies to a set of neutral questions on a variety
of issues or on only one issue was evidence of "bias."

O ne group of publications that was infuriated by the
IRS's intervention rulings was the religious press,
which is largely dependent on tax-exempt, non-
profit status and which, believing that politics and morality
cannot be separated, had regularly published surveys of
candidates’ stands on selected issues. The reaction of the
Catholic press is an instructive case in point.

As the 1980 presidential campaign geared up, several of
the 140 member papers of the Catholic Press Association
denounced the revised ruling. For example. South Texas


17


Catholic, published in Corpus Christi, ran an editorial on
March 21 , 1980, which said, in pan:

No 'bias'* is permitted. And how does the ruling define bias? If a.
Catholic newspaper conducted a poll, for example, on candidates
views regarding abortion only. [Revenue Ruling] 78-248 says that
“its emphasis on one area of concern indicates that its purpose is
not nonpartisan voter education.** . . . But how wide a variety of
issues will be acceptable to the IRS? And what will the IRS de-
termine to be strictly “Catholic" issues?

A deeper question is how, in this land of freedom, has the IRS
been able to gather the power necessary to restrict the content of a
newspaper . . .?

Perhaps the most trenchant attack on the ruling to appear in
the Catholic press was written by syndicated columnist
Reverend Virgil C. Blum. S.J., president of the Catholic
League for Religious and Civil Rights. In a May 8, 1980,
column, headlined ms suppresses free press. Father Blum
wrote that the IRS had. in effect, told Catholic newspaper
editors: "As a condition for continuing to enjoy a tax-
exempt status, you must surrender your First Amendment
right to free speech and press.*' The IRS’s imposition of
such a choice, he went on, conflicted with a 1958 Supreme
Court decision. Speiser v. Randall . which ruled unconstitu-
tional a California law that required individuals claiming a
property-tax exemption to take a loyalty oath. The Court
declared:

To deny an exemption to claimants who engage in certain forms of
speech is in effect to penalize them for such speech. Its deterrent
effect is the same as if the State were to fine them for this speech.

But the IRS was not the only target of the Catholic press's
wrath. The Catholic Press Association, whose headquarters
are in Rockville Centre, New York, also caught holy hell.
Trying to be helpful, in February 1980 the CPA had drawn
up guidelines for coping with the IRS ruling. The watch-
word was caution. A specific guideline, underlined for em-
phasis, stated categorically: Endorsements and evaluations
of any sort are not to be carried on." The CPA's
"Guidelines for Member Publishers” further stated:

If an organization publishes a vote within a reasonable time, after
such a vote is recorded, and periodically publishes the vote of
public officials, then the publication of the vote during the election
campaign will probably not expose the organization to a challenge
on the basis of the ruling. . . .

Such counsel seemed gudess to The Catholic Standard
and Times of Philadelphia, among other member papers. A
March 20 Standard and Times editorial, religious press,
religious freedom, described both the IRS’s ruling and
the CPA's compliant attitude toward it as "crippling to
Catholic newspapers, which should be free to publish the
records or positions of public officials or candidates when
people are most interested in such records or positions —
near the election.” To cease doing so. tfie paper said,
"would amount at best to journalistic mediocrity and at
worst to journalistic cowardice." The editorial concluded
on a militant note: "The CPA would appear to be counsel-


ing such cowardice; the IRS would appear to be directing it
— a clear violation by a government agency of freedom of
the press and freedom of religion.”

Responding to such criticisms, the CPA's board of direc-
tors in mid-May advised publishers that the guidelines did
not constitute approval of the IRS’s ruling, which was now
perceived as endangering freedom of speech and religion.

By June 1980 Catholic militancy on press freedom had
become news in The New York Times. PRIEST in TEXAS
DEFIES RULING BY I.R.S, THAT BARS STAND ON POLITICAL IS-
SUES read the four-column headline of a June 22 story by
William K. Stevens. The defiant priest was the Reverend
Brian Wallace, editor of Today's Catholic, the official
weekly newspaper of the archdiocese of San Antonio. On
May 2 — the day before the Texas presidential primaries —
Father Wallace had published an editorial entitled to the
ms — nuts!!!” It read, in part:

Somehow after 50 years of the current federal tax code, the IRS
has recently reached the conclusion that churches must make a
choice: keep quiet and be tax exempt or enter into political debates
and pay for it dearly. Says the IRS: “Choose one, please."

To that. Today’s Catholic says emphatically and in the biggest
letters we can find: "NUTS!!!’*

Father Wallace then plunged into politics — or morality,
two aspects of life between which, he wrote, "there can be
no divorce.” The editor-priest assessed John Anderson’s,
Edward Kennedy’s, and Ronald Reagan's stands on a single
issue — abortion; described Reagan as "the only president-
ial candidate who is clearly opposed to abortion and is will-
ing to use the political power of the presidency to support
his position”; cited the voting records of congressional
candidates on the single issue of abortion; and, finally,
urged readers to "work for the passage of a resolution on
pro-life issues” at their precinct conventions and to vote
their conscience at the primary election.

The IRS has yet to take up Father Wallace’s well-
publicized challenge to its authority.

The mood that summer was, perhaps, not propitious for
IRS action. On August 20, the House of Representatives
passed an amendment to the Treasury Appropriations Bill
that would have prevented the IRS from disqualifying any
organization for tax-exempt status "by reason that such or-
ganization publishes or distributes voters’ guides relating to
any political campaign." (The bill failed to pass the Senate
during that legislative session; the amendment, introduced
by Congressman Philip M. Crane, of Illinois, was not in-
cluded in the House bill passed in late July of this year.) In
September, the American Civil Liberties Union brought suit
against the IRS on behalf of the Office for Church in Soci-
ety, the social-action agency of the United Church of Christ,
which as a church is tax exempt. The OCS had, for years,
periodically published the voting records of members of the
House and Senate on various issues, together with state-
ments of the church’s position on these issues. Following
the issuance of Revenue Ruling 78-248, the OCS had dis-
continued this service, fearing that the IRS might challenge


18


the church's exemption. The lawsuit asserted that the ruling
'‘interferes with, impairs, and hinders the free exercise of
plaintiffs rights under the First Amendment. . . .** The
issue was resolved in a “private letter ruling" that October;
the IRS said, in effect, that the church could safely resume
its voter-education project so long as publication was not
tied to a particular election.

Such reinterpretations, of course, made on a case-by-case
basis, do nothing to reduce the sense of vulnerability felt by
editors and publishers of other nonprofit publications. For,
in the eye of the IRS, each organization and each publica-
tion, is unique — and, given the discretionary power en-
joyed by district administrators, a practice that is over-
looked or condoned in one district may be challenged in
another.


B ig Mama Rag is about as far removed from a di-
ocesan publication as one can imagine. Founded in
1972, the heyday of the women’s movement. Big
Mama is one of the few feminist papers to survive — if only
by the skin of its teeth and the determination of its volunteer
staff. Published in Denver, the monthly gets along on an
annual budget of less than 510,000, more than half of which
comes from contributions. Ads account for less than 10 per-
cent of its content; more than half of its press run of 2,000 is
.given away. Two years after its founding, the struggling
paper applied for tax-exempt status as an educational or-
ganization whose purpose was “to create a channel of
communication for women that would educate and inform
them on general issues of concern to them." The applica-
tion was denied. Big Mama , the IRS ruled, was sold “in
accordance with ordinary commercial publishing practices**
— thus violating the same rule that may be invoked against
Mother Jones. This, at least, was the initial, official version
of the reason for denial. When, in September 1976, Big
Mama representatives met with IRS officials to explain just
how uncommercial their paper was, they were presented
with another objection: the paper promoted lesbianism. Ac-
cording to an internal IRS document subsequently produced
in court, IRS agents advised them that tax-exempt status
would be granted on condition that the editors would agree
“to abstain from advocating that homosexuality is a mere
preference, orientation, or propensity on par with
heterosexuality. . . .**

Lawyers in Denver and Washington, D.C., fought the
case, pro bono f all the way up to the Federal Circuit Court
of Appeals in Washington. There they argued that the IRS’s
regulatory scheme violated the iferst Amendment and the
equal protection guarantee of thp Fifth Amendment, and
was unconstitutionally vague. Sidestepping this broad chal-
lenge, on September 15. 1980, Circuit Judge Abner Mikva
ruled against the IRS on the ground that the Internal Reve-
nue Code's definition of “educational" was unconstitu-
tionally vague. The IRS's concern over Big Mama's views
on homosexuality, Judge Mikva said, simply highlighted
the inherent susceptibility of vague statutory language to
discriminatory enforcement.


“I was taken aback." recalls an attorney in the office of
the revenue service’s chief counsel. “This was the first time
something had been declared unconstitutional in this 501 (c)
(3) area.**

Judge Mikva’s decision was upheld and expanded in an-
other landmark case decided on May 27 of this year. The
case involved Attack. /, a racist monthly newsletter put out
by the nonprofit National Alliance. Attack! had applied for
tax-exempt status in July 1977; eight months later its appli-
cation was denied on the ground that the newsletter’s “tone
and subject matter potentially serve to influence the preju-
dices and passions of its readers." Further, said the IRS
denial. Attack! did not present a sufficiendy “full and fair
exposidon of the pertinent facts.'*

National Alliance v. U.S. reached the federal district
court in Washington, D.C., eight months after the Appeals
Court had handed down its decision on Big Mama Rag.
Applying the principles enunciated in that decision, the dis-
trict court ruled against the IRS, saying that the phrase “full
and fair exposidon" of the facts was even more open to in-
terpretation and selective application than “educational."
But this decision, too, left unanswered the central question
of whether the IRS's whole regulatory scheme is uncon-
stitutional in that it requires publications to trade their con-
stitutional rights for a tax status upon which their survival
may depend.

Another piece of that IRS regulatory scheme is being
challenged in a case now being weighed by the Court of
Appeals in Washington. This case, brought by Thomas F.
Field, publisher of Tax Notes , challenges the 501 (c) (3)
restriction on lobbying. Field says it violates the First
Amendment and also the equal -protection guarantee of the
Fifth Amendment because, while tax-exempt charities and
educational organizations are restricted from lobbying,
veterans groups and fraternal societies enjoy tax exemption
with no lobbying restriction. Field further argues that the
lobbying restriction serves no governmental purpose, as
proved by Congress in 1962 when it allowed business firms
to deduct most lobbying expenses from their taxes, reason-
ing that lobbying served society by keeping Congress in-
formed. Field’s case started after the IRS, in February 1978,
denied his application for tax exemption for a lobbying and
litigative group. In April of this year the IRS denial was up-
held by the Court of Appeals. But on June 1 1 the court de-
cided to hear his case en banc , meaning that all ten judges
will hear it. Thus, the decision is likely to be authoritative.

The resolution of Field’s case is crucial to the future of
IRS control over the contents of exempt publications be-
cause, as an IRS attorney says, “To determine if they are
lobbying, we have to look at content. We’re looking for
guidance [from the courts]. “


19


I n the past, the IRS's interest in content was often politi-
cally motivated. In 1967, for instance, the CIA asked
the IRS to help draw up countermeasures against Ram-
parts. which was exposing the National Student Association
as a CIA front, and the IRS agreed (see 4 ‘Sabotaging the
Dissident Press,” cjr, March/April 1981). Into the 1970s
the IRS continued to cooperate with the CIA, and with the
FBI and Army Intelligence, as these agencies sought to put
the underground press out of business. But if publications
on the left were a frequent target, those on the right were not
safe either. During the Kennedy administration, according
to a report issued in June 1975 by the Joint Congressional
Committee on Taxation, the IRS was used to “get” the rad-
ical right.


The proliferation of nonprofit publications in the last dec-
ade has been accompanied by a proliferation of IRS rules
governing their activities. This leaves the door wide open
for the resumption of IRS harassment of editors for political
purposes. Fine points of law aside, in the case of the press
the discretionary application of tax laws has meant, and
always will mean, government control of content. The IRS
got into editing through an act of Congress. Perhaps it is
time for Congress to usher it out. ■


On March 26, the U.S. Appeals Court in
Washington, D.C., reversed an earlier deci-
sion, handed down by a panel of three
judges, that had upheld an IRS denial of
tax-exempt status for Taxation With Repre-
sentation of Washington. This time around,
with ten judges hearing the case, the court
ruled that Section 501 (c) (3) of the Internal
Revenue Code constitutes a double standard,
in violation of the Constitution's equal pro-
tection guarantees, inasmuch as it permits
veterans' organizations to lobby without re-
striction while restraining other tax-exempt
charities and educational organizations from
doing so. Circuit Judge Abner Mikva, writ-
ing for the majority, concluded that Congress
should either take away the right of or-
ganized veterans to lobby with tax-
deductible money or extend that right to all
tax-exempt groups. The IRS has appealed to
the Supreme Court. Field expects the Court
to hear the case in late 1982.


The Mother Jones case, meanwhile, has
taken a couple of strange turns. In his article,
Mackenzie reported that the IRS had tenia-
dvdy decided to revoke the tax-exempt
status of the Foundation for National Prog-
ress, primarily because field auditors “could
not see how Mother Jones was distinguish-
able from a commercial publication."

Thomas Silk, the foundation's tax lawyer,
recently told Mackenzie that, shortly after
the Review article appeared last fall. IRS
agent Lee Junio called to say that the IRS
would not revoke the foundation's exemp-
tion. This welcome news was followed, on
April 15 of this year, by (he receipt of an IRS
bill for three quarters of a million dollars — a
sum roughly equivalent to the amount of
money the magazine lost in the audited years
1978, 1979. and 1980. What had happened?

The IRS is prohibited by statute from
commenting on individual tax cases; lawyer
Silk, far his part, offers this explanation:
"The briefs and exhibits we supplied to the
IRS last year convinced them that a substan-
tial pan of the foundation’s activities are


charitable and educational, but they con-
tinued to regard the magazine itself as
primarily a commercial operation — this de-
spite (he fact that Mother Jones lost money
every year and would not have been pub-
lished except as an effort to reach a broader
section of the public with the foundation's
message. Meanwhile, even if Mother Jones
were taxable as a commercial activity, it
would have no tax to pay because it lost
money. What the IRS has done is to allocate
as income all the funds received from sub-
scriptions and advertising revenue, but they
have not allowed us the deductions they
would ordinarily allow a commercial pub-
lishing venture.”

Silk adds that he is "reluctant to believe
that the IRS action represents harassment"
and that "it would seem to be the result of
confusion." He expects that this confusion
will be resolved at a higher administrative
level of the IRS.


July 1982


ao


Darker Cloaks,
Longer Daggers

A NEW LAW PROTECTS SPIES’ IDENTITIES AND COVERS
UP THEIR DIRTY WORK

June 1982


S oon President Reagan will sign the
Intelligence Identities Protection
Act and visit more destruction on
the nation’s ever-embattled press
freedoms than any recent predecessor. The
new law will, among other things, subject
anyone who reveals the names of covert
CIA, FBI, or Pentagon personnel to a
stretch in Federal prison. Advocates of (he
bill say it will protect the lives of those who
serve the United States under cover in dan-
gerous, far-flung places. But even propo-
nents acknowledged in Senate debate that
such well-behaved journals of record as The
New York Times would risk prosecution for
reporting intelligence abuses in the normal
course of business.

Representative Don Edwards, Califor-
nia Democrat, told the House that the bill
“strikes directly at the heart of the First
Amendment." and is “unparalleled by any
piece of legislation in our nation's history
during peacetime."

The act passed the Senate by a vote of 90
to 6 in March; House approval came last
September. 354 to 56.

The bill posts penalties for three groups.
First, Government employes who have, or
once had, access to secret s and intentionally
disclose “any information identifying" a
covert agent may be imprisoned for up to
ten years. Second. Government workers
who have had no access to secret identities
but on the strength of classified data deduce
identities and give them away may get up to
five years.

The threat of such punishment for those
on Government payrolls means that re-
porters talking to people attached to the in-
telligence community run a new gamble —
jailing by grand juries without benefit of
trial — for refusing to reveal their inside
sources, who themselves will now be liable
to long prison terms.

Third, the act comes down hard on any-
one committing “a pattern of activities in-
tended to identify and expose covert agents
. . . with reason to believe that such activities
would impair or impede the foreign intelli-
gence activities of the United States'* (em-
phasis added).


This reason-to-believe qualifier loomed
large in the Senate debate. Most of the Sen-
ate fight pivoted on a successful amendment
to the bill by Rhode Island Republican John
H. Chafee. He made prosecution easier by
replacing the so-called intent clause with
reason-to-believe, although S.I. Hay-
akawa, the Senate’s only certified semanti-
cist, said any distinction between the
phrases was “hair splitting." Other Sena-
tors made it clear they believed the Chafee
language meant the good intent of a writer
to expose wrongdoing is not a defense
against prosecution.

Bill Bradley. Democrat of New Jersey,
said, “The reason-to-believe standard
would cover virtually all disclosures by an
investigative reporter involving intelligence
agents.”

Joseph Biden, Democrat of Delaware,
questioned whether New York Times re-
porter Robert Pear might be imprisoned if


he continued to disclose names of current
CIA employes in a series on Korean
influence-buying in the Congress. Washing-
ton Democrat Henry M. Jackson replied to
Biden. “That is for a jury to decide." Pear,
reached at his paper's Washington bureau,
told The Progressive he was unaware that
his prospects for prosecution had figured in
the Senate debate.

So prosecution of Times reporters— or
anyone else — can be expected. And so,
Biden said, can “long debates in editorial
rooms of the newspapers of America as to
whether or not they go forward with expos-
ing a (Edwin] Wilson or a [Frank] Terpil or
anyone else." (Wilson and Terpil are
former CIA officers under indictment for
exporting explosives to Libya.)

In its report recommending the bill to
the full Senate, the Senate Intelligence
Committee made clear that the
identification of even one intelligence agent
may be illegal. Representative Edwards
says the bill prohibits “republication of dis-
closures made by others." One need not
even mention any names; “any informa-
tion" that identifies is enough for prosecu-
tion, reads the bill.

The act is intended to protect U.S. spies
stationed abroad, although 3,000 of them
have been named already by one-time CIA
agent Philip Agee, CounterSpy magazine,
and Covert Action Information Bulletin , all
hostile to the CIA. Supporters have repeat-
edly cited the case of CIA Station Chief Ri-
chard Skeffington Welsh, who was mur-
dered by anti-American leftists in Athens in
1975. His name had been connected by
CounterSpy to CIA operations in Peru.
Even before Welsh’s body reached home,
the finger of blame pointed straight at
CounterSpy. The Intelligence Identities
Protection Act quickly became a top legis-
lative priority for the CIA.

But will the act accomplish what its
sponsors want? Some say no. CounterSpy
editor John Kelly told The Progressive that
Welsh was identified first not by his maga-
zine in 1975, but in 1968 by Julius Mader, an
East German who wrote Who's Who in the


21


Ironically, it was the CIA itself
that pioneered the practice
of naming agents’ names*

In 1 969, an agent published
2Q0 alleged CIA identities
in an underground paper,
to establish a cover as he threw
himself into Operation CHAOS


C/A, naming Welsh and the foreign capitals
to which he had been assigned since 1960.
Even backers of the act said on the floor of
Congress that it would not bring to an end
such overseas identification of U.S. agents.
Kelly argues that the law will not accom-
plish what its drafters set out to do, but will
instead chill domestic debate on intelli-
gence activities.

O ddly enough. Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, New York
Democrat, agrees with editor
Kelly that much of the informa-
tion the bill would conceal under the cloak
of the criminal code is already in the public
domain. Yet it was Moynihan who, with
Chafee, introduced the legislation in the
Senate in January 1980.

However, by March of this year Moyni-
han was fighting Cha/ee’s re ason-to- believe
standard. Moynihan. acting as chairman of
the Senate Intelligence Committee, made a
stunning about-face. He reminded the Sen-
ate that he is its only member with ambassa-
dorial experience. His tour in New Delhi
proved to him that “we have failed to pro-
vide but nominal cover ... for American in-
telligence operatives. [They] might as well
be all Texans with high-heeled boots, so
conspicuous . . . and well known are they.
We are on the edge of making a crime out of
the publication of information which is
commonly available, information which is
not difficult to obtain." Then he voted
against the legislation he himself had pro-
posed.

In another midstream change. House
Select Committee on Intelligence Chair-
man Edward P. Boland, Massachusetts
Democrat, also an original sponsor, told his
colleagues. “I cannot support this bill on
Anal passage," and he too voted against it.

Early supporters now wonry the act will
hit even middle-of-the-road reformers —
and that is exactly what the CIA has wanted
since revelations of its adventures in domes-
tic spying hit the front pages in 1975 and


1976. So important was passage of the act to
the CIA that Vice President Bush, the
agency's former director, helped smooth its
way through the Senate. But Bush ne-
glected to tell the Senate how the whole
business of naming names got started. It got
started by the CIA.

In 1969, six years before an angry and
disenchanted Philip Agee went public, CIA
agent Salvatore John Ferrera published 200
names and addresses of alleged CIA em-
ployes in the August 26 issue of Quicksilver
Times , a Washington, D.C., underground
newspaper he had helped start. He appar-
ently exposed those 200 low-level agency
employes to establish credible cover with
U.S. dissident writers, whose ranks he was
infiltrating for the CIA. So it turns out that
the CIA pioneered the practice of naming
its agents — something it now wants out-
lawed.

Ferrera had a hand in Operation
CHAOS, an illegal CIA domestic program
that harassed the dissident press from 1969
to at least 1974, in violation of the 1947 Con-
gressional ban on any “internal-security
functions" for the CIA. The workings of
Operation CHAOS are still largely a secret.
A little-noticed loophole in the Intelligence
Identities Protection Act may help keep
them so: The act defines “covert agent” as
an officer or employe of an intelligence
agency “who is serving outside the United
States." The CIA is thus encouraged to fly
its domestic operatives overseas every five
years to assure them the protection of the
Identities Act.

Indeed, CHAOS agent Ferrera flew
overseas to spy on Philip Agee after keep-
ing watch on Quicksilver Times in Washing-
ton, Liberation News Service in New York,


and Second City in Chicago. The new act
may help conceal the names of domestic op-
eratives like Ferrera, thanks to its overseas-
travel clause, even though most members of
Congress thought they were voting for pro-
tection of our overseas spies only.

Such a potential loophole in any guide-
lines against CIA collection of information
about Americans here in the United States
was anticipated by the Church Committee
in its 1976 Senate report on CHAOS. And
now, just such a real loophole will allow the
CIA to violate its 1947 charter— to spy do-
mestically. From here on, domestic spies
may be protected from exposure so long as
they are flown abroad every five years, as
was Ferrera.

Bernard Raimo, counsel to the House
Intelligence Committee, confirmed that
this safety hatch for domestic agents was
written into the law at the behest of the
CIA- “When we were drafting this two or
three years ago, the CIA prevailed upon the
committee to establish some time so as to
include people in clandestine service who
come back here to train. Their career pat-
tern is overseas," he said.

When examined closely and from the
point of view of its backers, the act makes
sense, given recent developments in the in-
telligence community.

When the CIA reported that Libyan as-
sassination squads were gunning for him.
President Reagan ordered Director Wil-
liam Casey to embark upon “domestic
counterintelligence" on December 4, 1981.
With foreign assassins reportedly loose in
the United States, an unleashing of the CIA
seemed reasonable to most — until the Lib-
yans “disappeared,** leaving the FBI with-
out a trace of evidence. What was left be-
hind was the executive order to unleash the
CIA at home — an order the Administration
had been preparing long before the lurid
hit-squad news bought the Reaganites a
marketable excuse,.


Reagan's Executive Order' 12333 in-
structs the CIA to "conduct counterintelli-
gence activities within the United States."
and contains a legal aperture the size of a
bant: The CIA may "conduct special ac-
tivities approved by the President." In the
name of counterintelligence, the CIA. FBI.
and Army waged war from 1967 to 1974 on
black, antiwar, and antinuclear dissidents
and their publications. For example, in
early* 1967. Ramparts magazine, then per-
haps the leading publication of the Left,
was ready to expose the CIA’s funding of the
U.S. National Student Association. The
CIA got wind of what Ramparts was up to
two months before publication and. view-
ing the rumored article as an attack on the
CIA. started to shadow the magazine’s edi-
tors, ostensibly to find out whether they had
ties to hostile intelligence services. The
agency ordered counterintelligence agent
Richard Ober to conceive a counterattack.
Ober's proposals remain secret, but his was
exactly the sort of operation the CIA has in
the past called "foreign counterintelli-
gence." It will apparently be permitted
again, thanks to Reagan’s December 4 or-
der.

C ongress was wary of such Presi-
dential manipulation in 1947,
when the CIA was established.
Legislators fresh from a war with
totalitarian in Europe and Asia warned
that a powerful intelligence agency under
the control of the President might turn into
a security police apparatus. So Congress,
with a respectful eye toward civil liberties at


home, wrote into the 1947 National Secu-
rity Act language barring the CIA from
"internal-security functions’’ and police du-
ties. On April 24. 1947. Representative Oar-
ence J. Brown of Ohio said it all: "I am not
interested in setting up here in the United
States any particular central police agency
under any President, and I do not care what
his name may be. and just allow him to have
a Gestapo of his own if he wants to have it.**

Now Reagan has circumvented that
internal-security ban. Once the Intelligence
Identities Protection Act is on the books,
the press may be prevented from reporting
any CIA abuses — of the President’s making
or an energetic low-level functionary —
domestic or foreign.

Illegal CIA political action is not all that
may be shielded under this act. Representa-
tive Robert McClory. Illinois Republican,
gleefully pointed out just before the House
approved the act that "this legislation also


covers FBI agents who operate under cover
when they are engaged in counterintelli-
gence activities." The publishers of under-
ground and black-power newspapers,
among others, see the euphemism of
"counterintelligence activities" for what it
too often is.

It remains to be seen how the courts will
rule on this reckless new law. Certainly, un-
til now. the press has been asleep. But edi-
tors and reporters had better wake up. Spy
chief Casey wants authority to search news-
rooms without warrants for evidence of dis-
closures of CIA agent identities. And Casey
is proposing to Attorney General William
French Smith that CIA agents be granted
immunity from criminal prosecution while
on missions. The bill awaiting Ronald
Reagan’s signature will, sadly, not be a hard
act to follow for other hoofers in the Presi-
dent’s anti-First Amendment variety show. M


UPDATE: The final House-Senate conference report on the Intelligence
Identities Protection Act substantially limited the scope of this legisla-
tion. The conference report, issued after “Darker Cloaks" had gone to
press, said the law ‘ ‘does not affect the First Amendment rights of those
who disclose the identities of agents as an integral part of another enter-
prise such as news media reporting of intelligence failures or abuses. "
That report, taken as the final word on congressional intent, was quite
different from the statements made by proponents on the floor of
Congress. Of the law, as it applies to journalists, Society of Professional
Journalists attorney Bruce Sanford says, "Ignore it." But the law has
kept intelligence operatives from talking to reporters.


83


CIA Demands


I wing the Central Intelligence
Agency for violating the Freedom of In-
formation Act because the agency has
refused to release files concerning its In-
filtration of the dissident VS. press.

I first requested QA documents on the
underground press June 21, 1979, while
on assignment from the Columbia Jour*
naltam Review to write “Sabotaging the
Dissident Press.’’ The article was was
published, no thnnia to the CIA, In the
March/April 1981 issue. There I detailed
how the Army, Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation and the CIA beginning in 1967
infiltrated and harassed publications and
tried to put them out of business. I had
turned up CIA do cuments that prove the
agency had routinely Infiltrated a whole
generation of antiwar and black power
periodicals, sometimes using local police
informants.


After discovering these initial docu-
ments, I decided that under the FOIA the
American people have the right to see the
secret files from this illegal CLA attack on
the first amendment

So I requested the documents and
asked the CIA to waive search and copy
fees it would normally charge to produce
them. I could not afford to pay fees since,
like many freelancers, I earn less than
15,000 a year from writing. The FOIA
says the government shall waive fees if
releasing files would primarily benefit
the general public. Congress intended
this section of the law to prevent bureau-
crats from discouraging scholars and
journalists by charging them large sums
of money for government records.

The CIA refused to waive most fees for
Its underground press files. The agency’s
Charles E. Savlge responded to my fee
waiver request July 19, 1979, writing, *Tt
Is doubtful that we would have enough


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

WASHINGTON. O.C. 20303.

; ■ • • > • if. ....>*■ • : st

Lester A. Pines, Esq.

Langhatnmer & Pines
126 State Street

Madison, WI 53703 1 5 SEP 1330


Dear Mr* Pines:

This in to advise you of our estimate of the additional
search fees associated with the FOIA request of your client,
Angus MacKenzie, for information pertaining to the underground
press.


The additional fees come to a total of $153. They cons
of 22 1/4 hours of clerical search time @$4 per hour and 8
hours of professional search time @$8 per hour. The total
search fee, including the amount we mentioned to you in our
letter of 1 August 1980, now comes to $61,501.


^beginning the processing of the balance of

u^^n ee d t o receive a deposit


- The price Angus Mackenzie has to pay Is dearly
spelled out by the CIA In response to his FOI
request


i s t


84


$ 30,000

Search.

releasable material in our files to benefit
the general public to a degree sufficient
to Justify a fee waiver." However, the
agency would waive fees "if authorized
representatives of each paper requests
records on their organizations."

The trouble with this fee waiver Is that
it has no basis in the law and most papers
that were subject to infiltration by the
OLA are now defunct, the staffs scattered,
with little hope of getting releases from
them.

More than a year later the CIA decided
how much money It wanted just to search
— not to copy — Its files on the under-
ground press. On August 1, 1980, CIA In-
formation and Privacy Coordinator John
E. Bacon estimated fees would total
$61,348. He later boosted that sum to
$61,501. Payment, he wrote, would not
guarantee the CIA would find any docu-
ments releasable.

In addition, he demanded payment of
$30,000 and my promise to pay the re-
mainder of the $61,501 before the agency
would begin its search for the documents.

Eight months later, on administrative
appeal, the CIA dug in its heels. On March
3, 1981, the same day Colombia Journal-
ism Review published my "Sabotaging
the Dissident Press," Bacon wrote a let-
ter repeating that release of the files
would not benefit the general public
Coincidentally, excerpts from my article
were running on the Associated Press
wire, on NBC radio network news and on
National Public Radio. My Investigation
seemed to be benefiting the general pub-
lic.

What could I do against the CIA? I
knew that when Congress put teeth Into
the FOIA in 1974, Its House-Senate con-
ference report said "fees should not be
used for the purpose of discouraging re-
quests." But I was powerless as a free-
lance wri ter to fight the CIA's tactics.

Here comes help. The Freedom of In-
formation Service Center, which is a Joint
project ot the Reporters Committee for
Freedom of the Press and the Society of
Professional Journalists, ran to my res-
cue by arranging pro bono services from
Steptoe lc Johnson, one of the largest
Washington, D.C. law firms.


to Start
of Files

Almost three years after my Initial re-
quest, attorney Kevin Brooch phoned the
CIA on my behalf April 13, 1982. A QA
representative told Brosch that due to the
sensitive nature of the requested docu-
ments, the agency would not release for
two more years files on seven newspa-
pers from which I had earlier managed
to get releases in order to obtain a fee
waiver.

On June 16, 1982, we filed suit against
the agency with Executive Director of
the Reporters Committee Jack C landau
as co-counsel In an attempt to clarity two
major FOIA Issues. One, what b a reason-
able wait for documents? And two, Co
journalists with access to national media
deserve fee waivers on the presumption
that files released to them will primarily
benefit the general public?

The Justice Department, which de-
fends the CIA in such suits, bad told attor-
ney Brosch that the information I have
requested about GLA surveillance of dis-
sident papers will Involve a large number
of files.

Meanwhile, CIA director William J. Ca-
sey Is campaigning to have his agency
exempted from requests such as mine
under the FOLA. My estimate Is that Ca-
sey and company know how much the
American people are going to be disen-
chanted with his agency when and if the
full extent of QA operations against do-
mestic dissident newspapers becomes
public. No wonder Casey wants the QA
exempted. Every Journalist can help by
calling their elected representatives to
make sure the CLA receives no more
FOIA exemptions.

FOI '82


28


September 1983


Covering Up
Domestic Spying


American Civil Liberties Union, the Central
Intelligence Agency, and Republican Senators Barry
Goldwater and Strom Thurmond have become bedfel-
lows in the latest effort to exempt the CIA from the
Freedom of Information Act.

True, the ACLU, the Senators and the CIA are still
nitpicking over the language of the bill — S.B. 1324 —
which proposes to allow the Director of Central In-
telligence to withhold "operational files" from public
scrutiny. These former adversaries agree the bill will
free the CIA from searching those files it never makes
public anyway in response to Information Act requests.
This, they say, will allow timely processing of other
Information Act requests, speeding up the current two-
to- three-year wait.

Critics, however, say the bill amounts to a total
CIA exemption from the Information Act, under which
the CIA is now required to release some files.

Both CIA Deputy General Counsel Ernest May-
erfeld and ACLU Attorney Mark H. Lynch, friendly
enemies after their seven years of Information Act
courtroom battles, say the bill was introduced to Con-
gress after they reached an informal agreement. Their
compromise centers on the CIA dropping its push for
a total FOIA exemption and speeding up processing
of requests.

ACLU lawyer Lynch commented on the talks with
the CIA's attorney: "We’re two guys who’ve spent a
lot of time in court together shooting the shit and I’ve
always told him if they get off the total exemption
thing we might be able to work something out."

But some Information Act experts say the CIA is
taking the ACLU for a ride.

An examination of the bill and CIA attorneys* in-
terpretations of it reveal it will hide files from those
CIA components which were responsible for illegal
domestic spying. This provision is timely. President
Reagan, December 4, 1981, ordered the CIA into do-
mestic spying. CIA political espionage is rising like
a ghost from the Debategate scandal, in which Time
magazine revealed that CIA Director William J. Casey,
when he was Reagan’s 1980 campaign manager, set
up an intelligence apparatus using former CIA agents
to gather political information from their colleagues
still active in the agency.

Will this legislation help keep secret any future
domestic CIA political activities? Addressing that ques-
tion, CIA Deputy Director John N. McMahon told the


Senate Intelligence Committee not to worry. "There
will not ever again be a repeat of the improprieties of
the past. And let me assure you that Bill Casey and
I consider it our paramount responsibility that the
rules and regulations not be violated.’’ More CIA as-
surances follow.

The conservatives and the ACLU support the bill
because, they say, it will NOT expand the agency’s
power to keep files secret. They claim, instead, it will
speed up agency releases. Said Sen. Goldwater, "By
exempting from long and burdensome searches those
operational files from which very little information
has ever been released, the processing of all other re-
quests can be completed much sooner."

The CIA Deputy Director told the Senate Intelli-
gence Committee June 21, "It is hoped the CIA can
substantially curtail the present two-to- three-year wait
that requesters must now endure." This assurance is
not in the proposed law.

The ACLU's FOIA expert, Allan Adler, put it an-
other way. "If this bill lives up to CIA promises, it will
be a good bill. The CIA says nothing in this bill will
increase or expand withholding authority. It just fore-
goes search and review of material we agree is seldom
released."

The guts of this legislation will permit the CIA
to keep secret its "operational files," the definition of
which is the key to this bill. The CIA and ACLU dis-
agree about what that term means.

This reporter asked the ACLU and CIA for defi-
nitions of "operational files" and got two wildly dif-
ferent answers.

CIA Deputy Counsel Mayerfeld, formerly an oper-
ations officer, says "counterintelligence" files will be
exempt from release. "Counterintelligence" is the word
the CIA used to describe its illegal domestic spying
from 1967 to 1974. The agency may still be using that
term for any current domestic operations.

MHCHAOS was the counterintelligence operation
from 1967 to 1974 that targeted U.S. antiwar and civil
rights movements — and the underground press. One
CIA source says two roomfuls of these files have yet
to be released under the FOIA. The ACLU’s Lynch
says those documents would be made public under this
legislation because they have been the subject of a
congressional investigation. But CIA Attorney May-
erfeld says that whether this bill would keep secret
MHCHAOS documents "gets to be a complex question
I can’t answer."


86


Mayerfeld also says "security liaison arrange-
ments" will be exempt under this bill. The CIA Office
of Security conducted extensive liaison with U.S. police
in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The CIA organized
police political spying units which then fed informa-
tion to MHCHAOS.

These domestic operations were run despite the
congressional ban on them. Congress created the CIA
in 1947 " Provided , That the agency shall not have
police, subpoena, law-enforcement powers or internal-
security functions." Nevertheless, should CIA contacts
with local law enforcement continue, the files from
those operations may be kept secret under this legis-
lation.

Other domestic operations and files may become
exempt from disclosure also. Mayerfeld says "counter-
terrorism operations" are to be exempt. In 1974 the
CIA changed the name of MHCHAOS to the Inter-
national Terrorism Group, under Richard Ober, the
MHCHAOS commander. Ober kept MHCHAOS files
on more than 300,000 Americans. Mayerfeld refused to
comment on whether this bill would bar the public from
seeing files from the International Terrorism Group.

The ACLU holds a different view of what "opera-
tional files" mean. Although the CIA's Mayerfeld was
certain the definition was written into the legislation,
ACLU Attorney Lynch told this reporter the bill con-
tains "no definition." On the other hand, the ACLU’s
FOIA expert Adler attempted to define the term: "Op-
erational files contain how the intelligence is gathered.
You are not talking about intelligence itself."

The Organization of American Historians sent
Dr. Anna K. Nelson before the Senate Intelligence
Committee to testify that the term "operational files"
includes all files. "Is there any file of a government
agency that does not deal with ’operations’?" she asked
the committee.

Adler says if the ACLU can win "pinned down
meanings of operational files," the bill will then con-
tain "no additional withholding authority" and the
ACLU will support it. But when the Senate Intelli-
gence Committee asked the ACLU to submit revised
language for the bill, the ACLU declined, and instead
backed the House version introduced by Democrat
Romano L. Mazzoli of Kentucky, according to commit-
tee sources.

The House bill contains basically the same defini-
tion of "operational files" as the Senate version.

The House bill does contain differences from the
Senate version that the ACLU says are important.
Some experts, however, are not so sure the different
language is better. The Senate version opposed by
the ACLU would have let the CIA director designate
which files are to be exempt. The House bill drops that
provision. However, a spokesman for Sen. Walter D.
Huddleston, Democrat of Kentucky on the Intelligence
Committee, says that "makes no difference." With


either version, the CIA will decide which files to keep
secret.

The House bill also provides for the release of files
of investigations into CIA wrongdoing. That change
from the Senate version might be important except
that it depends on the CIA to determine what consti-
tutes "the subject of an investigation."

For instance, operation MHCHAOS was investi-
gated by Senator Church’s committee in 1975. But
Senate investigators ignored MHCHAOS operations
against the dissident U.S. press. MHCHAOS files on
the underground publications were not forwarded to
the committee for inspection. Those documents appar-
ently remain in the CIA counterintelligence section.
Will those files be released under the House bill be-
cause the overall operation was investigated by the
Senate? Or will those documents be exempt from dis-
closure because they are part of counterintelligence
files? The CIA shall decide.

The CIA told the Senate its method of deciding
which of its files investigated for impropriety it will
release. According to John N. McMahon, Deputy Di-
rector of Central Intelligence, if the agency finds that
allegations of wrongdoing are merited, records relating
to that impropriety will be released. In other words,
the CIA says it will determine which charges against
it are true and will then make public files that con-
firm those charges — an assurance reporters who have
attempted to get CIA files find difficult to accept.

The House version, supported by the ACLU, con-
tains another questionable improvement over the
Senate bill. Some experts, like the historian, say "op-
erational files" may include intelligence reports. The
House bill calls for search and review — but not re-
lease — of reports derived from operational files. So
the House bill, while an improvement over the Senate
bill on this score, remains unclear about whether the
CIA would have to release intelligence reports. If those
intelligence reports could be kept secret under this
measure, the legislation amounts to a total exemption
for the CIA from the Information Act.

The bills are much more specific in their desig-
nation of CIA components that shall be exempt from
the search and release requirements of the Informa-
tion Act.

Specifically, the bills define as exempt "operational
files located in the Directorate of Operations, Director-
ate of Science and Technology and Office of Security.”

The Directorate of Operations, also known as the
dirty tricks department, ran MHCHAOS against the
antidraft, antiwar and civil rights movements. It
also ran the agency’s still-secret operations inside the
United States Student Association into 1979.

The Office of Security studied the U.S. press and
lent support to MHCHAOS. Those operations were so
widespread that they, for example, checked into the
Washington-Baltimore Newspaper Guild, which rep-


87


resents reporters, and on March 16, 1968 received in-
formation from an infiltrator of a tiny antiwar sheet
in Lubbock, Texas, called the Forum , according to doc-
uments released under the Information Act.

The billa would exempt files from search and
review in those CIA components unless you were re-
questing them on yourself. But it is unclear from the
language of the legislation whether or not your per-
sonal files, once located, copld be designated as exempt
from disclosure.

Nevertheless, the CIA and ACLU say this legisla-
tion will not cover up files that might now otherwise
be released.

The CIA says "by removing these sensitive opera-
tional files from the FOIA process, the public is de-
prived of no meaningful information whatsoever.”

Lynch agrees. He told the Senate Intelligence
Committee June 28 that those operational files "are
now invariably exempt from disclosure.”

Are those CIA-ACLU claims true? The categorical
answer is NO. Operational files ARE occasionally re-
leased by the CIA. They have documented news stories
that have embarrassed the agency.

Here is one of many examples. A document was
released to John Foster Berlet, who edited the Denver-
based College Press Service, and that document was
used to corroborate a magazine article. Berlet's syndi-
cate mailed antiwar news to more than 200 college
newspapers, and still does under new ownership. On
October 25, 1976, in response to a request by Berlet,
the CIA declassified and approved for release a raw
informant's report on him. Dated April 29, 1971, the
agent’s report told the CIA of an important news serv-
ice move from its Washington, D.C. headquarters to
Denver. The agent, Salvatore John Ferrera, reported
Berlet "is an enthusiastic person but was closed-
mouthed about his background.” That report and oth-
ers like it were used to document "Sabotaging the
Dissident Press,” a Columbia Journalism Review
article by this author, which detailed the intelligence
agencies' campaign to destroy domestic underground
newspapers.

These bills would cover up the kind of news that
appeared July 16 in the Washington Post revealing
that the CIA as late as 1979 ran operations inside the
United States Student Association, which represents
three million students on 360 U.S. campuses. The CIA
file index which documented that story would have
been kept secret under this legislation because it in-
dexed files out of the Directorate of Operations, says
the students' attorney David Sobel.

Perhaps the most obvious cover-up contained in
these bills is the section that will throw out court chal-
lenges to CIA withholding of documents under the
Information Act.

CIA Attorney Mayerfeld testified before the Senate
Intelligence Committee that of 77 suits against the


agency under the Information Act, 46 would be affected
by this legislation; of those, 22 would be dismissed
outright and a majority of the requested files would
be designated exempt in 24 cases.

A few days later, Mayerfeld changed his figures.
To a Senate Intelligence Committee staffer, he said
of 69 suits against the agency, he didn’t know how
many would be affected.

Why the change in his testimony? Said the com-
mittee staffer, in the polite manner of the national
capital, "he was guessing.”

As for the ACLU's position on the lawsuit dismis-
sals, Adler says, "we haven’t addressed that issue at
this point.”

Here is one example of these lawsuits, to give an
indication of what may be dismissed. In 1979 when on
assignment to write "Sabotaging the Dissident Presa,”
this reporter requested the CIA's extensive files on
the underground press. After the CIA requested
$61,501 to search its files and persisted in refusing to
release even one page, I filed suit against the agency
June 16, 1982.

The CIA agreed September 9, 1982 to release some
of those files without charge during the next year.

Would these files be released had this legislation
passed, say, last year? I asked Lynch. They would be
released because that operation was the subject of an
investigation, he said.

scJJScti.

l.-wn t>U


Tba Ocntor «OlM vlll ba Vva.br *vA fraa tba basa •(

Ckl> (jK«siblr Onrlca) BSWt
20oU featb T, r ic Strut

JKPJJST la prucnUr la MX *a4 will nula far "wUr- tSSJSt la ab.at M
and baa lias bl.n*. bair. *a la *a (ntboaUatla r«raea bvfc v»a *l.a#-a-*tba4
abrvt kla bvkiraai.

TV* la«al CPS *ffla« la «n tba a«*«nrf f laar •< 1779 Cb*r*b


This censored CIA informant’s report to the Directorate of Opera-
tions was reteased to Colege Press Service October 25. 1970. unow
the Information Act. contrary to CIA-ACLU claims that this
operational file is never made public. The CIA may keep this type
of document secret if Congress passes another exemption for mm
agency.


88


But CIA attorney Mayerfeld would not give a
gtraight answer about the release of MHCHAOS-re-
lafced documents, I told Lynch.

"Well, that’s one of the things we’ll have to pin
down,” Lynch said.

y The real question becomes: why didn’t the ACLU

oppose this legislation from the start? The ACLU
S’; delivers many answers to that question, including dis-
- cussions about the role of opposition, fighting for better
language and tactics and strategy thereof. Those de-
bates might be worth airing had not this investigation
turned up another reason. The ACLU and CIA reached
l an informal agreement on this legislation before it was

t introduced to Congress.

A source who works closely with Lynch says "the
deal is on.”

f; The CIA says the deal is on.

Lynch, who has fought long and hard for the In-
formation Act, says, "I’ve always told him (Mayerfeld)
if they get off the total exemption thing we might be
able to work things out.”

CIA Deputy General Counsel Mayerfeld says "there
was kind of an understanding that we should wind up
somewhere between total relief and the status quo.
% There was a mutual realization that some improve-
: V ments could be achieved and this bill was it.”

Mayerfeld said some of those discussions were with
Mark Lynch. When asked when the understanding
was reached, Mayerfeld said "before the bill was in-
,v traduced."

I; What might have happened if the ACLU refused
the deal? Would the CIA have gotten a total exemp-
tion from the FOIA? Is the ACLU just making the
best of a bad situation?

Morton Halperin has one answer. He had served
as Henry Kissinger’s right-hand man in the National
Security Counsel and he now heads the ACLU project
called the Center for National Security Studies and
works closely with Lynch. He justified the deal this
way to rebelling ACLU troops: "The CIA would not
have given up their public and vigorous effort to secure
a total exemption unless we were willing to state that
this new approach was one we could consider.” In other
words, the CIA may have gotten a total FOIA exemp-
tion but for the deal.

The CIA doesn’t think it could get a total exemp-
tion. CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin told this
reporter, "We would have liked a full exemption but
we realized that wasn’t in the cards.”

One of the nation’s top FOIA experts, Tonda Rush,
who directs the Freedom of Information Service Center
for reporters in Washington, D.C., explained why this
total exemption wasn’t possible for the CIA. "There
wasn’t anybody in the Senate who would sponsor the
total exemption.”

And if the ACLU opposed this legislation? Lynch
says "if the ACLU opposes this bill, it won’t go through


Congress.” Most knowledgeable congressional sources
agree.

One respected reporter has an opinion of why the
ACLU can't oppose this legislation. Society of Profes-
sional Journalists President Steven Dornfeld says "it
would be difficult to pursuade the ACLU to oppose the
bill. The reason is that staff members of that group
had much to do with giving birth to the measure.”

Remember, the ACLU’s Adler said that if this bill
lives up to CIA promises , it will be a good bill. Remem-
ber the CIA assurances that there will be no more im-
proprieties. Remember agency hopes for speeding up
its Information Act response time?

The ACLU seems to have forgotten something it
once knew.

It has forgotten the testimony of its legislative di-
rector John H.F. Shattuck in July, 1981 when he spoke
against an FOIA-CLA exemption before Congress. He
told a committee, "CIA Director William Casey ... is
determined to pursue a broader FOIA exemption for
the CIA. What is the public to make of this when con-
fronted with reports of a proposed Reagan Executive
Order authorizing the CIA to carry out broad domestic
security functions inside the United States. Why
should the Congress accept this 'trust us’ approach to
CIA accountability . . . ?”

Yet the ACLU is now engaging in just that "trust
us” mentality.

"Basically, you've got the' CIA and the ACLU.
There are no other players. If they’re in agreement,
who is going to pick a fight?” That is how one con-
gressional FOIA expert sees this legislation floating
through Congress to the President’s pen.

In this game, the ACLU should continue its fight
for less secrecy in government. The ACLU should tell
Congress the deal is off. The ACLU should use its good
power to kill this legislation.

The Nation
September 1983


89


TEACHERS!

This booklet is available at bulk rates.

ONE COPY $1.95
TEN OR MORE $1.20
Postpaid

Send your purchase order to:


SABOTAGING

Center for Investigative Reporting
54 Mint Street, 4th Floor
San Francisco, CA 94103

Emergency orders gladly filled.

Call Angus Mackenzie at (415) 543-1200.

Leave message after hours.

Booklets will be quickly dispatched by first-class mail.
Pay after your students pay you.

The author is available for speaking engagements.

California residents add &Vz% sales tax.


30


Help Pry the Truth
From the CIA

Angus Mackenzie is suing the Central Intelligence Agency and is preparing to sue
the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the Freedom of Information Act to make public
files from their operations against the dissident U.S. press. Their efforts to destroy
newspapers are detailed in this booklet.

Moat files from CIA and FBI newspaper-smashing campaigns are still secret. Many
of the records may stay secret, even though the CIA September 9, 1982, agreed to produce
some of them over the next year. Now the CIA is claiming that many of its documents
on the smallest of U.S. periodicals are exempt from release to the public because exposure
of those files would violate "national security.” That "national security” claim may allow
the CIA to keep secret its activities against the underground press.

We are fighting that "national security” claim in court. It is a tough fight. Courts
presume the CIA is right. The burden to prove otherwise is on us. The lawsuit, Mackenzie
u. CIA, is being handled by a team of top-notch attorneys in Washington, D.C., obtained
free by the joint project of the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press and the
Society of Professional Journalists.

But even with free attorneys, investigative costs for this suit are running $40,000
per year. That is why we need donations.

Why help? So a free press can live free of government interference.

Donations are tax-deductible.


Yes, please accept this tax-deductible contribution payable to
C I R /Mackenzie.

Name

Address

City, state, zip

Please send copies of this booklet at $1.95 each, plus 6Vi% sales

tax for California residents.

Mall to: Center for Investigative Reporting
54 Mint St., 4th Floor
San Francisco, CA 94103


Photo: Tema


About the Author


Angus Mackenzie is director of the Media Alliance Freedom of Information Project
and is an associate of the Center for Investigative Reporting in San Francisco.
Portions of his writings in this booklet have been distributed by Los Angeles Times
Syndicate, Associated Press, NBC radio network news, and National Public Radio.

Mackenzie's study of government-press relations began after he was
repeatedly arrested for selling newspapers on the streets in 1970. Later that year,
in June, his newspaper The People’s Dreadnaught was raided by Beloit, Wisconsin,
police. In 1975 he took those police to trial for entering his newsrooms without
a warrant and for arresting him. He won a $2,500 judgment from a federal jury
which found the police had knowingly violated his civil rights.

In 1978 he began his search for evidence that suppression of the anti-war
press had been coordinated from Washington, D.C. Much to his surprise, he found
the Central Intelligence Agency at the center of the plot. He sued the CIA for its
files on the underground press June 16, 1982. Here are his findings, some of which
are reprinted from the prestigious Columbia Journalism Review.


Cover: Jane Norling
