SELECT C0I4MITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS 
Name 
Samuel Stem 
‘ Date 8/22/78 
Time 
Address wilmer> Cutler, & Pickering Place his lav office 
Interview: 
... . • • •• ... .K: -; r .* * ' 
Former Warren Commission counsel Sam Stern was interviewed in his Washington 
law office on August 22, 1978. Mr. Stem stated that his duties on the 
Commission involved handling the investigation into Lee Oswald's background 
specifically, the intelligence agencies awareness of Oswald prior to the 
assassination. Secondly, Stern stated that he had been in charge of evaluati 
"the efficacy of Presidential protection," as well as preparing a history of 
American Presidential assassinations. .. / * 
Mr. Stem stated that "at the outset we realized that there was no possible 
way to penetrate any offcial involvement in a cover-up or conspiracy if 
there was such complicity." Stem stated that he and several of his Commiss 
colleagues discussed what they regarded as "the fact that the agencies - the 
FBI and CIA - could formulate and maintain a cover-up which no one would 
ever penetrate. We of course did not.believe that was so. And I still 
don't. But we realized what we were dealing with, in the power of these 
agencies. Fortunately, we believed they were on our side." 
.. ; V i *" * 
Mr. Stem stated that on one occasion he believed that the Commission 
was influenced in its investigation by what he regarded as "some type 
of pressure or fear of the FBI." Stern stated thatthis came about when 
he prepared a detailed letter to be sent to the FBI setting forth 
detailed questions about their past Investigation and contacts with^ 
Lee Oswald. Stem stated that Earl Warren told him that the letter 
was too demanding and that it would cause problems vis a vis the 
Commission's relationship with Hoover. Stern stated that upon being told 
that the letter was "unacceptable" by Warren, he (Stem) met with John 
McCloy and explained the situation to him, hoping to gain his support. 
While McCloy did express agreement with Stern that the letter was . 
necessary, Stern was once again told by Warren that "the letter went 
further than was desirable." Stem thereupon sent a less detailed request. 
In connection with this episode. Stem stated that "one of my problems, 
a real difficulty, was having such limited contact with the Members* of 
the Commission. It was all done through Rankin. And you never really 
knew if your viewpoint or arguments or whatever were being communicated 
Interviewer Signature 
Typed Signature Mike Ewing 
Date transcribed 
. • By: 
Forml done through Rankin. And you never really 
knew if your viewpoint or arguments or whatever were being communicated 
Interviewer Signature 
Typed Signature Mike Ewing 
Date transcribed 
. • By: 
Form

--- PAGE BREAK ---n. And you never really 
knew if your viewpoint or arguments or whatever were being communicated 
Interviewer Signature 
Typed Signature Mike Ewing 
Date transcribed 
. • By: 
Form

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i 
i 
1 
I 
as strongly as you felt was necessary. We didn’t have direct access." 
Stern stated that his evaluation of the Secret Service showed that 
"the Secret Service was not a modem, demonstrably reliable, body 
at that time. It was, plain and simply, primitive. Both in operations 
and structure." Stem stated however that he could see (and still does) 
that "with the Secret Service you quickly get into your basic problems 
of civil liberties. How many people or potential threats are you going 
to put on your watch list? How many of these people do you round up when 
the President comes to that state? How do you determine who’s on the list, 
and what are the final criteria?" Stern stated that "very quickly you 
can get into a very unmanageable list" of people who should be watched. 
Speaking of the friction he observed between the FBI and SS during his 
work on the Commission, Stem stated that "the friction was expressed 
more by the Secret Service than by the FBI." 
Stem stated that he and various other staffers had not had a very 
high regard for James Malley, the FBI's liaison with the Commission. 
"We knew he was there hustling us. That was his job. He was the big 
jovial insurance salesman, without any great intelligence. 
Speaking of the FBI in general, Stern stated that "I had a very limited 
regard for their ability. They had almost a crazy impotent system of 
headquarters control. The Oswald case would shift to new offices when . 
Oswald traveled._There would then be lapses in the coverage of him. 
This was just a very bad system of internal management. I thought the 
level of competence in headquarters was very poor." Stern stated that 
on the other hand he regard the CIA as "very professional compared with 
the Bureau. They had great technology. Compared with the CIA, the FBI 
was like a bunch of clerks on roller skates." 
Stern stated that had he been told of FBI Agent Hosty's allegedly 
threatening note received from Lee Oswald shortly before the assassination, 
he "would have regarded it as greater identification of the possibility 
of potential danger in Oswald — of violence." Stern stated that if 
the staff of the Commission had discovered that the Hosty note had 
existed and had been destroyed by the FBI in Dallas, that If we had 
found out that happened, we would have gone to a full Commission 
meeting immediately, and would have made the big decision regarding 
any future relationship between the Commission and the FBI. It 
just would have gone to the heart of the whole relationships and 
the Bureau's motivation.- The destruction of that note would have 
resulted in the ultimate brouhaha."the Commission and the FBI. It 
just would have gone to the heart of the whole relationships and 
the Bureau's motivation.- The destruction of that note would have 
resulted in the ultimate brouhaha."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stern stated that had the Commission learned of the CIA-Mafia 
conspiracies to assassinate Fidel Castro, "we would have gone 
much more into Cuba, the CIA, and the Mafia.' We would have had 
a whole host of new avenues calling for investigation.

And we 
would have obviously had to develop some new sources of information - 
other than the agency." 
Stern stated that he developed close relationships with other staff 
members in that they usually had at least two meals together, shared 
small cramped offices, and were away from their families.

He stated 
that some senior counsel did not work as much as the juniors, and noted 
that "William Coleman, in particular, wasn't ever around that much." 
Stern stated that in conducting the investigation and writing the 
Report "I didn!t feel rushed, though others did.

And I never felt any 
outside pressure during that period." 
Stern stated that he "felt that I knew the Oswald personality.

I was 
comfortable with him acting alone.

Oswald was incompatible with 
society - I think he was really striking-down the king in his own 
mind.

I also felt comfortable with the assumption that no foreign 
power would utilize Oswald; that any group would readily realize that 
Oswald was ineffective and unreliable, especially for something like that." 
Speaking of the Dallas Police Department, Stern stated that "I had no 
problem believeing the Dallas Police would let someone down in the ^ 
basement.

Not as a conspiracy, but as an incompetent operation in 
guarding Oswald.

I had a very low opinion of them.

They turned in a 
horrible performance with the actual motorcade, and then things like 
no tapes of Oswald's interrogation, and on and on." 
l 
I 
j 
\\MlW 
|Vh 
Stem stated that "if there were a conspiracy, that would mean that 
Oswald was a consummate actor.

I felt that one of the most significant 
signs that there was in fact no conspiracy was the absence of any 
early effort to take him out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They turned in a 
horrible performance with the actual motorcade, and then things like 
no tapes of Oswald's interrogation, and on and on." 
l 
I 
j 
\\MlW 
|Vh 
Stem stated that "if there were a conspiracy, that would mean that 
Oswald was a consummate actor. I felt that one of the most significant 
signs that there was in fact no conspiracy was the absence of any 
early effort to take him out. Of other conspirators trying to kill 
him before he could really be interrogated at length." 
Stem briefly mentioned that he had been surprised, along with other 
Commission staffers, to learn that "Marina Oswald was sleeping with 
some guy within Weeks of the assassination, when we were questioning her." 
4 4 
When shown the CIA memorandum of November 1963 in which a CIA offrtd&r 
1 1"" 
wrote that the Agency had once considered using Oswald for inrpi 
purposes, Stern stated that "I have never seen this. I was never given 
this, and we had asked for and were supposed to be given anything of 
relevance like this." In reading the memo. Stern stated that "that would 
have definitely been relevant. If they (the CIA) were taking him that 
seriously, then you might think that others could or did also. If we 
found that had-been withheld, that would have been a major explosion also." 
When shown a copy of the 1960-1961 memos regarding "the possibility 
of an Oswald imposter," Stern stated that he had never seen those three memos 
either, despite the fact that "they would have certainly been relevant. I 
was supposed to have been given all relevant Bureau information and files 
on Oswald in the pre-assassination period. They said I had everything."

--- PAGE BREAK ---have certainly been relevant. I 
was supposed to have been given all relevant Bureau information and files 
on Oswald in the pre-assassination period. They said I had everything."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Speaking of the possibility of various Members of the Commission 
leaking information to the agencies or other people. Stem stated 
that "I always assumed Dulles was doing that - to the CIA, But 
I had no hard information-" Stern stated that the FBI had a "pretty 
good idea" of what the Commission was doing "because Malley was 
there to ingratiate himself as much as possible with each of us," 
Stern stated that among his closest colleagues on the staff, they 
were convinced that Albert Jenner was frequently leaking material 
to the press. Stern stated that at one point Jenner was more or less 
"caught" leaking something, and made "a partial confession." Stem 
stated that he and some of his colleagues made up a song about Jenner 
leaking information to the press when he would have lunch with various 
reporters. Stern stated that he can remember that it started out 
as follows: "Down at the tables of Hogate's where old Jenner dwells." 
Stem stated that he had no knowledge that the FBI prepared secret 
dossiers on the members of the Commission, and stated that "I'll have 
to put in an FOI request for mine and see what they had on me." 
Stem stated that he had been seriously misquoted by Edward Epstein 
in his book, "Inquest", and that he had complained to Epstein's editor 
that Epstein had misrepresented his credentials during the preparation 
of the book. 
In response to the question as to how he now feels about the 
conclusions of the Warren Commission, Stern stated, "I am less 
certain now than at the time we wrote the Report. Less certain that 
Oswald acted alone. Actually, I wasn't all that certain at the time. 
I thought the best evidence supported the final findings, and I agreed 
with them, but I wasn't tremendously firm or immovable in that, in my 
own mind. I just thought there were a lot of straws left." 
Stem stated that "I accepted the forensics, the rifle, the bullets, 
Tippit, and everything, but I hadn't been involved in the hard physical 
evidence at all." Stern also stated that he would have liked to see 
"a new head of the Secret Service when the Report came out. I just 
didn't think Rowley was up to the job at all." Stem- further noted 
that "after the assassination, the coffers really opened up for the 
Secret Service and they finally got the money they wanted." 
Stern concluded by stating that he has become "more skeptical about 
the Warren Commission findings and everything else that is a part of 
official life, I suppose. Everything has become discredited over the 
years since 1963. You don't really believe in things the way you did 
back then. You've seen the Vice President of the United States taking 
cash bribes in. his office and on and on and on. You couldn't help, but 
rely on government officials more then than you would now." 
1 
I