DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY 
ENGINEER RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CENTER, CORPS OF ENGINEERS 
WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION, 3909 HALLS FERRY ROAD 
VICKSBURG, MISSISSIPPI 39180-6199 
8 April 2009 
Office of Counsel 
SUBJECT: Freedom of Information Act Request No. 09-05 
Mr. John Greenewald, Jr. 
Dear Mr. Greenewald: 
In response to your FOIA request dated March 18, 2009, enclosed is the information you 
requested. There will be no charges associated with this request. If you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me at the address above or at telephone number (601) 634-2757. 
Sincerely, 
Enclosures 
Lewis H. Burke 
FOIA Officer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

— 
Property of the United States Government 
MISCELLANEOUS PAPER E-74-5 
USE OF THE SUBTERRENE FOR MILITARY 
DRILLING APPLICATIONS 
Major Lynn C. Webster 
October 1974 
LIBRARY BRANCH 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION CENTER 
US ARMY ENGINEER WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION 
VICKSBURG. MISSISSIPPI 
U. S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station 
Explosive Excavation Research Laboratory 
Livermore, California 
Approved for public release; distribution unlimited

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Destroy this report when no longer needed* 
Do not return it to the originator. 
The findings in this report are not to be construed as an 
official Department of the Army position unless so 
designated by other authorized documents* 
Printed in USA. Available from Defense Documentation 
Cameron Station, Alexandria * Virginia 22314 or 
National Technical Information Service, 
U< S* Department of Commerce 
Springfield, Virginia 22161 
■r, 
Ml 
!■.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nse Documentation 
Cameron Station, Alexandria * Virginia 22314 or 
National Technical Information Service, 
U< S* Department of Commerce 
Springfield, Virginia 22161 
■r, 
Ml 
!■.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unclas s if ied 
ICUftlTY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGE (Wh Data Entered) 
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 
REPORT number 
P E- 74- 5 
READ INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE COMPLETING FORM 
Z. -30VT ACCESSION NO. 3. RECIPIENT'S CATALOG NUMBER 
. TITLE Cfcid Submit) 
ISE OF THE SUBTERRENE FOR MILITARY 
DRILLING APPLICATIONS 
S. TYPE OF REPORT ft PERIOD COVERED 
Final 
6. PERFORMING ORG+ REPORT NUMBER 
'* AUTHOR(a) 
Lynn G* Webster 
!AJ, CE 
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS 
i 
S Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station 
Jxplosive Excavation Research Laboratory 
livermore, CA 94550 
CONTRACT OR GRANT NUMBERf*) 
CONTROLLING OFFICE NAME AND ADDRESS 
ffice of the Chief of Engineers 
ASH DC 20314 
to. program element project, task 
AREA & WORK UNIT NUMBERS 
4A1 62 121A859 
Task 05; Work Unit 014 
MONITORING AGENCY NAME * ADDRESSfff different from Controlling Of lice) 
tZ. REPORT DATE 
October 1974 
13. NUMBER OF PAGES 
27 
is. security CLASS, (of thta report) 
Unclas s if ied 
IS*. DECL 
SCH EDULE 
ASSIF1 CATION/DOWN GRADING 
'6. DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT (of thl* Report) 
Approved for PubLic Release: distribution unlimited 
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT (of the abstract entered in Block 20r if different from Rapert) 
18. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 
19. KEY WORDS (Continue on raver me aide if naceaeary and identify by block number) 
trilling Explosive Emplacement 
.ock Drilling Subsurface Exploration 
Subterrene 
ck Melting Techniques 
20. A BSTRACT (Conllnua on aide if necaetaty and identify by block number) 
The subterrene melts holes f rough soil and rock by means of a h 
perature penetrator. Its capabilities include precision drilling, simple opera- 
ion, a natural casing of the drill hole {in the form of a glass lining produced 
during penetration), Long life of the penetrator (the life of the subterrene pene- 
trator far exceeds that of the rock bit), and environmental advantages (the loud 
noise and dust produced by rotary and percussion drills do not exist at a sub¬ 
terrene site)* On the other hand, the cost of subterrene operations is a def- 
ite limitation; it is very high compared with that of conventional drilling* 
form 
1 J AN 73 
EDITION OF 1 NOV 65 15 OBSOLETE 
Unclas sified 
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGE (Whan Data Entered)ite limitation; it is very high compared with that of conventional drilling* 
form 
1 J AN 73 
EDITION OF 1 NOV 65 15 OBSOLETE 
Unclas sified 
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGE (Whan Data Entered)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unclassified 
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGEfWiwi Dmtm Entered) 
0., Continued 
.n analysis of military drilling requirements reveals that additional serious 
imitations arise when the subterrene is considered for military applications. 
It is concluded that, in its present configuration and even with its projected 
:apabilities, the subterrene does not meet a significant number of the drilline 
equirements of the Army. 
Unclassified 
W/7 
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PASEfWJi«» Dele Enter'd)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MISCELLANEOUS PAPER E-74-5 
USE OF THE SUBTERRENE FOR MILITARY 
DRILLING APPLICATIONS 
Major Lynn C. Webster 
U. S. ARMY ENGINEER WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION 
EXPLOSIVE EXCAVATION RESEARCH LABORATORY 
LIVERMORE, CALIFORNIA 
MS. date, October 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---LLING APPLICATIONS 
Major Lynn C. Webster 
U. S. ARMY ENGINEER WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION 
EXPLOSIVE EXCAVATION RESEARCH LABORATORY 
LIVERMORE, CALIFORNIA 
MS. date, October 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---

»9; -1 
■mmt' 
The U. S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station 
(USAEWES) Explosive Excavation Research Laboratory {EERL) 
evolved from the organization originally known as the USAE Nuclear 
Cratering Group (NCG), which was established in 1962. The period 
between 1 August 1971 and 21 April 1972 was a transition period dur¬ 
ing which the laboratory was known as the Explosive Excavation Re¬ 
search Office (EERO). 
EERL conducts research in the areas of nuclear and high explo¬ 
sive effects with emphasis on the use of explosives for creation of 
military barriers to armor movement and large scale construction 
excavation. Closely related to this explosive excavation work is a 
concern with the ability of Corps of Engineers personnel to optimally 
place explosives for specific applications. Thus, there exists an ex¬ 
tensive interest in improving the capability to drill large-diameter 
holes to reasonable depths. This work was performed as a result of 
this interest and funding supplied by the Inhouse Laboratory Independ¬ 
ent Research Program of the Waterways Experiment Station, 
The Director of WES during the preparation of this report was 
COL G. H, Hilt and the Director of EERL was LTC R. R. Mills Jr. 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---rch Program of the Waterways Experiment Station, 
The Director of WES during the preparation of this report was 
COL G. H, Hilt and the Director of EERL was LTC R. R. Mills Jr. 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ABSTRACT 
The subterrene melts holes through soil and rock by means of a 
high temperature penetrator. Its capabilities include precision dril¬ 
ling, simple operation, a natural casing of the drill hole (in the form 
of a glass lining produced during penetration), long life of the pene¬ 
trator (the life of the subterrene penetrator far exceeds that of the 
rock bit), and environmental advantages (the loud noise and dust pro¬ 
duced by rotary and percussion drills do not exist at a subterrene 
site). On the other hand, the cost of subterrene operations is a def¬ 
inite limitation; it is very high compared with that of conventional 
drilling. An analysis of military drilling requirements reveals that 
additional serious limitations arise when the subterrene is considered 
for military applications. 
It is concluded that, in its present configuration and even with its 
projected capabilities, the subterrene does not meet a significant 
number of the drilling requirements of the Army,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACKN OW LEDGMEN TS 
The preparation of this report was made possible by the 
contributions of several people. The author desires to ac¬ 
knowledge the assistance ofMAJ Richard L. Gates and SP4 
Jon Morishita for their assistance in collecting data on the 
subterrene and its capabilities* Appreciation is also ex¬ 
pressed to Dr s * J + C * Rowley, C, A* Bangs ton, and R. J* 
Hanold, and to Mr. R. E. Williams, all of Los Alamos Sci¬ 
entific Laboratory* for their assistance in providing reports 
on development progress and participation in discussions on 
the subterrene. 
iv

--- PAGE BREAK ---E. Williams, all of Los Alamos Sci¬ 
entific Laboratory* for their assistance in providing reports 
on development progress and participation in discussions on 
the subterrene. 
iv

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS 
PREFACE 
ABSTRACT . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. 
I. 
—- —- ' t *1 
INTRODUCTION. 
* 1 * * * 
* * * a- . 
A. 
Background ..... 
* * * * * 
B. 
Scope ...... 
* 9 * t p 
II. 
ARMY DRILLING REQUIREMENTS AND CAPABILITIES . 
A. 
Drilling Requirements. 
* ■ 4 . . 
1. 
Combat Support .... 
• * * ■ f 
2. 
Construction Support . 
3. 
Utilities ...... 
i 1 t > « 
B. 
Drilling Capabilities 
* * • * * 
C. 
Proposed Procurement 
• P * f * 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUBTERRENE CONCEPT . 
A. 
History. 
■ + * 4 * 
B. 
Concept and Devices 
* * + ■ . 
C. 
Support Equipment 
* * * * * 
D. 
Evaluations ..... 
E. 
Future Plans ..... 
* 1 i t t 
IV. 
CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE .... 
SUB TERRENE FOR DRILLING APPLICATIONS 
A. 
Penetration Rate f . 
B. 
Support Requirements , 
* • f > * 
C. 
Costs . . ' 
. 
D. 
Special Advantages 
*■>*!* 
V. 
EVALUATION OF THE SUB TERRENE FOR .... 
MILITARY DRILLING APPLICATIONS 
VI. CONCLUSIONS. 
REFERENCES . 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ...... 
^a-ge 
■ * 
II 
6 s r 
in 
iv 
1 
] 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
5 
5 
5 
7 
7 
9 
10 
10 
10 
11 
12 
14 
16 
17 
18 
v

--- PAGE BREAK ---LICATIONS 
VI. CONCLUSIONS. 
REFERENCES . 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ...... 
^a-ge 
■ * 
II 
6 s r 
in 
iv 
1 
] 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
5 
5 
5 
7 
7 
9 
10 
10 
10 
11 
12 
14 
16 
17 
18 
v

--- PAGE BREAK ---

USE OF THE SUB TERRENE FOR 
MILITARY DRILLING APPLICATIONS 
I. INTRODUCTION 
^' Backgrcmnd, U. S. Army Engineers, like their counterparts 
in industry, are continuously seeking new ways to increase their capa¬ 
bility to excavate soil and rock. Unlike his civilian counterpart, the 
Army Engineer has as his main purpose for this search the improve¬ 
ment of the quality of the support he is able to give to the fighting 
soldier. The types of missions included in this support vary from the 
excavation of individual fighting positions to the creation of effective 
obstacles and beyond. Construction is also included in these missions; 
however, responsiveness to the front-line soldier's needs is of prU 
niary importance. The Army Engineer has been severely restricted 
in efforts to improve his capabilities by the absence of a truly effective 
method for rapidly drilling holes in soil and rock. Therefore, he is 
vitally interested in new drilling techniques. 
One such technique now being developed at the Los Alamos Scien¬ 
tific Laboratory (LASL) employs a tool called the subterrene. The 
subterrene melts holes through soil or rock with a high temperature 
penetrator. Tests have demonstrated that the concept is workable and 
may well prove to be an extremely effective drilling method. 
B. Scope. This report will review current and anticipated mili¬ 
tary drilling requirements, briefly describe the subterrene, and eval¬ 
uate the apparent suitability of the subterrene for meeting these re¬ 
quirements. Since subterrene development is still in the active stage, 
the evaluation of its capabilities must, by necessity, reflect the antici¬ 
pations of its developers. In some cases, these concepts have not yet 
been proven. 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---he active stage, 
the evaluation of its capabilities must, by necessity, reflect the antici¬ 
pations of its developers. In some cases, these concepts have not yet 
been proven. 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II- ARMY DRILLING REQUIREMENTS AND CAPABIUTTFS* 
A. Drilling Requirements. For discussion purposes. Army 
drilling requirements have been divided into three distinct categories: 
1 ‘ Combat Support. Combat support represents those operations 
specifically oriented toward assisting the front-line combat soldiers in 
performance of their fighting mission* 
-Although several techniques have been developed to assist the 
soldier in preparing fighting positions, none has proven entirely ade¬ 
quate, Most require excessive installation time or are at least partly 
restricted by certain geologic conditions* A workable large-hole 
drilling capability could do much toward improving this situation. 
Such a capabiiity would be especially effective in rapidly preparing 
secondary or alternate positions during defensive and retrograde oper¬ 
ations* The reduction in manpower required to perform such work 
would greatly increase the forces available to the combat commander. 
One of the most useful combat support tools available is the barrier 
or obstacle to enemy armor movement. Many natural obstacles exist 
in most terrains; however, the combat engineer is called upon to tie 
these natural obstacles together with artificial obstacles created at 
selected locations and selected times. An effective obstacle of this 
type is the explosively produced crater. Both nuclear and high explo¬ 
sive sources can be used to produce such craters. At present, only 
nuclear cratering detonations are available for producing large ob¬ 
stacles. High explosive cratering is generally limited to production of 
small road craters that will certainly slow and harass enemy armored 
forces but will not present a serious obstacle to their movement. An 
active research program is evaluating the possible military use of bulk 
explosives commonly used in the commercial mining and quarrying 
industries. These explosives would allow the combat engineer to pro¬ 
duce large craters using Large quantities of explosives. In order to 
gain optimum use of both nuclear devices and these new bulk explosives* 
a capability for drilling large, relatively deep emplacement holes must 
be provided. Only then can cratering charges be placed at sufficient 
depth to optimize crater production.ew bulk explosives* 
a capability for drilling large, relatively deep emplacement holes must 
be provided. Only then can cratering charges be placed at sufficient 
depth to optimize crater production.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a capability for drilling large, relatively deep emplacement holes must 
be provided. Only then can cratering charges be placed at sufficient 
depth to optimize crater production.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

j?
Construction Support. The construction support capabilities 
of combat and construction engineers can be greatly improved by 
expanding the ability to drill holes more effectively in soil and rock. 
Exploratory drilling can do much toward improving construction de¬ 
signs. Current capabilities are seriously limited. Larger hole size, 
both diameter and depth, is needed to allow expansion of foundation 
construction. In many locations, the ability to install large concrete 
caissons would ease the construction of large structures, such as 
petroleum storage tanks. 
The state-of-the-art in explosive excavation has been significantly 
advanced in recent years. With the potential for using large quantities 
of explosives in such applications, a capability to drill large holes is 
essential if this new tool is to be fully utilized. It was learned in 
Vietnam,jthat in certain locations, massive quantities of crushed rock 
must be produced in order to build and to maintain effective lines of 
communication. Current capabilities proved inadequate for the needs 
in this particular situation. As mentioned earlier, the qua rr yin si 
industry is now using large quantities of bulk explosives to increase 
production. This same capability is required if the Army is to be pre¬ 
pared for all types of combat situations. In addition to a bulk explo¬ 
sive, rock drilling equipment is required to produce rapidly emplaced, 
larger, deeper holes for production blasting. 
3. Utilities. In the area of utilities construction, an improved 
capability to install water wells and utility poles is required to enhance 
base development operations. 
B. Drilling Capabilities. In view of the current capabilities of 
commercial drilling equipment, Army drilling equipment might be con¬ 
sidered quite antiquated. Rock drilling equipment includes a hand-held 
pneumatic percussion drill capable of drilling a 51-mm {2 - in)-diameter 
hole to a depth of 3 m (10 ft), wagon- and crawler-mounted drifters 
capable of drilling up to 0. 1 -m (4-in)-diameter holes to a depth of 
7. 3 m (24 ft), and a well-drill capable of drilling 0. 2 m (8-in. 
holes to a depth of 305 m (1000 ft). The only earth drilling equipment 
available is a skid-mounted earth auger, which can drill holes up to 
’ll), and a well-drill capable of drilling 0. 2 m (8-in. 
holes to a depth of 305 m (1000 ft). The only earth drilling equipment 
available is a skid-mounted earth auger, which can drill holes up to 
’ll

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. Proposed Procurement. An effort is being made to gain 
approval for procurement of a commercial-type drilling machine for 
military use. A Requirement Operational Capability (ROC) is being 
evaluated and, if it is approved, evaluation of existing commercial 
equipment will begin. The specifications included in the ROC call for 
a drilling machine capable of drilling a 0.9-m (3-ft)-diameter hole to 
a depth of 18. 3 m (60 ft) in a maximum of 2 h. The material to be ex¬ 
cavated includes soil and very soft rock. The machine must also have 
a capability for underreaming the bottom of the hole to a diameter of 
1.8 m (6 ft). If this proposed capability is approved and a suitable 
drilling machine is procured, a major step toward satisfying the re¬ 
quirements described above will have been taken. Yet to be met is the 
requirement to drill larger holes more quickly in medium and hard 
rock. 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---r step toward satisfying the re¬ 
quirements described above will have been taken. Yet to be met is the 
requirement to drill larger holes more quickly in medium and hard 
rock. 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ill, DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUB TERRENE CONCEPT 
A- History, The subterrene {rock melting) concept was first 
generated over a decade ago at LASL. Unfortunately, insufficient 
interest in its development prevented funding for immediate research. 
Thus, the concept lay essentially dormant until recent years. In the 
early 19 7 0 r s, LASL revived the concept and was able to obtain develop¬ 
ment support funds from the National Science Foundation (NSF), 
The initial basis for this support was the desire to develop an im¬ 
proved tunnelling capability. Development research began with tunnel¬ 
ling as its initial goal* Midway through this first-year effort, the 
emphasis was changed by the sponsor. LASL was asked to concentrate 
its efforts on developing a subterrene capable of drilling deeply into 
rock. In deep holes where rock temperatures rise to a significant 
level, conventional drilling techniques encounter serious problems. 
The subterrene was viewed as a device the effectiveness of which might 
be enhanced by these rising temperatures. When NSF was unable to 
continue its support of the subterrene development during the following 
year, the Atomic Energy Commission (AEG) provided for its continued 
development. The goal of the AEC gave another new direction for the 
developers. It called for the development of a working subterrene cap¬ 
able of drilling nonlinear exploration holes through granular materials, 
LASL is working toward this goal and plans to begin on-site field test- 
2 
ing soon. 
B, Concept and Devices, The subterrene concept is based on the 
o o 
fact that most rocks melt at about 1200 C (2200 F), and that materials 
are available that can be heated to this temperature without nearing 
^ * 
their melting points. Thus, a penetrator manufactured from some 
o 
such material, heated to a temperature in excess of 1200 C, and 
pressed against rock by an external load should melt a path through 
the rock. 
The initial device developed to test the concept consists of an 
electric heating element encased in a bullet-shaped metal penetrator 
(see Fig. 1). A series of hydraulic jacks provide a controlled loading 
to push the penetrator forward as the rock melts. The molten rock is 
5ing element encased in a bullet-shaped metal penetrator 
(see Fig. 1). A series of hydraulic jacks provide a controlled loading 
to push the penetrator forward as the rock melts. The molten rock is 
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---in a bullet-shaped metal penetrator 
(see Fig. 1). A series of hydraulic jacks provide a controlled loading 
to push the penetrator forward as the rock melts. The molten rock is 
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

forced into rock fractures, pores in the rock, and back alongside the 
penetrator as the penetrator advances. When properly adjusted for 
temperature and advance rate, this subterrene can leave a relatively 
impervious glass-lined hole. Although rock drilling was the primary 
goal, the glass lining prompted the testing of the device In granular 
soil in which hole casing is normally a necessity in conventional drill¬ 
ing. Tests performed in these soils showed that the glass lining was 
again formed and served as an effective casing. 
Problems encountered in penetrating dense, unfracfcured rock, 
coupled with a desire to increase hole sizes led to the search for a tech¬ 
nique for evaluating at least part of the molten rock. Whereas the orig¬ 
inal device consolidated the melted materials, the new device would be 
required to extrude the material. Thus, the subterrene technique was 
expanded to include two types of operation, consolidation and extrusion. 
The extrusion penetrator still leaves a glass-lined drill hole; 
however, the bulk of the melted material is removed to the surface. 
The technique used for this removal includes the use of forced gaseous 
coolant circulating through the device. As the coolant returns to the 
surface, it cools the melt and carries it out of the hole through the 
center of the penetrator stem. The rock-melt debris can be extruded 
as glass rods, glass pellets, or rock wool. The system for removing 
A 
the debris is not unlike that used in conventional rotary rock drills. 
C. Support Equipment. The total system for the current sub- 
terrene devices is somewhat complex. Both extrusion and consolida¬ 
tion devices require precis ion monitoring and control equipment to 
ensure maintenance of optimum penetrator temperatures and advance 
rates. Both also require an electrical power source, a load applica¬ 
tion structure, and a supply of compressed coolant to cool the pene¬ 
trator and in extrusion to cool and remove debris. 
D. Evaluations. The subterrene prototypes have been extensive¬ 
ly evaluated in both laboratory and field environments. They have 
successfully drilled small-diameter holes in various types of soils and 
rock, including tuff, granite, and basalt (Fig, 2). Use in an actual 
field application has been accomplished, and another field application 
7lled small-diameter holes in various types of soils and 
rock, including tuff, granite, and basalt (Fig, 2). Use in an actual 
field application has been accomplished, and another field application 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mnw« 
A**'* 
WRK 
r- 
KL 
Holes drilled in rock samples by coxisolidating- 
penetra tor 
iUfdLJb.-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is planned for the near future. 
E. Future Plans. LASL developers envision expansion of the 
subterrene's capability to include the drilling of much larger holes. 
It is expected that such a device will consist of a series of small pene- 
trators mounted together in a circular configuration (or some other 
shape if desired). On very large holes, such as tunnels, the subter¬ 
rene would probably be used to excavate and to line the extremities of 
the hole; some other method, possibly conventional, would be used to 
fracture and remove the core material. Another extension being con¬ 
sidered is the development of a device that will leave intact a glass- 
coated center core removable for exploratory examination. The ulti¬ 
mate subterrene is a tunnelling machine with a self-contained nuclear 
5 6 
power source to support its operation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted center core removable for exploratory examination. The ulti¬ 
mate subterrene is a tunnelling machine with a self-contained nuclear 
5 6 
power source to support its operation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IV. CAPABILITIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE SUB TERRENE FOR 
DRILLING APPLICATIONS 
A. Penetration Rate. The penetration rate of the subterrene 
varies considerably with the mode of operation {i. e. , consolidation or 
extrusion) and the medium being penetrated. These rates can be pre¬ 
dicted with reasonable accuracy based on the medium properties, 
penetrator design, and melting power (melting power is that portion of 
the total power input applied to melting the rock). Essentially, the 
penetration rate is proportional to the melting power with the propor¬ 
tionality constant being dependent upon the media properties and pene- 
trator design. The 90-mm (3. 5-in) consolidation prototype has dem¬ 
onstrated penetration rates ranging from 1,4 m/h (4. 5 ft/h) in hard 
soil to 6. 1 m/h (20 ft/h) in soft soil. The extrusion prototype has 
drilled 30-mm (1.2 - in.)-diameter holes through rock at rates of 
2 
0.6 m/h (2 ft/h) in hard material and 1.5 m/h (5 ft/h) in soft rock. 
Although these rates appear to be quite low, it must be remembered 
that refinements of the subterrene are continuing, and one of the fore¬ 
most goals is to improve these rates significantly. Analysis (by de¬ 
velopers) of what might be considered a typical military requirement, 
drilling of 0. 6-m (2-ft)-diameter shafts in hard rock or soil, has led 
to the conclusion that equipment with the following specifications can 
be developed: 
Hole Diameter 0. 6 m ( 2 ft) 
Hole Depth 20 m (100 ft) 
Penetration Rate l.Omm/s (10 ft/h) 
Power 
200 
Coolant Type Air 
3 
Hydraulic Thrust Force 20 to 50 x 10 lb 
B. Support Requirements. The presently working subterrene 
prototype is supported by two major mobile items of equipment. The 
first, a flat-bed semitrailer, consists of a derrick-type mast mounted 
on the rear, a power supply for the hydraulic jacking system, and a 
rectifier to convert an external AC power supply to DC for heating the 
penetrator. The second item of equipment is a control van 
trailer, which houses the monitoring and control equipment. 
semi- 
Thectifier to convert an external AC power supply to DC for heating the 
penetrator. The second item of equipment is a control van 
trailer, which houses the monitoring and control equipment. 
semi- 
The

--- PAGE BREAK ---n external AC power supply to DC for heating the 
penetrator. The second item of equipment is a control van 
trailer, which houses the monitoring and control equipment. 
semi- 
The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

compressed coolant supply, like the electrical power, is furnished by 
an outside source. It is anticipated that the design of a single self- 
contained unit could be accomplished if such a design is desired, A 
single power source mounted on the semitrailer could be tailored to 
meet the electrical, compressed coolant, and hydraulic needs of the 
system, A compact control unit could also be mounted on the same 
sem i trailer. 
Operation of the subterrene prototypes in remote Locations re¬ 
quires both electrical generation equipment and an air compressor* A 
10-kW gasoline engine generator is adequate to meet electrical needs, 
3 3 
and a 105 ft /min compressor (actual use - 35 ft /min) will provide 
the coolant flow to support the cooling and debris evacuation functions* 
The general rule-of-thumb used in estimating power requirements for 
future larger-scale equipment is that the power needed increases as 
the square of the penetrator diameter. The fuel consumption of the 
generator and compressor is approximately 4 gal/h during subterrene 
operation. Theoretically, the subterrene, after set-up has been 
accomplished, can be operated by one person; however, it is expected 
that additional personnel will be required for set-up and maintenance 
and repair operations, 
C, Costs, The cost of operating the sub terrene is quite high 
when compared with conventional drilling. Early cost analyses for 
the consolidating penetrator revealed that total operating costs ranged 
from $8. 04/m ($2. 45/ft} to $26, 74/m ($8, 15/ft) depending upon the 
type of penetrator used and the temperature of operation. The analysis 
addressed penetration of unconsolidated material* These figures are 
based upon the cost of^cons traction of prototype one-of-a-kind pene¬ 
trator s and probably represent the upper limits for this type of opera- 
tion. Despite this fact, the lowest cost operation does not favorably 
compare with a conventional percussion drill operation costing on the 
order of $3.30/m ($1,00/ft) in hard limestone* In cases in which gran¬ 
ular materials are encountered, this variance may be significantly re¬ 
duced if casing of the conventional hole is required, since the subter¬ 
rene produces its own glass-like casing. Efforts are continuing to 
IIare encountered, this variance may be significantly re¬ 
duced if casing of the conventional hole is required, since the subter¬ 
rene produces its own glass-like casing. Efforts are continuing to 
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---s variance may be significantly re¬ 
duced if casing of the conventional hole is required, since the subter¬ 
rene produces its own glass-like casing. Efforts are continuing to 
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reduce subterrene operating costs to a point at which the costs become 
competitive with those of conventional equipment. At present, however, 
only in very special applications involving serious drilling problems 
can the sub terrene hope to compete on an economic basis. 
D, Special Advantages. The subterrene offers several special 
advantages over conventional drilling equipment in certain cases. Al¬ 
though some of these have been mentioned earlier, it is appropriate to 
review them. The subterrene lends itself to precision drilling. Since 
the rock or soil material is melted during penetration, the concern for 
misalignment of the penetrator upon encountering perturbations in the 
medium is minimized. Such is not the case for conventional drilling. 
Conventional drills are easily pushed off-course by hard rocks in soil 
or fault planes in rock. Thus, the subterrene offers a major advantage 
when hole alignment is a critical issue. 
Casing of drill holes becomes a serious problem in conventional 
drilling. It is both time-consuming and often only marginally success¬ 
ful. The subterrene creates a natural casing in the form of the glass 
lining produced during penetration. 
Tests indicate that the quality, thickness, and continuity can be 
influenced by the operator to meet the needs of each particular situa¬ 
tion, The life of a conventional rock bit is relatively short when the 
drilling is in hard rock. The need to change these bits regularly re¬ 
duces the effectiveness of the drilling operation, especially when very 
deep holes are to be drilled. The subterrene penetrator life is not 
nearly so restricted and far exceeds that of the rock bit. This pene¬ 
trator life enhances the subterrene's capability for providing contin¬ 
uous operation for an extended period -- especially true when very 
deep drilling is involved. 
Whereas the rotary drill begins to encounter severe problems at 
depths at which rock temperatures become very high, the subterrene 
takes full advantage of this increased temperature and is able to in¬ 
crease productivity. 
The subterrene demonstrates environmental advantages over con¬ 
ventional equipment when rock is being drilled; for example, the loudis increased temperature and is able to in¬ 
crease productivity. 
The subterrene demonstrates environmental advantages over con¬ 
ventional equipment when rock is being drilled; for example, the loud

--- PAGE BREAK ---

noise and dust produced by rotary and percussion drills do not exist at 
a subterrene site. The noise level is limited to that caused by the 
operation of a generator and a compressor, and these may be remotely 
located to reduce their effects further. No dust is produced by the 
subterrene; thus, this nuisance and health hazard normally encountered 
in rock drilling is eliminated. 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---ly 
located to reduce their effects further. No dust is produced by the 
subterrene; thus, this nuisance and health hazard normally encountered 
in rock drilling is eliminated. 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V. EVALUATION OF THE SUBTERRENE FOR MILITARY DRILLING 
APPLICATIONS 
In evaluating the suitability of the subterrene for military drilling 
applications, a typical combat support mission will be used. An anal- 
sis of the potential for using the subterrene to support this mission 
should provide insight into the subterrene's applicability. 
The emplacement of an explosively produced crater to close a bar¬ 
rier system would be an extremely high priority combat support mis¬ 
sion. Such an obstacle, to be effective, must be on the order of 30 m 
(100 ft) wide. To produce a crater of this size, the explosive charge 
would probably range between 4, 500 and 9.000 kg (5 and 10 tons). To 
optimize placement, a vertical shaft with a diameter of 0. 5 to 1 m 
{1.6 to 3. 4 ft) to a depth of 6 to 12 m (20 to 40 ft) must be drilled. 
Since closure of a barrier is normally done in the face of advancing 
enemy forces, the ability to drill the emplacement hole and place the 
explosives within a very short time (3 to 4 h at most) must exist. Can 
the subterrene effectively support such a task? 
Although developers predict that a penetrator system could be de¬ 
veloped to drill a hole with a diameter on the order of that required, 
such a design is still highly theoretical. A multiple penetrator head 
system would be required to attain such hole sizes, and, although a 
subterrene of this type can probably be developed, development costs 
will be high and there is no assurance of success. 
If the required diameters could be provided, it is anticipated that 
other requirements might still not be met. Hole depths of 12 m (40 ft) 
should present no serious problem; however, penetration rates as high 
as those required to meet the time limits seem impossible with the 
present, and even projected, state-of-the-art for the sub terrene. 
Penetration rates of 3 to 6 m/b (10 to 20 ft/h) are needed to produce an 
emplacement hole quickly. Such rates can be achieved with current 
drills and augers in soil. To create a similar capability for rock pre¬ 
sents a most difficult challenge. 
Assuming all of the above problems could be overcome, two other 
difficulties would still exist for the combat engineer. To expedite cra¬ 
ter production, explosives must be placed into the drill hole as soon 
14of the above problems could be overcome, two other 
difficulties would still exist for the combat engineer. To expedite cra¬ 
ter production, explosives must be placed into the drill hole as soon 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as drilling is completed. This would be extremely dangerous and 
possibly prohibitive with the subterrene since the material surrounding 
the hole will remain quite hot for some time. In addition, the maneu¬ 
verability of a large semitrailer-mounted drill rig will greatly reduce 
the rapidity with which the site can be reached and the subterrene 
placed in operation. In some cases, it would be necessary to select a 
les s-than-optimum location due to the inability of the unit to reach the 
best emplacement location. The degree to which the drilling unit can 
be decreased in sixe is extremely limited when one considers the data 
presented in paragraph IV A for a 0,6-m {2-ft) hole. 
The subterrene shows promise for improving the overall drilling 
capability of the U, S. In its present configurations it is best-suited 
for special applications in which particular problems are encountered 
that cannot easily be solved by conventional methods. The most prom¬ 
ising future uses appear to be in the areas of deep drilling for geo¬ 
thermal energy recovery and rapid drilling of tunnels through hard 
rock. The unique capabilities of the subterrene may even be required 
for special military engineering tasks; however, it is expected that the 
number of such cases would be limited.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ck. The unique capabilities of the subterrene may even be required 
for special military engineering tasks; however, it is expected that the 
number of such cases would be limited.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VI. CONCLUSIONS 
The subterrene, in its present configuration and with its projected 
capabilities, does not meet a significant number of the drilling require¬ 
ments of the Army. The subterrene developers are continuing their 
attempts to improve its performance. The short-term development 
goals for the subterrene do not promise to improve significantly its 
applicability to military requirements. 
At some later date, if significant improvements in the subterrene 
have been achieved, the above conclusion should be reevaluated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tly its 
applicability to military requirements. 
At some later date, if significant improvements in the subterrene 
have been achieved, the above conclusion should be reevaluated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mm nh*WM|B^*; &**&#&*#:.* *i*m»»*? ■■■**&&**■■ 
REFERENCES 
1. Joseph Briggs, Military Engineering Applications of Commercial 
Explosives: An introduction, U- S, Army Engineer Waterways 
Experiment Station Explosive Excavation Research Laboratory, 
Livermore, CA, Report TR-E-73-2 (1973), 
2. Private communication Dr. C. A. Bangs ton, LASL (1 July 1974), 
3. The Los Alamos Rock-Melting Subterrene: How It Works, Los 
Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, (undated). 
4. J* W. Neudecker, A. J. Giger and F. E, Armstrong, Design and 
Development of Prototype Universal Extruding Sub terrene Pene- 
trators, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, 
Report LA-520 5-MS (1973), 
5* R. J. Hanold, Large Subterrene Rock-Melting Tunnel Excavation 
Systems: A Preliminary Study, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM, Report LA 5210-MS (1973). 
6, E. S. Robinson, R, M, Potter, B. B, Mclnteor, J. C. Rowley, 
D, E. Armstrong, R. L. Mills, and M- C. Smith, A Preliminary 
Study of the Nuclear Subterrene, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM, Report LA-4547 (1971), 
7p R. G. Gido, Subterrene Penetration Rate: Melting Power Rela¬ 
tionship, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, 
Report LA-5204-MS (1973), 
8, Prospectus of Subterrene Devices of Potential Interest to U, S. 
Army Corps of Engineers, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM, {March 1974). 
9. Private communication, D. L. Sims, LASL {20 April 1973). 
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---ential Interest to U, S. 
Army Corps of Engineers, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM, {March 1974). 
9. Private communication, D. L. Sims, LASL {20 April 1973). 
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Armstrong, D. E. f J. S* Coleman, B* B* Mclnteer, R. M. Potter, 
E* S, Robinson, Rock Melting as a Drilling Technique, Los Alamos 
Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, Report LA-3243 (1962)* 
Black, D* L. , Technical Summary: Basic Understanding of Earth 
- I  t ■ ■ nr- ---b_i_^ ■   » '■ ■= « -— 
—-»lu ■ ? m^^jilui — 
Tunnelling by Melting, Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Pittsburgh, 
PA, Report WANL-TME-2841, Vol 1 (1973). 
Gido, R. G. , Description of Field Tests for Rock-Melting__ 
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, Report LA-5213- 
MS (1973). 
Gido, R. G- , Internal Temperature Distribution of a Subterrene Rock- 
Melting Penetrator, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, 
NM., Report LA-5215-MS (1973). 
Krupa, M. C. , Phenomena Associated with the Process of Rock Melt¬ 
ing, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, Report 
LA-5208-MS (1973). 
Murphy, D. J. , and R. G, Gido, Heat Loss Calculations for Small- 
Diameter Subterrene Penetrators, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM, Report LA-5207-MS (1973), 
Neudecker, J. W. , Design Description of Melting-Consolidating Proto¬ 
type Sub terrene Penetrators, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM, Report LA-52 15-MS (1973). 
Rowley, J. C. , The Subterrene Program, Los Alamos Scientific Lab¬ 
oratory, Los Alamos, NM, Mini-Review 73-1 (1973), 
Sims, D. L., Identification of Potential Applications for Rock-Melting 
Subterrenes, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, 
Report LA - 5206-MS (1973), 
Williams, R. E. , Development and Construction of a Modularized Mo¬ 
bile Rock-Melting Subterrene Demonstration Unit, Los Alamos Scien¬ 
tific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, Report LA-5209-MS (1973). 
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---velopment and Construction of a Modularized Mo¬ 
bile Rock-Melting Subterrene Demonstration Unit, Los Alamos Scien¬ 
tific Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, Report LA-5209-MS (1973). 
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DISTRIBUTION 
Roger E. Batzel, L-1 
Earth Sciences Division, L-4.1 
D-Division, L-92 
TID File, LLL, E-3 5 
Dr. J, C. Rowley 
Eos Alamos Scientific Laboratory 
P. O. Box 1663 
Los Alamos, NM 87544 
HQDA (DAEN-ZS) 
WASH DC 20314 
HQDA (DAEN-RDM/LTC Hughes) 
WASH DC 20314 
HQDA (DAEN-CWE-G/W. McIntosh) 
WASH DC 20 314 
US Army Engineer School 2 
ATTN: Technical Library 
ATSE-CTD-MS 
Ft. Bel voir, VA 22060 
USAE Waterways Experiment Station 
ATTN: Library 
P. O. Box 631 
Vicksburg, MS 39180 
USAE Waterways Experiment Station 
ATTN: S&PL 
USAE Waterways Experiment Station 
ATTN: WEL 
Defense Document Center 12 
ATTN: Scientific & Technical Information 
Cameron Station 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
Explosive Excavation Research Laboratory L-396 21 
NOTICE 
“This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by 
the United States Government, Neither the United States nor 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission, nor any of their 
employees, nor any of their contractors, subcontractors, or their 
employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes 
any Segal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness 
or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product or process 
disclosed, or represents thr ts use would not infringe privately- 
owned rights." 
19