3
Chapter One
"ITINERARIUM MENTIS IN NIHILUM".
FOR A HISTORY OF THE CONCEPT AND THE PROBLEM
Contemporary man is in a situation of uncertainty and precariousness. His 
condition is similar to that of a wayfarer who has walked on an icy surface for a 
long time, but who with the thaw feels that the ice floe is moving and breaking 
into a thousand slabs. The surface of traditional values and concepts is 
shattered and the continuation of the journey is difficult.
Philosophical thought has tried to offer a diagnosis of this situation, of the 
ills that afflict contemporary man and the perils that threaten him. And it has 
believed it can identify the essential cause of this in 'nihilism'. But what is 
nihilism?
As a term, nihilism made its appearance as early as the turn of the 18th and 
19th centuries in the controversies that characterised the birth of German 
idealism; later, in the second half of the last century, it became a general topic 
of discussion, but only emerged as a problem, in all its virulence and 
magnitude, in the thought of the 20th century. As an expression of artistic, 
literary and philosophical attempts to experience the power of the negative and 
to live with its consequences, it brought to the surface the deep malaise that 
cuts like a crack through the self-understanding of our time. Nietzsche already 
apo strated it as 'the most disturbing' of all guests. In the meantime, this sinister 
guest now wanders everywhere around the house and there is no longer any 
point in trying to put him at the door. But what does one's own nihilism mean?
We find the answer to our question in Nietzsche, the first great prophet and 
theorist of nihilism. In a fragment written in

--- PAGE BREAK ---him at the door. But what does one's own nihilism mean?
We find the answer to our question in Nietzsche, the first great prophet and 
theorist of nihilism. In a fragment written in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
the last years of lucidity, asking himself the question, Nietzsche answers:
Nihilism: the end is missing; the answer to the "why?" is missing; what does nihilism
mean? - that supreme values are devalued (VIII, II, 12).
Nihilism is thus the situation of disorientation that arises once the 
traditional references, i.e. the ideals and values that represented the answer to 
'why' and as such illuminated man's actions, have disappeared. In another 
fragment, Nietz sche further illustrates the dynamic that triggers the 
devaluation of supreme values and causes the advent of nihilism:
Modern man now experimentally believes in this or that value, only to drop it; the 
circle of values that have been surpassed and dropped is ever widening; the emptiness
and poverty of values is increasingly felt; the movement is unstoppable - although
great attempts have been made to slow it down. Eventually man dares a critique of 
values in general; he recognises their origin; he knows enough not to believe in any 
values any more; here is pathos, the new brivi do ... What I am telling is the story of 
the next two centuries ... (VIII, II, 266).
Meanwhile, Nietzsche's prophecy has been confirmed. The fire he ignited 
is now blazing everywhere. Anyone can see that nihilism is no longer merely 
the bleak experiment of extravagant intellectual avant-gardes, but is now part 
of the very air we breathe. Its ubiquitous and multiform presence imposes it on 
our consideration with an evidence that is only matched by the difficulty of 
embracing it in a clear and unambiguous definition. On the diagnosis of ni 
chilism, on the anamnesis of the pathologies and cultural malaise it presents, 
minds are divided. Historical investigations into the genesis of the term have 
also brought to light the traces of a com plete and ramified manifestation of the 
phenomenon.
As a first definition would have it in deference to etymology, nihilism -
from nihil, nothing - is thought obsessed with nothingness. If this were the case, 
one might be tempted to find nihilism and its tracings almost everywhere in the 
history of Western philosophy, at least in every thought in which nothingness 
is set up as a central problem - with good grace from Bergson, who counted it 
among the pseudo-questions.
In this sense, Gorgias could be considered the first nihilist in Western history 
because of the lightning-fast inference from him: nothing is; even if it were, it 
would not be knowable; and even if it were, it would not be knowable.nsidered the first nihilist in Western history 
because of the lightning-fast inference from him: nothing is; even if it were, it 
would not be knowable; and even if it were, it would not be knowable.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ihilist in Western history 
because of the lightning-fast inference from him: nothing is; even if it were, it 
would not be knowable; and even if it were, it would not be knowable.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
if knowable, would not be communicable (anhermèneuton). This being the 
case, one wonders whether a history of nihilism should not also include 
Fridugisus of Tours, the pupil of Alcuin who, in De sub stantia nihili et 
tenebrarum, with a philosophical gesture that was scandalous for the times, 
wished to show that nothingness imposes itself with a presence of its own and 
that it therefore has a being and a substantiality of its own. And would not the 
meditations in which Meister Eckhart, with a vertiginous annihilation, declares 
that God and nothingness, "the angel, the fly and the soul" are one and the 
same thing - as in the commentary on Luke's saying: "Paul rose from the 
ground and, with his eyes open, saw nothingness" - rightfully belong to such a 
story? And why not with him other sublime expressions of speculative 
mysticism, from Dionysius the Areopagite to John of the Cross and Angelo 
Silesius?
So why not Charles de Bovelles who, at the height of the Renaissance, in his 
Liber de m'bilo (1509), rambles on about that "original negation of creatures and 
matter" that is nothingness, employing it as a cardinal concept in his negative 
theology? Or even Leo nardo, who in a note in the Codex Atlanticus (folio 389 
verse d) an notes: 'Infralle cose grandi che infra noi si trovano, l'essere del nulla è 
grandissima'? Or the bible of nihilistic scepticism, Francisco Sanches' Quod nihil 
scitur? And why not Leibniz with the famous do manda formulated in Principes de 
la Nature et de la Gràce: "Pourquoy il y a plustòt quelque chose que rien?" and 
with the even more astonishing answer: "Car le rien est plus simple et plus facil 
que quelque chose" (Leibniz, 1875-90: VI, 602 )? And finally, why not that 
sublime master of nothingness that was Leopardi with his thesis noted in the 
Zibaldone that "the principle of things, and of God himself, is nothingness" (Leo 
pardi, 1 937-49: III, 903)?
Like an irrepressible shadow, nothingness has always haunted and troubled 
philosophical reflection - like Mephistopheles his Faust. The 'spirit that always 
denies' insinuates itself into the thoughts that animate the human mind, taking 
up the reasons for negativity that were already Anaximander's:
... denn alles, was entsteht,
Ist wert, da/5 es zu Grunde geht;
Drum besser wiir's, da/5 nichts entstiinde*.
* "... for everything that is born l is such that. it perishes; l therefore it would be better if nothing 
were born>> (Goethe, Faurt, I, vv. 1339-1341).;
Drum besser wiir's, da/5 nichts entstiinde*.
* "... for everything that is born l is such that. it perishes; l therefore it would be better if nothing 
were born>> (Goethe, Faurt, I, vv. 1339-1341).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nor can philosophy exempt itself from thinking nothingness if it is true 
that, in order to fulfil its proper task, i.e. questioning being as being, it must 
demarcate it from its essential opposition, i.e. nothingness. This is the reason for the
drastic conclusion reached by Heidegger in this regard: 'The hardest, but also 
least misleading touchstone for assessing the genuine character and strength of 
a philosopher is whether he immediately and fundamentally experiences, in the 
being of being, the closeness of nothingness. He to whom this experience 
remains precluded stands definitively and hopelessly outside philosophy' 
(Heidegger, 1994: 382).
Having said this, a restriction must immediately be made on the field of 
enquiry into which we will move in our reconstruction of nihilism. Leaving 
aside the philosophical problem of nothingness and its history (cf. Givone, 
1995 ), we will limit ourselves to nihilism in the strict sense as it emerged 
within philosophical thought, as a concept and as a problem, in the last century 
and then especially in the 20th century. Our perlu stions - which complement 
other studies (in particular Verra, 1 979; Vercellone, 1992) and develop an 
earlier synopsis (Volpi, 1995c)
- They follow the history of the concept and the problem as their guiding 
principle. We hold towards nihilism the same conviction that applies to all 
true philosophical problems: they have no solution but history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ncept and the problem as their guiding 
principle. We hold towards nihilism the same conviction that applies to all 
true philosophical problems: they have no solution but history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
Chapter Two
TURGENEV AND ITS ALLEGED PAT ERNITY
The first thing to app ure in a historical reconstruction of nichili smo is its 
birth. It is generally accepted that the two
founding fathers and great theorisers of nihilism were Do stoevskij and 
Nietzsche. To them belong respectively the literary and the more properly 
philosophical strands of the movement. The term, however, had already been 
coined before them. But when and by whom?
It was Turgenev who first claimed authorship. In truth, on the basis of 
lexicographical investigations we now know that it is a more presumed than 
actual authorship. But let us first see what he himself makes clear.
In an autobiographical retrospective, Turgenev states that it was he, in his 
novel Fathers and Sons ( Otcy i deti, 1862), who invented the term 'nihilist'. By 
this term he actually defines the way of thinking of the protagonist of his novel, 
Bazarov, and that he actually wanted to give substance in this character to a 
type of man and attitude, both theoretical and practical, that was imposing 
itself on the historical reality of his time. The central motif of the novel - the 
events of which take place in 1859 Russia, i.e. two years before the abolition of 
serfdom and the liberation of the peasantry - is the conflict between the 
generation of fathers, inspired by traditional humanist ideals, and the 
rebellious, materialistic and illusory generation of sons. Bazarov, who belongs 
to the latter, is a young middle-aged man visiting a friend who receives him on 
his farm at the pre-nuptial of his father and uncle. He first expresses 
disappointment and then condemnation at the idle way of life of these 
people, who are indifferent and deaf to what is happening in society. The 
noblemen wonder whether Ba-uncle. He first expresses 
disappointment and then condemnation at the idle way of life of these 
people, who are indifferent and deaf to what is happening in society. The 
noblemen wonder whether Ba-

--- PAGE BREAK ---esses 
disappointment and then condemnation at the idle way of life of these 
people, who are indifferent and deaf to what is happening in society. The 
noblemen wonder whether Ba-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
zarov is not a dangerous 'denier' of existing values and social order, a 'nihilist'. 
And Bazarov gladly accepts this appellation: he declares that he does indeed 
want to deny the inveterate order and with it the principles and values of the 
old generation living in an opulent in difference to what happens to the people. 
Being a nihilist, however, means for him not only destroying the old, but also 
committing himself to his chosen social task, that of a doctor (he will die of an 
infection contracted while treating a sick person). Bazarov is - as Turgenev 
defines him - the 'new man', the 'hero of our time' who has passed through the 
hard school of work and sacrifice, destined to replace the tired and feeble 
nobility. He knows he must deny, he knows that in order to advance he must 
trample on traditional beliefs and values, and he proceeds undaunted without 
too much concern for the ashes and destruction he leaves behind him. 'Nihilist' 
is the appellation that suits him.
In the fifth and final chapter of his Memoirs of Literature and Life
Turgenev remembers his choice:
As a starting point for the main figure, Bazarov, I had taken the personality, which 
had struck me, of a young provincial doctor (who died shortly before 1860). In this 
singular man was summed up, in my eyes, that set of principles that later received the 
name of nihilism (Turgenev, 1992: 186; 1993: 277-78).
As for the effects that the literary representation of the phenomenon 
produced, it is still Turgenev who offers us the most effective illustration:
I will not dwell on the impression made by this story; I will only say that when I 
returned to Petersburg, on the same day as the famous burning of the Apraksinsky Dvor 
[the city's great market buildings], the word 'nihilist' was already on thousands of mouths, 
and the first exclamation I heard on the lips of the first acquaintance I came across by the 
Neva [the main thoroughfare of Petersburg] was: 'Look what your nihilists are doing!
They are burning Petersburg!' (Turgenev, 1992: 1 87-88; 1993: 278-79).
In short, the novel provokes, albeit for the purpose of condemnation and 
retribution, a reading of nihilism that is more radical than that of the author 
himself - as the shrewd observation of a reader Turgenev reports suggests, 
and which probably hits the mark:
'Neither fathers nor sons', a witty lady told me after reading my li bro. 'That is the true 
title of your tale; and you yourself are a nihilist' (Turgenev, 1992: 195; 1993 : 283 ).bly hits the mark:
'Neither fathers nor sons', a witty lady told me after reading my li bro. 'That is the true 
title of your tale; and you yourself are a nihilist' (Turgenev, 1992: 195; 1993 : 283 ).

--- PAGE BREAK ---Neither fathers nor sons', a witty lady told me after reading my li bro. 'That is the true 
title of your tale; and you yourself are a nihilist' (Turgenev, 1992: 195; 1993 : 283 ).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
What these observers wanted, and which further sharpened their sensitivity 
to the phenomenon of nihilism, was to stem the movement of ideas that this 
term denoted and stop the social disruption it had initiated.
The word I created, 'nihilist', was then used by many others who were only waiting 
for an opportunity, a pretext to halt the movement by which Russian society was dragged 
along. Not in the sense of a reproach, not for the purpose of mortification did I use that 
word, but as a precise and exact expression of a real, historical fact; it was transformed 
into an instrument of denunciation, of unappealable condemnation, almost into a mark of 
infamy (Tur genev, 1992: 198; 1993: 284-85).
As soon as it was created, the term 'nihilist' thus got out of hand of its
avowed inventor and spread like a category of so cial criticism. But how was 
the term 'nihilist' defined in Fathers and Sons? It is worth rereading the precise 
point in the novel where Turgenev introduces it and specifies its meaning.
"A nihilist," proffered Nikolai Petrovich. "It comes from the Latin nihil, nothing, as far as 
I can judge; so this word indicates a man, who ... who admits nothing?"
'Say rather: which respects nothing,' resumed Pavel Petrovich ...
"Who considers everything from a critical point of view," observed Arkadij.
"And is it not the same?" asked Pavel Petrovich.
"No, it is not the same. The nihilist is a man who does not bow before any authority, 
who does not put his faith in any principle, whatever respect that principle is surrounded 
by'.
"And does that sound good?" interrupted Pavel Petrovich.
"According to whom, uncle. For some it is good, and for some it is very bad'.
"Oh, just like that? Well, I see that this is not our game. We are people of the old 
century, we believe that without 'prensip' (Pavel Petro vic pronounced this word softly, in 
the French manner, Arkadij, on the other hand, pronounced 'principii', trailing off the final 
syllable) without 'prensip', accepted, as you say, by dogma, one cannot move a step, one 
cannot draw a breath ... What do you call yourselves?"
"Nihilists," proffered Arkadij distinctly.
"Yes, first t h e r e were the Hegelians, now there are the nihilists. We shall see how he 
nets existence in the vacuum, in airless space..." (Turgenev, 1991: 809- 10).
In these few lines is condensed the tension that animates Turgenev's 
narration and generates the rift between the old and newexistence in the vacuum, in airless space..." (Turgenev, 1991: 809- 10).
In these few lines is condensed the tension that animates Turgenev's 
narration and generates the rift between the old and new

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vision of the world, that of the fathers, anchored in the old principles, and that 
of the sons, who are no longer capable of cultivating a faith. It is not said that 
Turgenev's definition really hits the mark. Probably, as the many protests and 
corrections it provoked testify, the new generation of children was anything but 
indifferent to principles. Only they were now other: they were those of the new 
positivist and materialist worldview. But whatever the case, in fact Turgenev's 
definition was effective in capturing an ongoing trend in Russian culture and 
society.
Moreover, the term nihilism had already been used before, both elsewhere 
and in Russia itself. For example, as early as 1829, the romantic cri tician N.I. 
Nade:idin, in an article entitled I:adunata dei nichilisti (Somnifée nigilistov), 
had defined those who know nothing and understand nothing as nihilists. And 
M. N. Katkov had also used the epithet 'nihilists' to criticise the contributors to 
the journal 'The Contem porary' as people who believe in nothing. Turgenev 
should, however, be credited, if not the authorship, with popularising the term.

--- PAGE BREAK ---se the contributors to 
the journal 'The Contem porary' as people who believe in nothing. Turgenev 
should, however, be credited, if not the authorship, with popularising the term.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter Three
NIHILISM, ROMANTICISM, IDEALISM
Without prejudice to Turgenev's merit in having put the idea of nihilism 
into circulation and turned it into a problem felt on a large scale, it has to be 
said that he was unaware of the term's more ancient origin. Apart from its use 
in Russian culture itself, the word had already made its appearance elsewhere. 
In the literature Turgenev might have been familiar with, we find it, for 
example, in the title of a short story by Karl Ferdinand Gutzkow (Die
Nihilisten, 1853), a successful German novelist and playwright, an exponent of 
the 'Young Germany' movement, who had polemically confronted Scho 
penhauer on the question of the writer's social commitment.
Thanks to investigations into conceptual history (Arendt, 1974; Riedel 
1978), we now know that the origin of the concept of nihilism goes back much 
further. Quite apart from the unattested use that Augustine is said to have made 
of it by referring to non-believers as nihilists, the appearance of the term, in the 
variant nihilianismus, is documented in Gualtiero di San Vittore. The latter 
uses it to designate the Christological eras according to which, since the divine 
illogos is eternal and uncreated, humanity belongs to Christ only as an 
accident. If, on the other hand, we strictly adhere to the form nihilismus, it first 
appears in 1733 in the title of F.L. Goetzius's treatise De nonismo et nihilismo 
in theologia (cf. Miiller-Lauter, 1984: 846). But beyond these isolated 
occurrences, an earlier, more general use of the word has been identified in the 
French culture of the Revolution. In this historical text the attribute 'nihilist' 
was employed to qualify the ranks of those who were 'neither for nor against 
the Revolution'.
The

--- PAGE BREAK ---ench culture of the Revolution. In this historical text the attribute 'nihilist' 
was employed to qualify the ranks of those who were 'neither for nor against 
the Revolution'.
The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
Transferring this meaning to the level of religious convictions, Anacharsis 
Cloots - a member of the National Convention who was later guillotined -
stated that 'the Republic of the Rights of Man is neither theist nor atheist, it is 
nihilist' (27 December 1793). 
However, beyond lexical occurrences, what is of interest here is the actual
philosophical use of the concept. With regard to the general historical 
philosophical premises that make this possible, a lengthy discourse should be 
made on the emergence of nihilism before the term itself was born. It should be 
shown, in particular, how modern co smology with its conception of nature as res
extensa, i.e. mere empty space and matter, caused man's me taphysical 
disorientation. At the beginning of the New Age, a chilling observation by 
Pasca! gives the measure of what a profound transformation materialistic co 
smology has caused in man's metaphysical position in the universe. 'Drowned 
in the infinite immensity of the spaces that I ignore and that ignore me,' Pasca! 
- I frighten myself' (Pa sca!, 1 962: 94 ). This worried lament signals that man's
spiritual situation is changing with the new cosmology. In the physical universe 
of modern cosmology, he can no longer dwell and feel at home as in the ancient 
and medieval cosmos. The universe is now perceived as extraneous to his 
individual destiny: it appears to him as an anxious cell in which his soul feels 
imprisoned, or as a bewildering infinity that disquiets him.   Faced with the 
eternal silence of the
stars and infinite spaces that are indifferent to him, man is alone with himself. 
He is without a homeland.
By naming the metaphysical bewilderment of modern man in such clear 
terms, Pasca!'s annotation already touches on the deepest reason for the 
emergence of nihilism well in advance, at the threshold of the modern age. 
When meaning is missing, when there is no answer to the
"why?", nihilism is now at the doorstep. This disturbing guest - as Nietzsche
put it - has already crept into the ca sa in such a way that no one will be able to 
drive it out. Of course Pasca! fronts and thinks about this new condition in 
order to counter it: behind the irrefragable necessity of nature, there is still an 
absconditus Deus who governs it and who governs us, even if He is not 
immediately re cognizable in His creation. Man is, yes, a fragment of nature, a 
nothingness crushed by cosmic forces, but he can, insofar as he thinks and 
creates, subtract his contingency from the conditioning of nature's laws and 
proclaim himself a citizen of the other world, that of the spirit.
But the scenario is now set. Soon even God will eclipse himself. At first 
only by hypothesis: everything is to be imagined "as if God were not therea citizen of the other world, that of the spirit.
But the scenario is now set. Soon even God will eclipse himself. At first 
only by hypothesis: everything is to be imagined "as if God were not there

--- PAGE BREAK ---her world, that of the spirit.
But the scenario is now set. Soon even God will eclipse himself. At first 
only by hypothesis: everything is to be imagined "as if God were not there

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
was' (etiamsi Deus non daretur) . Then for real: everything must be rethought, first 
and foremost the meaning of our existence, taking note of the fact that 'God is 
dead'. Then, when transcendence loses its binding force and falls silent, man 
abandoned to himself reclaims his freedom. Indeed, he has no choice but to take it: 
man is freedom itself because he is now no more than what he plans to be, and 
everything is allowed to him. That this freedom is a desperate freedom, which 
infuses more anguish than fullness of being, is a fact t h a t existentialism has tried 
to live with.
The speculative horizon to which these few lines allude, and which develops 
in a nihilistic crescendo along the historical arc from Pascal to contemporary 
existentialism, makes it possible to frame the first occurrences of the term nihilism 
and the very genesis of the movement in a less restricted context than that to which 
a simple lexicographic or conceptual-historical investigation is limited. In this 
horizon, one can better understand the first real philosophical use of the con cept, 
identified towards the end of the 18th century in the context of the con troversies 
characterising t h e birth of idealism.
In idealism's opposition to realism and dogmatism, the term 'nihilism' is used to 
characterise the philosophical operation by which idealism intends to 'annul' 
the object of common sense in order to show how it is in truth nothing more 
than the product of an invisible and unconscious activity of the subject. 
Depending on the point of view, favourable or unfavourable to such an 
operation, the term acquires a positive or negative sense. Ni chilism then 
means, in the positive sense, the philosophical destruction of all 
presuppositions; in the negative sense, on the other hand, the destruction of the 
evidence and certainties of common sense by idealistic speculation.
It is precisely in this second sense that Jacobi accuses the idea of lism of 
being nihilism, thus first introducing the term
with a philosophical valence. The most famous passage, usually referred to as 
the first occurrence of the term in its speculative sense, is contained in a letter 
from Jacobi to Fichte written in March and published in the autumn of 1799. 
Jacobi states:
Truly, my dear Fichte, it should not bother you if you, or anyone else, want to call 
chimerism that which I contrast with idealism, which I reproach with nihilism (Jacobi,
1972: 245; cf. also 223 ).
This use of the concept is not occasional, since Ja cobi also employs it in 
other places. He uses it for example in theth idealism, which I reproach with nihilism (Jacobi,
1972: 245; cf. also 223 ).
This use of the concept is not occasional, since Ja cobi also employs it in 
other places. He uses it for example in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---reproach with nihilism (Jacobi,
1972: 245; cf. also 223 ).
This use of the concept is not occasional, since Ja cobi also employs it in 
other places. He uses it for example in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
Jacobi wrote On divine things and their revelation ( Von den gottlichen Dingen 
und ihrer Offenbarung, 18 1 1 ), in the first part of which, in which he recalls 
the term, he reworks and inserts a review of the works of Matthias Claudius 
planned in 17 98 (thus before the missive to Fichte) and then withdrawn 
because of the Atheismusstreit of 1799. Jacobi describes as 'nihilism)), but also 
as 'atheism)), the way in which God is brought into the consideration of 
philosophy, from Spinoza to Fichte to Schelling: He becomes the object of 
argumentation, i.e. of discursive, dialectical, rational knowledge, and ceases to 
be the pure and simple Asoluto which only a direct intuitive grasp can reach. 
For Jacobi, this grasping is the proper function of Vernunft, i.e. reason, 
understood, according to the etymology of the term already emphasised by 
Leibniz and Herder, as Vernehmen (to perceive), i.e. as the perception of the 
Absolute. Hence the reduction of reason to a kind of immediate contact with 
the Absolute, i.e. to a 'faith)) (Glaube)-reduction that characterises Jacobi's 
philosophical position and that will be severely attacked by the idealists, in 
particular by Hegel. As for the sources from which Jacobi might have drawn 
the term 'nihilism', the hypothesis that can be advanced is that
he had heard it used in the French cultural environment where it was already 
circulating, albeit with a different meaning. It was also mo
layer that Jacobi was familiar with the German continuation of Bossuet's Discours
sur l'histoire universelle by Johann Andreas Cramer, dated 17 86, in which it was 
declared that theologians who used the con cept of "nothing)) to distinguish the 
divinity of Christ from his humanity were guilty of the "heresy of Nihilanism)) 
(Baum, 1969).
That the term came into circulation in Germany at that time, perhaps even 
as a 'fundamental term in the discussion of ideali smo' (Poggeler in Arendt, 1974: 
310), is evidenced by the circumstance that a widespread reference work such as 
Wilhelm Traugott Krug's Portable Universe Dictionary of the Philosophical 
Sciences (Allgemeines Handworterbuch der philosophischen Wissenschaften,
1828) dedicates a special headword to it, expressly added in the supplementary 
volume. But the main confirmation comes from lexical research that has 
documented the use of the term in other Romantic thinkers, even before 
Jacobi's missive to Fichte. For example Daniel]enisch
-an otherwise almost unknown author, who was close to Hamann and had 
dealings with Kant, and ended up committing suicide in the Spree -employs 
it repeatedly in his treatise On the Foundations and Value of the Discoveries 
of the Pro/ Kant in Metaphysics, Morals and Aesthetics (Uber Grund und 
Wert der Entdeckungen des Herrn Professar Kant in der Metaphysik, Mora! undise On the Foundations and Value of the Discoveries 
of the Pro/ Kant in Metaphysics, Morals and Aesthetics (Uber Grund und 
Wert der Entdeckungen des Herrn Professar Kant in der Metaphysik, Mora! und

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns and Value of the Discoveries 
of the Pro/ Kant in Metaphysics, Morals and Aesthetics (Uber Grund und 
Wert der Entdeckungen des Herrn Professar Kant in der Metaphysik, Mora! und

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
Asthetik, 1796), submitted to the Prussian Academy's competition on the 
progress of metaphysics. In answering the famous question of "what real 
progress has been made in metaphysics in Germany since the time of Leibniz 
and Wolff", Jenisch contrasts Spinozism, i.e. dogmatism and realism, with the 
new position that emerged with Kant, i.e. dealism, and sets out to illustrate - as
the title of the author's letter to Kant, published as an appendix to the paper,
states - "the favourable and unfavourable effects of critical philosophy that 
have occurred so far". A proponent of a 'relative realism' ( Verhiiltnis-
Realismus), Jenisch interprets Kant's dealism not in an absolute sense, but in a 
critical sense, i.e. as transcendental idealism: since our intellect is not 'ar 
chetypical' but 'ectypical', i.e. finite, the thing itself cannot be eli minated. That 
is, there remains a hard resistance of being that does not allow itself to be 
absorbed and resolved entirely in thought. Now, despite the fact that the 
nullification of the thing in itself appears to our reason and imagination as a 
monstrous and terrible hypothesis, this hypothesis has nevertheless been widely 
practised by more recent philosophy, which has stretched and developed idealism in 
the absolute sense. But in doing so, it has ended up denying the reality of 
things, i.e. by annihilating into the abyss of unreality, amidst the 'lethic waves 
of eternal nothingness', the whole of nature with the myriad beings and 
creatures that teem in the universe. If they were to be interpreted in this way, 
idealism and criticism 'would predi cate the most manifest atheism and nihilism'
(cf. Poggeler in Arendt, 1 974: 335 ff.; Riedel, 1 978: 380).
More or less at the same time asJacobi, in some cases before
other well-known authors such as Friedrich Schlegel and Jean Paul also use 
the term. The former even several times and with different meanings. For
instance, in a note of 1797 Schlegel notes that 'every witticism ten de al 
nihilismo'. The occurrence of the term in this fragment is not easy to 
contextualise or interpret. Schlegel is probably referring to the corrosive 
function of wit ( Witz), i.e. of irony: it produces a shift in perspective and a 
detachment from the finite, it suspends and destroys its claims to absolute 
worth, and in this sense tends towards that 'nihilism' which, by questioning the 
finite and relativising it, opens the way towards the infinite, i.e. towards the true 
Asso luto. A use of the term in clear reference toJa cobi's polemic with Fichte 
can be found in the university courses held by Schlegel between 1804 and 
1806. Here is what he observes in this regard:
Although idealism and realism stand in an absolute antithesis to each other, it is 
nevertheless very easy to jump from one extreme to the other. Both lead06. Here is what he observes in this regard:
Although idealism and realism stand in an absolute antithesis to each other, it is 
nevertheless very easy to jump from one extreme to the other. Both lead

--- PAGE BREAK ---observes in this regard:
Although idealism and realism stand in an absolute antithesis to each other, it is 
nevertheless very easy to jump from one extreme to the other. Both lead

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
easily to nihilism (...).should not nihilism constitute its own determinate system? 
(Schlegel, 1837: 475; cf. also 428, 486).
Schlegel uses the term 'nihilism' in yet another sense, to characterise t h e 
Eastern worldview. He says that nihilism is the mystical oriental form of pantheism 
(Schlegel, 1963: 27, 573, 575 ) - an equation, this one, that is also found later in 
Feuerbach's Es without Christianity.
While in Schlegel the meaning of the term fluctuates and changes in the 
different phases of his thought, Jean Paul instead makes a very precise and 
defined use of it. Creator, not by chance, of the character of Roquairol (Titan,
1800-01), one of the most significant figures of the nihilist in German 
literature, Jean Paul criticises in Clavis Fichtiana seu Leibgeberiana (1800),
dedicated to Jacobi, and then in an entire chapter of the Propedeutica
all'estetica (Vorschule der Asthetzk, 1804), those whom he calls the 'poetic ni 
chilists', that is, the Romantics. They only see art and not nature: intoxicated by 
their ego, profoundly 'selfish', they only celebrate the free play of the 
imagination, i.e. the spontaneous activity of the creator ego, forgetting the non-
ego, all of nature, the entire universe, including God, which they end up 
annihilating. But when, almost like a setting sun, God too disappears and 
vanishes for an epoch, then the whole world enters into darkness (Jean Paul, 
1959: V, 31). Atheism breaks up the whole universe into a myriad of isolated 
selves, without unity and connection, in which each stands alone before that 
Nothingness at whose co
even Christ, at the end of time, despairs of the existence of God the father. It is
the disconcerting apocalyptic vision that Jean Paul imagines twice. First in 
Shakespeare's Lamentations of the dead, among the dead listening to him in 
church, on the non-existence of God (Des toten Shake spear's Klage unter den 
toten Zuhorern in der Kirche, daft kein Gott sei, 1789). Engaging in a literary 
description of his experience of Nothingness, Jean Paul imagines a voice 
proclaiming from the altar:
There is neither God nor time. Eternity only broods itself and gnaws at chaos. 
The rainbow of beings arches sunless over the abyss and dissolves drop by drop - we 
witness the mute burial of Nature on the cida and are buried with her. Who ever lifts his 
gaze to an eye of Nature's wine? She gazes into it with an empty, black orbit (Jean Paul, 
1959: Il, n, 590-91).
A second time in the famous Discourse of the Dead Christ, from above the 
universe, on the non-existence of God (Rede des toten Christus, vomh an empty, black orbit (Jean Paul, 
1959: Il, n, 590-91).
A second time in the famous Discourse of the Dead Christ, from above the 
universe, on the non-existence of God (Rede des toten Christus, vom

--- PAGE BREAK ---bit (Jean Paul, 
1959: Il, n, 590-91).
A second time in the famous Discourse of the Dead Christ, from above the 
universe, on the non-existence of God (Rede des toten Christus, vom

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
Weltgebà'ude herab, dafi kein Gott sei, 1796 ), included in the novel Sie benkà "s 
and made known by Madame de Stael who translated it into French in De
l'Allemagne. Here Jean Paul perfects and radicalises his bold vision of absolute 
Nothingness:
Nothing still and mute! Cold, eternal necessity! Foolish chance! Do you know what 
you dominate? When will you tear down the building and me? - Chance, do you know 
what you do when you advance with your hurricanes in the sleet of the stars, extinguishing 
one sun after another with your breath, and when the luminous dew of the constellations 
ceases to sparkle at your passing? - How lonely each one is in the immense tomb of the 
universe! Beside me there is only me - O father! where is thy infinite bosom, that I may 
rest upon it? (Jean Paul, 1 977: 30).
In the Nothingness, the fixed point on which the idealists based their 
annihilatio mundi, namely the self, also ends up sinking.
If each self is its own father and creator,' Jean Paul wonders, 'why can it not also 
be its own exterminating angel? (Jean Paul, 1977: 30).
It is no coincidence that in the work whose radical and caustic irony is 
considered by many to be the culmination of Romantic nihilism, Bonaventure's
Nocturnes (Nachtwachen des Bonaventura, 1804), the anonymous author takes 
up the same nihilistic motif as Jean Paul in the episode of the Wandering Jew, 
without diluting it in the dream frame as the latter does. The whole piece of 
writing is a grappling with Nothingness, and the profession of nihilism made in 
the eighth nocturne could not be bleaker:
The skull never deserts the mask that it gazes upon, life is but the rattlesnake that the 
Nothing wears to tinkle before tearing it off. What is the All? Nothing but Nothingness: it 
chokes itself, and down it voraciously swallows itself: this is what the perfidious 
charlatanism is reduced to, according to which something exists! For if only once the 
choking were to pause, the Nothing would leap out in the eyes of men to horrify them; 
fools call this pausing eternity! - but no, it is precisely Nothingness instead, absolute death 
- for life consists only in uninterrupted dying (Bo naventura, 1984: 77-78; 1990: 1 87 ). 
And in the close of the writing, the self-destructive challenge to 
Nothingness is once again launched:eath 
- for life consists only in uninterrupted dying (Bo naventura, 1984: 77-78; 1990: 1 87 ). 
And in the close of the writing, the self-destructive challenge to 
Nothingness is once again launched:

--- PAGE BREAK ---sists only in uninterrupted dying (Bo naventura, 1984: 77-78; 1990: 1 87 ). 
And in the close of the writing, the self-destructive challenge to 
Nothingness is once again launched:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
I want to gaze furiously into the Nothingness and become affrighted with it, so 
that I will no longer experience human remnants when it finally gherminates me!
With you, old alchemist, I would like to set out; only, you don't have to beg to get 
heaven - don't beg - rather expel it, if you have the strength( ... ) stop begging; I'll 
forcefully untie your hands! Alas! What is this - you too are but a mask and you 
deceive me? I no longer see you, Father - where are you? At the touch of my fingers 
everything is reduced to ashes and on his lo there remains nothing but a handful of dust, 
while a couple of satol worms sneak away( ... ). I scatter this handful of fatherly dust in 
the air, and what remains - Nothing!
Opposite, on the grave, the visionary still lingers and embraces Nothingness! And 
the echo in the ossuary calls for the last time - "Nothing!"( Bonaventura,
1990: 319, 323; 1984: 143-45).
These elements may suffice to give an idea of the suggestive con text in 
which the Romantics deal with the problem of 'nihilism'. But even more 
significant from a philosophical point of view is the fact that the term is 
employed in a technical sense by none other than the young Schelling and 
Hegel. Whilst Schelling takes note of the controversy between Cobi and Fichte 
and rejects the accusation that he himself is a nihilist, Hegel asserts the 
necessity of transcendental nihilism as a methodical procedure of philosophy. 
In the essay Faith and Knowledge (Glauben und Wissen, 1802), published in 
the "Kritisches Jour nal der Philosophie", the journal he edited together with 
Schelling, He gel takes a position on the controversy between Jacobi and Fichte 
and criticises them both, together with Kant, as dualists. The main argument put 
forward against them is that they remain stuck in a basic dichotomy, as they 
fail to completely resolve being in thought. In this context, Hegel asserts -
against Jacobi - that Fichte's 'nihilism of transcendental philosophy' is an 
inevitable methodological step, but at the same time - against Fichte - that his 
nihilism is merely relative and incapable of reaching that pure thought in which 
the opposition to being is overcome. "The 'first task of philosophy', the 'task of 
nihilism', is to arrive at 'the knowledge of absolute nothingness', i.e. to arrive at 
the 'fulfilment of true nothingness' - where it should be noted that unlike in the 
Science of Logic ( Wissenschaft der Logik, 18 12) here it is nothingness, not 
being, that serves as the starting point in the beginning of philosophy (Hegel, 1
98 1: 231). Questa prima tematizzazione del nulla è lo sfondo sul quale Hegel 
svilupperà successivamente la diagnosi nichilistica del- la transizione al mondo 
moderno in termini di «morte di Dio», «atei- smo», «fatalismo», 
«pessimismo», «egoismo», «atomismo», e dichiar-egel 
svilupperà successivamente la diagnosi nichilistica del- la transizione al mondo 
moderno in termini di «morte di Dio», «atei- smo», «fatalismo», 
«pessimismo», «egoismo», «atomismo», e dichiar-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

he need for the dialectic to go through negativity and 'nihilism', i.e. the 'feeling 
that God is dead', while recognising it as a simple moment in the life of the 
spirit that must be overcome.
That even a thinker as important as Hegel employs the term 'nihilism' in 
philosophical terms, even if only in the early phase of his thought, is an 
extremely significant episode for the reconstruction of the history of the 
concept and the problem. Later on, especially through the critical confrontation 
with Schelling, the problem of the
'Nothingness' and 'negativity', together with the use of the related terms, 
underwent a considerable transformation in Hegel.
As far as the further presence of the concept within idealism is concerned, as 
evidence of the non-occasional nature of its use, it must be said that it is also found 
in other minor exponents of the movement, such as Karl Rosenkranz, Christian 
Weisse and Immanuel H. Fichte, with different emphases from time to time. But 
the further one moves away from the original controversy over the genesis of 
idealism, the more the meaning of the term shifts from the strictly philosophical-
speculative sphere to the social and political sphere, i.e. to the consequences 
generated by the assumption, on the part of a privileged subject, of an attitude of 
radical annihilation of everything that delimits his actions. The fi gure of the 
'nihilist' makes its appearance as a free thinker who demolishes every assumption, 
every prejudice, every given condition, and thus also every traditional value, and 
thus prefigures the traits of the anarcho-libertarian nihilist who will live his most 
intense season in the last d e c a d e s of the 19th century.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o every traditional value, and 
thus prefigures the traits of the anarcho-libertarian nihilist who will live his most 
intense season in the last d e c a d e s of the 19th century.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
Chapter Four
NIHILISM IN THE SOCIAL AND POLITICAL SENSE 
AND ITS FRENCH ORIGIN
The new meaning of the concept, used to describe a state of society to be 
overcome, can be found in the work of the only great romantic thinker of 
Catholic confession, namely Franz von Baader. Rather than from the idealistic-
romantic discussions, Baader took the concept of nihilism from French culture, 
especially from Joseph de Maistre, and employed it in two writings: in the 
article
On 
Catholicism 
and 
Protestantism 
(Uber 
Katholicismus 
und 
Protestantismus, 1 824) and in the academic lecture On the Freedom of 
Intelligence (Uber die Freiheit der Intelligenz, 1 826).
In the first text, Baader argues that Protestantism has given rise to a 
"scientific, destructive nihilism" on the one hand and a "non-scientific, 
separatist pietism (mysticism)" on the other. The task of Catholicism is to 
combat both tendencies, especially the former, by restoring "the concept of 
authority in the ecclesiastical, political and scientific sense against any doubts 
or protests, whether anecdotal or new" (Baader, 1 851: 76). Nihilism is here 
identified with the dissolution of 'sacred truths', i.e. with the destruction of 
traditional orders and rules in their social cohesive function. The cause of such 
nihilism is identified in the controlled exercise of the rationality of science.
In the academic prolusion of 1 826, this meaning of the term is further 
specified. Nihilism' is defined here as an 'abuse of intelligence that is 
destructive to religion' and is associated with 'obscurantism', i.e. the 'equally 
reprehensible inhibition of its use stemming partly from a fear of knowledge, 
partly from the di-

--- PAGE BREAK ---estructive to religion' and is associated with 'obscurantism', i.e. the 'equally 
reprehensible inhibition of its use stemming partly from a fear of knowledge, 
partly from the di-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
scorn of knowledge' (Baader, 1 85 1: 149). Nihilism and obscurantism, 
considered respectively as consequences of the too free or too inhibited use of 
reason, are both stigmatised as symptoms of degeneration and disintegration of 
religious, social and civil life. In this text too, Baader believes that action must 
be taken against the 'nihilistic' tendencies in society, and that the force capable 
of countering them is Catholicism: it must organise itself, seeking to overcome 
them through a reconciliation of science and religion.
Concerned about the same disruptive effects of nihilism is Juan Donoso 
Cortés. In his Ensayo sobre el catolicismo, el libe ralismo y el socialismo (1851)
he accuses the French socialists, especially Proudhon, of nihilism. From the point 
of view of this prince of anti-revolutionary conservatives, nihilism is but one of 
the many perverse forms in which rationalism, i.e. the Enlightenment, 
manifests itself:
"Deism, pantheism, humanitarianism, Manichaeism, fatalism, scepticism,
atheism" (C .Jnoso Cortés, 1972: 254 ). It is to be opposed and combated as it leads 
to the denial of divine and human government (Donoso Cortés, 1972: 357).
The use of the term 'nihilism' as a category of social analysis and criticism in 
these authors hostile to the Enlightenment and the Revolution comes to light. But 
the word had already been used in this sense, from the end of the 18th century 
onwards, in the French linguistic area, where it is probable that Jacobi, having 
stayed in Paris several times, had already had the opportunity to transpose it. In the 
culture of the Revolution, the appellation of
'Nihilist' had been used to refer to the ranks of those who were 'neither for nor 
against the Revolution'. As mentioned, Ana charsis Cloots - a member of the 
Convention - had stated in a speech on 27 December 1793 that 'the Republic 
of Human Rights is neither theist nor atheist, it is nihilist'.
And it was precisely in the France of the Enlightenment and Revolution that a 
thought was born, that of the Marquis de Sade, which presents itself as one of the 
most radical forms of atheistic and materialistic nihilism. In his novels, as well as 
in his two philosophical dialogues (Dialogue entre un prétre et un moribond, 1782
and La Philosophie dans le boudoir, 1795 ), Sade imaginatively stages all the 
corrosive and harmful consequences that his nihilistic view of Nature and Reason 
has for custom and society. From the very beginning, i.e. already in the re-
presentation of the dying man to the priest in the dialogue of the same name, his 
nihilism is formulated as a metaphysical consequence of a consistent materialistic 
rationalism:. already in the re-
presentation of the dying man to the priest in the dialogue of the same name, his 
nihilism is formulated as a metaphysical consequence of a consistent materialistic 
rationalism:

--- PAGE BREAK ---presentation of the dying man to the priest in the dialogue of the same name, his 
nihilism is formulated as a metaphysical consequence of a consistent materialistic 
rationalism:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
What system, my friend? That of nothingness. It has never frightened me and I do not 
see anything in it that is not simple and consoling. All other systems are the work of pride, 
that alone is the work of reason. Besides, it is neither hateful nor absolute; have I not the 
perpetual generations and regenerations of nature in view? Nothing perishes, my friend, 
nothing is destroyed in the world ( ... ) How can you claim the goodness of your so-called 
God with such a system? (Sade, 1 976: 20).
Irrespective of a precise knowledge of these and other occurences of the 
concept and the problem, it was already clear at the time that just as the Re 
volution, so 'nihilism' was a phenomenon of French origin. This is emphasised 
by the already mentioned Wilhelm Traugott Krug in his Dizio narzo manuale 
delle scienze filosofiche. First of all, he gives this definition of nihilism:
Nihil est - nothing is - is a self-destructing statement that has also been called 
nihilism. For if nothing were, one could not even af stop nothing (Krug, 1969: III, 63 ).
And in a supplement to the work he notes:
In French, one is also called a 'nihiliste' who in society, and particularly in bourgeois 
society, has no importance (which is only number, but has no weight and no value), and 
likewise in religious matters believes in nothing. Such social or political and religious 
nihilists are far more numerous than philosophical or metaphysical ni chilists who want 
to annihilate everything that is (Krug, 1969: V, n, 83 ).
The source that Krug probably draws on in his reference to French 
linguistic usage is Louis-Sébastien Mercier's work Néologie ou Vocabulaire de 
mots nouveaux (1 801 ), in which 'nihili ste' or 'rienniste' is defined as one 'qui 
ne croit à rien, qui ne s'intéres se à rien'.
'Riennisme' as a term to designate the attitude of asso lute lack of belief -
in contrast to the different beliefs, sects and vi sions of the world - is also 
incidentally used by Joseph de Maistre in his Correspondance diplomatique 
from St. Petersburg (1 811 -1 7). De Maistre laments the fact that all sects, even 
'nihilism', are allowed in Russia, while Catholicism is not tolerated.
And to add another famous name to our reconnaissance of the concept's 
history, we may recall that Jules-Amédée Barbey d'Aurevilly would also speak 
explicitly of 'nihilism' later on. Inot tolerated.
And to add another famous name to our reconnaissance of the concept's 
history, we may recall that Jules-Amédée Barbey d'Aurevilly would also speak 
explicitly of 'nihilism' later on. In

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Les prophètes du passé (1 851 ) he links the nihilistic phenomenon to the 
egological subjectivism of Cartesian philosophy that lies at the origins of 
modernity. The seemingly incontrovertible foundation of Descartes' cogito
ergo sum - taken up, developed and taken to the extreme in all its variations 
by modern philosophy - is in reality a very puny foundation, it is that shaky 
foothold that can par ticulate the mind of man understood as ego. The outcome 
of this can only be a 'nihilism incapable of any response' (cf. Hofer, 1 969).
In the German linguistic area, the term nihilism continued to be used in a 
social and political sense with a negative value even after the revolution of 
1848. This was the case in the anonymous work Eritis si eu! Deus (1 854), a 
novel in three volumes, in which Hegelism is regarded as the root and cause of 
nihilism, especially social and political nihilism. One thinks, evidently, of the 
conse guences reached in the radical circles of left-wing Hegelism. This is the 
case with Karl F. Gutzkow, author of the aforementioned collection The
Nihilists and the novel The Knights of the Spirit (Die Ritter vom Geiste, 1 849-
50), which also looks at the revolution with a certain sympathy. The 'nihilists' 
are for him sophists who criticise the old without knowing how to create the 
new, they are the 'philosophers of absolute nothingness', the 'Liebigs of the 
invisible world', in the sense that, as in chemistry, they dissolve everything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng how to create the 
new, they are the 'philosophers of absolute nothingness', the 'Liebigs of the 
invisible world', in the sense that, as in chemistry, they dissolve everything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
Chapter Five
THE GROUNDLESS NIHILISM OF MAX STIRNER
The first authentic theorisation of a philosophical position that can be 
defined as nihilism, albeit without the use of con cept, occurs with Max Stirner. 
His capital work Lunico e la sua pro prietà (Der Einzige und sein Eigentum, 1
844) is the most rab bious and corrosive expression of the left-wing radicalism 
that arose as a reaction to he gelism. Advocating the reasons for an anarchic-
libertarian revolt pushed to the extreme, Stirner rails against any attempt to 
assign the life of the individual a meaning that transcends it and claims to 
represent its needs, requirements, rights and even image. And he calls the 
undefinable entity that I myself am 'the One', just as in the same years 
Kierkegaard - also against Hegel - called it 'the Individual'.
A prince of modern iconoclasts, Stirner intends to dismantle every 
philosophical system, every abstraction, every idea - God, but also Hegel's
Spirit or Feuerbach's Man - that arrogates to itself the impossible task of 
expressing the 'unspeakability' of the One. It knows that this is not an object of 
thought and will not tolerate usurpers of its inalienable right to self-
determination. In this sense, at the beginning of his work, he sets as an 
emblem the thesis that supports the entire speculative self-assertion of the 
One: "I have founded my cause on nothing". Not 'on Nothing' (aufdas Nichts), 
but precisely 'on nothing' (au/ nichts): this means that the resulting nihilism is 
not based on a philosophical affirmation of Nothing, but is simply the negation 
and rejection of any foundation that transcends the original and unrepeatable 
existence of the individual.
This is the underlying motif of the entire work, from beginning to end.
It begins with the peremptory declaration of the unpropriability of the Unico:al and unrepeatable 
existence of the individual.
This is the underlying motif of the entire work, from beginning to end.
It begins with the peremptory declaration of the unpropriability of the Unico:

--- PAGE BREAK ---existence of the individual.
This is the underlying motif of the entire work, from beginning to end.
It begins with the peremptory declaration of the unpropriability of the Unico:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
God and humanity have founded their cause on nothing, on nothing other than 
themselves. In the same way I then ground my cause on myself, I who, in God's presence, 
am the nothingness of all others, who am my everything, I who am the only one ( ... ) I am 
not nothingness in the sense of emptiness, but the creator nothingness, the nothingness
from which I myself, as creator, create everything (Stirner, 1979: 13).
And after having ridden this motif for pages and pages, the work closes 
with the categorical rejection of any task, mission or ideal with which the One 
identifies himself, that is, he annihilates himself as one. To the point of 
rejecting any name that claims to be its own name:
It is said of God: 'No name can name you'. This is true for me: no con cept expresses me, 
nothing that is indicated as my essence exhausts me: they are only names ( ... ) The owner of 
my power is myself, and I am so in the moment that I know I am unique. In t h e unique, the 
owner himself re-enters his creative nothingness, from which he was born. Every being 
superior to myself, be it God or man, weakens the feeling of my uniqueness and pales as soon 
as the sun shines on this awareness of mine. If I base my cause on me, the only one, it rests on 
the ephemeral, mortal self-creator who consumes himself, and I can say: I have founded my 
cause on nothing (Stimer, 1979: 380-81). 
The blasphemous tenor of Stirnerian rejection of any foundation is clear 
when one considers that the expression 'I have founded my cause on nothing' 
was introduced by Goethe in the poem Vanitas! Vanita tum vanitas! by
reversing the title of an ecclesiastical hymn by Johannes Pappus (1549- 1610) 
which reads: 'I have entrusted my cause to God' (Ieh hab' mein' Sach' Gott 
heimgestellt).
But the ultimate outcome this nomadic thinker arrives at is discussed in a 
letter to which Cari Schmitt drew attention:
He expressed his ultimate drive in a letter in which he says: we will then become 
again like the animals of the forest and the wild flowers. This is the true nostalgia of this 
invaded ego. This is the new paradise. This is na ture and natural law, the elimination of 
self-alienation and self-extraction in an untroubled corporeity. The Adamic bliss of the 
Garden of Earthly Delights that Hieronymus Bosch cast in white nudity on a table. But 
forest animals and wild flowers are added to it. The flight of mosceri ni in the sunbeam. 
The utterly natural nature and natural law of the deepest spheres of telluric existence. The 
utterly carefree chirping of Rossini's magpie. The pure identity with oneself in the sense of 
happiness of a blissfully accelerated blood circulation (Schmitt, 1987: 84).of telluric existence. The 
utterly carefree chirping of Rossini's magpie. The pure identity with oneself in the sense of 
happiness of a blissfully accelerated blood circulation (Schmitt, 1987: 84).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If ever in his proud isolation the One can have points of support for his return 
to nature, they lie in the only two truths he recognises: 'my power' and the 'splendid 
egoism of the stars'. A very contagious profession of faith, which aroused spirits 
and immediately provoked scandalised reactions. It was no coincidence that in the 
German Ideology, Marx and Engels devoted over three hundred pages of criticism 
to the One. But t h e eccentricity and marginalisation of the Self-king ensured that 
the anarchic-individualistic disease was isolated for the time being. A few decades 
- let us say: from then on
- it would quickly and unstoppably spread. Only at po stern, then, did Stirner 
find a space and a place in the history of nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eing. A few decades 
- let us say: from then on
- it would quickly and unstoppably spread. Only at po stern, then, did Stirner 
find a space and a place in the history of nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
Chapter Six
NIHILISM, ANARCHISM, POPULISM IN RUSSIAN 
THOUGHT
In the Russian thought of the last decades of the 19th century, nihilism became 
a general phenomenon that permeated the cultural atmosphere of the entire era. 
What pushed it in this direction was, among other factors, the circumstance that the 
term, having become the designation of a movement of social and ideological 
rebellion, emerged from the sphere of philosophical discussions and grafted itself 
directly into the fabric of society, acting on anarchic and libertarian components, 
and setting in motion a vast process of transformation (cf. Masaryk, 1971;
Venturi, 1 972).
The theorists of Russian nihilism engaged in an anti-romantic and anti-
metaphysical revolt of 'sons against fathers', contesting existing authority and 
order and especially attacking the values o f traditional religion, metaphysics 
and aesthetics, considered as
'nothingness', as illusions destined to dissolve. The Russian nihilist movement was 
often more dogmatic and rebellious than critical and sceptical, convinced as it was 
of the imperative to deny at all costs, of the need to proceed in any case, no matter 
if amidst ruins and shattering. He therefore disowned the past, condemned the 
present, but without the ability to open himself up to a concrete and positive
configuration of the future. What he extolled was the sense of individuality, the 
utilitarian coldness, neither ci nical nor indifferent, but radical and consistent in 
supporting the revolt of the intelligenczja against the dominant power and culture. 
Decisive for the preparation and dissemination of nihilism was the work of the 
a f o r e m e n t i o n e d Turgenev, who put the concept into circulation, and the 
activity of a host of other intellectuals among whom the twoion and dissemination of nihilism was the work of the 
a f o r e m e n t i o n e d Turgenev, who put the concept into circulation, and the 
activity of a host of other intellectuals among whom the two

--- PAGE BREAK ---n of nihilism was the work of the 
a f o r e m e n t i o n e d Turgenev, who put the concept into circulation, and the 
activity of a host of other intellectuals among whom the two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
who died in their early thirties: Nikolai A. Do broljubov (1 836- 1861) and 
Dmitry I. Pisarev (1840- 1866). The former was a contributor to the magazine 
'The Contemporary)) and with his criticism of Goncarov's Oblomov (1 856), who 
represented the passive and conservative nobility, he became an advocate of a 
democratic and progressivist radicalism, which he intended to support by means of 
literature and ro mance. (He inspired Lukacs with his critical realism and Marxist 
aesthetics). Pisarev, a critic par excellence of the ideal of art as an end i n itself 
(Razrusenie estetiki, 1865: The Destruction of Aesthetics), took nihilism to its 
extreme consequences, dropping all remnants of anthropologism or moralism, and 
accepted in a positive sense the appellation of 'nihilist') popularised by Turgenev 
(Bazarov, 1862).
•
But the mastermind of the nihilists of the 1960s was Nikolai G. Cemysevsky, a 
scholar of economics and advocate of strict mate rialism. His novel of social 
agitation Che /are? (Cto delat', 1863), written in prison, was a great success with 
the public and is to be regarded as one of the main manifestos of Russian nihilism. 
In it, the new forms of life based on the abolition of conventions and traditions, on 
a communitarianism that banished all possessive feelings, on the emancipation of 
women, and on dedication to the cause of the people were described.
However, the nihilistic movement of the 1960s soon had its head cut off. 
Dobroljubov and Pisarev died prematurely, Cernysevsky was imprisoned at the age 
of thirty-four, in 1862, and only regained his freedom shortly before his death in 
1888. This did not, however, prevent the nihilist ideas from spreading rapidly and 
inflaming Russian Jewry. But without any concrete successes: throughout the 
successful decade there were large-scale trials with mass convictions and 
deportations. In the general escalation of social contrasts, the 'People's Will' 
(Narodnaja Volja) movement was born, which argued that the overthrow of the 
symbol of power, i.e. the killing of the Tsar, was the first concrete action to be 
taken in order to initiate the desired changes. After a series of attacks, Tsar 
Alexander II fell under the bombs of the narodnovoliki on April 1881. In the 
course of the extremely harsh repression, an extremist, Sergei G. Necaev, author of 
a Catechism of the Revolutionary (Katechizis revoljucionera) whose theses are 
distinguished by the ruthless sense of organisation put at the service of faith in the 
revolution, was captured. The expression 'necaevism)) was then used to designate 
the most unscrupulous and intransigent forms of political ni chilism - a radical 
way of conceiving revolutionary action, that of Necaev, which was rejected by 
Aleksandr I. Herzen and con-designate 
the most unscrupulous and intransigent forms of political ni chilism - a radical 
way of conceiving revolutionary action, that of Necaev, which was rejected by 
Aleksandr I. Herzen and con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---unscrupulous and intransigent forms of political ni chilism - a radical 
way of conceiving revolutionary action, that of Necaev, which was rejected by 
Aleksandr I. Herzen and con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
divided by Michail A. Bakunin. Some even believe that the latter was the 
inspiration and co-author of the Catechism.
These two thinkers effectively embody opposite ways of conceiving the 
nihilistic-revolutionary worldview: radical and rebellious extremism in Bakunin, 
moderation and concreteness in Herzen. Bakunin proclaimed himself the 'founder 
of nihilism and apostle of anar chia>> and declared:
Pour vaincre !es ennemis du prolétariat il nous faut détruire, encore dé truire et 
toujours détruire. Car! l'esprit destructeur est en meme temps l'esprit constructeur (cf.
Wittkopf, 1974: 83 ).
Bakunin thus glorified the moment of negativity, which he took from left-
wing Hegelianism and considered a 'terrible ram', the expression of the force of the 
spirit that annihilates and destroys. And he radicalised nihilism in an explosive 
combination of anarchist, socialist, utopian-libertarian ideas.
As for Herzen, he directed the strides of his criticism against the
'Buddhists of science' who lingered in contemplation in an age that called for 
action. Opposed to all conservatism, he was the main theorist of populism, but, 
opposing Necaev's terror and Bakunin's rebellionism, he conducted his battles 
with the moderation that came from his love of culture and history, as is 
evident from his letters to an old comrade (K staromu tova rifcu) and the 
essays dictated in German on the other side (Vom anderen U/er, 1 850; the 
Russian edition is from 1 855). In this way, he was able to articulate a 
differentiated view of nihilism and saw in it the logic of transformation, hailing 
it as a positive phenomenon:
Nihilism is logic without strictures, it is science without dogma, it is the 
unconditional obedience to experience and the humble acceptance of all con- sequences, 
whatever they may be, if they arise from observation, if they are demanded by reason. 
Nihilism does not turn something into nothing, but reveals that nothing, mistaken for 
something, is an optical illusion and that any truth, however much it contradicts fantastic 
representations, is healthier than these and in any case obligatory.
Whether this name is appropriate or not, it does not matter. We have b e c o m e 
accustomed to it, it is accepted by friend and foe alike, it has become a marker for the police, it 
has become a delusion, an offence for some, praise for others (Herzen, 1977: 31 ). 
But he also saw the dangers that nihilism concealed and assessed it with a 
critical eye:marker for the police, it 
has become a delusion, an offence for some, praise for others (Herzen, 1977: 31 ). 
But he also saw the dangers that nihilism concealed and assessed it with a 
critical eye:

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, it 
has become a delusion, an offence for some, praise for others (Herzen, 1977: 31 ). 
But he also saw the dangers that nihilism concealed and assessed it with a 
critical eye:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
Of course, if by nihilism we mean reverse creation, i.e. the transformation of facts 
and ideas into nothingness, into sterile scepticism, into haughty
'sitting on their hands', in despair leading to inaction, then the true nihilists least of all will 
fall under this definition and one of the greatest nihilists will be I. Turgenev, who cast the 
first stone against them, and perhaps his favourite philosopher Schopenhauer (. . .). When
Bakunin sma- sched the Berlin professors and the Parisian revolutionaries of 1 848,
accusing the former of timidity and the latter of conservatism, he was a perfect nihilist (
... ). When the petrasevcy went to forced labour because they 'wanted to ab beat all 
human and divine laws and destroy the foundations of society' ( ... ) he was a nihilist 
(Herzen, 1977: 31 -32). 
That is why he countered the abyss that nihilism had opened with an 
awareness of the limits within which the phenomenon had manifested itself:
Nihilism has since expanded, has become clearer in its self-consciousness, has partly 
become a doctrine, has taken much of science into itself, and has aroused men of action 
with enormous strengths and enormous talents ( ... ) all this is indisputable. But it has not 
brought about any new principals (Herzen, 1977: 32).
The scenario of nihilism opens up in all its breadth and depth in 
Dostoevsky's work. A universal writer, destined to influence not only Russia 
but the whole of European literature, Dostoevsky fleshes out the existential 
figures and situations of his novels - especially Crime and Punishment 
(Prestuplenie i nakazanie, 1863 ), The Demons (Besy, 1 873) and 1/ The Karamazov 
Brothers (Brat'ja Karamazovy, 1 879- 80) - to philosophical insights and motifs 
that anticipate decisive experiences of twentieth-century thought, first and 
foremost that of atheism and ni chilism. In him, the phenomenon of the 
dissolution of values, experienced as a crisis that consumes the Russian soul, 
unfolds before our eyes in all its nefarious consequences, even to the point of 
crime and perversion. And although the ultimate aim of his exhibition of evil is 
t o instruct its indictment, the literary fortune of his work actually favours the 
spread of the nihilist disease, helping to undermine inveterate certainties and 
corrupt established orders. Among the sugge stive characters in his novels, 
which represent so many examples of how Dostoevsky was able to develop the 
theme of nihilism, declining it in all its varieties and representing it in con crete 
figures, may be mentioned here:
l) Raskolnikov, the protagonist of Crime and Punishment, for whom the 
unconditional re vindication of his freedom becomes a philosophical-moral 
problem with endless tribulations;be mentioned here:
l) Raskolnikov, the protagonist of Crime and Punishment, for whom the 
unconditional re vindication of his freedom becomes a philosophical-moral 
problem with endless tribulations;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2) In Demons, there is the 'black angel' Stavrogin - whose real historical 
model is Bakunin - a nihilist with a luciferous and depraved intelligence who 
corrodes and destroys everything, without being able to transform his de moniacal 
will into productive creativity; and then the atheist Kirillov who, blindly following 
the rigid thread of logic, deduces from his hypothesis ('If God were not ...') the 
lawfulness of all amo ral behaviour and, in the end, kills himself to prove the non-
existence of God;
3) In The Brothers Karamazov, the character of lvan, a subtle atheist to whom 
Dostoevsky puts the terrible tale of the Grand Inquisitor-King into his mouth to 
illustrate the laceration between the ideals of Christianity, which reach for heaven and 
'would like to go empty-handed' on earth, and the realism of this world over which Evil 
is sovereign, 'the spirit of self-destruction and non-being' (Dostoevsky, 1984: Il, 845;
cf. Hessen, 1 980) .
Important for the philosophical understanding of nihilism is the fact that 
Dostoevsky's glimpse into the nihilist scenario - notwithstanding his 'great 
wrath' and his categorical condemnation of the phenomenon in the name of a 
regeneration of ideals according to the evangelical spirit -
found an 
enthusiastic observer in Nietzsche, and that the combination of their influence 
in Europe gave a decisive imprint to the literature and spiritual atmosphere of 
the first decades of the 20th century (cf. Schubart, 1 939; Sestov, 1950).

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion of their influence 
in Europe gave a decisive imprint to the literature and spiritual atmosphere of 
the first decades of the 20th century (cf. Schubart, 1 939; Sestov, 1950).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
Chapter Seven
NIHILISM AND DECADENCE IN NIETZSCHE
It is in Nietzsche's work - especially in the fragments of the 1980s 
published posthumously in the dubious and controversial compilation The Will 
to Power (Der Wille zur Macht) in a first edition in 1901 and in a second, more 
than doubled, edition in 1906 - that nihilism becomes the subject of explicit 
philosophical reflection. With him, the analysis of the phenomenon reaches its 
culmination, maturing a historical awareness of its more distant roots, in 
Platonism and Christianity, while at the same time nurturing the critical need to 
overcome the evils that have proliferated in it. It is therefore not hyperbole to 
consider Nietzsche as the greatest prophet and theorist of nihilism, as the one 
who diagnosed the 'disease' that was to afflict the world at an early stage and 
for which he offered a therapy. But by which route did Nietzsche arrive at the 
problem of nihilism?
The term is found used for the first time in the notes of the summer of 
1880, but Nietzsche had long since recognised and identified, following the 
motif of the 'death of God', the distinctive traits of the phenomena. Seen as a 
capital problem, it became the thematic axis around which his final, exhausting 
research revolved. This tends to be taken into account in the distribution of the 
fragments proposed by the editors of The Will to Power, whose first book, of 
the four into which the work is divided, has as its theme 'European Nihilism'.
Decisive for the constitution of the horizon of thought in which Nietzsche 
developed a sensitivity to the problem was his youthful reading of 
Schopenhauer and some exponents of the school of pessimism, in particular 
Eduard von Hartmann, Julius Bahnsen and Philipp Mainlander (cf. Miiller-
Seyfarth, 1 993 ; lnvernizzi, 1 994 ). As forng of 
Schopenhauer and some exponents of the school of pessimism, in particular 
Eduard von Hartmann, Julius Bahnsen and Philipp Mainlander (cf. Miiller-
Seyfarth, 1 993 ; lnvernizzi, 1 994 ). As for

--- PAGE BREAK ---and some exponents of the school of pessimism, in particular 
Eduard von Hartmann, Julius Bahnsen and Philipp Mainlander (cf. Miiller-
Seyfarth, 1 993 ; lnvernizzi, 1 994 ). As for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
Schopenhauer, his importance in Nietzsche's formation is well known and has 
been the subject of numerous investigations. Without the metaphysical horizon 
that opens up with the Schopenhauerian conception of the Will, both Nietzsche 
and Wagner would be unthinkable, as would all that they represented for 
German culture. Relative to our problem, it would be necessary to show to 
what extent t h e Schopenhauerian thematisation of Nothingness, even in the 
absence of the concept of 'nihilism', influenced the reception of this phenomenon in 
Nietz sche. In any case, Nietzsche considers Schopenhauerian pessimism and 
the yearning for Nothingness that it nurtures as a form of
"passive nihilism>>, i.e. as a weakening of the power of the spirit. The same applies to 
Eduard von Hartmann's philosophy of the unconscious, to Julius Bahnsen's 'pessimism 
of contradiction', who qualifies his own philosophy as 'nihilismm>> and defines man 
as 'a self-conscious Nothingness', creating the neologism Nihilenz in analogy to 
Existenz (Bahnsen, 1 93 1: 161 -62) - and for Philipp Mainlander's 'metaphysics of 
entropy>> - which understands the creation of the world and evolution as a kind of 
'self-cadaverisation of God>>. These are all motives and references that converge in 
the intellectual experience in which Nietzsche formed his own understanding of 
nihilism.
Of course, from a historical point of view, one should not forget the focus 
on the phenomenon that developed in those years throughout Europe following 
the attacks in Russia, which led the press and the public to equate nihilism and 
terrorism. But the next occasion that led Nietzsche to intensively deal with the 
phenomenon, influencing his understanding of it, was the reading, in addition 
to Turgenev's Fathers and Sons, of two authors in particular: Paul Bourget and 
Do stoevskij.
As far as Dostoevsky is concerned, the influence that the reading of his 
works had on Nietzsche and the structural analogies traceable in the literary 
and speculative experiences of the two would require a separate investigation 
in order to be sufficiently illustrated. Beyond the reference to the classical studies 
already mentioned (Schubart, 1939; Sestov, 1950), it suffices here to recall that 
Nietzsche himself, in a letter to Overbeck dated 23 February 1887, recounts his 
own discovery of Dostoevsky in the midst of his feverish work on the planned 
Will to Power:
A few weeks ago I did not even know his name, as an uncultured person who does 
not read 'magazines'! A visit to a bookstore accidentally put me in front of my eyes! Esprit 
souterrain, his work that had just been translated into French (and equallyan uncultured person who does 
not read 'magazines'! A visit to a bookstore accidentally put me in front of my eyes! Esprit 
souterrain, his work that had just been translated into French (and equally

--- PAGE BREAK ---who does 
not read 'magazines'! A visit to a bookstore accidentally put me in front of my eyes! Esprit 
souterrain, his work that had just been translated into French (and equally

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
I discovered Schopenhauer at 21 and Stendhal at 35 by chance!). The instinct of affinity 
(or what shall I call it?) made itself felt immediately, my joy was extraordinary... 
(Nietzsche, 1986: VIII, 27).
Less well known, however, is the influence that reading Paul Bourget (1 852-1 93 
5) had on him. In the history of French literature, this otherwise little-known writer 
enjoys a certain notoriety as a novelist and literary critic. His novels were hailed as 
seismographs of the incipient literary modernity, despite the attacks of conservative 
critics such as Ferdinand Brunetière. The most successful of them was Le Disciple 
(1889). The protagonist is a young student who is initiated into philosophy by a 
teacher, Adrien Sixte, from whom one recognises the figure of Taine, with whom 
Bourget had trained but from whom he distanced himself with this novel.
As a literary critic, Bourget gained notoriety thanks to a series o f articles in 
which he effectively described the salient features of turn-of-the-century literature, 
using as categories for t h e analysis of the society of the time concepts that would 
make his fortune such as 'deca dence', 'pessimism', 'cosmopolitanism' and 'nihilism'. 
The articles appeared between 15 December 1881 and l0 October 1885, under the title 
Psy chologie contemporaine - Notes et Portraits, in the 'Nouvelle Revue' founded by 
Juliette Adam in 1 879 and edited and promoted by her for a ven tennium in her 
Parisian salon. In 1883 Bourget collected the articles on Baudelaire, Renan, Flaubert, 
Taine and Stendhal under the title Essais de psychologie contemporaine (1 883 ) into 
a book, and in 1885 he followed this up with a second volume: Nouveaux Essais de 
psychologie contemporaine, comprising articles on Dumas the son, Lecomte de Lisle, 
the Gon court brothers, Turgenev and Amiel.
Literary criticism, which Bourget practises using what he calls the 
'psychological method', describes the transition from late French romanticism 
to modernity and sees the trends in decadent literature as a reflection of 
transformations affecting the whole of society. The Essais constitute a lucid 
analysis of 'some of the fatal consequences of cosmopolitan life' (Bourget, 1 993 : 
439) and illustrate the processes of decadence and decomposition of the so cial 
fabric as they were manifesting themselves in the literature of the time. Bourget
gravitates his 'psychological' analysis of decadence around certain capital themes, 
motifs and questions.
l) A first area is the aesthetic one. Bourget wonders about some 
fundamental questions: what are the function and place of ar t in the process of 
social transformation? What is the role of the artist infirst area is the aesthetic one. Bourget wonders about some 
fundamental questions: what are the function and place of ar t in the process of 
social transformation? What is the role of the artist in

--- PAGE BREAK ---esthetic one. Bourget wonders about some 
fundamental questions: what are the function and place of ar t in the process of 
social transformation? What is the role of the artist in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
in the face of the process of societal decomposition that characterises modern 
cosmopolitan life? Can the artist, with respect to the egua litarian tendencies 
that impose themselves everywhere, maintain the aristocratic primacy that 
comes from his awareness of his task as experimenter and creator?
2) A second set of questions revolves around the moral perspective: is it 
possible, as well as describing, to make an assessment of the de cadence of 
contemporary society? But does not admitting the possibility of such a judgement 
mean introducing a moral perspective?
3) What, then, is the attitude to take towards the de-composition of society 
and the decay of its vital forces? What to do in the face of the 'disease of the 
will', i.e. the inability to tame, by virtue of a principle, the contradiction 
emerging from physiological drives? Bourget considers the viewpoint of the 
moralist and the politician, who produce 'reactions' to the forces of decadence, 
to be legitimate, but believes that only another viewpoint, the 'psychological' 
one, is capable of seeing decadence in a positive light and grasping the 
'aesthetic values' it expresses - a motif, too, echoed in Nietzsche.
What made Bourget's Essais especially famous were the four pages at the 
end of the essay on Baudelaire, the first in the series, entitled 'Théorie de la 
décadence' (Bourget, 1 993: 13-18). Through a disenchanted analysis Bourget 
recognises in the pessimism and Ni chilism of his contemporary literature the 
'evil of the century' (Bourget, 1993: 438) and declares that, to take the illness 
seriously, one must admit that there are no remedies to counter it and that, 
therefore, one must accept it together with the aesthetic values it produces 
(Bourget, 1993: 442). This is best understood if one keeps in mind what 
Bourget means by 'décadence'.
The term has two similar meanings for him: one refers to society, the other 
to style and literature. Both society and language can be compared to an 
organism. Social decadence occurs when the individuals that make up the 
society make themselves independent and 'the organisms that make up the total 
organism cease to subordinate their energy to the total energy and the anarchy 
that is established constitutes the decadence of the whole' (Bourget, 1 993: 14).
From this idea of social decadence Bourget derives by analogy a theory of 
literary decadence and formulates it in terms that will be taken up, almost 
verbatim, by Nietzsche:
An equal law governs the development and decadence of that other orga nism that is 
language. A decadent style is one in which the unity of the bookt will be taken up, almost 
verbatim, by Nietzsche:
An equal law governs the development and decadence of that other orga nism that is 
language. A decadent style is one in which the unity of the book

--- PAGE BREAK ---almost 
verbatim, by Nietzsche:
An equal law governs the development and decadence of that other orga nism that is 
language. A decadent style is one in which the unity of the book

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
decomposes to make way for the independence of the page, the page decom mises to make 
way for the independence of the sentence and the sentence to make way for the indi pendence 
of the word (Bourget, 1993 : 14).
It has long been suggested (cf. Weigand, 1893 ; Andler, 1 958: III, 41 8 
ff.), and it has been shown with abundant evidence following a line of research 
indicated by Mazzino Montinari (cf. Kuhn, 1 992; Cam pioni, 1993 ; Volpi, 1 
995a), that this theory of decadence found in Nietzsche an attentive and 
voracious reader. But before turning to Nietzsche, it must be said what 
consequences Bourget draws from his theses. Well, when faced with decadence 
he notes the possibility of two attitudes: decadence can be approached from a 
'moral-political' perspective or from what he calls a 'psychological' perspective. 
The first perspective, the one according to which 'politicians and mora lists 
reason', looks at the overall 'amount of force' that can keep the social organism 
as a whole functioning and, if it finds that it is lacking or insufficient, it 
deduces a perspective of decadence and tries to counter it. Opposite to the point 
of view of the moralist and the politician is the point of view of the 
'psychologist': his interest is directed not at the whole, but at individual 
individualities, and he aims to study their originality, unrepeatability and 
ineffability with all their most attractive and fascinating features, and the 
aesthetic values they produce.
By means of this 'psychological' consideration, Bourget opens up an access 
to the phenomenon of decadence that allows him to valorise its positive effects, 
i.e. above all the aesthetic values that artistic individuality produces by 
becoming independent of society. By opening up this access, he is able to make 
an apologia for the experimental and eccentric existence of the man of letters 
and the artist: the latter lives only by himself and self-justifies himself, from a 
'psychological' point of view, by his intrinsic value, according to the principle 
of art for art's sake. Bourget presents the aestheticising point of view of 
decadence as the 'supreme equity' of the spirit and of ideas, because it is able to 
assap rate and assimilate them all without adhering to any, thus producing 'a 
richer treasure of human acquisition'.
If the citizens of a decadence are inferior as workers of the country's grandeur, are 
they not far superior as artists of their soul's interiority? If they are unsuitable for private or 
public action, is it not because they are too suited to solitary thought? If they are bad 
reproducers of future gene rations, is it not because the abundance of fine sensations and 
the exquisiteness of rare sentiments have made them virtuous, sterile but refined,thought? If they are bad 
reproducers of future gene rations, is it not because the abundance of fine sensations and 
the exquisiteness of rare sentiments have made them virtuous, sterile but refined,

--- PAGE BREAK ---bad 
reproducers of future gene rations, is it not because the abundance of fine sensations and 
the exquisiteness of rare sentiments have made them virtuous, sterile but refined,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
of voluptuousness and sorrows? If they are incapable of the dedications proper to deep 
faith, is it not because their over-educated intelligence has freed them from prejudices and 
because, having made the review of ideas, they have arrived at that supreme equity which 
legitimises all doctrines to the exclusion of all fanaticism? Certainly, a Germanic chieftain 
of the 2nd century was more capable of invading the empire than a Roman patrician was 
capable of defending it; but the erudite and fine, curious and disenchanted Roman, such as 
the emperor Hadrian, for example, the Cesa king who loved Tivoli, represented a richer 
treasure of human acquisition (Bourget, 1993: 15).
With this, Bourget counteracts the arguments that have always been made 
against the view of decadence, i.e. that it would be per tooth and have no 
future. He neutralises the negative assessment of the phenomenon and shows 
the reasons why it can be understood in the aesthetic values it produces.
The great argument against decadence is that it has no tomorrow and that there will 
always be a barbarity that will crush it. But is not the fatal legacy of the exquisite and the 
rare to be wrong in the face of brutality? One is entitled to confess such a wrong and to 
prefer the defeat of Athens in decadence to the triumph of the violent Macedonian 
(Bourget, 1993: 15). 
In an analogy, this belief in social and political decadence is also extended 
to the literatures of decadence.
These literatures do not have a tomorrow either. They result in alterations of 
vocabulary, in subtleties of words that will make this style unintelligible to generations to 
come. Fifty years from now, for example, the language of the Goncourt brothers will only 
be understood by specialists. Who cares? Perhaps the writer's aim is to present himself as 
a perpetual candidate before the universal suffrage of the centuries? We delight in what 
you call our stylistic corruptions, and we delight with us the refined of our race and our 
time. It is a question of whether our exception is not an aristocracy, and whether, in the 
order of aesthetics, the plurality of suffrages represents nothing but the plurality of 
ignorances (Bourget, 1993: 16).
The ideal of aesthetic aristocratism that Bourget cultivates and on the basis 
of which he justifies the ideal of the great artist is evident from these lines. 
Since there is a reciprocal relationship of action between the individual and 
society, the individuality that distances itself from the social environment ends 
up severing its roots in the soil from which it draws its vital energies and runs 
the risk of perishing and dying. It will then be that only the courageous, strong 
and mature artist, with a great personality andts roots in the soil from which it draws its vital energies and runs 
the risk of perishing and dying. It will then be that only the courageous, strong 
and mature artist, with a great personality and

--- PAGE BREAK ---from which it draws its vital energies and runs 
the risk of perishing and dying. It will then be that only the courageous, strong 
and mature artist, with a great personality and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
creativity, he is able to practise the perspective of decadence and to afirm his 
individuality independently of society. This is the case with Baudelaire: fatally 
attracted by the 'phosphorescence of evil' he has the strength and courage to 
'proclaim himself decadent)) and to seek
"everything that in life and art to simple natures seemed morose and artificial)) 
(Bourget, 1993: 16). It is capable o f decay and ruin without perishing, 
producing, on the contrary, imperishable aesthetic values.
Bourget thus sketches out a theory of so cial and literary decadence in 
which the aristocratic ideal of art has in itself its own justification and 
meaning. The decadent artist ennobles the scene with his appearance and draws 
his aesthetic and spiritual nourishment from the manifestations of decadence. 
Themes, such as these, that ela borated with much more speculative vigour can 
be found in Nietzsche.
In fact, the motif of decadence, closely connected to that of nihilism, runs 
through Nietzsche's entire oeuvre and became, after the exploration of French 
literature and the study of Bourget's Es sais, a central theme in the speculation 
of his later years of lucidity. A condensation of this is the booklet Nietzsche
contra Wagner, where already in the preface one encounters traces of Bourget's 
in fluence. Nietzsche declares that it is 'an essay (Es sai) for psychologists, not
for Germans' (VIII, III, 399), evidently alluding to the 'psychological' 
perspective, as opposed to the moral one, that Bourget had adopted in order to 
understand decadence from a positive perspective. And in the course of the 
booklet - in which, as is well known, reflections made elsewhere are included 
- Nietzsche makes use of the repertoire of motifs on décadence gathered
through 
his 
exploration 
of 
French 
literature 
following 
Bourget's 
'psychological)) guide.
One motif, in particular, seems to have touched Nietzsche: that according 
to which décadence is characterised by the physical-logical dissolution of the 
organism and the disintegration of the parts that detach themselves from the 
whole and become independent of it. Already in a short annotation in the 
winter of 1883/84, Nietzsche pins down Bourget's central thesis:
Style of decadence in Wagner: the /single phrase becomes sovereign, subordination and 
co-ordination becomes random. Bourget, p. 25 (VII, 1/2, 313 ) .
In this fragment is contained in nuce the theory of decadence that 
Nietzsche develops in the wake of Bourget and applies to what in his opinion is 
the manifestation par excellence of decadence, Wagner's music. This 
application is put forward in a letter to Cari Fuchs in mid-April 1 886, sent 
from Nice, thend applies to what in his opinion is 
the manifestation par excellence of decadence, Wagner's music. This 
application is put forward in a letter to Cari Fuchs in mid-April 1 886, sent 
from Nice, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---n his opinion is 
the manifestation par excellence of decadence, Wagner's music. This 
application is put forward in a letter to Cari Fuchs in mid-April 1 886, sent 
from Nice, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
"cosmopolis' in which he was staying. Speaking of the 'decadence (Verfal[) of
the melodic sense' that he says he perceives in German musicians, and thus of 
the ever-increasing attention to the individual gesture and the ever-increasing 
skill in the detail and configuration of the individual moment, Nietzsche writes 
of Wagner:
The Wagnerian formula 'infinite melody' expresses in the most lovely way the danger, the 
corruption of instinct, and also the good faith, the tranquillity of conscience in the midst of 
such corruption. Rhythmic ambiguity, whereby one no longer knows or should no longer know 
whether a thing is head or tail, is undoubtedly an artistic experiment through which wonderful 
effects can be achieved - the Tri stane is rich in it - but as a symptom of an art, it is and 
remains the sign of dissolution. The part reigns over the whole, the phrase over the melody, the 
moment over time (even over musical time), the pathos over the ethos (character or style or 
whatever you want to call it), and finally the esprit over 'sense' (Nietzsche, 1986: VII, 176-77 
).
Here, too, although without naming it, Nietzsche traces his own de finition 
of decadence to that of Bourget. However, a difference in emphasis and 
evaluation should be noted. Nietzsche is attracted by the phospho rescence that 
decadence emanates; he knows, however, that it is a light that absorbs but is 
insufficient to illuminate. He is a child of decadence, ep also struggles and 
protests against it. If he accepts, therefore, the tendency to disaggregate from 
the organism to its individual functions, from society to the individual, from 
the whole to the parts, which Bourget hailed as the germ of a more refined 
sensibility, it is not simply to suffer it. On the contrary, Nietzsche wants to 
counter it by means of a 'countermovement' that has its centre of gravity in art 
as the will to po tence, that is, as creativity and activity and not as passive 
enjoyment. In the same letter to Carl Fuchs he continues:
Excuse me! But what I believe I perceive is a change in pro spective: one sees much, 
too minutely the particular; much, too much goes into the whole. In music, the will is 
stretched towards this sowering perspective, it is more than the will! And this is 
décadence: a word that, among people like us, does not despise but defines (Nietzsche, 
1986: 177).
Two years later, in The Wagner Case, Nietzsche re-proposes his own 
theory on decadence in a for but definitive form, taking up from Bourget the 
analogy between literary decadence and social decadence, between the
disintegration of the whole of a text and the dissolution of the whole of 
society. Only, in spite of the declarations of intent - déca dence is "a word that 
( ... ) does not despise but defines" - he does not os-of the whole of a text and the dissolution of the whole of 
society. Only, in spite of the declarations of intent - déca dence is "a word that 
( ... ) does not despise but defines" - he does not os-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ext and the dissolution of the whole of 
society. Only, in spite of the declarations of intent - déca dence is "a word that 
( ... ) does not despise but defines" - he does not os-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
serves decadence with detached neutrality, but strongly opposes it. This is why, 
on the one hand, he cannot fail to recognise the reasons for decadence as a 
phenomenon intrinsic to life itself and the parable of its development, stating in 
Fragment 14 [75] of Spring 1 888, entitled 'Concept of "decadence"':
The phenomenon of decadence is just as necessary as any rise and progress of life: it 
is not in our power to eliminate it. Reason, on the contrary, wants to be given its due (...)
(VIII, III, 46).
On the other hand, however, he holds against Bourget that the extenuation 
of decadence in individuality does not produce new and more refined aesthetic 
values, and that it is instead indispensable to regain the life of the whole. 
Taking up Bourget's description in almost the same terms, Nietzsche 
reformulates it in such a way as to derive a critical judgement on decadence:
By what is each literary décadence characterised? By the fact that the vi ta no longer 
resides in the whole. The word becomes sovereign and leaps out of the sentence, the sentence 
usurps and blurs the sense of the page, the page takes vi ta at the expense of the whole, - the
whole is no longer the whole. But this is the allegory of every style of décadence: always
atomistic anarchy, disintegration of the will, 'li berty of the individual', or to put it in the 
language of morality extended to political theory, 'equal rights for all'. Life, the equal vitality,
vibration and e suberance of life included in the smallest organisms, and the rest poor i n life.
Everywhere paralysis, sorrow, stiffening, or enmity and chaos: both are more and more 
apparent the higher the forms of organisation towards which one ascends. The whole does not 
generally live any more: it is down, calculated, posthumous, an artificial product (VI, III, 22-23
).
And in a corresponding posthumous fragment h e openly names his 
source:
This senseless overloading of details, this underlining of piccolos, the mosaic effect: 
Pau! Bourget (VIII, II, 339).
All this sheds light on the historical context of ideas and experiences in 
which Nietzsche's theory of decadence is rooted, and shows to what extent it 
depends on it. On the other hand, however, Nietzsche grafts the motifs he 
transposes almost verbatim from Bourget onto the broader horizon of his 
interpretation of nihilism as the logic of western stock. He can thus warn against 
mistaking the con-he grafts the motifs he 
transposes almost verbatim from Bourget onto the broader horizon of his 
interpretation of nihilism as the logic of western stock. He can thus warn against 
mistaking the con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---he 
transposes almost verbatim from Bourget onto the broader horizon of his 
interpretation of nihilism as the logic of western stock. He can thus warn against 
mistaking the con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
consequences for the causes, from confusing the surface manifestations of 
decadence for the deep metaphysical reasons that inneeded it. In Fragment 14 
[85] from the spring of 1888 he summarises and formulates the intuition that 
projects him far beyond Bourget:
Nihilism is not a cause, but only the logic of decadence (VIII, m, 55).
If Bourget is used to diagnose the phenomenon of deca dence, Nietzsche, on 
the other h a n d , tries, against Bourget, to penetrate it more deeply in order to 
hazard a prognosis and prescribe a therapy. Hence his relative distance from 
Bourget, expressed in letters to Peter Gast (7 March 1887 ), to Taine (4 July 1887 
), and to Malwida von Meysenbug (4 October 1888) (cf. Nietzsche, 1986: VIII, 42, 
106, 447). In short, as he writes in the Preface to the Wagner Case, if it is true that 
decadence was the problem that most deeply occupied him, i t is also true that he 
just as resolutely sought to defend himself against it (VI, III, 5). Nietzsche was 
therefore absolutely right when he proclaimed in Ec ce homo that he was a 
decadent but at the same time also the antithesis of the decadent, that he had learnt 
'the art of filigree in taking and understanding in general' and experienced for 
himself the affi nment that comes from décadence, but at the same time that he had 
the strength for the healthy and robust vision of the whole and for the 
transvaluation of values:
With a sick look at healthier concepts and values, or the other way around, from the 
fullness and security of the rich life to the secret workings of the instinct of décadence -
this has been my longest exercise, my real experience, the only one in which, if ever, I 
have become a master. Now it is in my hand to shift perspectives: the first reason why 
for me alone a 'transvaluation of values' is possible (VI, lll, 273 ). 
It is clear at this point to what extent Dostoevsky's and Bourget's readings 
prompt Nietzsche's thought. With these two readings, Nietzsche's thought is 
brought to maturity by a guiding motif that he had long since grasped in the 
sentence "God is dead" and that had converged in the diagnosis of the 
devaluation of supreme values and in the recognition of the dynamics of 
Western history interpreted as decadence, as the history of Platonism-nihilism. 
Already in his early years (1870), Nietzsche had found the reason for the 
'death of God' in the statement, quoted by Plutarch, that 'the
Great Pan is dead'. And he immediately radicalised it:ilism. 
Already in his early years (1870), Nietzsche had found the reason for the 
'death of God' in the statement, quoted by Plutarch, that 'the
Great Pan is dead'. And he immediately radicalised it:

--- PAGE BREAK ---is early years (1870), Nietzsche had found the reason for the 
'death of God' in the statement, quoted by Plutarch, that 'the
Great Pan is dead'. And he immediately radicalised it:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
I believe in the ancient Germanic sentence: all gods must die (VIII, m/1, 121).
It is in Gaia scienza (Die /rohliche Wissenscha/t, 1882), in the passage
No. 125 entitled 'The Madman', that the death of God is presented as the 
decisive experience in which the awareness of the vanishing of traditional 
values is acquired. It is no coincidence that four years later, when he wrote a 
fifth book for the new edition of the work, Nietzsche began with the same 
theme:
The greatest recent event - that 'God is dead', that faith in the Christian God has 
become unacceptable - is already beginning to cast its first om bre on Europe (V, n, 239).
The death of God, i.e. the demise of traditional values, becomes the thread for 
interpreting Western history as decadence and providing a critical diagnosis of the 
present. From the discovery of Bour get and Dostoevsky onwards, Nietzsche will 
increasingly interpret this historical process in terms of 'nihilism'.
But what does 'nihilism' actually mean? In posing the question himself, 
Nietzsche answers with a dry and precise definition that describes the 
phenomenon in its essence and indicates its cause:
Nihilism: the end is missing; the answer to the "why?" is missing; what does nihilism 
mean? - that supreme values are devalued (VIII, II, 12).
Nihilism is thus the 'lack of meaning' that arises when the binding force of 
traditional answers to the 'why?' of life and being is lost, and this occurs along 
the historical process in the course of which the supreme traditional values that 
gave answers to that 'why?
"why?" - God, Truth, Good - lose their value and perish, generating the 
condition of 'meaninglessness' in which contemporary humanity finds itself. 
Nietzsche writes in one of the fragments drafted for the preface to his planned 
work The Will to Power:
I describe what is to come: the advent o f nihilism ( ... ). Modern man experimentally 
believes now in this or that value, only to have it fall away; the circle of values that have been 
surpassed and allowed to fall away is ever-increasing; the emptiness and poverty of values is
ever more noticeable; the movement is unstoppable - although great attempts have been made 
to slow it down. Eventually, man dares to criticise values in general; he recognises their origin; 
he knows enough not to believe in any values any more; this is the pathos, the new thrill (... ).
What I am counting is the history of the next two centuries ( ... ) (VIII, n, 266-65).their origin; 
he knows enough not to believe in any values any more; this is the pathos, the new thrill (... ).
What I am counting is the history of the next two centuries ( ... ) (VIII, n, 266-65).

--- PAGE BREAK ---nows enough not to believe in any values any more; this is the pathos, the new thrill (... ).
What I am counting is the history of the next two centuries ( ... ) (VIII, n, 266-65).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
And in a remake of the same piece he asks:
Why in fact is the advent of nihilism now necessary? Because it is our own previous 
values that draw their ultimate conclusion in it; because nihilism is a logic thought through to 
the very end of our great values and ideals - because we must first experience nihilism in 
order to realise what the value of these 'values' really were ( . . . ) (VIII, 11, 393-94).
According to Nietzsche, the process of the devaluation of values is the most
profound trait that characterises the unfolding of the history of European 
thought, which is thus the history of a decadence: the originating act of this 
decadence is already present in the foundation of the doctrine of the two 
worlds by Socrates and Plato, i.e. in the postulation of an ideal, transcendent 
world in itself, which as a true world is superordinate to the sensible world, 
considered instead as a relative world.
Why is this? Because soon the supersensible world, as ideal, proves to be 
unattainable, and unattainability means a di fect of being, a diminution of its 
consistency and value. Ideality, i.e. unattainability, is a 'calumniating force of 
the world and of man', a 'poisonous breath upon reality', 'the great seduction
that leads to nothingness' (VIII, II, 265). The devaluation of supreme values, i.e. 
nihilism, already begins here, i.e. with Platonism, which di stinguishes between 
two worlds and thus introduces a dichotomy into being. Nihilism, as the history 
of the postulation and progressive dissolution of the ideal world, is the other 
side of Platonism and "the nihilist is he who, of the world as it is, judges that it 
should not be and, of the world as it should be, judges that it does not exist" 
(VIII, II, 26). In a short text included in The Twilight of the Idols (Gotzendam 
merung, 1888) and titled "How the True World Ended Up Becoming Faerie" 
Nietzsche offers an illuminating compendium of the history of the nihilist
lism-platonism in six chapters. Let us look at them concisely.
l. The true world, attainable by the wise, the pious, the virtuous, - he lives in it, 
he himself is this world (VI, III, 75).
Nietzsche alludes here to the situation that occurs in the first phase of the 
history of Platonism-nihilism, i.e. the chapter that corresponds to Plato's 
thought: the existence of a ve ry, suprasensible world is postulated, which, 
however, has not yet become a mere 'ideal', 'Platonic' entity, but is attainable 
by the wise.hat corresponds to Plato's 
thought: the existence of a ve ry, suprasensible world is postulated, which, 
however, has not yet become a mere 'ideal', 'Platonic' entity, but is attainable 
by the wise.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lato's 
thought: the existence of a ve ry, suprasensible world is postulated, which, 
however, has not yet become a mere 'ideal', 'Platonic' entity, but is attainable 
by the wise.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
2. The true world, for the moment unattainable, but promised to the wise, the pious, 
the virtuous ("to the sinner who does penance") (VI, 111, 75).
In the second phase of the history of Platonism-nihilism, the rift between the 
ideal world and the sensible world, between transcendence and imma nce, opens 
up, since even for the sage, the ideal world is only a promise, therefore 
unattainable for the time being. Contextually, the sensible world is devalued: 
earthly existence is de-graded to the realm of appearance, of transience, even if the 
possibility of one day reaching the real world is envisaged. Human existence takes 
place in the aldiqua, but is stretched out towards the hereafter - which becomes the 
object of promise and faith. Platonism becomes Platonism for the people, i.e. 
Christianity.
3. The true world unattainable, indemonstrable, impromissible, but already as thought a 
consolation, an obligation, an imperative (VI, m, 75 ). 
The third chapter in the history of Platonism-nihilism is the one that
corresponds to Kant's thought. The true, supersensible world is excluded from 
the realm of experience and is thus declared indemonstrable within the limits of 
theoretical reason alone. However, it is recovered as a postulate by practical 
reason: although forced into the pale existence of a mere hypothesis, it 
continues to bind in the form of an im perative.
4. The real world - unreachable? However u n r e a c h e d . And as unreached, also 
unknown. Consequently not even consoling, sal vific, binding: to what could something 
unknown bind us? (VI, III, 75 ). 
With the fourth chapter in the history of Platonism-Nihilism, Nietzsche 
marks the phase of scepticism and metaphysical disbelief that follows Kantism 
and idealism, and which can be identified with the incipient positivism. As a 
consequence of the Kan tian destruction of metaphysical certainties, the belief 
in the ideal world and its knowability disappears. However, this does not mean 
that Platoni smo-nihilism itself is already outdated. Once the supra-sensible 
world is declared absolutely unknowable, it follows that one cannot know 
anything about it and that, strictly speaking, one can neither decide for it nor 
against it. It loses the moral-religious relevance it still had as a postulate of 
practical reason.one cannot know 
anything about it and that, strictly speaking, one can neither decide for it nor 
against it. It loses the moral-religious relevance it still had as a postulate of 
practical reason.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ything about it and that, strictly speaking, one can neither decide for it nor 
against it. It loses the moral-religious relevance it still had as a postulate of 
practical reason.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
5. n 'real world' - an idea that is no longer useful for anything, not even more 
binding - an idea that has become useless and superfluous, therefore a refuted idea: let us 
abolish it! (VI, III, 75).
In the last two chapters of his compendium, Nietzsche begins to present 
his own philosophical perspective. This is already revealed by the fact that the 
term 'real world' is now inverted. In fact, since the 'true world' has been 
abolished, this term no longer has any value and must therefore be suspended, 
hence put in inverted commas. Nietzsche is thinking here of his own work of 
demolition, which with The Gaiety of Science has achieved its first result: he is 
at the beginning, in the phase of morning thought, even if not yet in full 
noontide. But after the abolition of the supersensible world, as a superfluous 
hypothesis, two problems remain open: what happens to the place where the 
ideal stood and which, after its abolition, now remains empty? And what is the 
meaning of the sensible world after the idea world has been abolished? A 
further step is needed in which the demolition undertaken is brought to 
completion.
6. n real world we have abolished it: what world is left? Perhaps the apparent one? 
(. . . ) But no! With the true world we have also abolished the apparent one (VI, 111,76).
This last chapter, which also involves the abolition of the apparent mon 
do, indicates the task Nietzsche sets himself in the last phase of his thought. 
We are at the "incipit Zarathustra", at the philosophy of the full noontide, at the 
moment of the shortest shadow in which Platonism
nihilism is truly overcome. But for this to happen, it is necessary to 
that the 'apparent world' is also abolished. This does not mean simply getting 
rid of the sensible world as such. If this were the case, since the ideal world 
and the sensible world together constitute the totality of being, their abolition 
would result in nothingness. But Nietzsche cannot want this, if it is true that he 
aims at an overcoming of nihilism. Abolishing the
"Rather, 'apparent world' means eliminating the way in which the sensible is 
seen from the perspective of Platonism, i.e. stripping it of its appearance. It is 
therefore not a question of abolishing the sensible world, but of eliminating the 
Platonic misunderstanding and thus paving the way for a new conception of the 
sensible and a new relationship between the sensible and the non-sensible. To 
this end, it is not enough simply to overthrow the old hierarchy and place at the 
top what was previously at the bottom, appreciating thew relationship between the sensible and the non-sensible. To 
this end, it is not enough simply to overthrow the old hierarchy and place at the 
top what was previously at the bottom, appreciating the

--- PAGE BREAK ---en the sensible and the non-sensible. To 
this end, it is not enough simply to overthrow the old hierarchy and place at the 
top what was previously at the bottom, appreciating the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
sensible and despising the non-sensible. Instead, one has to get one's entire 
mind out of the horizon of Platonism-nihilism, that is, out of the ontological 
dichotomy it implies and the related categories.
In a famous fragment entitled 'Critique of Nietzsche's Nihilism' (VIII, II,
256-59),
Nietzsche asserts that nihilism necessarily takes over as a 
psychological state when the great categories with which an organising 
principle had been introduced into the world and a meaning had been given to 
becoming are eroded by the suspicion that they were merely fuelled by the 
unconscious self-delusion that human life uses to survive. These are the categories 
of 'end', 'unity' and 'truth'.
Whereas once we were under the illusion that becoming had a meaning, a 
goal - be it the 'moral order of the world', the 'increase of love and harmony)) 
or the 'approach to a universal state of fe licity)) - with the onset of nihilism 'it 
is realised that with becoming one aims at nothing, attains nothing ( . . . ) 
Therefore the delusion about a pretence of becoming is a cause of nihilism)) 
(VIII, II, 256-57). Secondly, the way o f dominating the becoming, which 
consists in leading it back to a unifying principle, i.e. one that simplifies and 
controls its complexity by organising it as a unity, also fails.
and considering the latter as its final value.
The third major category that falls away with nihilism is that of truth: since 
in becoming there is neither end nor unity,
There is nothing left as a loophole but to condemn this whole world of becoming as an 
illusion and to invent a world beyond it as the real world. But as soon as man realises that 
this world has only been fabricated on the basis of psychological bi-dreams, and that in no 
way does he have the right to do so, the last form of nihilism arises, which encapsulates 
disbelief for a metaphysical world
- which forbids itself to believe in a true world (VIII, n, 257 -58).
When it becomes clear that "it is not permissible to interpret the ge neral 
character of existence neither with the concept of 'end', nor with the concept of 
'unity', nor with the concept of 'truth'" (VIII, II, 258), one ends up inhibiting 
every organising principle and every transcendence and admitting as the only 
reality the world in its eternal flow and becoming: the problem is that the latter 
appears devoid of sense and value. Hence "one cannot bear this world which 
one does not want to deny") (VIII, II, 258); "the categories "end", "unity", 
"being", with which we had introduced a value into the world, are once again 
extracted from it - and now the world appears to be valueless") (VIII, II, 258).I, 258); "the categories "end", "unity", 
"being", with which we had introduced a value into the world, are once again 
extracted from it - and now the world appears to be valueless") (VIII, II, 258).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ries "end", "unity", 
"being", with which we had introduced a value into the world, are once again 
extracted from it - and now the world appears to be valueless") (VIII, II, 258).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
l) Nihilism, which imposes itself as a 'psychological state', and which 
initiates the process of devaluation and dissolution of the supreme transitional 
values, is nevertheless an incomplete nihilism. In it, the di struction of old 
values begins, but the new ones that take their place occupy the same place as 
the previous ones, i.e. they retain a supersensible, ideal character. In 
incomplete nihilism, the distinction between the real and apparent worlds does 
not disappear completely, and a faith still remains operative. To overthrow the 
old, one still has to believe in something, in an ideal; one still has a 'need for 
truth'. In the fe nomenology that Nietzsche presents, incomplete nihilism 
manifests itself in various areas and forms:
a) In the sphere of scientific knowledge, positivism and the naturalistic, 
causal and mechanistic explanation of the universe are manifestations of 
incomplete nihilism; associated with these in the sciences of the spirit is the 
historiographic positivism of the historical sciences, which finds its 
philosophical formulation in historicism;
b) In the field of politics, incomplete nihilism manifests itself as 
nationalism, chauvinism, democraticism, socialism and anar chism (Russian 
nihilism);
c) Finally, in the artistic sphere, the French naturalism and csteticism are 
manifestations of nihilism in their entirety.
2) Only with the maturing of what Nietzsche calls the complete nichtli smo is
the place they occupied, i.e. the true, ideal, supersensible world, destroyed along 
with the old values.
a) Such nihilism is at first a passive nihilism, i.e. a sign of "decline and 
regression of the power of the spirit", incapable of achieving the ends pursued 
so far. Its manifestation par excellence is the transformation and assimilation of 
Oriental Buddhism into Western thought, with the cultivation of the yearning 
for Nothingness, already present in the Romantics but nourished above all by 
Schoen-Phenhauerian philosophy.
b) Complete nihilism later manifests itself as active ni chilism, i.e. as a 
sign of the 'increased power of the spi rite' which is expressed in promoting and 
accelerating the process of destruction (VII, n, 12- 13; n. 9 [35]).
Nietzsche calls extreme the form of active nihilism that strips away not 
only traditional values, hence the moral worldview and the truth value itself, 
but also the supersensible place these values occupied:calls extreme the form of active nihilism that strips away not 
only traditional values, hence the moral worldview and the truth value itself, 
but also the supersensible place these values occupied:

--- PAGE BREAK ---orm of active nihilism that strips away not 
only traditional values, hence the moral worldview and the truth value itself, 
but also the supersensible place these values occupied:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
The extreme form of nihilism would be the claim that every belief, every holding for 
true is necessarily false: because there is no REAL WORLD. Hence: a perspectival illusion, 
the origin of which is in us (since we co nsistently need a restricted, abbreviated, 
simplified world) (VIII, II, 15).
And again:
That there is no truth; that there is no absolute constitution of things, a 'thing in 
itself'; - that itself is nihilism, indeed extreme nihilism (VIII, n, 13-14).
It is only with the abolition of the ideal place of traditional values that 
space is made for the possibility of a new position of values. Referring to the 
fact that in this way extreme nihilism creates space and comes into the open, 
Nietzsche also speaks of ecstatic nihilism (VII, III, 222 ). The negative character 
inherent in nihilism as such here takes on a positive declination insofar as this 
nihilism makes possible the new position of values based on the recognition of 
the will to power as the fundamental character of all that is. By once again 
opening 
up 
the 
possibility 
of 
affirmation, 
nihilism 
overcomes 
its 
incompleteness and becomes complete; it becomes classical nihilism.
sic. It is this nihilism that Nietzsche claims as his own
when he says he is 'the first perfect nihilist in Europe, who has, however, already 
experienced nihilism itself to the full - who has it behind him, under him, outside 
him' (VIII, n, 3 93 ). 
Now, to truly bring the nihilistic hypothesis to fruition - as Nietzsche 
illustrates, among other things, in the great fragment on "The European 
nihilism" (Lenzer Heide, 10 June 1887), dismembered in the sister edition and 
restored by Colli-Montinari in its integral form (VIII, I, 199-206; no. 5 [7 1]) - it
is necessary for us to "think this thought in its most terrible form: existence, as 
it is, without meaning or purpose, but inevitably returning, without an end in the 
nullity of the nihilistic. 5 [7 1]) -it is necessary that we 'think this thought in its 
most terrible form: existence, as it is, without meaning or purpose, but 
inevitably returning, without an end in the null: "the eternal return". This is the 
extreme form of nihilism: the eternal nul la (the 'meaninglessness')' (VIII, I,
201). The fulfilment of nihilism requires the thought of the eternal return. This 
means that we must not only think that life does not aim at anything and that, 
like the turning of the planets, it pursues nothing in its race but itself: just as the 
planets travel millions of kilometres to simply continue in their orbit, so life 
does everything that the mechanics and energy of the cosmos allow it to do -
and nothing else. But we mustust as the 
planets travel millions of kilometres to simply continue in their orbit, so life 
does everything that the mechanics and energy of the cosmos allow it to do -
and nothing else. But we must

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to think also that all this returns eternally. Nietzsche's conclusion is consistent:
The overall character of the world is chaos for all eternity (V, 11, 136-37). 
But who is able to bear this terrible thought that seems to make existence 
unbearable? It is the 'superman'. This figure
- as Heidegger explained (Heidegger, 1961: 204, 24 1) - is not to be understood 
in the sense of a prodigious being who has enhanced the faculties of the normal 
man to excess, but as the one who 'surpasses' the traditional man in that he 
dispenses with the attitudes, beliefs and values of the latter and has the strength 
to create new ones. The transvaluation of all values is the movement that 
opposes nihilism and surpasses it: it breeds the 'super-man' as the one who 
expresses the highest concentration of the will to power and who accepts the 
eternal return of things.
The question with which the aforementioned fragment on European 
nihilism concludes, namely "How would such a man think about the eternal 
return?" (VIII, 11, 206), indicates precisely that after the abolition of the an 
tithesis between the real and apparent worlds, i.e. after the Platonic-nihilistic 
worldview has been overcome, the task remains of rethinking the meaning of 
becoming without falling back into the schemes and values produced by the 
Platonic-nihilistic dichotomy or, worse still, into its surrogates. And it is 
precisely the doctrine of the eternal return that offers Nietzsche such an 
opportunity.
As we can see, the analysis of nihilism as the logic of decadence, the doctrine of 
the will to power and the hypothesis of the eternal return are connected in a 
coherent theoretical sequence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, the analysis of nihilism as the logic of decadence, the doctrine of 
the will to power and the hypothesis of the eternal return are connected in a 
coherent theoretical sequence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

53
Chapter Eight
NIHILISM, RELATIVISM AND DISENCHANTMENT IN 
THE 'CULTURE OF CRISIS'
Nietzsche evoked the ancient doctrine of the eternal return in terms of a 
suggestive teaching that promised to give existence a new centre of gravity and 
make the perennial becoming of all things bearable. The hypothesis with which 
he introduces the eternal return at the end of the first edition of Gaia scienza 
(1882), in the passage entitled 'The Greatest Weight', has become classic:
What would happen if, one day or night, a demon crept stealthily into the loneliest of 
your solitudes and said to you: "This life, as you now live it and have lived it, you will 
have to live it again and again innumerable vol you, and there will never be anything new 
in it, but every pain and every pleasure and every thought and sigh, and every unspeakably 
small and great thing in your life will have to return to you, and all in the same sequence 
and succession - and so will this spider and this moonlight in the branches and so will this 
moment and myself. The eternal dust-clock of existence is being wound again and again -
and you with it, you speck of dust from the dust! Or, how much would you have to love 
yourself and life, so that you would desire nothing more than this last eternal sanction, this 
seal? (V, Il, 236-37). 
From the moment of its discovery onwards - which took place, as recalled 
in Ecce homo, in August 1881 along Lake Silvaplana in the pres si of Surlei, 'six 
thousand feet beyond man and time' (VI, I, 344)

--- PAGE BREAK ---iscovery onwards - which took place, as recalled 
in Ecce homo, in August 1881 along Lake Silvaplana in the pres si of Surlei, 'six 
thousand feet beyond man and time' (VI, I, 344)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
- The thought of the eternal return will never again abandon Nietzsche, who 
will elaborate this conception of his, 'the supreme formula of affirmation that 
can ever be attained', in numerous fragments and will put it forward in at least 
two other important public communications. The first is in Zarathustra. This
work, which can be regarded as Nietzsche's masterpiece, is in its entirety the 
grand elaboration and communication of the doctrine of the eternal return. The 
second is found in Beyond Good and Evil encapsulated in the formula 
"circulus vi tiosus deus?" (VI, n, 61 -62) which, despite the many exegesis it has 
been given, remains an enigma to this day.
It is a fact, however, that the inherently esoteric character of the eternal
no return, the apparent contradiction in which it stands with the doctrine of the 
will to power, the difficulty of interpreting it in the meaning and consequences 
with which it burdens human existence and the ontological interpretation of 
becoming were obstacles to its fortune. It would have taken Heidegger and 
Lowith, in the philosophical field, as well as Borges and Kundera, in the 
literary one, to fully penetrate the meaning of the eternal return and show its 
essential belonging to Nietzsche's thought.
At the turn of the century and in the first decades of the 20th century, it 
was the diagnosis of decadence and the crisis of values, i.e. the theorisation of 
nihilism and the far-sighted prediction of the consequences it would trigger, 
that made Nietzsche such a widely read author that he occupied the place in the 
German soul that had previously belonged to Schopenhauer, and in his own 
intellectual education. His work has thus stretched its shadow over much of the 
thought and culture of the late 19th and early 20th century, and has not ceased 
to torment the philosophical understanding of our time. When the dialectical 
synthesis had become imprati cable, undermined by the development of the 
scientific image of the world, reference was made to Nietzsche's thought in 
order to compensate for the philosophical vacuum that had opened up in the 
'post-Hegel era' and to avoid both of the pitfalls into which it was all too easy 
to fall: nostalgia for the lost dialectical totality or flat adherence to the 
positivism of facts. However, by following the Nietzschean paradigm in an 
increasingly tenacious and angry manner, not only did the con sumption of the 
great ideals of God, the Good and the True occur, but any possibility of filling 
the resulting void of meaning was undermined. In addition, the criticism 
inspired by Nietzsche, corrosive and dissolving, was not merely descriptive but 
helped to produce, or accelerate, the state o f crisis it described. The outcome 
is well known: it was the 'desert that grows', the lengthening shadow of 
nihilism.g, was not merely descriptive but 
helped to produce, or accelerate, the state o f crisis it described. The outcome 
is well known: it was the 'desert that grows', the lengthening shadow of 
nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---scriptive but 
helped to produce, or accelerate, the state o f crisis it described. The outcome 
is well known: it was the 'desert that grows', the lengthening shadow of 
nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
That is why in our century Nietzsche has aroused enthusiasm and attracted 
anathema, inspired attitudes, cultural fashions and styles of thought, but at the 
same time provoked equally rational reactions and rejections. He was a good 
prophet of himself when, in the fatal monologue of Ecce homo, he predicted 
that one day his name, that of the first immoralist and destroyer par excellence, 
would be linked to a profound collision of consciences, to an unparalleled 
cataclysm of spirit.
An eloquent testimony to the spread of his 'myth', but at the same time to 
its dual effect of attraction and repulsion, is the sociologist Ferdinand Tonnies'
The Cult of Nietzsche. Una criti ca (Der Nietzsche-Kultus. Eine Kritik, 1897).
After having been an enthusiastic Nietzschean himself - he had especially 
appreciated the Nasci
of the tragedy in which he saw the idea of a 'Dionysian community' depicted, 
which is the basis of the famous distinction between 'community'
(Gemeinscha/t) and 'society' (Gesellscha/t) that he introduced - Tonnies
removed his youthful passion and loudly proclaimed the visceral reasons why 
it was urgent to oppose Nietzschean nihilism: they were essentially 
individualistic immoralism and the elitist and anti-democratic conception that 
the late Nietzsche had arrived at.
But this and other stances did not stem the Nietzsche-inspired ni chilistic 
tide that was rising. Scores of artists and men of letters continued, tirelessly, to 
look to him as a myth to emulate: Gide, Strindberg, von Hofmannsthal, 
George, Musil, Broch, Klages, Thomas and Heinrich Mann, Benn, Jiinger are 
the names that stand out among many others. In the strictly philosophical field, 
too, thinkers from the most diverse backgrounds incorporated his doctrines: 
Vaihinger, von Hartmann, Simmel, Spengler, Jaspers, Heidegger and al tri 
again. Even Carnap, in his famous 1931 essay in which he tried to demolish all 
past, present and future metaphysics by means of the logical analysis of 
language, recognised Nietzsche's 'metaphysics' as having a legitimate, if only 
'aesthetic', status (Carnap, 1969: 53 1. 
The full nihilistic experience occurred above all when the influences of 
Nietzschean 
thought 
converged 
with 
the 
relativistic 
outcomes 
of 
historiography. This occurred in particular within the so-called 'philosophy of 
life' and in the series of criticisms of civilisation that characterised European 
reflection in the first decades of the 20th century. Starting from the 
Nietzschean con- vinction that there was a radical and unsurmountable 
antagonism between the Dionysian and the Apollonian, i.e. between life and 
the spirit, between nature and culture, between the soul as a living principle and 
the spirit as a being, the philosophy of life.nism between the Dionysian and the Apollonian, i.e. between life and 
the spirit, between nature and culture, between the soul as a living principle and 
the spirit as a being, the philosophy of life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nysian and the Apollonian, i.e. between life and 
the spirit, between nature and culture, between the soul as a living principle and 
the spirit as a being, the philosophy of life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
and forms as schemes within which life is captured, expression was given -
philosophical, literary and artistic - to a widespread distrust of reason's claims 
to synthesis and a corresponding call for the other dimension of 'life'. Life - as
was being affirmed - had to be grasped at its original level, in its own 
characteristics, and not according to traditional theoretical methods, which, by 
adjectivizing it, relegated it and in principle prevented a genuine grasp of it. A 
significant relativistic and nihilistic outcome of the philosophy of life occurred 
with the thought of the late Georg Simmel. After his initial adherence to 
evolutionary positivism, Simmel later moved towards neo-criticism and the 
philosophy of values, and through his study of Bergson and Nietzsche, he 
arrived at a pessimistic philosophy of life with mystical results, which is 
expressed above all in his work Intuition of Life. Four Metaphysical Chapters 
(Lebensan schauung. Vier metaphysische Kapitel, 1918). It is significant that 
in 1897, Simmel reviewed the aforementioned booklet by Tèinnies in critical 
terms, defending Nietzsche against the accusation of immoralism and opposing 
it with a valorisation of Nietzsche's concept of 'nobility' or 'distinction'
('Vornehmheit'). This review indicates how Sim mel was then engaged in an 
assimilation of Nietzschean thought. After 1900, the latter will increasingly 
impregnate his tragic vi sion of culture, his Kulturpessimismus. The basic 
conviction that Simmel will mature is that the plurality of worlds and spheres 
that the study of the history of the human spirit reveals - myth, art, religion, 
science, technology - do not compose themselves in a synthesis and 
conciliation. Each of these spheres seems to assert itself in its autonomy and 
validity; in each of them, an or ganic tendency is manifested that is an 
expression of life, which asserts itself and empowers itself by selecting the 
truths that are useful to it and by letting that which harms it succumb as false. 
Life stands in perpetual contrast to the cultural forms that it itself produces, 
insofar as the latter hold
gift to crystallise.
Faced with the life of the soul, which vibrates ceaselessly, developing without limit, 
and which is in some sense creative, is its solid, ideally immovable product, which has the 
disquieting retroactive effect of fixing, or rather rigidifying, that vitality: often, it is as if 
the creative dynamism of the soul moved into its product (Simmel, 1985: 193).
But the tendency for objective forms, once produced, to preserve 
themselves against the subjective life that produces them, hence the predo-sm of the soul moved into its product (Simmel, 1985: 193).
But the tendency for objective forms, once produced, to preserve 
themselves against the subjective life that produces them, hence the predo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---into its product (Simmel, 1985: 193).
But the tendency for objective forms, once produced, to preserve 
themselves against the subjective life that produces them, hence the predo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mination of the object over the subject, which becomes the winning tendency in 
modernity, lead in the sphere of culture to the 'unlimited extension of the objective 
spirit' (Simmel, 1985: 211). There is then a hypertrophy of objects, products and 
cultural offerings that subjective life is no longer able to take in or assimilate. In 
this dyscrasia, that is, in the inadequacy of the productions of the objective spirit 
compared to the assimilative capacity of the subjective spirit, lies the 'tragedy of 
culture'. As Siegfried Kracauer wrote in the essay Die Wartenden
(Waiting), published in the 'Frankfurter Zeitung' of 22 March 1922 ,
this philosophical perspective that saw life as 'the ultimate Absolute' was 'a 
gesture of despair of relativism'.
The motif of Kulturpessimismus, which Simmel caressed with raf
finesse and moderation, was pushed to the extreme and exhibited in its crudest 
form by Oswald Spengler. In him, the assimilation of Nietzschean pensie ro, 
historicist relativism and the demands of the philosophy of life combined into a 
true philosophy of history and crisis with a sceptical-nihilistic bent. Already in his 
succinct doctoral thesis (1 904), in which he was passionate about Heraclitus' 
philosophy of becoming and embraced the idea of the eternal flow of things, 
Spengler showed, in the footsteps of Nietzsche, a pronounced inclination towards 
the tragic worldview. Everything becomes, everything passes away, everything is 
re lative: the maxim that Spengler declared to follow was to regard 'the world as 
history'. By taking this attitude, which for him meant a Copernican revolution, 
Spengler intended to be the Galilei o f history, the one who deciphered the 
unstable and changing
language of what is born, grows and perishes. All of this was declined in a grim 
pessimism, against which Spengler claimed the robust and virile attitude of the 
Roman, while ostentatiously scorning that of the Graeculus histrio, artist and 
philosopher. Against university philosophizing, which he felt was not up to the 
tasks of the contemporary era, i.e. the era of 'Caesarism', he declared that he 
wrote
"for men of action and not for critical spirits". His pessimism was not meant to be 
'a system in which to speculate' but 'an image of the world in which to live'. 
'Philosophy for its own sake,' he wrote in the essay Pessimismus? of 1921, 'I 
have always despised it profoundly' (Spengler, 1937: 64 ).
In his capital work The Decline of the West (Der Untergang
des Abendlandes), which was published in two parts at the end of the war (1918-1
922) and was an immediate success with the public, he envisaged a 'morphology of 
universal history' in which the succession of different civilisations, each considered as 
an organism with its own
57922) and was an immediate success with the public, he envisaged a 'morphology of 
universal history' in which the succession of different civilisations, each considered as 
an organism with its own
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---diate success with the public, he envisaged a 'morphology of 
universal history' in which the succession of different civilisations, each considered as 
an organism with its own
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
'form' and closed within its own horizon, it is determined not by rational 
designs and aims but by the rhythm of life that characterises them and which is 
analogous to that of the individual: birth, growth, decline and death. 
Civilisations do not develop and succeed each other by building on each other, 
but each by virtue of its initial impulse and following its own energetic rhythm, 
having in itself the beginning and the completion of its life cycle. If this is so, 
universal history cannot have a linear development, but rather will have a 
cyclical character. Behind this vi sion lies the conviction, of Nietzschean origin, 
that life, as the common character of all that becomes, is countered by the spirit, 
that is, the stabilising principle of form and rationality. Now, according to 
Spenglerian prognosis, the life force of western civilisation, suffocated by the 
forms of culture, civilisation and technology, would have entered its twilight 
phase. Not by chance, but by an ineluctable necessity that is written in the 
rhythms of sto ria. And since what is the fruit of necessity does not grant the 
freedom to choose or refuse, those caught in the wheel of universal history have 
no choice but to accept this fate, because, as Spengler is pleased to recall with 
Seneca: ducunt fata volentem, nolentem trahunt. Instead of a science of 
history, Spengler had thus given birth to a metaphysics of becoming in dark and 
apocalyptic tones, which fed the atmosphere of crisis into which German 
culture had effectively plunged after the First World War.
Spengler's nihilistic pessimism acted as a point of reference, both 
positively and negatively, for a whole series of civilisation critiques and 'crisis 
philosophies' that characterised the cultural atmosphere in Germany between 
the wars. In the copious literature that emerged, alongside Kulturpessimismus,
the need to overcome it and to cure the nihilistic pathologies of modernity.
Even before the Sunset of the West, a widespread of
sage, which soon translated into an open reaction against the bourgeois civilisation 
of the Wilhelmine era, t h e positivistic worldview and optimistic belief in 
progress that characterised the
"Belle Époque'. Just think of the murky, opaque irrationalism, inspired
ry to the romantic philosophy of Carus, the mythological investigations of Ba 
chofen and Nietzsche's tragic conception of life, which animated the Dionysian 
visions of the so-called 'cosmic' circle of Alfred Schu ler and the young Ludwig 
Klages in Munich at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century. Or to 
the cultural line successfully promoted by Eugen Diederichs, the founder in 1896 
of a publishing house that supported a neo-mystical fashion and collaborated with 
the German artist Eugen Diederichs.the cultural line successfully promoted by Eugen Diederichs, the founder in 1896 
of a publishing house that supported a neo-mystical fashion and collaborated with 
the German artist Eugen Diederichs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ccessfully promoted by Eugen Diederichs, the founder in 1896 
of a publishing house that supported a neo-mystical fashion and collaborated with 
the German artist Eugen Diederichs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
It was only after the First World War, with the advent of the Weimar Republic, 
that they would separate into the De Stra and Left fronts, but who were then united 
in their search for an alternative to 19th century bourgeois society, such as Fer 
dinand Avenarius, Walter Benjamin, Eduard Bernstein, Lujo Brenta no, Martin 
Buber, Hans Freyer, Hermann Hesse, Karl Korsch, Ernst Krieck, Gyorgy Lukacs. 
For this reason, analyses of decadence that would otherwise have to be separated 
such as those of Lukacs in I.:anima e le/orme (Die Seele und die Formen,
1911), by Walter Rathenau in For the Critique of Present Time (Zur Kri
tik der Zeit, 1912) and Di cose venture ( Von kommenden Dingen, 1917), by 
Rudolf Pannwitz in La crisi della civiltà europea (Die Krise der eu 
ropdischen Kultur, 1917).
After Spengler, some following him, some against him, some independently of 
him, the ranks of the 'critics of civilisation' grew to an unbelievable extent: Theodor 
Lessing, the friend and follower of Kla ges with his murky personality, with History
as the Making Sense of the Meaningless ( Geschichte als Sinngebung des Sinnlosen, 
1919) and The Cursed Civilisation (Die verfluchte Kultur, 1 92 1 ); the neo-
Germanic Leopold Ziegler with his successful two-volume work Metamorphosis of 
the Gods (Ge
staltwandel der Gotter, 1920); Protestant theologian Albert Schweitzer
with Decadence and Reconstruction of Civilisation ( Ver/all und Wiederau/bau 
der Kultur, 1 923 ), and on the Catholic side Romano Guardini with Lette re dal 
Lago di Como. Pensieri sulla tecnica (Brie/e vom Comer See. Ge danken uber 
Technik, 1 927). And again Hermann Keyserling, the founder of the "School of 
Wisdom", with The Spectre of Europe (Das Spek trum Europas, 1927); Freud 
with The Malaise of Civilisation (Das Unbehagen in der Kultur, 1929); and 
finally the psychologist, mythologist and graphologist Ludwig Klages with his 
impressive work The Spirit as an Antagonist of the Soul (Der Geist als 
Widersacher der Seele, 1929-32), whose title became a slogan on the lips of the 
younger generations.
In the more rigorously philosophical field, exits from the nihilistic crisis were 
envisaged by Bloch in The Inheritance of Our Time (Erbscha/t dieser Zeit, 
1918), by Lukacs in History and Class Consciousness (Geschichte und 
Klassenbewufttsein, 1 923 ), by Scheler in I.:man in the age of levelling (Der 
Mensch im Zeitalter des Ausgleichs, 1 929), by Jaspers in The Spiritual Situation 
of Our Time (Die geistige Situation der Zeit, 1 93 1 ), by Husserl in The Crisis of 
the European Sciences (Die Krisis der eu ropiiischen Wissenscha/ten, 
1936), by Horkheimer and Adorno in Dialet tics of the Enlightenment 
(Dialektik der Au/klirung, 1947).
The phenomenon of the 'critique of civilisation' was, however, not limited to 
the 'civilisation criticism'.orkheimer and Adorno in Dialet tics of the Enlightenment 
(Dialektik der Au/klirung, 1947).
The phenomenon of the 'critique of civilisation' was, however, not limited to 
the 'civilisation criticism'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---in Dialet tics of the Enlightenment 
(Dialektik der Au/klirung, 1947).
The phenomenon of the 'critique of civilisation' was, however, not limited to 
the 'civilisation criticism'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
the German-speaking cultural sphere, but manifested itself throughout Europe: in 
the France of Valéry (La Crise de l'esprit, 1919) and Julien Benda (La 
Trahison des clercs, 1927), but also in that of the Russian emigrants
Sestov (La Philosophie de la tragédie, 1926) and Berdiaev ( Un nouveau
Moyen Age, 1 927) and in the initiatory one of Guénon (La Crise du monde 
moderne, 1 927 ); in the Spain of }osé Ortega y Gasset (La rebeli6n de las 
masas, 1930) and in the Holland of Johan Huizinga with In the Shadows of 
Tomorrow (ln de schaduwen van morgen, 1 93 5) and The Waste of the World 
(Geschonden wereld, 1 945 ).
In spite of the frenetic overlapping of perspectives and motives that 
characterised it, all this literature contributed to heightening the feeling that a 
historical cycle was coming to an end and that with it came the demise of the 
Vetero-European orders and values o f traditional religion, metaphysics and 
morality. The icy winds of the new critical consciousness that was taking shape, 
and which came to have its clearest expression in Max Weber, swept away the 
haze that was gathering over that cultural landscape.
Already at the end of his first major reconstruction of the processes of 
rationalisation that characterise the development of modernity and which have 
science, technology and bureaucracy as their leading factors, in the famous 
conclusion of the Protestant Ethics and the Spirit of Capitalism (Die
protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus, 1904-1905) Max Weber 
welcomed the new spirit of modernity, but warned at the same time that the 'thin 
mantle of rationalisation',
Initially at the service of the world of life, it had become a 'steel calot ta' (stahlhartes 
Gehiiuse), under which the children of modernity, at the height of Western 
civilisation, were in danger of becoming 'spiritless specialists and heartless hedonists'. 
And in a harsh judgement on the 'last man' he added: 'This Nothing believes he has 
risen to a stage of humanity never reached before' (Weber, 1965: 3 06).
At the end of his scientific work, a year before his death, in two famous lectures 
he gave in Munich in January 1919 during the profound crisis following the First 
World War - Science as a Profession (Wissenschaft als Beruj) and Politics as a 
Profession (Politik als Beruj) - Max Weber offered an even clearer and more 
illuminating analysis of the historical perspective that was emerging. With a few 
essential strokes he showed how scientific rationalisation had produced an irreversible 
'disenchantment' (Entzauberung), secularising the old worldviews of mythological-
religious origin and replacing them with an 'objective' image. And if, through the 
descriptive neu- trality of his diagnosis, it transpired, not too covertlyising the old worldviews of mythological-
religious origin and replacing them with an 'objective' image. And if, through the 
descriptive neu- trality of his diagnosis, it transpired, not too covertly

--- PAGE BREAK ---iews of mythological-
religious origin and replacing them with an 'objective' image. And if, through the 
descriptive neu- trality of his diagnosis, it transpired, not too covertly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
tion, a stance in favour of the new situation, hence of the progress of science and 
reason, Weber also appeared to be aware of the harsh fate reserved for modernity. 
Having lost the inno cence of its origins, humanity, which has eaten from the tree 
of knowledge, is no longer disposed to the sacri/icium intellectus and becomes 
refractory to all faith. It pays for its achievements with the inability to rationally 
ground ultimate values and life choices.
It is the fate of our age,' Weber wrote, 'with its characteristic rationalisation and 
intellectualisation, and above all with its disenchantment with the world, that it is precisely 
the ultimate and most sublime values that have withdrawn from the public sphere to take 
refuge in the extra-mundane realm of mystical life or the fraternity of immediate 
relationships between individuals (Weber, 1922: 612; cf. 1948: 41).
The consequence of disenchantment is the polytheism of values, the com 
presence of instances and ultimate life choices in perpetual conflict with each 
other, whose antagonism is rationally undecidable. The isosthenia of values leads 
to the devaluation and ultimately to the indifference of values. Po liteism is no 
longer polytheism of values but of decisions. Not even ar t appears capable of 
creating new values: compared to the reality of rationalisation, it can be 'protest' 
that easily becomes 'flight' or 'integration' that easily turns into 'apologia'. In this 
cultural-historical situation 'devoid of gods and prophets', in which Weber saw 
coming not 'the blossoming of summer', but a 'polar night of glacial obscurity and 
rigidity' (Weber, 1 92 1: 559; cf. 1948: 120), there remains, as the only possible 
heroism of reason, nothing left but to take leave of nostalgia for the lost whole and 
global expectations of salvation. Weber asserted this both against his friend Ernst 
Troeltsch, who in his lecture German Culture (Deutsche Bildung, 1918)
placed his hopes in the three great traditional powers that had formed Europe, 
namely humanism, Christianity and the Germanic spirit, and above all against the 
sects and prophets that were springing up
everywhere - as Thomas Mann had already grasped in his novella Visit to the 
pro/ethnic (Beim Propethen, 1904) and as he himself saw in the example of the 
esoteric circle formed around Stefan George, a circle that immediately reacted to 
Weberian theses with Erich von Kahler's The Profession of Science (Der 
Beru/der Wissenschaft, 1920).
Instead, Weber appealed to the sense of responsibility of the intellectual and
the scientist and called for a virile living, without prophets or redeemers, of the fate 
of the relativism and nihilism of our age by following, in dedication to the task of 
the day, the demon that holdscientist and called for a virile living, without prophets or redeemers, of the fate 
of the relativism and nihilism of our age by following, in dedication to the task of 
the day, the demon that holds

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the threads of one's existence. For those who were not capable of this, all that 
remained was the sacrifice of the intellect, and with it the return to the ever 
mercifully open arms of the brotherhood and the churches: let the disciple also 
return to the prophet and the believer to the redeemer; but for those who had 
made reason the guiding thread of their existence, the only virtue left was the 
radical exercise of reason itself.
Reason remains lucid only if i t does not submit to any heteronomous 
principle, but gives itself its own law and its own form: the power of the rational 
lies in dissolving all substantiality and in standing as the foundation of itself. The 
exercise of reason is the virtue of a worldly asceticism that recognises and accepts
the creaturality of this world, but which renounces any value of transcendence and 
considers finitude as the only temporal dimension in which the success or failure 
of existence is measured.
In this sense can be read the abstinence that Weber rac commanded at the 
end of his first Munich lecture, echoing the words of the song of the Idumean 
schola in the oracle of Isaiah:
A voice calls out from Se'ir in Edom: "Sentry, how much longer will the night last?". 
The sentinel replies: "Morning will come, but still it is night. If you want to ask, come 
back another time' (Weber, 1922: 613; cf. 1948: 42).

--- PAGE BREAK ---much longer will the night last?". 
The sentinel replies: "Morning will come, but still it is night. If you want to ask, come 
back another time' (Weber, 1922: 613; cf. 1948: 42).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
Chapter Nine
AESTHETIC-LITERARY NIHILISM
In the widespread mistrust of the optimistic ideals of progress and 
humanity's great march towards the better, the cumbersome presence of a force 
was increasingly felt, which - however it was called and exorcised - did not
appear governable by reason, but rather seemed to enslave it to its own blind 
ends. The concepts that were coined to evoke it deeply marked the cul tural
atmosphere of the time: Wille zur Macht (Nietzsche), élan vita! (Bergson), Er
lebnis (Dilthey) or Leben (Simmel, Klages), Paideuma (Frobenius), Es
or Unconscious (Freud), the Archetypal (Jung), the Demonic (Th. Mann). 
Newly coined, they soon became slogans around which the attention of the 
younger generations was catalysed. Rightly or wrongly, they ended up being 
flaunted against the 19th century cult of science and reason.
It is not surprising that in such an atmosphere, a search for alternative 
resources to rationality was set in motion. The main one and the most attempted 
was ar t. Not that this represented anything new. There was a whole and noble 
tradition that had considered the Beautiful as the 'splendour of the True'; even in 
times not so long ago, Romanticism had seen art as a privileged access route to the 
Absolute; Schopenhauer had theorised it as catharsis from the Will; Nietzsche as 
the only metaphysical activity that life still allows us; The artistic avant-gardes of 
the early 20th century had conspicuously emphasised the guiding function of art, 
proposing it as a revelatory experience to be relied upon whenever rationality no 
longer knew how to give being and existence a meaning that redeemed them. The 
literature of the crisis is teeming with speculative ferments that make use of the 
emancipatory potential of art tono 
longer knew how to give being and existence a meaning that redeemed them. The 
literature of the crisis is teeming with speculative ferments that make use of the 
emancipatory potential of art to

--- PAGE BREAK ---to give being and existence a meaning that redeemed them. The 
literature of the crisis is teeming with speculative ferments that make use of the 
emancipatory potential of art to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
attempt to traverse nihilism and overcome it. Musi!, Broch, but above all Benn 
and Junger exploited the aesthetic-lethal resources of the form to this end,
grappling closely with Nietzsche's diagnosis of decadence and nihilism.
This diagnosis, at least in the German context, imposed itself forcefully and 
profoundly shaped the experience of entire generations. Even personalities 
educated in the values of classical humanism, such as the Mann brothers, were 
fatally attracted to it. Not only Heinrich, who from the emi gnition edited a 
successful anthology of Nietzsche's 'immortal thoughts')) for the famous 'Living 
Thoughts Library') (which also housed his brother's Schopenhauer). Even 
Thomas, as reluctant as he was to any form of aesthetic-lethal extremism, was 
deeply influenced by reading Nietzsche and Schopenhauer. Already in his early 
twenties, he had studied and annotated Au rora and Gaia scienza extensively.
We know that he then carefully read the second Unactual Consideration, Ecce 
homo and the epistolary - and that he reread them during the preparation of the 
novel Doktor Faustus (1947), whose protagonist, the musician Adrian 
Leverkiihn, has the biography of
Nietzsche. Nietzschean thoughts also recur in the conversations of the protagonists of 
The Enchanted Mountain (Der Zauberberg, 1 924). And this presence of 
Nietzsche has a correspondence in Thomas Mann's non-fiction -
from the 
Considerations of an Impolitic (Betrachtungen eines Unpolitischen, 1918),
which develop the Nietzschean motif of the opposition between Kultur and
Zivilisation, up to the two studies expressly dedicated to Nietzsche in 1 924 and 1
948.
Nietzsche was for Thomas Mann a thinker who had experienced philosophy
not as 'cold abstraction)) but as 'experience, suffering, sacrifice for humanity)). As 
such, Nietzsche had felt and forewarned the new. His tragic, Hamletic figure 
appeared to him 'circled by the flaming flashes of a renewing world')) (Th. Mann, 
1980: 1 04). Nietzsche's diagnosis of nihilism was the filter he used to focus his 
own representation of the crisis. But, anxious as he was to resurrect the much-
trodden values of the humanistic tradition, it was inevitable that Nietzsche's 
aesthetic nihilism with its romantic exaltation of evil and its destruction of morality 
would appear to him as a dangerous phantasmagoria. With respect to the demonic 
forces Nietzsche evoked, with respect to the struggle he unleashed of instinct 
against reason, Thomas Mann declared:
He who takes Nietzsche seriously, who takes him literally and believes him, is per- 
sured (Th. Mann, 1968: III, 46; cf. 1980: 100).gle he unleashed of instinct 
against reason, Thomas Mann declared:
He who takes Nietzsche seriously, who takes him literally and believes him, is per- 
sured (Th. Mann, 1968: III, 46; cf. 1980: 100).

--- PAGE BREAK ---instinct 
against reason, Thomas Mann declared:
He who takes Nietzsche seriously, who takes him literally and believes him, is per- 
sured (Th. Mann, 1968: III, 46; cf. 1980: 100).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
But while keeping his distance from him and above all from the 'ten 
thousand professors of the irrational who, in his shadow, have sprung up like 
mushrooms all over Germany' (Th. Mano, 1980: 1 02 ), he recognised that 
Nietzsche had been right when he had pointed to the discord between the 
Dionysian and the Apollonian, between instinct and reason, between life and 
spirit, as the source of civilisation's maladies. Going beyond Nietzsche, i.e. 
beyond the 'tragic fate' that he had represented, it was a matter of reconstructing 
reason on new foundations and conquering a new and deeper concept of 
humanitas, capable of satisfying t h e demands of life that Nietzsche had 
initiated.
Less conspicuous and quieter, but no less important, is the reception of 
Nietzschean nihilism in Robert Musil. Like many other writers of his generation, 
Musil read Nietzsche at a young age of eighteen. In I.:German Man as 
Symptom (Der deutsche Mensch als Symptom, 1 923 ), he himself declares 
that Nietzsche was, along with Marx, Bergson, Bismarck, among the figures who 
had most
influenced the formation of the German soul from 1890 to his own day (Musil, 1978: 
1355). And this statement should be understood in the strong sense that results from 
another statement of his a few years earlier (1918):
Kant can be true or false. Epicurus or Nietzsche are neither true nor false, but are 
either alive or dead (Musil, 1986: 67 ).
However, unlike in the case of many other writers of his generation, the 
Musilian exploitation of Nietzsche is not ostentatious, does not make strong 
theses and proclamations, but proceeds latently and is always accompanied by a 
vigilant attention to the dangers of epigonal Nietzscheanism. Against it he 
willingly hurls the strides of his subtle irony, as in the case of Spengler, 
criticised in his
"notes for readers who have escaped the sunset of the West" entitled Spi
rite and experience ( Geist und Er/ahrung, 1921), or in that of the universal 
stories of decadence targeted in Europe abandoned to itself (Das hilflose 
Europa, 1922). This did not prevent Musil from making abundant references to 
Nietzsche in his masterpiece - the example of Clarissa with her declared enthusiasm 
for the works of the philosopher-writer is sufficient for all - but also from elaborating, 
in the novel's own manner, Nietzschean motifs such as t h e analysis o f decadence 
and its manifestations, the critique of morality and traditional values, perspectivism, 
aestheticism, genius and the pathologies of creativity
artistic, the overcoming of nihilism through the artist's experiential existence.he critique of morality and traditional values, perspectivism, 
aestheticism, genius and the pathologies of creativity
artistic, the overcoming of nihilism through the artist's experiential existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ity and traditional values, perspectivism, 
aestheticism, genius and the pathologies of creativity
artistic, the overcoming of nihilism through the artist's experiential existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
Even sharper, in terms of Nietzsche's fortune, is the case of Hermann 
Broch. His literary production, famously fuelled by an articulate philosophical 
reflection on the 'disintegration of values' (Zer/all der Werte), is unthinkable 
without Nietzsche's theorisation of Nietzscheanism. While clearly distancing 
himself from it, Broch acknowledges that Nietzsche is right in taking the decay 
of values a s a key to understanding the contemporary crisis. He reproaches 
him, however, for simply having turned the
old values and not having been able to create new ones. Nietzsche would have 
remained within an 'isomorphic' horizon with respect to the traditional one, i.e. he 
would not have really stepped outside the perspective of the values he intended to 
criticise and would simply have re-proposed them in an inverted form. Influenced by 
neo-Kantism, in his essay Ethik (1914), based on Houston Stewart Chamberlain's 
book on Kant, Broch asserts that the Kant of practical reason, with his 'heroic 
scepticism', demolishing the edifice of dogmatism, would have opened up a 'far deeper 
nihilism' and effected a 'far more radical overthrow of values' than Nietzsche. With his 
determination of freedom he would have given rise to 'the most powerful scepticism of 
all time' (Broch, 1977: X/1, 246-47 ). But the reason why Broch definitively 
distances himself from Nietzsche is the primacy over aesthetics that he intends to 
assign to ethics. And in any case, art, which in Nietzsche is a function of life 
nihilistically conceived as pure will to power, becomes in him an expression and 
opening of truth. Men three for Nietzsche the <<Truth>>, if truth is permissible to 
speak of, is that
"kind of error" necessary for those in the becoming and its eternal
return, for Broch it is located in the timelessness proper to the 'original im magine' 
( Urbild) that artistic creation has the task of shining forth.
On the other hand, the one who assumed an attitude of almost 
unconditional admiration and emulation towards the 'Nietzsche model')) was 
Gottfried Benn. As early as 1935, in a letter to his friend Oelze dated 16 
September, he wrote:
Nietzsche was great, nothing greater this century has seen. And it was no greater than 
Nietzsche, who embraced it all and coexisted with it. He is the Rhine - or the Nile, I do not 
know exactly at this moment - the bearded old man on whom everything swarms, t h e 
reclining figure from whom the various species unfolds: this was Nietzsche for us all, without 
exception (Benn, 1977-80: l, 71).at this moment - the bearded old man on whom everything swarms, t h e 
reclining figure from whom the various species unfolds: this was Nietzsche for us all, without 
exception (Benn, 1977-80: l, 71).

--- PAGE BREAK ---bearded old man on whom everything swarms, t h e 
reclining figure from whom the various species unfolds: this was Nietzsche for us all, without 
exception (Benn, 1977-80: l, 71).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
After the war, in the radio lecture Nietzsche cin quant anni dopo, which
stands at the antipodes of Thomas Mann's 1 947, Benn unhesitatingly reiterated his 
judgement. And he did so without too much concern for Nietzsche's 'political 
dangerousness', which in a climate of 're-education' ( Umerziehung) many were 
quick to denounce. Not so much because Nietzsche himself, with foresight, had 
parried it by saying that he would have liked to have fences around his pen sires so 
that 'swine and the exalted' would not break into his gardens. But above all because 
Nietzsche remained for Benn, despite everything, 'the gigantic dominant figure of 
the post-Goethean era' and <<after Lu
the greatest genius of the German language', he who had suffered and anticipated 
all the decisive spiritual experiences of modern times, first and foremost that of 
nihilism and its overcoming through art (Benn, 1992: 254-55). In his 
autobiography of 1 949 he reiterated:
In truth, all that my generation discussed, all that it inte rorally confronted, one could 
say: that it suffered, or even: that it discussed far and wide - all this had already been 
expressed and exhausted and had found a definitive formulation in Nietzsche. Everything 
else was exegesis (Benn, 1986- 1991: v. 160).
The decisive experience anticipated by Nietzsche is that of nihilism and the 
new type of man capable of withstanding the waves of nothingness.
Nietzsche ( ... ) ushered in 'the fourth man' of whom so much is now said, the man with 
the 'loss of the centre', of a centre that we romantically try to reawaken. The man without 
moral and philosophical content who lives by the principles- pi o f form and expression. It is a 
mistake to believe that man even has a content or must have one ( ... ) Man no longer exists at 
all, only his symptoms exist (Benn, 1992: 264).
From the perspective of the shattering produced by nihilism, Benn also 
explains Nietzsche's aphoristic style:
I now understand,' he told Oelze on 27 December 1949, 'why Nietz sche wrote in 
aphorisms. He who sees no more connections, no more trace of a system, can still only 
proceed by episodes (Benn, 1990: 81).
To the disorientation and emptiness caused by nihilism Benn reacts, following 
in the footsteps of Nietzsche, with the force of artistic creativity, with the 
metaphysics of expression and form. Art is the attitude ca peace to correspond to 
t h e impulse of the Dionysian force of life, tosteps of Nietzsche, with the force of artistic creativity, with the 
metaphysics of expression and form. Art is the attitude ca peace to correspond to 
t h e impulse of the Dionysian force of life, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---with the force of artistic creativity, with the 
metaphysics of expression and form. Art is the attitude ca peace to correspond to 
t h e impulse of the Dionysian force of life, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

express its perennial flow and inescapable perspective. This is because art 
produces the form, that is, the creative glimpse that penetrates the reality of 
becoming better than the metaphysical concept of truth can. From the artist's point 
of view, the fate of nihilism - rather than "sop brought manly" as Weber wanted -
is to be experienced by enjoying it and going with it: "Nihilism is a feeling of 
happiness" (Benn, 1986-91: IV, 185). In an age 'in which it is not the spirit of God 
that hovers over the waters, but nihilism', Nietzsche's thesis 'that ar t is the only 
metaphysical activity to which life still obliges us' (Benn, 1992: 155) thus applies 
to Benn. This central motif, which Benn takes up almost verbatim from Fragment 
853 of the Will to Power, is found again and again in his writings, touched upon 
and developed in different variations. It has its mirror counterpart in the other 
Nietzschean thesis, also taken up by Benn, according to which the world can only 
be justified as
"aesthetic phenomenon". This gives rise to an aestheticism that Benn fuses with 
another motif-pillar of his thought, that of the mo nological isolation and radical 
estrangement of the ego from the world. In Brains (Gehirne, 1915) we find its 
most searing literary expression and
in the poem Two Things Only (Nur zwei Dinge), i.e. 'the emptiness and the I that
remains marked by it>>, the seal that Benn placed on his work in 1956. But since 
the identification with the 'Nietzsche model'>> is in Benn not at all epigonal, but 
productive, there is inevitably also transformation and distance. For Benn, for 
example, the
"chthonic force>> of life does not only want to preserve and increase as in 
Nietzsche, but also to perish. Life and death, eros and thanatos, are in dissolubly 
conjoined. This is why Benn believes that art i s not limited to being a mere 
function of life, but must come to redeem life by crystallising it in static forms. 
Hence his ap prodo to a 'static metaphysics' of being that distances him from the 
Nietzschean exaltation of becoming. An aesthetic-metaphysical experiment, this, 
that would like to project itself beyond nihilism. But beyond Benn's post-nihilistic 
ur gencies, there is no doubt that - along with Jiin ger, Heidegger and Cari Schmitt 
- he remains among those who have thoroughly discussed the nihilistic destiny of 
the 20th century and attempted to open up ways out of it.oubt that - along with Jiin ger, Heidegger and Cari Schmitt 
- he remains among those who have thoroughly discussed the nihilistic destiny of 
the 20th century and attempted to open up ways out of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
Chapter Ten
BEYOND THE LINE OF NIHILISM: JÙNGER
'VERSUS' HEIDEGGER
A memorable confrontation on nihilism as a category for the dia gnosis of our 
epochal situation took place in the first half of t h e
1950s between Ernst Ji.inger 
and Heidegger. It is to the former's credit, with the intervention Beyond the Line (
Uber die Linie, 1 950) offered to Heidegger on the occasion of his 60th birthday, 
that he drew attention to the problem. To the second, with his response on the 
occasion of Ji.inger's sixtieth birthday (1955 ), that of having returned to the 
argo mento calling for a deeper philosophical questioning. Taken together, the two 
texts represent the most pene trante contemporary analysis of the problem of 
nihilism, an itinerarium mentis in nihilum on the scale of the twentieth 
century.
The object of contention is the 'line' of nihilism. It marks the turning point at
which the contemporary epoch seems to have reached, the watershed that marks 
the consummation of the Old without the emergence of the New, the magical 'ze 
meridian' beyond which the old navigational instruments no longer apply and the 
spirit, subjected to an increasingly rapid technological acceleration, appears 
disoriented. Now, whereas for Ji.inger the spiritual elites must have the courage to 
cross the line and go forward
perta, and in this sense Ober die Linie means for him trans lineam,
Heidegger believes this is still premature and calls on 'those w h o think' to think 
more cautiously along the lines of nihilism
- the title means for him de line - trying to go back to the basics
the metaphysics of such a situation.
The common starting point from which the two are compared is

--- PAGE BREAK ---es of nihilism
- the title means for him de line - trying to go back to the basics
the metaphysics of such a situation.
The common starting point from which the two are compared is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
the conviction that the question of nihilism is central to our age. At the conclusion 
of Beyond the Line Jiinger writes:
Those who have not experienced for themselves the enormous power of Nothingness 
and have not been tempted by it know very little about our age (Jiinger-Heidegger, 1989: 1
04).
For his part, already in 1 93 7, in a university course published in 1 961 in the 
Nietzsche (but then unknown to Junger), Heidegger had stated:
The hardest, but also least misleading touchstone for testing the genuine character 
and strength of a philosopher is whether he experiences immediately and from the ground 
up, in the being of the entity, the nearness of nothingness. He to whom this experience 
remains precluded stands definitively and hopelessly outside philosophy (Heidegger, 
1994: 382).
As for the concept of nihilism, even before the war, and above all in the essays 
The Total Mobilisation (Die totale Mobilmachung, 1 93 0), The Worker (Der 
Arbeiter, 1 93 2) and On Pain ( Ùber den Sch merz, 1934), Jiinger had already 
put forward a lucid and disenchanted vision of what was happening. He saw the 
crisis of civilisation, so much lamented by others, as the inevitable passage towards 
a new historical situation, one in which it is work, organised according to the im 
peratives of technology, that mobilises all the planet's resources, that unleashes all 
that being can give. The emptiness of 'values' and 'sense' that technology has 
produced does not provoke in him a pas sive and lamenting attitude, but a heroic 
nihilism of action. Strictly speaking, a positive use of the term nihilism should be 
avoided at this stage of Jiinger's thought. The theme that interests him i s not yet 
nihilism.
nihilism, neither as a European nor as a planetary phenomenon, but rather the new 
principle of work t ha t shapes all reality. I.:shadow of nihilism only looms for 
those who have not yet grasped and accepted this principle. Nihilism is thus still 
something negative and subordinate: it manifests itself where the spirit remains 
attached to the old va lors and lingers to lament their consumption. But neither the 
process of devaluing the supreme traditional values nor the effort to transform 
them into new values is what interests the Jiinger of the Worker. In a passage of 
this work, very significant in this regard, he states:
It has become superfluous to continue dealing with a transvaluation of values, just see the 
New and take part in it (Jiinger, 1 978: VIII, 50).this work, very significant in this regard, he states:
It has become superfluous to continue dealing with a transvaluation of values, just see the 
New and take part in it (Jiinger, 1 978: VIII, 50).

--- PAGE BREAK ---nificant in this regard, he states:
It has become superfluous to continue dealing with a transvaluation of values, just see the 
New and take part in it (Jiinger, 1 978: VIII, 50).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
It is only in the essay On Pain of 1934 that a spo rtation of the Jungian 
perspective can be recorded. For the first time, the idea that technology is a factor 
in nihilism makes its appearance: when the new form is not matched by the 
development of adequate content, when reality is shaped and transformed by 
technology without ideas, people and institutions adapting with the same speed, 
when discipline, organisational capacity and energy potential grow without an 
equal growth of new substance, then technology produces nihilism. At this point, 
the question arises as to the appropriate attitude man must take when the vortex of 
techno-logical acceleration seems to be sucking him in. Can man, having reached 
the zero point, hope for a 'new dedication of being' in which 'what actually is' 
flashes by? ]Unger has here reached the level of critical awareness manifested in the 
novel On Marble Cliffs (Au/den
Marmorklippen, 1939) - "a book that with great boldness describes
the abysses that lurk behind the orderly masks of nihilism' (Schmitt, 1 987: 24) - 
and from which he will also observe the situation after the war, in Beyond the 
Line.
In this essay - to be read together with the Rebel's Treatise (whose
original title is Der Waldgang, 1 95 1) - }unger takes the pre-war cue and 
develops it into a full-fledged phenomenology of Nietzscheanism, with its 
awesomeness, manifestations and conse guences. As Heidegger acknowledges, 
it surpasses the copious Nietzschean-inspired literature on the subject in 
originality and effectiveness. Indeed, moving from Nietzsche and Dostoevsky, 
Junger draws a penetrating vision of nihilism as a process of the now ubiquitous 
and general 'vanishing of values'. His originality, compared to Nietzsche's 
model, lies in recognising the not only European but planetary nature of
nihilism, and in optimistically proposing a therapy for the evils it has produced. It 
consists in the strenuous defence of the narrow but inviolable spaces of 
individual interiority, by
}unger considered the last possible bastion of resistance. Following this strategy, 
without failing in the conviction that what falls should not be kept standing but 
should be helped to fall, he does not stage a frontal attack against traditional values 
and orders, as is Nietzsche's style. In other words, he does not pose as a 
demolitionist, but rather puts in place a description that highlights the processes of 
decay, loss and consumption, which he calls 'reduction' and 'vanishing'
(Schwund), showing how they undermine every psychic, spiritual, aesthetic and 
religious sovereignty but also accelerate, in doing so, the approaching end of 
nihilism.lls 'reduction' and 'vanishing'
(Schwund), showing how they undermine every psychic, spiritual, aesthetic and 
religious sovereignty but also accelerate, in doing so, the approaching end of 
nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---'vanishing'
(Schwund), showing how they undermine every psychic, spiritual, aesthetic and 
religious sovereignty but also accelerate, in doing so, the approaching end of 
nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
What is decisive is to understand where the line is, where and when its 
crossing comes, that is, the overcoming of nihilism. Now, contrary to the 
impression Heidegger's objections give, for Jiinger the line is not the end point, the 
term beyond which nihilism ceases. Rather, it is located within nihilism itself as its 
midpoint.
T h e crossing of the line, the crossing of the zero point divides the spectacle; it 
indicates the midpoint, not the end. Safety is still a long way off (Jiinger - Heidegger,
1989: 79).
With the crossing of the line, then, the crossing of ni chilism is not yet 
complete. It approaches its ultimate goal, but has not yet reached its end.
It is true that, compared to Heidegger's prudence, Jiinger in
dulge in a certain optimism. In a 1993 retrospective on Beyond the Line, he 
recalls that that essay was 'the attempt of someone with two earthquakes who 
wanted to get back on track in a sta bib> way and that the particularity of the 
analysis of nihilism that was carried out in it
ta was "its optimistic nature" (cf. Jiinger, 1993 : 20) . It is clear that
In Beyond the Line, nihilism is presented as the stage of a spiritual trajectory that 
can be endured to the end, overcome and
"perhaps covered with new skin like a scar" (Jiinger - Hei degger, 1989: 50) . And
to justify his relative optimism Jiinger no mines some positive signs that hint at a 
will to overcome nihilism. They are 'the metaphysical restlessness of the masses, 
the emergence of the individual sciences out of Copernican space, and the 
appearance of theological themes in world literature' (]unger - Heidegger, 1989: 
90). But these are only warnings. The conquest of post-nihilistic territory is still far 
off. Rather, he who crosses the line enters the zone in which nihilism becomes a 
normal condition in the sense that it becomes an essential and constitutive aspect 
of reality. This is why it cannot be contained, let alone easily eradicated. The only 
way to resist its unstoppable advance is to erect an inner bulwark to defend the rare 
oases of freedom that remain in the 'growing de serto'. These oases - eros,
friendship, art, death - are the wilderness (Wildnis) of interiority in which the 
individual, by c o m b a t i n g every attack, the appeals of the churches, the threats 
of Leviathan, the systems of organisation, manages to resist and m a i n t a i n
equilibrium in the 'vortex of nihilism'.
Heidegger - who since the early 1930s had been intensively concerned with 
theof Leviathan, the systems of organisation, manages to resist and m a i n t a i n
equilibrium in the 'vortex of nihilism'.
Heidegger - who since the early 1930s had been intensively concerned with 
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---stems of organisation, manages to resist and m a i n t a i n
equilibrium in the 'vortex of nihilism'.
Heidegger - who since the early 1930s had been intensively concerned with 
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
The author of the essay, Junger, who had taken an interest in technology as a 
key to understanding the modern world, and who in his university courses on 
Nietzsche had tackled the question of nihilism in a wide-ranging manner,
acknowledges Junger's merit of presenting a penetrating view of the problem.
By means of an original assimilation of the doctrine of the will to power, he 
would highlight the two essential features of today's reality: its total character 
of work and the consumption of every value and resource of meaning, i.e. 
technology and nihilism, and precisely as phenomena that are no longer just 
European but planetary.
The Jungian view thus focuses on two motifs that are also fundamental for 
Heideggcr. For the latter, however, it is a matter of understanding these two 
traits in reference to the history of being as essential and extreme figures in the 
fulfilment of Western me taphysics. Heidegger's agreement with the picture 
drawn by Jiinger therefore only concerns the phenomenology of nihilism, i.e. 
the surface. As for the anamnesis of the illness, i.e. the search for the
its historical roots and its deeper causes, he takes an al tra road and opens a 
dispute with Jiinger. He is naturally convinced
that Jiinger's writings are not to be considered 'as archival acts of the nihilistic 
movement' (Jiinger - Heidegger, 1989: 119). But he considers that Jiinger's 
suggestive literary description of nihilism does not allow for a deep philosophical 
analysis of the disease. This is because in Jiinger's overview, neither the 
Nietzschean metaphysics of the will to power nor its fulfilment in technology as 
total mobilisation in the form of work are clearly understood in their authentic 
foundation, i.e. in relation to the history of being. In order to be able to do so, one 
must ask oneself about the epochal openness that makes the Nietzschean 
determination of being as will to power possible, and thus its development in the 
Worker's de scription.
This openness is provided by metaphysics understood not as a discipline of 
philosophy, but as the 'clearing' (Lichtung) of being itself, i.e. as the way in 
which being opens up and retracts in relation to man, which has characterised 
the history of Western thought. Western man experiences the being that comes 
before him in a certain way: as something generated by nature or as an artefact, 
as a divine creation, as an extended reality, as an object, as matter susceptible to 
investigation, experiment and scientific research. What the entity is, or what the 
'being of the entity' is, is experienced in a different way each time. Now, in 
understanding what entitiesible to 
investigation, experiment and scientific research. What the entity is, or what the 
'being of the entity' is, is experienced in a different way each time. Now, in 
understanding what entities

--- PAGE BREAK ---on, experiment and scientific research. What the entity is, or what the 
'being of the entity' is, is experienced in a different way each time. Now, in 
understanding what entities

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
are in their 'being', man does not remain on the plane of entities but
'transcends', and such transcendence (Uberstieg) is for Heidegger
"metaphysics'. Metaphysics is the occi dental man's fundamental way of 
understanding the being of being. What characterises the approach of metaphysics 
is the 'presenting' (Anwesen) of being in a certain way, with a certain 'being' of its 
own, to the man who understands it. From time to time, a certain understanding of 
the being of the being takes shape, i.e. a certain answer to the question "what is the 
being?" is established, in which the original openness of the "presenting itself", of 
the Anwesen, is forgotten. When being is definitively understood and determined 
as the will t o power and as work, when the essential thing is to secure and make 
available being as a possible source of energy, then the original openness of the 
presenting of being, i.e. its being susceptible to different understandings of being, 
is occluded. Thus not only is forgetfulness of being established, but also 
forgetfulness of such forgetfulness. Metaphysical ni chilism is precisely this 
situation in which of being
"there is no more of it". The question that arises is: what to do?
Before anything else, the question of being must be recalled. But this is 
precisely what Jiinger neither does nor can do. Like the metaphysics that 
constitutes the unquestioned presupposition of his descriptions, Jiinger thinks 
within the horizon of forgetfulness of being. His very plastic and effective 
picture stops at the symptoms of nihilism, the devaluation of values and the loss 
of substance, but does not penetrate the essence. In the end, Heidinger remains a 
prisoner of nihilism itself. Heidegger's conclusion and judgement are 
peremptory:
The attempt to cross the line remains at the mercy of a representation that belongs to the 
sphere in which forgetfulness o f being dominates. And it is for this reason that it is still 
expressed with the fundamental concepts of metaphysics (form, value, transcendence) Uiinger 
- Heidegger, 1989: 161).
Before wanting to overcome nihilism, it is indispensable for Heideg ger to 
grasp its essence, and this means understanding that nihilism is an event that 
belongs to the very history of being, to its giving and subtracting itself in the 
various historical-epochal openings of metaphysics. The traces of this movement 
of 'giving' and 'subtracting' being can be recognised in the fundamental traits of the 
history of metaphysics. In the texts included in the Nietzsche, written between 1
93 6 and 1 946 but published in 1961, Heidegger dealt in depth with the sto ria of 
metaphysics: he showed how Nietzschean nihilism is thecs. In the texts included in the Nietzsche, written between 1
93 6 and 1 946 but published in 1961, Heidegger dealt in depth with the sto ria of 
metaphysics: he showed how Nietzschean nihilism is the

--- PAGE BREAK ---luded in the Nietzsche, written between 1
93 6 and 1 946 but published in 1961, Heidegger dealt in depth with the sto ria of 
metaphysics: he showed how Nietzschean nihilism is the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
reversal of Platonism and how the archetypal figure of metaphysics that Platonism 
inau gurates and represents, which he calls 'subjectivity' (Subiectità't), is
manifested in its extreme aspect. 
It is not even the case here to attempt to illustrate the steps through which, in 
the Heideggerian reconstruction, Platonism transitions into the metaphysics of the 
will to power, and how the 'transcendence' of the Platonic ideal is transformed into 
the 'rescendence' of nihilism. What is essential is that the 'subjectivity' that arose 
with Platonism
- i.e. the "sovereign appearance" of man as the figure who becomes the bearer 
of the project for the cognitive and operative mastering of all that is - finds its 
essential inversion in the technical configuration of the being of the entity 
called Gestell. This term - which can be translated as 'implant' or 'set-up' and 
stands for the existence of that which is placed, artefactual, as opposed to that 
which is born, which is created, and which is not.
and grows spontaneously like entities by nature - is chosen by Hei
degger to indicate the essence of technique. The latter, as the total mobilisation 
of the world in the form of labour, is the epochal figure in which being is 
manifested and at the same time concealed at the end of the metaphysical 
destiny of the West. Platonism and nihilism thus appear to Heidegger as the two 
extremes of the same paradigm
- metaphysics - and both are seen as homogeneous and functional to the essence 
of technique. Technique is the last form of me- taphysics, i.e. Platonism, just as 
metaphysics is the prehistory of technique, i.e. nihilism. This is why Heidegger is 
convinced that the Worker form and the Platonic idea, once one attempts to pen 
them in their essential provenance, have a common origin in the epochal, 
technical-metaphysical constellation of the Gestell.
By setting his response in these terms, Heidegger, while being sympathetic 
to the Jingerian phenomenology of nihilism, recalls a more vigilant 
philosophical attitude. This is not to demolish such an effective and in many 
respects irreplaceable description of the symptoms of nihilism, but to take up its 
insights at a deeper level. In order to do so, however, one must question the 
presuppositions of the Jiingerian vi sion, i.e. the metaphysical horizon in which 
it moves and the concepts it uses as an optical system through which to look: 
'for ma', 'domain', 'representation', <<Will', <<Value', 'security'. But it must then be 
understood above all that, if the crossing of the li nea is ever possible, it requires 
that nihilism is first truly accomplished, that is to say, understood in its 
metaphysical essence: "Instead of wanting to cross over nihilism, we must first 
gather in its ex
without ( Wesen)' (Tiinger - Heidegger, 1989: 1 62 ). This means understanding co-understood in its 
metaphysical essence: "Instead of wanting to cross over nihilism, we must first 
gather in its ex
without ( Wesen)' (Tiinger - Heidegger, 1989: 1 62 ). This means understanding co-

--- PAGE BREAK ---metaphysical essence: "Instead of wanting to cross over nihilism, we must first 
gather in its ex
without ( Wesen)' (Tiinger - Heidegger, 1989: 1 62 ). This means understanding co-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
but it is the consequence of an occlusion of the original openness of the 
presentation (Anwesen) of the entity in its being. Therefore, without moving, or 
rather taking up the problem that the line indicates, it is necessary to take a step 
backwards: not to stimulate the will to go beyond nihilism, nor to set up a new 
instrumentation to navigate at all costs, but to think of a "to pology" of nihilism and 
to identify in the history of being the essential place where the fate of nihilism is 
decided.
If in fact crossing the line of nihilism has as its essential condition the 
overcoming of metaphysics and the dimention of being, this overcoming cannot 
be 'willed'. Doing so would not only lead one back to a compromised 
metaphysical determination such as the will, but one would also end up 
believing that the forgetfulness of being is a mere 'machination' of man, i.e. it is 
within his power. Instead, it depends on being and its way of referring to man. 
Precisely in reference to the finitude of the one to whom it is destined, the 
giving of being is never absolute, but is always epochally determined and at the 
same time also always open to another epochal determination. This makes it 
simultaneously a giving of oneself and a withdrawing of oneself. When 
"subjectivity", i.e. the primacy of the individual as subject, comes to the 
forefront and claims to be the definitive answer to the question "what is 
being?", this means that being is "given" in the form of subtraction and 
negation, i.e. negation and nihilism.
Nor can rationality - even less than the will - be the Archimedean point on 
which to catapult oneself beyond nihilism. Even rationalism is for Heidegger an 
expression of subjectivity and anthropocentrism. Faced with ultimate things, 
where the whole is at stake, trust in the calculations of reason is no better than 
escapes into the irrational. Rationalism and irrationalism are for Heidegger - in
agreement in this with Jiinger - two complementary and convertible figures of 
ni chilism. If nihilism is a destiny that depends on being, man's will and reason 
can, if anything, arrive at something penultimate. Once this has been radically 
acknowledged, it is no longer the case, either for Heidegger or Jiinger, to linger 
in devising possible ethics or virtues for the age of technology.
Recognising this does not mean renouncing responsibility. On the contrary, it 
means demanding that higher responsibility of thought that consists in taking on 
nihilism at its most problematic - without pretending to turn away the guest who 
has been wandering around the house for some time now, without closing one's 
eyes to thethat consists in taking on 
nihilism at its most problematic - without pretending to turn away the guest who 
has been wandering around the house for some time now, without closing one's 
eyes to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---77
fact that nihilism is now part of the reality in which we live.

The only possible 
effect that thought can aim for is to produce an acceleration of nihilism.

In 
Ji.inger, this happens through that peculiar description of the consummation, fading 
and reduction triggered by nihilism, which, by putting the decisive features of the 
new reality before our eyes, helps to produce it.

In Heidegger, on the other hand, it 
happens through his disenchanted critique of values - a motive that he develops on 
several occasions, starting with his confrontation with Nietzsche and in opposition 
to neo-Kantism and the philosophy of values, and which leads him to argue that, if 
one really intends to overcome the
nihilism, there is no point in producing resistance and reactions, erecting the frail 
barriers of new values or attempting counter-movements.

Instead, it is preferable 
to allow the immense power of nothingness to be unleashed and to
all the possibilities of nihilism are exhausted to their essential fulfilment.

This is not - as it may have seemed - an apologia for nihilism.

nihilism, neither in Ji.inger nor in Heidegger.

Acknowledging that the acceleration of 
nihilism is the only way that can lead to its overcoming, d o e s not mean taking t h e 
side of nihilism or hailing it as the 'gay know-it-all', as the disenchanted lucidity that 
rejoices in having recognised that the 'true world', the meaning and truth of becoming 
are prospective illusions.

Both Heidegger and Ji.inger invite us to experience the 
power of nothingness to its fullest extent, convinced that only with the total 
explanation of nihilism is its exhaustion also given and, with it, the pos sibility of its 
overcoming.

In short, it is a matter of "letting t h e still intact sources of energy gush 
forth, and resorting to every aid, in order to regress 'into the vortex of nihilism'" 
(Ji.inger - Heidegger, 1989: 139).

But where to trace these sources of energy?--- PAGE BREAK ---

In short, it is a matter of "letting t h e still intact sources of energy gush 
forth, and resorting to every aid, in order to regress 'into the vortex of nihilism'" 
(Ji.inger - Heidegger, 1989: 139). But where to trace these sources of energy? On this point, the i tinerary of 
the two diverges. Ji.inger points to a point of resistance to which his later 
writings - the Rebel's Treatise is a good example - abound with increasing 
tenacity, but which is already identified here with too much clarity. It consists of 
the figure of the Anarch, the in dividual rebel who feels hunted by the armies of the 
churches and the Le viathan, but who knows that he no longer belongs to 
anything or anyone. Like Stirner's One, the Anarch is a loner who takes refuge 
in his own in teriority. He is not to be confused with the anarchist, he is not a 
revolutionary who wants to transform the world and who, in order to achieve his 
goal, is also willing to commit crime and terror. The Anarch may submit 
outwardly to order and law, but in his inner self, in the so litudine of the night, 
he thinks and does as he pleases. And even when he marches between the lines 
of an army, he only fights his wars. He takes refuge in the wilderness and in the 
few remaining oases to regenerate his strength. La

--- PAGE BREAK ---s. And even when he marches between the lines 
of an army, he only fights his wars. He takes refuge in the wilderness and in the 
few remaining oases to regenerate his strength. La

--- PAGE BREAK ---

location of the Anarch is where Junger imagined himself to be in a note dated Paris, 
9 July 1 942:
If I close my eyes, I sometimes glimpse a bleak landscape at the edge of the infi nite, 
with stones, cliffs and mountains_ In the background, at the edge of a black sea, I 
recognise myself, a tiny figure, almost sketched in chalk. That is my outpost, close to 
Nothingness - down there, in the abyss, I conduct my struggle alone Oiinger, 1978: Il, 
344).
In Beyond the Line he concludes his remarks on the same motive, opening 
up an optimistic perspective:
One's own chest: here lies, as once in the Thebaid, the centre of all desert and ruin. 
Here lies the cavern towards which the demons drive. Here each one, of whatever 
condition and rank, leads his own struggle, and with his victory the world changes. If he 
prevails, the Nothing will pull back into itself, abandoning on the shore the treasures that 
its waves had submerged Oiinger - Heidegger, 1 989: 104).
Heidegger is more vigilant and guarded: there are no Archimedean points 
to lean on, no recipes or strategies to follow. To the Pelagians of the 20th 
century, convinced that salvation lies in their hands, Heidegger counters with 
the sentence: 'Now only a god can save us. If ever a foothold is possible, it lies 
in that heroism of the pen serum capable of patience, waiting for the 'other 
beginning', in the only position able to correspond to the epochal destiny of 
nihilism and technology, that is to say, of the era of the gods who fled and the 
new god yet to come: GelaSJenheit, the calm attitude of the 'ahbandono'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o the epochal destiny of 
nihilism and technology, that is to say, of the era of the gods who fled and the 
new god yet to come: GelaSJenheit, the calm attitude of the 'ahbandono'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
Chapter Eleven
NIHILISM, EXISTENTIALISM, GNOSIS
There is no doubt that Heidegger's work makes a fundamental contribution 
to the analysis of European nihilism. However, it highlights, in its final 
outcome, a singular paradox, which is at the same time the paradox of a 
significant part of contemporary thought. It is the fact that two extremes seem to 
touch and coexist in it.
me incompatible: a radical nihilism, on the one hand, and abandonment to inspired 
vision, if not mysticism, on the other. It is for this reason that the more one adheres 
to the
the one perspective, the more one is confronted with the problems that the other 
opens up. The radicalisation of philosophical questioning, which dresses 
everything up and consumes everything, produces, on the one hand, an 
acceleration of dis-solution, a strengthening of nihilism. On the other hand, in the 
fulfilment of this dissolution, thought opens up to the expectation of the totally al 
tro, to what is radically beyond what has been dissolved. The de-construction of 
the concepts and theorems of traditional philosophy results in an opening up to the 
problematic of the sacred and the divine. The do mandate that Heidegger considers 
'the piety of thinking' implies the questioning and at the same time the search, 
dissolution and attitudes: it leads to that Nothingness which is the extreme 
purification of the finiteness that wants to strip itself of everything in order to 
access the divine, it leads t o that extreme point that Meister Eckhart called with 
words almost
blasphemes the point 'where the angel, the fly and the soul are the same co sa'. It 
is a questioning that razes metaphysics to the ground in preparation for the 'new 
beginning'.
The key that has best brought to light this possibility of coexistence between 
nihilism and mysticism is thatquestioning that razes metaphysics to the ground in preparation for the 'new 
beginning'.
The key that has best brought to light this possibility of coexistence between 
nihilism and mysticism is that

--- PAGE BREAK ---es metaphysics to the ground in preparation for the 'new 
beginning'.
The key that has best brought to light this possibility of coexistence between 
nihilism and mysticism is that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
of the approach of Heideggerian thought to Gnosticism. This raf fronto is a 
variation from the more general take on the gno stic paradigm - separated from its 
historical location in late antiquity- as a palimpsest for an interpretation o f 
modernity. This road was already taken in the last century by Ferdinand Christian 
Baur. In our century, the initial credit for the rediscovery of Gnosticism goes to 
Carl Gustav Jung and the meetings he promoted from the 1930s onwards in 
Ascona, of which the "Eranos Jahrbuch" provides documentation. But it was above 
all in the 1950s that t h e h e r m e n e u t i c fruitfulness of the Gnostic paradigm 
came to light and was discussed on a wider scale. The debate heated up around the 
theses argued re spectively by Eric Voegelin and Hans Blumenberg.
The former frontally attacked the legitimacy of the modern era, arguing 
that its development should be interpreted as the triumph of Gnosticism. 
Decisive philosophers for modernity such as Hegel, Marx and Nietz sche would 
be considered 'gnostic' insofar as a speculative scheme of gnostic derivation 
would be at work in their thought. In Hegel, the process in which the spirit 
comes to find itself again from a situation of alienation is, for Voegelin, 
analogous to the pere grination through which the alienated spark (pneuma) of
the gnostics is
stics returns from its exile in the cosmos to its original fullness (pie
rome). In Marx, the dialectical process of history, which materialism allows to be 
recognised, frees man from alienation and transports him into the fullness of an 
integral human existence. In Nietzsche, the natural principle of the will to power 
transforms man, stifled by values that are hostile to life and now bloodless, into the 
Superman. In all three ca
the idea of man's self-salvation through gno
si, that is, through the knowledge of one's condition of captivity and alienation, 
which becomes the instrument of redemption. By virtue of gnosis, the degraded 
being restores its original piety by virtue of itself. For Voegelin, the modern 
triumph of gnosis means the immanentization of Christian eschatology, which 
ultimately leads to nihilism: God and man's spiritual life are sacrificed to 
civilisation with the consecration of all human energies to the enterprise of 
salvation through immanent action in the world.
Blumenberg firmly opposed these theses. He defended modernity, arguing 
that it is not so much the secularisation of Christianity, but rather the process of 
man's autonomous affirmation in the world. With its absolutization of the 
earthly dimension, modernity denies the Gnostic dualism still present in late 
medieval theological speculation that radically separates God andfirmation in the world. With its absolutization of the 
earthly dimension, modernity denies the Gnostic dualism still present in late 
medieval theological speculation that radically separates God and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ld. With its absolutization of the 
earthly dimension, modernity denies the Gnostic dualism still present in late 
medieval theological speculation that radically separates God and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
world. Modernity, then, is not the triumph, but the second, definitive defeat of 
gnosis (cf. Faber, 1 984; Taubes, 1984 ).
What is of interest here - beyond the modern metamorphoses of gnosis -
is that the dualistic gnostic paradigm allows contemporary ni chilism to be seen 
from a different, broader and more illuminating perspective. If Gnosticism, 
considered not as a historical phenomenon but as a paradigm of thought, can be 
interpreted as a kind of existentialist nihilism ante litteram, which through 
annihilatio
mundi operates a radical isolation of the soul in order to obtain the
salvation and the reunion with God, then contemporary nihilism can in turn be 
read as a modern atheistic gnosticism: blind to all transcendence, it is 
concentrated in a tragic depiction of the uprootedness and disorientation of 
dead existence; existence, in its cosmic solitude, repeats the questioning of the
stic, knowing that it will remain unanswered: who are we? where do we come 
from? where are we going?
It was mainly thanks to Hans Jonas, a pupil of Heidegger and
Bultmann in Marburg, to have brought to light the structural connections between 
ancient Gnosticism and contemporary existentialism and nihilism, and to have used 
the Gnostic model of thought as an inter preative key to understanding the 
existentialist and nihilistic crisis of man today. From his thorough historical 
reconstruction of ancient Gnosticism, Jonas derived a typological profile to show 
how the comparison with the Gnostic paradigm frees the questions posed by 
nihilism and existentialism from the cage of absurdity and illuminates them with a 
broader meaning (Jonas, 1992: 23-47). 
But Jaspers and Émil Bréhier had also noted the important
analogy that exists between existentialism and nihilism on the one hand and 
Gnosticism on the other. In particular, Bréhier made very insightful remarks on the 
analogy that exists between the existential analytic of Being and Time and the 
structure of the Gnostic novel. In Heidegger the fall of individual existence into 
finitude is recounted, just as in Gnosticism the fall of the soul into the abyss of the 
world is recounted. Except that in Being and Time, the narrative lacks a 
beginning and an end, and it is precisely this ignorance of its origin and destination 
that gives the fictional life its dramatic tension - as in a tragedy whose origin and 
solution a r e unknown. To put it simply, the unfolding of the Gnostic novel is 
divided into the following episodes: l) first of all, there is the original Unity; 2) 
hypostases break away from this Unity, wanting to become independent - this is 
where sin and guilt lie - and fall into the world, in which, having forgotten, they 
are not able to be independent.2) 
hypostases break away from this Unity, wanting to become independent - this is 
where sin and guilt lie - and fall into the world, in which, having forgotten, they 
are not able to be independent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---away from this Unity, wanting to become independent - this is 
where sin and guilt lie - and fall into the world, in which, having forgotten, they 
are not able to be independent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
that of their origin and inclined to curiositas, are lost (which, according to 
Bréhier, corresponds to the Heideggerian 'cure'); 3) through knowledge (gnosis),
some existences manage to overcome forgetfulness and regain reminiscence of 
their origin, returning to it.
Well, if one obscures the beginning and the end of the story, one obtains 
exactly
the temporal sequence of finite existence in the dynamic of 
inauthenticity and authenticity as Heidegger describes it. Existential analytics 
would thus be the expression of a gnostic and nihilistic attitude that no longer 
knows the original divine unity nor believes in a return, but consumes everything 
in the empty and dramatic horizon of finitude.
This reading paradigm sheds light from a new angle not only on Heidegger's 
work, but also on two opposing developments in contemporary thought that were 
inspired by it: that i n the direction of theology and philosophy of religion, and that 
in the direction of atheist and nihilist essentialism. The former tested the possibility 
of thinking about the sacred and the divine in the age of disenchantment, hostile to 
transcendence, by questioning the philosophical categories tacitly employed by 
traditional theologies and refining their conceptual tools. This has led to a re-
evaluation of those ways of thinking about the divine, such as apophatic theology, 
in which a critical vigilance against God's positive de-terminations is implemented 
ante litteram, for different reasons and in different ways (cf. Weischedel, 1972; 
Garaventa, 1989). In this sense, it could even be argued - as Henry Cor bin did by 
comparing Jewish, Christian and Islamic monotheism - that the cause of the 
West's cultural nihilism is a consequence of the determination of God as a person 
and man as an individual. The metaphysical primacy that Occi dente accords t o 
the principle of individuality and the cosmotheological dualism that results from it 
are thus called into question (cf. Corbin, 1986: 136 ff.; Guénon, 1972: 83-99). In the 
other direction, that o f atheistic and nihilistic existentialism,
attempted to think about the fatticity and finitude of existence, and precisely in the 
absurdity it derives from the lack of principles that explain it and give it 
meaning. In this perspective, the fusion of essentialism and nihilism - for
example in the work of thinkers such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus -
has made a decisive contribution to the thematisation and clarification of human 
existence.
In Sartre's writings, for instance, without the concept of ni chilism being 
employed as such, the presence of an explicit, sometimes almost ostentatious 
nihilistic attitude can be felt everywhere. This applies especially to the writings of 
the existentialist period. In L'étre et leas such, the presence of an explicit, sometimes almost ostentatious 
nihilistic attitude can be felt everywhere. This applies especially to the writings of 
the existentialist period. In L'étre et le

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce of an explicit, sometimes almost ostentatious 
nihilistic attitude can be felt everywhere. This applies especially to the writings of 
the existentialist period. In L'étre et le

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
néant (1943) - whose intuitions are prepared and accompanied by a copious literary 
production, in which the philosophical novel La nausée (1938) stands out -
nothingness and negativity stand out at the centre of the treatment and have a decisive 
function in Sartre's effort to define the radically free character of human existence. The 
latter, insofar as it is freedom, cannot be conditioned by any determination, any 
concept, any definition; it is for es without what it will choose to be, what it will 
become by its choice. Man is the being in whom existence precedes essence and 
determines it. Existence and freedom, thought coherently together, impose on the one 
hand the negation of God - since, if one were to admit this, one would have eo
ipso a principle that would determine the essence of man before the
existence - and on the other, they force man, left to himself, to invent his existence 
each time by deciding what to hunger for. Hence, the conscious freedom, the 'for-
self', which exposes man to the inevitable burden of continual planning, is not an 
abstract freedom, but is always dropped into a situation, thrown into a condition, 
inserted into the world of things, of the 'in-self'. Existence is consciousness and 
freedom that transcends the world, but cannot transcend it except by referring to it 
continuously. Insofar as existence is then a body, it becomes a thing among things, 
an absurd contingency among contingencies. The body 'is the contingent form 
assumed by the necessity of my contingency' (Sartre, 1 965 : 3 85 ). The freedom 
of the for-self has in the contingency of the in-self its own term of reference: 
existence, as consciousness and freedom, is not reduced to the opaque 
gratuitousness of the being of the body or of things, but constantly denies and 
transcends it. It is expressed, all of it, in the freedom that constitutes it as per-itself 
and with which, denying all prior conditioning and all facticity, it projects itself 
from nothingness into nothingness. The freedom of existence
human being, to be affirmed in the radicality of its consequences, im plates a 
'nihilisation' (néantisation) that deprives man of any external reference to lean on 
and forces him to withdraw into himself, t o be his own freedom and his own 
nothingness. Freedom is in fact that peculiar mode of being that becomes lack of 
being, i.e. nothingness. Sartre's conclusion is consistent: man is a useless passion. 
The motif of Gnostic nihilism appears here, although not made explicit. On the 
other hand, those who are fully aware of the Gnostic structure underlying the
his own existentialist and nihilistic reflection is Camus. This awareness is not 
surprising if one considers that in his dissertation Mé taphysique chrétienne et 
néoplatonisme (1 936), in which the figures of Plotinus and Augustine are at the 
centre of the discussion, Camus dealt with Gnosticism and dedicated the entire second 
chapter of the work to it.et 
néoplatonisme (1 936), in which the figures of Plotinus and Augustine are at the 
centre of the discussion, Camus dealt with Gnosticism and dedicated the entire second 
chapter of the work to it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1 936), in which the figures of Plotinus and Augustine are at the 
centre of the discussion, Camus dealt with Gnosticism and dedicated the entire second 
chapter of the work to it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
ro (Camus, 1 965: 1250-69). Although here he does not yet achieve either the 
perspective or the originality of the writings that made him famous, and it is 
therefore not possible to make precise connections, it can nevertheless be 
emphasised that his treatment of Gnosticism proceeds by 'themes' and 'solutions' 
and follows a problematic approach interested in grasping the structure o f this 
thought. This points to an interest that is not merely historical but typological, in 
the light of which one cannot dismiss as a mere coincidence the fact that Camus 
chooses as the titles of some of his works so many gnostic metaphors: !
L'exile et le royaume. The meta horizon also appears much clearer.
physical of nihilism that Camus treats and unfolds along the thread of the two 
motifs that obsess him, namely the absurd and the revolt of fi nitude. The first 
motif lies at the heart of Le mythe de Sisyphe (1 942 ), where the gratuitousness 
of existence - once the gods are silenced or dead - is claimed as a human affair to 
be experienced without reason or explanation. The second motif substantiates what 
must be considered one of the most illuminating and profound studies on the 
problem of nihilism, J;homme revolté (1951). On the strength of his enviable 
literary ta lento Camus reconstructs the history of nihilism in an evocative review 
and finally presents the attitude of revolt as the only viable virtue to wrest 
meaning from the absurdity of the human condition.
But the theme of nihilism has found a propitious climate for attaining and 
spreading not only in the season and environments of essentialism. Favourable 
conditions also occurred in other places and moments of contemporary French 
thought, especially where the problem of finitude was taken up. For the
confluence of existentialism and nihilism, typical of a certain French philosophical 
style, the importance of the seminars on Hegel's Phenomenology of the Spirit 
held by Alexandre Hegel cannot be overemphasised.
Kojève at the École des Hautes-Études between 1933 and 1 93 9 - and attended
by, among others, Raymond Queneau, Georges Bataille, Jacques Lacan, Raymond 
Aron, André Breton, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and Jean Hyppo lite. It is no 
coincidence that, against more traditional readings of Hegel, in his seminars 
Kojève strongly emphasised and valorised the moment of negativity and its 
decisive function in the constitution of fi nitude and its figures.
But to give an immediately convincing idea of the presence of nihilistic 
themes in French culture, it will suffice to recall, for their paradigm value and 
the suggestions they evoke, two names: Georges Bataille and Emil M. Cioran. 
The former was present at the se-istic 
themes in French culture, it will suffice to recall, for their paradigm value and 
the suggestions they evoke, two names: Georges Bataille and Emil M. Cioran. 
The former was present at the se-

--- PAGE BREAK ---nch culture, it will suffice to recall, for their paradigm value and 
the suggestions they evoke, two names: Georges Bataille and Emil M. Cioran. 
The former was present at the se-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
minaries of Kojève, remained in contact with him to the point of asking him, at the 
beginning of 1 950, for a preface for the new edition of L:expérience intérieure, 
recognising in the end, however, the irreconcilability of their perspectives. His 
work is so difficult to embrace, that it is not even the case here to try to point out 
the common thread. What I would like to say is that it is shot through from top to 
bottom with the lucid awareness that nihilism is a constant shadow that inevitably 
accompanies us when we think in the absence of gods or when we strive to bring 
negativity, limitation and otherness into language. And this is precisely what 
happens in the three volumes of the 'summa atheologica' with which Bataille
debuted as a philosopher: L'expérience intérieure (1 943 ) , Le coupable (1 944),
Sur Nietzsche (1 945).
As for Cioran, his thought would also require an articulate discourse, but we 
will limit ourselves here to a single observation. His ope ra administers, page after 
page, a concentration of pessimism that mortally poisons all the ideals, hopes and 
meta-physical impulses of philosophy, that is, all the attempts to anchor existence 
in a sense that reassures it in the face of the abyss of absurdity that threatens it at 
every moment. Cioran's meditations push us to that point where each of us stands 
naked before our naked destiny. In La chute dans le temps (1964) - a title of 
clear gnostic origin - he says:
We are not really us except when, confronted with ourselves, we coincide with nothing, 
not even our own singularity (Cioran, 1 995: 1 1 - 1 2 ).
In short, man is a self-conscious nothingness, he is 'he who is not': this is 
what Cioran asserts, overturning the Old Testament definition of God as 'he 
who is'. His constellation of thought does not go with
merged with that of hopeful philosophies o f existence. It is rather
that of the Gnostic who - aware of having fallen into time and finitude, of 
being free but at the same time a prisoner in the cramped cell of the universe -
wants to save himself by virtue of himself and desperately denies any positive 
value of the world, setting fire with iconoclastic fury to all the images, ghosts 
and gods that populate it, even knowing that the abandoned altars will be 
inhabited by demons. A blatantly gnostic-nihilistic aura thus emanates from the 
writings of this godless mystic and condenses, like an obsession, along the
sequence of his sharp aphorisms and essayistic wanderings. The Gnostic 
nihilism we are dealing with here is more evoked withritings of this godless mystic and condenses, like an obsession, along the
sequence of his sharp aphorisms and essayistic wanderings. The Gnostic 
nihilism we are dealing with here is more evoked with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

images and literary effects that it does not unfold and expound in the broad and 
rigorous turns of philosophical reasoning. But it is precisely in this way that the 
despair and at the same time the lucidity that sustains him, the melancholy and 
doggedness on which he feeds, the em pity that draws him towards the 
phosphorescence of evil and at the same time the devotion with which Cioran 
rushes towards that 'purest version of God' that is for him Nothingness, come to 
light in an almost dazzling manner.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of evil and at the same time the devotion with which Cioran 
rushes towards that 'purest version of God' that is for him Nothingness, come to 
light in an almost dazzling manner.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

87
Schmitt,
Chapter Twelve
NIHILISM, POLITICAL THEOLOGY, SECULARISATION: CARL 
SCHMITT
In contrast to the French culture, at least in thinkers such as Camus, Bataille 
and especially Cioran, who enjoy their nihilistic spleen, the same cannot be said 
of the thinkers on the other side of the Rhine. Certainly, the great German theorists 
of Ni chilism - Benn, Heidegger, Heidegger - have bent over backwards in their 
analysis of the nihilistic experience to such an extent that it has been held against 
them as a fault. In truth, their thinking is moved deep down by a desire to 
overcome, or at least to exorcise, the crisis and negativity of which this movement 
is an expression.
Worthy of mention in this regard is a figure who, together with the three just 
mentioned, has made a de cisive contribution to the understanding and theoretical 
elaboration of nihilism in our century: Cari Schmitt. In his work, a lucid 
investigation of modern and contemporary nihilism and the processes of 
secularisation and neutralisation that have produced it is carried out from the point 
of view of po litical philosophy.
vocated. An investigation that appears all the more disenchanted and unprejudiced
the more fierce the aversion that
in the name of a pro
fession of Catholic-Gnostic faith, nurtures towards the sgregatory outcomes of 
secularisation. As is often the case with thinkers who vibrate with the power of 
the elemental, Schmitt has been much discussed and his theses have been the 
subject of exacerbated controversy. For some, he has personified a political 
decisionism that threatens the principles of parliamentarianism and democracy, 
i.e. the two pillars on which the political life of modern societies rests; for 
others, he has been the theorist of a strong state, politically capable of acting, 
i.e. of de-rianism and democracy, 
i.e. the two pillars on which the political life of modern societies rests; for 
others, he has been the theorist of a strong state, politically capable of acting, 
i.e. of de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, 
i.e. the two pillars on which the political life of modern societies rests; for 
others, he has been the theorist of a strong state, politically capable of acting, 
i.e. of de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
cide. Some of his texts - from The Concept of the Political (Der Begrz//des Po 
litischen, 1 927) to The Nomos of the Earth (Der Nomos der Erde, 1 950) - 
constitute indispensable reference points for contemporary political philosophy.
Taking as his starting point the problem of today's crisis of state legitimacy, 
Schmitt notes that our situation, for those who wish to address this crisis, is 
characterised by the impracticability of traditional resources, i.e. the 
impossibility of having recourse to pre-political instances capable of giving 
foundation and legitimacy to state sovereignty. Ta li were in the past theology, 
worldviews and ideologies, now definitively in their twilight years. In the 
situation of political nihilism that characterises our age, it becomes crucial, in 
order to identify the foundation of power, to define the authentic subject of 
sovereignty, i.e. to establish 'who decides'. Now, legal positivism - on this 
point, Schmitt's great interlocutor and antagonist is Kelsen - identifies the state 
with the legal system of laws, in which, however, only how the set of norms 
functions is said, i.e. how decisions are to be made, but not who decides on this 
'how', i.e. not who determines the functioning of the political-legal system and 
how this is to take place. The functioning of norms thus presupposes a si tuation
of normality that has already been produced. But to understand how it is produced,
the moment that precedes legal normality is decisive: the
"state of exception'. In it, since there are no norms yet, or no longer, in force, the 
conditions must be imposed for the norms to apply. For Schmitt, being sovereign 
means being 'the one who de cides in the state of exception' (precisely who is 
'friendly' and who is 'ne mical'). The keystone of every legal system does not lie in 
a fundamental norm, but in an original decision that sets the le
and guarantees its effectiveness.
It is within this framework that the State, a typically modern form of the 
Political, must be conceived for Schmitt. The process of forming the le 
gitimacy and sovereignty of the state is inseparable from the phenomenon of the
political nihilism that troubles its theoretical self-representation. Modernity is 
characterised by the gradual disappearance of the traditional theological foundation 
of legitimacy and the corresponding need to produce it autonomously, etiamsi 
Deus non daretur, i.e. through the 'fiction' of God's non-existence and the use in 
its stead of a rational argumentation independent of the dictates of theology. The 
traditional theological foundation is then progressively secularised and neutralised, 
in accordance with the principle already uttered by Alberico Gentile: Silete,
theologi, in munere alieno -' The sacelli del-theological foundation is then progressively secularised and neutralised, 
in accordance with the principle already uttered by Alberico Gentile: Silete,
theologi, in munere alieno -' The sacelli del-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion is then progressively secularised and neutralised, 
in accordance with the principle already uttered by Alberico Gentile: Silete,
theologi, in munere alieno -' The sacelli del-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
theology are emptied and their content transferred to political thought, which, 
in order to give itself a foundation, resorts to reference frameworks that are 
substitutes for the theological one: the metaphysical one (17th century), the 
moral one (18th century), the economic one (19th century) and finally, in the 20th
century, the technical one. But technology, insofar as it serves any end, 
produces the eradication of all reference and orientation, even that linked to the 
earth, which, in contrast to the sea, characterises for Schmitt the tradition of the 
Jus Publicum Europaeum. Technique, which unifies and amalgamates 
everything, cannot actually constitute any foundation and order. It no longer 
recognises any national 'place'.
tural in which to put down roots. For Schmitt, this is the true condition of
u-topia and nihilism - terms that, in the world uprooted by technology, are latently 
conjoined (Schmitt, 1 991a: 53) - that characterises contemporary e poca. In this 
situation, as the only prati cable criterion for an identification of the 'Political)) 
remains the stark opposition of 'friend and foe)) - where by enemy is not meant the
inimicus, i.e. the one who harbours hostile feelings on a personal level, nor the
adversarius, i.e. the adversary in general, but the hostis, the enemy
"of the fatherland)), public, political, he who is simply "other)) and who in his 
irreducible otherness requires to be addressed in the appropriate disposition, the 
strategic-conflictual disposition of struggle.
But one would not truly understand Schmitt's theses if one did not square 
them within the horizon of the problem that constituted the guiding thread of his
thought and haunted him to the very end: the struggle between Catholicism and 
Judaism over the interpretation of the meaning of universal history. For 
Schmitt, this conflict was not just a matter of chance but a vital problem. 
Modernity is for him the field of this great clash from which, with 
secularisation, the Jews would emerge victorious. Schmitt was convinced that 
the great Jewish thinkers of the 19th century had realised that in order to be 
victorious on the level of universal stock, the old Christian order of the world 
had to be eliminated - hence that secularisation and the disintegration of that 
order had to be promoted. Indeed, it was with them that the fundamental 
concepts of dissolution came into circulation: Marx, with his theory of 
capitalism, introduced the idea of the class struggle that demolished all social 
order; Freud, with psychoanalysis and the unconscious, dissolved the concepts 
of the soul and the person, the pivot of Christian anthropology; Einstein, with 
his theory of relativity, destroyed forever the anthropocentric image of the 
universe.
But the most fearsome theoretician of Judaism is Benjamin Disraeli, whose 
portrait Schmitt not surprisingly hung above his desklativity, destroyed forever the anthropocentric image of the 
universe.
But the most fearsome theoretician of Judaism is Benjamin Disraeli, whose 
portrait Schmitt not surprisingly hung above his desk

--- PAGE BREAK ---forever the anthropocentric image of the 
universe.
But the most fearsome theoretician of Judaism is Benjamin Disraeli, whose 
portrait Schmitt not surprisingly hung above his desk

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
in Dahlem's house in Berlin. According to Disraeli - who entrusts his thesis to 
the novel Tancred, or The New Crusade (1 847) - history is a conflict between 
races and there is one people, that of Israel, superior to the others and destined to 
assert itself. In the key sentence of the novel it is said: 'Christianity is Judaism 
for the people'. For Schmitt, this is an unprecedented statement that overturns 
two thousand years of history. If it were true, the Christian aeon would be 
tantamount to an error. More: Christianity would simply be the strategy employed
by the Jews to get the better of other peoples. But Schmitt is convinced that 
history is proving Judaism right and for this very reason he is struck by Disraeli's 
thesis. Christian eschatology, based on original sin and man's redemption in the 
afterlife, is emerging as the losing interpretation of universal history. Winning 
is the Jewish one: humanity is on a progressive journey towards the future 
'kingdom of peace', towards the 'New Jerusalem', far away in time
but located in the hereafter. For Schmitt, it is clear that with modern secularisation,
at the latest from the French Revolution onwards, European peoples have 
interpreted history in the sense of Judaism and that the Jewish idea of a 
universal principle encompassing all mankind has found its incipient realisation 
in the global era into which the modern world has effectively entered. From the 
point of view of the political theologian who sees Roman Catholicism as the 
katéchon, the force that holds back the coming of the Antichrist, this is
tantamount to the victory of the Jewish elite that wants dissolution. Accordingly, 
one can understand the statement in Ex captivitate salus that Schmitt used to 
repeat: 'The enemy is the personification of our own problem' (Schmitt, 1987: 92 ).
It matters little, for the purposes of a historical and theoretical analysis of 
nihilism, that Schmitt - as testified by the diaries written in the years of crisis 
after the war, Ex captivitate salus and Glossarium - risks the crudity of these 
theses by inscribing them within the framework of a theological-esque
interpretation of history, in respect of which he assumes the attitude of a
"Christian Epimetheus'. It matters little, that is, that he simply presents himself as 
the one who shows the evils contained in Fan dora's vase, but who at the same time 
contemptuously condemns, in the spirit o f 
Catholicism, the egological 
subjectivism and nihilism of modern and contemporary thought, behind which he 
glimpses the forces of Evil that can only be opposed by the 'force that holds back', 
the katéchon represented by the Roman Church. Little matter the poisons that 
Schmitt pours against modernity in the Glossa rium, declaring, for example, that 
the alleged /undamentum inconcussum of the Cartesian cogito is a challenge 
to God of unparalleled arrogance; or that Spinoza, with his equara-ernity in the Glossa rium, declaring, for example, that 
the alleged /undamentum inconcussum of the Cartesian cogito is a challenge 
to God of unparalleled arrogance; or that Spinoza, with his equara-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of God and Nature, has brought the Divine the most shameless offence ever 
uttered; or that Nietzsche, with his philosophy of the will to power, represents 
'the culmination of the most miserable lack of taste and existential stupidity'. 
What is important is that this Epimetheus of our time did not fear that radical 
analysis that led him to uncover the vase of nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e lack of taste and existential stupidity'. 
What is important is that this Epimetheus of our time did not fear that radical 
analysis that led him to uncover the vase of nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

93
Chapter Thirteen
NIHILISM, 'POSTHISTOIRE', END OF HISTORY
In the course of secularisation - the dynamics of which Cari Schmitt's 
work lays bare -
the nihilistic neutralisation of values also attacks the 
understanding of history as the horizon of human action that arches between 
past and future along the progressive development of events.
In modern philosophies of history - born from the secularisation of sacred 
history motifs in Bossuet (Discours sur l'histoire universelle, 1681), Voltaire
(Essai sur l'histoire générale et sur !es moeurs et l'esprit des nations, 1756),
Condorcet (Esquisse d'un tableau historique des progrès de l'esprit 
humain, 1795 ) - an underlying polarity determines the tension that characterises 
the course of res gestae: the polarity between history and utopia, between
tradition and revolution. But with the advent of the historicist mentality, i.e. the 
positivism of history that considers history not as a 'teacher of life' but as an object 
of scientific observation, the tension that history traditionally conveyed to action is
reabsorbed. In the second of his Untimely Considerations ( Un zeitgemiifle
Betrachtungen, 1 873 -76), with its famous title On the Usefulness and Harm of 
History for Life ( Vom Nutzen und Nachteil der Historie/ii r das Leben, 1 874),
Nietzsche foresaw the outcome to which the modern scientific understanding of 
history would lead. Prisoner of the historicist mentality, man wanders around like 
an idle tourist in the garden of history, paying a visit to all the beauties and 
curiosities it displays, but he himself becomes incapable of historical action: he 
behaves as a detached observer, indifferent to tradition and utopia, in accordance 
with that tout comprendre which is at the same time a tout pardonner and which 
deprives him of the power to decide, i.e. to act. In the realisation of the mo-to tradition and utopia, in accordance 
with that tout comprendre which is at the same time a tout pardonner and which 
deprives him of the power to decide, i.e. to act. In the realisation of the mo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---opia, in accordance 
with that tout comprendre which is at the same time a tout pardonner and which 
deprives him of the power to decide, i.e. to act. In the realisation of the mo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dernity - instead of acting, through the critical assimilation of tradition, as a 
horizon and reservoir from which to draw content and motives for planning the 
future without ambiguity - the weight of the historiographic understanding of 
history ends up suffocating and paralysing action.
Relativism and scepticism, pessimism and nihilism are moments on the path 
towards the exhaustion of history understood as the linear course of 
magnificent fates and progressions.
Confirming this process are crepuscular reflections and beliefs that increase 
the feeling that we have reached an irreversible final stage. The idea of an 'end 
of history)) and a 'posthistoire)) is explicitly theorised. The "end of all things")), 
which the Enlightenment philosopher Kant envisaged as the final meaning of 
history to which humanity's constant progress towards the best would lead, has 
become a mere "agony of the end")), the suffocating acknowledgement of the 
irreversibility of the state reached, in today's debate on the "posthistoire")) and 
the end of history.
But what is meant by 'posthistoire))? The meaning of the expression 
obviously depends on the idea of history that one wants to have left behind. In 
the current debate, it has been introduced and used as a critical diagnosis of the 
present: it is meant to indicate the exit from history as linear progress and the 
entry into a dimension where what was history - evolution, development, 
progress according to the unstoppable and irreversible course of time - has been 
put out of action by the stagnation to which historical events have led. 
Intellectuals from the right and left have used the concept of 'posthistoire)) 
filling it with different contents respectively. It is especially worth mentioning 
here two thinkers who, independently of each other, have both made use of this 
concept: Alexandre Kojève and Arnold Gehlen.
Kojève, a native of Moscow, had dealt with Russian messiani smo in his 
youth. His doctoral thesis, presented in Heidelberg with Ja spers, was on Solov'ev's 
philosophy of religion. In Paris, where he had emigrated, he had had contact with 
Berdiaev. The latter, especially in Le sens de l'histoire (1 92 3) and Essai de 
métaphysique eschatologi que (1 94 1), had already developed against the 
optimism of progress and the
"divinisation of the future)) the motif of the "end of history)), placing it in the 
framework of a millenarian eschatology. Kojève, in the above-mentioned
seminars on the Phenomenology of the Spirit, is also fascinated by the thesis 
of the "end of history)), but he elaborates on it - starting from his own reading 
of the Hegelian dialectic of servant and lord and from a singular interpretation 
of the figure of Napoleon - in an entirely original Marxist perspective.
94tes on it - starting from his own reading 
of the Hegelian dialectic of servant and lord and from a singular interpretation 
of the figure of Napoleon - in an entirely original Marxist perspective.
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---from his own reading 
of the Hegelian dialectic of servant and lord and from a singular interpretation 
of the figure of Napoleon - in an entirely original Marxist perspective.
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---

95
The thesis, in short, is this: history ends, in principle, with Napoleon's
victory at Jena. This event - whose importance Hegel im mediately grasps
when he writes to Niethammer that he saw in the victor of Jena 'the soul of the 
world concentrated in a single point'- - symbolises for Kojève the worldwide 
affirmation of the principles of the French Revolution: freedom and equality as 
the foundations of the modern egalitarian and democratic state. It is precisely 
with this form of state, which Kojève calls the État universel et homogène, 
that history is fulfilled and ends. In the universal and homogeneous state, the 
deadly conflict between servant and lord, i.e. the struggle for recognition, 
reaches its fulfilment, all previous conflicts and contradictions are reconciled, 
freedom and equality are realised, and the possibilities of history reach their 
saturation point. Whether this end of history, in the universal and homogeneous 
state, is to be regarded simply as a possibility or as a reality of/act, is a question 
that Kojève dodged now and again with irony and now with patience, and can 
be left aside here. It can only be recalled that the second of the two alternatives 
has recently been taken up and developed by Francis Fukuyama, who, inspired 
by Kojève, has disseminated a cruder, liberal-inspired ver sion of the thesis of the 
end of history. Quite different is the perspective of Arnold Gehlen. In essays 
published in the 1950s and 1960s, he introduced the concept of the end of 
history.
'posthistoire' and 'the end of history' in the German cultural area, ela borando in an 
essentially sociological key and in a political colouration that - unlike Kojève's 
Marxist one -
declares itself conservative. On the basis of the historical-
terminological indications provided in Hendrik de Man's book Massication and 
Cultural Decadence ( Vermassung und Kulturverfall, 1 95 1), another singular 
figure of 'con
revolutionary servant', Gehlen states that the concept of 'posthi stoire' was first 
used by the French mathematician and economist Anton-Augustin Cournot (1801-1 
87 7). The latter hypothesises 'a final state in which history will, so to speak, enter 
into a stasis, since, with respect to the smooth running of the wheels of 
administration and industry, it will henceforth have nothing but dysfunctions. The 
future so cial state that will take over, governed by a universal administration that 
will take care of its own dysfunctions, will not in principle be condemned to death, 
but it is possible to imagine it in time spans that extend at will' (Gehlen, 1 975:
126).
For Gehlen, this 'post-historical' dimension already partially connotes our
present and will completely determine the civilisation of the future: the dynamics 
of technological-industrial development, however much it may be, will be the 
result of the 'post-historical' dimension.ent and will completely determine the civilisation of the future: the dynamics 
of technological-industrial development, however much it may be, will be the 
result of the 'post-historical' dimension.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ely determine the civilisation of the future: the dynamics 
of technological-industrial development, however much it may be, will be the 
result of the 'post-historical' dimension.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
that alternating accelerations and decelerations, progress and regressions, has led 
to a 'state of perpetual motility' that reproduces and repeats itself without
end. There is then a 'stasis of history' in which society and culture 'crystallise'. 
This is the situation Gehlen calls 'posthi stoire)) or - as he explicitly says in one 
of his last essays - 'fi
of history)):
From 1954 onwards, referring back to Cournot, we have called the state so ragged 
'posthistoire)). There will be a suction into the future in which idea motives will take a back 
seat, while rapidly ageing inventions will be replaced by new ones, and all this within the 
long-standing framework o f a continuous growth of mankind with an increasing standard of 
living. "The future sentiment of mankind)), said Gottfried Benn, "will not be that of 
development, but that of incessant movement)) (Gehlen, 1975: 65 ).
Gehlen reiterates the thesis of 'posthistoire)) on several occasions - spe cialy in 
the essays The Secularisation of Progress (Die Siikularisie rung des 
Fortschritts, 1 967 ) and End of History? (Ende der Geschichte?, 1 97 4) - and
supplements it with considerations on the stagnation of mon dial politics. As 
decisive factors for the emergence of this phenomenon, the establishment of the 
balance between the two superpowers and, above all, the emergence of the 
planetary empire of technological civilisation are mentioned:
total mobilisation elevated to a permanent state. What this means above all is the 
disappearance of the possibility of the new and the different, the fact that 
technological-industrial civilisation has now reached a point of no return and has 
assumed the character of irreversibility. There is no longer any force - not
knowledge, not philosophy, not religion, not art - capable of producing a new 
image of the world. The civilisation of science and technology has reached what -
in an essay of the same name from 1961
-
Gehlen calls cultural
crystallisation.
As the oxygen of history and tradition dies out, so does the fire of utopia. The 
tension between being and what ought to be - which, in the forms of modern 
secularisation, had been the driving motive of human action in history, which Kant 
had summarised as the foundation of the hope that mankind was in constant 
progress towards the best, and which Hegel, while taming it in the identity of 
reality and rationality, still kept burning in the movement of the life of the spirit -
today disappears and is no longer there. Marxi's volcanoes extinguished
tion, dismantled the last strongholds of utopian thought, takes pie
The conviction that the contents of the happy life can no longer be anticipated, 
not even in a counterfactual description. It has vanishedismantled the last strongholds of utopian thought, takes pie
The conviction that the contents of the happy life can no longer be anticipated, 
not even in a counterfactual description. It has vanished

--- PAGE BREAK ---trongholds of utopian thought, takes pie
The conviction that the contents of the happy life can no longer be anticipated, 
not even in a counterfactual description. It has vanished

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the belief in a happy ending to history, nor do we venture any more 
philosophies of history, except on the level of esoteric knowledge. The nihilism 
of contemporary culture is not only a crisis of values and the absence of shared 
beliefs: it is also the fact that human action no longer flares up between the two 
opposing poles of tradition and revolution, but is awakened in the narrow 
perspective of the 'here and now'. Neither history nor happening, but the 
punctiformity of the present moment is the horizon for the a gire of 
contemporary man. Subjectivity, the royal principle of modern thought, is today 
weakened, deconstructed, and incapable of bearing the weight of the historical 
arc that stretches between history and utopia. Its projec tuality flattens out in the 
fruition and enjoyment of the pre sent. This is the problem: we want the freest 
and most complete realisation of the individual, and we want it now; we want 
the greatest possible happiness, and we want it today; we want the most 
complete and most free realisation of the individual, and we want it now; we 
want the most complete realisation of the individual, and we want it now.
tion of all social problems, but not one day in the future, rather today or tomorrow 
or the day after tomorrow at the latest.
Thus, at the 'end of history' or in the 'post-historical' age, in the extinguished 
ashes of utopia, intelligence today appears incapable of producing symbolic 
experiences susceptible of consensus and risks being reduced to a cynical 
intelligence, which, in order to erase the discomfort of the loss of centres of 
gravity, is pleased and intoxicated by the here and now, by t h e present in its most 
punctiform and ephemeral actuality, by meaning in its most immeasurable 
consummation. This too is nihilism.of 
gravity, is pleased and intoxicated by the here and now, by t h e present in its most 
punctiform and ephemeral actuality, by meaning in its most immeasurable 
consummation. This too is nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ased and intoxicated by the here and now, by t h e present in its most 
punctiform and ephemeral actuality, by meaning in its most immeasurable 
consummation. This too is nihilism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
Chapter Fourteen
NIHILISM IN ITALY
For a series of reasons that cannot be examined here, Italian philosophical 
culture has been particularly sensitive in capturing the manifestations of 
nihilism and attempting a theoretical elaboration. To begin with, we should recall 
a circumstance overlooked in histories of nihilism, namely that very ancient 
occurrences of the term are attested in the Italian language (cf. Battaglia, 1981:
423-24). 
It is used incidentally by Pasquale Galluppi in Con
philosophical considerations on transcendental idealism and absolute
rationalism published a year before his death, in 1845, in which Zeno of Elea's 
position, which denies the movement by refutation, is mentioned and called 
'nihilism' (Galluppi, 1845: 204). The term is also found more or less in the same 
years in Carlo Cattaneo, who also makes sporadic use of it, but in a more generic 
and derogatory sense. One occurrence is enough, by way of example, to get an 
idea. Cattaneo writes in his typical polemical style:
Having made philosophy the solace of imbeciles and the art of scepticism and 
nihilism, one cannot see how knowledge of the world could flourish (Cattaneo, 1960: I, 
335).
But it is above all Francesco De Sanctis who employs the concept of 
nihilism to qualify Leopardi's philosophical position and his thematisation of 
nothingness. In order to highlight the contradiction between his rootedness in 
Enlightenment rationalism, on the one hand, and his poetic yearning for 
nothingness, on the other, De Sanctis states:
His weak and split will does not allow him to come to a stable conclusion, to 
philosophical coherence, suspended and split between an absolute and desperate nihilism
and individual and humanitarian vel leities (De Sanctis, 1960: 286).low him to come to a stable conclusion, to 
philosophical coherence, suspended and split between an absolute and desperate nihilism
and individual and humanitarian vel leities (De Sanctis, 1960: 286).

--- PAGE BREAK ---stable conclusion, to 
philosophical coherence, suspended and split between an absolute and desperate nihilism
and individual and humanitarian vel leities (De Sanctis, 1960: 286).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
But beyond these historical-terminological occurrences, it is on a theoretical 
level that Italian culture has made important contributions to the analysis of 
nihilism. In the 1970s and 1980s of our century, there was a veritable efflorescence 
of nihilistic literature, which blossomed in conjunction with the fortunes of 
Nietzsche's and Heidegger's thought. There was a wide-ranging debate in which 
the need for a philosophical critique of current affairs was recognisable and in 
which thinkers with different approaches such as Pareyson and Caracciolo
intervened,
Severino, Sini, Vitiello, Ruggenini, Vattimo, Givone, Cacciari, to name but a few.
The merit of bringing attention to nihilism as a horizon for a critical diagnosis 
of the present, and of providing an initial philosophical elaboration of it, has been 
that of thinkers such as Alberto Caracciolo and Luigi Parey son and their 
respective schools. In the works of both, albeit from different theoretical 
perspectives and with different emphases, the analysis of n i h i l i s m occupies a 
central position. Nihilism is embraced by both of them as a decisive experience of 
our century. It must therefore be thought through to the end, in all its 
manifestations and consequences, in the conviction, however, that the theoretical 
assimilation of the phenomenon opens the way to overcoming it. This latter 
requirement explains the constant connection - in both Pareyson and Caracciolo -
with the problem of the sacred and the religious, in which a way out of the 
nihilistic outcomes of modernity is glimpsed.
From the Pareyson school, however, also came an opposite interpretation 
of nihilism, which ended up setting the tone for the debate: that of Gianni 
Vattimo. Vattimo did not reject nihilism as a malaise of our culture, but argued, 
on the contrary, that the unease it provokes in contemporary consciousness 
stems from the fact that it is not yet sufficiently nihilistic, that it has not yet 
renounced the will to impose meaning on things, that it does not yet know how to 
accept them in their naked and raw becoming. Vattimo has therefore elected 
nihilistic awareness, understood in this way, as the horizon of his thought and 
has not hesitated to profess to be an apologist for nihilism.
He therefore declared his 'nihilistic vocation' and consistently hailed the 
nihilistic phenomena of contempo ranean culture as positive events. Intervening in 
this sense in the pro-sophistic debate - on topics such as the crisis of dialectical 
thought (The Adventures of the dzf/erence, 1980), the death of the subject 
(Beyond the Subject, 1 981), the postmodern (The End of Modernity, 1985 ) -
he has progressively focused on a philosophical perspective defined as 'de bole>) 
(The Weak Thought, 1983 ) . In this programme, incorporating, 1 981), the postmodern (The End of Modernity, 1985 ) -
he has progressively focused on a philosophical perspective defined as 'de bole>) 
(The Weak Thought, 1983 ) . In this programme, incorporating

--- PAGE BREAK ---dern (The End of Modernity, 1985 ) -
he has progressively focused on a philosophical perspective defined as 'de bole>) 
(The Weak Thought, 1983 ) . In this programme, incorporating

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
way the critique and overcoming of the metaphysics theorised by Nietz sche 
and Heidegger, he affirmed the need to renounce the strong cate gories of the 
Western philosophical tradition and developed a
A "weak ontology" that intends to recognise and accept becoming in its facticity, 
without giving it a meaning that transcends it and without imposing strong 
forms, categories or interpretative schemes that would inevitably end up 
inhibiting its flow. In Vattimo's opinion, it is precisely this inflexibility that
characterises metaphysics, which, with its search for a 'transcendent' explanation 
of everything that is, represents an excessive defensive reaction, the index of a 
way of thinking that cannot tolerate the unpredictable nature of becoming. 
Against this, Vattimo advocates a philosophical attitude that neither removes 
nor clumsily attempts to bring back to unity the fragmentation of reality, the 
irreducible diversity of language games and forms of knowledge, nor suffers all 
this as an inevitable circumstance, but accepts it as an essential characteristic of 
the contemporary world.
Because of this peculiar trait, 'weak thought' is certainly in tune with the 
programmatic intentions of postmodern culture. In it, the analysis of the dissolution 
of traditional categories is not accompanied - as in the early twentieth-century 
philosophies of the crisis- - by a feeling of nostalgia for the lost unity and 
wholeness, but greets di versification and fragmentation, hence plurality and 
instability, as intrinsic aspects of reality to be recognised as such in their positive 
character, without claiming to lead them back to unity and strong hierarchies 
constructed f r o m above or from outside. Consequently, Vattimo declared the 
need to assert a paradigm of weak, paralo gical rationality, not subordinating and 
hierarchising but paratactic, not vertical but transversal, i.e. one that is intrinsically 
differentiated and thus cut and adapted to the respective object fields of 
application. Along the lines of the Wittgensteinian model of the plurality of 
language games, he noted and declared the positive character of the plurality of 
forms of knowledge, of possibilities of action, of life worlds, emphasising from 
this plurality not the possibility of coordination and standardisation, but the 
potential for fragmentation, conflictuality and even incommensurability. This led 
to the theorisation of cultural operations, attitudes and practices of rupture, such as 
the 'fragmentation' and 'regionalisation' of knowledge, 'decanonisation', i.e. the 
abandonment of traditional 'canons', and 'hybridisation', i.e. the contamination of 
genres (cf. Welsch, 1987).
This was stated by claiming a ni-onalisation' of knowledge, 'decanonisation', i.e. the 
abandonment of traditional 'canons', and 'hybridisation', i.e. the contamination of 
genres (cf. Welsch, 1987).
This was stated by claiming a ni-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ledge, 'decanonisation', i.e. the 
abandonment of traditional 'canons', and 'hybridisation', i.e. the contamination of 
genres (cf. Welsch, 1987).
This was stated by claiming a ni-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
chylistics. If, as weak thought would have it, one accepts the becoming of 
things with submissiveness, without over-interpreting or transcending it, then 
one can disentangle gloomy and nostalgic nihilism - as happens when one still
cultivates the memory and nostalgia of lost values - and with Nietzsche, the 
possibility opens up of a "joyful" nihilism that intends to be closer to human 
finitude, to its joys and sufferings, than metaphysics. This position, with its 
rejection of cultural pessimism, is clearly different from other interpretations of 
nihilism, including Pareyson's and Sergio Givone's, in which a close link between 
nihilism and cultural pessimism is revealed.
and problem of evil (cf. Pareyson, 1993 , 1 995 ; Givone, 1984, 1 988). But the 
interpretation of nihilism that stands out in the panorama of Italian philosophy for 
its originality and systematicity is that of Emanuele Se verino. Trained at the 
Catholic University of Milan with Gustavo Bontadini - who rejected the label of 
'neo-scholasticism' to claim that of 'classical metaphysics' - Severino confronted 
himself from his earliest
me works with the metaphysical problem: how is the being of w h a t becomes to 
be understood and explained? The presence of this problem, reproduced by 
Bontadini, can be felt in Severino's early writings: Heidegger e ilproblema 
della metafisica (1 950), which contains an analysis of the Heideggerian critique 
of metaphysics as set out in the book on Kant and in the essays of 1 929, and the 
Note sul problematicismo italiano (1 950), in which critical studies on Ugo 
Spirito, Nicola Abbagnano and Antonio Banfi are collected. In relation to Bon 
tadini's revival of classical metaphysics, it is possible to better grasp both the crux 
of Severini's thought and the originality of his position.
First of all, it should be made clear that Bontadini's revival was not a 
restoration operation. Beyond the reference to the Greek paradigm, it aimed at 
defining the logical-anthological structure of metaphysics in order to vindicate 
its necessity against the modern dominance of gnoseolgy. Interesting in our 
context is the path Bontadini followed to arrive at this. He started out from an 
interpretation of modern philosophy as 'gnoseologism', i.e. as a speculative
approach in which, as the transcendence of being with respect to thought is 
naturalistically presupposed, being is not immediately apparent. Knowledge is 
then taken as the starting point and its primacy in 'gnoseology' is theorised. 
Given the heterogeneity and surplus of being with respect to knowing, 
philosophies with a gnoseological taxation cannot ground experience, i.e. the 
manifestation of being in the act of knowing, but must presuppose it as given. 
They generally end up surreptitiously interpreting it asth a gnoseological taxation cannot ground experience, i.e. the 
manifestation of being in the act of knowing, but must presuppose it as given. 
They generally end up surreptitiously interpreting it as

--- PAGE BREAK ---axation cannot ground experience, i.e. the 
manifestation of being in the act of knowing, but must presuppose it as given. 
They generally end up surreptitiously interpreting it as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

103
receptivity or as construction: receptivity in relation to a being given t o it from 
outside, construction on the basis of an internal principle. In the idea lism, modern 
gnoseologism reaches its extreme formulation but also its resolution. Indeed, the 
rethinking of the concept of experience that it imposes reopens the possibility of 
metaphysics, which, in its classical structure, i.e. in its essentiality, is nothing other 
than the coherent philosophical explanation of the being of what becomes. Three 
are the components and at the same time the steps of the metaphysical argument: 
experience, the principle of non-contradiction, and the idea of what is 'other' or 
'further' than experience.
Now, the first definition of the structure of metaphysics is given by Greek 
thought, in particular by Parmenides, who first formulated the principle of non-
contradiction in its ontological valence. By saying that being is and it is 
impossible for it not to be, and that non-being is not and it is impossible for it to 
be, he establishes the principle - which Bontadini does pro prio - according to 
which being cannot and can never be counted from non-being. If one strictly 
adheres to such a principle, the reality of becoming that immediate experience 
attests to us, and which now is and now is not, appears contradictory: becoming 
presents itself as that being whose reality is mixed with non-being. But since 
contradiction cannot be admitted, one must then think that the being of becoming,
which appears limited by non-being, does not exhaust the totality of being. By 
means of a 'metempirical inference' one must then think of the incontrovertible 
reality of an absolute being that is not limited by becoming: such is the reality 
of divine being.
In his early speculative works, especially in The Oriental Structure
ginaria (1958), Severino takes up and radicalises this approach through the 
rigorous 
analysis 
of 
the 
logical-ontological 
structure 
of 
absolute 
and 
incontrovertible being and the incontrovertible thought, epistéme, that
corresponds to it. Now, according to Severino, this thought is structure, i.e. the 
original relation of "logical immediacy" and "phenomenological immediacy", and 
this relation is the appearance of the "eternity" of being as being, i.e. of every 
being. Eternity, i.e. the impossibility of non-being, is not, however, simply a 
property of pure being, as in Parrnenides, or of a metaphysical-theoretical-logical 
principle, but is the essential predicate of the totality of the differences of the
being. In the Original Structure, Severino intends to show that the structure of 
origin is that which authentically possesses the property that Aristotelé 
attributes to the principle of non-contradiction: that of being the incontrovertible, 
that which is not contradictory.
which cannot not be because its negation also presupposes it.y that Aristotelé 
attributes to the principle of non-contradiction: that of being the incontrovertible, 
that which is not contradictory.
which cannot not be because its negation also presupposes it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ttributes to the principle of non-contradiction: that of being the incontrovertible, 
that which is not contradictory.
which cannot not be because its negation also presupposes it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
Taking Bontadini's teaching as his starting point, Severino thus arrived at 
unexpected and uncomfortable conclusions, which came to light above all in the essay 
Ritornare a Parmenide (Returning to Parmenides), originally published in the 
Rivista di filosofia neoscolastica (56, 1964, pp. 13 7- 175, with a Postscript, ibid., 
57, 1965, pp. 559-618) and later included in Essenza del nichilismo (1972).
While in fact Bontadini inferred from the contradictory nature of becoming, by virtue 
of the principle of non-contradiction, the existence of a transcendent being that does 
not become, Severino drew from the same starting point an opposite conclusion: if 
becoming is contradictory, it is necessary to deny its reality, but not in order to 
postulate a transcendent principle that is absolutely different from becoming.
come itself, but to recognise that all that is, since it cannot be admitted as 
becoming, on pain of contradiction, must then be thought of as eternal and 
necessary.
Developed with coherence and rigour, this position became increasingly 
clearer for what it was, namely as a "neo-Parmenidean" anthropology, which, 
because of the pulpit from which it was professed and the personality of its 
professors, could not fail to arouse amazement, then scandal, then anathema. It was 
officially condemned by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith as atheistic 
spe culation, irreconcilable with the contents of revelation and the teaching of the 
Catholic Church. Severinus responded to the condemnation with his Answer to the 
Church (cf. Severinus, 1 982: 3 17 -87), but left the Catholic University and moved, 
followed by his students, to the Uni versity of Venice.
Following this important event, Severino continued t o unravel in an 
increasingly rigorous and radical manner the premises from which he had started, 
gradually giving more and more shape to his own
'neo-Parmenideism'. Not only that. On the basis of this original conception, he also 
developed a diagnosis of civilisation with temporary and it is in this context that 
the category of 'nihilism', used as a critical analysis, became central for him. His 
insistence on nihilism and technology as the hallmarks of the current world epoch 
has led to his analysis being associated with Heidegger's famous thesis about the 
fulfilment of metaphysics in nihilism and the essence of modern technology, but it 
must be said that Severino arises in completely different terms from Heidegger. In 
addition to Es
without nihilism, the texts in which these motifs are developed
are: The Inhabitants of Time, especially interesting for its analysis of 
Christianity, Marxism and technology as fundamental forms of Western nihilism; 
Techne. The roots of violence (1 979), de-ped
are: The Inhabitants of Time, especially interesting for its analysis of 
Christianity, Marxism and technology as fundamental forms of Western nihilism; 
Techne. The roots of violence (1 979), de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ants of Time, especially interesting for its analysis of 
Christianity, Marxism and technology as fundamental forms of Western nihilism; 
Techne. The roots of violence (1 979), de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
dicated to the examination of the different manifestations of the uprootedness of 
contemporary e poca. His Adelphian production follows: Law and Ca so ( 1979), 
The Missed Patricide (1985 ), The Fundamental Tendency of Our Time (1988) ,
Beyond Language (1 992) and above all Destiny of Necessity (Milan 1980), The
Yoke (1989) and Taut6tes (1995 ), in which the vast speculative design of his first 
systematic works is taken up again, with the intention of exposing in an even more 
rigorous manner, in alternation with the nihilistic alienation of the West, the structure 
of the truth of being from the pure point of view of the necessity of that truth. And 
with regard to the problem of nihilism and technology, the interpretation of Leopardi, 
to whom the book Ilnul la e la poesia is dedicated, is also important. At the End of 
the Age of Technique: Leopardi (1990).
Now, although in some texts, especially in the long Introdu
ions written for the new edition ( 1 981) of the Original Structure and re cently in 
Taut6tes, alludes to a certain evolution of it, Severinus' thought lends itself to 
being considered as a monolithic and unitary block. We can illustrate here, at least 
briefly, the two components that constitute its essential core: the examination of 
the fundamental structure of the West as the history of the forgotten ni chilism of 
being, and the theoretical analysis of the ne cessary and incontrovertible structure 
of being in its radical and absolute dif ference from nothingness.
For Severino, the thinking and acting of Western humanity have their 
deepest metaphysical motivation in an unconscious structure. It is located at a 
more radical anthological level than the structures of historical occurrence 
identified by Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche and psychoanalysis. This unconscious 
structure can be traced back, in its ex noxiousness, to the will that the entity be 
nothing. And this nihilistic will is attributed to all forms and phases of Western 
thought, in the mi sura in which what they all have in common is the belief in 
becoming, that is, the belief that all things stand and flow in time. The belief 
that 'everything flows and nothing remains' is not only Heraclitus' but of the 
entire West. And why should this belief amount to the will that things are 
nothing? Simply because of this: because to think that things are in time, that 
they are born and die, that they come out of nothing and return to nothing, is to 
think that they, although being entities, have been nothing in the past and will 
be nothing again in the future. But to believe this is to think it possible that (at 
some time in the past or future) the entity is nothing. When we think and say
that things are in time, that past things are not (any more) and future things are 
not (yet), we think and say that(at 
some time in the past or future) the entity is nothing. When we think and say
that things are in time, that past things are not (any more) and future things are 
not (yet), we think and say that

--- PAGE BREAK ---he past or future) the entity is nothing. When we think and say
that things are in time, that past things are not (any more) and future things are 
not (yet), we think and say that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
entity is nothing, and we are therefore, according to Severino, nihilists in an 
essential sense. But to say that being is nothing is contradictory. Thus Western 
man, in his nihilism, rests on the inconsistent foundation of a contradiction. 
Nevertheless, there is no way to remove him from his belief in the reality of 
becoming, from thinking and acting as if being came from nothing and returned to 
it, as if being was nothing. Placing the entity in time - time being interpreted as the 
element that separates (on the basis of the reconduction of tempus to gre
co témnein and chr6nos a krinein) - western man separates him from the
being and thinks of it as non-being, as nothing, forgetting the admonition of 
Parmenides who says: "Thou shalt not separate being from being".
sere' (fr. 4).
This is the basic contradiction in which the West consciously persists to the 
extent that it believes in the existence of the to come. But let us listen to 
Severino's argument as he formulates it:
For metaphysics, things 'are'. Their 'being' is their not being a nothing. Insofar as 
they are, they are called 'entities)) or 'beings)). But the entity, as such, is that which may 
not be: either in the sense that it could have been or may not be, or in the sense that it 
begins and ends (was not and is no longer). Metaphysics is the allowance for the non-
being of entity. By affirming that being is not - by consenting to the non-existence of 
being - it affirms that non-being is nothing. The fundamental thought of metaphysics 
is that being, as such, is nothing (Severino, 1 982: 1 95 ).
And elsewhere:
We say: 'things past and things to come are nothing)). What could be more 
unquestionable? But in this unquestionable conviction of ours we mean something 
different from the statement: 'nothing is nothing)); that is, it is not of nothingness that we 
mean that it is nothing, but it is of things past, or of things to come, that is, of that whose 
meaning is not identical with the meaning <<nothing)). But that whose meaning is not 
identical with the meaning <<nothing)) is not a nothing. Of the city of Hiroshima we say 
that it has become nothing. But Hiroshima does not mean 'nothing)), that is, it is not a 
nothing. Hiroshima, of which we say that it is now a
'nothing'), is not a nothing. We therefore think that what is not a nothing is a nothing. The 
past and the future are the time in which things, that which is not a nothing, is a nothing. 
If they were to tell us that the past and the future are the time in which the circle is square, 
we would be quite ready to retort that there can be no time in which this absurd 
identification of the circle and the square is realised. But this sensitivity to the absurd (...) 
does not prevent us from thinking instead of a time in which the thing, that which is not a 
nothing, is nothing and not a square.and the square is realised. But this sensitivity to the absurd (...) 
does not prevent us from thinking instead of a time in which the thing, that which is not a 
nothing, is nothing and not a square.

--- PAGE BREAK ---alised. But this sensitivity to the absurd (...) 
does not prevent us from thinking instead of a time in which the thing, that which is not a 
nothing, is nothing and not a square.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
prevents us from living and acting in accordance with this thought. We think and live 
things as if they were nothing. For European civilisation, things are nothing: the sense of 
the thing, which guides the history of the West, is the nihilism of things. The essence of 
European civilisation is nihilism, since the fundamental sense of nihilism is the rendering 
of things as nothing, the persuasion that the entity is nothing, and it is acting guided and 
established by this persuasion (Severino, 1978: 20).
From Parmenides onwards, the West remains for Severinus within the 
horizon of such nihilism. Indeed, nihilistic would be all civilisations, all peoples 
and religions, social institutions, masses and individuals that remain bound to 
the belief in becoming. In Western civilisation, with technology, this belief 
would reach its highest form and its most profound and inestimable diffusion. 
Indeed, where not only human thought, but also human action is guided by the 
nihilistic conviction that things are nothing in the sense that they can be 
fabricated and destroyed, that is to say, extracted from nothing and brought 
back into nothing, Ni chilism reaches its highest degree of reality. But 
technology is just that, since it must assume that things can be made (from 
nothing) and destroyed (in nothing) according to one's liking. And whereas at one 
time the task of creating and destroying things was entrusted to God, in the 
contemporary era technology takes on this divine prerogative: if theology is the 
first form of technology, then technology is the last form of theology. The 
consistent conclusion is:
God and modern technology are the two fundamental expressions of metaphysical 
nichi lism (Severino, 1982: 197). 
On the basis of this determination of nihilism Severino constructs his critical 
diagnosis of the contemporary world and the values it produces. Inhabiting time, 
believing in becoming and thus in the li berty of things to come and go from 
nothing, implies the consummation and demise of all those that Severino calls the 
'immutables' of the West. Such are the figures, forms, ideals and values through 
which Western thought attempts to capture and stabilise becoming in its 
unpredictable complexity. In sum, time implies the fall of all the gods and idols 
produced by history: the God of Christianity as well as the gods of other religions, 
the capitalist organisation of labour like Marxism, the various forms of 
philosophical thought from Plato to Husserl. And the demise of the immutable is 
not only a sociological-cultural process, but has its cause in the metaphysical-
nihilistic choice for becoming.ms of 
philosophical thought from Plato to Husserl. And the demise of the immutable is 
not only a sociological-cultural process, but has its cause in the metaphysical-
nihilistic choice for becoming.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thought from Plato to Husserl. And the demise of the immutable is 
not only a sociological-cultural process, but has its cause in the metaphysical-
nihilistic choice for becoming.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108
In this regard, keeping in mind the precise sense in which Severino 
maintains that Western civilisation is nihilistic and the terms in which he 
criticises its manifestations, it must be said that much of the attention his work 
has attracted is based on a misunderstanding. It consists in believing that he 
speaks of nihilism in the common philosophical sense of the term, i.e. as a 
cultural phenomenon that is interesting to study for some, worrying for others, 
and indifferent for others. But the sense in which nihilism is for some worrying 
and for others interesting or indifferent is quite different from what Severino 
means.
On the basis of the identification of the unconscious structure of the West, 
Severinus proposes an alternative to the path of night followed so far. It is 
represented by the way of day of which Parmenides speaks, and which with 
systematises in recognising the necessity that being is and cannot not be, and that 
nothing is not and cannot be. Severinus, however, does not want a sem
plete return to Parmenides, as one might think and as has actually been thought. 
Instead, it is necessary to repeat the 'parricide' by which Plato believes he is rid 
of Parmenides and deludes himself into saving the
world of phenomena. In the repetition of the 'parricide', the differences are 
finally brought back into being: no longer isolated from it - as happens in 
Parmenides, in Plato, in the entire history of the West - they then appear in 
their eternity. The sense of their becoming therefore also radically changes, 
which is no longer to be understood as leaving nothingness and returning to it, 
but as the appearance and disappearance of the eternal. If we allow this 
necessary and questionable structure to come to light in our thinking and 
speaking, then the Ni chilistic belief in the becoming of entities, that is, the 
obstinacy of wanting to live in time, i.e. outside of necessity, and of wanting to 
separate the entity from its being, will appear - this is the Severinian thesis - as
the most profound alienation, as the most radical and tenacious evil of any 
original sin, of any economic or psychological error. Here is how Severin 
himself summarises this proposal of his in a significant passage from Essence
of Nihilism:
In order to reawaken the truth of being, which has been asleep in Western thought 
since the day of its birth, one must still penetrate the meaning of this simple and great 
thought: that being is and is not allowed not to be. Its reawakening certainly constitutes 
the greatest danger for the long winter of reason, which sees its oldest habits disrupted 
and feels a new and most essential task proposed to it. If one is able, one must stifle 
this thought before it comes to bloom, because otherwise it is de-son, which sees its oldest habits disrupted 
and feels a new and most essential task proposed to it. If one is able, one must stifle 
this thought before it comes to bloom, because otherwise it is de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---oldest habits disrupted 
and feels a new and most essential task proposed to it. If one is able, one must stifle 
this thought before it comes to bloom, because otherwise it is de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

109
stined, he alone, to have the right to flourish. Indeed, he pushes along a path, from which 
it is no longer possible to turn back: if of being (of every, of all being) it cannot be thought 
that it is not, then of being (of every, of all being) it cannot be thought that it becomes, 
because, in becoming, it would not be - that is, it would not be before its birth and after its 
corruption. So all being is immutable. It does not come out of nothingness and does not 
return to nothingness. It is eternal (Se verino, 1982: 69).
In Destiny of Necessity, western nihilism is analysed in its sedimentation in 
the structure of Indo-European languages and in the western way of understanding 
action starting with Aristotle. Here, too, Severino traces the multiple 
manifestations of nihilism back to a single root, the belief in becoming, i.e. the 
contradictory conviction that being is nothing, and again explains how the Western 
decision to separate being from being, i.e. from the destiny of necessity, in order to 
subject it to human will, has deeply de fined the course of Western history up to 
the present day. And once again Severino intends to show that the West represents 
but one of the two coursers that drag the happening of the earth in two opposite 
directions: it is the visible courser, the one guided by the will to power; the other 
courser, invisible in the horizon of moral appearances, lets itself be guided instead 
by the <<Will to Destiny>>, and precisely by the will of that destiny of necessity 
to which Severino's thought intends to bear witness.
It goes without saying that this position represents an unparalleled 
provocation not only for common sense, but also for contemporary thought. 
Everywhere today, there is a defensive attitude on the part of philosophy, which 
is concerned with safeguarding its legitimacy and disciplinary consistency on 
two fronts, i.e. both against the rationality of science and technology and against 
myth and religion. This defensive attitude has led to the abandonment of claims 
to absoluteness and the search for paradigms of philosophical rationality that 
are either partial, limited to specific fields of reference and application, as in the 
case of so-called practical rationality, or more debo lished, i.e. with 
circumscribed or even zero claims to validity. Well, against these predominant 
tendencies, Severino not only claims a
strong cognitive role to philosophical discourse, but even argues that it must have the 
character of incontrovertibility. It must be the logical locus of the manifestation of 
the anthological structure of the necessity of being, which is that which is and cannot 
not be, in its radical difference from nothingness as that which is not and can never be.the manifestation of 
the anthological structure of the necessity of being, which is that which is and cannot 
not be, in its radical difference from nothingness as that which is not and can never be.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the anthological structure of the necessity of being, which is that which is and cannot 
not be, in its radical difference from nothingness as that which is not and can never be.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
It is not surprising, therefore, that his writings have been attacked on all 
sides, even if the vehemence of the attacks detracts from the general recognition 
of the coherence with which he has been able to develop his philosophical 
discourse. Naturally, the criticisms that have worried Severino have not been 
those that have limited themselves to
polemics with him, but rather those that, by getting to the heart of his ar 
gomentations, aimed to unhinge the neo
Parmenides. This was especially the case with the criticism levelled at Severinus
by his teacher Gustavo Bontadini, by Cornelio Fabro and by Enrico Berti - the
latter from an Aristotelian point of view, thus making the case for that 
plurivocentric conception of being that represents the most powerful and 
dangerous antithesis to the univocentric conception Severino refers to. Severino 
also devoted much attention to Lucio Colletti's objections, especially in relation to 
the problem of contradiction.
In lieu of an examination of these various critiques, allow me here only a 
brief point to make in order to understand Severino's thought critically, 
especially in view of the developments contained in De stino della necessità, 
in Il Giogo and in Taut6tes, all works that radicalise the position developed in 
Original Structure and in Essenza del nichilismo, taking up the point of 
view of necessity even more rigorously. It is clear that for Severino, the truths 
of reason and the fundamental principles that govern them, the principle of 
identity and the principle of non-contradiction, not only have anthological value 
but also represent the structure of the Absolute. In short, thought, in its logical 
structure, reflects the immutable structure of being in its uncontroversial
necessity. Therefore thought, in its implementation by
fect, transposes man beyond the phenomenological horizon of finite knowledge 
and elevates him to the point of view of the Absolute. Bearing this in mind, it is 
possible to understand the sense of Severin's negation of becoming: in the horizon 
of the Absolute, that is sub specie aeternitatis, becoming is resolved in the already 
given and eternal movable "sequence" of all its infinite moments; only from the 
point of view of a finite mind, that is sub specie temporis, these infinite moments, 
not recognised in their eternal connection, appear from time to time in their 
flowing and in their flowing, generating the appearance of becoming. This is why 
the negation of time and becoming has taken on, from Destiny of Necessity 
onwards, a so to speak "Spinozistic" connotation - even if, obviously, the severinia 
na determination of being has nothing to do with Spinoza's metaphysical 
presupposition of substance. In this sense, the speculative operation that Se verino 
performs basically consists in this: in bringing fi-ation of being has nothing to do with Spinoza's metaphysical 
presupposition of substance. In this sense, the speculative operation that Se verino 
performs basically consists in this: in bringing fi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---othing to do with Spinoza's metaphysical 
presupposition of substance. In this sense, the speculative operation that Se verino 
performs basically consists in this: in bringing fi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

111
losophical, through the recognition of the logical-anthological necessity that comes 
to light in the rational structure that even a finite mind can recognise, to that "point 
o f view" from which knowledge itself is no longer the point of view of finiteness, 
but is the manifestation of the logical-anthological necessity of the Absolute, of 
God himself. Severino wants to elevate human existence to that "point o f view" 
that allows him to look beyond the circle of appearance, towards Necessity itself 
and thus transcend nihilism.
Naturally, many problems remain open, especially, to name the one with 
which I think the decisive pages of Destiny of Necessity and Taut6tes grapple,
the difficulty of mediating between the whole of being and t h e contents of 
appearing, between being and entities, between the co
infinite and finite science, between thought and experience, between logi c and 
phenomenology. This is a fundamental question with which all forms of thinking 
about the Absolute have always had to contend.
This is a problem because - as Aristotle showed - it is precisely the assumption of 
the principle of non-contradiction in its anthological scope that requires the 
recognition of the multiple and diverse determinations of being (which Severin 
admits in fact). This poses a problem because - as Aristotle showed - it is 
precisely the assumption of the principle of non-contradiction in its anthological 
scope that makes it necessary to recognise the multiple and diverse determinations 
of being (which Severinus actually admits as eternal). But then: how is it possible 
to say different without denying, i.e. without saying 'this is not that' or 'that is 
not this'? That is, without saying that 'that', which is being, is not 'this', which is 
also being?
so entity? So without saying that something that is is not ente, i.e. that en te is non-
entity, i.e. nothing?
It is clear at this point that the showdown must be made with
Aristotle, since he is the very thinker who was the first to show how the 
assumption of the principle of non-contradiction implies the recognition of the 
plurality of meanings of being and therefore the rejection of the univocal 
conception o f being o f which the Parmenian conception is the first rigorous 
formulation. Vice versa, accepting the latter, one is forced not only to deny 
becoming, as Severinus actually does, but also to remove differences, which 
Severinus does not admit. Now, while in his revival of Parmenides Severino had 
good play in denying becoming and time by declaring them as forms of appearing, 
the problem of explaining and telling differences and determinations without
contradiction still remains open; for in order to do so - within the horizon of a 
univocistic conception of the -earing, 
the problem of explaining and telling differences and determinations without
contradiction still remains open; for in order to do so - within the horizon of a 
univocistic conception of the -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

being, within which the copula 'is' is always and only employed in the meaning of 
'is identical', indeed, of 'is eternally identical',
therefore in the sense of the essential preaching of identity - one must di re
differences without using negation. This is what Severinus tries to do in
Taut6tes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nally identical',
therefore in the sense of the essential preaching of identity - one must di re
differences without using negation. This is what Severinus tries to do in
Taut6tes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
Chapter Fifteen
BEYOND NIHILISM?
Since it has had such a tense hold on our century, it is safe to assume that 
nihilism represents more than just a current in contemporary thought or a 
sombre occurrence of its intellectual avant-garde. One does not have to be a 
Nietzschean to recognise that its ghost lurks almost everywhere in the culture of 
our time. Nor does one have to go so far as to think, with Hei degger, that 
nihilism is the very occurrence of Western history, to recognise that 'those who 
have not experienced for themselves the enormous po tence of nothingness and 
have not been tempted by it know very little about our epoch' Uunger -
Heidegger, 1989: l 04 ).
Today, nihilism - a word that until recently was reserved for a few elites -
is the expression of a deep malaise in our culture: on a socio-historical level, it 
overlaps with the processes of seco larisation and rationalisation, and hence of 
disenchantment and shattering of our image of the world, and on a 
philosophical level, it has led to the corruption of faiths and the spread of 
relativism and scepticism with regard to worldviews and ultimate values. And 
whichever attitude one takes towards it, of acceptance or rejection, anyone can 
see how much history has
filled nihilism "with substance, with lived life, with actions and pains" Uunger -
Heidegger, 1989: 49) .
Having in this sense touched a nerve point in the critical consciousness and 
cultural self-representation of our time, nihilism has provoked reactions and 
attempts to overcome it that are just as de finite. Especially on the level of morality 
and ethics, efforts to overcome our nihilistic condition and the evils that result from 
it are now swarming (cf. Reale 1995; Scalfari 1995; Zecchi, 1993).

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the level of morality 
and ethics, efforts to overcome our nihilistic condition and the evils that result from 
it are now swarming (cf. Reale 1995; Scalfari 1995; Zecchi, 1993).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
Yet precisely on a moral and ethical level, the observation made by sociologist 
Niklas Luhmann applies today more than ever: Paradigm lost. We have lost the 
traditional paradigms for orienting ourselves. And this va ration of John Milton's 
famous title applies in a twofold sense: both at the level of foundation and 
application, both in the theoretical and practical-applicative dimension (cf. 
Luhmann, 1 990).
Of course, there is undeniably a widespread demand for eti ca today. This 
should come as no great surprise. With a stoic look at modernity - to which 
Luhmann invites us - one can see that from the invention of the printing press 
onwards, in the last decades of each century of the New Age, the demands for 
ethics return with almost astronomical regularity.
l) Towards the end of the 16th century, with Justus Lipsio, there is the great 
spread of Neo-ostoicism.
2) Between 1 670 and 1690, the parenetic ethics of the great moralists 
dominated the scene: Balthasar Gracian, Pasca!, La Rochefoucauld.
3) A century later, in Germany, there is Kant with his critique of practical
reason and, in England, Bentham with his utilitarian calculations. In France, the 
most conspicuous thematisation of virtue and vice, in their mirror-image 
opposition and their effects, is entrusted to the dissolute pen of the Marquis de 
Sade.
4) The next wave arrived regularly around 1880, when with Simmel and 
Neo-Kantism came the flowering of value philosophies.
What about our century? We have even anticipated this periodic revival. From 
the 1960s onwards, we have witnessed a resurgence in the demand for ethics and a 
corresponding efflorescence of theories that aim to satisfy it.
How to interpret this phenomenon? As the manifestation of a historical 
rhythm in the life of modern culture? Or as the expression of a critical awareness 
and philosophical health? Or perhaps as a sign of a reaction to the crisis and a will 
to overcome it?
Let us gladly leave the interpretation of these periodic returns to the 
astrologers and simply note that the panorama of contemporary ethical theories 
offers a babelic spectacle. Confusion reigns supreme in the tradition of continental 
thought, ranging from the 'neo-Aristotelianism' of Gadamer to the 'ethics of 
argumentation' of Habermas and Apel to the 'ethics of responsibility' of Hans 
Jonas, and in the field of Anglo-American discussion, where we move from 
utilitarianism to meta-ethics, from neo-contractualism to communitarianism, from 
bioethics to environmental ethics. The catalogue of ideas is sva-ld of Anglo-American discussion, where we move from 
utilitarianism to meta-ethics, from neo-contractualism to communitarianism, from 
bioethics to environmental ethics. The catalogue of ideas is sva-

--- PAGE BREAK ---discussion, where we move from 
utilitarianism to meta-ethics, from neo-contractualism to communitarianism, from 
bioethics to environmental ethics. The catalogue of ideas is sva-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
and the curious tourist could stroll endlessly through the ethics market garden.
The reality is that today, to an extent aggravated by the nihilistic 
framework and the planetary and complex nature of modern life, the crisis that 
has marked other historical epochs is being repeated and is characterised by the 
conflict between worldviews and systems of differing standards, by the 
difficulty of framing new moral actions and facts within traditional ethical 
paradigms, by the competition between different ethical theories that generates 
logomachies with neither winners nor losers and results in indifference, 
relativism and scepticism.
Things are no better on a practical level. The binding force of moral standards 
and the possibility of their being accepted and applied have vanished. Here too it 
must be noted: Pa radigm lost. Traditional references -
myths, gods, 
transcendences, values - have been eroded by the disenchantment of the world. 
Scientific-technical rationalisation has produced the undecidability of ultimate 
choices on the level of reason alone. The result is the polytheism of values and the 
isoste ny of decisions, the same stupidity of prescriptions and the same inu tility of 
prohibitions. In the world governed by science and technology, the effectiveness of 
moral imperatives seems to be equal to that of bicycle brakes mounted on a jumbo 
jet (Beck, 1988: 1 94). Under the steel canopy of nihilism, there is no virtue or 
morality possible.
The fact is that the lost paradigm has been replaced by a new one that 
imposes its own imperatives on all human conduct and behaviour.
no. It is the techno-scientific paradigm. Science and technology - which
coring space and speeding up time, relieving pain and prolonging life, 
mobilising and exploiting the planet's resources - they provide a far more 
effective and coercive guide to action than morality can. They impose obligations 
that bind more than all morals written in the history of mankind, making all 
other imperatives superfluous from now on. Science and technology organise 
life on the planet with the inevitability of a geological shift. In their sight, ethics 
and morality now have the beauty of rare fossils.
Contemporary man has no alternative: whatever he thinks or does, he is 
already subject to the coercion of 'technoscience'. Despite this, he still lulls 
himself in the uplifting attitude of traditional humanism and its ideals, which, 
however, appear powerless in the face of the reality of technoscience and which 
produce, at best, an e vation and compensation. There are those who think - like
Heidegger - that what is disturbing today is not the fact that the world will 
become completely technocratic, but that man is not prepared for this 
transformation of thee are those who think - like
Heidegger - that what is disturbing today is not the fact that the world will 
become completely technocratic, but that man is not prepared for this 
transformation of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---k - like
Heidegger - that what is disturbing today is not the fact that the world will 
become completely technocratic, but that man is not prepared for this 
transformation of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
world. Those who linger on thinking in terms of morals and ethics are not yet 
up to the challenge of technoscience. To those who asked him why, after Being
and Time, he had not yet written an ethics, Hei degger replied that an ethics 
appropriate to the problems of the modern world already lies in understanding 
the essence of technology. Any ethics - conceived to the measure of the 
individual - would be inadequate for the planetary macro-action of mankind, it 
would remain something 'pe nultimate' to the ultimate realities produced by 
technoscience. In the age dominated by nihilism, ethics remain on the level of 
homiletics.
The question that arises at this point is whether nihilism is indeed - as
Heidegger believed - an inevitable outcome of western rationalism, a sort of 
essential reversal of the struttive power of rationality born with the Greeks, or 
whether it is not rather
- as Husserl thought -
a betrayal of the original idea of reason, a 
barbarianisation and impoverishment of that logos, which with Socrates,
Plato and Aristotle had been able to impose itself on the nihilism of a Gorgias.
This dilemma has tormented contemporary thought - as witnessed by the 
controversy over the 'total critique of reason' between two of its leading 
exponents, Apel and Derrida - and, if it can ever be resolved, to do so requires 
a historical stance that we have not yet matured.
The days when Talleyrand said that to establish something lasting one must 
act according to a principle are not too distant: with a principle we are strong 
and meet no resistance. But we know - thanks to this diplomat capable of 
serving so many sovereigns and sooner or later betraying them all, thanks to 
this chameleon-like prince capable of wearing the clothes of the Ancien Régime 
on the skin of the modern individual and reconciling Christian virtues and 
secularism, moral principles and political realism -
that this declaration 
conceals its exact opposite and that declarations of principles today mask the
absence of principles. Principes, c'est bien.' Cela n'engage point. The figure of 
Talleyrand, with his fidelity to the maxim larvatus prodeo, shows how nihilism 
has become reality (cf. Calasso, 1983).
But, one wonders, if it is true that nihilism begins where there is the will to 
self-deception, can we then turn our experience of it into a lesson, or rather a
vigorous invitation to clear thinking and radical questioning - at a time when 
abandoned altars are inhabited by demons?
Jean Dubuffet wrote that 'only nihilism is constructive' because it is 'the 
only path that leads man to establish himself in the chime ra' (Dubuffet, 
1969:80). The provocation of this artist and theoristDubuffet wrote that 'only nihilism is constructive' because it is 'the 
only path that leads man to establish himself in the chime ra' (Dubuffet, 
1969:80). The provocation of this artist and theorist

--- PAGE BREAK ---'only nihilism is constructive' because it is 'the 
only path that leads man to establish himself in the chime ra' (Dubuffet, 
1969:80). The provocation of this artist and theorist

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the avant-garde, even without being shared, helps us to see that ni chilism has 
indeed taught us a corrosive and disturbing yet profound and consistent lesson.
It has taught us that we no longer have a private perspective - not religion 
nor myth, not art nor metaphysics, not politics nor morality, not even science -
capable of speaking for all
the others, that we no longer have an Archimedean point on which we could 
again name the whole. This is the deeper meaning of the negative terminology - 
'loss of the centre',
"devaluation of values", "crisis of meaning" - which nihilism has made flourish 
and which evidently expresses the crisis of self-description of our time. Nihilism 
has given us the awareness that we moderns are rootless, that we are navigating by 
sight in the archipelagos of life, of the world, of history: because in 
disenchantment, there is no longer a compass to guide us; there are no longer any 
routes, paths, previous measurements that can be used, or pre-established 
destinations to land on.
Nihilism has corroded truths and weakened religions; but it has also dissolved
dogmatisms and brought down ideologies, thus teaching us to maintain that 
reasonable prudence of thought, that paradigm of oblique and cautious 
thinking, which enables us to navigate by sight among the rocks of the sea of 
precariousness, in the crossing of becoming, in the transition from one culture 
to another, in the negotiation between one group of interests and another. After 
the fall of transcendences and the entry into the modern world of technology 
and the masses, after the corruptio n of the realm of legitimacy and the 
transition to that of convention, the only recommended course of action is to 
work with conventions without believing in them too much, the only non- naive 
attitude is the renunciation of an ideological and moral overdetermination of 
our behaviour. Ours is a philosophy of Penelope who unravels (analyei) her
web inces santly because she does not know whether Ulysses will return.
For we still do not know when we could say of ourselves what Nietzsche 
dared to think of himself when he claimed to be
"the first perfect nihilist of Europe, who, however, has already experienced 
nihilism itself to the core - who has it behind him, under him, outside him)) 
(VIII, n, 393 ).self when he claimed to be
"the first perfect nihilist of Europe, who, however, has already experienced 
nihilism itself to the core - who has it behind him, under him, outside him)) 
(VIII, n, 393 ).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
TEXTS
F. von Baader:
Werke, edited by Fr. Hoffmann and others, 16 vols., Bethmann, Leipzig 1850- 1860; 
anastatic reprint Scientia, Aalen 1963 , vol. I, 1 85 1: Ober Kattoli cismus und 
Protestantismus (1824), pp. 71-80 and Ober die Freiheit der ln telligenz. (1826), pp. 
133-50.
]. Bahnsen:
Wie ich wurde, was ich ward, edited by R. Louis, Miiller, Miinchen-Leipzig 1905 ; edited
by A. Ruest, Barth, Leipzig 1931 (posthumous autobiography, ste sa between 1875 and 
1881).
M.A. Bakunin:
Stato e anarchia, trad. it. by N. Vincileoni and G. Corradini, Feltrinelli, Mila no 
197Y.
G. Bataille:
Oeuvres complètes, 12 vols., Gallimard, Paris 1 970-88.
On Nietz.sche (1 945), transl. it. by A. Zanzotto, with an essay by M. Blan chot, SE, 
Milan 1994.
G. Bataille - A. Kojève -]. Wahl - E. Weil - R. Queneau:
Sullafine della storia, edited by M. Ciampa and F. Di Stefano, Liguori, Naples 1985.
G. Benn:
Brie/e an F W Oelz.e, edited by H. Steinhagen and]. Schroder, 3 vols., Limes, 
Wiesbaden 1977-80.
Siimtliche Werke, Stuttgarter Ausgabe, edited by G. Schuster, 7 vols., Klett Cotta, 
Stuttgart 1986-91. 
Stone, verse, flute, edited by G. Forti, Adelphi, Milan 1 990.
Lo smalto sul nulla, edited by L. Zagari, Adelphi, Milan 1992, including, among 
others, Oltre il nichilismo (1932), pp. 126-36, and Nietz.sche cin quant anni dopo (1
950), pp. 254-64.

--- PAGE BREAK ---malto sul nulla, edited by L. Zagari, Adelphi, Milan 1992, including, among 
others, Oltre il nichilismo (1932), pp. 126-36, and Nietz.sche cin quant anni dopo (1
950), pp. 254-64.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
N. Berdiaev:
Il senso della storia (1923), trad. it. by P. Modesto and A. Dall'Asta, Jaca Book, Milan 
197 1.
Un nouveau Moyen Age (1 924), Plon, Paris 1927.
Essai de métaphysique eschatologique. Acte créateur et objectivation, Au bier, Paris 
1946.
Bonaventure:
Veglie, edited by P. Collini, Marsilio, Venice 1990 (previous translation by F.
Filippini, I notturnidi Bonaventura, preface by LA. Chiusano, Rizzoli, Milan 1984).
P. Bourget:
Essais depsychologie contemporaine ( 1883), preface by A. Guyaux, Gal limard, Paris 
1993.
Ch. de Bovelles:
Le Livre du Néant, edited by P. Magnard, Vrin, Paris 1983 (transl. it. Il pic colo libro 
del nulla, edited by P. Necchi, Il melangolo, Genoa 1994).
H. Broch:
Action and Knowledge, transl. it. by S. Vertone, Lerici, Milano 1 966 (including the 
pages on the Disgregation of Values) .
Kommentierte Werkausgabe, edited by P.M. Liitzeler, 13 vols., Suhrkamp, Frankfurt 
a.M. 1 977.
A. Camus:
Thédtre, récits, nouvelles, edited by R. Quilliot, Gallimard, Paris 1962.
Essais, edited by R. Quilliot and L. Faucon, Gallimard, Paris 1965.
Works. Novels, short stories, essays, edited and with an introduction by R. Grenier, 
apparatus by M.T. Giaveri and R. Grenier, Bompiani, Milan 1988.
R. Carnap:
Overcoming metaphysics through the logical analysis of language
(1931), in A. Pasquinelli (ed.) , Il neoempirismo, Utet, Turin 1969,
pp. 504-32.
C. Cattaneo:
Scrittifiloso/ici, edited by N. Bobbio, 3 vols., Le Monnier, Florence 1960.
E.M. Cioran:
Tears and Saints (1937), translated in Italian by D. Grange Fiori, Adelphi, Milan 1990.
Sillogismi dell'amarezza (1952), transl. it. by C. Rognoni, Adelphi, Milan 1993.
The Temptation to Exist (1956), transl. it. by L. Colasanti and C. Laurenti, Adelphi, Milan 
1 984.
Storia e utopia (1960) translated into Italian by M.A. Rigoni, Adelphi, Milan 1982.
Ilfunesto demiurgo (1969), translated by D. Grange Fiori, Adelphi, Milan 1986.d C. Laurenti, Adelphi, Milan 
1 984.
Storia e utopia (1960) translated into Italian by M.A. Rigoni, Adelphi, Milan 1982.
Ilfunesto demiurgo (1969), translated by D. Grange Fiori, Adelphi, Milan 1986.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

123
I.:inconvenience of being born (1973), translated by L. Zil, Adelphi, Milan 1991. 
Squartamento (1 979), trad. it. by M.A. Rigoni, Adelphi, Milan 1981.
La caduta nel tempo, translated by T. Turolla, Adelphi, Milan 1995.
CEuvres, Gallirnard, Paris 1 995.
Entretiens, Gallimard, Paris 1995.
F. De Sanctis:
Leopardi, edited by C. Muscetta and A. Pema, Einaudi, Turin 1960.
]. Donoso Cortés:
Saggio sul cattolicesimo, il liberalismo e il socialismo (1 85 1 ), edited by G. Allegra,
Rusconi, Milan 1972.
F. Dostoevsky:
All Novels, 2 vols., translated in Italian, Sansoni, Florence 1984.
]. Dubuffet:
Asphyxiante culture, Pauvert, Paris Ì968 (translated into Italian by A. Spatola, 
Asfissian te cultura, Feltrinelli, Milan 1969).
M. Fernandez:
La materia del nulla, edited by M. Ravoni, Ricci, Parma 1974.
Fridugisus of Tours:
De substantia nihili et tenebrarum, critical edition and introductory study by
C. Gennaro, Cedam, Padua 1 963 .
P. Galluppi:
Considerazioni filosofiche sull'idealismo trascendentale e sul razionalismo assoluto, 
Silvestri, Milan 1845.
A. Gehlen:
Einblicke, Klostermann, Frankfurt a.M. 1975.
Gesamtausgabe, edited by K.-S. Rehberg, Klostermann, Frankfurt a.M. 1978 ff.
N. G6mez Davila:
Escolios a un texto implicito, Procultura, Bogota 1977 .
Nuevos escolios a un texto implicito, Procultura, Bogota 1986.
R. Guénon:
The Crisis of the Modern World (1927), edited by ]. Evola, Edizioni Mediter ranee, 
Rome 1972.
The Kingdom of Quantity and the Signs of the Times (1945), transl. it. by T. Masera
and P..
Nutrizio, Adelphi, Milan 1982.
G.W.F. Hegel:
Early Critical Writings, edited by R. Bodei, Mursia, Milan 1981.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty and the Signs of the Times (1945), transl. it. by T. Masera
and P..
Nutrizio, Adelphi, Milan 1982.
G.W.F. Hegel:
Early Critical Writings, edited by R. Bodei, Mursia, Milan 1981.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124
M. Heidegger:
Niet:zsche's sentence "God is dead" (1 950), in Id., Sentieri interrotti, edited by P.
Chiodi, La Nuova Italia, Florence 1 968, pp. 191-246.
Niet:zsche (1961), transl. it. edited by F. Volpi, Adelphi, Milan 1994, 19952-
Der europiiche Nihilismus, Neske, Pfullingen 1967 (contains the uni versity course 
of the second quarter of 1 940, already published in the Niet:zsche and ree fing in 
1986 edited by P. Jaeger as vol. XLVIII of the Gesamtausgabe).
Gesamtausgabe, Klostermann, Frankfurt a.M. 1975 ff.
A.l. Herzen:
Dall'altra sponda (1850), edited by P. Pera, Adelphi, Milan 1993 .
To an Old Comrade (1870), edited by V. Strada, Einaudi, Turin 1 977.
H. Hesse:
Zarathustras Wiederkehr (1919), edited by V. Michels, Suhrkamp, Frank furt a.M. 1 993
.
M. Horkheimer - Th.W. Adorno:
Dialectics of the Enlightenment (1 947), translated by L. Vinci, Einaudi, Turin 1976.
J. Huizinga:
The Crisis of Civilisation (1935), transl. it. by B. Allason, Einaudi, Turin 1 962.
E. Husserl:
The Crisis of the European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology (1936),
translated by E. Filippini, Il Saggiatore, Milan 1 9652-
Br.H. Jacobi:
FH. Jacobi an Fichte in Jena. Eutin, 3.-21. Miir:z 1 799, in J.G. Fichte, Ge 
samtausgabe der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, edited by R. Lauth, H. 
Jacobs and H. Gliwitzky, Frommann-Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt 1962 ff., 
series III, vol. III: Briefe 1 796-1 799, 1 972, pp. 222-81.
Scritti kantiani, edited by G. Sansonetti, Morcelliana, Brescia 1992.
K. Jaspers:
Psychology of Worldviews (1919), transl. it. by V. Loriga, Astrolabium, Rome 1950, pp. 
332-53 ("Scepticism and Nihilism").
Jean Paul:
Si:imtliche Werke, edited by N. Miller, 9 vols., Hanser, Miinchen 1 959 ff.
The Discourse of the Dead Christ and Other Dreams, transl. it. by B. Bianchi, Ricci, 
Par ma 1977 .
E. Junger:
Sà "mtliche Werke, Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 1978 ff.
La mobilitazione totale (1930), transl. it. by C. Galli, 'll Mulino', 34, 1985,
pp. 753-70.ansl. it. by B. Bianchi, Ricci, 
Par ma 1977 .
E. Junger:
Sà "mtliche Werke, Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 1978 ff.
La mobilitazione totale (1930), transl. it. by C. Galli, 'll Mulino', 34, 1985,
pp. 753-70.

--- PAGE BREAK ---chi, Ricci, 
Par ma 1977 .
E. Junger:
Sà "mtliche Werke, Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 1978 ff.
La mobilitazione totale (1930), transl. it. by C. Galli, 'll Mulino', 34, 1985,
pp. 753-70.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

125
I.:worker. Dominio e/orma (1 932), edited by Q. Principe, Longanesi, Mi lano 1984.
Treaty of the Rebel ( 1951 ), transl. it. Adelphi, Milan 1990.
Avant-propos inédit ( 1993), in Passage de la Ligne, transl. frane. by H. Plard, Le 
Passeur, Nantes 1993 , pp. 19-25 (the quoted passages are translated from the 
unpublished German origi nal, in my possession).
E. Jiinger - M. Heidegger:
Oltre la linea, trans. it. by A. La Rocca and F. Volpi, edited by F. Volpi, Adelphi, Milan 
19954-
F.G. Jiinger:
Die Perfektion der Technik, Klostermann, Frankfurt a.M. 1946.
E. von Kahler:
Der Beru/der Wissenschaft, Bondi, Berlin 1920.
H Keyserling:
Das Spektrum Europas, Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, Stuttgart-Berlin 1928.
L. Klages:
Der Geist als Widersacher der Seele (1 929), in Siimtliche Werke, Bouvier, Bonn, 
vols. 1-11 1964-82, (translation of the part I Pelasgi, edited by G. Moretti, Tempi 
Moderni, Naples 1990).
A. Kojève:
Introduction à la lecture de Hegel. Leçons sur la Phénoménologie de l'esprit, edited by 
R. Queneau, Gallimard, Paris 1947, 19672 (partial Italian translation by P. Serini, La
dialettica e l'idea della morte in Hegel, new edition with in troduction by R. Bodei, 
Einaudi, Turin 1991).
L'Empereur ]ulien et son art d'écrire, Fourbis, Paris 1990.
W.T. Krug:
Allgemeines Handworterbuch derphilosophischen Wissenscha/ten nebst ih rer
Literatur und Geschichte (1 828), anastatic reprint of the 2nd revised and enlarged 
edition, Leipzig 1832-38, 4 vols. plus l vol. of supplements, Frommann-
Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt 1969.
G.W. Leibniz:
Die philosophischen Schrz/ten, edited by C.I. Gerhardt, 7 vols., Weidmann, Berlin 
1875-90.
G. Leopardi:
Tutte le opere, edited by F. Flora, 5 vols., Mondadori, Milan 1937-49.
Th. Lessing:
Geschichte als Sinngebung des Sinnlosen, (1919) Matthes & Seitz, Miin chen 1983.
Die ver/luchte Kultur. Gedanken uber den Gegensatz von Leben und Geist
(1921), Matthes & Seitz, Miinchen 1981.Lessing:
Geschichte als Sinngebung des Sinnlosen, (1919) Matthes & Seitz, Miin chen 1983.
Die ver/luchte Kultur. Gedanken uber den Gegensatz von Leben und Geist
(1921), Matthes & Seitz, Miinchen 1981.

--- PAGE BREAK ---als Sinngebung des Sinnlosen, (1919) Matthes & Seitz, Miin chen 1983.
Die ver/luchte Kultur. Gedanken uber den Gegensatz von Leben und Geist
(1921), Matthes & Seitz, Miinchen 1981.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
G. Lukacs:
I:anima e leforme (191 1), trans. it. by S. Bologna, SE, Milan 1991.
H. Mann:
(ed.), The Living Thoughts o/ Nietzsche, Longmans, Green & Co., New York-
Toronto 1 939; the German original appeared under the title: Nietz sches unsterbliche 
Gedanken, Aufbau, Berlin 1992 (transl. it. of the in troduction essay by H. Mann,
Nietzsche, with an afterword by S. Barbera, Il Saggiatore, Milan 1993 ).
Th. Mann:
Considerazioni di un impolitico (1918), transl. it. by M. Marianelli, De Do nato, 
Bari 1967.
Nietzsche's Philosophy (1 947), in Id., Nobility of Spirit. Saggi critici, edited by B. 
Azzeni and L. Mazzucchetti, Mondadori, Milan 1953 , pp. 679- 716; later also in Id., 
Saggi. Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Freud, transl. it. by B. Arzeni and I.A. Chiusano, 
ivi, 1980.
Das essayistische Werk, 8 vols., Fischer, Frankfurt a.M. 1968.
Meister Eckhart:
Surrexit autem Saulus de terra apertisque oculis nihil videbat, in Sermoni te deschi,
edited by M. Vannini, Adelphi, Milan 1985, pp. 199-209.
]. Michelet:
La strega (1867), transl. it. by M.V. Malvano, introductory essay by R. Barthes, 
Einaudi, Turin 1971, pp. 15-20 ('The Death of the Gods').
]. de Maistre:
Napoleon, Russia, Europe. Dispatches from Petersburg 181 1-1813, translated by G. 
Farina, Donzelli, Rome 1994.
R. Musil:
Gesammelte Werke, edited by A. Frisé, 2 vols., Rowohlt, Reinbek 1 978. On Stupidity 
and Other Writings, transl. it. by A. Casalegno, Mondadori, Milan 1986.
O. Neurath:
Anti-Spengler (1 92 1), edited by F. Fistetti, Palomar, Bari 1993 .
F. Nietzsche:
Opere, edited by G. Colli and M. Montinari, Adelphi, Milan 1964 ff. The Roman 
numerals in small capitals, after the indication of the volume, specify the subdivision of a 
volume into tomes, the fraction in Arabic numerals the further subdivision of the tome 
into parts (e.g.: VII, r/2, 312 = vol. VII, tome I, part two, p. 3 12 ). When necessary, the 
fragment number is also indicated.
Epistolario, edited by G. Colli and M. Montinari, Adelphi, Milan 1977 ff.to parts (e.g.: VII, r/2, 312 = vol. VII, tome I, part two, p. 3 12 ). When necessary, the 
fragment number is also indicated.
Epistolario, edited by G. Colli and M. Montinari, Adelphi, Milan 1977 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r/2, 312 = vol. VII, tome I, part two, p. 3 12 ). When necessary, the 
fragment number is also indicated.
Epistolario, edited by G. Colli and M. Montinari, Adelphi, Milan 1977 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
Siimtliche Briefe. Kritische Studienausgabe, edited by G. Colli and M. Monti nari, 8 
vols., de Gruyter-dtv, Berlin-Mtinchen 1986.
Siimtliche Werke. Kritische Studienausgabe, edited by G. Colli and M. Monti nari, 15 
flights, de Gruyter-dtv, Berlin-Mtinchen 1988.
La volontà dipotenza, edited by M. Ferraris and P. Kobau, Bompiani, Milan 1992.
B. Pascal:
Pensieri, edited by P. Serini, Einaudi, Turin 1962.
G. Rensi:
Intellectual autobiography. My Philosophy. Testamento /tloso/t "co, Corbac cio, Milan
1993 .
D.A.F. de Sade:
Opere, edited by P. Caruso, preface by A. Moravia, Mondadori, Milan 1 976.
F. Sanches:
That Nothing is Known (Quod nihil scitur), edited by D.F.S. Thomson, 
Cambridge UP, Cambridge 1988.
J.-P. Sartre:
La nausea (1938), transl. it. by B. Finzi, Einaudi, Turin 1948.
L'essere e il nulla (1943 ), translated by G. Del Bo, Il Saggiatore, Milan 1 965.
I.:Existentialism is a Humanism (1946), transl. it. edited by G. Mursia Re, Mursia, Milan 
1 964.
F. Schlegel:
Philosophische Vorlesungen aus den Jahren 1804 bis 1806, edited by C.J.H. 
Windischmann, vol. II, Weber, Bonn 1837.
Philosophiscbe Lehrjahre. Erster Teil, Kritische Ausgabe, vol. XVIII, cu ra di E. 
Behler, Schi:iningh, Paderborn 1963 .
C. Schmitt:
The categories of the 'political'. Saggi di teoria politica, edited by G. Miglio and P. 
Schiera, Il Mulino, Bologna 1972.
Ex captivitate salus. Experiences of the Years 1945-47 (1 950), transl. it. by C. 
Mainoldi, with an essay by F. Mercadante, Adelphi, Milan 1987.
Il nomos della terra nel diritto internazionale dello <<]us Publicum Euro paeum" (1
950), translated into Italian by E. Castrucci, edited by F. Volpi, Adelphi, Milan 1991.
Glossarium. Au/zeichungen der Jahre 1947-51, Duncker & Humblot, Ber lin 1991. 
A. Schweitzer:
Agony of civilisation (1 923 ), transl. it. by M. Tassoni, Comunità, Milan 1963 .pi, Adelphi, Milan 1991.
Glossarium. Au/zeichungen der Jahre 1947-51, Duncker & Humblot, Ber lin 1991. 
A. Schweitzer:
Agony of civilisation (1 923 ), transl. it. by M. Tassoni, Comunità, Milan 1963 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---991.
Glossarium. Au/zeichungen der Jahre 1947-51, Duncker & Humblot, Ber lin 1991. 
A. Schweitzer:
Agony of civilisation (1 923 ), transl. it. by M. Tassoni, Comunità, Milan 1963 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128
L. Sestov:
The Philosophy of Tragedy. Dostoevsky and Nietzsche, edited by E. Lo Gatto, 
Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane, Naples 1950 (Russian ed. or., 1903; transl. frane., 1 
926).
E. Severino:
The Original Structure (1958), new enlarged edition, Adelphi, Milan 1981.
Studi difilosofia della prassi (1 962), new enlarged edition, Adelphi, Mi lano 1984.
Essence of Nihilism (1972), new enlarged edition, Adelphi, Milan 1982.
The Inhabitants of Time. Christianity, Marxism, Technique, Armando, Rome 1978.
Techne. Le radici della violenza, Rusconi, Milan 1979a.
Law and Chance, Adelphi, Milan 1979b.
Destiny of Necessity, Adelphi, Milan 1 980.
The fundamental tendency of our time, Adelphi, Milan 1988.
The Yoke. At the Origins of Reason: Aeschylus, Adelphi, Milan 1 989.
Nothingness and Poetry. At the End of the Age of Technology: Leopardi, Rizzoli, Mila 
no 1990.
Beyond Language, Adelphi, Milan 1992. Heidegger and 
Metaphysics, Adelphi, Milan 1994. Taut6tes, Adelphi, Milan 
1995.
G. Simmel:
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche ( 1 907), edited by A. Olivieri, Ponte alle Grazie, Florence 
1995.
Saggi di cultura filosofica (191 1), trans. it. by M. Monaldi, Longanesi, Mila no 1985.
Der Begri/f und die Tragodie der Kultur, 'Logos', 2, 191 1/12, pp. 1 -25.
Intuition of Life. Four Metaphysical Chapters (1918), transl. it. by F. Sternheim,
introduction by A. Banfi, Bompiani, Milan 1938.
Gesamtausgabe, edited by O. Rammstedt, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt a.M. 1989 ff.
O. Spengler:
Heraklit. Eine Studie iiber den energetischen Grundgedanken seiner Philo sophie 
(1904), in Id., Reden undAufsatze, Beck, Miinchen 1 937, pp. 1 -47.
The Sunset of the Ocadent. Lineamenti di una mor/ologia della stona mon dzale 
(1918-22), trad. it. by ]. Evola, edited by R. Calabrese Conte, M. Cot tone, F. Jesi, 2 
vols., Longanesi, Milan 1978; later in one volume, with an introduction by S. Zecchi, 
Guanda, Parma 1991.ale 
(1918-22), trad. it. by ]. Evola, edited by R. Calabrese Conte, M. Cot tone, F. Jesi, 2 
vols., Longanesi, Milan 1978; later in one volume, with an introduction by S. Zecchi, 
Guanda, Parma 1991.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pessimismus? (1 92 1), in Id., Reden und Aufsiitze, Beck, Miinchen 1937, 
pp. 63-79.
I.:Man and Technique. Contribution to a Philosophy of Life (1932), transl. it. by
G. Gurisatti, edited by S. Zecchi, Guanda, Parma 1992.
M. Stirner:
I. :Unico e la sua proprietà (1 844), trad. it. by L. Amoroso, Adelphi, Milan 1979.
I.S. Turgenev:
Padri efigli (1862), in Id., Romanzi, edited by G. Spende!, Mondadori, Mi lano 1991,
pp. 781-1 009; translated in Italian by S. Polledro, edited by E. Bazzarelli, Rizzoli, Milan 
1993 .
Literary Memoirs, edited by E. Damiani, Passigli, Florence 1992.
P. Valéry:
Sguardi sul mondo attuale, edited by F.C. Papparo, Adelphi, Milan 1994a.
La crisi del pensiero e altri "saggi quasi politici", edited by S. Agosti, Il Mu lino,
Bologna 1994b.
M. Weber:
I.:Protestant Ethics and the Spirit of Capitalism (1 904-05), transl. it. by P. Cur reri, 
introduction by E. Sestan, Sansoni, Florence 1965.
Wissenscha/t als Beru/ (1919), in Id., Gesammelte Au/siitze zur Wissen 
scha/tslehre, Mohr, Tiibingen 1 922, 19855.
Politik als Beru/( 1919), in Id., Gesammelte politische Schrz/ten, Mohr, Tii bingen 1
92 1, 19814-
Il lavoro intellettuale come professione, transl. it. by A. Giolitti, introduzio ne by D. 
Cantimori, Einaudi, Turin 1948.
L. Ziegler:
Gestaltwandel der Gotter, 2 vols., Reichl, Darmstadt 1 9222-

--- PAGE BREAK ---lettuale come professione, transl. it. by A. Giolitti, introduzio ne by D. 
Cantimori, Einaudi, Turin 1948.
L. Ziegler:
Gestaltwandel der Gotter, 2 vols., Reichl, Darmstadt 1 9222-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130
STUDIES
AA.W.:
Nihilism and Nihilisms, Special issue of 'Riscontri', Sabatia, Avelli no 1981.
G. Abosch:
Das Ende der grof$en Visionen. Plier/ur eine skeptische Kultur, Junius, Hamburg
1993.
Ch. And.ler:
Nietzsche. Sa vie et sa pensée (1920-3 1), 3 vols., Gallimard, Paris 19582-
D. Arendt:
(ed.), Nihilismus. Die An/ige von ]acobi bis Niet1.Sche, Hegner, Koln 1970.
Der 'poetische Nihilismus' in der Romantik. Studien zum Verhiiltnis von Dichtung 
und Wirklichkeit in der Fruhromantik, 2 vols., Niemeyer, Tiibin gen 1972
(habilitation thesis, Marburg a.L. 1970).
(ed.), Der Nihilismus als Phiinomen der Geistesgeschichte in der wissenschaftlichen 
Diskussion unseres ]ahrhunderts, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt 
1974.
H.E. Aschheim:
The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany 1 890- 1990, University of California Press, Berkeley 1
992.
D. Auffret:
Alexandre Kojève. La philosophie, l'État, lafm de l'Histoire, Grasset, Paris 1990.
W. Bannour:
(ed.), Les nihilistes russes, Aubier-Montaigne, Paris 1974.
S. Barbera - G. Campioni:
The tyrant genius. Ragione e dominio nell'ideologia dell'Ottocento: Wagner, 
Nietzsche, Renan, preface by M. Montinari, Angeli, Milan 1983 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Paris 1974.
S. Barbera - G. Campioni:
The tyrant genius. Ragione e dominio nell'ideologia dell'Ottocento: Wagner, 
Nietzsche, Renan, preface by M. Montinari, Angeli, Milan 1983 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

131
S. Battaglia:
Grande dizionario della lingua italiana, Utet, Turin 1 961 ff, sub voce:
'Nihilism', vol. XI, 1981, coli. 423-24.
J. Baudrillard:
The Transparency of Evil. Saggio sui/enomeni estremi (1990), transl. it. by F. 
Masciani, SugarCo, Milan 1 991.
I.:illusion of the end (1992), transl. it. by A. Serra, Anabasi, Milan 1 993 .
G. Baum:
Vernun/t und Erkenntnis. Die Philosophie F H. ]acobis, Bouvier, Bonn 1969 
(dissertation, Mainz 1966).
U. Beck:
Gegengi/te. Die unorganisierte Verantwortlichkeit, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt
a.M. 1988.
E. Benz:
Westlicher und ostlicher Nihilismus in christlicher Sicht, Evangdischer Ver lagswerk, 
Stuttgart s.a. [ma: 1948] .
Franz von Baader und der abendlindische Nihilismus, 'Archiv fiir Philo sophie', 3, 
1949, pp. 29-52.
E. Berti:
The Nihilism of the West according to Nietzsche, Heidegger and Severino, 'Fi losophy 
Today', 3, 1980, pp. 501 -09.
Le vie della ragione, TI Mulino, Bologna 1987.
Introduction to Metaphysics, Utet, Turin 1993 .
E. Bertram:
Nietzsche. Per una mitologia (1918), translated into Italian by M. Keller, edited by 
L. Rit ter Santini, Il Mulino, Bologna 1988.
M. Blanchot:
I.:in/inito intrattenimento (1969), trad. it. by R. Ferrara, Einaudi, Turin 1977 , pp. 1
84-232 ("Riflessioni sul nihilismo").
A. Bloom:
La chiusura della mente americana (1987 ), trad. it. by P. Pieraccini, Frassi nelli, 
Milano 1988 (especially part two: 'Nichilismo, stile ame ricano').
H. Blumenberg:
The Legitimacy of the Modern Age (1 966), transl. it. by C. Marelli, Marietti, Ge nova
1992.
R. Bodei:
Scomposizioni, Einaudi, Turin 1987.
In Praise of Ethical Relativism, 'Micromega', 1995, no. 2, pp. 146-55.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Age (1 966), transl. it. by C. Marelli, Marietti, Ge nova
1992.
R. Bodei:
Scomposizioni, Einaudi, Turin 1987.
In Praise of Ethical Relativism, 'Micromega', 1995, no. 2, pp. 146-55.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132
K.-H. Bohrer:
Die Asthetik des Schreckens. Die pessimistische Romantik und Ernst Jun gers 
Fruhwerk, Hanser, Miinchen 1978.
N. Bolz:
Auszug aus der entzauberten Welt. Philosophischer Extremismus zwischen den 
Weltkriegen, Fink, Miinchen 1989.
M. Bonola:
At the wall of nothingness. Heidegger, funger and the beyond of nihilism, "Journal of 
Aesthetics", 23 , 1983 , pp. 13 1 -50.
A. Boutot:
Heidegger et Platon. Le problème du nihilisme, P.V.F., Paris 1987.
E. Bréhier:
Review of A. De Waelhens, La Philosophie de M. Heidegger, 'Revue philosophique 
de la France et de l'Étranger', 133, 1942-43, pp. 165-69.
S. Breuer:
Anatomie der Konservativen Revolution, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell schaft, 
Darmstadt 1993.
M. Cacciari:
Krisis. An essay on the crisis of negative thought from Nietzsche to Wittgenstein,
Feltrinelli, Milan 1976.
Pensiero negativo e razionalizzazione, Marsilio, Venice 1977.
From Steinhof Viennese Perspectives of the Early 20th Century, Adelphi, Milan 
1980.
Icons of the Law, Adelphi, Milan 1 985 .
R. Calasso:
The Ruin of Kasch, Adelphi, Milan 1983.
The Forty-Nine Steps, Adelphi, Milan 1991.
G. Samples:
On the Road to Nietzsche, ETS, Pisa 1993.
A. Caracciolo:
Nichilismo ed etica, Il melangolo, Genoa 1983.
Leopardi and Nihilism, edited by G. Moretto, Bompiani, Milan 1994.
G.M. Cazzaniga - D. Losurdo - L. Sichirollo:
(ed.), Tramonto dell'Occidente?, Quattro Venti, Urbino 1989.
A. Coquard:
Dmitri Pisarev et l'idéologie du mhilisme russe, Bibliothèque de l'Institut français de 
Léningrad, Paris 1946.
H. Corbin:
Ilparadosso del monoteismo (1981), trad. it. by G. Rebecchi, Marietti, Ge nova 
1986, pp. 129-61 ("Della teologia apofatica quale antidoto al nichi lismo").

--- PAGE BREAK ---Paris 1946.
H. Corbin:
Ilparadosso del monoteismo (1981), trad. it. by G. Rebecchi, Marietti, Ge nova 
1986, pp. 129-61 ("Della teologia apofatica quale antidoto al nichi lismo").

--- PAGE BREAK ---

133
LP. Couliano:
The Myths of Western Dualisms. Dai sistemi gnostici al mondo moderno, translated
by D. Cosi and L. Saibene, Jaca Book, Milan 1989.
A. Danto:
Nietzsche und der semantische Nihilismus, in A. Guzzoni (ed.), 90
]ahre philosophische Nietzsche-Rezeption, Hain, Konigstein 1979, pp. 140- 154.
G. Deleuze:
Nietzsche and Philosophy (1962), transl. it. by F. Polidori, introduction by M. 
Ferraris, Feltrinelli, Milan 1992.
J. Derrida:
Positions, edited by G. Sertoli, Bertani, Verona 1975.
Sproni. Gli stili di Nietzsche, edited by S. Agosti, Adelphi, Milan 1991. 
F. Duque:
Filoso/fa de la técnica de la naturaleza, Tecnos, Madrid 1986.
El mundo por de dentro. Ontotecnologia de la vida cotidiana, Ediciones del Serbai, 
Barcelona 1 995a.
The Black Flower. Satanism and paganism at the end of modernity, Lanfranchi, Milan 
1 995b.
R. Faber:
Roma Aeterna. Zur Kritik der 'Konservativen Revolution', Konigshausen
& Neumann, Wiirzburg 1981.
Der Prometheus-Komplex. Zur Kritik der Politotheologie Eric Voegelins und Hans 
Blumenbergs, Konigshausen & Neumann, Wiirzburg 1984.
M. Ferraris:
Traces. Nichilismo moderno postmoderno, Multhipla, Milan 1983 .
Nietzsche and the Philosophy of the 20th Century, Bompiani, Milan 1989.
G. Figal:
Der metaphysische Charakter der Moderne. E. Jungers Schri/t "Uber die Li nie" (1 950) 
und M. Heideggers Kritik "Uber "Die Linie"" (1 955), in H.H. Miiler - H. Segeberg 
(eds.), Ernst ]unger im 20. ]ahrhundert, Fink, Miinchen 1995a, pp. 181-97 .
Nochmals uber die Linie, in G. Figal - H. Schwilk (eds.), Ernst]unger zum 
Hundertsten, Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 1995b, pp. 25-40.
G. Filoramo:
Il risveglio della gnosi ovvero diventare Dio, Laterza, Roma-Bari 1990.
Figures of the Sacred, Morcelliana, Brescia 1993 .
E. Fink:
La filosofia di Nietzsche (1 960), trad. it. by P. Rocco Traverso, introduzio ne by M. 
Cacciari, Marsilio, Padova 1973 .a, Roma-Bari 1990.
Figures of the Sacred, Morcelliana, Brescia 1993 .
E. Fink:
La filosofia di Nietzsche (1 960), trad. it. by P. Rocco Traverso, introduzio ne by M. 
Cacciari, Marsilio, Padova 1973 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

134
M. Foucault:
Nietzsche, Freud, Marx, in Nietzsche, Colloque de Royaumont, Minuit, Pa ris 1967, 
pp. 183-92.
Nietzsche, genealogy, history ( 1 97 1 ), in Id. Microphysics of Power. In terventi 
politici, edited by A. Fontana and P. Pasquino, Einaudi, Turin 1 977,
pp. 28-54.
F. Fukuyama:
La fine della Storia e l'ultimo uomo (1992), translated by D. Ceni, Rizzoli, Mi
Lano 1992.
U. Galimberti:
La terra senza ilmale, Feltrinelli, Milan 1984.
Gli equivoci dell'anima, Feltrinelli, Milan 1987.
C. Galli:
Ernst ]unger e Cari Schmitt: per la ricostruzione di due modalità del nichili smo 
contemporaneo, in S. Rota Ghibaudi e F. Barcia (eds.), Studi po litici in onore di 
Luigi Firpo, Angeli, Milano 1990, pp. 963 -86.
R. Garaventa:
Nihilism, Theology and Ethics. Essay on Wilhelm Weischedel, Milella, Lecce 1989.
Suicide in the Age of Nihilism. Goethe, Leopardz; Dostoevsky, Angeli, Milan 1994.
H.-J. Gawoll:
Nihilismus und Metaphysik. Entwicklungsgeschichtliche Untersuchung vom
Deutschen Idealismus bis zu Heidegger, Frommann-Holzboog, Stutt gart-Bad
Cannstatt 1989.
F. Ghedini:
Experience of Nothingness and Denial of God. Interpretation of Atheism in 
Nietzsche, Gregoriana, Padua 1988.
S. Giametta:
Beyond Nihilism. Nietzsche, HO!derlin, Goethe, Modern Times, Naples 1988.
M.A. Gillespie:
Nihilism be/ore Nietzsche, University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1995.
S. Givone:
Dostoevsky and Philosophy, Laterza, Rome-Bari 1984.
Disenchantment of the World and Tragic Thought, Il Saggiatore, Milan 1988.
Storia del nulla, Laterza, Roma-Bari 1995.
W. Goerdt:
Der Nihilismus-Begri//in Ru/Sland, in J. Ritter et al. (eds.), Histori sches 
Worterbuch der Philosophie, Schwabe, Basel-Stuttgart 1 97 1 ff., vol. VI, 1984, coli. 
853-54.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Goerdt:
Der Nihilismus-Begri//in Ru/Sland, in J. Ritter et al. (eds.), Histori sches 
Worterbuch der Philosophie, Schwabe, Basel-Stuttgart 1 97 1 ff., vol. VI, 1984, coli. 
853-54.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

135
D. Guérin:
(ed.), Neither God nor Master (1970), transl. it. by C. Giannetto, L. Meda,
A. Barberini and P.P. Poggio, Jaca Book, Milan 1 97 1. 
E. Gundolf - K. Hildebrandt:
Nietzsche als Ricbter unserer Zeit, Hirt, Breslau 1 923.
E. Heftrich:
Vom Verfall zur Apokalypse. Ober Thomas Mann, Klostermann, Frankfurt
a.M. 1982.
J. Herf:
Reactionary Modernism. Technology, culture and politics in Weimar and Third Reich 
Germany (1984), translated by M. Cupellaro, ll Mulino, Bo logna 1 988.
S. Hessen:
Good and Evil in Dostoevsky (1928-30), edited by I.C. Angle, Armando, Rome
1980.
B. Hillebrand:
(ed.), Nietzsche und die deutscbe Literatur, 2 vols., Niemeyer, Tubin gen 1978.
Asthettk des Nibilismus. Von der Romantik zum Modernismus, Metzler, Stuttgart 1 99
1.
W. Hof:
Stufen des Nzhilismus. Nzhilistiscbe Stromungen in der deutscben Literatur vom Sturm 
und Drang bis zur Gegenwart (1 963 ), in Arendt, 1 974: 221 -58.
Pessimistiscb-nzhilistiscbe Stromungen in der deutscben Literatur vom Sturm und 
Drang bis zum Jungen Deutschland, Niemeyer, Tiibingen 1970.
Der Weg zum beroiscben Realismus. Pessimismus und Nibilismus in der deutschen
Literatur von Hamerling bis Benn, Rotsch, Bebenhausen 1974.
H. Hofer:
Barbey d'Aurevilly, Nietzsche und Dostoevskzj. Zum Problem von Nihilis mus 
undDekadenz in der Literatur des 19. Jahrbunderts, 'Schweizer Rund schau', 68,
1969, pp. 148-63 .
K. Hiibner:
Fichte, Sartre undder Nzhilismus (1 956), in Arendt, 1974: 126-43 .
A. lacovacci:
Idealism and Nicbilism. La lettera diJacobia Ficbte, Cedam, Padua 1992.
M. lntrovigne:
The Return of Gnosticism, SugarCo, Milan 1993.
G. lnvemizzi:
Nineteenth-Century German Pessimism. Scbopenbauer, Hartmann, Babnsen and 
Mainlider and their opponents, La Nuova Italia, Florence 1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sticism, SugarCo, Milan 1993.
G. lnvemizzi:
Nineteenth-Century German Pessimism. Scbopenbauer, Hartmann, Babnsen and 
Mainlider and their opponents, La Nuova Italia, Florence 1994.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

136
R. Jaccard:
La tentation nihilirte, P.U.F., Paris 1 989.
K. Jaspers:
Nietzrche. Ein/uhrung in dar Verrtiindnir reiner Philorophierenr, de Gruy ter, Berlin 
1936.
H. Jonas:
Between Nothingness and Eternity, edited by G.R. Rilke, Gallio, Ferrara 1992.
H. Kiesel:
Wisrenrchaftliche Diagnore und dichterirche Virion der Moderne. Max We ber und
Ernrt funger, Manutius, Heidelberg 1994.
L. Klages:
Die psychologirchen Errungenrcha/ten Nietzsches (1 926), in Id., Siimtliche Werke, 
vol. III: Philosophische Schrz/ten, Bouvier, Bonn 1974.
P. Klossowski:
Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle (1969), translated by E. Turolla, Adelphi, Milan 
1981.
W. Kohlschmidt:
Nihilirmus der Romantik, in Arendt, 1 974: 79-98.
L. Kolakowski:
Metaphysical Horror (1988), translated in Italian by B. Morcavallo, Il Mulino, Bologna 
1990.
P. Kondylis:
Die Aufklirung im Rahmen des neuzeitlichen Rationalismus, Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 
1981, ch. VII: 'Formen des Nihilismus in der Aufkliirung'.
A. Kopf:
Der Weg der Nihilismus von Friedrich Nietzsche bis zur Atombombe, Mi nerva, 
Miinchen 1988.
W. Kraus:
Nihilismus beute oder Die Geduld der Weltgeschichte, Zsolnay, Wien Hamburg 
1983; later Fischer, Frankfurt a.M., 1985.
Chr. von Krockow:
Die Entscheidung. Eine Untersuchung uber E. funger, C. Schmitt, M. Hei degger, 
Enke, Stuttgart 1958.
R.F. Krummel:
Nietzsche und der deutsche Geist, 2 vols., de Gruyter, Berlin-New York 1 974-83 .
E. Kuhn:
Friedrich Nietzrches Philosophie des europiischen Nihilismus, de Gruyter, Berlin-New 
York 1992.
H. Kuhn:
Begegnung mit dem Nichts, Mohr, Tiibingen 1950.

--- PAGE BREAK ---w York 1 974-83 .
E. Kuhn:
Friedrich Nietzrches Philosophie des europiischen Nihilismus, de Gruyter, Berlin-New 
York 1992.
H. Kuhn:
Begegnung mit dem Nichts, Mohr, Tiibingen 1950.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

137
T. La Rocca - F. Mellone:
(ed.), The Time of Nihilism, Bovolenta, Ferrara 1983 .
J.-W. Lee:
Politische Philosophie des Nihilismus. Nietzsches Neubestimmung des 
Verhiiltnisses von Politik und Metaphysik, de Gruyter, Berlin-New York
.
1992.
H. Lehnert - E. Wessel:
(ed.), Nihilismus als Menschen/reundlichkeit. Thomas Manns 'Wand lung' und sein 
Essay 'Goethe und Tolstoj', Klostermann, Frankfurt a.M. 1 99 1.
G. Leyerberg -].-]. Forté:
(ed.) , Traversées du nihilisme, Osiris, Paris 1993.
K. Li:iwith:
Der
europiische Nihilismus. Betrachtungen zur geistigen Vorgeschichte des 
europiichen Krieges (1 940), in Id., Siimtliche Werke, Metzler, Stuttgart 1 98 1 -
88, vol. II, 1983, pp. 473 -540.
From Hegela Nietzsche (1 94 1), transl. it. by G. Colli, Einaudi, Turin 1949 (reprinted 
several times).
Significato efine della storia. l presupposti teologici della filosofia della sto ria (1
949), trans. it. by F. Tedeschi Negri, Comunità, Milan 1963.
K. Li:iwith - L. StrauB:
Dialogue on Modernity, translated by A. Ferrucci, introduction by R. Espo sito, 
Donzelli, Rome 1994.
N. Luhmann: 
Paradigm lost: Ober die ethische Reflexion der Mora!, Suhrkamp, Frank furt a.M. 
1990.
G. Lukacs:
The Destruction of Reason (I 954), translated by E. Arnaud, Einaudi, Turin 1959.
C. Luporini:
Nihilism and virtue in Leopardi's path, in AA.VV. , Leopardi und der Geist der 
Moderne, Stauffenburg, Tiibingen 1 993 , pp. 115-42.
C. Magris:
The Ring of Clarisse. Grande stile e nichilismo nella letteratura europea, Ei naudi,
Torino 1 984.
C. Magris - W. Kaempfer:
(ed.), Problems of Nihilism, Shakespeare & Company, Brescia 1981. 
O. Marcel:
La maladie européenne. Thomas Mann et le XX- siècle, P.U.F., Paris 1993 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---84.
C. Magris - W. Kaempfer:
(ed.), Problems of Nihilism, Shakespeare & Company, Brescia 1981. 
O. Marcel:
La maladie européenne. Thomas Mann et le XX- siècle, P.U.F., Paris 1993 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138
G. Marramao:
Heaven and Thee. Genealogy of Secularisation, Laterza, Roma-Bari 1994.
Th.G. Masaryk:
Russia and Europe: Studies on Spiritual Communities in Russia (1913), ed.
E. Lo Gatto, new completely revised edition with historical and bibliographical 
update, 2 vols., Boni, Bologna 1971.
F. Masini:
G. Benn and the Myth of Nihilism, Marsilio, Padua 1967.
Nihilism and Religion in Jean Pau!, De Donato, Bari 1974.
The Travail of the Inhuman. For a Phenomenology of Nihilism, Bibliopo lis, Naples 
1983.
Th. Mayer:
Nietzsche und die Kunst, Francke, Tiibingen-Basel 1 993 .
D. Merezkovsky:
Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. Life - Creation - Religion, edited by A. Polledro, Laterza, 
Bari 1947.
M. Meyer:
Ernst funger, Hanser, Miinchen 1990.
Ende der Geschichte?, Hanser, Miinchen 1993.
A. Mohler:
Die Konservative Revolution in Deutschland 1918-1932. Ein Handbuch,
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt 1989).
G. Moretti:
Romantic Heidelberg. German Romanticism and European Nihilism, Co smopoli, 
Bologna 1995.
G. Moretta - D. Venturelli:
(ed.), Philosophy, religion, nihilism, Morano, Naples 1988.
G. Morra:
Catholic Culture and Contemporary Nihilism, Japadre, L'Aquila 1984.
W. Miiller-Lauter:
Zarathustras Schatten hat lange Beine (1 963 ), in Arendt, 1974: 169-94.
Nihilismus als Konsequenz des ldealismus, in Schwan, 1975: 113-63.
Nihilismus, in ]. Ritter et al. (eds.), Historisches Worterbuch der Phi losophie, 
Schwabe, Basel-Stuttgart 1971 ff., vol. VI, 1984, coll. 846-53 .
W. Miiler-Seyfarth:
(ed.), 'Die modernen Pessimisten als décadents. Von Nietz.sche zu Horstmann. Texte 
r.ur Rezeptionsgeschichte von Philipp Mainliders Phi losophie der Erlosung, 
Konigshausen & Neumann, Wiirzburg 1993.
M. Nacci:
(ed.), Technique and Culture of Crisis, Loescher, Turin 1982.ann. Texte 
r.ur Rezeptionsgeschichte von Philipp Mainliders Phi losophie der Erlosung, 
Konigshausen & Neumann, Wiirzburg 1993.
M. Nacci:
(ed.), Technique and Culture of Crisis, Loescher, Turin 1982.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eptionsgeschichte von Philipp Mainliders Phi losophie der Erlosung, 
Konigshausen & Neumann, Wiirzburg 1993.
M. Nacci:
(ed.), Technique and Culture of Crisis, Loescher, Turin 1982.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

139
S. Natoli:
I nuovipagani, Il Saggiatore, Milan 1995.
H. Niehues-Probsting:
Der Kynismus des Diogenes und der Begri/1des Zynismus, Fink, Miinchen, 1979; 
later Suhrkarnp, Frankfurt a.M. 1988.
L. Niethammer:
Posthistoire. Ist die Geschichte zu Ende?, Rowohlt, Reinbek 1989.
E. Nolte:
Nietzsche and Nietzscheanism (1 990), translated in Italian with a preface by L. 
Colletti, Sansoni, Florence 1991.
L. Pareyson:
Dostoevsky. Filosofia, romanzo ed esperienza religiosa, edited by G. Ricon da and G. 
Vattimo, Einaudi, Turin 1993.
Ontology of Freedom. Evil and Suffering, Einaudi, Turin 1995.
G. Penzo:
(ed.), Il nichilismo da Nietzsche a Sartre, second revised edition, Città Nuova, Rome 
1 984.
Max Stirner. La n-volta esistenziale, Marietti, Genoa 19923-
O. Poggeler:
Hegel und die An/ige der Nihilismus-Diskussion, 'Man and World', 3, 1970, pp. 
163-99; later in Arendt, 1974: 307-49.
'Nihilist' und 'Nihilismus', 'Archiv fiir Begriffsgeschichte', 19, 1975,
pp. 197-2 10.
V. Possenti:
On the Essence of Theoretical Nihilism and the 'Death of Metaphysics', 'Filoso fia', l, 
1993, pp. 3-53.
H.-Ch. Puech:
On the Trails of Gnosis, edited by F. Zamboni, Adelphi, Milan 1985.
H. Raschel:
Das Nietzsche-Bild im George-Kreis. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der deut schen 
Mythologeme, de Gruyter, Berlin-New York 1984.
H. Rauschning:
Die Revolution des Nihilismus. Kulisse und Wirklichkeit im Dn "tten Reich, Europa,
Ziirich-New York 1938; edited by G. Mann (without subtitle), Europa, Ziirich 1
964 (translated by F. Pistolato, introduction by E. Nolte, La rivoluzione del 
nichilismo, Armando, Rome 1994).
Masken und Metamorphosen des Nihilismus. Der Nihilismus des XX.
Jahrhunderts, Humboldt, Frankfurt a.M. 1 954.
G. Royal:
Ancient wisdom. Therapy for the ills of man today, Cortina, Milan 1995.e 1994).
Masken und Metamorphosen des Nihilismus. Der Nihilismus des XX.
Jahrhunderts, Humboldt, Frankfurt a.M. 1 954.
G. Royal:
Ancient wisdom. Therapy for the ills of man today, Cortina, Milan 1995.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140
M. Riedel:
Nihilismus, in O. Brunner, W. Conze, R. Koselleck (eds.), Geschichtli che 
Grundbegri/fe. Historisches Lexikon zur politischen Sprache in Deutsch land, Klett-
Cotta, Stuttgan 1978 ff., vol. IV, 1978, pp. 37 1-411. 
M. Ritzer:
Hermann Broch und die Kulturkrise im /riihen XX. ahrhundert, Metzler, Stuttgart 
1988.
S. Rosen:
Nihilism: A Philosophical Essay, Yale UP, New Haven 1969.
The Question o/ Being. A Reversal o/ Heidegger, Yale UP, New Haven London 
1993, pp. 246-90.
P. Rossi:
Paragone degli ingegni moderni e postmoderni, Il Mulino, Bologna 1989.
M. Ruggenini:
Truth and Interpretation. Le /orme della fine della filosofia, Angeli, Milan 1984.
R. Saviane:
Vitalism and Nihilism in Goethe's 'Faust', Olschki, Florence 1992.
The Beautiful and the Dionysian (Schiller - Nietzsche), Olschki, Florence 1995.
G. Sasso:
Sunset of a myth. The idea of 'progress' between the 19th and 20th centuries, The
Mulino, Bologna 1984.
E. Scalfari:
In Search of Lost Morals, Rizzoli, Milan 1995.
W.-H. Schmidt:
Nihilismus und Nihilisten. Untersuchungen zur Typisierung im russischen Roman der 
2. Hrilfte des 19. ]ahrhunderts, Fink, Munchen 1974.
H. Schmitz:
Nihilismus als Schicksal?, Bouvier, Bonn 1972.
G. Scholem:
Der Nihilismus als religioses Phà'nomen, 'Eranos Jahrbuch', 43, 1974, pp.
1 -50.
M. Schroter:
Metaphysik des Untergangs. Bine kulturkritische Studie iiber O. Spengler,
Leibniz, Munchen 1949.
W. Schuban:
Dostojewski und Nietzsche. Symbolik ihres Lebens, Vita Nova, Luzern 1939.
A. Schwan:
(ed.), Denken im Schatten des Nihilismus, Wissenschaftliche Buch gesellschaft, 
Darmstadt 1975.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dostojewski und Nietzsche. Symbolik ihres Lebens, Vita Nova, Luzern 1939.
A. Schwan:
(ed.), Denken im Schatten des Nihilismus, Wissenschaftliche Buch gesellschaft, 
Darmstadt 1975.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
H. Schwilk:
Ernst]iinger. Leben und Werk in Bildern und Texten, Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 1 988.
M. Serra:
Beyond Decadence. The Revolt of Moderns Against the Idea of the End, ll
Mulino, Bologna 1994.
R.P. Sieferle:
Die Konservative Revolution. Fun/ biographische Skiv.en (Pau/ Lensch, Werner 
Sombart, Oswald Spengler, Ernst ]unger, Hans Freyer), Fischer, Frankfurt a.M. 
1995.
C. Sini:
Images of Truth, Spirali, Milan 19892-
Silence and words. Luoghi e confiniper un uomo planetario, Marietti, Ge nova 1989.
Ethics of Writing, Il Saggiatore, Milan 1992.
P. Sloterdijk:
Kritik der zynischen Vernun/t, 2 vols. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt a.M. 1983 (partial Italian 
translation, Critica della ragione cinica, edited by A. Ermano, Gar zanti, Milan 
1992).
P. Sloterdijk -Th.H. Macho:
(ed.), Weltrevolution der Seele, 2 vols., Artemis & Winkler, Ziirich 1991.
M. Staglieno:
Spengler, Thomas Mann, Cari Schmitt, in S. Zecchi (ed.), Aesthetics
1991 , Il Mulino, Bologna 1991, pp. 280-300.
G. Steiner:
La nostalgia dell'Assoluto (1 974), transl. it. by L. Cornalba, Anabasi, Mila no 1995.
F. Stem:
Kulturpessimismus als politische Ge/ahr. Eine Analyse nationaler Ideologie in 
Deutschland, dtv, Miinchen 1986.
Th. SiiB:
Der Nihilismus bei FH. ]acobi (195 1), in Arendt, 1974: 65-78.
J. Taubes:
Abendliindische Eschatologie (1 947 ), Màtthes & Seitz, Miinchen 1 991. 
Das stiihlerne Gehiiuse und der Exodus daraus oder Ein Streit um Markion, einst 
und jetzt, in Id. (ed.), Gnosis und Politzk, Fink-Schoningh, Miinchen-Paderbom 
1984, pp. 9-15.
Die Politische Theologie des Paulus, Fink, Miinchen 1 993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Streit um Markion, einst 
und jetzt, in Id. (ed.), Gnosis und Politzk, Fink-Schoningh, Miinchen-Paderbom 
1984, pp. 9-15.
Die Politische Theologie des Paulus, Fink, Miinchen 1 993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142
B.H.F. Taureck:
Nietzsches Alternativen zum Nihilismus, Junius, Hamburg 1991.
H. Thielicke:
Der Nihilismus. Entstehung, Wesen, Oberwindung, Reichl, Tiibingen 1950; later 
Neske, Pfulgen 1951.
F. Tonnies:
Der Nietzsche-Kultus. Eine Kn "tik (1897), edited by G. Rudolph, Akade mie, Berlin 
1990.
G. Vattimo:
The Subject and the Mask. Nietzsche and the Problem of Liberation, Horn-
plans, Milan 1 974, 19942-
The Adventures of Difference, Garzanti, Milan 1980.
The End of Modernity. Nichilismo ed ermeneutica nella cultura postmo derna,
Garzanti, Milan 1985 (in particular 'Il nichilismo come destino', pp. 27-56).
Oltre l'interpretazione, Laterza, Roma-Bari 1994.
G. Vattimo - P.A. Rovatti:
(ed.), Il pensiero debole, Bompiani, Milan 1983.
G. Vattimo - V. Verra:
Nihilism in Contemporary Thought, 'Third Programme', l, 197 3, 
pp. 74-131. 
F. Venturi:
Il populismo russo, 3 vols., Einaudi, Torino 19722 (in particular vol. Il:
From servant liberation to nihilism).
F. Vercellone:
Introduction to Nihilism, Laterza, Rome-Bari 1 992.
V. Verra:
Nihilism, in Enciclopedia del Novecento, Istituto della Enciclopedia Ita liana, Rome 
1 979, vol. IV, pp. 778-90.
Nihilism, history, necessity, 'Studium', 1991, No. 6, pp. 933-47.
V. Vìtiello:
Utopia of Nihilism. Tra Nietzsche e Heidegger, Guida, Naples 1983.
Topology of the Modern, Marietti, Genoa 1992.
Christianity without Redemption, Laterza, Rome-Bari 1995.
E. Voegelin:
La nuova scienza della politica (1 952), trad. it. by R. Pavetto, introduction by A. Del 
Noce, Boria, Turin 1968.
Wissen:scha/t, Polittk und Gnosis, Kosd, Miinchen 1959 (partial Italian translation 
by A. Munari, Il mito del mondo nuovo. Saggi sui movimenti rivoluzionari del 
nostro tempo, introduction by M. Marcolla, Rusconi, Milan 1970).

--- PAGE BREAK ---en 1959 (partial Italian translation 
by A. Munari, Il mito del mondo nuovo. Saggi sui movimenti rivoluzionari del 
nostro tempo, introduction by M. Marcolla, Rusconi, Milan 1970).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

143
F. Volpi:
Karl Lowith and Nihilism, 'aut-aut', no. 222, Nov.-Dec. 1987, pp. 21 -37.
Itinerarium mentis in nihilum, introduction to M. Heidegger - E. Jiinger,
Beyond the Line, Adelphi, Milan 1989, 1995\ pp. 9-45.
Praktische Klugheit im Nihilismus der Technik: Hermeneutik, praktische 
Philosophie, Neoaristotelismus, 'lntemationale Zeitschrift fiir Philo sophie', l, 1 
992, pp. 5 -23 .
On the fortune of the concept of 'décadence' in German culture: Nietz.sche and its /only 
/fronts, 'Political Philosophy', 9, 1995a, pp. 63-82.
Praktische Vernun/t inmitten ihrer technischen Entmachtung, in G. Figal
H. Schwilk (ed.), ErnstJiinger zum Hundertsten, Klett-Cotta, Stutt gart 1995b, pp. 72-93 .
Nichilismo, in P. Rossi (ed.), La filosofia, 4 vols., Utet, Turin 1995c, vol. IV, pp. 
313-60.
F. Volpi - W. Welsch:
Wir Nihilisten, afterword to E. Severino, Vom Wesen des Nihi/ismus,
Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart 1983 , pp. 347-64.
K. Vondung:
Die Apokalypse in Deutschland, dtv, Miinchen 1988.
W. Weigand:
Friedrich Nietzsche. Ein psychologischer Versuch, Lukaschik, Miinchen 1893.
W. Weier:
Nihilismus. Geschichte, System, Struktur, Schoningh, Paderbom 1980.
H. Wein:
Zur Recht/ertigung des Nihilismus (1963 ), in Arendt, 1974: 195-209.
W. Weischedel:
Der Gott der Philosophen. Grundlegung einer philosophischen Theologie im 
Zeitalter des Nihilismus, 2 vols., Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung, Miinchen 
1965; new edition, Wissenschaftliche Buchgeselischaft, Darmstadt 1972 (partial 
Italian translation Il Dio deifiloso/i. Fondamenti diuna teo logiafilosofica nell'epoca 
delnichilismo, edited by M. Letterio, 2 vols., ll me langolo, Genoa 1988-91).
Philosophische Theologie im Schatten des Nihilismus (1 967 ), in Arendt, 1974: 143-68.
W. Welsch:
Unsere postmoderne Moderne, VCHIActa humaniora, Weinheim 1987.
J.F. Wirtkopf:
MichailA. Bakunin, Rowohlt, Reinbek 1974.
S. Zecchi:
Syllabary of the New Millennium, Mondadori, Milan 1993.8.
W. Welsch:
Unsere postmoderne Moderne, VCHIActa humaniora, Weinheim 1987.
J.F. Wirtkopf:
MichailA. Bakunin, Rowohlt, Reinbek 1974.
S. Zecchi:
Syllabary of the New Millennium, Mondadori, Milan 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INDEXES

--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
INDEX OF NAMES
Abbagnano, N., 102.
Adam, J., 37.
Adorno, Th.W., 59.
Hadrian, 40.
Augustine, 11, 83.
Alcuin, 5.
Alexander II of Russia, 30. Arnie!, 
H.F., 37.
A,nassimander, 5.
Andler, Ch., 39.
Angelo Silesio, 5.
Apd, K.O., 1 14, 116.
Arendt, H., 11, 14-15.
Aristotle, 103, 109, 111 , 116.
Aron, R., 84.
Avenarius, F., 59.
Baader, F. von, 21-22. Bachofen,
].]., 58.
Bahnsen,].,   35-36.
Bakunin, M.A., 31-33.
Banfi, A., 102.
Barbey d'Aurevilly, J.-A., 23 . 
Bataille, G., 84-85, 87.
Battaglia, S., 99.
Baudelaire, Ch., 37-38, 40.
Baum, G., 14.
Baur, F.Ch., 80.
Beck, U., 1 15 . 
Benda, }., 60.
Benjarnian, W., 59.
Benn, G., 55, 64, 66-68, 87, 96.
Bentharn,]., 114.
Berdiaev, N.A., 60, 94.
Bergson, H., 4, 56, 63, 65.
Bemstein, E., 59.
Berti, E., 1 10. Bismarck, O. 
von, 65. Bloch, E., 59.
Blumenberg, H., 80.
Bonaparte, N., 94.
Bontadini, G., 102-104, 110.
Borges,J.L., 54.
Bosch, H., 26.
Bossuet, J.-B., 14, 93.
Bourget, P. , 36-45. 
Bovelles, Ch. de, 5. 
Bréhier, É., 81-82.
Brentano, L., 59.
Breton, A., 84.
Broch, H., 55, 64, 66.
Brunetière, F., 37.
Buber, M., 59.
Bultmann, R., 81.

--- PAGE BREAK ---4, 93.
Bourget, P. , 36-45. 
Bovelles, Ch. de, 5. 
Bréhier, É., 81-82.
Brentano, L., 59.
Breton, A., 84.
Broch, H., 55, 64, 66.
Brunetière, F., 37.
Buber, M., 59.
Bultmann, R., 81.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148
Cacciari, M., 100.
Calasso, R., 1 16.
Samples, G., 39.
Camus, A., 82-84, 87.
Caracciolo, A., 100.
Camap, R., 55.
Carus, C.G., 58.
Cattaneo, C., 99.
Cemysèvskij, N.G., 30.
Chamberlain, RS., 66.
Cioran, E.M., 84-87.
Claudius, M., 14.
Cloots, A., 12, 22.
Colletti, L., 110.
Colli, G., 51. 
Condorcet, J.-A.-N., 93.
Corbin, H., 82.
Cramer, J.A., 14.
Coumot, A.-A., 95-96.
Derrida, J., 116. De 
Sanctis, F., 99. 
Descartes, R., 24.
Diederichs, E., 58.
Dilthey, W., 63.
Dionysius Areopagitus, 5.
Disraeli, B., 89-90.
Dobroljubov, N.A., 30. Donoso 
Cortés, J., 22.
Dostoevsky, F., 7, 32-33 , 36, 44-45, 71.
Dubuffet,J., 116. 
Dumas,A., son, 37.
Eckhart, M., 5, 79.
Einstein, A., 89.
Engels, F., 27.
Epicurus, 65.
Heraclitus, 57, l 05.
Fabro, C., 110.
Feuerbach, L., 16, 25.
Fichte, I.H., 19.
Fichte, J.G., 13-15, 18.
Flaubert, G., 37.
Freud, S., 59, 63, 89.
Freyer, H., 59.
Fridugisus of Tours, 5. 
Frobenius, L., 63.
Fuchs, C., 41-42.
Fukuyama, F., 95.
Gadamer, H.-G., 1 14.
Galilei, G., 57.
Galluppi, P., 99.
Garaventa, R., 82.
Gast, P., 44.
Gehlen, A., 94-95.
Gentile, A., 88.
George, S., 55, 61.
Gide, A., 55 .
John of the Cross, saint, 5. Givone, S., 6, 
100, 102.
Goethe, J.W., 5, 26.
Goetzius, F.L., 11. 
Goncarov, LA., 30.
Goncourt, brothers, 37, 40.
Gorgias, 4, 116.
Gracian, B., 114.
Gualtiero di San Vittore, 11. Guardini, 
R., 59.
Guénon, R., 60, 82.
Gutzkow, K.F., 11, 24.
Habermas,J., 114.
Hamann, J.G., 14.
Hartmann, E. von, 35-36, 55.
Hegel, G.W.F., 14, 18-19, 25 , 54, 80,
84, 96, 105.
Heidegger, M., 6, 52, 54-55, 68-79, 81- 
82, 87, 99, 101, 104, 113, 115-16.
Herder, J.G., 14.
Herzen, A.I., 30-3 1. 
Hesse, H., 59.
Hessen, S., 33.
Hofer, H., 24. Hofmannsthal, 
H. von, 55. Horkheimer, M., 59.
Huizinga,J., 60.
Husserl, E., 59, 116.
Hyppolite, ]., 84.
Invernizzi, G., 35.., 14.
Herzen, A.I., 30-3 1. 
Hesse, H., 59.
Hessen, S., 33.
Hofer, H., 24. Hofmannsthal, 
H. von, 55. Horkheimer, M., 59.
Huizinga,J., 60.
Husserl, E., 59, 116.
Hyppolite, ]., 84.
Invernizzi, G., 35.

--- PAGE BREAK ---30-3 1. 
Hesse, H., 59.
Hessen, S., 33.
Hofer, H., 24. Hofmannsthal, 
H. von, 55. Horkheimer, M., 59.
Huizinga,J., 60.
Husserl, E., 59, 116.
Hyppolite, ]., 84.
Invernizzi, G., 35.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
Jacobi, F.H., 13- 16, 18, 22.
Jaspers, K., 55, 59, 94.
Jean Paul, 15-16.
Jenisch, D., 14-15.
Jonas, H., 81, 114.
Jung, C.G., 63, 80.
Jiinger, E., 55, 64, 68-78, 87, 113.
Kahler, E. von, 61. 
Kant, 1., 14-15, 18, 47, 65-66, 94, 96,
102, 114.
Katkov, M.N., 10.
Kelsen, H, 88.
Keyserling, H., 59.
Kierkegaard, S., 25.
Klages, L., 55, 58-59, 63.
Kojève, A., 84-85, 94-95.
Korsch, K., 59.
Kracauer, S., 57.
Krieck, E., 59.
Krug, W.T., 14, 23.
Kuhn, E., 39.
Kundera, M., 53.
Lacan, J., 84.
La Rochefoucauld, F., 114.
Leconte de Lisle, Ch.-M., 37. 
Leibniz, G.W., 5, 14-15.
Leonardo da Vinci, 5. Leopardi, 
G., 5, 99, 105.
Lessing, Th., 59.
Lipsio, G., 114.
Lowith, K., 54.
Luhmann, N., 114.
Lukacs, G., 30, 59.
Luther, M., 66.
Mainlander, Ph., 35-36.
Maistre, ]. de, 21, 23 . 
Man, H. de, 95.
Mann, H., 55, 64.
Mann, Th., 55, 61, 63-65, 67.
Marx, K., 27, 65, 80, 89, 105.
Masaryk, Th.G., 29.
Meister Eckhart, 5, 79.
Mercier, L.-S., 23 .
Merleau-Ponty, M., 83. 
Meysenbug, M. von, 44. Milton, ]., 
1 14.
Montinari, M., 39, 51. 
Miiler-Lauter, W, 11. 
Miiler-Seyfarth, W, 35.
Musil, R, 55, 64-65.
Nadddin, N.I., 10.
Necaev, S.G., 30-3 1.
Niethammer, 1., 94.
Nietzsche, F., 3-4, 7, 12, 33, 35-39, 41- 
58, 63-68, 71, 74, 77, 80, 91, 93,
101- 102, 105, 117.
Odze, F.W., 66-67.
Ortega y Gasset, ]., 60. Overbeck, 
F., 36.
Pannwitz, R., 59.
Pappus, J., 26.
Pareyson, L., 100, 102.
Parmenides, 103, 106-108, 111. 
Pascal, B., 12-13, 114.
Pisarev, D.l., 30.
Plato, 46, 107-108, 116.
Plotinus, 83.
Plutarch, 44.
Poggeler, 0., 14-15.
Proudhon, P.-]., 22.
Queneau, R., 84.
Rathenau, W, 59.
Royal, G., 113. 
Renan, E., 37.
Riedel, M., 11, 15.
Rosenkranz, K., 19.
Rossini, G., 26.
Ruggenini, M., 100.
Sade, D.-A.-F., Marquis of, 22-23, 114.
Sanches, F., 5.
Sartre, ].-P., 82-83.
Scalfari, E., 113.
Scheler, M., 59., E., 37.
Riedel, M., 11, 15.
Rosenkranz, K., 19.
Rossini, G., 26.
Ruggenini, M., 100.
Sade, D.-A.-F., Marquis of, 22-23, 114.
Sanches, F., 5.
Sartre, ].-P., 82-83.
Scalfari, E., 113.
Scheler, M., 59.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Schelling, F.W.]., 14, 18-19_ Schlegel, F., 
15-16.
Schmitt, C., 26, 68, 87-90, 93.
Schopenhauer, A., 11, 32, 35-36, 54,
63-64.
Schubart, W. , 33, 36.
Schuler, A., 58.
Schweitzer, A., 59.
Seneca, 58.
Sestov, L., 33, 36, 60.
Severino, E., 100, 102- 12.
Sirnmel, G., 55-57, 63, 114.
Sini, C., 100.
Socrates, 46, 116.
Solov'ev, V.S., 94.
Spengler, 0., 55 , 57-59, 65 .
Spinoza, B., 14, 90, 110.
Spirit, U., 102.
Stael, A.-L.-G. Neck...-, Madame de, 17.
Stendhal, 36-37.
Stirner, M., 25, 27, 77.
Strindberg, A., 55.
Taine, H., 37, 44.
Taleyrand, Ch.M., 116.
Taubes, J., 81.
Tonnies, F., 55-56.
Troeltsch, E., 61. 
Turgenev, I .S ., 7-1 1, 29-30, 32, 36-37. 
Vaihinger, H., 55.
Valéry, P., 60.
Vattirno, G., 100-101. 
Venturi, F., 29.
Vercellone, F., 6.
Verra, V., 6.
Vitiello, V., 100.
Voegelin, E., 80.
Volpi, F., 6, 39.
Voltaire, 93.
Wagner, R., 36, 41-42, 44.
Weber, M., 60-62, 68.
Weigand, W., 39.
Weischedel, W., 82.
Weisse, Ch., 19.
Welsch, W., 101.
Wittkopf, J.F., 31. 
Wolff, Ch., 15.
Zecchi, S., 113. Zeno of 
Elea, 99. Ziegler, L., 59.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ber, M., 60-62, 68.
Weigand, W., 39.
Weischedel, W., 82.
Weisse, Ch., 19.
Welsch, W., 101.
Wittkopf, J.F., 31. 
Wolff, Ch., 15.
Zecchi, S., 113. Zeno of 
Elea, 99. Ziegler, L., 59.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TABLE OF CONTENTS
l. "Itinerarium mentis in nihilum. For a history of the concept
and the problem
3
2. Turgenev and his alleged paternity
7
3. Nihilism, romanticism, idealism
1 1
4. Nihilism in the social and political sense and its origin
French
21 
5. The groundless nihilism of Max Stirner
25
6. Nihilism, anarchism, populism in Russian thought
29
7. Nihilism and decadence in Nietzsche
35
8. Nihilism, relativism and disenchantment in the 'culture of crisis'
53
9. Aesthetic-Literary Nihilism
63
10. Beyond the line of nihilism: Jinger 'versus' Heidegger
69
11. Nihilism, existentialism, gnosis
79
12. Nihilism, political theology, secularisation: Carl Schmitt
87
13. Nihilism, 'posthistoire', end of history
93
14. Nihilism in Italy
99
15. Beyond Nihilism?
113
Bibliography
119
Texts, p. 121 - Studies, p. 130
Index of names
147