n f

chapter two / Organized Crime


65


Kcfanver Committee's investigation in New York City. The Committee
biiid: “. . . the wiretaps in particular gave a vivid picture of Frank
Costello as a political boss and an underworld emperor.” Since Costello
and his confreres could not be expected to cooperate, such information
was thought otherwise impossible to come by.

On the surface the related theses that Robert Kennedy ran the FBI
: ind that lie was able to do so only because he had a brother in the
White House exuded a certain logic. Under Robert Kennedy's prodding
;tnd with Jack Kennedy’s backing, the FBI for the first time effectively
entered the fights for civil rights and against organized crime. And
imnuTlately upon President Kennedy’s assassination, the FBI link
ircriliv halted the bulk of its diplomatic relations with the Attorney
Oncrql's office. Among other disruptions, the Bureau stopped sending
a e;ir to pick up the Attorney General as he traveled around th e
(uiuilry; it started communicating directly with th e new President
1:11 in.-r than via the Attorney General as protocol (and the practiced
jin: Kennedy Administration) indicate d’ if Bypassed — the Deputy-
::r»mrv General in undertaking to dear potential judicial nominees :
jj o:diklcd the Attorns General from its investigations for the
Warren Commission (and then prematurely released their findings to
he jrcss, in violation of Chief Justice Warren’s orders )<■&» and it
^.niTaiiv behaved in what Ed Gulhman. Robert Kennedy's press
I'lihr-, ciiarnr'-ri/cs as “an unmanly fashion/’ Indeed, the very
afternoon of the assassination Jack Miller, the Assistant Attorney
Unrigl m Turfr.- nf the Criminal Division, flew fn Dallas to take
^ !|r Li\ only to br. blatantly, rudely and improperly ignored by the FBI.
Vi ilhout disputing the facts, another interpretation — and quite the


reverse — is possible. During -President Kennedy's life Robert never
dllcwpicd to control either the Director or the FBI. He accepted the
l arcau as another country which he was content to influence rather
han capture, and he tempered his efforts to influence the FBI so as not
lo embarrass his brother. In practical terms, this meant that he had un-
fittingly ceded half of his power to Hoover and the FBI, and missed
lac chance to force Hoover’s resignation.

ter President - Kennedy’s assassination, Attorney General Kennedy
no lon SCT felt under the constraints of brotherly obligation. He no
ungcr feared that confrontation with the FBI might undermine the
r C c f goals of the Administration. And having accumulated three
o ^ arS Vl,r ^ 1 °f expertise at FBI-managing (not to mention the advice
ln , , 1 C 1 ‘ nc ^ 0 °verologists as Burke Marshall), he exerted new and
Portant influence on the FBI’s activities — especially in the civil


4


pQonm , KetAt f=z ^ ,
Victor NftV^SksY, PiTHe^eurm,

U C ITP1T10 rJ RQ.Fe.ae


To

TV


vi g -p,fttsl:n <->F -BRoWeras
ESXD W i f'4 »
