Ferrie Confessed His Involvement
In John Kennedy Assassination Plot

August 5, 1968 Lbs Angeles By Stephen Jaffe

(Steve Jaffe is a student at UCLA and a growing critic of the
Kennedy Assassination. He is concentrating his efforts into the
events surrounding the assassination of Senator Robert Kennedy.)


The first public disclosure of a confession by any of
the participants in the conspiracy which led to the Dallas
assassination of President Kenedy was revealed in sur-
prising fashion recently on the Stan Bohrman, Tempo I,
television show in Los Angeles. An ex-roommate of the
late David Ferrie appeared on the program as a last min-
ute guest. The roommate, Reverend Raymond Broshears
of Long Beach, was asked to replace a guest who had
been scheduled to discuss psychic phenomena and predic-
tions of the future.

After introductory comments were made, the program,
which is in the format of receiving questions from outside
telephone callers, became one of significant historical im-
portance. In response to one of the callers questions the
Reverend told of his association with the late David Ferrie
of New Orleans.

Ferrie was named by District Attorney Jim Garrison
of New Orleans as one of the participants in the con-
spiracy which ended in the murder of President Kennedy.
Garrison said of Ferrie, “He was one of history’s most
important individuals.”

The caller questioned Reverend Broshears and much
to the shock of host Stan Bohrman, Broshears answered
the questions frankly. When asked if Ferrie had told him
of the assassination conspiracy his former roommate
replied, “David admitted being involved with the assassins.
There’s no question about that.”

Reverend Broshears, who has tried to escape harrass-
ment by “individuals from mysterious sources” ever since
his short association with Ferrie in 1965, told of the role
which Ferrie had played in the plot. “He was in Houston
at the time Mr. Garrison has him in Houston, with an
airplane waiting,” reported Broshears. The Reverend said
that Ferrie had intended to fly the assassins on the second
leg of a getaway trip which was to carry at least two of
the gunmen, first to South America and then to South
Africa. The location in Africa was chosen as a final des-
tination because that country has no extradition agree-
ment with the United States.

According to the Reverend, Ferrie was waiting in the
Houston airport, that Friday afternoon, when the two
assassins, having just murdered President Kennedy, fled
in a light aircraft from a landing strip just outside of
Dallas. Instead of going straight to Houston as was ar-
ranged, the assassins tried to make their escape all the
way to Mexico without stopping. The assassins died in a
plane crash that afternoon off the coast of Corpus Christi,
Texas.

Broshears said that Ferrie had been a nervous wreck
in the days of their acquaintanceship. This was over a
year before the public disclosure of the investigation of
Jim Garrison and, according to a recent article in Ramparts
Magazine by William W. Turner, Garrison hadn’t begun
his probe even secretly, until the later half of 1966. Bro-

* * . 1 .1 _4? T7> ^ _ > . <• i« i r _ . t


shears u>iu ox r ernes rears tnat someone was going to
kill him. “No matter what happens I will never commit
suicide/' Ferrie had told the Reverend. “He was emphatic
about this/' Broshears reiterated.

Broshears said that he knew David Ferrie had been
murdered and thus confirmed another portion of Gar-
rison's analysis of the evidence since his probe began.

More questions in the assassination matter are added
by the case of David Ferrie. Aside from his mysterious
death, the strange activities of Ferrie on November 22,
1963 had led Garrison to arrest him for questioning when
Ferrie returned from his trip to Houston. After the Dis-
trict Attorney’s office questioned Ferrie they referred him
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for further ques-
tioning, and examination by the Warren Commission. As
in so many similar cases, the Warren Commission never
questioned Ferrie, who, it is evident, might have shed
considerable light on the true events of the assassination.

Compounding the federal negligence is the fact that
the F.BJ. did question Ferrie and the forty page transcrip-
tion of that interview has been committed to the National
Archives for the duration of 75 years from the issuance
of the Warren Report.

Reverend Broshears was asked by the caller if he was
ever arrested for threatening the life of President Lyndon
Johnson. Most reluctantly he repied that he had been.
But he qualified the implication saying that it was for
the love of his country that such an incident transpired
He did not actually threaten President Johnson, and he
explained that he does not believe in killing. “What then ’’
Bohmian puzzled, “did you say?"

At the risk of being re-arrested for repeating a state-
ment that had caused Secret Service agents to take the
Reverend into custody two years ago, Broshears stated
“I said that Mr. Johnson, the person "who was responsible


THI MIDLOTHIAN MIRROR


directly or indirectly, for the assassination of President,
Kennedy, should be put to death’.” I

With the energy of ten men, and the breath of a
Kff*’ Bohrman activated his lips to form the words,
We 11 be right back after this word from Arid Extra Dry.”

But the shock which characterizes most of the assas-
sination revelations did not stop there. Broshears admis-
sions, however courageous or honest, have meant nothin?
but total tortuie and harrassment for him ever since the
television program.

xt Si J? c , e the time of his arrest by Federal Agents in
New Orleans for the incident of his alleged threat on
President Johnson (after which he was questioned and
released without conviction or sentence) he has had to
be in constant touch with Federal offices of the Secret
Service and F.B.I. by order of the Federal Government.
Agents from those organizations have warned him to "keep
his mouth shut or risk being committed to a mental in-
stitution.

After the television program Broshears was served
by his landlady, Mrs. Norma L. Smith, with a seven-day-
uimt eviction notice. Phone calls from anonymous sources
told PS?’ a How many Presidents did you kill today, Rev-
erend? And two reporters from the Sunday supplement
of the Long Beach Press Telegram newspaper, have plan-
ned an article for this Sunday’s edition which will reveal
that Reverend Broshears is a homosexual. A friend of
the Reverend’s on the Long Beach Police Force confided
that the article would not be favorable to him at all.


Broshears realizes mat tne price of breaking his silence
on the case could certainly bring damaging comments
about him and possibly endanger his life. Ironically
Broshears never tried to hide the fact that he is a homo-
sexual. He answered , “I am a homosexual but I have never
denied it.” Homosexuality is often used as a source of
smear material but that is usually in the case of a person
who would be damaged by that public revelation. Broshears
only fault or sin seems to be his persistent honesty.

Apparently, freedom of speech is something which
Broshears has always taken as a cause to defend. When
an attack was waged by Reverend John C. Bonner, of
the Long Beach-Lakewood Area, to try and halt the sale
of the Los Angeles Free Press, in March of 1968, Broshears
replied to the aggressor. In a modest but outspoken news-
paper published by Reverend Broshears, called ‘The Light
of Understanding/' Broshears replied to Reverend Bonner's
limited acceptance of journalistic freedom. ‘‘In the Bible
it states that if you raise your children rightly, you need
not fear," he wrote. Where Reverend Bonner had requested
that the representatives of some 47 area churches ‘‘stand
up and be counted,” Broshears answered, “Stand up and
be counted as what? A person who opposes freedom of
the press?" As a result of this small but noble defense
Reverend Broshears was expelled from the ministerial al-
liance of his district.

Another Los Angeles broadcaster, Elliot Mintz of
KPFK, invited Reverend Broshears on his show. Respond-
ing to his tremendous audience interest in the events
surrounding the murder of President Kennedy, Mintz
questioned Broshears on his association with Ferrie. After
callers quizzed the Reverend there was not much time
allowed to the Reverend to discuss his Night Ministry
school which is his occupation in Long Beach. Although
the program closed without the discussion of some of the
Reverend's work in the Community Relations field (finding
help for “skid row" bums, improving conditions in the
ghettos) the oversight of time promised the Reverend
shall be corrected by the show's host. Mintz told me, “If
Mr. Broshears would like to come on our show to discuss
his work, and his Night Ministry school and not to discuss
his association with David Ferrie, he has a standing in-
vitation from me to do that."

It is impossible to estimate the truth or falsehood
of the Reverend's statements about the assassination. It
is certain that in his association with Ferrie he had the
unique opportunity to learn what Ferrie might have told
the New Orleans Grand Jury had he lived. In the case of
the assassination of President Kennedy it seems apparent
that those with important knowledge, who speak out, risk
death. In the current issue of Reverend Broshears' news-
paper he explains his puzzle in a different way. He says,
“The price of SILENCE is death."
