Vault 8
Source code and analysis for CIA software projects including those described
in the Vault7 series.
This publication will enable investigative journalists, forensic experts and the
general public to better identify and understand covert CIA infrastructure
components.
Source code published in this series contains software designed to run on
servers controlled by the CIA. Like WikiLeaks' earlier Vault7 series, the
material published by WikiLeaks does not contain 0-days or similar security
vulnerabilities which could be repurposed by others.
All Releases
Hive - 9 November, 2017
Today, 9 November 2017, WikiLeaks publishes the source code and
development logs to Hive, a major component of the CIA
infrastructure to control its malware.
Hive solves a critical problem for the malware operators at the CIA.
Even the most sophisticated malware implant on a target computer is
useless if there is no way for it to communicate with its operators in a
secure manner that does not draw attention. Using Hive even if an
implant is discovered on a target computer, attributing it to the CIA is
Hive Repository
Hive Commit History
Leaked
Documents
Releases ▼

Documents ▼
Hive
9 November, 2017
WikiLeaks
Donate Submit
Search
Leaks News About Partners

--- PAGE BREAK ---ibuting it to the CIA is
Hive Repository
Hive Commit History
Leaked
Documents
Releases ▼

Documents ▼
Hive
9 November, 2017
WikiLeaks
Donate Submit
Search
Leaks News About Partners

--- PAGE BREAK ---

difficult by just looking at the communication of the malware with
other servers on the internet. Hive provides a covert communications
platform for a whole range of CIA malware to send exfiltrated
information to CIA servers and to receive new instructions from
operators at the CIA.
Hive can serve multiple operations using multiple implants on target
computers. Each operation anonymously registers at least one cover
domain (e.g. "perfectly-boring-looking-domain.com") for its own use.
The server running the domain website is rented from commercial
hosting providers as a VPS (virtual private server) and its software is
customized according to CIA specifications. These servers are the
public-facing side of the CIA back-end infrastructure and act as a
relay for HTTP(S) traffic over a VPN connection to a "hidden" CIA
server called 'Blot'.
The cover domain delivers 'innocent' content if somebody browses it
by chance. A visitor will not suspect that it is anything else but a
normal website. The only peculiarity is not visible to non-technical
users - a HTTPS server option that is not widely used: Optional Client
Authentication. But Hive uses the uncommon Optional Client
Authentication so that the user browsing the website is not required
to authenticate - it is optional. But implants talking to Hive do
authenticate themselves and can therefore be detected by the Blot
server. Traffic from implants is sent to an implant operator
management gateway called Honeycomb (see graphic above) while
WikiLeaks
Donate Submit
Leaks News About Partners

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Blot
server. Traffic from implants is sent to an implant operator
management gateway called Honeycomb (see graphic above) while
WikiLeaks
Donate Submit
Leaks News About Partners

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all other traffic go to a cover server that delivers the insuspicious
content for all other users.
Digital certificates for the authentication of implants are generated by
the CIA impersonating existing entities. The three examples included
in the source code build a fake certificate for the anti-virus company
Kaspersky Laboratory, Moscow pretending to be signed by Thawte
Premium Server CA, Cape Town. In this way, if the target
organization looks at the network traffic coming out of its network, it is
likely to misattribute the CIA exfiltration of data to uninvolved entities
whose identities have been impersonated.
The documentation for Hive is available from the WikiLeaks Vault7
series.
WL Research
Community - user
contributed research
based on documents
published by
WikiLeaks.
Tor is an encrypted
anonymising
network that makes
it harder to intercept
internet
communications, or
see where
communications are
coming from or
going to.
Tails is a live
operating system,
that you can start on
almost any computer
from a DVD, USB
stick, or SD card. It
aims at preserving
your privacy and
anonymity.
The Courage
Foundation is an
international
organisation that
supports those who
risk life or liberty to
make significant
contributions to the
historical record.
Bitcoin uses peer-to-
peer technology to
operate with no
central authority or
banks; managing
transactions and the
issuing of bitcoins is
carried out
collectively by the
network.

Top
WikiLeaks
Donate Submit
Leaks News About Partners