wrr.' v irr ' • 
-JfS- - 
• WS > -T.^: i \\* -» •,'v46( - *-.cs 
~ "rAgg* - 
- '3* ,-TR r* JjAs^5**S» -a*v; 
3*3§=&»“ 
BRIEFING BOOK 
■■is 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS * 
* ■ 
• ♦: ;U 
&

--- PAGE BREAK ---

;...i i- 
. ; * 
0 
•; v 1. .*». - .. .» » . • „• 
A / f« 
U 
■ r i *■* » • -*• 
At. t«io cor \
mmt . \\j C*'*r?%-.vc j..
m
t VJ ii’y 
uu:: u , >'• •-<:•'Jr ..in.'-gi:rent LVv.ision, is pre-parir.g a. survey 
r , - ‘ H 
1;. l:cr cr * ho r.n r ox lin-.v.r feci, of rratc-rial prices sc cl 
pur.su r'lL tv; cop-!ic;,_:b Cr:; .it te e ' c is ri!:.rcs one’ is ey.prctc d 
*Lo hJVO thi.: sut \*cy .•.o--.O.c:.c;i before rc-c^nbcr, 10/3. 
l-’o-.’over, or. of October 31, 197G, the t(«U:l request letters 
received f- r.; this Corraittcc since December 3, 13/i$, 
rn : D--r 3 Of. Most ci these iowears listed mir*orons 
rccpic ets. 
The procorr ins of this Co -roll t ee's requests has 
boon handle-.: by the Congrr--sriov] Inquiry Unit, Recer vds 
Jbnageii’xnt Division, v.hieh hrs added or taken away 
personnel, depending on the a:vooat of vrork necessary 
and has had as raany as seventy-five employees \;cv king full 
tii.'.e on this Ca:.jT>it:tc-c's requests. 
The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Drench, 
Records Management Division, has Curnislic-icl the Ccruitl.&e a 
total of 9»P»,7C»5 pages comprising the FBI Headquarters' file 
on the Kennedy assassination investigation and the Ruby 
ar»d Oswald. files. FOIA figures reveal that as o? September 10, 
19/8, a total cf $7.9',, 534 vss spent just c-n the processing 
of the Kenned} ossnrsination file for release to the public. 
hr>ct ^3© 
ir^

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Possible Questions From Committee Members

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Have you discussed with Mr. Adams the allegation that 
he is a racist? If so, what was his response?

--- PAGE BREAK ---PAGE BREAK ---

Possible Questions From Committee Members

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Have you discussed with Mr. Adams the allegation that 
he is a racist? If so, what was his response?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

( 
Mr. Adams has stated that Mr. Murtaugh's characterization 
of him as a racist is absolutely untrue and the only basis Mr. Murtaugh 
gave for his belief was a hearsay statement allegedly made by his Special 
Agent in Charge, Mr. Joseph Ponder, in the early 1960’s. Mr. Murtaugh 
made the same charges before the House Select Committee on Intelligence 
in 1975 at which time Mr. Adams categorically denied having made any 
such statement and stated that the FBI’s record of affirmative action in 
recruiting Black employees belied any such statement. Mr. Adams points 
out that he has vigorously supported the FBI's equal employment oppor- 
tunity efforts, personally approved a letter of commendation of Mr. Murtaugh 
in 196,6 and an incentive award in 1967 for Mr. Murtaugh,both in connection 
with his recruitment efforts. Further, Mr. Adams was appointed Assistant 
Personnel Officer in 1961 and Personnel Officer in 1965, holding such 
position until 1971. The total number of Black employees on the FBI rolls 
rose from 51 in 1961 to 1487 in 1970. A Bureau spokesman, Homer Boynton, 
has contacted Mr. Ponder, who categorically denies Mr. Adams made the 
statement attributed to him and denies having made the statement attributed 
to him by Mr. Murtaugh.

--- PAGE BREAK ---10GG 
• ■Ji.

—J 
< 
Mr.

STANTON.

I fas it ever provided refuge for fugitives from 
justice?

Mr.

RASKIN.

Xo.

sir.

Mr.

STANTON.Thunk you.

Tlic (.'hair will yield to Mr.

Dolinins.

Mr.

1 >i:i.u MS.

Thunk you.

Mr.

Chairman.

Mr.

Murtagh.

unfortunately I was not aide to be here this morning, 
and I would like (o lake the opportunity to ask you a few questions, 
perhaps in a dilicrent tone and certainly of a dilicrent nature than 
those of the distinguished ranking minority member.

II as the FBI tended to screen out certain racial groups and religious 
groups?

Mr.

MruTACti.

I am sorry.

I didn't hear the question.

Mr.

l)i:u,t Ms.

Has the Fill tended, over the years, to screen out 
certain racial and religious groups?

Mr.

Mn:r.\cir.

Uncial and religious groups.

I don't understand what 
you mean by ‘‘screen out." In hiring?

Mr.

Pia.i.VMS.

Yes.

Mr.

Mi I:TU;II.

There is no question about it.

The selection process 
has been designed in such a way that a ]xrson could not lx- hired as 
an agent unless ho could get l>y an interview with a person who was 
already in the* position of, say, an SAC and the screening was done 
along the lines of "if you look the part, if von arc the type of person 
that I am.

then we will take you: and if you are not.

wc won't.” 
I have had personal experience in a situation where an Air Force 
captain came into the Bureau—I mean was asking for employment— 
and the assistant in charge in Atlanta called me in.

I had been assist- 
ing in screening some of these people.

He asked me to go out and take 
a look at this fellow, and I went out and looked at him.

and I went 
back in and he said.

“Do you see anything wrong with him?" I said, 
“No.

I can't see anything wrong.” 
He said.

"Didn't you notice that he has eyes like Robert Mitchum!

His eyelids fall down over his eyes.” I said.

“Yes.

I noticed that.” lie 
said.

“Well.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I noticed that.” lie 
said. “Well. I would he afraid to recommend him." lie said, ‘T got 
transferred one time for recommending somebody that had ante on 
their face.” 
I give that as an illustration of the sort of qualifications that they 
looked into. Mr. DKLIXMS. Thank you, Mr. Murtagh. My next qw.-tions is: Has this policy of exclusion had consequences 
or a licet cd the results or policies of the FBI ? Mr. MI KTAKII. I think it is the whole problem because the direction 
and the attitudes that control the thinking in the FBI are the atti- 
tudes of tho.-o that are hired. Now, Mr. Adams here this morning was mentioning that they were 
having trouble recruiting minority agents. 1 happened to know of a 
situation where I recruited minority people in Alhuita forrlerica! po- 
sitions at the request of the SAC—several hundred of them over a 
period of -1 years—and I recruited them very vigorously. My job was merely to get them, approve them for investigation.and 
then other agents conducted the investigations. We got to the point 
where we had a hundred or more finished inve>tigationsat the Bureau. The boss at that time was doe Bonder, the boss in Atlanta. He came 
) 
i 
t • 
1 
i 
» 
I 
I i 
i 
« 
in the Bureau { 
up to my dr.-k. week, and I v.i • 
until I got to .* 
or another, y«. Murtagh'*s bla 
-|f you don't - 
South to work i 
Mr. DKU.V.V- 
thc FBI have :i 
• al views alb.; 
Socialist Work 
dissident groi:; 
Mr. Mum., 
to hit the left 
damage, as th 
Bureau is for. I went into1 
I lie trouble i': ! and the Bun-, 
ami bv lfUi- t1 
of first names 
ever. And if; 
they made of; 
I am talking 
sixties when 
whatsoever of 
assigned to t 
were worked 
KlnxKlan. The only t: 
murder and: 
Mr. Dtu j 
mony. Mr. V 
Mr. STAX* 
Mr. JOHN* 
Mr. Mutt 
had from ;•' 
you though* 
it was—wa- - 
at ion to de-' 
Was that 
illation on y 
operntion 
Mr. M»'t- 
Mr. Jon' 
Mr. M>: 
tion that v 
it was. in 
I wouldn t 
hit-und-t'
1' 
lie told 
the week futt 
had from ;•' 
you though* 
it was—wa- - 
at ion to de-' 
Was that 
illation on y 
operntion 
Mr. M»'t- 
Mr. Jon' 
Mr. M>: 
tion that v 
it was. in 
I wouldn t 
hit-und-t'
1' 
lie told 
the week f

--- PAGE BREAK ---

m 
■ ■ ■ i 
fugitive's fro,,, 
■"•re this mon,i„,r 
. f,,w 'inrsi;n,£ 
^ ''’id nature (|,an 
s ail<l I1p,iffiotw 
; >n. 
to screen out 
’* | „ Jl;lt 
V;i7",<rV0" pnx-oss 
“ ,I m,t '* i.ircl as 
P(‘t>'0„ »J,o H, * 
' ‘■•■""’X n-as .lone 
Ii,,‘ of person 
'7f- we won't.*’ 
: “‘i Air J«’orco 
.been nssi«t- 
! 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
r 
i 
i 
I 
i* - . ul11 <in.j fajfo 
? and I 
ji U“hu»rix,u‘ 
“ iii'Vi/, '”y n'; 
l ;1,;o,l3
‘ Uiat IJ,(.v 
h:lil ro'1^J.fences 
1,1 «'* <J.c atti- 
~ tfiat tJirv were 
"> w«- of a 
of V, ,,' 'Va' P°- 
,u,‘ over a 
11 *P<’ tioipf 
1 
I'-nean. 
1 ,l' v.nne 
/ 
I 
i 
i 
i 
i 
I 
m 
#*>£• 
4UU/,.. 
,n flic JJiireai, for 'A 
|«-ssSrL£r ^ 
™i “im vM-v n™ w*,,w 
^oculist l\'orkeisVi
1.V?if'f'r;,tioM ?* bl„efes! h,°’ a?(,»c v s politjf 
W'T/r ‘{j #rro"I,s? * ’ i,n'! a,,,iw'Mr n'ovo/nenV,"m,
(r!jVVt’1,0ns’ tho 
to l V The eniiilio -•. ’ °t,lcr *°-c.llled 
Jtanies an,| tn,,tf on tj„, J^J . * i.inie down j„ jp-. 
And if v, ‘ ; so" J J.cv /, ,*i. ba,,,n ot,1<?r fJ,onn&t 
},lcv *»>» Je of i J,e Ida - I!"V1,ilf the * „ jj - \? ^'“Ti-ation w],atS? 
si-‘th «,^»rfc!,nd 1 *<* & tint 
•St\f„.ij wJ,ej, certain I.I , ,,v "nils in fl>e \,f . so J know \\J,at 
whatsoever of (he e/jVu/ 'n^5 !**•«•* inilita‘5 1 .“,,ra
. ««* diiriiy?}JJ 
jpp,s^5S3^fi^ 
  i».,Ons tcs(i. 
thwgi,! J,Ki,hir <f«« iiJ\”i!i,rBrc',o"««>■ >o„

,. £ 7;:-ty E^rcr^- ""

"■ Ckiitr      w,,

--- PAGE BREAK ---jVu/ 'n^5 !**•«•* inilita‘5 1 .“,,ra
. ««* diiriiy?}JJ 
jpp,s^5S3^fi^ 
  i».,Ons tcs(i. 
thwgi,! J,Ki,hir <f«« iiJ\”i!i,rBrc',o"««>■ >o„

,. £ 7;:-ty E^rcr^- ""

"■ Ckiitr      w,,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AV{v' vWvpi-lirfl-1 tP,nSI>0NSKS TO STATEMENTS MADE 
m5NliFAR 1M'V 1 ",,NESSES »liDNG NOVEMBER 18, 
UNITED STATUS DEPARTMENT Or JUSTICE 
FLEJERAi ItKEAC OF INVESTIGATION 
•UIIKIW.M mil 
November 21, 1975 
RE: TESTIMONY OF ARTHUR MURTAGH BEFORE 
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE, 
NOVEMBER 18, 1975 
Among the allegations made by Murtagh during tha 
November 18, 1975, hearings before the HSC was that at one 
time he was asked to obtain through his informants hand- 
writing sanplcs of Andrew Young of Atlanta and other 
assistants of Or. Martin Luther King in the Southern Christian 
Leadership Conference (SCLC), for what he believed was to be 
used for illegal purposes. 
In 1973, the time Kurtaqh originally made this 
allegation, a check of FBI Headquarters files as well as 
those of the Atlanta Office of the FBI was made. A com- 
munication was directed to FBI Headquarters by the Atlanta 
Office on August 13, 1973, which advised that a review of 
files disclosed no information to support Murtagh's allegation 
and that personnel, who would be knowledgeable of such a re- 
quest cf Murtagh, had no recollection of any such request. 
FBI Headquarters files did not contain information which 
would substantiate Murtagh's allegation. 
Mr. Murtagh alleged the FBI used illegal activity 
to compromise the "movement" and that Mr. Hoover had no 
sympathy with any "racial movement." Presuming that Murtagh 
is referring to the Civil Rights Movement, our investigations 
were aimed at determining the nature and extent of communist 
influence in the racial movement and not to deter the move- 
ment itself. The TB1 promptly and vigorously handled investi- 
gations relating to Civil Rights violations and our excellent 
record in this area speaks for itself. 
Hr. Murtagh alleged that Mr. Hoover threw a veil of 
secrecy over the Bureau's internal operations making it impos- 
sible for the public or Congress to know of Bureau operations. 
I 
(11»)r itself. 
Hr. Murtagh alleged that Mr. Hoover threw a veil of 
secrecy over the Bureau's internal operations making it impos- 
sible for the public or Congress to know of Bureau operations. 
I 
(11»)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r* 
© 
1130 
Testimony of Arthur Murtegh before the Select 
Committee on Intelligence, November 18, 1975 
h!i«J?Urt“2h il well,',Jre that annual appropriations were 
which werc^at^libertv ,°=tlr,ony before Congressional Committees 
=•\^S3&255 gg Hlli’— 
the Bureau' * ai"a>f been in a position to know of 
Mr- Murtagh alleges that the Bureau uses harsh dis- 
s try,BrSU"S- Th° standards of conduct of*the FBI are 
standards is handled promptly and fairly. No administrative 
froi thoS CV?r tdkCn wlthout first obtaining an explanation 
from the employee involved. Disciplinary policies of the aid- 
960s were no different than in previous decades and little 
outside the Agent’s job description his obvious initial re- 
-ut^eirUldctC t0 rCport next higher Ju^vIHry 
wuld not'beSr.» Murtagh insinuated that internal chlnnels 
would not be responsive to accepting or forwardino such 
• lilinilk rLnUSt “iSO ** P°inted out that Agents could 
.uch'as^he ZtorZly ^ l° hi9her -“thority. 
Testis 
Coesni;- 
select 
the r;-. 
in ou: 
Our e- 
persc- 
invest 
■ine : 
with t 
and hv 
Agents 
This i: 
studii- 
sister- 
Indus-.: 
resis; 
in a:.; 
in V.- 
Specii. 
educe-. 
The 
The C 
be cc: 
Stud;- . 
educi 
recru. 
typic-: 
FBI j-- 
of Sp 
crio: 
1972, 
•ntra- 
- 2 - 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---This i: 
studii- 
sister- 
Indus-.: 
resis; 
in a:.; 
in V.- 
Specii. 
educe-. 
The 
The C 
be cc: 
Stud;- . 
educi 
recru. 
typic-: 
FBI j-- 
of Sp 
crio: 
1972, 
•ntra- 
- 2 - 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1131 
i.-, *.. -,v 
J 
4 
\ 
i 
? 
•cct 
,%o n. 
• -ion* 
:i- 
•' ;over 
* :k.cd 
"i 
t 
r 
j 
> 
Testimony of Arthur Murtngh before the Select 
Committee on Intelligence, November 18, 1975 
Mr. Murtagh alleges that the TBI has carefully 
selected /.gent personnel who were politically disposed to 
the right. 
The FBI is excepted from the competitive Civil Service 
in our oir.plo/nent of both Special Agents and clerical personnel. 
Our employees are selected based on educational qualifications, 
personal interviews, appropriate testing and rigid background 
investigations. Ho instructions have ever been issued to deter- 
mine the political of filiation of applicants for employment 
with the 1T.1. political affiliation or persuasion is not now 
and has never been a prerequisite for employment. 
Additionally, Mr. Kurtagh alleges that thousands of 
Agents have been forced to leave the Bureau in "utter disgust." 
This is not corroborated by the facts. Percentage comparison 
studies reveal that t.nc turnover rate of Special Agents is con- 
sistently below that in the Federal Government and private 
industry. In the first place, large numbers of Agents have not 
resigned and no information has come to our attention that would 
in any way indicate that large numbers of Agents have resigned 
in "utter disgust." 
He also suggests that either the salary scale for 
Special Agents should te reduced or that we should establish 
educational requirements to justify our high pay standards. 
The starting grade for a Special Agent in the FBI is GS-10. 
The U. S. Civil Service Concussion has found this position to 
be correctly classified in grade GS-10, based on a thorough 
study of all pertinent background information including the 
educational, physical and other qualification standards for 
recruitment, training courses and facilities, examination of 
typical, practical case problems and a study of the scope of 
FBI jurisdiction and the numerous duties ar.d responsibilities 
of Special /.gent personnel. Classification standards for the 
criminal investigating series GS-1811 were revised in February, 
1972, and in format icr. therein continues to support GS-10 as the 
entrsnee level for Special Agents. 
- 3 
u-ICS o • ic • i< 
-Pi 
■fTT- 
Ial investigating series GS-1811 were revised in February, 
1972, and in format icr. therein continues to support GS-10 as the 
entrsnee level for Special Agents. 
- 3 
u-ICS o • ic • i< 
-Pi 
■fTT- 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T ' 
J J. 
AC'.fc/ 
Committee on Nove'^cr^S.a^j1 
SS
1L*KHio?2T;IHn?”"”~' &, 
•onr.cl would reprint ?Jo ?u,T rC°COSS 50 th« future 
instead of only a narrow .egiint^U ™^^ic4" *°C^ 
cross section of^e^ican^rr A<,ent COI"Pl«>cnt is made UD of a 
races and creeds. All apnl > eff?SCntlnt? 411 walks of life 
inrt1CWCd *nd trc«t<?d in a like mlnn rccelvcd *ro thoroughly 
individual’s station in life. r wltho“t regard to^n* 
Policy of ^earB?PP0^en9uLsiS'w“nd h“ b~"’ ■« established 
policy of considering each aoni?** a?plied an unqualified 
regard to race or any other dilcr?m‘ ^ without 
years we have emphasized and ri”*nat°ry factor. Over the 
but the desire to at£ra^ ?PhaS”ed not only the Med 
or er to be representative of theyAe'Cp*iCantS to our ranks in 
our responsibilities. * the ABerie«n people and fulfil? 
institution^l'rac^m ?n W practiced 
i 
i 
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Have any Arent applicants been identifed as racially 
prejudiced? 
(Division HI RESPcnn.) 
FBIHQ is not aware of any Special Agent applicants having been 
identified as racially prejudiced.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q. 
Has the FBI undertaken any positive means to insure that 
a racially prejudiced person would (1) not be hired, or 
(2) not be continued in his or her employment as an 
Agent of the FBI? 
A (1) The Agent selection process is designed to identify 
such a person through testing and interview techniques 
and investigation. If a racially prejudiced person 
were identified, that person would not be hired. 
(2) If any Agent were found to demonstrate racial 
prejudice in the conduct of his official duties, that 
person would be dealt with in accordance with the 
specifics of the incident. All supervisors are 
instructed to be alert for such incidents. 
- V -

--- PAGE BREAK ---t of his official duties, that 
person would be dealt with in accordance with the 
specifics of the incident. All supervisors are 
instructed to be alert for such incidents. 
- V -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q. Do you have Agents in the FBI that may be characterized 
as "racist"? 
A. Since I have been Director, no incident has come to my 
attention that would cause me to conclude that any Agent 
has officially acted in such a way as to demonstrate that 
a personal prejudice toward any race resulted in official 
activity that was illegal or otherwise unacceptable. 
Your Committee has received testimony from SA James J. 
Rose. Although he stated he was personally prejudiced 
against Dr. King before becoming an FBI Agent, there is 
no evidence, to the FBI's knowledge, that such a personal 
prejudice against one man - not an entire race - caused 
SA Rose to officially act in an improper or illegal 
manner. 
-JT-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q. Would you consider firing an Agent who demonstrated 
racial prejudice? 
A. Termination of employment might become a viable option. 
It would depend on the individual circumstances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Would you consider firing an Agent who demonstrated 
racial prejudice? 
A. Termination of employment might become a viable option. 
It would depend on the individual circumstances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c 
o 
QUESTION: Since the time of the Kennedy Assassination 
there have been many developments in the 
scientific field which might be of assistance in an investigation 
of a future assassination. We all are aware of the capabilities 
of the FBI Laboratory to assist in these investigations. Does 
the FBI have access to outside scientific experts in fields 
where the FBI does not have sufficient expertise to do examina- 
tions that might be of assistance in the assassination investigation? 
ANSWER: The FBI Laboratory has immediate access to 
recognized scientific experts through contacts at 
Federal laboratories (over 180 in number) that permit us to 
obtain scientific expertise in virtually all disciplines. As 
examples, chemical and biological warfare matters can be 
handled through the U. S. Army Chemical Systems Laboratory 
at Edgewood, Maryland. In the situation of assassination of a 
national figure, we can obtain immediate assistance through the 
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. Additionally, we have 
contacts with other laboratories at industrial and university levels 
that provide us with scientific expertise that may not be available 
in our Laboratory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Additionally, we have 
contacts with other laboratories at industrial and university levels 
that provide us with scientific expertise that may not be available 
in our Laboratory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

QUESTION: In the past the FBI has allowed supervisory 
personnel who were involved in the investigation 
of specific individuals to be also involved and to supervise- 
investigations when those same inidividuals later become the 
victim of criminal activity. For example, Bureau supervisory 
personnel involved in the domestic intelligence investigation 
of Martin Luther King, Jr., were also involved in the Murkin 
investigation. Would you as Director allow this same 
practice to continue in the future? 
ANSWER: I see no reason to preclude supervisory or 
Agent personnel involved in the legitimate 
investigation of a particular individual from later participation 
in an investigation where that individual becomes a victim of 
a criminal act. The knowledge of the activities and associates 
of the individual would be of great value in determining suspects 
and in assisting in the pursuit of the investigation to a logical 
conclusion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V. 
Q. The Committee has learned that the FBI’s reporting in 
the King investigation to the USDJ was superficial and 
untimely, and further that the general relationship 
between the USDJ and FBI during the King investigation 
would be characterized as poor and counterproductive. 
What would the case be today? 
A. The FBI today enjoys an open and productive relationship 
with the USDJ. Reportings in all matters of mutual 
concern are as complete and timely as the exigencies 
of the cases permit. In the unfortunate event of such 
a major figure assassination case in the future, you 
may be assured that all avenues of communication 
between the FBI and USDJ would be open and constant. 
-9-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ate event of such 
a major figure assassination case in the future, you 
may be assured that all avenues of communication 
between the FBI and USDJ would be open and constant. 
-9-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

e 
<; 
Q. The Committee has learned that the FBI investigations 
into the deaths of President Kennedy and Dr. King may 
have suffered because the FBI assigned supervisory 
duties in both to many Agents as an adjunct to their 
normal duties. Would this happen today? 
A. No -- supervisory assignments in any future investigation 
of such magnitude would exclude other duties.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Would you authorize dissemination of information of 
a personal nature about an individual to persons outside 
the Federal Government? 
I would, but only to satisfy the legitimate needs of. 
law enforcement, as in the case of a fugitive investi- 
gation where dissemination of certain personal information 
may be expected to lead to the location and apprehension 
of the fugitive. As you know, the FBI is authorized 
by Public Law 95-624, (the Department of Justice Appropri- 
ation Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 1979), to exchange 
identification records with, and for the official use 
of, the duly authorized officials of the Federal Govern- 
ment, of States, cities, and other institutions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---979), to exchange 
identification records with, and for the official use 
of, the duly authorized officials of the Federal Govern- 
ment, of States, cities, and other institutions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

( 
V' 
QUESTION: What is the extent of FBI presence at locations that 
are going to be visited by the President? 
ANSWER: The U. S. Secret Service has been mandated by statute 
with the primary responsibility to protect the person 
of the President. The FBI has also been authorized to provide 
protection to the President. Department of Justice Appropriation 
Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 1979, Section (8). Generally 
speaking, the FBI carries out its responsibility by consulting with 
Secret Service advance teams if the Secret Service so requests, 
n Further, upon request of the Secret Service, the FBI will provide 
manpower to assist in the protection of the President. In short, our 
physical presence will be dependent upon receiving a request for 
assistance from the Secret Service.

--- PAGE BREAK ---provide 
manpower to assist in the protection of the President. In short, our 
physical presence will be dependent upon receiving a request for 
assistance from the Secret Service.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c 
QUESTION: In March, 1978, the St. Louis Office of the FBI furnished 
information regarding a possible conspiracy in the King 
Assassination. This information concerned an offer of $50,000 made 
to Russell Eugene Byers to kill Dr. King. This information was received 
S+, l&iMQ OftfjCt, J 
by the^FBI in March, 1974, placed in an informant contact memorandum, 
and never disseminated or acted upon. What action did you take concerning 
this matter and what were the results. 
ANSWER: I ordered an inquiry into this matter and directed that 
Agent personnel who handled this information be interviewed 
to determine reasons for the failure to act on or disseminate that 
information. The Agent who contacted the informant recalled receiving 
the information, had no recollection of having disseminated it, and 
stated his failure to do so was inadvertent. This Agent's supervisor 
w 
did not recall the specific contact memorandum and could furnish no 
reason other'than inadvertance.as to why it had not been acted upon. 
Since both of these Agents were retired, no administrative 
or disciplinary action was taken against them. 
The Committee has been provided copies of all the 
documents concerning the inquiry into this matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---re retired, no administrative 
or disciplinary action was taken against them. 
The Committee has been provided copies of all the 
documents concerning the inquiry into this matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

QUESTION: How would you, as Director, consider the creation of 
another "Warren Commission" type of organization or 
a Special Prosecutor to investigate a future political assassination? 
ANSWER: As you know, the FBI is vested with the responsibility 
for investigations of Presidential or other assassinations 
that might be political in nature. I believe that a trained and professional 
law enforcement institution is best able to conduct complicated and 
f kts 
sensitive major investigations. This organization has the facilities and 
the expertise to organize and administer complicated investigations of 
this type. This is evidenced by the recent investigation into the 
assassination of Orlando Letelier which was, of course, political in 
nature. 
The creation of an organization similar to the Warren 
v* 
Commission might be desirable to review the results and the methods 
of a major political assassination investigation. It is my opinion, however, 
that the FBI, working closely with the Department of Justice and utilizing 
all the tools available to us, is best able to investigate major political 
assassinations and assassination attempts. 
The question of a Special Prosecutor is one that would 
be more appropriately answered by Deputy Attorney General Benjamin 
Civiletti who will appear before the Committee. However, I would like

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to point out to you that the FBI and the Criminal Division in the 
Department of Justice work very closely together on a day-to-day basis 
and, in the event of a major political assassination, we are ready to 
immediately involve ourselves and bring all our resources to bear 
to bring the matter to a successful conclusion. 
*

--- PAGE BREAK ---the event of a major political assassination, we are ready to 
immediately involve ourselves and bring all our resources to bear 
to bring the matter to a successful conclusion. 
*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-7SO (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
Page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or more of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
□ Deleted under exemption(s)     with no segregable 
material available for release to you. 
I I Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request. 
I I Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
I I Document(s) originating with the following government agency(ies)  
   was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
JL.  Page(s) referred for consultation to the following government agency(ies); e- 
 __ as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
Page(s) withheld for the following reason(s): 
1 1 For your information: 
P<l The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
bo go. [u ent JeL  
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) \ 
£ NO DUPLICATION FEE x 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
F BI/DOJ

--- PAGE BREAK ---garding these pages: 
bo go. [u ent JeL  
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) \ 
£ NO DUPLICATION FEE x 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
F BI/DOJ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

' ^ \ ®il1t ean also toe commit^ ^merely ' 
But, of course, f'f corehension of harm whether or "®^that harm." 
putting another ^^ehensio^ Is capable of this 
- establishment 
SrS**SSSSS;J^s*^ 
case brought under 18 USC lli,^ evl(Jence showed only a confendant,. 
Judgment of JW«"’defendant whlchwaa ended ** Whll. , 
between the victl ha(J y0UP warning, we 1 8 from . f 
which an implication with words alone carry an f 
Sdlti°fiLCofC^ce'! in addition ^%£oX?A«”. at 
application in the future -Hot conduct not 
best the defendant's «flaw (but see «:* nigate the 
erss■ 
SS» •* ft***- 
”Tm >«......>™.SS»I.'1£S . 
uniin”, . . in4>a two categories, . . 11T1_ occurs then 
IsS Bi|«3 SSC^iSfs • 
a Congressman. ls apparent that 
prom the debate on^thi^slctipn in this ^{^^er 
. senator Ervin’s potion to ^clu(Je simple assaults from ^ 
prompted by { » desire , p. a. 17, 519 V Mem*er of 
penalty provisKi . ^St if“a man strikes ST; doe# strlkc 
10/8/70). He ?^|g ste without landi^ the blov,^ the lesser 
Congress with his then he should be gu ” congressman la 
hil6°l^ n^ ;nde-th0an «-« , 
^el'hy tgfT^lncould*be°sought"in that case. . 
the higher - - atute does not provide^for^aggrava^e^assaulta 
-»i^ 1SS 
for^aimple^ssault appears unsuitable. . 
20 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---de-th0an «-« , 
^el'hy tgfT^lncould*be°sought"in that case. . 
the higher - - atute does not provide^for^aggrava^e^assaulta 
-»i^ 1SS 
for^aimple^ssault appears unsuitable. . 
20 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(• w. , 
O ^ • •' * ~ 
6. Federal Investigative and Prosecutive Jurisdiction; 
TH U.S.C. 351 (f) 
"If Federal Investigative or prosecutive Jurisdiction 
is asserted for a violation of this section, such 
assertion shall suspend the exercise of jurisdiction by 
a State or local authority, under any applicable Stata 
or local law, until Federal action Is terminated.* 
t 
When and if Federal Investigative or prosecutive 
Jurisdiction is asserted, this provision suspends State or local 
Jurisdiction in cases of possible violation of 18 U.S.C. 351, until 
all Federal action is terminated. This is within the powers 
delegated to Congress under the Constitution, as it has long been 
established that the enforcement of state laws which interfere 
with the protection of a dominant Federal Interest in the same * 
subject, as we have here, can be suspended by Federal law. Sea 
Pennsylvania v. Nelson. 350 U.S. 497, 504-505 (1956). 
Although this section suspends state action, it does 
not prevent the states from cooperating with Federal authorities 
in an investigation of violations of the act. See 18 U.S.C. 351 (g). 
In addition, state action is only suspended until the Federal 
action is terminated. 
Conflicts of Jurisdiction resulting from the commission 
of an Independent state offense, such as the wounding of a state 
official, incidental to an offense against a Member of Congress, 
are to be resolved on a case-by-case basis. v. . 
. * •’ 
7. Investigative F.esponslblllty; lB U.S.C. 251 (g) 
"Violations of this section shall be investigated 
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Assistance 
may be requested from any Federal, State, or local 
agency. Including the Army, Navy, and Air Force,' any 
statute, rule, or regulation to the contrary notwith- 
standing.” .   
This section makes it clear that the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation shall have investigative jurisdiction over 
Eolations of the act, and may avail itself of the assistance 
of any Federal, State* or local agency, or the military. The 
purpose of this ar">‘»3ment Is to make investigations under the 
act the fix®* responsibility of one agency having the necessary 
resources and experience to conduct such investigations. 
• - 
The provision also overcomes the effect of 18 U.S.C. 
1385, which generally prohibits the use of any part of the Army 
or Air Force as a posse commltatus or otherwise to execute the laws. 
21 -• - 
The provision also overcomes the effect of 18 U.S.C. 
1385, which generally prohibits the use of any part of the Army 
or Air Force as a posse commltatus or otherwise to execute the laws. 
21 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---SECTION 89.

( ( 
ASSAULTING OR KILLING OF FEDERAL.

OFFICERS; 
CONCESSIONAL ASSASSINATION STATljyi 
-.IVJ 
ao 
>.

:’fi V.

STATUTES - ASSAULTING FEDERAL OFFICERS (AFO) 
Title 18, USC, Sections 111, 1114, and 2232.

Elements 
/ 
Assaulting or Killing of Federal Officers, Title 18, USC, 
Sections 111, 1114, and 2232.

(1) That the defendant assaulted or killed the Federal officer 
(2) That the Federal officer was within one of the enumerated 
classes as set forth in the statute.

(3) That the Federal officer was engaged in the performance 
>f his official duties or that he was assaulted or killed on account 
>f the performance of his official duties.

£99-1.2 Background and Definitions •   ..

p9-1.2.1 Assaulting or Killing of Federal Officers 
(1) The Bureau's jurisdiction in these cases is based on the 
£3>riainal statute of 5-18-34, which made the assaulting or killing of 
pertain Federal officers a Federal crime.

The power of Congress to enact 
“-uhis legislation was challenged in Barrett v.

U.

S., 82 F.

(2d) 523, 
Nut the court held that there was no merit to the contention.

(2) Since its original enactment, this legislation has been 
^ tmended several times to include within its provisions additional classes qf 
federal employees.

The officers and employees that are covered are listed in 
' VCC.

Section 1114 (See 89-1.3.2).

Effective 8-27-64, the statute * 
as broadened to include any security officer of the Department of State or 
he Foreign Service.

The intent of this addition is to extend the coverage 
o any security officer of the Department of State or Foreign Service engag- 
d in protective activities under Title 22, USC, Sections 2666 and 2667.

^ t is noted that persons afforded protection under Section 1114 are also 
“fforded protection from assault under Title 18, USC, Section 111.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The intent of this addition is to extend the coverage 
o any security officer of the Department of State or Foreign Service engag- 
d in protective activities under Title 22, USC, Sections 2666 and 2667. ^ t is noted that persons afforded protection under Section 1114 are also 
“fforded protection from assault under Title 18, USC, Section 111. (Title 
£(.2, USC, Section 2666, concerns those individuals employed by the Department 
State and the Foreign Service who have been designated to carry firearms 
£or the purpose of protecting heads of foreign states and other distinguished 
oreign visitors. Effective 8-27-64, these security offficers are empowered 
o arrest without a warrant any person violating Title 18, USC, Sections 
11 or 112, in their presence if they have reasonable grounds to believe 
x. hat the person to be arrested has committed or is committing such a 
iolation.) 
* 
t-i) xne Criminal Division of the Department has pointed out 
hat one question upon which there has been considerable diversity of 
pinion relates to the necessity of alleging and proving that the defendant 
new at the time the act was committed that the person killed or assaulted 
^as a Federal officer or employee. (Court decisions that have held the 
|||^e£endant did not have to possess such knowledge in order to violate 
^he statute are U. S. v. Lorobardozzi, 335 F. (2d) 414 (1964), certiorari 
^.^cnied, and Bennett v. U. S., 285 F. (2d) 567 (1960), certiorari denied.) 
t has been urged by some that, while it would not be necessary to prove that 
£;•- •• • 
465 
1/31/78 
MIOG 
hrsr * I %

--- PAGE BREAK ---SECTION 89.

X 
• • Vi.*.

'• •>' - ‘ 
ASSAULTINC OR KILLING OF FEDERAL OFFERS; 
CONCESSIONAL ASSASSINATION STATUTE^* 
■ -*i.

V 
• t*.

• 
‘ ■> IS 
V ,ie defendant had knowledge that the person killed or assaulted was a Federal 
officer or employee where the officer was acting at the time in the perform- 
{ ance of[his/herJofficial duties, it would be necessary to allege and prove the 
defendant's knowledge of the official character .of the person killed or 
J assaulted if the act was committed on account of the performance of[his/her] 
official duties.

It is understood that the Criminal Division of the Depart- 
ment has generally taken the position that knowledge of the official capacity 
of the person killed or assaulted is not an element of the offense.

Such 
evidence, where possible-, however, should always be obtained.

(4) The penalties imposed for killing a Federal officer are based 
on the nature of the killing whether voluntary or involuntary manslaugther or 
FSJ murder.

These terms are defined in Title 18, USC, §1 1111 and 1112, as set 
out in 89-3.1.1 and 89-3.2.1 of this section.

89-1.3 Wording of AFO Statute 
89-1.3.1 Section 111 - Assaulting, Resisting or Impeding Certain Officers 
or Employees .

"Whoever forcibly assaults, resists, opposes, impedes, intimidates 
or Interferes with any person designated in Section 1114 of this title while 
li*j!

engaged in or on account of the performance of his official duties, shall be 
fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than three years, or both.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Whoever forcibly assaults, resists, opposes, impedes, intimidates 
or Interferes with any person designated in Section 1114 of this title while 
li*j! engaged in or on account of the performance of his official duties, shall be 
fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than three years, or both. "Whoever, in the commission of any such acts uses a deadly or 
dangerous weapon, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more 
than ten years, or both." 
os-1.3.2 Section 1114 - Protection of Officers and Employees of the 
United States j 
"Whoever kills any judge of the United States, any United States 
Attorney, any Assistant United States Attorney, or any United States marshal 
or deputy marshal or person employed to assist such marshal or deputy marshal, 
any officer or employee of the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the Depart- 
ment of Justice, any officer or employee of the Postal Service, any officer or 
employee of the secret service or of the Drug Enforcement Administration, any 
officer or enlisted man of the Coast Guard,[any officer or employee of any 
United States penal or correctional institution,]any officer, employee or 
agent of the customs or the internal revenue or any person assisting him in 
the execution of his duties, any immigration officer, any officer or employee 
of the Department of Agriculture or of the Department of the Interior desig- 
nated by the Secretary of Agriculture or the Secretary of the Interior to 
enforce any Act of Congress for the protection, preservation, or restoration 
of game and other wild birds and animals, any employee of the Department of 
Agriculture designated by the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out any law or 
regulation, or to perform any function in connection with any Federal or State 
program or any program of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands of the United 
States, or the District of Columbia, for the control or eradication or pre- 
vention of the introduction or dissemination of animal diseases, any officer 
or employee of the National Park Service, any officer or employee of, or 
assigned to duty in, the field service of the Bureau of Land Management, or 
any officer or employee of the Indian field service of the United States, or 
1 
O' 
r 
i 
466 
7/tft rta 
KIOCyee of, or 
assigned to duty in, the field service of the Bureau of Land Management, or 
any officer or employee of the Indian field service of the United States, or 
1 
O' 
r 
i 
466 
7/tft rta 
KIOC

--- PAGE BREAK ---SECTION 89.

' k CkAXk A.

* - - *—• !

- * 
SALUTING OR KILLING OF FEDERAL'bh'15 
N\.

.SSIONAL ASSASSINATION STATUTE^ 
CERS; 
„ny officer or employee of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
directed to guard and protect property of the United States under the admin- 
istration and control of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
any security officer of the Department of State or the' Foreign Service, or any 
officer or employee of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, or of 
the Department of Labor(or of the Department of the Interior, or of the 
Department of Agrlculturejassigned to perform investigative, inspection, or 
law enforcement functions, while engaged in the performance of his official 
duties, or on account of the performance of his official duties,^shall be 
punished as provided under sections 1111 and 1112 of this title.

The Department of Justice advises in its opinion Supreme Court 
Justices are included in the category of "judge of the United States.

89-1.3.3 Section 2231 - Assault or Resistance 
"(1) Whoever forcibly assaults, resists, opposes, prevents.

Impedes, intimidates, or interferes with any person authorized to serve or 
execute search warrants or to make searches and seizures while engaged in the 
performance of his duties with regard thereto or on account of the performance 
of such duties, shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more 
than three years, or both; and— 
"(2) Whoever, in committing any act in violation of this section, 
uses any deadly or dangerous weapon, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or 
imprisoned not more than ten years, or both." 
**9-1.4 
Policy 
The Bureau will accept for investigation cases involving the 
assaulting or killing of any Government employee specifically named in Title # 
18, USC, f 1114, except cases involving assaults on employees of the U.S.

Treasury Department.Impedes, intimidates, or interferes with any person authorized to serve or 
execute search warrants or to make searches and seizures while engaged in the 
performance of his duties with regard thereto or on account of the performance 
of such duties, shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more 
than three years, or both; and— 
"(2) Whoever, in committing any act in violation of this section, 
uses any deadly or dangerous weapon, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or 
imprisoned not more than ten years, or both." 
**9-1.4 
Policy 
The Bureau will accept for investigation cases involving the 
assaulting or killing of any Government employee specifically named in Title # 
18, USC, f 1114, except cases involving assaults on employees of the U.S.

Treasury Department.

The Department has advised that the Bureau should not 
investigate assaults on any Treasury employees.

The Department advised that ■ 
if any case develops wherein the absence of an FBI Investigation is materially 
interfering with law enforcement, the Attorney General should be advised.

Furnish complete details of any such instance to FBIHQ.

By agreement between the Department of Justice, U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Furnish complete details of any such instance to FBIHQ. By agreement between the Department of Justice, U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS), and the FBI, the following policy with respect to the 
investigation of assaults of USPS employees has been approved and it should 
eliminate overlapping investigative efforts by the USPS and the FBIs 
"Unless otherwise directed by the Department, investigation 
of assaults on and homicides of personnel of the USPS is for the FBI if 
incidental to another violation under the primary investigative Jurisdiction 
of the FBI or if the attack is by a nonemployee against a Postal Inspector and 
for the USPS In all other instances." 
By way of clarification, this means the FBI will continue to 
Investigate assaults on Postal Inspectors by outsiders, that assaults 
-on Postal Inspectors by postal employees will be investigated by USPS, 
and that USPS will handle all other assaults on USPS personnel except 
in cases where the assault is incidental to another violation under the 
467 
KIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---be investigated by USPS, 
and that USPS will handle all other assaults on USPS personnel except 
in cases where the assault is incidental to another violation under the 
467 
KIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 89. 
.ULTING OR KILLING OF FEDERW OFFICERS* 
jrRESSIONAL ASSASSINATION ST^ Jr^ 
- r ’.mary investigative jurisdiction of the FBI, or if otherwise directed 
.Vi., the Department of Justice. 
J. • v 
The Department has advised that the Bureau should accept complaints 
C: ’ under Section 111 when the victim is an employee of the Agricultural 
Research Service, formerly the Bureau of Animal Industry, of the Department, 
-of Agriculture. 
89-1.5 
Investigative Procedure 
(1) Promptly notify FBIHQ of receipt of each and every assault- 
ing or killing of Federal officers complaint by teletype, airtel, or letter 
as exigencies of complaint dictate. FBIHQ should be advised immediately 
#by telephone or teletype when an assault involves Bureau Agent personnel. 
(2) As the investigations involving the murders of Government 
officers or Members or Members-elect of Congress may result in sentences of 
capital punishment being imposed against the defendants. Agents making 
such investigations should bear in mind that all evidence used in the 
trial of said defendants will be given the strictest interpretation and 
will be subject to the closest scrutiny by the trial court. Therefore, 
means should be taken to obtain and preserve any pertinent evidence in 
such a form that it will withstand the scrutiny of the court. 
(3) Immediately following the commission of such a crime, 
a painstaking investigation should be made at the scene thereof. 
(4) Interviews should be had with every individual who witnessed 
t‘ crime or who would have been in a position to have known anything 
; a>..ut the crime. If possible, signed statements should be obtained from 
all witnesses and such statements should not be restricted to only eyewit-^ 
nesses but to any person who might later be in a position to state that 
h*» nr shp had some information concerning the offense. 
(5) Statements from persons who were in the vicinity of the 
crime, who claim not to have seen or heard or known anything about it, 
should be secured. The statements will later preclude those persons 
from changing their testimony in the event that they are later contacted 
by defense counsel or their representatives. 
.. j (6) The witnesses should be thoroughly questioned concerning 
their understanding as to the identity of the persons involved, as to 
any remarks made by them or bystanders, and as to any incidents- which 
came to their attention. 
(7) Insofar as possible the investigation should eliminate 
the possibility of obtaining additional evidence of any nature in the 
future from any individual who may have been in the viqinity when the 
Ltcd. 
(8) In proving the death of the murdered victim, it is essential 
to establish that the death was caused by reason of the acts of the defend- 
ants. It is, therefore, necessary that an autopsy be performed by a 
(vc capable physician who will be competent to testify as to the cause of 
M the death. 
468 
1/31/78 
MIOGhe acts of the defend- 
ants. It is, therefore, necessary that an autopsy be performed by a 
(vc capable physician who will be competent to testify as to the cause of 
M the death. 
468 
1/31/78 
MIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---d- 
ants. It is, therefore, necessary that an autopsy be performed by a 
(vc capable physician who will be competent to testify as to the cause of 
M the death. 
468 
1/31/78 
MIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 89. 
ASSAULTING OR KILLING OF FEDERAL OFFICERS; 
CONGRESSIONAL ASSASSINATION STA'BF’iE 
c (9) The i nvestigation should exhaust every possible means 
of obtaining evidence to establish that the accused murdered the victim. 
If he was killed as the result of gunshot wounds, the bullets and the 
gun should be recovered for ballistic tests and the gun should be properly 
identified as having been used by the defendant. Likewise, if a knife 
or other instrument or means was used to accomplish the murder all available 
evidence connecting the instrument of death with the crime should be 
obtained and properly preserved. 
(10) By the weight of authority in cases involving homicide 
and particularly those involving a murder of a law enforcement officer, 
evidence of the defendant's commission of a recent crime which might 
have been a reason for attempting to avoid arrest can be introduced during 
the trial of the case to show motive on the part of the defendant. There- 
fore, in conducting these investigations, every effort should be made 
to determine whether the defendant was a fugitive from justice or whether 
he was wanted for a crime in any jurisdiction pursuant to outstanding 
process or otherwise at the time he committed the murder. 
(11) A thorough development of the past history of the defendant 
should be made as in many instances information is thus developed which 
later can be used as rebuttal evidence during the course of the trial. 
(12) Title 18, USC, Section 3432, provides that when any person 
is indicted for a capital offense, a copy of the indictment and a list 
of the jurors and witnesses shall be delivered to him at least three 
entire days before the trial. It is, therefore, very important that 
dicing the investigation the full names of all prospective witnesses, 
t »ther with their home addresses, the street, city, county, and state 
addresses, should be obtained. In some sections of the United States it 
is custom in issuing subpoenas duces tecum for records of corporations • 
to designate some named official or "his authorized representative." 
However, in murder cases it is necessary for such subpoenas to be directed 
to the individual expected to produce the records at the trial and care 
should be taken that such person's name and address, together with his 
official capacity, be obtained. 
(14) Where a Federal judge is the victim of a violation of this 
statute the appropriate U. S. Marshal should be advised' immediately. Addi- 
tionally, if investigation is instituted, close personal contact should be 
established with the U. S. Marshal particularly during the initial phases. 
Copies of all investigative reports in such instances should be disseminated 
locally to the U. S. Marshal. 
89-1.6 Character - Assaulting a Federal Officer; 
Killing a Federal Officer 
469 
1/31/78 
MIOGes of all investigative reports in such instances should be disseminated 
locally to the U. S. Marshal. 
89-1.6 Character - Assaulting a Federal Officer; 
Killing a Federal Officer 
469 
1/31/78 
MIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---

**+ Y<. 
PART I 
AsC IWINO 0* MHI5S-X.S?’^|S,KIM’ 
■o 
89-2 
89-2.1 
CFTTION 89. AS*. JLTING OR KILLING* ur 
SECTION a CONGRESSIONAL ASSASSINATION STAT 
0> 
STATUTE - CONGRESSIONAL ASSASSINATION STATUTE (CAS) 
Title 18, USC, Section 351. 
Elements 
Congressional. Assassination Statute - Title 18, USC, Section 351. 
That the defendant killed or kidnaped, attempted or conspired 
to kill or^kidnap? or assaulted a Member of Congress or a Member-of 
Congress-Elect. 
89_2.2 Background and Definitions 
89-2.2.1 Congressional Assassination Statute 
m The Department defines a member of Congress as "one
' Jjj°, h 
U a component part o£ . nfegesRIf"lmSe“hIp?!‘’see 
is sharing the responsibilities and privileges 1904). it is the 
United States v. Dietrich, 126 F. 676, 681 (B t Cl ^ extended to include 
view ot theTJepartment that **^ership as thl Resident Commissioner 
^%ue?CWSRlcrindSt°e Hoi-Voting Delegate from the District of Columbia. 
^ the 
t the Senate or the House of Representatives. 
o 
• 
usru-usri a-ss s. 
eluded that an "assault* is: 
(a) an attempt wlthforce ^violence to do. c«poral 
*^55 actual violence 
agalnst°theCperson.W^Guarro v^COnited^States,°237 P.W 578. 580 ,D. C. 
Cir. 1956). ilftCfl. 
lb) in 1 adner 'v- Dnited 
It was held an assault can also be =°“B‘“^ct”'Cl«uaU? Intends to 
,4, section 2514 of Title 
enumerated in Section 2516, * Attorney to make application for 
authorize through the United Stat*® witness in any proceeding 
■transactional immunity f°r a tha United States in connection with 
5l2UlS of*the^Congressional Assassination Statute. 
c 89-2.3 Wording of CAS Statute 
P 
470 
1/31/78 
KIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---t'*.

rfCtN 'J 
SECTION 89.

I 
ASSAULTING OR KILLING OF FEDERAL OFFICERS; 
CONCESSIONAL ASSASSINATION STATl rl<0 
Xi 
, I C^-2.3.1 Section 351.

Killing, Kidnaping, Attempts and Conspiracy to Kill 
or Kidnap, and Assaults ot Members of Congress or Congress-Elect 
“ 
"(a) Whoever kills any individual who is a Member of Congress 
or a Member-of-Congress-elect shall be punished as provided by Sections 
1111 and 1112 of this title.

■(b) Whoever kidnaps any individual designated in subsection 
(a) of this section shall be punished (1) by imprisonment for any term 
of years or for life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any term of 
years or for life, if death results to such an individual.

"(c) Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any individual designated 
in subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for 
any term of years or for life.

"(d) If two or more persons conspire to kill or kidnap any 
individual designated in subsection (a) of this section and one or more 
of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each 
shall be punished (1) by imprisonment for any term of years or for life, 
or (2) by death or imprisonment for any term of years or for life, if 
death results to such individual.

■(e) Whoever assaults any person designated in subsection (a) 
of the section shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not 
more than one year, or both; and if personal injury results, shall be 
fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned for not more than ten years 
* both.

"(f) If Federal investigative or prosecutive jurisdiction is # 
asset tea tor a violation of this section, such assertion shall suspend 
the exercise of jurisdiction by a State or local authority under any 
applicable State or local law, until Federal action is terminated.

■(g) Violations of this section shall be investigated by the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"(f) If Federal investigative or prosecutive jurisdiction is # 
asset tea tor a violation of this section, such assertion shall suspend 
the exercise of jurisdiction by a State or local authority under any 
applicable State or local law, until Federal action is terminated. ■(g) Violations of this section shall be investigated by the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Assistance may be requested from any 
Federal, State, or local agency, including the Army, Navy, and Air Force, 
any statute, rule, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. ■(h) The Attorney General or any Assistant Attorney General 
specially designated by the Attorney General, may authorize an application 
to a Federal judge of competent jurisdiction for, and such judge may 
grant in conformity with section 2518 (Title 18, USC) an order authorizing 
or approving the interception of wire or oral communication by the Federal. Bureau of Investigation, or a Federal agency having responsibility for 
of the offense as to which the application is made, 
when such interception may provide or has provided evidence of any offense 
which is punishable under Title 18, USC, Section 351." 
89-2.4 Policy , 
fff§ In congressional Assassination Statute investigations, the Depart- 
ing ment has requested to be advised should a Congressman — victim or a 
Member-of-Congress-elect — victim request an investigation be terminated 
or left solely in the hands of local law enforcement personnel. 471 
1/31/78 
MIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---gressman — victim or a 
Member-of-Congress-elect — victim request an investigation be terminated 
or left solely in the hands of local law enforcement personnel. 471 
1/31/78 
MIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 89. f 
L 
ULTING OR KILLING OF FEDER 
•SESSIONAL ASSASSINATION ST, 
^OFFICERS; 
^ Since violations of Assaulting of Federal Officers and Con- 
- g ssional Assassination Statute will fall within purview of agreement 
.between FBI and Secret Service concerning protective responsibilities, 
local office of Secret Service should be furnished a copy of reports. 
V . 89-2.5 
Investigative Procedures 
D 
(1) Upon receipt of any information indicating a possible viola- 
tion of the Congressional Assassination Statute, FBIHQ should be advised 
y telephone or teletype, depending upon the circumstances. Although 
threats against Members or Members-elect of Congress are not violations of 
itle 18, USC, Section 351, in view of the importance of these matters, the 
. S. Secret Service and the Office of the Congressman will be immediately 
dvised no FBI investigation will be instituted. (Field Office covering 
victim's home district should, however, immediately 
oncernina possible violation or threat to (a) 
(2) In investigations of violations of the Congressional Assassi- 
jpnation Statute, the FBI is authorized to request assistance from the Army, 
gJNavy, an<j Aj_r force. This is a specific exception to the Posse Comitatus 
tute (Title 18, USC, Section 1385.) 
89-2.6 
9-3 
9-3.1 
Character - Congressional Assassination Statute • 
STATUTES COMMON TO AFO AND CAS CLASSIFICATIONS 
Title 18, USC, Section 1111 (Murder) 
Section 1111 imposes the following penalties for murder: 
■Whoever is guilty of murder in the first degree, shall suffer 
gjideath unless the jury qualifies its verdict by adding thereto 'without 
Mcapital punishment,' in which event he shall be sentenced to imprisonment 
--ifor life." 
■Whoever is guilty of murder in the second degree, shall be 
imprisoned for any term of years or for life.” 
9-3.1.1 Section 1111. Murder (Definition) 
Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice afore- 
hought. Every murder perpetrated by poison, lying in wait, or any other 
inds of willful deliberate, malicious, and premeditated killing; or com- 
itted in the perpetration of, or attempt to perpetrate, any arson, rape, 
urglary, or robbery; or perpetrated from a premeditated design unlawfully 
nd maliciously to effect the death of any human being other than he 
ho is killed, is murder in the first degree. 
r t? 
472 
1/31/78 
MIOG 
T-L-or perpetrated from a premeditated design unlawfully 
nd maliciously to effect the death of any human being other than he 
ho is killed, is murder in the first degree. 
r t? 
472 
1/31/78 
MIOG 
T-L-

--- PAGE BREAK ---a premeditated design unlawfully 
nd maliciously to effect the death of any human being other than he 
ho is killed, is murder in the first degree. 
r t? 
472 
1/31/78 
MIOG 
T-L-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 89. 
W FAULTING OR KILLING OF FEDI^ 
( ^RESSIONAL ASSASSINATION 1. ^ 
OFFICERS; 
'*E , 
'; Q "Any other murder is murder in the second degree.” 
89-3.2 Title 18, USC, Section 1112 (Manslaughter) 
Section 1112 imposes the following penalties for manslaughter: 
•Whoever is guilty of voluntary manslaughter, shall be imprisoned 
not more than ten years; 
•Whoever is guilty of involuntary manslaughter shall be fined not 
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than three years, or both." 
89-3.2.1 Section 1112. Manslaughter (Definition) 
■Manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being without 
malice. It is of two kinds: 
■Voluntary—Upon a sudden quarrel or heat of passion. 
"Involuntary—In the commission of an unlawful act not 
amounting to a felony, or in the commission in an unlawful manner, or 
without due caution and circumspection, of a lawful act which might produce 
death. 
89—3•3 Section 372, Title 18, USC. Conspiracy to Impede or Inlure 
an Officer~   
•If two or more persons in any State, Territory, Possession, 
c District conspire to prevent, by force, intimidation, or threat, any 
P«rson from accepting or holding any office, trust, or place of confidence 
under the United States, or from discharging any duties thereof, or to 
induce by like means any officer of the United States to leave the place, 
^ where his duties as an officer are required to be performed, or to injure 
‘him in his person or property on account of his lawful discharge of the 
duties of his office, or while engaged in the lawful discharge thereof, or 
to injure his property so as to molest, interrupt, hinder, or impede 
^ him in the discharge of his official duties, each of such persons shall 
“ be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than six years, 
or both." 
i 
Note: Under Section 111 some force must be used for a violation 
to be effected. Section 372, however, provides broader coverage, where 
i two or more subjects are involved, since it does not require the prohibited 
’sets be committed forcibly. 
89-4 
VENUE - AFO AND CAS 
(1) In these investigations the question of jurisdiction and 
venue becomes very important. Title 18, USC, Section 3236, provides 
that the crime of murder is committed at the place where the injury was 
inflicted, the poison administered, or other means employed which caused 
the death of the victim, without regard to the place where the death 
occurred. Adequate photographs should be taken of the scene of the crime 
at the earliest possible moment. Measurements and charts should be made 
^indicating the location of the witnesses who are to testify and indicating 
•the, line of vision or the possibility of observation by these witnesses. 
‘ ' 
473 
1/31/78 MUand charts should be made 
^indicating the location of the witnesses who are to testify and indicating 
•the, line of vision or the possibility of observation by these witnesses. 
‘ ' 
473 
1/31/78 MU

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 89. 
■ ( ■’..: -‘i--v;\ Vj-.., 
 ’Mw |^#..‘ - / ^ S»ii,*-Vn'Wv' -‘S'-!- *■i-V. ^ ■ 7 ■+** <+ i. 
ASSAULTING OR KILLING OF FEDERAL OFFICERS; % 
CONCESSIONAL ASSASSINATION STATUT^ 
■t''srged photographs and charts have been found to be of value not only 
ii, determining jurisdiction but also for use in the courtroom during 
jthe trial of the case. 
t (2) Title 18, USC, 3235, provides that the trial of offenses 
bunishable with death shall be had in the county where the offense was 
fcomroitted, where that can be done without great inconvenience. However, 
■this statute does not confer upon the defendant an absolute right to 
5ave the trial in the county where the offense was committed, but the 
’court has some discretion in determining the situs of the trial and where 
.the trial judge, after hearing, determines the trial cannot be had in 
|the county where the offense was committed without great inconvenience, 
find no abuse of discretion is apparent, his findings will not be disturbed 
jwBrown v. U. S., 256 U. S. 335). Other supporting decisions ares Greenhill 
/. U. S., 6 F (2d) 134, and Davis v. U. S., 32 F. (2d) 860. Greenhill 
v, 0. S. holds that the lack of a U. S. public building in the county 
vhere the crime occurred justifies holding the trial elsewhere. Davis 
/. 0. S. holds that this statute leaves the discretion to the trial judge 
and that where there was no provision for a term in court in the county 
■’here the murder was committed the designated place of trial need not 
aven be the nearest and most accessible county. 
*u - 
o

--- PAGE BREAK ---was no provision for a term in court in the county 
■’here the murder was committed the designated place of trial need not 
aven be the nearest and most accessible county. 
*u - 
o

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTINGENCY PLANS 
ACT FOR THE PROTECTION OF FOREIGN OFFICIALS 
AND OFFICIAL GUESTS OF THE UNITED STATES 
I 
The Act for the Protection of Foreign Officials and 
Official Guests of the United States was enacted by signature 
of the President on October 24, 1972. Pursuant to its 
enactment, the FBI assumed responsibility for investigations 
of those violations contained in the Act, Public Law 92-539. 
Commensurate with responsibilities for investi- 
gations of violations, to include Title 18, USC, Section 1116, 
Murder or Manslaughter; Title 18, USC, Section 1117, Conspiracy 
to Murder; and Title 18, USC, Section 1201, Kidnaping of 
Foreign Officials or Official Guests of the United States, 
the FBI implemented in November, 1972, a requirement for each 
field office to formulate a field contingency plan. 
These plans are updated on a yearly basis by each 
field office and submitted for approval to the Terrorism 
Section of the Criminal Investigative Division. The plan 
consists of segments detailing command authority, communi- 
cations, manpower requirements, equipment requirements, and 
identification of diplomatic establishments within divisional 
geographical areas. Within each listed segment of the plan, 
specific lines of authority are set forth, telephone numbers 
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED 
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED x 
DATE .tf/)/ft/ BY 
C

--- PAGE BREAK ---as. Within each listed segment of the plan, 
specific lines of authority are set forth, telephone numbers 
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED 
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED x 
DATE .tf/)/ft/ BY 
C

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of local and other Federal law enforcement agencies are listed, 
notification flow charts are presented for progressive* contact 
during off-duty hours of personnel responding to incident, 
on-scene command post requirements are listed, as well as 
equipment requirements for a particular contingency. 
These contingency plans used for initiation in the 
event of terrorist activity involving kidnaping, murder, or 
takeover of an embassy building have been * gamed to test the 
efficiency and effectiveness of response and, in fact, have 
been used in response to terrorist activities occurring in the 
United States. Within the past year, these include the takeover 
of the West German Consulate in Chicago, Illinois; the takeover 
of the Chilean Consulate in San Juan, Puerto Rico; and in # 
previous years, the takeover of the Philippine Embassy in 
Washington, D. C.; and the assassination of former Chilean 
Ambassador to the United States, Orlando Letelier, in 
Washington, D. C. 
The practical application of the contingency plans 
has resulted in singular command voices at the crime scene; 
liaison and coordination with local and other Federal law 
enforcement agencies, both at the scene and throughout the 
investigation; and the combining of technical expertise and 
equipment to aid in the successful resolution of the activity 
occurring.

--- PAGE BREAK ---encies, both at the scene and throughout the 
investigation; and the combining of technical expertise and 
equipment to aid in the successful resolution of the activity 
occurring.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As a supplement to the field office contingency 
plansi there exists the Headquarters contingency plan encom- 
passing notification procedures in the event of a terrorist 
act occurring. These procedures include communicating with 
U. S. Department of State; White House Situation Room; U. S. 
Department of Justice, Emergency Programs Center; U. S. Secret 
Service, Intelligence Division; and the National Military 
Command Center. Initial information, as well as updates, are 
provided regarding terrorist incidents and coordination of 
possible investigative efforts is accomplished through 
implementation of this contingency plan.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

o 
* 
9 
Civil Rights and Related Assassination Investigations 
All civil rights investigations initiated by the 
FBI are conducted based upon statutory authority such as under 
Title 18, U. S. Code, Section 241 (civil rights conspiracy 
statute) and Section 242 (deprivation of rights under color of 
law), and pursuant to the guidelines of the U. S. Department 
of Justice. 
For example, the Department requested the FBI to 
conduct an investigation into the assassination of Martin 
Luther King, Jr., who was shot in Memphis, Tennessee, on 4/4/68, 
based upon the statutory authority of Section 241. (The 
assassination interferred with his Federal right to travel e 
freely from one state to another.) 
The Department also requested the FBI to conduct 
an investigation into the shooting of Governor George C. 
Wallace in May of 1972, at Laurel, Maryland, based, in part, 
on the statutory authority of Title 18, U. S. Code, Section 245 
(federally protected activities), in that there was an 
interference of a federally protected activity, namely, the 
qualifying or campaigning as a candidate for elective office. 
boa ^ i Sction 245 
(federally protected activities), in that there was an 
interference of a federally protected activity, namely, the 
qualifying or campaigning as a candidate for elective office. 
boa ^ i S

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c 
» 
The subject, Arthur Breramer, was immediately taken into 
custody and thereafter charged with Section 245 and Title 
18, U. S. Code, Section 111, Assault on a Federal Officer 
in connection with the shooting of a Secret Service Agent 
who was with Wallace. The subject was also subsequently 
charged with violation of the Federal firearms statutes. 
He was ultimately convicted in State Court. 
y 
- 2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C 0 
ROLE OF THE DOMESTIC SECURITY INVESTIGATION 
The domestic security investigation is often 
referred to as the "preventive phase" of the Terrorism 
Program. The domestic security investigations comprising 
the preventive phase are conducted in compliance with the 
Attorney General Guidelines for such investigations as 
implemented on April 5, 1976. 
These investigations are conducted to ascertain 
information on the activities of individuals or groups which 
involve or will involve the use of force or violence and 
which involve or will involve the violation of Federal law 
for four explicitly stated purposes. These investigations 
have as their bases the likelihood of criminal activity or • 
actual criminal activity on the part of the group or 
individual involved. 
One objective of these investigations is the 
early development of information concerning criminal conduct 
or activities prior to the commission of a completed 
terrorist act. The Bureau's ability to detect, identify, 
and collect evidence for the prosecution of terrorists and 
terrorist groups in advance of the completed act serves to 
prevent terrorist violence. Such investigations often allow 
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED 
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED . 
0 ATE^WS1_ 
‘ V3 -•

--- PAGE BREAK ---ups in advance of the completed act serves to 
prevent terrorist violence. Such investigations often allow 
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED 
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED . 
0 ATE^WS1_ 
‘ V3 -•

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the FBI to prevent an act of terrorism by alerting the 
target or targets involved. 
The advantage of a reliable domestic security 
investigative unit within the Terrorism Program cam be 
seen in the possibility that foreknowledge of contemplated 
assassination of the President of the United States or 
other public figure could be brought to the Bureau's 
attention at an early stage, thus enabling its prevention 
through appropriate investigative action. 
Information developed by the FBI's domestic 
security investigations is provided appropriate dissemination 
within the Executive Branch of Government, including the 
U. S. Secret Service which has protective responsibilities 
insofar as the President is concerned. In addition, infor- 
mation which is developed through our domestic security 
investigations as it relates to threats to life and property 
of any individual is promptly made available to that 
individual. For example, during the summer of 1977, the 
FBI developed information through two undercover Special 
Agents who had infiltrated the Weather Underground Organi- 
zation (WUO) indicating that terrorist group was planning 
a act of violence against a member of the California State 
Legislature. This information was conveyed to that 
individual promptly on its receipt and our resultant

--- PAGE BREAK ---p was planning 
a act of violence against a member of the California State 
Legislature. This information was conveyed to that 
individual promptly on its receipt and our resultant

--- PAGE BREAK ---

( 
investigation culminated in the arrests of four leather 
Underground subjects and the leader of the West Coast above- 
group support organization for the WUO in November, 1977. 
These arrests prevented the bombing of the public official's 
office. 
Of some concern, however, is the signficantly 
diminished Domestic Security Program and the resultant loss 
of a broad security informant base capable of providing 
advance information concerning planned terrorist activities. 
As of October 27, 1978, the FBI was conducting domestic 
security investigations of only 13 organizations and 40 
individuals. 
The adoption of the Attorney General Guidelines in 
1976, considerably diminished our informant base by virtue # 
of the fact that a great number of revolutionary and extremist 
groups, including the revolutionary Socialist Workers Party 
which advocates violent overthrow of the United States 
Government, were closed since their activities did not meet 
the investigative criteria set forth in the Guidelines. 
- 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---y 
which advocates violent overthrow of the United States 
Government, were closed since their activities did not meet 
the investigative criteria set forth in the Guidelines. 
- 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INFORMANTS 
1 
> 
The FBI is operating several highly productive 
informants in every high priority investigative area. The 
availability of this coverage varies in some geographical 
areas. The FBI's ability to develop informants has been 
effected by factors which impact upon the FBI’s ability to 
protect the identity of informants, such as Freedom of 
Information and Privacy Acts and certain civil suits. FBI 
Agents have also indicated concern regarding the personal 
risks which they are exposed to in the operation of 
informants. 
The FBI has no informants developed specifically 
r 
for providing information regarding the possible assasination 
of any major political figures. Any information the FBI may 
obtain regarding possible assasinations would be 
coincidental. Should an assasination occur, every informant 
would be contacted regarding any possible knowledge of the 
assasination and any positive information obtained would be 
coincidental. 
boo 
1 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssasination occur, every informant 
would be contacted regarding any possible knowledge of the 
assasination and any positive information obtained would be 
coincidental. 
boo 
1 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

e 
i 
c 
* 
Current Bureau Structure and Operations (B. 2 & 3) 
'j'*. n.isfa*- ^ Jt/A* /'-C'tfA* r r 
The Director would have overall authority of any 
investigations of crimes against the President. He would 
be assisted by the Associate Director, and by the Assistant 
Director, Criminal Investigative Division (CID) as well as 
two Inspector - Deputy Assistant Directors of the CID. The 
Section Chief of the Personal and Property Crimes Section 
of the CID with an appropriate staff of supervisory Special 
Agents, would coordinate all leads and investigative results 
from the field and outside sources and forward recommendations 
and policy decisions_jip_ihe chain jof command for approval. 
9 | A supervisory Special Agent in the Section would be assigned 
* | the case at the first level of supervision, however, would 
be assisted by other supervisory Agents in the Section, 
Depending upon the complexity of the incident, 
the Director would decide whether the Special Agent in Charge 
(SAC) of the Field Office where the incident occurred had 
sufficient time, based upon the demands of other duties, to 
handle the overall field investigative effort, or whether 
another Bureau official such as an Inspector would be sent 
to the scene to take full charge of the field investigative 
effort. The SAC or Inspector would have direct access to the 
hoc ^ 
1 ^ 
G 
"psi*#

--- PAGE BREAK ---such as an Inspector would be sent 
to the scene to take full charge of the field investigative 
effort. The SAC or Inspector would have direct access to the 
hoc ^ 
1 ^ 
G 
"psi*#

--- PAGE BREAK ---

e 
y % —. . 
C 
Director on emergency decisions, and would brief the 
Director where pertinent. The SAC or Inspector also would 
have complete access to others in the chain of command. 
The SAC or Inspector would have Special Agents 
and Field Supervisors working on the investigation who 
would report directly to them. 
Other field offices would be requested either 
by the SAC, Inspector, or FBI Headquarters to conduct 
investigations needed in their respective territories. FBI 
Headquarters would also coordinate information needed from 
the FBI Legal Attaches in foreign countries. Other Divisions 
at FBI Headquarters such as the Intelligence Division and 
the Legal Counsel Division would report information to the 
Criminal Investigative Division and others up the chain of 
command and to the field where pertinent. Other service 
Divisions such as the Laboratory, Identification, and Records 
Management Divisions also would provide respective information 
to other Bureau Divisions and the Field when requested. 
The appropriate United States Attorney and the 
Department would be kept fully advised of all pertinent 
developments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion 
to other Bureau Divisions and the Field when requested. 
The appropriate United States Attorney and the 
Department would be kept fully advised of all pertinent 
developments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-70) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
)_ 
0 
□ 
□ 
□ 
□ 
0 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
Pagc(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or more of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
i 
Deleted under exemption(s) _ 
material available for release to you. 
with no segregable 
Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request 
Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
Document(s) originating with the following government agency(ies)

was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
Page(s) referred for consultation to the following government agency(ies);   
  as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
Page(s) withheld for the following reason(s): 
For your information: 
The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
 I ? rr&fCt'  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) \ 
£ NO DUPLICATION FEE x 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
FBI/DOJ

--- PAGE BREAK ---is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
 I ? rr&fCt'  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) \ 
£ NO DUPLICATION FEE x 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
FBI/DOJ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t 
I 
V. 
. C Tin   
ACC'.  — 
^ .joined cs 
A third- ;arwV rcC*"d C _ (rVe firs-t ps*1^ 
- - i-ir -•• *-r- 3 Pc ' "’1 N 
i I , 'rv>o r.v. <■ •u 1 
core* o- - _. i it vtk-w 
. , • _ ,ov/^- by the — ^ third 
. -n tl " cv. ^ 1 v „„a M1UV.5 
,d vhich .- f
- include ?ovcV. '• «■ 
, e.,.b record* bank 
records, 
- ■nV'O"'0 corapa^O ■ •••ordP. 
toLcpho..- „„d tax rtf'-01 
rcccl . .„_,nciel • “ 
ceeovds. t-e~' r-T ,v/ acquire ch ' 
1« »<=»«rt1, ■“ „ 6«"a iuiy 
• y.'r-i 1' f>' 
1 - 
v-‘ 
V n Vi';J ■-*'“■ 
t-v^ou^ a -! , 
rc-.coroo - V,ol<-cl * , 
_ b.. ccavsnt: of t.- -restrict*,d 
8Cbpoen-i. or . _ ( a search —ran-i- 
The util ' -'• '• ls 2 need to show • 
b>- «*» *»*«* taCi^C^^lc existed probable cause 
vapor, appellee ««•' ^ 'bat the 
*>* the search -PPO- * the 6oods to be 
warrant described -h par ^ thaC the —- 
seized and the pX.ce to he Obviously, the 
«.—by * —in and . 
judicial -rant o£ third-part, — 
h.v,sa for hrosd a--qe 
the inecn-i.-i’1 
f 
fc. 
hoc-**!? 
ijWSj"*'^

--- PAGE BREAK ---^ thaC the —- 
seized and the pX.ce to he Obviously, the 
«.—by * —in and . 
judicial -rant o£ third-part, — 
h.v,sa for hrosd a--qe 
the inecn-i.-i’1 
f 
fc. 
hoc-**!? 
ijWSj"*'^

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r*. 
/. i p c;i d , V' • 'J 
cn] r o: r-: » * 1 ( 
rl.- f) hi: util • od t o 
i 
*' V; Co; . . r -. c .. X , J. the P'.° trso.i or no red t©prob tee 
. - J 
t M c 
C ■" 
P.t s rv. irt.-s. 
* « . » 
L. i » - 
Cov. 
. vr,* . 
e. • % . • .. n i 
TTiCV 5 . eh. a c our t order 
t •* •.■pp j J : ■'»' 
ji: oduct ’» ' '* . 
rh r-. n:; i ty to vhev. the sub; *OC;11.1 
X-.. 
U i iT'- '• 
■ ; ,-..ry c” 
-V the \ . i. . i d J. t y of t:h:* sun] insne, 
t t\ it he hi <» I'.C- bur ' ti ** * \ of p vovi 
n 
' o that the sub' 
. A . »•.
1 
V V. • «* ' j r. 
VJ 
V 1 i (. 
i;u V;U:*t p*Ov e th ';t L he pi.bpon'i is ur tv : 
n' 
to its breadth 
id irr«; 
: t* 
1 
1 > as to t.t.c ir.quir -■ • 
OR:; ht-.r-? 
IV k* - ] 
rjo Co.r.; 
Z v • r iJJlnfi. 32? h.r>. 16S, 
A (>7, 203 
f ; i* / t- \ 
V?_' SilOXl :d point oat A-t. 
i. ft I at dir :*.lo:;v.; c- of grand 
jury prom: din-s to :ny per sen other then the attorney 
for the Gova-amnt it generally prohibited inr.twch ar, 
tli m proceedings cr« secret. Rule 6(c). Federal Rules 
of Criminal Procedure 
As noted* earlier, records ir. posoeosion of ^ 
third parlies «J also be acquired through their consent. 
In such circutistonccs, consent is said io be vicariously 
given, that is, given by the third party for the ovner. 
And although consent may be vicarious, the rrgh. to 
m 
relief is i 
I5S 
* • r • 
The owner, 
PT * 
*• % 
the right 
holder of 
;$&!• 
“«■ 
436 (1976) 
W-V 
• v 
- 2 - 
m • •

--- PAGE BREAK ---er. 
And although consent may be vicarious, the rrgh. to 
m 
relief is i 
I5S 
* • r • 
The owner, 
PT * 
*• % 
the right 
holder of 
;$&!• 
“«■ 
436 (1976) 
W-V 
• v 
- 2 - 
m • •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C 0 
In sic
1, the i'our'.h Anomb-vndoc-:-: nol' nfjcra the 
owner of records iho right rc> challenge its <’Lsclosure 
vmere he is not also its hoi dor. 
Similarly, the.* FJ ith A^endovnt right against. 
self•• incrimination ir. essentially a personal privilege end 
may not bo dl.-imed on bchn? of another or by r corporation 
or association. Kellis v. Tnitad States, 417 U.S. 85 (1574). 
v'; ’ : " * , . 
lienee, a holder of records :i ncririinat.xg another has no 
standing to object to its disclosure. This rule has not 
boon extended to records in the possession of counsel. 
Aside from the constituional considerations 
discussed above, the FBI is also presently restricted in 
its ability to acquire third-party records by statutes in 
the fo!loving areas: 
1) IT.I Accuisition of Tax Fecords fron the: IF**- - 
The Tax Reform Act of 1576 (Title 26, U. S. Code, Section 6103) 
considerably restrict*".? Federal investigatory agencies 
from acquiring tax information on persons or corporations 
from the IRS. Indeed, the requirements are more rigorous 
than those for obtaining a subpoena. The statute provides 
that "tax return information" may be provided to an 
agency for use in investigating a Federal criminal (non- 
tax) case? only upon order of a Federal District Court judge. 
The head of the Federal agency must show in his application 
for such an cx parte order that (1) there is reasonable

--- PAGE BREAK ---tax) case? only upon order of a Federal District Court judge. 
The head of the Federal agency must show in his application 
for such an cx parte order that (1) there is reasonable

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c t O i 'lieC Lh t. a cri " i.iinl s, t.r. 
t he inf or; l. i r .1 s <uvf. t hr.;; probe 
the i r. for. a1 ■ i, r;.rr.o t ro;.sov;.:bl 
her 
: ource or f:;;*: the ; (- i urn jv; 
viola I :••«!; 
probo.Liv evidence of the criminal mi ?;c ondv.ee . 
As to Ke-jViirir'e "inforient Leri other ih.'.n tax- 
payer information," the Act v.-ov? prescribes that the* 
Assistant Attorney General rust first request the 
inforrMfci.cn from I?\S in writing. There are al.ro other 
provisions pertaining to disclosure of nonta> return 
information rhic.li arc significant but not here explained. 
It should be noted that IKS has interpreted 
any information relating to a Social Security Card as 
"taxpayer return inforientionthereby requiring a court 
order before its disclosure. 
2) FBT Acquisition of Records Free*, a Financial 
In?; ti tut Ion - The Right to Financial Privacy Act (P. L. 
will significantly curtail the FBI's ability to gain 
access to records in the possession of third party 
financial institutions. The bill creates a right of 
privacy for an individual or partnership of five or less 
in records maintained by a financial institution. The 
bill was Congress' apparent response to the Supreme Court's 
decision in United. States v. Miller which held that

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve or less 
in records maintained by a financial institution. The 
bill was Congress' apparent response to the Supreme Court's 
decision in United. States v. Miller which held that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

•» 
c 
a c’.i-u.o-• could r. o • object 
i o thc Go v c m ient.'s a c e cs c 
1.0 11 - S i . ) ■ uncial 
: C c od u a t an institution because the 
rtf 
records 
•. o the r • rI;IV vty o 7 the institution and the 
iud.i vide ; • . In 
C f L c-'t, the b :l ] 1 on J >• 5 n f o rr* a 1 ecces s 
to fine ns!. . !. K-CCVii r. a no requires the t the Government 
one if the fbllo i .* L1. g. method y to obtain such records: 
A) Cut to-. .* author- ration; 
r») Ath\i:! i a era t ivo summons or subpoena - not 
applicable to the Vhi; 
C) Search warrant; 
D) Judicial warrant; or 
I:) Noncoro ilfery formal written request for o£uncie 
lacking er r.mons or subpoena powers. 
The corn-j; . tcv.e of this bi? 1 5 s that*, subject 
*•, ^ 
to certain except!c;\;, ‘ individual has a right both t&' 
be notified when the Government is seeking his financial 
records and to challenge the Government's access to his 
records . f'-tT,-j; r, ,'CS , HO ?. 
3) FLI Aer-'-.-s to Commercial Records Held by 
Third- Part"
1 * C»• cd5t: Agencies - Under the Fair Credit 
Reporting Act of 1977 (FCRA), Title 15, U. S. Code, 
Section ir.Sl, consumer credit reporting agencies are 
prohibited from furnishing information on a consumer 
credit history except (1) where disclosure is authorised 
by the consumer; (2) where the agency has reason to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng agencies are 
prohibited from furnishing information on a consumer 
credit history except (1) where disclosure is authorised 
by the consumer; (2) where the agency has reason to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

l c ! i. 1 hat L^< • 
v h: r.hc r . 
r o Lv. n:,~£ * o ’ ■ • y 
a 
in . , 
de 1 -.11; 
o 
.dit, >.• 
V 
avarice. 
oyricnl 
nscs . or o! 1. 
..l.t :■ :> w runsnull rns to tan cvi sterner; 
or (2) vi: ,.'ii so c C " i d l*y 
C'-'VVt, 
hr Ac: limits even 
further d ‘c 1 os orf' of mat 
: deal: •• ; :5th bscV.gr euv«e., 
as; e clave 
, 1 i fe s tylc?*., etc. 
Kxes p ?. ire.'; Li e fev agoing 
pvcvir ici i i's a re port to <v;-. Cover iv "ii agent. to "A: n in inj:. 
only the consumer 
1 s name, adr rcss, fe ■v or address, and 
cn.pl oy..:c r c b: storv 
* • 
• 
Final 1}% like the F inr.nciri 1 rivacy Act, the FCP.A 
requires ul'ic-.L upOii request-a 
/ 
consumer must be informed 
of thc idc:n tit i es 
r • 
o ft •. i. rt o i. giants o f consumer reports 
pert:' Inin g to hit'., even vat r the rec! pient is a Govern- 
ir.anCal irivest 1 $atory r.geney . 
As the for-.-going e'emots tre LCS , the ability of 
the FBI end other Government rgencicr to obtain third- * 
party records has be care more burdensome and difficult. 
Indeed, in keeping vith the spirit of the Privacy Act of 
1974, Title 5, U. S. Code, Section 552a, the FBI, as a 
matter of policy, has itself restricted its collection 
of information to only those matters vhich are necessary 
, / Vrs 
and relevant to authorised functions ar.d purposes. 
We should also point out that third-party holders in the 
public and private sectors have become more av:aro. of 
individual, privacy interests and more sensitive to potential 
civil and criminal liability eith regard to disclosing 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---he 
public and private sectors have become more av:aro. of 
individual, privacy interests and more sensitive to potential 
civil and criminal liability eith regard to disclosing 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L\ i ri • noo:-v '.on . As a r<'cu 1L . Uici o hoi ut rr. j 
( O'. 
i.c., r.e.U-phonc co.v.>.' ic .», havtr l'cfuscc! to voluntarily 
di:• cic•c re cui'd:: c:iv.’ Ravelin Larn^rcquired Goverriy.uiLal 
egonci :•> to compel routine disclosure through the* grand 
jtn-y .subpoena proccs.-:. 
In short , i '.:u ceopei ative altitude of 
third-party record holders v?hich manlier,fed itself during 
the K< 
FBI 
/V i 
•ic* Kennedy Assassination invc r- r.iaction to provide, the 
>-/v. ' ,W. 
31 with its records ro lone••»*/ nrevail?.' , . , 
. - . . • - •- . . . , •. • < :»ir. 
iV i .'«* -> .... _ y .. , .. <.* v *■'.« f- • ' ' 
Furthermore, the trends of third-party record-. .* • J >’X 
'.L' - 
law a j g r r s rr that even riore restrictions will be imposed 
upon the Government' s ability to acquire such records. / '7 
»• 
Av least AS legislative nroDosals that cvuld extend the : 
• * i 
spirit of the Right to Financial Privacy Act to other j\' 
■a types of records such ns toil records, uedical, creditjv ; 
». 
i- 
lu 
V . # 
A 
and enployrvynt records, criir.ir.al history records, and y 
\ ■ 
other inf ormati on were introduced in the 95th Congress. -J ' . 
H.R. 10076, an omnibus bill consolidating many legislative 
proposals and recommendations, is certain to receive 
considerable attention in the 96th Congress. This bill 
would even go so far as to restrict the use of grand jury 
subpoenas and search warrants for personal papers, such as 
business records of a sole proprietorship. (H.R. 10076, 307.) 
Additionally, proposed legislation to reform 
the grand jury system, such as the Grand Jury Reform Act 
of 1977 (S. 1449) will have a significant adverse impact 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---R. 10076, 307.) 
Additionally, proposed legislation to reform 
the grand jury system, such as the Grand Jury Reform Act 
of 1977 (S. 1449) will have a significant adverse impact 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c 
1 
on I'-.- I«r 
. . i 
i. c •.«-. i • . 
tlu- V. i.t 
the iv.votr 
invoi cl. 
• the Hbilii 
ai v*c* r tLi*.t i. 
pol :• ties] 
si tv; .1 ty of 
. • *» • • 
Utl A xziri;". a sob/'oo •v- t o obtain 
Fee insL.inco , Sec L i on 6 of S. 
* i 4 9 \ /on 1 cl requir e 
to receive notice c f t he suv jeer natter of 
'tier. Cud | r; - t :nfivc‘ or 1:-eral r.rr.t.utes 
f: 1 j 1 » O ^ * f*' i* ' 1 : i%r, COUld Ol' V ' Cv:. •y jeopard!se 
y to properly cc/.d uet inquiries ir.t o s,cx r.5.Live 
r:ry surround the invent illation of a prominent 
ons:^. cin.it ion. 
t S

--- PAGE BREAK ---*' i* ' 1 : i%r, COUld Ol' V ' Cv:. •y jeopard!se 
y to properly cc/.d uet inquiries ir.t o s,cx r.5.Live 
r:ry surround the invent illation of a prominent 
ons:^. cin.it ion. 
t S

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tit*; (!‘.u *I.»r v. h : i'mr no'.’ ijlalion t" r. premp.i*«. 
r-utoi: is n'*cr?s-:-.v can ba answered in Hit: nega've. Ii is csear 
•a.'.i rv\- 1C* D.S.C. 1751, President lei Assassination, created 
T c.ic juiif diction and ma m it a federal crime Jo Kill. Klein;:,) 
ur :. nH the Pi a;icle:A. etc. The lav assurer that if roc>..:;l 
jurisdiction ir assorted, ful> rnd complete Federal investignilre 
and ?.„--:jwCuti\e jurisdiction is in the : ;il. and such ussei ik,, s..all 
su-Ji-rd the trorcise ol juri diction by a Slate or local amhurdy 
u,v-vr rnr m n’icrble Slate or local lav.* until Federal action is 
terminareJ (emphasis added). The silentior in 11*03. wherein the 
Score; S ervice technically violated Texes Code Annotate SeC.Vn 
C;f,r: cl. , (autopsy required in c-ent of hoiniside, prohibits 
removal of body), is net a viable consideration in 1073, the dfect 
of 'lido 18 Il.S.C. 1751 would obviate the* Texas law. 
The second question oi whether a recommendation should 
be nr > concerning the freezing of travel records or communication 
records (telephone, etc.) or a six month period, does not seem to 
have been a problem to the factfinder of the Warren Commission. 
There is no indication that any investigative agency or the Commission 
CM ecu:, to red any difficulty in obtaining records or was faced with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---tfinder of the Warren Commission. 
There is no indication that any investigative agency or the Commission 
CM ecu:, to red any difficulty in obtaining records or was faced with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
  Page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or more of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
0 Deleted under exemption(s)  tj /  — with no segregable 
material available for release to you. 
1 I Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request. 
1 I Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
1 I Documents) originating with the following government agency(ies) 
, was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
_ Page(s) referred for consultation to the following government agency(ies);   
   as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
Page(s) withheld for the following reasonls): 
I I For your information: 
0 The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
LQC. *   
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) $ 
% NO DUPLICATION FEE $ 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
rai/ooj

--- PAGE BREAK ---eference regarding these pages: 
LQC. *   
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) $ 
% NO DUPLICATION FEE $ 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
rai/ooj

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 
c 0 
i- :i:o.rr ov v.;: irtrui;..!.:: >'ckTi::
T.” 
AS ’iv-n • v I'.T. \:: THE POS 
I • , . . . •. • • i . . \ 
• ..MO;- 
v — v-. : i i uia C l ~ * l - v ur ; 1 J. v ’ v* * *• • K 
ryvw. tZ'J'fOSTrofr 7&t9Ctr* 
o FH1 !>y the new media, m.i ' ■   a j rand Q 
Hr. I,.ov;;:t. I:] a ley, Chief Cocuso?. to tilt- rouse 
S'.- ' >'t Co’.v.rlv l ca on /.sr-a.-sin* t.u ns , has indicated t.hat it 
is re :.*■>;•: p ••'.»•.ctice for media pr-reor.ncl covering re .da 
f.'u-’ . -Jlit ice. I eve* ;s n carry with then; tape recorders 
ace constantly running;. He inquired about the FBI's 
a-^'-ority and policy with regard to obtaining such rcccrc- 
irig*. or other Materials of a similar evidentiary nature 
vbieh '.-.ay be io the per.session of the- media. 
Assertiny such irc.-is a^ o not vol ontarily /al leered, 
to 
jury rohp.n.or a search varrant to obtain such materials. 
Tap-.- recordings and similar evidentiary materials such * 
as photographs and videotapes might in particular cases 
be invaluable in the investigations of political 
an r r. s i- > r»u11 cuts . 
In the 95th Congress, thirteen pieces of proposed 
legislation vnre introduced in response to the United States 
Supreme Court decision in Zurchcr v. Stafford Daily. None 
of these legislative proposals were voted out of contuittec 
but strong Congressional continent favors sone such • 
legislation in the 96th Congress. Some of the proposed 
legislation protects all third parties; other proposed 
m- 
•m 
3 c .L J -vu *"*c*f.c:c C>; o- iy the pc> r, media. 5>orc preoor-.nl 
boc.*<3i

--- PAGE BREAK ---96th Congress. Some of the proposed 
legislation protects all third parties; other proposed 
m- 
•m 
3 c .L J -vu *"*c*f.c:c C>; o- iy the pc> r, media. 5>orc preoor-.nl 
boc.*<3i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

alio’ 
.. rch v; rr,~ .its 
cl — rev a failu re to c cr'pl y v.’i t.'i a 
i a’ r.ocr. 
. Hi? ’ :s. 
0 
r propos e'l :• do not provide 
lor ;.r;y 
5 Vtl.oJ or o!>; a i>i ir " such raa t or ial. 
The bar,.-; r a ent c£ Justice 
* : ? it s in die:: ted a 
tenia i- \ r p o e i tier: 
vcv ir; 
r. sub pc n ■; 
« 4>w‘. -lir st r n-oceduvt: 
except 
win n th :C hold cr . i ~ invol ve c in cri.T ••inal 
petD.Y.U5ca to which the material is relevant; (2) the 
Siil'7'or-no has not been complied vith; and (3) there is 
ir-.r.:’.r,t i.t peril to hunr.n life. 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---l ve c in cri.T ••inal 
petD.Y.U5ca to which the material is relevant; (2) the 
Siil'7'or-no has not been complied vith; and (3) there is 
ir-.r.:’.r,t i.t peril to hunr.n life. 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VISUAL INVESTIGATIVE ANALYSIS 
Visual Investigative Analysis (VIA) is a modified 
version of Program Evaluation and Review Technique/Critical 
Path Method (PERT/CPM) management information systems de- 
veloped primarily for project management. VIA makes use of 
the principals of the network-based systems to graphically 
display the sequential and concurrent order of performance 
and dependency relationships of all the elements of an in- 
vestigation. However, VIA modifications of PERT/CPM rules 
enables VIA to be more flexible in the application of chart- 
ing principals. The rules of network logic may be bent or 
broken and the function of symbols may be expanded and new 
symbols may be used. Each VIA chart is uniquely designed 
to suit the individual needs of each case. The primary 
function! of the VIA technique is to provide administrative 
assistance in solving complex investigations. 
The tremendous amounts of information detailed in 
an investigator's report makes it difficult to analyze the 
relationships between isolated pieces of important data 
necessary to better understanding the elements involved in 
a crime. Isolating these elements and charting them in term 
of their logical dependence upon one another allows the 
observer to visually follow the crime much as you would in

--- PAGE BREAK ---in 
a crime. Isolating these elements and charting them in term 
of their logical dependence upon one another allows the 
observer to visually follow the crime much as you would in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reading a road map which gives you clear direction in 
reaching a desired goal. 
The goal in the use of VIA is an understanding 
of the involvement of persons, dates, times and places and 
identifies their interrelationships with other known facts 
in the overall completion of a crime from its beginning up 
to the point of final completion. 
Through the use of a clearly defined set of sym- 
bols the analyst can chart relevant pieces of information 
available to him into the VIA format. The activity arrows 
and event modes are logically connected to represent the 
sequential and concurrent flow of activities. All excep- 
HSUs 
tions, additions and other innovations introduced as 
required. 
The VIA chart presents the investigator with a 
graphic display of a reconstruction of the crime as it 
occurred, a reconstruction of the on-scene and follow- 
investigation and/or a plan of action for continuing 
the investigation. This illustrates to the investigator 
areas where potential leads may be developed and points 
out positive leads that must be investigated. 
The VIA analyst and the investigator work to- 
gether as a team, constantly revising and updating the 
information on the VIA chart. Information concerning 
additional leads developed and investigated is incorporated 
into the network on a regular basis. This process is 
continued up to and including the presentation of the 
case in court.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tional leads developed and investigated is incorporated 
into the network on a regular basis. This process is 
continued up to and including the presentation of the 
case in court.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TECHNICAL SURVEILLANCE OF INVESTIGATIVE TARGETS 
Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
Streets Act of 1968 provides for utilization of electronic 
surveillance techniques with judicial authorization in 
violations as murder; kidnaping; robbery; extortion; espionage; 
sabotage; treason; disclosure of atomic energy information; 
organized crime activities; and Presidential assassination, 
kidnaping, or assault. The Attorney General possesses the 
authority in an emergency situation to authorize electronic 
surveillances. 
In an emergency situation involving the assassination 
of a major political figure, all investigative means available 
would be utilized in an attempt to obtain necessary information 
leading to the identification and prosecution of the perpetrators 
to include electronic surveillance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s available 
would be utilized in an attempt to obtain necessary information 
leading to the identification and prosecution of the perpetrators 
to include electronic surveillance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

) 
THE FBI'S POLICY CONCERNING THE USE OF HYPNOSIS 
Hypnosis, as a tool in law enforcement, has been 
used sporadically by various local police departments 
throughout the United States since 1959, with little or 
no controls concerning who would hypnotize. The FBI’s 
policy concerning the use of hypnosis in law enforcement 
was originally set forth in 1968, and subsequently was 
revised in 1976. Current policy states that the FBI is 
to utilize hypnosis only in select cases. This would be 
in such cases as bank robbery wherein force is used or a 
large amount of money is involved; in kidnapping cases; 
extortions; or crimes of violence vrhich occur where the 
FBI has jurisdiction. Hypnosis is confined to its use * 
upon key witnesses or to victims of crimes only. No one 
. who has the potential of becoming a suspect or subject 
in a case is to be hypnotized for any reason. 
The FBI uses only psychologists, psychiatrists, 
physicians, or dentists who are highly qualified as hyp- 
notists to do the actual induction. The use of hypnosis 
must be discussed with the U. S. Attorney and his per- 
mission obtained. Additionally, the U. S. Attorney must 
obtain written permission from the Assistant Attorney 
I 
i M 
DOC <2*1 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---discussed with the U. S. Attorney and his per- 
mission obtained. Additionally, the U. S. Attorney must 
obtain written permission from the Assistant Attorney 
I 
i M 
DOC <2*1 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

General of the Criminal Division of the U. S. Department 
of Justice. The current policy states that no Bureau 
Agent may participate in a hypnotic interview without 
written permission from the Attorney General. Further, 
the hypnotic interview must be recorded, in its entirety, 
either by audio or video tape with video the preferred 
method. 
On June 1, 1978, the FBI Training Division con- 
ducted a Law Enforcement Hypnosis Seminar. Attending was 
one Agent from each field office throughout the United States. 
The purpose of the seminar was to familiarize Agents with as 
many theories as possible on hypnosis techniques and compli- 
cations. 
and! 
both 
internationally known experts in the field of hypnosis, were 
■■■■instructed 
asked to participate in this seminar. ■■■§ 
the Agents extensively in the various theories existing in 
the use of hypnosis and familiarized the Agents with the 
possibility for "leading” the witness or victim in their 
responses while under hypnosis. The thrust of^^mjj^jj 
lecture was not concerned with instructing FBI Agents on 
how to hypnotize. Rather, Bureau Agents were taught to 
act as liaison between the professionals who actually hyp- 
notize the witness or victim, and the legal needs of the FBI. 
In Fiscal Year 1977-78, the FBI has requested the use of hyp- 
nosis in excess of 30 cases. While initial results from those 
cases where hypnosis has been conducted indicate that hyp- 
t 
nosis is a valuable investigative tool, this area is still 
being researched by the Training Division of the FBI. 
1)6*

--- PAGE BREAK ---ses where hypnosis has been conducted indicate that hyp- 
t 
nosis is a valuable investigative tool, this area is still 
being researched by the Training Division of the FBI. 
1)6*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c o 
PSYCHOLINGUISTICS: 
THE ANALYSIS OF COERSIVE COMMUNICATIONS 
AS AN INVESTIGATIVE TECHNIQUE 
it 
Based on an interagency transfer of funds from the Law 
Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA), the FBI since 6/18/75 
has monitored the utilization of psycholinguistic analysis in 
selected Bureau cases. Under the provisions o^th^U|^^ra^^ 
all nwrhnl inauistic analysis is performed 
iiS] 
\'J*I 
i 
K

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UNITED STATES GOVER^ JENT 
o Memorandum 
TO : Mr. Ingram 
FROM : K. E. Joseph 
( \J 
SUBJECT: HOUSE COMMITTEE ON 
ASSASSINATION 
UNITED STATES DKI'AKTM^V OE .JUSTICE 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF U'TvESTlGATlON 
DATE: 11/7/78 
0«f AO U*.   
Ant. DM.9 
AAB. Scrrt. -- - 
Gift. U«. 
lint.  
fault  
L«U'«*t7

Lt^al CM*. __ 
MM. I Imtp  
IK. ■ - 
Ttck. ■ - 
Traiauif   
P.blic Alim. Oil  
TtlffUat ft*.   
OiiKHr'i Smc’y _ 
Per your 11/6/78 request, enclosed are addendum 
regarding Bureau policy and use of hypnosis and psycho- 
linguistics which you may desire to include in Director's 
testimony. 
The Training Division does not maintain a separate 
listing of scientific equipment and contracts which data is 
maintained in the Laboratory Division. Contact with the 
Laboratory Division indicates this information will be supplied 
by the Laboratory Division.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t and contracts which data is 
maintained in the Laboratory Division. Contact with the 
Laboratory Division indicates this information will be supplied 
by the Laboratory Division.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

y * 
jp3 
r..\ j 
c d • •- • 
9. Existing Bureau policy concerning the use of 
tape recorders in interviews of subjects, suspects or witnesses 
in major cases is based on a survey taken at FBIIIQ and contact with 
field personnel. The survey determined general opposition to 
any rule which would require tape recording of interviews. 
Analysis of the question has raised a number of problem 
areas that must be taken into account when deciding whether or not 
to record the statements of witnesses, subjects, or suspects. The 
voluntariness of the statement must be clearly established. Questioning 
must be carefully prepared so that tone of voice or wording does not 
suggest intimidation or promise of reward. Mechanical reproduction 
must be of such quality as to preclude any question of editing or 
alteration. Tapes must be sealed and stored, and chain of evidence 
"aintained. Since recorders can have an inhibiting effect on some 
individuals, this potential must be evaluated. While these * 
problems are not insurmountable, they dictate that the use of 
recorders be made on a limited, highly selective basis. Current 
instructions emphasize it is imperative that any use of recording 
equipment be open and unconcealed; and the tape itself must clearly 
indicate knowledge and consent by the person being interviewed that 
the interview is being recorded. The use of tape recorders is 
currently permitted on SAC authority. 
In light of the inherent problems in the use of tape 
recorders set forth above it is recommended the existing policy 
be continued. 
hoc. 
IPanyw-.i

--- PAGE BREAK ---y permitted on SAC authority. 
In light of the inherent problems in the use of tape 
recorders set forth above it is recommended the existing policy 
be continued. 
hoc. 
IPanyw-.i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(B) TAPE RECORDING OF INTERVIEWS--Recent suggestions have been 
received from FBI Field Offices that in lengthy interviews or selected 
interviews in major cases consideration be given to the use of tape 
recorders. Survey of FBIHQ and contact with field personnel reflects 
general opposition to any rule which would require tape recording of 
interviews. However, it was generally favored that the field be per- 
mitted to use this investigative technique on a limited basis. • 
Analysis of the question has raised a number of problem areas 
that must be taken into account when deciding whether or not to record 
the statements of witnesses, subjects, or suspects. The voluntariness 
of the statement must be clearly established. Questioning must be 
carefully prepared so that tone of voice or wording does not suggest 
intimidation or promise of reward. Mechanical reproduction must be 
of such quality as to preclude any question of editing or alteration. 
Tapes must be sealed and stored, and chain of evidence maintained. 
Since recorders can have an inhibiting effect on some individuals,; this 
potential must be evaluated. While these problems are not insurmountable, 
they dictate that the use of recorders be made on a limited, highly 
selective basis. 
In application of this technique, strict adherence to Bureau rule^* 
regarding interviews, as set forth in FBI Handbook, Part n, Chapter 2, 
must be insured. It is imperative that any use of recording equipment 
be open and unconcealed; and the tape itself must clearly indicate knowledge 
and consent by the person being interviewed that the interview is being 
recorded. The use of tape recorders will be permitted on SAC authority. _ 
Cassette recorders previously furnished the field, such as Sony models 
TC-110A, TC-110B, or TC-55, with built-in microphone and automatic 
recording level control should be utilized. I expect, however, that care- 
ful consideration be given to the circumstances in each individual case, 
and strict administrative control be maintained over the use of this 
technique and equipment. 
7/29/75 
MEMORANDUM 33-75 
Clarence M. Kelley 
Director 
-2 -he circumstances in each individual case, 
and strict administrative control be maintained over the use of this 
technique and equipment. 
7/29/75 
MEMORANDUM 33-75 
Clarence M. Kelley 
Director 
-2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11/6/78 
Mr. Moore (Attention: Mr. Ingram) 
The FBI Laboratory has immediate access to recognized scientific 
experts through contacts at Federal laboratories (over 180 in number) that 
permits us to obtain scientific expertise in virtually all disciplines. As 
examples,chemical and biological warfare matters can be handled through 
the U. S. Army Chemical Systems Laboratory at Edgewood, Maryland. 
In the situation of assassination of a national figure, we can obtain immediate 
assistance through the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. Additionally, 
we have contacts with other laboratories at industrial and university levels 
that provide us with scientific expertise that may not be available in our 
Laboratory. 
V 
Bell P. Herndon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In reply to question number 11 from letter dated 10/6/78, 
to Mr. Bassett from Mr. Drew J. Clark. 
The Bureau has no formalized list of recognized 
scientific experts in the area of acoustic analysis. On an 
informal basis, experts in the area of Digital Signal 
Analysis have been contacted, their equipment identified and 
discussed, as well as, their area of expertise in the general 
application of Advanced Signal Processing Techniques. 
The Audio Analysis Unit of the Technical Services 
Division has the most Advanced Signal Processing equipment 
currently available. This equipment is used daily, by FBI 
experts in the tape enhancement, signal recognition, and 
voiceprint fields.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0 
In reply to question number 1 from letter dated 10/6/78, 
to Mr. Bassett from Mr. Drew J. Clark. 
The Engineering Section has designated specific primary 
and backup personnel and set aside special equipment to support 
crisis management teams at FBIHQ and in the field.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Clark. 
The Engineering Section has designated specific primary 
and backup personnel and set aside special equipment to support 
crisis management teams at FBIHQ and in the field.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

StK. Bc^/Jjo/J 
flnetitxtte flpftcific^rule^oe^ta?^? PBI rcm1^ advocates 
|lnvcStiEatiye 
by the FBI i^governed b^Sectio^fn^® information 
of the Code of Fedml £ JSfJ • °n of ?f\ 
"Release of Information hv P lona* Tnls is ^entitled 
of Justice Relating to Criminal0?^1^*^ the DePartment 
Which clearly defines thl ?yp|s ^JY11 Proceedlngs- 
may, as well as the tvnes nf?If f lnformation that 
be made available to £ews media^i^10" t$at may not' 
C1V11 and criminal cases hv Qm i th regard to pending 
of Justice, including FBI personnel?3 °f the DePartment 
assassination, investigativ^infC°nC?^n' SUCh aS an 
available to the publi? iffhpn?°fnatlon would be made 
that such action was in the best inf1*6* Jeneral believed 
States and so directed the FBI? interests of the United 
t 
hod da°i 
ilTf: ' —^37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I N DEX 
9 
Informational Memos - Legal Counsel Division -A   
Background Material - Records Management Division 
FBI Investigative Jurisdiction ^ 
Assaulting The President Of The United States - fnC 
l± Acreement'fietween^. S. Secret Service and FBI 
D.3. Agreement Between Armed Forces Institute of 
^Pathology and the FBI ‘ B 
D.4. FBI Manual of Investigative Operations and 
Guidelines 
E?l?reFBI°ManualSo|Sinvestigative Operations and 
Guidelines 
Act For The Protection Of Foreign Officials And 
Official Guests Of The United States # 
Civil Rights 
Domestic Security Investigations 
Informants I a lj 
* tsT 
FBI Structure and Operations r 
Acquisition Of Third Party Records *1 »&•"*» 
Information In Possession Of News Media r& A * .lit. 
Gassffied by 
>0—1——^

--- PAGE BREAK ---Informants I a lj 
* tsT 
FBI Structure and Operations r 
Acquisition Of Third Party Records *1 »&•"*» 
Information In Possession Of News Media r& A * .lit. 
Gassffied by 
>0—1——^

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0 
<1 
< 
* 
N. Support Capability 
N.l. Visual Investigative Analysis - 
N*.2. Technical Surveillance 
N.3. Hypnosis and Psycholinguistics 
N.4. Tape Recorders _ . • 
N.5. Scientific Expertise and Equipment 
O. Release Of Information To The Public 
P. House Select Committee On Assassinations Access To 
FBI Information 
Q. Possible Questions From Committee Members 
R. Draft Agreement With U. S. Secret Service

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* V** >2 ' •? 
(i) • -.mm 
: * ^r.<^r 
- * 
•• • *■ * <f ** 
September 0/ 1970 
»’*• • r • -"*r.- 
Vi, 
»• * * a.* > *-V; 
• • «*•- -e . f • •» 
OB Beptembmr 0, 1973, G. Cohort Blokoy, Chief 
Cotmcel cad Dlroctor , COOM Celoot Ccs^slttoo on . 
bssassinaticas, odvicod that h« had a difficult tlo® . • -" / *•* 
percuading hie otaff to (7° along with TOOT do a Ira cot - •yj'K" 
to toctify ca historical iesues dealing with the Kennedy ” ^v 
Assassination investigation and wold d-g finitely EOt * / 
CozLra your appearance at the conclusion of tba •Kennedy*. 4-*—>-*- 
and *Ricg“ bearings. Co felt this would bo cut of contort * 
and only daslroo your tostlcony during tho Kennedy - : 
boor logo. Hr. Blakoy was odvioed that thia would cot bo - * 
> V-*i 
cut of context olnca yea would tootlfy aa to bent tba F3X •• > 
-- - -- 'j* •-A — ** 
would currontly bandlo a Presidential assassination or a r 
mjor investigation each aa tho BUT dor of Bartin l«thor 
• • « 
* - 
Mr. BlaJcey stated bo only deciroa your testiacay 
On Septeober 20, 1973, during tho Kennedy boaringo. 
Attached is tho outline os proposed by 
Hr. Dlakey. 
•• > .v 
■< • ‘' 
Tf . *- 
Zn view of tho above, you My vioh to have a 
conference with Hr. 'Maas, Assistant Director Hints end ?y/-. 
Dnit Chief Cool DOB. • .* i? 
• -** 
t* 
.«. 
. * «-mm~ 
— . e 
John A# Mints

--- PAGE BREAK ---ew of tho above, you My vioh to have a 
conference with Hr. 'Maas, Assistant Director Hints end ?y/-. 
Dnit Chief Cool DOB. • .* i? 
• -** 
t* 
.«. 
. * «-mm~ 
— . e 
John A# Mints

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
f • 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
Page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or wore of the following statements, whan 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
□ Deleted under exemption(s)   ——— wlU* 00 aegregable 
material available for release to you. 
1 I Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your wjumt 
1 I Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
I I Document*8) originating with the following government agencyties)  ——

was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
  Pagets) referred for consultation to the following government agencylies);  —

as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
J2  Page(s) withheld for the following reason(s): 
P«oc.<zsseJ ;<a iJ- maio - £/>*/esu-rs*  
I I For your information: 
P?1 The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
bo<2,<JU*)e.n+ * 3  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
I DELETED PAGEXS) | 
$ NO DUPLICATION FEE Y 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
rai/ooj

--- PAGE BREAK ---garding these pages: 
bo<2,<JU*)e.n+ * 3  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
I DELETED PAGEXS) | 
$ NO DUPLICATION FEE Y 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
rai/ooj

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
<• <• 
V 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
Page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or store of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
□ Deleted under exemption(s)      —— **0* ®° eegregabie 
material available for release to you. 
1 I Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request. 
I I Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
I I Document! s) originating with the following government agencyfies) —  —

was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
  Pagets) referred for consultation to the following government agencyties);    —

as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
A  Page!s) withheld for the following reason(s): 
Processed /»> ms go - /239X/    
1 I For your information: 
Pfl The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) I 
I NO DUPLICATION FEE £ 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
rai/ooj

--- PAGE BREAK ---used for reference regarding these pages: 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE(S) I 
I NO DUPLICATION FEE £ 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
rai/ooj

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 
/ltd 
taunt 
Rr. Bastetti 
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE OH ASS AS SIN ATI OTS 
U. S. BOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES (USCA) 
Sir as you Instructed, as often as coanttoents 
pemittod. thi RSCA public hearings on thc 
coraaittoeot.ff 23 ££«« 
As you recall, the Committee has wticuiated Items 
of inforration it seeks via an outline torn those 
provided Director to ask theJFBl to respond 
possibility that the President of the United States miff* 
assassinated at an^l^» . „ reaeJ'iv'f. - y 
Ujtuim- /^whither or^not th£ FBI has developed a ^..r 
fore. ortenlr.^on^repreecntatlve^of .ell^Eiffeau^lnveetlg»tiva,Op^ 
Activated toedliwly « FaW^uortc^poeelbly *“ * . y / 
Pr«Pl—1 -W ""f, 
’ J. Whether or “ot0f5Tc£r,2S‘2Sd,S“««ro.. re AVlJ 
3. wiccner ««n"le field ©orcmandor, 
lnv.etlt.tlon vould Pr°v^e1|"d?,!ely t.he charpo of .11 
vho would be designated to Ixclusion of any othar* ; 
field resources at the scene, to theexcluaion o* . \ 
lutloe. .j rar JJ_  6'~f 
: t*y. 
:;: »•*<’ *V ^Tther « nor.oneld«etlon hed been Rlv^to^ fgl « 
WnR ll.4i;o„^r...nt.tlv.e fro. 
<Iop.rtncnte.lnt.tt. tod Into «nd 
dop.rtnente, Integrated Into tn. «nd 
SSu^n;u."« required or .pproprlot.. 
rf» U u,k*r~~r *****

--- PAGE BREAK ---en Rlv^to^ fgl « 
WnR ll.4i;o„^r...nt.tlv.e fro. 
<Iop.rtncnte.lnt.tt. tod Into «nd 
dop.rtnente, Integrated Into tn. «nd 
SSu^n;u."« required or .pproprlot.. 
rf» U u,k*r~~r *****

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V 
sUt 
t) z 
At* 
%> 4 
K 
5 Whether or not the TCI hae undertaken any 
effort, or is «v«r« that cay other Ksncyksii““>• “7 
effort to forrzaliza arrangements within the executive  
Branch to insure that any autopsy would be perror^ed^or _^ 
t assisted by the most qualified forenaicpqthologist in tbs 
^country. - 7 
6. Whether or not the TBI vould advocate or <*“ *" 
undertake special means to provide total investigative „ 
access to all media and private photographic or 
A-. ~-u*frra % afsjrsiw s&r x u. w. . 
77 Whether or not the FBI would advocate or - „ 
undertake special means to freeze all thfc*** 
for a specified period in order to insure availability should f* 
investigation require same (i.e. telephone t®1?**?* . ^ 
records for sir months prior and six Pout hi. after the fact). 
„ 8. >*^ether or not the FBI would advocate or 
undertake special means to insure immediate investigative 'i** 
access to banking and other financial transaction records V 
no roquired^^ J/,J mJ *fr" 
I,)}. 9TWhcther or not tho FBI vould consider special JJJJ 
investigative reporting procedures such as tho taping and 
subsequent tronocription of all key interviews or a 
intorvijJM~.'/"A ± 
r. b*b 10. Whether the FBI would advocate or undertake 
special means to secure prompt technics1 surveillance or 
taw,t4,e»t S)U. 
-- -  - -»■ - FBI Bain tains proactively,=*»" 
/I-*' 
*^■7 
S - l«t 
*\*sa 
n. Whether or not the"FBI maintains proa< 
on a continuing basis, a list of recognized scientific 
experts in the forensic discipline or other appropriate 
disciplines and whether such a list would specify the 
location of certain sophisticated, scientific equipment 
which may not be available in house, but which could be 
throush dleltal ^ " 
12. Whether cr not the rBI would advocate or ^ 
institute specific rules pertaining to the i 
investigative information to the pubiic via the media. 
■f- '•* The above, while not all inclusive, are furnished 
", for your consideration and in the event you may wish to . 
provide same to thooe Divisions responsible for the preparation 
4 of any statement the Director may choose to make. 
Thank you. 
fl IH 
Drew J. Clarkconsideration and in the event you may wish to . 
provide same to thooe Divisions responsible for the preparation 
4 of any statement the Director may choose to make. 
Thank you. 
fl IH 
Drew J. Clark

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V > 
.r r . /. ::c \r ST £il2. 
._,...-T-.-r jn-.T::Dif J  
. m*. 
■Cl |>'Mi ' '1(.i'..l » 1‘ ...

FSJ    
„„ ~ <—«r -r 
• d b- Che acbiitJity °I the t*‘'’ 
assassinations is c.ouoe , ^ bolo„ are scctc statutes 
''political assar.sinrtxo..s . FEI which ncy 
vithin the investitive Jnrirficxxc • particular 
provide a predicate, depending upon t: foct 
case.  „ »vr» ASSAULT: 
.. _T r..- VT m?AT’lT G .   
PHr.SID5D7i!ki'5-S—• iit_1 . 1751 tives the 
  Title 18. U.s. code. Sectxon 1751. H 
• tive jurisdiction in the assassinatio... 
m investxgatxv J kidnaping of the 
■»s- nr artcn^teo KIU^P 
napinr.. »«aul" 1 - vice president, or'next in suc- 
President, President-H. • 6ecti,„ ,Uo coffer's 
v nffiefc of President. 
cession to t c, sdiction for conspiracy to 
on the PBX xnve tx,.txv ^ ^ ^ ^ authorired 
comnat the above errvices” concerning 
--«"•“ - -m. - “ 
violation of this sectxon. Sta ^ m is 
suspended if Federal^risdxc^xon ^ ^ _ state. 
authorized to requrcst as ForCes the Posse 
or local agency including the to 
Cotnitatus Act. or other tion effective 
. . rv rotvithstandxng. This se 
the contrary V.OLVIC 
August 7-8, 1963- 
V\ * *

--- PAGE BREAK ---cst as ForCes the Posse 
or local agency including the to 
Cotnitatus Act. or other tion effective 
. . rv rotvithstandxng. This se 
the contrary V.OLVIC 
August 7-8, 1963- 
V\ * *

--- PAGE BREAK ---

» 
( 
* 
ro;::rjrr ■ ^::I) /SSAi:f V: 
The same basic provisions, with the exception of 
the rt’J'ti'u provision, -are set forth at Title 18i L.S. Code, 
Section 351. giving investigative jurisdiction in crimes 
of Congressional assassinations, kicnr.ping, and assuult 
or attempted killing or kidnaping or conspiracy to kill or 
kidnap a Member of Congress or Member-cf-Congress-Elect. 
Tliis section was effective January 2, 1971. 
FOkEIC'i OFFICIALS AljD OFFICIAL CHESTS: 
TiUjL-liL U. S. Code, Sections, 1116 and 1117 
make it unlawful to kill a foreign official, official guest, 
or internationally protected person or to conspire to kill 
such person. Title 18, U.S. Code Section l^Ql makes kid- 
naping or conspiring to kidnap such a person unlawful. • 
Title 18, U. S. Code, Section U2 makes it unlawful to 
assault, strike, wound, imprison, or offer violence to or 
intimidate, coerce, threaten, or harass such a person. 
Sections 1116 and 1117 became effective, as amended, on 
October 8, 1976, and October 24, 1972., respectively. 
Section j,?Oi became effective, as amended, on August $^,.1956. 
Section 112 became effective, as amende^, on October 8, 197£. 
- 2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---8, 1976, and October 24, 1972., respectively. 
Section j,?Oi became effective, as amended, on August $^,.1956. 
Section 112 became effective, as amende^, on October 8, 197£. 
- 2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

n T:Ti^TS_VlC^TIO:S: 
Title IS. U.S. Code, Section 241 makes it 
unlawful to conspire, to injure, oppress, threaten, or 
intimidate any citizen "in the free exercise of hir. 
constitutional rights." 
This statute provided predicate for the FBI s 
investigation into the Karlin Luther King, Jr., assassina- 
tion. Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 242 makes similar 
acts unlawful when done under color of law. These sections 
were effective in their current state as of April 11, 1963. 
OTHER VIOLATIONS: 
The foregoing violation^ are broadly applicable 
to many assassination? v.’bich could be characterized as 
* 
"political." The statutes set forth below are narrower 
application but they also form the basis for FBI juris- 
diction, depending upon the facts of the particular case. 
- Title 18^ U.S. Code, Section 844 (d) - 
(i), effective October 15, 1970, makes unlawful certain 
of the detailed acts which may be involved in "political 
assassinations" by bombing, such as, interstate transportation 
_ • 
of explosives with intent to injure; use of telephone, 
mail, or other instrument of commerce to transmit a bomb 
threat; the bombing of U. S. property or institution or

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion 
_ • 
of explosives with intent to injure; use of telephone, 
mail, or other instrument of commerce to transmit a bomb 
threat; the bombing of U. S. property or institution or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

o 
U. ^0 
organizat ionV cceiving Federal financial assistance;' 
res session of a bc>r:L> in a Government building; carrying 
0ir usl,'ii a !'ori,,J in the co-misr.ion of any Federal felony; and 
use of a bomb to damage property used in an activity 
affecting interstate commerce. FBI jurisdiction is con- 
current v^ith the Bureau of AWhrO < Tobacco and Fire aims 
except vhere the motivation is political rather than the 
desire for personal or organizational gain in vhich case a 
Memorandum of Understanding gives the FBI exclusive 
jurisdiction. 
CRIMES OK COTORKHEKT RESERVATION - The following 
sections of Title 1S..U.S. Code, are capable of application 
in United circumstances'’.to political assassinations when 
such acts take place within the special carititle and 
territorial jurisdiction of the United States 
Section 1111 (Murder) effective as amended October 24, 
1972; 
Section 1113 (Attempt to Conrr.it Murder or Manslaughter) 
effective as amended August 3, 1977. 
Section 1201 (Kidnaping) effective as amended October 8, 
1976. 
# • 
Section 1363 (Destroying or Injuring Buildings or 
Property) effective June 25, 1948. 
Q 
- 4 - 
«v 
-*v 
•—TT

--- PAGE BREAK ---Section 1201 (Kidnaping) effective as amended October 8, 
1976. 
# • 
Section 1363 (Destroying or Injuring Buildings or 
Property) effective June 25, 1948. 
Q 
- 4 - 
«v 
-*v 
•—TT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rl£ - Title* 18, U.P. Code, ^tiens 1961 to 
1963. e/fectL.o a:, aren.-c-.l October 5, l^>,b, vould provide 
an investigational predicate in situations where a person 
or persons involved in a pattern of racketeering activities 
would eerv^it an assassination of a political figure in 
furtherance of that pattern of racketeering activity. 
ELECTION LAU - Title 18, U. S. Code, Section 245 
makes it unlawful to injure, intimidate, or interfere with 
a person because he is voting, qualifying to vote, 
campaigning as a candidate, or attempting to do so. This 
section was effective as of April 11, 1968. 
Title 18.U.S. Code, Section 594 makes unlawful 
* » 
the intimidation or attempted intimidation of a person for 
the purpose of interfering with his right to vote for 
specified Federal candidates. This section is effective 
as of June 25, 1948. 
In appropriate cases, these statutes may serve 
as predicates for FBI investigative jurisdiction. 
ALIEN REGISTRATION - Title 22, U.S. Code, 
Section 612 requires the registration of foreign aliens. 
This could be a basis for a political assassination in- 
^ « 
vestigation by the FBI in circumstances where it is suspected 
that the assassination may have been the work of a foreign 
power. This section is effective as amended October 4, 1961.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tigation by the FBI in circumstances where it is suspected 
that the assassination may have been the work of a foreign 
power. This section is effective as amended October 4, 1961.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

» 
( . ^ 
FEDERAL TRAIN WRECK STATUTE - Title 18, 
U.S. Code, Section 1991 makes it unlawful to enter & train ^ 
with the intention to coro.it any unlawful violence. 
Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 19S2 makes the. willful derailing, 
disabling, or wrecking of a train used in interstate or 
foreign commerce unlawful. This section is effective 
June 25, 1948. In appropriate circumstances these sections 
may form a basis for a Federal investigation of a political 
assassination. 
AIRCRAFT PIRACY - Title 49, U.S. Code, Section 1472 
makes unlawful the seizure or exercise of control by force 
or violence or threatened force of violence of an aircraft 
within the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States. 
This section is effective, as amended, August 5, 1974. 
Conceivably, such piracy could play a part in a v 
political assassination and, if so, the statute would 
provide a basis for investigation by the FBI. 
- 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---ended, August 5, 1974. 
Conceivably, such piracy could play a part in a v 
political assassination and, if so, the statute would 
provide a basis for investigation by the FBI. 
- 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t 
* 
ASSAULTING THE PRESIDENT OF THE 
UNITED STATES AND THREATS AGAINST THE 
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 
I. Statute 
The United States Congress passed and 
President an amendment to Title 18# U. S. Code# . . 
89-141) which provided for the application of Federal criminal 
law in instances of Presidential assassination, kidnaping, 
and assault. This law was approved by the President of the 
United States on August 28, 1965, and is specifically embodied 
in Chapter 84, Section 1751, Title 18, U. S. Code. 
sent to the 
(Public Law 
Persons designated as coming within the purview of 
this statute are as follows: The President, the President 
Elect, the Vice President, or, if there is no Vice President, 
the officer next in the order of succession to the office of 
President, the Vice President Elect, or any individual acting 
as President under the Constitution and laws of the United States. 
^Specifically, penalties are provided for the following 
offenses: 
* 
1. Killing or Kidnaping the President or Other% 
Designated Person. 
Punishment shall be as provided by Sections 
1111 and 1112, Title 18, U. S. Code in those 
instances where the designated individual is killed. 
Where kidnaping is involved, the penalty is imprison- 
ment for any term of years or for life or, if death 
resulted to the individual by death or imprisonment 
for any term of years or for life. 
2. Conspiracy to Kill or Kidnap the President or 
Other Designated Person. 
Punishment is provided by imprisonment for any 
term of years or for life or, if death results to 
the individual by death or imprisonment, for any 
term of years or for life. 
3. Attempt to Kill or Kidnap the President or 
Other Designated Person. 
Punishment as provided by the statute is 
imprisonment'for any term of years or for life. 
•T‘any 
term of years or for life. 
3. Attempt to Kill or Kidnap the President or 
Other Designated Person. 
Punishment as provided by the statute is 
imprisonment'for any term of years or for life. 
•T‘

--- PAGE BREAK ---r for life. 
3. Attempt to Kill or Kidnap the President or 
Other Designated Person. 
Punishment as provided by the statute is 
imprisonment'for any term of years or for life. 
•T‘

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. Assault on the President or Other Designated 
Person. 
The statute provides for punishment by 
imprisonment of not more than ten years or fine 
of not more than $10/000 or both. 
The statute specifically authorizes the Attorney 
General to pay an amount not to exceed $100,000 for 
information and services concerning a violation 
of this section. 
If Federal investigative or prosecutive 
jurisdiction is asserted, such assertion shall 
suspend the exercise of jurisdiction by state or 
local authority until Federal action is terminated. 
The statute provides for investigative 
jurisdiction to lie with the FBI. 
There is a tenth section of the act which amends 
subsection (c) of Section 3486, Title 18, U. S. Code to 
provide that: 
"Whenever in the judgement of a United States 
Attorney the testimony of any witness, or the 
production of books, papers, or other evidence by 
any witness, in any case or proceeding before any 
qrand jury or court of the United States involving 
any violation of Section 1751 of Title 18 of the 
United States Code,' . . .is necessary to the public 
interest, he, upon the approval of the Attorney General, 
shall make application to the court that the witness 
shall be instructed to testify or produce evidence 
subject to the provisions of this section, and upon 
order of the court such witness shall not be excused 
from testifying or from producing books, papers, or 
other evidence on the ground that the testimony or 
evidence required of him may tend to incriminate him 
or subject him to a penalty or forfeiture. But no 
such witness shall be prosecuted or sub3ected to any 
penalty or forfeiture for or on account of any trans- 
action, matter, or thing concerning which he is 
compelled, after having claimed his privilege against 
self-incrimination, to testify or produce evidence, 
nor shall testimony so compelled be used aspevidence 
in any criminal proceeding (except prosecution described 
in subsection (d) hereof, i.e., perjury or contempt) 
against him in any court." 
- 2 - 
•Y*'Vall testimony so compelled be used aspevidence 
in any criminal proceeding (except prosecution described 
in subsection (d) hereof, i.e., perjury or contempt) 
against him in any court." 
- 2 - 
•Y*'V

--- PAGE BREAK ---pelled be used aspevidence 
in any criminal proceeding (except prosecution described 
in subsection (d) hereof, i.e., perjury or contempt) 
against him in any court." 
- 2 - 
•Y*'V

--- PAGE BREAK ---

o 
( - V 
The national importance of the offenses covered by 
the act was thought to require the authorization of immunity 
in this area, notwithstanding Congress' reluctance to enlarge 
existing immunity provisions. S. Rep. No. 498, 89th Congress, 
1st Session 5 (1965); H. Rep. No. 488, 89th Congress, 1st 
Session 5 (1965). Only the United States Attorney, after 
careful consideration and with the approval of the Attorney 
General, is permitted to make applications for immunity. 
See Hearings, supra, p. 59. 
Application of the immunity statute immunizes the 
witness against both state and Federal prosecution. Ullmann 
v. United States, 350 U.S. 422, 436 (1956). The restriction 
thus placed on the exercise of state power is justified by the 
paramount authority of Congress to secure the more effective 
exercise of Federal power. See ibid. 
II. Venue 
Prosecution should be initiated in the district in 
which the offense was committed, or if the offense was committed 
outside of the jurisdiction of any particular state or district 
prosecution should be as provided for in Section 3238, Title 18, 
U. S. Code (offense not committed in any district). 
III. Background and~ Purpose of the Act 
Prior to the enactment of this legislation, the* 
President, Vice President, etc., were protected by Federal law 
only against oral as well as written threats upon their lives 
and persons (Section 871, Title 18, U. S. Code). While Secret 
Service was charged with the protection and security of the 
President, Vice President, their families, etc., (Section 3056, 
Title 18, U. S. Code), only local and state statutes covered 
attacks on the President, except if the attack should take place 
on a Government reservation over which the Federal Government 
exercised concurrent or exclusive jurisdiction. 
This situation was graphically brought to light with 
the assassination of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy on 
November 22, 1963. Immediately thereafter, by letter dated 
November 25, 1963, the Director advised the Attorney General 
of this legislative void and cited the need for Federal 
jurisdiction over offenses of this nature. 
The Congress, in studying various legislative proposals, 
based the assertion of Federal jurisdiction on the theory that 
murder of the President is a Crime Against the National Government 
Since the injury suffered by the United States does not bear any 
C 
- 3 -the assertion of Federal jurisdiction on the theory that 
murder of the President is a Crime Against the National Government 
Since the injury suffered by the United States does not bear any 
C 
- 3 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---eral jurisdiction on the theory that 
murder of the President is a Crime Against the National Government 
Since the injury suffered by the United States does not bear any 
C 
- 3 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

relation to the activities of the victim orthe “tivea (»* the 
assailant, the statute does not require that the hostile act 1* 
engaged in (or because of) the performance of °f. 
(Senate report No. 498, 89th Congress, 1st Session)• *hi. is • 
requirement in the Assaulting a Federal Officer Statute. 
Senate report Ho. 482, 89th Congress, 1st Session, 
when considering the suspension of local authority in ®**®*?f 
this nature, indicated such action would insure x 
jurisdiction in the investigation and prosecution of Presidential 
assailants by providing for unimpeded Federal jurisdiction to 
the extent necessary. However, suspension does not imply tnat 
the states cannot cooperate with Federal authorities during the 
course of any investigation. v.. 
The legislation, as adopted, implemented recommendations 
by the President's commission on the assassination of _ 
President Kennedy which urged Congress to adopt legislation 
which would: 
■punish for murder, manslaughter of, 
attempt or conspiracy to murder, kidnaping 
of, and assault upon the President, 
Vice President, or other officer next in 
the order of succession to the office of ^ 
President.-. .whether or not the act is 
committed while the victim is in the 
performance of his official duties ox on 
account of such performance. (Page 455, 
Report of the President's Commission). 
IV. Departmental Interpretations 
By memorandum No. 488, dated March 3, jl* ev 
United States Attorneys, Fred M. Vinson, “ V f 7 
General of the Criminal Division, provided a legal analysis of 
the legislation. 
Specifically, certain aspects of the legislation 
were defined and clarified as follows: 
1. Killing the President 
The statute incorporates by reference Section* 
1111 and 1112 of Title 18. The former defines murder 
dividing it into two degrees - fifft4.a5d. 
First degree murder is the premeditated killing or 
takinq of a human life and is punishable by death 
!£les! ?he jury qualifies its verdict in which event . 
punishment is life imprisonment. Second de9r®e 
murder is any other kind of murder and is punishable 
by any term of imprisonment including life. 
- 4 -he jury qualifies its verdict in which event . 
punishment is life imprisonment. Second de9r®e 
murder is any other kind of murder and is punishable 
by any term of imprisonment including life. 
- 4 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---s verdict in which event . 
punishment is life imprisonment. Second de9r®e 
murder is any other kind of murder and is punishable 
by any term of imprisonment including life. 
- 4 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Section 1112 defines manslaughter as the unlawful 
killing of a human being without malice. Voluntary * 
manslaughter is punishable by imprisonment for not 
more than ten years, and involuntary manslaughter 
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or 
imprisonment for not more than three years or both. 
2, Kidnaping the President 
The statute does not define kidnaping. However, 
common law defines kidnaping as the forceable abduction 
and carrying away of a man, woman, or child from their 
own country and sending them to another. T" 
Vaccaro, 51 F, 2d, 17, 19, 4th ?ir.» 1931). Onlik. 
the Federal Kidnaping Act (Section 1201, Title 18, . 
D. S. Code), which authorizes the imposition of the 
death penalty for any injury to the victim, the 
Presidential Assassination Statute providesforthe 
death penalty only if death results to the victim. 
3. Attempt to Kill or Kidnap the President 
The Criminal Division cites Congressional intent 
in House Report No. 488, 89th Congress, 1st Session, 
in defining an attempted killing indlcJ^ing1 
of a preparation which came so reasonably close to 
consummation of the crime that it would have 
executed had nothing interfered to prevent the further 
continuation of the activity,* is sufficient to 
entertain prosecution. 
In Hyde v. United States, 225, U.S., 347, the 
court held "intention and overt act may all be P*®B 
without amounting to a criminal attempt~as i^ll th 
were done should be an agreement to murder a man fifty 
milesawayand the purchase of a pistol for the purpose. 
There must be dangerous proximity to success. , 
Sit exists the overt act is the essence of the offense. 
tinder the Model Penal Code, comment is made relative 
to the dangerous proximity doctrine as follows: 
•In order to determine whether a «iven act 
constitutes an attempt the foUowing factors 
are considered: the gravity of the offense , 
intended, the nearness ofthe act to completion 
of the crime, and the probability that the 
conduct will result in the offense intended. 
The greater the gravity and probability, ana 
the nearer the act to the crime, the stronger, 
is the case for calling the act an 
The test is based on the assumption that tne 
- 5 -offense intended. 
The greater the gravity and probability, ana 
the nearer the act to the crime, the stronger, 
is the case for calling the act an 
The test is based on the assumption that tne 
- 5 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---he greater the gravity and probability, ana 
the nearer the act to the crime, the stronger, 
is the case for calling the act an 
The test is based on the assumption that tne 
- 5 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

o 
purpose of punishing attempts is to deter 
undesirable behavior and that until the actor a 
conduct becomes sufficiently dangerous there ia 
not adequate reason for deterring it. The 
assumption, as it relates to the law of attemp a, 
is not, in our view, the right foundation for the 
liability. The primary purpose of punishing > 
attempts is to neutralize dangerous individuals 
and not to deter dangerous acta." 
4. Conspiracy to Kill or Kidnap the President 
The conspiracy section is identical to the general 
conspiracy statute (18 U.S.C. 371) except that it is 
limited to the two objects of killing or kidnaping the 
President. This section does'not preclude prosecution 
under the general conspiracy statute, but merely provides 
an increased penalty where the object of the 
is to kill or kidnap the President. Cf. United Stages 
v. Bazzell, 187 F. 2d 878, 885 (7th Cir.), Cert, den., 
342 U.S. H«9 (1951). 
5. Assaulting the President 
There are several Federal Assault Statutes, but 
only in the Uniform Code of Military Justice, has 8 
Congress undertaken to define t5®°ffensf: Z 
of the Uniform Code( 10 U.S.C. 928) provides that«any 
person who "attempts or offers with unlawful 
violence to do bodily harm to another P*rJon» 
1 
or not the attempt or offer is consummated, ia guilty 
of assault." The Committee which considered the present 
act contemplated that the term "assault would be 
understood according to its established 
criminal law. The Supreme Court has said, in construing 
a criminal assault statute, that "an assault is 
ordinarily held to be committed merely by putting 
another In apprehension of harm whether 
actor intends to inflict or japabie of 
that harm." Ladner v. United States., 358 U.S. l®9» 
177 (1958). 
V, Jurisdiction 
<?)(A™L?Ln?I^ specifically authorizes 
"a^Fstatute*qrule,aor1regulationmtollthe contrary notwithstanding." 
- 6 -of 
that harm." Ladner v. United States., 358 U.S. l®9» 
177 (1958). 
V, Jurisdiction 
<?)(A™L?Ln?I^ specifically authorizes 
"a^Fstatute*qrule,aor1regulationmtollthe contrary notwithstanding." 
- 6 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. R ponsibility of U. S. Seci ) Service. 
By statute, the Secret Service is charged with the 
protection of the President and other designated 
individuals. (Section 3056, Title 18, U. S. Code)«- In 
addition, the Secret Service is charged by Statute with 
the investigation of threats against the President and 
other designated persons. (Section 871, Title 18, 
U. S. Code). The Department has indicated since the 
Statute names the FBI as the agency to investigate 
violations of Section 1751, Title 18, D. S. Code, the 
FBI would therefore be responsible under the law to 
investigate under certain conditions violations over 
which the Secret Service had previously exercised 
its jurisdiction. Threats against the President and 
other designated persons which do not fall within the 
criteria set forth above would according to the 
Department continue to be investigated by the Secret 
Service under Section 871, Title 18, D. S. Code. 
Memorandum of Agreement Between the FBI and the Secret 
Service Regarding the Presidential Assassination Statute (PAS) 
The full text of the agreement between the FBI and 
the Secret Service relating to the PAS is attached as Appendix A 
VII. Dissemination of Information 5ei 
In 1966 the following agencies were notified in 
writing of the jurisdictional responsibilities of the FBI under 
Title 18, Section 1751, U. S. Code (PAS). These agencies, at 
V?i> _-.fr ■ . • 
• ~»j—'r.'-T' v1 
JET

--- PAGE BREAK ---notified in 
writing of the jurisdictional responsibilities of the FBI under 
Title 18, Section 1751, U. S. Code (PAS). These agencies, at 
V?i> _-.fr ■ . • 
• ~»j—'r.'-T' v1 
JET

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that time, were requested to 
received which may ^dicatect0rcompliance Division, General 
Department of Defense, D Department of State; Central 
Services Administration; U.^P National Security 
and^aturalization Service. 
The Manual o£ Investigative Operations ^Guideline3 
Section 1751, U. S. Code, instructs that: 
Telephonically notify the nearest office of the 
srs.*sts^*jssjssu*: sr.s.fis.u.. 
Esai'“ss .12.2s, 
Secret Service deems appropriate. 
MTOG part I, Section 175-2.1, paragraph1(a), 
relating to Threats Against the President, instructs that: 
full text of the MIOG instructions, Section 175, 
United S?ltL," is"Attached 
as Appendix B. 
INVESTIGATIVE OPERATIONS PLAN I» «« 
EVENT OF AN ASSAULT UPON OR KILLING OF 
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 
I. Chain of Command 
authority and fix responslbility for the^nan^ ^9^ (SAC)) 
through ^“fsocI^Str^cti/and appropriate Assistant Pirector.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The SAC carries out his responsibilities by directing 
his assistants and squad supervisors who, in turn, direct the 
efforts of the investigators. 
II. Jurisdiction Over and Medical Examination of the Body of 
+ President of the United States

--- PAGE BREAK ---stants and squad supervisors who, in turn, direct the 
efforts of the investigators. 
II. Jurisdiction Over and Medical Examination of the Body of 
+ President of the United States

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
e^L. Page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or more of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
S3 Deleted under exemption(s) 
Lz- 
with no segregable 
material available for release to you. 
I 1 Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request 
I I Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
□ Documents) originating with the following government agency(ies)  
    was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
Page(s) referred for consultation to the following government agency(ies); — 
    as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
Page(s) withheld for the following reason(s): 
1 1 For your information: 
M The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
/# tiA  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGEtS) X 
JNO DUPLICATION FEE $ 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
Fil/DOJ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i 
Additionally, the FBI maintains a computerized 
Personnel Information Network System (PINS), which identifies 
Special Agents possessing unique skills and qualifications 
which may be of critical value to the investigation. One such 
area is the existence of a computerized listing of all Special 
Agent pilots, their location, and their current pilot rating. 
These Special Agent pilots can be sent to the scene to fly 
aircraft already in place, or they can transport aircraft 
personnel and technical equipment to areas where needed. 
- 12 - 
■ . 
TP*

--- PAGE BREAK ---Agent pilots can be sent to the scene to fly 
aircraft already in place, or they can transport aircraft 
personnel and technical equipment to areas where needed. 
- 12 - 
■ . 
TP*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEGISLATIVE IIISTORY 
the 97th General £?«£ 
?• rrrs^-rrss 
«"u“ .vscr&pH" >.!“■>■• *“ *»“ “r- **• 
Comptroller General-, decision J unices throughout the 
The presence of Pfe”on“c‘ U o™7 to the advantage of the 
world U required and f his {amliy to accompany him. 
Government, as well a* of the m ’ i.ninidtntL It it worthy of note 
Medical care should be thi Foreign 
that the problem has been ^heifo *rs employed by the Foreign 
Service. Had the "ansportaUon of their wive, and nece^ 
Scnlce in Eritrea or Indonesia, transpo.iauo tke Govern- 
nary .ttendanU to the hospital *ou ... . t tht Foreign Service Act 
ment under the authority o ‘«t Military personnel and their 
Amendments of 1956 (22 V.s.t-. 1 . medical care U not avail- 
families a^e .tatloncd in areas where adequate medicw^ ^ ^ ^ 
“■ ^ 
COST AND BUDGET DATA 
Although having to pay JrSS. t2*2K 
w« GoTeniment tran- 
portation facilities be utilixcd w henever practicable. 
Sincerely your*. pAUT< H. Nrrn, 
Secretary of the Xaey. 
PRESIDENTIAL ASSASSINATION-PENALTIES 
Tor text of Act tee p. 61* 
House Report (Judiciary Committee) No. 488, 
June 9,1965 [To accompany HJL 6097) 
Senate Report (Judiciary Committee) No. 498, 
July 21,1965 [To accompany H JL 60971 
Cone. Record VoL 111 (1965) 
DATES OF CONSIDERATION AND PASSAGE 
House June 21, Anj. 12, 1965 
Senate July 23,1965 
The Senate Report is set out. 
SENATE REPORT NO. 498 
2866 
.• i {■■ 
»L-rSt-r“ - f’

--- PAGE BREAK ---riu:sii( 
VL ASSASSINATION 
assassination of the President or the Vice President, and for other pur- 
poses, having considered the same, reports favorably thereon, with amend- 
ments, ar.d recommends that the bill as amended do pass.

PURPOSE OF AMENDMENTS 
Amendments No.

1 and No.

2.

The purpose of these amendments is to 
provide that if Federal jurisdiction is asserted for a violation of this sec- 
tion, such assertion shall suspend the exercise of jurisdiction by a State or 
local authority under any applicable State or local law until Federal action 
is terminated.

This would insure clear Federal jurisdiction in the investiga- 
tion and prosecution of Presidential assailants by providing for unimpeded 
Federal jurisdiction to the extent necessary.

However, suspension docs not 
imply that the States cannot cooperate with the Federal authorities during 
the course of any investigation pursuant to this legislation.

Amendment No.

3.

The purpose of amendment No.

3 is to make clear 
that the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall have jurisdiction over the 
investigation of violations of this act, end in the investigation of such vio- 
lations may avail itself of the assistance of any Federal.

State, or local 
agcr.cv, mcludmg the services of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, 
any statute, rule, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding.

PURPOSE 
■nie purpose of the proposed legislation, as amended, is to rectify the 
omission in Federal law by making it a Federal crime to kill, kidnap, or 
assault the President, the President-elect, the Vice President, or, if there is 
J^ice President, the officer next in the order of succession to the office 
of President of the United States, the Vice-President-elect, or any individual 
who is acting as President.

In addition, it makes it a Federal crime to at- 
tempt, or to conspire, to kill, or kidnap any of the individuals designated.--- PAGE BREAK ---

PURPOSE 
■nie purpose of the proposed legislation, as amended, is to rectify the 
omission in Federal law by making it a Federal crime to kill, kidnap, or 
assault the President, the President-elect, the Vice President, or, if there is 
J^ice President, the officer next in the order of succession to the office 
of President of the United States, the Vice-President-elect, or any individual 
who is acting as President. In addition, it makes it a Federal crime to at- 
tempt, or to conspire, to kill, or kidnap any of the individuals designated. STATEMENT 
There was no Federal criminal jurisdiction with respect to the assassina- 
tion of the President on November 22, 1963. It is anomalous that Congress 
has legislated in other ways to protect the safety of the Chief Executive 
Md other Federal officers, but has never made the murder of or an attack on 
the President a Federal crime. Under existing Federal criminal law. title 
18, United States Code, threatening harm to the President is a Federal of- 
fense (see. 871), as is advocacy of the overthrow of the Government by 
assassination of any of its officers (sec. 2358). The murder of Federal 
judges, U. S. attorneys and marshals, and many other specifically designated 
Federal law enforcement officials is a Federal crime (sec. 1114); as is con- 
spiracy to injure any Federal officer on account of, or while he is engaged in, 
the discharge of his official duty (sec. 372). , Notwithstanding these various criminal provisions covering other officiats 
m Federal service, the Federal law today fails to assure full and complete 
Federal investigative and prosecutive jurisdiction over acts designed to 
harm the Chief Executive of the United States. A primary advantage resulting from the enactment of this measure 
would be the assurance of clear Federal jurisdiction in the investigation and 
prosecution of Presidential assailants. Dear Fedwal jurisdiction in this 
2867 
%

--- PAGE BREAK ---4) 
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY 
area would minimize the conflict and confusion growing out of concurrent 
of l-cdcl and S.aK „l thi, bill33 
mean that mvcst.gation of the acts covered and of any possibility of a fa.

a?CrP!

"TW * COnduc,cd b* Fcdcra‘ enforcement ofifcials.

At 
p Ct‘Cr‘1 a?,CnC‘CS part,c'Patc onl>- at the sufferance of local author- 
ities.

Enactment of the btll would also insure that the detention and protec- 
v-SUSpCCtS ,“CCUScd of cornrii,tins any of the acts against the President 
andV.ee Present would be under Federal control.

A further value of 
♦ir« !Cff!S atl°n
1'VOu!d ** that susPecU wou5d l* protected by Federal prac- 
tices and procedures in their trial and prosecution.

A committee amendment provides that the Federal Bureau of Investiga- 
tion shall hare jurisdiction over investigations of violations of this act 
and such investigations be the fixed responsibility of one agency.

From the 
standpoint of investigative experience and expertise the Federal Bureau of 
Instigation has demonstrated that it has the know-how and the talent to 
conduct these investigations.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation has 
demonstrated through its present close association with police departments 
throughout the country that it is able to work in concert with all law en- 
forcement agencies.

It is self-evident that the murder of the President of the United States 
is a crime against the National Government The committee restricted the 
coverage of the bill to the President and Vice President, and, in the ab- 
iittice of the \ ice President, to the officer next in order of succession.The Federal Bureau of Investigation has 
demonstrated through its present close association with police departments 
throughout the country that it is able to work in concert with all law en- 
forcement agencies.

It is self-evident that the murder of the President of the United States 
is a crime against the National Government The committee restricted the 
coverage of the bill to the President and Vice President, and, in the ab- 
iittice of the \ ice President, to the officer next in order of succession.

(The 
bill also apples to any individual acting as President under the Constitution 
and laws ot the United States and during the period between election and 
inauguration, to the President-elect and the Vice-President-elect.) *>The 
committee considers it unnecessary to require that the hostile act occur 
while thcvictim ,, engaged in (or because of) the performance of official 
duties.

The injury suffered by the United States as a consequence of an 
assault on any of the officers specified in the bill does not bear any relation- 
ship to the activities of the victim at the time of the assault nor to the mo- 
tves of the assailant.

In this connection, the committee adopts the follow- 
ing statement made by Senator George F.

Hoar in the 1902 debate on leg- 
islation seeking to make the assassination of the President a Federal crime: 
* * * ,wfut **“» means to punish is the crime of interrup- 
tion of the Government of the United States and the destruction 
of its security by striking down the life of the person who is ac- 
tually in the exercise of the Executive power, or of such persons as 
have been constitutionally and lawfully provided to succeed thereto 
to case of a vacancy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In this connection, the committee adopts the follow- 
ing statement made by Senator George F. Hoar in the 1902 debate on leg- 
islation seeking to make the assassination of the President a Federal crime: 
* * * ,wfut **“» means to punish is the crime of interrup- 
tion of the Government of the United States and the destruction 
of its security by striking down the life of the person who is ac- 
tually in the exercise of the Executive power, or of such persons as 
have been constitutionally and lawfully provided to succeed thereto 
to case of a vacancy. It is important to this country that the in- 
terruption shall not take place lor an hour * * * 
This bill is designed to implement recommendations for a Federal crim- 
inal statute on the subject made in the “Report of the President’s Commis- 
sion on the Assassination of President Kennedy." After a thorough and 
painstaking investigation of the assassination of President Kennedy the 
Commission urged that the Congress adopt legislation which would:' 
Punish the murder or manslaughter of, attempt or conspiracy 
to murder, kidnaping of and assault upon the President Vice 
President, or other officer next in the order of succession to the 
Ofhce of President, the President-elect and the Vicc-I’rcsidcnt- 
2868

--- PAGE BREAK ---g of and assault upon the President Vice 
President, or other officer next in the order of succession to the 
Ofhce of President, the President-elect and the Vicc-I’rcsidcnt- 
2868

--- PAGE BREAK ---

f 
PRESIDENT 
ASSASSIN,' ATION 
elect, whether or not the act is committed while the victim is in 
t!,c performance of his official duties or on account of such per- 
formance (at p. 4a5). 
There have been a number of efTorts in the past to make the assassina- 
tion of the President a Federal crime. Ml such efforts have failed. A num- 
ber of bills were introduced immediately following the assassination of 
President Kennedy. Approximately 50 measures on this subject have been 
introduced in the S9th Congress. A judiciary subcommittee ofi the Hou« 
of Representatives conducted 2 days of hearings on May 26 and 27, \96.. 
in which the Deputy Attorney General and the Under Secretary of 
Treasury the former counsel to the President's Commission on the As- 
sassination of President Kennedy, a representative of the American Bar 
Association, and congressional sponsors of this legislation appeared a 
testified. ’ ' ,, . , „ 
The committee believes the need for this legislation is manifest and rec- 
ommends the bill do pass. 
ANALYSIS OF THE BILL 
The bill would amend title 18 of the United States Code by inserting a 
new chapter 84 and a new section 17Sl-Prcsidential assassination, kid- 
naping, and assault; penalties. 
Subsection (a) , . „ ... 
This .objection would make the killing of the President of the United 
States, the President-elect, the Vice President, or if there is no(Vice Pr ' 
dent the officer next in the order of succession, the Vice-Prcs.dcnt-elcct, or 
any ’individual acting as President, punishable by the penalties prescribed 
in sections 1111 and 1112 of title 18, United States Code. _ 
Section 1111 provides the death penalty for murder m the first degree 
in the absence of a qualified verdict, or imprisonment for any term of years, 
or for life for murder in the second degree. 
Section 1112 provides imprisonment for not more tlwn 10 
untary manslaughter, or imprisonment for not more than 3 years, or a 
of not more than §1.000, or both, for involuntary manslaughter. 
• 
Subsection (b) . . _ • „ 
This subsection provides that the crime of kidnaping the President o 
other individual designated in subsection (a) be punishable by imprisonment 
to ", ter mot ,-ea,.or for life II death —W 
the death penalty would be permitted. 
Subsection (c) „tll„ 
This subsection males the attempt to kill or kidnap the Pres,den orate, 
official designated in snbsection (a) punishable bj imprisonment (o y 
term of years, or for life. 
Snbsection (d) ., . 
This subsection makes the conspiracy to kill or kidnap the President or 
other official designated in subsection (a) punishable by imprisonment fo 
^/teirn of year,: or for life, with a permissible death penalty .1 the con- 
spiraev results in the death of the victim. 
2869ther official designated in subsection (a) punishable by imprisonment fo 
^/teirn of year,: or for life, with a permissible death penalty .1 the con- 
spiraev results in the death of the victim. 
2869

--- PAGE BREAK ---ated in subsection (a) punishable by imprisonment fo 
^/teirn of year,: or for life, with a permissible death penalty .1 the con- 
spiraev results in the death of the victim. 
2869

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY 
Subsection (o) 
This subsection makes an assault upon the President or any other official 
designated in subsection (a) punishable by a fine of not more than $10,000, 
or imprisonment for not more than 10 years, or both. 
Subsection (f) 
This subsection defines the terms "President-elect" and "Vice-President- 
elect" as used in this section to mean such persons as are the apparent suc- 
cessful candidates for the offices of President and Vice President, respec- 
tively, as ascertained from the results of the national general elections for 
electors of President and Vice President 
Subsection (g) 
This subsection authorizes the Attorney General to pay rewards not ex- 
ceeding $100,000 for information and services concerning a violation of 
this section. The subsection also makes ineligible for such rewards Federal 
and local officials who furnish information or render services in the per- 
formance of their official duties. 
Subsection (h) * 
This subsection provides that if Federal investigative and prosecutive 
jurisdiction is asserted for any of the prohibited acts, the exercise of ju- 
risdiction by State or local authority shall be suspended until Federal action 
is terminated. In order to avoid opportunities for confusion and conflict 
accompanying concurrent Federal and State jurisdiction in this area, the 
subsection provides for unimpeded Federal jurisdiction to the extent neces-^ 
sary. 
Subsection (I) 
This subsection provides that violations of this section shall be investi- 
gated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Assistance may be re- 
quested from any Federal, State, or local agency, including the Army, Navy, 
and Air Force, any statute, rule, or regulation to the contrary notwithstand- 
ing. 
Section 8 
This provision amends section 3486 of title 18, United States Code, the 
general immunity statute, by making the provisions of that statute applica- 
ble to grand jury or court proceedings involving any violation of this bill. 
Under section 34S5, only the U. S. attorney, upon approval of the Attor- 
ney General, is permitted to make application to the court that a witness, 
after invoking his privilege against self-incrimination, be instructed to tes- 
tify or produce evidence. In such circumstances, section 3486 provides that 
the witness will not thereafter be subjected to criminal prosecution, except 
for perjury or contempt, on account of such compelled testimony. 
Although the committee is reluctant to enlarge existing immunity pro- 
visions, it believes that successful detection and prosecution of offenses cov- 
ered by this bill is of such national importance as to require immunity au- 
thorization in this area. *immunity pro- 
visions, it believes that successful detection and prosecution of offenses cov- 
ered by this bill is of such national importance as to require immunity au- 
thorization in this area. *

--- PAGE BREAK ---'v 
C 
PRESIDENTIAL ASSASSINATION 
Attached hereto and made a part hereof for the information of the Senate 
it a listing of the general statutes providing the death penalty for viola- 
tions thereof: 
Atomic Energy Act—Violations and conspiracies to commit such violations 
(42 U.S.C.

2272, 2274, 2275, and 2276).

Bank robbery (robbery of a bank or savings and loan association resulting 
in the death or kidnaping of a person) (IS U.S.C 2113(e) ).

Espionage (committing or attempt to commit espionage and conspiring to 
do so) (IS U.S.C 794).

• 
Kidnaping, if the victim has not been released unharmed and conspiring to 
do so (IS U.S.C 1201(a) (c) ).

Killing certain Federal officers and employees (IS U.S.C 1114).

Murder in the first degree within the special maritime and territorial ju- 
risdiction of the United States (18 U.S.C 111).

Narcotics Control Act (furnishing narcotics to minors) (21 U.S.C 176 
(b) )• 
Rape within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United 
States (18 U.S.C.

2031).

Trainwrecking, which results in the death of a person (18 U.S.C 1992).

Treason (18 U.S.C 2381).

Willfully damaging motor vehicles or aircraft, if death results to any per- 
son (IS U.S.C.

34).

Attached hereto and made a part of this report is a letter dated March 
8, 1965, from the Attorney General of the United States to the Vice Prtsi- ■ 
dent, recommending the introduction of this legislation.

i 
■mm 
f 
Omen or Tire ATTOESET Crmut, • 
Washington, D.

O, liarch 3, JOSS.

The Vice PBESIDENT, 
V.

B.

Senate, Washington, D.

C.

DI.VR MR.

VICE PRESIDENT: Enclosed for your consideration and appro- 
priate reference Is a legislative proposal to amend title 18.

United States 
Code, to provide penalties for the assassination of tba President or the 
Vice President, and for other purposes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

VICE PRESIDENT: Enclosed for your consideration and appro- 
priate reference Is a legislative proposal to amend title 18. United States 
Code, to provide penalties for the assassination of tba President or the 
Vice President, and for other purposes. The assassination of President Kennedy and ensuing events focused 
nttentlon on an anomaly In Federal law: it Is sot a Federal crime to as- 
sassinate the President of tho United States, nor do Federal Investigative 
agencies have absolute jurisdiction to Investigate tho assassination of a 
President Following the death of President Kennedy, there was no clear 
basis for the exercise of Federal Investigative jurisdiction, and when the 
assassin was apprehended. Federal authorities were unable to assert 
authority end take him iuto custody for questioning and safekeeping. The 
tragedy which resulted from this Inability to act la too well known to 
require further detailing here. There enn be no doubt that a statute should be enacted to make It a 
Federal crime to kill the President or deliberately Injure him in any way. The President Is the one person through whom the eaecutlve branch of 
the Government operates. Ho Is Commander in Chief of our military 
forces and is vital to tlie peace and safety of the country. Although every 
reasonable protective measure is taken to insure the safety of the Prtsi- 
d'-ut, ike very nature of Ills office requires him to be exposed to un- 
anticipated dangers. Accordingly, In view of the essential nature of tho 
Office of tho President and the hazards attendant to It. It is essential that ' 
it be a Federal crime to harm ^dm or his immediate successor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---view of the essential nature of tho 
Office of tho President and the hazards attendant to It. It is essential that ' 
it be a Federal crime to harm ^dm or his immediate successor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEGISLATIVE HLSTORY 
The enclosed proposal seeks to rectify the omission In Federal law by 
making It a Federal crime to kill, kidnap, or assault the President, the 
President-elect, tho Vice President, or other officer next in the order of 
presidential succession, the Vice President-elect, or any individual who It 
acting as President. In audition, it makes it a Federal crime to endeavor 
or attempt, or to conspire, to kill, or kidnap any of the individuals desig- 
nated. Two provisions are included to aid in the solution and prosecution 
of a violation of the proposed statute. One of these would authorise the 
Attorney Ccncral to pay rewards up to $100,000 tor information leading 
to the detection of any violator, while the other would authorize the com- 
pelling of testimony concerning a violation and the granting of immunity 
therefor. Finally, to avoid any conflict between Federal and State Juris- 
diction. or any confusion as to whose authority shall control, a provision is 
included under which the assertion of Federal investigative or prosccutivo 
jurisdiction under the proposed statute would preclude the exercise of 
jurisdiction by State or local authorities to such extent as the Attorney 
General of the United States directs. . 
Tho proposal was drafted to implement recommendations contained In 
the "Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of Presi- 
dent Kennedy." The Secretary of the Department of the Treasury joins 
me in submitting it to the Congress. It is the belief of .both of us that 
the proposal would bo an effective aid In preventing future acts of violence 
against tho President, as well as in solving such crimes if they should occur. 
We believe that there is an urgent need for this legislation, and for these 
reasons, its early introduction and prompt consideration Is requested. 
The Bureau of the Budget has advised that there is no objection to the 
eubmlsslon of this proposal from the standpoint of the administration’s 
program. 
* Sincerely, „ 
* • NICHOLAS DEB. KATZEEXBACH, 
Attorney Centro’. 
COPYRIGHT PROTECTION—EXTENSION 
For test of Act tee p. 6+S 
House Report (Judiciary Committee) No. 369, 
May 25, 1965 [To accompany HJJtea. 431] 
Senate Report (Judiciary Committee) No. 548, 
Aug. 10,1965 [To accompany HJ-Res. 431] 
Cong. Record Vol. 111 (1965) 
DATES OF CONSIDERATION AND PASSAGE 
House June 7,1965 
Senate Ang. 12,1965 
The Senate Report is set out. 
SENATE REPORT NO. 548 
% HE Committee on the Judiciary, to which was referred th'c joint reso- 
lution (H.J.Rcs. 431) extending die duration of copyright protection in 
certain cases, having considered the same, reports favorably thereon with- 
out amendment and recommends that the joint resolution do pass. 
2872 
m v * -»1 
9*9$* 
* * •< 
* iopyright protection in 
certain cases, having considered the same, reports favorably thereon with- 
out amendment and recommends that the joint resolution do pass. 
2872 
m v * -»1 
9*9$* 
* * •< 
* i

--- PAGE BREAK ---in 
certain cases, having considered the same, reports favorably thereon with- 
out amendment and recommends that the joint resolution do pass. 
2872 
m v * -»1 
9*9$* 
* * •< 
* i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER $ f—rjlES!DEXTIA L ASSASSINATION, 
KIDNAPING, AND ASSAULT 
Sec. 
1751. Prc.-iutniial assassination, kidnaping, and assault; penal* 
ties. 
§ 17oI. Presidential assassination, kidnaping, and assault; 
penalties 
(a) . Whoever kill? any individual v.lio is the President of the 
United Ftaf.s, the President-elect, the Vice President, or, if there 
is no A ice President, the officer next in the order of succession to the 
office of President of the United Stales, the Vice-President-elect, or 
any individual who i*. aciing as President under the. Constitution 
and laws of the United Stales, shall be punished a.* provided by 
sections 1111 aad 1112 of this title. 
(b) Whoever kidnaps any individual designated In subsection (a> 
of this section shall he punished (1) by imprisonment for any tenn 
of years or for life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any terra of 
years or for life, if death results to such individual. 
(c) Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any individual desijfhatcd 
in subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by imprisonment 
for any term of years or for life. 
(d) If two or more persons conspire to kill or kidnap any individ- 
ual designated in subsection (a) of this section and one or more of 
such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each 
shall be punished (1) by imprisonment for any term of years or 
for life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life, if death results to such individual. 
(c) Whoever assaelts any persou designated In subsection (a) of 
tills section shall be fined not more than $1*.',UCSJ or imprisoned no; 
more than ju years, or both. 
(f) The terms "President-elect*’ and "Vice-Prcsident-clcct" a.* 
used iu this section shall mean ruch JMTSOIJS ns are the apparent 
successful candidates for the offices of President aad Vice President, 
respectively, as ascertained from the results of the mncrnl elect ior.j 
held to determine the electors of IVe.-ident and Vice President in 
accordance with title ", United Plates Code, sections t arid 2. 
(C) The Attorney General of the United States, in his discretion. 
Is authorized (o pay an amount led to eveoed £10rt,uri0 for information 
and sendees com crnim* a violation of this section. Any officer or 
employee of the Unit-•! cUntes or of any Slate or local novcrmivat 
11G 
I 
i 
t 
i 
1unt led to eveoed £10rt,uri0 for information 
and sendees com crnim* a violation of this section. Any officer or 
employee of the Unit-•! cUntes or of any Slate or local novcrmivat 
11G 
I 
i 
t 
i 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

_ ••* ✓ - 
<■ C 
**vs.,<,vt, 
' D 
23 § 2751 
I/- , • “v O - 
'. 0 " l,r; ,li„n Ai* ,<'11.1. ■ ■ 
<w ,C1 taWor (liis iiu(i* 
(10 If /Vilcr.'il ftivA I,. 
:-r a %iv|.,.;„n {.r .,.j 
1 I”" ’• i'ivciuiis.i,• . 
■ i--*»>• -»•■> • 
::: ‘r1 <«« 
'»■ the Federal 
>**;.Muw:g. i.uiu.ion to tin* contrary notwith- 
.\iiiliil ruU.J,. SHIM r , . 
"* § T* Au" 25< 1M3. TO Slat 5S0. 
Historical Koto 
«Sr5.5rs J5L «S5 «• «**• «** « —^ . 
CroSB References 
W*r# r, i — ere aces 
1*-«• «*•»« - 
« SIMJ o: ,w. * a violation* JuVu|vj3? ,k|t 
-* «'«’•!? anl r:;.ivrj- <2=>* 
C>n<;.;r2i'v — 
U^aM0.j Vi»l. ’ 
KMi .i; :.Jn <—1. 
l:-v.nK <--i ,t ^ 
*ui<i o=;.io. 
I<(l*rapjr Referjnee* . 
C.JX .Wall ,n.J n «lrtJ. , , rf 
CV.V. Cw,:*r.;r5cjr : ui 1 * *** 
<~J.S. ..• P !ri.|« J X 
* 
LJ *• *<••*> ar«U «• T.J 
VJjf. *iai<u || Jf - 
# 
117 
l

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ik- - 
5 
- 
*»r.

to 
AND n::v;\’A5.

r:;o:i:uu::E 
Cir-'.I’T.V: f.-i.--}»»•:• >:r>; *: riAL Ar.v.

is.N'A'jiON, 
;,:;D JW 
I'-.*.

|1 .t t- r ry r^*U‘- on- <■< tie- 
' *..>*.i * 
»• •■■■■ •» 1'Au tr.

CM.

Tt:i • v.

| ;•«.

2.

SKI.

*» SUL sox.

«Kb*«t 
audit--.

I-J cij: ij.-ii.

£ I*.

51.

Wes 
T-uiu to ZCCto 
) t» •» (• Irik-go 3 
fcMuJ:b:.-.t 1 
■ It * * 
J- •:.* !-*.l o*..-.,v.t- 
• *r tr:..-,1- 
HIM 
li-i.; v.frtf is*- 
U*j «*lf 1.

1 1—u-.-t si til', -i I-- an 
•>>•■•?

n.l.l-.l t-t', 1 nv- Ui ,»'r>i «6 : l-<j 
CUM<..-.I»I-' I- rv ■■ • ta an aajr utk«r 
MW V.'.iul- l-t.

t J.

2.

V- ICTUW |iml' w 
Cbt.-v r ir* TiiWli'.-c" In rut 
esli-r'.

1f rhjr.

~f l*t.

t.rur?!.

jrt 
•- » tlrixiim U' l -t -iy f-l tSe r.

*• ».

J».CCaLi:*i5.

O-i t 
«NN 
3.

!>fp*nimi) 
AIM.

I.«rnf1 l« 1»< nn)V.»t 
l*r- ii *•:,< «»f r- ftY.li*-'!

•- • 
* !••• •**•**!.•►1 H"- .*!• 
-KaNM:»: .,«u «f 
tVr J*ir.

n*-.

tl m: I- r- :* *r.

: f* 
t* r.»un !•» i.rv*r.xi hi* i 
li-i, ffit -p, t»» r.»u<u k 4» ••• I T * rt 
*1 %».*•« !?*::« it * :»!a« a.

4 • .* ifa 
r.

b.

v.

4* .V.* 
fo fkl.(vprii« 
JVK;'.**- «»f "ti3fullv»* ••♦ivjji-r#** v*5% 
lN'»t f.• .*« If iu t» 
dff uj -ts l*.

;»•!>•» .•»*• I*i>.I- 
is" I «•-.

I*.'* : «• i 
mill.- n lit | allots j •; v*.

* < fS
s :*i•• »«.» ; r ; 
••• •.*!

I * feu.i : » HJ* prtf.

i-tNi- 
l*> «- •’ -♦* !«>• s I .

K.

T.

>r« ' -si u"u.Uo^ 
!♦ :••• *'.

• v 1 r.

i 
I if.

v.

r|* ii.il 
l?.T, f< ■’ •!.: i fcitl i 
6 V’- :: i '.-yjr « ..y «.t »i:* 
4v*i*s i i *u?

1 si/;•**" Ji -jr I-  
U^cd(f;r B*v ii< IMV;2 J ‘vici^i |<rntn%* 
fi r«:tV -.c* of l’:o t'rrO«li*nt 
(a) II £•>!.!’ he onlnvfut fer :\ny pertoa or .:roc^ of vcr»OMi— 
(1) vlllfui’r and }:ao-.;n:;ijr to c-'i;;.- or rt-ej.-fji In 
(!) cay r.r «./ iVe ?^cre’:.rr el 
the Tr»r...*-.ry r - *, r« «Ufre« o.

U ?

I rcUdCni or as 
tca.porcr) wfilrcs of the f*J<• Itlc-ut ued h’s r -ff, or 
(II) nt.y cr.r-.'cr.cd rtl, or o;nri- ;-Ms rcjrrlcic!--- PAGE BREAK ---

U ? I rcUdCni or as 
tca.porcr) wfilrcs of the f*J<• Itlc-ut ued h’s r -ff, or 
(II) nt.y cr.r-.'cr.cd rtl, or o;nri- ;-Ms rcjrrlcic! ar«v 
®f a tui!U or rioaiida vhcro tho PiCdlJont Is cr vili lr*r ;en- 
rortrlly vlfitin*:; 
in vliilaliiifl of tl« ttralrthw fovernlr.p Inws or egress thereto: 
(i) vlth Intent to intrtit or ili-rcpt the orderly rotiduet cf Cov* 
nswitt brrlot.-s or o:r»c).nI (n:>Rilc»t. to coys-no in £I:oricly or 
lisrn;iilva ccr.Juci lr., or vMItiu ruth im>rlu».';y to. r.ny builtftpt or 
Croeodv t-csfsnal^a io p.*:a- raph (1) vhta. or so that. o*ch Mifcut. la fact, Ia»«tt*v3 or tii.-rr.U uiC oittrrty conduct oC Corcrr.aicnt Aud- 
its: or oifitial !iant=; 
(S) vt’.’fulty t::•! kr:o»irt'l7 to oMtroct cr ,lcspo*!e ingress or 
WC-r* to or frost si J t vl.din-. srour.us. or art s tic.:!cr.a:cd or enu- 
Brrafcil la i>sm i:); cr 
(O vililvily .*:•« V..ov-ii.rly to en-.nj.*. |n rj»y *?t of physte*.! vl- 
olcscc r.y ilr.nt my j.'rtu nr jirf.nrriy vi r.ny hnlidinj. (rounds, or 
area dwIneMfi or euiuftsinl in rsraiTaoh (1). (b) YJcl.-.tloo cf this rrcil'>a. and i.tteinj.u or concplraelcs to eortmlt 
sue); rlolitionn. shaf: op sv";Ciahlc by a fins not cr.t^wi *500 or io- 
pnsonuci.'l not iw^utr rite aiwntlis. or both. (e) Violation or tliU secria.i. end -••ttctnpis or con*plracts* to w tult 
so elk vlo’.it l.-Ttr. kl'-ill l*e iiri-HCHtvd ky tb>* tteitod S-ta'cs attorney in the 
FV-dcr.-i dtatriet court hnv.r.;; juri:-dfction of the place srhere the oficaso 
•ecu; ltd. (d) The Secretary of the Treasury Is cnthorlse-!— 
(1) to i!cal**iiste by nttthllf.ii'. the littlWiif.'. and isatrdt which 
ton»!tii;h lh- te.uforr.ry rcri«l-*nns of the )*rt-i«Ienl kii^ the lrtt:-o- 
rary offices cf li;0 1‘rculdcnt end bis staff, and 
' V.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thllf.ii'. the littlWiif.'. and isatrdt which 
ton»!tii;h lh- te.uforr.ry rcri«l-*nns of the )*rt-i«Ienl kii^ the lrtt:-o- 
rary offices cf li;0 1‘rculdcnt end bis staff, and 
' V.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
• e 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTtGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
Page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or more of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
HU Deleted under exemption! s)   00 *®8*®8*We 
material available for release to you. 
□ Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request 
n Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
I 1 Documents) originating with the following government agency(ies)   ——  
     was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
// Page(s) referred for consultation to the following government agency(ies); —i^Sd/c/ fii/C. 
    as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
  Page(s) withheld for the following reason(s): 
I I For your information: 
0 The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
A*9  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE1S) X 
j?N0 DUPLICATION FEE § 
X FOR THIS PACE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
xxxxxx 
PBI/DOJ

--- PAGE BREAK ---or reference regarding these pages: 
A*9  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGE1S) X 
j?N0 DUPLICATION FEE § 
X FOR THIS PACE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
xxxxxx 
PBI/DOJ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or more of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
CD Deleted under exemption(s)   
material available for release to you. 
with no segregate 
CD Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request 
CD Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
CD Documents) originating with the following government agency(ies)   
 —

, was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
S Page(s) referred for consultation to the following government agency(ies); bppt, D< 
& .. . m . • • • _ A 1 ! iL it. — 11 
as the information originated with them. You will! 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
Pagets) withheld for the following ieason(s): 
CD For your information: 
13 The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages:

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAQEtS) 
$ NO DUPLICATION FEE 
X FOR THIS PAGE 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FBI/DO J

--- PAGE BREAK ---o be used for reference regarding these pages:

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAQEtS) 
$ NO DUPLICATION FEE 
X FOR THIS PAGE 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FBI/DO J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART I 
i 
SECTION 175. 
ft 
ASSAULTING THE PRES IDENTIC* THE UNITED STATES AND 
THREATS AGAINST THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 
175-1 
175-1.1 
175-1.1.1 
person. 
175-1.2 
ASSAULTING THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 
Statute * 
Title 18, USC, i 1751 
Elements 
(1) Whoever kills, kidnaps, assaults, or 
(2) Attempts to kill or kidnap, or 
(3) Conspires to kill or kidnap 
(4) The President of the United States or other designated 
Definitions 
1 
5r^- - 
(1) The Department has indicated Congress intended that the 
common law definition of the term "assault'* be to thl# 
Assault is defined in U.S. v. Hand, (26 Fed. Cas. 103). 
"An assault is an offer or attempt by forcetodoa corporal 
injury to another; as if one person strike at another with his 
_ L-A and misses him: for if the other be stricken, it is a battery, vhicn 
U ^oHeSse if" high« grade. Or if h. shake hi. fist .t mother or 
•resent a run or other weapon, within such distance as that .hurt might he 
eiven* or drawing a sword, and brandishing it in a menacing manner. But 
ciiftitute ei assault, that an intent to do some injury should be 
coupled with the act; and that intent should be to do a corporal hurt t 
another." 
(2) Use of Army, Navy, and Air Force as "posse comitatus" 
18, USC, 5 1385, prohibits the general use of the A^.°* Air ^ 
comitatus. Section 1751 (i) specifically authorises the FBI to 
assistance from these military agencies, any statute, rule, or regulatl 
the contrary notwithstanding. 
1 
(3) President-elect and Vice-President-elect - These terms are 
defined in Title 18, USC, 5 1751 (f). 
175-1.3 Jurisdiction 
Title 18, USC, § 1751 <i>, states in xolmto€ this 
section shall be investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigate . 
175-1.3.1 Actual Assault, Killing or Kidnaping 
The FBI is responsible for the investigation of any 
assault, killing or kidnaping of those individuals designated in the statute. 
j75—1.3.2 Conspiracy to Rill or Kidnap 
f [The FBI shall immediately investigate as an urgent »atter any 
i credible cl legation of coosoirscy to kill or kidn.p those sndi.tdu.l. 
| designated in this statute.) 
805 
6/8778 
boc. * n 
MIOCf [The FBI shall immediately investigate as an urgent »atter any 
i credible cl legation of coosoirscy to kill or kidn.p those sndi.tdu.l. 
| designated in this statute.) 
805 
6/8778 
boc. * n 
MIOC

--- PAGE BREAK ---mediately investigate as an urgent »atter any 
i credible cl legation of coosoirscy to kill or kidn.p those sndi.tdu.l. 
| designated in this statute.) 
805 
6/8778 
boc. * n 
MIOC

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 175. 
/ \ULT1NC THE PRESIDENT OF THE l JTED STATES AND 
T/ "ATS AGAINST THE PRESIDENT OF 4 j UNITED STATES, 
175-1.3.3 Attempts to Kill and Kidnap 
V'‘ , r — 
^ ^ The FBI shall investigate actual attempts to kill or kidnap. An 
actual attempt to kill or kidnap, even on the part of an individual acting 
V, alone without coconspirators when there is activity, such as obtaining the 
instruments, means, or other necessities, so as to indicate an effort by the 
individual to consummate the attempt, would -likewise be investigated by the 
FBI. 
175-1.3.4 Attempted Assault 
The common lavdefinition of assault includes the concept of an 
attempt falling within the definition of the term "assault." Accordingly, the 
FBI would investigate such attempted assaults whenever there exists clear-cut 
physical action on the part of an individual sufficient to cause apprehension 
of personal injury to an individual designated in the statute. 
175-1.3.5 Responsibility of P.S. Secret Service 
By statute, the Secret Service is charged with the protection of 
the President and other designated individuals. (Title 18, USC, §3056.) In 
addition, the Secret Service is charged by statute with the investigation of 
threats against the President and other designated persons. (Title 18, USC, 
§ 871.) The Department has indicated since the statute names the FBI as the 
agency to investigate violation of Title 18, USC, § 1751, the FBI.would . . 
therefore be responsible under the law to investigate under certain conditions 
violations over which the Secret Service had previously exercised its 
jurisdiction. Threats against the President and other designated persons 
which do not fall within the criteria set forth above would, according to the 
’‘'•partment, continue to be investigated by the Secret-Service under Title 18, 
C, § 871. 
175-1.3.6 Rewards 
Section 1751 (g) provides for the Attorney General to pay an 
amount not to exceed $100,000 for information and services concerning a 
violation of the statute. Any request for payment or consideration for pay- 
ment of a reward should be referred to FBIHO immediately by the most expedi- 
tious means. 
175-1.3 Investigative Procedure 
(1) Each complaint shall receive immediate priority investiga- 
tive attention to expeditiously resolve the situation and where necessary to 
locate and take into custody those individuals who are in violation of the 
statute. It is imperative that there be no delay in handling of any 
complaints under this statute. Each SAC will be held personally responsible 
to insure that each complaint is thoroughly and vigorously pursued. It 
shall further be the personal responsibility of each 
C 
806 
6/8/78 
MIOGtatute. Each SAC will be held personally responsible 
to insure that each complaint is thoroughly and vigorously pursued. It 
shall further be the personal responsibility of each 
C 
806 
6/8/78 
MIOG

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 175. 
PART I 
ASSAULTING THE PRESIDENT OF^THE UNITED STATES AND 
TURF.ATS AGAINST THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 
SAC to insure Federal, state and local agencies are promptly alerted whew 
appropriate. 
(2) Upon receipt of each complaint involving a possible violation 
of this statute, the field should take action in accordance with the 
following: 
(a) Immediately initiate intensive investigation utilizing 
all available manpower where appropriate. 
(b) Advise FBIHQ by telephone of the facts of the complaint. 
(c) Telephonically notifiy the nearest office of the Secret 
is furnished should be obtained. 
175-1.5 Penalties 
(1) First degree murder - maximum - death; minimum “ *J;f® 
imprisonment (upon recommendation of jury) (Section 1111)• 
(2) Second degree murder - maximum - life; minimum - any term 
of years (Section 1111). 
(3) Voluntary manslaughter - maximum - ten years (Section 1112) . 
(4) involuntary manslaughter - maximum - three years or $1,000. 
or both (Section 1112) . 
175-1.6 Venue 
prosecution should be initiated in the district in which the_ 
offense was committed or if the rtLlfbl *s 
providod°fforninP?nieU18, CSC, Section 3238 (offense not committed in any 
district). , 
175-1.7 Character 
Assaulting, Killing, Kidnaping (whichever appropriate) the

--- PAGE BREAK ---e rtLlfbl *s 
providod°fforninP?nieU18, CSC, Section 3238 (offense not committed in any 
district). , 
175-1.7 Character 
Assaulting, Killing, Kidnaping (whichever appropriate) the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION 175. 
/^SAULTING THE PRESIDENT OF THIVUNITED STATES VCMJ 
HATS AGAINST THE PRESIDENT ^/THK UNITED STATES * 
resident or Vice-President (whichever appropriate) of the United States. 
k 175-2 THREATS AGAINST THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AMD OTHER 
PERSONS PROTECTED DY THE U. S. SECRET SERVICE 
175-2.1 Dissemination of Information Regarding Threats 
(1) Title 18, USC, Section 3056, (in part) authorizes the Secret 
Service, subject to the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, to 
protect the person of the President of the U. S., the members of his 
immediate family, the President-elect, the Vice-President, or other 
officer next in order of succession to the office of the President, and 
the Vice-President-elect, together with a former President, at his request, 
for a reasonable period after he leaves office. Therefore, any information 
indicating the possiblity of an attempt against the person or safety of 
the President or the other persons aforementioned, must be referred 
immediately in accordance with the following: 
in 
.'A 
1/31 / 7R

--- PAGE BREAK ---f an attempt against the person or safety of 
the President or the other persons aforementioned, must be referred 
immediately in accordance with the following: 
in 
.'A 
1/31 / 7R

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-750 (2-7-79) 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
xxxxxx 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET 
  Page(s) withheld entirely at this location in the file. One or more of the following statements, where 
indicated, explain this deletion. 
(X! Deleted under exemption(s)  Lz  
with no segregable 
material available for release to you. 
CD Information pertained only to a third party with no reference to you or the subject of your request 
CD Information pertained only to a third party. Your name is listed in the title only. 
CD Documents) originating with the following government agency(ies)  
   was/were forwarded to them for direct response to you. 
Page(s) referred for consultation to the following government agency(ies);  
  as the information originated with them. You will 
be advised of availability upon return of the material to the FBI. 
Page<s) withheld for the following reason(s): 
CD For your information: 
0 The following number is to be used for reference regarding these pages: 
// 
^ SO 9 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGEtS) X 
X NO DUPLICATION FEE $ 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
FBI/DO J

--- PAGE BREAK ---rence regarding these pages: 
// 
^ SO 9 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
X DELETED PAGEtS) X 
X NO DUPLICATION FEE $ 
X FOR THIS PAGE X 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
XXXXXX 
FBI/DO J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*r nt\4 A 
SECTION 175. 
r.TING THE PRESIDENT OF THE U 
.S AGAINST THE PRESIDENT OF 
ED STATES AND 
UNITED STATES 
<% 
Be: 
(6) It Is the responsibility of each SAC to insure that the 
above instructions are administered with good judgement in each instance. 
175-2.3 Responsibility Regarding Dissemination 
\ (1) All field and FBIHQ Agent personnel must be completely 
familiar with the Bureau’s policy and procedures c°vef£"9cS™*BseJvice 
k responsibilities for dissemination of information to the Secret 
l concerning the President and other persons listed in Item 175-2.1 (1) above. 
( 12) All field and FBIHQ Agent personnel must be constantly alert 
‘to any and all information coming to their attention through t*®*?; ?a8®^ 
for otherwise and insure that appropriate action is taken to see that s 
i is promptly disseminated to Secret Service in accordance with existing 
3 policy and procedures. Resolve all doubts in favor of as liberal a dissemi- 
I nation policy as practicable. 
j (3) SACs and FBIHQ Division heads must periodically sj^t-check 
1 this matter for proper handling and must remind Agent P®riodically 
[ at conferences of the policy and procedures concerning this matter. 
eio 
1/31/78 
MIOC

--- PAGE BREAK ---odically sj^t-check 
1 this matter for proper handling and must remind Agent P®riodically 
[ at conferences of the policy and procedures concerning this matter. 
eio 
1/31/78 
MIOC

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONGRESSIONAL ASSASSINATION, 
KIDNAPING, AND ASSAULT 
Background and Purpose of the Act 
On January 2, 1971, the Omnibus Crime Control Act of 
1970, P.L. 91—64U, became effective. Title IV of this Act, 
providing protection for Members of Congress, established a new 
Section 351 and amended Section 2516 of Title 18, United States 
Code. These provisions were added by a floor amendment offered 
by Senator McClellan on October 8, 1970, and are basically the 
same legislation that had passed the Senate earlier on that 
date as S. 642. The title IV provisions, as part of H.R. 17,825, % 
received minimal mention in the Reports or floor discussion, 1 
thus Senate Report No. 91-1249, 91st Cong., 2d Sess. (1970) and.? 
debate on S. 642 contain the bulk of the applicable legislative > 
history. “ 
Prior to this legislation there were no specific 
statutes covering the (1) killing, (2) kidnaping, (3) attempting 
to kill or kidnap, (4) conspiring to kill or kidnap, or 
(5) assaulting of a Member of Congress or Member-of-Congress-Elect. 
Criminal attacks directed against a Member of Congress would 
have been pursued under one of our general criminal statutes 
(i.e., assaults within the special maritime and territorial 
Jurisdictions, 18 U.S.C. 113), where applicable, otherwise 
reliance was upon State and local statutes. « 
This legislation made it a Federal offense to kill or 
kidnap any Member of Congress or Member-of-Congress-Elect; to 
attempt to conspire to commit such offenses, or to assault such 
an individual. S. Rep, supra. Available records indicate that 
between 1850 and 1971 there were only seven attacks on Senators 
and nine on Congressmen. S. Rep. supra., 6,7. Although 
quantitatively the number of assassinations or attempted 
assassinations was small, a comparison of our history to the 
other nations of the world indicates that the level of assassination 
in the United States was high. S. Rep., supra 2. It was the 
hope of Congress that passage of this legislation would prevent 
any further acts of this nature, and that should such violence 
occur, it would provide an appropriate forum for the trial of 
any accused of such violence. S. Rep., su£ra. 7. 
In enacting this legislation the Congress acted well 
within its constitutional powers, as the acts denounced have a 
substantial relation to the execution of the powers of Congress, 
indeed, assassination goes to the heart of the very existence of 
Congress. Under the Incidental Powers granted to Congress by the 
"necessary and proper clause," Art. I, Sec. 8, cl. 18 of the 
Constitution, it is universally conceded that Congress has the 
power to create, define and punish crimes and offenses whenever 
necessary to effectuate the objects of the Federal Government.of the 
Constitution, it is universally conceded that Congress has the 
power to create, define and punish crimes and offenses whenever 
necessary to effectuate the objects of the Federal Government.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, it is universally conceded that Congress has the 
power to create, define and punish crimes and offenses whenever 
necessary to effectuate the objects of the Federal Government.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

See United States v. Pox, 95 U.S. 670, 672 (1877); United States 
v. Barnow, 239 U.S. 7^ (1915) (court found predecessor to 
18 U.S.C. 912, making impersonation of an officer or employee of 
the United States a Federal offense, constitutional), and 
Barrett v. United States. 82 P. 2d 528, 53^ (7th Cir., 1936) 
Xestablished the constitutionality of the predecessor of 18 U.S.C. 
1114, which makes killing various officers of the United States 
a Federal offense). 
II. Statute 
On January 2, 1971, the Omnibus Crime Control Act of 
1970 (P.L. 91-644, 84 Stat. 1880), became effective. Title IV 
of this Act provided new legislation (18 U.S.C. 351) making it 
a Federal offense to: 1) kill; 2) kidnap; 3) attempt to kill or 
kidnap; 4) conspire to kill or kidnap; or 5) assault, a Member of 
Congress or a Member-of-Congress-Elect. In addition. Title IV 
amended 18 U.S.C. 2561 to allow the interception of wire or oral 
communications and the use of the "transactional immunity" authority 
provided under 18 U.S.C. 2516, to investigate violations of the 
new statute. 
Specifically, the Act provided as follows: 
"(a) Whoever kills any individual who Is a Member 
* of Congress or a Member-of-Congress-Elect shall be 
punished as provided by sections 1111 and 1112 of 
this title. 
"(b) Whoever kidnaps any Individual designated In 
subsection (a) of this section shall be punished 
(1) by imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any term 
of years or for life. If death results to such 
individual. • 
■(c) Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any individual 
designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be 
punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life 
"(d) If two or more persons conspire to kill or kidnap 
any individual designated in subsection (a) of this 
section and one or more of such persons do any act to 
effect the object of the conspiracy,• each shall be 
punished (1) by imprisonment for any term of years or 
for life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any 
term of years or for life; if death results to such 
individual. 
- 14 - 'cy,• each shall be 
punished (1) by imprisonment for any term of years or 
for life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any 
term of years or for life; if death results to such 
individual. 
- 14 - '

--- PAGE BREAK ---punished (1) by imprisonment for any term of years or 
for life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any 
term of years or for life; if death results to such 
individual. 
- 14 - '

--- PAGE BREAK ---

■(e) Whiter assaults any person <f?5ignated In 
subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not 
more than $5,000, or Imprisoned not more than one 
year, or both; and If personal Injury results, shall be 
fined not more than $10,000, or Imprisoned for not 
more than ten years, or both* 
/ 
*(f) , If Pederal investigative or prosecutive 
Jurisdiction is asserted for a violation of this 
section, such assertion shall suspend the exercise of 
Jurisdiction by a State or local authority, under 
any applicable State or local law, until Pederal 
action is terminated. 
•(g) Violations of this section shall be investigated 
by the Pederal Bureau of Investigation. Assistance 
may be requested from any Pederal, State, or local 
agency, including the Arq>y, Navy, and Air Force, any 
statute, rule, or regulation to the contrary notwith- 
standing." _ 
III. Departmental Interpretation 
By letter dated February 22, 1971, captioned, 
"Congressional Assassination, Kidnaping, and Assault," the 
Criminal Division of the Department provided a legal analysis of 
the legislation. ' ..... 
Specifically, certain effects of the legislation were 
defined and classified as follows: * * 
1. Killing a Member of Congress; 18 P.S.C. 351 (a) 
■Whoever kills any individual who is a Member of 
Congress or a Member—of—Congress—Elect shall be 
punished as provided by sections 1111 and 1112 of 
this title." . 
The statute incorporates by reference Sections 1111 
and 1112 of Title 18, and these sections should be consulted for 
definitions of the various substantive homicides and the 
applicable penalty. 
Member of Congress - has been defined as "one who is a 
component part of the Senate or House .of Representatives, . . . 
one who is sharing the responsibilities aj5/rP5iviJ<8e?p?f/<**». cir* 
membership." United States v. Dietrich. 126 F. 676, 681 (8th Clr 
190*1). It is our view that the membership of Congress includes 
not only the presently constituted membership of one hundred 
Senators and four hundred thirty-five Congressmen, but also 
those representatives or delegates for special geographical 
divisions who are extended the privileges of membership.rship of one hundred 
Senators and four hundred thirty-five Congressmen, but also 
those representatives or delegates for special geographical 
divisions who are extended the privileges of membership.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Senators and four hundred thirty-five Congressmen, but also 
those representatives or delegates for special geographical 
divisions who are extended the privileges of membership.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(< 
•' o 
LdeVt 
<3 • * 
such as the Resident Commissioner from Puerto R*co * ** 
1“J1J 
Non-Voting Delegate from the District of Columbia, 
_ , . iQ70 Public Law 91-*05, title IT, section 202(a)* 
B4Pstat. 8MS’(Mon-Voting Delegate from the DJstI1^.of.S°oUBbla 
to have Privileges granted a Representative.) Mote. A1?°» - 
\° o^vlewtheVlcf-Presldent would be classed as a Me«ber-of-. 
Congress. However, any prosecutions for lncldentslnvolving 
fi.a. nrfirial should be pursued under lo U.5.C. lrbx, me 
Presidentlal^assasslnatIon atatute, so as to allow ».e of th. ‘ 
more liberal assault provision and reward provision contained in 
the statute. 
MoenHsaT* nr Poncress-Elect - is one who has been certified 
by the usual state, or local, ceTTifying offlclai».^s
1:h^15?e^een 
elected to one of the offices discussed above. . 
not encompass a Senator appointed under the 17th Amendment, 
pendlng°hl3 entry upon the office, though, of course, thereafter 
he is a member. 
Unlike 18 U.S.C. Ill* (protection of officers and 
employees of the United States) these provisions do no^ 
Sit the attack occur while the victim is engaged in, or be on 
account of the performance of his official ?"0F’§ongress 
sunra 7 Therefore, any incident involving a Member of Congress 
or^Member-of-Congress-Elect, would be ^thin these provisions ... 
regardless of the timing or motive of the ^iStatio^sSi 
functioning of an institutionvital to the 
  Rocha v. United States, 288 P. 2d   
affd sub ncn. 
9th Cir., 19517. 
I960) 
AR with section 111* and 1751 of title 18, United States 
Code the official status of the victim is merelyJ** *?®ls up 
which Federal Jurisdiction is asserted. Knowle g offense 
official status of the victim Is element of the offena. 
4f.aU Tirited States v. Kartman, **17 F» _ 
Us5“ VJrtnS Sn KtiTT^T gffg* JJ W7). 
House Committee on the Judiciary, 89 o ng«» 
Wfawher of Congress: 18 U.S.C. 351(b). 
2. Kidnaping a 
•Whoever kidnaps any individual de 
subsection (a) of this section shall be . 
(1) by imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life or (2) by death or imprisonment for any term 
It lUrl or fS life, if death results to such 
Individualsubsection (a) of this section shall be . 
(1) by imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life or (2) by death or imprisonment for any term 
It lUrl or fS life, if death results to such 
Individual

--- PAGE BREAK ---is section shall be . 
(1) by imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life or (2) by death or imprisonment for any term 
It lUrl or fS life, if death results to such 
Individual

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(( 
*> 
o 
€ 
This section has been included even though there has 
never been an attempt to kidnap a Member of Congress. S. Reg., 
supra, p. 6-7. 
As with the Federal Kidnaping Act (18 U.S.C. 1201), this 
statute does not attempt to define the term "kidnap." Blackstone 
is his Commentaries indicates that the English Common Law view, 
is that "kidnaping*
1 meant to forcibly abduct or steal and carry 
away a person from their own country to another. 2 Bl. Comm. 219. 
See Collier v. Vaccaro, 51 F. 2d 17, 19 (*th Cir. 1931).In Gooch 
v. United States, 82 F. 2d 53*», 536 (10th Cir. 1936), the common 
law view was construed to mean "to carry from one state into 
another state." Although this is the English common law view, 
It was not adopted in that form in the United States. Instead, 
the early cases dispensed with the need to carry out of the 
country, and questioned the need to carry beyond the boundaries, 
of the state. See State v. Rollins, 8 N.E. 550, 567 (1837). 
The definition is perhaps best stated as "a false imprisonment 
aggravated by conveying the imprisoned person to some other 
place." 2 Bish Crln. Law Section 750 (9th Ed.). This then is 
the common law definition as adopted in the United States. In 
any event, the term is used in its generic sense in this statute 
and to fulfill the purpose intended by Congress, protection 
of its members, it should be given a broad scope and should not 
be limited by geographical considerations beyond the element of 
"carrying away" the victim. 
Unlike 18 U.S.C. 1201, under section 351 the designated 
investigative agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, can 
commence its investigation immediately without the need to rely 
on any presumption such as the 2^ hour provision of 18 U.S.C. 
1201 (b). Under section 351 (b) enhanced punishment. Including 
the death penalty, is imposable if death results to the •' 
victim. This provision is narrower than section 1201's requirement, 
•unless the victim be released unharmed," and implies a casual 
relationship between the act of kidnaping and the death as a 
condition for its application. The usual analysis for proximate 
cause in kindred situations e.g. homicide, appears applicable. 
There must be cause in fact ("but for," etc.) plus factors 
making it reasonable to relate the kidnaping to the death rather 
than to some independent or intervening cause. Trial by 
either Judge or Jury can result in a death penalty, thus the 
defect in 18 U.S.C. 1201, (see United States, v. Jackson, 390 
U.S. 570 (1968) precluding imposition of the death penalty under 
1201 Is not present in section 351. 
3. Attempts to Kill or Kidnap a Member of Congress; 
18 U.S.C. 351 tcT 7 "• 
"Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any Individual 
designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be 
. punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life." 
• - 17 -.S.C. 351 tcT 7 "• 
"Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any Individual 
designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be 
. punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life." 
• - 17 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any Individual 
designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be 
. punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for 
life." 
• - 17 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"*C“ , - ■ 
This prclC-sion provides for punishi^it of attempts t6 
kill or kidnap a Member of Congress. 
As with other such provisions in the Federal Criminal 
Code, this section does not provide a definition of the term 
"attempt." At present there is no clear line of approach which 
could be regarded as the "Federal law” on the question, with 
Federal law being, at present, unclear as to when preparation ends 
and attempt begins. See Final Report of the National Cotitmlssion 
on Reform of Federal Criminal Laws, p. b7.The Federal approach 
can be"generally divided into two main lines of cases, representing 
the major "tests” in the area: 
1) Dangerous Proximity Test - adopted by Judge 
Learned Hand in a case in which the defendant was arrested before 
passing classified government documents, which were in her purse, 
to her paramour: . 
(P)reparation is not an attempt. But some preparations 
may amount to an attempt. It is a question of degree. 
If the preparation comes very near to the accomplishment 
of the act, the intent to complete it renders the crime 
. so probable that the act will be a misdemeanor, although 
there is still a locus poenitentiate, in the need of a 
further exertion of the will to complete the crime. 
(Emphasis added.) United States v. Coplon, 185 F. 2d 
• 629, 633 (2d Cir. 1950) l quoting Holmes, J., in Common- 
wealth v. Peaslee, 177 Mass. 267, 272 (1901)), cert. den., 
342 UTS. 920 (1$52). -9 * 
2) Any Act or Endeavor Test - a more recent development, 
this concept can be found in a case in which a defendant was 
charged with using communication facilities in attempting to 
commit the crime of illegally importing narcotic drugs, having 
mailed a letter to a Mexican manufacturer of heroin in which ne 
asked to purchase some. The Court said: .** ** ” 
To attempt to do ah act does not imply a completion 
of the act, or in fact any definite progress toward it. 
Any effort or endeavor to effect the act will satisfy 
the terms of the law. United States v. Robles. 185 F. 
Supp. 82, 85 (N.D. Calif., I960). • 
This position must be examined with an eye to these cases 
which have striven to distinguish the- terms "attempt and 
■endeavor," thereby forcing a definition of theformer 
much the same terms as under the Dangerous Proximity Test. . Se« 
' Osborn v. United States. 385 U.S. 323, 333, rehearing den., 386 
^l).s:~938 (1966). The“gravity of the violations encompassed by the 
' statute would indicate the propriety of prosecution attempt 
for conduct which might as to other violations be considered 
nere preparation or endeavor.gravity of the violations encompassed by the 
' statute would indicate the propriety of prosecution attempt 
for conduct which might as to other violations be considered 
nere preparation or endeavor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tions encompassed by the 
' statute would indicate the propriety of prosecution attempt 
for conduct which might as to other violations be considered 
nere preparation or endeavor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inasmuc>/~>s the assault provision J£)thls statute, • 
section (e) makes no provision for aggravated assaults (l.e., 
assault by use of a deadly or dangerous weapon) and since the 
penalty for assaults not resulting in personal injury carry 
such a light penalty, consideration should be given to prosecuting 
as an attempted killing, when a deadly or dangerous weapon Is 
Involved in an Incident where no injury results. _ V 
H. (Conspiracy to Kill or Kidnap a Member of Congress! 
lb U.S.c/ 351 (d): 
"If two or more persons conspire to kill or kidnap 
any individual designated in subsection (a) of this 
section and one or more of such persons do any act 
to effect the object of the conspiracy, each shall be 
punished (1) by imprisonment for any term of years or 
for life, or (2) by death or imprisonment for any ter* of 
years or for life, if death results to such individual." 
This provision tracks the general conspiracy statute 
(18 U.S.C. 371) except that it is limited to the two objects of 
killing or kidnaping a Member of Congress. This section does 
not preclude prosecution under the general conspiracy statute, 
but merely provides an increased penalty where the object of the 
conspiracy-is to kill or kidnap a Congressman. See United States 
v. Bazzell, 187 F. 2d 878, 885 (7th Cir.) cert, den., 3^2 P*S. q*»9 
(1951). Conspiracy to kill or kidnap the Member-of-Congress is 
punishable by imprisonment for any term of years or life, or 
by death if death results to the victim,, while the maximum 
penalty under 18 U.S.C. 371 would be a $10,000 fine and fivg 
years imprisonment. ^ 
5. Assaulting a Member of Congress; 18 U.S.C. 351 (el: 
"Whoever assaults any person designated in subsection 
(a) of this section shall be fined not more than $5,000 
or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and . 
if personal injury results, shall be fined not more 
than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than ten years, 
or both." 
Absent a statutory definition of assault the Courts 
have looked to the common law and have concluded that an 
■assault" is: % 
An attempt with force or violence to do a corporal 
injury to another; and may consist of any act tending 
to such corporal injury, accompanied with such cir—^ 
cumstances as denotes at the time and intention, 
coupled with present ability, of using actual violence 
against the person. Guarro v. United States, 237 F* 
2d 578, 580 (D.C. Cir. 19f>&).