Treatise on the
Hyperborean Gnosis
Gustavo Brondino


--- PAGE BREAK ---

INDEX
1.
Introduction
7
2.
The creationist trinity of the demiurge
19
3.
Myths and their metaphysical action. The symbols
sacred and eternal symbols
25
4.
The ontological designs and their effects on the
centers or chakras of the microcosm
39
5.
The seven chakras, or energy vortexes of the
microcosmos
43
6.
Study and analysis of the three lower chakras of the
human soul
49
7.
Study and analysis of the four higher chakras
from the demiurgic and demiurgic metaphysical
realities.
hyperborea
61
8.
Difference between reality and reality
81
9.
The Unknowable and the loyal siddhas. The demiurge
and the gods traitors to the eternal spirit
87
10. Culture and its incidence on the formation of the
pasu and virya psychology
95
11. Noological differences in the ethical attitudes of the
virya and pasu
105
12. The virya and its liberation strategies
spiritual
113
13. Space-times of the pasu and the virya.
Transcendent time and immanent time
117
14. Noological consciousness of the awakened virya
on the cultural structure
127
15. The asymmetries of the psychological ethics of
the pasu and the symmetries of the noological
ethics of the virya. The
bijas of creation
129
16. The archetypal metaphysical asymmetries of the demiurge.
The bijas and their significance in the pasu psyche
135


--- PAGE BREAK ---the noological
ethics of the virya. The
bijas of creation
129
16. The archetypal metaphysical asymmetries of the demiurge.
The bijas and their significance in the pasu psyche
135


--- PAGE BREAK ---

17. The virya and his Sign of Origin. The vril and the vruna of the
cold fire
145
18. The vril, the vrunas and its projections in the order
created. Runes and hyperborean arts
149
19. Runes, eternal symbols and their images
transcendent to archetypes and designs
of the sacred symbols of the demiurge
157
20. The Lady archetype and the Eve archetype
161
21. Hereditary archetypal professions. The military and
priestly archetypes. Their actualization
in reality and in the psyche of the pasu and the virya
171
22. Analysis of the family archetype. The spiral staircase
and the infinite staircase
175
23. The evolution of the human archetype. The demiurge and
the projections of his plan in the created universe
183
24. The hyperborean culture as an opposition to the
synarchic counterculture
193
25.Hyperborean solar ethics and lunar ethics of
synarchy. The ethos and pathos in the solar
hyperborean and lunar demiurgic
201
26. Synthesis extracted from the Treatise on Hyperborean Physics
209
27. Analysis of physics from the Hyperborean Gnosis
213
28. Emanations of the morphological archetypal field
or archetypal morphological teleology of The One
217
29. Metempsychosis or reincarnation, part of the system
evolution of the pasu
223
30. The awakened virya and his duty of honor. The struggle
for the spiritual freedom of their comrades
227
31. The mystery of initiation in the secret
organizations of the synarchy. The initiations
hyperborea
229
32. The initiatory tests and the different doors
hyperborea of spiritual liberation
233


--- PAGE BREAK ---of initiation in the secret
organizations of the synarchy. The initiations
hyperborea
229
32. The initiatory tests and the different doors
hyperborea of spiritual liberation
233


--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
1. INTRODUCTION
Comrades, comrades in struggle, they will come from the 
POLE, 
the 
SOUTHERN 
BREEZES, 
THEY 
WILL 
RAUDELY PENETRATE IN THE AWAKENING MAN 
WHISPERING IN HIS SPIRIT THE MYSTERY OF 
HYPERBORNE GNOSIS; comrades.
We must be attentive, because in it are contained the 
ETERNAL TRUTHS.
To have patience where it can be had is not the true thing, 
but to have patience where it usually cannot be had, only then 
will we say that we have had patience. Patience is one of the 
greatest human virtues that distinguishes the true man from 
the common man. It could be affirmed that it determines in 
individuals the degree of self-mastery, that is to say, the 
capacities of ontological knowledge that man has about 
himself. In this way we can affirm that from a philosophical 
and ontological point of view, the BEING can fully belong to 
the individual, as long as he has entirely mastered his 
patience, since it is the internal key to self-knowledge. 
Ontologically (onto = being; study of being and all its 
possibilities) we can affirm that the individual must orient his 
NOOLOGICAL SELF (Noo = way of the spirit) towards his 
own psychological and psychic reality, since this is the only 
way to know himself and to reach the highest noological, 
ontological 
and 
gnoseological 
aspiration, 
which 
is 
ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUATION. The path and the study 
contained in this treatise specifies how to concretize the 
realization of the three initiatory paths that the Hyperborean 
Warrior must follow, which are essential to awaken and 
become a WISE WARRIOR, a self-chosen and deified man 
by his own egoic will.


--- PAGE BREAK ---three initiatory paths that the Hyperborean 
Warrior must follow, which are essential to awaken and 
become a WISE WARRIOR, a self-chosen and deified man 
by his own egoic will.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
free and oriented in the hyperborean languages and in the 
eternal symbols.
Man lives trapped in a cultural and social structure that has 
atomized him, confined to certain moral guidelines that have 
turned him into a totally collective and gregarious being; this 
situation has disintegrated his ego into a plurality of Egos that, 
structured in complexes, have led him to live in a constant 
DRAMATIC TENSION, which slowly but gradually destroys 
him in his spirit and his spirit. But in man there is a possibility 
of being, a destiny that transcends the stages of ordinary 
consciousness. This path, the Hyperborean GNOSIS calls the 
WAY OF INDIVI- DUATION.
Individuation means to become a singular and selfless 
entity, 
with 
full 
self-knowledge 
and 
fundamentally 
ORIENTED, affirmed in the ETERNAL SELF and in a 
wisdom that allows him to know and deeply understand 
REALITY.
Unfortunately, the comedy of life has been transformed 
into a drama that slowly leads us to tragedy and this is 
particularly due to man's loss of the CENTER, OF HIS 
BEING. The dramatic tensions have created an internal and 
external conflict that has led us to an existential crisis where 
we are immersed in a nebula of desires that only create a state 
of loss and confusion. In this way, we are overwhelmed by 
our complexes, which are the fruit of our desires that, because 
we are unable to make them conscious and control them due 
to lack of knowledge and wisdom, we are irremediably 
plunged into a moral and social crisis from which it is 
increasingly difficult to emerge. In this desperation we appeal 
to ask for assistance in certain religious or scientific 
institutions, to give us the solution and allow us to recover the 
volitional and emotional loss.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s desperation we appeal 
to ask for assistance in certain religious or scientific 
institutions, to give us the solution and allow us to recover the 
volitional and emotional loss.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
Thus, we are lost inside a psychological, internal labyrinth 
and we think that the reality of our being is in a DRAMATIC 
TENSION because of our fault, our incapacity, our "sins" so 
that we turn to psychologists, psychiatric doctors and if they 
do not give results we appeal to religious structures such as 
Catholicism, Protestant churches, Buddhism, Hinduism, or 
esoteric 
systems 
such 
as 
theosophy, 
Freemasonry, 
Rosicrucianism, Yogism, etc., believing that in them lies a 
panacea, the solutions to all our ailments, our ills, our ills, 
believing that in them lies the panacea, the solutions to all our 
ailments, our ills. The truth is that the beginning of our ills 
does not lie within ourselves but in the destiny that has us 
deceived, subjected to the world, to this material order that is 
directed by a WORLD SYNARCHY (union of powers) that 
ONLY INTENDS TO DESTROY US MATTERALLY AND 
SPIRITUALLY.
It is for this reason that if wealth were distributed 
equitably, poverty and misery would be eliminated, and in this 
way man would recover his dignity and rise to a level of 
spirituality where the best human qualities would be 
developed. By raising the standard of living of humanity, 
combating ignorance and destroying that which hinders the 
growth of consciousness, we will recover the honor and value 
that we have always had and that has been lost because of 
unbridled ambition, unbridled greed for money and power. 
The change must be made profoundly, man must awaken in 
his being another level of understanding and 
comprehension, only in this way will the eternal warrior 
emerge who will become a warrior.
lies in the depths of the human spirit.
A drama is entrenched in human existence and an inner 
cry from the depths of its spirit cries out for a more dignified 
and just existence in all aspects. The human will in the face of 
existential drama tries imperiously to rise above the pain and 
anguish of a subdued existence.
rit cries out for a more dignified 
and just existence in all aspects. The human will in the face of 
existential drama tries imperiously to rise above the pain and 
anguish of a subdued existence.


--- PAGE BREAK ---more dignified 
and just existence in all aspects. The human will in the face of 
existential drama tries imperiously to rise above the pain and 
anguish of a subdued existence.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
The world is subject to an absolute materialism, to religious 
systems loaded with connotations where man and destiny are 
subject to "predestination" and "predetermination", concepts 
very similar to those expressed in HINDUISM, BUDDHISM, 
JUDEOCRISTIANISM, ISLAM, etc. In this way, regrettably, 
man leaves his destiny to god, and thus the personality is 
constituted on the basis of formal parameters constituted by 
archetypal models structured in a moral and religious axiology 
where the aesthetic, the formal is determinant over the ethical; 
where consciousness is massified in the collective, losing 
volitional and intellective autonomy, falling into an 
ontological degree where the merely human is determined by 
an unconscious mechanism where man is food for the gods.
But in existence, life is constantly offering alternatives of 
spiritual development, since being yourself a being intrinsic to 
the eternal spirit although determined in a finite and relative 
ontology, even in man, in the human soul underlies the eternal 
reality of the spirit. It is for this reason that beyond the 
uncertainties of reality distributed in the different economic, 
political, social and cultural orders, there is always in man the 
possibility of being an awakened man, free from the premises 
of this aberrant materialism and dogmatic religions; That 
reality of a spiritual and intellectual understanding that does 
not allow us to see the lie is only possible if we have in 
ourselves a Gnostic predisposition of mind and spirit, which 
orients us to a superior, different knowledge, to an absolute 
truth, the WAY OF INDIVIDUATION that prepares us to be 
initiated in the Hyperborean Gnosis.
This is why it is imperative to understand that an 
international political, religious and financial power structured 
in a WORLD SYNARCHY determines the human being with 
guidelines
borean Gnosis.
This is why it is imperative to understand that an 
international political, religious and financial power structured 
in a WORLD SYNARCHY determines the human being with 
guidelines


--- PAGE BREAK ---is why it is imperative to understand that an 
international political, religious and financial power structured 
in a WORLD SYNARCHY determines the human being with 
guidelines


--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
The cultural and cultural practices that in preeminent forms 
are poured into our being, through culture and education, thus 
determining our ontological and noological complexion, 
limiting our capacities of apprehension and comprehension, 
and the level of being and consciousness falling to an 
axiological limit where the "I" is reduced to its minimum 
expression. In this way we are massified, asleep and trapped 
in an external world where we serve as slaves to that 
international synarchy, which is a world power that only 
wants us to be servants of itself and its plan of universal 
domination. That is why it is essential to reorient ourselves 
and wake up from the illusory reverie of this materialistic 
culture governed by a capitalist neoliberalism or a pseudo-
socialist Marxism and realize that there really is an external 
enemy, sometimes visible (imperialist governments such as 
USA, RUSSIA, ISRAEL), RUSSIA, ISRAEL) in the world 
and others invisible (world synarchy, secret societies, esoteric 
organizations, etc.) which we must fight with all our strength 
and for this we must recover our spirit, being essential to 
access 
a 
liberation 
contained 
in 
the 
ABSOLUTE 
INDIVIDUATION. But in order to reorient ourselves 
internally, it is imperative to unveil and unmask the real 
enemy, which is entrenched in this reality, structured in a 
religious, political, financial and economic synarchy that 
operates in the world since the beginning of history, 
conspiring and destroying everything that is spiritual and there 
is practically no culture or nation that has not been subdued 
by it, because of its cultural, religious or atheistic, 
materialistic, capitalist and liberal premises.
Therefore, we emphatically affirm that to be awake is not 
only to conscientize the self and access individuation but 
mainly consists of coldly and objectively analyzing all the 
events, facts and occurrences of the extensive cultural 
network of the world in all its contents and passive realities.
ividuation but 
mainly consists of coldly and objectively analyzing all the 
events, facts and occurrences of the extensive cultural 
network of the world in all its contents and passive realities.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ly consists of coldly and objectively analyzing all the 
events, facts and occurrences of the extensive cultural 
network of the world in all its contents and passive realities.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
and future. It is essential to discern and understand the 
international plot of this world super-government that from 
the 
shadows 
constantly 
manipulates 
the 
collective 
consciousness and to REALIZE that the real enemy is 
MATERIALISM 
and 
its 
NEOLIBERAL 
COUNTER-
CULTURE (we call it counter-culture because the true culture 
is based on principles totally opposed to those of capitalism) 
and to understand that its ideology, its economic and political 
philosophy, its concepts and premises, hide pure destructive 
intentions of everything that is national, tra- ditional and 
spiritual is the first step to AWAKENING, its economic and 
political philosophy, its concepts and premises, hide purely 
destructive intentions of everything that is national, 
transnational and spiritual is the first step to AWAKENING.
Comrades, we must resist and sustain with will and honor, 
within our true culture, within the spiritual values of blood, 
family and homeland, because the direct link to the eternal 
spirit, to noological freedom, is contained in NATIONAL 
CULTURE.
DEAR SEEKERS OF TRUTH AND TRUTHFULNESS
SPIRITUAL FREEDOM, these writings are intended to 
awaken your consciences, to clarify all the doubts that since 
the dawn of civilization until today have been confusing the 
human spirit. Man is a seeker who by all means tries to 
capture the truth, seeking a meaning, a path that will lead him 
to freedom, immortality, eternity, which are a divine right that 
should not be curtailed. But what happens? He walks along 
the most diverse paths, knocks on all doors, studies all 
sciences, realizes himself in his profession, complies to the 
letter with the moral and religious dogmas, practices all the 
rites and ceremonies imposed by his priests, by the "masters 
of wisdom". Thus, the seeker of truth goes through all the 
schools of learning, from the academic to the esoteric, 
complying to the letter with the conditions and guidelines,
ts, by the "masters 
of wisdom". Thus, the seeker of truth goes through all the 
schools of learning, from the academic to the esoteric, 
complying to the letter with the conditions and guidelines,


--- PAGE BREAK ---of wisdom". Thus, the seeker of truth goes through all the 
schools of learning, from the academic to the esoteric, 
complying to the letter with the conditions and guidelines,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
without any questioning, accepts its dogmas and premises as 
absolute truths following the instincts and designs imposed on 
the human soul by its creator. But let us first analyze the 
PASU (we will call this way from now on the sleeping man; 
concept extracted from the Sanskrit that means needle) the 
massified man and submitted to the chronological threads and 
ontological designs of his existence with which the gods of 
matter weave the daily plot of life. First, he develops as an 
individual, affirming his being on the basis of a personality 
structured in his racial, national and cultural idiosyncrasy that 
endows him with a psychological ego; second, the pasu tries 
to fulfill all the social, cultural and religious guidelines 
imposed on him by society and his cultural being: to have a 
family, children, to progress materially and economically, to 
succeed in the world of money and love, to obtain a name, 
fame, social status, etc. In this way he spends his whole life 
feeling that if he is successful he is "happy" and if he does not 
comply with the demands of reality and liberal culture he is 
simply a common man, he is a simple "failure" more of this 
plot, of this existential labyrinth and suffers the consequences 
of it, falling psychologically into a depressive well that drags 
him inexorably to ruin and perdition. Undoubtedly, if this is 
not enough, the current NEOLIBERAL culture offers other 
alternatives to dissolve the EXISTENTIAL DRAMA, such as 
PERVERSION, through the vices of alcohol, drugs, 
indiscriminate sex, techno music, etc. Now, if the pasu is a 
lucky one in the world of circumstances and random events 
full of sense favor him obtaining money, love and social 
status, feeling that he has triumphed. Fate also has its traps 
and the bourgeois pasu will suffer the consequences of a 
hedonistic, sensible life, being trapped in the illusion of the 
power of money and frightening consumerism.
phed. Fate also has its traps 
and the bourgeois pasu will suffer the consequences of a 
hedonistic, sensible life, being trapped in the illusion of the 
power of money and frightening consumerism.


--- PAGE BREAK ---its traps 
and the bourgeois pasu will suffer the consequences of a 
hedonistic, sensible life, being trapped in the illusion of the 
power of money and frightening consumerism.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
But if man is a VIRYA (a term taken from the Sanskrit 
meaning awakened man) and has in his being a differentiated 
psychic principle, still existing within himself something 
spiritual, he will awaken a second religious intention and will 
be able to make an ontological leap reorienting his SELF 
towards a mysticism, generally at the beginning he will seek 
according to his degree of intellectual will and consciousness 
relating to certain esoteric religious groups: Freemasonry, 
Rosicrucianism, Theosophy, Yoga, Buddhism, Zen, etc., 
adhering to them with conviction and loyalty, since these 
institutions pro- vide him to solve the spiritual dilemma by 
"initiating" him into the "secrets" of some millenary wisdom.
Thus the years pass within these organizations and the 
disciple begins to lose "faith", demanding and begging for 
more knowledge from the "masters", arguing that the disciple 
is not yet ready to receive the "initiations" that will allow him 
to "evolve", "cleanse his karma" and thus gain access to 
higher knowledge. They demand more faith from him, to keep 
on begging because the pleading is insufficient, that he should 
be even more rigorous with himself, that he lacks inner work, 
more disintegration of the ego, of the "I", etc. Unfortunately, 
as the most fateful victim of fatality, man submits to these 
doctrinal designs subject to their ideologies, to the vertical 
hierarchical structures that impose the hardest conditions to 
access their pseudo-initiations and crumbs of knowledge.
In this state of situation is the LIGHT WARRIOR when he 
submits himself to a priest, a guru, a master of an esoteric or 
religious doctrine, exactly the same happens in the academic 
forms; to obtain a drop of wisdom that never comes, that was 
never granted to him even though it corresponds to him.
In this way, the searcher is tricked, subjected to the
happens in the academic 
forms; to obtain a drop of wisdom that never comes, that was 
never granted to him even though it corresponds to him.
In this way, the searcher is tricked, subjected to the


--- PAGE BREAK ---mic 
forms; to obtain a drop of wisdom that never comes, that was 
never granted to him even though it corresponds to him.
In this way, the searcher is tricked, subjected to the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
cultural guidelines of these esoteric religious structures of 
strictly devotional characteristics and conceptual premises of 
low level of knowledge. Their usurped will and alienated 
conscience by these merchants, "intermediaries" of the divine, 
incorporate the disciple, man or woman, to their dogmas, to 
serve and blindly obey the masters or gurus; that is the 
fundamental premise: LOVE to their visible or invisible 
superior hierarchies. The subjugation to which he is subjected 
is so terrifying that even his goods are taken away from him, 
forced to part with them or to donate them to his masters as a 
token of "love". He is isolated, secluded in cloisters, in 
convents, in monasteries, schools, ashrams, etc., demanding 
him to break with his families, to abandon his parents, 
brothers, friends because the essential duty is worship, to love 
his gods and masters of wisdom; everything must be 
abandoned if he wants to receive an iota, a drop of 
knowledge, he will have to pay for it with more than enough: 
pain and suffering. The reality and the truth is that these 
philosophical, religious, esoteric ideologies, of Eastern or 
Western origin, structured in sects, lodges, institutions, etc., 
only deceive the man in search of knowledge, only deceive 
the man in search of spiritual freedom and only seek to stop 
him on his way to knowledge, to freedom; this sooner or later 
leads to nothing, producing in the seeker an exhaustion, an 
awakening of time, slowly losing FAITH and hope, 
inexorably reaching disillusionment and disappointment with 
mysticism and causing the abandonment of the search.
That is why he must wake up, realize the truth, understand 
that those sects, lodges or religious institutions that promise 
everything, 
"INITIATIONS", 
"WISDOM", 
"IMMORTALITY", respond to a religious and political world 
synarchy that only responds to their interests, to their PLAN 
and in it man is simply a tool, a means and not an end, that is 
why he is usable, disposable, in
to a religious and political world 
synarchy that only responds to their interests, to their PLAN 
and in it man is simply a tool, a means and not an end, that is 
why he is usable, disposable, in


--- PAGE BREAK ---political world 
synarchy that only responds to their interests, to their PLAN 
and in it man is simply a tool, a means and not an end, that is 
why he is usable, disposable, in


--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
is definitely expendable.
This religious synarchy metaphysically directed from the 
heavens by the "masters" of the so-called "LOGIA BLANCA" 
called Hierarchy, masters who are shown with figures or 
angelic images or saints and who in reality are hypocrites who 
call themselves enlightened, prophets or messiahs, and who 
carry so much malice and dogmatism, in reality they are true 
demons disguised as angels. These beings, "divine" 
emanations of the demiurge who are called minor gods that 
Christian eschatology divides into thrones and powers, 
seraphim, 
nephilim, 
archangels 
and 
finally 
angels, 
representing them with an image of kind beings who help the 
pasu, in reality are traitor gods who strictly serve the plan of 
the demiurge and have in themselves a degree of cruelty and 
coldness such that they do not hesitate to sacrifice whatever is 
necessary if the plan of the great architect requires it. Such is 
the deception in which the man who firmly believes in these 
beings finds himself, and due to the guidelines that he has 
acquired through religious culture and education, it is not 
possible for him to see the reality of these "celestial beings", 
TRUE DEMONS CLAD IN LAMB'S CLOTHES.
They and their henchmen of the world synarchy in the 
service of their plans only intend to deceive the spirit to 
submit it to their designs, to their plans, to have it captured in 
matter, in the world, in the plan and its projects. The spiritual 
man is VICTIM of these gods traitors to the eternal spirit and 
they keep him asleep, subject to this plane of creation, to this 
insane world of illusion where the DEMIURGE, THIS DARK 
GOD IMITATOR OF THE ETERNAL is the one who is the 
one who is the most powerful and the one who is the one who is 
the most powerful.
the main enemy of the spiritual.
THE WARRIOR HAS A CHANCE TO ESCAPE, TO 
BREAK THE CHAINS THAT BIND HIM.
o is the 
one who is the most powerful and the one who is the one who is 
the most powerful.
the main enemy of the spiritual.
THE WARRIOR HAS A CHANCE TO ESCAPE, TO 
BREAK THE CHAINS THAT BIND HIM.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
THEY ARE SUBJECT TO FEAR, IGNORANCE AND 
MEDIOCRITY AND THESE WRITINGS ARE A DOOR, A 
WINDOW TO THE TRUTH, TO THEIR LIBERATION.
FELLOWSHIP for the pursuit of freedom and eternity, 
divine rights inherited in our BLOOD and SPIRIT, PROPER 
TO WARRIOR MEN AND
FIRM HEART, you have the natural and spiritual right to the 
highest knowledge, to the eternal truths, and from this 
moment you will open this knowledge which is the key to the 
TEMPLE OF VESTA and the flames of wisdom will burn 
within you; if you are bold and courageous as a knight in the 
fray you have the NOOLOGICAL right to begin the study of 
these mysteries.
TO HAVE THE PRESENT IS TO HAVE THE POWER IN 
YOUR HANDS, AND THE BREEZES FROM THE SOUTH 
WILL INITIATE YOU INTO THE HYPERBOREAN 
MYSTERY OF ETERNAL GNOSIS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---O HAVE THE PRESENT IS TO HAVE THE POWER IN 
YOUR HANDS, AND THE BREEZES FROM THE SOUTH 
WILL INITIATE YOU INTO THE HYPERBOREAN 
MYSTERY OF ETERNAL GNOSIS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
2. THE CREATIONIST TRINITY OF THE DEMIURGE.
THE ENTITY OR MOMENT ONE OR THE FATHER. 
THE GNOSEOLOGICAL SPACE OR MACROCOSMIC 
MIND OF THE ONE.
THE ENTITY OR DUO MOMENT OR THE SON. THE 
ONTOLOGICAL 
SPACE. 
FINALITIES 
AND 
SUPRAFINALITIES OF THE EVOLUTIONARY PLAN 
OF THE ONE.
THE ENTITY OR TRIUNE MOMENT OR HOLY 
SPIRIT. AXIOLOGICAL SPACE OF CREATION. 
ETHICAL AND AESTHETIC ENTELE- QUIES.
The creationist trinity of reality or of the material universe 
of the demiurge Jehovah Satan and the siddhas consists of 
these three acts, which from the Christian perspective are 
denoted 
as 
the 
HOLY 
TRINITY. 
THE 
GNOSTIC 
PHILOSOPHY
JUSTICIALIST 
OLOGIC 
calls 
the 
FATHER: 
the 
GNOSEOLOGICAL space (theory of knowledge), entity one 
of creation. The SON: the ONTOLOGICAL space (theory of 
being), or duo entity of creation. And to the HOLY SPIRIT: 
the AXYLOGICAL space (theory of values), or triune entity 
of creation.
Taking this into account and analyzing the cultural 
structure of the world, reality, we find that it is composed of a 
number of concrete and abstract entities structured in a 
continent of natural and cultural objects. These cultural and 
natural entities were projected into the world from the ONE 
ENTITY: macrocosmic gnoseological space from where the 
demiurge extracts from the eternal worlds the ideas or 
archetypes that he then gnoseologically thinks, elaborates and 
projects into the material world.


--- PAGE BREAK ---l space from where the 
demiurge extracts from the eternal worlds the ideas or 
archetypes that he then gnoseologically thinks, elaborates and 
projects into the material world.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
The demiurge and his hosts of "divine" entities bear upon 
themselves a series of ONTOLOGICAL DESIGNS that 
predetermine the gnoseological and ontological constitution of 
the substantial reality of the entity or of all the entities of 
creation; that is to say, in the gnoseological laboratory where 
the archetypal matrices are elaborated, which is the entity one 
of creation, the second step or DUO ENTITY is executed, 
which consists in endowing the archetypes thought in 
ONTOLOGICAL forms, IN BEING, IN LIFE. In this way, 
the essential reality of all the entities of creation that underlie 
in this creationist ontological space, in this material universe 
is predermined in its essence and its sus- tancy by a series of 
DESIGNS and finalities that are incorporated into their ontic 
contexts and that affect and form the TRINE ENTITY, which 
is the moment in which the AXIOLOGICAL realities are 
projected to the ONTOLOGICAL CONCRETE FORMS: 
ETHICAL AND AESTHETIC, that is to say, they are given 
significance, value. Therefore we say that in the forms, in the 
ontic images projected by each entity of the natural or cultural 
creation there is an ontic unconscious that has deposited a 
series of ontic images and MEANINGS that contain the truth 
of that entity, that is to say, they contain in themselves the 
TELEOLOGICAL, METAPHYSICAL, AND
OF THE PHYSICAL ENTITY. For this reason we maintain 
that the virya with Gnostic predisposition and in relation to a 
Hyperborean Mysticism, can decipher the designs and the 
purposes that entities have in the world, that is to say, the 
virya can make a READING OF THE ONTIC RECORD, OF 
THE SOUL OF THE ENTITY and thus understand why and 
for what purpose the demiurge projected that entity into the 
world.
At the beginning of the analysis of this point, we consider 
entelechies as the greatest development that a cultural or 
natural entity or object can reach in creation.
that entity into the 
world.
At the beginning of the analysis of this point, we consider 
entelechies as the greatest development that a cultural or 
natural entity or object can reach in creation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---world.
At the beginning of the analysis of this point, we consider 
entelechies as the greatest development that a cultural or 
natural entity or object can reach in creation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
has in itself, in its ontic continent, deposited a finiteness that 
drives it instinctively or mechanically to develop as an entity 
itself. HYPERBORNE WISDOM holds for example: if we 
analyze the entity horse, its being in itself, its ontic finality 
will impel it to be a horse and will distinguish it as such; but 
the entity horse has besides the finality or being in itself, a 
SUPRAFINALITY or BEING FOR MAN WHICH IS AN 
UNCONSCIOUS MECHANISM THAT IMPELLS IT TO 
BE AN ENTELEQUIA, THAT IS TO SAY THE
BEST OF ALL HORSES. For this reason we designate and 
conceptualize this ontic reality as ENTELEQUIA, which 
consists essentially in the maximum AXIOLOGICAL 
development that every BEING, in its aesthetics or BEAUTY 
aspect, or in its ethics, INTELLIGENCE aspect, can reach. 
That is why entelechies have in themselves the purpose of 
capturing the attention of man, that is why entelechies are in 
the world to FASCINATE THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE 
VIRYA and thereby capture it in the cultural register of the 
entelechied entity. For example, returning to the equines, let 
us think of the quantities of cultural registers that belong to 
this species and that the sleeping viryas actively participate in 
(arts and sports that have the equines as a center of attraction), 
incorporated into their registers with a postorative action of 
meaning. For this reason we must understand deeply with all 
our sensitive being, the reality that we are analyzing because 
this point is a cognitive hinge in wisdom. By this we mean 
that it is at this point where we need a transcendent cognitive 
principle proper to an AWAKENED VIRYA, since it is this 
condition of the spirit the only one that can distinguish truth 
from falsehood in the matter of cultural registers and their 
designs, the being in itself or ontic finality and the being for 
man or ontological suprafi- nality. In this way, and taking into 
account the
sehood in the matter of cultural registers and their 
designs, the being in itself or ontic finality and the being for 
man or ontological suprafi- nality. In this way, and taking into 
account the


--- PAGE BREAK ---of cultural registers and their 
designs, the being in itself or ontic finality and the being for 
man or ontological suprafi- nality. In this way, and taking into 
account the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
We know that all the entities of creation have in themselves a 
design, which was imposed in the ontic register of the object. 
This entity in relation to the subject creates an ontological 
interaction in which the subject interiorizes the object and 
structures it in its mental screen, generating a MENTAL 
SPACE-TIME where the interiorized object or entity is 
gnoseologically or intellectually unstructured in order to be 
DISCERNED and UNDERSTANDED in its totality in a 
language. We call this inner time where the object is the 
subject of analysis by the cognitive will of the virya, 
IMMANENT TIME. In this way we affirm that all the entities 
of creation contained in the continent of natural or cultural 
objects of the material universe of the One that have real 
existence in the transcendent time of the demiurge or 
ontological consciousness of the same, possess or are 
determined in their axiology and ontology by an IMMANENT 
TIME that is the one that predetermines the period of 
existence of life or permanence of the entity in the 
MACROCOSMIC TRANSCENDENT SPACE-TIME OF 
THE
In this way we affirm that the reality of the entity adjusts to 
the existential reality of its immanent time and the biological 
clocks of each entity participate in the ontic immanence of the 
same; only MAN IN HIS INNER TEMPORAL INMA- 
NENCE 
WHICH 
WE 
CALL 
CHRONOLOGICAL 
IMMANENT TIME HAS THE POWER TO MODIFY THE 
BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS AND THUS DETERMINE HIS 
REALITY IN THE WORLD OF THE
This is specifically because man is the only living being that 
possesses an attribute that the other entities of creation do not 
have in their ontological constitution. MAN, ESPECIALLY 
THE VIRYA, I.E. THE BEING OF DIVINE ORIGIN, HAS 
IN HIMSELF THE POWER OF ABSOLUTE WILL, OF 
THE ETERNAL SPIRIT.
entities of creation do not 
have in their ontological constitution. MAN, ESPECIALLY 
THE VIRYA, I.E. THE BEING OF DIVINE ORIGIN, HAS 
IN HIMSELF THE POWER OF ABSOLUTE WILL, OF 
THE ETERNAL SPIRIT.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
NO. It is this terrible faculty found in the soul of every 
AWAKENED VIRYA that allows him to break with the 
determining ontic structures of his BEING IN HIMSELF and 
of his BEING FOR MAN, also called ONTOLOGICAL 
FINALITY AND SUPRAFINALITY. In this way, the virya 
has in his SELF the power to resign these contents or designs, 
using the energies deposited in them for his own strategy of 
liberation. Undoubtedly, it is characteristic of a hyperborean 
warrior determined to do everything, to be able to resign these 
tremendous ontological designs deposited in the human soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---Undoubtedly, it is characteristic of a hyperborean 
warrior determined to do everything, to be able to resign these 
tremendous ontological designs deposited in the human soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
3. MYTHS AND THEIR METAPHYSICAL ACTION.
THE SACRED SYMBOLS AND ETERNAL SYMBOLS
The theme to be developed is of fundamental importance 
for the warrior if he intends to fully understand the mystery of 
maya and the subjugation of humanity in the hands of a 
synarchy that has enslaved it to its purposes.
What is the strategy of Jehovah Satan and his 
metaphysical hierarchies? Where does the power of the 
International Synarchy lie?
The answer to these two questions is: the strategy of the 
gods of matter is based ON THEIR MYTHS AND THEIR 
SACRED SYMBOLS. The power of the world synarchy is 
not in money, nor in weapons, but specifically in CULTURE 
and its political, religious and scientific cultural patterns 
structured in the cultural superstructure of the world.
But in order to better understand these concepts we must 
go step by step through these definitions, as if we were putting 
together a puzzle, because this analogy is the correct 
representation of the will that the hyperborean warrior needs 
to be able to reconstitute this labyrinthine puzzle and thus 
understand these truths. The first answer states that Myths and 
Sacred Symbols are the fundamental strategies of the enemy, 
but what are myths and sacred symbols?
Before proceeding further and in order to clearly 
understand these answers, we must first define what a symbol 
is.
For science, the linguistic sign is a two-sided psychic 
entity, formed by the union of signifier (acoustic image) and 
signified (concept). For the Hyperborean Gnosis, this 
definition is an element of total strategic significance, because 
in the signifier of the linguistic sign, which is with the 
linguistic sign, the linguistic sign is a two-sided psychic entity, 
formed by the union of the signifier (acoustic image) and the 
signified (concept).
r of the linguistic sign, which is with the 
linguistic sign, the linguistic sign is a two-sided psychic entity, 
formed by the union of the signifier (acoustic image) and the 
signified (concept).


--- PAGE BREAK ---sign, which is with the 
linguistic sign, the linguistic sign is a two-sided psychic entity, 
formed by the union of the signifier (acoustic image) and the 
signified (concept).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
formed by the set of phonological elements of the series of 
sounds that support it, sustain it, for example the signifier of 
the concept sword would be h+o+m+b+r+e. The meaning of 
the linguistic sign is the concept and idea that the signifier 
evokes in the mind, in the reason. It is vital to understand and 
comprehend from the Gnostic vision the importance of the 
signifier and the signified, because as we will see in the point 
about the Hyperborean Physics and when analyzing the 
energetic centers of the microcosm, it is of transcendental 
importance to glimpse this reality, because the whole 
construction of creation, of the continent of entities contained 
in the created universe is sustained in a magic or acoustic 
cabala, and the designated sounds of The One are its VOX, 
which gives the entities onto- logical conformation, but we 
will study this in depth in the next topics. Continuing with the 
definition, the signifier of the word man would be the concept 
of man, that is, the set of characteristics common to all men 
that allows them to be grouped as a class. There is another 
element to consider, apart from the signifier and the signified 
there is the REFERENT which is the entity, the object of 
REAL identity to which the sign refers. The referent can be a 
real object, a concrete entity or an imaginary, cultural 
creation, such as an extra-terrestrial word; the important thing 
is that signifier and signified form a structure of codes, of 
symbols that allow us to understand in a language the 
referents or concrete, natural or imaginary entities. Signs are 
fundamental participatory elements in the constitution of 
symbols, because the connection between natural signs creates 
signifying relations whose referents have a link of real 
meaning. For example, the principle SMOKE IS DIRECTLY 
LINKED TO THE PRINCIPLE FIRE, but a SYMBOL is a 
connection of links between principles or concepts that is 
socially accepted in a conventional or arbitrary form, 
constituting itself in
DIRECTLY 
LINKED TO THE PRINCIPLE FIRE, but a SYMBOL is a 
connection of links between principles or concepts that is 
socially accepted in a conventional or arbitrary form, 
constituting itself in


--- PAGE BREAK ---THE PRINCIPLE FIRE, but a SYMBOL is a 
connection of links between principles or concepts that is 
socially accepted in a conventional or arbitrary form, 
constituting itself in


--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
a premise or law. Scientific and mathematical premises or 
different languages, alphabets, aesthetic arts or, for example, 
traffic signs or Morse code, are structures that form symbolic 
languages that are socially accepted in a con- ventional way, 
allowing human communication. But what we are interested 
in understanding are the symbols that have an impact on a 
deeper semiotic and linguistic content, and in this there is an 
axiological, ethical and aesthetic scale that is directly related 
to an ontological reality. Religious symbols and political 
symbols are contained in them, such as patriotic symbols, for 
example, the colors of the flags, the rosettes, etc. But what we 
investigate are the sacred symbols such as religious images, 
because it is there where the SACRED SYMBOLS intervene.
Understanding this places us in an inner position where we 
can glimpse from a Gnostic vision that the sacred symbols are 
the images that acquire sacred significance, because the 
constitution of their principles is directly related to a mystical 
religious reality, since it is conventionally accepted by the 
religious community of Pasu- ges as truth, endowing the 
symbols with reality; Thus, the symbol of the cross is 
identified with Christianity, or the symbol of the moon with 
Islam, or the symbol of the five-pointed star with Judaism. In 
this way we understand that religious languages are mystical 
structures of symbolic content that act in the psyche of man as 
pre-eminent patterns that generate psychological content, for 
example the mystical complexes that endow the being with 
religious sense or religiosity. Now, why are sacred symbols so 
important? What is the difference between a sacred symbol 
and one that is not?
Answer: because the sacred symbols are arranged in the 
following way
or religiosity. Now, why are sacred symbols so 
important? What is the difference between a sacred symbol 
and one that is not?
Answer: because the sacred symbols are arranged in the 
following way


--- PAGE BREAK ---why are sacred symbols so 
important? What is the difference between a sacred symbol 
and one that is not?
Answer: because the sacred symbols are arranged in the 
following way


--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
in the archetypal memory or reason, in the ontology of the 
microcosm as an instinctive or archetypal energetic substrate, 
that is to say, they are guidelines or designs contained in the 
BEING IN ITSELF of man, participating directly in the 
development of the psychic constitution of man. Thus the 
sacred symbols are not outside the microcosm but are inside 
the human soul, deposited in the being, in his unconscious; 
just as they are OUTSIDE, in the macrocosm, deposited in the 
cultural superstructure of the world.
That is why terms such as spirit, god, saints, virgin, angels, 
archangels, paradise, hell, etc., are symbolic structures that act 
as SACRED SYMBOLS, are symbolic structures that act as 
SACRED SYMBOLS and have in themselves a numinous 
power in the relationship between the signifier (acoustic voice 
projection of The One, wherein lies the being itself, which 
defines the entity as such) and the signified, generating in the 
psyche of massified man a conceptual relationship that 
sacralizes and dogmatizes him in the concept or idea, This is 
so, for the simple reason that the voice of these ideas or their 
MEANING are BIJAS sounds (magical sounds) that 
participate in the ontology, in the human being, as designs 
imposed by the demiurge in the human soul. Let us take for 
example the idea of GOD, this word is a sacred symbol that 
acquires significance even in the most primitive individual, 
because this archetype is the symbol that represents the 
creator god, the demiurge, the One and it is in the human soul, 
in the microcosmic ontic structures (chakras or energetic 
centers), motor, instinctive, emotional, intellectual) arranged 
by him, on a scale that goes from the gnoseological 
(knowledge, divine logos) to the ontological (universal being, 
the macrocosm) and finally the axiological (sense, existential 
value of the divine). The disposition of this transcendental 
archetypal idea is the main link between two fundamental 
principles of creation and the transcendental idea.
ical (sense, existential 
value of the divine). The disposition of this transcendental 
archetypal idea is the main link between two fundamental 
principles of creation and the transcendental idea.


--- PAGE BREAK ---tial 
value of the divine). The disposition of this transcendental 
archetypal idea is the main link between two fundamental 
principles of creation and the transcendental idea.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
the human and the divine. But if the term or the idea is 
MOTHER, CIRCLE, or TREE, equally they are symbols and 
acquire a value for the pasu according to their axiological 
link; thus the representation of the mother acquires greater 
significance than that of the circle or the tree, simply because 
the main link of the referent of the meaning is, for example, 
SON, BROTHER, WOMAN, MAN. That is to say, the 
purpose, or being in itself of the term mother is especially 
related to these concepts, while the meaning tree, or circle, its 
relations or links contained in its being in itself, are related to 
other conceptual principles (Circle: to geometry, etc. Tree: to 
the forest, etc.). Only the sacred symbols are directly 
significant for the pasu because they act as living 
psychological structures and are unconscious motors that 
actively participate in its anomic and ontological evolution.
Having understood this, we verify that myths, according to 
the conventional definition, are a narrative that describes and 
portrays in a SYMBOLIC language the origin and basic 
assumptions of a civilization. On the other hand, myths speak 
of gods and supernatural processes related to religion; their 
nature is to explain the origin of the gods, the world and 
civilizations. Generally, the mythological narration is a 
marvelous, fascinating and extraordinary event located out of 
the present or historical time, carried out by a character of 
divine or heroic character. There are several kinds of myths 
that can be classified according to the dominant theme 
revealed by their mythical structures, which can be grouped as 
follows: Cosmogonic myths (explaining the origin of the 
world; the Biblical Genesis, the Rig Veda, contain 
cosmogonic tales). Myths of heroes, gods or demigods (Greek 
and Roman mythology has a continent of myths where the 
hero is immortalized thanks to his epic deeds). Myths of birth 
and rebirth
tain 
cosmogonic tales). Myths of heroes, gods or demigods (Greek 
and Roman mythology has a continent of myths where the 
hero is immortalized thanks to his epic deeds). Myths of birth 
and rebirth


--- PAGE BREAK ---es). Myths of heroes, gods or demigods (Greek 
and Roman mythology has a continent of myths where the 
hero is immortalized thanks to his epic deeds). Myths of birth 
and rebirth


--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
(related to initiation rites, transformation of human beings into 
new beings. An example of this myth is the rebirth or 
resurrection of Christ in Christianity). Foundation myths (they 
relate the foundation of cities, the myth of Gilgamesh in 
Babylon or Romulus and Remus in Rome are foundation 
myths). Sacrificial myths (these myths are ritual structures 
where an aspect of oneself is immolated in pursuit of a deity. 
The crucifixion sacrifice of Christ or the blood sacrifice rites 
of the Druidic Celts, or of the Carthaginians, or in America 
the sacrifices of the Aztecs, etc.).
In our western culture, its foundations are imbued, 
impregnated, its cultural contexts constituted by mythical 
preeminences and from the beginning of the civilizations of 
the European peoples or nations, mythology and its myths 
were decisive factors in the conformation of their religious, 
political and social ethics and morals; let us think how 
decisive Greco-Roman mythology was in Imperial Rome, in 
the Italian Renaissance or in European Romanticism. The 
action of myths evolved from mythologies such as Egyptian 
or Chaldean, to those of greater transcendence such as Greek 
and Roman mythology, in which we find a set of myths well 
specified and structured in a harmonious mythical context in 
all classes and orders. In the chapter on THE TRUTH OF 
HISTORY we develop historically the incidence of 
mythological thought in the hyperborean social phenomena of 
psychosocial liberation strategy. THE MYTHS AND 
SACRED SYMBOLS OF THE
RELIGIOUS SYNARCHY are living structures contained in 
the mythical continent of Jewish, Christian, Hindu, Muslim 
sacred texts; in reality all monotheistic religions are sustained 
by myths and the root, the axial axis of these myths is a 
SACRED, messianic, priestly or clerical IMAGE, the sacred 
symbol being the main one.
in reality all monotheistic religions are sustained 
by myths and the root, the axial axis of these myths is a 
SACRED, messianic, priestly or clerical IMAGE, the sacred 
symbol being the main one.


--- PAGE BREAK ---heistic religions are sustained 
by myths and the root, the axial axis of these myths is a 
SACRED, messianic, priestly or clerical IMAGE, the sacred 
symbol being the main one.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
structural support of the myth and the image that sacralizes 
the con- sciousness of the pasu or human animal. Greco-
Roman myths, the essential basis of Latin and European 
culture, also have their impact on Western culture. The 
European pagan mythologies such as the Nordic, Celtic and 
Germanic, after the appearance of the Imperial Rome of the 
Augustans of the West, suffer the insidious action of the 
Judeo-Christian myths, but we still do not understand the 
importance and the action of the myths in the culture and 
fundamentally in the psyche of man.
Hyperborean Gnosis defines myths as living structures 
because their symbols participate in the formation of the 
psyche, its complexes and the ego, being true literary 
machines of psychological transformation. Myths act by 
influencing the social collective unconscious, determining 
social con- sciousness; once the mythical patterns have been 
structured in their cultures, the action of their ethical and 
moral concepts in a preeminent way is molding, forming their 
fundamental principles: religious, political, social and 
cultural. For example, we can see how in the West the social 
and cultural structures are founded on the Judeo-Christian 
myth in all its cultural expressions: religious, political, artistic 
and scientific. The action of the myth of Jesus Christ, a myth 
of birth and rebirth affirmed in a narrative where a monk or 
priest, a messiah called Jesus is killed and crucified, is reborn 
through his own resurrection. This religious mythical 
narration that has in its axial axis a SACRED SYMBOL, the 
figure of the crucified Christ and his resurrection is perhaps 
the most powerful myth that has been projected on humanity, 
because this mythical literary structure has and had the power 
to destroy and replace the western mythological, pagan, Greek 
and Roman cultures that were affirmed on a continent of 
WARM MYTHS which were structured on SYMBOLS, and 
which had the power to destroy and replace the western 
mythological, pagan, Greek and Roman cultures that were 
affirmed on a continent of WARM MYTHS which were 
h were structured on SYMBOLS, and 
which had the power to destroy and replace the western 
mythological, pagan, Greek and Roman cultures that were 
affirmed on a continent of WARM MYTHS which were 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
structured on SYMBOLS, and which had the power to destroy 
and replace the western mythological, pagan, Greek and 
Roman cultures that were affirmed on a continent of WARM 
MYTHS which were structured on SYMBOLS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---d the power to destroy 
and replace the western mythological, pagan, Greek and 
Roman cultures that were affirmed on a continent of WARM 
MYTHS which were structured on SYMBOLS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

33
ETERNAL BOLOS. It is important to differentiate this 
because the eternal symbols differ from the sacred ones, their 
representations refer in their relations and principles to 
ETHICAL, HEROIC, etc. meanings. For example, in the 
Greek and Roman civilizations their cultures revolved around 
their war myths, and the heroic deeds of their gods were the 
determining eternal symbols for these societies, which were 
molded in all their cultural, religious, political and artistic 
forms under the ethical and aesthetic action of their epic 
myths. That is why they were civilizations governed by an 
aristocratic and warrior sense, on the other hand, when their 
Greek myths (hyperborean Apollo by the Semitic Jesus 
Christ) were replaced by the Christian myth of axiology and 
religious morality, these Christianized peoples lost the heroic 
mythical sense for the religious mythical sense, converting 
their peoples to Christianity, which transformed the entire 
culture and civilization of the peoples attracted by the action 
of this myth and its sacred symbol. We must understand the 
destructive action of a myth and its impact on the psyche of 
man, and if we can reflect gnostically we will verify the 
importance of myths and especially of their sacred symbols 
for the synarchy, in its goals of world domination. That is why 
we affirm that in the psychological structure of the pasu, of 
the sleeping man, the complex formers of his personality are 
subject to certain myths, and all his ethical and moral psychic 
processes are based on conceptual pre- eminences that have 
the Christian myth and Jesus as the sacred symbol that 
sacralizes the conscience of this type of individual. Such is the 
importance of the mythical preeminences within the 
consciousness of the pasu that, taking for example two 
individuals, one a Marxist atheist and the other a liberal 
capitalist, we verify that neither of them has a Christian 
ethical and moral sense, although we must consider that both 
were raised and educated under the rigor of Catholicism.
e other a liberal 
capitalist, we verify that neither of them has a Christian 
ethical and moral sense, although we must consider that both 
were raised and educated under the rigor of Catholicism.


--- PAGE BREAK ---apitalist, we verify that neither of them has a Christian 
ethical and moral sense, although we must consider that both 
were raised and educated under the rigor of Catholicism.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
Christian. But the development of their lives led them to move 
away from that myth and its dogma; understanding this, 
logical reasoning leads us to think that neither of these two 
individuals suffers from the action of the Christian myth, 
however, reality shows us that this is wrong and for example, 
let's look at socialist Russia today totally converted to 
Christianity.
What does this mean, and why are these men, apparently 
free of these myths, not free of them?
The truth is that education and upbringing are determinant 
for the introjection and action of a myth in the psyche of the 
pasu, and this is due to the action of the world synarchy and 
its gods that rule the material order, who have the mission to 
retain in their cultural superstructure, in their religious and 
political superconcepts, the men tied to their designs. In such 
a way man, from childhood, is culturally structured in a 
religious form where its rites and ceremonies affirm in the 
unconscious of the child, of the infant, its sacred symbols, 
which are deposited in its unconscious, its sphere of shadow, 
remaining there in potential form. Let us think that the whole 
of Western civilization revolves around the Christian myth, 
from birth, with baptism, childhood with confirmation, youth 
with the rite of the sacrament of matrimony, death with 
extreme unction; everything is sustained by this myth. The 
military structure and the military are Catholic, so are the 
politicians, primary, secondary and university education, 
however secular it may be, also suffers from the morality of 
this myth. Nothing escapes the action of the myth of the 
synarchy that governs world culture: the Christian myth. This 
myth is the projection of the demiurge's best strategy in the 
world and in its text is the most powerful sacred symbol of the 
religious synarchy: that of Jesus Christ, that of the priestly 
hero. It is important to understand that the myths of the 
synarchy have in their axial axis, in
most powerful sacred symbol of the 
religious synarchy: that of Jesus Christ, that of the priestly 
hero. It is important to understand that the myths of the 
synarchy have in their axial axis, in


--- PAGE BREAK ---d symbol of the 
religious synarchy: that of Jesus Christ, that of the priestly 
hero. It is important to understand that the myths of the 
synarchy have in their axial axis, in


--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
its center to a religious personage, to a PRIEST OR MONK. 
This is its SACRED SYMBOL and has a numinous power 
that exerts a fascination in the psyche of the pasu, of the 
human animal.
Today the cultural synarchy and its branches, sociology, 
psychology, pedagogy, etc., give explanations of the reality of 
the myths and maintain without mistake that they are the basis 
of the complexes affirming the psychological reality of the 
myth, but we must understand that this is simply a strategy, 
because the truth of the action of the myth in society and in 
the psyche of man will never be revealed, because these 
academic sciences are allied to the purposes and plans of The 
One. The pasu can only experience the numinous reality of 
the myth when it is socially or particularly constellated, for 
example, critical or tragic situations are significant events for 
the emergence of a myth. An example of this in the collective 
sphere was the Malvinas war and the arrival of Pope John 
Paul II, with the masses becoming involved in his social 
phenomenon. In the particular, in any critical situation of 
existence, man automatically appeals unconsciously to a 
myth, affirming himself in it, which takes possession of his 
existence until man can overcome his psychic crisis.
The important thing is to understand this and specifically 
the action of the Sacred Symbols in myths, because they are 
present in all religious mythical contexts, since the sacred 
symbol is an image or can also be a conceptual traction. That 
is why in Christianity it is the image of Jesus or the concept of 
love, humility, equality, the same happens with Buddhism, 
Islam, Lama- ism and all the religious or esoteric structures of 
the world synarchy.
Undoubtedly, the sacred symbol is an IMAGE of sacred 
significance and, according to the evolutionary grade of the 
pasu is
ism and all the religious or esoteric structures of 
the world synarchy.
Undoubtedly, the sacred symbol is an IMAGE of sacred 
significance and, according to the evolutionary grade of the 
pasu is


--- PAGE BREAK ---igious or esoteric structures of 
the world synarchy.
Undoubtedly, the sacred symbol is an IMAGE of sacred 
significance and, according to the evolutionary grade of the 
pasu is


--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
The greater the onto- logical evolution, the more the sacred 
symbol, which in the primitive pasu is simply configured in 
the image (the image of Jesus on the cross or of Buddha 
meditating are sacred for man), in the evolved pasu or in the 
Virya, this image acquires conceptual SIGNIFICANCE. It is 
for this reason that evolved men seek sacred symbols that 
contain in their contexts certain axioms or premises that have 
a greater conceptual structure, thus becoming connected to 
esoteric philosophical or religious forms of greater 
significance than conventional religions, such as Masonry, 
Theosophy, Yoga tantra, Zen Philosophy, etc. Unfortunately, 
the warrior who embraces these symbols is mistaken, because 
they also contain the designs of the demiurge and his religious 
synarchy. It is interesting to note that these esoteric structures 
have within their contexts, beyond their sacred symbols which 
are in reality the structure and foundation of their ideologies, 
certain ETERNAL SYMBOLS.
How is it possible that these esoteric structures of the 
synarchy contain eternal symbols, being part of the strategies 
of the metaphysical synarchy?
This is simply due to the action of the gods loyal to the 
eternal spirit, the esoteric structures of the world synarchy still 
contain certain eternal symbols because their esoteric 
religious and philosophical ideologies are affirmed in the idea 
of liberation, of individuation. These transcendental ideas are 
based on an eternal symbol, on heroic myths and warriors 
who seek freedom for its own sake, by the grace of their 
eternal will. Although these heroic myths, where the eternal 
symbol was a warrior character, have been distorted and their 
structures modified to an esoteric religious language, whose 
doctrines and knowledge, affirmed in a sacred symbol, act as 
modifying tapasignos,
a warrior character, have been distorted and their 
structures modified to an esoteric religious language, whose 
doctrines and knowledge, affirmed in a sacred symbol, act as 
modifying tapasignos,


--- PAGE BREAK ---have been distorted and their 
structures modified to an esoteric religious language, whose 
doctrines and knowledge, affirmed in a sacred symbol, act as 
modifying tapasignos,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
They deviate and disorient, affirming in a different sense the 
idea of liberation, which is now only possible through 
worship, through submission to the gods, that is to say, 
through a priestly, monastic devotional conduct. For this 
reason, all awakened men reoriented in a warrior, heroic 
mysticism, such as that contained in this treatise, at some 
point in their existence have embraced a sacred symbol, 
structuring themselves along some of the esoteric mystical 
lines of the world religious synarchy, because no one enters 
the world of the One, of illusion, without suffering the effects 
of the same, no matter how much spiritual power they 
possess, because when we incarnate we suffer the devastating 
action of the kalachakra key. So it is that sooner or later, when 
our spirit and our Self reorient themselves, they are trapped by 
an esoteric superconcept, but thanks to the action of the 
liberating gods there exists in them subliminally an eternal 
symbol, which we will grasp and will allow us to escape from 
this esoteric concept and thus relate to a gnoseological science 
that charismatically unites us to a HYPERBorean strategy of 
SPIRITUAL LIBERATION.
On the other hand, the hyperborean myths have in their 
mythical narrations a heroic story, having as axis an 
ETERNAL SYMBOL, which is a warrior image, that of a 
hero.
We must consider that the greater the will and noological 
consciousness, the lesser the action of the sacred symbols in 
the spirit of the virya and the real possibility of accessing the 
ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUALITY, which is the dissolution, the 
total disintegration of the myths and the designs of the sacred 
symbols in the soul, in the microcosm of the liberated and 
reoriented warrior in the ORIGIN. But the lesser the 
consciousness and will, the greater the action of the sacred 
symbols and the greater the disintegration of the self and the 
spiritual will in the ontological designs arranged by The One 
in the soul, in the microcosm of the pasu, of the massified 
man. The greater the identification of the pasu in a symbol
self and the 
spiritual will in the ontological designs arranged by The One 
in the soul, in the microcosm of the pasu, of the massified 
man. The greater the identification of the pasu in a symbol


--- PAGE BREAK ---ual will in the ontological designs arranged by The One 
in the soul, in the microcosm of the pasu, of the massified 
man. The greater the identification of the pasu in a symbol


--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
The sacred, greater soul evolution, awakening in the soul the 
ontological designs, which have the mission to lead the 
conscience and will of man to the specified destinies that the 
synarchy has for the pasu in the world. The sacred symbols 
and their ESOTHERIC INSTITUTIONS OR RELI-
GIOSES are structured in the world to trap men, their forms 
and cultural dogmas, in which the warrior will be destroyed in 
his will, serving all his life as a devotee, an adept or perhaps 
an initiate; perhaps if he complies with the principles of its 
dogmas he will be able to evolve and arrive at a Manu 
entelechy, as for example is a Cardinal or the Pope in 
Christianity, or an enlightened yogi in Samaddhi who reached 
NIRVANA, in Hinduism or Brahmanism. The ontological 
entelechy Manu is the maximum EVO- LUtion of the Soul 
and the greatest disintegration of the warrior's Spirit, of his 
ETERNAL SELF, and this reality means the total and 
definitive loss of the warrior's maximum aspiration: the 
ABSO- LUTE INDIVIDUATION. The myths in their 
symbolic contexts possess a being in itself, that is to say, a 
purpose that is the intention deposited by the demiurge in its 
literary continent and a being for man that is contained in the 
suprafinality of the myth. The FINALITY OR BEING IN 
ITSELF (philosophy deals with these ontological designs 
contained in all the entities of creation) of a myth is to fulfill 
its objective, which is to unfold on the cultural superstructure 
or extensive network of the world as a cultural fact or event. 
THE SUPRAFINALITY OR BEING-FOR-MAN is contained 
in a strategic purpose whose fundamental principle is to trap 
in its axiological contexts the greatest number of passives and 
guide them to the designs, which is to serve in certain 
strategies to the ends of the same. The world power, in the 
event of needing, for example, soldiers for a war, acts by 
potentiating and deploying
hem to the designs, which is to serve in certain 
strategies to the ends of the same. The world power, in the 
event of needing, for example, soldiers for a war, acts by 
potentiating and deploying


--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
the myths of the hero on world culture. To this end they 
emerge the myth in a certain cultural segment that is 
contained either in the literary arts, in cinematographic art 
(these myths commonly emerge to the world through 
cinematographic art and films of war or epic genre, such as 
the saga of the Lord of the Rings or films like Matrix, are a 
strategic part of the being itself of the emerging myth), on 
television, in the media, the press, etc. Therefore, the myths of 
the synarchy are living structures that constantly participate in 
culture, potentiating and generating social and cultural 
phenomena or facts in which they participate in their being-in-
itself or finality, and if necessary their being-for-man or 
suprafinality. We must bear in mind that all emergent cultural 
facts, whether religious or political, that acquire collective or 
social significance always generate vitality in the cultural 
superstructure of the world, endowing it with movement, 
being sustained by a myth and its designs.
For this not to happen and for the fellow fighter, the 
HYPERBorean warrior, to be able to access his own initiation 
as a total, absolute warrior, determined to do everything for 
his own freedom, he must destroy from himself any vestige of 
the sacred symbols in his consciousness and in his 
unconsciousness. If this is so, and the companion achieves the 
absolute dissolution of the sacred symbols, it means the 
definitive elimination of the sphere of the shadow, of the 
unconscious, the warrior being ABSOLUTE VOLUN- TAD, 
ETERNAL CONSCIOUSNESS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ution of the sacred symbols, it means the 
definitive elimination of the sphere of the shadow, of the 
unconscious, the warrior being ABSOLUTE VOLUN- TAD, 
ETERNAL CONSCIOUSNESS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
4. ONTOLOGICAL DESIGNS AND THEIR EFFECTS 
ON THE MICROCOSM CENTERS OR CHAKRAS.
When we refer to the designs we must understand that we 
are 
referring 
to 
the 
biological, 
physiological 
and 
psychological preeminences that are contained in the 
microcosm or human machine that determine a priori our 
form of action and apprehension.
To develop this subject and to be able to discern it in all its 
complexity and understanding we must understand that these 
designations are contained in the energetic centers, such as the 
MOTOR center that governs the muscular and skeletal 
system, the INSTINCTIVE center that is based on the 
reproductive apparatus, the EMOTIONAL center that governs 
the psychic system, and the INTELLECTUAL center that 
directs the reason, the memory, etc. In reality, we will study 
these centers according to the Eastern theories, such as yoga, 
tantrism, Buddhism, Brahmanism, etc., which call them 
CHAKRAS. It is important to understand that from the 
Hyperborean Gnossolo- gical philosophy the terminology we 
use with respect to the chakras is that of energetic centers, but 
we will develop this point from the esoteric philosophy of 
yoga, since there is a strong dogmatism in this concept; 
therefore we will study it under this conceptual theme. We 
will begin with a description of the SEVEN CHAKRAS, their 
element, location, and the energy centers.
lization, yantra, mantra, function and deity.
It is important to recognize and understand that each racial 
group has a certain SPIRITUAL ORDER that is correlative to 
its cultural structure. Therefore, we must understand that we 
WESTERN people of ARIO INDO-EUROPEAN origin 
belong to a certain group of SPIRITUAL ORDER that is 
correlative to its cultural structure.


--- PAGE BREAK ---Therefore, we must understand that we 
WESTERN people of ARIO INDO-EUROPEAN origin 
belong to a certain group of SPIRITUAL ORDER that is 
correlative to its cultural structure.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
We have a RACIAL AND CULTURAL IDOSIN-CRACY 
OF OUR OWN, which is
contained in the cultural heritage that comes from the 
GRECO-ROMAN TRADITIONS AND FROM THE GREAT 
CIVI- LIZATIONS THAT CAME TO BE THROUGHOUT 
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN HIS- TORIA.
Therefore, it is essential to understand that it is according 
to the SPIRITUAL AND RACIAL origin that we must SEEK 
OUR SPIRITUAL LIBERATION and it is a waste of time to 
insist on seeking freedom for an Aryan: Latin, German, 
Hispanic, Nordic, etc. in EASTERN theories, SINCE THEY 
WILL 
ONLY 
FIND 
CONFUSION 
AND 
DISORIENTATION.
Unfortunately this type of oriental dogmas through 
history, especially contemporary history, has penetrated the 
social body of the westerner, contaminating with its esoteric 
doctrines and ideologies the cultural structure of the Aryan 
Indo-Germanic West or the AMERICANIZED EUROPEAN 
IMMIGRANT, because it is necessary to clarify that it is not 
only the BLOOD the medium from which we acquire 
NOOLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS, also the SOIL contains 
in its geomancy a chorolography that contributes a mysticism 
with which we can incorporate spiritual consciousness; 
Hence, the fusion of certain groups of European immigrants 
with the indigenous American San- gres has generated a 
RACE OF SPIRITS of unparalleled power and an example of 
this is the absolute leader JUAN DOMINGO PERÓN and his 
companion, the siddha EVA PERÓN. In this way we have 
fallen into oriental dogmas that have modified our mystical 
religious and esoteric sense by introducing religious panaceas 
such as yoga, Buddhism, Zen meditation, Eastern Christianity, 
Muslim mysticism, etc., which although they are religious 
dogmas that have certain hyperborean connotations, they are 
delineated for the different religions.
en meditation, Eastern Christianity, 
Muslim mysticism, etc., which although they are religious 
dogmas that have certain hyperborean connotations, they are 
delineated for the different religions.


--- PAGE BREAK ---rn Christianity, 
Muslim mysticism, etc., which although they are religious 
dogmas that have certain hyperborean connotations, they are 
delineated for the different religions.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
rent ORIENTAL RACIAL GROUPS.
That is why we must place ourselves internally and 
understand that for us, the descendants of European Aryans, 
the 
WAY 
IS 
NOT 
CONTAINED 
IN 
OUR 
MYTHOLOGICAL MYTHOLOGICAL GRECO-ROMAN, 
GERMAN, NORDIC, CELTIC, IBERIAN, OR INDOAME- 
RICAN, 
ETC. 
MYTHOLOGICAL 
TRADITIONS. 
THEREFORE, WE SHOULD NOT FALL INTO THE 
ERROR OF BELIEVING THAT ORIENTALISM IS THE 
TRUTH, BECAUSE IT IS NOT SO, THE TRUTH IS IN 
OUR BLOOD AND SOIL, IN ITS RACIAL AND 
SPIRITUAL VRIL.
But as many viryas deviate and fall into the esoteric 
oriental dogmas, we will refer to a description of the 
ENERGETIC CENTERS OF THE HUMAN MACHINE 
FROM AN EASTERN CONCEPTION, but we will also refer 
to a description of the ENERGETIC CENTERS OF THE 
HUMAN 
MACHINE 
FROM 
AN 
EASTERN 
CONCEPTION.
We do this simply to demonstrate to the hyperborean warrior 
that our path is different, because WE MUST LOOK AT 
OURSELVES SINCE WE ARE ALL HYPERBORNE.
It is necessary to understand deeply with our spirit this 
mystery contained in the blood, in the race and in our racial 
collective conscience. We wish to dwell on this point because 
there should be no mistaken understanding, because when we 
maintain that race is fundamental in the path of salvation, we 
affirm this premise not as the only condition but as one more 
that participates in the set of conditions necessary for 
transcendence. For more than race, what is distinguished in 
the individual, in the virya, is his ANIMIC SPIRITUAL 
condition, and it is this onto- logical substratum proper to the 
SELF that is the main principle of the spirit. It may be that the 
virya is sanguinely pure, but his spiritual animic situation is 
unbalanced or that he participates in a myriad of complexes or 
traumas, which limit the virya in his
he spirit. It may be that the 
virya is sanguinely pure, but his spiritual animic situation is 
unbalanced or that he participates in a myriad of complexes or 
traumas, which limit the virya in his


--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
individuation process. On the other hand, a mujin, a warrior, 
may not be totally pure in his blood, and his blood may 
contain a certain blood substratum of a minor racial nature. 
But if in his being there is an aristocratic spiritual soul 
condition, 
that 
is 
to 
say, 
totally 
ORIENTED 
TO 
TRASCENDENCE, this compensates for the lack of racial 
purity by directly impelling the man, the warrior, to his own 
individuation; although generally the symbol of Origin is 
deposited in the blood, racial purity being almost decisive, the 
above can happen and occur: The oriented Ego can, with will, 
resolve the soul complexes inherited from its inferior biology 
and can dissolve these unconscious contents in such a way 
that the spirit and the conscience recover their spiritual 
freedom.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ul complexes inherited from its inferior biology 
and can dissolve these unconscious contents in such a way 
that the spirit and the conscience recover their spiritual 
freedom.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
5. THE SEVEN CHAKRAS OR ENERGY VORTEXES 
OF THE MICROCOSM
Comrades, to know our body and soul from a spiritual 
wisdom is fundamental for the mastery of oneself and the 
absolute consciousness of the microcosm and at this point we 
will describe the seven chakras that make up the soul from the 
esoteric Buddhism or yoga. These are grouped in what is 
called in kundalini yoga or in Vedanta philosophy the subtle 
or astral body, which has different names depending on the 
esoteric science that studies it. Thus, the lotuses or chakras are 
grouped and energetically aligned by the nadis, which are like 
the blood vessels or the circulatory system of the body. The 
most important nadis are three channels called Ida, Pingala 
and Sushumma that unify and regulate them uniformly, 
integrating them all into an energetic unit that we call SOUL 
and that kundalini yoga calls the astral or etheric body.
In previous chapters we called soul to the psychoanimic 
structure that sustains the physical body and explained that 
this contains in itself a series of neurophysiological systems 
such as: nervous system, which is divided into peripheral or 
vegetative and central or volitional. The digestive, respiratory, 
circulatory, excretory, urinary, endocrine and lymphatic 
systems also participate. All these physiological apparatuses 
are interrelated and interrelated and are supported or 
contained in a motor unit, in which a bone system, an articular 
system and a muscular system participate. Also participating 
and essentially determining the being is a psychological 
system that contains a complex psycho-animal network 
determined by an emotional, an intellectual and a motor 
content. The latter make up the consciousness and the 
unconsciousness of the being,
system that contains a complex psycho-animal network 
determined by an emotional, an intellectual and a motor 
content. The latter make up the consciousness and the 
unconsciousness of the being,


--- PAGE BREAK ---ns a complex psycho-animal network 
determined by an emotional, an intellectual and a motor 
content. The latter make up the consciousness and the 
unconsciousness of the being,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
in which a series of complexes are structured, which are the 
ones that give the I, the eternal spirit a HUMAN 
EXISTENTIAL reference.
This plane or referential space is the one that contains the 
spirit, the ETERNAL SELF, the DESIGNS deposited in the 
human soul and are the ones that influence the eternal being to 
project his gaze to the material world and be trapped in this 
SPACE OF DEMIURGICAL SIGNIFICATION.
It is interesting to note how the SPIRIT, which is trapped 
in a TRAP, IN A METAPHYSICAL TRAP CONTAINED IN 
METEMPSYCHOSIS OR REINCARNATION UNDOES 
ONTOLOGICALLY 
BY 
GNOSEOLOGICALLY 
CHANGING ITS AXIOLOGY. This could-
We can exemplify this analogically in the following way, 
comparing the spirit as if it were a balloon in which the outer 
aspect is the spiritual one, but with the fall it has reversed 
itself, verifying now that what was contained OUTSIDE is 
now LOCKED INSIDE and vice versa. This is the best 
example to describe what happened to the spirit in his fall, for 
he reversed his gaze and in so doing lost the sense of origin 
and affirmed himself in illusion. Hence, now he can only look 
at matter and this meant that he was caught in the deception 
by the traps of the demiurge that closed to the spirit the return 
to the origin.
In this way the macrocosmic cultural archetypes of the 
demiurge are a barrier, a wall that does not allow the spirit to 
look towards the origin, that is why he has his back turned to 
his return, having that wall behind him and worst of all, not 
being able to turn around to try to see even that infrangible 
wall, because if he could see it, some question would arise 
that would lead him to ask himself why, what is the cause of 
such a construction. So he is condemned to look forward, to 
the future, embedded in the cultural world of the
me question would arise 
that would lead him to ask himself why, what is the cause of 
such a construction. So he is condemned to look forward, to 
the future, embedded in the cultural world of the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
archetypes, dogmas and exoteric or esoteric religious myths of 
the world synarchy, one of those myths that are part of that 
wall is the esoteric science of KUNDALINI YOGA.
In our development we must understand that this analysis 
of the soul from an orientalist line of study is simply to clarify 
to the warrior that the CHAKRAS, THE AWAKENING OF 
THE KUNDALINI, WHAT IS NAMED SERPENT, WHICH 
IS THE SEXUAL ENERGY, THE EROTICATED LIBIDO, 
WHICH EXCITES AND STIMULATES THE ENERGY 
CENTERS OF THE HUMAN MACHINERY, THIS IS A 
VERY SERIOUS ERROR THAT CAN EVEN COST THE 
WARRIOR HIS LIFE, BECAUSE THIS IS HOW THE 
ONTOLOGICAL 
DESIGNS 
OR 
FINALITIES 
ARE 
ACTIVATED, 
WHICH 
PROJECT 
THE 
PSYCHOID 
ARCHETYPES INTO THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE 
VIRYA, TRAPPING HIM IN DIFFERENT COMPLEXES 
OR TRAUMAS THAT STOP THE WARRIOR MONK IN 
HIS SPIRITUAL LIBERATION.
Therefore, from here on, we will begin to describe step by 
step this definition and the warrior, tireless seeker of the truth, 
will be able to access this wisdom to verify under the light of 
his own conscience the REAL and the SUTTERLY 
DECEITFUL of the science of kundalini yoga that has such a 
predilection among the followers of Eastern religions.
But it is important to understand that also in the West, in 
the neoliberal culture of this atheistic and materialistic 
synarchic capitalism, all the cultural representations, all the 
social phenomena emerging to the collective or social 
conscience are due or were due specifically to the activation 
of what the FREUDIAN PSYCHOLOGICAL science called 
SEXUAL COMPLEX OR LIBERATION OF FREEDOM.
This representation in the conscience of the man of the 20th 
Century


--- PAGE BREAK ---the activation 
of what the FREUDIAN PSYCHOLOGICAL science called 
SEXUAL COMPLEX OR LIBERATION OF FREEDOM.
This representation in the conscience of the man of the 20th 
Century


--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
XX is the product of a power that in a precise and effective 
way executed a perfectly thought out and directed plan to dis- 
pert erotic complexes, with which to establish in the social 
psyche a specifically AESTHETIC, VISUAL preeminence of 
reality and of the world.
In this analysis and in the knowledge that will be poured 
from now on, we specify technically and esoterically from a 
HYPERBorean 
perspective, 
the 
PSYCHOLOGICAL, 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
AND 
BIOLOGICAL 
realities 
that 
originate when the kundalini is unleashed.
AND 
DEVELOPED 
THE 
SCIENCE 
OF 
HYPERBOREAN YOGA THAT NEUTRALIZES THE 
CONSEQUENCES OF KUNDALINI YOGA.
BECAUSE KUNDALINI YOGA IS TODAY SIMPLY A 
TECHNICAL 
DEGRADATION 
OF 
THE 
HIGH 
NOOLOGICAL SCIENCE OF HYPERBOREAN RUNIC 
GYMNASTICS.
It is fundamental to understand that there is a hyperborean 
science called HYPERBorean ROUND GYMNASTICS and it 
is a psychomotor technique of spiritual socialization of all the 
psychic systems of the physical body or microcosm. The 
Loyal Gods taught this system to the warriors of the origin 
with a strategic purpose: that the luciferic warrior may break 
with the ontological designs and in this way take possession 
of HIMSELF.
In another study we will explain this spiritual science in 
detail, now we will simply point out that the entire military 
ethical structure, martial arts, fencing, certain yogas are 
emanations of this transcendent hyperborean technique.
Unfortunately, the synarchy has been in charge of 
destroying these concepts, especially the MILI- TAR. The 
systematic degradation of the military being and militarism is 
regrettable, because the loss of this form of


--- PAGE BREAK ---harge of 
destroying these concepts, especially the MILI- TAR. The 
systematic degradation of the military being and militarism is 
regrettable, because the loss of this form of


--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
The ethical system has weakened the armies of nations, 
leaving them at the mercy of imperialism. Another special 
consideration is the modification suffered in certain oriented 
philosophical systems such as yoga and martial arts, which as 
emanations of an eternal symbol were slowly modified and 
deformed in their ethical and aesthetic forms, i.e. axiological, 
relating their principles to religious or philosophical systems 
that have nothing to do with their truths. Today in the schools 
of yoga and martial arts, they are only taught as gymnastic 
forms to maintain health and physical form, losing the true 
sense that once had these arts of spiritual liberation. Only in 
the West the systems of fencing, Greco-Roman wrestling, 
boxing, still have a warrior code inherited from the ancient 
systems of JUST CABALLERESCAS; incredibly the western 
man seeks in the East what he has at his fingertips and has lost 
himself in martial or mystical dogmas that although they have 
a spiritual context, as specifically the OKI- NAWENSE 
KARATE or certain lines of Chinese KUNG FU, they do not 
belong to his cultural sphere. But on this cultural record about 
the warrior arts, the author of this treatise on HYPERBORIC 
GNO-SIS CAN OPINATE SEVERELY ABOUT IT, 
BECAUSE HE HAS BEEN TRAINED IN ALL OF THEM.
I can therefore give my opinion with absolute truth and in the 
book THE WARRIOR ARTS, A DIRECT LINK TO THE 
ETERNAL WORLDS, I study the most important martial arts 
techniques in the world.
The technical, religious and philosophical aspects of all of 
them are analyzed and analyzed.
What is important to note and what is essential to 
distinguish is the direct relationship that exists between the 
Nordic mythologies such as the Greek, Roman and 
Scandinavian or Germanic and the warrior arts, because all 
their gods are GREEK beings and handle to perfection some 
martial art. For this reason
Nordic mythologies such as the Greek, Roman and 
Scandinavian or Germanic and the warrior arts, because all 
their gods are GREEK beings and handle to perfection some 
martial art. For this reason


--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
reason between them and the Viryas there was a BLOOD 
PACT and the emperors and kings descended from a divine 
genealogy as the Romans or the Germans were first MILI- 
TARES, they were soldiers of the eternal and then 
PONTISTIC, wise warrior monks, but they never put the 
priestly before the WARRIOR. Unlike the Nordic European 
Mediterranean 
mythologies, 
IN 
THE 
EAST 
THE 
SACERDOTAL PREVALUES IN THEIR MYTHOLOGIES 
(Egyptian, Chaldean, Jewish, Christian, Brahmanic, Hindu, 
etc.), there being a RELIGIOUS CULTURAL COVENANT 
between the gods and their creatures, the Pasu, where the 
priestly and their religious institutions are above the military, 
the warrior, subordinating these to their religious dogmas, and 
where the priestly and their religious institutions are above the 
military, the warrior, subordinating them to their religious 
dogmas.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ing these to their religious dogmas, and 
where the priestly and their religious institutions are above the 
military, the warrior, subordinating them to their religious 
dogmas.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
6. STUDY AND ANALYSIS OF THE THREE LOWER 
CHAKRAS OF THE HUMAN SOUL
Sexuality is one of the great mysteries about which much 
has been written and in recent times, with the emergence of 
psychology, it is no longer a TABoo and its analysis was and 
is the object of study by science. The sexual liberation 
experienced today has forged two well-defined ethical 
extremes. On the one hand, a conscientialization of the sexual 
center has been generated, widening the limits of intellectual 
volitional consciousness, thus allowing to contain the instinct 
with the will and in this way to be able to direct the sexual 
energies. On the other hand, this sexual liberation potentiated 
in the cultural structure of the world an instinctive and sexual 
tendency in culture, which affected and modified the ethical 
and aesthetic delineations, for example in art, in all its 
manifestations, suffering consciously or unconsciously from a 
sexual inclination in its themes, works or arguments.
The aesthetic reality, the visual image of things was 
altered in its values, these modifications determined by the 
sexual complex which, having preeminence in the social 
conscience, influenced the aesthetic and axiological meanings. 
For this reason, the beauty archetype was modified in its 
symbols, being sacralized by certain symbols with an 
instinctive, passionate and erotic affective charge. The 
modification of this whole sphere of culture affects in reality 
the whole culture, because the aesthetic is today determining 
the ethical and this alteration of the REAL that creates a 
reality structured in a world where the aesthetic is determined 
by the EROTIC (eroticized libido) drastically diminishes the 
ETHICAL, losing this archetype symbolic function in the 
social 
conscience. 
What 
interests 
us 
in 
describing 
synthetically the sexual complex
C (eroticized libido) drastically diminishes the 
ETHICAL, losing this archetype symbolic function in the 
social 
conscience. 
What 
interests 
us 
in 
describing 
synthetically the sexual complex


--- PAGE BREAK ---) drastically diminishes the 
ETHICAL, losing this archetype symbolic function in the 
social 
conscience. 
What 
interests 
us 
in 
describing 
synthetically the sexual complex


--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
The chakra Muladhara, located at the base of the spine 
between the anus and the genitals, is activated when the 
chakra Muladhara is activated.The chakras have form, 
element, yan- tra, mantra, deity and function, but what we are 
specifically interested in knowing is the formation of 
complexes generated by this chakra when it is activated and 
its corresponding action in the consciousness of the pasu and 
the virya. This energy center undoubtedly activates in the 
unconsciousness of the soul a fundamental archetype, in man 
the "animus" and in woman the "anima".
These archetypal images are formed in the consciousness, 
processed with the energy provided by the chakra, and 
structure certain complexes that will be decisive in the pasu 
and in the virya, because the ETHICAL and AESTHETIC 
destiny, that is to say, the warrior's axiological destiny, 
depends fundamentally on them. This archetype has in its 
ontological 
structural 
conformation 
a 
series 
of 
DESIGNATIONS that, when fixed in the consciousness, in 
the sphere of light, project to the SELF certain BIJAS that 
combine to phagocytize the being and lead it to structure itself 
according to the PURPOSE OF THE BEING IN ITSELF 
CONTAINED 
IN 
THE 
ANIMA 
OR 
ANIMUS 
ARCHETYPE.
It is unquestionable that unconsciously this archetype 
serves the projection and the formation of a complex that will 
be projected externally serving in the search for THE IDEAL 
COUPLE, the consort, bride, wife, woman, lover, virgin, 
goddess, etc. This depends on the relationship existing 
between 
this 
cha- 
kra 
and 
others, 
because 
THE 
AXIOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIP IN THE ATTITUDE OF 
THE VIRYA AND THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT IS 
THE RESULTANT BETWEEN THE INTERACTION OF 
SEVERAL COMPLEXES OR WHAT IS THE SAME OF 
THE FORM OF THE VIRYA.
E 
AXIOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIP IN THE ATTITUDE OF 
THE VIRYA AND THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT IS 
THE RESULTANT BETWEEN THE INTERACTION OF 
SEVERAL COMPLEXES OR WHAT IS THE SAME OF 
THE FORM OF THE VIRYA.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
THE 
POTENTIAL 
EXPRESSION 
IN 
THE 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
OF 
CERTAIN 
ARCHETYPAL 
IMAGES THAT EMERGE FROM THE RELATIONSHIP 
OF TWO OR MORE CHAKRAS.
For example, if the muladhara chakra emerges related to 
the anahata chakra, it will generate an archetypal image of the 
anima supported by a strong MYSTIC AND DEVOTIONAL 
connotation, REPRESENTING THE COMPLEX THE 
FIGURE OF A VIRGIN, PRIESTESS, MYSTIC WIFE, 
GODDESS, THAT IS TO SAY OF A SHAKTI.
Now, if the relationship of the muladhara in its activation 
occurs with a relationship of a minor chakra such as the 
svadhista- na, which is an energetic center of the pubic region 
and contains certain bijas that activate certain instinctive 
functions, which trigger dramatic archetypes generating in the 
consciousness complexes and dark and vicious tendencies. 
These chakra relations, when they emerge from the 
consciousness and their archetypal contexts are not resigned 
from the "I" and the noological will, always subject the 
consciousness to their complexes and structure it to certain 
dramas or dramatic behaviors that usually end under tragic 
circumstances. Why we affirm this, simply because of the 
fundamental fact that the MULADHARA, SVADHIS- TANA 
AND MANIPURA chakras contain in their ontological 
structures the PRIMORDIAL ONTICAL DESIGNS OF THE 
PHYSICAL DEATH OF THE SOUL, AND MAINLY THE 
DEATH ARCHETYPE.
By this we mean that all the energies of the soul, those that 
are unleashed to develop the microcosm, the physical body, 
its conformation, its aesthetic figure, its motor power, its 
neurological, physiological, anatomical strength, etc., are 
contained in these three minor chakras that are ultimately in 
EVERY SOUL AN ONTICAL RECORD OF PAST LIVES.


--- PAGE BREAK ---wer, its 
neurological, physiological, anatomical strength, etc., are 
contained in these three minor chakras that are ultimately in 
EVERY SOUL AN ONTICAL RECORD OF PAST LIVES.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

53
Thus we find that in these vital energy centers of the 
microcosm 
are 
deposited 
energies 
that 
potentiate 
ARCHETYPES THAT CONTAIN THE ONTIC RECORDS 
OF THE METEMPSYCHOSIS OR REINCARNATION OF 
THE SOUL IN ALL ITS INCARNATIONS ON THIS 
PLANET, THEREFORE IS ALSO CONTAINED THE 
DEATH ARCHETYPE, WHICH IS AN ESSENTIAL PART 
OF THE END OF PHYSICAL LIFE.
That is why these minor chakras, when by some means we 
activate them, either by sciences such as YOGA, TANTRA, 
MARTIAL ARTS, OR CERTAIN esoteric techniques such as 
MANTRAS AND MUDRAS REPETITION, etc., we must 
know what risk we run if we do not have the wisdom, the 
knowledge of how to resign the demiurgic aspects of them, 
that is to say their finalities, suprafi- nalities and designs 
deposited by one, WE MUST KNOW WHAT RISK WE 
RUN IF WE DO NOT HAVE THE WISDOM, THE 
KNOWLEDGE OF HOW TO RESIGN THE DEMIURGIC 
ASPECTS OF THEM, THAT IS TO SAY THEIR 
FINALITIES, 
SUPRAFI- 
NALITIES 
AND 
DESIGNS 
DEPOSITED BY THE ONE IN THE SOUL.
WE MUST UNDERSTAND THAT THE WARRIOR'S 
POWER TO TRANSMUTE INTO A MUJIN, INTO AN 
AWAKENED VIRYA AND PERHAPS INTO A SIDDHA 
DEPENDS ESSENTIALLY ON THESE TECHNIQUES OF 
ARCHETYPAL ISOLATION OF THE CHAKRAS.
The pasu is generally a victim of these minor energy 
centers or instinctual chakras. Generally in the pasu, his center 
of gravity, his being is structured in these complexes and he 
can never escape from them, unless he is captured by some 
archetypal structure of the religious synarchy that evolves him 
psychically.
If this does not happen, the pasu lives eternally an INS- 
TINTIVE life, that of a rational animal as previously 
established by the demiurge, following MECHANICALLY 
the ontological designs determined by the One and the gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---an INS- 
TINTIVE life, that of a rational animal as previously 
established by the demiurge, following MECHANICALLY 
the ontological designs determined by the One and the gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
traitors creators of the material soul. That is why we affirm 
that the created animal man can never escape from his 
ontological designs if it is not by the SLOW AND 
MECHANICAL EVOLUTION OF THE LAW OF KARMA, 
HE MUST TRAVEL THE FINITE PATTERNS OF THE 
LAW OF EVOLUTION, INCARNATING SUCCESSIVELY 
THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE AXIOLOGICAL SCALE, 
FROM THE LOWEST KINGDOMS SUCH AS MINERAL, 
VEGETABLE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN, EVOLVING IN 
THE DOGMAS OF THE METAPHYSICAL SYNARCHY, 
COMPLYING WITH THE ARCHETYPAL PRECEPTS OF 
THE DESIGNATED SOUL WITHOUT BEING ABLE TO 
MAKE AN ONTOLOGICAL LEAP, SUFFERING THE 
VISCITUDES OF THE GODS AND BEING THE BREATH 
OF THE GODS.
That is why we affirm that the animal man, a copy created 
and evolved by the One and his gods traitors to the spiritual 
worlds of the eternal, is a being that has a spirit acquired by 
the mixtures of races product of the historical evolution, a fact 
that occurred in the last two millennia. That is why 
anthropology, psychology, philosophy, history are sciences 
that have been altered by a sinarchic culture that pretends to 
demonstrate the equality of men before god and that is a 
vulgar lie, because not even they allow this reality to be so, 
since the true god by allowing the pasu to have a spirit admits 
that he himself can BE, but the demiur- go will never allow 
him to become. The sleeping pasu or virya will never escape 
from the illusory nets of the sensory world of the demiurge, he 
will never be able to individualize himself because his being, 
no matter how much he has experienced the mystery of the 
COLD FOOT, HAS THE DESIGNS OF THE CREATOR 
IMPOSED ON HIS SOUL, AND THE CREATOR WILL 
NOT ALLOW THE PASU TO DISSOLVE HIMSELF 
FROM THEM BY TRANSMUTATING HIMSELF AND 
INDIVIDUALIZING HIMSELF.


--- PAGE BREAK ---S THE DESIGNS OF THE CREATOR 
IMPOSED ON HIS SOUL, AND THE CREATOR WILL 
NOT ALLOW THE PASU TO DISSOLVE HIMSELF 
FROM THEM BY TRANSMUTATING HIMSELF AND 
INDIVIDUALIZING HIMSELF.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
That is why man must resign his unconscious contents 
structured in his minor energetic centers, because it is there 
where the ontological designs of the created soul lie, because 
it is in these chakras where the instinctive and passionate 
sacred archetypes of the rational animal are found, because it 
is in these psychic contexts where man loses to the human and 
disintegrates the only possibility of BEING, because it is there 
where the virya must use these energies to transmute his 
animal being and to be able to ISOLATE HIS ANIMIC 
BEING, HIS SOUL, IN ORDER TO POTENTIALIZE HIS 
SELF AND HIS SPIRIT.
These three chakras, sustainers of the human soul, of the 
human insinct, are the cornerstone of the ontological alchemy 
of the human enchainment, because the virya through them 
has fallen in his axiological scale, losing his spiritual 
capacities, affecting especially his intellectual will, his motor 
will, his noological sensibility. In counterpart, the virya has 
fallen asleep, creating his offspring in an undisciplined way, 
falling into the nets of Maya, SUBMITTING TO THE 
MATERIAL ARCHETYPES AND THE DESIGNS OF THE 
HUMAN BEING.
Psychologically in these energetic centers the LIBIDO is 
framed, this energetic force is the one that drives the instincts 
and 
archetypes 
that 
will 
determine 
the 
ontological 
development of the soul and through it the complexes are 
potentiated, which are the egoic forms that will give 
constitution to the individuality or personality. Carl G. Jung, 
the eminent psychologist, maintains that the evolution of 
psychic development in man is generated from the libido, 
which is an unconscious correlate that emerges from the 
physiological instinctive functions, which are intimately 
linked to the mental archetypal structures of the soul.
nerated from the libido, 
which is an unconscious correlate that emerges from the 
physiological instinctive functions, which are intimately 
linked to the mental archetypal structures of the soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ido, 
which is an unconscious correlate that emerges from the 
physiological instinctive functions, which are intimately 
linked to the mental archetypal structures of the soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
The archetypes of the soul. According to Jung, there is no 
separation or division between the instincts manifested in the 
different senses or physiological functions and the archetypes 
structured in the logical and rational operations of the mind or 
consciousness, because both energies are substrates of the 
libido, This Swiss psychologist affirms that both functions, 
the instincts structured in the lower energies or in the minor 
chakras and the archetypes, higher energies structured in the 
major chakras that we will study below, are the essential bases 
of the formation of the UNCONSCIOUS.
Jung continues to affirm that in the end the energetics of 
the soul or of the unconscious is the libido and this 
encompasses the inklings and the archetypes, this awakened 
virya being inclined to define the archetypes over the inklings 
as the principle or genesis in the formation of the 
psychoanimic structure of the soul. This statement is so, 
because the soul is an emanation and unfolding of the 
NOOLOGICAL AND ETERNAL BEING that is embodied in 
the material world of the One in an ONTOLOGICAL BEING, 
subject first to the archetypal and metaphysical orders and 
second, although apparently first to the material designs 
determined by the physiological and anatomical morphologies 
contained in the instincts. It is important to understand that 
both instincts and ontological designs are definitely the same 
realities, they simply differ in an axiological space within the 
action that each of them has in the centers or chakras, because 
ultimately we can say that the designs to which the being is 
subject are the natural and metaphysical limits that as typical 
patterns of action condition and determine man. For example, 
no one can stop feeding or breathing or excreting because 
these instinctive action patterns are DESIGNS imposed a 
priori in the human ontology.
However, we must first and foremost relocate internally and 
fundamentally
or breathing or excreting because 
these instinctive action patterns are DESIGNS imposed a 
priori in the human ontology.
However, we must first and foremost relocate internally and 
fundamentally


--- PAGE BREAK ---reting because 
these instinctive action patterns are DESIGNS imposed a 
priori in the human ontology.
However, we must first and foremost relocate internally and 
fundamentally


--- PAGE BREAK ---

57
The archetypal formations, because they are the structures that 
will determine the formation of the EGO and will endow the 
personality with ontological significance and the psychic 
characteristics of the being. We can prove that the archetypal 
is prior to the instinctive in human genesis, both par- ticular 
and collective, first on the basis of the definition given above 
and secondly by verifying empirically how certain archetypes 
have fundamental preeminence in development, for example 
in the child, the archetypes love, mother, father, play, 
protection, etc.
Undoubtedly the basis of a child at birth is formed on 
certain instincts, but it is not a question here of a 
chronological order in the psychological, but on what the soul 
is based, whether on the material or the spiritual, and only an 
atheistic materialist, based on a Freudian psychology and on a 
positivist and Marxist philosophy can deny that the 
transcendent and archetypal attributes of the soul are above 
the instinctive and physio- logical formations of the soul.
Unfortunately this is the most common position of science 
and classical philosophy existing today, due to which man 
cannot understand the functioning of his being and reverts the 
importance of these psychological formations, structuring his 
self in a self where the lower energetic centers and the 
complexes that they introject in the consciousness as desires 
and passions have preeminence. In this way the "I" is diluted 
in a SELF that has the instinctive egoic complexes as the axial 
axis of the personality, deforming the guiding and forming 
archetypes of the being.
The animal man is mainly a victim of this, because he does 
not even respond to the natural archetypal commands, but 
being massified in a purely materialistic culture, he only has 
the strictly instinctive as a governing body, being more and 
more animal every day; on the other hand, we could say that 
the virya
being massified in a purely materialistic culture, he only has 
the strictly instinctive as a governing body, being more and 
more animal every day; on the other hand, we could say that 
the virya


--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
The sleeping person develops within the normal ontological 
canons and his psychic and psychological evolution is 
directed by the strictly archetypal, having preeminence in him 
archetypes that form the personality such as the monk or 
priest, the warrior or military, the merchant or bourgeois, or 
the archetype of the professions, for example, doctor, lawyer, 
archaeologist, geologist, architect, sportsman, etc.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THE AWAKENED VIRYA, 
THE 
LUCIFERIC 
WARRIOR 
GOVERNED 
BY 
A 
TRANSCENDENT CHRISTIAN MENTALITY, PLACES 
HIMSELF IN HIS AWAKENING ABOVE THE WHOLE 
ONTOLOGICAL 
COMPLEXION 
OF 
HIMSELF, 
RESIGNING INWARDLY THE INSTINCTIVE DESIGNS 
AND THE SACRED ARCHETYPES THAT FORM THE 
EGO AND THE PERSON OR THE SELF.
IN THIS WAY THE MUJIN, THE AWAKENED 
VIRYA, 
PLACES 
HIMSELF 
INWARDLY 
ON 
AN 
AXIOLOGICAL 
AND 
ONTOLOGICAL 
SCALE 
SUPERIOR TO THE INSTINCTS AND MAINLY TO THE 
ARCHETYPES, 
THUS 
ALLOWING 
HIM 
TO 
DE-
STRUCTURE 
THE 
EGO 
FROM 
THE 
PSYCHIC 
CUTTINGS OF THE COMPLEXES CONTAINED IN 
EACH ARCHETYPE OR IN EACH INSTINCT.
THIS INNER POSTURE RELOCATES THE SELF 
ABOVE THE SELF AND THE TRANSCENDENT AND 
NOOLOGICAL BEING DOES NOT FALL INTO THE 
ARCHETYPAL OR INSTINCTIVE WEBS OF THE SOUL.
THUS, WE AFFIRM
FIRST: THAT THE PASU OR HUMAN ANIMAL IS A 
STRICTLY INSTINCTIVE BEING.
SECOND: 
THE 
SLEEPING 
VIRYA 
OR 
THE 
EVOLVED MAN IS A BEING STRICTLY ENTE- 
LEQUIADO BY THE ARCHETYPES.
THIRD: THE AWAKENED VIRYA IS A BEING


--- PAGE BREAK ---IS A 
STRICTLY INSTINCTIVE BEING.
SECOND: 
THE 
SLEEPING 
VIRYA 
OR 
THE 
EVOLVED MAN IS A BEING STRICTLY ENTE- 
LEQUIADO BY THE ARCHETYPES.
THIRD: THE AWAKENED VIRYA IS A BEING


--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
TOTALLY NOOLOGICAL THAT HAS RECOVERED ITS 
EIDETIC 
AND 
MNEMIC 
FACULTIES, 
ITS 
TRANSCENDENT CONSCIOUSNESS BEING FREE OF 
THE UNCONSCIOUS IN THE REALM OF INSTINCTS 
AND ARCHETYPES.
FOURTH: A SEPARATE MENTION IS THE PSYCHE 
OF THE SIDDHAS OR DIVINE HEROES, WHOSE BEING 
IS OF A NOOLOGICAL FORMATION THAT PRESIDES 
OVER 
THE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL, 
THEIR 
BEING 
UNFOLDING ON THE BASIS OF CERTAIN ETERNAL 
SYMBOLS AND ATTRIBUTES PROPER TO THE DIVINE 
AND THE ETERNAL, WHICH PRACTICALLY FOR OUR 
REALITY AND OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE REAL 
IS IMPOSSIBLE TO DEFINE.
WE CAN ONLY SAY THAT THE HYPERBOREAN 
SIDDHAS HAVE AN AFFIRMED CONSCIOUSNESS IN 
THE ETERNAL AND CAN LOOK AT ALL REALITIES OF 
ALL CREATED AND UNCREATED WORLDS BECAUSE 
THEY ARE SUSTAINED BY THE ABSOLUTE AND ARE 
PART OF THE SAME.
WE 
COULD 
AFFIRM 
THAT 
THE 
HIGHEST 
NOOLOGICAL POSI- BILITIES OF THE AWAKENED 
VIRYA, SUCH AS LOYALTY, HEROISM, A-MOR, 
HONOR, COURAGE, NOOLOGICAL JUSTICE, ETC., 
ARE 
THE 
ATTRIBUTES 
OF 
A 
SIDDHA, 
A 
HYPERBOREAN 
SPHERE 
SPIRIT. 
ARE 
THE 
ATTRIBUTES OF A SIDDHA, OF A HYPERBOREAN 
SPHERE SPIRIT.
One of the properties of the transcended warrior, affirmed 
in the infinite, in the absolute worlds is his condition of 
ABSOLUTE, 
BEING 
ABLE 
TO 
SELF-REPRESENT 
HIMSELF ONTICALLY AT MORPHOLOGICAL WILL. 
From this
In this way it acquires form according to its strategic relation 
according to the existential space-time. One of the most 
feasible manifestations of the SIDDHAS is the Spherical 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
ONTOLOGY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
RICA, in other words a SPIRIT SPHERE, this morphological 
and ontological structuring is a UNIQUE AND ABSOLUTE 
property of the liberated gods and is used specifically in 
strategic concordance.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---s morphological 
and ontological structuring is a UNIQUE AND ABSOLUTE 
property of the liberated gods and is used specifically in 
strategic concordance.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
7. STUDY AND ANALYSIS OF THE FOUR HIGHER 
CHAKRAS 
FROM 
THE 
DEMIURGIC 
AND 
HYPERBOREAN METAPHYSICAL REALITIES
If we have understood wisely and with intellectual and 
spiritual depth the synthetic but precise analysis of the minor 
chakras that sustain the soul and specifically the rational 
animal, we will enter fully into the study of the higher chakras 
that conform the most "spiritual" part of the human soul. We 
affirm this because the centers of energies or cha-kras that 
comprise the highest part of the created soul are the lowest 
aspect of OUR TRANSCENDENT BEING.
In them are deposited the soul's psychic, sensitive, 
emotional, 
sensitive 
and 
intellectual, 
cognitive, 
ARCHETISTIC contents, which compose the EMOTIONAL 
AND 
PSYCHIC 
STRUCTURE 
OF 
THE 
CONSCIOUSNESS.
We must remember that the soul is composed of a 
consciousness and an unconscious which is divided into 
particular and collective. The consciousness contains in its 
continent these four higher chakras and the unconscious the 
three lower chakras analyzed above.
In an analysis, we first meet the most sensitive energetic 
center of the human soul, the Anahata chakra located at the 
level of the heart. We say that it is the most delicate because it 
is the permanent center of gravity of the energies of the human 
soul, it is the union and link between the animal aspect or 
lower soul, also called ANIMIC BEING and the higher soul 
or spiritual aspect, called CONSCIOUS BEING.
We affirm this because at this neuralgic point the 
unconscious energies of the soul being or anima in its highest 
axiological scale coincide with the energies of the conscious 
being in its highest axiological scale and the energies of the 
conscious being in its lowest axiological scale.


--- PAGE BREAK ---axiological scale coincide with the energies of the conscious 
being in its highest axiological scale and the energies of the 
conscious being in its lowest axiological scale.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
the lower conscious axiological ones. It is important to 
understand that the CONSCIOUS SELF has the capacity to 
determine and dominate in volitional consciousness all its 
individuality, but this is a process of spiritual growth and 
ontological understanding according to each of the centers of 
consciousness of the human soul, from the lower to the higher 
chakras. This growth of consciousness is an awakening that in 
some way all religious and esoteric dogmas in their doctrines 
preach in a similar way. In the process of mastering the soul, 
for example, Christian dogma preaches against lust, gluttony, 
sloth, etc., which are axiological conditions proper to the 
lower soul; Buddhism, likewise, speaks about the body of 
desires where the passions of the rational animal are rooted, 
etc. Esoteric doctrines such as gnosis or theosophy,
or Freemasonry, etc. They preach that the ego must be dissolved.
or the various egos or egoic attitude, in order to be able to 
resign the lowest aspect of human nature.
All these systems advise this process, but we maintain that 
it is necessary to possess a knowledge, a very wise esoteric 
technique, because if we do not possess it we will be 
destroyed by the action of the ONTOLOGICAL DESIGNS 
DEPOSITED BY THE DEMIURGO INSIDE THE HUMAN 
SOUL, THEREFORE WE ASSERT THAT ONLY A 
TRANSCENDENT WISDOM LIKE THE HYPER-BOREAU 
CAN WE DOMINATE AND CONCIENTIALIZE THE 
SOUL.
The animal man, the pasu, owes his ontological reality to 
material evolution and is completely determined by the 
mechanicity of his archetypal soul and can never escape the 
axiological limits of the same, therefore he evolves towards 
ontic entelechy through the karmic evolution or the eternal 
wheel of Samsara. The virya, on the other hand, has in himself 
an ETERNAL SELF and can reverse his conscious being.
he evolves towards 
ontic entelechy through the karmic evolution or the eternal 
wheel of Samsara. The virya, on the other hand, has in himself 
an ETERNAL SELF and can reverse his conscious being.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
that, although he is trapped in the soul's psychic designs and in 
the macrocosmic net of maya, he possesses the inner power to 
free himself; the first step is to isolate his soul, CHAKRA BY 
CHAKRA, AND TO CARRY OUT THE PROCESS OF 
INDIVIDUALIZATION, BUT THE DRAMATIC THING 
FOR THOSE WHO ARE ON THE WAY TO AWAKENING 
IS TO SEE IN THE WORLD OF MAYA THE PATH, THE 
SYMBOLS THAT LEAD TO LIBERATION, BECAUSE 
THE VIRYA CAN ACHIEVE ABSOLUTE MASTERY OF 
HIS SOUL BUT IT IS OF NO USE TO HIM IF HE IS LOST 
IN THE LABYRINTH OF MAYA, TRAPPED BY THE 
SACRED 
MACROCOSMIC 
SYMBOLS 
OF 
THE 
ILLUSORY UNIVERSE CREATED BY THE ONE, LOST 
IN THE MULTIPLICITY OF TEMPORARY SPACES 
THAT IN A LABYRINTHINE FORM ARE WOVEN 
AROUND HIM. FOR THIS REASON IT IS NOT ENOUGH 
TO BE MASTER OF ONESELF, WE CAN ONLY 
LIBERATE OURSELVES IF WE DEEPLY UNDERSTAND 
THE 
TERRAIN 
OF 
THE 
ENEMY 
AND 
THE 
METAPHYSICAL ENEMY THAT DECEIVED US AND 
SUBJECTED US TO THIS INFERNAL WORLD OF 
MAYA, WHICH, ALTHOUGH IT IS AN ILLUSION, IS 
THE ILLUSORY REALITY THAT WE MUST LIVE AND 
UNDERSTAND IN ORDER TO BE ABLE TO RESIGN IT 
AT THE TIME OF OUR LIBERATION.
But if the three minor chakras previously analyzed in a 
precise but synthetic way are centers or ontic registers that we 
must open and discern deeply, separating the demiurgic 
semiotic elements or contents from the hyperborean ones, 
going through each one of them as if they were a tunnel, in the 
same way we must proceed with the remaining four chakras, 
taking into account that if in the first three we must open and 
discern deeply, separating the demiurgic semiotic elements or 
contents from the hyperborean ones, going through each one 


--- PAGE BREAK ---o account that if in the first three we must open and 
discern deeply, separating the demiurgic semiotic elements or 
contents from the hyperborean ones, going through each one 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
of them as if they were a tunnel, in the same way we must 
proceed with the remaining four chakras, taking into account 
that if in the first three we must proceed in the same way.


--- PAGE BREAK ---them as if they were a tunnel, in the same way we must 
proceed with the remaining four chakras, taking into account 
that if in the first three we must proceed in the same way.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
If we would run risks when penetrating into their depths, into 
their shadows, in these centers the risks are increased in a 
poten- cial way. This is due to the fact that in these energy 
centers do not reside the primordial, instinctive and sensitive 
energies of the soul as in the minor centers, but the more 
subtle, sensitive and archetypal energies of the soul, because 
in the former the INSTINCTS prevail, but in these higher 
chakras the energies activate all the TRANSCENDENT 
ARCHETYPES that contain the SACRED SYMBOLS, which 
are the subtlest traps prepared in each of these chakras by the 
demiurge to stop the process of INDIVIDUATION AND 
TRANSMUtation of the VIRYA.
In this study we verify that the sacred symbols are certain 
archetypes that in their semiotic registers contain certain 
symbols or signs of HOLY images, generating in the sleeping 
pasu or virya a constellation of sensitive and sensitive 
complexes that have as an axial axis in their contexts images 
of passion, love, devotion, etc. It is at this point that we must 
stop and deeply examine these symbols that generally 
sacralize the consciousness and weaken the Luciferic Will and 
the ETERNAL SELF.
We maintain that it is necessary to discern and consciously 
open these images, these symbols, because they contain the 
main illusory trap set by the demiurge to seduce and trap the 
virya in the illusion of maya. Previously we have analyzed 
that the minor chakras activate the INSTINCTS and they 
contain PASSIONATE symbols that activate GREASY 
ENERGIES OF HEDONISTIC CHARACTER OR VICIOUS 
OF ANIMOSITY, LUXURIOUS, LUDIC, PERNICIOUS 
AND EGOISTIC.


--- PAGE BREAK ---e the INSTINCTS and they 
contain PASSIONATE symbols that activate GREASY 
ENERGIES OF HEDONISTIC CHARACTER OR VICIOUS 
OF ANIMOSITY, LUXURIOUS, LUDIC, PERNICIOUS 
AND EGOISTIC.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
Therefore, if in these minor energetic centers, which are 
ontic registers that contain certain semiotic contents that can 
lead us to an internal axiological deviation and to relate to the 
cultural structures of the world of the lowest human condition, 
admitting that pornography, unbridled sex, alcohol, drugs, 
gluttony, chance or gambling, collective or mass sports are 
part of the culture, which they are, but of a part of the culture 
that acts as COUNTER-CULTURE and that we will analyze 
in another point. Let us go deeper and understand what is 
contained in the archetypal images contained in the higher 
centers of the human soul and the consequences of each of the 
archetypes contained in the most demiurgic sacred symbols.
Specifically we must analyze the Anahata Chakra. This is 
an energetic center that by controlling the heart and the 
circulatory system, i.e. the blood, basically controls the 
balanced and harmonious distribution of all the energetic 
tensions of the soul; we could affirm that this chakra is the 
essential node of the energies of the energetic channels of 
YING and YANG, or Ida and Pingala or of the physiological 
and neurological polarities of the nervous system. This chakra 
is the center of gravity of the chakras of the subtle body, 
having in the soul supremacy over all the others, with the 
exception of SAHASRARA BECAUSE IN THIS CHAKRA 
RADIATES THE CONSCIOUS SELF.
But we must remember that the spirit is a reversed being, 
what was once outside is now trapped inside, and to represent 
this idea we have used the analogy of the reversible globe. By 
this we mean that the "I", being trapped inside by the soul and 
egoic psyche, runs in all the centers of the human machine, 
especially settles in the Anahata Chakra, in the heart, and 
practically in the heart.
at the "I", being trapped inside by the soul and 
egoic psyche, runs in all the centers of the human machine, 
especially settles in the Anahata Chakra, in the heart, and 
practically in the heart.


--- PAGE BREAK ---apped inside by the soul and 
egoic psyche, runs in all the centers of the human machine, 
especially settles in the Anahata Chakra, in the heart, and 
practically in the heart.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
The psyche is constituted by the complexes or sacred symbols 
of this subtle center.
Now, why is the self located more in the feelings than in 
the thoughts, what is the reason for this settlement in the heart 
chakra?
This is so because the neurophysiological system or 
physical body has its primary development in the instincts and 
fundamentally in two transcendent images that the demiurge 
imitated and copied from the eternal worlds, degrading them 
in archetypal form. The first is the archetype A-MOR and the 
second 
is 
the 
archetype 
MOTHER 
OR 
ETERNAL 
FEMININE, which the demiurge integrated and deposited in 
the SACRED SYMBOL OF THE ANAHATA CHAKRA. 
Psychologically we could say that all the ontological 
development of the soul takes place in an unconscious form 
and as the consciousness or sphere of light increases, a certain 
aspect of the unconscious or sphere of shadow decreases. This 
increase of the center of consciousness occurs in a SPIRAL or 
SPIRIFORM FORM, with the conscientialized contents of the 
shadow sphere revolving around an emotional or affective 
function. This condition structures the soul to the emotional 
center, which is the axial nucleus around which all the other 
contents of consciousness will later be linked. In this way the 
affections form in the development of man the first 
psychological layer that will recount like the layers of an 
onion the "I" and together with certain physiological 
instinctive principles will consolidate the personality or ego.
These archetypal emerging contents of the heart chakra are 
typical universal forms of reaction, common to all beings, 
therefore these manifestations of the soul in the development 
of the libido are structured in a sterically eroticized emotional 
content; that is to say, the feeling of love is the pillar of the 
psychic structure of the soul. Now, as is this
the development 
of the libido are structured in a sterically eroticized emotional 
content; that is to say, the feeling of love is the pillar of the 
psychic structure of the soul. Now, as is this


--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
What axiological quality generates it and what does it 
psychologically awaken in the human soul? Psychologically, 
the emergence of feelings and emotional complexes (we use 
the term COMPLEX, because we must learn to study the soul 
with the psychological language and especially from the 
analytical psychology of Carl Gustav Jung) are the product of 
energetic contents provided by a quantum of libido that 
activates at the beginning an ETERNAL SYMBOL, which is 
of deep spiritual nobility as in the specific case of the eternal 
love of the son to the father or fundamentally to the mother 
fundamentally. That is to say, the emerging content of the 
anahata chakra in the deepest of its spiritual aspect, in the 
axial axis of the heart chakra, is built at the beginning in the 
development of the child in an ETERNAL SYMBOL; WHAT 
SUCCEEDS IS THAT WHEN THE SOUL IS REVERTED, 
THE ETERNAL SYMBOL IS THE FIRST ONTO-
LOGICAL MANIFESTATION OF THE BEING. AFTER 
THAT, WHAT WILL BE UNLEASHED IS A WIDE 
RANGE OF SACRED SYMBOLS.
In this case the eternal symbol is structured in the nucleus 
of the onion and the sacred symbols in the different layers that 
are constituted around the center. But when the soul is 
reverted, this event occurs in the same way in all the energetic 
centers of the soul, that is to say, the chakras are modified in 
their gnose- ological conformation and what was in the 
nucleus, in the center of gravity of the same, is now located in 
the periphery and what was in the periphery became part of 
the nucleus. In this way the eternal symbol of the anahata 
chakra is the first emerging manifestation in the child and it is 
itself a transcendent, SPIRITUAL image.
The unfortunate thing about it is that in this image of the 
actual
symbol of the anahata 
chakra is the first emerging manifestation in the child and it is 
itself a transcendent, SPIRITUAL image.
The unfortunate thing about it is that in this image of the 
actual


--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
A-MOR, together with another ETERNAL EMERGING 
SYMBOL OF THE AJNA CHAKRA, THE FALL AND THE 
ENCOUNTERMENT OF THE SPIRIT TO THE MATH 
ORDER IS PRODUCED.
This is the reality of the fall, it is the product of a song of 
love, of that immense and terribly transcendent mystery that 
only the gods in their infinite and eternal wisdom will 
understand, because the fallen man, chained to the infernal 
world of maya, to this VALLEY OF TEARS, cannot 
understand in an absolute way this profound metaphysical 
mystery. ONLY THE COURAGE AND THE KNOWLEDGE 
THAT THE HYPERBOREAN GNOSIS, LEGACY OF OUR 
DIVINE ANCESTORS TO THE VIRYA, TO THE INDO-
ARYAN MAN, TO THE WARRIOR WHO HAS A HEROIC 
ATTITUDE, WILL ALLOW US TO UNVEIL THE 
MYSTERY AND UNDERSTAND ITS REALITY.
Understanding the functioning of the heart chakra is 
essential in the process of individuation, since this energetic 
center is the greatest problem of the human being, the man, 
the warrior or the Amazon. This is why we lose the capacity 
for noological action and our will is weakened, because by 
being so emotional and taking things affectively or 
sentimentally we lose the capacity for consciousness. 
Emotions are the motor of the will and it is intrinsically 
related to thought, we can affirm that all thought or all 
rational, 
intellectual 
and 
cognitive 
capacities 
are 
psychological structures that have a physiological seat in the 
cerebral or cranial neurological system, but there is also an 
emotional root.
The VISHUDHA CHAKRA, the energetic center of the 
human machine located in the larynx plexus, at the level of 
the throat, at the place where the spinal cord becomes the 
medulla oblongata, is the direct link between ANAHATA


--- PAGE BREAK ---e 
human machine located in the larynx plexus, at the level of 
the throat, at the place where the spinal cord becomes the 
medulla oblongata, is the direct link between ANAHATA


--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
CHAKRA and the superior AJNA chakra, which is located in 
the pineal gland between the eyebrows, called the THIRD 
EYE. The ajna chakra is where thought is located, 
physiologically in the neuronal, but what we are interested in 
understanding beyond the technical mystical oriental 
development that we are analyzing is the psychological. We 
understand then that the cognitive capacities emerging in the 
consciousness are intellective for the I, that is, they are 
perceived in all their contexts when they are established in the 
sphere of light of the consciousness and can be observed and 
discerned there by the I, because we must understand that 
when they emerge in the sphere of light they contain in their 
structures a strong emotional connotation. By this we mean 
that a thinking intention arises from an IDEA and that it is 
born because something impresses the sensory sphere of the 
virya or the pasu, producing an impression that is generally 
EMOTIONAL and that later is structured in the RATIONAL; 
that is to say, it is born in the anahata cha- kra, activates the 
energies of this center, moves to the vishudha which is the 
center of language and then if such a reality exists it can be 
structured in the ajna chakra. We can visualize that there is a 
direct correlation between these centers, that is to say, there is 
a biunivocal connection between each one of them, relating all 
the superior centers of the soul to intervene in the maximum 
capacity that the soul has, the THOUGHT, whether it is the 
ANALYTICAL CONSCIOUS DISCERNMENT or the 
ANALYTICAL CONSCIOUS DISCERNMENT.
INTUITIVE. It is important to understand this inner process 
and fundamentally to understand the function of language, of 
the Vishudha Chakra, because this energetic center is vital in 
the link between emotions and thought since every cognitive 
symbol must be expressed in a language and in this center of 
the microcosm this function is structured. That is to say that 
once the impression hit the sensory sphere of man and 
projected the emergence of a symbol and it traveled through 
the sensory sphere of the human being.
nction is structured. That is to say that 
once the impression hit the sensory sphere of man and 
projected the emergence of a symbol and it traveled through 
the sensory sphere of the human being.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
The latter is created according to a language because reason, 
which is the medium where the thinking act takes place, uses 
the cultural structure as a tool and it is formed on the basis of 
acquired data or LANGUAGES.
By this we mean that the act of thinking is directly related 
to the cultural structure that man has incorporated in his 
reason and that it is given by the amount of knowledge that he 
has stored throughout his existence. We have previously 
developed this point, but it is essential to review it again, 
because languages are the cognitive tools that allow us to 
interpret the real world and the illusory reality of maya. More,
what is a language?
To describe this definition scientifically would take us a 
hundred volumes because the scientific fields where language 
can be studied are immense, philosophy, psychology, 
linguistics, etc., are some of the means that study this cultural 
concept. We will simply analyze this concept synthetically by 
saying that a language is a means of oral or written 
communication that allows understanding between people. 
Language is structured in a linguistic form, in a language, 
which is composed of morphemes that are words structured in 
propositions. Words are formed by LETTERS and they are 
part of an ALPHABET which is a structure formed by SIGNS 
OR SYMBOLS.
Thus, all logical content is a semiotic structure formed by 
the interrelation of signs representing symbols, which are the 
reduction of images or aesthetic forms that acquire linguistic 
significance as soon as they are axiologically quantified 
according to their ontological value. In this way we deduce 
that the internalized symbols are semiotically reduced in some 
language that can vary from


--- PAGE BREAK ---xiologically quantified 
according to their ontological value. In this way we deduce 
that the internalized symbols are semiotically reduced in some 
language that can vary from


--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
according to the cultural structure of the virya on a scale of 
value determined by the ontological sense that these symbols 
have for the virya. This is because the symbols are IDEAS 
and these are realities of the macrocosm that emanate from the 
REAL world and conform the REALITY and this has a 
determined value for the virya and for the pasu; for this reason 
the language differs specifically in each one of them, because 
the axiological and spiritual values are different. Thus, we 
maintain that language is fundamental for the hyperborean 
warrior because through it one can SEE reality and make a 
better READING of it, allowing one to distinguish the real 
from the illusory. The awakened man must recover language 
and it is essential to expand the cultural structure to its 
maximum potential by mastering as many languages as 
possible, because the greater the cultural structure, the greater 
the knowledge, and the lesser the cultural structure, the 
greater the ignorance. Man on his way to awakening must 
necessarily cultivate himself in the greatest possible number 
of 
languages 
and 
sciences 
such 
as 
PHILOSOPHY, 
PSYCHOLOGY, THEOLOGY, POLITICS, etc., in order to 
be able to understand and understand the world.
CA, HISTORY, etc. have to be studied with scientific rigor 
because they are an indispensable part of KNOWLEDGE and 
WISDOM, since as we understand it is not only necessary to 
awaken and have mastery of oneself because this is only a 
part of the process of liberation. The ABSOLUTE 
INDIVIDUATION requires a KNOWLEDGE and the same is 
composed by the knowledge of itself, of the MACRO- 
COSMOS 
WITH 
ALL 
THE 
MANIFESTATIONS 
CONTAINED 
IN 
ITS 
EXTERNAL 
CULTURAL 
SUPERSTRUCTURE, THAT IS TO SAY WITH ALL ITS 
CULTURAL LANGUAGES.
If we analyze the human animal, we will see that it does 
not 
KNOW 
OR 
UNDERSTAND 
ANYTHING, 
we 
understand that it has no cultural structure, it is simply an 
unconscious mechanism.
LANGUAGES.
If we analyze the human animal, we will see that it does 
not 
KNOW 
OR 
UNDERSTAND 
ANYTHING, 
we 
understand that it has no cultural structure, it is simply an 
unconscious mechanism.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
If we analyze the evolved or entelechiated man, we will verify 
that this type of individual generally has a FRAGMENTED 
cultural structure, that is to say, he participates in certain 
knowledge in a specific way according to his ARCHETISTIC 
condition. By this we mean that his cultural development is 
correlative to his ONTOLOGICAL EVOLUTION, his 
intellectual 
and 
cognitive 
being 
being 
axiologically 
determined by the gnoseological scope of the archetype that 
contains him. For example, if he is under the archetype 
profession his limit will be given by the profession he 
professes, if he is a doctor he will know about medicine, if an 
architect about architecture, if a veterinarian about animals, 
and so on. But he will never be able to escape the limits of his 
archetypal form that has phagocytized him, he may perhaps 
contain certain knowledge but he will never be able to 
UNDERSTAND it NOOLOGICALLY.
THIS IS WHERE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE 
VIRYA AND THE PASU LIES, SINCE THE AWAKENED 
AND ORIENTED MAN NOT ONLY HANDLES ALL THE 
POSSIBLE LANGUAGES BUT ALSO UNDERSTANDS 
THEM 
FROM 
A 
HYPERBOREAN 
MYSTICISM, 
ALLOWING HIM TO ACCESS THE TRUTH OF EACH 
ONE OF THEM, PLACING THEM IN THEIR RIGHT 
VALUE. ON THE OTHER HAND, THE ENLIGHTENED 
MAN, NO MATTER HOW MUCH HE HANDLES A 
MULTITUDE OF LANGUAGES, WILL NEVER BE ABLE 
TO ACCESS THE TRUTH OF EACH ONE OF THEM 
BECAUSE HE LACKS A TRANSCENDENT MYSTICISM 
THAT ALLOWS HIM TO READ THE ETERNAL 
SYMBOLS OF THEM.
The ENTELEQUIATE MAN IS SIMPLY DORMANT AND 
HIS CULTURAL STRUCTURE IS COM- PLETELY 
DISORDERED 
AND 
FRAGMENTED, 
WHILE 
THE 
VIRYA HAS ITS CULTURAL STRUCTURE AND ITS 
CULTURAL STRUCTURE IS FRAGMENTED AND 
DISORDERED.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ND 
HIS CULTURAL STRUCTURE IS COM- PLETELY 
DISORDERED 
AND 
FRAGMENTED, 
WHILE 
THE 
VIRYA HAS ITS CULTURAL STRUCTURE AND ITS 
CULTURAL STRUCTURE IS FRAGMENTED AND 
DISORDERED.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
THE 
LANGUAGES 
CONTAINED 
THEREIN 
ARE 
ORDERED AND CLASSIFIED ACCORDING TO THEIR 
STRATEGIC VALUE, USING CULTURE NOT AS AN 
END BUT AS A TACTICAL ELEMENT FOR THEIR OWN 
SPIRITUAL LIBERATION.
The analysis developed leads us to the understanding and 
clarification of our higher centers, understanding that the 
impressions coming from the macrocosmic order of the 
external cultural networks of the material universe of the One 
that impact on our sensory sphere, are structured by the con- 
sciousness, producing the emergence of certain complexes, 
which are coming from the shadow sphere or lower centers of 
our ontological reality or from the lower chakras or from the 
higher centers that are also part of the shadow sphere or 
personal or collective unconscious. But if man is a virya, it 
will 
be 
characterized 
by 
being 
reduced 
by 
the 
conscientializing action of the "I".
As we know the SHADOW is the personal and collective 
unconscious and generally the common man lives his 
consciousness in a shadow, because he does not know the 
ultimate reality of his own psyche and is massified by the 
action of his collective unconscious that integrates him to the 
different archetypes-masses. The shadow sphere is composed 
fundamentally by the complexes rooted in our lower or 
unconscious psyche, because it does not exist in reality lower 
or higher, since the PSYCHIS IS A WHOLE, but for a better 
understanding we divide it in these terms. In this lower psyche 
are contained the minor chakras and they appear to us in a 
chiaroscuro for the consciousness, therefore we call it 
SHADOW SPHERE, and LIGHT SPHERE the consciousness 
or the parts of the shadow sphere that have been reduced to 
consciousness by the EGO.


--- PAGE BREAK ---he consciousness, therefore we call it 
SHADOW SPHERE, and LIGHT SPHERE the consciousness 
or the parts of the shadow sphere that have been reduced to 
consciousness by the EGO.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
THEREFORE WE SAY THAT THE PSYCHE IS A 
WHOLE, BECAUSE AT THE BEGINNING IT IS THE 
SELF SURROUNDED BY THE UNCONSCIOUS, THAT IS 
TO SAY THAT CONSCIOUSNESS IS AN EVENT THAT 
IS GENERATED FROM THE SELF WHEN THE SELF 
ACQUIRES NOOLIC CAPACITY TO BE ABLE TO 
REDUCE THE SPHERE OF SHADOW AND CREATE 
CONSCIOUSNESS OR SPHERE OF LIGHT.
We affirm with it that the whole being is submerged in the 
unconscious and the consciousness is a creation of the 
ETERNAL SELF, when it has the volitional capacity to 
reduce the complexes and especially the sacred symbols 
deposited in the chakras of the human machine.
As we analyzed previously, we found that the Visudha 
Chakra is the vortex of energy that psychologically 
harmonizes thought with language, translating and expressing 
it orally. It is important to understand correctly the function 
that this center has, because in it is located the VOX or the 
SOUND OF THE VERB, THE MYSTERY OF THE
FIRE AND SOLAR, because in this center is the principle of 
awakening, since the ETERNAL SYMBOLS are manifested 
in this chakra in their total NOOLOGICAL POWER, 
surpassing the sacred symbols. Neurologically, the human 
animal uses only the left hemisphere of the brain where the 
functions of the rational mind are located and where the 
empirical, the pragmatic and the affective devotional take 
precedence, discarding the use of the right cerebral 
hemisphere, where the directed volitional consciousness, the 
idealizations, the intuition and the superior metaphysical 
thought are located. The awakened virya activates his whole 
brain, uses all the powers of his soul because he has 
previously resigned the sacred designs and symbols, using his 
soul for himself as a strategy of encirclement for his own 
INDIVIDUATION.


--- PAGE BREAK ---the powers of his soul because he has 
previously resigned the sacred designs and symbols, using his 
soul for himself as a strategy of encirclement for his own 
INDIVIDUATION.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
On the other hand, the rational animal called man rejects 
the conscious utilization of these functions by activating the 
vishudha chakra, being trapped by the sacred symbols and the 
linguistic structures underlying it, be they religious, political, 
philosophical, scientific, of purely synarchic characteristics. 
This is the case of the gurus, masters, manosantas, holy men, 
politicians, scientific intellectuals, etc. of the world synarchy 
who have consciously or unconsciously activated this chakra, 
awakening in it the numinous forces of the sacred symbols 
deposited in the ontology, in the being of the chakra, thus 
generating the psychological emergence of certain archetypal 
complexes that directly affect the formation of personalities 
and the ego. In the vishudha chakra, as in the anahata, are 
structured the sacred symbols that contain the most dangerous 
numinous forces of the created soul, in them are framed in an 
unconcealed substratum of these centers or vortices of soul 
energy, the archetype devotion and the archetype sacred verb, 
two of the most alienating complements of the human 
consciousness 
that 
have 
the 
seductive 
powers 
to 
FAGOCITATE the ego and submerge it in the psychoid 
conditions of these complexes. That is why we affirm that 
those who believe themselves to be prophets, messiahs or 
divine envoys and who act in the name of one of the great 
religious, political or scientific organizations of the world 
synarchy are simply sleeping beings, part of a demiurgic 
metaphysical mechanism that has suppressed their wills, 
alienating them in certain sacred entelechies at the service of 
the demons that sustain this creation.
It is only possible to escape the power of these centers if 
we do not dis- pert these chakras. If we activate them we must 
know the hyperborean techniques to resign the sacred 
symbols, which we are developing at this point. But it is 
important to understand that this path is the path of the 
WARRIOR,
te them we must 
know the hyperborean techniques to resign the sacred 
symbols, which we are developing at this point. But it is 
important to understand that this path is the path of the 
WARRIOR,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
OF THE HERO, OF THE KNIGHT WHO RIDES ON HIS 
OWN HORSE, WHO HAS IN HIS POSSESSION THE 
SWORD OF KNOWLEDGE AND THE SHIELD OF 
KNOWLEDGE.
STRATEGY but which fundamentally carries within itself the 
VALUE and HONOR of men who, fallen in the material 
order, seek to dignify themselves and rise from their condition 
of created and sinful creatures to become serious men. When 
we refer to being SERIOUS MEN, we place ourselves on the 
plane of the KNIGHT, OF THE WARRIOR MONK, OF THE 
NOBLE OF SPIRIT WHO KNOWING HIMSELF TO BE 
HUMAN WANTS TO STOP BEING TOO HUMAN, 
BECAUSE HE KNOWS THAT HE CARRIES IN HIS 
SPIRIT THE TRANSCENDENT RIGHT OF THE DIVINE, 
OF THE ETERNAL.
To realize this process he must activate the eternal 
symbols of his own spirit and develop all the inner aspects of 
himself, clearing his own weakness, understanding A-MOR 
without falling into LOVE, understanding PITY without 
falling into PAIN, understanding PA-SION without falling 
into DEVOTION, understanding CREATION without falling 
into ILLUSION.
If we do not fall into these traps and if we resign ourselves 
to the sacred contents of the vishudha, we will obtain the 
power of WISDOM, understanding the VERB that allows us 
to live in the ETERNAL A- MOR FREE OF PAIN, 
DEVOTION AND CREATION.
Finally, we have the two higher centers of the created soul, 
the higher chakras AJNA and SAHASRARA which are 
ultimately the two lower aspects of OUR ETERNAL SELF, 
THE PLACE OF CONSCIOUSNESS THE FIRST AND 
WHERE 
OUR 
ETERNAL 
SELF 
THE 
SECOND 
RADIATES.
The ajna chakra is also located in the brain, having


--- PAGE BREAK ---wer aspects of OUR ETERNAL SELF, 
THE PLACE OF CONSCIOUSNESS THE FIRST AND 
WHERE 
OUR 
ETERNAL 
SELF 
THE 
SECOND 
RADIATES.
The ajna chakra is also located in the brain, having


--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
The pineal gland is of some importance. Psychologically it is 
the psychic terrain where CONSCIOUSNESS develops and 
where rational processes and thought are structured. It is 
interesting to understand noologically this center of the human 
machine, of the microcosm, because just as in the vis- hudha, 
also in the ajna are the traps of maya, but we must emphasize 
that in it there is only ONE SACRED SYMBOL that carries 
the most powerful of the archetypes, the GOD ARCHETYPE.
In this archetype we find the figure of the MOST 
POWERFUL PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPLEX OF THE 
HUMAN SOUL, THAT OF BELIEVING TO BE A GOD, 
AN ENVOY, AVATAR, ARCHANGEL, ANGEL, ETC., 
REPRESENTED IN THE MYTH OF THE PROPHET.
The disciple of some center of the religious or esoteric 
synarchy, after having activated all the chakras and all the 
sacred symbols, becomes a MANU ENTELE- chia, an 
evolved creature that has fully complied with the evolutionary 
plan of his MONAD. The soul entelechiated in the MANU 
archetype is thus incorporated into the illusion itself, being 
itself part of this whole, of this great creationist work of the 
ONE, of the satanic demiurge. This being has ceased to exist 
in his SELF and his being has merged into the entelechial self, 
participating in an ARCHETYPICAL MONAD, being an 
element of the hierarchies of the gods of maya, a being who 
generally participates in the esoteric religious structure of the 
synarchy as rabbi, priest of high hierarchy, bishop, cardinal, 
or perhaps pope or guru or yogini or saint, or a great master of 
the masonry, theosophy, etc. Whatever the case may be, his 
being is always taken by the GOD OR PRIESTLY 
ARCHETAGE and participates in the demiurgic strategies, 
being a deceived person who will never escape from the 
illusion, from the creation of the hierarchy, but will never 
escape from the illusion.
HETAGE and participates in the demiurgic strategies, 
being a deceived person who will never escape from the 
illusion, from the creation of the hierarchy, but will never 
escape from the illusion.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
whatever he may be. When the god or priestly archetype 
awakens, he has merged into the created soul and has left 
aside all possibility of individuation, he has lost his self, his 
spirit has slipped into the soul. THE TRANSCENDENT AND 
ETERNAL 
BEING 
HAS 
COMPLETELY 
DISINTEGRATED INTO THE MATERIAL ORDER, 
CEASING TO BE SPIRIT TO BE PURE SOUL, TO BE 
PART OF THE ILLUSORY CREATION OF MAYA 
WITHOUT 
THE 
SLIGHTEST 
POSSIBILITY 
OF 
RECOVERING HIS ORIGIN, IT MUST EXIST IN THIS 
SPACE OF MATERIAL CREATION UNTIL THE END, 
UNTIL THE UNKNOWABLE TOGETHER WITH THE 
WARRIORS OF KRISTOS-WOTAN UNLEASH THE 
DESTRUCTION OF THE CREATION OF THE ONE 
THROUGH THE COSMIC NIGHT, WHEN ALL THE 
WORLDS OF THE ONE DISINTEGRATE INTO THE 
ETERNAL.
What must the virya do in order not to trigger this sacred 
symbol?
What is the hyperborean technique or strategy to 
ontologically deactivate the sacred symbol and the psychic 
complexes it carries?
Undoubtedly, and after having analyzed the minor chakras 
and now the higher centers, we must understand that 
detaching ourselves from the dogmatic structures and not 
becoming attached to the sacred or sacred symbols that are 
scattered in the esoteric and religious world superstructure is a 
fundamental condition, if we do not want them to awaken in 
our interior to their psychic and psychological designs. For 
this not to happen it is inevitable to acquire STRATEGY and 
the same is found in these writings, more specifically, in order 
not to produce the emergence of the demiurgic aspects of this 
center we must first resign the designs of the anahata chakra, 
because automatically the devotion aspect awakens


--- PAGE BREAK ---not to produce the emergence of the demiurgic aspects of this 
center we must first resign the designs of the anahata chakra, 
because automatically the devotion aspect awakens


--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
In the ajna its sacred symbol, but if we resign ourselves to it, 
we can use all the noological and gnoseological potencies that 
are in our brain and develop ABSOLUTE consciousness, 
being able with it to unleash the ETERNAL SYMBOL THAT 
UNDERLIES IN THIS CENTER OF SCIENCE: THE 
SYMBOL OF ORIGIN.
We want to mean with this definition that if we are 
absolute masters of our soul and if we manage to accomplish 
the difficult task of ISOLATING THE SOUL or minor 
mundus, from the COSMIC SOUL or major mundus, we will 
be able to internally access to REVERTIR THE SOUL BY 
THE SPIRIT AND WE WILL BE SERIOUS MEN, 
AWAKENED BEINGS READY TO ACQUIRE BY 
THEMSELVES THE DIVINE RIGHT OF THE ETERNAL, 
TO TRANSMUTATE OURSELVES INTO VIRYAS, INTO 
TUL-KUS, INTO WARRIORS OF KRISTOS LUCIFER.
But we will only have access to this REAL possibility as 
long as we understand our SYMBOL OF ORIGIN, which is a 
power that we call VRIL, which represents in itself 
psychologically 
a 
TRANSCENDENT 
NOOLOGICAL 
ATTITUDE 
TO 
REALITY 
AND 
THE 
ENEMY 
ENCRYPTED IN IT.
The mystery of the SYMBOL OF THE ORIGIN is the 
terrible image of the FALL OF OUR ETERNAL BEING TO 
THE
Through its inner visualization we can understand the whole 
personal, family, racial and spiritual history of the MOMENT 
AND ACT in which we were deceived and projected into the 
material order, but it is important to emphasize that in it we 
not only find the general causes of the deception but we 
penetrate into our particular motives, our KARMIC motives 
by which we noolo- gically yielded and descended into the 
universe of the demiurge.
The symbol of ORIGIN contains in its ontic context a 
TRASCENDENT aspect OF THE NOOLOGICAL SELF


--- PAGE BREAK ---which we noolo- gically yielded and descended into the 
universe of the demiurge.
The symbol of ORIGIN contains in its ontic context a 
TRASCENDENT aspect OF THE NOOLOGICAL SELF


--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
OF OUR ETERNAL ORIGINAL.
We can affirm that the SAHASRARA CHAKRA or center 
of ABSOLUTE CONSCIOUSNESS, WHERE THE SELF 
RADIATES.
when it is liberated from the sacred symbol of the ajna chakra, 
it is the only chakra or center of superior energy that is not 
demiurgic, because in reality, as our being is structured in the 
soul while we are asleep, the energy of the chakra animates 
the soul, but when we free ourselves from it and take 
possession of its reality, we place ourselves in the VRIL, 
which is the energy of the sahasrara and from there we access 
our symbol of ORIGIN, awakening definitively in our inner 
spiritual worlds.
In this way we become TULKUS, beings who can exist in 
absolute consciousness here in this creationist order and know 
their 
DESTINY 
by 
understanding 
the 
PAST, 
fully 
understanding the PRESENT and intuiting noologically the 
FUTURE.
COMRADES IN CAUSE, COMRADES IN STRUGGLE, 
I 
HOPE 
YOU 
UNDERSTAND 
WHAT 
IS 
INTELLECTUALLY DESCRIBED IN THIS ANALYSIS 
OF 
THE 
CHAKRAS. 
IT 
IS 
IMPORTANT 
TO 
UNDERSTAND THAT THE SEMANTIC LIMITS OF 
LANGUAGE 
DO 
NOT 
ALLOW 
A 
BETTER 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MYSTERY ANALYZED, BUT I 
HOPE THAT YOU, THE TRUE SEEKERS OF THE 
MYSTERY OF THE LIBERATION OF THE SPIRIT, WILL 
APPEAL TO YOUR MAXIMUM INTELLECTUAL AND 
SPIRITUAL 
WILL 
TO 
COMPREHEND 
AND 
UNDERSTAND WHAT I INTEND FOR YOU TO 
VISUALIZE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---HE 
MYSTERY OF THE LIBERATION OF THE SPIRIT, WILL 
APPEAL TO YOUR MAXIMUM INTELLECTUAL AND 
SPIRITUAL 
WILL 
TO 
COMPREHEND 
AND 
UNDERSTAND WHAT I INTEND FOR YOU TO 
VISUALIZE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
8. DIFFERENCE BETWEEN REALITY AND REALITY 
It is essential to understand reality and its manifestations 
within the whole because the individual consciousness is 
within the whole, that is, our reality participates directly in the 
real. This interrelation between the whole or the collective 
consciousness, or rather the collective unconscious of the 
world of the demiurge or the One creates such an illusion in 
the reality of the subject or man that he perceives the world 
according 
to 
the 
manifestations 
coming 
from 
two 
metaphysical orders. The first order is represented by the real 
nature of the concrete and finite entities, that is to say, in this 
first manifestation the perception of reality is realized through 
our consciousness, according to the parameters that are 
translated from the ARCHETYPES AND THEIR NATURAL 
DESIGNATIONS.
That is to say, nature manifests itself in our consciousness as 
it is in its archetypal manifestation and as it is in its reality, 
which allows the interrelation between the real of the natural 
and the real of the human, that is to say the free consciousness 
of reality, to communicate with each other allowing a union 
between the eternal spirit underlying the order created by the 
INCOGNOSCIBLE and the eternal spirit within the human 
soul.
It is in this way that the reality of the forms is a 
manifestation of the real, deformed by the metaphysical 
synarchy of the gods traitors to the eternal spirit, which is 
conditioned by the psychoid archetypes projected by the 
synarchy to the real, which directly affects a new 
conformation and formation of the real in the consciousness 
of man, who perceives this reality distorting it.
This means that man as a subject is trapped by the designs 
and consequently his natural subjectivity,
formation of the real in the consciousness 
of man, who perceives this reality distorting it.
This means that man as a subject is trapped by the designs 
and consequently his natural subjectivity,


--- PAGE BREAK ---al in the consciousness 
of man, who perceives this reality distorting it.
This means that man as a subject is trapped by the designs 
and consequently his natural subjectivity,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
which is real consciousness, is determined by the parameters 
emanating from the reality of the demiurge. Thus, in the 
consciousness of man a diffuse image of the real is formed, in 
which the real is modified by the direct action of the subjacent 
designs in each entity of reality. It is important to understand 
this point because the demiurge, by being able to intercede in 
the real of the INCOGNOSCIBLE and modify creation 
according to his plans, a tremendous mystery that only the 
true ether does not know why, succeeded in installing in the 
collective consciousness or in the collective unconscious of 
the real his strategies structured in the archetypal designs. 
This interference of the demiurge in the real and the 
projection of the designs did not modify all the REAL but 
modified certain numbers of entities, but we must consider 
that those modified in their ontological and axiological 
contexts are unfortunately the most important within the 
world, within this space-time of human existence. For this 
reason we maintain that although the real is modified by the 
direct action of the demiurge and the traitor gods, the warrior 
can still perceive in his consciousness the REALITY OF 
REALITY, because if we still have in us a certain Gnostic 
predisposition in our spirit, the EGO CAN RESIGN THE 
REALITY OF CERTAIN ENTITIES AND PERCEIVE THE 
TRUE REAL SENSE THAT EXISTS HYPOSTASIATED IN 
THEM.
We must know that the demiurge has in mind a plan for 
evolution, that it is predetermined according to the purposes of 
the gods who are traitors to the eternal spirit. This is because 
they also suffer the fascination of their own work and 
therefore this copy of the real, of the eternal worlds is 
sustained by the eternal will of themselves and the soul will of 
the eternal spirits that fell by a deception of A-MOR to this 
space of material significance. It is undoubtedly a mystery to 
decipher why the Absolute,
al will of themselves and the soul will of 
the eternal spirits that fell by a deception of A-MOR to this 
space of material significance. It is undoubtedly a mystery to 
decipher why the Absolute,


--- PAGE BREAK ---s and the soul will of 
the eternal spirits that fell by a deception of A-MOR to this 
space of material significance. It is undoubtedly a mystery to 
decipher why the Absolute,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
The Unknowable in its infinite and eternal wisdom allows this 
world of pain and tragedies where joy is simply a drop of 
fresh water scattered in an ocean of salt water. But we, the 
beings who participate in the eternal in our being, must 
struggle according to our level of knowledge to free ourselves 
from the chain of designs imposed on culture, which 
determines 
reality. 
Unfortunately, 
on 
this 
plane 
of 
consciousness, the spiritual man can only perceive certain 
concepts of the whys and wherefores of this tremendous 
misunderstanding, and to understand the world and the lies 
that the international synarchy has subjected us to throughout 
history is the main objective of the comrades who seek to free 
themselves from the illusory webs of reality.
We must only fight for the man of tomorrow, for the 
eternal principle of honor and loyalty to all that is spiritual 
and know that only this illusion will sooner or later vanish. 
Therefore the mujin must remain vigilant no matter which 
individual or collective path he chooses to follow, he must 
plan his strategy of liberation according to the tactics he 
considers most suitable. WHETHER HE CHOOSES AN 
APOLLONIAN PATH OR A DIONYSIAN PATH, HE 
MUST BE ALERT AND DETERMINED TO MAKE THE 
LEAP TO THE ETERNAL.
For this reason we must know how to distinguish the tree 
from the forest, we must understand the designs underlying 
the archetypes and know how to read them and resign them so 
as not to fall under their hypnotic nets, because they will 
plunge us into pain and suffering and will put our 
consciousness to sleep, trapping the EGO and our SPIRIT in 
their axiological, ethical and aesthetic contents.
For this not to happen, it is essential to understand the 
essential archetypes of this creation, such as: the archetype 
mother, the archetype father, the archetype money, the 
archetype
contents.
For this not to happen, it is essential to understand the 
essential archetypes of this creation, such as: the archetype 
mother, the archetype father, the archetype money, the 
archetype


--- PAGE BREAK ---ot to happen, it is essential to understand the 
essential archetypes of this creation, such as: the archetype 
mother, the archetype father, the archetype money, the 
archetype


--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
blood, the archetype monk, the archetype warrior, the 
archetype magician, the archetype war, the archetype war, the 
archetype love, the archetype man, the archetype woman, the 
archetype profession, the archetype god, etc. We are simply 
naming a list of which we consider the most significant, 
therefore we must understand that every entity of creation, 
concrete or abstract, is in itself an archetype and has on itself 
an 
ONTOLOGICALLY 
AND 
AXIOLOGICALLY 
DESIGNATED 
REALITY, 
BUT 
WE 
MUST 
UNDERSTAND THAT RESIGNED ITS BEING IN ITSELF 
AND ITS BEING FOR MAN, EACH ARCHETYPE OPENS 
ITSELF GNOSEOLOGICALLY AND WE CAN PERCEIVE 
GNOSTICALLY 
THE 
REAL 
AND 
ETERNAL 
HYPOSTASIZED BY THE UNKNOWABLE FOR OUR 
BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF THE REAL AND THE 
ETERNAL.
The world is a diversification of collective or psychoid 
archetypes that manifest themselves to us in an orderly 
illusion, structured in different orders of three-dimensional 
spatio-temporal signification. Thus, what we call reality are 
phenomena that are sustained in the real but suffer the action 
of the demiurge and his gnoseological sciences, with which he 
has the power to modify the topological spaces and the 
archetypal forms contained in them. Undoubtedly in our 
psyche, trapped in the world of Maya and reverted by the 
illusory deception of the psychoid archetypes, the real is 
distorted by the action of the social complexes activated in 
culture, being victim of the virtual projections emanating from 
the cultural strategies generated by the political, religious, 
economic, financial, etc. synarchy. Our being, the SELF has a 
direct and charismatic relationship with the sub-spirit lying in 
the essential forms of the REAL, and can know and 
understand the truth of the illusory cultural lie that is
being, the SELF has a 
direct and charismatic relationship with the sub-spirit lying in 
the essential forms of the REAL, and can know and 
understand the truth of the illusory cultural lie that is


--- PAGE BREAK ---a 
direct and charismatic relationship with the sub-spirit lying in 
the essential forms of the REAL, and can know and 
understand the truth of the illusory cultural lie that is


--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
projected by the action of the archetypal psychoid archetypal 
designs emanated by the demiurge and sustained by 
mechanical men, asleep or fascinated by REALITY.
There is a direct relationship between the illusion of MAYA, 
the DEMIURGE and the SLEEPING HUMANITY, because 
there is a biunivocal feedback between reality and the 
sleeping humanity. This is because the EVO- LUCIONED 
ANIMAL MAN is a being permeable to the contingencies of 
the world culture and responds mechanically to the social and 
cultural complexes promoted by the world synarchy. This is 
so because the demiurge needs the mechanical humanity and 
these men, evolved creatures of non-pure races, need their 
creator to continue existing; therefore there is a humanity that 
actively responds to the plans of the demiurge and serves the 
purposes or suprafinalities of the demiurge. The only victim 
of this illusory gear is the spiritual man, the man on the way to 
his own INDIVIDUALITY, because first he must fight as a 
warrior within himself to contain his material soul and resign 
the unconscious contents incorporated into his individual 
psyche, and second, because he must resist until the last of his 
days with courage and honor the cultural and psychological 
bombardment that the enemy projected to his ego to destroy it 
spiritually and psychologically.
Therefore, the true man who seeks his own INDIVI- 
DUATION and lives charismatically in the REAL, must know 
and understand that he requires a CONSTANT WILL, A 
CLEAR INTELLECT AND A TOTAL CONVICTION OF 
HYPERBOROUS CONSCIENCE TO RESIST WITH 
VALOR 
AND 
HONOR 
THE 
DESTRUCTIVE 
EMANATIONS OF THE REALITY PROJECTED BY THE
ENEMY. In the power of himself and determined to do battle, 
the hyperborean warrior will resist and destroy the illusory lie 
of the
R 
THE 
DESTRUCTIVE 
EMANATIONS OF THE REALITY PROJECTED BY THE
ENEMY. In the power of himself and determined to do battle, 
the hyperborean warrior will resist and destroy the illusory lie 
of the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

87
maya and will transmute into an awakened virya, connecting 
charismatically with the HYPERBorean Gods and their 
cronies in the world with whom he will fight the enemy until 
the final battle arrives where all the illusory reality of maya 
will be destroyed and we all will be able to return to the land 
of the spirit, to the eternal worlds.


--- PAGE BREAK ---emy until 
the final battle arrives where all the illusory reality of maya 
will be destroyed and we all will be able to return to the land 
of the spirit, to the eternal worlds.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
9. THE UNKNOWABLE AND THE LOYAL SIDDHAS. 
THE DEMIURGE AND THE GODS BETRAYERS OF 
THE ETERNAL SPIRIT
In the previous section we reviewed the existing 
relationship between the reality of the world of maya, 
contained in a cultural superstructure or social collective 
consciousness, from which the psychoid archetypes emanate 
and are projected to the masses with their corresponding 
designs. We also analyze what lies behind this social or world 
collective consciousness in a world collective unconscious, 
where the REAL of the world and its true meaning is 
hypostatized.
Having examined these points we must understand these 
truths and know that behind the reality is the DEMIURGE and 
his hosts endorsing this cultural structure and sustaining his 
world evolutionary plan.
Now, what is the demiurge, or who is he, or who are these 
gods? Why do the gods allied to the eternal spirit perish the 
action of the demiurge? Why do the eternal gods not destroy 
the work of the One? Why does the Unknowable, which is 
perfect and infinite, allow the demiurge to create something 
finite and perishable?
Undoubtedly, there are hundreds or perhaps thousands of 
questions to be answered, and undoubtedly, the more we 
penetrate into a terrain that escapes the axiological limits of 
our gnoseological or knowledge sphere, the more we find 
ourselves entering a metaphysical world where the questions 
become tremendous doubts that increasingly require from us a 
gigantic, gigantic intellectual and spiritual will.
It is important to highlight the contributions of great 
geniuses, awakened or awakening vir- yas who, consciously 
or unconsciously, have contributed to the development of our 
society.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ortant to highlight the contributions of great 
geniuses, awakened or awakening vir- yas who, consciously 
or unconsciously, have contributed to the development of our 
society.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
In this way, being participants in a hyperborean strategy, they 
have contributed to plant certain traditionalist, nationalist and 
hyperborean symbols. Many philosophers, psychologists, 
writers, historians, etc., described in their languages to 
perfection the demiurgic of the world and specifically the 
demiurge and his henchmen leaders of the international 
synarchy, both physical and metaphysical. But it is necessary 
to emphasize and clarify a point that some, for strategic 
reasons, do not fully explain in their comments. For example, 
the psychiatrist Carl Gus-Tav Jung, or the traditionalists René 
Guenon and Julius Evola. Simply for strategic reasons many 
do not describe the struggle unleashed in the world, in this 
terrestrial hell, by the enemies of the demiurge to free the 
captive viryas and the strategies carried out by these HYPER-
BORROUS powers.
We must consider this point very seriously because it is 
the fundamental cause of the demiurge's strategies for the 
spiritual and cultural destruction of political, religious, 
philosophical, etc. systems that possess or possessed certain 
HYPERBORNE signs or symbols.
What is important to differentiate is that, as we analyzed at 
the beginning and that in some way Jung, Guenon and Evola 
intellectually determined and affirmed, by a superior 
metaphysical discernment, the reality from their ethical, 
axiological and linguistic conceptions, all the visible and 
invisible aspects of the reality of the creation of the One and 
of the captive spirit according to their languages. But only the 
HYPERBorean GNO-SIS tacitly and absolutely describes the 
concrete or abstract realities that participate in a duality 
sustained by the demiurge from the gnoseological plane or 
One entity of the material creation.
As we argued earlier, all entities, including their being-in-
itself and their being-for-human beings (especially
the demiurge from the gnoseological plane or 
One entity of the material creation.
As we argued earlier, all entities, including their being-in-
itself and their being-for-human beings (especially


--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
The first thing we need to do is to understand how what is 
created by the demiurge in his illusory magical science is 
labyrinthically ordered in an axiological world where 
conceptions differ in ontological opposites, which are 
structured in each center of the human machine. But what 
concerns us first of all is to understand how what is created by 
the demiurge in his illusory magical science is labyrinthically 
ordered in an axiological world where conceptions differ in 
opposites. For example, in religion, Christianity, Buddhism, 
etc., in politics, capitalism, Marxism, etc., in philosophy, 
idealism and materialism, in ethics, good or evil, etc. We can 
also find these opposites in a multitude of natural entities, 
such as day and night, cat and dog, mountain and plain, etc. 
These situations are the play of the ARCHETI- POS, WHICH 
ARE EMANATIONS AND PROJECTIONS OF THE 
DEMIURG TO DISSOLVE THE CON- SCIENCE OF THE 
VIRYA IN THE ONTOLOGICAL AND AXIOLOGICAL 
MULTIPLICITY, A CIRCUMSTANCE THAT LEADS TO 
THE ATOMIZATION OF COMPLEXES AND THE 
DISINTEGRATION OF THE SELF IN THE LABYINTHIC 
OPPOSITES.
It is in this metaphysical chess where reality, ontic 
distortion of the real, is a game of appearances and images 
that present themselves to the Ego with all their numinous and 
fascinating power. This has an effect on man's consciousness 
for a very particular reason: it is the ambivalent constitution of 
the logical structure of reason or mental discernment. As we 
have stated elsewhere, the soul is MICROCOSMOS and is a 
replica of MACROCOSMOS, that is to say, a min- mundus 
that contains within itself all the images of the greater 
mundus.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ave stated elsewhere, the soul is MICROCOSMOS and is a 
replica of MACROCOSMOS, that is to say, a min- mundus 
that contains within itself all the images of the greater 
mundus.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
of the One. Later we will detail under the study of the 
HYPERBOREAL ONTIC CABALA THE SCIENTIFIC 
MAGICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE MACROCOSMOS.
Therefore, this epistemological formation of the mind or 
of the primordial principle that is the formal logic or reason, is 
related to two ONTOLOGICAL ANTITHESIS where the 
EGO, ETERNAL BEING, must make a reading of reality in 
its mental space before a BINARY disjunctive, constituted by 
two archetypal opposites that can be presented as: 1) simple 
opposite principles, 2) links of opposite principles, 3) relations 
of opposite links and 4) as compound conceptual structures. 
There is no doubt that these logical and ontological 
interactions of opposites develop in this way according to the 
mental intensity of the virya or the energetic capacity of the 
spirit of the mujin, since the pasu, a simple rational animal 
man can only embrace a logical thought-principle which 
rarely reaches the second option. On the other hand, in the 
awakened virya, his mental logic develops the maximum 
intellectual capacity acting in the maximum logical exponent, 
which is the analysis of reality through logical structures. This 
differentiation between the pasu and the virya is due to the 
fact that the rational animal man, not having intellectual will, 
his logical capacities are diminished. On the other hand, the 
mujin, possessing a firm SELF in an oriented intellectual will, 
can discern reality and its realness by using all the logical 
options, being able to decipher through his reason or intellect 
the illusory labyrinths of MAYA in its different emerging 
cultural conformations in the superstructure.
macrocosmic cultural structure of the demiurge.
That is why we affirm that spirit is synonymous with will. 
The greater the will, the greater the spiritual strength.
That the eternal spirit is will, transcendent vital energy.
you.
the demiurge.
That is why we affirm that spirit is synonymous with will. 
The greater the will, the greater the spiritual strength.
That the eternal spirit is will, transcendent vital energy.
you.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
The greater the will, the more the spirit awakens the 
ontological capacities.
The greater the logical capacity, the greater the cultural 
structure.
The greater the cultural structure, the better the reading of 
Maya's reality.
The greater the intellectual will, the greater the will in the 
other centers.
The greater the will, the more resigned the complexes 
become.
That complexes are psychoid structures generated by lack 
of will.
That complexes dilute the will of the SELF.
That the complexes are part of macrocosmic conceptual 
structures of the external world that participate in the psyche 
of the virya who has lost will.
That only the virya resigns the soul with will and 
intellectual understanding.
That the reality of the world of the demiurge is 
intellectually deciphered.
That one can willingly resign one's intentions as deposited 
in the entities.
That the virya must use all the power of his will to resign 
his psychological complexes and also resign the real of the 
illusory cultural structures sustained by the cultural synarchy 
of the One.
That freedom is will and that will is the ETERNAL SELF.
THE WARRIOR IS THEREFORE PURE WILL IN 
ACTION TOWARD THE ETERNAL WILL OF THE 
UNKNOWABLE.
The warrior who understands inwardly how the enemy is 
everywhere and that the only thing that belongs to him is his 
inner world, as long as he has succeeded in destroying and


--- PAGE BREAK ---The warrior who understands inwardly how the enemy is 
everywhere and that the only thing that belongs to him is his 
inner world, as long as he has succeeded in destroying and


--- PAGE BREAK ---

93
If he resigns his own soul, his soul being, he can understand 
the deep roots of the deception to which he was subjected 
when he fell prey to himself and to the webs of destiny. We 
must recognize that we will only get loyal siddhas to support 
our individual and collective strategy as long as we recover 
our spiritual integrity and reorient ourselves inwardly, 
occupying the CENTER from which the SELF affirms itself 
in a hyperborean mystique and from there can LISTEN TO 
THE SIDDHAS' SONG.
But it is essential to understand that loyal dioceses will not 
always agree with our strategy, since perhaps the KAIROS 
has not yet become present, let us not forget that we are under 
the era of KALY YUGA and this is characterized by the rigor 
of 
MATERIALISM 
and 
the 
MASSIFICATION 
OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS.
This era is not always the same in all the geographies of 
the planet, since in certain areas it is less than in others, and an 
example of this is the action of the same in our country. 
Argentina today has a direct action of the Kaly Yuga and all 
the forces of the enemy are oriented in a strategy of national 
destruction, where the synarchy with its different edges of 
power, together with a powerful metaphysical support on the 
part of the traitor siddhas, is trying to totally suppress the 
terrible ETERNAL SYMBOL ENGRAVED IN FIRE IN 
THE PERONIST DOCTRINE BY THE AWAKENED VIRYA 
EVA PERON.
That is why we must understand that it is not easy to 
redirect the gaze of the gods, because there are other places 
where the hyperborean strategies are more important and they 
do require the assistance of the divine comrades. That is why 
the warrior must assist himself without asking for anything, 
bearing everything, he is THE GREAT ALONE and he has 
only one weapon to fight against the hosts of the world 
synarchy and the world's sinarchy.
r must assist himself without asking for anything, 
bearing everything, he is THE GREAT ALONE and he has 
only one weapon to fight against the hosts of the world 
synarchy and the world's sinarchy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

94
is its LUCIFERIC WILL.
But in reality we are never alone, because we will always 
have the charisma of our original divine being, of our eternal 
comrade who from the ORIGIN assists us and encourages us 
to resist with all our strength the pain and suffering to which 
the tyrants subject us in this material universe. Therefore, 
although it seems that we are totally alone and that all around 
us are submerged in the ocean of life, with their consciences 
fascinated by the numinous bourgeois archetypes that seduce 
the viryas and drag them into a collective madness where the 
only principle is money, power, sex, in short, to live like a 
bourgeois. We must know that the truth is with the awakened 
man, with the man of integrity and firm in his doctrinal 
convictions, which give him intellectual lucidity, emotional 
daring and a courage of spirit, proper to the wisdom that has 
nurtured him.
The warrior who realizes this construction in himself will 
sooner or later relate to his comrades and to the loyal gods, 
because alone he will never remain, since as we resist the 
forces unleashed by the enemy, internally we TRANSFORM 
INTO AWAKENED VIRYAS, INTO TULKUS, INTO 
SIDDHAS.
THIS IS THE GREAT ACHIEVEMENT OF THE 
WARRIOR, TO BE A GOD IN HIMSELF, DEVELOPING 
THE NOOLOGICAL POWER PROPER TO THE LOYAL 
SIDDHAS AND THUS JOINING THE HYPERBOREAN 
HOSTS THAT IN THE END WILL DEFEAT THE 
DEMIURGE AND HIS WORLD SYNARCHY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

95


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---TO THE LOYAL 
SIDDHAS AND THUS JOINING THE HYPERBOREAN 
HOSTS THAT IN THE END WILL DEFEAT THE 
DEMIURGE AND HIS WORLD SYNARCHY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

95


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

95
10. CULTURE AND ITS IMPACT ON THE 
FORMATION OF THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE PASU 
AND THE VIRYA
This enemy, in reality, is presented to us as a system of 
diverse cultural structures, in which two social strata are 
located in a pyramidal form. First, the political-religious and 
second, the economic-financial, which are the main columns 
of this temple that supports the reality of the world. These 
structures are the foundation of the entire edifice of power of 
the world synarchy and it is extremely important to recognize 
the tremendous impact they have on the formation of social 
reality, economic reality, financial reality, cultural reality, etc. 
That is to say, the cultural whole that surrounds and 
encompasses us is formed externally as a great supranational 
organization that groups together the largest political, 
economic and financial structures, unified under the action of 
a theocratic power that seeks to establish in the world a single 
and absolute world government.
The danger is imminent, the virya will be attacked from all 
sides, he must be prepared with weapons in his hands if he is 
to survive, because this is not a simple comedy, it is the drama 
of life, it is the tragedy of the soul. Only those who have a will 
of steel will bear the karma of their destiny and deny it to the 
demiurge.
We must understand that the greatest enemy is 
SYNARCHIC CULTURE, in reality it is misconceptualized, 
because culture is a term that has in itself a transcendent and 
profoundly spiritual value, it is hyperborean since the pure 
and noble races such as the Dorians, the Latins, the Germans, 
the Goths, etc. are the true creators of civilization and culture. 
For this reason we say that the term is misused and

--- PAGE BREAK ---d noble races such as the Dorians, the Latins, the Germans, 
the Goths, etc. are the true creators of civilization and culture. 
For this reason we say that the term is misused and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
we should call it the SYNARCHICAL CONTRACULTURE 
DESTROYING CULTURE AND CIVILIZATION.
From a hyperborean point of view and perspective, culture 
is indispensable because it allows us to develop in all aspects 
of our being. Basically, since childhood we are in some way 
fruits of an inner cultivation that occurs progressively, first 
from the family, then through the school and finally by 
various means according to our choice; this is directly related 
to our level of inner being or our socio-economic, socio-
cultural reality and multiple external factors. Undoubtedly, 
since childhood and according to the family archetype in 
which we have incarnated following the genetic inheritance of 
our blood, because we always incarnate on the same 
genealogy, our cultural formation will be determined by 
several factors to take into account, among them the racial 
collective unconscious of our blood, because our family 
idiosyncrasy comes from it, varying if we are descendants of 
an Italian, Spanish, German, Semitic or Jewish ethnicity. Jung 
maintained that according to our racial collective unconscious, 
the complexes that form the personality and the ego were 
structured according to our racial collective unconscious, and 
this was decisive in the conformation of our egoic psychic 
being or our soul. In this way our psyche undergoes a first 
formation by the psychogenetic contributions determined by 
the archetypes and instincts contained in the blood or 
ethnicity, which is what contains us in our microcosm. Our 
formation is thus based on several essential facts that 
intertwine with each other: race or blood, family, cultural 
etiological circumstances, geomantic characteristics of the soil 
and metaphysical, astrological and astronomical influences. 
All these factors, plus the karmic and dharmic aspects 
acquired in the successive incarnations in this mathematical 
order, are essential.
metaphysical, astrological and astronomical influences. 
All these factors, plus the karmic and dharmic aspects 
acquired in the successive incarnations in this mathematical 
order, are essential.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ogical and astronomical influences. 
All these factors, plus the karmic and dharmic aspects 
acquired in the successive incarnations in this mathematical 
order, are essential.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

97
rial DETERMINE OUR CURRENT ONTOLOGICAL 
FORMATION.
Now, what is more determinant, what exists in the soul as 
a karmic substrate or the cultural environment?
This question is one of the most profound questions of our 
existence, because in reality our eternal being, the "I", being 
submerged and trapped in the material soul, should potentiate 
the karmic or darmic soul substrates. But this is not so, due to 
the certain fact that the soul, when unraveling under the action 
of a sacred symbol by the action of the lords of Karma or the 
Gods of Destiny, when they intervene in the end of existence 
in a tragic way, such is the case of death by accident, etc., 
which shortens the life of the passer-by, the soul is not able to 
live in the material soul, but it is able to live in the material 
soul, which shortens the life of the pasu or simply by the 
death or end of the physical life by the ACTIVATION OF 
THE DEATH ARCHETYPE; the disembodied soul thus 
remains in a state of ANIMIC AND PSYCHOLOGICAL 
SUSPENSION, THAT IS TO SAY THAT THE DESTINY 
SEXES EXECUTE A REMOVAL OF MEMORY OR 
ONTO- 
LOGICAL 
CLEANING 
OF 
THE 
SOUL, 
GENERATING 
THE 
LOSS 
OF 
ITS 
INDIVIDUAL 
KNOWLEDGE, OF ITS INDIVIDUALITY. THE PASU IN 
HIS ETERNAL RETURN TO THE ILLUSORY WORLD 
OF MAYA, TO THIS SPACE OF CREATION, DOES SO 
WITHOUT MEMORIES OF HIS PREVIOUS LIFE, 
BECAUSE HIS BEING HAS BEEN MANIPULATED AND 
HIS MEMORY HAS BEEN DESTROYED.
But we must emphasize that he has in his unconscious, in 
the ontic registers of his chakras, certain psychic contents of 
his past lives, but these cannot be activated by him, because of 
the action of the TAPA SIGNS imposed on his soul by the 
gods of karma.
At another point we will analyze this subject in detail, we 
simply want to point out that the soul is not a TABLE.
ause of 
the action of the TAPA SIGNS imposed on his soul by the 
gods of karma.
At another point we will analyze this subject in detail, we 
simply want to point out that the soul is not a TABLE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---of the TAPA SIGNS imposed on his soul by the 
gods of karma.
At another point we will analyze this subject in detail, we 
simply want to point out that the soul is not a TABLE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
RASA, but not always the karmic determines the future 
existence of the being. What was stated in the previous point, 
that what is brought into existence as karmic ontological 
values, are psychochemical factors that are in unconscious 
form, that is, in a potential state, and they can be awakened or 
not, having to do with the degree of soul evolution of the 
sleeping pasu or virya. In reality, we must understand pro- 
fessionally that the unconscious contents that remain as 
psychological residues in the historical record of the being, 
are psychic formations that remain structured in each of the 
centers of the microcosm, in the chakras, in the form of 
ARCHETYPICAL 
PSYCHIC 
COMPLEXES, 
which 
anaesthetize the psychic and psychic elements of the being.
We will
IN THIS WAY WE CAN AFFIRM THAT IN EACH 
CHAKRA OR ENERGY VORTEX OF THE HUMAN 
MACHINE, IN AN UNCONSCIOUS SUBSTRATUM OF 
THE ONTOLOGICAL REGISTER OF EACH CHAKRA, 
CERTAIN CONTENTS OF CONSCIOUSNESS ARE 
REGISTERED, WHICH ARE GENERALLY THOSE THAT 
HAVE BEEN VERY SIGNIFICANT IN THE LIFE OF 
THAT PARTICULAR SOUL OR BEING.
In this way the events that have moved the existence of 
that individual and that have been very significant, either 
emotionally at the level of the heart chakra or intellectually at 
the level of the ajna chakra, or perhaps instinctively at the 
level of the lower chakras, surely these events are engraved in 
fire. First in the consciousness of the pasu or virya and then 
they are deposited as memories in the personal unconscious of 
the same, structuring themselves according to their axiological 
context in the center or chakra that is correlative to it. This 
happens in this way because the impression or that which 
impresses the sensory sphere of the pasu is so vital or 
important for its existence that it generally produces an 
EVOLUTIONARY LEAP.
is 
happens in this way because the impression or that which 
impresses the sensory sphere of the pasu is so vital or 
important for its existence that it generally produces an 
EVOLUTIONARY LEAP.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
ONTOLOGICAL VO ONTOLOGICAL in its being.
For this reason certain facts or comple- ments are 
registered within the human soul, and in this way these 
psychic contents are PSYCHOID FORMS OR PSYCHIC 
COMPLEXES 
WHICH 
MAY 
A 
PRIORIALLY 
DETERMINE THE ONTOLOGICAL REALITY OF THE 
SOUL IN ITS NEXT INCARNATION.
But it is important to understand that only highly 
significant facts or events, and generally of a deep emotional 
shock, are those structured in the ontic karmic register of the 
soul. Generally these contents are marked by some archetypal 
situation, being of special significance the FAMILY 
ARCHETYPE, THE A-MOR ARCHETYPE OR THE 
PROFESSION 
ARCHETYPE, 
ESPECIALLY 
THE 
PRIESTLY AND MILITARY ARCHETYPE HAVE A 
GREAT SIGNIFICANCE.
Generally these archetypal structures are the ones that 
produce decisive SHOCKS or SHOCKS in the psycho- 
logical reality of the pasu or virya, producing inner states so 
critical that they generate profound psychic changes. These 
situations impact the psyche of the pasu or virya, structuring 
instinctive and fundamentally archetypal conditions that 
generate such DRAMATIC TENSION that it leads to modify 
its axiological and ontological reality. That is to say, they 
affect the interior in such a way that they awaken certain 
SACRED SYMBOLS OR ARCHETYPICAL DESIGNS 
THAT MODIFY THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE SELF.
Hence, these energetic psychic substrates or complements 
can be potentized again in certain moments of a future life, 
this is possible if there is a CULTURAL KARMIC 
COINCIDENCE, because in reality the pasu can never by 
himself activate these registers. Only the AWAKENED 
VIRYA CAN DO IT, and ONLY


--- PAGE BREAK ---is possible if there is a CULTURAL KARMIC 
COINCIDENCE, because in reality the pasu can never by 
himself activate these registers. Only the AWAKENED 
VIRYA CAN DO IT, and ONLY


--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
IN CASE OF STRATEGIC REQUIREMENT. In cam-
This process is only possible if there is a cultural coincidence 
that exerts such pressure from the environment in the interior 
of man, leading to the activation of certain chakra and the 
emergence of certain mnemic contents or memories, but we 
must point out that the individual can never UNDERSTAND 
this reality from where such inner vision comes, he can only 
understand this if he has a guru or esoteric priest who indicates 
such a process. In general, the pasu activates these contents as 
long as he belongs to some mystical religious or political 
organization of the synarchy, that is to say, if he is under the 
tutelage of a sacred symbol.
But this situation is produced by the synarchy and its gods 
as long as it is convenient for their strategies, such is the case 
of some EVOLVED MANU, because otherwise the common 
man, even if he belongs to a mystical esoteric religious or 
political esoteric organization of the synarchy, rarely has any 
memory of his previous life and even less of his past 
incarnations, because he will never know the esoteric 
noological techniques to be able to access the ontic registers, 
due to the fact that he will never have any memory of his past 
incarnations, rarely has any memory of his previous life and 
even less of his past incarnations, because he will never know 
the esoteric noological techniques to be able to access the 
ontic registers, since the religious synarchy will never teach 
him this knowledge.
Only the AWAKENED VIRYA, the TULKU, has the 
gnoseological capacities to produce the openings of his 
karmic ontic registers, being at a certain moment these 
techniques essential if we want to DESTROY OUR KARMA, 
because sooner or later, in the awakening, the Hyperborean 
Gnosis will indicate us when it is necessary to BREAK with 
our soul and with the karmic of it, and for this we are teaching 
the techniques of NOOLOGICAL ISOLATION OF THE 
CHAKRAS. In the power of this knowledge, the awakened 
virya, the mujin, will be able to remember all of his or her
it, and for this we are teaching 
the techniques of NOOLOGICAL ISOLATION OF THE 
CHAKRAS. In the power of this knowledge, the awakened 
virya, the mujin, will be able to remember all of his or her


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
1
previous lives, for he is ABSOLUTE WILL, ETERNAL 
CONSCIOUSNESS and BEARER OF THE HIGHEST
WISDOM, and in the power of it he can place himself beyond 
good and evil, beyond all karmic or darmic of synarchic 
metaphysics.
Undoubtedly all these genetic and psychic inheritances are 
makers of a spiritual and cultural idiosyncrasy from which we 
are nourished. In this way, and through family formation and 
the system's own cultural mechanisms, such as education at 
school or university, this will structure new cultural codes 
which are formative of a personal conscience that will 
determine 
the 
personality 
of 
the 
individual. 
The 
counterculture imposed by the world synarchy and directed by 
the sectors of power of the HIGH INTERNATIONAL 
ECONOMIC FINANCE, TOGETHER WITH CERTAIN 
RELIGIOUS AND POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS, are in
reality the entities that have imposed this model of man that 
unfortunately is collapsing more and more on its own RUINS.
Thus, the fall of all values and the degradation suffered by 
MATERIALISM, which has atrociously eaten away at the 
psyche of the people who have been victims of consumerism 
and the much talked about GLOBALIZATION, leads us to a 
situation where the only alternative is the search for a 
meaning that leads us to a different truth, because by 
following the DESTINY of this neoliberal culture and this 
economic capitalism we, THE ARGENTINE PEOPLE ARE 
LOST.
We do not intend to develop a deep study about the 
realities of the world in these orders, because we would have 
to write a thousand pages, at another point we will develop 
synthetically the political, religious and historical evolution of 
these organizations.


--- PAGE BREAK ---rs, because we would have 
to write a thousand pages, at another point we will develop 
synthetically the political, religious and historical evolution of 
these organizations.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
We only want to point out that this culture is MAYA AND 
WE KNOW THAT MAYA IS THE CARRIER OF A 
DEMONIC ILLUSION, DESTROYER OF EVERYTHING 
HYPERBORN, IT IS THE ACTION OF THE DEMIURGE 
JEHOVAH 
SATAN 
AND 
HIS 
HOSTS 
OF 
GOD 
WORSHIPPERS 
OF 
THE 
MATERIAL 
WORLD, 
SUPPORTERS OF THIS GREAT ILLUSORY ESOTERIC 
MAGIC THAT SUBJECTS MAN TO A CULTURAL 
DECEPTION THAT BURIES HIM IN HIS OWN TRAP.
Undoubtedly, this is the reality and it is what we have to 
live daily, it is what marks us in our daily life in all our 
actions and nothing the common man can do to modify it. 
This is so and we must take these guidelines, the reality is 
what it is and we are submerged in it and its rigor and 
hardness hits us, it bombards us daily in our head having to 
endure it in the best possible way. In it nothing good exists for 
the great human mass, which is subject to pain and suffering, 
only a few enjoy the "good life" and the hedonistic and 
materialistic pleasures of a BURGLAR and Oligarchic social 
class.
That is the PURE REALITY of man in this life, we are the 
meat of this great grinder that is the ORDINARY LIFE and 
like cows to the slaughterhouse, we are driven without any 
resistance. Therefore, FELLOWS, WE MUST DESPERATE, 
because it is the only honorable way out for the man with 
honor, for the man with courage, without fear of destiny and 
who is aware of it, since the great human tide are drops of this 
great ocean of ignorance and pain. But those who belong to 
the reality of the One, those who are chosen by the great 
deceiver are those who close the trap, those who execute us in 
their ignorance, those who oppress us believing that what they 
do is right, because that is the system and they endorse 
everything. That is the law and that is the justice of the 
demiurge and we are CRUCIFIED.
those who oppress us believing that what they 
do is right, because that is the system and they endorse 
everything. That is the law and that is the justice of the 
demiurge and we are CRUCIFIED.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
3
In this VALLEY OF TEARS, without being able to do 
anything, because we are bound hand and foot. That is why it 
is imperative to un- pert and retake the path of hyperborean 
consciousness, a legacy of our divine ancestors that through 
our health still remains in the world. Only this is the path, we 
must cling to our destiny of blood, of struggle, of WAR and 
transmute ourselves into WARRIOR MONKS, harden 
ourselves inside and out as STONES, as ROCKS, be FIRE 
AND LIGHT that illuminates BY ITSELF and take HEAVEN 
BY ASSAULT.
If we become soft, if we surrender to the destiny traced by 
the synarchy we will fall into a pit from which we will never 
be able to get out, only defeat awaits us because nothing will 
help us, on the contrary, we will receive a shovelful of earth to 
bury us. For this reason we must declare ourselves in a state 
of WAR, because this is reality and its cultural superstructure, 
they are the enemies to be defeated, since they pursue the 
destruction of the spirit, of the ARIO-HIPERBORIC man.
THE PASU IS PART OF THIS CULTURE AND EXISTS 
THROUGH IT, BEING A COG IN THIS ILLUSORY 
MECHANISM THAT IS LIFE. THE VIRYA, ON THE 
OTHER HAND, IS ITS VICTIM.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---ASU IS PART OF THIS CULTURE AND EXISTS 
THROUGH IT, BEING A COG IN THIS ILLUSORY 
MECHANISM THAT IS LIFE. THE VIRYA, ON THE 
OTHER HAND, IS ITS VICTIM.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
11. NOOLOGICAL 
DIFFERENCES 
IN 
THE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL ETHICAL ACTIONS OF THE 
VIRYA AND THE PASU.
There are well differentiated realities between the psyche 
of the virya and the pasu, two types of attitudes that are 
ethically differentiated from each other. The human animal, 
mechanized in the world, is governed in his life, in all his 
daily manifestations, by a PSYCHOLOGICAL ETHICS, that 
is to say, he only responds in one way to events and his inner 
processes: psychologically. By this we mean that the pasu 
only responds in this way because, not having a permanent 
center of gravity, he is part of a collective psychological 
machinery that forms him inside, programming his mind and 
his being to act according to these premises and respond to 
them, 
without 
asking, 
without 
questioning, 
without 
interrogating, without questioning. Thus, his MIND AND 
BODY 
act 
and 
condition 
themselves 
unconditioned, 
responding mechanically to the stimuli of the social and 
cultural environment without being able to question anything. 
Their DOGMATIC mind responds with PSYCHOLOGICAL 
attitudes and their BODY is totally conditioned to a response 
that lacks MOTORIC AWARENESS.
The internal processes represented in their MENTAL 
ASSOCIATIONS, structured in IDEAS AND THOUGHTS 
and the external ones in PSYCHOPHYSICAL attitudes, are 
simply inductive, mechanical and unconscious responses, 
therefore the passu's thinking is ASSOCIATIVE AND 
INDUCTIVE and its postural attitude is ethically ANIMAL.
It is interesting to remember and keep in mind that the 
mind of pasu, its psychological structure is composed of a 
sphere 
of 
personal 
and 
collective 
SHADOW 
OR 
UNCONSCIOUSNESS, and somehow it has a certain cone of 
LIGHT OR CONSCIOUSNESS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---, its psychological structure is composed of a 
sphere 
of 
personal 
and 
collective 
SHADOW 
OR 
UNCONSCIOUSNESS, and somehow it has a certain cone of 
LIGHT OR CONSCIOUSNESS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
developed throughout life that allows him to reason according 
to the mechanics of his cultural structure or reason. We 
describe this situation of the sleeping man because it is 
interesting to describe the illusory and fantastic processes with 
which the consciousness of the pasu is clothed. Since he is the 
subject of his own fantasies and illusions, which are 
prototypes of the cultural myths of the cultural superstructure 
of the outside world, fantasies and myths are the ontological 
evolutionary basis of the pasu. We have previously studied 
that all thought originates from an idea that initiates a process 
of associa- tion of links of principles. These links of 
principles, which are partakers of the same axiological sense, 
generate a relationship that from this will initiate a second 
mental process, as long as the pasu has the capacity where that 
RELATIONSHIP or thought, which was based on an idea, 
which is an inner representation of an image or entity, 
whether cultural or natural, in an associative form will be 
linked to another RELATIONSHIP that is generally the 
antithesis of the first synthesis. If this is concretized, the links 
of relations create a STRUCTURE and from it by 
UNCONSCIOUS INDUCTIVE ASSOCIATION it will be 
structured or linked to another ANALOGOUS STRUCTURE. 
When this is potentiated in the pasu and is actualized in its 
reason, it develops a sequence of free associations that are 
characterized by generating a thinking correla- tion in which 
reason, without the intervention of the I, takes possession of 
each thinking context that in a mechanical and inductive way 
freely associates other analogous principles located in the 
same context. In this way, this totally unconscious mechanism 
is unleashed and the introjection of an idea is derived in a 
whole context of free associations, where the relationships 
that are linked to the content structured in the initial idea in 
the ANIMAL MAN ARE DIS- TORSIONED, according to 
the magnitude of the impression received.
associations, where the relationships 
that are linked to the content structured in the initial idea in 
the ANIMAL MAN ARE DIS- TORSIONED, according to 
the magnitude of the impression received.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
The pasu is not able to stop this process because of its limited 
capacity for conscious discernment. Undoubtedly, the pasu's 
BEING, due to its scarce capacity of conscious discernment, 
cannot stop this process, its will being more and more 
submerged and disseminated in the associative structure. This 
mechanics triggers a distortion of thought that is called 
FANTASY OR ILLUSION, PSYCHOLOGICALLY WE 
KNOW THAT THEY ARE DISTORTIONS OF REALITY 
OR 
SIMPLY 
COMPLEXES 
THAT 
ACT 
PSYCHOLOGICALLY, UNLEASHING CERTAIN FOBIAS 
OR MANIAS, MAYBE OBSESSIONS THAT DRIVE IT TO 
SITUATIONS OF LOSS OF THE REAL AND OF 
REALITY.
The pasu's psyche is always paved by ILLUSIONS or 
fantasies that lead him to exist under a constant mental 
psychosis. In truth, the pasu lives in a perpetual mental 
pathology because his psychological continuity, being 
sustained by an external cultural immanence, projects him in 
time, in the LINEAR TRASCENDENT sense of it, without 
immanent consciousness of himself due to the fantasies and 
illusions that motivate his psychic interior. The pasu lives 
PROJECTED IN TRASCENDENT TIME, that is to say, he is 
subject to the FUTURE and to the cultural premises of the 
same according to his ontological text. Hence, his being has 
no REAL existence, because he is part of an UTOPIC 
FANTASY OF HIMSELF AND OF REALITY.
Therefore, the sleeping man is one more ENTITY among 
all the entities of creation, since he has PSYCHIC 
CONTINUITY AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTEGRITY 
when he exists under the processes of myths and fantasies, 
because if the pasu does not participate in these psychic 
manifestations, 
he 
is 
ANIMICALLY 
AND 
PSYCHOLOGICALLY DISINTEGRATED.
No matter the social or economic condition, no matter your


--- PAGE BREAK ---pasu does not participate in these psychic 
manifestations, 
he 
is 
ANIMICALLY 
AND 
PSYCHOLOGICALLY DISINTEGRATED.
No matter the social or economic condition, no matter your


--- PAGE BREAK ---

108
If he loses animosity due to the lack of fantasies or illusions, 
he will be precipitated to an extinction of his psychic 
continuity leading him to his own psychological disintegration 
which will drag him to NEUROSIS, and then to a 
PSYCHOSIS that will irremediably lead him to MADNESS 
AND MAYBE TRAGEDY.
This means that the man full of fantasies and illusions is 
not a sane and healthy being, on the contrary, he is 
psychologically ill, but this condition is COMMON TO ALL 
because he is part of the great illusory machinery that is 
MAYA, which is the creation of this cosmocreator demiurge 
and his hosts of gods sunk in their own fantasies and illusions. 
WE MUST UNDERSTAND THAT JUST AS THE PASU IN 
THE WORLD, SO ALSO THE GODS OF THE ONE AND 
HIS HOSTS OF IMMORTAL BEINGS ARE VICTIMS OF 
ILLUSION AND OF THEIR FANTASIES, ONLY THEY 
DIFFER IN THAT SOME ARE PARTS OF THE 
MATERIAL WORLD AND THE OTHERS OF THE 
"SPIRITUAL" WORLD.
BUT AT THE END OF COSMIC TIME, AT THE END 
OF 
THE 
MATERIAL 
UNIVERSE, 
WHEN 
THE 
EXISTENCE OF REALITY ENDS, EVERYTHING WILL 
END HERE, IN MATTER, IN ALL ITS SUBSTANCES, 
FROM THE FINEST OR SPIRITUAL TO THE GROSSEST 
OR MATERIAL. IN THE END, GODS AND IMMORTALS 
AND MEN WILL DISAPPEAR IN THE GREAT COSMIC 
NIGHT, EACH SPIRIT RETURNING TO ITS ORIGINAL 
BEING.
After the analysis made, we must understand how the 
ethics of the pasu, of the sleeping man, is, if we can really call 
it ethical behavior, we must simply consider it as a 
PSYCHOLOGICAL OR ARCHETÍPIC MORAL because in 
reality the pasu is simply


--- PAGE BREAK ---, of the sleeping man, is, if we can really call 
it ethical behavior, we must simply consider it as a 
PSYCHOLOGICAL OR ARCHETÍPIC MORAL because in 
reality the pasu is simply


--- PAGE BREAK ---

109
a victim, whether he is a common man without cultural 
preparation or an intellectual evolved in some archetypal 
profession, will always act PSYCHOLOGICALLY according 
to his ARCHETYPICAL con- dition.
On the other hand, it is a totally different reality that exists 
in the awakened man or VIRYA, because his inner condition 
is totally different and his response to the environment is not 
psychological but NOOLOGICAL, that is to say, he acts with 
an ETHICS and not with a morality.
This NOOLOGICAL ETHICS is due in a particular way 
to the fact that the virya has a permanent center of gravity, 
that his SELF and his whole BEING revolve around himself 
and his STRATEGY OF LIBERATION structured in 
determined KNOWLEDGE OR KNOWLEDGE.
Due to this spiritual condition, the awakened man does not 
respond with psychological attitudes, but his action and 
reaction are always contained and defined by his strategy, and 
since it is NONOLOGICAL, THAT IS TO SAY, SINCE IT 
IS NOT ARCHETIC, SINCE IT IS NOT DESIGNATED BY 
THE DEMIURG, IT IMPELLS THE AWAKENED MAN 
TO ACT IN SUCH A WAY, THAT IS TO SAY, WITH 
NONOLOGICAL ATTITUDES.
Therefore, the warrior lives in a state of INTE- RIOR 
ALERT, he always exists in the MOMENT and his psycho- 
logical reality does not depend on myths and fantasies, 
because in his inner self his CONSCIOUS SELF directs him 
and CONCIOUSLY ORGANIZES EVERYTHING, his 
psychic space being a CLOSED, ISOLATED territory, A 
WALLED CASTLE where what is allowed to enter or 
participate is part of the psychological mysticism or related to 
it.
It is important to recognize intellectually and spiritually 
what we have analyzed in this point in synthetic forms, 
because understanding the ethical differences between the 
morals of the common man and the ethics of the awakened or 
awakening man is important.
have analyzed in this point in synthetic forms, 
because understanding the ethical differences between the 
morals of the common man and the ethics of the awakened or 
awakening man is important.


--- PAGE BREAK ---is point in synthetic forms, 
because understanding the ethical differences between the 
morals of the common man and the ethics of the awakened or 
awakening man is important.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
is fundamental and essential in the strategy of the spiritual 
warrior. For this reason we recommend observing and 
understanding this, not only in the reality of the world and in 
daily contact with it, but also in OUR INNER SELF, in our 
PSYCHIS.
I am going to make a stop in this part of the study of 
hyperborean gnosis to narrate an event that has moved me 
deeply. This event, so significant for me, took place in a space 
of inner significance, in what is called dream language, but for 
me this is a field of action where the "I" can relate to an aspect 
of itself governed by its symbol of origin, by its noological 
being.
I was in a cemetery full of mausoleums and crypts and 
suddenly I sat in the lotus position or a very similar one, it 
happened that at that moment a woman dressed in black of 
extreme beauty appeared and began to dance around me. Her 
dance was sensual and terribly erotic, one could perceive the 
charm of her figure and sought to awaken in me a certain 
erotic content, feeling inside me the emergence of that instinct 
and my soul was becoming sexualized, but I knew that I had 
to resign myself to it and so I did. The beautiful dancer 
insisted with her erotic dance and more and more she 
insinuated herself, already letting her erogenous part show, 
already touching me with her veils or her gaze. But I felt that 
an inner strength emerged from my being, which allowed me 
to appreciate the aesthetic magic of the dance but not to fall 
for the dancer's ethical insinuations.
NA. This is how this whole act passed, where I lost 
consciousness that I was really surrounded by sepulchers, 
which represented death. Suddenly the dancer ended her 
choreographed dance and stopped, and I felt admiration for 
the beauty of it, but my being and my SELF was with a 
lucidity of conscience that presented a dialogue between this 
dancer and the dead.
oreographed dance and stopped, and I felt admiration for 
the beauty of it, but my being and my SELF was with a 
lucidity of conscience that presented a dialogue between this 
dancer and the dead.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

111
WALQUIRIA and a warrior like me, and the same began.
The woman spoke: "My dance is the dance of fire and you 
have resisted it, therefore you have the right to a truth. The 
truth is located in the poles and in the cold fire that exists in 
them. Only by meditating on this truth will you find within 
yourself the essence of the true and the eternal- .
After that I woke up.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---that exists in 
them. Only by meditating on this truth will you find within 
yourself the essence of the true and the eternal- .
After that I woke up.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
12. THE VIRYA AND HIS SPIRITUAL LIBERATION 
STRATEGIES
At this point we will analyze the situation of the warrior 
who seeks to awaken and how to carry out this inner process. 
For this it is important to understand two key points for the 
companion in struggle.
First: to make an ontological examination of your inner 
reality.
Second: to develop a sympathetic attitude towards our own
be.
In the first point, which is the most critical psychologically
In speaking we must be EXTENSIVE, meaning that we must 
not only visualize our psycho-animal constitution but 
everything that is related to ourselves. Starting from ourselves 
we must extend ourselves to all the archetypes that we have 
incorporated in our being, whether it is the family or the 
archetype family, mother, father, wife, children, etc., the 
archetype profession, also the cultural environment in which 
we find ourselves and its political, religious, cultural reality, 
etc. We must be ruthless with all that we have incorporated in 
our soul and we must proceed from the PAR- TICULAR to 
the GENERAL.
That is to say, we must first FLEX OURSELVES ON 
OUR 
ANIMAL 
AND 
SPIRITUAL 
REALITY, 
PARTICIPATING in the process.
CULAR and from there we will extend towards all the parts 
of our soul, TO THE GENERAL, because in reality our 
SOUL IS PART OF THE FAMILY SOUL AND OF THE 
SOCIAL SOUL. We are a being, a MICROCOSM 
INTEGRATED TO THE GREAT UNIVERSAL SOUL OR 
MACROCOSM AND IF WE PRETEND TO AWAKEN WE 
MUST 
DEFINITIVELY 
BREAK 
WITH 
THE 
COLLECTIVE, WITH THE MECHANICAL, WITH THE 
MACROCOSM AND THE DEMIUMER.


--- PAGE BREAK ---GREAT UNIVERSAL SOUL OR 
MACROCOSM AND IF WE PRETEND TO AWAKEN WE 
MUST 
DEFINITIVELY 
BREAK 
WITH 
THE 
COLLECTIVE, WITH THE MECHANICAL, WITH THE 
MACROCOSM AND THE DEMIUMER.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
GICO.
Therefore, with the scalpel of the Hyperborean Gnosis and 
with what we have learned and assimilated in this knowledge, 
we will proceed to CONSCIENTIZE and shed LIGHT on the 
individual unconscious and on the collective or general 
unconscious.
Undoubtedly this inner alchemy, this work of Hercules, 
which is not an easy task to perform, requires all our will and 
patience, because we must be cautious and strategic. For this 
reason we must follow the guidelines of a strategy mentioned 
above: THE STRATEGY OF THE FENCE.
It requires of a fundamental principle, that of knowing 
how to ISOLATE ourselves internally from our psychic 
reality until we are able to dissolve and destroy our 
psychology of complexes, for this we must apply what has 
been taught in the points studied in these writings. After 
achieving this tactic in our interior we must continue with our 
exterior, that is why we must be EXTENSIVE, that is to say, 
we must continue with everything that surrounds us and has 
psychological support in our interior.
In our exterior it is necessary to RECOGNIZE the realities 
of those around us in all their complexity, analyzing each part 
of it with no other optic than that of COLD FIRE, because if 
we analyze this environment psychically we will be victims of 
the HEART ARCHITECTURE and all the designs that are 
found there; the warrior must be ALERT AND PROCEED 
TO EXECUTE THIS STRATEGY WITHOUT FEELINGS.
To use an analogy, we must be like the warrior knights 
entrenched in their own castles and when surrounded by 
enemies strategically applied the tactic of surprise, making 
unexpected raids on them and then quickly returning to the 
protection of their walled castles, where they were practically 
invulnerable.


--- PAGE BREAK ---plied the tactic of surprise, making 
unexpected raids on them and then quickly returning to the 
protection of their walled castles, where they were practically 
invulnerable.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
In this way, applying the principle of FENCE and then that 
of ISOLATION, which will allow us to strengthen ourselves, 
we will use the techniques of the RIGHT ANGLE and COLD 
FIRE to penetrate the external world, the microcosmic 
structures of the demiurge, and to be able to ENTER AND 
ESCAPE them without being detected. Because we must not 
only destroy our PASU PSYCHOLOGY, incorporated in our 
being by the archetypal adhesions, but we must also 
CONCIENTIALIZE the world around us. This means that we 
have to OPEN ALL THE CULTURAL RECORDS OF THE 
SELF, BOTH THE PARTICULAR AND THE GENERAL.
We have previously analyzed and studied the hyper-
Borean techniques to operate on the cultural registers of the 
demiurge, and they are essential for such a strategic operation 
if we intend to free ourselves from the bonds of the gods of 
this material universe that has imprisoned us to its destiny.
All these techniques of the highest hyper-borean spiritual 
science give us the necessary strategy to destroy the 
techniques of strategic opposition projected by the enemy here 
in the world.
Thus, in the first point we find ourselves with the 
development of certain strategic tactical conditions that we 
must apply if we intend to know our ontology.
They are divided into four phases.
- THE ENCIRCLEMENT STRATEGY
- THE ISOLATION STRATEGY
- THE RIGHT ANGLE STRATEGY
- THE COLD FIRE STRATEGY
By carrying out these procedures we enter the second phase: 
the development of an UNDERSTANDING attitude, because 
once we have developed a


--- PAGE BREAK ---LE STRATEGY
- THE COLD FIRE STRATEGY
By carrying out these procedures we enter the second phase: 
the development of an UNDERSTANDING attitude, because 
once we have developed a


--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
When the warrior has been spiritually consolidated, an 
UNDERSTANDING NONOLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 
expands in him,
which allows him to intellectually understand the world of 
eternal symbols and the world of sacred symbols. That is, in 
the power of himself and in the mastery of the highest 
wisdom, the warrior, having fought the illusory forces of 
maya, understands the MYSTERY OF HIS OWN FALL 
AND OF CREATION and awakens to the highest knowledge: 
the TRASCENDENTAL HYPERBORNE NOOLOGICAL 
UNDERSTANDING.


--- PAGE BREAK ---llusory forces of 
maya, understands the MYSTERY OF HIS OWN FALL 
AND OF CREATION and awakens to the highest knowledge: 
the TRASCENDENTAL HYPERBORNE NOOLOGICAL 
UNDERSTANDING.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
13. SPACE-TIMES OF THE PASU AND THE VIRYA. 
TRANSCENDENT TIME AND IMMANENT TIME.
One of the fundamental differences between the pasu and 
the hyperborean warrior is determined in their psychoanimic 
realities, since the pasu lives embedded in the REALITY and 
contemporaneity of the phenomenal world and owes his 
ontological structure to it. Its psychology, formalized by the 
sum of complexes distributed in a plurality of egos, forms an 
ontological whole, whose center of gravity varies according to 
the complex that has the greatest axiological implication, 
which we could say is the EGO of the pasu in itself. 
Therefore, it is essential to understand that the PASU is a 
completely 
animic 
being 
without 
an 
INTEGRATED 
ETERNAL SELF, but that his spiritual being, his will has 
disintegrated along the karmic evolutions to the ontological 
archetypes conforming the PERSONALITY AND THE EGO, 
which is psychologically structured by complexes.
Undoubtedly this inner process is disintegrating man in the 
complexes, which are energetic substrates emerging from the 
different centers of the human machine, that is to say, from 
the chakras, which are taking energy from him because each 
complex is a psychological body that has its own ontic 
significance. We want to affirm with this that the pasu has 
ontic existence thanks to the complexes, because they are the 
same 
ones 
that 
give 
it 
PSYCHOLOGICAL 
CONSCIOUSNESS. THIS IS WHY WE STATED ABOVE 
THAT THE PASU HAS ONLY A PSYCHOLOGICAL 
ETHIC,
because it is understood that it is a psychic whole that is 
integrated by a plurality of complexes or "I's" (we use this 
conceptual definition which belongs to the great Russian 
thaumaturgist G. I. Gurdjieff). This Russian esoteric master 
had


--- PAGE BREAK ---d by a plurality of complexes or "I's" (we use this 
conceptual definition which belongs to the great Russian 
thaumaturgist G. I. Gurdjieff). This Russian esoteric master 
had


--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
Gurdjieff was of great intellectual relevance in certain 
intellectual circles in England and France after the First World 
War, forming an esoteric line called the Fourth Way or Path 
of the Razor's Edge, which had a certain hyperborean 
language. It could be said that Gurdjieff was a sleeping sid- 
dha and his thought is still of great importance, therefore we 
recommend the study of all his literature, since it is an 
anteroom to hyperborean thought).
Thus, the sleeping man, his being, his center of gravity 
which is the axial axis of his psychological symmetry is a 
COMPLEX, a psychic structure with archetypal autonomy 
that conditions him internally in a psychic space which we 
denote as TRASCENDENT TIME.
Why is the psychic inner space of the sleeping man or 
pasu called transcendent time? What do we mean by 
psychological symmetries?
We call transcendent time the psychological time of the 
sleeping man because the psychic reality of his thinking, of 
the structural context of his mental associations are 
unconscious products that have a basis in the archetypes or 
complexes, whose emerging symbols are analogous correlates 
of the emerging cultural projections in the cultural 
superstructure of the world or macrocosm. With this we want 
to denote that the sleeping man projected in the cultural 
archetypes of the world DOES NOT HAVE A CONSCIOUS 
THOUGHT, because his being is disseminated in the 
problems of the external world that have a hold in his interior, 
therefore 
his 
psychological 
time 
is 
undoubtedly 
a 
TRANSFERSION 
OR 
PROJECTION 
OF 
THE 
TRANSCENDENT TIME OF THE DEMIURG.
In this way we assert that the pasu is a man determined in 
his interior by the archetypal complexes of the macrocosm 
and of the transcendent time of the same, with which
ENT TIME OF THE DEMIURG.
In this way we assert that the pasu is a man determined in 
his interior by the archetypal complexes of the macrocosm 
and of the transcendent time of the same, with which


--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
it could be said that he is part of that general whole which is 
the macrocosm, therefore in reality there is no MICROCOSM 
AND MACROCOSM DIFFERENTIATED PSYCHOSMOS.
LOGICALLY SPEAKING, because the pasu psychologically 
is a PROJECTION OF THE DEMIURGH, it is ONE MORE 
ENTITY OF HIS CREATION. He is only a differentiated 
being, a MICROCOSM, the man who BREAKS with the 
existing cultural archetypal structures within the transcendent 
time of the demiurge.
Now what is the transcendent time of the demiurge?
Undoubtedly, if we understand the previous answer we 
will deduce that the transcendent time of the demiurge is his 
CONSCIOUSNESS, or better said, IT IS AN ASPECT OF 
THE CONSCIOUSNESS OR MACROCOSMIC LIGHT 
SPHERE WHICH TO MY EYES IS REPRESENTED TO US 
AS THE REA- LITY.
Because we must understand that the REALITY OF THE 
WORLD is the DEMIURGH, and the chronological time that 
appears to us as a projection of PAST, PRESENT AND 
FUTURE is simply the transcendence of the ENTITIES with 
their being, which give to the moment the spatio-temporal 
sense, an ASPECT OF CONTINUITY OR TRANSCEN- 
DENCE FORWARD, TOWARDS THE FUTURE. But this
state of reality that in the psyche of the pasu gives him 
temporal reference and sense of ubiquity in the environment 
or habitat, is simply an ILLUSION that although it is real for 
him, it is simply because the pasu is also one MORE ENTITY 
OF CREATION and his being is participating in the 
ILLUSORY ASYMMETRY OF MAYA.
Before proceeding with the development of this topic, we 
must 
say 
that 
it 
belongs 
to 
the 
TREATISE 
ON 
HYPERBORNE PHYSICS and it does not fall within the 
scope of this book, but we are simply analyzing certain points 
because it has certain characteristics.


--- PAGE BREAK ---the 
TREATISE 
ON 
HYPERBORNE PHYSICS and it does not fall within the 
scope of this book, but we are simply analyzing certain points 
because it has certain characteristics.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

120
The implication of this in the psychology of the pasu. Going 
on, we maintain that the massified man is an archetypal 
projection of the demiurge and that his interior, his 
psychological immanence is occupied by the transcendence of 
the demiurge. In this way he is a drop of this ocean of illusion 
that is maya and therefore we affirm that the psychologically 
asleep man has no REAL existence.
Thus, we affirm that only the AWAKENED VIRYA has 
REAL EXISTENCE, because he has his OWN IMMANENT 
TIME, and when he detaches himself from reality he breaks 
with the illusory chains of the space-times of the transcendent 
time of the demiurge. It is important to understand the 
psychological significance of the acquisition of immanent 
time in the consciousness of the AWAKENED VIRYA, 
because this condition is the one that allowed the development 
of the DEDUCTIVE THOUGHT, which was the reason for 
the development of abstract sciences such as mathematics, 
geo-metrics, philosophy, etc.
The warrior, by psychologically leaving the transcendent 
time of the demiurge, can in his psychic immanence analyze 
and reflect on the archetypes in their different logical 
structures, thus being able to discern their ontological 
registers in all their historical space-times. This strategic 
attitude allows the warrior monk to isolate the concept, the 
entity from the reality inherent in its archetypes, that is to say, 
to escape from the designs and their sacred symbols, 
specifically from the bijas structured in them, and to SEE 
THE TRUTH of the analyzed historical cultural register. But 
the pasu or virya dor- mido, being his mass consciousness 
trapped in transcendent time, participating his being in some 
of the psychological realities of the archetype, being a 
conscious or unconscious victim of the purposes of the 
demiurge, will be a victim of the archetypal phenomena or 
social facts. An example of this
ychological realities of the archetype, being a 
conscious or unconscious victim of the purposes of the 
demiurge, will be a victim of the archetypal phenomena or 
social facts. An example of this


--- PAGE BREAK ---s of the archetype, being a 
conscious or unconscious victim of the purposes of the 
demiurge, will be a victim of the archetypal phenomena or 
social facts. An example of this


--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
are the mass movements, whether for political or religious 
reasons; being driven by a social archetype they generate a 
mass attraction whose consequences overflow the will of the 
passu, being this one dragged to follow uncon- ciently the 
total development of the fact or social event which unfolds in 
all its magnitude. It may end in a tragic phenomenon, and he 
may be the fatal victim of this social archetype. On the other 
hand, the luciferic warrior, located himself in his immanent 
consciousness isolated from the linear time of the One, 
operating with the precision of a surgeon, will be able to open 
all the cultural registers that he strategically needs, verifying 
the REAL, the truth of the lie, and thus he will know the 
REALITY 
of 
them. 
Undoubtedly 
this 
hyperborean 
gnoseological strategic technique is the cause of culture and 
deductive thinking and had historical origin in awakened men, 
viryas who contributed with their thinking to develop 
consciousness in all fields of universal culture.
It is therefore imperative that the virya develops this 
faculty of knowledge, because it is the only way to have a 
DIRECTED THOUGHT WITH WHICH TO OPERATE ON 
THE ARCHETYPES AND THEIR CULTURAL RECORDS.
RALES. In this way the virya, the warrior monk with this 
strategy, appropriates, takes possession of himself and realizes 
his 
INDIVIDUATION, 
generating 
an 
IMMANENT 
CONSCIOUSNESS.
governed by his SELF, detaching himself from the realities 
and from the emerging archetypal projections of the world, 
FROM THE TRASCENDENT TIME of the demiurge that 
simply pretend to keep him inside the trap of maya, inside the 
world. In this way the virya escapes and frees himself from 
reality and locates himself in the real, generating an 
ISOLATED SPACE-TIME within the reality of the 
demiurge's space-time, escaping from the sense of spatio-
temporal CONTINUITY dominated by the dimensional 
references width, length and height. By
ISOLATED SPACE-TIME within the reality of the 
demiurge's space-time, escaping from the sense of spatio-
temporal CONTINUITY dominated by the dimensional 
references width, length and height. By


--- PAGE BREAK ---E within the reality of the 
demiurge's space-time, escaping from the sense of spatio-
temporal CONTINUITY dominated by the dimensional 
references width, length and height. By


--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
For example, a cultural register that is important to OPEN are 
those of the physical and mathematical sciences, currently 
governed by universal laws that the scientific community 
certifies as absolute truths. They are in reality partial truths 
that are determined by the SCIENCE ARCHETYPE, which in 
its physical and mathematical complexion has developed only 
a part of the whole that is its cultural register. The present 
science is still far from being fully developed, and 
furthermore the world synarchy has placed upon it a SIGNAL 
COVER which does not allow scientific researchers access to 
more transcendental truths. This is because this area of culture, 
the scientific column, is one of the strategies of the world 
synarchy with which it seduces and traps the sleeping viryas 
into its cultural register; thus science and technology, leaders 
in the formation of cultural precepts, absorb the greatest 
intelligences into its archetype and put them to sleep in it. 
Unfortunately, classical physics and especially astronomy 
hold one of the most atrocious lies in history, because they 
drive certain space researches that require immense amounts 
of money to simply investigate EMPTY SPACES FULL OF 
NOTHING.
But we must understand that this idea is simply a tactic of 
the synarchy to affirm MATTER over SPIRIT and these 
tyrants do not mind spending sidereal sums of money with 
which they would put an end to hunger and misery on this 
planet. Meanwhile, they have managed to install physics as 
the most powerful SACRED SYMBOL of their strategy of 
spiritual disintegration, leading with it to affirm in the world's 
collective consciousness the scientific premises as absolute 
truths which are unquestionable. That is why HYPERBORN 
WISDOM, IN ITS TREATISE OF
HYPERBORNEAN PHYSICS reveals scientific truths 
unknown to current science and the hyperborean virya who is 
in sin
uths which are unquestionable. That is why HYPERBORN 
WISDOM, IN ITS TREATISE OF
HYPERBORNEAN PHYSICS reveals scientific truths 
unknown to current science and the hyperborean virya who is 
in sin


--- PAGE BREAK ---stionable. That is why HYPERBORN 
WISDOM, IN ITS TREATISE OF
HYPERBORNEAN PHYSICS reveals scientific truths 
unknown to current science and the hyperborean virya who is 
in sin


--- PAGE BREAK ---

123
The charismatic and strategic chronicism with them will be 
able to access these mysteries. One of these laws, gravity and 
that of the three dimensions can be altered with certain 
esoteric hyperborean scientific techniques that demonstrate 
that they are NOT ABSOLUTE TRUTHS, but it is not in this 
treatise where we will develop them, we simply want to 
clarify this point because it is of vital importance for the 
strategy of certain comrades.
When the virya awakens to these truths he acquires an 
ABSOLUTE UNDERSTANDING and understands where he 
stands, 
becoming 
himself 
a 
BUILDER 
because 
he 
understands that he alone must awaken from the deception by 
building within himself a hyperborean reality, which will 
build 
a 
PSYCHOLOGICAL 
CONSTRUCTION 
UNMATCHED TO THE ETERNAL. Thus, the awakened 
comrade will gain access to the noological truths and will 
relate to a warrior mysticism that will allow him to sustain the 
battle that he will have to fight against the hostility of maya.
It is important to differentiate that the awakened virya, 
when he internally crystallizes his own individuation and has 
full conscious control of his space-times of abstract 
consciousness, is located TRASVERSAL to reality, which, 
having a sense of continuity, acquires a LINEAR or 
HORIZONTAL sense. It is vital to understand this concept 
because in a previous point we called these asymmetries of 
temporal con- sciousness the MYSTERY OF THE RIGHT 
ANGLE, which is part of the hyperborean physics that studies 
it from a physical perspective, but we will do it from a 
SPIRITUAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL point of view, because in 
reality we must first understand how to apply this technique in 
the internal worlds to be able to realize it later in the external 
worlds.
Continuing with the analysis, we understand that the cro-
ality we must first understand how to apply this technique in 
the internal worlds to be able to realize it later in the external 
worlds.
Continuing with the analysis, we understand that the cro-


--- PAGE BREAK ---understand how to apply this technique in 
the internal worlds to be able to realize it later in the external 
worlds.
Continuing with the analysis, we understand that the cro-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

124
The time that is determined by clock hours, which is the 
scientific measure that physically quantifies it in its different 
cultural 
variables, 
governs 
all 
spatial 
measurements 
considered in terms of speed. For this reason, from the 
beginning of humanity man began to order his realities by 
incorporating them into a way of measuring them, and time, 
days and nights, he distributed them mathematically into 
seconds, minutes, hours, months, years, etc. This social 
formality, which by convention was universally accepted, 
structures in the consciousness a linear premise of time 
determined by a consciousness of PAST, PRESENT AND 
FUTURE which is contained in a spatial geometry formed by 
three dimensions LENGTH, WIDTH AND HEIGHT.
Undoubtedly, from a psychological SYMBOLOGICAL 
structuralism, in the consciousness of the pasu these realities 
are structured in a psychological form in a complex that 
presents 
these 
realities 
in 
a 
UNIFIED 
form, 
INCORPORATED ONE TO THE OTHER UNDER A 
SENSE 
OF 
TRANSCENDENT 
SPACE-TEMPORAL 
CONTINUITY. If we reduce the
Psychologically speaking, we could say that the HABITUAL 
LANGUAGE exists as an INERCITY OF TIME FORWARD, 
as if something were propelling it into the future. For the 
common man the present is a continuous becoming of the 
future and he projects himself into the future because for him, 
time and its spaces contain him in their complexion as 
something else, as another entity. This perception of reality, 
although it is real because in this creational dimension the 
world is determined by these laws and all the entities of 
creation are subject to them, we must understand the 
hyperborean knowledge that allows us to transcend the gnos- 
seological limits of the physical laws. Thus we understand 
that the soul and the body, the microcosm is a being integrated 
to the macrocosm, therefore it participates directly in all the 
orders of the physical world.
e physical laws. Thus we understand 
that the soul and the body, the microcosm is a being integrated 
to the macrocosm, therefore it participates directly in all the 
orders of the physical world.


--- PAGE BREAK ---s we understand 
that the soul and the body, the microcosm is a being integrated 
to the macrocosm, therefore it participates directly in all the 
orders of the physical world.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

125
creationists of the One, therefore we are PRISONED, 
ENCLOSED, subordinated to the ontological and axiological 
limits that the DESIGNS presupposed in the soul determine. 
In this way the soul is simply a projection of the demiurge and 
is an extension of the One, therefore the psyche of the pasu is 
EXTENSIVE AND ITS BEING IS INCORPORATED.
TO THE TRANSCENDENCE OF THE ONE. On the other 
hand, in the awakened virya, his being, upon leaving and 
escaping from the orders of the demiurge, adopts a 
TRANSVERSAL position to the horizontal mechanics of 
creation and generates a consciousness that is UNMANENT 
TO HIS SELF, which allows him to embrace all reality from 
the real and to see the illusion of maya, the seduction of the 
macrocosmic archetypes and the trap of Isis without suffering 
from its consequences. But for this it is necessary to 
ALCHEMICALLY TRANSMUTATE THE SOUL, to modify 
its designs, awakening all the gnoseological and axiological 
potencies of our eternal spirit, which are a REAL part OF 
ONE'S SELF, but which, being asleep, we do not realize that 
they exist.
By awakening these qualities we will obtain certain 
spiritual 
capacities 
that 
will 
allow 
us 
to 
MOVE 
INTERNALLY, EITHER INTELLECTUALLY THROUGH 
THE INTERNAL WORLDS AND IF WE WANT TO, ALSO 
WITH OUR PHYSICAL VEHICLE THROUGH ALL THE 
CREATIONIST SPACE-TIMES OF THE ONE WITHOUT 
SUFFERING ANY CONSEQUENCES.
But what is important in the strategy of the Right Angle is 
the inner vision that opens in 360 degrees and allows us to 
embrace the whole reality from a superior perspective, and to 
dominate the whole cultural structure of the world verifying 
from the REAL the different manifestations of the demiurge 
and of the world synarchy, here in this material universe. This 
is what is essential in the awakening, in the individuation, 
because the acquisition of power is the result of the acquisition 
of the power of the demiurge and the world synarchy.
universe. This 
is what is essential in the awakening, in the individuation, 
because the acquisition of power is the result of the acquisition 
of the power of the demiurge and the world synarchy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---hat is essential in the awakening, in the individuation, 
because the acquisition of power is the result of the acquisition 
of the power of the demiurge and the world synarchy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
The condition of FREEDOM is not essential for the virya in 
matter, the condition of FREEDOM is essential for survival in 
matter, the rest are mere fascinations and in the end, when one 
is liberated, everything will be added. For this reason we 
recommend that the warrior monk understands what is the 
purpose of the man who seeks to inwardly connect himself to 
his original divine being, because otherwise he will be the 
VICTIM OF HIS OWN POWER, and only this should be the 
purpose of the virya as long as a HIGHER STRATEGY 
REQUIRES IT.
In the strategies and tactics of the synarchs, within their 
religious and esoteric entelechies the demiurge prepares them 
in their designs with the actualization of certain powers which 
are incorporated, but these techniques of the synarchy have a 
purpose and it is to impress the masses and the sleeping viryas 
to capture them in their cultural purposes, but also the 
synarchy uses these tactics in the latter case, because to tell 
the truth it is enough to emerge certain entelechies in science 
or in art or perhaps in politics. Although we must consider 
that the main Manu entelechies are structured in the 
SACERDOTAL ARCHITECTURE and the world synarchy 
strategically prepares certain disciples to reach these states of 
mind and the same contains certain powers.
We have previously developed this point and it is not 
necessary to continue on it, we must simply clarify that within 
the faculties that Gnosis and dis- pertartism give us is that of 
being able to generate different strategic conditions that allow 
us to overcome certain psychic and physical laws. But we 
reiterate, these are useful as long as and when the strategy 
requires it, besides it is not so simple to awaken these faculties 
because they are qualities of our FREE SELF and for this it is 
essential 
to 
have 
completed 
our 
own 
ABSOLUTE 
INDIVIDUATION.
quires it, besides it is not so simple to awaken these faculties 
because they are qualities of our FREE SELF and for this it is 
essential 
to 
have 
completed 
our 
own 
ABSOLUTE 
INDIVIDUATION.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
14. NOOLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE 
AWAKENED VIRYA ON CULTURAL STRUCTURE
It is important to signify the immanent reality of the con- 
sciousness of the virya because it is a structure enclosed and 
isolated from the transcendent reality of the demiurge and its 
cultural archetypes. The consciousness of the virya must be 
seated in the eternal symbols and in the VRIL and for nothing 
in the world should it transcend its permanent center of 
gravity which is the I, for this reason we sustain the 
SYMMETRIC sense OF THE PSYCHIS, where the I must 
order and distribute the emergent complexes according to the 
significant realities of the same.
That is why we must understand that even though when 
we realize the process of INDIVIDUATION in our being and 
when we understand the ABSOLUTE REALITY OF THE 
SPIRIT, as long as we are subjected to this space-time where 
our physical body is imprisoned or chained, we will always 
have to resist the attacks that the gods who sustain the 
material order make on our strategy. Therefore, no matter how 
much we have absolutely mastered our soul, we must 
understand that the enemy is always present and that he is 
waiting for our weakness, a vestige of carelessness, to project 
his weapons of destruction upon it.
The virya must understand his enemy and know that he 
never surrenders, he will never resign himself to losing a virya 
of pure blood and even less to his declaring a total war on the 
material world, therefore, companions of struggle, we will 
always entrench ourselves in our blood, in our ideals and 
above all in the HYPERBORNE GNOSIS, WHICH IS THE 
SPIRITUAL SCIENCE WHERE THE VIRYA WILL 
ALWAYS FIND RELIEF FOR HIS SOUL.
It is necessary to keep in mind the difficulties of taking the
deals and 
above all in the HYPERBORNE GNOSIS, WHICH IS THE 
SPIRITUAL SCIENCE WHERE THE VIRYA WILL 
ALWAYS FIND RELIEF FOR HIS SOUL.
It is necessary to keep in mind the difficulties of taking the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

128
way of the way of the sword, of the mystical-metaphysical 
path of the warrior monk, because this way of liberation that 
leads to the ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUALITY, to the 
SUPERMAN, does not
It has no rest, it has no shoulder to rest its head on, it has only 
sacrifice, continuous pain of the soul and much, much 
conscious suffering, because it is a razor-edged path, a path of 
hard trials where nothing of the world is given to us, on the 
contrary, everything is taken away from us and an infinite 
loneliness surrounds us around our life even if we have the 
best family, the materially ordered reality and we are owners 
of reality, all this is illusion and sooner or later we can lose it 
and this is so whether we like it or not. Only one thing is 
certain, this path is for the man who has guts, who is different, 
who can change everything, who is not of this world, because 
if he is, he will surely not be able to overcome and will perish, 
but if he is, if he really has a different spirit and in his spiritual 
essence has the SIGN OF ORIGIN engraved in his 
consciousness, he will be able to walk with VALOR AND 
HONOR the HYPERBOROUS path to freedom.
This is the reality of the warrior, he is the great alone, he 
has no deity, no cult, nothing, he has only himself and if he 
relates charismatically certain divine comrades will watch 
over him spiritually. That is why in this inner struggle there is 
no supplication, no plea, no prayer because our gods have 
already assisted us, they have given us the greatest of help, the 
best of assistance, they have provided us with GNOSIS, 
WISDOM, THE TRASCENDENTAL KNOWLEDGE OF 
HOW TO DETACH THE ETERNAL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ted us, they have given us the greatest of help, the 
best of assistance, they have provided us with GNOSIS, 
WISDOM, THE TRASCENDENTAL KNOWLEDGE OF 
HOW TO DETACH THE ETERNAL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

129
15. THE ASYMMETRIES OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL 
ETHICS OF THE PASU AND THE SYMMETRIES OF 
THE NOOLOGICAL ETHICS OF THE VIRYA. THE 
BIJAS OF CREATION
At this point we will analyze the psychological 
asymmetries of the pasu and we must say that by asymmetries 
we refer to the internal psychic process of the massified man 
whose consciousness is partialized, divided into multiple 
complexes which alternate to occupy the pasu's consciousness 
and displace his center of gravity which, instead of being 
located in his ego, is absorbed by the sacred symbols 
emerging in the complex that has axiological preeminence in 
the ontology of the individual.
The pasu, being situated in time, in the transcendent time 
of the demiurge, is one more entity of creation and his being 
participates in the events of the world being a bidder of 
meaning and fulfilling the ontological suprafinality deposited 
in his soul, he is in harmony with his creator because he 
complies with the plans agreed upon by the demiurge for his 
existence. Therefore, this human machine that is man, lives 
and exists according to the objectives that the creator gods and 
their hosts of metaphysical hierarchies have delineated for 
him and nothing will be given to him, only the created man 
must fulfill his archetypal designs and if he rebels against it he 
will be destroyed.
We point this out because in the psyche of the sleeping 
man, being subject to himself, his conscience believes that he 
is a normal being and cannot verify the psychic and 
psychologic asymmetries that project him to certain neuroses 
or psychoses. Because we must understand that the common 
man, being centered in reality from the vision of the cultural 
archetypes, these deform the real, generating a symmetrical 
sense of it.
or psychoses. Because we must understand that the common 
man, being centered in reality from the vision of the cultural 
archetypes, these deform the real, generating a symmetrical 
sense of it.


--- PAGE BREAK ---se we must understand that the common 
man, being centered in reality from the vision of the cultural 
archetypes, these deform the real, generating a symmetrical 
sense of it.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

130
This is like a game of mirrors where you think you see the 
right image without realizing that it is not only upside down 
but also deformed, totally asymmetrical.
THE 
ARCHETYPICAL 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
is 
characterized by generating images of reality and of ourselves 
with a symmetrical ethical and aesthetic sense, that is, placing 
us in an ontological point where everything is normal. These 
axiological manifestations of the archetypes that contain us 
have the power to generate a certain numinosity in the 
consciousness that endows reality with such a perfect illusory 
sense that the pasu perceives it as something natural. 
Therefore, the complexes, which are psychic and psychic 
manifestations of the archetypes, are in charge of manifesting 
to the Ego the symmetry of life and have the capacity to 
generate an image of reality and of oneself endowed with a 
symmetry where everything is surrounded by TRUTH, 
NOBILITY AND BEAUTY.
Undoubtedly, this perception of reality is true because the 
consciousness has in its first conscious perception of reality 
the capacity to grasp the ETERNAL SYMBOLS, therefore in 
our appreciation of the world and of ourselves this archetypal 
vision is founded primarily on the eternal symbols. In this 
way we essentially see life as a symmetry of forms and colors 
essentially in the natural terrain, this is so but in the cultural 
space reality shows us that the ASYMMETRIC is what 
governs the human order.
We have to understand that this is why the common man 
or the sleeping virya has a relationship with the life of LOVE, 
KINDNESS AND BEAUTY and this is due to the 
unconscious aspects of the eternal symbols underlying the 
macrocosmic archetypes with which the demiurge or this 
demiur- go cosmocreator, Jehovah Satan, copied and shaped 
from the worlds.
the 
unconscious aspects of the eternal symbols underlying the 
macrocosmic archetypes with which the demiurge or this 
demiur- go cosmocreator, Jehovah Satan, copied and shaped 
from the worlds.


--- PAGE BREAK ---pects of the eternal symbols underlying the 
macrocosmic archetypes with which the demiurge or this 
demiur- go cosmocreator, Jehovah Satan, copied and shaped 
from the worlds.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

131
The eternal and infinite two of this creation. Man through his 
SPIRIT 
grasps 
the 
eternal 
symbols 
but 
then 
his 
ARCHETYPICAL REASON perceives reality and an 
axiological confusion, a gnoseological color blindness occurs 
within his consciousness, because the asymmetrical and 
painful reality of the world is modified by a psychological 
asymmetry where man's consciousness is fascinated by an 
axiological magic that makes him perceive evil, pain, misery, 
as if it did not exist, and this is due to the fact that the 
demiurge in the archetypical reason of the pasu has created a 
complex, an archetype where he shaped a gnoseological 
technique that allowed him to endow certain archetypes with a 
BIJA, with an eternal metaphysical sound that has the power 
to make the asymmetrical symmetrical symmetrical.
This is due to the lack of sensitivity of certain social 
classes, of certain economic and financial powers, of the 
political class, of those who constantly beat their breasts 
begging God, of the international organizations that say a lot 
but do nothing, etc. All these individuals who incredibly see 
the evil, the pain and misery of this creation where suffering 
humanity is dying in poverty and ignorance and yet these 
gentlemen with a blindness, with a visor, with a prism that 
deforms their conscience say that the world is evolving, that 
with time things will be solved, that they are working for the 
good of humanity; PLEASE GENTLEMEN, YOU MUST 
WAKE UP AND COME OUT OF THE DECEPTION 
BECAUSE IN YOUR REVERIES YOU ARE THE 
MAKERS OF PAIN.
Politicians, self-righteous, bankers with cigars and prostitutes 
on their legs and a whole troop of sell-out lackeys at the 
service of the great capitalist whore suffer from an archetypal 
vision 
of 
reality 
where 
they 
OBSERVE 
SOCIAL 
ASYMMETRY AND SEE SYMMETRY WHERE THERE 
IS NO SYMMETRY.
But this reality, which is the one that binds man to pain and to
ffer from an archetypal 
vision 
of 
reality 
where 
they 
OBSERVE 
SOCIAL 
ASYMMETRY AND SEE SYMMETRY WHERE THERE 
IS NO SYMMETRY.
But this reality, which is the one that binds man to pain and to


--- PAGE BREAK ---

132
matter, it is the mystery of the MIRRORS that gives birth to 
MAYA, to ILLUSION, to the light that blinds the 
consciousness and deforms ideas. That is why we affirm that 
this asymmetry in the con- sciousness of the pasu or of the 
sleeping virya, a direct consequence of the LOVE 
ARCHETYPE, is what makes us perceive the archetypal 
opposites in a modified form axiologically speaking.
It is important to understand that the power of these 
METAPHYSICAL BIJAS MODIFIES THE AXIOLOGICAL 
AND 
GNOSEOLOGICAL 
DUALITY 
OF 
THE 
ARCHETYPE, BECAUSE IF WE TAKE INTO ACCOUNT 
THAT EVERY ARCHETYPE HAS IN ITSELF ITS 
SYMBOLIC 
OPPOSITE 
IN 
ITS 
AXIOLOGICAL 
CONTEXT WE UNDERSTAND THAT THE ARCHETYPE 
LOVE CONTAINS IN ITS AXIOLOGICAL CONTINENT 
ITS COUNTERPART, HATE, IF IT IS THE ARCHETYPE 
BEAUTY IT CONTAINS ITS AESTHETIC OPPOSITE, 
UGLINESS, ETC.
HENCE WE AFFIRM THAT THE ESOTERIC MAGIC 
OF 
THE 
DEMIURGE 
IS 
TO MODIFY 
IN 
THE 
ARCHETYPAL REASON THE SYMBOLIC SEMIOLOGY 
OF THE ARCHETYPES, WHICH CAUSES THAT WHERE 
THERE IS PAIN IT IS PERCEIVED FROM LOVE AND SO 
IT HAPPENS WITH ALL REALITY, FOR EXAMPLE, 
POVERTY IS PERCEIVED FROM WEALTH, COURAGE 
FROM FEAR, ETC.
To tell the truth it would be endless to name these realities, 
but I will describe a simple and very common case, that of the 
street children who go begging for a coin or a piece of bread 
and unfortunately people deny them, incredibly arguing that 
they are doing them wrong because in the future they will be 
lazy or because they fantasize that behind them there are real 
organizations that exploit them or that their parents then take 
the money from them and spend it, and they deny them a coin 
believing that in this way they are doing them GOOD. 
INCREDIBLE-


--- PAGE BREAK ---hat exploit them or that their parents then take 
the money from them and spend it, and they deny them a coin 
believing that in this way they are doing them GOOD. 
INCREDIBLE-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

133
IN THEIR MINDS THIS IS SO, THEY SEE THE PAIN 
AND RESPOND WITH A KIND OF LOVE THAT MAKES 
THEM FEEL AN ACT OF GOOD WHERE THEY 
ACTUALLY DO WRONG.
This is so because it does not matter what exists behind, in the 
shadows, in the child what really exists is pain, and the non-
archetypal sensitivity sees that and if it can, it helps it, 
besides, if it exists, it is already the problem of the state or of 
certain public organisms of the state to solve them. THE 
AWAKENED 
MAN 
SEES 
THE 
PAIN 
AND 
UNDERSTANDS FROM THE PAIN THE SUFFERING 
AND NOT VICE VERSA.
Unfortunately, the reality of existence, marked by the 
desire to achieve material well-being first and enjoy the 
pleasures of life second, has led man to develop in a single 
cultural and social environment that allows him to quickly 
access the problem of well-being, worrying about urgently 
obtaining housing, a vehicle, and everything related to 
material goods. This unconscious programming, vitiated by 
greed and power, generates a man deprived of sensitivity and 
brutally ignorant, dragged by his goals, losing the sense of 
good and evil.
This pitiful type of individual, which sadly is the most 
common cultural archetype of today's reality, is the por- tator 
and the maker of a HARD, PENEROUS, INCREDIBLE, 
PAINFUL, SAD, SAD AND MEANINGLESS world.
By using prophetic topics such as the prophecies 
mentioned in the Gospel of St. John, we can assert that this 
individual is the one who spreads the plagues on mankind, he 
is the one who opens and breaks the seals so that what is 
prophesied in these scriptures may come to pass. Of course, 
behind him is the great betrayal of the world synarchy and its 
gods who, enclosed in their own creation, project this 
HUMAN ENTITY that generates pain, but we know from 
what we have seen in the prophecies of these scriptures, that this 
individual is the one who is the one who will open and break the 
ject this 
HUMAN ENTITY that generates pain, but we know from 
what we have seen in the prophecies of these scriptures, that this 
individual is the one who is the one who will open and break the 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

134
seals so that what is prophesied in these scriptures will come to 
pass.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

135
studied that it is pain, which is the brother of misery and the 
cousin of suffering, all children of the GREAT MOTHER 
IGNORANCE, the indispensable elements to hold the spirit 
captive in this creation of the One, in the world of maya.
Looking at reality and opening it as if it were a historical 
record, which it is, we will see, especially looking at the 
present, all the human misery that hides behind a world in 
which apparently everything is bourgeois, full of comfort, 
social status, high finances, market, etc. In this type of world 
very well sold by HOLLYWOOD, by its neoliberal merchants 
who invent and emerge to the light of the world, to the 
collective 
social 
conscience, 
BEAUTIFUL 
AND 
BEAUTIFUL cultural, scientific, artistic, sporting and 
exoteric and esoteric religious panaceas. The REAL OF IT IS 
THE POVERTY THAT INCREASES DAILY, THE DEATH 
FOR LACK OF FOOD AND THE DISEASES THAT IT 
CAUSES, THE SEQUELS OF THE WARS INVENTED 
AND CARRIED OUT IN DESPERATE WAYS BY THE 
SINARCHS AND THEIR SECRET MASTERS, ETC.
Sadly, this is the truth and no matter how much they try to 
mask life with beauty and LOVE, in reality we only find in 
the great majority of this suffering humanity FEAR, FEAR 
OF AN EXISTENCE THAT IS FOR ALMOST ALL OF US 
LACKING PRESENT AND FUTURE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---beauty and LOVE, in reality we only find in 
the great majority of this suffering humanity FEAR, FEAR 
OF AN EXISTENCE THAT IS FOR ALMOST ALL OF US 
LACKING PRESENT AND FUTURE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

136
16. THE
ARCHETYPAL 
METAPHYSICAL 
ASYMMETRIES OF THE DEMIURGE. THE BIJAS 
AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE IN THE PSYCHE OF 
THE PASU.
This issue of psychological asymmetries is the essential 
key to understanding human selfishness and the lack of 
sensitivity of rich, wealthy people to poverty and truth. They 
are the first victims of this whole illusory machine that is 
perfectly designed to deceive and seduce people's 
consciences. What we call psycho-logical symmetries are the 
existing differentiation between the real of the awakened man 
and the illusory of the sleeping man, but we must recognize 
that the latter is the victim of the archetypal contents of his 
rational psyche or of his archetypal reason. Therefore, those 
who submit most to the plans of the One are those who 
respond mechanically, either instinctively or rationally, to the 
stimuli of the macrocosmic cultural order. This is so because 
the microcosm is analogous to the macrocosm, the individual 
soul is an emanation of the universal soul and thus man is a 
mechanism of this engine that drives and moves the material 
order. On the other hand, the awakened and oriented wise 
warrior is asymmetrical in his archetypal memory or reason, 
because he is an isolated and individualized being, he is a 
cutout of the collective con- sciousness of the macrocosmic 
cultural order, generating from this a different thought and 
discernment. As we know, the archetypes, which are the 
eidetic forms with which the matrices of all the entities of 
creation were structured and with which the 
neurophysiological network of the brain was biologically 
formalized, which is the organ where the neuro-cerebral 
activation is produced, originating synapses and neural 
pathways, which psychologically are translated symbolically 
into ideas and thoughts. It is these pre-existing contents
the neuro-cerebral 
activation is produced, originating synapses and neural 
pathways, which psychologically are translated symbolically 
into ideas and thoughts. It is these pre-existing contents


--- PAGE BREAK ---

137
The VOX of the demiurge with which he modified the eternal 
symbols originally contained in them and adapted the sacred 
symbols that are the mother archetypal structures, sustainers 
of the mathematical order. IT IS THEREFORE IMPORTANT 
TO UNDERSTAND THE MEANING OF THE ACOUSTIC 
CABALA AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE SOUND OF 
THE VOX CONTAINED IN THE PHONETICS OF EACH 
ARCHETYPE, BECAUSE IT IS IN THAT SOUND, IN ITS 
MANTRIC ACOUSTICS, THAT THE SACRED SYMBOLS 
ARE UNCONSCIOUSLY ACTIVATED.
We can assert that with the mere sonorous presence of a 
bija that resonates in some context, the emergence of the biu-
nivocal archetype is produced in the consciousness of the 
sleeping pasu or virya, with the bija activated in the cultural 
superstructure of the world. That is to say that the resonance 
of a bija, which activates in the cultural superstructure of the 
world the emergence of a social fact or a cultural event, which 
is based on the archetype corresponding to the bija; in an 
inductive, associative and mechanical way in the BRAIN OF 
THE PASU, IN ITS NEURO- BRAIN NETWORK A 
NEURONIC 
PATH 
IS 
GENERATED, 
WHICH 
IS 
ANALOGOUS IN THE PSYCHIS TO THE EMERGENCE 
OF AN IDEA THAT BY ASSOCIATION GENERATES A 
THOUGHT THAT IS BASED ON AN ARCHETYPE THAT 
CORRESPONDS TO THE ACTUALIZED BIJA IN THE 
WORLD.
This metaphysical and psychological symmetry is the 
result of the utterance of a BIJA. Now, who pronounces the 
bijas in the world, whether visible or invisible? What is the 
consequence of the bijas in the psychological symmetries? 
How is it possible to neutralize the power of this synarchic 
acoustic cabal?
Undoubtedly this is one of the deepest mysteries of 
existence, is to try to penetrate into the essential principle of


--- PAGE BREAK ---o neutralize the power of this synarchic 
acoustic cabal?
Undoubtedly this is one of the deepest mysteries of 
existence, is to try to penetrate into the essential principle of


--- PAGE BREAK ---

138
The absolute is a science that only the liberated gods who 
participate 
in 
the 
eternal 
and 
are 
part 
of 
the 
INCOGNOSCIBLE know in their infinite wisdom. We 
awakened viryas can only understand how the bijas act in the 
creation of this demiurge and his associates, the treacherous 
hierarchies, because this is a knowledge only accessible to 
hyperborean warriors.
In answer to the first question we will say: the BIJAS are 
the emanations of the absolute, the VOX of the Unknowable 
which has its direct correspondence with the ETERNAL 
SYMBOLS WHERE THE INFINITE SPIRITS DWELL, 
THE SUBLIMATE AND PUREST IMAGES OF THE 
ETERNAL WORLDS.
But these bijas were the essences, the matrices with which 
the demiurge, the COSMOCREATOR OF THIS MATERIAL 
UNIVERSE created the MACROCOSE ARCHETYPES.
We must understand that the bijas of the demiurge are 
ARCHETYPICAL BIJAS, and that the archetypes of the 
demiurge, although based on the ETERNAL SYMBOLS, 
WERE SUPPLIED IN THEIR SIGNS BY THE DESIGNS 
OF THE SACRED SYMBOLS.
Therefore, we must answer that the bijas pronounced by 
the demiurge and his hosts of followers are ARCHETIC 
SAGRA Bijas, which are the energetic support of the 
ACOUSTIC CABALA OF THE WORLD SYNARCHY,
that has two institutions in charge of pronouncing the sacred 
bijas in a constant and CONTINUOUS way in the world, 
because these sounds are always resonating, because if they 
were to stop being pronounced, the illusory creation of the 
One would disappear. From a physical perspective the bijas 
are the sounds that enable the atomic and molecular fusion of 
matter, these elements constituting the elemental substance of 
matter creation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---physical perspective the bijas 
are the sounds that enable the atomic and molecular fusion of 
matter, these elements constituting the elemental substance of 
matter creation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

139
On the other hand, the sacred symbols are the gnoseo- logical 
matrices that give ontological constitution to the macrosmic 
archetypes. The bijas as sound waves have an electromagnetic 
property that agglutinates the atomic and molecular energies 
in the diverse archetypal ontological matrices with which the 
demiurge orders all the material creation, therefore these 
sounds must constantly be emanated in the physical world 
because matter is sustained from matter itself.
The main persons responsible for the recitation of these 
sacred bijas are the TIBETAN MONKS OF THE LAMAIST 
MONASTERIES OF TIBET WHO RESPOND TO THE 
METAPHYSICAL 
RELIGIOUS 
SYNARCHY 
OF 
SHAMBALA, THE CITY WHERE THE GREAT Deceiver 
RESIDES, AND THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS OF THE 
GREAT RELIGIONS OF THE WEST.
The recitation of MANTRAS, CHORAL chanting and 
PRAYERS AND PRAYERS are degraded derivations of the 
sacred bijas and furthermore, certain LANGUAGES and 
LANGUAGES are projections of the SACRED BIJAS OF 
THE DEMIURGO. ALL THIS IS PART OF THIS 
ACOUSTIC 
CABALA 
WHICH 
IS 
ESOTERICALLY 
REPRESENTED IN THE HEBRAIC CABALA OR 
SEPHIROTIC TREE, VERY MUCH STUDIED IN THE 
ESOTERIC ORGANIZATIONS OF THE SYNARCHY, 
SUCH 
AS 
FREEMASONRY, 
THEOSOPHY, 
THE 
ROSICRUCIANS, FALSE GNOSIS, ETC.
If we are correctly analyzing this knowledge and we are 
understanding these mysteries, we will continue with the 
study of them, but if doubts remain, it is important to review 
and read everything until the doubts are dissipated. Then, we 
should know that the so much talked about practice of mantras 
proposed by the esoteric organizations of the religious 
synarchy and so fashionable in the orientalist tendencies, is a 
practice of mantras.


--- PAGE BREAK ---talked about practice of mantras 
proposed by the esoteric organizations of the religious 
synarchy and so fashionable in the orientalist tendencies, is a 
practice of mantras.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

140
These are the esoteric tactical enemy of the warrior monk, 
because with these strategies the sacred symbols and the 
demiurgic semiotic contexts contained in the chakras are 
awakened. Earlier we said that in each energy vortex or center 
of the human machine there is a sonority or mantra or 
SACRED BIJA that corresponds to it. Technically we know 
that each mantra has the property of activating certain 
energies and that these energies deactivate the complexes 
structured in the ontic reality of each chakra. These mantras 
are like the keys that allow the opening of these energetic 
centers and once they are opened, they are unchained and 
everything that is deposited in each psycho-animic context, 
which psychologically we call alienating complexes of the 
consciousness, is precipitated. The mantras not only open the 
chakras but, even worse, they energetically potentiate them by 
adding an extra quantum of energy, which is what the sacred 
bija brings; this makes the power of the axiological reality of 
the chakra fascinate and seduce the ego and compel it to 
follow the designs and purposes of the same without the will 
of the sleeping pasu or virya being able to do anything to 
counteract it.
THAT IS WHY WE MAINTAIN THAT IF WE 
ACTIVATE A CHAKRA BY THE REPETITION OF A 
MANTRA, IT WILL BE-
WE ARE SLAVES TO THEIR DESIGNS. We must perfectly 
understand these concepts because that is where the key to 
religious synarchy lies, the secret of the sacred bijas and the 
technique of mantra repetition are the strategies to DESTROY 
THE 
WISE 
WARRIOR, 
TO 
DORMIT 
HIM 
AND 
REGISTER HIM TO HIS CULTURAL RECORDS.
In addition, there is a whole series of arts such as MUSIC, 
SONG, POETRY, CINEMATOGRAPHY, THE
DANCE that today respond directly to the strategies of the 
cultural synarchy and these arts, which in reality are forms
is a whole series of arts such as MUSIC, 
SONG, POETRY, CINEMATOGRAPHY, THE
DANCE that today respond directly to the strategies of the 
cultural synarchy and these arts, which in reality are forms


--- PAGE BREAK ---arts such as MUSIC, 
SONG, POETRY, CINEMATOGRAPHY, THE
DANCE that today respond directly to the strategies of the 
cultural synarchy and these arts, which in reality are forms


--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
The traditional arts, legacy of the true hyperborean cultures, 
contain in their contexts various sacred symbols. Also these 
arts are esoteric sciences that activate the corresponding 
chakras according to the art in question, for example: music, 
the heart chakra, dance the motor chakra, poetry, the heart 
chakra and the larynx chakra and so on.
Also the SCIENCES OF SYNARCHY, as well as certain 
careers, have their languages supported by sacred symbols, for 
example: FREUDIAN PSYCHOLOGY, PSYCHIATRY, 
PHYSICS, CERTAIN FIELDS OF
PHILOSOPHY, etc. It is indeed the function of the awakened 
virya to uncover the truth from the lie and to access the 
understanding of all that exists today in the world culture.
Undoubtedly the entire culture, which today is aligned 
with political and religious power, is contaminated by the 
tendencies of the powers of neoliberal capitalism and 
consumer materialism which, guided by the theologians and 
philosophers of the international synarchy, have built in this 
true counterculture of the spirit, a wall where the hyperborean 
concepts, the symbols of the spirit have no foothold.
Unfortunately, culture is the enemy of the spirit and it is 
the greatest TAPASIGNO that the virya has, because it is a 
lock to the truths of the infinite worlds, therefore the only way 
to penetrate it and break the seals of its tapasignos is with the 
power with which the gods endow us through the wisdom 
contained in these writings. Thus, the only possibility for the 
warrior to penetrate the universal culture and unveil the 
cultural records without being harmed is with the knowledge 
granted to us by the gods and with the power that underlies 
the VRIL of our liberated consciousness.
Only by understanding and accepting these truths and by 
resig- nizing our soul, our soul being, will we be able to 
understand the
e power that underlies 
the VRIL of our liberated consciousness.
Only by understanding and accepting these truths and by 
resig- nizing our soul, our soul being, will we be able to 
understand the


--- PAGE BREAK ---es 
the VRIL of our liberated consciousness.
Only by understanding and accepting these truths and by 
resig- nizing our soul, our soul being, will we be able to 
understand the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

142
mystery of the sacred bijas and break with the archetypal of 
this neoliberal counterculture. The hyperborean warrior, the 
man with decision and gnostic predisposition to the spirit, will 
always recognize the esoteric and exoteric deceptions 
embedded in the extensive cultural network of the world and 
will avoid being trapped by the deadly traps that the demiurge 
will set for him throughout his struggle.
It is necessary to be ALERT AND IN DRAMATIC 
TENSION to avoid being seduced by the strategies of the 
satanic demons of the material order, because on the path of 
individuation they will look for an Achilles heel and will try 
to project to us the most terrible weapon they have in their 
power: the archetypal actualization of a sacred bija. In some 
center of our being, they will try to stick their most powerful 
daggers, in the heart chakra, it is there where these beings of 
the insi-dia will try to activate the most powerful and deadly 
sacred bija, the LOVE ARCHETYPE.
It is here that we find the greatest psychological 
asymmetry of man, because this archetype love is in reality 
pain, passion, suffering, enchainment and death. This concept, 
which in reality is the resultant of an eternal bija and which in 
the infinite worlds is one of the principal essences and 
substances of the eternal, here in this material world, in the 
finite universe of the One is distorted and structured in the 
sacred symbols that sacralize love to a strictly material 
dogma, always defining its axiological significance to an 
ontology, to a being, to a material entity. We do not intend to 
give a philosophical class on love or the verb to love, we 
simply maintain that the love of this world is a degraded copy 
of the mystery of the eternal A-mor and is one of the sacred 
symbols that has the greatest power in its various axiological 
contexts.
THE LOVE COMPLEX HAS ON ITS CONTINENT
ld is a degraded copy 
of the mystery of the eternal A-mor and is one of the sacred 
symbols that has the greatest power in its various axiological 
contexts.
THE LOVE COMPLEX HAS ON ITS CONTINENT


--- PAGE BREAK ---y 
of the mystery of the eternal A-mor and is one of the sacred 
symbols that has the greatest power in its various axiological 
contexts.
THE LOVE COMPLEX HAS ON ITS CONTINENT


--- PAGE BREAK ---

143
THE SEMIOTIC THEORY IS AN ASYMMETRICAL 
AXIOLOGY THAT AFFECTS THE AFFIRMATION OF 
MAN'S 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
IN 
THE 
DEVOTIONAL 
ARCHETYPES OF CULTURE.
Undoubtedly, love as a complex is one of the most 
numinous manifestations of consciousness and its emergence 
is contained in certain archetypes that directly affect the 
ontology of man. It is related in an associative way with a 
plurality of links that generate one of the most significant 
relationships, 
which 
give 
shape 
to 
the 
MOST 
CAUTIVATING ARCHETIC COMPLEX OF HUMAN 
SCIENCE.
We can designate hundreds of links that appear a priori to 
the emergence of consciousness; moreover, it could be 
affirmed that the impulse of LIBIDO is interrelated with the 
awakening of the archetype love and could be classified as the 
energetic substrate that is the depository of the development 
of instincts and archetypes. The libido, which is the energy of 
the soul, is projected in the unconscious, transferring its 
energy to the I, which generates consciousness from the 
different structures that the archetypal love complex 
formalizes. In the beginning of life, love is undoubtedly 
localized as an instinct, but as the development of the being 
takes place, it is transferred to an archetype. Psychologically 
there is a significant transference of the maternal instinct to 
the mother complex, which progressively extends in its 
emotional and affective complexion to the family archetype 
(father, grandparents, uncles, aunts, uncles, brothers, etc.). In 
this way the complex directly influences the growth of the 
consciousness, in its identification with its ontological reality. 
This affirmation of the complex in the consciousness grows 
and extends from the insertion of other archetypal factors such 
as education and the acquisition of knowledge.
ts ontological reality. 
This affirmation of the complex in the consciousness grows 
and extends from the insertion of other archetypal factors such 
as education and the acquisition of knowledge.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ty. 
This affirmation of the complex in the consciousness grows 
and extends from the insertion of other archetypal factors such 
as education and the acquisition of knowledge.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

144
of reality and of the environment. We must understand that in 
the psyche of the pasu the constant reaffirmation of the 
complex is significant and it mimics itself in such a way that 
we could affirm the existence of a SYMBIOSIS between the 
LOVE COMPLEX AND THE STRUCTURE OF THE 
CONSCIOUSNESS.
The human animal, when reaffirming itself, always does so 
through its axiology, and on the scale of this axiology, the 
complex love is linked to certain entities that give it 
conceptual and mental substance. For example: love of home, 
work, goods, welfare, money, friendships, profession, 
religion, etc. We could go on describing many more 
relationships, because in short, the perception that the pasu 
realizes of the archetype is a function of the relationship of the 
entities linked to it. The animal created man can never 
understand love in its transcendent significance, the one 
contained in the sacred bijas, only certain evolved men have 
the right and ontological capacity in the monastic archetypes 
and in those who are related to certain arts.
What is essential to understand is the MEANING OF THE 
LOVE 
ARCHETYPE 
AND 
THE 
EMERGING 
COMMLEXES 
THROUGH 
IT 
FOR 
THE 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 
IN 
PRACTICAL 
TERMS, 
THE 
COMPLEX IS THE PSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPORT OF 
THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE
PASU. Such is the incidence of the complex in the anemic 
constitution of the sleeping man, that if for any reason he 
loses energetic potency in the light sphere of the pasu, 
declining in its extension and symbolic complexion and 
falling or descending to the shadow or unconscious sphere of 
the pasu, he will suffer a loss of consciousness, being plunged 
into a psychic void and a psychological asymmetry that can 
lead to madness and even suicide. Moreover, we can assure 
that in the case of an energetic loss of the complex in the 
pasu's consciousness, the pasu will suffer a loss of 
consciousness.
at can 
lead to madness and even suicide. Moreover, we can assure 
that in the case of an energetic loss of the complex in the 
pasu's consciousness, the pasu will suffer a loss of 
consciousness.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

145
the demiurge arranged the heart chakra in its archetype love a 
RELIGIOUS SACRED BIJA THAT EMERGES AND ACTS 
SUPPORTING THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE PASU IN 
CASE IT LOSES ANIMIC AND PSYCHOLOGICAL 
SENSE.
In this way we can confirm that the loss of axiological 
action in the pasu's consciousness of the archetype love and 
the fall of the same to the shadow sphere automatically, 
inductively and associatively, activates the emotional 
psychological mechanism of a SUPPORTING COMPLEX 
whose axial center has a RELIGIOUS ARCHETYPE AND 
THE SACRED BIJA SELF. This activated complex has the 
power to sustain the pasu's soul and psychological integrity by 
supplanting the pasu's self, registering it to the world again 
and remaining in the pasu's sphere of light until the pasu's self 
can take charge of its ontology again, which actually happens 
because generally the supporting archetype will structure it to 
a religious organization or institution that will propel it back 
to the pasu soulfully so that the pasu regains its self or 
personality.


--- PAGE BREAK ---orting archetype will structure it to 
a religious organization or institution that will propel it back 
to the pasu soulfully so that the pasu regains its self or 
personality.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

146
17. THE VIRYA AND HIS SIGN OF ORIGIN. THE 
VRIL AND THE COLD FIRE VRUNA
The warrior must deeply understand the reality behind 
certain cultural movements and must know the truth that lies 
behind them, in the unknown cultural collective of the world, 
because not everything appears to be what it is and 
unfortunately culture is today the main tool of the 
international synarchy. Their great ideological structures are 
mounted on cultural facts that emerge in the light of social 
consciousness as forms delineated to do good, however these 
manifestations are simply strategies of the occult powers that 
are in the shadows to attract and retain to their dogmas the 
viryas who are spiritually predisposed. The scientific and 
religious premises are the structures par excellence where 
viryas register to their dogmas and the sleeping comrade who 
is linked to them loses the possibility of converging in the 
noological symmetries of the eternal symbols. The only 
possibility for a virya to escape the songs of Circe, of the 
enchanting muses of the sensual and passionate arts of the 
gods of matter is in his SPIRITUAL BLOOD, because if his 
being has been fasci- nated by one of the ideological doctrines 
of the synarchy, he can only get out of the deception if he has 
in his spirit the LIGHT-PHYRIC-KRISTIC SIGN OF COLD 
FIRE.
This sign is a condition inherent to its SPIRITUAL 
ORIGIN and is characterized by having a different axiology 
built on certain ethical and aesthetic values that come from its 
ANCESTRAL HEALTH, FROM ITS DIVINE ORIGIN.
If in the warrior, in the man there is that image, that sign 
of the origin, he has in his being the cold fire enough to 
extinguish the flames of the sacred symbols and he will be 
able to go back to his origin.
r, in the man there is that image, that sign 
of the origin, he has in his being the cold fire enough to 
extinguish the flames of the sacred symbols and he will be 
able to go back to his origin.


--- PAGE BREAK ---is that image, that sign 
of the origin, he has in his being the cold fire enough to 
extinguish the flames of the sacred symbols and he will be 
able to go back to his origin.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
from the ashes, like the Phoenix Bird, towards the wisdom of 
the gods of Apollo, of Wotan, of KRISTOS LUCIFER. 
Therefore, we hold that although the virya is subjected to an 
ideological segment of the synarchic culture within himself, 
sooner or later his ego will reorient itself and will understand 
the situation, the cultural context that has incorporated him. In 
this way, understanding the reality that contains him in a 
continent of illusions and passions that, however intellectual 
they may be, are asymmetries of the real, the companion will 
seek in himself the strategic understanding to escape from it in 
the most noological way. Perhaps this will require time and a 
technique of STRATEGIC DISORIENTATION to be able to 
escape from the yoke of the enemy's tyranny without being 
identified, but the warrior will internally know the moment 
and the way to carry out such an act of VALOR AND 
HONOR.
It is necessary to understand that although in this combat, 
in this war that is life and how hard it is to emerge victorious 
from it, WE ARE NOT ALONE, because there are OUR 
DIVINE BEDS that from the origin, in the eternal are waiting 
for us and are constantly giving battle to the enemy in this 
PLANE AND IN ALL THE SPACES OF CREATION 
WHERE IT IS NECESSARY TO RESCUE THE FALLEN 
HERMA- NOS.
But the warrior does not even need them because he has in 
the world, embedded in the culture of the enemy, the 
ETERNAL VRU- NAS, THE SOUNDS OF THE SYMBOLS 
OF THE
ORIGIN that charismatically sound in all worlds, the 
uncreated and the created, and in their ears these mysteries 
SOUND WHISPERING to them the path of HYPERBORNE 
GNOSIS.
Therefore, the awakened warrior perpetuates in his 
consciousness a GNOSEOLOGICAL AND NOOLOGICAL 
SIMETRY, BECAUSE HIS TRASCENDENTAL BEING 
PARTICIPATES OF THE VRIL (the noo-
f HYPERBORNE 
GNOSIS.
Therefore, the awakened warrior perpetuates in his 
consciousness a GNOSEOLOGICAL AND NOOLOGICAL 
SIMETRY, BECAUSE HIS TRASCENDENTAL BEING 
PARTICIPATES OF THE VRIL (the noo-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

148
logical) AND OF THE ETERNAL SYMBOLS (the 
gnoseological), AND HIS HUMAN ONTOLOGY OF THE 
REAL OF THE REA-.
He has become JANUS, the two-faced Roman god who has his 
gaze fixed on ORIGIN and on the world.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

149


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---OF THE 
REAL OF THE REA-.
He has become JANUS, the two-faced Roman god who has his 
gaze fixed on ORIGIN and on the world.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

149


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
18. THE 
VRIL, 
THE 
VRUNAS 
AND 
THEIR 
PROJECTIONS IN THE CREATED ORDER. THE 
RUNES AND THE HYPERBOREAN ARTS
In the uncreated, in the depths of its mystery, which can 
only be accessed by true men who with the cold fire of their 
spirits have liberated themselves by penetrating by their own 
right into the wisdoms of the Unknowable, the VRIL is the 
uncreated and absolute force that in the world of maya was 
embedded in a transcendental knowledge for man and his 
liberation.
This knowledge was formalized in a language that was 
called RUNE language, hyperborean science that allows us to 
read and understand the strategies of the gods of AGAR-THA 
and their tactics of liberation. In this treatise we are not going 
to develop all that this science means nor are we going to 
narrate its historical developments because this is a task that 
the vir- yas must investigate for themselves and there is 
abundant literature about the Runes in any bookstore. Only 
the warrior will have to know how to see and read which texts 
contain truth and which are simply deceptions poured over the 
runic literature to mislead. In principle, to disprove certain 
synarchic theories, we will affirm that the RUNES ARE NOT 
AN ADIVINATIVE ART, indeed they are not even an ART, 
we will also affirm that the runes are not an ALPHABET that 
belonged to certain peoples of antiquity, nor were t h e y ever 
constituted as a language. Therefore we affirm that there is no 
runic language because the RUNES, EACH ONE OF THEM, 
ARE UNIQUE, SINGULAR AND ABSOLUTE. WE CAN 
BE SURE THAT CERTAIN LANGUAGES DEVELOPED 
FROM THE RUNIC LANGUAGES.
RUNES, specifically the languages of certain ARIAN peoples 
of hyperborean blood such as the Hellenics and Trojans,


--- PAGE BREAK ---THAT CERTAIN LANGUAGES DEVELOPED 
FROM THE RUNIC LANGUAGES.
RUNES, specifically the languages of certain ARIAN peoples 
of hyperborean blood such as the Hellenics and Trojans,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

150
Etruscans, Romans, etc. What the RUNES did generate are 
CULTURES THAT DEVELOPED UNDER THE LIGHT 
AND POWER OF A SPECIFIC RUNE, FOR EXAMPLE: 
THE IMPERIAL ROME OF THE SESARS.
Rome in antiquity was the cradle and birth of the highest 
hyperborean strategy, led by awakened viryas and in later 
points we will describe and analyze in detail the historical 
significance of this empire that was and is the ORIGIN OF 
ALL CIVILIZATION.
We will simply point out that the Roman Empire had in its 
transcendental mystique the eidetic image of a RUNE, which 
is what the warriors captured and embodied in all their 
culture, in politics, in justice, in the art of war, in family 
ethics, in the lesser arts, etc.
The RUNE that descended and charismatically captured 
the Romans is the most powerful of the Runes, it is a rune that 
in its gnoseological complexion contains in its continent the 
ETERNAL SYMBOLS that transmit the highest collective 
strategies of spiritual liberation, it is the RUNE OF HEALTH 
AND FIRE, THE RUNE OF ORIGIN, THE RUNE THAT 
BEGAN ALL OTHER RUNES.
We can affirm that also certain RUNES gave origin to 
certain techniques of PARTICULAR liberation, such as 
certain YOGAS AND MARTIAL ARTS or BELIANS, but it 
is essential to describe that these RUNES are only activated 
not in a collective form but in a purely PARTICULAR form. 
In reality, in the culture existing today in the world these 
techniques of YOGA AND MARTIAL ARTS HAVE LOST 
THE ACTION AND PROTECTION OF THEIR RUNES 
BEING SIMPLY A MASK AT THE SERVICE OF THE 
SYNARCHY 
THAT 
PROJECTED 
ON 
THEM 
ITS 
SYMBOLS AND SACRALIZED THEM IN ITS
DOGMAS. In this way we can ensure that in the yogas


--- PAGE BREAK ---NES 
BEING SIMPLY A MASK AT THE SERVICE OF THE 
SYNARCHY 
THAT 
PROJECTED 
ON 
THEM 
ITS 
SYMBOLS AND SACRALIZED THEM IN ITS
DOGMAS. In this way we can ensure that in the yogas


--- PAGE BREAK ---

151
At present there is no hyperborean mysticism, which has been 
modified by the religious synarchy that structured in this 
science a strictly DEVOCATIONAL ethics. The same 
happens in the martial arts of the West as well as of the East, 
these were ethically modified in their axiologies. But yoga 
and martial art are always DIRECT LINKS TO THEIR 
RUNES, 
SPECIFICALLY 
CERTAIN 
LINES 
OF 
OKINAWENSE KARATE AND KUNG FU, EVEN THE 
GUE- rER CAN PERCEIVE NOOLOGICALLY THE RUNE 
THAT CORRESPONDS TO HIM AND PARTICULARLY 
SYNCHRONIZE 
CHARISMATICALLY 
WITH 
THE 
POWER UNDERLYING THEREIN.
In truth, the RUNES are the representatives of the 
noological qualities of the uncreated gods, allied to the 
strategies 
of 
KRISTOS-LUCIFER, 
WOTAN, 
SHIVA, 
QUETZALCOATL 
AND 
THEIR 
SIDDHAS 
HOST 
LEAKED TO THE PURE RACES TRAPPED IN ILLUSION.
OF THE ONE. Therefore, in each rune lies in its spirit a 
mystery that cannot be rationalized, that can only be accessed 
by the one who CARISMATICALLY COINCIDES WITH 
HIS SPIRIT, WITH THE POWER THAT RADIATES IN 
THE RUNE.
But it is essential to understand that when we refer to the 
power of the rune, it is not any faculty that the warrior 
acquires in his ontology, as is commonly believed, the rune is 
simply for the warrior HIS SIGN, which identifies him in his 
SPIRIT.
The RUNE that the comrade discovers by his own merit is 
the TRUE REFLECTION OF HIMSELF, which identifies him 
NOOLOGICALLY AS SUCH and which allows him access 
to the impenetrable mysteries of the eternal worlds. In this 
way we affirm that what esoteric culture affirms about them is 
vitiated by deceit because to the synarchy it is necessary to be a


--- PAGE BREAK ---ble mysteries of the eternal worlds. In this 
way we affirm that what esoteric culture affirms about them is 
vitiated by deceit because to the synarchy it is necessary to be a


--- PAGE BREAK ---

152
The interest is to DESTROY the real that exists in them, and 
since this is impossible, the company is engaged in structuring 
them in a cultural text that strategically disorients the seeker 
of its truths.
Thus, comrade, you must first resolve this gnose- ological 
dilemma that is in the culture with respect to the cultural 
realities that hover over them, since all that has been written 
are simply literary devices of the enemy to disorient us. Thus 
we must break with what we have pre- eminently incorporated 
in our mental structure, because this is an axiological limit 
that dogmatizes us in a belief where we understand them as a 
divinatory esoteric magic. This terrible error is a popular 
belief among esotericists, who see in them a divinatory 
language like Tarot or the I ching and unfortunately this has 
led many comrades to believe it, affirming themselves in this 
reality and losing the true sense of their wisdom. Another very 
common error is to believe that they act jointly in an 
organized synergy where certain messages can be read, that is 
why we repeat that the RUNES ONLY ACT UNIFICANTLY 
IN THE CASE OF A COLLECTIVE WAR STRATEGY, 
BUT 
MAINTAINING 
THEIR 
ABSOLUTE 
GNOSEOLOGICAL 
AND 
NONOLOGICAL 
INDIVIDUALITY.
The important thing is to understand that above them there 
is a reality that is not of this world and that never intervened 
in it, neither in its genesis nor in its evolutionary development, 
because the demiurge is terrified just by seeing them, since 
they remind him of an origin that sooner or later he will have 
to assume, and that is so. The RUNES ARE THE SIGN OF 
THE UNCREATED ORIGIN OF THE ETERNAL SPIRIT 
AND THEY ARE THE DESTRUCTIVE IMAGES OF 
ILLUSION THAT SOON OR SOON WILL ACT FROM 
THE ETERNAL, ADJUSTING THE REALITY AND
so. The RUNES ARE THE SIGN OF 
THE UNCREATED ORIGIN OF THE ETERNAL SPIRIT 
AND THEY ARE THE DESTRUCTIVE IMAGES OF 
ILLUSION THAT SOON OR SOON WILL ACT FROM 
THE ETERNAL, ADJUSTING THE REALITY AND


--- PAGE BREAK ---HE SIGN OF 
THE UNCREATED ORIGIN OF THE ETERNAL SPIRIT 
AND THEY ARE THE DESTRUCTIVE IMAGES OF 
ILLUSION THAT SOON OR SOON WILL ACT FROM 
THE ETERNAL, ADJUSTING THE REALITY AND


--- PAGE BREAK ---

153
THEIR UNIVERSE OF PAIN.
But this is the action of the gods, it does not concern us, 
because being here, in the trap of maya, we have only one 
difficult mission to accomplish, TO RETURN TO OUR 
ORIGINAL HOMELAND, and for this it is essential to 
achieve our ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUATION.
The runes, each one of them, describe the qualities inherent 
to the eternal spirit, and they manifest themselves to us when 
the initiatory process in us is concretized in deification, in 
absolute individuation. It is in that act where the human in 
ourselves loses before the divine of our spirit, the designated 
of 
the 
soul 
mutating 
into 
NOOLOGICAL 
CONSCIOUSNESS, when the rune of our origin is revealed 
to us indicating the path and the mystery of liberation. We can 
affirm that there exists a NOOLOGICAL CHARISMATIC 
SYNCHRONISM.
CO between the RUNE and our spirit. This COINCIDENCE 
is not causal, that is to say, it is outside the logical realities of 
reason and transcendent time. IT MARKS A SIGN IN THE 
SPIRIT OF THE VIRYA THAT GIVES HIM AN 
UNDERSTANDING, A CAPACITY OF ANALYSIS THAT 
DOES NOT COME FROM THE SOUL BUT FROM THE 
VRIL, WHICH IS THE ORIGIN OF THE RUNE ITSELF.
Therefore, those who pretend to understand the runes 
logically, dogmatically pigeonholing them in a language of 
rational interpretation, masking their mystery in some science, 
not only will not grasp absolutely nothing, but they risk losing 
everything because this mystery can not be played with or 
sacralized in a dogma of faith. This attitude is typical of the 
religious and esoteric synarchy of the traitors to the eternal 
spirit, they perpetuate in the world culture this concept leading 
this to the pasu and the sleeping viryas to structure themselves 
to each of the lies deposited on the runes, losing our comrades 
in this conceptual labyrinth.
world culture this concept leading 
this to the pasu and the sleeping viryas to structure themselves 
to each of the lies deposited on the runes, losing our comrades 
in this conceptual labyrinth.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
demiurgic without being able to understand anything.
WE MUST UNDERSTAND THAT WE WILL NEVER 
FIND THE RUNES, BECAUSE THEY ARE THE ONES 
WHO FIND US WHEN IN OURSELVES WE HAVE 
REALIZED 
THE 
TRANSCENDENT 
MYSTERY 
OF 
ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUATION.
That is the reality of the runes, they do not belong to this 
order of creation because they are emanations of the one 
entity, of the gnoseological spaces of the Unknowable, they 
participate of the VRIL, of the ETERNAL and here in the 
world they are embedded in matter to make us REMEMBER. 
That is why they have been engraved in the STONES, IN 
THE ROCKS because the symbolism of the same represents 
the eternal, the hard, the cold and so are the runes, they are the 
hard and cold image of the eternity of the DIVINE AND 
EXTRATERRESTRIAL ORIGIN OF THE SPIRIT,
The world is the destiny of every man and of the whole of 
mankind. If we understand these truths, if we understand the 
noological sense embodied in the images of the same, we will 
understand that they are in all culture, introduced in all the 
languages of culture as hyperborean openings to a different 
reality. WE CAN DISTINGUISH RUNES IN ALL AREAS 
OF CULTURE IN GENERAL, FOR EXAMPLE: IN 
MATHEMATICS, IN GEOMETRY, IN ARCHITECTURE, 
IN GRAMMAR, ETC.
They are mysteriously found in all culture because they 
are ultimately the divine knowledge derived from the eternal, 
which has given rise to the civilizations of the spirit that 
strategically opposed the atheistic and materialistic or 
religious and sinarchic cultures that arose from the peoples 
who worshipped the golden calf.
At another point we will specifically develop this topic, 
we will only add that they ARE and WILL REMAIN in the


--- PAGE BREAK ---es that arose from the peoples 
who worshipped the golden calf.
At another point we will specifically develop this topic, 
we will only add that they ARE and WILL REMAIN in the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
universal culture and that the virya with gnostic predisposition 
can recognize them. But it is necessary to understand that no 
matter how much we recognize them, this does not mean 
anything, although it is a merit to discover them, this simply 
leads us to realize that the gods of the eternal are assisting us 
and constantly strive for us to recover by our own merit, by 
our own effort, the power of true knowledge in order to 
realize our own liberation.
COMRADES, COMRADES, WE MUST FIND THE 
RUNE 
OF 
OUR 
SELF, 
THE 
ONE 
THAT 
CHARISMATICALLY COINCIDES WITH OUR SPIRIT 
AND IN SYNCHRONISTIC RELATIONSHIP WITH ITS 
POWER MARCH RESOLUTELY TO THE TRUTH THAT 
FREES US FROM THE FANTASY OF THE WORLD OF 
PAIN.
Mainly we must understand the following steps. FIRST: 
The wise warrior must decide on the path to be followed.
The first thing to do is to seek the LIBERATION OF HIS 
SPIRIT, marching resolutely in search of a knowledge that 
coincides with his or her destiny.
SECOND: This knowledge in the world is contained in the 
languages derived from the ETERNAL VRUNES.
THIRD: It must coincide with some language that has its 
origin in an ETERNAL VRUNA, such as the ARTS: MUSIC, 
DANCE, MARTIAL ARTS,
LITERATURE, etc. Also in the HYPERBORN SCIENCES: 
ARCHITECTURE, ENGINEERING. etc.
FOURTH: Through an art we will be able to see the sign 
of the vruna that is analogous to a RUNE, because the 
INCREATED VRUNES ARE THE ORIGIN OF THE 
RUNES and as
We study them, they are in all the languages of creation. 
FIFTH: To relate to a divine language is internali-
and in the power of the rune we will understand the rune in the 
blood and in the power of the rune.


--- PAGE BREAK ---languages of creation. 
FIFTH: To relate to a divine language is internali-
and in the power of the rune we will understand the rune in the 
blood and in the power of the rune.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

156
the UNCREATED IMAGE OF OUR SPIRIT'S VRUNES.
SIXTH: With the wisdom of the uncreated vruna and with 
the strategy that the WISE TONGUE of the rune grants us, we 
will understand the SPIRAL SERPENT (the soul and the 
psyche) that in the world represents the BIJAS AND THEIR 
SACRED SYMBOLS.
SEVENTH: The wise tongue turns us into Luciferic 
warriors and with its wisdoms we understand the Luciferic 
Sign of the Gallic Fire and the Can Sword.
TARINA OF UNCREATED LIGHT, with this the "I" will 
descend to the ADAMIC PARADISE AND WE WILL 
DESTROY THE SERPENT ENCROSHED IN THE TREE 
OF THE ETERNAL.
EIGHTH: He who understands these truths is a man of 
STONE and his mission is revealed to his spirit, having the 
ethical obligation to fulfill what the gods of AGARTHA 
together with the HYPERBORNE GNOSIS WILL REVEAL 
TO HIS ETERNAL EAR.


--- PAGE BREAK ---his mission is revealed to his spirit, having the 
ethical obligation to fulfill what the gods of AGARTHA 
together with the HYPERBORNE GNOSIS WILL REVEAL 
TO HIS ETERNAL EAR.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

157
19. THE RUNES, THE ETERNAL SYMBOLS AND 
THEIR 
IMAGES 
TRANSCENDENT 
TO 
THE 
ARCHETYPES AND THE DESIGNS OF THE SACRED 
SYMBOLS OF THE DEMIURGE
The wise warrior, reoriented and strategically ordered in 
his knowledge of the reality of the labyrinthine paths of Maya, 
of the enchanting Illusion of the songs of Circe, must 
recognize THE TRUTH that lies behind the forms, the images 
that structure the three-dimensional reality of space-time, 
conformed by a spatial delineation constituted in three 
dimensions: height, width and length, and by the temporal 
sense integrated in a continuity represented in three times: 
past, present and future. These principles found reality and 
sustain the material world and life giving it REALITY, 
incredibly the whole foundation on which creation is 
sustained is structured in this CONTI- NENT of CONTENTS 
OF IMAGES that constitute and give form and being, that is 
to say existence to ALL THE REI- NOS OF CREATION.
Thus, our world, our reality is determined by the sum of 
phenomena and events that are presented to us in symbolic 
form that have entities as their bearers, but it is important to 
understand that in our psychic and psychic consciousness we 
receive everything in the form of IMAGES, WHICH ARE 
PRINCIPLES OR SYMBOLS, REPRESENTATIONS.
SENTAN ENTES. This world of images is what surrounds 
the psychic reality of the virya and we are constantly 
introjecting them into our inner world and we give them 
meaning either intellectually, by interpreting them in some 
rational 
or 
emotional 
language, 
by 
enclosing 
them 
archetypically or instinctively in our world of passion. This 
concep-


--- PAGE BREAK ---er intellectually, by interpreting them in some 
rational 
or 
emotional 
language, 
by 
enclosing 
them 
archetypically or instinctively in our world of passion. This 
concep-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

158
We have analyzed this at length in other points, but it is 
necessary to understand that reality is analogous to a 
MIRROR that REFLECTS THE REAL, but which, due to its 
CONCAVE AND CONVEX ASYMMETRY, distorts the 
REAL into a REALITY OF IMAGES WHERE THE 
REPRESENTATIONS OF THE REAL ARE STRUCTURED 
IN A WORLD OF SIGNS AND SYMBOLS THAT CREATE 
A CULTURAL LANGUAGE THAT LEADS US TO 
INTERIOR 
CONVENIENCE, 
AFFIRMING 
WITHIN 
OURSELVES THE ILLUSORY REALITY OF THE FINITE 
WORLD AS THE REAL OF THIS LIFE.
That is why we affirm that this demiurgic magic carried 
out in the laboratories of the metaphysical synarchy of the 
traitorous dio- ses to the captive spirit in the world of pain, 
has the power to generate a world of images where the gno- 
seological and axiological limits are contained in a physical 
continent 
determined 
by 
certain 
SCIENTIFIC 
AND 
RELIGIOUS dogmas IMPOSSIBLE TO VIOLATE, because 
if we dare to violate them, we will be able to create a world of 
images where the limits of the spirit are contained in a 
physical continent determined by certain SCIENTIFIC AND 
RELIGIOUS dogmas that are IMPOSSIBLE TO VIOLATE.
If the virya is to realize it, the wise warrior will have to 
assume the consequences that the demiurge will project to his 
destiny. Undoubtedly, these limits are what we do not have 
captured, imprisoned in the world and limiting us in the 
physical and metaphysical understanding, whether in the 
scientific or mystical order of reality, of delusion and what is 
even worse, of the real of absolute truth.
HOWEVER, IT IS IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND 
THAT THIS THREE-DIMENSIONAL SPACE IS AN 
ILLUSION FORMED BY A CLOSED CONTINENT OF 
IMAGES AND MEANINGS, WHICH ARE THE ONES 
THAT DETERMINE IN A PREEMINENT WAY OUR 
CON- CEPTIONS AND BELIEFS.
In this way, our reality is enclosed in a recurring circle where 
A CLOSED CONTINENT OF 
IMAGES AND MEANINGS, WHICH ARE THE ONES 
THAT DETERMINE IN A PREEMINENT WAY OUR 
CON- CEPTIONS AND BELIEFS.
In this way, our reality is enclosed in a recurring circle where 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

159
DIVERSITY AND UNITY are


--- PAGE BREAK ---

160
The result of this is that we can no longer distinguish good 
from evil, the beautiful from the ugly, truth from falsehood, 
wisdom from deceit, and so on. That is to say, this closed 
circle, which in the Alexandrian Gnosis was called by the 
name of the god ABRAXAS, represented by a DRAGON 
DEVOURING ITSELF, or also in the symbolic figure of 
Buddhism of the ETERNAL RETURN or, what is the same, 
the LABYRINTH OF MAYA. It is built on a deceptive 
science so perfect in its design that it directly affects the 
human soul, incorporating it into the same as ONE MORE 
ENTITY OF CREATION, AS ONE MORE PART OF THE 
CREATION, AS ONE MORE PART OF THE ETERNAL 
RETURN.
OF THE ALL. This terrible confusion that is unleashed in the 
head, in the consciousness of the warrior is what leads him to 
create an image of himself as HUMAN, SIMPLY HUMAN, 
and to project himself in life as a FINITE AND 
PERISHABLE being, PART OF THIS CREATION.
Therefore, to elucidate certain archetypal images is a 
fundamental strategy of the virya and to verify what is really 
behind them, in the unconscious, in its shadow sphere, hidden 
by the designs imposed by the demiurge in the fina- lities and 
suprafinalities that we have studied above, is the ETHICAL 
MISSION OF THE HYPERBORNE WARRIOR.
For this purpose, we are going to analyze goseologically 
under the light of HYPERBORNE GNOSIS CERTAIN 
IMAGES FROM THE
CREATION, exactly as we have done with the military 
archetype, the priestly archetype and the family archetype. We 
proceed in the same way with two essential images of 
creation, the EVA OR WOMAN ARCHETYPE, WHICH WE 
NAME LADY, AND THE MAN ARCHETYPE, WHICH 
WE NAME KNIGHT.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
ype. We 
proceed in the same way with two essential images of 
creation, the EVA OR WOMAN ARCHETYPE, WHICH WE 
NAME LADY, AND THE MAN ARCHETYPE, WHICH 
WE NAME KNIGHT.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

161


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
20. THE ARCHETYPE LADY AND THE ARCHETYPE 
EVA
It is important to understand the reality, the real that is in 
the unconscious, in the depths of the spirit of a comrade, of a 
virya, of a pure virgin, of a guiding muse, image of the 
infinitude of the spirit, of the beautiful and eternal life, this is 
our immaculate muse, eternal bride, spiritual sister of 
transcendent bond that links us internally to our primordial 
origin through the SUBLIME, ABSOLUTE and ETERNAL 
BEAUTY, that emanates from her infinite being. Our 
INSPIRING MUSE, our LIBERATING WALKIRIA, OUR 
LADY, grants us and awakens through the irradiation of her 
spirit within us a cold fire that turns us into warriors and 
through the transparent purity of her infinite beauty into wise 
men. Therefore, these two conditions transmute us into wise 
warriors, owners of the absolute truth that strips us internally 
so that we can verify the eternal spirit of Himself.
Our lady is the transparent virgin with a gaze as deep as 
the infinity of the eternal night, who observes us in our 
interior and undresses us in our soul, penetrating it like the 
light of a fire that illuminates in an absolute night, allowing us 
to see ourselves in the depths of our infinite obscurities and 
thus to know ourselves in all the depths of our eternal being.
Thus the Valkyrie, GODDESS OF THE ABSOLUTE, 
EMANATION OF THE ETERNAL encrusted in INFINITE 
BEAUTY transmits to us from the depths of her being that 
vision of life where the true meaning of life is the search for 
freedom through knowledge, the path that leads us to the 
ETERNAL WISDOM OF THE LIBERATING GODS OF 
THE SPIRIT OF THE CHAINS OF MAYA DEL MAYA.


--- PAGE BREAK ---meaning of life is the search for 
freedom through knowledge, the path that leads us to the 
ETERNAL WISDOM OF THE LIBERATING GODS OF 
THE SPIRIT OF THE CHAINS OF MAYA DEL MAYA.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

162
DEMIURGE JEHOVAH SATAN.
The understanding of the reality that lies behind the 
woman of the feminine spirit, of the eternal feminine is one of 
the greatest mysteries of the creation of the ABSOLUTE, OF 
THE ETERNAL ONE and the degradations that were 
projected on her nature during history because of a strategy 
led by the metaphysical synarchy led by the monotheistic 
gods of this satanic goat demiurge, persecutor of all that is 
terribly spiritual, who hate to death what is of the ETERNAL 
ONE in this world and who have constantly sought to destroy 
and if not degrade THE TRUTH OF THE FEMALE SPIRIT.
We intend to signify with this development the importance 
of the FEMININE in the human spirit and its historical 
significance in the consciousness of mankind, because it is 
from man's awareness of all that is feminine incorporated in 
the world that art and its sensitivities originate, endowing the 
human soul with a new awakening towards the most sublime 
spheres of ideas of creation. The con- sciousness of man 
without his feminine aspect is part of the pasu, because in the 
animal man the feminine is codified simply as SEXUAL 
INSTINCT and fulfills the mission of procreation and this is 
the point of inflection between the pasu and the virya, 
BECAUSE THE FEMININE IN THE VIRYA CONNOTES 
WITH CERTAIN IMAGES THAT TRANSCEND THE 
NATURAL INSTINCTIVE SEXUAL ORDER, CARRYING 
THEMSELVES 
AN 
ETERNAL 
SYMBOL 
THAT 
AWAKENS IN MAN THE VRIL.
This is why the virya's perception of the lady archetype is 
different with respect to the pasu. In the pasu this image 
activates certain emergencies within him that awaken certain 
symbols in certain chakras, which are generally the lower 
ones, such as the manipura or the anahata. These symbols con-


--- PAGE BREAK ---tes certain emergencies within him that awaken certain 
symbols in certain chakras, which are generally the lower 
ones, such as the manipura or the anahata. These symbols con-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

163
have a certain semiotic content whose reception in the 
consciousness of the pasu is structured as complexes of a 
sexual or emotional nature. Freud's entire psychology 
develops from these realities, taking the sexual complex as the 
fundamental principle of the development of his psychology. 
We must indicate with this that the pasu determines the lady 
and the feminine spirit in the lowest aspect of its ontology, 
that is to say that of the female, that of the woman, discarding 
from her any other type of attribute, structuring the feminine 
as one more attribute of material nature without any type of 
spiritual condition, therefore the pasu sees the woman simply 
as a being without spirit, without intellect and conditioned to 
her designs strictly of mother, of female and nothing else. 
Moreover, all the development in universal culture, from the 
academic sciences such as psychology, philosophy, sociology 
or in the great religions, has deprived women of their true 
spiritual conditions. And if we take into account specifically 
the religious, from monotheistic doctrines such as Judaism or 
Christianity, we will verify that in their theologies the reality 
of the feminine, of the eternal feminine does not exist. This 
idea has been COMPLETELY ELIMINATED FROM 
THESE RELIGIOUS DOGMAS. THE TRUTH IS THAT 
THE SYNARCHY, IN ITS DIFFERENT DOGMAS, HATES 
THE TRANSCENDENT ESSENCE THAT IS IMMANENT 
TO THE FEMININE SPIRIT, BECAUSE SHE IS THE 
BEARER OF CERTAIN ETERNAL SYMBOLS THAT THE 
VIRYA 
WHO 
ENTERS 
INTO 
CHARISMATIC 
RELATIONSHIP 
WITH 
THE 
MYSTERY 
OF 
THE 
ETERNAL FEMININE DISCOVERS IN HIMSELF: THE 
TRANSCENDENTAL POWER THAT THE VRIL OF THE 
RUNES OR VRUNAS INCRUSTED IN THE FEMININE 
SPIRIT TRANSFERS TO HIM.
In this way we affirm the contempt that the metaphysical 
synarchy has for all that is feminine and essential.
THE VRIL OF THE 
RUNES OR VRUNAS INCRUSTED IN THE FEMININE 
SPIRIT TRANSFERS TO HIM.
In this way we affirm the contempt that the metaphysical 
synarchy has for all that is feminine and essential.


--- PAGE BREAK ---NES OR VRUNAS INCRUSTED IN THE FEMININE 
SPIRIT TRANSFERS TO HIM.
In this way we affirm the contempt that the metaphysical 
synarchy has for all that is feminine and essential.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

164
The most important aspect of the woman is her transcendent 
aspect and especially the FEMININE WITHIN THE 
WOMAN, EVEN MORE SO IF SHE IS A VIRGIN, A 
HOLY 
WARRIOR 
BEARER 
OF 
THE 
HIGHEST 
HYPERBORIC SIGN: THE LADY.
There are countless examples in universal history of great 
viryas who have developed highly significant historical facts, 
who left a mark, a path of justice and freedom and that power 
destroyed them, projecting on them all kinds of lies and 
falsehoods. Two of these warriors of the spirit that have 
transcended historically are: Joan of Arc and our warrior Saint 
Eva Duarte de Peron.
That is why we must deeply understand this mystery and 
for this it is imperative to understand how the feminine is 
despised and especially the woman, the bearer of that image 
of eternity, and unfortunately if they do not manage to 
discover in themselves their hyperborean lady, if they do not 
manage to awaken, it is such a reaction of the metaphysical 
synarchy with that type of spirits that generally they are put to 
the hardest tests, the greatest dilemmas, The reaction of the 
metaphysical synarchy with this type of spirits is such that 
generally the hardest tests, the greatest dilemmas are put to 
them, indeed, if they do not awaken in this incarnation, they 
will surely try to incarnate them if possible in the worst 
archetypal conditions. Thus, the realities of the bed are 
dramatic if it does not manage to reorient itself and the pasu, 
the sleeping man today has lost the recognition of the 
feminine, despising it and placing this condition in the lowest 
scale of values.
The pasu, the virya asleep in the state of his onto- logical 
reality and in the degradation of his axiology, determined by a 
series of cultural archetypes that register him to a psycho- 
logy, to a materialistic, consumerist political, economic and 
cultural philosophy based clearly on the action and reaction of 
the instincts, perceives in woman the most archetypal and in- 
tinctive aspect of the feminine, unable to perceive what 
nomic and 
cultural philosophy based clearly on the action and reaction of 
the instincts, perceives in woman the most archetypal and in- 
tinctive aspect of the feminine, unable to perceive what 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

165
underlies the feminine.


--- PAGE BREAK ---f 
the instincts, perceives in woman the most archetypal and in- 
tinctive aspect of the feminine, unable to perceive what 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

165
underlies the feminine.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

166
behind, in the spirit of these comrades.
But it is totally different in the awakened virya, because he 
recognizes in himself the feminine, knowing that the reality of 
it is transferred to an aspect of creation that is the purest of 
creation and that is contained in the depths of the soul of a 
LADY. The reoriented wise warrior understands the 
ontological significance of the feminine, he knows that THE 
WOMAN 
OF 
SPIRITUAL 
BLOOD, 
ETHICALLY 
DIGNIFICANT OF HERSELF HAS IN HER BEING, IN 
HER BLOOD A NOOLOGICAL SIGN THAT IDENTIFIES 
HER AND THAT ITSELF IS TRANSLATED IN A PURITY 
AND A SUBLIMATE BEAUTY THAT DISTINGUISHES 
AND INDIVIDUALIZES HER AS A LADY.
The hyperborean knight sees in the feminine the sweet, the 
white, the flexible, perceives in the feminine the song of the 
sublime and understands through it his own inner essence, his 
own eternal feminine represented in the AXIOLOGICAL 
SELF OF HIS OWN ONTOLOGY, IN HIS ANIMAL, THE 
ASPECT OF HIS OWN ONTOLOGY.
FEMININE ASPECT OF HIS OWN SOUL. The wise warrior 
knows because he knows what is created in himself, his inner 
duality, and understands that his I, his original eternal being, 
must transcend the psychoanimic dualities structured in the 
ontology of his ANIMA, his feminine aspect. By 
understanding his reality, he knows that he must decipher the 
reality of his anima and potentiate the reality of his animus, of 
his MASCULINITY and for this he has on the outside, in the 
world, the feminine of the LADY, OF THE WOMAN OF 
COLD FIRE, BECAUSE SHE TRANSFERS IN HIS 
INTERIOR A POWER WITH WHICH TO RESIGN THE 
FEMININE ONTOLOGY OF HIS OWN SOUL AND TO 
POTENTIALIZE THE VIRILITY OF HIS OWN SOUL.
HEROIC OF THE WISE WARRIOR. It is therefore vital to 
understand the Lady archetype and to reveal the semiotic 
content inherent in the archetypal reality of this image of 
creation.
HIS OWN SOUL.
HEROIC OF THE WISE WARRIOR. It is therefore vital to 
understand the Lady archetype and to reveal the semiotic 
content inherent in the archetypal reality of this image of 
creation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

167
The gods of matter designate it with a series of designs that 
act as a cover-signs that distort the TRASCENDENT aspects 
incorporated from the eternal in the SPIRIT OF THE 
FEMININE.
The awakened virya knows and understands that the 
feminine is a grace of sublime beauty that contains in its being 
the deepest images of an aspect of the eternal and that he 
nourishes himself with them, but he also knows that the 
synarchy intends to project this ARCHITECTURE TO THE 
WORLD 
COLLECTIVE 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
BY 
DEVIRTING 
THE 
SPIRITUAL 
AND 
AFFIRMING 
WEAKNESS, 
SENTIMENTALISM, 
DEVOTION, 
INSTINCTIVE AND SEXUAL PASSION IN ORDER TO 
WEAKEN THE WARRIOR, THE RIDER, SO THAT HE 
LOSES 
HIS 
MASCULINITY, 
HIS 
VIRILITY, 
HIS 
HEROISM, AND FOR THIS HE USES THE EVA 
ARCHETYPE, 
WHICH 
IS 
THE 
AXIOLOGICAL 
COUNTERPART OF THE LADY ARCHETYPE, TO 
PROJECT INTO THE WORLD PSYCHE, INTO THE 
SYNARCHIC COUNTER-CULTURE, THE FEMININE 
FROM THE INSTINCTIVE, FROM THE SEXUAL, FROM 
THE ANIMAL.
Jung describes with a certain intelligence the archetypal 
reality of the feminine, describing this aspect with the figure 
of the ANIMUS, which is the masculine counterpart of the 
feminine soul and calls ANIMA the feminine aspect of the 
mas- culine soul.
Jung describes the psychological realities of these figures 
as two psychic aspects that influence the consciousness and 
determine it in its complexion and formation, he describes 
these processes in his famous books PSYCHOLOGY OF 
TRANSFERENCE and TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE 
LIBI-.
DO that we recommend to study. However, it is necessary to 
understand that Jung approaches this study from a 
psychological perspective, whereas in this particular case we 


--- PAGE BREAK ----.
DO that we recommend to study. However, it is necessary to 
understand that Jung approaches this study from a 
psychological perspective, whereas in this particular case we 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
are studying the study from a psychological perspective.


--- PAGE BREAK ---proaches this study from a 
psychological perspective, whereas in this particular case we 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
are studying the study from a psychological perspective.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
Others we widen the field of Jungian study and describe it 
from the Hyperborean Gnosis, which analyzes it from the 
meta-physical, philosophical, psychological, etc. We will find 
direct correlations between Jung's study and that of the 
Hyperborean Gnosis because Jung was undoubtedly an 
awakened virya and understood all the gnoseological 
mechanics of the ontological development of the individual, 
but for strategic reasons he developed these truths in a partial 
way, but in these writings we develop them completely.
It is important for the warrior monk to understand these 
transcendental truths in order to resign the Eve archetype and 
accept the Lady archetype, and it is vital to resign the 
complexes that are generated by the action of the Eve 
archetype, which begins to act in youth from adolescence 
onwards. Let us remember that the microcosm, the soul 
contains this ontological duality and in each center of the 
human machine, in each chakra or vortex of motor, 
instinctive, emotional and intellectual energy, there exists in 
its unconscious, in its shadow, an archetypal asymmetrical 
con- part. For example, in man, in his energy centers, in his 
shadow aspect, there is an archetypal asymmetry containing 
feminine symbols or, as Jung mentions, the ANIMA, and in 
the case of women, this archetypal asymmetry is called 
ANIMUS, that is, its masculine counterpart.
Considering this point, we understand why the designs and 
purposes of the soul have in these aspects, in their archetypal 
ontological duality, certain sacred symbols and bijas that are 
determinant when activated in relation to the other being of 
different sex.
Moreover, we understand why it is a cause of neurosis and 
certain insurmountable problems when a man's psyche is 
possessed by his soul and vice versa, when a woman's psyche 
is possessed by her soul and vice versa.
and why it is a cause of neurosis and 
certain insurmountable problems when a man's psyche is 
possessed by his soul and vice versa, when a woman's psyche 
is possessed by her soul and vice versa.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

170
ANIMUS. Psychologists would understand and treat neuroses 
better if they understood perfectly how this aspect of the 
created soul works; thanks to Professor Jung, some people of 
this science managed to understand the reality of the soul and 
its unconscious functions.
IT 
IS 
THEREFORE 
IMPORTANT 
THAT 
WE 
DESTROY THESE PSYCHIC FORMATIONS, BECAUSE 
WE MUST UNDERSTAND THAT THE FEMININE, 
STRUCTURED IN THE EVE ARCHETYPE, DESTROYS 
AND WEAKENS THE WARRIOR AND THE VIRILITY 
OF THE MASCULINE. THIS REGISTERS US IN 
CERTAIN SACRED SYMBOLS, PROTOTYPES OF THE 
FEMININE 
THAT 
AWAKEN 
UNCONSCIOUS 
POTENTIALITIES 
THAT 
FEMINIZE 
OUR 
CONSCIOUSNESS. IF, ON THE OTHER HAND, WE 
RESIG- NATE THE EVA ASPECT, WE WILL GAIN 
ACCESS TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE HIGHEST 
OF THE FEMININE, PENETRATING INTO A SUPERIOR 
IMAGE 
NOT 
ARCHETYPICALLY 
DESIGNATED, 
WHICH IS THAT OF THE LADY OR VIRGIN OF 
AGARTHA, VIRGIN OF THE AWAKENED MEN, OF 
THE WISE WARRIORS WHO HAVE RECOGNIZED IN 
THEMSELVES 
THE 
IMPERATIVE 
NEED 
FOR 
LIBERATION.
IN DIRECT RELATIONSHIP WITH IT WE CAN 
UNDERSTAND AND COMPREHEND FROM THE SELF 
TO 
OUR 
UNCREATED 
SPIRIT, 
THE 
ETERNAL 
MASCULINE IN ITS GENERALITY, NOT ONLY 
MICROCOSMIC BUT MACROCOSMIC.
THAT IS TO SAY THAT BY UNDERSTANDING THE 
FEMININE FROM THE ARCHETYPE LADY, WE WILL 
UNVEIL THE ARCHETYPAL REALITY OF PAIN, 
REPRESENTED IN THE SUFFERING IMAGES OF THE 
ARCHETYPE EVA, ALLOWING US TO DISCOVER THE 
DESIGNS AND PURPOSES STRUCTURED IN THE 
SOUL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---L 
UNVEIL THE ARCHETYPAL REALITY OF PAIN, 
REPRESENTED IN THE SUFFERING IMAGES OF THE 
ARCHETYPE EVA, ALLOWING US TO DISCOVER THE 
DESIGNS AND PURPOSES STRUCTURED IN THE 
SOUL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

171
BY THE DEMIURGE AND THUS IN POSSESSION OF 
THIS KNOWLEDGE TO BE ABLE TO DESTROY THE 
SACRED SYMBOLS AND THE BIJAS OF THE CREATED 
SOUL.
THIS POWER ALLOWS US, BY DESTROYING AND 
RESIGNING THE EVA ARCHETYPE, TO RELATE 
CHARISMATICALLY AND SPIRITUALLY WITH THE 
LADY ARCHETYPE, WHICH IS THE IMAGE THAT 
CONTAINS THE VIRYAS, THE WISE WARRIORS OR 
THE 
DAUGHTERS 
OF 
THE 
COLD 
FIRE, 
THE 
STANDING 
COMRADES, 
ALL 
OF 
THEM 
REPRESENTED BY THE VIR- GEN OF AGARTHA. THE 
IMAGE OF THE LADY IS THE ONE THAT AWAKENS 
WITHIN 
US 
THE 
HYPERBOREAN 
RUNES, 
THE 
TRANSCENDENT VRIL THAT ILLUMINATES WITH AN 
ENLIGHTENING HATRED THE TRUTH AND THE LIE 
POSTULATED ON THE REALITY OF ONESELF.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---HYPERBOREAN 
RUNES, 
THE 
TRANSCENDENT VRIL THAT ILLUMINATES WITH AN 
ENLIGHTENING HATRED THE TRUTH AND THE LIE 
POSTULATED ON THE REALITY OF ONESELF.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

171
21. ARCHETYPAL 
HEREDITARY 
ARCHETYPAL 
PROFESSIONS. THE MILITARY AND PRIESTLY 
ARCHETYPES. 
THEIR 
ACTUALIZATION 
IN 
REALITY AND IN THE PSYCHE OF THE PASU AND 
THE VIRYA.
The conscious will, the "I", our subjectivity or particular 
consciousness is immersed like an island in an ocean of 
collective or universal consciousness. These factors, the 
consciousness and the unconscious, are integrated by the 
instincts in an eminently biological aspect and by the 
collective archetypal representations in a psychological 
aspect. All these contents constantly press upon the "I", 
plunging the consciousness into a diversity of instinctive or 
archetypal COMPLEXES which, if actualized in a sphere of 
light, capture the will of the sleeping man in a given complex, 
which unfolds in the consciousness in its total complexion. In 
this circumstance man ceases to be, being the subject of the 
psychic representation of the complex which, emerging from 
the SPHERE OF SHADOW OR UNCONSCIOUS, and 
actualized in the consciousness or SPHERE OF LIGHT, 
SUBMITS THE WILL OF THE VIRYA TO REPRESENT 
THE ARCHETYPICAL CHARACTER.
of the potentialized complex.
Professions 
such 
as 
medicine, 
law, 
architecture, 
merchants, bankers, military, clerical, are a part of the 
extensive social and cultural complex network, being 
hereditary collective archetypal structures, transmitted from 
generation to generation, for example in the BANKING 
profession we can find complete genealogies in this same 
field. But what we will try to understand are two basic 
archetypes of the international synarchy and of the gods of 
illusion: the MILITARY and the PRIESTLY archetypes. 
Starting from this definition we will be able to understand in 
an orderly fashion the


--- PAGE BREAK ---ational synarchy and of the gods of 
illusion: the MILITARY and the PRIESTLY archetypes. 
Starting from this definition we will be able to understand in 
an orderly fashion the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

172
The military, like the priestly, are archetypal social complexes 
which are the basis of the constitution of the cultural super-
structure. They are cultural superconcepts that have been 
rooted in the human soul since the dawn of man, both being 
the two archetypal pillars of the collective professions.
Undoubtedly, we know that behind a collective archetype, 
there is contained in itself a sacred symbol and a bija, 
projected by the traitor gods that neutralize the action of the 
transcendent aspect that these archetypes have. We must 
understand that the military and priestly archetypes have a 
HYPERBorean NOOLOGICAL SUSTRATUM, carrying in 
their image a RUNE. We can only verify this noological 
reality if the VIRYA has the gnoseo- logical wisdom to resign 
the sacred symbols and the bijas, structured by THE ONE in 
the military or priestly archetypal representation. It is 
important to understand that the projection of these archetypes 
to the world generated in reality a cultural super-structure 
sustained by a series of military institutions (warrior caste) and 
in the case of the priestly of churches (Christianity, 
Buddhism, Islam, Judaism, etc.) that in the social sphere were 
affirmed as pillars of culture. That is to say that throughout 
history these two archetypes are the ones that structured in 
reality the power held today by the military and the prelates 
and their institutions, and they have a numinous power that 
has an impact on the pasu to join their institutions. If we 
analyze the Catholic Church or the U.S. Army and its training 
schools, we can see terribly powerful structures that have a 
decisive insertion in society. They are constantly growing and 
the sleeping man is a victim of the fascinating power of these 
archetypes, which capture the will of the pasu and bind him to 
its institutions.
rtion in society. They are constantly growing and 
the sleeping man is a victim of the fascinating power of these 
archetypes, which capture the will of the pasu and bind him to 
its institutions.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ey are constantly growing and 
the sleeping man is a victim of the fascinating power of these 
archetypes, which capture the will of the pasu and bind him to 
its institutions.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

173
myths and ideologies.
Undoubtedly, these archetypal professions have an 
axiological scale such that in their different ethical and 
aesthetic levels they possess a hierarchical scale that 
pyramidically 
leads 
to 
the 
ARCHITECTICAL 
ENTHELEQUY. In these degrees of entelechial ascension the 
representations vary, from a simple soldier to a general in the 
military, or from a monk to a bishop or cardinal in the 
religious; the hierarchy reached depends on the degree of 
ontological and karmic evolution of the pasu, and only those 
beings who in some way are initiated and chosen by the 
religious or military synarchy, previously agreed upon by the 
traitor gods who sustain the evolutionary plan of the world 
order, reach the entelechies.
It is necessary to understand the power of these archetypes 
and their myths, sustained by a literary ideological structure. 
For example, the incidence of religious texts such as the 
BIBLE, THE TORAH, THE KORAN, THE BAGHAH, THE 
BIBLE, THE TORAH, THE KORAN, THE BAGHAH, THE 
BAGHAH, THE BIBLE and THE BAGHAH, must be 
emphasized.
VAD GITA, etc. in the monastic and military fields, the epic 
accounts of great battles, wars, etc. In addition, its great 
building complexes, especially in the clerical, its Churches, 
Cathedrals, Monasteries, Abbeys, which affirm their concrete 
material reality to these archetypal professions; all this is 
decisive to capture the pasu and phagocytize it in its dog- mas.
We must recognize that these sacralizing images of these 
professions capture the pasu because he cannot understand 
and dissolve the sacred symbols and even less the bijas, on the 
other hand, the Hyperborean Warrior, reoriented and affirmed 
in his absolute SELF, stops and dissolves these symbols by 
accessing the transcendent and eternal aspects that exist in the 
noological background of the military and priestly, relating to 
these archetypal figures not mechanically but charismatically 
accessing the NOOLOGICAL RUNE underlying them.
ts that exist in the 
noological background of the military and priestly, relating to 
these archetypal figures not mechanically but charismatically 
accessing the NOOLOGICAL RUNE underlying them.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

174
These formations, which in the military is the HEROIC, the 
spiritual image of the HERO, and in the priestly the image of 
the WISE, contained in the HYPERBORN WISDOM.
It is in this way that the awakened man who has attained 
ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUATION is a HEROIC WISE MAN.
CO, a luciferic warrior, since in order to access the eternal it is 
essential to understand these archetypal figures, dissolve their 
historical cultural records and access their RUNES, 
charismatically relating to the transcendent image of the 
HERO and the WISE, thus acquiring their power and wisdom.


--- PAGE BREAK ---their 
historical cultural records and access their RUNES, 
charismatically relating to the transcendent image of the 
HERO and the WISE, thus acquiring their power and wisdom.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

175
22. ANALYSIS OF THE FAMILY ARCHETYPE. THE 
SPIRAL STAIRCASE AND THE INFINITE 
STAIRCASE
Undoubtedly, studying the instincts is a quantifiable task 
and biology and physiology do it correctly, but it is almost 
impossible to do the same with the archetypes since they are 
the structures of reason and require from the warrior a very 
pro- foundational ontological bending of himself. This is 
specifically because they act in a macrocosmic and 
microcosmic space of signification where it is difficult to 
study, since the energy of the archetypes in reason and 
consciousness are quantified as psychological phenomena.
It is therefore a difficult task to reduce the archetypes, 
since as psychological complexes they have the capacity to 
hypostasize themselves within the context of a mental 
representation, generally in an idea, a t h o u g h t that we 
believe belongs to us and that is a product of our conscious 
will; in reality, the triggering factor of this psychological 
process is the action of an archetype. In the previous review of 
the lady, military and priestly archetypes we tried to arrive at 
an understanding of their action, but in this analysis we will 
develop the archetype FAMILY because it is the axial axis of 
the social and the individual. Analyzing the term family we 
verify that it encompasses a diversity of meanings, defining 
some of them we verify that family means the convergence of 
individuals or persons within the same space, united by blood 
ties of kinship governed by certain norms conventionally 
accepted within the family or social group. What we intend to 
point out is


--- PAGE BREAK ---ns within the same space, united by blood 
ties of kinship governed by certain norms conventionally 
accepted within the family or social group. What we intend to 
point out is


--- PAGE BREAK ---

176
the direct relationship that exists between the family archetype 
and the SPIRITUAL BLOOD, since there is a direct link 
between the two, because in it lies the fall, the throwing of the 
spirit into matter, this being the most guarded secret of the 
gods of The One. That is why it is extremely important to 
understand the incidence of all the components of the same: 
father, mother, siblings and their direct ascendants, 
grandfathers, grandmothers, great-grandfathers, that is to say 
of our genealogical tree, because there is a blood and 
psychological preeminence in the formation of the personality 
of the individual. But unfortunately the synarchic culture has 
destroyed the NOOLOGICAL relief, the eternal symbols 
underlying the family, corrupting its ethical and moral 
structures and modifying its true values for others where 
decadence takes over, leading the family t o a total ruin. The 
most significant thing for the hyperborean warrior is the 
noological reintegration of the family archetype, and this 
strategy will allow us to access a gnoseological recognition of 
our ontological registers, that is to say, an experience of our 
past existences.
In this strategic noological family tactic it is essential to 
use the FENCE STRATEGY, with which we must fence and 
isolate each component of our family archetype, starting from 
the most significant relationships or most essential principles 
of our existence: father, mother, sons, daughters, wife, 
brothers, sisters, uncles, etc. Once we enclose each archetypal 
component, we must resign its being in itself and assign to 
each representation a new connection of meaning, because it 
is essential not to have a DRAMATIC tension with any aspect 
of the family archetype. This is why we advise not to break 
with the family argument but to strategically assign a 
noological value, which will allow us to climb the 
genealogical ladder and thus penetrate into the most 
unconscious blood ascendants, for example, grandparents, 
grandmothers, grandfathers, grandmothers, grandmothers, 
grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, 
penetrate into the most 
unconscious blood ascendants, for example, grandparents, 
grandmothers, grandfathers, grandmothers, grandmothers, 
grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

177
grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, 
grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers.


--- PAGE BREAK ---hers, grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

177
grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, 
grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

178
lo, great-grandmother, great-great-grandfather, etc.
Let us specify this process in more detail, for this we must 
consider this situation: each family figure contains its 
archetypal representation, a link in its being in itself with the 
profession archetype, which acts as a tapasign that invests it 
with an axiology that modifies the real and spiritual sense of 
the relative. Generally, the archetype profession is the 
connection of meaning with which the components of the 
family archetype are linked, endowing it with an axiological 
relationship which usually generates a dra- matic tension that 
sacralizes the relationships between the components. It is 
essential, therefore, to restructure each family relative in their 
argument, encircling their family, social, professional, etc., 
conformation with a RUNE. Once this strategy is carried out, 
we can reintegrate the family being without connection of 
meaning, being able in such a way to understand and visualize 
its spiritual reality, in such a way that in this ontological 
instropection we will find significant aspects of strategic value 
for our conscientization and reintegration of the family blood 
that possesses HYPERBORNE aspects.
We must understand that there exist in the activities of our 
relatives professions that are ethical or aesthetic forms that 
have been transferred from generation to generation, through 
the family blood, affirming a hyperborean or demiurgic 
component and visualizing such a reality is essential to know 
the ontological genesis of the family. Undoubtedly, if our 
family archetype is registered to a profession that has a 
hyperborean argument this is strategically favorable for the 
warrior, and the process of reintegration of our family 
archetype will be less dramatic; but if the reality indicates the 
opposite, the virya must be a cold warrior and take tragic 
measures, and depending on his courage he will have to break 
definitively with some family component, but always
reality indicates the 
opposite, the virya must be a cold warrior and take tragic 
measures, and depending on his courage he will have to break 
definitively with some family component, but always


--- PAGE BREAK ---e 
opposite, the virya must be a cold warrior and take tragic 
measures, and depending on his courage he will have to break 
definitively with some family component, but always


--- PAGE BREAK ---

179
strategically.
Going back and ascending through our family tree allows 
us to understand the INFINITE STAIRS and to visualize our 
ontological register, specifying in our historical subject the 
previous incarnations or lives. Each step, rung of the infinite 
ladder is a familiar archetypal element that we must overcome 
and in this way we configure a ladder that step by step allows 
us to ascend, to advance, affirming the "I" in a noological 
space where nothing can stop us. The opposite happens in the 
strategies of synarchy, in which the evolution towards the 
cultural entelechies takes place in an archetypal form, where 
specifically the evolutionary sense is rooted in the archetype 
PROFE- SION. That is to say, in the archetypal professions of 
the synarchy are deposited in a spiral form (that is why it is 
called the SNAIL STAIRWAY) the designs that have the 
purpose and suprafinality of draining and disintegrating the 
ego in its completes, which will affirm the archetypal 
profession, having the mission of arriving and taking it to its 
maximum entelechial expression, to its archetypal profession. 
In such a way that the archetypal professions evolve in the 
form of an ascending spiral towards their entelechy, for 
example, a spirit subjected to a profession that serves the ends 
of the world synarchy, such as a banker, a politician or a 
priest, its evolution is hierarchical, its existence always 
revolves around the PATHOS, its suprafinality structured in 
its CARACOL SCARLET, which has the essential objective 
of draining the being in the seeming, the ethics in the 
professional aesthetics. Liberalism, capitalism, Marxist 
socialism are great structures that have arrived at the 
microcosmic political entelechy in an analogous way, for 
example Lenin was a microcosmic entelechy, following the 
evolutionary sense structured in the Snail's Ladder.
es that have arrived at the 
microcosmic political entelechy in an analogous way, for 
example Lenin was a microcosmic entelechy, following the 
evolutionary sense structured in the Snail's Ladder.


--- PAGE BREAK ---at the 
microcosmic political entelechy in an analogous way, for 
example Lenin was a microcosmic entelechy, following the 
evolutionary sense structured in the Snail's Ladder.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

180
Previously we explained how to climb the infinite 
staircase that leads us to our divine ancestor and enthrones us 
in the eternal; we revealed that for this it is necessary to use 
the STRATEGY OF THE FENCE and we expressed how to 
apply such a technique to isolate noologically the family 
archetype and to resign its demiurgic arguments. We will now 
explain how, by tracing back our family archetype, we can 
access our historical memory and be able to visualize the 
mnemic context within our historical subject in which we can 
reference, remember and experience our metempsychosis. In 
order to access these experiences, it is important to use the 
RIGHT ANGLE STRATEGY, since it is the best way to 
achieve and attain the visualization of our historical records. 
The technique consists in the fact that as we go up each step 
of our genealogy, in a given ancestral being, in its ontological 
space of signification is its cultural register where its 
archetypal profession is found, in that same space of 
signification that coincides with an aspect of the historical 
transcendent time, obliquely and analogously, an ontological 
reality of ours had real existence, in such a way that one of 
our existences coincides symmetrically with that of one or 
more of our ancestors, being able through the ontological 
register of our relative to go out perpendicularly from it and 
visualize the historical context in which we had a real 
existence. In other words, going back to our ancestors, for 
example understanding one of our grandfathers who is third 
generation, we visualize that he was born in 1880 and died in 
1958. Opening his ontological subject we visualize that he 
was of Italian blood, that his profession was a farmer, 
dedicated to the cultivation of vines and the production of 
wines. By experiencing his existence we understand that he 
was born in Italy and lived from 1880 to 1939, then he settled 
in Argentina, where he worked as a farmer, dedicated to vine 
growing and wine production.
cing his existence we understand that he 
was born in Italy and lived from 1880 to 1939, then he settled 
in Argentina, where he worked as a farmer, dedicated to vine 
growing and wine production.


--- PAGE BREAK ---e understand that he 
was born in Italy and lived from 1880 to 1939, then he settled 
in Argentina, where he worked as a farmer, dedicated to vine 
growing and wine production.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

181
He also worked in the same function, making wine and 
working the land in cereal production. We can understand that 
this Italian Creole was a semi-cult by nature, a good reader 
and at the same time that in his politicized Italy at the time he 
adhered to Fascism and during the war to the Axis; We also 
see that in Argentina his political reality was Peronist, his 
religious affiliation was Christian, specifically devoted to the 
Virgin Mary, and his cultural traditions were a symbiosis 
between Italian and Creole, whether in the taste for music, 
singing, dancing, sports and specifically the foods of his 
ancestral lands.
In this situation we can understand that the same epoch in 
which our grandfather existed is analogous to one of our 
existence; We can access this truth without making a mistake 
by using the technique of the right angle, because in the same 
instep of the infinite staircase, in the step where our 
grandfather is located, analogously to it, in a place of the step 
has historical reality our historical context where we had real 
existence, in such a way that from the register of our 
grandfather we can go out perpendicularly at a right angle and 
see that previous life, visualizing all our historical cultural 
register. We warn that this technique is feasible and real, but it 
is our duty to warn that it is not indispensable for our 
ABSOLUTE 
INDIVIDUATION 
and 
our 
SPIRTUAL 
LIBERATION, simply because if there is such a strategic 
need in the Luciferic Warrior to see his historical record, we 
reveal this mystery, but we warn to follow step by step what is 
described, because we run the risk of being trapped in a 
historical argument, in an ontological obliquity from which it 
is difficult to get out; ALTHOUGH NOT IMPOSSIBLE.
We must consider that in REALITY THERE IS TRUTH 
and it is very common to be fascinated with believing that we 
were great characters in history; it is unbelievable that we can 
not
OT IMPOSSIBLE.
We must consider that in REALITY THERE IS TRUTH 
and it is very common to be fascinated with believing that we 
were great characters in history; it is unbelievable that we can 
not


--- PAGE BREAK ---

182
understand that this is one of the sacred esoteric symbols of 
the synarchy that best serves their strategy. If we look at the 
neuropsychiatric institutes, they are full of crazy lunatics who 
believe they are Jesus, Napoleon, etc. It is only important to 
penetrate these truths if it is strategically necessary, that is 
why we must have patience and remember that everything 
comes in due time, being necessary to keep in mind that the 
gods will guide us, indicating why we must open certain 
particular or collective historical records, meanwhile it is 
important to understand this technique, this knowledge that 
allows us to understand our family archetype. The warrior 
must recognize his blood and genealogy, being fundamental 
to know our origin because it is strategically necessary for the 
hyperborean luciferic warrior, but it is not essential to open 
our particular historical record; but only the virya knows in 
his infinite wisdom, in his will and in his spirit the path to 
follow.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

183


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---ar historical record; but only the virya knows in 
his infinite wisdom, in his will and in his spirit the path to 
follow.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

183


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

183
23. THE EVOLUTION OF THE HUMAN ARCHETYPE. 
THE DEMIURGE AND THE PROJECTIONS OF HIS 
PLAN IN THE CREATED UNIVERSE.
This is the main objective of the enemies of the spirit: to 
demonstrate that the man of the present is better than the man 
of the past, AND THAT MAN EVOLVES IN A 
PROGRESSIVE AND FUTURISTIC SENSE TOWARDS 
AN ENTELEQUY OF HUMAN PERFECTION. This is 
perhaps
Perhaps the man of tomorrow will achieve his maximum 
ontological development and will accede to the manu 
entelechy, and will be evolutionarily assimilated to the project 
devised by the demiurge Jehovah Satan and his hosts of 
treacherous gods, who by a mystery of A-MOR trapped the 
eternal spirit in the created soul, thus initiating the evolution 
of the animal man. Perhaps the soul of man will be able to 
evolve and a certain sector of humanity will transmute 
psychoanimically and make an ontological leap. Of course, 
every certain period the metaphysical synarchy performs 
certain COLLECTIVE INITIATIVE RITES, where VIRGINS 
AND PASSOULS are SACRIFIED AND IMMOLATED TO 
RELEASE THE SPIRITUAL VIRIL OF THOSE RACES OR 
PEOPLES, IN ORDER TO EVOLVE CERTAIN BEINGS 
TO SUPERIOR ANIMAL STATES.
These rites of blood, which are regularly performed by the 
metaphysical synarchy and which we will develop later in 
other points, are a reality, and the real holocausts of fire that 
have been taking place lately, for example in Iraq and 
Palestine, have, beyond the economic and political goals, a 
THEOLOGICAL reality. We affirm this, simply because 
behind the political and financial synarchy, we find the 
DEMIURGO AND THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS directing the 
political and financial synarchy, and the DEMIURGO AND 
THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS directing the financial synarchy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---rchy, we find the 
DEMIURGO AND THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS directing the 
political and financial synarchy, and the DEMIURGO AND 
THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS directing the financial synarchy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

184
This process is being managed from a metaphysical order and 
from a physical order. There is in the world a religious and 
esoteric synarchy whose chiefs are PRELATES, RABBITS 
AND MASO- NES, who are the true leaders in the world 
order of the destinies of humanity.
That is why these gentlemen, when one of them is 
sufficiently evolved to make an ontological leap and ascend to 
a higher hierarchy within the evolutionary scale of the entities 
created by the demiurge, DO NOT HESITATE TO 
PERFORM CERTAIN COLLECTIVE BLOOD RITES TO 
PRODUCE THESE INITIATIONS.
Undoubtedly, this is a profoundly mysterious subject and 
is one of the most powerful SACRED BIAS of metaphysical 
sinar- chy, understanding these realities requires certain 
awakenings in the consciousness of the warrior. We can only 
understand such sacrificial acts of horror and terror, where 
thousands of human beings are slaughtered without the 
slightest mercy, if we HAVE ISOLATED AND CLOSED 
OLOLOGICALLY, and if we are not able to comprehend 
them.
MIND and fundamentally if we have achieved a certain 
absolute understanding of HYPERBORNE GNOSIS.
Because in reality the metaphysical synarchy is MATRIX, 
A GREAT CENTER FROM WHERE THEY DIRECT 
EVERYTHING AND FROM WHERE THEY DO NOT 
HESITATE TO TORTURE THE HUMANITY IN ORDER 
TO ACHIEVE THEIR OBJECTIVES.
That is why we maintain that perhaps humanity will 
SOME DAY be able to reach the soul evolution intended by 
the international synarchy and the demiurge The One, but it 
will always be asleep, and as in the movie MATRIX, it will be 
all a great DREAM, the work of archetypes and designs.
The reality of it is that only those awaken who escape 
from MATRIX AND ACHIEVE TO REBEL AGAINST 
THEIR DESTINY AND MAKE THEIR OWN.
We must recognize that humanity is for the gods.
es and designs.
The reality of it is that only those awaken who escape 
from MATRIX AND ACHIEVE TO REBEL AGAINST 
THEIR DESTINY AND MAKE THEIR OWN.
We must recognize that humanity is for the gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---reality of it is that only those awaken who escape 
from MATRIX AND ACHIEVE TO REBEL AGAINST 
THEIR DESTINY AND MAKE THEIR OWN.
We must recognize that humanity is for the gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

185
something sacrificial, and nature is constantly renewed by 
blood and fire, and humanity is blood and fire. Thus the 
phenomenal world, which we perceive and receive in 
archetypal forms or eidetic models and which we represent, is 
the projection of the will of the demiurge and the traitorous 
gods, even our physical body, our microcosm, is part of the 
molecules and atoms components of this demiurgic 
projection. We must begin to understand that the body and the 
soul are projections of each other and that our reality is only 
ARCHETISTIC MIND AND ONTOLOGICAL DESIGNS.
All the components of reality, which we perceive in our 
mind, in our feelings and in our flesh are undoubtedly 
endowed with a truth, with something strictly real because we 
experience it inwardly in that way. It is impossible to deny 
that the world is also represented to us interiorly as something 
strictly REAL and these sensible or sensitive representations 
coincide with the REALITY structured in the phenomenal 
world. The reality of pain, of joy, of sorrow and grief, of 
suffering and happiness, are undeniable elements, because we 
daily perceive them either in our being or in the world, in the 
people who daily live and struggle to survive. Our archetypal 
mind represents everything and can assimilate the 
phenomenal reality with all the axiological and gnoseological 
variants. That is to say that the ontus, the forms and their 
sensitivities are perceived by the "I", and the archetypal mind 
represents these projections and interprets them according to 
its designs or purposes. We describe this interaction between 
the self and reality b e c a u s e it is imperative to 
understand that the self is an essential part of the universal 
whole, our soul is integrated in all its essential components 
either molecularly, in its atoms and ENERGETIC QUAN- 
TUM to the ILLUSION OF MAYA, to the CREATION, to 
the CREATION of the soul.
al 
whole, our soul is integrated in all its essential components 
either molecularly, in its atoms and ENERGETIC QUAN- 
TUM to the ILLUSION OF MAYA, to the CREATION, to 
the CREATION of the soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---is integrated in all its essential components 
either molecularly, in its atoms and ENERGETIC QUAN- 
TUM to the ILLUSION OF MAYA, to the CREATION, to 
the CREATION of the soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

186
CION.
Gnosticism, the direct heir of HYPER-BOREAU 
GNOSIS, maintains, as we have explained above, the 
relationship between our microcosm and the macrocosm, 
explaining that the min- mundus mundus is part of the greater 
mundus. The microcosm is the prototypical projection of the 
macrocosm and therefore what is in the macrocosm is 
potentially in the microcosm. That is why the Alexandrian 
Gnostics believed that it was essential to adjust internally to 
the whole, to the great UNIVERSAL SOUL in order to be 
able to evolve, from there the error was born, because they 
believed that the ontological assimilation of the individual 
being to the universal being, to the FATHER, WAS THE 
PATH TO SPIRITUAL FREEDOM AND THAT IS THE 
GREAT ERROR OF ALL THE SECTAS THAT AROSE IN 
THE OCCIENT THROUGH GNOSTICISM.
This integration to the universal ocean, this union with the 
father, means nothing more and nothing less than the absolute 
loss of the individual will, we must keep in mind that we are 
atoms and that creation is atoms, In short, all creation is 
emanations 
of 
ARCHETICALLY 
DIFFERENTIATED 
ATOMS that were endowed by the Demiurge with an 
INDISCERNIBLE POINT, that when they coincide with each 
other regardless of the ontological constitution of their forms, 
an AXIOLOGICAL AND GNOSEOLOGICAL FUSION is 
produced, MUTUALLY INTEGRATING THE ONE, THE 
DEMIURGH.
You understand, comrade, the demiurge and his esoteric 
science represented in the world by his planetary celestial 
hierarchies and especially on planet Earth, distorts the 
energies of the origin that come from the ETERNAL 
WORLDS OF THE INCOGNOSCIBLE of which we are its 
essence, that is why it is our eternal and infinite being. It does 
it archetypically in its scientific-esoteric laboratories of 
CHANG SHAMBA- LLA, which is a city encrusted in certain 
topographical folds.
at is why it is our eternal and infinite being. It does 
it archetypically in its scientific-esoteric laboratories of 
CHANG SHAMBA- LLA, which is a city encrusted in certain 
topographical folds.


--- PAGE BREAK ---eternal and infinite being. It does 
it archetypically in its scientific-esoteric laboratories of 
CHANG SHAMBA- LLA, which is a city encrusted in certain 
topographical folds.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

187
between the sun and the earth. From this point the demiurge 
modifies the energies of the origin and deforms them by 
codifying them archetypically, projecting in their atomic 
nuclei that indiscernible point that allows him to control 
absolutely 
everything. 
This 
great 
METAPHYSICAL 
MACHINERY is a complex scientific magical science that 
has the properties of MODIFYING THE REAL OF THE 
ORIGIN AND SIGNIFYING A REALITY THAT IS 
REPRESENTED TO US AS REAL, BUT WHICH IS AN 
ILLUSION.
We affirm this truth as absolute and we assert it because 
the experience of the AWAKENED VIRYA confirms it, but 
we understand that from the perspective of the pasu, of the 
man submerged in the sea of passions, of conflicting feelings, 
in the archetypal reason and the designs of his soul, reality 
transfers to him a reference where the phenomenal is simply 
measured with the AXIOLOGICAL LIMITS OF THE 
MERELY HUMAN.
Man perceives reality as something strictly REAL and his 
being represents the world as he experiences it, influencing it 
with his subjectivity, which gives meaning to the 
phenomenological world according to its cultural structure. 
We know perfectly well that reason thinks and elaborates 
thoughts depending strictly on what it has incorporated in its 
memory, which is part of its unconscious. The memory is a 
semiotic content of signs and symbols that are reductions of 
concepts and hyperconcepts introduced through education and 
culture that are incorporated in the shadow sphere. All these 
semiotic formations, all these contents assimilated throughout 
the existence of the pasu will compose the HISTORICAL 
CULTURAL SUBJECT and its gnoseological capacities of 
knowledge will be defined by the extension of its intellectual 
archetypal memory or CULTURAL STRUCTURE.
f the pasu will compose the HISTORICAL 
CULTURAL SUBJECT and its gnoseological capacities of 
knowledge will be defined by the extension of its intellectual 
archetypal memory or CULTURAL STRUCTURE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ose the HISTORICAL 
CULTURAL SUBJECT and its gnoseological capacities of 
knowledge will be defined by the extension of its intellectual 
archetypal memory or CULTURAL STRUCTURE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

188
Let us give a practical example for a better understanding 
of this idea: if we name an archetypal figure as MOTHER, 
undoubtedly the aesthetic figure of the same will 
automatically emerge. Any individual will quickly understand 
this concept because it is common to all, due to the fact that in 
the archetypal reason this entity is an IMAGE A PRIORI, IT 
IS AN ARCHETIPO. It is the image of the MOTHER, AN 
INNATE IDEA that is deposited in the archetypal and 
instinctive memory of the human animal. Undoubtedly this 
image does not need to be reasoned because it has in itself an 
impulse, an unconscious design that was foreseen by the 
demiurge in the constitution of the human soul. It is this 
archetype so singular that children, in their spirit, without 
knowing it, know what it means. In this way we can signify 
hundreds of essential eidetic archetypes that are a priori in the 
soul and do not need a posteriori reasoning.
But this cognitive reality is in essence MECHANICAL, 
INSTINCTIVE, but if instead of naming an essential 
archetype we refer to the term ARCHITECTURE we will 
verify that in the grasp of this concept the human animal, the 
pasu, will not have an unconscious response for the simple 
reason that this concept is a cultural acquisition, that is to say, 
it requires for its cognitive comprehension a referential or 
formal learning.
By this we mean that the passu or animal man has a 
volitional scope in his reason to understand instinctively or 
archetypically the innate ideas or essential archetypes, but that 
he requires another volitional and anemic condition to 
understand cognitively the significant references of the 
CULTURAL CONCEPTS OR CULTURAL ARCHETYPES.
Only the virya, whether asleep or awake, has sufficient 
will in his being to be able to represent these ideas.
itively the significant references of the 
CULTURAL CONCEPTS OR CULTURAL ARCHETYPES.
Only the virya, whether asleep or awake, has sufficient 
will in his being to be able to represent these ideas.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ant references of the 
CULTURAL CONCEPTS OR CULTURAL ARCHETYPES.
Only the virya, whether asleep or awake, has sufficient 
will in his being to be able to represent these ideas.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

189
cultural because he has a spirit, a different quantum of energy 
called VRIL by the Hyperborean Gnosis.
Therefore, the virya has in his unconscious a tendency that 
leads him to KNOW AND KNOW, this impulse is something 
that does not come from his designated soul, but from his 
SPIRIT.
This is the great differentiation between the man with 
spirit and the pasu: the virya has in his being a 
DIFFERENTIATED SELF that makes him different. That 
something is what differentiates him and leads him 
unconsciously to the search for the truth about HIMSELF, 
first outside, in the world, in its cultural superstructure, 
seeking to solve the questions and concerns of his being, and 
then within himself, diving into his own soul.
For the virya nothing in the world is sufficient, no habitual 
and dogmatic structure will be absolute for him, he will only 
remain in it momentarily, then he will jump from one to 
another, but he will never find answers. Sooner or later he will 
always escape from them by rebelling against DOGMAS, not 
caring about the reality of them, be they religious, scientific, 
political. He will become a LUCIFERIC REBEL, a being who 
wants nothing to do with the synarchic culture. He will end up 
hating the world of lying and deceitful constitution, despising 
all the deception that is structured in it.
In reality the virya must understand that the world, this 
space of existential significance where we fell by the action of 
a subtle deception orchestrated by the demiurge and the gods 
traitors to the eternal spirit, is a HOSTILE TERRITORY, 
because it is the enemy's area. Therefore we maintain that the 
warrior must understand this profound truth: WE DO NOT 
COME TO THE CREATION OF THE ONE TO REDEEM 
OR MODIFY IT, FOR THAT IS IMPOSSIBLE, WE COME 
TO THE REA- LITY OF PAIN, TO THE UNIVERSE OF 
ILLUSION, TO THE RESCUE OF OUR FALLEN 
FELLOWS,
: WE DO NOT 
COME TO THE CREATION OF THE ONE TO REDEEM 
OR MODIFY IT, FOR THAT IS IMPOSSIBLE, WE COME 
TO THE REA- LITY OF PAIN, TO THE UNIVERSE OF 
ILLUSION, TO THE RESCUE OF OUR FALLEN 
FELLOWS,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

190
TRAPPED 
IN 
THE 
PANTHEISM 
OF 
THE 
ONE, 
JEHOVAH SATAN. IT IS BECAUSE OF THEM THAT WE 
DESCEND TO THE EXISTENTIAL PLANE OF THE 
SOUL AND LET OURSELVES SLEEP AND BE 
SEDUCED, BECAUSE IT IS THE ONLY WAY TO 
PENETRATE THE DECEPTION OF THE ONE, BUT WE 
ALWAYS WAKE UP AND GO TO THE RESCUE OF OUR 
BROTHERS AND UNTIL THE LAST ONE OF THEM IS 
RESCUED WE WILL NOT STOP FIGHTING.
THUS, COMRADES, THE GREAT BATTLE IS YET 
TO BE FOUGHT AND WE WILL FIGHT IT TO THE END, 
GIVING THE MAXIMUM SPIRITUAL AND MATERIAL 
EFFORT TO DEFEAT THE DEMONS OF JEHOVAH 
SATAN AND HIS HOSTS OF SYNARCHIC LACKEYS.
We must engrave this idea in our hearts and it is for this 
reason that our mission is to commit ourselves to the spirit 
and specifically to WAR, which is the root of this 
commitment. It is useless to believe that we can liberate 
ourselves by ourselves because that is a GREAT ILLUSION, 
IT IS A LIE, WE WILL NEVER LIBERATE OURSELVES 
ALONE, ALWAYS WITH ALL OUR CAMARADES.
If we understand this truth we will understand that the 
battle initiated by our divine ancestors, our HYPERBORNE 
DIVI- NOS has not ended and will never end. But it is 
indispensable to understand that it is a strategy of the highest 
wisdom to occupy certain political spaces and to carry out in 
them a period of HYPERBorean TIME, but that the purpose 
of it is simply to rescue the greatest number of sleeping 
viryas. Only these strategies of world domination are 
necessary to generate COLLECTIVE STRATEGIES OF 
SPIRITUAL REORIENTATION and the big ones are not 
necessary.
hyperboreal beings who carried out this mission in the world and


--- PAGE BREAK ---e 
necessary to generate COLLECTIVE STRATEGIES OF 
SPIRITUAL REORIENTATION and the big ones are not 
necessary.
hyperboreal beings who carried out this mission in the world and


--- PAGE BREAK ---

191
The goal, comrades, is the liberation of the spirit and not the 
spiritualization of matter, because that does not correspond to 
us. THE GOAL, COMRADES, IS THE LIBERATION OF 
THE SPIRIT AND NOT THE SPIRITUALIZATION OF 
MATTER, BECAUSE THAT DOES NOT CORRESPOND 
TO US.
FUNCTION TO ACHIEVE THIS GOAL. Our essential 
function is to strip the hyperborean masses of eternal spiritual 
blood, of the illusion of reality, and in this we pledge our 
honor and our courage, even to the last drop of our blood. The 
world and the illusion that hovers in it, is nothing but the 
enemy disguised as matter, because HE IS A NECESSARY 
PARTICIPANT 
OF 
THE 
ENGAGEMENT, 
A 
FUNDAMENTAL PART OF REALITY.
If we spiritually experience the truth that is hidden behind 
this cloak of lies, if we grasp with our intellectual knowledge 
the transcendent ideas, we will understand that this finite 
demiurgic space of creation is the enemy's terrain where we 
will simply unleash the GREAT FINAL BATTLE. This is how 
we must proceed, penetrate the world as NINJAS in the night 
and perform what honor requires of us, that is to fight, rescue 
and retreat to our trench, which protects us from the enemies.
Therefore, each comrade in his POSITION, IN HIS 
CLOSED AND WALLED CASTRUM will know when to 
act, each one in his CASTRUM must prepare himself for 
when the HYPERBOLIC KAIROS rushes in and the final 
battle begins. In the meantime we must WAIT LIKE 
WARRIORS IN THE NIGHT, BEHIND THE SHADOWS, 
WITH WEAPONS IN HANDS, FOR THE UNEXPECTED 
ALWAYS APPROACHES US AND THE HAND OF 
DEMIURGO IS ALWAYS SORPRESSIVE. THEREFORE, 
COMRADES, 
YOU 
MUST 
BE 
ALERT 
AND 
FOREWARNED, 
BUT 
WE 
MUST 
ALWAYS 
BE 
UNNOTICED BECAUSE OF THE UNEXPECTED, AND 
DEMIURGO'S HAND IS ALWAYS SURPRISIVE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---SSIVE. THEREFORE, 
COMRADES, 
YOU 
MUST 
BE 
ALERT 
AND 
FOREWARNED, 
BUT 
WE 
MUST 
ALWAYS 
BE 
UNNOTICED BECAUSE OF THE UNEXPECTED, AND 
DEMIURGO'S HAND IS ALWAYS SURPRISIVE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

192
THAT IF THEY IDENTIFY US THEY WILL TRY TO 
ELIMINATE US.
WE KNOW THAT NO MATTER HOW LONELY WE 
REMAIN, NO MATTER HOW MUCH WE HAVE TO 
WAIT ETERNALLY, SOONER OR LATER KRISTOS-
LUCIFER, WITH THE FURIOUS HORDES OF ODIN, OF 
APOLLO, OF SHIVA, OF QUEZTALCOATL WILL 
RETURN TO RESCUE US AND THUS BE ABLE TO 
FIGHT THE GREAT FINAL BATTLE AGAINST THE 
HOSTS OF THE ONE AND HIS GODS OF ILLUSION.
Comrades in cause and struggle, I know that waiting for us 
means suffering the pain and misery of deception and I know 
that it hovers over us like a ghost in the night. I know that at 
certain moments it would seem that we feel lost and that our 
strength is fading, but we must understand that it is THERE 
WHERE OUR BATTLE REALLY BEATS, the one we wage 
DAY by DAY.
We must fight against our CREATED SOUL, because the 
enemy is part of it and if we are careless, if we give in to the 
seductions of Circe, he will penetrate into it trying to recover 
what he believes belongs to him and that by our will we have 
taken away from him. Now that we are masters and masters of 
ourselves, that we have isolated ourselves from the world, that 
we have fenced ourselves in and walled ourselves off from 
illusion, we must not let our guard down, our arms must be 
raised high with the RUNES IN OUR HANDS because the 
enemy is always there. WE MUST WAIT FOR THE 
UNEXPECTED AND UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS THE 
ENEMY'S CAMP AND THAT THE CHARISMA AND THE 
SIDDHAS WILL PROTECT US UNTIL THE FINAL 
TRIUMPH, UNTIL THE RETURN TO THE ORIGINAL 
HOMELAND WHERE WE WERE ALWAYS ETERNAL 
GODS, SPIRITS OF THE UNKNOWABLE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---HE CHARISMA AND THE 
SIDDHAS WILL PROTECT US UNTIL THE FINAL 
TRIUMPH, UNTIL THE RETURN TO THE ORIGINAL 
HOMELAND WHERE WE WERE ALWAYS ETERNAL 
GODS, SPIRITS OF THE UNKNOWABLE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

193
24. HYPERBOREAN CULTURE AS AN OPPOSITION 
TO SYNARCHIC COUNTERCULTURE
Culture is a fundamental tool for the development of 
civilization and is the only real possibility that man has for his 
evolution, both psychically and spiritually. From this 
perspective, culture is an educator of the instincts and a 
conductor of human energies toward a higher consciousness; 
it provides the possibilities of directing the libido to higher 
ends. In the history of mankind, which actually begins when 
man becomes a cultural being, man, by becoming a bearer of 
culture, began a process of learning and knowledge that has 
never stopped. The product of this movement was reflected in 
a complex number of cultural structures that were distributed 
in three great cultural areas: POLITICS, SCIENCE AND 
RELIGION.
Undoubtedly, cultural axiology has its origin in the human 
soul; we understand that a priori, in human ontology, in its 
being, in its ontological unconscious, there are found in 
potential form a series of images that were learned and 
represented by the consciousness, and a posteriori concretized 
in reality as type forms or cultural models. It is not relevant to 
discuss whether culture is in fact the product of sensible 
experiences or whether it is purely an attribute of the human 
mind. We say this because we understand that what really 
happens is a symbiosis of both philosophical conceptions, that 
is, in the soul there are the primordial images or innate ideas, 
archetypes of all sensible things, and also the sensitive 
experience stimulating the emergence of these archetypes. For 
example: the hostility of the cold urged man to discover fire 
and to reproduce it, but man


--- PAGE BREAK ---d also the sensitive 
experience stimulating the emergence of these archetypes. For 
example: the hostility of the cold urged man to discover fire 
and to reproduce it, but man


--- PAGE BREAK ---

194
Within himself he already had these images in symbolic form. 
That is to say, in the unconscious man projected certain 
semiotic conditions such as heat, passion, pain, suffering, etc., 
which in reality were signs or archetypes that were 
condemned in a single image, that of fire.
Man always tried to discern reality, specifically Western 
man, considered nature, the world as something alien to him; 
natural reality was outside and was the object of study and 
analysis in its different forms. It was treated with total 
objectivity and was the subject of a meticulous scientific 
analysis on the part of European man, who made a distinction 
between the reality of the observing subject and the observed 
object. It is in this way that in the accidental culture 
experimental empirical science was born by the strict 
observation of phenomena, which were classified and 
quantified in different scientific branches. This was done 
taking into account that for a phenomenon to be scientifically 
classified and considered a LAW or STANDARD, it had to be 
repeated in a recurrent and exact way through time, either in 
the natural phenomenological reality or by the scientific 
verification carried out in laboratories.
We could say that in some way this method of observation 
gave rise to science and in pursuit of it man was able to 
civilize and activate his designs, both those contained in his 
soul and those of his spirit. It is at this point that we are really 
interested in analyzing in detail, because in truth we must 
understand that since the demiurge and its gods of the material 
order projected this created universe and shaped an Edenic 
man, a degraded copy of the eternal spirit, the ADAN-
KADMON, they failed in the attempt to make this archetypal 
man evolve. That is why they somehow and with certain 
devices precipitated the eternal spirits into the material uni- 
verse of the One and embedded them in the material universe.
his archetypal 
man evolve. That is why they somehow and with certain 
devices precipitated the eternal spirits into the material uni- 
verse of the One and embedded them in the material universe.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

195
The archetypical man, thereby managing to PLASMAR IN 
THE ARCHETIC MEMORY OF MAN THE
SIGN OF THE ORIGIN. Undoubtedly this is a profound 
mystery that can only be understood in possession of the 
VRUNA OF ORIGIN, but we will try to make an intellectual 
or rational approach to understand this truth.
The important thing is that from the reality of the present 
and after the spirit fell into the world and mimicked matter, a 
whole series of PURE RACES MIXED WITH THE 
ANIMAL MAN AND ADDED, BY THE GENETIC 
MIXING, HYPERBORN INTELLIGENCE TO THE
EVOLVED RACES. This made possible the emergence of a 
CULTURAL MAN, AND PREVIOUSLY WE HAVE 
ANALYZED THAT THE MAN STUCK IN LIFE IS A 
CULTURAL SUBJECT, A BEING PROJECTED UNDER 
THE ACTION OF CULTURAL ARCHETYPES.
Therefore we maintain that the action of the emergence of 
the culture proper to the spiritual races generated a propitious 
field for the evolution of the created races and their 
assimilation to the races of the spirit. Culture enabled the 
golden man to assimilate himself to the spiritual man and after 
4000 or 5000 years of history to place himself intellectually or 
psychically at the side of the spiritual man. But we must 
consider and we must DIS- TINGUISH that although this 
evolved man stands next to the spiritual man coming from the 
pure races such as those of the INDOARIOUS TRUNK, for 
example the Indo-Germanic, whether Dorians, Achaeans, 
Etruscans, Latins, Franks, Germans, Goths, Saxons, Angles, 
in short, the European Indo-Aryan races, NEVER WILL 
THIS EVOLVED AND CULTURALLY MIMETIZED 
ARCHITECTURAL 
MAN 
HAVE 
THE 
SAME 
POSSIBILITY OF LIBERATING HIMSELF AS HIMSELF.
HAS THE HYPERBOREAN MAN. We hold this affirmation 
to be true.


--- PAGE BREAK ---LVED AND CULTURALLY MIMETIZED 
ARCHITECTURAL 
MAN 
HAVE 
THE 
SAME 
POSSIBILITY OF LIBERATING HIMSELF AS HIMSELF.
HAS THE HYPERBOREAN MAN. We hold this affirmation 
to be true.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

196
This is because this being evolves CULTURALLY, that is to 
say, what he really is and will be will be determined by the 
environment and the action of the cultural archetypes, because 
although the pasu has acquired consciousness and an I in his 
being there is no SPIRITUAL WILL, he only has ANIMIC 
WILL and this is not enough for LIBERATION. We must 
understand and comprehend that there is a well determined 
noological and axiological differentiation between the 
spiritual will of the virya and that of the pasu. The virya has 
by the action of his spirit his Ego affirmed in the VRIL and 
this gives him an additional energetic charge, a quantum of 
energy that allows him to resign himself to the ontological 
designs of the soul. On the other hand, the pasu, when his ego 
is affirmed in the cultural archetypes, these act directly in the 
ontology of the pasu, activating his animic designs, and this is 
strictly due to the simple reason that in the pasu his spiritual 
being does not prevail but his animal being.
The case of the spiritual man is different, he has in his 
being a TRANSCENDENT VOLITIVE SELF and this allows 
him to be beyond all the pain and suffering he must endure. 
The awakened man has the capacity to overcome the locu- 
ration of reality, the liberal counterculture sustained in an 
economic materialism and in an empirical and atheistic 
pragmatic philosophy that presents man with an aspect of life 
in which the axiology of morality and ethics is contained in 
matter. This does not stop the spiritual man, he will somehow 
unconsciously or consciously relate to the languages of the 
spirit and to the eternal hyperborean symbols embodied by the 
gods of the spirit in the different cultural areas throughout 
history.
We must therefore distinguish that there are two cultural 
antagonisms, one located in the Hyperborean linguistic 
concepts and the other in the cultural structures of the 
synarchy. Undoubtedly-
We must therefore distinguish that there are two cultural 
antagonisms, one located in the Hyperborean linguistic 
concepts and the other in the cultural structures of the 
synarchy. Undoubtedly-


--- PAGE BREAK ---istinguish that there are two cultural 
antagonisms, one located in the Hyperborean linguistic 
concepts and the other in the cultural structures of the 
synarchy. Undoubtedly-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

197
The hyperborean realities are cultural emergences coming 
from the INTELLECTUAL NOUS of the spiritual man, while 
the cultural realities of the synarchy are coming from the 
ARCHETISTIC MEMORY OR KADMIC MIND of the 
psychological man.
The reality of the world is the measure of the inner reality 
of the masses and civilization and its progressive evolution is 
determined by the values framed in its cultural structure. One 
does not need to be a genius to understand that the cultural 
contents affirmed in the ethics and philosophies of the world 
only tend to the development of ONE PSYCHOLOGICAL 
TYPE OF MAN, and the same is delineated by a 
mathematical criterion. That is to say, man today develops on 
the basis of totally pragmatic and scientific-materialistic 
principles, his ethics is condensed in the material world, his 
consciousness is determined by the OUTSIDE, and all that 
exists in his being is contained by the apparent realities of the 
phenomenal world. This criterion is undoubtedly not absolute, 
but we can affirm that it is the massive tendency that is 
gradually inclined to affirm the world of the material order as 
the absolute truth, at least here in the West. It is easy to see 
why, simply by taking a look at the psychoanalytical 
constitution of our young people who are the reality of 
tomorrow, because they will be the men who will direct world 
behavior and the destinies of humanity; we will see the 
incidence of world culture in the psychological tendencies 
structured in their consciences that determine them, in young 
people of weak wills and lacking in character and spirit. We 
can verify this reality by systematically analyzing what is in 
the youth of western man, and we do not even need to be 
psychologists or psychiatric doctors to understand and verify 
the painful reality of the youth of today. He lacks WILL, he 
has no PHYSICAL RIGOR, he has lost
n man, and we do not even need to be 
psychologists or psychiatric doctors to understand and verify 
the painful reality of the youth of today. He lacks WILL, he 
has no PHYSICAL RIGOR, he has lost


--- PAGE BREAK ---

198
INTELLECTUAL capacity and its consciousness is totally 
possessed by an emotional feeling determined by its 
INSTINCTS.
To preserve the destiny of the youth of all peoples and to 
generate in them the ethical, noological and intellectual 
aptitudes and attitudes that will orient them internally to the 
REAL and keep them away from the ILLUSORY 
REALITIES of this virtual and consumerist culture is the 
purpose of the HYPERBORN GODS AND OF THE 
AWAKENED MEN.
DESTINY LIES IN THE FUTURE WISE WARRIORS 
WHO WILL HAVE IN THEMSELVES, IN THEIR HANDS, 
THE POWER TO DEFEAT THE ENEMY AND HIS 
STRATEGIES.
That is why we recommend to the companions who will 
soon undertake the path of knowledge, of wisdom, that they 
build their strategies on certain protection techniques such as 
the MARTIAL ARTS, because this noological structure is 
perhaps one of the only ones that gives the warrior, the virya, 
a KNIGHTLY WARRIOR INTERIOR ATTITUDE.
Companion, it is important to understand this idea 
spiritually, we are in the world of war and this is the 
beginning of the final battle; we must know with all our 
intellectual understanding and our spiritual understanding that 
this is a WAR. The virya who does not have this reality in 
mind, who does not understand that it is a combat terrain and 
that he must be prepared and trained for combat, struggle and 
victory or defeat, will never be able to LIBERATE himself, 
because this is the only ABSOLUTE truth and everything else 
is a lie and illusion.
We affirm this truth for one reason only, because we know 
it, because we have experienced it and because history proves 
it, and it is in history that we find the conceptual guidelines.


--- PAGE BREAK ---this truth for one reason only, because we know 
it, because we have experienced it and because history proves 
it, and it is in history that we find the conceptual guidelines.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

199
The same is true of the war between two sides: THE 
HYPERBORN ASES, THEIR HERO RACES. If we analyze 
it, we can verify that it is a continuous war between two sides: 
THE HYPERBorean ASES, THEIR HERO BREEDS, THEIR 
HERO BREEDS, THEIR HERO BREEDS and THEIR 
HEROES.
And of WISE WARRIORS; on the other side are all the 
followers of THE UNIVERSAL SYNARCHY OF THE ONE 
AND HIS SERILE LACAYS.
Therefore, if we do not understand this idea of the final 
war, of the combat that has moved from the heavens to the 
infernos and that today is situated in all the worlds of creation, 
it is because we have yet to AWAKEN.
So it is, comrades in struggle and comrades in cause, if we 
do not overcome the fear and dread of our souls we will never 
reach the eternal symbols and absolute truths and the reason 
for this is that we are still PRISONED BY THE 
SERPENTINE POISON AND CANINE RABIES. That is 
why
We are ALMOST NOTHING, ephemeral beings trapped in a 
world of images and meanings, forms and sounds confused in 
this endless serpentine labyrinth of axiological, ethical and 
aesthetic senses without being able to escape or get out of this 
ontological nothingness, but on the other hand, we are 
ALMOST ETERNAL, because we have a real possibility of 
eternity and we observe it in the creative capacity of man in 
his cultural activity, which allowed him to manage the natural 
forces and with it to modify reality. Those energies emanating 
from the interior of man, if they are conducted with 
consciousness and in strategic HYPERBORNE science, 
WILL ALLOW US TO DESTROY AND ELIMINATE THE 
PERVERSE POISONS AND FREE US FROM THE DARK 
AND LABYANTIC CAVES OF THE TERRIBLE POWER 
OF MAYA.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---E science, 
WILL ALLOW US TO DESTROY AND ELIMINATE THE 
PERVERSE POISONS AND FREE US FROM THE DARK 
AND LABYANTIC CAVES OF THE TERRIBLE POWER 
OF MAYA.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

201
25. HYPERBOREAN SOLAR ETHICS AND LUNAR 
ETHICS OF THE SYNARCHY. ETHOS AND PATHOS 
IN 
HYPERBOREAN 
SOLAR 
AND 
DEMIURGIC 
LUNAR ETHICS
We must consider the existence of two well-defined 
philosophical ethics: the first represented by the GUEERAL, 
ARISTOCRATIC ATTITUDE, the second by the religious, 
priestly attitude. One constitutes the virile pole, the other the 
feminine pole. The first has as symbolism the SUN, its con- 
signas are the triumph, the victory, everything that 
differentiates man through his will and that elevates him 
above the temporal and the material. It affirms the ideal of a 
spirituality sustained in a disciplined order, where individuals 
and society as a whole participate in ethical premises that aim 
at a simultaneous realization of the temporal and the spiritual. 
It is built on the idealization of the noble, the simple and the 
perpetual, having as social goals the realization of social 
justice, political sovereignty, and economic independence, but 
all contained in a framework of principles and maxims where 
ETHOS merges into a heroic warrior and transcendent 
mysticism.
When we refer to ETHOS we are indicating a quality that 
is inherent to the inner being, to the inner world of man that 
touches his spirit and that moves through the psyche in his 
whole sensitive soul system. ETHOS is the most transcendent 
aspect of the SELF, because ethos is a strategic orientation 
from the INSIDE to the OUTSIDE.
Mainly, its ethos emphasizes the individual will, the 
values in which man builds and fulfills himself. Having him 
as the center and nucleus through which the whole of society 
participates and from which it is possible to realize his own 
identity.


--- PAGE BREAK ---builds and fulfills himself. Having him 
as the center and nucleus through which the whole of society 
participates and from which it is possible to realize his own 
identity.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

202
the impossible. The aim of these solar ethics is the realization 
of man in all his conditions, specifically the transcendence of 
his humanity and spirituality, enthroning him in a divine order 
through his own action.
These solar ethics have as their ideological standard in 
their social or collective PATHOS (pathos is the reality of 
man that represents the exterior of himself, his image, that 
which is OUTSIDE. We must understand that pathos is 
always sustained in illusion, in the phenomenological reality 
of the external world) the IMPERIUM and the NATION, 
THE BLOOD AND THE RACE; the enthronement of the 
individual in a world where man transcends the human and 
perpetuates himself in the superman, in a man who can endure 
the unbearable, where he constantly surpasses himself by 
effort, sacrifice and will. The superman of these ethics is 
identified with the solar, because like the sun this man has his 
own LIGHT, he illuminates himself and illuminates others. 
Moreover, we can affirm that the true hyperborean solar ethics 
had as a symbol the BLACK SUN and it is interesting to note 
that this refers to the sun of the unknowable, of the absolute 
god that is beyond the ordering gods of the material universe, 
to which the lunar ethics of the priestly religions worship.
On the other hand, the ideal of lunar ethics is built on a 
mental and psychological condition, where the ETHOS of 
man imperiously considers himself a creature created and 
limited by his creator, sustaining himself by the action and 
grace of his divinity to which he pays homage and devotion. 
Just as the MOON has no light of its own and owes its 
brightness to other stars, in the same way man, affirmed in the 
lunar ethics, his light is propitiated by his divinities and his 
being participates in a PATHOS, in a PASSION where 
humiliation, equality, weakness and sentimentality are part of 
a PATHOS, a PASSION where humiliation, equality, 
weakness and sentimentality are part of his being.
n a PATHOS, in a PASSION where 
humiliation, equality, weakness and sentimentality are part of 
a PATHOS, a PASSION where humiliation, equality, 
weakness and sentimentality are part of his being.


--- PAGE BREAK ---SION where 
humiliation, equality, weakness and sentimentality are part of 
a PATHOS, a PASSION where humiliation, equality, 
weakness and sentimentality are part of his being.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

203
ned in the cult of the priestly and religious. In lunar societies 
man himself is of no interest because he is just another 
participant in the supreme and collective value of these ethics 
where the THEOCRATIC, the cult, the ritual, the priestly is 
above individual truth.
If we look at the ancient world and especially at the 
magnificent Greco-Latin civilization, we will observe that its 
philosophy warned, in the mouths of philosophers such as 
SOCRATES, PLATO and ARISTOTHELES, to name the 
most recognized ones, that in the ETHOS is found the truth of 
being and that in its inner experience the GATES OF 
URANUS, the mysteries of eternal wisdom, can be opened. 
On the other hand, they affirmed that in the PATHOS are 
found the masks of the collective dramatic expressions which 
submerge the being in the reality and the external world of 
MAYA.
Undoubtedly the ETHOS is, psychologically speaking, the 
path that the "I" must follow on the path of the Hyperborean 
Initiate and is located internally in the strategy of the FENCE. 
As we studied in previous points, the inner hedge is analogous 
to the inner ETHOS and gnoseologically this ETHOS is the 
WISDOM OR THE HYPERBorean KNOWLEDGE.
BOREAU, which allows us to recognize what the 
SHIVAISTS OF INDIA called the KULA and the inner 
AKULA. From now on, we understand by the hyperborean 
analogical logic that the KULA are undoubtedly the 
labyrinthine paths of the designated soul, on the one hand 
represented in the ontological designs, and the AKULA is the 
call of the inner spirit recalling the path of the VRUNES AND 
THE VRIL.
If we go deep into the world of Buddhism or the paths of 
the oriental doctrines, we would discover that they contain 
hundreds of dogmas that we can study from a Hyperborean 
perspective, but we will do this in another point. We will only 
indicate that NIRVANA IS ANALOGICAL.
we would discover that they contain 
hundreds of dogmas that we can study from a Hyperborean 
perspective, but we will do this in another point. We will only 
indicate that NIRVANA IS ANALOGICAL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---hat they contain 
hundreds of dogmas that we can study from a Hyperborean 
perspective, but we will do this in another point. We will only 
indicate that NIRVANA IS ANALOGICAL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

204
TO CERTAIN HYPERBOREAN HEAVENS AND THAT 
THE SAMAD- DHI IS SIMILAR TO THE IMMANENT 
CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE AWAKENED VIRYA.
That is why the kula and akula, which are the paths to 
follow to reach or arrive at samadhi, are analogous to the 
Pythagorean Tretarkis, that is, SEARCH, CHOICE AND 
ELECTION OF THE SELF IN THE KNOWLEDGES OF 
THE SELF-FREEDOM OF THE SPIRIT.
Therefore, and continuing with the Greek perspective, the 
ETHOS is analogous to the VRIL and the knowledge that in 
our interior we possess in the conscience and in the I, that is to 
say that it is a participant of our noological being that 
constantly and through the hyperborean semiotics indicates us 
the sense to follow. Undoubtedly, some will consider that the 
ETHOS is the SOUL and that, according to the Ethics of 
Morals, it represents the WILL, the INTELLECT AND the 
EMOTIONAL.
And we are not denying that it is so, what we are doing is a 
gnoseological clarification, because although we can take 
ETHOS in such a normative way, we must be clear in 
discerning that it is the most elevated and sublime part of the 
soul that is enthroned to the EGO and the SPIRIT. It is 
necessary to distinguish this definition in order to deeply 
understand this concept, otherwise we will fall into error. The 
ethos itself is the soul, but ISOLATED from the macrocosm. 
In the Greek world Plato maintained that man needed to 
dialogue with his ETHOS, because it would show him the 
way to the IDEAS, to the INTELLECTUAL NOUS, the only 
means 
to 
access 
the 
ETERNAL, 
ABSOLUTE, 
INCOGNOSCIBLE worlds.
On the other hand, these great Greek philosophers studied 
the PATHOS as the DRAMATIC referencing of ETHOS 
when it was externalized through the world of feelings. These 
Greek philosophers, in their infinite wisdom, understood the 
PATHOS as a DRAMATIC reference to ETHOS when it was 
externalized through the world of feelings.
through the world of feelings. These 
Greek philosophers, in their infinite wisdom, understood the 
PATHOS as a DRAMATIC reference to ETHOS when it was 
externalized through the world of feelings.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

205
They said and explained that the PATHOS represented the 
DRAMATIC EXPRE- SION of the archetypes structured in 
the ontological designs of the animal soul of the psyche of the 
pasu. That is why Plato affirmed that the man who was 
dominated by his PATHOS lost his ETHOS and fell into the 
psychological web of the ego, being trapped by the archetypal 
CHARACTERS of the designated soul. From a Hyperborean 
perspective the PATHOS is the SOUL when it dissolved the 
ETHOS, 
in 
the 
ANIMIC 
PSYCHOLOGICAL 
DESIGNATIONS 
imposed 
by 
the 
demiurge 
in 
the 
CREATED SOUL.
IN SHORT, THE AWAKENED VIRYA ANIMATES 
HIS ETHOS AND THROUGH IT IS REORIENTED TO 
HYPERBOREAN KNOWLEDGE, WHILE THE PASU 
ACTIVATES AND ANIMATES HIS PATHOS, WHICH 
REGISTERS 
HIM 
TO 
THE 
MACROCOSMIC 
ARCHETYPES OF THE ONE.
It is important to understand that the ETHOS from the 
HYPERBorean 
perspective 
is 
APOLYNEO-SOLAR, 
entrenched in a heroic and warrior ethic; from this definition 
of the solar ethos we affirm that this concept refers to the 
VIRILE and MASCULINE, as the KNIGHTLY path that 
leads us to the affirmation of the SELF and of the being in a 
HEROIC INDIVIDUATION.
This definition must be understood psychologically and 
philosophically as meaning that the affirmation of the EGO in 
the soul, in the psyche, is made specifically on the ANIMUS, 
THAT IS TO SAY ON THE MASCULINE ASPECT as far 
as man is concerned and on the FEMININE ASPECT AS 
FAR AS WOMAN IS CONCLAIMED. It is interesting to 
note this philosophical reality, because from the religious and 
priestly perspective, the lunar ethos affirms in man his being, 
in his FEMININE psychic reality, thus bringing about the 
ABSOLUTE LOSS OF VIRILITY AND MASCULINITY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---gious and 
priestly perspective, the lunar ethos affirms in man his being, 
in his FEMININE psychic reality, thus bringing about the 
ABSOLUTE LOSS OF VIRILITY AND MASCULINITY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

206
Undoubtedly, in the hyperborean virya the affirmation of 
his masculinity is born of the need to strengthen himself 
spiritually in the world of pain and to be hard and firm in the 
face of it, otherwise it will bend us, because reality is hard and 
the demiurge and his plan do not contemplate mercy. 
Therefore, the man who wants to assert himself must do so in 
his virility and in his inner strength, which leads him directly 
to the path of INDIVIDUATION.
In spite of the difficulties that constantly and recurrently 
appear to us in reality, man must imperatively resort to one 
condition, which is the only real possibility of escaping from 
the problems that present themselves to him, and that 
condition is his own WILL.
Undoubtedly, when we refer to the will, we are basing 
ourselves on a concept that differs from that usually used by 
psychology or psychiatry. These sciences specifically define 
will as an act of will or power that is directly related to the 
neurological or physiological, or in any case to the strictly 
psychological. Only the ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY OF 
C. G. JUNG defines the will as a quality of being of a 
different nature, relating it as an ontological principle that has 
its 
origin 
in 
two 
a 
priori 
conditions: 
one 
of 
a 
neurophysiological order that is the energy of the soul or of 
the psyche and another principle that is of a noological order, 
that is, metaphysical, which is related to the divine. When we 
explain from the HYPERBorean sense we are referring 
specifically to the second order, taking JUNG's definition; that 
is to say, to the transcendent reality of the will in the 
awakened man. It is important to perform an act of higher 
thought to be able to understand and comprehend this 
VOLITIVE principle, because unfortunately from the formal 
logic of the common man it is impossible to define this 
transcendental idea.
gher 
thought to be able to understand and comprehend this 
VOLITIVE principle, because unfortunately from the formal 
logic of the common man it is impossible to define this 
transcendental idea.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

207
Therefore, when we refer to the WILL of the 
AWAKENED VIRYA, we are indicating a psycho-mental 
condition that comes not from the soul but from the spirit, and 
we understand it as an energy that comes from the SELF and 
its relationship with the ETERNAL.
It is important to explain this definition well because it is 
necessary to clearly define the concepts, since understanding 
and comprehension are given to the consciousness and the self 
by the intellect. In short, in every intellective ontological act, 
wisdom is given to the consciousness by intellectual or 
intuitive apprehension and the axiological capacity, the value 
of that comprehensive act is inexorably determined by the 
WILL of the I in the consciousness.
It follows that we can define that the truth of a 
COGNOSCITIVE act is determined by two essential motives; 
first, by the WILL and second, by the magnitude of the 
CONSCIOUS SELF.
THE WILL is the VRIL, the NOOLOGICAL energy of 
the AWAKENED VIRYA.
THE CONSCIOUS SELF is the spiritual magnitude and 
the ontological, gnoseological and noological power that the 
virya has summed up and realized in himself.
Given these two guidelines in the warrior, we can affirm 
that ILLUMINATION AND AWAKENING take place in 
him, leading to NOOLOGICAL TRANSMUTATION in which 
the human being is transmuted internally, acquiring a 
diamond body of divine and eternal hardness.
ETHOS HAS MERGED INTO VRIL AND THE VIRYA 
HAS 
TRANSMUTED 
INTO 
SIDDHA, 
INTO 
A 
HYPERBOREAN DIVINE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---g a 
diamond body of divine and eternal hardness.
ETHOS HAS MERGED INTO VRIL AND THE VIRYA 
HAS 
TRANSMUTED 
INTO 
SIDDHA, 
INTO 
A 
HYPERBOREAN DIVINE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
26. SYNTHESIS EXTRACTED FROM THE PHYSICS 
TREATISE HIPERBÓREA
The work of the demiurge, that is to say, his material 
creation, his creative order is an archetypal projection 
TEMPORAL SPACE CONSTITUTED BY AN ENER-
GETHIC QUANTUM OF ATOMS ORDERED IN FORM 
AND 
CONTENTS, 
ARCHETICALLY 
DESIGNED 
ACCORDING TO THE PLAN OF THE DEMIURGE AND 
THE GODS TRAITORS TO THE ETERNAL SPIRIT.
In the order, matter is form and energy or, in scientific 
rigor, we will say that it is ELECTRO- MAGNETIC energy 
PLASMED IN ARCHETIC MATRIXES THAT GIVE IT 
ONTOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE THAT MATERIALIZES IN 
THE CONCRETE AND ABSTRACT ENTITIES OF 
CREATION.
The demiurge projects this energy or vajra, or VRIL, by 
extracting it from the eternal worlds, transforming it into 
atomic energy (we call it atomic energy because its structure 
is composed of atoms that are the component particles of the 
molecular nuclei, which compose the cells of all tissues) 
which is constituted in matter. This is in essence perishable, 
corruptible, it degrades but paradoxically has an eternal 
essence. Undoubtedly, something happened so that the 
essence of the incorruptible substance of the eternal, the 
VRIL, has been projected into the creative order of the 
demiurge and has degraded, participating in this illusory and 
demonic creation.
This mystery, which is impossible to comprehend with 
formal human logic, is only comprehensible to awakened men 
who have a certain superior discernment, is in reality what 
allows matter and life to be what they are.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ehend with 
formal human logic, is only comprehensible to awakened men 
who have a certain superior discernment, is in reality what 
allows matter and life to be what they are.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

210
The One and the gods of the universe order from the finest 
particle to the last portion of matter; in this creative 
imagination he establishes an order that delineates the whole 
of the created universe in a series of laws that are rigorously 
fulfilled. In these laws, the macrocosmic archetypes are 
established as the computers of the material world, governing 
all the physical and chemical mechanisms of matter, that is to 
say that matter is confined and conformed on the basis of 
these matrices that give GNOSEOLOGICAL AND ONTO- 
LOGICAL order to substances.
We can affirm that the incorruptible energy substrate that 
the demiurge extracts from the ABSOLUTE AND ETERNAL 
worlds 
is 
archetypically 
molded 
into 
THREE 
ARCHETYPICAL 
PRINCIPLES: 
THE 
FIRST, 
GNOSEOLOGICAL, THE SECOND ONTOLOGICAL AND 
THE THIRD AXIOLOGICAL.
CO, which trigger all this metaphysical engineering work.
The first principle is contained in an archetypal science 
whose matrix generates matter, which is ordered by the 
demiurge. In actual Physics it is translated that this matter is 
what constitutes the whole, in reality the universe is 
constituted by PLASMA or PROTOPLASMATIC matter; in 
HYPERBORNE PHYSICS the Universe is plasma structured 
in different chemical components, this plasma is at first in a 
gaseous state condensing into matter according to the 
UNIFIED ARCHETYPICAL FIELDS or of the force that 
affects it. We understand that these fields are forces, but in 
reality they are archetypes that act as physical laws, 
generating condensed matter from it. The stars, the sun, the 
planets, all matter is made up of PROTOPLASMATIC 
MATTER OR PLASMA, THE SAME AS THE
SOUL. In this way we must understand why the soul is a 
vehicle that can move through the ten dimensions.
, the 
planets, all matter is made up of PROTOPLASMATIC 
MATTER OR PLASMA, THE SAME AS THE
SOUL. In this way we must understand why the soul is a 
vehicle that can move through the ten dimensions.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

211
This is because the plasma is the matter of the soul and the 
VRIL is the matter of the spirit. It is important to perform an 
act of conscious imagination from the "I" to understand this 
mystery noologically, because there is a physical relationship 
between the microcosm and the macrocosm and in the laws 
that govern them, which is why psychologically in our interior 
also our soul centers or cha- kras are subordinated to the same 
laws of the universe. The energy centers or vortices of the 
human soul are actually similar to the stars, which are 
condensed plasma. In this way the physical body is condensed 
matter or plasma, but we must consider that the essential 
difference between plasma or nuclear matter and human 
matter is that onto- logically the human soul contains in the 
pure races an essential component incorporated into the 
plasma and that component, which is not contained in the 
other forms or contents of the creation of the One, is the 
VRIL, the spirit, the ANTIMATERIA of protoplasmic matter, 
which is translated in the world into HYPERBORNE 
CONSCIOUSNESS.
The warrior, in all his power, has the capacity to break 
with the axiological limits of the soul, de-structuring his being 
from the physical laws and thereby acquiring the capabilities 
inherent to the powers of the spirit with which he has the 
wisdom and knowledge to transform himself into MUJIN, 
into a LIBERATED SIDDHA.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---pabilities 
inherent to the powers of the spirit with which he has the 
wisdom and knowledge to transform himself into MUJIN, 
into a LIBERATED SIDDHA.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

213
27. ANALYSIS OF PHYSICS FROM THE 
HYPERBOREAN GNOSIS 
In the theory of UNIFIED FIELDS it is stated that what 
allows the universe not to collapse on itself is the action of 
four forces which in question would be: the GRAVITATIVE, 
the ELECTROMAGNETIC, the STRONG INTERACTION 
and finally the WEAK INTERACTION.
These forces are interesting because in the end they are the 
ones that give PHYSICAL CONSISTENCY TO MATTER.
Previously we analyzed the entity one of creation, which is 
the emanation of matter from the eternal and the physical 
condemnation of the same in certain cosmogonic laws. We 
consider it as an alteration of the cosmocrator gods, who with 
an archetypal science molded the ETERNAL VRIL OR 
VAJRA CREATING FROM IT.
MATTER. This moment can be defined as the emanation of 
seven cosmogonic ontological principles, which were forces 
emanating from the ABSOLUTE and which endowed the 
universe with material and spiritual meaning.
We can define each creationist moment as CAM- POS, 
this term is actually the one used by academic physical 
science and we will also refer to it in this development; 
therefore we will name these principles in this way:
LIGHT FIELDS ACOUSTIC 
FIELDS ATOMIC FIELDS 
ELECTRIC FIELDS 
MAGNETIC FIELDS
ARCHETYPAL MORPHOLOGICAL FIELDS 
BIOLOGICAL OR ENTELECHIAL FIELDS
IT IS IMPERATIVE TO UNDERSTAND THAT THESE 
CHANGES ARE


--- PAGE BREAK ---FIELDS ATOMIC FIELDS 
ELECTRIC FIELDS 
MAGNETIC FIELDS
ARCHETYPAL MORPHOLOGICAL FIELDS 
BIOLOGICAL OR ENTELECHIAL FIELDS
IT IS IMPERATIVE TO UNDERSTAND THAT THESE 
CHANGES ARE


--- PAGE BREAK ---

214
THE THREE-DIMENSIONAL SPACE-TIMES OF THE 
ONE ARE THE PLACES WHERE THERE IS MATTER, IN 
THE THREE-DIMENSIONAL SPACE-TIMES OF THE 
ONE.
But we must understand that in physics there are errors of 
conception, starting from Newton's theory of gravity, because 
although in the three-dimensional field this is real, it is 
inapplicable outside of it, since for gravitational fields or 
electromagnetic fields to exist, the existence of matter is 
imperative and, as we know, the Universe is made up of only 
four percent of atomic matter contained in galaxies, the rest, 
the interstellar spaces, is empty or, as as astronomical science 
calls it, empty, As we know, the Universe is made up of only 
four percent atomic matter contained in the galaxies, the rest, 
the interstellar spaces, is empty or, as current astronomical 
science calls it, black matter (ALSO NAMED ETHERIC 
FIELDS OR ETHER) or dark energy. That is why this 
principle of astronomical physics, that the universe is 
sustained on the basis of these PHYSICAL FIELDS IS 
SIMPLY ACADEMIC ILLUSION.
In reality, the UNIVERSE is sustained because it is 
composed of a single atomic component which is called by 
physics HYPERBOREA ATOMO GRAVIS AND ALL 
UNIVERSAL MATTER IS CONFORMED BY IT, BE IT 
ATOMIC MATTER AS WELL AS BLACK MATTER, ALL 
IS ONE AND THE ELSE IS SIMPLY THE ACTION OF 
THE ARCHETYPES THAT, TOGETHER WITH A 
SYSTEM CREATED BY THE BROUGHT SIDDHAS 
CALLED THE KALACHAKRA KEY, GENERATE BY 
THE ACTION OF THIS SCIENCE THE SPATIO-
TEMPORAL REALITY AND DIVERSITY, WHICH IS 
NOTHING MORE AND NOTHING LESS THAN THE 
ARCHETYPAL PROJECTION OF THE ONE IN ITS OWN 
MATERIAL MANIFESTATION.
Thus, it is important to understand that matter is the 
archetypal projection of the mind of the One and of the gods 
THAN THE 
ARCHETYPAL PROJECTION OF THE ONE IN ITS OWN 
MATERIAL MANIFESTATION.
Thus, it is important to understand that matter is the 
archetypal projection of the mind of the One and of the gods 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

215
brought forth and that this is possible because by some 
MYSTERY OF THE


--- PAGE BREAK ---atter is the 
archetypal projection of the mind of the One and of the gods 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

215
brought forth and that this is possible because by some 
MYSTERY OF THE


--- PAGE BREAK ---

216
INCOGNOSCIBLE, from the UNBELIEVABLE LIGHT OF 
THE
The ETERNAL VERB, the ABSOLUTE, allows the bringer 
gods the cosmogenesis, the sustaining of the demonic reality, 
the development of the evolutionary plan, and this is the 
greatest mystery which can only be understood by the 
unlearned warriors.
From the eternal the gods extracted the VRIL, the 
antimate- ria VAJRA that gives origin to the gravis atoms and 
these to the luminous fields that generate the radiation and to 
the acoustic fields that structure together with the luminous 
ones the ATOMIC MATTER. It is the critical union of these 
two principles, of these two emanations of the uncreated light 
that 
structures 
the 
ATOMIC 
FIELD, 
ESSENTIAL 
PRINCIPLE 
FOR 
THE 
DEVELOPMENT 
OF 
THE 
UNIVERSE OF THE ONE. But it must-
We must consider that the atomic matter (archetypal plasma) 
in whose orders are contained the components or contents 
emanating from the BIG BANG, THAT IS TO SAY THE 
STELLAR MATTER structured in thousands of suns, stars 
and systems, is inert matter and it is here where the second 
intention of THE ONE and the KALACHAKRA key acts, 
endowing matter with two fields: one electric, which triggers 
the complex atomic world, incorporating the electron to the 
atoms and the second principle as a consequence of this is the 
magnetic 
field, 
which 
will 
provide 
EVOLUTION 
MOVEMENT TO CREATION, THAT IS TO SAY 
ANIMATED LIFE.
In this way it is that after the first creationist triad, the 
traitor gods intervene in the creation, carrying out the second 
stage of the devil's plan.
GICO. It is at this moment that, GIVING MATTER 
EVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT, the intelligence of THE 
ONE and of the TRAITOR GODS INTERVENE.
MODULATING MATTER, creating a science for this purpose.


--- PAGE BREAK ---this moment that, GIVING MATTER 
EVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT, the intelligence of THE 
ONE and of the TRAITOR GODS INTERVENE.
MODULATING MATTER, creating a science for this purpose.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

217
called MORPHOLOGICAL ARCHETIC SCIENCE,
with which they shape and give ontological form to reality, 
emerging in a certain order defined by an axiological 
eschatology, the ONTOS and its systems. In this SECOND 
CREATIONIST 
TRIAD 
THE 
SPACE-TIME, 
THE 
BIOLOGICAL LIFE AND THE EVOLUTION OF SPECIES 
ARISE, ARRIVING THE SAME TO ITS MAXIMUM 
EXPRE- SION WITH THE EMERGENCE OF THE 
PRIMATE, and it is in this
It is at this moment of evolution that the great betrayal of the 
gods over the pure spirits is consummated, and it is here that 
the great deception is gestated and the THIRD TRIAD is 
generated, the emanation of the TRAP OF MAYA, WHICH 
CAUSES THE FALL OF THE ETERNAL SPIRITS INTO 
THE UNIVERSE OF THE ONE. THE CONSEQUENCE OF 
THIS IS THE FALL OF THE ETERNAL RACES INTO THE 
MATERIAL ORDER, CAUSING THE ENTELECHIAL 
EVOLUTIONS OF THE ANIMAL MAN.


--- PAGE BREAK ---SPIRITS INTO 
THE UNIVERSE OF THE ONE. THE CONSEQUENCE OF 
THIS IS THE FALL OF THE ETERNAL RACES INTO THE 
MATERIAL ORDER, CAUSING THE ENTELECHIAL 
EVOLUTIONS OF THE ANIMAL MAN.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

218
28. EMANATIONS 
OF 
THE 
ARCHETYPAL 
MORPHOLOGICAL 
FIELD 
OR 
ARCHETYPAL 
MORPHOLOGICAL TELEOLOGY OF THE ONE
It is important to understand the MOTHER ARCHETYPE 
which is the entity one of creation, the root that sustains the 
matter and orders it ATOMICALLY. This matrix is the one 
that embodies the ETERNAL VAJRA in the ARCHETIC 
ATOMS.
which are those that, beyond the particles and sub-particles 
that are scientifically divided, compose the MATH itself.
This 
process, 
where 
the 
ONE 
ENTITY 
OR 
ARCHETISTIC MIND OF THE DEMIURG, which we call 
gnoseological archetypal space, molds the ETERNAL 
VAJRA INTO ATOMIC MATTER GRAVIS, is preceded by 
a second creative act called DUO ENTE, which is the ONTO- 
LOGICAL SPACE WHERE THE DEMIURG GIVES 
ONTOLOGICAL CONSTITUTION TO MATTER UNDER 
THE LAW OF FOUR FORMING ARCHETYPES OF ALL
THE ONTIC MATRIXES, these base archetypes are the 
archetypes FIRE, AIR, WATER AND EARTH.
In reality, these macrocosmic archetypes, formers of the 
ontic matrices of all the entities of creation, are related from 
an indiscernible point or from an astral plane in a symmetrical 
way with each of these four forces previously mentioned; but 
I do not intend to develop this point because it is a matter of 
study in the TREATISE OF HYPERBORNE PHYSICS.
It is fundamental to understand that these archetypes are 
the primordial images, genesis of everything created, and if 
the warrior or the comrade appeals to the gnoseological vision 
of his spirit, he will understand through the transcendent 
hyperborean understanding.


--- PAGE BREAK ---erything created, and if 
the warrior or the comrade appeals to the gnoseological vision 
of his spirit, he will understand through the transcendent 
hyperborean understanding.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

219
We can practically associate each of these archetypes with all 
the sacred symbols or, in other words, with the main 
archetypes that form creation. For example, in the 
MICROCOSMOS or human body the fire archetype is 
animating all the processes of the blood and nerves, the water 
archetype with the gastric and lymphatic processes, the air 
archetype with the pulmonary ones and the earth archetype 
with the osseous and muscular ones. That is why we call these 
macrocosmic base archetypes the FOUR ELEMENTS, 
because these archetypes, ontological matrices, are the ones 
that 
project 
matter 
into 
TWELVE 
ONTOLOGICAL 
ARCHETIC 
PRINCIPLES 
THAT 
CONTAIN 
IN 
THEMSELVES THE ELEMENTS THAT GIVE ORIGIN TO 
LIFE, THAT IS TO SAY THAT THESE TWELVE 
ARCHETYPES 
CONTAIN 
THE 
ONTOLOGICAL 
MATRIXES OF ALL ENTITIES, OF ALL THAT IS 
CREATED.
We can assign to these archetypes the creative property by 
which the demiurge gives form to all the elements derived 
from these base archetypes, i.e. constitutes the material order 
or the worlds and their biological contents that originate LIFE.
Progressively to this second creationist principle called 
DUO entity emerges the third principle that we assign the 
name of TRINE ENTITY, which is the most important, 
generated from the TWELVE ARCHETYPES THAT 
BIFURCATE INTO TWENTY-FOUR ARCHETYPES, that
have in themselves the SUPRAFINALITIES AND IN 
ADDITION THE AXIOLOGICAL DESIGNATIONS.
In this way we have the four macrocosmic archetypes that 
are AIR, FIRE, WATER AND EARTH, which in turn 
multiply into eight archetypes that make up the DUO entity of 
creation, where we find the UNI-VERSAL ROOT archetypes, 
of which we can name, for example: the


--- PAGE BREAK ---H, which in turn 
multiply into eight archetypes that make up the DUO entity of 
creation, where we find the UNI-VERSAL ROOT archetypes, 
of which we can name, for example: the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
archetype of the MOTHER, of the FATHER and of the SON, 
the archetype KING and QUEEN, the archetype WARRIOR 
and PRIEST, the archetype MAGICIAN; all these archetypes 
are the main ones and are the ones that give ontological sense 
to the soul in matter. These eight archetypes are undoubtedly 
the ontic roots where the ontological MATRIXES of the 
human soul are built, the remaining archetypes are derived 
from these eight main ones, which actually vary structurally in 
their ontic conformation. From a synarchic and demiurgic 
esoteric perspective, in the theories of the Kabbalah and the 
ZOHAR, the constitution of the illusory reality of the One is 
detailed, but we must deeply understand that to study the 
Hebrew Kabbalah, to internalize this esoteric doctrine, is to 
awaken a series of sacred designs and symbols that possess 
certain ARCHETYPICAL BIAS that are not advisable for the 
HIERBORIC WOMAN. That is why, although we physically 
consider the morphological structure of creation, in reality the 
WARRIORS OF THE SPIRIT SHOULD ONLY BE 
INTERESTED 
IN 
SUCH 
UNDERSTANDING 
FOR 
STRATEGIC REASONS, BECAUSE ULTIMATELY IT IS 
MAYA, ILLUSION, WHERE ONLY PAIN, ERROR AND 
TERROR 
RESIDE, 
AND 
THE 
ONLY 
SPIRITUAL 
STRATEGY OF THE VIRYA IS TO FREE HIMSELF 
FROM THE ILLUSION OF THE ONE.
These eight ROOT archetypes, TOGETHER WITH THE 
FOUR BASE ARCHETYPES, structured in the four elements 
that are the gnoseological properties that make up the matter, 
also have the projection of twenty-four more archetypes, 
which are those that make up all the entities of creation and 
that designate it in all its conformation. These TWENTY-
FOUR ARCHETYPES ARE THE SOUNDS OF THE 
DEMIURGO, 
THE 
VOX 
OF 
THE 
ONE 
THAT 
DESIGNATES THE ONE.
ALL CREATED FORMS. In reality, these twenty
designate it in all its conformation. These TWENTY-
FOUR ARCHETYPES ARE THE SOUNDS OF THE 
DEMIURGO, 
THE 
VOX 
OF 
THE 
ONE 
THAT 
DESIGNATES THE ONE.
ALL CREATED FORMS. In reality, these twenty


--- PAGE BREAK ---its conformation. These TWENTY-
FOUR ARCHETYPES ARE THE SOUNDS OF THE 
DEMIURGO, 
THE 
VOX 
OF 
THE 
ONE 
THAT 
DESIGNATES THE ONE.
ALL CREATED FORMS. In reality, these twenty


--- PAGE BREAK ---

221
The four archetypes are the SACRED BIASES THAT 
ONTOLOGICALLY FORM CERTAIN ARCHETYPES.
POS AS FOR EXAMPLE: the archetype TREE, the archetype 
DOG, the archetype HORSE, the archetype SNAKE, the 
archetype EAGLE, the archetype STONE, the archetype 
MOUNTAIN, the archetype SEA, the archetype TEMPLE, 
the archetype SWORD, the archetype BOOK, the archetype 
CHORUS. It is important to understand that these archetypal 
entities are in reality SACRED SYMBOLS THAT SUSTAIN 
QUALITIES OR VIRTUES OF THE ONE WHO IS 
INCORPORATED.
THE 
ARCHETYPES 
OF 
THE 
ONE 
ARE 
THE 
ONTOLOGIES OF THEIR ONTOLOGIES. And we must 
understand that these base archetypes are SOUND AND 
FORM, understanding by this that in each archetype is 
deposited ONE VOX OF THE ONE which sustains it and 
designates it as such. Within the qualifying associations of 
each archetype we can relate, for example, the serpent to the 
sphere of knowledge of the soul; the sword to pain, 
conscience, intelligence; the horse to nobility, royalty, vigor 
and unbreakable will; the tree to beauty, inner and outer 
growth, to life and death; the temple to magnificence, to the 
temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the 
temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the 
temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the 
temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the 
temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the temple, to the 
temple, to the temple and to the temple; to the temple, with 
magnificence, strategy, the collective and the divine; to the 
choir, with glory, the royal and heroic, the sacred and 
numinous; to the stone, with the eternal, the indestructible, the 
firm interior; to the mountain, with earthly elevation; and to 
the sea, with the sensitive, the profound and the unconscious. 
FOR A GREATER UNDERSTANDING, WE MUST POINT 
OUT THAT IN THE HEBREW KABBALAH, IN THE 
SEPHIROTH 
TREE, 
IN 
ITS 
TEN 
ARCHETYPAL 
to 
the sea, with the sensitive, the profound and the unconscious. 
FOR A GREATER UNDERSTANDING, WE MUST POINT 
OUT THAT IN THE HEBREW KABBALAH, IN THE 
SEPHIROTH 
TREE, 
IN 
ITS 
TEN 
ARCHETYPAL 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
FIGURES, WE FIND THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE 
ONE, WHICH ARE ANALOGOUS TO THE ABOVE. 
ALSO IN THE EGYPTIAN OR SPANISH TAROT, AS 
WELL AS IN THE INTERPRETATIONS OF THE I-
CHING, WE FIND DIRECT RELATIONS WITH THE 
ABOVE, 
BECAUSE 
IN 
SHORT, 
THESE 
ARE 
ANALOGOUS TO THE ONE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

223
THE 
ESOTERIC 
LANGUAGES 
ARE 
THE 
CHARACTERISTIC 
EXPRESSIONS 
OF 
THE 
GNOSEOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES WITH WHICH THE 
DEMIURGE, THIS GOD COSMO- CREATOR, CREATED 
AND PROJECTED THE ARCHITECTURE OF THIS 
SPACE OF DEMONIC ILLUSION.
Derived from these twelve archetypes are all the entities 
we know, because we must understand that the archetypes 
have in themselves AN INDISCERNABLE POINT WHICH 
ALLOWS THEM TO COMBINE AND MULTIPLY 
GEOMETICALLY.
TRICULARLY, allowing it to generate all the entities of 
creation both NATURAL AND CULTURAL.
Undoubtedly, in the cultural entities there is a multitude of 
archetypes that are basic forms that have given existence to a 
long creative process of man and that diversified into a whole 
technological science, for example, if we take THE EAGLE 
ARCHETYPE we will relate it to FLIGHT and this archetypal 
aspect or design of the eagle inspired the emergence of a 
cultural archetype that gave birth to a whole archetypal 
AEROSPACE science, since the first AIRPLANE of the 
WRIGHT brothers until today has not ceased to produce 
entities in this science, perhaps the most significant of the 
scientific human soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---NE of the 
WRIGHT brothers until today has not ceased to produce 
entities in this science, perhaps the most significant of the 
scientific human soul.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

223
29. MENTEMPSYCHOSIS OR REINCARNATION, 
PART OF THE EVOLUTIONARY SYSTEM OF PASSU
In previous sections we have discussed in detail that the 
soul transmigrates by reincarnating in different microcosms, 
which makes possible its evolution through the monad, 
towards the human entelechy. In this continuous becoming 
and passing from a microcosm to the monad and from the 
monad to a new microcosm, the soul evolves in each passing 
life, forming in each one of them a SCHEME OF ITSELF, 
AN IMAGE OF ITSELF that in each evolution tends to 
perfection, getting closer and closer to the entelechy, which is 
ultimately the ontological suprafinality that the ONE has 
planned for the PASU.
Undoubtedly, this passing from one incarnation to another 
has a meaning, which was defined by the gods of the material 
order and specifically the LORDS OF KARMA, who are in 
charge of the terrible secret called KALACHAKRA KEY. 
They are in charge of verifying the degree of soul evolution 
developed by the human animal and determine the ontological 
level that the pasu has reached in that life. We must deeply 
understand how this metaphysical and ontological process is, 
because it is the root of our oblivion, of our loss and of the 
total loss of the NEMIC content or memory of the previous 
lives. The microcosm is teleologically designated at its end by 
a series of archetypes that we know have specifically to do 
with AGEING, DISEASE AND DEATH.
represented in certain mythical figures such as the WISE 
ANCIENT and the DYING KING.
The microcosm is thus ontologically determined and it is 
almost impossible to stop this process, because in order to do 
so there would be


--- PAGE BREAK ---he WISE 
ANCIENT and the DYING KING.
The microcosm is thus ontologically determined and it is 
almost impossible to stop this process, because in order to do 
so there would be


--- PAGE BREAK ---

224
The virya has to stop the biological clocks that are registered 
to the macrocosmic time and for this it is essential to be a 
SID-DHA, a hyperborean god. In this way the virya, no 
matter how much consciousness and comprehension he may 
have, will see in himself how the body and the psychic 
subjects of himself trapped in the microcosm are losing 
energetic capacity, which translated psychologically is 
psychic soul will, for the simple reason that the vehicle of 
spatio-temporal manifestation is deteriorating due to the 
action of the archetypes structured in the designs of ontic 
disincarnation.
In this way, the reality of the microcosm is determined by 
a psychoenergetic entropy that originates in all the psychic 
structures of the microcosm. In reality we must understand 
that the microcosm is like an energetic capacitor, it is a 
rechargeable battery that, through use, its structure suffers 
wear and tear until it is totally destroyed. This analogy 
represents what happens with the human body, which suffers 
an energetic entropy in all its systems, degrading with it the 
psycho-animic faculties, which has repercussions in a loss of 
consciousness.
The microcosm, as every created entity and according to 
what has been previously studied, has in itself the designs and 
in them is the ontological finality and suprafinality, which in a 
teleological way was hypostasized in the soul by the 
demiurge. This results in a mechanical and biological 
determinism in which the activity of the archetypes and 
instincts demarcates the soul and physiological existence of 
the human soul. Thus, the reality of existence is limited to the 
axiological limits contained in the different registers of the 
physiological and psychological systems. In other words, in 
the CHAKRAS of the soul are structured the archetypes that 
teleologically determine the end of the material existence of 
the physical body or microcosm.
sychological systems. In other words, in 
the CHAKRAS of the soul are structured the archetypes that 
teleologically determine the end of the material existence of 
the physical body or microcosm.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

225
Undoubtedly, it is important to understand the need to 
eliminate the psychological aggregates or psychic vices that 
are constantly contaminating the NOOLOGICAL BEING.
It is vital to understand that this strategy of inner purity is 
essential for the wise warrior who intends to defeat his inner 
enemy, represented in his instincts and archetypes that 
animate his created soul, which must be isolated from these 
contents and conquered for its isolation from the archetypal 
and instinctive chains of the material order. The volitional 
capacities of the human spirit inherent to the transcendent 
SELF have in themselves the noological power to destroy and 
disintegrate the roots of the strongest complexes and before 
the power of discernment, of intuition of the SELF and the 
CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE MORTAL WARRIOR nothing 
can oppose, not even the demons, the lesser gods and all their 
strategies of psychosocial dis- truction. None can impede the 
action of the spiritual and physical warrior, soldier of the 
guiding action and fighter for the return to the homeland of 
the spirit, home of our spiritual and divine blood.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---and physical warrior, soldier of the 
guiding action and fighter for the return to the homeland of 
the spirit, home of our spiritual and divine blood.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

227
30. THE AWAKENED VIRYA AND HIS DUTY OF 
HONOR. 
THE 
STRUGGLE 
FOR 
SPIRITUAL 
FREEDOM FOR HIS COMRADES
This is one of the most primordial points to study, because 
once the warrior has oriented himself, he has only one duty: to 
indicate the path of the initiatory mystery to his companions 
in the struggle, to his comrades in spiritual blood. In this 
strategy the virya must not fail, because the charismatic link 
between the origin, the loyal gods and the strategies of social 
reorientation depend on him. It is important to know that this 
inner moment is the TAU point, a moment that is crucial for 
the woman, the warrior, because she must decide if she will 
assume the responsibility that the strategy and her honor 
demand of her.
What is this responsibility and what is its consequence? 
Are we obliged to assume it? And if we do not, what 
happens? What is the purpose of it? Do the gods commit 
themselves with their comrades in it?
Undoubtedly, all these answers require a superior 
understanding and for this we require the luciferic warrior to 
reorient himself and locate his EGO within himself, in the 
TAU point, in his space-time of uncreated light where he is 
ETERNAL AND INFINITE, since it is only in this infinite 
mystery that the EGO of the warrior can access the truths and 
answers to these questions. As for the strategic commitment, 
we maintain that it is given in two conditions: first, the 
warrior must have a social strategy and be together with a 
group 
of 
awakened 
comrades 
charismatically 
and 
ideologically related to each other in a common goal. Second, 
the comrades must have a space of coincidence and this space 
is an isolated point from which


--- PAGE BREAK ---arismatically 
and 
ideologically related to each other in a common goal. Second, 
the comrades must have a space of coincidence and this space 
is an isolated point from which


--- PAGE BREAK ---

228
to be able to carry out the strategies of cultural, spiritual and 
material OPPOSITION. The companions must understand 
that among them there is a noological and ideological 
coincidence, being all of them committed to mysticism, and 
their missions must have honor, courage and loyalty as the 
bond that seals the commitment between men and gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---al 
coincidence, being all of them committed to mysticism, and 
their missions must have honor, courage and loyalty as the 
bond that seals the commitment between men and gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

229
31. THE MYSTERY OF INITIATION IN THE SECRET 
ORGANIZATIONS 
OF 
THE 
SYNARCHY. 
HYPERBOREAN INITIATIONS
This is a subject that we will analyze in the study on THE 
INITIATIONS OF THE HYPERBORN WARRIOR, for
understand a subject that is generally taboo and that within the 
esoteric and religious structures of the synarchy is part of its 
sacred symbols, being forbidden to reveal the secrets of their 
initiations. In the lodges of Freemasonry, or Freemasonry, 
which are part of the highest hierarchy of the world synarchy 
along with the great religions such as Judaism or Catholicism 
and others always derived from them; their esoteric and 
religious doctrines are divided into degrees and categories that 
represent the level of the hierarchical position. For example, 
the first degree of Freemasonry is that of Apprentice and the 
last, or 33rd degree is that of Grand Master Mason, the same 
happens in almost all esoteric and religious organizations of 
the synarchy, whether they are called Rosicrucian, theosophy, 
tantric Buddhism, hatha yoga, etc. There is always the secret 
taboo of initiations being tests that the disciple must 
unconditionally pass if he intends to ascend in the hierarchical 
structure to higher degrees. These so much mentioned 
initiations, that generally in these lodges or secret 
organizations are characterized for being contained in a 
structure of RITES where through a ceremony the student is 
initiated in a knowledge or mystery to which he will only 
accede if he can overcome this test. Such initiation 
ceremonies are SYMBOLIC representations mounted in a 
ritual scenography without reality significance where the 
priest or grand master invokes his unknown superiors, angels, 
devas, masters of the white lodge, etc., who with their 
presence endorse such rites of initiation.
t reality significance where the 
priest or grand master invokes his unknown superiors, angels, 
devas, masters of the white lodge, etc., who with their 
presence endorse such rites of initiation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ce where the 
priest or grand master invokes his unknown superiors, angels, 
devas, masters of the white lodge, etc., who with their 
presence endorse such rites of initiation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

230
ascension. In reality this initiation has a terribly suggestive 
aspect in the pasu, because the rite affirms in his heart the 
SACRED SYMBOL, clinging the will and the conscience of 
the initiate in the ideological dogmatism of his creed, thus 
generating a PSYCHOLOGICAL, archetypal COMPLEX that 
registers the pasu fanatically to its doctrine, to a 
DEVOCATIONAL MYSTIC where it is believed that one is a 
chosen one.
We want to specify with this analysis that the INITIATIC 
RITES of the secret organizations or societies are the 
SACRED SYMBOL that most sacralizes the conscience and 
the will of the disciple, THEY ARE THE GREAT LIE and 
the structure of deception because in reality it is that among 
the GRA- DOS or hierarchical categories it is always the 
same, nothing changes, it is simply a preconception that 
determines the pasu within these organizations. Only within a 
very select group of entelechiated beings, generally racially 
related to the masters of the synarchy and chosen by the 
TRAITOR GODS, there are certain initiations that produce 
changes and modifications in those initiates, but always for 
the sake of deepening the servitude towards the demiurge, the 
One. But the pasu, the needle man with whom the gods of 
Karma weave the destiny of humanity, sacrificing it in a 
constant rite of blood and pain, will never receive any 
knowledge in the esoteric or religious secret structures of 
which he is an adept or disciple, no matter how many 
initiations he may have had; he is simply one more link in the 
gear of this great illusory and fantastic machinery that is 
contained in the PSEUDOINICATIONS, which is one of the 
most significant SACRED SYMBOLS in the traps of the 
WORLD RELIGIOUS SYNARCHY.
The secret lodges and organizations of mystical, religious, 
contemplative character of this world power that rules from 
the shadows through its two columns, the scientific-political 
and the scientific-political.
and organizations of mystical, religious, 
contemplative character of this world power that rules from 
the shadows through its two columns, the scientific-political 
and the scientific-political.


--- PAGE BREAK ---mystical, religious, 
contemplative character of this world power that rules from 
the shadows through its two columns, the scientific-political 
and the scientific-political.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

231
The destiny of humanity follows the indoctrinations and 
guidelines ordained by their unknown superiors, who are 
initiated into the deepest mysteries of the plan of the One. In 
reality the mass society has a total and absolute ignorance of 
the existence of these secret societies, being molded and 
modeled to their cultural archetypes. The human being is used 
(humanity is a totally sacrificial entity) to fulfill the 
teleological purpose imposed by the demiurge in his creation, 
which is contained from the genesis of matter and is the 
culmination and concretion of the ENTELEQUIAS of his 
plan. It is for this reason that the sects and religions in their 
cults have a preeminence in the categories of rank and in each 
of them, according to the tests and initiatory rites, the hierarchy 
is determined, the ontological evolutionary degree of the 
disciple. We do not intend to explain the initiatory methods of 
these lodges, we will only point out that their rituals are of 
connotations where the SUBMISSION and OBEDIENCE to 
their elder brothers or masters is the fundamental condition of 
such rites full of satanic perversity.
The three Hyperborean initiatory paths lack rites and cults, 
and the luciferic warrior participates in a real pragmatic 
experience where he comes face to face with DEATH and 
BIRTH. But we must understand that when we say and affirm 
an encounter with death it is totally real, occurring this 
process in the here, in this space-time, where the warrior, if he 
fails, can lose his life or fall into absolute madness. Here there 
is no master to enlighten us nor a superior to ascend us 
through a rite or cult, hierarchically. Here everything is real, 
we define ourselves if we have the willpower, the power to 
confront the DEMIURGE face to face and defeat him in a 
combat, in a real fight where the warrior generates a real fight, 
a real fight where the warrior generates a real fight, a real fight 
where the warrior generates a real fight.
d defeat him in a 
combat, in a real fight where the warrior generates a real fight, 
a real fight where the warrior generates a real fight, a real fight 
where the warrior generates a real fight.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

232
a circumstance, a phenomenon that will result in a 
confrontation, a challenge to a duel where the warrior will try 
to resist and survive the limits of combat, which is all or 
nothing, the result of which will be SPIRITUAL FREEDOM 
OR TOTAL SLAVERY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---nge to a duel where the warrior will try 
to resist and survive the limits of combat, which is all or 
nothing, the result of which will be SPIRITUAL FREEDOM 
OR TOTAL SLAVERY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

233
32. THE INITIATORY TESTS AND THE DIFFERENT 
HYPERBOREAN 
DOORS 
OF 
SPIRITUAL 
LIBERATION
It is essential to understand certain initiatory processes on 
the path of the hyperborean warrior. Within the path are 
structured the KEYS that operate his inner world, generating 
in his psyche the psychological and non-logical openings that 
endow the warrior with certain transcendent faculties. The 
hyperborean initiate knows how to recognize and search 
internally for the outer SIGNS and the inner SYMBOLS that 
guide him in the discovery of the truth; these symbols are 
manifested in his interior, preferably in his ONIRICAL 
WORLD and in his REALITY, and it is there where the 
awakened 
man 
can 
penetrate 
into 
the 
DEEPEST 
MYSTERIES OF HIS SPIRIT.
It is important first to know how to READ THE 
MEANINGS of the images or symbols to be able to recognize 
the existing meaning in them, because deception is the 
strategic weapon of the enemy and to elucidate them is the 
main and FIRST INITIATION OF THE VIRYA.
INITIATION INTO HYPERBOREAN GNOSIS GIVES 
US THE NOOLOGICAL VISION THAT IS THE SCIENCE 
THAT TEACHES US TO DISTINGUISH THE REALITY 
OF THE INNER WORLD FROM THE OUTER WORLD, 
STRUCTURED IN A SCENOGRAPHY OF IMAGES OF 
TRUTH AND FICTION. IT ALLOWS US TO SEE AND 
LOOK INSIDE THE MICROCOSMIC BEING AND TO 
RECOGNIZE THE MACROCOSMIC BEING, WHICH IS 
WHAT CONTAINS REALITY AND OURSELVES.
WE 
MUST 
THEREFORE 
KNOW 
THAT 
UNDERSTANDING 
AND 
COMPREHENSION 
ARE 
DIRECTLY RELATED TO EACH OTHER.


--- PAGE BREAK ---E THE MACROCOSMIC BEING, WHICH IS 
WHAT CONTAINS REALITY AND OURSELVES.
WE 
MUST 
THEREFORE 
KNOW 
THAT 
UNDERSTANDING 
AND 
COMPREHENSION 
ARE 
DIRECTLY RELATED TO EACH OTHER.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

234
THE INNER VISION AND THE INNER EAR ARE AN 
INDISPENSABLE PART OF THE AWAKENING AND 
STRATEGIC ORIENTATION.
Therefore, we must understand that the initiatory principle 
developed by the warrior is inner vision, which is a 
recognition of the images of our world and of the ontic 
contents of material creation. It is the morphological 
representation of reality that manifests itself in our interior as 
a being in itself, endowed with significance and with which 
we identify ourselves, allowing us to recognize ourselves as 
entities among entities; this vision allows us to make 
conscious the diverse structure of reality and the structural 
contents that represent it. This is why we affirm that this 
primary initiation is fundamental and necessary to develop the 
main hyperborean gnoseological principle of the awakened 
warrior, the INNER VISION that allows us to FLEX and read 
the truths of reality in all its forms (political, social, cultural, 
historical, etc.) in the INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL 
OPTICAL SYMMETRICS.
These symmetries are represented in the CONCAVE AND 
THE CONVEXUS OF THE INNER REALITIES AND THE
EXTERIORS, in the exoteric and esoteric game determined 
by the demiurge and the gods, in which man is the axis of the 
illusion and at the same time the main actor and the only 
spectator, because in truth that is what this whole creationist 
drama is all about. In its worst tragic figure, it is simply a 
LUDIC OPTICAL SYSTEM where we are mirrors, concave 
and convex, we are representing ourselves in it, seeing 
ourselves, identifying ourselves with the image in such a way 
that we lose consciousness of being, animating more the 
image that we represent in the mirror of life than the one we 
really are.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ying ourselves with the image in such a way 
that we lose consciousness of being, animating more the 
image that we represent in the mirror of life than the one we 
really are.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

235
we are. This is the symbol that represents the reality of the 
sleeping man, because he is constantly feeding a reality of 
himself (the Ego or inflated soul). It is interesting to note, as 
Jung described it, that the existing psychological analogy 
between the symbolism of the MIRROR is the INFLATION 
OF THE EGO or EGOIC SOUL, because it is interesting to 
note that when man places himself in front of a mirror and 
begins to observe himself, certain complexes arise that 
IMFLAME THE EGO), where he projects himself in space-
time as an entity, one more object of creation, being a 
participant in this world, incorporating himself into it and 
closing himself within his reality. Regrettably, the sleeping 
virya has forgotten himself in his noological reality and he has 
lost the capacities that allow him to recognize himself as the 
eternal and unique being that he is. This is so because he has 
divided himself, he has split himself in a gnoseological 
asymmetry where the "I" has detached himself from the 
symmetrical of the eternal and condemned himself to the 
asymmetrical of matter.
It is important to understand the reality of the spirit 
trapped in the soul, it is interesting to note the inner 
juxtaposition that it adopts since it is divided, split into two 
inner geometric optical concave and convex positions; the 
reality of this space of temporal significance, the SELF, is 
structured in a position that is mixed and juxtaposed as 
previously studied in optics; the SELF is located on an axial 
symmetrical 
axis 
between 
the 
CONCAVE 
and 
the 
CONVEXO, between the outside and the inside. It is the I in 
the world a noological, spiritual introversion and a 
psychological, animic extraversion, that is to say that it is the 
divine and the human that are unified in a unique reality in 
which two well-defined realities participate: THE REALITY 
OF THE ETERNAL AND THE REALITY OF THE 
ETERNAL.
This unification of these two existential perspectives produces 
an ontological confusion, because the being
ined realities participate: THE REALITY 
OF THE ETERNAL AND THE REALITY OF THE 
ETERNAL.
This unification of these two existential perspectives produces 
an ontological confusion, because the being


--- PAGE BREAK ---cipate: THE REALITY 
OF THE ETERNAL AND THE REALITY OF THE 
ETERNAL.
This unification of these two existential perspectives produces 
an ontological confusion, because the being


--- PAGE BREAK ---

236
In this condition it cannot distinguish itself between its two 
ONTOS, since, being separate, it participates in both, being in 
its greater part ephemeral, extroverted, phenomenal, convex, 
and in its lesser part eternal, introverted, spiritual, concave.
It is this partition, this division of the being that only the 
AWAKENED VIRYAS can distinguish (the human animal 
does not have the capacity to recognize itself in this situation) 
that keeps it enslaved in a juxtaposition where the I and the 
consciousness become the YIN or the YANG, the KULA and 
the AKULA, the ANIMUS and the ANIMUS.
In these circumstances we find ourselves trapped 
specifically between two worlds, that is, we find ourselves 
submerged in an immense mystery, in a spiritual paradigm 
where the eternal, noological and absolute being is relativized 
in a becoming where we are trapped in the labyrinth of Maya, 
in the world of the MIRRORS and to this mystery, which by 
some meta-physical sense we must live, we were THROWN 
by the gods. Reality indicates to us that matter has us 
subjugated and bound, without us being able to realize 
absolutely nothing if we do not awaken; since this trap can 
never be opened by the HYPERBORNE VIRYA if he has not 
realized in himself the ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUATION 
THAT GIVES US THE POWER TO END THE KULA AND 
THE AKULA, THE YIN AND THE YANG, THE ANIMUS 
AND 
THE 
ANIMUS, 
THE 
ILLUSION 
OF 
THIS 
DEMENTIAL REALITY.
The warrior, the man who has oriented and consolidated 
himself, absolute master of his will and his strategy, who 
knows and knows the secrets of maya and understands the 
transcendent gnosis of the gods and hyperborean comrades; he 
goes resolutely with weapons in his hands in search of his 
LIBERTY and nothing and no one can stop him, because he is 
the bearer of a divine sign, the SIGN OF ORIGIN, which 
identifies him.
he 
goes resolutely with weapons in his hands in search of his 
LIBERTY and nothing and no one can stop him, because he is 
the bearer of a divine sign, the SIGN OF ORIGIN, which 
identifies him.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

237
The spirit is a terrifying being, implacable, DESTRUCTIVE 
WITH THE MATERIAL ORDER, merciless with the 
enemies of the spirit.
He is a warrior of the eternal, of the INCOGNOSCIBLE 
and is born twice, in soul and spirit, he is a rebellious being 
because he knows and knows the reality of the eternal and the 
ephemeral of matter. This warrior fears nothing because 
within himself dwells only the mystery of the spirit and in him 
the soul no longer exists, there is no fear, human weakness, 
the merely animal, only he is a warrior, an absolute being, a 
MAN 
AWAKENED 
IN 
THIS 
REALITY 
AND 
IN 
WHATEVER REALITY HE HAS TO SUSTAIN.
VADEM RETRUM, SUM QUI DIVINUM INFINITUM 
ET AETERNUM.
This Latin affirmation is a phrase that allows us to protect 
ourselves and gives us the power to react against the 
hostilities of the environment, coming from the outside world. 
It is a HYPER-BORUS mantra, it is an ACOUSTIC RUNE 
and it is fundamental to understand the POWER of protection 
and action that it gives us.
It is important to understand the spiritual meaning of their 
affirmations and to DECIDE WISELY WHEN IT IS 
ESSENTIAL TO USE THEM, BECAUSE THE POWER 
THAT EXISTS IN THESE ACOUSTIC RUNES HAS THE 
CAPACITY TO DESTROY MATTER ITSELF AND ALL 
ITS MORPHOLOGY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

238
Printing was completed on April 20, 2008, in San 
Martín s/n, Córdoba, Argentina.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hyperborean vision of history


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hyperborean 
vision of history
Study by a warrior initiated in the 
Hyperborean Gnosis
Gustavo Brondino


--- PAGE BREAK ---rean vision of history


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hyperborean 
vision of history
Study by a warrior initiated in the 
Hyperborean Gnosis
Gustavo Brondino


--- PAGE BREAK ---

All rights reserved. The reproduction of all or part of this work, 
including the cover design, by any means or process, including 
reprography and computer processing, is strictly prohibited without 
the written permission of the copyright holder, subject to the 
penalties established by law.
Copyright © 2008 by Gustavo Brondino. 
I.S.B.N.: 978-987-05-4174-5
Printed in Argentina
The deposit provided for in Law 11,723 has been made.
Brondino, Gustavo
Hyperborean vision of history. - 1st ed. - Córdoba : the author, 
2008.
E-Book.
ISBN 978-987-05-4174-5
1. Argentine Essay. I. Title CDD 
A864


--- PAGE BREAK ---3 has been made.
Brondino, Gustavo
Hyperborean vision of history. - 1st ed. - Córdoba : the author, 
2008.
E-Book.
ISBN 978-987-05-4174-5
1. Argentine Essay. I. Title CDD 
A864


--- PAGE BREAK ---

INDEX
1. Introduction
7
2. Greek mythology. Historical source of myths
hyperboreans
11
3. Synthesis of the rational trap of the sleeping man.
and of the gnostic logic of the awakened man
19
4. Historical analysis of origins and differences
of Eastern and Western cultures
35
5. Study of the gnoseological techniques to open up
historical cultural records
39
6. The synarchic peoples of ancient times that
were participants in the cultural pact
51
7. Athenian and Spartan Greece as a link
to hyperborean wisdom. The Roman empire orbis 
terrarum, absolute master of the foundation and knowledge
hyperborean strategy in the world
55
8.
Augustus, Pontiff Maximus, Divine Prince, Universal 
Emperor. The triumphal march of Imperial Rome 
against the cultures of the Kali Yuga and the world 
synarchy. The Druids, the Jews and the Egyptians, 
heirs and chosen by the gods of the
universal order
61
9.
The Praetorian Order. Initiates in the mysteries of 
Mars and Apollo. Absolute warriors. Custodians 
and
Emperor's honor guards
65
10. Semitic lunar Christianity in history and the 
hyperborean opposition. The Roman Empire and the 
strategies of the princes and emperors of the Holy 
Roman Empire.
Germanic Roman Empire
67
11. The Carolingian Empire. The maximum strategy of 
the religious synarchy and the papacy. The second 
barbarian invasions. The Vikings and their ferocious 


--- PAGE BREAK ---ic Roman Empire
67
11. The Carolingian Empire. The maximum strategy of 
the religious synarchy and the papacy. The second 
barbarian invasions. The Vikings and their ferocious 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

march against the synarchy. Key to the hyperborean 
heritage.
in the Princes of the Holy Roman Empire
75
12. The Vikings. Their role in European history.
The affirmation of the eternal hyperborean symbols
81
13. The Holy Roman Empire and its emperors. 
The struggle between popes and emperors. 
The heretical movements. The
cathars and the orders of chivalry
85
14. The modern age. The power of the world synarchy 
in the financial centers. The Benedictine and 
Dominican orders. Resistance in the monarchies of
hyperborean blood
99
15. The contemporary age. The new power of the 
international 
synarchy. 
Political 
ideologies. 
The 
emergence
of nationalisms
109
16. Analysis of eternal symbols in art
113


--- PAGE BREAK ---9
15. The contemporary age. The new power of the 
international 
synarchy. 
Political 
ideologies. 
The 
emergence
of nationalisms
109
16. Analysis of eternal symbols in art
113


--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
1. INTRODUCTION
THE SOUTHERN BREEZES WILL COME FROM THE 
POLE, 
WARMLY 
EMBRACING 
THE 
HYPERBOREAN 
WARRIOR, WHISPERING IN HIS SPIRIT THE MYSTERY OF 
ETERNAL TRUTHS.
Every initiate in hyperborean gnosis must deeply 
understand history, because there will never be absolute 
consciousness if we do not awaken to the historical subject 
that is the ontogenesis of the ego and the phylogenesis of the 
racial and spiritual self. Man possesses a reason (rational 
subject) that develops an intellect which operates based on a 
cultural structure (cultural subject), with which we can study 
the scheme of the self (historical subject) thus verifying that 
we participate in a personal, family, racial and social or 
collective history. It is in this way that if we intend to know 
ourselves we must imperatively know our per-sonal and 
collective historical subject, that is to say we have to STUDY 
AND REVIEW OUR HISTORY AND UNIVERSAL 
HISTORY.
For this it is necessary to open the historical records, both 
individual and collective; that is, in the reality of history are 
contained the TRUTHS and LIES, being necessary and 
indispensable for the warrior to know them in their totality, 
because it depends fundamentally on this to be able to know 
the 
ABSOLUTE 
TRUTH 
OF 
HIMSELF, 
THE 
ONTOGENESIS OF THE SELF, OF THE ETERNAL 
BEING, OF THE ORI-GEN AND OF THE PATRIOTHOOD 
OF THE SPIRIT.
HYPERBORN 
GNOSIS 
studies 
the 
strategies 
of 
awakening, and now in this treatise we will develop the 
strategies of the GODS and of the AWAKENED MEN, in the 
history of the CULTURES, WHO WERE PARTICIPANTS 
OF


--- PAGE BREAK ---ategies 
of 
awakening, and now in this treatise we will develop the 
strategies of the GODS and of the AWAKENED MEN, in the 
history of the CULTURES, WHO WERE PARTICIPANTS 
OF


--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
HYPERBOREAN STRATEGIES AND THE GREAT WARRIORS 
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THEM.
We will therefore initiate a study of history that we must 
understand does not correspond to the studies carried out by 
the academic historical sciences. It does not consist of an 
exhaustive and systematic development of the chronological 
facts of history, such as the treatises of European or universal 
history that gravitated and described it from its historical 
reality, whether they are merely descriptive in the historical 
evolution or the treatises that in their historicism contain 
twists, turns, deviations that are the perspectives of the 
authors. Undoubtedly, if the aim is to know the past from a 
simply chronological and phenomenological point of view, 
political, military, diplomatic events, etc., there are multiple 
volumes that have an OBJECTIVE HORIZONTAL AND 
LINEAR ATTENTION OF THE SAME, whether through the 
economy, society, culture, etc., and if the aim is to know the 
history of the past from the point of view of the economy, 
society, culture, etc., there are multiple volumes that have an 
OBJECTIVE HORIZONTAL AND LINEAR ATTENTION 
OF THE SAME, and if the purpose is to know history from 
these parameters, we recommend the reader to renounce this 
compendium of the TRUTH OF HISTORY, because the work 
of HYPERBorean HISTORY that we present here is a work 
that deals with it from a purely NONOLOGICAL perspective, 
that is to say, from an angle where the past is contained in a 
historical strategy of spiritual liberation. Just as all 
contemporary intellectual movements since Romanticism 
have contributed to exalt its importance, if possible to 
exaggerate it, the most antagonistic tendencies converged in 
various ways. For example, for the THEOCENTRIC OR 
THEOLOGICAL view, History is the external, visible 
manifestation 
of 
the 
DIVINE 
DESIGNS. 
For 
ANTROPOCENTRIST scholars, historical becoming is the 
ultimate reality and essence, cause and end of it. In turn, the 
SOCIAL OR NATURAL SCIENCES claim it as their own, 
he 
DIVINE 
DESIGNS. 
For 
ANTROPOCENTRIST scholars, historical becoming is the 
ultimate reality and essence, cause and end of it. In turn, the 
SOCIAL OR NATURAL SCIENCES claim it as their own, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
taking EVOLUTION in accordance with their


--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
Similarly, in recent times, when the politicization of culture is 
manifest, history has been clothed in very specific tendencies 
such as MARXISM (historical materialism) or LIBERALISM 
(capitalism), which, according to their political, ideological 
and philosophical doctrines, have classified it.
We affirm with it that generally the history was always 
analyzed and considered under the magnifying glass of an 
ideological subjectivism that dressed to the same one of 
certain tendencies, turns, courses, etc., that adapted it to their 
criteria and doctrines. it is for this reason that its analysis and 
conclusion will depend on the prism with which it is viewed. 
Understanding and
Understanding these concepts, our historical study is 
contained from the vision of the Gnostic Hyperborean 
warrior. Our analysis consists of the historical, philosophical 
and political preeminences that described and developed facts, 
events, social phenomena that were framed in certain 
Hyperborean Strategies of national and spiritual liberation. 
This review of history considers that all the historical facts 
that will be analyzed are bearers in their contextual context of 
HYPERBorean MYTHS, which represent the HEROIC, EPIC 
AND TRASCENDENT ethical sense of life and existence. In 
this study of History all phenomena, events and happenings 
are considered and reviewed from the point of view of the 
wise warrior, who has been initiated and has experienced the 
HYPERBORIC ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUATION, described 
in the treatise on HYPERBORIC GNOSIS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

11


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---been initiated and has experienced the 
HYPERBORIC ABSOLUTE INDIVIDUATION, described 
in the treatise on HYPERBORIC GNOSIS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

11


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
2. GREEK MYTHOLOGY. HISTORICAL SOURCE OF 
THE HYPERBOREAN MYTHS.
Mythology is the study and interpretation of myth and 
myth bodies of a particular culture, myth being a complex 
cultural phenomenon that can be approached from various 
points of view. In general, it is a narrative that describes and 
portrays a symbolic language, the origin of the basic elements 
of a culture. The mythical narrative tells, for example, how 
the world began, how human beings and species were created 
and how certain customs, rites or forms of human activities 
were generated, with almost all cultures having at one time or 
another myths, living in relation to them.
The sequence of myth is extraordinary, developed in a 
time that predates the birth of conventional history; myths 
refer to an extraordinary time and place and to extraordinary 
gods and processes, and are often considered aspects of 
religion. However, since their nature is all-encompassing, 
myth illuminates many aspects of the individual and cultural 
life of mankind, even though they have posed a problem of 
interpretation, generating many controversies about the value 
and importance of mythology.
Our study is based specifically on the HYPERBorean 
MYTHS and these myths can be found in all the mythologies 
of the cultures of the Aryan peoples, in their polytheistic 
paganism they are well structured, whether in Hindu, Greek, 
Etruscan, Roman, Scandinavian, Germanic, etc. mythology.
It is interesting to note that ARIA, NORDIC AND 
SOLAR Greek mythology develops around 700 b.c., 
appearing


--- PAGE BREAK ---du, Greek, 
Etruscan, Roman, Scandinavian, Germanic, etc. mythology.
It is interesting to note that ARIA, NORDIC AND 
SOLAR Greek mythology develops around 700 b.c., 
appearing


--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
The Iliad and the Odyssey of Homer, and their teachings were 
adopted as the ethical, religious and philosophical norms of 
the Hellenic world. It is important to emphasize that the man 
of the Ancient Age of the Mediterranean world, his way of 
thinking and reasoning about knowledge and knowledge was 
based on the MYTHOLOGICAL, being imperative to 
understand what this means, because the whole society and 
culture of these peoples revolved around their myths, but as 
these societies evolved, a new way of thinking about 
knowledge 
and 
knowledge 
was 
developed: 
the 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
way 
of 
thinking. 
This 
replaced 
mythological thinking, which was a way of understanding 
reality that unfortunately today is impossible to understand, 
because mythological thinking was a direct experience 
between the eternal worlds of gods and men. On the other 
hand, philosophical thinking is already a bridge between the 
two, structured on the foundations of reason. We want to 
clarify that in this treatise we are not going to carry out a 
study of the mythical characters, gods, demigods, heroes, nor 
of their feats and stories, a revelation that we will develop in 
the TREATISE ON HYPERBorean MYTHOLOGY; We 
simply take this analysis to demonstrate the importance of 
mythological thought in history, although we recommend that 
the awakened warrior open these cultural records and 
investigate certain myths in particular, for example, the myth 
of PER- SEO, of PROMETEO, of JASON AND THE 
ARGONAUTS, of HERCULES, etc.
The mythological world and its hyperborean myths is a 
language that teaches the techniques and strategies that the 
warrior must implement to produce his spiritual liberation, 
from a warrior ethic. Unfortunately, its myths and legends 
have reached us in a confused and distorted form, but if we 
reduce it gnostically we will see that it is sustained in certain 
ways.
, 
from a warrior ethic. Unfortunately, its myths and legends 
have reached us in a confused and distorted form, but if we 
reduce it gnostically we will see that it is sustained in certain 
ways.


--- PAGE BREAK ---hic. Unfortunately, its myths and legends 
have reached us in a confused and distorted form, but if we 
reduce it gnostically we will see that it is sustained in certain 
ways.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
These are narrated on a mythical magical language describing 
eternal historical truths. These are narrated in a magical 
mythical language that describes eternal historical truths 
where today these realities are interpreted by a bastard culture 
from 
a 
philosophical, 
sociological 
or 
psychological 
perspective that degrades the mythological language, but for 
man, the Spartan, Athenian, Trojan or Roman warrior, the 
mythological were absolute truths. Hyperborean Gnosis 
recommends making an effort to place oneself in the historical 
context and to be able to verify this truth for oneself. That is 
why Greek or Roman mythologies did not function as a 
religious institution, that is, it was not a religion in the same 
way as Hinduism, Judaism or Christianity, because there was 
an almost equal relationship between gods and men, each 
living in their own spaces of significance or existential plane 
almost the same visions and contingencies. The mythological 
gods are outwardly equal to human beings, but they differ in 
having certain powers and wisdom inherited by their divine or 
semi-divine genealogy, because they were enthroned in the 
eternal, in their heavens by the grace of their actions and 
heroic deeds. That is why these cultures were ethically 
structured around their myths and through their initiatory 
mysteries (Orphic mysteries or the mysteries of Eleusis) the 
warrior could relate face to face with the gods. This synthetic 
analysis of mythology is due to the fact that in Greece, once 
the mythological vision had been lost, a new form of 
questioning about life and nature emerged from it: 
PHILOSOPHICAL GNOSIS.
On the other hand, if we analyze Eastern cultures such as 
the Egyptian, Persian, Jewish, etc., we will see that the vision 
of existence always revolved around the religious and if they 
had a mythological treatment, their myths were subject to a 
religious context. On the contrary, in Greece and Rome, 
mythological thinking turned towards a science, the 
philosophical, where the knowledge of the mythological is 
based on a religious context.
ligious context. On the contrary, in Greece and Rome, 
mythological thinking turned towards a science, the 
philosophical, where the knowledge of the mythological is 
based on a religious context.


--- PAGE BREAK ---the contrary, in Greece and Rome, 
mythological thinking turned towards a science, the 
philosophical, where the knowledge of the mythological is 
based on a religious context.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
and knowledge structured on reason and wise understanding, 
is constituted on a PHILOSOPHICAL GNOSIS, which is not 
religious in the manner and style of the theologies and 
polytheistic creeds, such as the Egyptians, Persians, 
Carthaginians, Druids, or monotheisms such as Judaism and 
later Christianity. This new system of thought generated and 
gave the beginning to a new understanding of reality, nature 
and man, being the great Greek and Roman thinkers the 
precursors of this method of knowledge and the first to 
question and rationally understand the profound mystery of 
deception. This was due to the fact that the Greeks, Achaeans, 
Dorians and Ionians were racially Hyperboreans and in their 
pure blood still lingered a mysticism, an image of nostalgia, a 
mythological memory of the extraterrestrial Origin of their 
HOMELAND. Hence, when the mythological thinking was 
lost by the action of a synarchic culture, the philosophical 
thinking of the Greek world was the Hyperborean logical 
system that replaced the mythological one, which is why the 
theory of knowledge of the HYPERBorean PHILOSOPHER 
PLATO stated that there were two lines of wisdom: opinion 
and 
knowledge. 
According 
to 
Plato, 
statements 
or 
affirmations about the physical or visible world, including the 
observations and propositions of science, are only opinions, 
some well founded and others not, but none of them should be 
understood as true knowledge. The highest point of 
knowledge is knowledge, because it concerns reason rather 
than experience; reason properly used leads to IDEAS that are 
true, and the objects of these rational ideas are the true 
universals, the eternal for- mums. That is why Plato affirmed 
that myths could be understood exactly if they were analyzed 
from a superior logic, which was a different way of 
discerning, requiring an effort of will and understanding that 
must be founded on wisdom, and for the Greeks and
exactly if they were analyzed 
from a superior logic, which was a different way of 
discerning, requiring an effort of will and understanding that 
must be founded on wisdom, and for the Greeks and


--- PAGE BREAK ---analyzed 
from a superior logic, which was a different way of 
discerning, requiring an effort of will and understanding that 
must be founded on wisdom, and for the Greeks and


--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
Roman mythological knowledge contained the myths that lead 
to higher knowledge. The theory of ideas can best be 
understood in terms of mathematical entities; for example, a 
circle is defined as a plane figure composed of a series of 
points, all equidistant from the same place. However, no one 
has ever actually seen such a figure, what people have seen 
are traced figures, more or less accurate approximations of the 
ideal circle; in fact when mathematicians define a circle, the 
points mentioned are logical, not spatial, and although the 
perfect form of a circle has never been seen -- and can never 
be seen in nature -- mathematicians and others do know that it 
is; therefore the formula of the circle exists, but not in the 
physical world of space and time, but in the realm of ideas. 
Thus, the Greek Gnostics affirmed that creation is the work of 
a cosmocreator demiurge, an inferior archon who built this 
world by shaping the created things, the entities, based on the 
innate ideas or uncreated eternal symbols of the Unknowable. 
The example of the circle is valid as an analogy because this 
demiurge imitated from the ideal, eternal, perfect worlds, the 
substances with which he created and concretized the 
mechanics of the material order. The world of images, of 
objects, of entities are imperfect forms, mere imitations that 
participate in the eternal truths of pure ideas. This reality, that 
of objects, is determined by becoming, and the truth of the 
real can never be reached through them; this is only possible 
if we transcend the reality of entities or objects and penetrate 
into the real that is contained in the idea-worlds or 
supracelestial worlds, which is where the pure, innate ideas 
are found, which are the suprasensible models of all sensible 
objects or concrete entities of creation. Therefore, the realm 
where the ideas dwell is ideal, perfect, immutable, 
transcendent, where we can only penetrate with the action of 
our own will, and where we can only penetrate with the action 
of our own will.
where the ideas dwell is ideal, perfect, immutable, 
transcendent, where we can only penetrate with the action of 
our own will, and where we can only penetrate with the action 
of our own will.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ell is ideal, perfect, immutable, 
transcendent, where we can only penetrate with the action of 
our own will, and where we can only penetrate with the action 
of our own will.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
of a superior intellectual will, since Gnostic knowledge is the 
only means by which we can apprehend these models in their 
pure states, because in the created world the material referents 
or objects only resemble each other, they are facsimiles, 
copies, IMPERFECT FORMS WHICH ONLY ACQUIRE 
PERFECTION 
IN 
THE 
ETERNAL, 
UNCREATED 
WORLDS.
It is important to understand Gnostic philosophical thought 
because the great contribution of Greek philosophy is to have 
uncovered the real possibility of accessing the transcendental 
world of innate ideas, the hyperborean truths, through the 
KNOWLEDGE OF A HIGHER DISCERNMENT.
The Hellenic world allowed access to the reality of 
knowledge as the REAL possibility of understanding and 
comprehending the ABSOLUTE TRUTHS, the ETERNAL 
SYMBOLS, and the ETERNAL SYMBOLS.
HYPERBOREAHS. The Greek philosophers were the first to 
describe creation, the material world, the universe, as a 
creation of a demiurge, of a lesser god who was not at all the 
TRUE GOD, THE INCOGNOCIBLE ONE, but rather he was 
an imitator god who created an INPERFECT world. The 
Greek philosophers, and then as we shall see later the 
ROMANS, unveiled and fought the chosen cultures and races 
of the demiurge, the One.
Man has always pursued the idea of self-realization and 
liberation, because this is the real image of himself, in the 
ideal worlds and according to the reach of the will, of 
knowledge, is the possibility of ethically approaching that 
ideal truth, which is absolute and eternal in the men of PURE 
RACES, in the NOBLE BLOODS, in the warrior who still has 
in his mind, in his consciousness, the REMEMBRANCE OF 
ORIGIN. Now, why has man fallen, what is the essential 
reason for man's inability to remember?
Why has man lost the memory of his past onto-.
n his mind, in his consciousness, the REMEMBRANCE OF 
ORIGIN. Now, why has man fallen, what is the essential 
reason for man's inability to remember?
Why has man lost the memory of his past onto-.


--- PAGE BREAK ---onsciousness, the REMEMBRANCE OF 
ORIGIN. Now, why has man fallen, what is the essential 
reason for man's inability to remember?
Why has man lost the memory of his past onto-.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
Where is the physical or metaphysical cause of forgetfulness, 
of the inability to remember, and who is responsible for our 
forgetfulness, for the fall of the uncreated and eternal into the 
created world? Is there still the possibility of a spiritual 
reorientation?
Undoubtedly, all these questions refer to a concrete 
answer: THE DEMIURG JEHOVAH SATAN and THE 
GODS TRAITORS TO THE ETERNAL SPIRIT ARE THE 
CAUSERS OF THE LOSS OF MEMORY.
ANCESTRAL OF MAN, and the reality is: BECAUSE HE 
HAS BEEN Deceived. This is the answer to all the questions, 
since man, being imprisoned in matter, incarcerated in matter, 
lost without being able to remember, has lost the 
REMEMBRANCE OF ORIGIN. The GNOSIS HYPERBÓ-
REA in his treatise affirms that the reason for this are the 
ONTOLOGICAL 
SIGNS 
THAT 
THE 
DEMIURGUS 
PLACED IN THE MICROCOSM, IN THE SOUL, WHICH 
ACT AS GNOSEOLOGICAL LIMITS PREVENTING THE 
SEEING OF THE ARCHETYPICAL, ONTOLOGICAL AND 
NOOLOGICAL MEMORY.
OF THE SOUL AND THE SPIRIT. This esoteric 
metaphysical demiurgic technique is an alchemical magic that 
psychically prevents the warrior from remembering the 
extraterrestrial HYPERBorean origin of his eternal spirit, and 
projects the consciousness, the senses of man, the 
MATERIAL ORDER, putting cultural SENSE to the external 
world (the Pathos) first and then to the internal world (the 
Ethos). In this way, and as we explained previously in the 
Treatise 
on 
Hyperborean 
Gnosis, 
MAN 
IS 
ONTOLOGICALLY REVERTED, modi
The warrior's being has been shaken, removed from his 
permanent center of gravity, from his spiritual axial axis, and 
his eternal SELF, which used to be affirmed and fixed in the 
spirit, is now reflected in matter. Thus we understand that the 
warrior has lost himself and has fallen into the nets of the 
illusory world, losing the memory and the recollection of his
in the 
spirit, is now reflected in matter. Thus we understand that the 
warrior has lost himself and has fallen into the nets of the 
illusory world, losing the memory and the recollection of his


--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
eternity, considering himself now as merely human and what 
is even worse, a created being, a creature of god, a mere 
evolved product of the earth and of creation. But we must 
consider that although the demiurge incarnated us and 
enslaved us in matter, in his creation, drugging us in an 
illusory dream, in reality as we are fallen beings of the 
UNCREATED worlds, the eternal is within us and thanks to 
the action of the GODS LOYAL TO THE ETERNAL SPIRIT 
there still exists for us the real possibility of AWAKENING.


--- PAGE BREAK ---the 
UNCREATED worlds, the eternal is within us and thanks to 
the action of the GODS LOYAL TO THE ETERNAL SPIRIT 
there still exists for us the real possibility of AWAKENING.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
3. SYNTHESIS OF THE RATIONAL TRAP OF THE 
SLEEPING MAN AND THE GNOSTIC LOGIC OF THE 
AWAKENED MAN
This synthesis is a review of what has been dealt with in 
the Hyperborean Gnosis, but I consider it necessary to make it 
so that the comrade of struggle, upon entering the next 
chapters of the truth of history, may affirm these texts in his 
spirit, because they will allow him to understand and 
comprehend deeply these historical truths that will be 
developed after this theme.
Undoubtedly there is a psychic or psychological process 
that is triggered in the mind of man, in his reason or 
discernment, which is a dialectical dilemma where there is a 
cognitive system developed in a mechanical and unconscious 
way, in which the consciousness of the sleeping man reacts a 
priori subject to the cultural parameters (axiological and gnos- 
ological) that have a direct influence on reasoning, 
discernment and its forms of analysis. In this way, the mental 
psychological process of discernment is a totally automatic 
mechanism that processes data in symbolic form and then 
translates them into languages that are the ultimate expression 
of consciousness. Thus, the being of the sleeping man is 
structured in the seeming, his ontology being determined in 
the reality of finite forms, falling into the confines of illusion, 
in the dualistic networks of uncertainty contained either in the 
KULA and AKULA of Hinduism, in the YIN and YANG of 
Taoism, in the DOGMATIC MORALS of Judaism or 
Christianity, or in the axiological dualities, THESIS, 
ANTITHESIS of Western philosophies (Kant, Hegel, etc.) 
that lead him to get lost.) that lead him to get lost, thus 
confusing the sense of truth, the capacity to know and to know 
where he is.


--- PAGE BREAK ---tern philosophies (Kant, Hegel, etc.) 
that lead him to get lost.) that lead him to get lost, thus 
confusing the sense of truth, the capacity to know and to know 
where he is.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
the REAL and true of historical reality. Thus, we have been 
thrown out of paradise by a tyrant god, and that is why we 
now wander in this material hell, in this valley of tears trying 
to find the origin, the wisdom that allows us to return again, to 
escape from the cavern and stop being prisoners of the 
creation of the demiurge. Only the HYPERBORNE GNOSIS 
is the means to return, being necessary to break with this 
mental process where the psyche automates itself in a strictly 
rational, formal logical discernment scheme, inherited from a 
liberal capitalist materialism and a dogmatic religious 
morality, leaving aside the Gnostic capacities of the intuitive 
MAGICAL TRAS- CENDENT knowledge, necessary to 
know the universal and personal history.
Therefore, the thought structure of the awakened man, of 
the reoriented warrior is affirmed on his cultural structure, 
where discernment is contained in certain mental, cognitive 
cons- tructions, where formal logic is replaced by an 
INTUITIVE 
IMA-GINATIVE 
thought 
system. 
This 
TRASCENDENTAL way of thinking, the CONSCIOUS SELF 
is reflected in the act of knowledge about the cultural structure 
(Cultural Structure: it is made up of all the knowledge 
acquired through existence. The Cultural Structure is equal to 
the Cultural Subject) or archetypal memory, that is to say that 
which contains the intellectual substratum of memory; thus 
reason or reasoning acts upon it by elaborating logical 
relations 
of 
conceptual 
or 
rational 
systems, 
either 
INDUCTIVE OR DEDUCTIVE which are the logical 
mechanics of reason. But we must understand that besides this 
logical mechanism the HYPERBORNE VIRYA acts with a 
different ontological bending, because the VIRYA'S SELF 
adopts a rational and GNOSTIC position where he can 
THINK AND INTUITION CONSCIOUSLY.
logical mechanism the HYPERBORNE VIRYA acts with a 
different ontological bending, because the VIRYA'S SELF 
adopts a rational and GNOSTIC position where he can 
THINK AND INTUITION CONSCIOUSLY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---the HYPERBORNE VIRYA acts with a 
different ontological bending, because the VIRYA'S SELF 
adopts a rational and GNOSTIC position where he can 
THINK AND INTUITION CONSCIOUSLY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
SCIENTIFICALLY. This capacity to think and intuit is based 
on the gnoseological juxtaposition of the warrior who has in 
himself his ISOLATED AND REORIENTED SELF, 
allowing him to EXIT the formal logical scheme and think 
from a superior, imaginative, intuitive reason, which allows 
him to understand the logical systems from a SUPERIOR 
PERSPECTIVE.
Undoubtedly this type of thinking is indispensable, 
specifically when the intellectual logical systems are based on 
certain transcendent mystical languages where mental 
abstraction or purely abstract thinking is necessary, as in 
mathematics, philosophy, or art, etc. By this we mean that this 
hyperborean method of thinking is not indispensable in the 
habitual thinking of mechanical life, with the logical 
discernment structured on a moderately large cultural memory 
is sufficient to arrive at the conclusions or answers that serve 
for the development within society and ultimately this is the 
method used by the professional layman. That is to say that 
the common man or passu simply uses a formal logic based 
on syllogistic reasoning or, if he is very intelligent, on 
symbolic reasoning. To exemplify this type of thinking we 
will describe two situations or phenomena where the pasu, or 
animal man, simply analyzes the event from his formal logic, 
for example, a man is walking down the street and passes 
under a ladder and after passing under it a flowerpot falls on 
his head. The injured man will think that by passing under the 
ladder he triggered bad luck and will simply attribute it to the 
fall of the flowerpot on his head to the taboo of passing under 
the ladder, or perhaps he will think that someone carelessly 
dropped the flowerpot, which ended up on his head, but it will 
never occur to him to think that behind the event of the
assing under 
the ladder, or perhaps he will think that someone carelessly 
dropped the flowerpot, which ended up on his head, but it will 
never occur to him to think that behind the event of the


--- PAGE BREAK ---dder, or perhaps he will think that someone carelessly 
dropped the flowerpot, which ended up on his head, but it will 
never occur to him to think that behind the event of the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
The fall of the pot there is a hidden meaning, a second 
intention of the demiurge, which is what usually happens. In 
truth, man will think in the first two ways, leaving the event to 
a merely common accident, to the bad luck of destiny itself, 
leading to the fact that he will never pass under a ladder and 
to believe strongly in this myth. Let us take another example, 
it is the case where the scientific or religious premises and 
propositions that undoubtedly are the epistemological bases of 
the formal logic, either of the syllogistic reasoning or of the 
scientific deductive symbolic or of the dogmatic mystical 
reasoning of the religious, act preeminently in the 
understanding of the phenomenon. In this example: a man of 
science has a oneiric experience where appears to him in his 
dream an eagle that looks him carefully in the eyes, implying 
this look of the eagle a certain fear to the dreamer. When this 
individual wakes up, who in this case is a doctor who must 
assist a patient in the city and traveling to Cordoba on the 
way, he perceives the flight of an eagle, which attracts his 
attention, but he does not give it any importance. When he 
arrives at the patient's house, who lives in the apartment of a 
condominium building, on the tenth floor, when he is 
attending to the patient, an eagle appears on the patient's 
balcony, which apparently is wounded, this fact deeply 
attracts the attention of the doctor who is already amazed by 
the event. With all these situations the scientist will begin to 
unleash a whole series of explanations, based on his logic and 
will resort to the propositions and preeminent concepts and 
forms that were incorporated in his cultural structure and on 
the basis of them he will deduce and rationalize inductively 
and deductively the reality of these experiences. Evidently, 
before these manifestations the deductions can be several, 
they can be; first, the doctor will attribute to a coincidence the 
oneiric experience and the apa-
ty of these experiences. Evidently, 
before these manifestations the deductions can be several, 
they can be; first, the doctor will attribute to a coincidence the 
oneiric experience and the apa-


--- PAGE BREAK ---ces. Evidently, 
before these manifestations the deductions can be several, 
they can be; first, the doctor will attribute to a coincidence the 
oneiric experience and the apa-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
The second is that he will look for certain questions, which 
could be that this is a mere coincidence, a chance occurrence 
that has clearly impressed him, and for a few days he feels 
uneasy, but this is what generally happens to the sleeping 
man. Second, he will look for certain questions, and they may 
be the same that this is a mere coincidence, a fortuitous 
occurrence that has clearly impressed him and for some days 
he feels uneasy, but he does not go beyond this amazement. 
Third, the events have impressed him, taking him out of his 
rational arguments, generating questions that he cannot 
answer from his formal logic, leading him to look for answers 
in other directions. If this is so, man generally has something 
different in himself and this event has awakened within him a 
sense of search, and this virya (virya = awakened man) turns 
to inquire deeply into the subject and the relationships that 
may exist on it. This process of search and inquiry will lead 
him to certain answers that will transcend his cultural 
structure and will transport him to a world of mysticism and 
esoteric knowledge where the mythological, the magical, the 
philosophical will give him truths that he will never find in his 
formal logic. But we must consider that this situation only 
happens or occurs in men or women who have within them a 
sign, a gnostic pre-disposition that identifies them and 
differentiates them as spiritual beings.
It is interesting to note that the linguistic sciences, such as 
Logic in its modern or symbolic form, affirm a science where 
perspective and doubt are the most considered topics and 
premises, in certain propositions in which facts or phenomena 
where Aristotelian, syllogistic logic cannot grant true 
conclusions from the philosophical pragmatism that governs 
the culture of the uni- versal synarchy.
Truly, this modern logical science, the creation of true 
materialists, ramblers of a semantics without meaning, is not a
sophical pragmatism that governs 
the culture of the uni- versal synarchy.
Truly, this modern logical science, the creation of true 
materialists, ramblers of a semantics without meaning, is not a


--- PAGE BREAK ---that governs 
the culture of the uni- versal synarchy.
Truly, this modern logical science, the creation of true 
materialists, ramblers of a semantics without meaning, is not a


--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
In order to illustrate this, we will take and analyze certain words 
such as LOYALTY, HONOR and LOVE, which are not only 
confused and confusing, but have developed a symbolic 
logical language to confuse and disorient, without being able 
to interpret the noblest symbols existing in the human 
conscience. To exemplify this we will take and analyze certain 
words such as LOYALTY, HONOR and LOVE. We prove 
that any individual knows what these terms really mean for a 
simple reason and that is that they are SYMBOLS OF THE 
SPIRIT and are engraved in the soul and the human spirit by 
fire, they are inherent to the SELF, to the BEING; in such a 
way that even the son of any good peasant knows why he 
understands mystically the meaning of these words, even if he 
does not have a developed cultural structure. The symbolic 
linguistic science, the only thing that it does with its logical 
methods is to propose on these truths meanings and 
propositions that destroy the REAL AND SPIRITUAL that 
exists in them, and this is because for the synarchy and the 
powers that rule the universal atheistic and materialistic 
culture, TRUTH must be destroyed and all that is 
transcendental must be eliminated from the universal culture. 
To understand this it is enough to see the vagueness of 
language, where fewer and fewer words or concepts are used, 
where terms such as honor, loyalty, love, homeland, are 
incomprehensible. Unfortunately, man's cultural structure is 
being drastically reduced and it seems a paradox, because in a 
universe where technology and science are advancing rapidly, 
people's language skills are becoming more and more 
mediocre; this abysmal differentiation between academic 
thought and the language of the world.
and that of the common man is deliberate.
It is important to note that these academic logical sciences 
have their roots in certain cultural superstructures and that 
they have made real progress in fields such as medicine, 
physics, mathematics, computer science and other related 
sciences, but we must know that
ots in certain cultural superstructures and that 
they have made real progress in fields such as medicine, 
physics, mathematics, computer science and other related 
sciences, but we must know that


--- PAGE BREAK ---ral superstructures and that 
they have made real progress in fields such as medicine, 
physics, mathematics, computer science and other related 
sciences, but we must know that


--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
This is part of a plan and a strategy, because in reality their 
ultimate purpose is to confuse the man in search of eternal 
truths. If we analyze, for example, the legal sciences, we will 
understand that legal language is made up of a semantics and 
a semiotics that require a profound study for their 
comprehension, given the particularities of this science. Since 
their historical evolution, legal sciences developed from a 
semantics determined by a linguistic logic, where legal 
concepts were linguistic structures that were related to formal, 
common language and could be understood by the people. As 
they evolved, legal laws developed in a semantic structure 
where the legal linguistic semiotics is increasingly complex in 
its terminology, diversified and expanded in an endless 
number of laws that are increasingly difficult to understand 
and comprehend.
Undoubtedly, this process obeys a specific condition of 
history, and it is the evolution of civilization that has brought 
about the extension of all sciences to unheard-of limits. If we 
consider the field of mathematics or that of medicine and all 
the sciences in general, we will verify that the extension of the 
language of each particular science is immense, its 
developments in its semantic structural continents are only 
recognized by the professionals of each scientific branch. The 
writing of a medical prescription is only understood by a 
professional related to that science; the same is true of a legal 
dossier or a mathematical theory or an accounting balance 
sheet. Scientific languages are constituted by a semantic 
structuralism that is specific and codified in a hermeticism 
only accessible to the specialists of each science. The 
common man, faced with these cultural superstructures, has 
remained beyond the reach of understanding them for the 
simple reason that he develops within a semantic structure that 
is specific and codified in a hermeticism accessible only to 
specialists in each science.
the reach of understanding them for the 
simple reason that he develops within a semantic structure that 
is specific and codified in a hermeticism accessible only to 
specialists in each science.


--- PAGE BREAK ---anding them for the 
simple reason that he develops within a semantic structure that 
is specific and codified in a hermeticism accessible only to 
specialists in each science.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
The latter is not enough to understand the linguistic realities 
of these sciences.
In scientific languages there is a semiotic reality and their 
meanings are intrinsically related to phenomena or facts that 
are difficult to interpret for the common man. But the sciences 
have made possible the technological and scientific evolution, 
which has meant benefits and a better quality of life for man, 
but we must consider that this evolutionary quality of life, of a 
better life, is not the RIGHT OF ALL and that in reality, even 
though evolution allows us to see certain advances in rigor of 
the truth, this is simply an illusion. No matter how much they 
want to convince us that in the future everything will improve, 
we know that this is not so, because the majority of the people 
of this world live in MISERY AND POVERTY FROM 
WHICH THEY CAN NEVER ESCAPE.
The international synarchy and its technological sciences 
unroll their achievements and conquests for a sector of 
humanity 
and 
this 
is 
that 
of 
the 
MATERIALIST 
ADINERATES, because they are the only ones who can 
access these benefits, the vast majority of humanity is totally 
relegated from these structures, although the masses of the 
seventeenth century were in socio-economic conditions 
perhaps worse than those of the twentieth century, and today 
we do not suffer scourges such as the black plague of the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. It is undeniable that humanity 
and civilization, together with science, generated advances 
that eliminated certain conditions of suffering that plagued 
mankind and that are no longer suffered today. It is important 
to understand this and the HYPERBorean WISDOM does not 
deny science at any time, indeed, we defend this for the 
simple reason that thanks to the geniuses of hyperborean 
blood and noble spirits is that the world improved, but we 
must understand that there is a TYRANNY IN THE 
CENTERS OF
efend this for the 
simple reason that thanks to the geniuses of hyperborean 
blood and noble spirits is that the world improved, but we 
must understand that there is a TYRANNY IN THE 
CENTERS OF


--- PAGE BREAK ---simple reason that thanks to the geniuses of hyperborean 
blood and noble spirits is that the world improved, but we 
must understand that there is a TYRANNY IN THE 
CENTERS OF


--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
AND THAT THE WORLD, ALTHOUGH IT HAS 
ADVANCED TO A BETTER CONDITION, THE VAST 
MAJORITY OF HUMANITY STILL LIVES IN THE 
WORST CONDITIONS OF POVERTY AND POVERTY, 
AND THAT THE WORLD, ALTHOUGH IT HAS 
ADVANCED TO A BETTER CONDITION, STILL THE 
VAST MAJORITY OF HUMANITY LIVES IN THE 
WORST CONDITIONS OF POVERTY AND POVERTY.
EXISTENCE. We affirm this because it is language and 
cultural structure the limit between truth and lie, between 
awakening and being asleep and subject to the power of a 
world synarchy that pretends a massified man and a man 
entelechiated in professional.
What do we intend to point out with this analysis of 
science and its benefits for the world? What is the reality of 
them and what is true and what is a lie in them?
First, we will answer that with this analysis we intend to 
bring to the understanding of the virya that the sciences and 
religions, although they tend to generate a benefit, in them are 
found the ontological designs of the PROFESSION 
ARCHITECTURE and that in their languages are deposited 
certain mechanisms that activated in the consciousness of man 
will link him to their structures, alienating his being, capturing 
him definitively to their forms, which will never allow him to 
question himself beyond what is pre-eminently learned in 
them; The example given above of the physician is valid, but 
to understand even more, let us simply analyze the cultural 
reality of a structured scientist, for example in astronomy, and 
we will see how he is totally skeptical of other realities that 
de-structure him from his academic logic; A UFO may 
appear, an extraterrestrial may appear or his three-dimensional 
space may be modified and he will never be able to 
understand that it was real; it will be impossible for him to 
transcend the cognitive limits of his intellectual formation and 
we will find the same thing in the dogmatism and religious 
hatred that exists between a Christian priest and a Jewish 
or him to 
transcend the cognitive limits of his intellectual formation and 
we will find the same thing in the dogmatism and religious 
hatred that exists between a Christian priest and a Jewish 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
rabbi, or between a liberal democrat and a Marxist socialist.
This is why we intend to show the gnoseo-logical reality 
that exists in scientific premises and doctrines.


--- PAGE BREAK -----

28
rabbi, or between a liberal democrat and a Marxist socialist.
This is why we intend to show the gnoseo-logical reality 
that exists in scientific premises and doctrines.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
It is believed that it is science that will save the world, and 
this idea is a great lie, since science and religion are at the 
pure and exclusive service of the inter-national synarchy, 
which uses them according to its purposes and conveniences.
Now, if scientific or religious languages are structured on 
certain signs or symbols that respond to the synarchy, what 
ways of thinking should the awakened man develop in order 
to study these sciences without falling into the traps that exist 
within them?
We have begun this point practically in order to point out 
to the wise warrior and the hyperborean woman the difference 
existing in the language of the awakened virya and the pasu or 
man subjected to his animal soul. We argued that the sleeping 
man uses a habitual, formal language, which in logic is called 
syllogistic language because the conclusions and deductions 
of his propositions are common and simple, totally 
mechanical. That is to say that the common man in his usual, 
rational, syllogistic form does not use the intellect, he does not 
think, he only processes data instinctively, unconsciously, 
learned through culture and education. On the other hand, the 
virya, the wise warrior, uses his reason from a full deductive, 
symbolic, profound logic, transcending syllogistic thought and 
penetrating into a semantics and a gnoseological semiotics 
that transcends the limits of culture. What we intend to point 
out is that in the thinking of the awakened man, besides using 
his purest deductive and symbolic logic, a transcendental 
intuitive attitude intervenes in the thinking process, where 
phenomena and their realities are analyzed from a causal or 
causal perspective, in which certain questions are realized or 
answered with a superior knowledge.
The hyperborean comrade is not only able to discern on the
lities are analyzed from a causal or 
causal perspective, in which certain questions are realized or 
answered with a superior knowledge.
The hyperborean comrade is not only able to discern on the


--- PAGE BREAK ---from a causal or 
causal perspective, in which certain questions are realized or 
answered with a superior knowledge.
The hyperborean comrade is not only able to discern on the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
The fact or phenomenal events that occur on the cultural 
structure of the macrocosm, whether they have collective 
characteristics, be they of an economic, political or social 
order, but also have the power or the gnostic faculty to read 
and understand, because everything refers to itself. We must 
consider that the emergence of any collective event that 
transforms itself into a social phenomenon always has in itself 
a purpose, that of generating a meaning-generating action by 
the passués who will turn ontologically to become religious or 
join, either actively or passively to the social event. However, 
as we have studied in the DESIGN AND PURPOSES OF 
CULTURAL EVENTS IN
THE SYNARCHIC SYSTEMS, we understand that the same, 
beyond the purpose of adding a collective action of massive 
characteristics, have an essential particularity and it is that of 
their supraphinality, which is determined by the second 
intention deposited by the traitor gods and the demiurge or by 
the cultural synarchy, which is in reality, here in the world, 
the 
maker 
of 
these 
collective 
social 
events. 
This 
SUPRAFINALITY is to trap the warriors awake to their 
dogmas; the companion or the comrade must know how to 
read the events, to be able to understand what really exists in 
them and they must appeal to all their knowledge in cultural 
matters and for this there is the wisdom of our gods that from 
the eternal will inspire us in the truth and in the study of the 
HYPERBORN GNOSIS, which is today in the world the 
highest wisdom with which we can understand and see the 
reality.
For this reason we affirm that a cultural superstructure 
alone is not enough, the gnoseological power of an acute mind 
developed in the best systems of thought is not enough, a 
logical coldness in which we master the best technique of 
knowledge is not enough. The awakened warrior must, apart 
from
an acute mind 
developed in the best systems of thought is not enough, a 
logical coldness in which we master the best technique of 
knowledge is not enough. The awakened warrior must, apart 
from


--- PAGE BREAK ---oped in the best systems of thought is not enough, a 
logical coldness in which we master the best technique of 
knowledge is not enough. The awakened warrior must, apart 
from


--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
all methods of discernment, appeal to his TRANSCENDENT 
GNOSIS, which is a non-logical perspective or one that 
transcends pure human logic and which is embodied in a 
divine HYPERBOROUGH order of knowing.
The "human, simply human" is a limit if the warrior is not 
mystically related to the ETERNAL SYMBOLS, TO THE 
VIRUNS OF THE GODS OF THE POLES, OF A-POLO, OF 
THE COMING FROM THE ICE, OF NAVUTAN.
We must consider the reality of the warrior as in a terrain 
of war where the environment is totally hostile, where this 
reality is the enemy's camp and in which we are trapped, 
having as our mission the essential strategy of finding the 
direct routes to our trenches, to our security, which allow us to 
feed ourselves and recover strength and fortitude, both 
material and spiritual. But as long as we remain in the field of 
war, in the world of the inertia of the demiurge, of the agents 
of the ordered chaos of the enemy, we must remain absolutely 
on CONSISTENT ALERT, ON GUARD, AS IN THE 
MARCIA- 
ARTS, 
we 
must 
remain 
absolutely 
on 
CONSISTENT ALERT, ON GUARD, AS IN THE 
MARCIA- ARTS.
We must remember that in order not to fall into the traps of 
the gods of destiny and their agents in the world of illusion, it 
is necessary to be AWAKE and ready with weapons in our 
hands. That is why it is necessary to remember that in order 
not to fall into the traps of the gods of destiny and their agents 
in the world of illusion, it is necessary to be AWAKE and 
ready with weapons in our hands and determined to give 
everything without hesitation, because just a moment, a 
second in which we are careless, is enough for the DANCE 
OF MAYA to entangle us and trap us in some argument of 
pain.
COMRADE, 
COMRADE, 
WISE 
WARRIOR 
WALKYRIE, 
YOU 
MUST 
UNDERSTAND 
THAT 
WISDOM IS HAVING THE PRESENT BETWEEN YOUR 
HANDS AND THIS ALLEGORY REPRESENTS BEING 
d trap us in some argument of 
pain.
COMRADE, 
COMRADE, 
WISE 
WARRIOR 
WALKYRIE, 
YOU 
MUST 
UNDERSTAND 
THAT 
WISDOM IS HAVING THE PRESENT BETWEEN YOUR 
HANDS AND THIS ALLEGORY REPRESENTS BEING 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
AWAKE, THE


--- PAGE BREAK ---

33
TO REMAIN ALERT WAITING FOR THE UNEXPECTED, 
BECAUSE THE MYSTERY OF LIBERATION IS THE 
MASTERY OF ONESELF, OF OUR SOUL CREATED 
FROM THE UNCREATED SELF AND IN ITS POWER TO 
KNOW HOW TO FACE THE WORLD AND ITS 
CIRCUMSTANCES WITH HONOR AND COURAGE, 
WITHOUT FEAR OF LIFE OR THE WORLD OF 
SHADOWS, TO FACE DEATH ITSELF IN ORDER TO 
CONQUER, CONQUER, CONQUER.
WILL, COURAGE, HONOR AND KNOWING HOW 
TO RECOGNIZE THE ERROR SO AS NOT TO FALL 
AGAIN AND IF SO, TO HAVE THE CONSCIOUS 
SUFFERING IN IT UNTIL BEING ABLE TO RECOVER 
THE PSYCHIC AND SPIRITUAL FORCES TO DESTROY 
THE DARK, THE DARK AND EVIL.
BECAUSE THE ENEMY HAS THOUSANDS OF 
WORLDS OF ILLUSION, OF SEDUCTIONS AND EACH 
ONE OF THEM IS A PARADISE IN WHICH TO REMAIN 
THERE IS THE AMBROSIA, THE PANACEA, THE 
OASIS IN WHICH EVERYTHING IS PLEASURE, 
EVERYTHING IS SENSUAL.
THE WARRIOR IN THE WORLD OF ILLUSION HAS 
THE DUTY TO AWAKEN AND REORIENT HIMSELF TO 
THE PATH OF ORIGIN, AND FOR THIS HE MUST PASS 
THROUGH ALL THE DRAMATIC AND TRAGIC 
ALTERNATIVES OF EXISTENCE, BECAUSE THE 
DEMIURGE NEVER ALLOWS THE WARRIOR TO 
ESCAPE 
FROM 
HIS 
REALITY 
WITHOUT 
DEMONSTRATING BEFORE HIM HIS TRUE SPIRITUAL 
DIMENSION, THAT IS, WITHOUT BEING A WISE MAN, 
WITHOUT FULLY BECOMING A GOD.
HE WILL THEREFORE SUBJECT IT TO ALL 
POSSIBLE TESTS, HE WILL THROW IT INTO THE 
WORLD OF ILLUSION IN THE MOST DIVERSE 
REALITIES, FROM


--- PAGE BREAK ---WISE MAN, 
WITHOUT FULLY BECOMING A GOD.
HE WILL THEREFORE SUBJECT IT TO ALL 
POSSIBLE TESTS, HE WILL THROW IT INTO THE 
WORLD OF ILLUSION IN THE MOST DIVERSE 
REALITIES, FROM


--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
THE MOST PARADISIACAL SPACES OF SENSUALITY 
TO THE MOST TRAGIC TIMES OF PAIN. MAN WILL 
NEVER IMAGINE THE PATH HE WILL HAVE TO 
TRAVEL ON THE PATH OF THE WISE WARRIOR, ON 
THE PATH OF LIBERATION, BUT HE HAD BETTER BE 
PREPARED TO RESIST AND FIGHT, BECAUSE ONLY 
BY OVERCOMING ALL THE TRIALS HE WILL 
ENCOUNTER ON HIS PATH WILL HE BE ABLE TO 
REALIZE IN HIMSELF THE HYPERBOREAN BEING.
THIS IS THE GREAT DILEMMA OF THE WARRIOR, 
TO CONSCIOUSLY ASSUME THE DESTINY OF WAR, 
OF COMBAT, BECAUSE THIS IS THE REALITY OF THE 
WARRIOR IF HE ASSUMES HIS TRUTH, SINCE SUCH IS 
THE HOSTILITY THAT THE DEMIURGE WILL OPPOSE 
HIM BEFORE HIMSELF THAT HE WILL NEVER AGAIN 
SLEEP, FEEL HAPPY, FEEL JOY. BECAUSE TO BE 
DIFFERENT, 
TO 
BE 
CONSCIOUS, 
IS 
TO 
BE 
TRANSCENDENT WITH THE DEFINITIVE RIGHT TO 
THE ETERNAL, AND IN THIS THE JOY OF THE SOUL, 
THE HAPPINESS OF THE SENSUAL AND HEDONISTIC 
LIFE DIES, DISAPPEARS, BECAUSE WITHOUT A 
DOUBT THEY ARE ESSENTIAL PARTS OF THE 
ILLUSION AND ONE CANNOT SERVE TWO MASTERS, 
ONE IS EITHER WITH THE ONE OR WITH THE OTHER.
THUS WE WARN THOSE WHO PRETEND TO 
ACQUIRE THE HIGHEST WISDOM THAT IN THIS 
SPACE OF EXISTENCE ARE THE WORST CONDITIONS 
TO WHICH THE SPIRITS ARE SUBJECTED, BECAUSE 
THIS IS THE WORLD OF PAIN, OF DIFFERENT 
REALITIES, THIS SPACE-TIME IS THE WORLD WHERE 
ALL THE WORLDS COINCIDE. THIS IS WHY THE 
SPIRIT IS THROWN INTO THIS WORLD, INTO THE 
LAST OF THE WORLDS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---D OF PAIN, OF DIFFERENT 
REALITIES, THIS SPACE-TIME IS THE WORLD WHERE 
ALL THE WORLDS COINCIDE. THIS IS WHY THE 
SPIRIT IS THROWN INTO THIS WORLD, INTO THE 
LAST OF THE WORLDS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
THE WORST OF ALL WORLDS, THE WORST OF 
HELLS, BECAUSE IN IT THE HIGHEST OF HEAVENS 
AND THE LOWEST OF HELLS COINCIDE IN A 
MYSTERIOUS AND SYNCHRONISTIC WAY, AND SO 
THE SPIRIT MUST TRAVEL THROUGH THIS VALLEY 
OF TEARS, IN ORDER TO AWAKEN AND REMEMBER 
THE ORIGIN, ITS ETERNAL HOMELAND.
Comrades, we will now enter into a historical retrograde, 
in order to understand the reality of what has happened in 
history, we recommend the comrade of unbreakable will to 
study this treatise carefully, because this knowledge will be 
tactically useful for his strategy of spiritual liberation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---rade of unbreakable will to 
study this treatise carefully, because this knowledge will be 
tactically useful for his strategy of spiritual liberation.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
4. HISTORICAL ANALYSIS OF THE ORIGINS AND 
DIFFERENCES OF ORIENTAL AND OCCIDENTAL 
CULTURES
We want to make a condensed but precise analysis, to 
unveil a mystery that since the beginning of history is still 
kept in a deep mantle of uncertainty and fusion. This is 
because the origin of certain cultural legacies, specifically of 
the European Mediterranean peoples, Greeks, Etruscans, 
Romans, 
Latins 
or 
Nordic 
Europeans, 
Germanic, 
Scandinavian 
Vikings, 
never 
anthropology, 
ethnology, 
ethnolinguistics, history, have described the true origin of 
these peoples or nations, that is to say of all the Aryan Indo-
Germanic races that invaded European soil. The study of the 
origin of these western races and cultures is what we are 
really 
interested 
in 
knowing, 
because 
they 
were 
HYPERBORN, they came from beyond the boreal, arctic, 
descended from the northern pole, they had a physiognomy 
whose aesthetic aspect was totally different from any racial 
group evolved from the human animal, being slender, blond 
and with pink eyes, with a strong anatomical structure and a 
superior intelligence. These so-called Aryans, of white 
ethnicity, had a well-developed culture in all fields of 
knowledge, mastered hyperborean architecture and the art of 
war, were politically aristocratic and professed a solar 
polytheism. We will also study the cultures of Semitic origin, 
but we must understand that the history that will be unveiled 
is EUROPEAN HYPERBorean history and it is contained in 
their races and cultures.
Undoubtedly, academic history imposed the historical 
belief that the cultures of European peoples come from the 
East, which have certain Semitic overtones. For example, that


--- PAGE BREAK ---Undoubtedly, academic history imposed the historical 
belief that the cultures of European peoples come from the 
East, which have certain Semitic overtones. For example, that


--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
In the Dorian Greeks, in their language, in their alphabet, 
there were Semitic, Phoenician questions; or that in the 
Greeks or Romans, in their cults, there were certain rites such 
as that of human sacrifice, as in the religious cults of the 
Druids, the Jews, Phoenicians or Carthaginians, etc. Others 
maintain that the Greeks and Romans had certain beliefs about 
immortality or reincarnation similar to the Brahmins of India, 
or that they participated in certain astrological beliefs like the 
Chaldeans or the Babylonians, etc. About the Greeks, the 
Etruscans or the Romans, the same thing always; history has 
somehow tried to relate their Western, warrior and solar 
cultures with the Eastern Semitic cultures; the reality is that 
ALL THIS IS A BIG LIE, INVENTED BY HISTORIATORS 
WHO ARE AT THE SERVICE OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
SYNARCHY, WHO TODAY HOLD POWER AND WHO 
ARE SERVANT TO THE DEMIURGUS AND THE 
SHAMBALA GODS (city
where the traitor gods and the hierarchies of the "white lodge" 
reside), SUSTAINERS OF THE MONO-THEISTIC LUNAR 
CULTURES.
Undoubtedly, the TRUTH will never be told, because it 
awakens consciousness, but sciences such as Philology, 
Archaeology, 
Comparative 
Mythology, 
Ethnology, 
Evolutionary Biology, Idealist and Existentialist Philosophy, 
and especially HYPERBORN HISTORY, TATIENTLY 
AFFIRM THAT CULTURAL DIFFERENCES EXIST.
and spiritual between the Semitic and the Aryan. Therefore, 
this analysis of history affirms that the creation and the 
evolutions that it has undergone is a path that from the 
beginning, 
when 
the 
gods 
decided 
to 
realize 
the 
cosmogenesis, was developed on the basis of a system of 
TRIAL AND ERROR, this has led to the existence of several 
creations and evolutions that were a failure, for example that 
of the dinos.
e 
cosmogenesis, was developed on the basis of a system of 
TRIAL AND ERROR, this has led to the existence of several 
creations and evolutions that were a failure, for example that 
of the dinos.


--- PAGE BREAK ---developed on the basis of a system of 
TRIAL AND ERROR, this has led to the existence of several 
creations and evolutions that were a failure, for example that 
of the dinos.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
saurians, which was totally destroyed, or that of the primates 
or hominids, which is the last existing one. The Hyperborean 
Wisdom maintains that such a hominid was POTENTIALLY 
designed in an essential purpose by the DEMIURGE to fulfill 
an important task, that of being the POSTOR OF SENTI- DO 
and CREATOR OF CULTURE. But we must understand that 
the great work of the demiurge Jehovah Satan and his hosts of 
hierarchies of gods traitors to the eternal spirit is his material 
universe, the world, later they create the hominid or pasu with 
the only purpose of generating a being that ADMITS 
ESTETICALLY and discovers GNOSEOLOGICALLY or 
scientifically his WORK, the creation. But for some reason 
this species failed in its essential and fundamental mission for 
which it was created and again its inevitable extinction was 
evaluated, but what was the "miracle" that allowed its rapid 
evolution? The incorporation of a different element: THE 
ETERNAL SPIRIT, DIVINE BEING that is not of this 
created and evolved world, it is EXTRATERRESTRIAL, OF 
AN UNCREATED AND TRASCENDENT ORI- GENE.
We wish to specify that the created man, evolved from the 
primate, the hominid, the Neanderthal man and finally the 
Cro-Magnon man, who was able to evolve and MODIFY HIS 
GENETIC KEY thanks to the ENCOUNAGEMENT OF THE 
DIVINE SPIRITS, extra-terrestrial beings, was able to evolve 
and MODIFY HIS GENETIC KEY thanks to the 
ENCOUNAGEMENT OF THE DIVINE SPIRITS, extra-
terrestrial beings, who were able to evolve and modify his 
genetic key.
The earthlings, and the MIXING OF BLOODS between the 
Pashu man and the gods. In addition, the traitor gods, chief 
leaders of the DEMIURG, THE ONE, generated certain 
systems of thought that were introjected into these primitive 
cultures, which allowed these races to evolve, to make an 
ontological leap. With the incorporation of the eternal spirit 
into the animal man, an individual of double nature was 
generated, half AN EVIL and half DIVINE, as the Gnostics 
olve, to make an 
ontological leap. With the incorporation of the eternal spirit 
into the animal man, an individual of double nature was 
generated, half AN EVIL and half DIVINE, as the Gnostics 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
and later the Manichaeans rightly maintained.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
It is here where we enter a particularly obscure aspect of 
history, since there is no document or cultural, archaeological, 
anthropological, historical, etc., that shows us what happened, 
what were the facts, the events that allowed these races that 
were practically animals, primitive in their cultural forms, 
without language or writing, to TAKE AN ONTOLOGICAL 
LEAP AND EVOLVE AND DEVELOP CONSCIOUSNESS.
In reality what happened only exists in certain myths and 
legends, in certain accounts of antiquity, the Greek 
philosopher PLATO, in the TIMEOUS and the CRITIAS, 
expounded two dialogues about these mysteries. According to 
the account in the Timaeus, the Athenian statesman SOLON 
tells a story related by an EGYPTIAN PRIEST, who 
maintained that ATLANTIA was an island larger than LIDIA 
and ASIA MINOR put together. The priest, who belonged to 
the cult of Amon-RA, revealed to him that on the island 
Atlantis there existed a superior, very powerful civilization, 
which developed about 12,000 years before the Athenians and 
which had CONQUERNED ALL THE PEOPLES OF THE 
MEDITERRANEAN, EXCEPT THE
GREEKS. In the Critias, Plato again expresses himself about 
Atlantis, describing the nation as a utopian republic. These are 
the only accounts that affirm the existence of Atlantis and it is 
interesting to analyze and visualize with the inner vision, 
which is the WISE WARRIOR'S FACULTY OF ANAMNE- 
SIA, the account that this great philosopher made in TIMEO.


--- PAGE BREAK ---it is 
interesting to analyze and visualize with the inner vision, 
which is the WISE WARRIOR'S FACULTY OF ANAMNE- 
SIA, the account that this great philosopher made in TIMEO.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
5. STUDY OF THE GNOSEOLOGICAL TECHNIQUES 
TO 
OPEN 
UP 
THE 
HISTORICAL 
CULTURAL 
RECORDS
We will stop at this point to indicate to the scholars how 
we should proceed in order to understand the historical 
themes that we will describe below. It is for this reason that 
we affirm the need to know the gnoseological techniques to 
open and operate on the cultural registers; a technique already 
instructed previously but which I will state again. With our 
faculty of gnostic discernment, we will penetrate into the 
historical context (in this case Plato's account) and step by 
step we will open the SACRED SYMBOLS, but before 
opening them we will resign them with the egoic will of the 
EGO by projecting on each symbol or archetype an 
ETERNAL SYMBOL, a TRANSCENIC ROYAL IMAGE.
DENTE with which we will isolate the archetypal images 
contained in the sacred symbols of the analyzed story.
In this case we have in the beginning of the same two 
essential images to visualize. First, Plato names SOLON, 
referring to him as the transmitter of a story. We know that 
Solon is one of the seven sages of Greece and this symbol 
brings us no inconvenience to resign it, because in reality 
there is little about him to possess this symbol SACRALITY, 
unless the virya, the man who is making an analysis of this 
record is a philosopher, if so he must make a resignation of 
this symbol, but we will take the case that he is not and we 
will continue. The second symbol that stands out is the figure 
of the EGYPTIAN PRIEST and it is there where we must stop 
and apply all our gnoseological power of inner vision and 
begin to resign this SACRED ARCHETYPE, because on this 
image we will find the symbol of the EGYPTIAN PRIEST, 
and it is there where we must stop and apply all our 
gnoseological power of inner vision and begin to resign this 
SACRED ARCHETYPE.
n this 
image we will find the symbol of the EGYPTIAN PRIEST, 
and it is there where we must stop and apply all our 
gnoseological power of inner vision and begin to resign this 
SACRED ARCHETYPE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---l find the symbol of the EGYPTIAN PRIEST, 
and it is there where we must stop and apply all our 
gnoseological power of inner vision and begin to resign this 
SACRED ARCHETYPE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
We are a sacred symbol designated by The One who 
possesses upon himself a power that can capture the 
consciousness of VIRYA, of the awakened man.
This is so because the image of the priest refers to us and 
triggers in our unconscious the emergence of the 
SACERDOTAL complex, which possesses a series of 
relations and associations of diverse axiological contents, that 
is, of values, according to the magnitude of the semiotic and 
cultural content of the man who opens this register; that is, if 
the man is a pasu and has priestly cultural preeminences in his 
being because, for example, he is a Christian priest or a 
Rosicrucian, or a Mason, or simply a devout Christian or of 
any priestly religious line, this complex will generate a 
connection of meaning; this complex will generate a 
connection of meaning between the image of the story, the 
Egyptian priest and the root of the priestly complex, which 
may cause the emergence of the second intention, which is the 
INTERVENTION OF A SACRALIZING SIGN THAT WILL 
CAUSE THE UNLOCKING OF A RELIGIOUS MYTH IN 
THE CONSCIOUSNESS.
OF PASU. This is directly the intervention of the demiurge 
through the sacred priestly symbol, which will trigger various 
processes in the consciousness of man.
First, a relationship will emerge in which the sacred sense 
will submerge man's consciousness in a feeling of devotion, 
thus alienating the will of the warrior, not allowing this to 
continue with the opening of the cultural register. It is 
interesting to note the figure of a priest because it situates us 
in the fact that this mystery of Atlantis was inherited by the 
Egyptian sacer- dotal cults of Amun-Ra, and deducing this 
will allow us to understand that the Atlanteans were a society 
where the sacer- dotal had a very singular power, perhaps 
similar to the Egyptian sacer- dotes.
Second, the relationship and the second intention emerge, 
which generates the situation described above, plus a 
substratum
d a very singular power, perhaps 
similar to the Egyptian sacer- dotes.
Second, the relationship and the second intention emerge, 
which generates the situation described above, plus a 
substratum


--- PAGE BREAK ---wer, perhaps 
similar to the Egyptian sacer- dotes.
Second, the relationship and the second intention emerge, 
which generates the situation described above, plus a 
substratum


--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
emotional that makes a MYTH emerge and unfold (in the 
FUNDAMENTALS OF HYPERBORNE WISDOM)
In the study of the psychology of the pasu and the virya, in the 
points THE MYTH AND THE FANTASY, we can find an 
extensive and elaborate analysis). The pasu aligns himself 
with the myth, suffering from the complex that underlies the 
myth and its consequences, which can lead him to madness 
(neuropsychiatrists are full of mystical madmen who believe 
themselves to be envoys or prophets of God) or simply 
modify forever the reality of the story, because the myth will 
act by structuring the pasu in another significant context that 
will automatically distance him from the truth.
Third, if the warrior is an awakened hyperborean virya, 
then he will proceed to reassign to the Egyptian priestly 
symbol a value that does not possess any sacralizing power, 
placing on it an ETERNAL SYMBOL that will prevent the 
emergence of any sacred symbol or second intentions, thus 
being able to continue with the opening of the cultural 
registry.
Having understood these steps, we will continue analyzing 
the story and we find in it the emergence of another symbol, 
the ATLANTIC, superior civilization, and it is this 
PRINCIPLE that generates a question mark in our 
unconscious, since we have nothing about this concept in our 
cultural structure. If this happens, the virya will remain 
neutral, that is to say, his being will suffer from the being in 
itself of the questioning, and this must be overcome. If this 
happens we will find ourselves with another symbol, the 
Atlanteans conquered all the Mediterranean peoples except 
the Greeks 10,000 years before the Romans. This principle is 
THE MOST SIGNIFICANT RELATIONSHIP, because if the 
warrior has a GNOSTIC predisposition and is really interested 
in knowing the truth of the story and of this history, in this 
SYMBOL he will find and be able to see and understand the 
entire mystery of the
as a GNOSTIC predisposition and is really interested 
in knowing the truth of the story and of this history, in this 
SYMBOL he will find and be able to see and understand the 
entire mystery of the


--- PAGE BREAK ---osition and is really interested 
in knowing the truth of the story and of this history, in this 
SYMBOL he will find and be able to see and understand the 
entire mystery of the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
Atlantis.
And this is the truth that can be verified if we open this 
record and resign its sacred symbols, because ATLANTIDA 
EXISTED and in it a great culture developed that was 
contemporary to the primitive tribes of the peoples that 
resided in ASIA, AFRICA, EUROPE AND AMERICA,
12,000 to 10,000 years before Christ. The ATLANTIDA was 
a city-state, a fortress founded by the extraterrestrial gods who 
descended into the material order, into their own creation 
solely in order to provide the necessary elements in which 
were contained and still are, a gno-seological wisdom of 
ontological transformation, which they called the mystery of 
the kalachakra key.
Before proceeding further, we will tell a story, an event 
that forever changed the destiny of the spirit and of man in the 
world. In heaven there was a confrontation between Jehovah, 
the god of matter, and the spiritual hosts of Lucifer. In this 
cosmic contest, the agents of the material order succeeded in 
getting certain gods disloyal to the eternal, traitors to the 
spirit, to ally themselves with the strategies of the One, 
Jehovah Satan, and to participate in the evolutionary plans of 
matter. This dramatic event allowed the eternal and pure 
spirits to be deceived by a mystery of A-mor and thrown into 
the confines of the material order, hence thousands of divine 
beings were hypostasized and incarnated in the world. To this 
was due the appearance and emergence of the white races, 
causing this event the rebellion of Lucifer. There is a very 
common error in the interpretation of the creationist myth, 
LUCIFER, THE LIGHT-BEARING ANGEL, THE MOST 
BEAUTIFUL, 
DOES 
NOT 
PARTICIPATE 
IN 
THE 
CREATION MYTH.
CREATION has nothing to do with the existence of this 
insane work, rebelling against its creation. Subsequently, the 
synarchy has been in charge of affirming and confusing 
Lucifer with Satan, a more sinister lie because the real
existence of this 
insane work, rebelling against its creation. Subsequently, the 
synarchy has been in charge of affirming and confusing 
Lucifer with Satan, a more sinister lie because the real


--- PAGE BREAK ---insane work, rebelling against its creation. Subsequently, the 
synarchy has been in charge of affirming and confusing 
Lucifer with Satan, a more sinister lie because the real


--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
Satan is The One, the great architect, creator and organizer of 
matter and of the evolution of its TYPICAL MONADS 
(entities). For this reason, from the Unknowable, from the 
eternal, Lucifer and his divine comrades decided to come to 
the rescue of the races of pure spirit, for this reason they 
descended to the material order and created an extraterrestrial 
city, AGARTHA, FROM WHERE THEY ASSIST THE 
CAMARDAS STUCK IN
THE WORLD, FOR ITS LIBERATION. It is fundamental to 
clarify a point of history, an event that generates confu- sion; 
when the gods decide to create the material order, together 
and in a united way these COSMOCRATORS DIVI- NOS 
generated a COSMOGENESIS, the UNIVERSE and the 
EVOLUTIONARY PLAN come from it. But in that plan it 
was not contemplated to animate the matter, to endow it with 
"spirituality" and it is there where the antagonism, the 
disagreement and the division of the gods in two sides, 
factions that we described before, is generated.
But not all the gods agreed to the creation of a 
MATERIAL 
UNIVERSE, 
OF 
THIS 
DEMENTIAL 
INFERNO, AND EVEN LESS TO GIVE IT TO THEMSELF
OF "SPIRITUALITY". We must understand that these gods, 
from the INCOGNOSCIBLE, FROM THE PURE AND 
ABSOLUTE ETERNAL WORLDS decide to make a 
STRATEGIC OPTION to the gods who participated in the 
CREATIONIST ACT OF THE MATERIAL ORDER.
Among them KRISTOS LUCIFER is the leader of the 
gods who directly oppose the plans of the demiurge JEHO- 
VÁ SATANAS and the gods of matter, deciding to RESCUE 
his comrades, comrades deceived and subjected to the 
destinies of the traitor gods. To do so, he DISSEMINATES 
AND CREATES AN OPPOSITION STRATEGY directed 
from a CHARISMATIC center, from a magically walled city 
located between HEAVEN AND THE DENOMINAL POLE.
of the traitor gods. To do so, he DISSEMINATES 
AND CREATES AN OPPOSITION STRATEGY directed 
from a CHARISMATIC center, from a magically walled city 
located between HEAVEN AND THE DENOMINAL POLE.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
AGARTHA. We must understand that these gods decide to 
fight against the material order when the plans of THE ONE 
had already evolved to the point that the ATLANTY 
REIGNED and all the gods ruled in a unified way; THAT IS 
TO SAY, THE GREAT CRISM, THE DIVISION, THE 
DISENCHANTMENT, 
THE 
DISINTERGENCE, 
THE 
DIVISION OF THE ONE had NOT YET HAD OCCURRED.
BETWEEN THEM. Before the deception and submission of 
the spiritual races to the chaining to matter, this action 
generates discord among the gods and some rebel, but the 
majority 
disloyally 
participates 
in 
the 
strategy 
of 
TRAITORSHIP 
AND 
THE 
CAUTIVERY 
AND 
TRAITORSHIP. But the rebels turn to KRISTOS LUCIFER 
and ally themselves, denouncing the colossal and insane work 
of the TRAITOR SIDDHAS, generating this action a 
confrontation, a WAR BETWEEN THE GODS THAT 
BEGAN IN HEAVEN AND WAS TRANSFERRED TO 
EARTH.
That is why the ATLANTIDA WAS DESTROYED BY 
ACTION OF WAR, but when this happened the work was 
already consummated and the human animal had undergone 
its neurophysiological and psychological metamorphosis by 
the action of the traitor siddhas who had already modified its 
genetic key.
As we have related, the gods of the material order and the 
traitor sid- dhas descended to their own creation and founded 
Atlantis, where they planned the strategies to be followed, 
which had only one purpose: TO EVOLVE THE CREATED 
CREATURES BECAUSE THEIR EVOLUTION HAD 
BEEN
The company developed certain tactics in order to achieve 
these objectives.
First, they introduced certain architectural principles, 
building stone structures that were distributed in different 
geographical points according to their science. The 
Atlanteans, when they migrated after the cataclysm that 
chitectural principles, 
building stone structures that were distributed in different 
geographical points according to their science. The 
Atlanteans, when they migrated after the cataclysm that 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
destroyed the


--- PAGE BREAK ---istributed in different 
geographical points according to their science. The 
Atlanteans, when they migrated after the cataclysm that 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
destroyed the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
Atlantis developed or described a migratory journey that 
began in the West and culminated in the East. First they 
penetrated Europe, in two migratory currents, one began its 
journey through Spain and from there it developed its lithic 
tactics, penetrating the European peoples approximately at the 
beginning of the NEOLITHIC. In fact, these migratory 
currents are the ones that started the Neolithic, beginning in 
all of Western Europe from Spain, France, England, Italy, 
Germany and Greece in its first Atlantean migratory current. 
At the same time a second migratory current penetrated in 
AFRICA, especially touched the coastal groups taking the 
EGYPTIAN people as the direct heirs of the highest Atlantean 
wisdom, generating with this people a CULTURAL PACT 
that marked the Egyptians as the first people CHOSEN by the 
representatives of the ONE in the world. In Egypt they taught 
certain architectural and mortuary techniques, such as the 
construction of PYRAMIDS AND MUMMIFICATION; the 
mortuary cult of mummification or the construction of tombs 
such as the pyramids or the Neolithic tombs in England stand 
out as one of the most specific symbols and legacies of the 
treacherous synarchy and we can distinguish in it the 
WORSHIP TO THE SOUL, TO THE BODY, TO THE 
CREATED. That is why the lunar priestly cultures paid 
homage to death by surrounding themselves with very specific 
mortuary rites and ceremonies, this being one of the esoteric 
sciences par excellence of the religious synarchy. The KING 
PRIESTS, or pharaohs, with the construction of the 
PYRAMIDS DEFINITIVELY SEALED THE COVENANT.
CULTURAL SACERDOTAL with the gods of matter and 
were the CHOSEN PEOPLE until the Hebrew people 
inherited this covenant.
The lithic structures were part of a priestly magic that 
generated an alteration in the geography, modifying the
tter and 
were the CHOSEN PEOPLE until the Hebrew people 
inherited this covenant.
The lithic structures were part of a priestly magic that 
generated an alteration in the geography, modifying the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
topographical 
fields 
that 
influenced 
the 
collective 
consciousness of the people who lived near them; we can still 
observe in certain places of Europe great stone monuments 
like STONEHENGE or KARNAK, etc., whose construction 
history erroneously attributes to the Celtic tribes. The truth is 
that these machines of psychological transformation were 
embedded by the Atlanteans who responded to the strategies 
of the creator gods of material evolution. THERE IS A 
CERTAIN MYSTERY ABOUT THE CONSTRUCTIONS 
OF THE
The scientific magicians of Atlantis knew about this and that 
is why the first strategic move to modify the ontological level 
of the races WAS TO ENCLOSE THE GEOGRAPHY 
WHERE THEY DWELLED, WITH STRUCTURES
LITICAL RAS and embedded in them signs in SPIRAL or 
CIRCULAR, which is the SACRED SIGN OF THE 
ANIMAL.
MAN or PASU, and also in PIRAMIDAL form.
Secondly, in Atlantis certain beings were prepared who 
were later introduced in the peoples of evolved races, these 
instructors and trainers of culture are known as MESSIAHS 
or PROPHETS and they were Atlanteans who had a purpose, 
that of preparing certain groups (PRIEST CLASS) who had 
the responsibility of guiding the peoples in their cultural 
evolution after they, the Atlanteans, retired. These prophets or 
messiahs, sent by the Atlanteans, coming from the terrestrial 
Atlantis, or from the extra-terrestrial SHAMBALA, CITY OF 
THE CREATING GODS OF THE
MATERIAL ORDER, they implemented a SACERDOTAL 
CULTURAL COVENANT with their created and evolved 
peoples or races.
Thirdly, they generated the racial mixtures by becoming 
blood related, which allowed racial improvement to take 
place. This system is the essential part of


--- PAGE BREAK ---peoples or races.
Thirdly, they generated the racial mixtures by becoming 
blood related, which allowed racial improvement to take 
place. This system is the essential part of


--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
the strategy of evolution and ontological transformation, 
because the mixture of the blood of extraterrestrial origin of 
the Atlanteans and of the evolved races of the hominid 
allowed a biotype of individual where the state of pre-
consciousness that the primitive man carried was modified by 
the acquisition of a superior blood, which generated a greater 
CONSCIOUSNESS and therefore a greater CULTURAL 
evolution.
Fourth, the CULTURAL PACT is structured on a 
fundamental premise, the absolute submission of the being to 
the god, to The One, the definitive affirmation of the being as 
a creature of god unconditionally subject to his divine law and 
to the fulfillment of the strategies of the metaphysical 
synarchy of The One, regardless of the consequences, neither 
individual nor collective. In the cultural pact of the gods with 
men, immolation, individual sacrifice and collective holocaust 
are conditions assumed by the adepts and brothers of the 
religious or esoteric brotherhoods and lodges of the world 
synarchy.
Having developed these four premises, we must affirm 
that the priestly cultures of EGYPT, INDIA, ISRAEL, etc., 
are a cultural legacy of the ATLANTIC.
On the other hand, we must understand that the 
aristocratic, royal, warrior, solar cultures of the Aryan peoples 
are cultures that have their historical legacy from the 
HYPERBoreans and their fortress city was at the pole, or near 
the POLE, THESE GODS BEING THOSE WHO ASSISTED 
THE 
ARIAN 
EUROPEAN 
PEOPLES 
LIKE 
THE 
ETRUSCANS, GREEKS, ROMANS AND ALL THE 
NORDIC PEOPLES.
COS. That is why there existed between the Luciferian gods 
and men a COVENANT OF BLOOD AND HONOR, 
protected in THE WARRIOR. Thus, in their PHILOSOPHIES 
OR 
MYSTE- 
RIOS, 
THE 
SACERDOTAL 
WAS 
SUBORDINATE
s why there existed between the Luciferian gods 
and men a COVENANT OF BLOOD AND HONOR, 
protected in THE WARRIOR. Thus, in their PHILOSOPHIES 
OR 
MYSTE- 
RIOS, 
THE 
SACERDOTAL 
WAS 
SUBORDINATE


--- PAGE BREAK ---between the Luciferian gods 
and men a COVENANT OF BLOOD AND HONOR, 
protected in THE WARRIOR. Thus, in their PHILOSOPHIES 
OR 
MYSTE- 
RIOS, 
THE 
SACERDOTAL 
WAS 
SUBORDINATE


--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
TOTALLY TO THE MILITARY, TO THE ROYALTY, TO 
THE NOBILITY, TO THE KING OR EMPEROR.
It is important to understand that these WHITE RACES 
did not come from evolution, like the SEMITIC BLACK 
RACES, but that they were THROWN INTO THE WORLD, 
INTO THE MATERIAL ORDER, BY SOME MYSTERY 
THAT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO DEVELOP.
That is why they are recent, they appeared in 
approximately 1,500 BC, the Etruscans, the Achaeans, the 
Minoans, the Spartans and Athenians Dorians, the Latins, 
Romans, etc., came down from the European north, 
Scandinavian peninsula, or the North Pole and emerged 
carrying a CULTURE superior to any civilization of the 
Aegean and Mediterranean. They themselves already 
possessed in their being a superior ontological awakening, 
because the EUROPEAN ARYANS WERE RACES 
ORIGINATING from the Aegean and the Mediterranean.
OF OTHER WORLDS, that by a deception, a trap of the 
Demiurge THE ONE generated this situation, for the simple 
reason of elevating even more the soul evolution of the animal 
man with the RACIAL MIXING OF THE SUBRACES 
WITH THE EUROPEAN PURE RACES.
So the HYPERBORN gods intervened, for they saw their 
comrades trapped in the world of The One and decided to 
assist them. To this end they sent their best BODIES OF 
BLOOD, LORDS OF WAR, TO AWAKEN AND GUIDE 
THE PURE RACES BACK TO THEIR ORIGIN, TO THEIR 
SPIRITUAL HOMELAND.
We must consider that the Hyperboreans and their warlords 
developed opposition strategies and one of them was that 
wherever the traitor gods passed and left cultural vestiges 
such 
as 
constructions, 
lithic 
monuments, 
etc., 
they 
DESTROYED THEM OR IF THEY DID NOT MODIFY 
THEIR SYMBOLS.
LOS. That is why even archaeology cannot explain certain 
symbols inscribed on top of others or the intentional 
monuments, 
etc., 
they 
DESTROYED THEM OR IF THEY DID NOT MODIFY 
THEIR SYMBOLS.
LOS. That is why even archaeology cannot explain certain 
symbols inscribed on top of others or the intentional 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
destruction of


--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
This was due to the fact that both sides systematically fought 
each other throughout history, and even the war continues. It 
is interesting to understand the abysmal differences between 
the cultural languages bequeathed to the peoples conquered by 
the black Atlanteans (we will call them so because the 
Hyperboreans maintained that the Atlanteans were true black 
magicians) and the cultural inheritances of the Hyperboreans. 
One of the most significant is language and writing, if we 
appeal to our Gnostic understanding we can see very 
significant elements between one and the other, for example 
between the Hebrew alphabet, which is the esoteric linguistic 
heritage of the demiurge and his gods traitors and the 
RUSSIAN and LATIN alphabet, which is the heritage of the 
Hyperborean gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

53


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---e of the demiurge and his gods traitors and the 
RUSSIAN and LATIN alphabet, which is the heritage of the 
Hyperborean gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

53


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
6. THE SYNARCHIC PEOPLES OF THE ANTIQUITY 
WHO 
PARTICIPATED 
IN 
THE 
CULTURAL 
COVENANT OF THE
In history, the actions of the Black Atlanteans in their 
migrations, after the destruction of the Atlantean Atlantis, led 
to a journey that we have developed above. But at this point 
we want to clarify that the history of mankind could be 
divided into different times or periods, in which the power 
was in the hands of the hyperborean strategies and formerly 
under the synarchy. But we must recognize a period where the 
myths and sacred symbols of the gods brought and allied to 
the demiurge The One and his strategies of world domination, 
governed the history of humanity practically until the arrival 
of the Hyperborean Aryan Races.
We have stated that this is a treatise on Western history 
and is not so much interested in understanding the ancient 
civilizations that were generally under the tutelage of the 
cultural pact, and most of their kings, with the exception of a 
few, always served absolutely the plans of the world, physical 
and metaphysical synarchy. We know that in the ancient age, 
5,000 years
B.C. civilizations and empires developed in Mesopotamia, 
Egypt and the Indus Valley. There is anthropological and 
ethnological knowledge that attests that these peoples of 
Negroid Semitic origin are racial derivations of the evolved 
races of the hominid, and that from the modifi- cation of the 
genetic key by the gods they acquired culture and with time 
they developed great civilizations. It is important to 
understand that in Europe the peoples were coming out of the 
Copper Age and entering the Bronze Age, and in some places 
the Stone Age still persisted, with these primitive peoples 
existing at a lower cultural level.


--- PAGE BREAK ---coming out of the 
Copper Age and entering the Bronze Age, and in some places 
the Stone Age still persisted, with these primitive peoples 
existing at a lower cultural level.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
to Sumerian civilizations, although we must distinguish that 
certain racial groups in Bronze Age Europe HAD IN THEIR 
BLOODS THE REMEMBRANCE OF THE ORI-
GEN, but they were quickly conquered and their hyperborean 
reminiscences suppressed. The Egyptians were the most 
powerful civilization of the Ancient Age, building an empire 
around the Nile River, coexisting with the Mesopotamian 
civilizations between the Tigris and the Euphrates, such as the 
Sumerians and the Akkadians, later the Assyrians and the 
Babylonians, the Jews, (it is interesting to note the importance 
of Judaism at that time of history, being already in 1.800 B.C. 
an important religious force constituted at that time as the 
chosen people of the gods of matter that would displace the 
Egyptians) and finally the Persians, at the service of the Jews 
(the Persian king Cyrus freed them from the Babylonian 
captivity). It is necessary to understand that the Indus Valley 
civilizations that developed 5,000 years B.C. are racially and 
culturally equal to the Negroid African or Semitic cultures of 
Mesopotamia, and their cultures and religions only affirm the 
reality of the cultural pact. Brahmanism, Lamaism and some 
Buddhism are simply religious diversifications of Egyptian 
polytheism. What really happens is that the gods of matter 
choose a topological space-time fold to settle their 
metaphysical city SHAMBALA, one of its gates coincides 
with Tibet and its priests are the heirs and bearers of the 
knowledge, myths and sacred symbols of the gods of matter 
and The One. We must remember that the migrations of the 
black Atlanteans and their magician priests were tracing a 
circuit that began with Egypt, continued with the 
Mesopotamian cultures, and ended with those of the Indus 
Valley to definitively leave matter and realize their demonic 
city. These envoys sent by the demiurge, after having fulfilled 
the mission of making the cultural pact with these peoples, 
affirmed that they had been sent to the Indus Valley.
e their demonic 
city. These envoys sent by the demiurge, after having fulfilled 
the mission of making the cultural pact with these peoples, 
affirmed that they had been sent to the Indus Valley.


--- PAGE BREAK ---y. These envoys sent by the demiurge, after having fulfilled 
the mission of making the cultural pact with these peoples, 
affirmed that they had been sent to the Indus Valley.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

53
Brahmanism and Lamaism with a certain type of Buddhism, 
as religious dogmas of the cultural pact of the East, and 
rabbinical Judaism as the esoteric religious dogma of the 
cultural pact of the West, have definitely taken root. That is 
why the Indian people share certain Indo-Indian blood 
substrates, because certain groups of this racial biotype took 
root in India. Unfortunately, because of the racial mixtures it 
had with the races of The One throughout history it became a 
strategic weapon for the gods of matter. India and its peoples 
live subjected to the myths and sacred symbols, being 
collectively a strategic archetypal projection of The One, 
which is why they are submerged in a world of misery, 
ignorance and pain, subjected to the myths sustained by its 
priestly caste of lamas and gurus, who use them for the 
strategic purposes of the world religious synarchy. It is 
fundamental to try to understand that India is the center of 
world diffusion of synarchic esotericism, and any esoteric 
philosophical doctrine, no matter how western it may be in its 
cultural 
formation. 
In 
systems 
such 
as 
theosophy, 
Freemasonry, Christian gnosis, etc., in their ideological, 
mystical and religious contexts, underlie the sacred symbols 
of Hindu esoteric ideas. In their cultural penetration these 
premises were so deeply affirmed and moved the heart of 
European and North American societies, in the decade of the 
20's with Theosophy and Yoga, or in the 60's with the hippie 
movement, tantrism or free sex and its music and cultures 
called the New Age are simply part of the plan digested by the 
world synarchy since the beginning of history to contaminate 
the cultures of the hyperborean peoples.
The cultures of Mesopotamia, Egypt and the Indus Valley 
affirmed in the cultural pact only served the purposes of the 
synarchy, for the latter had in its plans to captivate, imprison 
and trap in matter certain pure races of
gypt and the Indus Valley 
affirmed in the cultural pact only served the purposes of the 
synarchy, for the latter had in its plans to captivate, imprison 
and trap in matter certain pure races of


--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
Indo-Germanic origin to mix them with the races evolved by 
the One, such as the Negroid or the Semitic. We wish to point 
out that all these synarchic civilizations, which are 
unfortunately considered as "cradle of civilization", were 
peoples whose culture was subjected to the cultural pact and 
allied to the first chosen people: the Egyptians.
It can be argued that only the Kassites and perhaps the 
Hittites were kingdoms that for some time opposed the 
Egyptians and the Jews, but in reality, until the arrival of the 
Greeks, the power of the world was in the hands of these 
peoples allied to the cultural pact. But these peoples coming 
from the Pole, called Hyperboreans, allied to the gods of 
AGARTHA and to the blood pact, would initiate (as we will 
study in detail later) a systematic process of destruction of all 
the peoples of the cultural pact.


--- PAGE BREAK ---to the gods of 
AGARTHA and to the blood pact, would initiate (as we will 
study in detail later) a systematic process of destruction of all 
the peoples of the cultural pact.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
7. ATHENIAN AND SPARTAN GREECE AS A LINK 
TO 
HYPERBOREAN 
WISDOM. 
THE 
ROMAN 
EMPIRE ORBIS TERRARUM, ABSOLUTE OWNER 
OF 
THE 
HYPERBOREAN 
FOUNDATION 
AND 
STRATEGIC KNOWLEDGE IN THE WORLD.
Returning to the study of historical facts, we must consider 
that we have made this analysis of the cognitive differences 
between the awakened and oriented man and the confused or 
sleeping man in order to continue with the hyperborean study 
of 
history, 
because 
it 
is 
essential 
to 
SEE 
AND 
UNDERSTAND with other mental capacities where the 
hyperborean symbols acted, generating historical processes in 
which aristocratic warrior ethics were developed.
Just as we name the Greeks we must recognize ATHENS 
and especially SPARTA AS THE HYPERBorean CITY-
States par excellence. It is in
these polis where the first manifestation of a full, absolutely 
hyperborean 
psychosocial 
strategy 
was 
structured. 
PHILOSOPHY AND ARCHITECTURE FLOURISHED IN 
ATHENS.
AND IN SPARTA, WAR. From the family and state 
education, the Spartan being was delineated under the 
aristocratic warrior ethical guidelines, educating the Spartan 
child and citizen in the concept of spiritual liberation through a 
philosophical-mystical-mythological system where the reality 
of the SPIRIT was preponderant over the reality of MATTER.
These cultural conceptions determined the Spartan in his 
being a will of spirit that was transmitted in all his acts, giving 
him a spiritual ethical attitude that allowed him to be the best 
among the best, preparing him to resist in the worst 
circumstances as a WARRIOR.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ted in all his acts, giving 
him a spiritual ethical attitude that allowed him to be the best 
among the best, preparing him to resist in the worst 
circumstances as a WARRIOR.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
That is why Sparta was a civilization of warrior men and 
that is why it was the city+state that prevailed over all the 
cities of the Greek world leaving a hyperborean cultural 
imprint, because Sparta taught the ancient world the SPIRIT 
OF SACRIFICE, THE UNBREAKABLE WILL AND THE 
FEELING 
OF 
LOVE 
FOR 
THE 
BLOOD, 
THE 
HOMELAND AND THE ETERNAL, BEYOND LIFE AND 
DEATH.
Just as in ATHENS the hyperborean manifestations were 
given in their highest expression in the ARTS, as in 
ARCHITECTURE and PHILOSOPHY, in SPAIN this
manifestation of the spirit developed into the purest of the 
arts, the ART OF WAR.
This Spartan example was continued and developed later 
by the warrior society par excellence, guided by one of the 
Hyperborean spirits, son of APOLLO, called ALE- JANDRO 
MAGNO. 
This 
Luciferic 
MACEDONIC 
prince 
REPRESENTED 
THE 
MAXIMUM 
INDIVIDUAL 
EXPONENT 
OF 
A 
HYPERBOREAN 
WARRIOR 
STRATEGY. ALEXANDER WAS GUIDED BY THE 
MYTHOLOGICAL HYPERBOREAN GODS TO FIGHT 
THE ENEMIES OF THE SPIRIT, THE CULTURES 
DEVOTED 
TO 
THE 
WORLD 
SYNARCHY 
OF 
ANTIQUITY, SUCH AS THE PERSIAN, EGYPTIAN, 
JEWISH, PHOENICIAN CULTURES OF ANTIQUITY. 
That is why ALEJAN-
DRO marched to the EAST, first defeating the Persians, who 
were at that moment in history subservient to the Sino-Syria 
and then defeated the Jews, the Phoenicians of Tyre and 
Sidon, taking Jerusalem and ending his campaign with the 
subjugation of Egypt and then marching directly to India, 
trying to penetrate and destroy the enemy stronghold par 
excellence which were the kingdoms of the Brahmans. 
Alexander had in his plans to penetrate the very city of the 
gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ying to penetrate and destroy the enemy stronghold par 
excellence which were the kingdoms of the Brahmans. 
Alexander had in his plans to penetrate the very city of the 
gods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

57
The action of ALEXANDER would remain forever in the 
memory of history and other WARRIORS would march again 
in the future on the East, trying to emulate and repeat the epic 
of this hyper-borean warrior.
We must understand and comprehend that the ancient 
world had hyperborean consciousness with the Greek spirit. 
All Mesopotamian cultures, from the Egyptians to the 
Persians, were under the strategy of the synarchic gods 
representing the demiurge THE ONE, the creator and 
sustainer of these cultures.
In another section we will analyze in detail the 
mythologies, philosophies and religions of these peoples, we 
will only say that they all came from and were structured in 
their cultures by the gods servants of the demiurge, The One, 
and that they responded specifically to the strategies of the 
gods of matter. They only had the mission in that part of 
history of introjecting into the cultures of mankind the 
essential idea of the created reality of being, of the religious 
philosophical principle that man is a creature of god and of 
the sense of subordination to the gods creators of the material 
order. For this reason, all the mythologies, philosophies and 
religions of these cultures responded with absolute devotion 
and 
unconditional 
love 
to 
their 
gods: 
AMON-RA, 
JEHOVAH, BAAL, ORMUZ, BRAHMA, etc. All of them 
were simple projections and em- nations of THE ONE, the 
archon Adonai, demiurge creator of matter, imitator of the 
eternal worlds.
It is important to note that all these mythologies imposed 
religions where the SACERDOTAL, the CLERICAL, the 
THEOCRATIC WAS MONASTIC, which undoubtedly had a 
preponderance over the ARISTOCRATIC WARRIOR, and 
the THEOCRATIC WAS MONASTIC, which undoubtedly 
had a preponderance over the ARISTOCRATIC WARRIOR.
EOCRATIC WAS MONASTIC, which undoubtedly had a 
preponderance over the ARISTOCRATIC WARRIOR, and 
the THEOCRATIC WAS MONASTIC, which undoubtedly 
had a preponderance over the ARISTOCRATIC WARRIOR.


--- PAGE BREAK ---C, which undoubtedly had a 
preponderance over the ARISTOCRATIC WARRIOR, and 
the THEOCRATIC WAS MONASTIC, which undoubtedly 
had a preponderance over the ARISTOCRATIC WARRIOR.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
CO, which in these cultures was subordinated to the will of the 
CLergy and the High Priest.
ALEXANDER fought and defeated these nations that had 
developed a CLERICAL CULTURAL COVENANT with the 
gods of matter and avenged the siege that the Persians carried 
out on Greece, specifically when JERJES destroyed 
ATHENS, and specifically the ACRÓPOLIS, the hyperborean 
arch- tectonic symbol par excellence. Therefore he did not 
forgive such offense and punished not only the PEOPLE BUT 
MARCHED ON THE SYNARCHIC MAGICAL CENTER 
OF THE ANCIENT WORLD, JUDEA AND EGYPT, 
DESTROYING THEIR TEMPLES AND CITIES.
Alexander not only subdued the Semitic Sinaitic cultures 
but also generated an aristocratic warrior cultural model, 
called Hellenism, which allowed the sowing and unleashing 
of the greatest hyperborean strategy of the ancient world: 
THE IMPERIAL ROME, THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
Hellenism defended and promulgated pagan ethics and 
Greek polytheistic culture over monotheism, which promoted 
a repressive and moralistic culture. It is interesting to visualize 
this moment in history because with the emergence of 
monotheistic religions, a cultural pact begins to be unleashed 
in which Christian morality and its doctrinal dogma will begin 
to penetrate the western world and will end up subjecting 
European culture to the designs of Christianity and its clergy. 
But the action of IMPERIAL ROME and its leaders, 
especially 
CAYUS 
JULIUS 
CAY 
JULIUS 
CESAR 
OCTAVIUS AUGUSTUS, first emperor of Rome and 
MAXIMUM HYPERBorean PONTIFICE, made it possible to 
defend classical Greco-Roman culture, ALLOWED THE 
DEFENSE 
OF 
THE 
CLASSICAL 
GRECO-ROMAN 
CULTURE BY DRYING UP THE MOST BRILLIANT 
HYPERBOREAN STRATEGY THAT ALLOWED THE 
HYPERBOREAN SPIRIT TO BE EMBEDDED IN THE 
EUROPEAN WORLD.
ure, ALLOWED THE 
DEFENSE 
OF 
THE 
CLASSICAL 
GRECO-ROMAN 
CULTURE BY DRYING UP THE MOST BRILLIANT 
HYPERBOREAN STRATEGY THAT ALLOWED THE 
HYPERBOREAN SPIRIT TO BE EMBEDDED IN THE 
EUROPEAN WORLD.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
The Roman Empire unleashed a strategic opposition 
achieving five hundred years of history where the meaning of 
life was based on certain philosophical mystical guidelines 
where honor, loyalty, courage and heroic attitude were the 
supreme values. Rome and its culture favored the arrest of the 
strategies of the monotheistic religious synarchy, regardless of 
what history may think about the Romans, since they have 
systematically emphasized the Roman evils, leaving aside the 
magnificent contributions made by Roman culture to 
universal culture.
Rome and its most transcendent symbol, THE IMPERIAL 
EAGLE WITH THE SERPENT BETWEEN ITS THROAT, 
represented THE FLIGHT OF THE WILL OF THE SPIRIT 
OVER THE CHAINS OF THE SOUL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---endent symbol, THE IMPERIAL 
EAGLE WITH THE SERPENT BETWEEN ITS THROAT, 
represented THE FLIGHT OF THE WILL OF THE SPIRIT 
OVER THE CHAINS OF THE SOUL.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
8. AUGUSTUS, SUPREME PONTIFF, DIVINE PRINCE, 
UNIVERSAL EMPEROR. THE TRIUMPHAL MARCH 
OF IMPERIAL ROME AGAINST THE CULTS OF THE 
KALI YUGA AND THE WORLD SYNARCHY. THE 
DRUIDS, THE JEWS AND THE EGYPTIANS, HEIRS 
AND CHOSEN BY THE GODS OF THE UNIVERSAL 
ORDER.
We dedicate this section to develop the story of a great 
warrior of eternal victory, who dedicated his life to fight and 
combat the plans and strategies of the world synarchy of his 
time. It is important to highlight this period of history since it 
is the first hyperborean manifestation of a psychosocial 
strategy that triumphed over the plans of the synarchy.
Imperial Rome initiated the establishment of a world 
power where the figure of the EMPEROR and the EMPIRE 
projected to the known world the image of a man, the 
EMPEROR as the example of what man should be.
AUGUSTUS represented the divine figure of a hyper-
Borean god, he was the incarnation of Apollo, the image of a 
warrior who, like any comrade, had ascended to the highest 
spiritual level by fighting from below. Firstly, by being 
instructed in the initiatory schools of esoteric Greece, as was 
his stay in the Greek Gnostic city par excellence: APOLLO-
NIA. Second, by affirming himself in the strategies of 
collective 
spiritual 
liberation 
of 
the 
Roman 
gods 
HYPERBOREANS. It is interesting to note that JULIUS 
CAESAR took him as an adopted son and this act, performed 
by this magnificent warrior that was Caesar, identified him as 
the CHOSEN one, being the great general the one who after 
adopting him forced him to initiate himself in the study of 
academic and esoteric sciences, designating him as


--- PAGE BREAK ---m as 
the CHOSEN one, being the great general the one who after 
adopting him forced him to initiate himself in the study of 
academic and esoteric sciences, designating him as


--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
to the city of Apollonia in Greece (Illyria). A special mention 
must be given to this city of ancient Greece, because in it lay 
the most important thing, its divine treasure: the SCHOOL OF 
PHILOSOPHY AND MYSTERIC APOLLONIA, fun-.
given by Anaximander, in the origins of the same. Apollo was 
founded in honor of APOLLO, THE HYPERBorean SOLAR 
GOD and bore his name in his honor, but misti- riously in the 
feminine form APOLONIA.
It is at that time that OCTAVIO would be instructed in the 
hyperborean arts, studying all the exoteric and esoteric 
sciences, being cultivated and initiated into the secrets of the 
initiatory mysteries of APOLLO. It is in Apollonia that 
Octavian became a wise warrior and a conductor, a prince and 
leader of what would become the most powerful strategic 
movement in ancient history. OCTAVIO would assume the 
divine role for which he was self-chosen by the gods of 
AGHARTA; that of transforming the ROMAN REPUBLIC 
into a UNIVERSAL EMPIRE, where HYPERBorean 
WISDOM would reign over all the synarchic cultures of the 
known world.
It is worth noting the magnificence of this prince of 
incredible light that was OCTAVIO AUGUSTO. His work 
and architectonic strategy was without equal, his genius 
architects MARCUS AGRIPPA and VITRUM, together with 
his philosophers MECENAS and ATONODORO, developed 
a LITHIC and architectonic hyperborean strategy with which 
they CLOSED the Roman world from the influences of 
enemy cultures to the Roman spirit. In the Hyperborean 
strategies of spiritual liberation four and seven guiding tactics 
are contemplated and one of them is Architecture. OCTAVIO 
AUGUSTUS implemented the way of encirclement, building 
Castrum, fortifications throughout the empire, but it is 
noteworthy that the Romans planned and architecturally 
shaped ROME, the imperial city,
TUS implemented the way of encirclement, building 
Castrum, fortifications throughout the empire, but it is 
noteworthy that the Romans planned and architecturally 
shaped ROME, the imperial city,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
with a HYPERBorean seal and in its splendor it was 
assimilated to the eternal city. It is noteworthy that the Roman 
temples were built under certain Hyperborean lithic 
techniques and the Pantheon of Agrippa is par excellence his 
masterpiece. This colossal and brilliant construction, the work 
of totally oriented and awakened warriors, is a perpetual 
symbol of the human spirit and of the greatness of this 
hyperborean prince and pontiff who was Augustus.
His war action was the pinnacle, the culmination of the 
work begun earlier by JULIUS CÉSAR. OCTAVIO fulfilled to 
the letter the strategies designed by his genial adoptive father 
and, having become AUGUSTUS AND MAXIMUM 
PONTICIPHUS, he successfully completed the plan of 
strategic opposition and SPIRITUAL isolation, defeating and 
conquering the enemy peoples of Rome, marching rau- 
diently against the KALI YUGA and establishing a GOLDEN 
AGE: the PAX ROMANA. Judea, Palestine, Syria, Egypt, 
Gaul and especially the DRUIDS, direct agents of the 
treacherous synarchy, were crushed by the power of the 
EMPERIAL EAGLE.
That is why we highlight as the main protagonist of the 
ancient history this Maximum Hyperborean Pontiff and the 
Imperial Rome as the representative and historical legacy of 
Augustus in the same way; thanks to this is that it endured and 
rejected for more than 400 years, the penetration of Judeo-
Christianity in Europe. It is essential to understand that the 
Metaphysical Synarchy of Jehovah Satan and his hosts of 
traitors projected Jesus into matter, creating the most powerful 
myth of this plan and in opposition to it the Luciferic gods 
that assist the comrades in their spiritual liberation sent to the 
world of illusion the purest warrior: OCTAVIO AUGUSTO.
t powerful 
myth of this plan and in opposition to it the Luciferic gods 
that assist the comrades in their spiritual liberation sent to the 
world of illusion the purest warrior: OCTAVIO AUGUSTO.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
9. THE PRAETORIAN ORDER. INITIATES IN THE 
MYSTERIES OF MARS AND APOLLO. ABSOLUTE 
WARRIORS. GUARDIANS AND HONOR GUARDS OF 
THE EMPEROR.
It is essential to recognize the PRETORIAN GUARD, 
GUARD OF HONOR AND HYPERBORN INITIATES IN 
THE ART OF WAR, WHOSE STRATEGIC ROLE WITHIN 
THE EMPIRE ALLOWED THE EMPEROR'S FIGURE TO 
BE THE AXIAL AXIS WHEREIN
ROMAN MYSTICISM. The action of the Praetorian Order 
always supported the figure of the emperor, no matter if he 
was efficient or not, because in fact if he was not, he was 
generally replaced. But the symbol, the image of the 
EMPEROR was emblematic, sacred and impossible to 
replace. AUGUSTUS instituted the PRETORIA-NA GUARD 
in 27 B.C., as an independent military force, they were 
initiated in the greatest mysteries of A-pollo, Mars and Janus, 
trained in the esoteric and warrior arts, elite troops, fierce 
fighters who never retreated. Thanks to the Praetorian Guard 
the Empire was sustained, because from its troops they were 
chosen and self-selected; only a Roman soldier who was 
initiated into arms at the age of 13 could have the right to be a 
Praetorian if he met certain physical and spiritual conditions, 
which were an indispensable requirement to be initiated into 
the Praetorian mysteries. After the young aspirant to arms in 
Rome had matured and gone through all the stages required to 
become a soldier and serve the Emperor in some military 
rank, which was already an honor, since the training was 
extremely rigorous and demanding and only the fittest and 
most efficient could endure it. This harsh, Spartan regimen 
was completed by a very strict and demanding training and 
only the fittest and most efficient could endure it.


--- PAGE BREAK ---nd 
most efficient could endure it. This harsh, Spartan regimen 
was completed by a very strict and demanding training and 
only the fittest and most efficient could endure it.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
At the age of 18 and after serving in arms for 10 years, and 
according to the degree of bravery, loyalty and honor, this 
soldier could aspire to be initiated and converted, if he passed 
the Gates of Janus, if he endured the gaze of Mars and 
understood the mysteries of A-POLE, IN PRE-
TORIANO. They obeyed the gods of AGHARTA and had the 
essential mission of watching over and sustaining the 
Emperors and the MILITARY ARISTOCRACY, they always 
kept the banner of the EMPEROR and the ARISTOCRATIC 
WARRIOR NOBILITY in force. The PRETORIANS WHEN 
THEY WERE INITIATED, THEY MADE A COVENANT
OF BLOOD AND HONOR, where the motto was HONOR, 
VALOR AND LOYALTY TO THE EMPEROR, having as 
maximum principles BLOOD, PATRIOT, STATE AND 
FAMILY.
The Praetorian Guard, as constituted by Augustus, lasted 
for more than 300 years, always following the spiritual, 
intellectual and martial premises of its founder, Pontius 
Maximus Augustus, and it took the arrival to the throne of 
Rome of the traitor Constantine I for this ORDER OF 
GUARDIANS to be dissolved in 312 AD.


--- PAGE BREAK ---s of its founder, Pontius 
Maximus Augustus, and it took the arrival to the throne of 
Rome of the traitor Constantine I for this ORDER OF 
GUARDIANS to be dissolved in 312 AD.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
10. SEMITIC LUNAR CHRISTIANITY IN HISTORY 
AND 
THE 
HYPERBOREAN 
OPPOSITION. 
THE 
ROMAN EMPIRE AND THE STRATEGIES OF THE 
PRINCES AND EMPERORS OF THE HOLY ROMAN-
GERMANIC EMPIRE
This period of history, the beginning of the Middle Ages, 
is called by the academic historical sciences as the Dark Ages 
or Obscurantism, having as its beginning the fall of the 
Western Roman Empire in 476 A.D. at the hands of the 
Germanic Herulus Odoacer. It is interesting to note that in 
reality the fall of Imperial Rome was mainly due to the 
introduction of the strategies of the CUL- TURE OF 
SYNARCHY, which slowly but gradually undermined the 
spirit and culture of the peoples of Europe. Already from 
Christianity, which is instituted primarily as a sect of Jewish 
origin, doctrinal heirs of the Egyptians and the sect of the 
Essenes, the destruction of the Roman Empire and specifically 
the introjection of a new axiological, ethical and aesthetic 
principle was planned in the synarchy of the traitor gods, 
which would modify everything that contained a hyperborean 
semiotics at that moment in history. Christianity, with its rites, 
ceremonies and doctrinal dogmas, specifically with its 
premises of love, asceticism, its maximum theological 
preaching of a single god manifested in a trinity, together with 
the criterion of the equality of all men on earth, developed a 
tactic of penetration in the culture of the Empire that slowly 
undermined its foundations. The pseudo-convert Constantine 
instituted Christianity as the sole religion of the Roman state, 
thus striking the greatest achievement of the world religious 
synarchy, the destruction of Hyperbolic polytheism.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ituted Christianity as the sole religion of the Roman state, 
thus striking the greatest achievement of the world religious 
synarchy, the destruction of Hyperbolic polytheism.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
The imperial eagle as the religion of the Roman state and the 
establishment of one of the institutions of greatest power in 
history, which is the representative here on earth of the gods 
of matter and their hosts of treacherous angels, devas, etc. The 
symbolism of the imperial eagle now had to compete with the 
symbolism of the dove, and this from that moment in history 
would begin to design a world government where the plan of 
the One would not only be concretized in the religious but 
would also seek to be carried out in the political reality. THE 
FOUNDATION OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH in Rome 
was the great blow to the Hyperborean strategies and with it 
the World Synarchy of The One penetrated the greatest 
Hyperborean bastion: the city of Rome. ROME IN THE 
TIME OF AUGUSTUS WAS A
COPY OF THE HYPERBorean AGHARTA and shared its 
grandeur and beauty in the main strategy of the gods of the 
eternal spirit. From Rome the romantic, chivalrous, heroic 
spirit of the IMPERIAL ROME, of the Bicephalous EAGLE 
had spread throughout the Roman world, from Britannia to 
Syria and Africa, etc. The ethical and aesthetic sense of the 
Roman morality was that of the European morality, but now 
this would be distorted. Gradually, from the CHRISTIAN 
ROME, CATHOLICISM, THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH
JUDEOCRISTIAN would penetrate the habits, the religious, 
social and political customs of the European peoples allied to 
Rome, which slowly, with the political decline of the Rome of 
the Augustans, would move away from everything Roman, 
becoming small Christian kingdoms. The independence of the 
peoples that were vassals of Rome would constitute two very 
significant historical facts that would be the hyperborean 
bulwarks with which the constitution of the world government 
of the ONE would be avoided. Specifically one of them, the 
Germanic people, will inherit the imperial symbolisms and the 
sign of the Hyperborean mysteries. THE GERMA-
ion of the world government 
of the ONE would be avoided. Specifically one of them, the 
Germanic people, will inherit the imperial symbolisms and the 
sign of the Hyperborean mysteries. THE GERMA-


--- PAGE BREAK ---ernment 
of the ONE would be avoided. Specifically one of them, the 
Germanic people, will inherit the imperial symbolisms and the 
sign of the Hyperborean mysteries. THE GERMA-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
WE WOULD BE THOSE WHO, FROM THE FALL OF 
IMPERIAL ROME IN 476 A.D., would carry and whiten the 
hyperborean power with which the main task given by the 
gods to them would be carried out: to stop and destroy the 
main objective of the cults. THEY WOULD CARRY AND 
WHITEN THE HYPERBOREAN POWER WITH WHICH 
THEY WOULD CARRY OUT THE MAIN TASK GIVEN 
TO THEM BY THE GODS: TO STOP AND DESTROY 
THE MAIN OBJECTIVE OF THE RELIGIOUS AND 
POLITICAL SYNARCHIC CULTS: TO REALIZE THE 
REALIZATION 
OF 
A 
THEOCRATIC 
WORLD 
GOVERNMENT WHERE ALL THE PEOPLES OF THE 
KNOWN WORLD WOULD BE SUBORDINATED TO THE 
POWER OF A UNIVERSAL CHURCH.
Thanks to the courage shown by the great Germanic 
princes and kings, who from the cultural contact with the 
Empire, first by warring against it and secondly by serving as 
a vassal and ally, were nourished by its culture and 
civilization and from this, the barbarians acquired the spirit of 
Rome and their kings were later the greatest EMPERORS of 
Europe.
It could be affirmed that practically in the fourth century 
the world Synarchy believed that its plan of world domination 
was complete and already foresaw that the destruction of the 
Western Roman Empire was a fact and that the Eastern 
Roman Empire was basically directed by the prelates and 
priests who made the Roman emperors of the East true 
puppets of the CHRISTIAN CLERGY.
Only a few emperors of Augustan Rome were resisting the 
strategic objective of the Eastern Synarchy, and this was no 
longer enough to stop their plans; with the fall of Rome the 
enemies of the spirit thought that the realization of their plans 
was already eminent. But this was far from happening because 
the invasions of the Germanic peoples of Northern Europe 
were directed with a different purpose and would never be the 
same as a tool to stop the invasions of the Germanic peoples of 
g because 
the invasions of the Germanic peoples of Northern Europe 
were directed with a different purpose and would never be the 
same as a tool to stop the invasions of the Germanic peoples of 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
Northern Europe.


--- PAGE BREAK ---pe 
were directed with a different purpose and would never be the 
same as a tool to stop the invasions of the Germanic peoples of 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
Northern Europe.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
They continued with the hyperborean tactics of continuing to 
assert hyperborean aristocratic warrior culture and traditions. 
They continued with the hyperborean tactics of further 
affirming the hyperborean aristocratic warrior culture and 
traditions.
As we stated above, the fall of Rome would have the 
direct consequence of generating a series of NATIONAL 
states, since the liberation of the peoples that were under the 
power of Rome would give rise to the emergence of an ethical 
anta- gonism in the different liberated nations or peoples. 
Some would choose to be supporters of the hyperborean 
tactics and strategies of the gods of AGHARTA and others 
would sell out to the plans of the world synarchy of the 
demiurge and his allies here in the world. Others would be 
used by both sides according to the kings who ruled, but no 
nation or people of the Middle Ages could escape this great 
world conflict that was installed throughout Europe and thus 
began the period that we would know with the name of 
OSCURANTIS- MO.
The fall of Rome allowed a cultural symbiosis that 
intertwined races and cultures, the Latins and the conquering 
peoples mixed, generating a union of bloods that had as a 
direct consequence the emergence of a new culture and the 
birth of new kingdoms, which settled the political, social and 
cultural power of Europe. In reality we must consider that the 
cultural power of the Latins was superior to that of the 
Germanic tribes and they were conquered by the wisdom of 
Roman knowledge. The arts, specifically ARCHITECTURE, 
had an impact on the Germanic peoples who, upon penetrating 
the Empire, understood that their mission was not to destroy 
Rome but to SAVE it, at least its culture, its orb and 
civilization. That is why the invading peoples mimicked and 
ROMANIZED themselves, this generated a resurrection of the 
hyperborean symbols and it is so that in the period of those 
three hundred years, where it was
s why the invading peoples mimicked and 
ROMANIZED themselves, this generated a resurrection of the 
hyperborean symbols and it is so that in the period of those 
three hundred years, where it was


--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
began to institutionalize FEUDALISM and until the rise of 
the monarch who brought the church closest to world 
domination, 
CHARLOMAGN, 
THE 
ROMANIZED 
BORBARIAN PEOPLES DETUVED THE CATHOLIC 
SYNARCHY.
It is interesting to note that the first barbarian invasions, 
although their peoples were Christianized and in appearance 
they responded religiously to the action of the papacy and the 
clergy, it is important to note that the Romanized Germans 
during those 300 years did not allow theocratic power to be 
above aristocratic power. THE POWER OF THE SWORD 
STOOD FIRM AGAINST THE POWER OF THE SWORD.
The Germanic kings and princes, although they were 
Christians, did not allow the papacy universal power, dividing 
the clerical power in such a way that the regional bishops 
enjoyed absolute power in their dioceses and thus the pope 
only had nominative power, not real power. Hence the 
princely lords ruled in feudalism at their will and in those 
three hundred years until the appearance of a hegemonic 
power like the Carolingian Empire, the Catholic Church and 
its sacred symbols were decimated by the action of the eternal 
symbols of the hyperborean strategies of the kings and princes 
of the feudal Middle Ages.
These three hundred years that are known as Oscurantism 
are in reality the seed of a new culture, which will have as a 
later development in time a union of the peoples according to 
their RACE, LANGUAGE AND CULTURE, which will lead 
in the XVII century to the NATIONALISMS.
It is interesting to note that the VASALLAJE relationship 
of the Middle Ages generated a situation in which the people, 
having lost the protection of the state, which was the figure 
that ROME used to fulfill, were now vulnerable.


--- PAGE BREAK ---p 
of the Middle Ages generated a situation in which the people, 
having lost the protection of the state, which was the figure 
that ROME used to fulfill, were now vulnerable.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
to their race, language and culture. We must understand that 
in ancient times cities flourished and that the barbarian 
invasions razed the cities to the ground and made the people 
move to the countryside and the great lords built real 
fortresses called CASTLES, where they could protect 
themselves from the harassment of the barbarian tribes.
We have to clarify that the barbarian tribes of the Goths, 
Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Lombards, who penetrated specifically 
in Italy in reality after taking power, lived peacefully with the 
Italic people, allowing the lords of the Roman patriciate to 
generate from there a new NOBILITY of lords structured in 
the FEUDS AND THEIR CASTLES. Thus we find a 
fundamental reality that is important to understand, the Goths 
when penetrating in Europe had a culture SIMILAR TO THE 
ROMANS, they were POLYTHEISTS, where the Germanic 
gods and the Romans were assimilated, ODIN was similar to 
JUPITER, THOR to MARS, WOTAN to APOLLO, etc. The 
figure of the KING and the NOBLE- ZA was similar to the 
figure of the EMPEROR and the PATRIOT, also the BLOOD 
relationship was coincident because both were ARIAN 
peoples, there was a similar link between the ROMAN 
LEGISLATION and that of the GERMAN peoples, that is to 
say, there were strong cultural and spiritual links. That is why 
the Germanic peoples, the GODS, NEVER had the intention 
of destroying ROME, they only thought and made a 
STRATEGIC OPPOSITION when the Roman culture was 
already CHRISTIANIZING and although the Goths took the 
empire this responded directly to the plans of the Hyperborean 
gods and their strategy.
Having clarified this, we argued that with the fall of the 
Empire and the barbarian invasions, FEUDALISM and the 
Middle Ages arose, the feudal class headed by the feudal lords 
who were related to each other by a force of union that was
the fall of the 
Empire and the barbarian invasions, FEUDALISM and the 
Middle Ages arose, the feudal class headed by the feudal lords 
who were related to each other by a force of union that was


--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
The power of the clergy was actively involved in power. The 
clergy actively participated in the power, which with the 
barbarian invasions was acquiring power as the barbarians 
were being Christianized, receiving more and more 
prerogatives and concessions from the barbarian kings. This 
mosaic of FEUDS and their castles, related to each other and 
united by geography, race, language and culture generated 
hundreds of small independent kingdoms where inside, in the 
castles, a culture was developing where the figure of the 
EMPEROR, OF THE KING was beginning again to take 
shape over that of the pope and a new feeling of 
NATIONALITY 
was 
emerging, 
and 
with 
it 
a 
NATIONALISM was beginning to manifest itself.
We must consider that in the Middle Ages several well-
delineated principles were established that differ from the 
Ancient Ages.
THE FIRST IS THE SPACE OF GEO- GRAPHICAL 
SIGNIFICANCE OF EACH STRATEGY, WHETHER IT IS 
THE HYPER-BOEO OR THE SYNARCHIC, SINCE IN THE 
ANTIQUITY THEY WERE SEPARATED. IN THE EAST 
THE 
SYNARCHIC 
AND 
IN 
THE 
WEST 
THE 
HYPERBOREAN. IN THE MIDDLE AGES THIS WAS 
LOST AND BOTH BEGAN TO FIGHT IN THE SAME 
GEOGRAPHICAL SPACE.
SECONDLY, POWER IS DIVIDED INTO TWO 
CLEARLY 
DELINEATED 
CAMPS. 
THE 
HYPERBOREAN, 
REPRESENTED 
BY 
THE 
ARISTOCRACIES AND THE NOBILITY, I.E. THE 
ROYAL 
POWER, 
AND 
THE 
SYNARCHIC, 
REPRESENTED BY THE CLERGY AND THEIR LACKEY 
KINGS IN THE SERVICE OF THE PAPACY.
THIRD, 
NEW 
STRATEGIES 
EMERGED, 
ESPECIALLY A LITHIC MAGIC CONTEMPLATED IN 
THE 
CONSTRUCTION 
OF 
CHURCHES 
BY 
THE 
CLERGY AND CASTLES BY THE NOBILITY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---RVICE OF THE PAPACY.
THIRD, 
NEW 
STRATEGIES 
EMERGED, 
ESPECIALLY A LITHIC MAGIC CONTEMPLATED IN 
THE 
CONSTRUCTION 
OF 
CHURCHES 
BY 
THE 
CLERGY AND CASTLES BY THE NOBILITY.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
HYPERBOREAL.
FOURTH, THE CASTLES AND THEIR FIEFDOMS 
BECOME THE MOST BRILLIANT STRATEGY OF 
ENCIRCLEMENT, 
BECAUSE 
THEY 
ISOLATED 
A 
CERTAIN GEOGRAPHY AND WITHIN THEIR WALLS 
THE HYPERBOREAN WARRIORS DEVELOPED THEIR 
MYSTICAL, 
ESOTERIC, 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
AND 
WARLIKE TACTICS, DEVELOPING NEW TECHNIQUES 
OF COMBAT AND A HYPERBOREAN SCIENCE FOR 
THE LIBERATION OF THE SPIRIT.
FIFTH, JUST AS THE CLERGY INSTITUTED THEIR 
PRIESTLY CEREMONIES AND RITES WITHIN THEIR 
CHURCHES, THE COURT AND THE ORDERS OF 
CHIVALRY 
AROSE 
IN 
THE 
CASTLES, 
CONSOLIDATING THEIR INITIATORY RITES.
SIXTH, THE GODS ENDORSED FROM AGHARTA 
THE 
STRATEGIES 
OF 
THE 
HYPERBOREAN 
WARRIORS, THUS ALLOWING BRILLIANT TACTICS 
TO EMERGE THAT STOPPED THE CONSOLIDATION 
OF A THEOCRATIC WORLD GOVERNMENT.
SEVENTH, THE HYPERBOREAN MYSTERIES ARE 
DEFINITIVELY CONSECRATED IN A SPIRITUAL 
ETHIC STRUCTURED IN A STRATEGY, REGAL AND 
MILITARY IN A COLLECTIVE ORDER, AND IN THE 
INDI- VIDUAL CHIVALROUS AND WARLIKE, WHERE 
COURAGE, HONOR AND LOYALTY ARE THE DIRECT 
WAYS OF SPIRITUAL LIBERATION.


--- PAGE BREAK ---EGY, REGAL AND 
MILITARY IN A COLLECTIVE ORDER, AND IN THE 
INDI- VIDUAL CHIVALROUS AND WARLIKE, WHERE 
COURAGE, HONOR AND LOYALTY ARE THE DIRECT 
WAYS OF SPIRITUAL LIBERATION.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
11. THE CAROLINGIAN EMPIRE. THE MAXIMUM 
STRATEGY OF THE RELIGIOUS SYNARCHY AND 
THE POPE. THE SECOND BARBARIAN INVASIONS. 
THE VIKINGS AND THEIR FEROCIOUS MARCH 
AGAINST THE SYNARCHY. THE KEY TO THE 
HYPERBO- REAN HERITAGE IN THE PRINCES OF 
THE HOLY ROMAN-GERMANIC EMPIRE.
The Middle Ages, from its beginnings with the fall of the 
Western Roman Empire until the eighth century, underwent a 
transformation in all political, economic and social orders. As 
we reviewed in the previous point, European society 
diametrically modified its culture and the consolidation of 
Feudalism 
and 
affirmed 
a 
HYPER-BOREAU 
ARCHITECTURAL strategy. Europe was flooded by a series 
of constructions that were called CASTLES, WALLED 
FORTIFICATIONS that had a social particularity, that of 
protecting their members from the attacks of the barbarians 
that devastated the territories of Italy, France, Spain, etc. 
Besides fulfilling in an excellent way the function of 
protecting the prince lords from the attacks of the enemies, the 
CASTLES WERE LITHIC MACHINES MADE OF ROCK 
OR STONE WHICH CARRIED OUT AN ALCHEMICAL 
FUNCTION OF
PSYCHOSOCIAL TRANSFORMATION. These structures 
transformed European culture; with the fall of Rome, its 
cultural premises and heroic epic traditions gave way to the 
gradual advance of the CLergy and the PAPATE. The 
implementation of a CHRISTIAN MORAL generated a 
culture where the fear of god or the divine structured 
superstition and ignorance in the European people, plunging 
all the peoples conquered by Christianity into a DEMENCIAL 
DELAY AND DISINTEXATION.


--- PAGE BREAK ---god or the divine structured 
superstition and ignorance in the European people, plunging 
all the peoples conquered by Christianity into a DEMENCIAL 
DELAY AND DISINTEXATION.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
GRATION, MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL. The true 
barbarians and savages were the prelates, simple-
We must turn to any book on the Middle Ages that is fair-
minded in its study of the subject to understand how the 
European peoples were mercilessly subjected to MATERIAL 
POVERTY AND SPIRITUAL MISERY.
The knowledge, wisdom in the sciences and arts of the Greeks 
and, fundamentally, of Hellenism and Romanism was 
systematically destroyed, crushed, the little that was saved 
from the conquest. All the knowledge, the wisdom in the 
sciences and arts of the Greeks and fundamentally of 
Hellenism and Romanism was systematically destroyed, 
crushed, the little that was saved was rescued by certain 
HYPERBorean INITIATES who kept it in absolute secrecy 
inside castles or in certain fiefdoms.
Thanks to the strategies of the CERCO implemented by 
the HYPERBÓREOS LORDS and structured in the great 
CASTLES, it was possible to counteract the religious 
synarchy and at the same time generate a ROYAL AND 
CABALLERESQUE strategy where the values of the 
PRETORIAN ROMAN PATRIOTY re-emerged, this time 
structured in the emergence of the ORDENES OF 
CABALLERY.
In this epoch of history we cannot name any prince, king 
or emperor who has transcended by his brilliant individual 
strategy, since the whole of Hyperborean Europe was under 
the 
CONSTELLATION 
OF 
A 
HYPERBorean 
ARCHITECTURE, structured in a WARRIOR, HEROIC 
AND KNIGHTLY ethic represented by THE KING AND 
QUEEN, THE COURTS AND THE ORDERS OF CABA-.
AT YOUR SERVICE. All this protected and protected by the 
ARCHITECTURAL STRATEGY OF THE FENCE,
The "castles and palaces" were the hundreds of castles and 
palaces strategically distributed by the awakened kings all 
over Europe. It is for this reason that thanks to these tactics 
employed by
he "castles and palaces" were the hundreds of castles and 
palaces strategically distributed by the awakened kings all 
over Europe. It is for this reason that thanks to these tactics 
employed by


--- PAGE BREAK ---ces" were the hundreds of castles and 
palaces strategically distributed by the awakened kings all 
over Europe. It is for this reason that thanks to these tactics 
employed by


--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
The warlords, the conquerors of ISLAM coming from the 
East, as previously the HUNOS and now the SARRACANS, 
were not able to take all of Europe. For we must understand 
that the Islamic peoples, although they had certain 
hyperborean symbols represented in their religious doctrine, at 
certain moments of history fell prey to their synarchic aspects. 
Thus, they were taken over by certain leaders who were at the 
service of the traitor DEMIURG, who threw them into the 
conquest and destruction of Europe. It is interesting to 
understand this process well because in reality the Islamic 
monotheism, ISLAM, although it attacked the hyperborean 
peoples, contributed under its hyperborean signs and under its 
leaders to the DETENTION OF THE WORLD THEORETIC 
POWER.
CRATIC, i.e. to the consolidation of the Catholic Church as 
the only world government. In this way, the Islamic world 
was part of a hyperborean strategy that promoted the 
STRATEGY OF THE FENCE AND THE CASTLES, 
allowing the consolidation of the Catholic Church as the only 
world government.
We therefore maintain that there is no great hyperborean virya 
in particular, we affirm that all the great kings of the feudal 
lords in the service of the king or emperor throughout Europe 
participated in the most brilliant and magnificent strategy of 
spiritual liberation that stopped the enemies of the royal and 
aristocratic spirit in a definitive way until the appearance in 
the eighth century of the Carolingian empire.
The Carolingian power was triggered by the fall of the last 
king FRANCO MEROVINGIO who ruled Gaul, i.e. France. 
Thus, in 754, King PIPINUS THE BRIEF, crowned by Pope 
Stephen III and supported by the power of the papacy and the 
church, assumed the throne; in this way a dynasty was 
consolidated on the Frankish throne, the Carolingian, which 
would be the TERROR OF THE PEOPLES.
supported by the power of the papacy and the 
church, assumed the throne; in this way a dynasty was 
consolidated on the Frankish throne, the Carolingian, which 
would be the TERROR OF THE PEOPLES.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
OF PURE BLOOD, WHO STILL PRESERVED IN THEIR 
BELIEFS HYPERBOREAN MYTHS.
The Carolingian kings who ruled the Franks were 
Christianized and strictly served the plans of the world 
religious synarchy, represented by the Pope and the Church. 
Especially collaborated with the plans of the papacy 
CHARLES THE GREAT, THIS FRENCH KING WAS THE 
MAIN ACTOR AND RULER OF THE WHOLE MIDDLE 
AGE, SERVING WITH HIS SWORD TO THE CAUSE OF 
THE POPE.
Charlemagne 
systematically 
conquered 
the 
last 
Hyperborean strongholds in Italy, in Germania, destroying, 
conquering and Christianizing the Germanic peoples who 
were the last polytheistic resistance, inherited from the IMPE- 
RIAL ROME.
One of the main works of Charlemagne to the cause of the 
demiurge was the creation of hundreds of churches, abbeys, 
cathedrals, etc., all over Europe, specifically in Germania. The 
conquest and destruction of the Saxons and Avars was one of 
the worst criminal acts in history. The Saxons were FORCED 
TO CONVERT TO CHRISTIANITY being executed if they 
did not accept the conversion, it was in this way that real mass 
executions were carried out. In reality Charlemagne was 
responding to the orders of certain Bishops and the Pope and 
these ordered on the GERMAN peoples a true HOLO- 
CAUSTO, thus fulfilling an INITIATIC RITE OF SAINT 
GRE that always prevailed within the church.
We must consider this fact especially because a man of the 
purest Germanic blood, as was Charlemagne, ended up being 
conquered in spirit by the action of the ideological and 
doctrinal guidelines of Christianity. This opens up a question, 
which provides us with an answer and the answer to it.


--- PAGE BREAK ---onquered in spirit by the action of the ideological and 
doctrinal guidelines of Christianity. This opens up a question, 
which provides us with an answer and the answer to it.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
The same is: no one, no matter how much pure blood he has, 
resists the alchemical magic of the religious synarchy, unless 
he has in his ontological reality, in his being, a GNOSTIC 
PREDISPOSITION, and undoubtedly Charlemagne did not 
have it.
But this Frankish emperor is undoubtedly the greatest 
agent of the medieval synarchy, an incarnation of an aspect of 
The One, an envoy of the TRAITOR SIDDHAS OF CHANG-
SHAMBALA, and thanks to his actions he consolidated the 
CHRISTIAN SACRED SYMBOLS, the dogmas of the 
church and fundamentally its demiurgic architecture. At the 
same time he destroyed and weakened all the vestiges of the 
Roman Empire, crushing its culture and its ETERNAL 
SYMBOLS.
Charlemagne died in 814, when his empire began to 
slowly disintegrate by the action and response of the GODS 
OF AGHARTA, who launched in revenge the pure blood of 
the VIKING RACES.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

81


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---sintegrate by the action and response of the GODS 
OF AGHARTA, who launched in revenge the pure blood of 
the VIKING RACES.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

81


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
12. THE VIKINGS. THEIR PERFORMANCE IN THE
EUROPEAN HISTORY. THE AFFIRMATION OF THE 
ETERNAL HYPERBOREAN SYMBOLS.
The arrival of the Vikings is a mystery to the synarchy, 
because these peoples burst into Europe ravaging the 
Carolingian Empire and leaving a trail of vengeance. The 
reality is that the VIKINGS AVENGED THE ROMAN 
EMPIRE AND
THE SAXON PEOPLES; that is why the main enemies were 
THE CHURCH, THE PAPATE and its SECUA- CES, the 
KINGDOMS that served the clergy.
The VIKINGOS (VIK means fortification) came from the 
Scandinavian peninsula. These Swedish, Norwegian and 
Danish peoples appeared in the MIDDLE AGE coming 
directly from the POLE, in the same way that in the ANTI-
GLOEAN AGE the Achaeans, Dorians and Ionians appeared. 
With the DORIANS came APOLLO and with the VIKING 
peoples came a mythology similar to the Greco-Latin 
mythology, 
THE 
SCANDINAVIAN 
OR 
NORDIC 
MYTHOLOGY, WHOSE GODS
ODIN, WOTAN, THOR, TIR, etc., were the representation 
and the new incarnation of the Greek and Roman gods. They 
played a fundamental role in the new culture that was 
generated from the symbiosis between Viking and European 
cultural precepts.
We must consider that the VIKINGOS WERE THE 
MOST BRILLIANT STRATEGY OF THE GODS OF
AGHARTA and thanks to them, the UNIVERSAL 
CHRISTIAN EMPIRE, THE THEOCHRATIC WORLD 
GOVERNMENT
IT WAS NOT CONSAGRATED, because the action 
unleashed by these people who came from the POLE, fallen 
from the "CIE- THE HYPERBORNEANS" was decisive.
The Norse warriors, with their tactics and strategies were.


--- PAGE BREAK ---he action 
unleashed by these people who came from the POLE, fallen 
from the "CIE- THE HYPERBORNEANS" was decisive.
The Norse warriors, with their tactics and strategies were.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
They conquered, thanks to their magnificent condition of 
implacable warriors, the whole of Christian Europe, and 
imposed their SYMBOLS on the cultures of the European 
peoples. Undoubtedly, the culture of the Norsemen had a 
mission given by the SIDDHAS and this was to embed again 
in the CONSCIENCE OF THE EUROPEAN PEOPLES THE 
HYPERBORIC CONCEPTS OF HONOR, VALUE AND 
LOYALTY TO THE BLOOD, TO THE PEOPLE AND TO 
THE KING.
With the action of the Vikings and their settlements all 
over Europe, whether in FRANCE (Normandy), ITALY 
(Sicily), ENGLAND, etc., the idea of NATION, PATRIOT 
and STATE was born from their definitive incorporation in 
these peoples. This essential principle was germi- nating from 
the incursion of the Nordic peoples, and also the consolidation 
of the NATIONAL STATES a pos- teriori. Its achievements 
were, first the action of the hyperborean symbols within the 
EURO-PEAN COLLECTIVE UNCONSCIOUSNESS and 
second the consolidation of certain ETHICAL guidelines 
WHERE THE ACCESS TO THE ETERNAL IS SIMPLY 
THE ACTION OF THE MAN WHO HAS IN HIS BEING 
WILL AND GNOSTIC PREDISPOSITION, third the
establishment in the literature of the HEROIC EPIC SAGES 
that generated a literary principle that structured a HEROIC 
MYTH that counteracted the CHRISTIAN MYTH imposed 
through the only literary source that existed in the Europe of 
the Middle Ages, the BIBLE, since unfortunately the triumph 
of the Catholic clergy and Christianity meant the systematic 
destruction of every cultural vestige that had to do with the 
Roman civilization. Especially its LITERARY art was 
destroyed, which was highly appreciated in the IMPERIAL 
ROME, having true masters in this art; but the arrival of 
Christianity meant the disappearance of it and only the BIBLE 
was for almost a thousand years the only literary source of 
information about the Roman civilization.
this art; but the arrival of 
Christianity meant the disappearance of it and only the BIBLE 
was for almost a thousand years the only literary source of 
information about the Roman civilization.


--- PAGE BREAK ---rrival of 
Christianity meant the disappearance of it and only the BIBLE 
was for almost a thousand years the only literary source of 
information about the Roman civilization.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
The law and the law were governed in such a way that 
Charlemagne structured a new juridical source based 
specifically on these precepts. Thus arose CANON LAW, 
which replaced ROMAN LAW, thus becoming the best 
source of justice. Once Roman law was displaced, only the 
will of the papacy and its clerical dogma became the absolute 
truth, plunging the people of the Middle Ages into a world of 
SUPERSTITION AND IGNO- RANCE, where the center of 
existence was GOD, thus generating an Aristotelian 
theocentric philosophical doctrine that, together with 
Thomism, directed the cultural world of Christian Europe. 
Thanks to the Viking invasions that since 800 began to 
devastate the Christian world, a new cultural expectation 
began to emerge in the cultures; a warrior mysticism, REGIO, 
ARISTOCRATIC was affirmed, generating a new way of 
thinking that gave the world a new philosophy, a thought in 
which man began to acquire historical relevance, a religious 
mystical system where the ANTROPOCENTRIC doctrine 
rose above the theocentric one. From the consolidation of the 
Germanic kings, this philosophy placed man at the center of 
the world, putting him in a different situation from the one he 
had in the Middle Ages, where the only meaning of existence 
was simply God and the Church. Now God was displaced and 
a MANI- QUEA philosophy emerged with the arrival of the 
German princes. A NEW VISION OF CHRISTIANITY 
AROSE DUE TO THE DISCREDIT OF THE POPES, 
REPRESENTED IN THE MANICHEAN DOCTRINES, 
WHICH 
EMERGED 
FROM 
THE 
NORDIC 
MYTHOLOGIES, GENERATING THE EMERGENCE OF 
CERTAIN MONASTIC GROUPS, SOME OF THEM 
HERETICS, STAUNCH ENEMIES OF THE POPE AND 
OTHERS ALLIES, SUBORDINATED TO ROME.
The disappearance of the Carolingians and the Surgeon 
General.
EMERGENCE OF 
CERTAIN MONASTIC GROUPS, SOME OF THEM 
HERETICS, STAUNCH ENEMIES OF THE POPE AND 
OTHERS ALLIES, SUBORDINATED TO ROME.
The disappearance of the Carolingians and the Surgeon 
General.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
THE EMERGENCE OF A NEW POWER, THE GERMA-KINGS.
NOS, direct descendants of the VIKINGOS, gave birth to the 
HOLY ROMAN GERMAN EMPIRE and with it a new 
political and cultural body would emerge at the end of the 
Middle Ages.
In the year 1,000 A.D. the whole medieval world, Roman 
Europe had given way to Christian Europe and now, after the 
fall of the Carolingian Empire and the arrival and settlement 
of the Germanic or Viking peoples, a new Europe was 
emerging divided into hundreds of states, where the power of 
the princes and feudal lords was being agglutinated under the 
power of a new lord: the Emperor.
ONCE AGAIN, THE IMPERIAL IDEA AROSE, NO 
LONGER OF AN EMPIRE SUBJECT TO THE INTERESTS 
OF THE CHURCH AND THE PAPACY, BUT OF A 
REGAL EMPIRE, SIMILAR TO THE ROMAN EMPIRE 
OF THE WEST.


--- PAGE BREAK ---GAIN, THE IMPERIAL IDEA AROSE, NO 
LONGER OF AN EMPIRE SUBJECT TO THE INTERESTS 
OF THE CHURCH AND THE PAPACY, BUT OF A 
REGAL EMPIRE, SIMILAR TO THE ROMAN EMPIRE 
OF THE WEST.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
13. THE HOLY ROMAN-GERMANIC EMPIRE AND 
ITS EMPERORS. THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN POPES 
AND EMPERORS. THE HEROIC MOVEMENTS. THE 
CATHARS AND THE ORDERS OF THE CATHARS 
AND THE ORDERS OF THE CATHARS AND THE 
ORDERS OF THE CATHARS.
It is important to describe the historical situation in which 
the known world found itself in the European Middle Ages. In 
the Christian West after the fall of Rome in the hands of the 
barbarian tribes, there were two well-defined empires, the 
WESTERN ROMAN EMPIRE AND THE WESTERN 
EMPIRE.
ROMAN OF THE EAST, then BYZANTINE. Also in the 
East, a number of Arab tribes united in the year 600
A.D. under a leader, A PROPHET, MAHOMA, generating 
this great warrior a religious doctrine called ISLAM. A 
monotheistic doctrine that arose in the Arabian Peninsula that 
proclaimed the teachings of MAHOMA, the prophet. Islam 
means, according to its religious book, the Koran, surrender or 
submission to the will of God and his law. The person who 
pre-dedicates the Koran is called MUSLIM, HE WHO 
SUBMITS TO GOD.
In the 8th century Islam practically dominated the entire 
Arab world, from Turkey to Mesopotamia, the Arabian 
Peninsula and all of Africa. ISLAM had undertaken the 
conquest of the world and only BIZANCIUS resisted, in 
Europe the Arabs had already practically subdued the 
Christian kingdoms of Spain. Only the rise of the Carlo-
Lingian Empire, which had prevailed over the first 
Christianized barbarian kingdoms, was able to stop and limit 
the Muslims, so that Christian Europe in the year 1000 A.D. 
was surrounded by the Islamic world, the bitter enemy of 
Judaism and Christianity. The fall of Charlemagne and the


--- PAGE BREAK ---the Muslims, so that Christian Europe in the year 1000 A.D. 
was surrounded by the Islamic world, the bitter enemy of 
Judaism and Christianity. The fall of Charlemagne and the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
settlements of the VIKINGS (Danish, Swedish and 
Norwegian peoples, who from the year 900 to 1,100 A.D. 
from the Scandinavian peninsula were penetrating and settling 
on European soil) modified the political, military, social and 
economic strata, generating a system called FEUDA- LISMO. 
The disintegration of the Carolingian empire by the action of 
the Viking invasions generated hundreds of feudal states 
whose lords were becoming increasingly powerful, having in 
their fiefdoms real armies, which in the face of foreign danger 
were united, choosing the figure of a KING or EMPEROR to 
guide them in the conflict.
It is interesting to note that feudalism contributed a series 
of principles that were forming and structuring a great empire, 
which would be the military and spiritual force that would 
save Europe from the clutches of Islam and the Arab world. 
The HOLY ROMAN GERMAN EMPIRE WAS THE 
SUMMATION OF THE FEUDAL STATES, MAINLY 
ALEMONIANS AND ITALIANS, WHO AFTER THE 
DISINTEGRATION OF THE CAROLINGIAN EMPIRE 
ADOPTED THE IDEA OF RESURGING AN EMPIRE IN 
THE MANNER OF THE WESTERN ROMAN EMPIRE, 
AND FROM THIS THESE PRINCES UNITED IN THE 
FIGURE OF THE EMPEROR AND DEVELOPED THIS 
VAST EMPIRE THAT WOULD RULE EUROPE FOR 
OVER A THOUSAND YEARS.
As we analyzed previously, together with the Carolingian 
Empire, the Papacy ruled Europe, and the popes pretended to 
be the architects of European politics, and in fact they were in 
those years. But with the coming of the Vikings and the 
disintegration of the Carolingians and the rise of the feudal 
princes, the papacy suffered a considerable loss of power, 
because the feudal lords in general applied in their fiefdoms 
the policies that were most convenient to them, and 
sometimes it became a matter of course that the papacy should 
be the only one to be able to control Europe.
general applied in their fiefdoms 
the policies that were most convenient to them, and 
sometimes it became a matter of course that the papacy should 
be the only one to be able to control Europe.


--- PAGE BREAK ---their fiefdoms 
the policies that were most convenient to them, and 
sometimes it became a matter of course that the papacy should 
be the only one to be able to control Europe.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

87
In other cases, most of them coincided with the Viking 
invaders, who in reality were staunch enemies of everything 
monastic and priestly. This ethnic and cultural symbiosis 
between the pagan Roman heritage and the emanated cultures 
of the barbarian tribes, added to the wisdom of the Vikings, 
generated and emanated a racial and cultural biotype that was 
assimilated to a heroic and chivalrous way of seeing life, 
which gave rise to the Germanic kingdoms. This originated at 
the end of the Middle Ages the beginning of the confrontation 
between the power of the papacy and the power of the 
Germanic emperors, called the QUERELLA OF THE 
INVESTMENTS. This started a fight to the death between the 
GUELPHIANS, supporters of the Papacy, who supported the 
idea that the Papacy and the Church, vicars of Christ on earth, 
was above any imperial power, and the GIBELINIANS, 
supporters of Imperial ideas, who held the theocratic principle 
that the THRONES OF THE ARISTOCRATIC SANCTIONS 
AND OF THE NOBILITY WERE PROVENANT FROM A 
DIVINE ORIGIN AND THAT THIS WAS PREVIOUS TO 
CHRISTIANITY. THE LATTER CAME FROM THE 
ARYAN PEOPLES, AND THAT IS WHY THE REGAL 
WAS THE SPIRITUAL PRINCIPLE THAT SHOULD 
GOVERN THE DESTINY OF EACH PEOPLE.
HYPERBÓREO, being the dynastic, royal and aristocratic 
superior to the hierarchical, monastic and clerical.
It is interesting to understand this historical instance 
because in eleventh and twelfth century Europe a series of 
spiritual movements called HERETICS arose, which related 
to certain seigniorial powers (the house of the CAPETS in 
France, the ARAGONS in Spain, the AUSBURGs in 
Germany and especially in certain kingdoms of northern Italy) 
generated profound religious controversies that shook the very 
foundations of Christianity.
It deserves special mention at this point in history.
specially in certain kingdoms of northern Italy) 
generated profound religious controversies that shook the very 
foundations of Christianity.
It deserves special mention at this point in history.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
The emergence of the Cathars, GUIDED FROM AGHARTA, 
DEVELOPED 
A 
HYPERBORN 
STRATEGY 
THAT 
DEFINITIVELY AFFIRMED A SPIRITUAL SYMBOL IN 
THE 
WORLD 
THAT 
WOULD 
PERMANENTLY 
PERPETUATE FOREVER IN HISTORY: THE GRAAL.
More Who were the CÁTAROS?
According to what little we know from academic history, 
CATARUS (from the Greek, KHATARUS, PURE), was the 
name adopted by many heretical Christian sects that reached 
enormous diffusion during the Middle Ages. The Cathars 
were characterized by their rigid asceticism and by their 
DUAL theology, BASED ON THE BELIEF THAT THE 
UNIVERSE WAS COMPOSED BY TWO WORLDS IN 
CON- FLICTION, ONE SPIRITUAL AND ETERNAL, 
CREATED BY AN INCOGNOSCIBLE GOD AND 
ANOTHER MATERIAL AND CORRUPTIBLE, FORGED 
IN THE IMAGE OF THAT OTHER ETERNAL WORLD 
BY A DEMIURG, A DEMIURG TRAITOR AND
Their worldview was based on the religious doctrines of 
MANICHISM.
Included under the general denomination of Cathars were 
the Novatians, the Paulicians, the Bogomils, sects that 
opposed the Church because they considered it to be led by 
evil. During the eleventh and twelfth century the PUROS had 
an enormous diffusion and had great strength in Greek 
Europe, arriving in northern ITALY during the twelfth 
century, strongly adhering to them the Milanese, receiving the 
name of PATARINES for the street where they met in Milan 
(the street is Pataria). It is interesting to note that the Cathar 
heresies found certain ideological coincidences in Italy, since 
in the 11th century a certain paganism still persisted in the 
Italian villages, specifically in Lombardy and Piedmont. 
These doctrines awakened certain questions and issues that 
put the clergy, specifically the German nobility, in difficulty.


--- PAGE BREAK ---n villages, specifically in Lombardy and Piedmont. 
These doctrines awakened certain questions and issues that 
put the clergy, specifically the German nobility, in difficulty.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
The Lombard mass that dominated this area adhered to the 
Cathar doctrines and although Catharism later took root more 
strongly in the south of France, it persisted in Italy, generating 
the conflict between the Ghibellines and the Ghibellines.
The Cathars in France were called ALBIGENSES, named 
after the town of Albi. They were fervent defenders and 
followers of the dualistic Manichean system, which for 
centuries was settled on the shores of the Mediterranean. In 
this area of southern France the Cathar preachers began to 
have a profound impact throughout the LANGUEDOC and 
nearby areas, taking root specifically in the French nobility. 
Catharism in France began to spread rapidly and threatened 
Catholicism, its tremendously radical stance and Manichean 
ideas, where the god of the Old Testament was a demon and 
the Christian message of the New Testament was distorted by 
a totally corrupt church, caused the resentment of the clergy. 
The ALBIGENSIAN CATHARS possessed a mystery totally 
different from any previous HERETIC movement and this 
was what really harassed the Semitic and lunar religious 
synarchy of the Popes, because these PURES had generated a 
cultural space where the hyperborean mystery of spiritual 
liberation was newly constellated. As in the Imperial Rome of 
Augustus, where the GRAAL was represented in the 
symbolism of the IMPERIAL EAGLE, just as the Vikings 
where the GRAAL was manifested in the TWO-LEAFED 
AXE, in the same way now the Cathars possessed the 
GRAAL; this time the symbol was a FALLING FOOT OF 
THE CROWN OF KRISTOS LUCIFER ANNOUNCING 
HIS RETURN TO END THE WORLD SYNARCHY.
This inflamed the demons of the corrupt Catholic Church, 
which once had in its midst pure-blooded LATIN VIRINES 
who tried to turn Catholicism into a
UNCING 
HIS RETURN TO END THE WORLD SYNARCHY.
This inflamed the demons of the corrupt Catholic Church, 
which once had in its midst pure-blooded LATIN VIRINES 
who tried to turn Catholicism into a


--- PAGE BREAK ---O END THE WORLD SYNARCHY.
This inflamed the demons of the corrupt Catholic Church, 
which once had in its midst pure-blooded LATIN VIRINES 
who tried to turn Catholicism into a


--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
SOLAR CHURCH, which was now totally victimized by 
corrupt and treacherous popes, sold to a financial power that 
pre- tended to destroy the Cathars and the GRAAL.
The traitor Pope Innocent III launched the crusade against 
the Cathars. The TEMPLARS financed this crusade and the 
ALBIGENSES 
were 
brutally 
repressed, 
a 
veritable 
HOLOCAUST and extermination suffered by the followers of 
the Cathar movement and the south of France was razed to the 
ground. Not even the King of France could save them, but the 
revenge was already in the making.
A historical review to mention are the CRUSADES, 
military expeditions carried out by the Christians of Western 
Europe from 1.205 A.D. against the Muslims, propitiated by 
the Catholic Church and certain Popes who had as objective 
the recovery of the holy places of pilgrimage, Bethlehem, 
JERUSALEM. These strategies, carried out during the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries, beyond the stated objectives, had a 
deep esoteric meaning determined BY THE GODS to the 
Popes Golen. We call GOLEN POPES the papal pontiffs who 
were more deeply ideologically consubstantiated with Hebrew 
theological studies, such as the KABALA and the ZOHAR, 
than with the Christian preaching of the New Testament. In 
short, the destinies of the Church were generally always 
directed by fanatical Golen popes and the CRUSADES 
organized by them (Urban II, Gregory VIII, Innocent III, 
Gregory IX) pursued basically three objectives. First, to 
liberate the Jews of Palestine from the Muslim yoke. Second, 
to recover architectural knowledge that was later used for the 
construction of their Gothic cathedrals. Third, to learn the 
interpretations of the Hebrew Kabbalah. In addition to all of 
the above, we must affirm that fundamentally the GOLEN 
Popes obeyed secret orders
n of their Gothic cathedrals. Third, to learn the 
interpretations of the Hebrew Kabbalah. In addition to all of 
the above, we must affirm that fundamentally the GOLEN 
Popes obeyed secret orders


--- PAGE BREAK ---thedrals. Third, to learn the 
interpretations of the Hebrew Kabbalah. In addition to all of 
the above, we must affirm that fundamentally the GOLEN 
Popes obeyed secret orders


--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
of their unknown superiors. Because of the Crusades, the 
kingdoms of France, Italy, Germany, Poland and England 
bled to death, which were economically and financially 
plundered thanks to the action of the TEMPLARS (Order 
whose 
theological 
principles 
were 
cabalistic, 
being 
practitioners of their rites and ceremonies, they managed the 
finances of the Crusades and acted on European soil as 
BANKERS, enriching themselves thanks to lending and 
usury). ANOTHER INTERESTING POINT IS THE 
INTRODUCTION 
AND 
CONSOLIDATION 
OF 
CHALDEAN, EGYPTIAN AND HEBREW ESOTERIC 
DOCTRINES IN EUROPE AT THE TIME OF THE 
CRUSADES.
RETURN OF THE CRUSADERS. In the same way, we can 
find in the heirs and ideological and theological children of 
the KNIGHTS OF THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON those who 
would be the heirs of the crusaders.
The PROTESTANT SECTAS, the future MASO- NES and 
their different aspects; certain esoteric sects such as the 
ILLUMINATES, CARBONARIANS, ROSARCHARS, and 
the ROSARCHARISTS.
CES, Theosophists, etc. Christianity was also widely 
contaminated by the Hebrew esoteric theological foundations 
and in ORDERS such as the BENEDICTINIANS, CIS-
TERCENSES, etc. We find their Christian theological 
dogmas deeply consubstantiated with the ideas of the 
Kabbalah and the Zohar. That is why within Christianity there 
was and still is a real ideological war between the different 
monastic orders. For example, in the Dominican Order their 
theological 
and 
philosophical 
conceptions 
were 
consubstantiated with a certain Cathar Manichaeism, with 
Platonic philosophical idealism and theologically they 
followed the ideas of St. Augustine; that is why they were 
enemies of the Benedictines. The HOLY INQUISITION, 
when it was managed by the Dominicans, was systematically 
dedicated to the hunt of converted Jews, being the main 
tine; that is why they were 
enemies of the Benedictines. The HOLY INQUISITION, 
when it was managed by the Dominicans, was systematically 
dedicated to the hunt of converted Jews, being the main 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
Catholic institution that persecuted them and that is why 
thousands of Jews fled or converted to Christianity.


--- PAGE BREAK ---t of converted Jews, being the main 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
Catholic institution that persecuted them and that is why 
thousands of Jews fled or converted to Christianity.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

93
But we must consider that since Paul of Tarsus introduced 
the Semitic lunar Christianity in Greece and Rome, thousands 
of Hebrews converted and acceded to the highest hierarchies 
of the Church, that is why many popes were of Jewish 
lineage. The Catholic Church even in its internal structures 
has a theological and philosophical conflict to settle and 
unfortunately, being extremely verticalist, it is the popes who 
impose the principles, in such a way that when the pope is 
determined by the lunar theological ideas, the church fully 
serves the World Synarchy. But from time to time a pope 
consubstantiated with solar theological ideas appears, in this 
case siding with the Hyperborean strategies, something that 
happened several times throughout history, but in general the 
GOLEN 
POPES 
GOVERNED 
ROME 
AND 
THE 
CATHOLIC CHURCH.
After the crusade against the ALBIGENSES, the Cathars 
had to flee and those who survived in the south of France 
became monks of the Order of Preachers or Dominicans, with 
some Cathar converts having real power within the structure 
of the Inquisition. Others, as in northern Italy, were hidden 
and welcomed as advisors to Italian aristocrats either in Milan 
or Turin, having a determining influence on their future 
policies and on the Renaissance. In any case, the GRAAL 
endured and the enemy could never destroy the Cathars and 
their doctrine, which endured and was assimilated to the 
transcendent solar ethics of the KINGS OF FRANCE AND 
THE GIBELINE NOBILITY OF GERMANY AND ITALY. 
After the CRUSADES and the ORDERS OF CABALLERY, 
the MONARCHIES
The Hyperborean Orders of the Orders of Blood would 
become stronger and stronger and would be fundamental in 
the history of the nations. The Hyperborean Orders of 
Cavalry, like THE THE THEUTHONIC ORDER, would 
become strong in Germania and Prussia, giving birth in the 
future to
would be fundamental in 
the history of the nations. The Hyperborean Orders of 
Cavalry, like THE THE THEUTHONIC ORDER, would 
become strong in Germania and Prussia, giving birth in the 
future to


--- PAGE BREAK ---in 
the history of the nations. The Hyperborean Orders of 
Cavalry, like THE THE THEUTHONIC ORDER, would 
become strong in Germania and Prussia, giving birth in the 
future to


--- PAGE BREAK ---

94
PRUSSIA and then to GERMANY. The Order of the 
HOSPITA- LARIOS will have decisive actions in the history 
and emergence of the Italian nation, and the treacherous 
ORDER OF THE TEMPLARS will be DESTROYED by the 
King of France. This usurious order at the service of the popes 
GOLEN, Innocent III, Boniface VIII, Gregory VII, 
incorporated real workers by buying them or lying to them 
about their aims. They were decimated by that magnificent 
warrior who was the King of France, FELIPE IV. No matter 
what historians say, some hold the idea that the crown of 
France destroyed the Templars and certain popes (the papacy 
moved with Philip IV to Avignon and there were seven popes 
in the service of the crown of France) because it was 
financially bankrupt and the Templars were its main creditors, 
the historical reality is that the Templars were destroyed and 
with them ended the absolute power of the synarchic popes. 
THE ORDER OF THE TEMPLE was destroyed and its 
properties were confiscated, its initiates who practiced a 
religious syncretism where they preached Hebrew, Egyptian 
and Christian rites and ceremonies that survived and escaped, 
emigrating to England or hiding in Switzerland, ended up 
founding the MASO- NERIA. That is why the rites and 
ceremonies of Freemasonry are similar or the same as those 
practiced by the Templars, being nowadays the MASONRY, 
WITH 
CERTAIN 
ESOTHERIC 
ORGANIZATIONS, 
TOGETHER WITH THE CATHOLIC CHURCH THE 
PINNACLE OF POWER OF THE
WORLD RELIGIOUS SYNARCHY. Although they may 
differ in their rites and theological dogmas, since some 
worship Abraxas, Yahweh or Jehovah, others worship God 
the Father, or Bhrama, etc., in reality they all worship the 
demiurge THE ONE, no matter how they call him. That is 
why the division and rivalry in history between Masons, Jews 
and Christians is simply conventional, because of the simple 
dispute of power between the Masons, Jews and Christians.
him. That is 
why the division and rivalry in history between Masons, Jews 
and Christians is simply conventional, because of the simple 
dispute of power between the Masons, Jews and Christians.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

95
brothers, because they are all equal, servants of the traitor 
siddhas, creators of the material order. The WHITE LOGY is 
the superior point where the masters dwell, the unknown 
superiors and their hosts of celestial hierarchies. They, from 
their metaphysical city guide and direct the strategies and 
plans of the soul evolution of humanity and the RELIGIOUS 
SYNARCHY, subordinated to the masters of wisdom of the 
white lodge, is in charge of executing all their plans of world 
domination.
What is vital for the total understanding of universal 
history is to understand that always, since the beginning of 
this plot, the gods of the white lodge have governed and 
controlled the evolution of reality and the historical process of 
its creation, coming directly upon it whenever necessary and 
even descending and incarnating in the illusion, in matter, 
certain beings of the highest hierarchy of THE ONE. In short, 
they rule humanity from the beyond and are constantly related 
and in contact with the religious synarchy, whether in its 
Christian or Hebrew aspect, indicating to THEIR ETERNAL 
LACAYANS AND SERVANTS THE PAU-
STRATEGIC TASKS that are essential to be able to bring the 
material evolution of creation to the entelechial ends.
The destruction of the Templars and the weakening of the 
Papacy gave birth to one of the most brilliant strategies in 
history, the rise of ABSOLUTE MONARCHIES and 
NATIONAL STATES.
We must consider that since the fall of the Templars and 
the weakening of papal power, the strategies of religious 
synarchy were transferred to the mendicant orders that 
emerged from the eighth century. In particular, the 
CISTERCENSE, 
FRANCIS- 
CANA, 
BENEDICTINE, 
DOMINICAN and JESUITICAN orders assumed this 
responsibility.
ferred to the mendicant orders that 
emerged from the eighth century. In particular, the 
CISTERCENSE, 
FRANCIS- 
CANA, 
BENEDICTINE, 
DOMINICAN and JESUITICAN orders assumed this 
responsibility.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ant orders that 
emerged from the eighth century. In particular, the 
CISTERCENSE, 
FRANCIS- 
CANA, 
BENEDICTINE, 
DOMINICAN and JESUITICAN orders assumed this 
responsibility.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
All of them authorized by the papacy at different times 
were growing and acquiring more and more spaces of power. 
First the Cistercian order was active and then the Benedictine 
and Dominican orders gained preponderance from the 12th 
century onwards. The discredit of the papacy increased the 
power of these two orders, which were institutions that were 
within the Catholic Church, but had and still have total 
autonomy in all their areas, from theological to financial, they 
are totally autarchic. It is interesting the role of these orders in 
history because they represent a mystery and are covered by a 
mantle of unknowns, their hermeticism, the mystery of their 
beliefs, the diversity of their rites and ceremonies, their 
dresses, habits, etc., make these orders possess an almost 
tenebrous destiny. Their temples, abbeys, cathedrals, full of 
esoteric symbolism, especially their Gothic cathedrals, are of 
an astonishing architecture, inserted in well-delineated and 
strategically oriented geo- graphic places. They have in 
themselves something satanic, something dark and they really 
exert a fascinating power. Let us imagine an image, the 
impact that one of these architectures must have had on the 
observer in the fifteenth or sixteenth century. Really the effect 
on the consciousness of the European was lethal and think that 
were strategically scattered throughout the European world.
That is why we affirm that from the 12th century onwards 
the true enemies of the HYPERBorean strategies of spiritual 
liberation were the MENDICANT ORDERS, with rare 
exceptions (the Dominican order, owner of the Holy 
Inquisition, managed by Cathar converts to Christianity) 
because these are the ones that transformed the European 
culture, Christianizing its peoples, building an architecture 
that affirmed its sacred symbols all over the world. It is 
imperative to understand that the predominance of a large 
number of Golen Popes, with tendencies and interests placed 
more in the finances
t affirmed its sacred symbols all over the world. It is 
imperative to understand that the predominance of a large 
number of Golen Popes, with tendencies and interests placed 
more in the finances


--- PAGE BREAK ---d symbols all over the world. It is 
imperative to understand that the predominance of a large 
number of Golen Popes, with tendencies and interests placed 
more in the finances


--- PAGE BREAK ---

97
and in a theological mercantilism where the only thing of 
interest was money and through it, the dominion of the world. 
It is interesting to comment on a historical fact, the 
introduction of the ARABIC NUMBERS and the calculation 
of SIMPLE AND COMPOUND INTEREST IN THE 
GUELPHIC OR PAPATE BANKS, in the 15th century, 
REPLACING THE ROMAN NUMBERS AND THE 
CALCULATION OF THE ABACO. Undoubtedly-
Roman numerals and their mathematics were exact, since 
applied to commerce, architecture, engineering or geometry, 
etc., they did not present the slightest inconvenience. That is 
why until the year fifteen hundred or more the European 
culture resisted the modification of the ROMAN NUMBERS 
by the ARABIGOUS NUMBERS, which were only 
introduced in Italy by LEONARDO FIBONACCI, a merchant 
and usurer at the service of the GUELPHIC city of PISA and 
the PAPATE, in the XII century. LET US REMEMBER 
THAT IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE USURY DID NOT 
EXIST, SINCE IT WAS CONDEMNED BY THE STATE 
AND THIS PERSISTED IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
EUROPE FOR MORE THAN A THOUSAND YEARS, the 
first lenders and usurers being the Templars and certain 
groups of Guelph bankers in the service of the papacy.
In turn, the Middle Ages gave shape to a hyperborean 
architecture, which with its CASTLES AND PALACES, the 
MILITARY ORDERS rebuilt an aristocratic ethic in the 
Roman manner, where the nobility of pure blood generated a 
series of arts aimed at affirming the HEROIC SPIRIT. Special 
mention should be made of fencing and chess, as well as the 
TROUBADOURS, who with their TROUBADOURS and 
CANTS gave rise to a LITERATURE that was to become the 
basis for the development of a new literary culture.
Epic RA that affirmed in the collective unconscious of the 
European peoples the symbols of the Knightly A-MOR, of the 
Heroic life and fundamentally shaped the REMEMBRANCE 
OF AN ORIGIN linked to the Greek mythologies.
n the collective unconscious of the 
European peoples the symbols of the Knightly A-MOR, of the 
Heroic life and fundamentally shaped the REMEMBRANCE 
OF AN ORIGIN linked to the Greek mythologies.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
COLATINAS.
All this magnificent cultural construction culminated with 
the Renaissance and Neoclassicism, which served to awaken 
that deep feeling of hyperborean nostalgia in the nobility and 
aristocracies, which meant a real resistance to the religious 
synarchy, the papacy and its servile kingdoms.


--- PAGE BREAK ---n 
that deep feeling of hyperborean nostalgia in the nobility and 
aristocracies, which meant a real resistance to the religious 
synarchy, the papacy and its servile kingdoms.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
14. THE MODERN AGE. THE POWER OF THE
WORLD SYNARCHY IN THE FINANCIAL CENTERS. 
THE BENEDICTINE AND DOMINICAN ORDERS. 
RESISTANCE 
IN 
THE 
MONARCHIES 
OF 
HYPERBOREAN SAINT- GREET MONARCHIES.
At the end of the Middle Ages, the known world was 
preparing to undergo profound cultural changes that would 
diametrically alter the consciousness of European man. It is 
important to understand that there was an essential difference 
between the man of the Ancient Age and the man of the 
Middle Ages, basically for the simple reason that practically 
from the fall of the Hyperborean races, the Hyperborean 
Collective Strategies dominated the world: SPARTA, 
ATHENS, MACEDONIA, AND THE EMPIRE.
ROMANO taxatively traced two thousand years of a WORLD 
DOMINION where the world was ruled by the cultural 
dominion imposed by these nations. The SINARCHY OF 
THE GODS OF THE WORLD, who had dominated during 
the Egyptian dynasties and with the Persians, were now in 
check by the Hyperborean races and the power of the world 
was absolutely possessed by the ROMAN WORLD; they 
were the axial axis where all political, cultural and religious 
events revolved. The PAX ROMANA was the maximum 
historical expression and for the first and perhaps only time 
the world, which we must recognize is a HOSTILE PLAZA 
for the captive spirit, lived a certain HEROIC spiritualization 
and the GODS OF THE SPIRIT traced together with the great 
awakened men, the HYPERBOREAN STRATEGISTS, the 
sciences for the collective liberation from the insane material 
order. The Renaissance and Neoclassicism left behind a 
decultura- lization characterized by an elitist scholastic system 
where


--- PAGE BREAK ---collective liberation from the insane material 
order. The Renaissance and Neoclassicism left behind a 
decultura- lization characterized by an elitist scholastic system 
where


--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
the Christianized masses were submerged in a world of 
SUPERSTITION AND total IGNORANCE; barbarism and 
misery had left their traces and in economic and social 
matters, 
poverty 
and 
disease 
caused 
an 
enormous 
demographic fall, either due to famines or plagues, which 
would take hundreds of years to recover.
This was the true reality that had sown a political system 
of theocratic aspirations, where the people, enslaved by totally 
flawed and tyrannical cultural patterns, had only one right: 
that of DEATH. Idleness, coupled with a hopelessness of a 
bearable life, was the framework of the man of the Middle 
Ages. We can find in any fair treatise of history the desolation 
that the man of the Middle Ages lived. The cities became real 
con- vents where the impoverished and ragged crowd begged 
in the streets for a piece of bread, while the clergy and the 
feudal lords lived wealthy and rich in their lordships at the 
expense of the popular misery. The magnificent Roman cities 
and all the advancement in agriculture, economy, arts and 
sciences had disappeared because of the OBSCURANTIS- 
MO THAT HAD PLASMATED THE CLERGY AND 
THEIR SECULARS.
CES, LIKE THE CAROLINGIANS; but with the rise of the 
BLOOD MONARCHIES AND THE KINGDOMS OF 
FRAN-
CIA, SPAIN AND GERMANY with their nobility a change 
was coming and the ITALIAN RENAISSANCE WOULD BE 
THE CULTURAL MOVEMENT THAT WOULD CHANGE 
HISTORY.
The Modern Age took place between the XVI and XVII 
centuries, beginning with the conclusion of the Hundred 
Years' War between France and England, with the fall of 
Constantinople in 1453 and the discovery of America as the 
most significant events that marked the beginning of the 
Modern Age. However, we maintain that the two previous 
dates were the most significant events of the Modern Age.
overy of America as the 
most significant events that marked the beginning of the 
Modern Age. However, we maintain that the two previous 
dates were the most significant events of the Modern Age.


--- PAGE BREAK ---the 
most significant events that marked the beginning of the 
Modern Age. However, we maintain that the two previous 
dates were the most significant events of the Modern Age.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
1
The fall of Constantinople is the collapse of the Eastern 
Roman Empire. The fall of Constantinople is the collapse of 
the Eastern Roman Empire and although at that time it was 
Christianized, the true meaning of its designation is to affirm 
the fall of everything Roman, because up to that time the only 
still existing bastion was Constantinople, especially its 
magnificent Roman architecture, because we must remember 
that if there is something that represented and RECORDED 
the LORDS OF AGHARTA and the ORIGIN OF THE
ETERNAL PATRIOT was it embedded like a DOUBLE 
BLADE 
SHAFT 
in 
the 
world 
with 
ROMAN 
ARCHITECTURE AND ENGINEERING.
Worse is the designation of the discovery of America 
because this event was planned by the Benedictines who knew 
of the existence of America and knew perfectly well the 
existence of the Hyperborean cultures of the Mayas, which 
they had to destroy by mandate of the gods of SHAMBALA 
and for that reason they planned the conquest of these lands. 
The mission of CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, a converted 
Jew at the service of certain financial power and of the 
Catholic clergy, which at that moment in history was totally 
subject to the power of the orders, especially the Benedictine, 
was to destroy all Hyperborean vestiges. We all know the 
consequent history of this, the conquerors: Hernán Cortés, 
Pizarro, the Almagro, etc., systematically undermined and 
destroyed the American cultures, creating a racial and cultural 
hybrid where the indigenous religions, their temples, their 
creeds, their traditions and idosyncracies were eliminated, 
replacing them with the Christian dogma. Thus was born a 
new MESTIZA AMERICA, enslaved to the designs of a 
ruthless culture that once it suppressed the hyperborean 
symbols, dedicated itself to affirm and colonize definitively 
the American soil. This is the most dramatic and tragic fact of 
humanity in those times.
re that once it suppressed the hyperborean 
symbols, dedicated itself to affirm and colonize definitively 
the American soil. This is the most dramatic and tragic fact of 
humanity in those times.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ressed the hyperborean 
symbols, dedicated itself to affirm and colonize definitively 
the American soil. This is the most dramatic and tragic fact of 
humanity in those times.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
The HOLOCAUST and extermination of the American 
Indigenous 
peoples 
and 
of 
the 
HYPER-BOREAU 
CULTURES OF THE MAYAS AND THE INCAS; that is 
why it represented the HOLOCAUST and extermination of 
the American Indigenous peoples and of the HYPER-
BOREAU CULTURES OF THE MAYAS AND THE 
INCAS.
that the most significant phenomenon that best represents the 
beginning of the Modern Age is the RENAISSANCE.
This cultural movement was a true event that gave rise to 
the civic and political changes that would leave behind 
centuries of terror, deserving to be the commemorative date of 
the beginning of the Modern Age. The Renaissance 
movement, characterized by a renewed interest in the 
GRECORRO- MANO CLASSICAL past and especially in its 
art and science, began in ITALY and then spread throughout 
the rest of EUROPE. It is not necessary to enunciate all the 
changes that took place in all the fields of art and knowledge, 
because this treatise of history has in itself a higher purpose, 
but we must affirm that thanks to it, MAN was once again 
THE CENTER OF CULTURE, as he was in the CLASSICAL 
AGE, relegating Christianity and its lunar and sinful doctrine 
to a lower order. The Middle Ages was in philosophical and 
pedagogical matters governed by its Thomistic scholasticism, 
it had two main philosophical axes. In theology, the 
theocentric theory, GOD WAS THE CENTER OF THE 
UNIVERSE, and the theocentric theory, GOD WAS THE 
CENTER OF THE UNIVERSE.
CHURCH its legacy in the world, together with the 
GEOCENTRIC astronomical idea that affirmed the earth as 
the center of the Universe (Ptolemy in the second century had 
enunciated this astronomical theory where the immobile earth 
had the planets revolving around it). The Renaissance 
radically modified this; the theocentric principle by the 
ANTROPOCENTRIC, where God lost its preponderance 
along with religion and especially the Church, being relegated 
d it). The Renaissance 
radically modified this; the theocentric principle by the 
ANTROPOCENTRIC, where God lost its preponderance 
along with religion and especially the Church, being relegated 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
3
almost to a second plane by MAN and THE ARTS; they 
positioned themselves and took the cultural center of the 
Renaissance. In Physics and Astronomy the geocentric theory 
was displaced by the première.


--- PAGE BREAK ---y MAN and THE ARTS; they 
positioned themselves and took the cultural center of the 
Renaissance. In Physics and Astronomy the geocentric theory 
was displaced by the première.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
The HELIOCENTRIC system, which affirmed that all the 
planets and even the Earth revolved around the sun. In this 
way MAN, the RACE and their cultures were oriented and 
escaped from the clutches of a cultural and intellectual life 
dominated by the Church and religion, generating a profound 
change. Thus, the Greco-Roman spirit emerged with such 
force that it affirmed hyperborean intellectual principles, 
allowing the birth of a new era where a political, social and 
cultural structure began to prevail, giving rise to the 
MONARCHIES OF ORIENTED SANGERIES and to the 
STATES of the ORIENTED SANTIAGOUSES.
MODERN. Great monarchs such as CHARLES V EMPE- 
RATOR OF GERMANY and SPAIN, AND LOUIS XIV OF
FRANCE, would undertake and succeed in predominating 
over THE CHURCH and the popes, IMPOSING A 
HYPERBORROW ETHICS IN ALL EUROPE. Undoubtedly 
the Modern Age was a time of contrasts well marked, because 
to the loss of power of the papacy and the changes happened 
in the philosophy, the art and the sciences; the monarchies and 
their national modern states began to govern the life and the 
European politics. The monarchs, now absolute masters of 
their nations and free from the interference of the church and 
the pope, could and did, in agreement with a group of 
advisors, plan their governments and the destiny of their 
nations. Aristocratic monarchies such as the French, Spanish 
and German monarchies, ruled by efficient kings, directed by 
intelligent and capable rulers, generated two centuries, XVII 
and XVIII, where the nations shone magnificently in all 
fields. In economic matters, the installation of a blood nobility 
in the administrative fields and of a national mercantile 
bourgeoisie made some nations true economic powers. In the 
political field, the displacement of the clergy, which in the 
Middle Ages advised and directed the politics of the kings, by 
an educated and cultured nobility, definitively allowed the 
separation of the nobility from the clergy.
f the clergy, which in the 
Middle Ages advised and directed the politics of the kings, by 
an educated and cultured nobility, definitively allowed the 
separation of the nobility from the clergy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---in the 
Middle Ages advised and directed the politics of the kings, by 
an educated and cultured nobility, definitively allowed the 
separation of the nobility from the clergy.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
5
The new government granted autonomy in legal and political 
matters, a fundamental basis for the development of modern 
states. In social matters, the improvement and creation of a 
better educational system, secular and free, the emergence of 
a health system -hospital centers-, improvements in urban and 
building developments and fundamentally the national 
bourgeoisie, allowed a better development and distribution of 
wealth, granting better salaries (thanks to the development of a 
manufacturing industry -large factories- that processed 
agricultural products generated a new social class: the 
workers). Generally, if the king was an AWAKE king, his 
nation was governed with absolute criterion, but if the king 
was a mediocre and incapable one, generally the opposite 
happened and even if his advisors applied good policies, the 
king disintegrated these plans due to incapacity or selfishness, 
leading those nations to ruin. The Renaissance brought great 
changes in religious matters and movements such as the 
REFORMATION gave rise to divisions in the Church, giving 
birth to the reformist theologies of Luther, Calvin, etc., which 
produced great schisms and the birth of Protestantism. Thus 
was born in this era a German Church, the LUTERANISM, a 
French Church, the CALVINISM, an English Church, the 
ANGLICANISM, etc.. Not even the CONTRARREFORM 
and the great emperors like CHARLES V of Germany 
COULD AVOID THE DEEP DIVISION WITHIN THE 
CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
In this way the national states became stronger and the 
enlightened monarchies SUPPORTED THE ARTISTS AND 
SCIENTISTS, generating a development of philosophy and 
the sciences that would definitively transform the modern 
world. 
Great 
monarchs 
such 
as 
RODOLPH 
II 
of 
HABSBURGH, Holy Roman Emperor of the Germanic Holy 
Roman Empire, supported the sciences, with ALCHEMY and 
the quest for science being the most important of these.
chs 
such 
as 
RODOLPH 
II 
of 
HABSBURGH, Holy Roman Emperor of the Germanic Holy 
Roman Empire, supported the sciences, with ALCHEMY and 
the quest for science being the most important of these.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
The PHILOSOPHICAL STONE remains one of the most 
sought after mysteries in the Modern Age, imposing this 
esoteric philosophical science, as it was in the Middle Ages 
the SEARCH FOR THE HOLY GRAIL.
At the end of the Middle Ages, ALCHEMISTRY, a 
science dedicated mainly to discovering a substance that 
would transmute the most common metals into SILVER AND 
GOLD, AND TO FIND THE MEANS TO PROLONG 
HUMAN LIFE INDEFINITELY, strongly emerged. This 
scien-
The alchemy was born in ancient EGYPT and began to 
flourish in ALE-JANDRIA in the HELLENISTIC period, 
simultaneously a school of alchemy developed in CHINA. 
The writings of some Jewish and Greek philosophers are 
considered to contain the first alchemical theories. The theory 
proposed by EMPEDOCLES in the 5th century B.C. - all 
things are composed of four elements, air, earth, water and 
fire - greatly influenced the alchemists. The tactics of the 
enemies of IMPERIAL ROME, which consisted in corrupting 
Roman society for gold, contemplated the alchemists in their 
strategies, which is why AUGUSTUS and specifically the 
great emperor DIOCLESIANUS, (a bitter enemy of all 
Semitic and Lunar, implacable with Christians and Jewish 
converts) ordered to BURN all Egyptian and Jewish books 
and texts related to the chemistry of gold and silver, in order 
to stop this wretched and corrupt synarchic strategy.
Thanks to this, this demiurgic science did not penetrate 
into Europe, but with the coming to power of the Catholic 
Church and the arrival of the Hebrew alchemists due to the 
Muslim conquest of Spain, alchemy returned in the Christian 
Middle Ages and fundamentally in the XVI and XVII 
centuries to occupy a preponderant place in the sciences of the 
Modern Age.


--- PAGE BREAK ---uest of Spain, alchemy returned in the Christian 
Middle Ages and fundamentally in the XVI and XVII 
centuries to occupy a preponderant place in the sciences of the 
Modern Age.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
7
But we must affirm that just as the HOLY GRAAL was a 
Hyperborean mystery, the PHILOSOPHAL STONE was a 
mystery of the esoteric synarchy of the traitor siddhas and 
they revealed this mystery to their henchmen. It is interesting 
to note the emergence of great fortunes and financial 
economic empires due to the alchemists, most of whom were 
Hebrews or were related to them (famous is the case of 
RODOL-FO II of Habsburg and the mysterious alchemist 
JOHN DEE, who was betrayed by his assistant, the Druid 
EDWARD KELLY). They knew the science of transmuting 
lead into GOLD and this is how they generated great wealth 
and fortunes, thus seizing the financial power of the world. 
This was the strategy of the gods of the material plane when 
they failed before the KINGS OF PURE BLOOD and their 
collective strategies of NATIONAL reorientation imposed in 
their NATIONAL STATES. The synarchs OPPOSED a 
power parallel to that of the Church and this was structured in 
certain esoteric secular organizations, such as MASONRY, 
and 
a 
world 
FINANCIAL 
center 
MANAGED 
BY 
BANKERS,
that responded to the requirements of the plans for world 
domination by the world synarchy and its masters. This 
synarchic financial center and its servants subsequently 
moved from Europe to the United States of America. This 
would be the new promised land of Jehovah Satan to his 
followers, belonging to Protestant sects and secular economic 
organizations that would later organize under Freemasonry 
and produce the NORTH AMERICAN REVOLUTION in 
1776. We must realize that the first revolutionary movement 
took place on American soil and it is there that the world 
synarchy would definitively take root. The United States of 
America became independent of the British and in a few 
years, given its PROTESTANT mentality, it became an 
economic and political power.
archy would definitively take root. The United States of 
America became independent of the British and in a few 
years, given its PROTESTANT mentality, it became an 
economic and political power.


--- PAGE BREAK ---vely take root. The United States of 
America became independent of the British and in a few 
years, given its PROTESTANT mentality, it became an 
economic and political power.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

108
slowly took over the international panorama. The future 
masters of the world, managed by economic corporations of 
bankers and liberal slave politicians, all framed in MASONIC 
LOGIES, are going to plan the construction of a new model of 
society where man simply responds to the interests of the 
same; 
their 
political 
label 
will 
be 
CAPITALIST 
LIBERALISM. After the REVOLUTION
NORTH AMERICAN, delineated, planned and carried out by 
MASONRY AND THE CENTERS OF FINANCIAL 
POWER.
The revolutionary movements led by pseudo-intellectuals 
organized in clubs such as the Jacobins and the Girondins, 
supported by the MASON HUMANISTS IN THE SERVICE 
OF CAPITAL LIBERALISM.
LISTA, ended the French monarchy with the FRENCH 
REVO- LUCION and later the Russian monarchy with the 
BOLCHEVIAN REVOLUTION; everything was prepared to 
put in power of the world the PEOPLE CHOSEN by the 
demiurge and the false gods of SHAMBALA, supporters of 
the material order and of their plan of world domination. 
They, the traitor Siddhas, from their metaphysical city and 
together with their lackey followers and their religious and 
esoteric powers worshippers of HIM, following the plan 
initiated ten thousand years before in Atlantis, would go after 
the definitive destruction of the Hyperborean cultural vestiges 
of the Roman Empire and the Pure-Blooded Emperors.
Thus, at the end of the Modern Age, the world slowly but 
steadily moved towards an ontological, axiological and 
gnoseological classification of men and humanity that would 
be contemplated from now on, not by spiritual ethnic rank 
(blood purity, aristocratic nobility, military or priestly 
hierarchies, intellectual wisdom, etc.) but by achievements in 
the economic and financial field, thus giving rise to the 
OLIGARCHY of money. In this
aristocratic nobility, military or priestly 
hierarchies, intellectual wisdom, etc.) but by achievements in 
the economic and financial field, thus giving rise to the 
OLIGARCHY of money. In this


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
9
new social stratification, the rich were the true masters (after 
the Reformation, the Protestant theories, especially Calvinism, 
proclaimed that being poor was almost synonymous with 
failure and for the Swiss Calvin the chosen ones would be 
those who succeeded and became rich, that is why in 
SWITZERLAND, the seat of international finance and heirs 
of the usurious capitals of the Templars and then of certain 
wealthy alchemists, to be poor was an insult) and this new 
society was built on an aristocracy of the Templars, the seat of 
international finance and heirs of the usurious capital of the 
Templars and then of certain wealthy alchemists, to be poor 
was an insult) and this new society was built on an aristocracy 
of blood and spirit that was beginning to decay and decline in 
all its strata. It would be crowned with the rise to power of a 
CAPITALIST BURGLARY that would definitively take 
political power, overthrowing or buying the monarchic 
governments 
that 
still 
remained 
faithful 
to 
the 
HYPERBOROUGH NOOLOGICAL ETHICS.
The emergence of this capitalist bourgeoisie first displaced 
the nobility itself from the positions of state, and then 
continued with the overthrow of the monarchies, instituting a 
political system that would definitively govern the destinies of 
humanity: the LIBERAL DEMOCRACIES.


--- PAGE BREAK ---e, and then 
continued with the overthrow of the monarchies, instituting a 
political system that would definitively govern the destinies of 
humanity: the LIBERAL DEMOCRACIES.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
15. THE CONTEMPORARY AGE. THE NEW POWER
OF THE INTERNATIONAL SYNARCHY. POLITICAL 
IDEOLOGIES. THE RISE OF NATIONALISM.
The Contemporary Age began with the cycles of the 
FRENCH REVOLUTION of 1789, which shook the political 
and cultural foundations of the modern world. The overthrow 
of the King of France, Louis XVI, meant the fall of one of the 
strongest monarchies in Europe, leaving only the English 
monarchy as the sole owner of European power, which in 
reality remained nominally in power because it had made a 
pact with the international synarchy, which, by imposing its 
parliament, the House of Lords and the House of Commons, 
exercised power. This planned and strategically executed 
event with such a degree of criminality was a true 
HOLOCAUST, 
because 
systematically 
the 
Jacobin 
revolutionaries who responded directly to the directives of the 
MASONRY executed all the French NOBILITY WITHOUT 
THE MINIMUM CONTEMPLATION, not even the king 
himself escaped to the guillotine. The plan of the international 
synarchy to impose a democratic capitalist republic where the 
money 
bourgeoisie, 
together 
with 
pseudo-humanist 
intellectual Freemasons would rule France was almost a 
reality. But not everything was written and again from the 
bosom of a family of Italian blood will emerge a luciferic 
warrior of ABSOLUTE VOLUN- TAD, who will put an end 
to the synarchic plans generating a Hyperborean political 
space; that great enlightened one was NAPOLEON 
BONAPARTE.
Napoleon, Emperor of the French from 1804 to 1815, was 
one of the greatest military men of all time.


--- PAGE BREAK ---rean political 
space; that great enlightened one was NAPOLEON 
BONAPARTE.
Napoleon, Emperor of the French from 1804 to 1815, was 
one of the greatest military men of all time.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
1
The European monarchies were unfortunately deceived by 
England, which was then the international financial center and 
the seat of Freemasonry. Unfortunately, the European 
monarchies allowed themselves to be deceived by England, 
which at that time was the international financial center and 
headquarters of Freemasonry. This organization, branching 
out all over Europe and secretly supported by clerical sectors, 
influenced with all its power the monarchs of Austria, Prussia, 
Spain, Russia, etc., who for various reasons opposed the 
Napoleonic reforms. Led by England, they marched and 
perished before the power of Napoleon, who defeated them 
and pursued them to the end. This great Corsican, like 
Alexander the Great and Octavian Augustus, followed the 
same Hyperborean designs, marching against the main 
esoteric centers of power of the KALI YUGA, origin of the 
chosen peoples. First by subduing the heirs of the black 
Atlanteans and spiritually destroying the high Egyptian black 
magic, defeating the Mamelukes and then trying to subdue 
definitively the esoteric center of the monotheistic religions, 
Jerusalem; only this was prevented by the endless treachery of 
the British who always in the service of the synarchy 
defended their masters to the death.
The brilliant general subordinated Freemasonry and then 
the Church and crowned himself Emperor, IN THE 
MANNER OF THE ROMANS AND THE HYPERBorean 
TRADITIONS.
He then continued with the strategy marked by the gods of 
AGHARTA and marched against Russia, which at that time 
was the main representative of the world synarchy after 
England. He surrendered all his forces and left a historical 
precedent by demonstrating who were the real enemies that 
prevented the reforms that were somehow promoted in the 
French Revolution. The symbol that Napoleon asserted in 
European society heralded what was soon to come and the 
monarchies that would support the imperialists.
that were somehow promoted in the 
French Revolution. The symbol that Napoleon asserted in 
European society heralded what was soon to come and the 
monarchies that would support the imperialists.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

112
Englishmen would soon see the extent of the treachery of 
these pirates and buccaneers. The revolutions that preceded 
the fall of Napoleon, such as those of 1848 and the 
revolutionary cycles of Marxist socialism that began in 1905, 
culminated in the fall of the Czar of Russia in 1917 and the 
beginning of the first world war, to dethrone the only 
monarchy that would understand trickery and treachery: the 
Kaiser's GERMANY, which would DEMONSTRATE TO 
THE WORLD what Napoleon professed.
The First World War would put an end to the last vestiges 
of the ARISTOCRATIC WARRIOR NOBILITIES OF PURE 
BLOOD AND HYPERBORN TRADITIONS. MARXIST 
SOCIALISM AND CAPITALIST LIBERALISM, BOTH IN 
THE SERVICE OF INTERNATIONAL SYNARCHY, 
WOULD 
DIVIDE 
THE 
GEOPOLITICAL 
AND 
ECONOMIC WORLD.
Man would be MASSIFIED and the meaning of life totally 
modified in its existence and essence; this new model of man 
that was beginning to take shape was oriented and affirmed to 
a pragmatic empiricism, where communist atheism and 
capitalist materialism left no options. Incredibly, even the 
church, eternal ally of these powers, denounced them. From 
the center of Europe, the IMPERIAL ROME WOULD RISE 
AGAIN WITH THE HYPERBORN NATIONALISMS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---ns. Incredibly, even the 
church, eternal ally of these powers, denounced them. From 
the center of Europe, the IMPERIAL ROME WOULD RISE 
AGAIN WITH THE HYPERBORN NATIONALISMS.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
16. ANALYSIS OF THE ETERNAL SYMBOLS IN THE 
ARTE
Reality is always built on deception, on the lies of opinion-
makers who erase what is not truthful, what really happened 
and the truth of history. These hidden powers, which hide 
behind large financial companies and economic corporations, 
or organizations such as Freemasonry, religious sects or 
philanthropic foundations, are the real powers that direct the 
cultural destiny of man.
The terrifying materialism that hangs over the world is the 
worst calamity that exists in humanity, and unfortunately it is 
almost impossible to banish it because the collective 
consciousness of the masses is totally suppressed. The masses, 
which is in reality the whole of humanity, are subjugated and 
surrendered to the psychological techniques of the enemy, the 
international synarchy, which seeks only to subjugate them to 
its designs. Humanity is thus condemned to the plans of this 
international organization which is preparing for it the most 
terrible of fates, the sacrifice of humanity for the benefit of its 
interests. The reality and the reality of this current situation is 
that this systematic subjugation of the masses to the projects 
of the synarchy is part of a perfectly organized plan that has 
been carried out since the very beginning of history. The 
Modern Age, beyond the opposition that took place in certain 
areas of culture and art, was also a victim of the synarchs, 
who, sensing the strategies of the Hyperborean gods, did not 
hesitate to oppose them with their most sophisticated 
demiurgic sciences in order to neutralize the Hyperborean 
etheric symbols.
Thus, the greatest of the hyperborean projects, which was


--- PAGE BREAK ---oppose them with their most sophisticated 
demiurgic sciences in order to neutralize the Hyperborean 
etheric symbols.
Thus, the greatest of the hyperborean projects, which was


--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
The projection and actualization of the eternal cultural 
symbols, rooted in art and then in politics, had a terrible 
performance in the world, unleashing cultural facts and events 
that forever marked the world's collective conscience. These 
events were built in the collective conscience operating 
changes that still remain and that are an essential part of the 
hyperborean culture embedded in this land.
No matter how hard the enemy tries to destroy the 
hyperborean strategies executed by the viryas, they were 
engraved in fire in the world and can never be erased, because 
they belong to the greatest of the worlds, to the eternal world 
of the UNKNOWN GOD.
Among the strategies led by the gods loyal to the eternal 
spirit in this space of existential significance, the ARTS are 
undoubtedly the most significant strategically speaking, 
because they allow us to experience certain aspects of the 
ETERNAL DIRECTLY.
We hold this truth because the eternal is concretely 
characterized in the world by the emergence of its eternal 
symbols, which have in their semiotic continent the essential 
qualifier of the SUBLIME. It is important to understand this 
qualifier in depth, since it is the specific characteristic of 
eternal realities, because the eternal is sublime and the 
sublime in the world is an emanation of the ETERNAL VRU- 
NAS, which are condensed in archetypal forms and structured 
in different languages. Undoubtedly the most direct language 
of the structured eternal in this space of cultural significance 
is ART in its different ideological conceptions. We 
understand by Art the expressions of the human soul and spirit 
that manifest in their different artistic fashions, systematically 
their highest longings, desires and virtues, using languages.
e 
understand by Art the expressions of the human soul and spirit 
that manifest in their different artistic fashions, systematically 
their highest longings, desires and virtues, using languages.


--- PAGE BREAK ---the expressions of the human soul and spirit 
that manifest in their different artistic fashions, systematically 
their highest longings, desires and virtues, using languages.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
Undoubtedly 
we 
could 
make 
several 
conceptual 
definitions about art and its manifestations, but it is essentially 
distinguished by two qualifiers that define it technically: THE 
BEAUTIFUL AND THE SUBLIME.
Art itself is the representation of these two axiological 
characteristics, because these qualifiers are intrinsic to the 
spirit and the soul. The BEAUTIFUL is the highest 
axiological representation of the manifestations of the human 
soul and the SUBLIME is the most significant of the spirit. It 
is vital to recognize the realities that are deposited in the 
ontological and epistemological substrates of each of these 
manifestations. In the process of the emergence of each of 
these axiological expressions, we undoubtedly distinguish the 
direct connection to an entity. In this emergence, the entity 
appears to our senses and it impresses us by activating in the 
unconscious a series of relations that are directly related to the 
ontic reality that had emergence, that is to say, to the entity 
that we experience. We have studied this process in the 
chapters 
PSYCHOLOGY 
OF 
THE 
PASU 
and 
PSYCHOLOGY OF THE VIRYA in a detailed and concise 
way, but it is important to distinguish at this moment in a 
precise way the realities of the characteristics of the beautiful 
and the sublime.
We emphasize this because it is there where the sacred 
symbols and the most terrible bijas that awaken in the soul the 
most NUMINIOUS AND BEATIC manifestations OF THE 
HUMAN HEART are manifested.
Undoubtedly this act, very well processed in the mind of 
the demiurge and which is perhaps one of the most perfectly 
orchestrated gnoseological tactics by the gods traitors to the 
hyperborean spirit, directly affects the human consciousness 
producing such hypnotism that leads us to the deepest of 
dreams. It is important to understand this reality since, as we 
have studied it in depth, we know that the entity
he human consciousness 
producing such hypnotism that leads us to the deepest of 
dreams. It is important to understand this reality since, as we 
have studied it in depth, we know that the entity


--- PAGE BREAK ---ss 
producing such hypnotism that leads us to the deepest of 
dreams. It is important to understand this reality since, as we 
have studied it in depth, we know that the entity


--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
emerging in the cultural structure of the world has in itself, in 
its ontology, in its axiological continent, a being in itself that 
is what determines the entity as such and defines it ethically 
and aesthetically. The most difficult concept to distinguish is 
the ethical one because it is part of the gnoseological and 
needs a language, a HYPERBORNE GNOSIS for its 
knowledge, and the pasu generally does not possess languages 
for such understanding. Thus, in the being-in-itself of the 
entity, the easiest reality for the human animal to access is the 
AESTHETIC aspect, because it is accessible simply in an 
instinctive and archetypal form; thus the pasu, with the simple 
formal archetypal logic, that is to say with reason, achieves a 
comprehension of the aesthetic reality of the entity. This 
relationship, entity and pasu, undoubtedly has a purpose 
which, as we know, is part of the being in itself of the entity, 
its ontological and demiurgic purpose, which is to trigger the 
postor action of meaning and to add the pasu to the cultural 
designs of the entity. Necessarily, when the aesthetic aspect 
emerges in the pasu, the numinous factor of this archetypal 
aspect is determined by the BEAUTY ARCHETYPE, which 
is the most powerful gnoseolo- gical tool of the demiurge and 
the gods of matter. When this archetype is unleashed it rules 
through the BEAUTY principle AND THIS IS THE MOST 
ACTIVE QUALIFIER OF THE HUMAN SOUL.
To understand the action of this aspect of the demiurge, 
connected to the material world and to understand what it 
triggers in the soul, is to awaken to the most seductive power 
of matter: the archetype beauty. This aspect of creation is the 
most numinous and has in itself the most fascinating of 
designs, which is a power that has the property of plunging 
the human soul into a deep reverie.
We must understand that when we study the archetypes 
and their designs, we understand by archetypes not only 
entities
power that has the property of plunging 
the human soul into a deep reverie.
We must understand that when we study the archetypes 
and their designs, we understand by archetypes not only 
entities


--- PAGE BREAK ---property of plunging 
the human soul into a deep reverie.
We must understand that when we study the archetypes 
and their designs, we understand by archetypes not only 
entities


--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
concrete but also abstract entities. That is to say that both 
entities and abstract nouns also possess in their ontological 
contexts and in their gnoseological continents certain designs 
that carry in themselves a finality and a suprafinality. 
Moreover, we must consider that these abstract nouns, which 
can also act as adjectives, have greater POWER AND 
NUMINIOUS CAPACITY than certain concrete entities or 
archetypes, such as the archetype mother, the archetype tree, 
the archetype horse, etc.
In this case the archetype BEAUTY, which is an abstract 
noun, is one of the most significant archetypes in the plans of 
the extraterrestrial synarchy that seeks to dominate the 
collective consciousness of the masses. It is one of the most 
destructive gnoseological tools of the demiurge when it is a 
function of its strategies.
It is important to understand, if we really want to know 
what happened in history, that the culture developed in any 
civilization prior to the GREEKS was INFERIOR in the entire 
cultural spectrum, be it the MEDES, the ASSYRIANS, the 
CHALDEANS, the BABYLONIANS, the EGYPTIANS, the
PERSAS, the BRAHAMANIC cultures of India or of the 
PEOPLES OF THE EAST, etc.... We affirm this with the 
certainty of truth, because the analytical sense of the Indo-
Germanic western man and specifically the Greek and the 
Roman, were superior; their aesthetic conformation was 
superior, more beautiful, slender, strong, their ethical 
formation was better AND THEIR INTE- LIGENCE 
SUPERIOR, better endowed intellectually and volitionally. 
Anthropology and the sciences that assist it know that the 
European Indo-Germanic man of the Greek, Latin, Germanic, 
Celtic, Gothic, Frankish, German, Anglo, Norman, Lombard, 
etc. races was and is superior. We must also point out that the 
superior did not always exercise power in the world, because 
for various reasons the hyperborean races
n, Anglo, Norman, Lombard, 
etc. races was and is superior. We must also point out that the 
superior did not always exercise power in the world, because 
for various reasons the hyperborean races


--- PAGE BREAK ---mbard, 
etc. races was and is superior. We must also point out that the 
superior did not always exercise power in the world, because 
for various reasons the hyperborean races


--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
were taken over and conquered from within, by the 
monotheistic cultures of the East. All history is the 
antagonism, the struggle, the war between these two ethics. At 
times, in history, in the world, HYPERBorean strategies 
dominated and structured their cultures. Generally the 
sublime, the beautiful and the wise, whether in the arts or in 
the sciences, is HYPERBorean. But unfortunately today the 
superior has given way to the inferior and the aberrant 
materialism that we live in will eventually lead man to his 
ruin, so the only alternative to resist is that the people who 
still carry in their blood the spirit of struggle awaken and fight 
these demonic powers that seek to subjugate us, subjecting us 
to total slavery.
It is important to analyze the emergence in the Neolithic of 
all the stone formations or buildings that appeared scattered 
throughout Europe, about which a number of theories have 
been developed and conventional history has always tried to 
demonstrate that these constructions are the work of the 
Neolithic or Stone Age peoples. Undoubtedly they remain 
without answers and no matter how much they invent theories 
and the archaeologists of the synarchy affirm such inventions, 
that they were astronomical observatories, or temples of cults, 
always the doubt and the lie is built on their speculations. The 
reality tells us that the peoples of the STONE AGE of the 
Neolithic could never have built such constructions, because 
they had neither the instructive nor the technological capacity 
to erect colossal lithic structures such as the MEGALITES of 
STONEHENGE, the amazing alignments of KARNAK, or the 
enormous TUMULES built in SALSBURY and the great 
tombs, erected from Portugal to Scandinavia.
The truth is that these constructions were built after the 
sinking of the ATLANTIDA. After the catastrophe
us TUMULES built in SALSBURY and the great 
tombs, erected from Portugal to Scandinavia.
The truth is that these constructions were built after the 
sinking of the ATLANTIDA. After the catastrophe


--- PAGE BREAK ---SALSBURY and the great 
tombs, erected from Portugal to Scandinavia.
The truth is that these constructions were built after the 
sinking of the ATLANTIDA. After the catastrophe


--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
After the collapse of Atlantis, the structures of the planet 
underwent a series of modifications in its geo- logical 
morphology 
that 
considerably 
altered 
its 
archetypal 
conformation and the siddhas, determined to recompose the 
planet, to align it to the macroconstructor archetypes, built a 
series of lithic structures that acted as archetypal geological 
codifiers that allowed to reorder the planet or created order, to 
the architectural guidelines previously established by the 
demiurge. The collapse of Atlantis was the product of the war 
waged by Kristos Lucifer against the hosts of demons who 
had treacherously developed the key KALACHAKRA, and 
certain races had been crossed in the creationist order, which 
generated such a destabilization of the planet, to the point of 
its total destruction. Only the lithic magic of the gods, who 
quickly acted by migrating to the places and geographies that 
were geologically most damaged, made it possible to seal 
such damage and thus avoid the total destruction of the 
demonic creation of THE ONE.
Now the question is this: Which were the gods that 
recomposed the material order with the lithic structures?
To answer this mysterious question we must make a small 
analysis of what we have seen previously; we argued that 
prior to the sinking of Atlantis, the gods of matter had 
possibly developed a plan to conquer culturally the European 
and African peoples, with whom they made a CULTURAL 
PACT. Following their migratory journey we can verify that 
there are coincidences between certain stone constructions 
and their actions and facts in those geographies; in such a way 
that we can elucidate that these gods of the cultural pact were 
the ones who carried out such actions. Although the gods had 
already been divided and the endless war was declared, we 
can see that in certain directions there was an action of the 
loyal siddhas, who acted as builders and builders.
Although the gods had 
already been divided and the endless war was declared, we 
can see that in certain directions there was an action of the 
loyal siddhas, who acted as builders and builders.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

120
The lithic routes acted as magical symbols, as encirclement 
techniques that had a very specific purpose: to reorient and 
point out the path to the Origin. That is why we can identify 
which are the buildings of the traitor gods, supporters of the 
creationist order, and which are the Hyperborean lithic 
structures. The traitor gods were characterized by building 
next to their dolmens and menhirs TUMMULS AND 
TOMBS, they instituted in the villages where they acted the 
MORTUARY cult and the RELIGION (priestly caste) which 
were the conditions of the cultural pact, and they also left 
engraved in their FUNERARY monuments the sacred 
symbol: the SPIRAL. Possibly the actions of these two sides, 
their 
migratory 
movements, 
occurred 
simultaneously 
conquering peoples; THE LORDS OF MATTER CAME 
FROM ATLANTIDA, but if we affirm that the migratory 
current of the gods of AGHARTA, of Kristos Lucifer came 
from the pole, from the north of Europe, trying to destroy and 
annul the peoples of the cultural pact, it is for this reason that 
the Atlanteans "came from the north, from the north of 
Europe, trying to destroy and annul the peoples of the cultural 
pact, that is why the "black" Atlanteans (called black because 
of the magic they practiced) ended up migrating to Egypt, 
becoming the FIRST CHOSEN PEOPLE and building the 
largest funerary structure on the planet to seal the cultural 
pact: THE PYRAMIDS.
