in Assassination Plots


Jack Anderson


WASHINGTON — There has been se-
cret, sworn testimony that the CIA and
FBI have plotted occasionally to murder
enemy agents in this country.

We have been unable to document a
single murder case. But at least two
witnesses have testified that they were
asked by the CIA or FBI to commit
murder.

THE SENATE Intelligence Commit-
tee has also obtained vouchers, which
prove exotic assassination weapons have
been sold to U.S. agencies. Senate inves-
tigators have evidence, furthermore,
that assassination teams were trained at
secret sites somewhere in southeastern
United States. Both government and con-
tract employes were taught how to use
James Bond-style assassination weap-
ons.

CIA employes have acknowledged to
us that assassination plots have been dis-
cussed in their presence. The plotters
were squeamish, said one source, about
using the words “assassination” and
“murder.” They spoke more delicately
about "eliminating" or “getting rid” of a
troublesome Communist agent. But there
was no question, insisted the source, that
they were talking about murder.

Another source stressed that a Soviet


v <

spy or double agent might be marked for
murder only if he were considered “a
tremendous threat” to U.S. interests.
Then the CIA wouldn’t use one of its own
agents but would recruit an outsider ”to
do the job,” the source said.

NORMALLY, THE CIA would try, he
said, to maneuver the victim out of the
country before arranging his disappear-
ance. But one CIA source, with only
second-hand knowledge of the case, told
of a spy who was thrown off a New York
City bridge. A cooperative police lieu-
tenant allegedly submitted a suicide re-
port on the victim. We have been unable,
however, to confirm the incident.

In secret testimony before the Rocke-
feller Commission, Frank Sturgis of the
Watergate break-in squad confessed that
he had once been asked to commit a
murder for the CIA in the Miami area.

He discussed with a CIA agent, Stur-
gis testified, how to dispose of the body.
One plan was to dump it into shark-
infested waters near the Bahamas. They
also considered ditching the body in the
Everglades swamp, Sturgis swore.

THE AGENT promised to identify the
victim at a subsequent meeting. But, ac-
cording to Sturgis’ account, he began to


have misgivings. He wanted to be sure
the agent wasn’t trying to use him to kill
a personal enemy.

So at the second meeting, Sturgis In-
sisted that the assassination order would
have to be confirmed by a CIA staff of-
ficer. That was the last, testified Sturgis,
he heard of the scheme. The CIA has de-
nied having anything to do with domestic
murder plots.

At a secret Senate hearing, mean-
while, an FBI informant in Tampa, Jo-
seph Jurton, testified that his FBI COTT-
tael - ' wanted him to do away with an
alleged revolutionary.

THE BIZARRE plot called for Burton
to conspire with the radical, Richard Ar-
vedon, to kidnap a Federal judge. Then
Burton would gun down Arvedon dn the
judge’s property, making it look as if a
revolutionary plot had backfired, Burton
testified.

He identified his FBI contact as agent
Robert Heibel, who allegedly told him
tfiStr Washington had approved the plan
to kill Arvedon. This is vigorously denied
by the FBI, which denounced as
"spurious” the “innumerable allega-
tions” Burton has made against the FBI.

Arvedon's attorneys, Judith Petersen


BURTON

Claims Involvement

of Tampa and David Rosenberg of Cam-
bridge, Mass., told us: “We have been


aware for some time that both the FBI
and the Justice Department have had
knowledge of (the assassinationplot).

“From sworn affidavits we have
seen, we believe the plot to kill Arvedon
existed. We do not know the dimension
or the scope of what was involved,
whether wiretapping or other sur-
veillance was utilized and how long the
plot was in effect, but we are making ef-
forts to determine the answer on these
questions.”
