Preface
"The extraterrestrial presence that has long been denied by public officials
“in the loop,” has powerful political implications at all levels of human
society."
—Michael Salla
THE existence of UFOs has been a tangled disinformation nightmare for
decades which continues to this day.
Those MSM news hounds who let the media dictate what they believe
“know” that there is no such thing as a UFO and that anyone who believes
in them is a kook, a crazy conspiracist who is not to be trusted. Thousands
of books, movies, radio shows and the like to the contrary, the government
designated term for the media reportage is still “kook.”
Kooks in Congress still hold hearings about this and try to smear
whistleblowers who come forward to describe their duties in the exopolitics
hierarchy of deception. If they ever have any physical evidence it is snatched
away from them never to be seen again.
The highest U. S. government official to steadfastly allege the contrary in
detail was Lt. Col. Philip Corso, a very honorable officer, who acting under
orders from his commander, Lt. Gen. Arthur Trudeau, undertook to educate
the public about the truth of this matter. Philip was himself once a
commander of a base. As a personal assistant to President Eisenhower he
had an “Eyes Only” security clearance that allowed him to read anything on
the presidents’ desk. He knew well that when he broke the news in his book
an organized smear campaign would appear in the press. Nonetheless, he
followed his orders and was dutifully smeared.
He has written two very worthwhile books and much has been written about
him. A widely respected Italian journalist, Paola Harris, who now lives in
Colorado was his most trusted confidant. She wrote the best available
coverage of his life and trials. She was recently interviewed by notable
author and exopolitics commentator Michael Salla.
All those cited in this little anthology are sources of the highest caliber and
have much to teach those with discernment who choose to think for
themselves.and exopolitics commentator Michael Salla.
All those cited in this little anthology are sources of the highest caliber and
have much to teach those with discernment who choose to think for
themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In memory of Lt. Gen. Arthur G. Trudeau. This great man was my superior as chief of U.S. Army Research and
Development. He was a man of great courage; he put on a sergeant's helmet and fought with his men at Pork
Chop Hill in Korea. He was deeply religious and went on "retreats" at Loyola. He was the most brilliant man I have
ever known, who only gave me one standing order: "Watch things for me, Phil. There are things we do not
understand. " His accomplishments changed the world for the better. Any success I had I attribute to him and to
his leadership.Forward
Senator Strom Thurmond
When I was first elected to the United States Senate in 1954, the United States and democratic Western
governments were locked in a bitter, and sometimes deadly, Cold War with totalitarian Communist governments
that sought to expand their bankruptideology throughout the world.

Though those who did not live during this era
have a hard time picturing it, the 1950s and 1960s were a period in our history when there was a very real need to
be concerned about a Communist, especially Soviet, threat to our security and institutions.

As a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, I took a lead role in seeking out those in our
government who sought to muzzle military personnel who wanted to alert Americans to the threats we faced
from our Communist enemies and to speak out against some of the plainly misguided, incorrect and, frankly,
dangerous policies of the United States in dealing with the Soviets and Red Chinese.

Distinguished officers and
patriotic men such as Admiral Arleigh Burke and General Arthur Trudeau were essentially censored by their own
government because of the views they espoused about the state of the world and the nature of the threat
before our nation.

As a veteran of World War II, a commissioned officer in the United States Army Reserve, and a
proponent of a strong and comprehensive military, I could not sit idly by and watch our military be undermined
by people in government who were sympathetic to Communism.

During this period, the Armed Services Committee held extensive hearings into this matter.

It seemed an alien
concept that in a nation that protects and cherishes free expression, the men who risked their lives to keep us free
and best understood how we should confront our enemies would be ordered silent.During this period, the Armed Services Committee held extensive hearings into this matter.

It seemed an alien
concept that in a nation that protects and cherishes free expression, the men who risked their lives to keep us free
and best understood how we should confront our enemies would be ordered silent.

It was under these
circumstances that I came to know Philip Corso, then a colonel in the United States Army, who was equally
disturbed about the muzzling of our military, and who shared my concern about the future of our military forces.

As the members of the Armed Services Committee worked diligently to discover who was working to quiet our
soldiers, sailors, marines, and airmen, Colonel Corso was brought to my attention by two of my former staff
members.

The colonel had a great deal of credibility and expertise not only as a military officer but also in the
fields of intelligence and national security.

A veteran of World War II and Korea, Corso had also spent four years
working at the National Security Council.

In short, he was very familiar with issues that concerned me and my
colleagues on the Senate Armed Services Committee, and he very quickly became a valued source of bountiful
information that was insightful and, most important, accurate.

As a matter of fact, the material he provided was
invaluable in helping us prove that the stifling of American military officers was being ordered by individuals in
high ranking positions within our own government.

In 1963, when I learned of Colonel Corso's impending retirement from the army, I thought that having a man
with his background and experiences on my staff would be of great benefit.

So after offering him a position that
promised nothing more than long hours of hard work at a modest salary, Philip Corso once again willingly went to
work serving and protecting the United States, this time as an aide in my office.In memory of Lt. Gen. Arthur G. Trudeau. This great man was my superior as chief of U.S. Army Research and
Development. He was a man of great courage; he put on a sergeant's helmet and fought with his men at Pork
Chop Hill in Korea. He was deeply religious and went on "retreats" at Loyola. He was the most brilliant man I have
ever known, who only gave me one standing order: "Watch things for me, Phil. There are things we do not
understand. " His accomplishments changed the world for the better. Any success I had I attribute to him and to
his leadership.

In 1963, when I learned of Colonel Corso's impending retirement from the army, I thought that having a man
with his background and experiences on my staff would be of great benefit. So after offering him a position that
promised nothing more than long hours of hard work at a modest salary, Philip Corso once again willingly went to
work serving and protecting the United States, this time as an aide in my office. There is no question that Philip Corso has led a full and adventurous life, and I am certain that he has many
interesting stories to share with individuals interested in military history, espionage, and the workings of our
government. We should all be grateful that there are men and women like Colonel Corso - people who are
willing to dedicate their lives to serving the nation and protecting the ideals we all hold dear - and we should
honor the sacrifices they have made in their careers and in their lives.

1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTIONMy name is Philip J.

Corso, and for two incredible years back in the 1960s while I was a lieutenant colonel in
the army heading up the Foreign Technology desk in Army Research and Development at the Pentagon, I led a
double life.

In my routine everyday job as a researcher and evaluator of weapons systems for the army, I
investigated things like the helicopter armament the French military had developed, the tactical deployment
complexities of a theater antimissile missile, or new technologies to preserve and prepare meals for our troops in
the field.

I read technology reports and met with engineers at army proving grounds about different kinds of
ordnance and how ongoing budgeted development projects were moving forward.

I submitted their reports to
my boss, Lt.

Gen.

Arthur Trudeau, the director of Army R&D and the manager of a three thousand plus man
operation with lots of projects at different stages.

On the surface, especially to congressmen exercising oversight
as to how the taxpayers' money was being spent, all of it was routine stuff.

Part of my job responsibility in Army R&D, however, was as an intelligence officer and adviser to General
Trudeau who, himself, had headed up Army Intelligence before coming to R&D.

This was a job I was trained for
and held during World War II and Korea.

At the Pentagon I was working in some of the most secret areas of
military intelligence, reviewing heavily classified information on behalf of General Trudeau.

I had been on General
Mac Arthur's staff in Korea and knew that as late as 1961 - even as late, maybe, as today - as Americans back
then were sitting down to watch Dr.

Kildare or Gunsmoke, captured American soldiers from World War II and
Korea were still living in gulag conditions in prison camps in the Soviet Union and Korea.

Some of them were
undergoing what amounted to sheer psychological torture.

They were the men who never returned.Some of them were
undergoing what amounted to sheer psychological torture.

They were the men who never returned.

As an intelligence officer I also knew the terrible secret that some of our government's most revered institutions
had been penetrated by the KGB and that key aspects of American foreign policy were being dictated from
inside the Kremlin.

I testified to this first at a Senate subcommittee hearing chaired by Senator Everett Dirksen of
Illinois in April 1962, and a month later delivered the same information to Attorney General Robert Kennedy.

He
promised me that he would deliver it to his brother, the President, and I have every reason to believe he did.

It
was ironic that in 1964, after I retired from the army and had served on Senator Strom Thurmond's staff, I worked
for Warren Commission member Senator Richard Russell as an investigator.

But hidden beneath everything I did, at the center of a double life I led that no one knew about, and buried
deep inside my job at the Pentagon was a single file cabinet that I had inherited because of my intelligence
background.

That file held the army's deepest and most closely guarded secret: the Roswell files, the cache of
debris and information an army retrieval team from the 509th Army Air Field pulled out of the wreckage of a flying
disk that had crashed outside the town of Roswell in the New Mexico desert in the early morning darkness during
the first week of July 1947.

The Roswell file was the legacy of what happened in the hours and days after the
crash when the official government cover-up was put into place.

As the military tried to figure out what it was
that had crashed, where it had come from, and what its inhabitants' intentions were, a covert group was
assembled under the leadership of the director of intelligence, Adm.The Roswell file was the legacy of what happened in the hours and days after the
crash when the official government cover-up was put into place.

As the military tried to figure out what it was
that had crashed, where it had come from, and what its inhabitants' intentions were, a covert group was
assembled under the leadership of the director of intelligence, Adm.

Roscoe Hillenkoetter, to investigate the
nature of the flying disks and collect all information about encounters with these phenomena while, at the same
time, publicly and officially discounting the existence of all flying saucers.

This operation has been going on, in
one form or another, for fifty years amidst complete secrecy.

I wasn't in Roswell in 1947, nor had I heard any details about the crash at that time because it was kept so
tightly under wraps, even within the military.

You can easily understand why, though, if you remember, as I do, the
Mercury Theater "War of the Worlds" radio broadcast in 1938 when the entire country panicked at the story of
how invaders from Mars landed in Grovers Mill, New Jersey, and began attacking the local populace.

The
fictionalized eyewitness reports of violence and the inability of our military forces to stop the creatures were
graphic.

They killed everyone who crossed their path, narrator Orson Welles said into his microphone, as these
creatures in their war machines started their march toward New York.

The level of terror that Halloween night of
the broadcast was so intense and the military so incapable of protecting the local residents that the police were
overwhelmed by the phone calls.

It was as if the whole country had gone crazy and authority itself had started to
unravel.

Now, in Roswell in 1947, the landing of a flying saucer was no fantasy.

It was real, the military wasn't able to
prevent it, and this time the authorities didn't want a repeat of "War of the Worlds.INTRODUCTION

Now, in Roswell in 1947, the landing of a flying saucer was no fantasy. It was real, the military wasn't able to
prevent it, and this time the authorities didn't want a repeat of "War of the Worlds. " So you can see the mentality
at work behind the desperate need to keep the story quiet. And this is not to mention the military fears at first that
the craft might have been an experimental Soviet weapon because it bore a resemblance to some of the
German designed aircraft that had made their appearances near the end of the war, especially the crescent
shaped Horton flying wing. What if the Soviets had developed their own version of this craft? The stories about the Roswell crash vary from one another in the details. Because I wasn't there, I've had to rely
on reports of others, even within the military itself. Through the years, I've heard versions of the Roswell story in
which campers, an archeological team, or rancher Mac Brazel found the wreckage. I've read military reports
about different crashes in different locations in some proximity to the army air field at Roswell like San Agustin and

2

--- PAGE BREAK ---3
Corona and even different sites close to the town itself.

All of the reports were classified, and I did not copy them
or retain them for my own records after I left the army.

Sometimes the dates of the crash vary from report to
report, July 2 or 3 as opposed to July 4.

And I've heard different people argue the dates back and forth,
establishing time lines that vary from one another in details, but all agree that something crashed in the desert
outside of Roswell and near enough to the army's most sensitive installations at Alamogordo and White Sands that
it caused the army to react quickly and with concern as soon as it found out.

In 1961, regardless of the differences in the Roswell story from the many different sources who had described it,
the top-secret file of Roswell information came into my possession when I took over the Foreign Technology desk
at R&D.

My boss, General Trudeau, asked me to use the army's ongoing weapons development and research
program as a way to filter the Roswell technology into the main stream of industrial development through the
military defense contracting program.

Today, items such as lasers, integrated circuitry, fiberoptics networks,
accelerated particle beam devices, and even the Kevlar material in bulletproof vests are all commonplace.

Yet
the seeds for the development of all of them were found in the crash of the alien craft at Roswell and turned up
in my files fourteen years later.

But that's not even the whole story.

In those confusing hours after the discovery of the crashed Roswell alien craft, the army determined that in the
absence of any other information it had to be an extraterrestrial.

Worse, the fact that this craft and other flying
saucers had been surveilling our defensive installations and even seemed to evidence a technology we'd seen
evidenced by the Nazis caused the military to assume these flying saucers had hostile intentions and might have
even interfered in human events during the war.In those confusing hours after the discovery of the crashed Roswell alien craft, the army determined that in the
absence of any other information it had to be an extraterrestrial.

Worse, the fact that this craft and other flying
saucers had been surveilling our defensive installations and even seemed to evidence a technology we'd seen
evidenced by the Nazis caused the military to assume these flying saucers had hostile intentions and might have
even interfered in human events during the war.

We didn't know what the inhabitants of these crafts wanted, but
we had to assume from their behavior, especially their interventions in the lives of human beings and the reported
cattle mutilations, that they could be potential enemies.

That meant that we were facing a far superior power
with weapons capable of obliterating us.

At the same time we were locked in a Cold War with the Soviets and
the mainland Chinese and were faced with the penetration of our own intelligence agencies by the KGB.

The military found itself fighting a two-front war, a war against the Communists who were seeking to
undermine our institutions while threatening our allies and, as unbelievable as it sounds, a war against
extraterrestrials, who posed an even greater threat than the Communist forces.

So we used the extraterrestrials'
own technology against them, feeding it out to our defense contractors and then adapting it for use in space-
related defense systems.

It took us until the 1980s, but in the end we were able to deploy enough of the Strategic
Defense Initiative, "Star Wars, " to achieve the capability of knocking down enemy satellites, killing the electronic
guidance systems of incoming enemy warheads, and disabling enemy spacecraft, if we had to, to pose a threat.

It was alien technology that we used: lasers, accelerated particle-beam weapons, and aircraft equipped with
"Stealth" features.It took us until the 1980s, but in the end we were able to deploy enough of the Strategic
Defense Initiative, "Star Wars, " to achieve the capability of knocking down enemy satellites, killing the electronic
guidance systems of incoming enemy warheads, and disabling enemy spacecraft, if we had to, to pose a threat.

It was alien technology that we used: lasers, accelerated particle-beam weapons, and aircraft equipped with
"Stealth" features.

And in the end, we not only outlasted the Soviets and ended the Cold War, but we forced a
stalemate with the extraterrestrials, who were not so invulnerable after all.

What happened after Roswell, how we turned the extraterrestrials' technology against them, and how we
actually won the Cold War is an incredible story.

During the thick of it, I didn't even realize how incredible it was.

I
just did my job, going to work at the Pentagon day in and day out until we put enough of this alien technology
into development that it began to move forward under its own weight through industry and back into the army.

The full import of what we did at Army R&D and what General Trudeau did to grow R&D from a disorganized unit
under the shadow of the Advanced Research Projects Agency, when he first took command, to the army
department that helped create the military guided missile, the antimissile missile, and the guided missile launched
accelerated particle beam firing satellite killer, didn't really hit me until years later when I understood just how we
were able to make history.

I always thought of myself as just a little man from a little American town in western Pennsylvania, and I didn't
assess the weight of our accomplishments at Army R&D, especially how we harvested the technology coming out
of the Roswell crash, until thirty-five years after I left the army when I sat down to write my memoirs for an entirely
different book.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The full import of what we did at Army R&D and what General Trudeau did to grow R&D from a disorganized unit
under the shadow of the Advanced Research Projects Agency, when he first took command, to the army
department that helped create the military guided missile, the antimissile missile, and the guided missile launched
accelerated particle beam firing satellite killer, didn't really hit me until years later when I understood just how we
were able to make history. I always thought of myself as just a little man from a little American town in western Pennsylvania, and I didn't
assess the weight of our accomplishments at Army R&D, especially how we harvested the technology coming out
of the Roswell crash, until thirty-five years after I left the army when I sat down to write my memoirs for an entirely
different book. That was when I reviewed my old journals, remembered some of the memos I'd written to General
Trudeau, and understood that the story of what happened in the days after the Roswell crash was perhaps the
most significant story of the past fifty years. So, believe it or not, this is the story of what happened in the days after
Roswell and how a small group of military intelligence officers changed the course of human history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER 1
The Roswell Desert
THE NIGHT HUGS THE GROUND AND SWALLOWS YOU UP AS YOU drive out of Albuquerque and into the desert.

As you head east along 40 and then south along 285 to Roswell, there's only you and the tiny universe ahead of
you defined by your headlights.

On either side, beyond the circle of light, there is only scrub and sand.

The rest is
all darkness that closes in behind you, flooding where you've been under a giant ocean of black, and pushes you
forward along the few hundred feet of road directly ahead.

The sky is different out there, different from any sky you've ever seen before.

The black is so clear it looks like
the stars shining through it are tiny windows from the beginning of time, millions of them, going on forever.

On a
hot summer night you can sometimes see flashes of heat lightning explode in the distance.

Somewhere it is light
for an instant, then the darkness returns.

But summer is the rainy season in the New Mexico desert, and
thunderstorms assemble over you out of nowhere, pound the earth with rain and lightning, pummel the darkness
with crashes of thunder, shake the ground until you feel the earth is breaking apart, and then disappear.

The
ranchers out there will tell you that the local storms can go on all night, bouncing off the arroyos like pinballs in
play until they expend themselves over the horizon.

That's what it was like fifty years ago on a night much like this.

Although I wasn't there that night, I've heard many different versions.

Many of them go like this: Base radar at
the army's 509th airfield Outside the town of Roswell had been tracking strange blips all night on July 1, 1947.

So
had radar at nearby White Sands, the army's guided missile base where test launches of German V2 rockets had
been taking place since the end of the war, and at the nuclear testing facility at Alamogordo.Many of them go like this: Base radar at
the army's 509th airfield Outside the town of Roswell had been tracking strange blips all night on July 1, 1947.

So
had radar at nearby White Sands, the army's guided missile base where test launches of German V2 rockets had
been taking place since the end of the war, and at the nuclear testing facility at Alamogordo.

The blips would
appear at one corner of the screen and dart across at seemingly impossible speeds for aircraft, only to disappear
off another corner.

Then they'd start up again.

No earthly craft could have maneuvered at such speeds and
changed direction so  sharply.

It was a signature no one could identify.

Whether it was the same aircraft, more
than one, or simply an anomaly from the violent lightning and thunderstorms was anybody's guess.

So after the
operators verified the calibrations of the radar equipment, they broke down the units to run diagnostic checks on
the circuitry of the screen imaging devices to make sure their radar panels were operating properly.

Once they'd
satisfied themselves that they couldn't report any equipment malfunction, the controllers were forced to assume
that the screen images were displays of something that was truly out there.

They confirmed the sightings with
radar controllers at White Sands, but found they could do little else but track the blips as they darted across the
screen with every sweep of the silent beacon.

The blips swarmed from position to position at will, operating with
complete freedom across the entire sky over the army's most secret nuclear and missile testing sites.

Throughout that night and the following day, Army Intelligence stayed on high alert because something
strange was going on out there.The blips swarmed from position to position at will, operating with
complete freedom across the entire sky over the army's most secret nuclear and missile testing sites.

Throughout that night and the following day, Army Intelligence stayed on high alert because something
strange was going on out there.

Surveillance flights over the desert reported no sightings of strange objects either
in the sky or on the ground, but any sighting of unidentified aircraft on radar was sufficient evidence for base
commanders to assume a hostile intent on the part of  "something.

" And that was why the Army Intelligence in
Washington ordered additional counter intelligence personnel to New Mexico, especially to the 509th, where the
activity seemed to be centered.

The radar anomalies continued into the next night as Dan Wilmot, owner of a hardware store in Roswell, set up
chairs on his front porch after dinner to watch the streaks of lightning flash across the sky in the distance.

Shortly
before ten that evening, the lightning grew more intense and the ground shook under the explosions of thunder
from a summer storm that pounded the chaparral off in the northwest of the city.

Dan and his wife watched the
spectacle from beneath the dry safety of their porch roof.

It was as if each new bolt of lightning were a spear that
bent the heavens themselves.

"Better than any Fourth of July fireworks, " the Wilmots must have been remarking as they watched in awe as a
bright oval object streaked over their house and headed off into the northwest, sinking below a rise just before
the horizon where it was engulfed in darkness.

The sky again became pitch black.

By the time the next bolt of
lightning shot off", the object was gone.

A most unusual sight, Dan Wilmot thought, but it was gone from his sight
and gone from his thoughts, at least until the end of the week.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By the time the next bolt of
lightning shot off", the object was gone. A most unusual sight, Dan Wilmot thought, but it was gone from his sight
and gone from his thoughts, at least until the end of the week. Whatever it was that passed over the Wilmot house in Roswell also flew over Steve Robinson as he drove his
milk truck along its route north of the city. Robinson tracked the object as it shot across the sky at speeds faster
than any airplane he'd ever seen. It was a bright object, he noted, elliptical and solid rather than a sequence of
lights like the military aircraft that flew in and out of the 509th airfield on the city's outskirts. It disappeared behind
a rise off" in the west toward Albuquerque, and Steve put it out of his mind as he pushed forward on his route. 4
To the civilians in Roswell, nothing was amiss. Summer thunder storms were common, the reports of flying
saucers in the newspapers and over the radio were simply circus side show amusements, and an object streaking
across the sky that so attracted the Wilmots' attention could have been nothing more than the shooting star you

--- PAGE BREAK ---io were simply circus side show amusements, and an object streaking
across the sky that so attracted the Wilmots' attention could have been nothing more than the shooting star you

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
make a wish on if you're lucky enough to see it before it disappears forever in a "puff" of flame. Soon it would be
the July 4th weekend, and the Wilmots, Steve Robinson, and thousands of other local residents were looking
forward to the unofficial start of the summer holiday. But at the 509th there was no celebrating.
The isolated incidents of unidentified radar blips at Roswell and White Sands continued to increase over the
next couple of days until it looked like a steady stream of airspace violations. Now it was becoming more than
serious. There was no denying that a traffic pattern of strange aircraft overflights was emerging in the skies over
the New Mexico desert where, with impunity, these unidentifiable radar blips hovered above and then darted
away from our most secret military installations. By the time the military's own aircraft scrambled, the intruders
were gone. It was obvious to the base commanders that they were under a heavy surveillance from a presence
they could only assume was hostile. At first, nobody gave much thought to the possibility of extraterrestrials or
flying saucers, even though they'd been in the news for the past few weeks that spring. Army officers at the 509th
and White Sands thought it was the Russians spying on the military's first nuclear bomber base and its guided-
missile launching site.By now Army Counter intelligence, this highly secret command sector which in 1947 operated almost as much
in the civilian sector as it did in the military, had spun up to its highest alert and ordered a full deployment of its
most experienced crack World War II operatives out to Roswell.

CIC personnel had begun to arrive from
Washington when the first reports of strange radar blips were filed through intelligence channels and kept coming
as the reports continued to pile up with increasing urgency over the next forty-eight hours.

Officers and enlisted
men alike disembarked from the transport planes and changed into civilian clothes for the investigation into
enemy activities on the area.

They joined up with base intelligence officers like Maj.

Jesse Marcel and Steve
Arnold, a Counter intelligence noncom who'd served at the Roswell base during World War II when the first
nuclear bombing mission against Hiroshima was launched from there in August 1945, just about two years earlier.

On the evening of July 4, 1947 (though the dates may differ depending on who is telling the story), while the
rest of the country was celebrating Independence Day and looking with great optimism at the costly peace that
the sacrifice of its soldiers had brought, radar operators at sites around Roswell noticed that the strange objects
were turning up again and looked almost as if they were changing their shapes on the screen.

They were
pulsating - it was the only way you could describe it - glowing more intensely and then dimly as tremendous
thunderstorms broke out over the desert.

Steve Arnold, posted to the Roswell airfield control tower that evening,
had never seen a blip behave like that as it darted across the screen between sweeps at speeds over a
thousand miles an hour.They were
pulsating - it was the only way you could describe it - glowing more intensely and then dimly as tremendous
thunderstorms broke out over the desert.

Steve Arnold, posted to the Roswell airfield control tower that evening,
had never seen a blip behave like that as it darted across the screen between sweeps at speeds over a
thousand miles an hour.

All the while it was pulsating, throbbing almost, until, while the skies over the base
exploded in a biblical display of thunder and lightning, it arced to the lower left hand quadrant of the screen,
seemed to disappear for a moment, then exploded in a brilliant white fluorescence and evaporated right before
his very eyes.

The screen was clear.

The blips were gone.

And as controllers looked around at each other and at the CIC
officers in the room, the same thought arose in all their minds: An object, whatever it was, had crashed.

The
military response was put into motion within seconds: This was a national security issue - jump on that thing in the
desert and bring it back before anyone else could find it.

Even before the radar officer called the 509th base commander, Col.

William Blanchard, reporting that radar
indicated the crash of an unidentified aircraft to the north and west of Roswell, the CIC dispatch team had
already mobilized to deploy an immediate-response crash-and-retrieval team to locate and secure the crash
site.

They believed this was an enemy aircraft that had slipped through our radar defense system either from
South America or over the Canadian border and had taken photos of top-secret military installations.

They also
wanted to keep civilians away just in case, they said, there was any radiation from the craft's propulsion system,
which allowed it to make hairpin turns at three thousand miles an hour.

Nobody knew how this thing was
powered, and nobody knew whether any personnel had ejected from the aircraft and were wandering around
the desert.5
make a wish on if you're lucky enough to see it before it disappears forever in a "puff" of flame. Soon it would be
the July 4th weekend, and the Wilmots, Steve Robinson, and thousands of other local residents were looking
forward to the unofficial start of the summer holiday. But at the 509th there was no celebrating.
The isolated incidents of unidentified radar blips at Roswell and White Sands continued to increase over the
next couple of days until it looked like a steady stream of airspace violations. Now it was becoming more than
serious. There was no denying that a traffic pattern of strange aircraft overflights was emerging in the skies over
the New Mexico desert where, with impunity, these unidentifiable radar blips hovered above and then darted
away from our most secret military installations. By the time the military's own aircraft scrambled, the intruders
were gone. It was obvious to the base commanders that they were under a heavy surveillance from a presence
they could only assume was hostile. At first, nobody gave much thought to the possibility of extraterrestrials or
flying saucers, even though they'd been in the news for the past few weeks that spring. Army officers at the 509th
and White Sands thought it was the Russians spying on the military's first nuclear bomber base and its guided-
missile launching site.

They also
wanted to keep civilians away just in case, they said, there was any radiation from the craft's propulsion system,
which allowed it to make hairpin turns at three thousand miles an hour. Nobody knew how this thing was
powered, and nobody knew whether any personnel had ejected from the aircraft and were wandering around
the desert. "Bull" Blanchard green-lighted the retrieval mission to get out there as soon as possible, taking with
them all the night patrol equipment they could scare up, all the two-and-a-half-ton trucks that they could roll,
and the base's "low-boy" flatbed wreckers to bring the aircraft back. If it was  a crash, they wanted to get it under
wraps in a hangar before any civilian authorities could get their hands on it and blab to the newspapers. But the air controllers at the 509th weren't the only ones who thought they saw an aircraft go down. On the
outskirts of the city, ranchers, families camping in the desert, and residents saw an aircraft that exploded in a
bright light in between flashes of lightning and plummeted to earth in the direction of Corona, the neighboring
town to the north of Roswell. Chavez County sheriff George Wilcox started receiving calls in his office shortly after
midnight on the morning of the fifth that an airplane had crashed out in the desert, and he notified the Roswell
Fire Department that he would dispatch them as soon as he had an approximate location. No sense pulling fire
apparatus out of the station house to chase something through the desert unless they knew where it was. Besides,
Wilcox didn't like rolling the trucks out of town just in case there was a fire in the city that needed all the
apparatus they could throw at it, especially the pumpers.knew where it was. Besides,
Wilcox didn't like rolling the trucks out of town just in case there was a fire in the city that needed all the
apparatus they could throw at it, especially the pumpers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6
However, finding the crash site didn't take long.

A group of Indian artifact hunters camping in the scrub brush
north of Roswell had also seen the pulsating light overhead, heard a hurtling hiss and the strange, ground shaking
"thunk" of a crash nearby in the distance, and followed the sound to a group of low hills just over arise.

Before
they even inspected the smoking wreckage, they radioed the crash site location into Sheriff" Wilcox's office,
which dispatched the fire department to a spot about thirty-seven miles north and west of the city.

"I'm already on my way, " he told the radio operator at the firehouse, who also called the city police for an
escort.

And by about four-thirty that morning, a single pumper and police car were bouncing through the desert
taking Pine Lodge Road west to where Sheriff  Wilcox had directed them.

Neither the sheriff nor the fire
department knew that a military retrieval team was also on its way to the site with orders to secure the location
and, by any means necessary, prevent the unauthorized dissemination of any information about the crash.

It was still dark when, from another direction, Steve Arnold, riding shotgun in one of the staff cars in the convoy
of recovery vehicles from the 509th, reached the crash site first.

Even before their trucks rolled into position, an MP
lieutenant from the first jeep posted a picket of sentries, and an engineer ordered his unit to string a series of
floodlights around the area.

Then Arnold's car pulled up, and he got his own first glimpse of the wreckage.

But it
wasn't really wreckage at all - not in the way he'd seen plane crashes during the war.

From what he could make
out through the purple darkness, the dark skinned craft seemed mostly intact and had lost no large pieces.

Sure,
there were bits and pieces of debris all over the area, but the aircraft itself hadn't broken apart on impact the
way a normal airplane would.

And the whole scene was still shrouded in darkness.Sure,
there were bits and pieces of debris all over the area, but the aircraft itself hadn't broken apart on impact the
way a normal airplane would.

And the whole scene was still shrouded in darkness.

Then, the staff cars and jeeps that had accompanied the trucks lined up head on to the crash and threw their
headlights against the arroyo to supplement the floodlights that were still being strung by the engineers.

In the
sudden intersecting beams of headlights, Arnold could see that, indeed, the soft cornered delta shaped eggshell
type of craft was essentially in one piece, even though it had embedded its nose hard into the embankment of
the arroyo with its tail high in the air.

Heat was still rising off the debris even though, according to the base radar
at the 509th, the crash probably took place before midnight on the 4th.

Then Arnold heard the brief sizzle of a
battery charging up and the hum of a gasoline generator.

That's when the string of lights came up, and the
whole site suddenly looked like a baseball field before a big night game.

In the stark light of the military searchlights, Arnold saw the entire landscape of the crash.

He thought it looked
more like a crash landing because the craft was intact except for a split seam running lengthwise along the side
and the steep forty-five-plus-degree angle of the craft's incline.

He assumed it was a craft, even though it was like
no airplane he'd ever seen.

It was small, but it looked more like the flying wing shape of an old Curtis than an
ellipse or a saucer.

And it had two tail fins on the top sides of the delta's feet that pointed up and out.

He angled
himself as close to the split seam of the craft as he could get without stepping in front of the workers in hazardous
material suits who were checking the site for radiation, and that was when he saw them in the shadow.

Little dark
gray figures - maybe four, four and a half feet in length - sprawled across the ground.He angled
himself as close to the split seam of the craft as he could get without stepping in front of the workers in hazardous
material suits who were checking the site for radiation, and that was when he saw them in the shadow.

Little dark
gray figures - maybe four, four and a half feet in length - sprawled across the ground.

"Are those people?"  Arnold heard someone say as medics rushed up with stretchers to the knife like laceration
along the side of the craft through which the bodies had either crawled or tumbled.

Arnold looked around the perimeter of light and saw another figure, motionless but menacing nevertheless,
and another leaning against a small rise in the desert sand.

There was a fifth figure near the opening of the craft.

As radiation technicians gave the all clear and medics ran to the bodies with stretchers, Arnold sneaked a look
through the rip in the aircraft and stared out through the top.

Jehosaphat!

It looked like the sun was already up.

Just to make sure, Steve Arnold looked around the outside again and, sure enough, it was still too dark to call it
daylight.

But through the top of the craft, as if he were looking through a lens, Arnold could see an eerie stream
of light, not daylight or lamplight, but light nevertheless.

He'd never seen anything like that before and thought
that maybe this was a weapon the Russians or somebody else had developed.

The scene at the crash site was a microcosm of chaos.

Technicians with specific tasks, such as medics,
hazardous material sweepers, signalmen and radio operators, and sentries were carrying out their jobs as
methodically and unthinkingly as if they were the Emperor Ming's brainwashed furnace stoking zombies from the
Flash Gordon serials.

But everyone else, including the officers, were simply awestruck.

They'd never seen anything
like this before, and they stood there, overpowered, it seemed, by simply a general sense of amazement that
would not let them out of its grip.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But everyone else, including the officers, were simply awestruck. They'd never seen anything
like this before, and they stood there, overpowered, it seemed, by simply a general sense of amazement that
would not let them out of its grip. "Hey, this one's alive, " Arnold heard, and turned around to see one of the little figures struggling on the
ground. With the rest of the medics, he ran over to it and watched as it shuddered and made a crying sound that
echoed not in the air but in his brain. He heard nothing through his ears, but felt an overwhelming sense of
sadness as the little figure convulsed on the ground, its oversized egg shaped skull flipping from side to side as if it
was trying to gasp for something to breathe. That's when he heard the sentry shout, "Hey, you!" and turned back
to the shallow rise opposite the arroyo.

--- PAGE BREAK ---7
"Halt!" the sentry screamed at the small figure that had gotten up and was trying desperately to climb over
the hill.

"Halt!" the sentry yelled again and brought his Ml to bear.

Other soldiers ran toward the hill as the figure slipped
in the sand, started to slide down, caught his footing, and climbed again.

The sound of soldiers locking and
loading rounds in their chambers carried loud across the desert through the predawn darkness.

"No!" one of the officers shouted.

Arnold couldn't see which one, but it was too late.

There was a rolling volley of shots from the nervous soldiers, and as the small figure tried to stand, he was flung
over like a rag doll and then down the hill by the rounds that tore into him.

He lay motionless on the sand as the
first three soldiers to reach him stood over the body, chambered new rounds, and pointed their weapons at his
chest.

"Fuck, " the officer spit again.

"Arnold.

" Steve Arnold snapped to attention.

"You and your men get out there
and stop those civilians from crossing this perimeter.

" He motioned to the small convoy of emergency vehicles
approaching them from the east.

He knew they had to be police or county sheriff.

Then he called out, "Medics.

"
Arnold jumped to at once, and by the time the medics were loading the little creature on a stretcher, he was
already setting up a perimeter of CIC personnel and sentries to block the site from the flashing lights and churning
sand far in the distance to the south of them.

He heard the officer order the medics to load the bodies on
stretchers, pack them in the back of whatever two-and-a-half-ton CMC he could pull off the line, and drive them
back to the base immediately.

"Sergeant, " the officer called out again.

"I want your men to load up everything that can be loaded on these deuce-
and-a-halfs and sway that damn .

.

.

whatever it is" - he was pointing to the delta shaped object - "on this low-boy and
get it out of here.

The rest of you, " he called out.whatever it is" - he was pointing to the delta shaped object - "on this low-boy and
get it out of here.

The rest of you, " he called out.

"I want this place spotless.

Nothing ever happened here, you
understand?

Just a nothing piece of scrub brush like the rest of this desert.

"
As the soldiers formed an arm in arm "search and rescue" grid, some on their hands and knees, to clean the
area of any pieces of debris, devices, or chunks of wreckage, the huge retrieval crane that had been deployed
from the air base hoisted the surprisingly light flying object out of its impact crater in the arroyo and swayed it
above the long flatbed Ford that accompanied the convoy of army trucks.

A small squad of MPs were deployed
to face the civilian convoy of emergency vehicles quickly approaching the site.

They fixed bayonets and
lowered their Ml barrels at the whirlwind of sand directly in front of them.

On the other side of the skirmish line, Roswell firefighter Dan Dwyer, the radioman riding shotgun on the red
Ward LaFrance pumper the company rolled that night along with the tanker, could see very little at first except
for an oasis of white light in the center of darkness.

His small convoy had been running lights but no sirens as they
pulled out of the firehouse in the center of Roswell, rendez voused with the police car north of town, and headed
out to the site to rescue what he had been told was a downed aircraft.

As he approached the brightly lit area of
floodlights off in the distance - it looked more like a small traveling amusement park than a crash site - he could
already see the soldiers in a rough circle around an object that was swinging from the arm of a crane.

As the
LaFrance got closer, Dwyer could just make the strange deltoid shape of the thing as it hung, very precariously,
from the arm, almost dropping once or twice under the very inexperienced control of the equipment operator.As he approached the brightly lit area of
floodlights off in the distance - it looked more like a small traveling amusement park than a crash site - he could
already see the soldiers in a rough circle around an object that was swinging from the arm of a crane.

As the
LaFrance got closer, Dwyer could just make the strange deltoid shape of the thing as it hung, very precariously,
from the arm, almost dropping once or twice under the very inexperienced control of the equipment operator.

Even at this distance, the sound of shouting and cursing was carrying across the sand as the crane was raised,
then lowered, then raised as the object finally sat over the Ford flatbed trailer.

The police unit ahead of the fire truck suddenly shot out toward the brightly lit area as soon as the driver saw
the activity, and immediately the area was obscured from Dwyer's vision by clouds of sand that diffused the light.

All he could see through the thicket of sand were the reflections of his own flashing lights.

When the sand cleared,
they were almost on top of the site, swinging off to one side to avoid the army trucks that had already started
hack down the road toward them.

Dwyer looked over his shoulder to see if any more military vehicles were
headed his way, but all he saw were the first pink lines of sunlight over the horizon.

It was almost morning.

By the time Dwyer's field truck pulled around to the area the soldiers had pointed out, whatever it was that
had crashed was sitting on the flatbed, still clamped to the hovering crane.

Three or four soldiers were working on
the coupling and securing the object to the truck with chains and cable.

But for something that had dropped out
of the sky in a fireball, which was how the police described it, Dwyer noted that the object looked almost
unscathed.

He couldn't see any cracks in the object's skin and there were no pieces that had broken off.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But for something that had dropped out
of the sky in a fireball, which was how the police described it, Dwyer noted that the object looked almost
unscathed. He couldn't see any cracks in the object's skin and there were no pieces that had broken off. Then
the soldiers dropped an olive tarp over the flatbed and the object was completely camouflaged. An army
captain walked over to one of the police units parked directly in front of the fire truck. And behind the officer
stood a line of bayonet wielding soldiers sporting MP armbands. "You guys can head on back, " Dwyer heard the captain tell one of the Roswell police officers on the scene. "We've got the area secured. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---t wielding soldiers sporting MP armbands. "You guys can head on back, " Dwyer heard the captain tell one of the Roswell police officers on the scene. "We've got the area secured. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
"What about injuries?" the police officer asked, maybe thinking more about the incident report he had to fill
out than about what to do with any casualties.
"No injuries. We have everything under control, " the captain said.
But even as the military was waving off the civilian convoy, Dwyer could see small bodies being lifted on
stretchers from the ground into army transport trucks. A couple of them were already in body bags, but one, not
bagged, was strapped directly onto the stretcher. The police officer saw it, too. This one, Dwyer could tell, was
moving around and seemed to be alive. He had to get closer.
"What about them?" he asked.
"Hey, get those things loaded, " the captain shouted at the enlisted men loading the stretchers into the truck.
"You didn't see anything here tonight, Officer, " he told the driver of the police unit. "Nothing at all. "
"But, I gotta ... "
The captain cut him off. "Later today, I'm sure, there'll be someone from the base out to talk to the shift;
meanwhile, let this one alone. Strictly military business. "
By this time Dwyer thought he recognized people he knew from  the army airfield. He thought he could see the
base intelligence officer, Jesse Marcel, who lived off" the base in Roswell, and other personnel who came into town
on a regular basis. He saw debris from whatever had crashed still lying all over the ground as the flatbed truck
pulled out, passed the fire apparatus, and rumbled off through the sand back on the road toward the base.Dwyer took off his fire helmet, climbed down from the truck, and worked his way through the shadows around
the flank of the line of MPs.

There was so much confusion at the site Dwyer knew no one would notice if he looked
around.

He walked around in back of the truck, across the perimeter, and from the other side of the military
transport truck walked up to the stretcher.

He looked directly down into the eyes of the creature strapped onto
the stretcher and just stared.

It was no bigger than a child, he thought.

But it wasn't a child.

No child had such an oversized balloon shaped
head.

It didn't even look human, although it had human like features.

It's eyes were large and dark, set apart
from each other on a downward slope.

It's nose and mouth were especially tiny, almost like slits.

And its ears were
not much more than indentations along the sides of its huge head.

In the glare of the floodlight, Dwyer could see
that the creature was a grayish brown and completely hairless, but it looked directly at him as if it were a helpless
animal in a trap.

It didn't make a sound, but somehow Dwyer understood that the creature understood it was
dying.

He could gape in astonishment at the thing, but it was quickly loaded onto the truck by a couple of
soldiers in helmets who asked him what he was doing.

Dwyer knew this was bigger than anything he ever wanted
to see and got out of there right away, losing himself amidst a group of personnel working around a pile of debris.

The whole site was scattered with articles that Dwyer assumed had fallen out of the craft when it hit.

He could
see the indentation in the arroyo where it looked like the object embedded itself and followed with his eyes the
pattern of debris stretching out from the small crater into the darkness beyond the floodlights.

The soldiers were
crawling all over on their hands and knees with scraping devices and carrying sacks or walking in straight lines
waving metal detectors in front of them.8
"What about injuries?" the police officer asked, maybe thinking more about the incident report he had to fill
out than about what to do with any casualties.
"No injuries. We have everything under control, " the captain said.
But even as the military was waving off the civilian convoy, Dwyer could see small bodies being lifted on
stretchers from the ground into army transport trucks. A couple of them were already in body bags, but one, not
bagged, was strapped directly onto the stretcher. The police officer saw it, too. This one, Dwyer could tell, was
moving around and seemed to be alive. He had to get closer.
"What about them?" he asked.
"Hey, get those things loaded, " the captain shouted at the enlisted men loading the stretchers into the truck.
"You didn't see anything here tonight, Officer, " he told the driver of the police unit. "Nothing at all. "
"But, I gotta ... "
The captain cut him off. "Later today, I'm sure, there'll be someone from the base out to talk to the shift;
meanwhile, let this one alone. Strictly military business. "
By this time Dwyer thought he recognized people he knew from  the army airfield. He thought he could see the
base intelligence officer, Jesse Marcel, who lived off" the base in Roswell, and other personnel who came into town
on a regular basis. He saw debris from whatever had crashed still lying all over the ground as the flatbed truck
pulled out, passed the fire apparatus, and rumbled off through the sand back on the road toward the base.

He could
see the indentation in the arroyo where it looked like the object embedded itself and followed with his eyes the
pattern of debris stretching out from the small crater into the darkness beyond the floodlights. The soldiers were
crawling all over on their hands and knees with scraping devices and carrying sacks or walking in straight lines
waving metal detectors in front of them. They were sweeping the area clean, it seemed to him, so that any
curiosity seekers who floated out here during the day would find nothing to reveal the identity of what had been
here. Dwyer reached down to pick up a patch of a dull gray metallic cloth like material that seemed to shine up
at him from the sand. He slipped it into his fist and rolled it into a hall. Then he released it and the metallic fabric
snapped hack into shape without any creases or folds. He thought no one was looking at him, so he stuffed it into
the pocket of his fire jacket to bring back to the firehouse. He would later show it to his young daughter, who forty-five years later and long after the piece of metallic
fabric itself had disappeared into history, would describe it on television documentaries to millions of people. But
that night in July 1947, if Dwyer thought he was invisible, he was wrong. "Hey you, " a sergeant wearing an MP armband bawled. "What the hell are you doing out here?"
"I responded with the fire company, " Dwyer said as innocently as possible. "Well, you get your civilian ass back on that truck and get it the hell out of here, " he ordered. "You take
anything with you?"
"Not me, Sergeant, " Dwyer said.wyer said as innocently as possible. "Well, you get your civilian ass back on that truck and get it the hell out of here, " he ordered. "You take
anything with you?"
"Not me, Sergeant, " Dwyer said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---9
Then the MP grabbed him as if he were under arrest and hustled him off to a major, who was shouting orders
near the generator that was powering the string of floodlights.

He recognized him as Roswell resident Jesse
Marcel.

"Caught this fireman wandering around in the debris, sir, " the sergeant reported.

Marcel obviously recognized Dwyer, although the two weren't friends, and gave him what the fireman only
remembered as an agonized look.

"You got to get out of here, " he said.

"And never tell anyone where you were
or what you saw.

"
Dwyer nodded.

"I mean it, this is top security here, the kind of thing that could get you put away, " Marcel continued.

"Whatever this is, don't talk about it, don't say anything until somebody tells you what to say.

Now get your truck
out of here before someone else sees you and tries to lock the whole bunch of you up.

Move!" He faced the
helmeted MP.

"Sergeant, get him back on that fire truck and move it out.

"
Dwyer didn't need any more invitations.

He let the sergeant hustle him along, put him back on the truck, and
told his driver to bring it back to the station.

The MP sergeant came up to the driver's side window and looked up
at the fireman behind the wheel.

"You've been ordered to evacuate this site, " the MP told the driver.

"At once!"
The Roswell police unit had already made a U-turn on the sand and was motioning for the truck to back up.

The driver dropped the truck into reverse, gently fed it gas as its wheels dug into the sand, made his U-turn, and
headed back for the firehouse in Roswell.

The Ford flatbed had already passed through the sleeping town in the
moments between darkness and light, the sound of its engines causing no alarm or stir, the sight of a large
tarpaulin covered object on the back of an army vehicle rolling along the main street of Roswell against the
purple gray sky raising nobody's eyebrows because it was nothing out of the ordinary.The driver dropped the truck into reverse, gently fed it gas as its wheels dug into the sand, made his U-turn, and
headed back for the firehouse in Roswell.

The Ford flatbed had already passed through the sleeping town in the
moments between darkness and light, the sound of its engines causing no alarm or stir, the sight of a large
tarpaulin covered object on the back of an army vehicle rolling along the main street of Roswell against the
purple gray sky raising nobody's eyebrows because it was nothing out of the ordinary.

But later, by the time Dwyer
backed his field truck into the station house, the sun was already up and the first of the CMC transport trucks was
just reaching the main gate at the 509th.

Plumbing subcontractor Roy Danzer, who had worked through the night at the base fitting pipe, knew
something was up from the way the trucks tore out of the compound through the darkness.

He had just walked
out of the base hospital to grab a cigarette before going back to work.

That's when he heard the commotion
over at the main gate.

Danzer had cut his hand a few days earlier cutting pipe, and the infirmary nurse wanted
to keep checking the stitches to make sure no infection was setting in.

So Danzer took the opportunity to get
away from the job for a few minutes while the nurse looked over her work and changed his bandage.

Then, on
his way back to the job, he would grab a cup of coffee and take an unscheduled cigarette break.

But this
morning, things would be very different.

The commotion he heard by the main gate had now turned into a swirling throng of soldiers and base workers
shoved aside by what looked like a squad of MPs using their bodies as a wedge to force a pathway through the
crowd.

There didn't even seem to be an officer giving orders, just a crowd of soldiers.

Strange.

Then the throng
headed right for the base hospital, right for the main entrance, right for the very spot where Roy was standing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Strange. Then the throng
headed right for the base hospital, right for the main entrance, right for the very spot where Roy was standing. Nobody moved him out of the way or told him to vacate the area. In fact, no one even spoke to him. Roy just
looked down as the line of soldiers passed him, and there it was, strapped tightly to a stretcher that two bearers
were carrying into the base hospital right through the main door. Roy looked at it; it looked at Roy, and as their
eyes met Roy knew in an instant that he was not looking down at a human being. It was a creature from
somewhere else. The pleading look on its face, occupying only a small frontal portion of its huge watermelon
sized skull, and the emotion of pain and suffering that played itself behind Roy Danzer's eyes and across his brain
while he stared down at the figure told Roy it was in its final moments of life. It didn't speak. It could barely move. But Roy actually saw, or believed he saw, an expression cross over its little circle of a face. And then the creature
was gone, carried into the hospital by the stretcher bearers, who shot him an ugly glare as they passed. Roy took
another drag on the cigarette butt still in his hand. "What the hell was that?" he asked no one in particular. Then he felt like he'd been hit by the front four of the
Notre Dame football team. His head snapped back against the top of his spine as he went flying forward into the arms of a couple of
MPs, who slammed him against an iron gate and kept him there until an officer - he thought it was a captain -
walked up and stuck his finger directly into Danzer's face. "Just who are you, mister?" the captain bellowed into Danzer's car. Even before Danzer could answer, two
other officers walked up and began demanding what authorization Danzer had to be on the base.

--- PAGE BREAK ---10
These guys weren't kidding, Danzer thought to himself; they looked ugly and were working themselves up into
a serious lather.

For a few tense minutes, Roy Danzer thought he would never see his family again; he was that
scared.

But then a major approached and broke into the shouting.

"I know this guy, " the major said.

"He works here with the other civilian contractors.

He's OK.

"
"Sir, " the captain sputtered, but the major - Danzer didn't know his name - took the captain by the arm right
out of earshot.

Danzer could see them talking and watched as the red faced captain gradually calmed down.

Then the two returned to where the MPs were holding Danzer against the wall.

"You saw nothing, you understand?" the captain said to Danzer, who just nodded.

"You're not to tell anybody
about this, not your family, not your friends - nobody.

You got that?"
"Yes, sir, " Danzer said.

He was truly afraid now.

"We'll know if you talk; we'll know who you talk to and all of you will simply disappear.

"
"Captain, " the major broke in.

"Sir, this guy has no business here and if he talks I can't guarantee anything.

" The captain complained as if he
were trying to cover his ass to a superior who didn't know as much as he did.

"So forget everything you saw, " the major said directly to Danzer.

"And hightail it out of here before someone
else sees you and wants to make sure you stay silent.

"
"Yes, SIR, " Danzer just about shouted as he extricated himself from the grip of the MPs on either side of him and
broke for his pickup truck on the other side of the base.

He didn't even look back to see the team of soldiers
carrying the body bags of the remaining creatures into the hospital where, before there were any other briefings,
the creatures were prepared for autopsy like bagged game waiting to be dressed.

The rest of the story about that week has become the subject of history.He didn't even look back to see the team of soldiers
carrying the body bags of the remaining creatures into the hospital where, before there were any other briefings,
the creatures were prepared for autopsy like bagged game waiting to be dressed.

The rest of the story about that week has become the subject of history.

First, 509th base commander Bull
Blanchard authorized the release of the "flying saucer" story that was picked up by news services and carried
around the country.

Then General Roger Ramey at 8th Army Air Force headquarters in Texas ordered Maj.

Jesse
Marcel to go back before the press and retract the flying saucer story.

This time, Marcel was ordered to say that
he'd made a mistake and realized the debris had actually come from a weather balloon.

Swallowing a story he
himself never believed, Jesse Marcel posed with some faked debris from an actual balloon and confessed to an
error he never could have made, even on a bad day.

It was a confession that would haunt him the rest of his life
until, decades later and shortly before he died, he would retract his public story and restate that he had actually
retrieved an alien spacecraft that night in the Roswell desert.

Meanwhile, in the days and weeks after the crash and retrieval, Army Intelligence and CIC personnel fanned
out through Roswell and neighboring communities to suppress whatever information they could.

With ill-advised
threats of violence, actual physical intimidation, and, according to some of the rumors, at least one homicide,
army officers bludgeoned the community into silence.

Mac Brazel, one of the civilians near whose property the
crash took place and one of the visitors to the site, was allegedly bribed and threatened.

He suddenly became
silent about what he had seen in the desert even after he had told friends and news people that he'd retrieved
pieces from a downed spacecraft.Mac Brazel, one of the civilians near whose property the
crash took place and one of the visitors to the site, was allegedly bribed and threatened.

He suddenly became
silent about what he had seen in the desert even after he had told friends and news people that he'd retrieved
pieces from a downed spacecraft.

Officers from the Chavez County Sheriffs Department and other law
enforcement agencies were forced to comply with the army edict that the incident outside of Roswell was a
matter of national security and was not to be discussed.

"It never happened, " the army decreed, and civilian
authorities willingly complied.

Even the local Roswell radio station news correspondents, John McBoyle from KSWS
and Walt Whitmore Sr.

from KGFL, who'd conducted interviews with witnesses to the debris field, were forced to
submit to the official line that the army imposed and never broadcast their reports.

For some of the civilians who claimed to have experienced intimidation from the army officers who flooded
into Roswell after the crash, the trauma remained with them for the rest of their lives.

One was Dan Dwyer's
daughter, who was a young child in July1947, and who endured the sight of a huge, helmeted army officer, his
expression obscured by sunglasses, looming over her in her mother's kitchen and telling her that if she didn't forget
what she had been told by her father, she and the rest of her family would simply disappear in the desert.

Sally
who had played with the metallic fabric her father had brought back to the firehouse that morning and had
heard his description of the little people carried away on stretchers, quaked in terror as the officer finally got her
to admit that she had seen nothing, heard nothing, and handled nothing.

"It never happened, " he hissed at her.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sally
who had played with the metallic fabric her father had brought back to the firehouse that morning and had
heard his description of the little people carried away on stretchers, quaked in terror as the officer finally got her
to admit that she had seen nothing, heard nothing, and handled nothing. "It never happened, " he hissed at her. "And there's nothing you will ever say about it for the rest of your life because we will be there and we will know it,
" he repeated over and over again, slapping a police baton into his palm with a loud crack at every word. Even
today, tears form at the corners of her eyes as she describes the scene and remembers the expression of her
mother, who had been told to leave the kitchen while the officer spoke to Sally. It's tough for a kid to see her
parents so terrorized into silence that they will deny the truth before their eyes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Roy Danzer's daughter, too, was frightened at the sight of her father when he came home from the base that
morning on July 5,1947.

He wouldn't talk about what had gone on there, of course, even though the town was
abuzz with rumors that creatures from outer space had invaded Roswell.

Wasn't it true that all the children in town
knew about it and there'd been stories about flying saucers in newspapers for weeks?

It was even on the radio.

But Roy Danzer wouldn't say a word in front of his daughter.

She heard her parents talking through the closed
door of her bedroom at nights and caught snippets of conversations about little creatures and "they'll kill us all.

"
But she buried these in a part of her memory she never visited until her father, shortly before his death, told her
what really happened at the base that day in July when the convoy arrived out of the desert.

Steve Arnold stayed in Roswell, finishing out his official re-enlistment with the army and, without his direct
knowledge, remaining apart of my own team right through the 1960s.

Some say he works for the government still,
carrying out a job that fell to him right out of the New Mexico skies, pumping out disinformation from the army or
the CIA or whomever, perpetuating a camouflage story that, fifty years later, has taken on a life of its own and
goes forward, like a tale out of a Dickens novel, simply on inertia.

You can see Steve today walking around
Roswell, visiting old friends from his army days, giving interviews on television to the news crews that periodically
pay visits to the folks at Roswell who want to talk about those days in the summer of 1947.

As for the debris retrieved out of the desert that July, it had another destiny.

Shipped to Fort Bliss, Texas,
headquarters of the 8th Army Air Force, and summarily analyzed for what it was and what it might contain, all of it
was transferred to the control of the military.As for the debris retrieved out of the desert that July, it had another destiny.

Shipped to Fort Bliss, Texas,
headquarters of the 8th Army Air Force, and summarily analyzed for what it was and what it might contain, all of it
was transferred to the control of the military.

As quickly as it arrived, some of the debris was flown to Ohio, where it
was put under lock and key at Wright Airfield - later Wright - Patterson.

The rest of it was loaded onto trucks and
sent up to a rest stop at Fort Riley in Kansas.

The 509th returned to its daily routine, Jesse Marcel went back to work
as if he'd never held the wreckage from the strange craft in his own hands, and the contractors returned to their
work on the pipes and doors and walls at the base just as if nothing had ever arrived there from the desert.

By the time the first week of July 1947 was over, the crash outside of Roswell might as well have never taken
place.

Like the night that engulfs you as you drive through the expanse of desert and chaparral toward Roswell,
so the night of silence engulfed the story of Roswell itself for over thirty years.

These are the stories as I heard them, as people later told them to me.

I wasn't there at Roswell that night.

I
didn't see these events for myself.

I only heard them years later when the task fell to me to make something out of
all this.

But the debris from the crash of the object that was either caused by lightning or by our targeting radar,
sonic say, and fell out of the sky that night was on its way to a collision course with my life.

Our paths would cross
officially at the Pentagon in the 1960s even though, for a very brief moment in 1947, when I was a young major at
Fort Riley, fresh from the glory of victory in Europe, I would see something that I would tuck away in my memory
and hope against hope I would never see again for the rest of my life.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the debris from the crash of the object that was either caused by lightning or by our targeting radar,
sonic say, and fell out of the sky that night was on its way to a collision course with my life. Our paths would cross
officially at the Pentagon in the 1960s even though, for a very brief moment in 1947, when I was a young major at
Fort Riley, fresh from the glory of victory in Europe, I would see something that I would tuck away in my memory
and hope against hope I would never see again for the rest of my life. CHAPTER 2
Convoy to Fort Riley
I CAN REMEMBER A TIME WHEN I WAS SO YOUNG AND FEELING so invincible that there was nothing in the
world I was afraid of. I had faced down fear in North Africa. With General Patton's army I stood toe-to-toe against
the artillery in Rommel's Panzer Divisions and gave them better than they dished out to us. We were an army of
young men from a country that hadn't started the war but found itself right in the midst of it before we even got
out of church the Sunday Pearl Harbor was attacked. The next thing we knew Hitler declared war on us and we
were fighting in Europe. But by 1942, we drove the Germans right out of Africa and jumped across the sea to
Sicily. Then, while Mussolini was still reeling from the punches, we invaded Italy and fought our way up the
peninsula until we came to Rome. We were the first invading army to conquer Rome since the Middle Ages, and
obviously the first invading army from the New World to ever occupy Rome. But there we were by early 1944, sitting in Rome after Mussolini fled and the German front collapsing all
around us. And as a too young captain in Army Intelligence, I was ordered to oversee the formation of a civilian
government under Allied military rule in the magical city of my ancestors that I'd only read about in history books. Pope Pious himself offered me an audience to discuss our plans for the city government. You can't even dream
11ary rule in the magical city of my ancestors that I'd only read about in history books. Pope Pious himself offered me an audience to discuss our plans for the city government. You can't even dream
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
this stuff up.

It has to happen to you in real life, and then you pinch yourself to make sure you don't wake up in
your own bed outside of Pittsburgh on a winter morning.

I stayed in Rome for three years from the months before the landing at Normandy in 1944, when the German
front lines were still only a few miles south of Rome and our boys were slugging their way up the slopes of Monte
Casino, to early 1947, when I was shipped back home and my wife and I threw everything we had into the trunk
of a used Chevy convertible and drove across the farmland state routes of peace time America from
Pennsylvania to Kansas.

I'd been away five years.

But now I was home!

Driving top-down across Missouri to an
assignment that was considered a plum for any young officer on his way up the army ladder: Military Intelligence
School, only one step away from Strategic Intelligence, the army's version of the Ivy League; I was moving up in
the world.

And what was I?

Just a draftee out of Pennsylvania who was chosen for Officer Candidate School,
and now fresh from a wartime intelligence command in Allied occupied Europe and ready to begin my new
career in Army Intelligence.

Having been in Africa and Europe for so many years, I was anxious to see America again.

By this time its
people were not stooping under the weight of the depression nor in factories nor in uniform sweating out a
desperate war across two oceans.

This was an America victory, and you could see it as you drove through the
small towns of southern Ohio and Illinois and then across the Mississippi.

We didn't stop overnight to see St.

Louis or
even to linger on the Kansas side of the river.

I was so excited to be a career officer that we didn't stop driving
until we pulled straight into Fort Riley and set up an apartment in nearby Junction City, where we'd live while they
got our house ready on the base.Louis or
even to linger on the Kansas side of the river.

I was so excited to be a career officer that we didn't stop driving
until we pulled straight into Fort Riley and set up an apartment in nearby Junction City, where we'd live while they
got our house ready on the base.

For most of the next few weeks, my wife and I got used to living in America again on a peacetime army base.

We had lived in Rome after the war while I was still trying to help pacify the city and fend off the Communist
attempts to take over the government.

It was as if we were still fighting a war because each day had brought
renewed challenges from either the Communists or the organized crime families who had tried to infiltrate their
way back into the civilian government.

My life was also in danger each day from the different cadres of terrorists
in the city, each group with its own agenda.

So in contrast to Italy, Fort Riley was like the beginning of a vacation.

And I was back in school again.

This time, however, I was taking courses in career training.

I knew how to be an
intelligence officer and, in fact, had been trained by the British MI 19, the premier wartime intelligence network in
the world.

My training had been so thorough that even though we were up against crack Soviet NKV Dunits
operating within Rome, we were able to out think them and actually destroy them.

Prior to the war, the United
States really didn't have a peacetime intelligence service, which is why they quickly formed the OSS when war
broke out.

But the Army Intelligence units and the OSS didn't operate together for most of the war because
communication lines were faulty and we never really trusted the OSS agenda.

Now with the war over and Army
Intelligence having come into its own, I was part of a whole new cadre of career intelligence officers who would
keep watch on Soviet activities.

The Soviets had become our new old enemies.Now with the war over and Army
Intelligence having come into its own, I was part of a whole new cadre of career intelligence officers who would
keep watch on Soviet activities.

The Soviets had become our new old enemies.

In intelligence school during those first months we reviewed not only the rudiments of good intelligence
gathering - interrogation of enemy prisoners, analysis of raw intelligence data, and the like - but we learned the
basics of administration and how to run a wartime intelligence unit called the aggressor force.

None of us realized
during those early days how quickly our newly acquired skills would be tested nor where our enemies would
choose to fight.

But those were confident days as the weather turned warmer on the plains and the days grew
long with the coming of summer.

Before the war broke out and when I was in high school back in California, Pennsylvania, my hometown, I was
something of a bowler.

It was a sport I wanted to get back to when the war ended, so when I got to Fort Riley,
one of the first places I looked up was the bowling alley on the base, which had been built in one of the former
stables.

Fort Riley was a former cavalry base, the home of Cutter's 7th Cavalry, and still had a polo field after the
war.

I started practicing my bowling again and was soon rolling enough strikes that the enlisted men who bowled
there began talking to me about my game.

Before too many months had passed, M.

Sgt.

Bill Brown - the men
called him "Brownie" - stopped me when I was changing out of my bowling shoes and said he wanted to talk.

"Major, sir, " he began, more than a little embarrassed to address an officer out of uniform and not on any
official army business.

He couldn't possibly have realized that I was a draftee just like him and had spent the first
few months in the service taking orders from corporals in boot camp.

"Sergeant?" I asked.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He couldn't possibly have realized that I was a draftee just like him and had spent the first
few months in the service taking orders from corporals in boot camp. "Sergeant?" I asked. "The men at the post want to start up a bowling league, sir, have teams to bowl against and maybe come up
with a team to represent the base, " he began. "So we've been watching you bowl on Saturdays. "
"So what am I doing wrong?" I asked. I figured at first maybe this sergeant was going to give me a tip or two
and wanted to establish some authority. OK, I'll take a tip from anybody. But that's not what he asked.

--- PAGE BREAK ---13
"No, sir.

Nothing at all, " he stammered.

"I'm saying something different.

We, the guys, were wondering if you've
bowled before - do you think maybe you'd like to become part of the team?" He had gotten more confidence
the more he framed his request.

"You want me for your team?" I asked.

I was pretty surprised because officers weren't supposed to fraternize
with enlisted men at that time.

Things are very different now, but then, fifty years ago, it was a different world,
even for much of the officer corps that started out as draftees and went through officer training.

"We know it's out of the ordinary, sir, but there are no rules against it.

" I gave him a very surprised look.

"We
checked, " he said.

This was obviously not a spur of the moment question.

"You think I can hold up my end of things?" I asked.

"It's been along time since I've bowled against anybody.

"
"Sir, we've been watching.

We think you'll really help us out.

Besides, " he continued, "we do need an officer on
the team.

"
Whether out of modesty or because he didn't want to put me off, he had completely understated the nature
of the bowling team.

These guys had been champions in their own hometowns and, years later, you could have
found them on Bowling for Dollars.

There was no reason in the world I should have been on that team except that
they wanted an officer because it would give them prestige.

I told him I'd get back to him on it because I wanted to check on the rules, if there were any, for myself.

In fact
officers and enlisted personnel were allowed to compete on the same athletic teams, and, in very short order, I
joined the team, along with Dave Bender, John Miller, Brownie, and Sal Federico.

We became quite a
remarkable team, winning most of our matches, more than a few trophies, and had lots of exciting moments
when we made the impossible splits and bowled our way all the way to the state finals.In fact
officers and enlisted personnel were allowed to compete on the same athletic teams, and, in very short order, I
joined the team, along with Dave Bender, John Miller, Brownie, and Sal Federico.

We became quite a
remarkable team, winning most of our matches, more than a few trophies, and had lots of exciting moments
when we made the impossible splits and bowled our way all the way to the state finals.

We ultimately won the
Army Bowling Championships, and the trophy sits on my desk to this very day.

Magically, the barrier between
officer and enlisted man seemed to drop.

And that's the real point of this story.

Through the months I spent on the team, I became friends with Bender, Miller, Federico, and Brown.

We didn't
socialize much, except for the bowling, but we also didn't stand on ceremony with each other, and I liked it that
way.

I found that a lot of the career intelligence officers also liked to see some of the barriers drop because
sometimes men will speak with more honesty to you if you don't throw what's on your shoulders into their faces
every time you talk to them.

So I became friends with these guys, and that's what got me into the veterinary
building on Sunday night, July 6, 1947.

I remember how hot it had been that whole weekend of July 4th celebrations and fireworks.

These were the
days before everybody had to have air-conditioning, so we just sweltered inside the offices at the base and
swatted away the fat lazy flies that buzzed around looking for hot dog crumbs or landing on chunks of pickle
relish.

By Sunday, the celebrations were over, guys who'd had too much beer had been dragged off to their
barracks by members of their company before the MPs got hold of them, and the base was settling down to the
business of the week.These were the
days before everybody had to have air-conditioning, so we just sweltered inside the offices at the base and
swatted away the fat lazy flies that buzzed around looking for hot dog crumbs or landing on chunks of pickle
relish.

By Sunday, the celebrations were over, guys who'd had too much beer had been dragged off to their
barracks by members of their company before the MPs got hold of them, and the base was settling down to the
business of the week.

Nobody seemed to take much notice of the five deuce-and-a-halfs and side-by-side low-
boy trailers that had pulled into the base that afternoon full of cargo from Fort Bliss in Texas on their way to Air
Materiel Command at Wright Field in Ohio.

If you had looked at the cargo manifests the drivers were carrying,
you'd have seen lists itemizing landing gear assembly struts for B29s, wing tank pods for vintage P51s, piston rings
for radial aircraft engines, ten crates of Motorola walkie-talkies, and you wouldn't think anything of the shipment
except for the fact that it was going the wrong way.

These spare parts were usually shipped from Wright Field to
bases like Fort Bliss rather than the other way around, but, of course, I wouldn't know that until years later when
the real cargo on those trucks fell straight onto my desk as if it had dropped out of the sky.

It got quiet that evening right after dark, and I remember that it was very humid.

Off in the distance you could
see lightning, and I wondered if the storms were going to reach the base before morning.

I was the post duty
officer on that night - similar to the chief duty officer of the watch on a naval vessel - and hoped, even more
fervently, that if a storm were on its way, it would wait until morning to break so that I might be spared
walking through the mud from sentry post to sentry post in the midst of a summer downpour.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Off in the distance you could
see lightning, and I wondered if the storms were going to reach the base before morning. I was the post duty
officer on that night - similar to the chief duty officer of the watch on a naval vessel - and hoped, even more
fervently, that if a storm were on its way, it would wait until morning to break so that I might be spared
walking through the mud from sentry post to sentry post in the midst of a summer downpour. I looked over the
sentry duty roster for that night and saw that Brownie was standing a post over at one of the old veterinarian
buildings near the center of the compound. The post duty officer spends his night at the main base headquarters, where he watches the phones and is the
human firewall between an emergency and a disaster. Not much to do unless there's a war on or a company of
roustabouts decides to tear up a local bar. And by late night, the base settles into a pattern. The sentries walk
their posts, the various administrative offices close down, and whoever is on night watch takes over the
communications system - which in1947 consisted primarily of telephone and telex cable. I had to walk a beat as
well, checking the different buildings and sentry posts to make sure everyone was on duty. I also had to close
down the social clubs. After I made my obligatory stops at the enlisted men's and officers' clubs, shutting down
the bars and tossing, with all due respect to the senior officers, the drunks back to their quarters, I footed it over to

--- PAGE BREAK ---14
the old veterinary building where Brown was standing watch.

But when I got there, where he was supposed to
be, I didn't see him.

Something was wrong.

"Major Corso, " a voice hissed out of the darkness.

It had an edge of terror and excitement to it.

"What the hell are you doing in there, Brownie?" I began cussing out the figure that peeked out at me from
behind the door.

"Have you gone off your rocker?" He was supposed to be outside the building, not hiding in a
doorway.

It was a breach of duty.

"You don't understand, Major, " he whispered again.

"You have to see this.

"
"Better be good, " I said as I walked over to where he was standing and waited for him outside the door.

"Now
you get out here where I can see you, " I ordered.

Brown popped his head out from behind the door.

"You know what's in here?" he asked.

Whatever was going on, I didn't want to play any games.

The post duty sheet for that night read that the
veterinary building was off-limits to everyone.

Not even the sentries were allowed inside because whatever had
been loaded in had been classified as "No Access.

" What was Brown doing on the inside?

"Brownie, you know you're not supposed to be in there, " I said.

"Get out here and tell me what's going on.

"
He stepped out from inside the door, and even through the shadow I could see that his face was a dead
pale, just as if he'd seen a ghost.

"You won't believe this, " he said.

"I don't believe it and I just saw it.

"
"What are you talking about?" I asked.

"The guys who off-loaded those deuce-and-a-halfs, " he said.

"They told us they brought these boxes up from
Fort Bliss from some accident out in New Mexico?"
"Yeah, so what?" I was getting impatient with this.

"Well, they told us it was all top secret but they looked inside anyway.

Everybody down there did when they
were loading the trucks.

MPs were walking around with sidearms and even the officers were standing guard, "
Brown said.Everybody down there did when they
were loading the trucks.

MPs were walking around with sidearms and even the officers were standing guard, "
Brown said.

"But the guys who loaded the trucks said they looked inside the boxes and didn't believe what they
saw.

You got security clearance, Major.

You can come in here.

"
In fact, I was the post duty officer and could go anywhere I wanted during the watch.

So I walked inside the
old veterinary building, the medical dispensary for the cavalry horses before the First World War, and saw where
the cargo from the convoy had been stacked up.

There was no one in the building except for Bill Brown and
myself.

"What is all this stuff?" I asked.

"That's just it, Major, nobody knows, " he said.

"The drivers told us it came from a plane crash out in the desert
somewhere around the 509th.

But when they looked inside, it was nothing like anything they'd seen before.

Nothing from this planet.

"
It was the silliest thing I'd ever heard, enlisted men's tall stories that floated from base to base getting more
inflated every lap around the track.

Maybe I wasn't the world's smartest guy, but I had enough engineering and
intelligence schooling to pick my way around pieces of wreckage and come up with two plus two.

We walked
over to the tarpaulin shrouded boxes, and I threw back the edge of the canvas.

"You're not supposed to be in here, " I told Brownie.

"You better go.

"
"I'll watch outside for you, Major.

"
I almost wanted to tell him that that's what he was supposed to be doing all along instead of snooping into
classified material, but I did what I used to do best and kept my mouth shut.

I waited while he took up his position
at the door to the building before I dug any further into the boxes.

There were about thirty-odd wooden  crates nailed shut and stacked together against the far wall the
building.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I waited while he took up his position
at the door to the building before I dug any further into the boxes. There were about thirty-odd wooden  crates nailed shut and stacked together against the far wall the
building. The light switches were the push type and I didn't know which switch tripped which circuit, so I used my
flashlight and stumbled around until my eyes got used to the darkness and shadows. I didn't want to start pulling
apart the nails, so I set the flashlight off to one side where it could throw light on the stack and then searched for
a box that could open easily. Then I found an oblong box off to one side with a wide seam under the top that
looked like it had been already opened. It looked like either the strangest weapons crate you'd ever see or the

--- PAGE BREAK ---15
smallest shipping crate for a coffin.

Maybe this was the box that Brownie had seen.

I brought the flashlight over
and set it up high on the wall so it would throw as broad a beam as possible.

Then I set to work on the crate.

The top was already loose.

I was right - this one had just been opened.

I jimmied the top back and forth,
continuing to loosen the nails that had been pried up with a nail claw, until I felt them come out of the wood.

Then I worked along the sides of the five-or-so-foot box until the top was loose all the way around.

Not knowing
which end of the box was the front, I picked up the top and slid it off to the edge.

Then I lowered the flashlight,
looked inside, and my stomach rolled right up into my throat and I almost became sick right then and there.

Whatever they'd crated this way, it was a coffin, but not like any coffin I'd seen before.

The contents, enclosed
in a thick glass container, were submerged in a thick light blue liquid, almost as heavy as a gelling solution of
diesel fuel.

But the object was floating, actually suspended, and not sitting on the bottom with a fluid overtop,
and it was soft and shiny as the underbelly of a fish.

At first I thought it was a dead child they were shipping
somewhere.

But this was no child.

It was a four-foot human shaped figure with arms, bizarre-looking four-fingered
hands - I didn't see a thumb - thin legs and feet, and an oversized incandescent lightbulb shaped head that
looked like it was floating over a balloon gondola for a chin.

I know I must have cringed at first, but then I had the
urge to pull off the top of the liquid container and touch the pale gray skin.

But I couldn't tell whether it was skin
because it also looked like a very thin one-piece head-to-toe fabric covering the creature's flesh.

Its eyeballs must
have been rolled way back in its head because I couldn't see any pupils or iris or anything that resembled a
human eye.But I couldn't tell whether it was skin
because it also looked like a very thin one-piece head-to-toe fabric covering the creature's flesh.

Its eyeballs must
have been rolled way back in its head because I couldn't see any pupils or iris or anything that resembled a
human eye.

But the eye sockets themselves were oversized and almond shaped and pointed down to its tiny
nose, which didn't really protrude from the skull.

It was more like the tiny nose of a baby that never grew as the
child grew, and it was mostly nostril.

The creature's skull was over grown to the point where all of its facial features - such as they were - were
arranged absolutely frontally, occupying only a small circle on the lower part of the head.

The protruding ears of
a human were nonexistent, its cheeks had no definition, and there were no eyebrows or any indications of facial
hair.

The creature had only a tiny flat slit for a mouth and it was completely closed, resembling more of a crease
or indentation between the nose and the bottom of the chinless skull than a fully functioning orifice.

I would find
out years later how it communicated, but at that moment in Kansas, I could only stand there in shock over the
clearly non-human face suspended in front of me in a semi-liquid preservative.

I could see no damage to the creature's body and no indication that it had been involved in any accident.

There was no blood, its limbs seemed intact, and I could find no lacerations on the skin or through the gray fabric.

I looked through the crate encasing the container of liquid for any paperwork or shipping invoice or anything that
would describe the nature or origin of this thing.There was no blood, its limbs seemed intact, and I could find no lacerations on the skin or through the gray fabric.

I looked through the crate encasing the container of liquid for any paperwork or shipping invoice or anything that
would describe the nature or origin of this thing.

What I found was an intriguing Army Intelligence document
describing the creature as an inhabitant of a craft that had crash landed in Roswell, New Mexico, earlier that
week and a routing manifest for this creature to the login officer at the Air Materiel Command at Wright Field and
from him to the Walter Reed Army Hospital morgue's pathology section where, I supposed, the creature would be
autopsied and stored.

It was not a document I was meant to see, for sure, so I tucked it back in the envelope
against the inside wall of the crate.

I allowed myself more time to look at the creature than I should have, I suppose, because that night I missed
the time checks on the rest of my rounds and believed I'd have to come up with a pretty good explanation for
the lateness of my other stops to verify the sentry assignments.

But what I was looking at was worth any trouble I'd
get into the next day.

This thing was truly fascinating and at the same time utterly horrible.

It challenged every
conception I had, and I hoped against hope that I was looking at some form of atomic human mutation.

I knew I
couldn't ask anybody about it, and because I hoped I would never see its like again, I came up with explanation
after explanation for its existence, despite what I'd read on the enclosed document: It was shipped here from
Hiroshima, it was the result of a Nazi genetic experiment, it was a dead circus freak, it was anything but what I
knew it said it was - what it had to be: an extraterrestrial.

I slid the top of the crate back over the creature, knocked the nails loosely into their original holes with the butt
end of my flashlight, and put the tarp back in position.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I knew I
couldn't ask anybody about it, and because I hoped I would never see its like again, I came up with explanation
after explanation for its existence, despite what I'd read on the enclosed document: It was shipped here from
Hiroshima, it was the result of a Nazi genetic experiment, it was a dead circus freak, it was anything but what I
knew it said it was - what it had to be: an extraterrestrial. I slid the top of the crate back over the creature, knocked the nails loosely into their original holes with the butt
end of my flashlight, and put the tarp back in position. Then I left the building and hoped I could close the door
forever on what I'd seen. Just forget it, I told myself. You weren't supposed to see it and maybe you can live your
whole life without ever having to think about it. Maybe. Once outside the building I rejoined Brownie at his post. "You know you never saw this, " I said. "And you tell no one. "
"Saw what, Major?" Brownie said, and I walked back to the base general headquarters, the image of the
creature suspended in that liquid fading away with each and every step I took. By the time I slid back behind the
desk, it was all a dream. No, not a dream, a nightmare - but it was over and, I hoped, it would never come back.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ith each and every step I took. By the time I slid back behind the
desk, it was all a dream. No, not a dream, a nightmare - but it was over and, I hoped, it would never come back.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER 3
The Roswell Artifacts
THE NIGHTMARE OF THE CREATURE I SAW AT FORT RlLEY NEVER faded from my memory, although I was able to
bury it during my years as a guided missile commander in Europe. And I never saw its body again the rest of my
life except for the autopsy photos and the medical examiner sketches that would catch up to me, along with the
rest of what happened at Roswell, when I returned to Washington from Germany for assignment at the Pentagon
in 1961. I can remember my first day back when I was waiting outside my boss's door for entry into the inner
sanctum. And, boy, was I ever nervous. The last time I remembered being that nervous in Washington, I was
standing in the little anteroom outside the Oval Office in the White House waiting for President Eisenhower to get
off the phone. I had a big request to make and I wanted to do it face-to-face, not go through any aides or
assistants or wait for special assistant C. D. Jackson to show up to make everything OK. I was almost a regular in
the Oval Office those days, back in the 1950s, dropping off National Security Council staff papers for the
President, making reports, and sometimes waiting while he read them just in case he wanted me to relay a
message. But this time was different. I needed to speak to him myself, alone. But Ike was taking a longer time than
he usually took on this phone call, and I shifted around and sneaked a glance at the switchboard lights on Mrs.
Lehrer's desk off to the side. Still on the phone, and you could see at the bottom of the switch panel where the
calls were backing up.I was asking President Eisenhower for a personal favor: to let me out of my fifth year on the White House
National Security staff so I could pick up the command of my own anti-aircraft guided-missile battalion being
formed up in Red Canyon, New Mexico.

Ike had once promised me a command of my own when I returned from
Korea and was posted to the White House.

And in 1957 the opportunity came up, a juicy assignment at a high-
security base with the coveted green tabs and all the trappings: train and command an anti-aircraft battalion to
use the army's most secret new surface-to-air missile and then take it to Germany for some front-line target
practice right where the Russians could see us.

In case of World War III, the order of battle read, Soviet Backfire
bombers will drop an inferno of high explosives on our positions first and the East German tanks will roll straight into
our barracks.

We stand and fight, torching off every missile we have so as to take out as many attacking aircraft
as we have missiles, and get the hell out of there.

I could almost taste the thrill in my mouth as I waited for Ike to
get off the phone that day back in 1957.

Those were my memories this afternoon as I stood outside the back door of General Trudeau's office on the
third floor of the outer ring of the Pentagon.

It was 1961, four years after I left the White House and put on my
uniform again to stand guard across the electronic no-man's-land of radar sweeps and photo sensors just a few
kilometers west of the Iron Curtain.

Ike had retired to his farm in Pennsylvania, and my new boss was General
Arthur Trudeau, one of the last fighting generals from the Korean War.

Trudeau became an instant hero in my
book when I heard about how his men were pinned down on the cratered slopes of Pork Chop Hill, dug into
shallow foxholes with enemy mortars dropping round them like rain.Ike had retired to his farm in Pennsylvania, and my new boss was General
Arthur Trudeau, one of the last fighting generals from the Korean War.

Trudeau became an instant hero in my
book when I heard about how his men were pinned down on the cratered slopes of Pork Chop Hill, dug into
shallow foxholes with enemy mortars dropping round them like rain.

You couldn't order anyone up that hell of an
incline to walk those boys back down; just too damn many explosions.

So Trudeau pulled off his stars, clapped a
sergeant's helmet over his head, and fought back up the hill himself, leading a company of volunteers, and then
fought his way back down.

That was how he did things, with his own hands, and now I'd be working directly for
him in the Army R&D Division.

I was a lieutenant colonel when I came to the Pentagon in 1961, and all I brought with me were my bowling
trophy from Fort Riley and a nameplate for my desk cut out of the fin of a Nike missile from Germany.

My men
made it for me and said it would bring me luck.

After I got to the Pentagon - it was still a couple of days before
my assignment actually began - I found out right away I'd need a lot of it.

In fact, as I opened the door and let
myself directly into the general's inner office, I found out how much luck I'd need that very day.

"So what's the big secret, General?" I asked my new boss.

It was strange talking to a general this way, but we'd
become friends while I was on Eisenhower's staff.

"Why not the front door?"
"Because they're already watching you, Phil, " he said, knowing exactly what kind of cold chill that would send
through me.

"And I'd just as soon have this conversation in private before you show up officially.

"
He walked me over to a set of file cabinets.

"Things haven't changed that much around here since you went
to Germany, " he said.

"We still know who our friends are and who we can trust.

"
I knew his code.CHAPTER 3
The Roswell Artifacts
THE NIGHTMARE OF THE CREATURE I SAW AT FORT RlLEY NEVER faded from my memory, although I was able to
bury it during my years as a guided missile commander in Europe. And I never saw its body again the rest of my
life except for the autopsy photos and the medical examiner sketches that would catch up to me, along with the
rest of what happened at Roswell, when I returned to Washington from Germany for assignment at the Pentagon
in 1961. I can remember my first day back when I was waiting outside my boss's door for entry into the inner
sanctum. And, boy, was I ever nervous. The last time I remembered being that nervous in Washington, I was
standing in the little anteroom outside the Oval Office in the White House waiting for President Eisenhower to get
off the phone. I had a big request to make and I wanted to do it face-to-face, not go through any aides or
assistants or wait for special assistant C. D. Jackson to show up to make everything OK. I was almost a regular in
the Oval Office those days, back in the 1950s, dropping off National Security Council staff papers for the
President, making reports, and sometimes waiting while he read them just in case he wanted me to relay a
message. But this time was different. I needed to speak to him myself, alone. But Ike was taking a longer time than
he usually took on this phone call, and I shifted around and sneaked a glance at the switchboard lights on Mrs.
Lehrer's desk off to the side. Still on the phone, and you could see at the bottom of the switch panel where the
calls were backing up.

"We still know who our friends are and who we can trust. "
I knew his code. The Cold War was at its height and there were enemies all around us: in government, within
the intelligence services, and within the White House itself. Those of us in military intelligence who knew the truth
about how much danger the country was in were very circumspect about what we said, even to each other,
and where we said it. Looking back on it now from the safe distance of forty years, it's hard to believe that even
as big eight-cylinder American cars rolled off the assembly lines and into suburban driveways and television
16g back on it now from the safe distance of forty years, it's hard to believe that even
as big eight-cylinder American cars rolled off the assembly lines and into suburban driveways and television
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---17
antennas sprung up on roofs of brand-new houses in thousands of subdivisions around the country, we were in
the midst of a treacherous war of nerves.

Deep inside our intelligence services and even within the President's own cabinet were cadres of career
government officers working - some knowingly, some not - for the Soviet Union by carrying out policies devised
inside the KGB.

Some of the position papers that came out of these offices made no sense otherwise.

We also
knew the CIA had been penetrated by KGB moles, just as we knew that some of our own policy makers were
advocating ideas that would only weaken the United States and lead us down the paths that served the best
interests of our enemies.

A handful of us knew the awful truth about Korea.

We lost it not because we were beaten on the battlefield
but because we were compromised from within.

The Russian advisers fighting alongside the North Koreans were
given our plans even before they reached those of us on Mac Arthur's staff.

And when we threw our host
technology into the field and into the air, the Soviets had already formulated plans to capture it and take it back
to Russia.

When the time came to talk peace at Panmunjom and negotiate a POW exchange, I knew where
those Americans were, ten miles north of the border, who wouldn't be coming home.

And there were people
right inside our own government who let them stay there, in prison camps, where some of them might be alive to
this very day.

So General Trudeau gave me his very grim smile and said, as he walked me toward the locked dark olive
military file cabinet on the wall of his private office, "I need you to cover my back, Colonel.

I need you to watch
because what I'm going to do, I can't cover it myself.

"
Whatever Trudeau was planning, I knew he'd tell me in his own time.

And he'd tell me only what he thought I
needed to know when I needed it."
Whatever Trudeau was planning, I knew he'd tell me in his own time.

And he'd tell me only what he thought I
needed to know when I needed it.

For the immediate present, I was to be his special assistant in R&D, one of the
most sensitive divisions in the whole Pentagon bureaucracy because that was where the most classified plans of
the scientists and weapons designers were translated into the reality of defense contracts.

R&D was the interface
between the gleam in someone's eye and a piece of hardware prototype rolling out of a factory to show its
potential for the army brass.

Only it was my job to keep it a secret while it was developed.

"But there's something else I want you to do for me, Phil, " General Trudeau continued as he put his hand on
top of the cabinet.

"I'm going to have this cabinet moved downstairs to your office.

"
The general had put me in an office on the second floor of the outer ring directly under him.

That way, as I
would soon find out, whenever he needed me in a hurry I could get upstairs and through the back door before
anybody even knew where I was.

"This has some special files, war materiel you've never seen before, that I want to put under your Foreign
Technology responsibilities, " he continued.

My specific assignment was to the Research & Development Division's
Foreign Technology desk, what I thought would be a pretty dry post because it mainly required me to keep up on
the kinds of weapons and research our allies were doing.

Read the intelligence reports, review films of
weapons tests, debrief scientists and the research people at universities on what their colleagues overseas were
doing, and write up proposals for weapons the army might need.My specific assignment was to the Research & Development Division's
Foreign Technology desk, what I thought would be a pretty dry post because it mainly required me to keep up on
the kinds of weapons and research our allies were doing.

Read the intelligence reports, review films of
weapons tests, debrief scientists and the research people at universities on what their colleagues overseas were
doing, and write up proposals for weapons the army might need.

It was important and it had its share of cloak
and dagger, but after what I'd been through in Rome chasing down the Gestapoand SS officers the Nazis left
behind and the Soviet NKVD units masquerading themselves as Italian Communist partisans, it seemed like a great
opportunity to help General Trudeau keep some of the army's ideas out of the hands of the other military services.

But then I didn't know what was inside that file cabinet.

The army generally categorized the types of weapons research it was doing into two basic groups, domestic
and foreign.

There was the research that sprang out of work going on in the United States and research by
people overseas.

I knew I'd be keeping track of what the French were doing with advanced helicopter design
and whether the British would be able to build a practical vertical takeoff and landing fighter, something we'd
given up on after World War II.

Then there was the German big gun, the V3, granddaughter of Big Bertha that the
Germans threatened Paris with during the First World War.

We'd found the barrel assemblies of the German
artillery pieces near Calais after we invaded Normandy and knew that the Nazis were working on something that,
like their jet engine fighter and new Panzer tank, could have changed the outcome of the war if they'd held us
off any longer at the Battle of the Bulge.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then there was the German big gun, the V3, granddaughter of Big Bertha that the
Germans threatened Paris with during the First World War. We'd found the barrel assemblies of the German
artillery pieces near Calais after we invaded Normandy and knew that the Nazis were working on something that,
like their jet engine fighter and new Panzer tank, could have changed the outcome of the war if they'd held us
off any longer at the Battle of the Bulge. I was responsible for developing this technology, ideas we hadn't come up with ourselves, and work up
recommendations for how we could incorporate this into our weapons planning. But I didn't know why the
general kept on patting the top drawer of that file cabinet. "I'll get to those files right away if you like, General, " I said. "And write up some preliminary reports on what I
think about it. "
"It's going to take you a little longer than that, Phil, " Trudeau said. Now he was almost laughing, something he
didn't do very much in those days. In fact, the only time I remember him laughing that way was after he heard

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
that his name had been put up to command the U.S.

forces in Vietnam.

He also heard that they wanted me to
head up the intelligence section for the Army Special Forces command in Vietnam.

We both knew that the army
mission in Vietnam was headed for disaster because it was a think-tank war.

And the people in the think tank
were more worried about restraining the army than in wiping out the Vietcong.

So Trudeau had a plan: "We'll
either win the war or get court-martialed, " he said.

"But they'll know we were there.

" And he laughed when he
said that the same way he was laughing as he told me to take my time with the contents of the file cabinet.

"You'll want to think about this before you start writing any reports, " he said.

I couldn't help but pick up the nervousness in his voice, forcing itself through his laughter, the same sound over
the phone that got me nervous when I heard it the first time.

There really was something here he wasn't telling me.

"Is there something else about this I should know, General?" I asked, trying not to show any hesitation in my
voice.

Business as usual, nothing out of the ordinary, nothing anybody can throw my way that I can't handle.

"Actually, Phil, the material in this cabinet is a little different from the run-of-the-mill foreign stuff we've seen up
to now, " he said.

"I don't know if you've ever seen the intelligence on what we've got here when you were over
at the White House, but before you write up any summaries maybe you should do a little research on the Roswell
file.

"
Now I'd heard more about Roswell than I was ready to admit right on the spot my first day at the Pentagon.

And there were more wild stories floating around about Roswell and what we were still doing there than anyone
could have imagined.

But I hadn't made the connection between the Roswell files and what was in the cabinet
General Trudeau was talking about.And there were more wild stories floating around about Roswell and what we were still doing there than anyone
could have imagined.

But I hadn't made the connection between the Roswell files and what was in the cabinet
General Trudeau was talking about.

Basically I had hoped after Fort Riley that it would all go away and I could
simply stick my head in the sand and worry about things I could get my brain around like bureaucratic in fighting
inside Washington instead of little aliens inside sealed coffins.

The general didn't wait for me to answer him.

He left me standing there in his office and walked out to the
reception room, where I heard him giving orders into a speaker phone.

He had barely clicked off the speaker
and walked back to where I was standing when four enlisted men pulling a hand truck showed up, saluted, and
stood there at attention while Trudeau kept looking at me.

He didn't say anything.

He turned to the enlisted men
instead.

"Load up this cabinet on that dolly and follow the colonel to his office on the second floor.

Don't stop for
anybody.

Don't talk to anybody.

If anyone stops you, you tell them to see me.

That's an order.

"
Then he turned back to me.

"Why don't you take some time with this, Phil.

" He paused.

"But not too much time.

Sergeant" - he turned his attention back to the enlisted man with the shortest haircut  -  "please see the colonel
back to his own office below.

"
They loaded the file cabinet onto the dolly as if there were nothing inside, pulled it toward the back door, and
stared at me until I followed them out.

"Not too much time, Colonel, " General Trudeau called after me as we
went out the door and down the hall.

I remember I spent quite a while just looking at that cabinet after it was loaded off the dolly and set up in my
inner office.

There was an almost ominous quality to it that belied its quiet, official army presence.I remember I spent quite a while just looking at that cabinet after it was loaded off the dolly and set up in my
inner office.

There was an almost ominous quality to it that belied its quiet, official army presence.

So I must
confess that, given the reverse hype of the general's introduction, part of me wanted to tear it open right away
as if it were a present on Christmas morning.

But the part of me that won just let it sit there, protected, until I
thought about what General Trudeau had said about Roswell and the amount of paper work that had circulated
through the White House when I was on the National Security staff there.

No, I wasn't going to review the Roswell
files.

Not just yet.

Not until I took a long hard look at what was inside this file cabinet.

But even that was going to
wait until the rest of my office was set up.

Whatever I was supposed to do, I wanted to do it right.

I spent a little time pacing around my new office while I thought some more about what the general said, why
this file was waiting for me in his private office, and why he had wanted to talk to me specifically about it.

It also
wasn't lost on me that I had not seen one scrap of paper from the general covering his delivery of the material to
me nor my receipt of it.

It could have just as easily been that this file cabinet didn't even exist.

As far as I knew,
only his eyes and soon my eyes would review it.

So whatever it was, it was serious and, only if by omission, very
secret.

I remembered a hot July night fourteen years before at Fort Riley when I was the young intelligence officer
after having just been shipped back from Rome.

I remembered being hustled into a storage hangar by one of
the sentries, a fellow member of the Fort Riley bowling team.

What he pointed to under the thick olive tarp that
night was also very, very secret, and I held my breath, hoping that what was inside this cabinet wasn't anything
like what I saw that night in Kansas, July 6, 1947.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I remembered being hustled into a storage hangar by one of
the sentries, a fellow member of the Fort Riley bowling team. What he pointed to under the thick olive tarp that
night was also very, very secret, and I held my breath, hoping that what was inside this cabinet wasn't anything
like what I saw that night in Kansas, July 6, 1947. I opened the cabinet, and almost immediately my heart sank. I knew, from looking at the shoebox of tangled
wires and the strange cloth, from the vise-like headpiece and the little wafers that looked like Ritz crackers only
with broken edges and colored a dark gray, and from an assortment or other items that I couldn't even relate to
the shapes and sixes of things I was familiar with, that my life was headed for a big

--- PAGE BREAK ---19
change.

Back in Kansas that night in July, I told myself that I was seeing an illusion, something that if I wished real
hard, didn't have to exist for me.

Then, after I went to the White House and saw all the National Security Council
memos describing the "incident" and talking about the "package" and the "goods, " I knew that the strange figure
I'd seen floating in liquid in a casket within a casket at Fort Riley wasn't just a bad dream I could forget about.

Nor
could I forget about the radar anomalies at the Red Canyon missile range or the strange alerts over Ramstein air
base in West Germany.

I only hoped all of it would never catch up with me again and I could go through the rest
of my army career in some kind of peace.

But it was not to be.

There, mangled like somebody else's junk, were
the trinkets I knew would involve me in something deeper than I had ever wanted.

Whatever else I had to do in
this life, here was a job that would change it all.

You know how in the movies when Bud Abbott would open a closet, see the dead body hanging there, close
the closet door, open it up again, and find the body gone?

That's what I actually did with the file cabinet.

Nobody was there to see me, or so I believed, so I opened it, closed it, opened it again.

But this was no movie
and the stuff was still there.

So here it was, some of the material they'd recovered from Roswell.

And now, just like a bad penny, it turned
up again.

I heard footsteps outside my door and caught my breath.

There were always sounds in the Pentagon
at night because the building was never empty.

Somewhere, in some office, in parts of the building most people
don't even know about, some group is planning for a war we hope we will never fight.

Therefore, more than any
other building except for the White House, the Pentagon is a place where someone is always walking around
after something.

General Trudeau peeked his head around the door.

"Look inside?" he asked.General Trudeau peeked his head around the door.

"Look inside?" he asked.

"What'd you do to me, General?" I said.

"I thought we were friends.

"
"That's why I gave you this, Phil, " he said, but he wasn't laughing, wasn't even smiling.

"You know how valuable
this property is?

You know what any of the other agencies would do to get this into their hands?'
"They'd probably kill me, " I said.

"They probably want to kill you anyway, but this makes them even more rabid.

The air force wants it because
they think it belongs to them.

The navy wants it because they want anything the air force wants.

The CIA wants it
so they can give it to the Russians.

"
"What do you want me to do, General?" I asked.

I couldn't figure out what he was thinking unless he thought I
should just bury the stuff and leave it at that.

"I need a plan from you, " he said.

"Not simply what this property is, but what we can do with it.

Something that
keeps it out of play until we know what we have and what use we can make of it.

"
This had all the makings of a plot, pure and simple.

"Look, who's our biggest problem?" I asked, but it was a proforma question because I already knew the
answer.

"The same people who lost Korea for us and who you had to fight over at the White House, " he said.

"You
know exactly who I mean.

We got to keep whatever's valuable here from falling into the wrong hands because
as sure as we're standing in this Pentagon, it'll find its way right to the Kremlin.

"
There were people floating around Washington right at that very moment who, even out of the most well
meaning intentions they could muster, would have shipped this Roswell file over to Russia while patting President
Kennedy on the back and congratulating him for contributing to world peace.

Just as there were people who
would have cut Trudeau's and my throat and left us right on the rug to bleed to death while they packed that file
away.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"
There were people floating around Washington right at that very moment who, even out of the most well
meaning intentions they could muster, would have shipped this Roswell file over to Russia while patting President
Kennedy on the back and congratulating him for contributing to world peace. Just as there were people who
would have cut Trudeau's and my throat and left us right on the rug to bleed to death while they packed that file
away. Either way, Trudeau didn't have to quote me chapter and verse to explain that he was handing me one of
the most important assignments I would ever receive from him. He was giving me the keys to a whole new
kingdom, but neither he nor I knew what in the world we could do with this stuff, short of keeping it out of the
hands of the Russians. At the very least, that was a start. "We have to know what we have first, " I said. "Then that's your job right away. What do we have? Anything usable here? Put together people you can trust
from the specialists we have and go over the contacts at our defense contractor lists. And this is only part of the
property we have. There's some more of it downstairs in the file basement that the other intelligence agencies
don't know anything about. Came here from New Mexico instead of going out to Ohio. Don't ask me why. It's
coming up to you right now in boxes. Just put everything together, take some time, and evaluate this for me. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---20
"Anybody know I have this?" I asked.

"Everybody knows that if you're poking around something it's got to be important, " he said.

"So don't act like
the cat that ate the canary.

They're watching you as much as they're watching me.

" Then he walked to the
doorway, looked down both ends of the hall, and turned back to me.

"But move this thing along, because we
could be out of this office in under a year and I don't want to have to worry about running out of time on this.

"
And he was gone in a heartbeat, as if we'd never had the conversation.

I didn't take the file apart that night, even after another nondescript wooden crate that looked like something
you ship vegetables in was carted to my office by an equally nondescript army corporal.

I didn't go through the
material the next night, either.

But over the following week, whenever I could be sure that no one was around
who could pop in without warning, I moved the material from the box into the file and allowed myself time to
look at it.

It was just like falling through the looking glass into a different world, a puzzle of separate pieces that
only vaguely captured what had been in the memos I'd read over at the White House.

No wonder no one had
really wanted anything to do with this junk, which held out the promise of a whole world we knew nothing about
but that as far back as 1947, the government had decided to keep an absolute secret.

Career after career of anyone in government who even hinted at the big dark secret of Roswell was
pulverized by whoever was behind this operation.

And, although I knew far more than I had even admitted to
myself, I would never be the one to shoot off my mouth.

But now this file, what I would eventually call the "nut file"
to General Trudeau, had come into my possession, and as the ensuing weeks turned into a month, I gradually
figured out where some of the puzzle pieces fit.And, although I knew far more than I had even admitted to
myself, I would never be the one to shoot off my mouth.

But now this file, what I would eventually call the "nut file"
to General Trudeau, had come into my possession, and as the ensuing weeks turned into a month, I gradually
figured out where some of the puzzle pieces fit.

First there were the tiny, clear, single filament, flexible glass like wires twisted together through a kind of gray
harness as if they were cables going into a junction.

They were narrow filaments, thinner than copper wire.

As I
held the harness of strands up to the light from my desk, I could see an eerie glow coming through them as if they
were conducting the faint light and  breaking it up into different colors.

When the personnel at the retrieval site in
the desert outside of Roswell pulled this piece out of the wreckage of the delta shaped object, they thought it
was some sort of wiring device -a harness is what they said - or maybe some of them thought it was a junction
box or electrical relay.

But whatever they thought it was, they believed there was nothing like it on this planet.

As I
turned the object over in my hand, I figured, from the way the individual filaments flexed back and forth but
didn't break and the way they were able to conduct a light beam along their length, they were a wire of some
sort.

But for what purpose I didn't have a clue.

Then there were the thin two-inch-around matte gray oyster cracker shaped wafers of a material that looked
like plastic but had tiny road maps of wires barely raised/etched along the surface.

They were the size of a
twenty-five-cent piece, but the etchings on the surface reminded me of squashed insects with their hundred legs
spread out at right angles from a flat body.

Some were more rounded or elliptical.They were the size of a
twenty-five-cent piece, but the etchings on the surface reminded me of squashed insects with their hundred legs
spread out at right angles from a flat body.

Some were more rounded or elliptical.

It was a circuit - anyone could
figure that out by 1961, especially when you put it under a magnifying glass - but from the way these wafers were
stacked on each other, this was a circuitry unlike any other I'd ever seen.

I couldn't figure out how to plug it in and
what kind of current it carried, but it was clearly a wire circuitry of a sort that came from a larger board of wafers
on board the flying craft.

My hand shook ever so slightly as I held these pieces, not because they themselves
were scary but because I was awed, just for a few seconds, about the momentous nature of this find.

It was like
an architectural treasure trove, the discoveries of some long departed culture, a Rosetta stone, even though
whoever crashed onto the desert floor was still very active and roaming around our most secret army and air
force bases.

I was most interested in the file descriptions accompanying a two piece set of dark elliptical eye pieces as thin
as skin.

The Walter Reed pathologists said they adhered to the lenses of the extraterrestrial creatures' eyes and
seemed to reflect existing light, even in what looked like complete darkness, so as to illuminate and intensify
images in the darkness to allow their wearer to pick out shapes.

The reports had said that the pathologists at
Walter Reed hospital who autopsied one of these creatures tried to peer through them in the darkness to watch
the one or two army sentries and medical orderlies walking down a corridor adjacent to the pathology lab.

These
figures were illuminated in a greenish orange, depending upon how they moved, but the pathologists could see
only their outer shape.

And when they got close to each other, their shapes blended into a single form.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These
figures were illuminated in a greenish orange, depending upon how they moved, but the pathologists could see
only their outer shape. And when they got close to each other, their shapes blended into a single form. But they
could also see the outlines of furniture and the wall and objects on desktops. Maybe, I thought as I read this
report, soldiers could wear a visor that intensified images through the reflection and amplification of available
light and navigate in the darkness of a battlefield with as much confidence as if they were walking their sentry
posts in broad daylight. But these eyepieces didn't turn night into day, they only highlighted the exterior shapes of
things. There was a dull, grayish-silvery foil-like swatch of cloth among these artifacts that you could not fold, bend,
tear, or wad up but that bounded right back into its original shape without any creases. It was a metallic fiber
with physical characteristics that would later be called "supertenacity, " but when I tried to cut it with scissors, the
arms just. slid right off without making even a nick in the fibers. If you tried to stretch it, it bounced back, but I
noticed that all the threads seemed to be going in one direction. When I tried to stretch it width wise instead of

--- PAGE BREAK ---21
length wise, it looked like the fibers had reoriented themselves to the direction I was pulling in.

This couldn't be
cloth, but it obviously wasn't metal.

It was a combination, to my unscientific eye, of a cloth woven with metal
strands that had the drape and malleability of a fabric and the strength and resistance of a metal.

I was on top
of some of the most secret weapons projects at the Pentagon, and we had nothing like this, even under the wish-
list category.

There was a written description and a sketch of another device, too, like a short, stubby flashlight almost with a
self-contained power source that was nothing at all like a battery.

The scientists at Wright Field who  examined it
said they couldn't see the beam of light shoot out of it, but when they pointed the pencil-like flashlight at a wall,
they could see a tiny circle of red light, but there was no actual beam from the end of what seemed like a lens to
the wall as there would have been if you were playing a flashlight off on a distant object.

When they passed an
object in front of the source of the light, it interrupted it, but the beam was so intense the object began smoking.

They played with this device a lot before they realized that it was an alien cutting device like a blowtorch.

One
time they floated some smoke across the light and suddenly the whole beam took shape.

What had been
invisible suddenly had a round, micro thin, tunnel-like shape to it.

Why did the inhabitants of this craft have a
cutting device like this aboard their ship?

It wasn't until later, when I read military reports of cattle mutilations in
which entire organs were removed without any visible trauma to the surrounding cell  tissue, that I realized that
the light beam cutting torch I thought was in the Roswell file was actually a surgical implement, just like a scalpel,
that was being used by the aliens in medical experiments on our livestock.Why did the inhabitants of this craft have a
cutting device like this aboard their ship?

It wasn't until later, when I read military reports of cattle mutilations in
which entire organs were removed without any visible trauma to the surrounding cell  tissue, that I realized that
the light beam cutting torch I thought was in the Roswell file was actually a surgical implement, just like a scalpel,
that was being used by the aliens in medical experiments on our livestock.

Then there was the strangest device of all, a headband, almost, with electrical signal pickup devices on either
side.

I could figure out no use for this thing whatsoever unless whoever used it did so as a fancy hair band.

It
seemed to be a one size fits all headpiece that did nothing, at least not for humans.

Maybe it picked up brain
waves like an electroencephalogram and projected a chart.

But no private experiment conducted on it seemed
to do anything at all.

The scientists didn't even determine how to plug it in or what its source of power was
because it came with no batteries or diagrams.

There were nights I'd spread these articles all around me as if they were indeed Christmas presents.

There were
nights when I'd just take one thing out and turn it around until I almost memorized what it looked like from different
angles before putting it back.

The days were passing and, without having been told directly by Trudeau, I knew
that he was getting anxious.

We'd sit at meetings together when other people were around and he couldn't say
anything, and I could almost hear his insides burst.

There were times when we were alone and Trudeau almost
didn't want to broach our shared secret.

Outside the Pentagon there was a battle starting up all over again set to rage just as it had during the Truman
and Eisenhower presidencies.

Whose intelligence was accurate?

Whose was truthful?Whose intelligence was accurate?

Whose was truthful?

Who was trying to
manipulate the White House and who believed that by coloring or twisting fact that he could change the course
of history?

John Kennedy was leading a young administration capable of making extraordinary mistakes.

And
there were people at the heart of his administration whose own views of how the world should work were inspiring
them to distort facts, misstate intentions, and disregard obvious realities in the hope that their views would prevail.

Worse, there were those, deep within a secret government within the government, who had been placed there
by the spymasters at the Kremlin.

And it was those individuals we had the greatest reason to fear.

Right now, Army
R&D had stewardship over these bits and pieces of foreign technology from Roswell.

How long we would have
them I did not know.

So, over a late night pot of coffee in General Trudeau's office, he decided that we would
move this material out, out to defense contractors, out to where scientists would see it and where, under the guise
of top secrecy, it would be in the system before the CIA could stow it where no one would find it except the very
people we were trying to hide it from.

"This is the devil's plan, General, " I said to Trudeau that night.

"What makes you think we can get away with it?"
"Not we, Phil, " he said.

"You.

You're the one who's going to get away with it.

I'll just keep them off your back
long enough until you do.

"
Now, all I could think about was what I'd seen that night in 1947 and, worse, what in the world I was going to
do with all this stuff next.

I'd asked myself "why me?" hundreds of times since that night in the Pentagon.

And
asked why after fourteen years and my experience at Fort Riley I had become the inheritor of the Roswell file.

But I
had no answers then and no answers now.

If General Trudeau had meant for this to happen when he took over
R&D three years before I got there, I'll never know.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But I
had no answers then and no answers now. If General Trudeau had meant for this to happen when he took over
R&D three years before I got there, I'll never know. He never gave me any reasons, only orders. But since he was
the master strategizer, I sometimes think he believed I must have had some experience with alien encounters and
wouldn't be spooked by working with the technology from the Roswell file. I never asked him about it, as strange as that seems, because the military being what it is, you don't ask. You
simply do. So, now as then, I don't question. I only remember that I went forward from that night to put into
development as much of the Roswell file as I could and believed that whatever happened, I was doing the right
thing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER 4
Inside the Pentagon at the Foreign Technology Desk
The pentagon never sleeps.

And neither did I in those first few weeks at the R&D Foreign Technology desk as I racked my brain to come up
with a strategy I could recommend to my boss.

Amidst the constant twenty four hour motion of an office building
where someone is always working, I spent more time at my desk than I did at home.

Evenings, weekends, early
mornings before the sunrise set the windows across the river in Washington an orange blaze, you could find me
staring at the four drawer file cabinet against my corner wall.

I'd fiddle with the combination lock, sometimes so
absorbed in coming up with a strategy for these strange artifacts that I'd forget the sequence of numbers and
have to wait until my brain reset itself.

And always, just outside my office was the pent up urgency of crisis, the
cocked trigger of a military machine always poised to attack anywhere, anytime, at the sound of a voice on the
other end of a scrambled phone behind the soft colored walls of an inner office along the miles of corridors on
the inner or outer ring.

You think of the Pentagon as something of an amorphous entity with a single mind set and a single purpose.

It's probably the same way most people see the structure of the American military: one army, one goal,
everybody marches together.

But that's almost totally false.

The American military - and its home office, the
Pentagon is just like any other big business with hundreds of different bureaus, many in direct and explicit
competition with each other for the same resources and with different agendas and tactical goals.

The separate
military branches have different goals when it comes to how America should be defended and wars fought, and
it's not uncommon for differences to emerge even within the same branch of the service.

I was plunged right into this in my first weeks back in D.C.The separate
military branches have different goals when it comes to how America should be defended and wars fought, and
it's not uncommon for differences to emerge even within the same branch of the service.

I was plunged right into this in my first weeks back in D.C.

Debates were still going on from World War II, sixteen
years before, and all of this formed the backdrop of Roswell.

There was a huge wrangling within the navy
between the aircraft carrier advocates from World War II and the submariners under Adm.

Hyman Rickover, who
saw the big flat tops as herds of elephants, slow and vulnerable.

Subs, on the other hand, running almost forever
on nuclear fuel, could slip deep beneath the sea, lay a thousand or so miles off enemy territory, and blast away
at his most vulnerable targets with multiple warhead ICBMs.

No way our enemies would escape destruction as
long as we had our submarine fleet.

So who needs another aircraft carrier with its screen of destroyers and other
escorts when just one sub can deliver a knockout punch anywhere, anytime, without enemy orbiting intel
satellites snapping pictures of its every move?

Look what our subs did to the Japanese in the Pacific; look what
the German U-boats did to us in the Atlantic.

But you couldn't convince the navy brass of all that in the 1960s.

Like the navy, the air force had different advocates for different goals, and so did the army.

And when there
are competing agendas and strategies articulated by some of the best and brightest people ever to graduate
from universities, war colleges, and the ranks of officers, you have hard nosed people playing high stakes games
against one other for the big prizes: the lion's share of the military budget.

And, at the very center of it all, the
place where the dollars get spent, are the weapons development people who work for their respective branches
of the military.

And that's right where I was in the early days of 1961 shortly after John F.And, at the very center of it all, the
place where the dollars get spent, are the weapons development people who work for their respective branches
of the military.

And that's right where I was in the early days of 1961 shortly after John F.

Kennedy came to town to begin his
new administration.

I had only just returned to Washington from the front lines of a war that nobody thought of as
a real war except for us, the guys who were there.

It was easier during a real war, like Korea.

Your objective is to
push the other guy back as far as you can, kill as many of his people as you can, and force him to surrender.

You
have a very pragmatic strategy: You try it and if it works you keep on doing it until it stops working.

But on the front
lines in Germany, where the battles were only fought with electron beams, threats, and feints, you had to assess
how many soldiers might  be killed or how many planes you could  bring down if the shooting were to start for
real.

For Americans this was the Cold War, the combined military machines of two massive superpowers each
capable of obliterating each other the moment either one perceived a material weakness in the other's ability to
retaliate.

So you had a chess game played and replayed every day around the world in scores of different war rooms
where different scenarios were formulated to see who would win.

It was all a game of numbers and strategies
with different armed services around the world winning and losing battles on computers - very elegant and
precise.

But what very few people outside of government knew was that the Cold War was really a Hot War,
fought with real bullets and real casualties, only no one could step forward to admit it because the front lines
were within the very government capitals of the countries that were fighting it.

I saw this with my own eyes right
here in Washington, where the war had been going on since 1947.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But what very few people outside of government knew was that the Cold War was really a Hot War,
fought with real bullets and real casualties, only no one could step forward to admit it because the front lines
were within the very government capitals of the countries that were fighting it. I saw this with my own eyes right
here in Washington, where the war had been going on since 1947. So with the sides drawn and tensions between the various bureaus and services within the Pentagon, it didn't
take me long in those first few weeks to learn the politics of my new job. With the field reports, scientific analyses,
medical autopsies, and technological debris from the Roswell crash I had under lock and key, my first rule was to
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---23
be as circumspect as possible, draw no attention to myself.

I'd learned this skill when I served on MacArthur's staff
in Korea ten years earlier: I had to be the little man who wasn't there.

If people don't think you're there, they talk.

That's when you learn things.

And within those first few weeks I saw and learned a lot about how the politics of the Roswell discovery had
matured over the fourteen years since the crash and since the intense discussions at the White House after
Eisenhower became president.

Each of the different branches of the military had been protecting its own cache
of Roswell - related files and had been actively seeking to gather as much new Roswell material as possible.

Certainly all the services had their own reports from examiners at Walter Reed and Bethesda concerning the
nature of the alien physiology.

Mine were in my nut file along with the drawings.

It was pretty clear, also, from the
way the navy and air force were formulating their respective plans for advanced military technology hardware,
that many of the same pieces of technology in my files were probably shared by the other services.

But nobody
was bragging because everybody wanted to know what the other guy had.

But since, officially, Roswell had
never happened in the first place, there was no technology to develop.

On the other hand, the curiosity among weapons and intelligence  people within the services was rabid.

Nobody wanted to come in second place in the silent, unacknowledged alien technology development race
going on at the Pentagon as each service quietly pursued its version of a secret Roswell weapon.

I didn't know
what the air force or navy had or what they might have been developing from their respective files on Roswell,
but I assumed each service had something and was trying to find out what I had.

That would have been a good
intelligence procedure.I didn't know
what the air force or navy had or what they might have been developing from their respective files on Roswell,
but I assumed each service had something and was trying to find out what I had.

That would have been a good
intelligence procedure.

If you were in the know about what was retrieved from Roswell, you kept your ears open
for snippets of information about what was being developed by another branch of the military, what was going
before the budget committees for funding, or what defense contractors were developing a specific technology
for the services.

If you weren't in the Roswell loop, but were too curious for your own good, you could be spun
around by the swirling rumor mill that the Roswell race had kicked up among competing weapons development
people in the services and wind up chasing nothing more than dust devils that vanished down the halls as soon
as you turned the corner on them.

There were real stories, however, that wouldn't go away no matter how many times somebody official
stepped up to say the story was false.

For example, I picked up the rumors pretty quickly concerning the UFO the
air force was supposed to be keeping at Edwards Air Force Base in California and the research they were
conducting on the spacecraft's technology, especially its electromagnetic wave propulsion system.

There were
also rumors circling around the air force about the early harvesting of Roswell technology in the design of the all-
wing bombers, but I didn't know how much stock to put in them.

The army had been developing an all-wing
design since right after World War I, and within a year after the Roswell crash Jack Northrop's company began
test flights of their YB49 flying wing recon/bomber models.

The YB49's quadruple vertical tail fins were so uncannily
reminiscent of the head on Roswell craft sketches in our files that it was hard not to make a connection between
the spacecraft and the bomber.The army had been developing an all-wing
design since right after World War I, and within a year after the Roswell crash Jack Northrop's company began
test flights of their YB49 flying wing recon/bomber models.

The YB49's quadruple vertical tail fins were so uncannily
reminiscent of the head on Roswell craft sketches in our files that it was hard not to make a connection between
the spacecraft and the bomber.

But the flying wing's development took place over
ten years before I got to the Foreign Technology desk, so I had no direct evidence relating the bomber to the
spacecraft.

General Trudeau was right, though, when he said that people at the Pentagon were watching Army R&D
because they thought we were onto something.

People wanted to know what Foreign Technology was working
on, especially the more exotic things in our portfolio just to make sure, the memos read, that we weren't
duplicating budgetary resources by spending twice or three times for the same thing.

There was a lot of talk and
pressure from the Joint Chiefs of Staff about technology sharing and joint weapons development, but my boss
wanted us to keep what we had to ourselves, especially what he jokingly kept calling "the alien harvest.

"
As if the eyes of the other military services weren't enough, we also had to contend with the analysts from the
Central Intelligence Agency.

Under the guise of coordination and cooperation, the CIA was amalgamating as
much power as it could.

Information is power, and the more the CIA tried to learn about the army weapons
development program, the more nervous it made all of us at the center of R&D.

Acquaintances of mine in the agency had dropped hints, shortly after I took over the Foreign Technology
desk, that if I needed any intelligence about what other countries were developing, they could help me out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Information is power, and the more the CIA tried to learn about the army weapons
development program, the more nervous it made all of us at the center of R&D. Acquaintances of mine in the agency had dropped hints, shortly after I took over the Foreign Technology
desk, that if I needed any intelligence about what other countries were developing, they could help me out. But
one hand washes the other, and they dropped hints that if I had any clues about where any stray pieces of "the
cargo, " or "the package" as the Roswell artifacts were commonly referred to within the military, might be found,
they would surely appreciate it if I let them know. After the third time my CIA contacts bumped into me and
whispered this proposal for exchanges of information into my ear, I told my boss that our friends might be anxious
about what we had. "You really put me on the hot seat, General, " I said to Trudeau over one of our morning briefings at the end of
my first month on the job. I was still working on the strategy for the nut file and, thankfully, my boss hadn't
pressured me yet to come up with recommendations for the plan. But it was coming. "How does the CIA know
what we have?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---24
"They're guessing, I suppose, " he said.

"And figuring it out by the process of elimination.

Look, everybody
suspects what the air force has.

"
Trudeau was right.

In the rumor bank from which everybody in
the Pentagon made deposits and withdrawals, the air force was sitting on the Holy Grail - a spaceship itself
and maybe even a live extraterrestrial.

Nobody knew for sure.

We knew that after it became a separate branch
of the military in 1948, the air force kept some of the Roswell artifacts at Wright Field outside of Dayton, Ohio,
because that's where "the cargo" was shipped, stopping off in Fort Riley along the way.

But the air force was
primarily interested in how things fly, so whatever R&D they worked on was focused on how their planes could
evade radar and out fly the Soviets no matter where we got the technology from.

"And, " he continued, "I'm sure the agency fellows would love to get into the Naval Intelligence files on Roswell
if they've not done so already.

"
With its advanced submarine technology and missile launching nuclear subs, the navy was struggling with its
own problem in figuring out what to do about UUOs or USOs - Unidentified Submerged Objects, as they came to
be called.

It was a worry in naval circles, particularly as war planners advanced strategies for protracted
submarine warfare in the event of a first strike.

Whatever was flying circles around our jets since the 1950s,
evading radar at our top secret missile bases like Red Canyon, which I saw with my own eyes, could plunge right
into the ocean, navigate down there just as easy as you please, and surface halfway around the world without
so much as leaving an underwater signature we could pick up.

Were these USOs building bases at the bottom of
oceanic basins beyond the dive capacity of our best submarines, even the Los Angeles-class jobbies that were
only on the drawing boards?Whatever was flying circles around our jets since the 1950s,
evading radar at our top secret missile bases like Red Canyon, which I saw with my own eyes, could plunge right
into the ocean, navigate down there just as easy as you please, and surface halfway around the world without
so much as leaving an underwater signature we could pick up.

Were these USOs building bases at the bottom of
oceanic basins beyond the dive capacity of our best submarines, even the Los Angeles-class jobbies that were
only on the drawing boards?

That's what the chief of Naval Operations had to find out, so the navy was
occupied with fighting its own war with extraterrestrial craft in the air and under the sea.

That left the army.

"But they don't know for sure what we have, Phil, " Trudeau continued.

He'd been talking the whole time.

"And
they're busting a gut to find out.

"
"So we have to keep on doing what we do without letting them know what we have, General, " I said.

"And
that's what I'm working on.

" And I was.

Even though I wasn't sure how we'd do it, I knew the business of R&D
couldn't change just because we had Roswell crash artifacts in our possession.

However we were going to camouflage our development of the
Roswell technology, it had to be within the existing way we did business so no one would recognize any
difference.

We operated on a normal defense development projects budget of well into the billions in 1960, most
of it allocated to the analysis of new weapons systems.

Just within our own bureau we had contracts with the
nation's biggest defense companies with whom we maintained almost daily communication.

A lot of the
research we conducted was in the improvement of existing weapons based on the intelligence we received
about what our enemies were pointing at us: faster tanks, heavier artillery, improved helicopters, better tasting
MREs.Just within our own bureau we had contracts with the
nation's biggest defense companies with whom we maintained almost daily communication.

A lot of the
research we conducted was in the improvement of existing weapons based on the intelligence we received
about what our enemies were pointing at us: faster tanks, heavier artillery, improved helicopters, better tasting
MREs.

At the Foreign Technologies desk, we kept an eye on what other countries were doing, ally or adversary, and
how we could adapt it to our use.

The French, the Italians, the West Germans, all of them had their own weapons
systems and streams of development that seemed exotic by our standards yet had certain advantages.

The
Russians had gotten ahead of us in liquid rocket propulsion systems and were using simpler, more efficient
designs.

My job was to evaluate the potential of the foreign technology and implement whatever we could.

I'd
get photos, designs, and specs of foreign weapons systems, like the French helicopter technology, for example,
and bring it to American defense companies like Bell, Sikorski, or Hughes to see whether we could develop
aspects of it for our own use.

And it was the perfect cover for protecting the Roswell technology, but we still had
to figure out what we wanted to do with it.

It couldn't simply stay in file cabinets or on shelves forever.

What we had retrieved from the Roswell crash and had managed to hold on to was probably the most closely
guarded secret the army had.

Yet it was nothing more than an orphan.

Up until 1961, the army had come up with
no plan to use the technology without revealing its nature or its source and in so doing blow the cover on the
single biggest secret the government was keeping.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet it was nothing more than an orphan. Up until 1961, the army had come up with
no plan to use the technology without revealing its nature or its source and in so doing blow the cover on the
single biggest secret the government was keeping. There was no one bureau within the army charged with
managing Roswell and other aspects of UFO encounters, as there was in the air force, and therefore nobody was
keeping any public records of how the army got its hands on its Roswell technology in the first place and,
consequently, no oversight mechanism. Everything up until 1961 was catch-as-catch-can, but now it had to
change. General Trudeau was looking for the grand end game development scheme. It began with researching
the history of how the whole file - the field reports, autopsy information, descriptions of the items found in the
wreckage, and the bits and pieces of Roswell technology themselves - came into the possession of Army R&D.

--- PAGE BREAK ---25
Luckily enough for me, the whole Roswell story was still unknown outside the highest military circles in 1961.

Retired major Jesse Marcel, the intelligence officer at the 509th who had been at the crash site in July 1947 and
who had given the initial reports of a spacecraft, would not yet tell his story in public for at least another ten
years.

Everyone else connected to the incident was either dead or sworn to silence.

The air force, which moved quickly to take over management of the Roswell affair and ongoing UFO contacts
and sightings, still kept everything they learned highly classified under the Air Force Intelligence Command and
waged a push and pull war with the CIA for information about sightings and ongoing contacts with anything
extraterrestrial.

These really weren't my concerns yet, but they would be.

My research was not concerned with the crash at Roswell itself, nor at Corona or at San Agustin - if those
crashes did, in fact, occur in early July 1947 - but on the day after Roswell, the day Bill Blanchard from the 509th
crated up the alien debris and shipped it to Fort Bliss, where Gen.

Roger Ramey's staff determined its final
disposition and the official government history of the event began to unfold.

In the early hours after the cargo arrived in Texas, there was so much confusion about what was found and
what wasn't found that army officers, who were in charge of the entire retrieval operation, quickly scraped
together both a cover story and a plan to silence all the military and civilian witnesses to the recovery.

The cover
story was easy.

General Ramey ordered Maj.

Jesse Marcel to recant his "flying saucer" story and pose for a news
photo with debris from a weather balloon, which he described as the wreckage the retrieval team recovered
from outside Roswell.

Marcel followed orders and the flying saucer officially became a weather balloon.Jesse Marcel to recant his "flying saucer" story and pose for a news
photo with debris from a weather balloon, which he described as the wreckage the retrieval team recovered
from outside Roswell.

Marcel followed orders and the flying saucer officially became a weather balloon.

The silencing of military witnesses was also accomplished easily enough through top-down orders from
General Ramey to everyone at the 509th and at Fort Bliss to deny that they were a part of any operation to
recover anything other than a balloon.

Once the material left Ramey's command and arrived at Lt.

Gen.

Nathan
P.Twining's Air Materiel Command at Wright Field, all General
Ramey had to do was keep denying what he was already denying and it was no longer his responsibility.

Now
it belonged to General Twining, from whose desk a whole new era of army involvement with the Roswell material
began.

General Ramey treated the incident as a threat to national security and deployed whatever forces he could
to bring the material back for evaluation and to suppress any rumors that might light a brushfire of panic.

Therefore, Ramey used the counter intelligence personnel already posted to the 509th and ordered them
deployed into the civilian community as well as the military to use any means necessary to suppress the story of
the crash and retrieval.

No news should be allowed to get out, no speculation was to be tolerated, and the story
already circulating about a crashed flying saucer had to be quashed.

By the next morning, July 8, the suppression of the crash story was in full operation.

The army had already
issued a new cover story to the press by the time CIC officers had gotten to the witnesses and, using threats and
outright promises of cash, forced them to recant their statements about what they saw.By the next morning, July 8, the suppression of the crash story was in full operation.

The army had already
issued a new cover story to the press by the time CIC officers had gotten to the witnesses and, using threats and
outright promises of cash, forced them to recant their statements about what they saw.

Rancher Mac Brazel, who
first said he had been at the site during the recovery and had described the strange debris, disappeared for two
days and then showed up in town driving a new pickup truck and denying he'd ever seen anything.

CIC officers
turned up at people's houses and spoke quietly to parents about what their children had learned.

Whatever
people thought was happening, army personnel said, wasn't, and it would have to stay that way.

"You didn't see a thing, " they ordered.

"Nothing happened here.

Let me hear you repeat that.

"
The silencing worked so well that for the next thirty years the story seemed to have been swallowed up by the
quiet emptiness of desert where all things are worn down to a fine grade of sameness.

But belying the quiet that
settled over Roswell, a thousand miles away, part of the U.S.

military went on wartime alert as bits and pieces of
the craft reached their destinations.

One of those destinations, Lt.

Gen.

Nathan Twining's desk at Wright Field, was
the focal point from which the Roswell artifacts would reach the Foreign Technology desk at the Pentagon.

Among the first of the army's top commands notified of the events unfolding in Roswell in early July would
have had to have been Lieutenant General Twining's Air Materiel Command at Wright Field, where the Roswell
debris was shipped.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nathan Twining's desk at Wright Field, was
the focal point from which the Roswell artifacts would reach the Foreign Technology desk at the Pentagon. Among the first of the army's top commands notified of the events unfolding in Roswell in early July would
have had to have been Lieutenant General Twining's Air Materiel Command at Wright Field, where the Roswell
debris was shipped. Nathan Twining has become important to UFO researchers because of his association with a
number of highly secret meetings at the Eisenhower White House having to do with the national security issues
posed by the discovery of UFOs and his relationship to National Security Special Assistant Robert Cutler, who was
the liaison between the NSC and President Eisenhower when I was on the NSC staff in the 1950s. The silver-haired
General Twining was the point man for initial research and dissemination of Roswell related materials and, partly
because of the capability with which he administered the vital AMC at Wright, he became part of an ad hoc
group of top military and civilian officials assembled by President Truman to advise him about the Roswell
discovery and its national security implications. General Twining had been scheduled to travel to the West Coast in early July 1947, but he canceled the trip,
remaining in New Mexico at the army's air base at Alamogordo until at least July 10. Alamogordo was important
not just because it was the nation's nuclear weapons test site in the 1940s and 1950s but because it was also a

--- PAGE BREAK ---26
field office of the AMC itself, where rocket scientists Wernher von Braun and others were primarily based.

Close by
was the White Sands guided missile base, where some of our military's most advanced tracking and embryonic
targeting radars were deployed.

These were sensitive installations, especially during the UFO activity that week,
and it made perfect sense that immediately after the recovery of the UFO the army general whose responsibility it
would have been to manage the retrieval was almost directly on-site conferring with his top scientists.

Although I never saw the actual memos from President Truman to General Twining regarding his trip to New
Mexico, I had heard stories about secret orders that Truman had issued to General Twining directing him to New
Mexico to investigate the reports of the crash and to report directly to the White House on what he'd found.

I
believe that it was General Twining's initial report to the President that confirmed that the army had retrieved
something from the desert and might have suggested the need for the formation of an advisory group to
develop policy about whatever was discovered.

And, remember, in those first forty-eight hours, nobody really
knew what this was.

By the time the Roswell debris had been shipped out of Fort Bliss and had arrived at Wright Field, General
Twining had flown back from New Mexico to Wright to oversee the analysis and evaluation of the Roswell treasure
trove.

Twining moved quickly once back at his office.

The alien bodies had to be autopsied in utmost secrecy and
the spacecraft and its contents analyzed, cataloged, and prepared for dissemination to various facilities within
the military.

In as much as everything about the crash was given the highest security classification, stories had to
be prepared for those with lower security classifications but whose contributions could be important to the
creation of a credible cover story.The alien bodies had to be autopsied in utmost secrecy and
the spacecraft and its contents analyzed, cataloged, and prepared for dissemination to various facilities within
the military.

In as much as everything about the crash was given the highest security classification, stories had to
be prepared for those with lower security classifications but whose contributions could be important to the
creation of a credible cover story.

The official camouflage was almost as important to the military in1947 as it was in 1961 when I took over.

It was
important because as far as the army was concerned, 1947 was still wartime, a Cold War, perhaps, but war
nevertheless, and stories about military hardware as valuable as the material retrieved from Roswell could not be
disclosed for fear that the Soviets would exploit it.

Thus, from day 1, the army treated its retrieval of the debris as if
it were an operation conducted in a wartime theater under battle conditions.

Roswell became military
intelligence.

General Twining had seen the material for himself, and even before he returned to Wright Field, he'd
conferred with the rocket scientists who were part of his brain trust at Alamogordo.

Now, during the remainder of
the summer months, he quietly compiled a report that he would deliver to President Truman and an ad hoc
group of military, government, and civilian officials, who would ultimately become the chief policy makers for
what would become an ongoing contact with extraterrestrials over the ensuing fifty years.

And as stories of the
Roswell crash and other UFO sightings around U.S.

military bases began to filter in through the command chain of
the armed services, General Twining also needed to establish a lower security channel along which he could
exchange information with other commands that were not cleared all the way to the top.And as stories of the
Roswell crash and other UFO sightings around U.S.

military bases began to filter in through the command chain of
the armed services, General Twining also needed to establish a lower security channel along which he could
exchange information with other commands that were not cleared all the way to the top.

General Twining still reported to higher ups who, though they may not have had the security clearance he
had with regard to extraterrestrial contact, nevertheless were his commanding officers and routinely sought
information from the AMC.

Accordingly, General Twining needed to maintain a quasi cover-up even within the
military.

The first of these reports was transmitted from General Twining to the commanding general of Army Air Forces
in Washington, dated September 23, 1947.

Written to the attention of Brig.

Gen.

George Schulgen, Twining's
memo addressed, in the most general of terms, the official Air Materiel Command's intelligence regarding "flying
discs.

" He drew a remarkable number of conclusions, most of which, I had to surmise when I was on Eisenhower's
National Security Council and then again when I got to the Pentagon, were based on Twining's own first hand
experience with the sighting reports from Roswell and other sighting reports as well as the materials themselves,
which were in the military's possession.

Flying saucers or UFOs are not illusions, Twining says, referring to the sighting of strange objects in the sky as
"something real and not visionary or fictitious.

" Even though he cites the possibility that some of the sightings are
only meteors or other natural occurrences, he says that the reports are based upon real sightings of actual
objects" approximating the shape of a disc, of such appreciable size as to be as large as man made aircraft.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Flying saucers or UFOs are not illusions, Twining says, referring to the sighting of strange objects in the sky as
"something real and not visionary or fictitious. " Even though he cites the possibility that some of the sightings are
only meteors or other natural occurrences, he says that the reports are based upon real sightings of actual
objects" approximating the shape of a disc, of such appreciable size as to be as large as man made aircraft. "
Considering that this report was never intended for public scrutiny, especially in 1947, Twining marveled at the
aircrafts' operating characteristics and went on record, drawing major conclusions about the material he had
and the reports he'd heard or read. But, when he wrote that the extreme maneuverability of the aircraft and their
"evasive" actions when sighted "or contacted" by friendly aircraft and radar led him to believe that they were
either "manually, automatically, or remotely" flown, he not only suggested a guided flight but imparted a hostile
intent to their evasive maneuvers to avoid contact. His characterization of the aircrafts' behavior revealed, even
weeks after the physical encounter, that those officers in the military who were now running the yet-to-be-code-
named extraterrestrial contact project already considered these objects and those entities who controlled them
a military threat.

--- PAGE BREAK ---27
He described the aircraft as it had been reported in the sightings: a "light reflective or metallic surface, "
"absence of a trail except in those few instances when the object was operating under high performance
conditions, " "circular or elliptical in shape, flat on bottom and domed on top, " flights in formation consisting of
from "three to nine objects, " and no sound except for those instances when "a substantial rumbling roar was
noted.

" The objects moved quickly for aircraft at that time, he noted to General Schulgen, at level flight speeds
above three hundred knots.

Were the United States to build such an aircraft, especially one with a range of over seven thousand miles, the
cost, commitment, administrative and development overhead, and drain on existing
high technology projects required that the entire project should be independent or outside of the normal
weapons development bureaucracy.

In other words, as I interpreted the memo, Twining was suggesting to the
commander of the Army Air Force that were the airforce, which would become a separate branch of the military
by the following year, to attempt to exploit the technology that had quite literally dropped into its lap, it had to
do so separately and independently from any normal weapons development program.

The descriptions of the
super secret projects at Nellis Air Force Base or Area 51 in the Nevada desert seem to fit the profile of the kind of
recommendation that General Twining was making, especially the employment of the "skunk works" group at
Lockheed in the development of the Stealth fighter and B2 bomber.In other words, as I interpreted the memo, Twining was suggesting to the
commander of the Army Air Force that were the airforce, which would become a separate branch of the military
by the following year, to attempt to exploit the technology that had quite literally dropped into its lap, it had to
do so separately and independently from any normal weapons development program.

The descriptions of the
super secret projects at Nellis Air Force Base or Area 51 in the Nevada desert seem to fit the profile of the kind of
recommendation that General Twining was making, especially the employment of the "skunk works" group at
Lockheed in the development of the Stealth fighter and B2 bomber.

Not revealing to the Army Air Forces command that Twining himself had been ordered to visit bases in New
Mexico in the hours after the crash, the general advised his bosses that the military should consider whether the
flying disks were of domestic origin, "the product of some high security project" already developed by the United
States outside of normal channels, or developed by a foreign power that "has a form of propulsion possibly
nuclear, which is outside of our domestic knowledge.

" At the same time, weaving a cover story that takes him
out of the loop of reporting any of these flying disks as a first hand observer, Twining writes that there is a "lack of
physical evidence in the shape of crash recovered exhibits which would undeniably prove the existence of these
objects.Not revealing to the Army Air Forces command that Twining himself had been ordered to visit bases in New
Mexico in the hours after the crash, the general advised his bosses that the military should consider whether the
flying disks were of domestic origin, "the product of some high security project" already developed by the United
States outside of normal channels, or developed by a foreign power that "has a form of propulsion possibly
nuclear, which is outside of our domestic knowledge.

" At the same time, weaving a cover story that takes him
out of the loop of reporting any of these flying disks as a first hand observer, Twining writes that there is a "lack of
physical evidence in the shape of crash recovered exhibits which would undeniably prove the existence of these
objects.

"
But, even though General Twining has just written that there is no evidence, he nevertheless recommends to
his superiors that:
Headquarters, Army Air Forces issue a directive assigning a priority, security classification and Code Name for
a detailed study of this matter to include the preparation of complete sets of all available and pertinent data
which will then be made available to the Army, Navy, Atomic Energy Commission, JRDB, the Air Force Scientific
Advisory Group, NACA, and the RAND and NEPA projects for comments and recommendations, with a
preliminary report to be forwarded within 15 days of receipt of the data and a detailed report thereafter every 30
days as the investigation develops.

A complete interchange of data should be effected.

This was an important part of the memo, at least for me and my research into how the army got the Roswell
rile, because it accounted for the army's dissemination of the Roswell materials and accompanying reports within
only a couple of months after the material's arrival at Wright Field.A complete interchange of data should be effected.

This was an important part of the memo, at least for me and my research into how the army got the Roswell
rile, because it accounted for the army's dissemination of the Roswell materials and accompanying reports within
only a couple of months after the material's arrival at Wright Field.

When General Twining suggested to his
commanding officers at AAF that all the military branches as well as existing government and civilian commissions
needed to share this information, the dispersal of the materials was already under way.

This is how the technology
came into the possession of Army R&D.

Finally, the general promised the Army Air Forces command that the Air Materiel Command would continue
to investigate the phenomenon within its own resources in order to define its nature further and it would route any
more  information it developed through channels.

Three days after the memo, on September 26,1947, General
Twining gave his report on the Roswell crash and its implications for the United States to President Truman and a
short list of officials he convened to begin the management of this top-secret combination of inquiry, police
development, and "ops.

" This working group, which included Adm.

Roscoe H.

Hillenkoetter, Dr.

Vannevar Bush,
Secretary James Forrestal, Gen.

Hoyt Vandenberg, Dr.

Detlev Bronk, Dr.

Jerome Hunsaker, Sidney W.

Souers,
Gordon Gray, Dr.

Donald Menzel, Gen.

Robert M.

Montague, Dr.

Lloyd V.

Berkner, and Gen.

Nathan Twining
himself, became the nucleus for an ongoing fifty-year operation that some people have called "Majestic-12.

"
At the Eisenhower White House, it was simply referred to as "the group, " and in the days after Roswell it went
into operation just as smoothly as slipping your new 1949 Buick with its "Dynaflow" automatic transmission into drive
and pulling away from the curb.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nathan Twining
himself, became the nucleus for an ongoing fifty-year operation that some people have called "Majestic-12. "
At the Eisenhower White House, it was simply referred to as "the group, " and in the days after Roswell it went
into operation just as smoothly as slipping your new 1949 Buick with its "Dynaflow" automatic transmission into drive
and pulling away from the curb. In this way General Twining had carefully orchestrated a complete cover-up of
what had happened at Roswell as well as a full scale, top-secret military R&D operation to identify the nature of
the phenomenon and assess its military threat to the United States. It was as elegant as it was effective. But the plan didn't stop with the creation of the working group - in fact, the operation very quickly developed
into something far more sophisticated because General Twining's "flying discs" simply wouldn't go away. As more
information on sightings and encounters came rolling in through every imaginable channel, from police officers
taking reports from frightened civilians to airline pilots

--- PAGE BREAK ---tracking strange objects in the sky, the group realized that they needed policies on how to handle what was
turning into a mass media phenomenon.

They needed a mechanism for processing the thousands of flying
saucer reports that could be anything from a real crash or close encounter to a couple of bohunks tossing a pie
tin into the air and snapping its picture with their Aunt Harriet's Kodak Brownie.

The group also had to assess the
threat from the Soviet Union and Iron Curtain countries, assuming of course that flying saucers weren't restricted to
North America, and gather intelligence on what kinds of information our allies had on flying saucers as well.

And it
still had to process the Roswell technology and figure out how it could be used.

So from the original group there
developed a whole tree structure of loosely confederated committees and subgroups, sometimes complete
organizations like the air force Project Blue Book, all kept separate by administrative firewalls so that there would
be no information leakage, but all controlled from the top.

With the initial and ongoing stories safely covered up, the plans for the long term reverse engineering work on
the Roswell technology could begin.

But who would do it?

Where would the material reside?

And how could the
camouflage of what the military was doing be maintained amidst the push for new weapons, competition with
the Soviets, and the flying saucer mania that was sweeping the country in the late 1940s?

General Twining had a
plan for that, too.

Just a little over a year after the initial group meetings at the White House, Air Force
Intelligence, now that the air force had become a separate service, issued a December 1948 report - 100-203-79
- called "Analysis of Flying Object Incidents in the U.S.

" in which UFOs are never referred to as extraterrestrial
objects but as elements of "foreign technology, " which is actually the subject of the report.Just a little over a year after the initial group meetings at the White House, Air Force
Intelligence, now that the air force had become a separate service, issued a December 1948 report - 100-203-79
- called "Analysis of Flying Object Incidents in the U.S.

" in which UFOs are never referred to as extraterrestrial
objects but as elements of "foreign technology, " which is actually the subject of the report.

The report, innocuous
to most people because it doesn't say that flying saucers came from outer space, is actually one of the first
indications showing how the camouflage plan was supposed to work over the ensuing years.

The writers of the report had located within the existing military administrative structure the precise place
where all research and development into the flying disk phenomenon could be pursued not only under a veil of
secrecy but in the very place were no one could be expected to look: the Foreign Technology desk.

Here, the
materials could be deposited for safe keeping within the military while army and air force brass decided what our
existing industrial and research technology allowed them to do.

There could he as weapons failed, secret
experiments without fear of exposure, and, most importantly, an ongoing discussion of how the United States
could develop this treasure trove of engineering information, all within the very structure where it was supposed to
take place.

Just don't call it extraterrestrial; call it "foreign technology" and throw it into the hopper with the rest of
the mundane stuff the foreign technology officers were supposed to do.

And that's how, twelve years later, the Roswell technology turned up in an old combination locked military file
cabinet carted into my new Pentagon office by two of the biggest enlisted men I'd ever seen.

CHAPTER 5
While General Twining was flying back and forth from Ohio to New Mexico, on the other side of the world in
Moscow, Chairman Josef Stalin was furious.And that's how, twelve years later, the Roswell technology turned up in an old combination locked military file
cabinet carted into my new Pentagon office by two of the biggest enlisted men I'd ever seen.

CHAPTER 5
While General Twining was flying back and forth from Ohio to New Mexico, on the other side of the world in
Moscow, Chairman Josef Stalin was furious.

Red-faced and not even trying to hide the rage that erupted like
an exploding volcano, Stalin held up a copy of the Roswell Daily Record for Tuesday, July 8,1947, and threw it out
onto the center of the table for any of the scientists in the room who could read English.

Stalin didn't need an
American newspaper to tell him what his NKVD agents on the ground at Alamogordo reported weeks before:
that a U.S.

Army retrieval team had pulled a crashed alien spacecraft out of the New Mexico desert and was
already evaluating the valuable technology they'd recovered.

At first, when the Soviet intelligence bosses got the reports from their agents at the American bases, they were
more than skeptical.

They figured the stories were plants, false information to flush out the Soviet spies the
Americans suspected had infiltrated their most secret bases.

If the Soviet government reacted to the
disinformation, the American counter intelligence agents would be able to determine the path of the story and
isolate the spies.

But when newspapers began reporting the crash, then covered it up with stories about weather
balloons, the Soviets knew they had stumbled onto the real thing.

So it was true, Stalin told the group, the
Americans had actually gotten their own flying saucer.

Now, he asked, what would they do with it?

One of the chief designers of the Soviet's embryonic liquid-fuel-rocket program was at the meeting.

He, like
many of the Soviet engineers who'd read the German secret weapons files at the end of the war, knew exactly
where the Americans should have been in their guided-missile-development program.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the chief designers of the Soviet's embryonic liquid-fuel-rocket program was at the meeting. He, like
many of the Soviet engineers who'd read the German secret weapons files at the end of the war, knew exactly
where the Americans should have been in their guided-missile-development program. What information his
28
The Cover-up

--- PAGE BREAK ---29
bosses in the Kremlin thought he still needed to know, they gave him from the reports they received from agents
in the field.

But nothing, nothing about the V2  launches at White Sands, nothing about the new tracking radars at
Alamogordo gave the scientists in the Soviet rocket program any indications the Americans were even an iota
ahead of them in guided missiles until he heard the news of the Roswell crash.

Both the Russian and American missile programs were based almost entirely upon the German weapons
research spoils that the Allies were dividing up even before the end of the war.

I was a firsthand participant in this,
secreting out German weapons scientists through Italy after we occupied Rome as part of a secret operation
code named "Paper Clip" that began in 1944.

With V2 designers Wernher von Braun, Willy Ley, and others running
experiments on the German missiles we brought back to the United States, the army had successfully
appropriated much of the German advanced weapons research and was carrying on experiments in New
Mexico.

The Soviets also got their own share of German technology through their own intelligence agents and
local Communist Party cells in occupied countries.

And what a technology it was.

The Germans had developed a crescent shaped jet powered flying wing, jet
powered Messerschmitts that blazed by our P51s as if they were standing still, and a U boat launched VI/V2 that,
had the Germans been able to hide even a small flotilla off the American East Coast, could have bombed out
much of heavily concentrated downtown Washington in a matter of hours.

All they needed to buy was enough
time to deploy their weapons and get their U-boats in position.

And that was their strategy toward the end of
1944 when they turned around and counter attacked through Belgium in the dead of winter and pinned us down
at the Battle of the Bulge.All they needed to buy was enough
time to deploy their weapons and get their U-boats in position.

And that was their strategy toward the end of
1944 when they turned around and counter attacked through Belgium in the dead of winter and pinned us down
at the Battle of the Bulge.

Break our advance on the ground, blast us out of the air with their new jets, bomb
North American cities, and knock Britain out of the war.

With their new weapons they could have fought us to a
stand still and won a bitter truce.

Both the
Americans and the Soviets wanted to get their hands on those German weapons, especially the V2s.

Stalin didn't have to worry much about who held the advantage in German weaponry after the war.

Both
sides were about equal.

But this flying saucer crash, that was a different matter, and it meant that in an instant
the United States could have gained an enormous advantage in the Cold War weapons race that had begun
only moments after the Germans surrendered.

What might that advantage be?

The Russian liquid fuel engineer
wondered aloud.

What could the Americans have retrieved from that crash?

Soviet agents reported that the townspeople in Roswell had talked about little creatures at the crash site and
a crescent shaped aircraft that the army hauled away on trucks, but the stories had been quickly silenced by
military counter intelligence.

So any real intelligence on what the Americans might be developing would have to
come from Soviet agents deep inside the U.S.

government.

Stalin would order it.

And, as if they were activated by
an invisible switch, spies from one of the most efficient and ruthless intelligence machines in the world began
homing in on the American military bases associated with the Roswell retrieval and the key American military and
civilian personnel the Russians knew would have to be involved.Stalin would order it.

And, as if they were activated by
an invisible switch, spies from one of the most efficient and ruthless intelligence machines in the world began
homing in on the American military bases associated with the Roswell retrieval and the key American military and
civilian personnel the Russians knew would have to be involved.

The Americans might not have been the most efficient spy catchers in 1947, but Army Counter intelligence
had been put on alert even before the Soviets knew that a flying saucer had been retrieved.

Starting from the
central point at the nexus of sensitive New Mexico bases during the summer of 1947, CIC agents questioned
anybody who seemed interested in learning about what happened in Roswell.

Ask too many questions and
knocking at your door would be a couple of plain clothes investigators who didn't need a search warrant to
rummage through your things.

So maybe the army was a little overzealous about their interrogation procedures,
but by early August it began producing results.

By the time General Twining was writing his report to Army Air
Forces command in Washington, both Army and Navy Intelligence commanders knew that the Soviets had a
high priority operation in place at military bases around the country.

Soviet agents were everywhere.

Central Intelligence group director Adm.

Roscoe Hillenkoetter, a member of
President Truman's advisory group on UFOs, informed the president.

A top down counter intelligence operation
had to he put in place immediately, here commended, or every plan the military had to evaluate what they'd
retrieved from Roswell would be compromised.

There were a million questions.

Were these flying objects the
prelude to something much bigger?

Were they communicating with the Soviets?

Were they allied with the
Soviets?

Were they probing our defenses for a planetary invasion?

We had already assumed that the behavior of
these aircraft was hostile, but what did they want?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Were they probing our defenses for a planetary invasion? We had already assumed that the behavior of
these aircraft was hostile, but what did they want? Meanwhile, other reports of civilian flying saucer sightings were
turning up in newspapers and coming in through local police. Even airline pilots were seeing strange lights. There
wasn't much time to act. A secret this big about flying saucers was bound to get out and cause untold panic
among the civilian population unless an elaborate camouflage was established. And worse, we had to keep the
Soviets away from this until we knew what we had. We needed a plan, and right away. Some have said it was Secretary of Defense James Forrestal's idea. Others said the whole scheme belonged
to Central Intelligence director Hillenkoetter. I, frankly, don't know first hand because when the plan was hatched
I was sweating out the end of the summer at Fort Riley, still trying to shake out of my mind the image of that
ghoulishly unearthly thing I'd seen floating in its container. But whoever said it first was saying the obvious,
according to the people on Eisenhower's National Security staff whom I worked with six years later. Maybe it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---30
Forrestal after all who was the only person in the cabinet who could have spoken to Truman that bluntly just a little
over two years after the man had inherited the office from FD Rand was already a very unpopular president.

"It's like this, " I had heard President Truman was told.

"We're in a real pickle here.

Nate Twining says he doesn't
know what the hell this thing is except that if the Soviets get a hold of it, it'll change the shape of things to come
for sure.

"
"You fellas going to write up some report for me?" the President asked.

"General Twining says he'd rather do it as a briefing, sir, for the time being, " Admiral Hillenkoetter suggested.

"For your ears only.

Then we have to have a working task group to manage this whole issue.

"
Maybe the working group, whatever it was going to be called, would come up with a report analyzing the
situation as soon as they reviewed what General Twining was putting under lock and key at Wright field, but
nobody wanted to speculate until they knew what was there.

"Maybe you should sit down with General Twining first, " both Forrestal and Hillenkoetter suggested.

They knew
that Harry Truman liked to get first hand reports from people who had seen the situation with their own eyes.

FDR
was corporate and knew how to digest reports.

He trusted his subordinates.

But Truman was different.

He knew
how to run a haberdashery store; if a hat didn't fit he'd have to go back to the factory to find out why.

It was the
same with General Twining, who'd been at the crash sites himself.

If Truman wanted answers, he'd have to see it
through the eyes of someone who'd been there.

"Does he know what these SOBs are after?" Truman asked, referring to the aliens in the crashed saucer.

"That's one of the questions we want to address, " they said."Does he know what these SOBs are after?" Truman asked, referring to the aliens in the crashed saucer.

"That's one of the questions we want to address, " they said.

"How do you plan to do it?"
Forrestal and Hillenkoetter explained that they wanted the President to hear what General Twining had to say
and then convene a group of military, civilian, and intelligence personnel with strong old school ties of trust for
one another.

In this way whatever decisions they made wouldn't have to be memoed all over the place, thus
risking the possibilities of leaks and tip-offs to the Soviets.

"We don't want the newspapers or radio people getting
their hands on any of this either, " they told the President.

"Winchell would crucify me with this if he found out what we were doing, " Truman was reported to have said
at that meeting.

Nobody in the know liked President Truman very much, and he could appreciate it.

"It's just like the Manhattan Project, Mr.

President, " Admiral Hillenkoetter reminded him.

"It was war.

We couldn't
tell anyone.

This is war.

Same thing.

"
Then they explained that after they had convened a working group, they would task out the research of the
technology while keeping it from the Soviet spy machine already operating at full bore within the government.

"We hide it from the government itself, " the secretary explained.

"Create a whole new level of security classification just for this, "the Central Intelligence director said.

"Any
information we decide to release, even internally, we down grade so the people getting the information never
have the security clearance that allows them all the way to the top.

The only way to hide it from the Russians is to
hide it from ourselves.

"
But the President was still thinking about the difficulties of keeping an operation this far reaching out of the
news, especially when flying saucers had become one of the hottest new items to talk about.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The only way to hide it from the Russians is to
hide it from ourselves. "
But the President was still thinking about the difficulties of keeping an operation this far reaching out of the
news, especially when flying saucers had become one of the hottest new items to talk about. What was he
supposed to say when people ask the government about the flying disk stories? he asked, pressing for details that
still had to be established. How could they research these strange creatures without the news getting out? And
how could they analyze the wealth of physical material Hillenkoetter had described to him without bringing
people from outside government? President Truman simply didn't see how this government within a government
camouflage idea could work without the whole thing spinning out of control. Despite Forrestal's assurances, the
president remained skeptical. "And there's one final point, " Truman was said to have brought up to his Central Intelligence group director
and secretary of defense. It was a question so basic that its apparent naivete belied an ominous threat that it
suggested was just over the horizon. "Do we ever tell the American people what really happened?" There was
silence. Don't ask me how I know. My old friend and enemy from the KGB wouldn't tell me how he knew, and I didn't
press him. But, accept it as fact from the only source that could know, just as I did back when I was told, that

--- PAGE BREAK ---31
neither the secretary of defense nor the director of intelligence had considered a disclosure like this as even a
remote possibility.

"Well, " President Truman said.

"Do we?"
On November 7, 1944, the day FDR was elected to his fourth and final term, his chief adviser, Harry Hopkins,
had described the new vice president Harry Truman as a man who couldn't block a hat but who shouldn't be
underestimated.

And James Forrestal, the man to whom he was speaking at the time, now understood what he
meant as the secretary sat across from the now President Harry Truman.

This was a basic yes/no question, and although Forrestal and Hillenkoetter had a knee jerk reflex answer, "no, "
Forrestal quickly saw that it wasn't that easy.

As wartime administrators their first response was naturally to disclose
nothing, abiding by the old saw that what the people don't know, they don't need to know.

But President
Truman, who had not come from a military background, had seen something neither Forrestal nor Hillenkoetter
had seen.

If these ships could evade our radar and land anywhere at will, what would stop them from landing in
front of the White House or, for that matter, the Kremlin?

Certainly not the U.S.

Army Air Force.

"So what do we say when they land, " I'm told that Truman continued, "and create more panic in the streets
than if we'd disclosed what we think we know now?"
"But we really don't know anything, " the director of intelligence said.

"Not a thing until we analyze what we've
retrieved.

"
But both the secretary of defense and director of intelligence agreed with President Truman that he was right
to be skeptical, especially on his final point about disclosure.

"So can we postpone coming to any conclusions at least until after you've meet with General Twining?"
Admiral Hillenkoetter asked.

"I think he'll provide some of the answers we're all looking for.

"
While Adm."I think he'll provide some of the answers we're all looking for.

"
While Adm.

Roscoe Hillenkoetter and James Forrestal were briefing President Truman on their plan for the
working group, Gen.

Nathan P.

Twining was completing his preliminary analysis of the reports and material sent to
Wright Field.

Almost immediately, he dispatched the remains of the aliens to the Bethesda Naval Hospital and the
Walter Reed Army Hospital for further analysis by the two military services.

The aircraft itself remained at Wright
Field but, as he would promise in his memo to the Army Air Forces command, General Twining was preparing to
distribute the material from the wreckage among the different military and civilian bureaus for further evaluation.

He'd already been cautioned by Admiral Hillenkoetter that new security classifications had been put in place
regarding the Roswell intelligence package.

No one within the military other than names he would receive from
the President himself had the full security clearance to learn the complete story.

about Roswell that Twining would
deliver to the President and other members of a working group.

Within three months after he'd been dispatched to New Mexico to learn what had happened at Roswell,
General Twining met with President Truman, as Hillenkoetter and Forrestal had suggested, and explained exactly
what he believed the army had pulled out of the desert.

It was almost beyond comprehension, he described to
the President, nothing that could have come from this planet.

If the Russians were working on something like this,
it was so secret that not even their own military commanders knew anything about it, and the United States
would have to establish a crash program just to prepare a defense.

So it was Twining's assessment that what they
found outside of Roswell was, in his words, "not of this earth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If the Russians were working on something like this,
it was so secret that not even their own military commanders knew anything about it, and the United States
would have to establish a crash program just to prepare a defense. So it was Twining's assessment that what they
found outside of Roswell was, in his words, "not of this earth. "
Now President Truman had heard it, he told Forrcstal after Twining had left for Ohio, "directly from the horse's
mouth, " and he was convinced. This was bigger than the Manhattan Project and required that it be managed
on a larger scale and obviously for a longer period. The group proposed by Forrestal and Hillenkoetter had to
consider what they were really managing and for how long. Were they only trying to keep one secret - that an
extraterrestrial alien spaceship crashed at Roswell - or were they hiding what would quickly become the largest
military R&D undertaking in history, the management of what would become America's relationship with
extraterrestrials? General Twining had made it clear in his preliminary analysis that they were investigating the whole
phenomenon of flying disks, including Roswell and any other encounter that happened to take place. These
were hostile entities, the general said, who, if they were on a peaceful mission, would have not avoided contact
by taking evasive maneuvers even as they penetrated our airspace and observed our most secret military
installations. They had a technology vastly superior to ours, which we had to study and exploit in case they turned
more aggressive. If we were forced to fight a war in outer space, we would have to understand the nature of the
enemy better, especially if it came to preparing the American people for an enemy they had to face. So
investigate first, he suggested, but prepare for the day when the whole undertaking would have to be disclosed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---32
This, Truman could understand.

He had trusted Twining to manage this potential crisis from the moment
Forrestal had alerted him that the crash had taken place.

And Twining had done a brilliant job.

He kept the lid on
the story and brought back everything that he could under one roof.

He understood as Twining described to him
the strangeness of the spacecraft that seemed to have no engines, no fuel, nor any apparent methods of
propulsion, yet out flew our fastest fighters; the odd childlike creatures who were inside and how one of them was
killed by a gunshot; the way you could see daylight through the inside of the craft even though the sun had not
yet risen; the swatches of metallic fabric that they couldn't burn or melt; thin beams of light that you couldn't see
until they hit an object and then burned right through it, and on and on; more questions than answers.

It would
take years to find these answers, Twining had said, and it was beyond the immediate capacity of our military to
do anything about it.

This will take a lot of man power, the general said, and most of the work will have to be
done in secret.

General Twining showed photographs of these alien beings and autopsy reports that suggested they were too
human; they had to be related to our species in some way.

They were obviously intelligent and able to
communicate, witnesses at the scene had reported, by some sort of thought projection unlike any mental
telepathy you'd see at a carnival show.

We didn't know whether they came from a planet like Mars in our own
solar system or from some galaxy we could barely see with our strongest telescopes.

But they possessed a military
technology whose edges we could understand and exploit, even if only for self defense against the Soviets.

But
by studying what these extraterrestrials had we might be able to build a defense system against them as well.But they possessed a military
technology whose edges we could understand and exploit, even if only for self defense against the Soviets.

But
by studying what these extraterrestrials had we might be able to build a defense system against them as well.

At the very least, Twining had suggested, the crescent shaped craft looked so uncomfortably like the German
Horten wings our flyers had seen at the end of the war that he had to suspect the Germans had bumped into
something we didn't know about.

And his conversations with Wernher von Braun and Willy Ley at Alamogordo in
the days after the crash confirmed this.

They didn't want to be thought of as but intimated that there was a
deeper story about what the Germans had engineered.

No, the similarity between the Horten wing and the craft
they had pulled out of the arroyo was no accident.

We always wondered how the Germans were able to
incorporate such advanced technology into their weapons development in so short a time and during the Great
Depression.

Did they have help?

Maybe we were now as lucky as the Germans and broke off a piece of this
technology for ourselves.

With an acceleration capability and maneuverability we'd never seen before, this craft
would keep American aircraft engineers busy for years just incorporating what they could see into immediate
designs.

The issue of security was paramount, but so were questions of disclosure, the President reminded him.

This thing
was too big to hide and getting bigger all the time while reporters were just like dogs on a scent.

So just putting a
higher security classification on it and threatening anybody who came too close wasn't enough to hide a secret
this big.

You couldn't prevent leaks, and eventually it would all have to come out anyway.

General Twining
should think about that before the group made any final decisions, the President advised.You couldn't prevent leaks, and eventually it would all have to come out anyway.

General Twining
should think about that before the group made any final decisions, the President advised.

By the middle of
September it was obvious to every member of President Truman's working group, which included the following:
Central Intelligence Director Adm.

Roscoe Hillenkoetter Secretary of Defense James Forrestal Lt.

Gen.

Nathan
Twining of the AAF and then USAF Air Materiel Command Professor Donald Menzel, Harvard astronomer and
Naval Intelligence cryptography expert Vannevar Bush, Joint Research and Development Board Chairman
Detlev Bronk, Chairman of the National Research Council and biologist who would ultimately be named to
the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics
Gen.

Robert Montague, who was General Twining's classmate at West Point, Commandant of Fort Bliss with
operational control over the command at White Sands Gordon Gray, President Truman's Secretary of the Army
and chairman of the CIA's Psychological Strategy Board Sidney Souers, Director of the National Security Council
Gen.

Hoyt Vandenberg, Central Intelligence Group Director prior to Roscoe Hillenkoetter and then USAF Chief of
Staffin 1948
Jerome Hunsaker, aircraft engineer and Director of the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics Lloyd
Berkner, member of the Joint Research and Development Board
Unless this group established a long term plan for protecting and developing the Roswell project, the secrets
would soon leak out.

I understand that it was General Twining who pointed out to the group that, in fact, the story
had already leaked out.

It was leaked, he said, hours after the crash and then retracted.

In fact, people were still
talking about it in New Mexico, but after the army's weather balloon story, the national newspapers were treating
the flying disk reports as the delusions of people who had seen too many Buck Rogers movies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was leaked, he said, hours after the crash and then retracted. In fact, people were still
talking about it in New Mexico, but after the army's weather balloon story, the national newspapers were treating
the flying disk reports as the delusions of people who had seen too many Buck Rogers movies. The national press
was already doing the committee's work. What was really needed, Twining suggested, was a method for gathering the information about continuing
UFO activity - especially crashes, high probability sightings by pilots or the military, or actual physical encounters
with individuals - and surreptitiously filtering that information to the group while coming up with practical
explanations that would turn unidentified flying disks into completely identifiable and explainable phenomena. Under the cover of explaining away all the flying disk activity, the appropriate agencies represented by members

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the working group would be free to research the real flying disk phenomenon as they deemed appropriate.

But through it all, Twining stressed, there had to be a way of maintaining full deniability of the flying disk
phenomenon while actually preparing the public for a disclosure by gradually desensitizing them to the potential
terror of confronting a more powerful biological entity from a different world.

It would have to be, General
Twining suggested, at the same time both the greatest cover-up and greatest public relations program ever
undertaken.

The group agreed that these were the requirements of the endeavor they would undertake.

They would form
nothing less than a government within the government, sustaining itself from presidential administration to
presidential administration regardless of whatever political party took power, and ruthlessly guarding their secrets
while evaluating every new bit of information on flying saucers they received.

But at the same time, they would
allow disclosure of some of the most farfetched information, whether true or not, because it would help create a
climate of public attitude that would be able to accept the existence of extraterrestrial life without a general
sense of panic.

"It will be, " General Twining said, "a case where the cover-up is the disclosure and the disclosure is the cover-
up.

Deny everything, but let the public sentiment take its course.

Let skepticism do our work for us until the truth
becomes common acceptance.

"
Meanwhile, the group agreed to establish an information gathering project, ultimately named Blue Book and
managed explicitly by the air force, which would serve public relations purposes by allowing individuals to file
reports on flying disk sightings.

While the Blue Book field officers attributed commonplace explanations to
the reported sightings, the entire project was a mechanism to acquire photographic records of flying saucer
activity for evaluation and research."
Meanwhile, the group agreed to establish an information gathering project, ultimately named Blue Book and
managed explicitly by the air force, which would serve public relations purposes by allowing individuals to file
reports on flying disk sightings.

While the Blue Book field officers attributed commonplace explanations to
the reported sightings, the entire project was a mechanism to acquire photographic records of flying saucer
activity for evaluation and research.

The most intriguing sightings that had the highest probability of being truly
unidentified objects would be bumped upstairs to the working group for dissemination to the authorized agencies
carrying on the research.

For my purposes, when I entered the Pentagon, the general category of all flying disk
phenomena research and evaluation was referred to simply as "foreign technology.

"
CHAPTER 6
There is an old story I once heard about keeping secrets.

A group of men were trying to protect their
deepest secrets from the rest of the world.

They took their secrets and hid them in a shack whose very
location was a secret.

But the secret location was soon discovered and in it was discovered the secrets that the
group was hiding.

But before every secret could be revealed, the men quickly built a second shack where they
stored those secrets they still kept to themselves.

Soon, the second shack was discovered and the group realized
they would have to give up some secrets to protect the rest.

So they again moved quickly to build a third shack
and protect whatever secrets they could.

This process repeated itself over and over until anyone wanting to find
out what the secrets were had to start at the first shack and work their way from shack to shack until they came
to where they could go no further because they didn't know the location of the next shack.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So they again moved quickly to build a third shack
and protect whatever secrets they could. This process repeated itself over and over until anyone wanting to find
out what the secrets were had to start at the first shack and work their way from shack to shack until they came
to where they could go no further because they didn't know the location of the next shack. For fifty years this was
the very process by which the secrets of Roswell were protected by various serial incarnations of an ad hoc
confederation of top-secret working groups throughout different branches of the government, and it is still going
on today. Were you to search through every government document to find the declassified secrets of Roswell and the
contact we maintained with the aliens who were visiting us before and have been doing so ever since, you
would find code named project after code named project, each with its own file, security classification, military
or government administration, oversight mechanism, some form of budget, and even reports of highly classified
documents. All of these projects were started to accomplish part of the same task: manage our ongoing
relationship with the alien visitors we discovered at Roswell. However, at each level, once the security had been
breached for whatever reason -even by design - part of the secret was disclosed through declassification while
the rest was dragged into a new classified project or moved to an existing one that had not been compromised. It makes perfect sense, especially to those of us who understand that the government is not some monolithic
piece of granite that never moves or reacts. To those of us inside the military/government machine the
government is dynamic, highly reactive, and even proactive when it comes to devising ways to protect its most
33
The Strategy

--- PAGE BREAK ---34
closely held secrets.

For all the years after Roswell we weren't just one step ahead of people wanting to know
what really happened, we were a hundred steps ahead, a thousand, or even more.

In fact, we never hid the
truth from anybody, we just camouflaged it.

It was always there, people just didn't know what to look for or
recognize it for what it was when they found it.

And they found it over and over again.

Project "Blue Book" was created to make the general public happy that they had a mechanism for reporting
what they saw.

Projects "Grudge" and "Sign" were of a higher security to allow the military to process sightings and
encounter reports that couldn't easily be explained away as balloons, geese, or the planet Venus.

Blue Fly and
Twinkle had other purposes, as did scores of other camouflage projects like Horizon, HARP, Rainbow, and even
the Space Defense Initiative, all of which had something to do with alien technology.

But no one ever knew it.

And when reporters were actually given truthful descriptions of alien encounters, they either fell on the floor
laughing or sold the story to the tabloids, who'd print a drawing of a large headed, almond eyed, six fingered
alien.

Again, everybody laughed.

But that's what these things really look like because I saw the one they trucked
up to Wright Field.

Meanwhile, as each new project was created and administered, another bread crumb for anyone pursuing
the secrets to find, we were gradually releasing bits and pieces of information to those we knew would make
something out of it.

Flying saucers did truly buzzover.

Washington, D.C., in 1952, and there are plenty of
photographs and radar reports to substantiate it.

But we denied it while encouraging science fiction writers to
make movies like The Man from Planet X  to blow off some of the pressure concerning the truth about flying disks.

This was called camouflage through limited disclosure, and it worked.But we denied it while encouraging science fiction writers to
make movies like The Man from Planet X  to blow off some of the pressure concerning the truth about flying disks.

This was called camouflage through limited disclosure, and it worked.

If people could enjoy it as entertainment,
get duly frightened, and follow trails to nowhere that the working group had planted, then they'd be less likely to
stumble over what we were really doing.

And what were we really doing?

As General Twining had suggested in his report to the Army Air Forces, "foreign technology" was the category
to which research on the alien artifacts from Roswell was to be delegated.

Foreign technology was one of the
great catch all terms, encompassing everything from researching French air force engineering advances on
helicopter blades to captured Russian MiGs flown in from Cuba by savvy pilots who could negotiate our southern
radar perimeter better than our own pilots.

So what if a few pieces of technological debris from a strange
crescent shaped hovering wing turned up in an old file somewhere in the army's foreign technology files?

If
nobody asked about it - and nobody did because foreign technology was just too damned dull for most
reporters to hang around - we didn't have to say anything about it.

Besides, most foreign technology stuff was
classified anyway because it dealt with weapons development we were hiding from the Soviets and most
reporters knew it.

Foreign technology was the absolute perfect cover.

All I had to do was figure out what to do
with the stuff I had.

And General Trudeau wasn't in the mood to wait any longer.

"Come on, Phil, let's go.

" The general's voice suddenly filled the room over the blown speaker hum of my desk
intercom.

I put down my coffee and headed up the stairway to the back door of his inner office.

This was a
routine that repeated itself three, sometimes four times a day.I put down my coffee and headed up the stairway to the back door of his inner office.

This was a
routine that repeated itself three, sometimes four times a day.

The general always liked to get briefed in person
because even in the most secure areas of the Pentagon, the walls tended to listen and remember our
conversations.

Our sessions were always private, and from the way our conversation bounced back and forth among
different topics, if it weren't for his three stars and my pair of leaves, you wouldn't even think you were listening to
a pair of army officers.

It was cordial and friendly, but my boss was my boss and, even after we both retired like
two old war horses put out to pasture, our meetings were never informal.

"So now you figured out how the package arrived?" he asked me after I sat down.

I had figured it out by going
through all of the files I could get my hands on and tracing the path of the Roswell information from the 509th to Fort
Bliss and from there to Wright Field, the dissemination point.

General Trudeau motioned for me to sit down and I settled into a chair.

It was already ten thirty in the morning
so I knew there'd be at least two other sit down briefings that day.

"I know it didn't come by the parcel service, " I said.

"I don't think they have a truck that big.

"
"Does that help you figure out what we should do?" he asked.

Actually, knowing how the material got into the Foreign Technology files was critically important because it
meant that it was dispatched there originally.

Even if it had been neglected over the years, it was clear that the
Foreign Technology desk of the R&D system was its intended destination, part of the original plan.

And I even had
the documents from General Twining's own files to substantiate this.

Not that I would have ever revealed them at
that time.

General Twining, more than anyone else during those years after the war, understood the sensitive and
protected nature of the R&D budget.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not that I would have ever revealed them at
that time. General Twining, more than anyone else during those years after the war, understood the sensitive and
protected nature of the R&D budget. And now that I understood how the camouflage was to take place, I also
saw how brilliant the general's plan was. R&D, although important and turning over records like topsoil from the
Nazi weapons development files captured after the war, was kind of a backwater railroad junction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---35
Unnoticed by most officers on their way to the top and not called upon in the late 1940s to do much more
than record keeping, it turned out to be the perfect hideaway when the CIA hirelings came sniffing through the
Pentagon in the early 1950s looking for anything they could find on the Roswell technology.

Unless they were part
of the working group from the start, not even members of the Eisenhower White House National Security staff
knew that R&D was the repository of Roswell artifacts.

I was there.

I can vouch for that.

In fact, it wasn't until I saw
the files for myself and reverse traced their path to my doorstep that I realized what General Twining and the
working group had accomplished.

By the time I had arrived at the White House, though, it was all ancient history.

People were more worried about the sighting information deluging Project Blue Book every day than they were
about the all but forgotten story of Roswell.

But my mind was drifting and the general was still speaking.

He wanted to know what my research had uncovered
and what I had learned about Roswell during my years at the White House, what I'd seen, how far the concentric
circles of the group and the people who worked for them went.

"Phil, we both know that the package you have is no surprise, " he said very flatly.

I didn't respond substantively, and he didn't expect me to, because to do so would have meant breaching
security confidentiality that I'd sworn to maintain when I was assigned to the NSC staff at the White House.

"You don't have to say anything officially, " he continued.

"And I don't expect you to.

But can you give me
your impressions of how people working for the group talked about the package?"
"I wasn't working for the group, General, " I said.

"And whatever I saw or heard was only because it happened
to pass by, not because I was supposed to do anything about it.But can you give me
your impressions of how people working for the group talked about the package?"
"I wasn't working for the group, General, " I said.

"And whatever I saw or heard was only because it happened
to pass by, not because I was supposed to do anything about it.

"
But he pushed me to remember whether the NSC staff had any direct dealings with the group and how much
the Central Intelligence staffers at the White House pressed to get any information they could about what the
group was doing.

Of course I remembered the questions going back and forth about what might have
happened at Roswell, about what was really behind Blue Book, and about all those lights buzzing the Washington
Monument back in 1952.

I didn't have anything substantive to tell my boss about my involvement, but his
questions helped me put together a bigger picture than I thought I knew.

From my perspective in 1961, especially
after reviewing everything I could about what happened in the days after the Roswell crash, I could see very
clearly the things that I didn't understand back in 1955.

I didn't know why the CIA was so aggressively agitated
about the repeated stories of flying saucer sightings or why they kept searching for any information about the
technology from Roswell.

I certainly didn't volunteer any information, mainly because nobody asked me, about
having seen parts of "the cargo" as it passed through Fort Riley.

I just played position, representing the army as the
military member of the National Security Staff, but I listened to everything I heard like a fly on the wall.

General Trudeau's questions forced me to ask myself what the big picture was that he saw.

He was obviously
looking for something in my descriptions of the architecture of the group, as I had learned it from my review of the
history, and of the starters on the lower security classification periphery as I understood it from my experience at
the White House.General Trudeau's questions forced me to ask myself what the big picture was that he saw.

He was obviously
looking for something in my descriptions of the architecture of the group, as I had learned it from my review of the
history, and of the starters on the lower security classification periphery as I understood it from my experience at
the White House.

He really wanted to know how the bureaucracy worked, how much activity the group itself
generated, what kinds of policy questions came up in my presence, and whether I was asked to comment
informally on anything having to do with the issues of the group.

Did Admiral Hillenkoetter host many briefings for President Eisenhower where Generals Twining, Smith,
Montague, and Vandenburg were present?

Gen.

W.

B.

Smith had replaced Secretary Forrestal after he
committed suicide during the second year of the Truman administration.

Were Professor Menzel and Drs.

Bush
and Berkner visitors to the White House on regular occasions?

Did they meet at the White House with Admiral
Hillenkoetter or the generals?

What was the level of presence of the CIA staffers at the White House through all of
this?

And did I recognize anyone from the Joint Research and Development Board or the Atomic Energy
Commission at any briefings chaired by Admiral Hillenkoetter?

Through General Trudeau's questions I could see not only that the general knew his history almost as well as I
did about how the original group was formed and how it must have operated, but he also had a sense of what
kind of problem was facing the military R&D and how much leeway he had to solve it.

Like most ad hoc creations
of government, the group must have at some point become as self-serving as every other joint committee
eventually became the longer it functioned and the more its job increased.

As the camouflage about flying disks
grew, so did the role of the group.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Like most ad hoc creations
of government, the group must have at some point become as self-serving as every other joint committee
eventually became the longer it functioned and the more its job increased. As the camouflage about flying disks
grew, so did the role of the group. Only the group didn't have the one thing most government committees had :
the ability to draw upon other areas of the government for more resources. This group was above top secret and,
officially, had no right to exist. Therefore, as its functions grew over the next ten years to encompass the
investigations of more flying saucer sightings and the research into more encounters with alien aircraft or with the
extraterrestrials themselves, its resources became stretched so thin that it had to create reasons for drawing upon
other areas of the government.

--- PAGE BREAK ---36
Accordingly, task-defined subgroups were formed to handle specific areas of investigation or research.

These
had to have had lower security classifications even if only because the number of personnel involved couldn't
have been cleared that quickly to respond to the additional work the group was taking on.

In fact, the work of
the group must have become unmanageable.

Bits and pieces of information slipped out, and the group had to
determine what it could let go into the public record and what had to be protected at all costs.

As in the story
about the shacks, the group members retreated to create new protected structures for the information they had
to preserve.

The official camouflage was sagging under the weight of the information the group had to investigate and
the pressure of time they were allotted.

Soon the military representatives found, just as we did in Korea, that they
really couldn't trust the career intelligence people, especially the CIA, because they seemed to have a different
agenda.

Maybe the military became resistant to giving up all the information it was collecting independently to
the central group?

Maybe, in the absence of any actual legislation establishing how the group's work was to be
paid for, the military saw valuable and fundable weapons opportunities slip through its fingers to the CIA's
budget?

Maybe - and I know this is what happened - a power struggle developed within the group itself.

The whole structure of the working group had changed, too, since the late 1940s when it was formed.

What
started out as a close-knit group of old friends from prep school had become an unmanageable mess within five
years.

Many pieces of the pie were floating around, and the different military branches wanted to break off
chunks of the black budget so that you needed an entire administration just to manage the managers of the
cover-up.What
started out as a close-knit group of old friends from prep school had become an unmanageable mess within five
years.

Many pieces of the pie were floating around, and the different military branches wanted to break off
chunks of the black budget so that you needed an entire administration just to manage the managers of the
cover-up.

Therefore, at some point near the middle of the Eisenhower administration, seams opened up in the
grand camouflage scheme where nobody knew what anybody else was doing.

Because of the cover-up,
nobody really had a need to know, so nobody knew anything.

The only people who wanted to get their hands
on information and hardware belonged to the CIA, but nobody, even those who vaguely understood what had
happened fourteen years earlier, trusted the CIA.

Officially, then, nobody knew nothing and nothing happened.

Through the 1950s a cascade effect developed.

What had started out as a single-purpose camouflage
operation was breaking up into smaller units.

Command and control functions started to weaken and, just like a
submarine that breaks up on the bottom of the ocean, debris in the form of information bubbled to the surface.

Army CIC, once a powerful force to keep the Roswell story itself suppressed, had weakened under the combined
encroachments of the CIA and the FBI.

It was during this period that my old friend J.

Edgar Hoover, never happy
at being kept out of any loop, jumped into the circle and very quietly began investigating the Roswell incident.

This shook things up, and very soon afterward, other government agencies - the ones with official reporting
responsibilities - began poking around as well.

For all intents and purposes, the original scheme to perpetrate a camouflage was defunct by the late 1950s.This shook things up, and very soon afterward, other government agencies - the ones with official reporting
responsibilities - began poking around as well.

For all intents and purposes, the original scheme to perpetrate a camouflage was defunct by the late 1950s.

Its functions were now being managed by series of individual groups within the military and civilian intelligence
agencies, all still sharing limited information with each other, each pursuing its own individual research and
investigation, and each - astonishingly - still acting as if some super intelligence group was still in command.

But,
like the Wizard of Oz, there was no super intelligence group.

Its functions had been absorbed by the groups
beneath it.

But nobody bothered to tell anyone because a super group was never supposed to exist officially in
the first place.

That which did not exist officially could not go out of existence officially.

Hence, right through the
next forty years, the remnants of what once was a super group went through the motions, but the real activities
were carried out by individual agencies that believed on blind faith that they were being managed by higher-
ups.

Remember the lines of cars at gas pumps during the fuel shortage of 1973 when one driver, thinking a gas
station was open, would wait at a pump and within fifteen minutes scores of other cars pulled up behind him?

Lines a mile long formed behind pumps that were never open because there was no gas.

That's what the great
flying saucer camouflage was like by the time President Kennedy was inaugurated.

"There's nobody home, Phil, " General Trudeau told me as we compared our notes at that morning's briefing.

"Nobody home except us.

We have to make our own policy.

"
I was a soldier and followed orders, but Trudeau was a general, the product of a political process, stamped
with congressional approval, and reporting to a civilian executive.

Generals are made by the government, not
by the army.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"
I was a soldier and followed orders, but Trudeau was a general, the product of a political process, stamped
with congressional approval, and reporting to a civilian executive. Generals are made by the government, not
by the army. They sit between the government and the vast military machine and from the Army Chief of Staff all
the way down to the brigadiers at bases around the world, generals create the way military policy is supposed to
work. And on the morning of this briefing over cups of coffee in his inner office of the third floor of the Pentagon,
Lieutenant General Trudeau was going to make policy and do the very thing that over ten years of secret work
groups and committees and  research planning had failed to do : exploit the Roswell technology. "I need you to tell me you found a way to make something out of this mess, " General Trudeau told me. "There
must be some piece of technology in your file that'll make a weapon, that we can use for one of our helicopters. What do we have in there, Phil?" Then he said. "Time is now of the essence. We have to do something because
nobody else will. "
In the great cloud of unknowing that had descended upon the Pentagon with respect to the Roswell
package, the five or six of us in the navy, air force, and army who actually knew what we had didn't confide in

--- PAGE BREAK ---37
anyone outside his own branch of the military and certainly didn't talk to the CIA.

So, in a way that could only
happen inside the military bureaucracy, the cover-up became covered up from the cover-up, leaving the few of
us in the know free to do whatever we wanted.

General Trudeau and I were all alone out there in so far as the package went.

Whatever vestige of the group
remained had simply lost track of the material delivered to Foreign Technology fourteen years earlier.

And the
general was right, nobody was home and our enemies inside government were capitalizing on whatever
information they could find.

The Roswell package was one of the prizes, and if we didn't do anything with it, the
Russians would.

And they were onto us.

Our own military intelligence personnel told us that the Soviets were trafficking so heavily in our military secrets
that they knew things about us in the Kremlin before we knew them in Congress.

The army at least knew the KGB
had penetrated the CIA, and the leadership of the CIA had been an integral part of the working group on flying
disks since the early 1950s.

Thus, whatever secrets the group thought they had, they certainly weren't secrets to
the KGB.

But here's what kept the roof from falling in on all of us.

The KGB and the CIA weren't really the adversaries
everybody thought them to be.

They spied on each other, but for all practical purposes, and also because each
agency had thoroughly penetrated the other, they behaved just like the same organization.

They were all
professional spies in a single extended agency playing the same intelligence game and trafficking in information.

Information is power to be used.

You don't simply give it away to your government's political leadership, whether
it's the Republicans, the Tories, or the Communists, just because they tell you to.

You can't trust the politicians, but
you can trust other spies.You don't simply give it away to your government's political leadership, whether
it's the Republicans, the Tories, or the Communists, just because they tell you to.

You can't trust the politicians, but
you can trust other spies.

At least that's what spies believe, so their primary loyalty is to their own group and the
other groups playing the same game.

The CIA, KGB, British Secret Service, and a whole host of other foreign
intelligence agencies were loyal to themselves and to the profession first and to their respective governments last.

That's one of the reasons we in the military knew that the professional KGB leadership, not the Communist
Party officers who were only inside for political reasons, were keeping as much information from the Soviet
government as the CIA was keeping from our government.

Professional spy organizations like the CIA and the
KGB tend to exist only to preserve themselves, and that's why neither the U.S.

military nor the Russian military
trusted them.

If you look at how the great spy wars of the Cold War played out you'll see how the KGB and CIA
acted like one organization: lots of professional courtesy, lots of shared information to make sure nobody got
fired, and a few human sacrifices now and then just to keep everybody honest.

But when it came down to
loyalty, the CIA was loyal to the KGB and vice versa.

I believe they had a rationale for what they did.

I know they thought the rest of us were too stupid to keep the
world safe and that by sharing information they kept us out of a nuclear war.

I believe this because I knew
enough KGB agents during my time and got enough bits and pieces of information off the record to give me a
picture of the Soviet Union during the 1950s and 1960s that's very different from what you'd read on the front
page of the New York Times.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I know they thought the rest of us were too stupid to keep the
world safe and that by sharing information they kept us out of a nuclear war. I believe this because I knew
enough KGB agents during my time and got enough bits and pieces of information off the record to give me a
picture of the Soviet Union during the 1950s and 1960s that's very different from what you'd read on the front
page of the New York Times. CIA penetration by the KGB and what amounted to their joint spying on the military was a fact we accepted
during the 1950s and1960s, even though most of us in the Pentagon played spy versus spy as much as we could;
those of us, like me, who'd gone to intelligence school during the war and knew some of the counter espionage
tricks that kept the people watching you guessing. We would change our routes to work, always used false
information stories as bait to test phones we weren't sure about, swept our offices for listening devices, always
used a code when talking with one another about sensitive subjects. We had a counter intelligence agent in the
military attaché's office over at the Russian consulate in Washington whose friends in the Soviet army trusted the
KGB less than I did. If my name came up associated with a story, he'd let me know it. But he'd never tell the CIA. Believe it or not, in the capital of my very own country, that kind of information helped me stay alive.. If my name came up associated with a story, he'd let me know it. But he'd never tell the CIA. Believe it or not, in the capital of my very own country, that kind of information helped me stay alive.

It was very disconcerting that the CIA had a tail on me all throughout my four year tenure at the White House.
I was mad about it, but there was nothing much I chose to do. Then, when I came back to Washington in 1961 to
work for General Trudeau, they put the tail back on and I led him down every back alley and rough
neighborhood in D.C. that I could. He wouldn't shake. So the next day, after I told my boss what I was going to
do, I  led my faceless pursuer right to Langley, Virginia, past a sputtering secretary, and straight into the office of
my old adversary, the director of cover operations Frank Wiesner, one of the best friends the KGB ever had. I told
Wiesner to his face that yesterday was the last day I would walk around Washington without a handgun. And I
put my .45 automaticon his desk. I said if I saw his tail on me tomorrow, they'd find him in the Potomac the next
day with two bloody holes for eyes; that is, if they bothered to look for him. Wiesner said, "You won't do that,
Colonel. " But I reminded him very pointedly that I knew where all his bodies were buried, the people he'd gotten
killed through his own ineptitude and, worse, his cooperation with the Russians. I'd tell his story to everyone I knew
in Congress. Wiesner backed down. Subsequently, on a trip to London, Wiesner committed suicide and was
found hanging in his hotel room. I never did tell his story. Two years later in 1963, one of Wiesner's friends at the
agency told me that it was "all in good fun, Phil. " Part of an elaborate recruitment process to get me into the CIA

--- PAGE BREAK ---38
after I retired from the army.

But I went to work for Senator Strom Thurmond on the Foreign Relations Committee
and then Senator Richard Russell on the Warren Commission instead.

Our collective experience dodging the CIA and the KGB only meant that when General Trudeau wanted the
CIA kept out of our deliberations at all cost, it was because he knew that everything we discussed would be a
topic of conversation at the KGB within twenty four hours, faster if it were serious enough for the KGB to get their
counterparts in the CIA to throw a monkey wrench into things.

How do I know all this?

The same way I knew how the KGB stayed one step ahead of us during the Korean
War and were able to advise their friends, the North Koreans, how to hold POWs back during the exchange.

We
had leaks inside the Kremlin just like they had leaks inside the White House.

What General Trudeau and I knew in
Army R&D, our counterparts in the navy and air force also believed.

The CIA was the enemy.

You trust no one.

So
when it became clear to the general even before 1961 that no one remembered what the army had
appropriated at Roswell, whatever we had was ours to develop according to our own strategy.

But we had to do
it so as not to allow the CIA, and ultimately our government's enemies, to appropriate it from us.

So when General
Trudeau said we have to run radio silent on the Roswell package, I knew exactly what he was talking about.

Logic, and clearly not my military genius, dictated the obvious course.

If nobody knows what you have, don't
announce it.

But if you think you can make something out of what you have, make it.

Use any resources at your
disposal, but don't say anything to anyone about what you're doing.

The only people in the room when we came
up with our plan were the general and myself, and he promised, "I won't say anything if you don't, Phil.

"
"There's nobody in here but us brooms, General, " I answered.

So we began to devise a strategy."
"There's nobody in here but us brooms, General, " I answered.

So we began to devise a strategy.

"Hypothetically, Phil, " Trudeau laid the question out.

"What's the best way to exploit what we have without
anybody knowing we're doing anything special?"
"Simple, General, " I answered.

"We don't do anything special.

"
"You have a plan?" he asked.

"More of an idea than a plan, " I began.

"But it starts like this.

It's what you asked : If we don't want anybody to
think we're doing anything out of the ordinary, we don't do anything out of the ordinary.

When General Twining
made his original recommendations to President Truman and the army, he didn't suggest they do anything with
this nut file other than what they ordinarily do.

Business as usual?

That's how this whole secret group operated.

Nobody did anything special.

What they did was organize according to a business plan even though the
operation was something that hadn't been done before.

That's the camouflage: don't change a thing but use
your same procedures to handle this alien technology.

"
"So how do you recommend we operate?" he asked.

I think he already figured out what I was saying but
wanted me to spell it out so we could start moving my nut file out of the Pentagon and out of the encroaching
shadow of the CIA.

"We start the same way this desk has always started : with reports, "I said.

"I'll write up reports on the
alien technology just like it's an intelligence report on any piece of foreign technology.

What I see, what I think
the potential may be, where we might be able to develop, what company we should take it to, and what kind
of contract we should draw up.

"
"Where will you start?" the general asked.

"I'll line up everything in the nut file, " I began.

"Everything from what's obvious to what I can't make heads or
tails out of.

And I'll go to scientists with clearance who we can trust, Oberth and von Braun, for advice.

"
"I see what you mean, " Trudeau acknowledged.

"Sure.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"
"I see what you mean, " Trudeau acknowledged. "Sure. We'll lineup our defense contractors, too. See which
ones have ongoing development contracts that allow us to feed your development projects right into them. "
"Exactly. That way the existing defense contract becomes the cover for what we're developing, " I said. "Nothing is ever out of the ordinary because we're never starting up anything that hasn't already been started up
in a previous contract. "
"It's just like a big mix and match, " Trudeau described it. "Only what we're doing, General, is mixing technology we're developing in with technology not of this earth, " I
said. "And we'll let the companies we're contracting with apply for the patents themselves. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Of course, " Trudeau realized.

"If they own the patent we will have completely reverse-engineered the
technology.

"
"Yes, sir, that's right.

Nobody will ever know.

We won't even tell the companies we're working with where this
technology comes from.

As far as the world will know the history of the patent is the history of the invention.

"
"It's the perfect cover, Phil, " the general said.

"Where will you start?"
"I'll write up my first analysis and recommendation tonight, " I promised.

"There's not a moment to lose.

"
"The photographs in my file, " I began my report that night over the autopsy reports, which I attached,  show a
being of about 4 feet tall.

The body seemed decomposed and the photos themselves aren't of much use
except to the curious.

It's the medical reports that are of interest.

The organs, bones, and skin composition are
different from ours.

The being's heart and lungs are bigger than a human's.

The bones are thinner but seem
stronger as if the atoms are aligned differently for a greater tensile strength.

The skin also shows a different
atomic alignment in a way that appears the skin is supposed to protect the vital organs from cosmic ray or
wave action or gravitational forces that we don't yet understand.

The overall medical report suggests that the
medical examiners are more surprised at the similarities between the being found in the spacecraft (note: NSC
reports refer to this creature as an Extraterrestrial Biological Entity [EBE]) and human beings than they are at the
differences, especially the brain which is bigger in the EBE but not at all unlike ours.

I wrote on into the first of many nights that year, drafting rough notes that I would later type into formal reports
that no one would ever see except General Trudeau, reaching conclusions that seemed more science fiction
than real.The overall medical report suggests that the
medical examiners are more surprised at the similarities between the being found in the spacecraft (note: NSC
reports refer to this creature as an Extraterrestrial Biological Entity [EBE]) and human beings than they are at the
differences, especially the brain which is bigger in the EBE but not at all unlike ours.

I wrote on into the first of many nights that year, drafting rough notes that I would later type into formal reports
that no one would ever see except General Trudeau, reaching conclusions that seemed more science fiction
than real.

I was most happy not because I was finally working on these files but, oddly enough, because when I
sat down to write, I believed these reports would never see the light of day.

In the harsh reality of the everyday
world, they sound, even now as I remember them, fantastic.

Even more fantastic, I remember, were the startling
conclusions I allowed myself to come to.

Was this really I writing, or was it somebody else?

Where did these ideas
come from?

If we consider similar biological factors that affect human beings, like long distance runners whose hearts and
lungs are larger than average, hill and mountain dwellers whose lung capacity is greater than those who live
closer to sea level, and even natural athletes whose long striated muscle alignment is different from those who
are not athletes, can we not assume that the EBEs who have fallen into our possession represent the end process
of genetic engineering designed to adapt them to long space voyages within an electromagnetic wave
environment at speeds which create the physical conditions described by Einstein's General Theory of Relativity?

(Note for the record: Dr.

Hermann Oberth suggests we consider the Roswell craft from the New Mexico desert not
a spacecraft but a time machine.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Note for the record: Dr. Hermann Oberth suggests we consider the Roswell craft from the New Mexico desert not
a spacecraft but a time machine. His technical report on propulsion will follow.)
CHAPTER 7
The EBE
Therefore, perhaps we should consider the EBEs as described in the medical autopsy reports humanoid robots
rather then life forms, specifically engineered for long distance travel through space or time. A hot Washington summer morning had already settled over the Potomac like a wet towel on the day I
finished the first of my reports for General Trudeau. And what a report it was. It set the tone for all of the other
reports and recommendations I was to make for the general over the next two years. It began with the biggest
find we had: the alien extraterrestrial itself. Had I not read the medical examiner's report of the alien from Walter Reed with my own eyes and reviewed
the 1947 army photographs and sketches, I would have called any description of this creature pure science
fiction; that is, had I not seen either this or its twin suspended in a transparent crypt at Fort Riley. But here it was
again, just a yellowing sheaf of papers and a few cracked glossy prints in a brown folder sitting among scores of
odds and ends, bits of debris, and strange devices in my nut file. 39

--- PAGE BREAK ---40
Even stranger to me than the medical examiner's report was my reaction: What could we exploit from this
entity?

I wrote the general that "whether we found an 'extraterrestrial biological entity' is not as important in the
R&D arena as are the ways we can develop what we learn from it so that man can travel in space.

" This quickly
became the overriding concern with all of the Roswell artifacts and the general format for all of my reports.

Once
I swallowed back the "oh wow" aspect to all of this life altering information - and sometimes it took a very big
swallow - I was still left with the job of sorting out what looked promising for R&D to develop from what seemed
beyond our realistic grasp for the present.

I began with the EBE.

The medical report and supporting photographs in front of me suggested that the creature was remarkably
well adapted for long distance space travel.

For example, biological time, the Walter Reed medical examiners
hypothesized, must have passed very slowly for the entity because it possessed a very slow metabolism,
evidenced, they said, by the enormous capacities of the huge heart and lungs.

The physiology of this thing
indicated that this was not a creature whose body had to work hard to sustain it.

A larger heart, my ME's report
read, meant that it took fewer beats than an average human heart to drive the thin, milky, almost lymphatic like
fluid through a limited, more primitive looking, and apparently reduced capacity circulatory system.

As a result,
the biological clock beat more slowly than a human's and probably allowed the creature to travel great
distances in a shorter biological time than humans.

The heart was very decomposed by the time the Walter Reed pathologists got their hands on it.

It seemed to
them that our atmosphere was quite toxic to the creature's organs.The heart was very decomposed by the time the Walter Reed pathologists got their hands on it.

It seemed to
them that our atmosphere was quite toxic to the creature's organs.

Given the time that passed between the
crash of the vehicle and the creature's arrival at Walter Reed, it decomposed all of the organs far more rapidly
than it would have decomposed human organs.

This fact particularly impressed me because I had seen one of
these things, if not the very one described in the report, suspended in a gel-like substance at Fort Riley.

So
whatever exposure it must have had was very minimal by human standards because the medical personnel at
the 509th's Walker Field got it into a liquid preservation state very quickly.

Nevertheless, the Walter Reed
pathologists were unable to determine with any certainty the structure of the creature's heart except to guess
that because it functioned as a passive blood storage facility as well as a pumping muscle that it didn't work the
same way as did a four chambered human heart.

They said the alien heart seemed to have had internal
diaphragm like muscles that worked less hard than human heart muscle did because the creatures were meant
to survive within a reduced gravity as we understand gravity.

As camels store water, so did this creature store whatever atmosphere it breathed in the large capacity of its
lungs.

The lungs functioned in ways similar to a camel's humps or to our scuba tanks and released atmosphere
very slowly into the creature's system.

Because of the large heart and the storage function we believed it had, we
also surmised that it took far less breathable atmosphere to sustain the creature, thereby reducing the need for
carrying large volumes of atmosphere along on the voyage.

Perhaps the aircraft had a means of recirculating its
atmosphere, recycling spent or waste air back into the craft.Because of the large heart and the storage function we believed it had, we
also surmised that it took far less breathable atmosphere to sustain the creature, thereby reducing the need for
carrying large volumes of atmosphere along on the voyage.

Perhaps the aircraft had a means of recirculating its
atmosphere, recycling spent or waste air back into the craft.

Moreover, because the creatures were only four or
to feet tall, the large lungs occupied a far greater percentage of the chest cavity than human lungs did, further
impressing the pathologists who examined the creatures' remains.

This also indicated to us that perhaps we were
dealing with an entity specifically engineered for long distance travel.

If we believed the heart and lungs seemed bioengineered for long distance travel so, too, was the creature's
skeletal tissue.

Although it was in a state of advanced decomposition, the creature's bones looked to the army
medical examiners to be fibrous, actually thinner than comparable human bones such as the ribs, sternum,
clavicle, and pelvis.

Pathologists speculated that the bones were more flexible than human bones and had a
resiliency that might be related to the function of shock absorbers.

More brittle human bones might more easily
shatter under the stresses these alien entities must have been routinely subjected to.

However, with a flexible
skeletal frame, these entities appeared well suited for potential shocks and physical traumas of extreme forces
and could withstand the fractures that would cripple human space travelers in a similar environment.

The military recovery team at the Roswell site had reported that the two creatures still alive after the crash had
difficulty breathing our atmosphere.

Whether that was because they were suddenly tossed out of their craft,
unprotected, into our gravity envelope or whether our atmosphere itself was toxic to them, we don't know.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The military recovery team at the Roswell site had reported that the two creatures still alive after the crash had
difficulty breathing our atmosphere. Whether that was because they were suddenly tossed out of their craft,
unprotected, into our gravity envelope or whether our atmosphere itself was toxic to them, we don't know. We
also don't know whether the one creature who died very shortly after the crash was struggling to breathe
because he was fatally wounded by gunshots or because of other reasons. Military witnesses recounted different
stories about the creature that survived and tried to run. Some said it was struggling to breathe from the moment
the military had secured the area; others said that it was gasping only after it had been shot by one of the
sentries. My guess was that it was the alien's sudden exposure to the earth's strong gravity that caused the
creature to panic at first. That could have been one reason his breathing seemed labored. Then, after he fled
and was shot, he was struggling to breathe because of his wounds. The medical examiner's report mentioned
nothing about toxic gases or the kind of atmosphere he believed the creatures naturally breathed. If the Roswell craft were a scout or surveillance ship, as the military analysts back at Wright believed, then it
was also more than likely that the creatures never intended to exit the craft. This was a craft equipped with a
device that was capable of penetrating our nighttime or utilizing the temperature differentials of different objects

--- PAGE BREAK ---41
to create a visual image, enabling the occupants to navigate and observe in darkness.

And because it could
elude our interceptors and appear and disappear on our radar screens at will, we believed that the occupants
simply stayed inside and observed rather than roamed about.

Perhaps other types of craft deployed from this
same culture were equipped to land and carry out missions and therefore had breathing and antigravity
apparatus on board for its crew that permitted them to exit the craft without suffering any consequences.

The
medical examiner didn't speculate on this.

What did intrigue those who inspected the aircraft once it was shipped to Wright Field was the complete
absence of any food preparation facilities.

Nor were there any stored foodstuffs on board.

At a time when space
travel was a science fiction writer's fantasy, military analysts were already at work formulating ideas for how just
such a technology could be practically implemented.

It was not for travel to other planets, but for navigation
around the earth because that's the technology that military planners believed the Germans were developing as
an extension of their V2 rocket program.

If you're going to put airmen into earth orbit, how do you process their
waste products, provide adequate oxygen, and sustain them during prolonged periods?

Clearly, after you've
developed a launch vehicle with enough thrust to put a craft into earth orbit, keeping it there long enough for it
to accomplish a mission is the next problem to tackle.

The Roswell craft seemed to have tackled it because
somehow it got here from somewhere else.

But there was no indication of how such household problems as food
preparation and the disposal of waste were solved.

There was much speculation from the different medical analysts about what these beings were composed of
and what could have sustained them.But there was no indication of how such household problems as food
preparation and the disposal of waste were solved.

There was much speculation from the different medical analysts about what these beings were composed of
and what could have sustained them.

First of all, doctors were more tantalized by the similarities the creatures
shared with us than they were concerned about the differences.

Rather than hideous-looking insects or the
reptilian man-eaters that attacked Earth in War of the Worlds, these beings looked like little versions of us, only
different.

It was eerie.

While doctors couldn't figure out how the entities' essential body chemistry worked, they determined that they
contained no new basic elements.

However, the reports that I had suggested new combinations of organic
compounds that required much more evaluation before doctors could form any opinions.

Of specific interest was
the fluid that served as blood but also seemed to regulate bodily functions in much the same way glandular
secretions do for the human body.

In these biological entities, the blood system and lymphatic systems seem to
have been combined.

And if an exchange of nutrients and waste occurred within their systems, that exchange
could have only taken place through the creature's skin or the outer protective covering they wore because
there were no digestive or waste systems.

The medical report revealed that the creatures were enclosed within a one piece protective covering like a
jumpsuit or outer skin in which the atoms were aligned so as to provide a great tensile strength and flexibility.

One
examiner wrote that it reminded him of a spider's web, which appears very fragile but is, in fact, very strong.

The
unique qualities of a spiderweb result from the alignment of fibers that provide great tenacity because they're
able to stretch under great pressure, yet display a resiliency that allows them to snap back into shape even after
the shock of an impact.One
examiner wrote that it reminded him of a spider's web, which appears very fragile but is, in fact, very strong.

The
unique qualities of a spiderweb result from the alignment of fibers that provide great tenacity because they're
able to stretch under great pressure, yet display a resiliency that allows them to snap back into shape even after
the shock of an impact.

Similarly, the creature's spacesuit or outer skin appeared to be stretched around it as if it
were literally spun over the creature and seized up around it, providing a perfect skin-tight protective fit.

The
doctors had never seen anything like it before.

I think I finally understood it years later, after I had left the Pentagon and I was buying a Christmas tree.

As I
stood there in the frosty air, I watched as the young man who prepared the tree for transport inserted it, top first,
into a stubby barrel like device that automatically spun a twine mesh covering around the branches to keep
them in place for the trip home.

After I got home I had to cut through the mesh with a knife to remove the tree
and separate the branches.

This tree set up reminded me specifically of the medical report on the creature from
the Roswell crash, and I imagined that maybe the spinning process of the creature's outer garment resembled
something like this.

The lengthwise alignment of the fibers in the suit also prompted the medical analysts to suggest that the suit
might have been capable of protecting the wearer against the low energy cosmic rays that would routinely
bombard any craft during a space journey.

The interior organs of the creature seemed so fragile and oversized
that the Walter Reed medical analysts imagined that without the suit the entity would have been vulnerable to
the cumulative physical trauma from a constant energy particle bombardment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The lengthwise alignment of the fibers in the suit also prompted the medical analysts to suggest that the suit
might have been capable of protecting the wearer against the low energy cosmic rays that would routinely
bombard any craft during a space journey. The interior organs of the creature seemed so fragile and oversized
that the Walter Reed medical analysts imagined that without the suit the entity would have been vulnerable to
the cumulative physical trauma from a constant energy particle bombardment. Space travel without protection
from subatomic particle bombardment might subject the traveler to the same kind of effects he'd experience if
he were cooked in a microwave oven. The particle bombardment inside the craft, if heavy enough to constitute
a shower, would so excite and accelerate the creature's atomic structure that the resulting heat energy would
literally cook the entity up. The Walter Reed doctors were also fascinated by the nature of the creature's inner skin. It resembled, although
their preliminary reports didn't go into any chemical analysis, a thin layer of fatty tissue unlike any they'd ever seen
before. And it was completely permeable, as if it were constantly exchanging chemicals back and forth with the
combination blood/lymphatic system. Was this the way the creatures nourished themselves during their journeys
and was this how waste was processed? The very small mouths and the lack of a human digestive system
troubled the doctors at first because they didn't know how these things were sustained. But their hypothesis that

--- PAGE BREAK ---42
they processed chemicals released from their skin and maybe even recirculated waste chemicals would have
explained the lack of any food preparation or waste processing facilities on the craft.

I speculated, however, that
they didn't require food or facilities for waste disposal because they weren't actual life forms, only a kind of robot
or android.

Another explanation, of course, suggested by the engineers at Wright Field, is that there would have been no
need for food preparation facilities had this craft been only a small scout ship that didn't venture far from a larger
craft.

The creatures' low metabolism meant that they could survive extended periods away from the main craft
by subsisting on some form of military prepackaged foods until they returned to base.

Neither the Wright Field
engineers nor the Walter Reed medical examiners had an explanation for the lack of waste disposal on board
the craft, nor could they explain how the creatures' waste was processed.

Maybe I was speculating too far about
robots or androids when I was writing my report for General Trudeau, but I kept thinking, also, that the skin analysis
that I was reading sounded more akin to the skin of a houseplant than the skin of a human being.

That, too, could
have been another explanation for the lack of food or waste facilities.

Much of the attention during the preliminary and later autopsies of the creatures focused on the size, nature,
and anatomy of their brains.

Much credence also was given to the first hand descriptions of on scene witnesses
who said they received impressions from the dying creature that it was suffering and in great pain.

No one heard
the creature make any sounds, so any impressions, Army Intelligence personnel assumed, would have to have
been created through some type of empathic projection or outright mental telepathy.Much credence also was given to the first hand descriptions of on scene witnesses
who said they received impressions from the dying creature that it was suffering and in great pain.

No one heard
the creature make any sounds, so any impressions, Army Intelligence personnel assumed, would have to have
been created through some type of empathic projection or outright mental telepathy.

But witnesses said they
heard no "words" in their mind, only the resonance of a shared or projected impression much simpler than a
sentence but far more complex because they were able to share with the creature a sense not only of suffering
but of profound sadness, as if it were in mourning for the others who perished on board the craft.

These witness
reports intrigued me more than any other information we took from the crash site.

The medical examiners believed that the alien brain, way oversized in comparison with the human brain and
in proportion to the creature's tiny stature, had four distinct sections.

The creatures were dead and the brains had
begun to decompose by the time they were removed from the soft spongy skulls that felt to the doctors more like
palatal cartilage than the hard bone of a human cranium.

Even had the creatures been alive when they were
examined, 1947 medical technology didn't have ultrasound scanning or the high resonance tomography of
today's radiology labs.

Accordingly, there was no way for the doctors to evaluate the nature of the cranial lobes,
or "spheres, " as they called them in the report.

Thus, despite the rampant speculation about the nature of the
creatures' brains - thought projection, psychokinetic powers, and the like - no hard evidence existed of anything,
and the reports were very light on real scientific data.

Where the possibility of some evidence about the workings of the
alien brains did exist was in what I referred to in my reports as the"headbands".Thus, despite the rampant speculation about the nature of the
creatures' brains - thought projection, psychokinetic powers, and the like - no hard evidence existed of anything,
and the reports were very light on real scientific data.

Where the possibility of some evidence about the workings of the
alien brains did exist was in what I referred to in my reports as the"headbands".

Among the artifacts we
retrieved were devices that looked something like headbands but had neither adornment nor decoration of any
kind.

Embedded by some very advanced kind of vulcanizing process into a form of flexible plastic were what we
now know to have been electrical conductors or sensors, similar to the conductors on an electroencephalograph
or polygraph.

This band was fitted around the part of the alien cranium just above the ears where the skull began
to expand to accommodate the large brain.

At the time, the field reports from the crash and the subsequent
analysis at Wright Field indicated that the engineers at the Air Materiel Command thought these might be
communication devices, like the throat mikes our pilots wore during World War II.

But, as I would find out when I
evaluated the device and sent it into the market for reverse-engineering, this was a throat mike only in a way that
a primitive stylus can be considered the forerunner of the color laser-imaging printer.

Suffice it to say that in the few hours the material was at Walker Field in Roswell, more than one officer at the
509th gingerly slipped this thing over his head and tried to figure out what it did.

At first it did nothing.

There were
no buttons, no switches, no wires, nothing that could even be considered to have been a control panel.

So no
one knew how to turn it on or off.

Moreover, the band was not really adjustable, though it had enough elasticity
to have been one size fits all for the creatures whose skulls were large enough to accommodate them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So no
one knew how to turn it on or off. Moreover, the band was not really adjustable, though it had enough elasticity
to have been one size fits all for the creatures whose skulls were large enough to accommodate them. However,
the reports I read stated, the few officers whose heads were just large enough to have made contact with the full
array of conductors got the shocks of their lives. In their descriptions of the headband, these officers reported
everything from a low tingling sensation inside their heads to a searing headache and a brief array of either
dancing or exploding colors on the insides of their eyelids as they rotated the device around their head and
brought the sensors into contact with different parts of their skull. These eyewitness reports suggested to me that the sensors stimulated different parts of the brain while at the
same time exchanged information with the brain. Again, using the analogy of an EEC, these devices were a very
sophisticated mechanism for translating the electrical impulses inside the creatures' brains into specific
commands. Perhaps these headband devices comprised the pilot interface of the ship's navigational and
propulsion system combined with a long range communications device. At first I didn't know, but it was only when
we began development of the long brain wave research project toward the end of my tenure at the Pentagon
that I realized just what we had

--- PAGE BREAK ---43
and how it might be developed.

It took a long time to harvest this technology, but fifty years after Roswell,
versions of these devices eventually became a component of the navigational control system for some of the
army's most sophisticated helicopters and will soon be on the American consumer electronics market as user
input devices for personal computer games.

The first Army Air Force analysts and engineers both at the 509th and at Wright Field were also bedeviled by
the lack of any traditional controls and propulsion system in the crashed vehicle.

Looking at their reports and the
artifacts from the perspective of 1961, however, I imagined that the keys to understanding what made the craft
go and directed its flight lay not only within the craft itself but in the relationship between the pilots and the craft.

If we hypothesized a brainwave guidance system that was as specific to the pilots' electronic signature as it was
to the spacecraft's, then we were looking at an entirely revolutionary concept of guided flight in which the pilot
was the system.

Imagine transportation devices in which the key to the ignition is a digitized code derived from
your electroencephalographic signature and is read automatically upon your donning some sort of sensorized
headband.

That's the way I believed the spacecraft was navigated, by direct interaction between the electronic
waves generated within the minds of the pilots and the craft's directional controls.

The electronic brain signals
were interpreted and transmitted by the headband devices, which served as interfaces.

I never managed to obtain a copy of the Bethesda autopsy of the alien body the navy received from
General Twining.

I only had the army report.

The remaining bodies were kept in storage at Wright Field initially.

Then they were split up among the services.The remaining bodies were kept in storage at Wright Field initially.

Then they were split up among the services.

When the air force became a separate branch of the service, the
remaining bodies, stored at Wright, along with the spacecraft, were sent to Norton Air Force Base in California,
where the air force began experiments to replicate the technology of the vehicle.

This made sense.

The air force
cared about the flight capabilities of the craft and how to build defenses against it.

Experiments were carried out at Norton and ultimately at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada, at the famous
Groom Lake site where the
Stealth technology was developed.

The army cared only for the weapons systems aboard the craft and how
they could be re-engineered for our own use.

The original Roswell spacecraft remained at Norton, however,
where the air force and CIA maintained a kind of alien technology museum, the final resting place of the Roswell
spacecraft.

But experiments in replicated alien craft continued to be carried on through the years as engineers
tried to adapt the propulsion and navigation systems to our level of technology.

This continues to this very day
almost in plain sight for people with security clearance who are taken to where the vehicles are kept.

Over the
years, the replicated vehicles have become an ongoing, inner circle saga among top ranking military officers
and members of the government, especially the favored senators and members of the House who vote along
military lines.

Those who are shown the secrets are immediately bound by national secrecy legislation and cannot
reveal what they saw.

Thus, the official camouflage is maintained despite the large number of people who really
know the truth.

I admit I've never seen the craft at Norton with my own eyes, but enough reports passed across
my desk during my years at Foreign Technology so that I knew what the secret was and how it was maintained.Thus, the official camouflage is maintained despite the large number of people who really
know the truth.

I admit I've never seen the craft at Norton with my own eyes, but enough reports passed across
my desk during my years at Foreign Technology so that I knew what the secret was and how it was maintained.

There were no conventional technological explanations for the way the Roswell craft's propulsion system
operated.

There were no atomic engines, no rockets, no jets, nor any propeller driven form of thrust.

Those of us in
R&D from all three branches of the service tried for years to adapt the craft's drive system to our own technology,
but, through the 1960s and 1970s, fell short of getting it operational.

The craft was able to displace gravity through
the propagation of magnetic wave, controlled by shifting the magnetic poles around the craft so as to control,
or vector, not a propulsion system but the repulsion force of like charges.

Once they realized this, engineers at our
country's primary defense contractors raced among themselves to figure out how the craft could retain its
electric capacity and how the pilots who navigated it could live within the energy field of a wave.

At issue was
not only a great discovery, but the nuts-and-bolts chance to land multibillion dollar development contracts for a
whole generation of military air and undersea craft.

The initial revelations into the nature of the spacecraft and its pilot interface came very quickly during the first
few years of testing at Norton.

The air force discovered that the entire vehicle functioned just like a giant
capacitor.

In other words, the craft itself stored the energy necessary to propagate the magnetic wave that
elevated it, allowed it to achieve escape velocity from the earth's gravity, and enabled it to achieve speeds of
over seven thousand miles per hour.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The air force discovered that the entire vehicle functioned just like a giant
capacitor. In other words, the craft itself stored the energy necessary to propagate the magnetic wave that
elevated it, allowed it to achieve escape velocity from the earth's gravity, and enabled it to achieve speeds of
over seven thousand miles per hour. The pilots weren't affected by the tremendous g-forces that build up in the
acceleration of conventional aircraft because to aliens inside, it was as if gravity was being folded around the
outside of the wave that enveloped the craft. Maybe it was like traveling inside the eye of a hurricane. But how
did the pilots interface with the wave form they were generating? I reported to General Trudeau that the secret to this system could be found in the single-piece skin-tight
coveralls spun around the creatures. The lengthwise atomic alignment of the strange fabric was a clue to me that
somehow the pilots became part of the electrical storage and generation of the craft itself. They didn't just pilot
or navigate the vehicle; they became part of the electrical circuitry of the vehicle, vectoring it in a way similar to
the way you order a voluntary muscle to move. The vehicle was simply an extension of their own bodies because
it was tied into their neurological systems in ways that even today we are just beginning to utilize.

--- PAGE BREAK ---44
So the creatures were able to survive extended periods living inside a high energy wave by becoming the
primary circuit in the control of the wave.

They were protected by their suits, which enclosed them head to feet,
but their suits enabled them to become one with the vehicle, literally part of the wave.

In 1947 this was a
technology so new to us that it was as frightening as it was frustrating.

If we could only develop the power source
necessary to generate a consistently well defined magnetic wave around a vehicle, we could harness a
technology which would have surpassed all forms of rocket and jet propulsion.

It's a process we're still trying to
master today, fifty years after the craft fell into our possession.

I pushed myself through the night to complete the report for the general.

At least I wanted him to see that our
strategy held out the probability that even in a basic evaluation of the material were covered, the seeds were
there for specific products we could develop.

I wanted to start the entire process by writing him a background
report about the nature of the beings we'd autopsied and what we could understand of the technology from an
analysis of their spacecraft.

By the time I finished, it was already just before sun up, and I looked like hell.

This was the day I was going to
drop my report on the general's desk, first thing.

I'd snap right to attention in front of him and say, "Here's that
report you were waiting for, General, " confident it contained more than he ever thought it would because the
subject was that new and complicated.

But I wanted to be clean shaven and in a clean, crisp shirt.

That's what I
wanted.

I didn't even need any sleep because my optimism and confidence at that moment were more
powerful than anything a few hours of sleep could give me.

I knew I was onto something here, something that
could change the world.I didn't even need any sleep because my optimism and confidence at that moment were more
powerful than anything a few hours of sleep could give me.

I knew I was onto something here, something that
could change the world.

Here in the basement of the Pentagon, lying close to dormancy for over a decade,
were secrets my predecessors had just begun to discover before they were stopped.

Maybe it had been the
Korean War, maybe the CIA or other intelligence agencies had cast a pall over R&D's operation, but those days
were over now.

I was at the Foreign Technology desk and the responsibility for this material was mine, just like
General Twining had said it should be fourteen years ago.

In those drawers I had found the puzzle pieces for a whole new age of technology.

Things that were only
twinkles in the minds of engineers and scientists were right here in front of me as hard, cold artifacts of an
advanced culture.

Craft that navigated by brain waves and floated on a wave of electromagnetic energy,
creatures who look through devices that helped them turn night into day, and beams of light so narrow and
focused you couldn't see them until they bounced off an object far away.

For years scientists had thought about what it would have been like to travel in space, especially since the
Russians first put up their Sputnik.

Plans for a military operated moon base had been developed by the army in
the 1950s under the leadership of Gen.

Arthur Trudeau at R&D but were ultimately shelved because of the
formation of NASA.

Those plans had tried to confront the issues of space travel for prolonged periods of time and
adjusting to a low gravity state on the moon.

But here, right in front of us, was the evidence of how an alien
culture had adapted itself to long range space travel, different gravities, and the exposure to energy particles
and waves crashing into a spacecraft by the billions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those plans had tried to confront the issues of space travel for prolonged periods of time and
adjusting to a low gravity state on the moon. But here, right in front of us, was the evidence of how an alien
culture had adapted itself to long range space travel, different gravities, and the exposure to energy particles
and waves crashing into a spacecraft by the billions. All we had to do was marshal the vast array of resources in
the military and industry at R&D's disposal and harvest that technology. It was all laid out for us, if we knew how to
use it. This was the beginning and I was right there on the cusp of it. So in the first few minutes of glimmering light just on the edge of the horizon, a promise of the day to come, I
took off for home, for a shower, a shave, a pot of coffee, and the crispest new uniform I could find. I was driving
east into the dawn of a brand new age, my report right alongside me in my briefcase on the front seat. There
would be other reports and the details of long term complicated projects to confront me in the future, I knew, but
this was the first, the foundation, the beam of light into a hidden past and an uncertain future. But it was a light,
and that's what was important. No time for sleep now. There was too much to do.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER 8
The Project Gets Under Way
"THIS IS A HELLUVA REPORT, PHIL, " GENERAL TRUDEAU SAID,
Looking up from the paper clipped sheaf of typewritten sheets I'd handed him first thing that morning.

I'd
been waiting at my desk since before six when I got back to the Pentagon, taking looks outside the building
every once in a while as the bright orange reflection of the rising sun that exploded in a distant window and
looked as if it had caught fire.

"What'd you do, stay up all night writing it?"
"I put in some work after hours, " I said.

"I don't want to spend too much time in the nut file when people are
supposed to be working.

"
The general laughed as he fingered through the paperwork, but you could see he was impressed.

As much as
I wanted to denigrate the Roswell file in front of him as a bunch of drawers full of stuff that people would put me
away for, we both knew that it contained much of the future of our R&D.

Military research and development agencies were under growing pressure from the Congress to put some
success points on the scoreboard or get out of the rocket launching business for good.

Early failures to lift off the
navy's WAC Corporal and the army Redstone had made laughing stocks out of the American rocket program
while the Soviets were showing off their success like basketball players on fancy lay-ups right across the court.

The
army's Project Horizon moon base project was sitting in its own file cabinet gathering dust.

And there was also a
growing concern among the military that we'd be pushed into taking over the failed French mission in Indochina
to keep the Vietcong, Pathet Lao, and Khmer Rouge from making the whole area Communist.

It was a war we
could not win but that would drain our resources from the real battle front in Eastern Europe.

So, even more than scoring some field goals, General Trudeau needed projects going into development to
keep the civilian agencies from cutting us back and diverting our resources.It was a war we
could not win but that would drain our resources from the real battle front in Eastern Europe.

So, even more than scoring some field goals, General Trudeau needed projects going into development to
keep the civilian agencies from cutting us back and diverting our resources.

Now my boss held my first report in
his hands and knew that our strategic plan had some rational grounding.

He pushed for a tactical plan.

"We know what we want to do, " he said.

"Now, how do we do it?"
"I've been thinking about that, too, General, " I said.

"And here's how I'd like to start.

"
I explained that I wanted to compile a list of all our technical human resources, like the rocket scientists from
Germany then still working at Alamogordo and White Sands.

I'd met more than my share of our rocket fuel and
guidance specialists in the guided missile program during my years at Red Canyon in command of the Nike
battalion.

But we were working with theoretical scientists as well, men with experience who could combine the
cold precision of an engineer with the speculative vision of a free thinker.

These were the people I wanted to
assemble into a brain trust, people I could talk to about strange artifacts and devices that had no basis in earthly
reality.

They were the scientists who could tell me what the potential was in items like wafer shaped plywood thin
pieces of silicon with mysterious silver etchings on them.

"And once you have this brain trust, " General Trudeau asked, "then what?"
''Match them up with technologies, " I said.

I admitted that we were flying blind on much of the material that
we had.

We couldn't go out to the general scientific and academic communities to ask them what we had
because we would very quickly lose control of our own secrets.

Besides, a lot of it had to do with weaponry, and
there were very strict rules on what we could and could not disclose without the appropriate clearances.

But our
brain trust would be invaluable.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Besides, a lot of it had to do with weaponry, and
there were very strict rules on what we could and could not disclose without the appropriate clearances. But our
brain trust would be invaluable. And, with the proper orientation and security checks, they would keep our
secrets, too, just as they had since the end of World War II. "Which of the scientists do you have in mind?" Trudeau asked, taking out the little black leather covered
notepad he kept in his inside pocket. "I was thinking of Robert Sarbacher, " I said. "Wernher vonBraun, of course. Hans Kohler. Hermann Oberth. John
von Neumann. "
"How much do they know about Roswell?" Trudeau wanted to know. If they'd been consulted on the Roswell
material back in1947, as I knew Wernher von Braun had been by General Twining, then we weren't revealing any
secrets. If they had never been informed about the crash, then we were going out on a limb by sharing
information that was still classified above top secret. General Trudeau needed to know how dangerous it was to
bring these scientists into the loop. But I assured him that all of them knew something about Roswell because of
their connection with the Research and Development Board. During the Eisenhower administration information
about the classified research and data collection projects into extraterrestrials was routinely filtered to the Office
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---46
of Research and Development because the head of the Research and Development Board had been one of
the original members of the group.

"I was at the White House when Sarbacher was on the board, General, " I told my boss.

"So I can be pretty sure
he was in the know.

And Hermann Oberth, " I admitted to Trudeau.

"He already told me that he believed that the
objects we saw popping up on our radar screens at Red Canyon and then disappearing as if they were never
there were probably the same kinds of extraterrestrial aircraft that we picked up at Roswell.

So he knew, but I
don't know how.

"
"Well, that's good news, at least, " the general said.

"I'd rather not be the one authorizing the release of
classified information to anyone who didn't know it before hand.

And I don't want to put you in the position, Phil,
of having to explain to any higher ups why you decided to release top secret information to people without
clearances, even in the interest of national security.

"
I appreciated that, but for our plan to work, we needed the technical and scientific expertise people like von
Braun, Oberth, and Sarbacher could bring to any reverse engineering and product development strategies.

"How will you approach them?" Trudeau asked.

"We'll have to begin by taking an inventory of all of the defense industry contracts we're currently managing,
General, " I said.

"Lineup the contracts and systems we're developing with the materials in the nut file to see
where they fit in.

Then bring in the scientists to consult on making sure we know what we think we have, that is, if
they can figure out what we have.

"
"Let's go through a potential product list first, " the general suggested.

"Then see where our contracts line up
and where the scientists can help.

And you know what happens then, " Trudeau asked.

I wasn't sure where he was going to take this.And you know what happens then, " Trudeau asked.

I wasn't sure where he was going to take this.

"We're sticking you back in civilian clothes and sending you on the road to visit our friends in these defense
contractors.

"
"I don't even get to keep my battle ribbons, " I joked.

"I don't want anyone to know, " General Trudeau explained, "that some lieutenant colonel on the CIA's Most
Wanted list is traveling to our biggest defense contractors with a mysterious briefcase full of nobody knows what.

You might as well wear a sign, " he laughed.

"We have to get to work on that list.

"
That same afternoon I went back to my report on the EBE and his craft and began to list the riddles it
contained and the opportunities for the discovery of product it presented to us.

The entire event was like an
enigma to us because every conventional requirement one would expect to have found at the crash site, in the
craft, or even in the EBEs themselves was missing.

Where was the engine or the power supply for the craft?

It had neither jet engines nor propellers.

It had no
rocket propulsion like the V2 missiles, nor did it carry any fuel.

At Norton Air Force Base, where the craft eventually
was hangared, engineers marveled at the thin amalgam of the most refined copper and purest silver they had
ever seen that covered the ship's underside.

The metal was remarkable for its conductivity, as if the entire craft
was an electrical circuit offering no resistance to the flow of current.

Yet it was something our military engineers
could not replicate.

By the 1950s at Norton Air Force Base, at least two prototypes of the alien craft had been
fabricated, but neither had the power source of the craft that had crashed.

In its stead were crude attempts at
nuclear fission generators, but they were ineffective and dangerous.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By the 1950s at Norton Air Force Base, at least two prototypes of the alien craft had been
fabricated, but neither had the power source of the craft that had crashed. In its stead were crude attempts at
nuclear fission generators, but they were ineffective and dangerous. Even the portable nuclear generators that
would power the primitive Soviet and American satellites in the 1960s were insufficient for the needs of the
replicated spacecraft. So the question remained, what powered the Roswell spacecraft? I reviewed all of my discoveries in a checklist:
• The crescent shaped space vehicle also had no traditional navigational controls as we understood them. There were no control sticks, wheels, throttles, pedals, cables, flaps, or rudders. How did the creatures pilot this
ship and how did they control the speed, accelerating from a near stationary hover above a given spot, like a
helicopter, to speeds in excess of seven thousand miles per hour in a matter of seconds? • What protected the creatures from the tremendous g-forces they would have had to have pulled in any
conventional aircraft? Our own pilots in World War II had to wear special devices as they pulled up out of dives
that kept the oxygen from flowing out of their brains and causing them to blackout. But we found nothing in the
flight suits of the creatures that indicated that they faced the same problem. Yet their craft should have pulled

--- PAGE BREAK ---47
ten times the g-forces our own pilots did, so we couldn't figure out how they managed this.

No controls, no
protection, no power supply, no fuel: these were the riddles I listed.

Along side them I listed that:
• The craft itself was an electrical circuit.

• That the flight suits - "flight skins" is a better description - the creatures wore were made of a substance whose
atomic structure was elongated, strengthened lengthwise, so as to provide a directional flow to any current
applied to it.

The engineers who first discovered this were amazed at the pure conductivity of these skins, functionally like
the skin of the craft itself, and their obvious ability to protect the wearer while at the same time vectoring some
kind of electronic field.

Where was the physical junction of the circuit between the pilot and the ship?

Was it
turned on and off somehow by the pilot himself through a switch we didn't know about?

Alongside the riddle of the apparent absence of navigational controls I listed the sensorized headband that
so intrigued the officers at Roswell's Walker Field and fascinated me as well.

If, as we all suspected, this device
picked up the electronic signatures from the creatures' oversized brains, what did it do with them?

I believed -
and our industrial product development from the 1960s through today as the brain wave control helmets finally
came into service ultimately confirmed - that these headbands translated the brain's electronic signals into
system commands that controlled speed, direction, and elevation.

Maybe the headbands had to be calibrated
or tuned to each individual pilot, or maybe the pilots - since I believed they were genetically engineered beings
biologically manufactured especially for flight or long term exploration had to be calibrated to the headband.

Either way, the headbands were the interface between the pilot and the ship.

But that still didn't resolve the
question of the lack of cables, gears, or wires.Either way, the headbands were the interface between the pilot and the ship.

But that still didn't resolve the
question of the lack of cables, gears, or wires.

Maybe the answer lay not in the lack of structural controls but in the way the suit, the headband, the
creatures' brains, and the entire craft worked together.

In other words, when I looked at the possible function of
the entire system, the synchronicity between the brain interface in the headband, the pure conductivity of the
spacecraft, and the elongated structure of the space skins, which also acted like a circuit, I could see how
directional instructions could have been translated by the headbands into some form of current flowing through
the skins and into the series of raised deck panels where there were indentations for the creatures' hands.

The
indentations on these panels, as the Roswell field reports described them, looked like the handprints pressed into
the concrete at the old Grauman's Chinese Theater in Hollywood.

Were the directional commands a series of
electronic instructions transmitted directly from the creatures' brains along their bodies and through the panels
into the ship itself as if the ship were only an extension of the creature's body?

For that to have been the case,
something was still missing.

The engine.

Again, I settled on the idea of function over structure.

The debris and the spacecraft indicated that an engine
didn't somehow fall out of the craft when it crashed.

A conventional engine was never there in the first place.

What we found was that the craft seemed to have had the ability to store as well as conduct a vast amount of
current.

What if the craft itself were the engine, imparted with a steady current from another source that it stored
as if it were a giant capacitor?

This would be like charging the battery in an electric car and running it until the
battery was drained.

Sound far fetched?This would be like charging the battery in an electric car and running it until the
battery was drained.

Sound far fetched?

It's not much different from filling up a car with gas at the pump and
driving until the tank's dry, or fueling a plane and making sure you land before the fuel's gone.

I suspected the
Roswell craft was simply a capacitor that stored current that was controlled or vectored by the pilot and was
able to be recharged in some way or could recharge itself with some form of built in generator.

That would have explained the power supply, I noted along side the riddle of the missing engine, but what
was the means of propulsion and direction?

If there was a force that functioned the same way thrust does, it
wasn't immediately obvious how it was created and vectored.

As early as September 1947, scientists who had
gone to the Air Materiel Command at Wright Field to see the debris were speculating that the electronic
potential of the Roswell craft reminded them of the German and British antigravity experiments of the 1920s and
1930s.

General Twining was reported to have said more than once that the name of the Serbian electrical
engineer and inventor of alternating current, Nikola Tesla, kept bubbling up in the conversation because the
scientists examining the damaged craft described the way it must have converted an electromagnetic field into
an antigravity field.

And, of course, the craft itself reminded them of the German experimental fighter aircraft that
made their appearance near the end of the war but that had been in development ever since the 1930s.

Tesla and a number of other European scientists had been pioneers in the conversion of circumscribed small
area antigravity fields out of electromagnetic fields.

However, the effort to develop true antigravity aircraft never
came to fruition among conventional aircraft manufacturers because gasoline, jet, and rocket engines provided
a perfectly good weapons technology.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tesla and a number of other European scientists had been pioneers in the conversion of circumscribed small
area antigravity fields out of electromagnetic fields. However, the effort to develop true antigravity aircraft never
came to fruition among conventional aircraft manufacturers because gasoline, jet, and rocket engines provided
a perfectly good weapons technology. But the theory of electromagnetic antigravity propulsion was not
unknown even if it was not well understood and, without a power source like a small portable nuclear fission
generator, not at all feasible. But, what if the flying craft already carried enough electric potential and storage
capacity to retain its power, just like a very advanced flying battery? Then it might have all the power it needed

--- PAGE BREAK ---48
to propagate and vector a wave directionally by shifting its magnetic poles.

If the magnetic field theory
experiments carried out by engineers and electrical energy pioneers Paul Biefeld and Townsend Brown in the
1920s at the California Institute for Advanced Studies were accurately reported - and the U.S.

military as well as
scientific record keepers at the Bureau of Investigation kept very close tabs on what these engineers were doing -
then the technological theory for antigravity flight existed before World War II.

In fact, prototypes for vertical takeoff and landing disk shaped aircraft had been on the drawing boards at
the California Institute since before the war.

It was just that in the United States nobody paid them much
attention.

The Germans did develop and had flown flying disks, or so the intelligence reports read, even though
they had no impact on the outcome of the war other than stimulating a race between the United States and the
USSR to gather as much of the German technology as possible.

Thus, even though engineers had attempted to
build vertical takeoff and flying wing aircraft before and had succeeded, the Roswell spacecraft, because it was
so truly functional and outflew anything we had - as well as traveled in space - represented a practical
technological challenge to the scientists visiting the Air Materiel Command.

We knew what the EBEs did, we just
couldn't duplicate how.

My reports for Army R&D were analyses of the types of technology that we had to
develop to either challenge this spacecraft militarily with a credible defense or build one ourselves.

In my notes to General Trudeau, I reviewed for him all the technological implications that I believed were
relevant in any discussion about what could be harvested from the Roswell craft.

I also wrote up what I
understood about the magnetic field technology and how unconventional designers and engineers had drafted
prototypes for these "antigravs" earlier in the century.In my notes to General Trudeau, I reviewed for him all the technological implications that I believed were
relevant in any discussion about what could be harvested from the Roswell craft.

I also wrote up what I
understood about the magnetic field technology and how unconventional designers and engineers had drafted
prototypes for these "antigravs" earlier in the century.

All of this pointed in one direction, I suggested : that we now
had a craft and could farm out to industry the components that comprised this electromagnetic antigravity drive
and brain wave directed navigational controls.

We had to dole them out piece meal once we broke them down
into developable units, each of which could have its own engineering track.

For that we'd need the advice of
the scientists who would eventually comprise our brain trust, individuals we could rely on and whom we could talk
to about the Roswell debris.

These were scientists who routinely worked with our prime defense contractors and
could tell us whom to approach in their R&D divisions for secure and private consultations.

I was hoping that the evaluation of the kinds of things we were able to learn from the EBE and his craft that I
was preparing for General Trudeau would lead me toward the solution of some of the physiological problems we
knew our astronauts would encounter in space flight.

In the early 1960s, astronauts from both the United States
and the USSR had made their first orbital flights and had experienced more than a few negative physical
symptoms from the weightless environment during the mission.

Despite our official claims that humans could travel
safely in space, our doctors knew that even short periods of weightlessness were extremely disorienting to some of
our astronauts, and the longer the flight, the more uncomfortable the symptoms could become.In the early 1960s, astronauts from both the United States
and the USSR had made their first orbital flights and had experienced more than a few negative physical
symptoms from the weightless environment during the mission.

Despite our official claims that humans could travel
safely in space, our doctors knew that even short periods of weightlessness were extremely disorienting to some of
our astronauts, and the longer the flight, the more uncomfortable the symptoms could become.

We were worried
about loss of physical strength, reduced muscle capability in the heart and diaphragm, reduction of lung
capacity, and loss of tensile strength in the bones.

Yet, scattered across the desert floor outside of Roswell were creatures who seemed completely adapted to
space flight.

Just to be able to examine these entities was an enormous opportunity, but I knew we had the ability
to harvest what we could observe about aliens.

So, again, along side the speculations I had made about the
EBEs and their craft I listed what I thought were the major possibilities of developing product to enable us to travel
in space for extended periods of time.

Renewable oxygen and food supplies were obvious directions to take, and by the 1960s, NASA engineers
were already designing ways to recharge the atmosphere inside a capsule and provide for food storage.

We
helped.

It was Army R&D and our plan for developing an irradiation process for food that even today provides
the basis for non-refrigerated food supplies on board spacecraft.

But beyond that were real issues of health and
survival.

Merely getting human beings into earth orbit or even launching them into lunar orbit and bringing them
back safely were straight forward engineering projects.

But the readaptation of the human body to earth gravity
after an extended period of weightlessness or reduced gravity was a far more intractable problem to solve.

The
physiology of the EBEs provided an important clue.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the readaptation of the human body to earth gravity
after an extended period of weightlessness or reduced gravity was a far more intractable problem to solve. The
physiology of the EBEs provided an important clue. Besides the development of super tenacity fibers that would
protect the astronauts and the skin of the spacecraft and the development of a food preservation process that
would neutralize all the bacteria that cause spoilage, we needed to examine the ways we trained our astronauts
physically so that they would be more adaptable to periods of weightlessness and spatial disorientation. At the
same time we needed to develop nutritional packages that would not place undue stress on a digestive system
that needed to compensate for deprivation of gravity. Since there were no food preparation facilities on board the spacecraft, we didn't know how they stored or
processed food or even what they ate, if anything at all. However, my concern over a process to preserve food
for space travel was prompted by the obvious challenge posed by the spacecraft itself. If we were going to
travel in space, and it was clear from what the army found at Roswell that at least one culture had developed
the technology to do so, then R&D had to find a way to feed our pilots in space. Therefore, we needed to
develop a process to preserve food for space missions that didn't require refrigeration facilities and the
consumption of excessive amounts of energy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---49
The problem of long term space travel still hasn't been solved, in part because we continue to rely upon
conventional means of propulsion that subject our astronauts to great periods of physical stress, especially during
takeoff.

We also have no magic way for astronauts to readjust to earth gravity after a long ride in an orbit in
space station like the Russian Mir or our own planned station early in the next century.

Manned trips to Mars, also
on the drawing boards for early in the twenty-first century, will also be a problem because they will last for months
and subject our astronauts to a great deal of stress.

I suggested to General Trudeau in my report that although this wasn't explicitly an Army R&D mission, NASA
should begin the preparation of astronaut candidates from the time they're still in school.

"If we train our
astronauts from the time they're children the same way we do with potential athletes at sports camps and
provide the most promising candidates with flight training and military or government scholarships to ROTC
colleges, we will create a cadre of officers physically adaptable and scholastically trained to enter the next
generation of space travel, " I wrote.

I know that General Trudeau passed this recommendation along because
NASA itself opened a space training camp for future astronauts within a few years after my retirement from the
service.

Beyond the issues concerning the training potential of astronauts for conventionally powered space flight, the
examination of the EBE bodies and the ship's possible propulsion system raised other intriguing questions.

What if,
in addition to having been bioengineered for interstellar travel, the EBE's weren't subjected to the kinds of forces
human pilots would routinely face?

If the EBEs utilized a wave propagation technology as an antigravity drive
and navigation system, then they traveled inside some form of adjustable electromagnetic wave.What if,
in addition to having been bioengineered for interstellar travel, the EBE's weren't subjected to the kinds of forces
human pilots would routinely face?

If the EBEs utilized a wave propagation technology as an antigravity drive
and navigation system, then they traveled inside some form of adjustable electromagnetic wave.

I suggested to
General Trudeau that we should study the potential physiological effects on humans of long term exposure to the
kinds of energy spillage generated by the propagation of an electromagnetic field.

Biologists needed to
determine how feasible such a form of space travel would be based upon whether energy radiation would
disrupt the cellular activity of the human body.

Perhaps the external one piece skins worn by the EBEs afforded
them protection against the effects of being enclosed in a portable electromagnetic field.

Although Army R&D never conducted these studies because the medical issues surrounding space travel
were subsumed by NASA under contracts with the military, indirect medical research was conducted years later.

Studies surrounding the physiological effects on persons living near high voltage power transmission lines and
persons using extendable antenna hand held cellular telephones both proved inconclusive.

While some people
argued that there were higher incidences of cancer among both groups, other studies argued just the opposite
or found other reasons for any incidences of cancer.

I believe that a definitive piece of research on the effects of
low energy or ELM wave exposure still needs to be done because, ultimately, even more than atomic energy or
ion drives, magnetic field generation will be the system that will propel our near planetary voyages from 2050
through the early twenty second century.While some people
argued that there were higher incidences of cancer among both groups, other studies argued just the opposite
or found other reasons for any incidences of cancer.

I believe that a definitive piece of research on the effects of
low energy or ELM wave exposure still needs to be done because, ultimately, even more than atomic energy or
ion drives, magnetic field generation will be the system that will propel our near planetary voyages from 2050
through the early twenty second century.

Beyond that, for humans to reach destinations beyond the solar system
technology will require a radically different form of propulsion that will enable them to reach velocities at or
beyond the speed of light.

Thus did my second report cover the opportunities for research presented to us by the autopsies of the EBEs
and from the crash of their vehicle.

To my mind, it was nothing less than a confirmation that the research into
electromagnetics in the 1920s and the highly experimental saucer and crescent shaped development of aircraft
by the Allies and Axis powers would have led to an entirely new generation of airships.

I know that my reports
were read by the higher ups in the military because top secret research has continued right through to the
present on a whole range of designs and propulsion systems from the Stealth fighter and bomber to prototypes
for a very high altitude suborbital interceptor aircraft, developed at Nellis and Edwards, now on the drawing
board, which can hover in place and fly at speeds over seven thousand miles per hour.

Once I finished my report on the opportunities we could possibly derive from the EBEs and the craft, I turned
my attention to compiling a short list of immediate opportunities I believed achievable by the Army R&D's Foreign
Technology Division from a reverse engineering of items retrieved from the crash.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I know that my reports
were read by the higher ups in the military because top secret research has continued right through to the
present on a whole range of designs and propulsion systems from the Stealth fighter and bomber to prototypes
for a very high altitude suborbital interceptor aircraft, developed at Nellis and Edwards, now on the drawing
board, which can hover in place and fly at speeds over seven thousand miles per hour. Once I finished my report on the opportunities we could possibly derive from the EBEs and the craft, I turned
my attention to compiling a short list of immediate opportunities I believed achievable by the Army R&D's Foreign
Technology Division from a reverse engineering of items retrieved from the crash. These were specific things, not
as theoretical as questions about the physiology of the EBE or the description of its craft. But, while some might
call them purely mundane, each of these artifacts, as a direct result of Army R&D's intervention, helped spawn an
entire technological industry from which came new products and military weapons. Among the Roswell artifacts and the questions and issues that arose from the Roswell crash, on my preliminary
list that needed resolution for development scheduling or simple inquiries to our military scientific community
were:
- Image intensifiers, which ultimately became "night vision"
- Fiber optics
- Supertenacity fibers
- Lasers
- Molecular alignment metallic alloys

--- PAGE BREAK ---50
- Integrated circuits
- Microminiaturization of logic  boards
- HARP (High Altitude Research Project)
- Project Horizon (moon base)
- Portable atomic generators (ion propulsion drive)
- Irradiated food
- Third brain guidance systems (EBE  headbands)
- Particle beams ("Star Wars" antimissile energy weapons)
- Electromagnetic propulsion systems
- Depleted uranium projectiles
For each of the items on my list, General Trudeau went into his human resources file and found the names of
scientists working on government defense projects or in allied research projects at universities where I could turn
for advice and some consultation.

I wasn't surprised to see Wernher von Braun turn up under every rocket
propulsion issue.

von Braun had gone on record in1959 by announcing that the U.S.

military had acquired a new
technology as a result of top secret research in unidentified flying objects.

Nor was I surprised to sec John von
Neumann's name next to the mention of the strange looking silver imprinted silicon wafers that I thought looked
like elliptical shaped crackers.

"If these are what I think they might be, " General Trudeau said, "printed circuitry,
there's only one person we can talk to.

"
Dr.

Robert Sarbacher was an especially important contact person on our list of scientists because he had
worked on the Research and Development Board during the Eisenhower administration.

Not only had Sarbacher
been consulted by members of Admiral Hillenkoetter's and General Vandenberg's working group on UFOs during
the 1950s, he was part of the original decision General Twining made to bring all of the Roswell debris back to
Wright Field for preliminary examination before farming it out to the military research community.Robert Sarbacher was an especially important contact person on our list of scientists because he had
worked on the Research and Development Board during the Eisenhower administration.

Not only had Sarbacher
been consulted by members of Admiral Hillenkoetter's and General Vandenberg's working group on UFOs during
the 1950s, he was part of the original decision General Twining made to bring all of the Roswell debris back to
Wright Field for preliminary examination before farming it out to the military research community.

As early as 1950,
Sarbacher, commenting on the nature of the debris, said that he was sure the light and tough materials were
being analyzed very carefully by government laboratories that had taken possession of the debris after the crash.

Because he was already knowledgeable about the Roswell debris, Dr.

Sarbacher was another obvious candidate
for an Army R&D brain trust.

We also listed Dr.

Wilbert Smith, who, in a memo to the controller of telecommunications in November 1950,
had urged the government of Canada to investigate the nature of alien technology the United States had
retrieved from crashed  extraterrestrial vehicles and that was at that time being studied by Vannevar Bush.

Dr.

Smith, who had learned of the U.S.

investigation from Sarbacher, said that regardless whether UFOs fit into our
belief system or not, the fact was we had acquired them and it was important for us to harvest the technology
they contained.

He implored the government to make a substantial effort to utilize alien technology.

General
Trudeau joked that although Dr.

Smith knew that we had acquired technology at Roswell, he didn't really know
what it was.

"I can't wait to see his face when you open your briefcase in front of him, Phil, " the general said,
thinking about how his old friend had always wanted to know the specifics of what he had secreted away in
1947.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Smith knew that we had acquired technology at Roswell, he didn't really know
what it was. "I can't wait to see his face when you open your briefcase in front of him, Phil, " the general said,
thinking about how his old friend had always wanted to know the specifics of what he had secreted away in
1947. Each of these scientists had maintained existing relationships with any number of defense contractors during
the 1950s. General Trudeau also had relationships with the army contractors who were developing new weapons
systems for the military within one part of the company while another part was harvesting some of the same
technology for consumer products development. These were companies -- Bell Labs, IBM, Monsanto, Dow,
General Electric, and Hughes  -  that General Trudeau wanted to talk to about the list of technological products
that we'd compiled from our R&D Roswell nut file. "You begin calling our scientist friends, " General Trudeau announced. "And make whatever appointments you
want. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Where are you going to be, General?" I asked.

"I'm going to be taking some trips, too, " he said.

"First to the chief of staff to make sure we have the
discretionary budget we're going to need.

Then to some of the people I want you to talk to once you have the
backing from the scientific community for the projects on your list.

"
"Where to first?" I asked.

"What do you like?" the general shot right back to me.

"We've been working with image intensifies for some time, " I said.

"We even got our hands on devices the
Germans were working on at the end of the war.

"
"Well then, why don't you make a very preliminary trip over to Fort Belvoir, " General Trudeau said.

"They've had
a night vision project in the works for the past ten years, but it's got nothing over what you have in your file.

"
"I'll get over there first thing, " I said.

"Yes, Phil, but you get out of that uniform and into a real lawyer suit, " the general ordered.

"And don't take
your staff car.

" He saw me raise my eyebrows.

"All you're going to do is feed a project, "Trudeau continued, "that's
been under way since right after the war.

They've got stuff, but you're going to give them a giant leap.

Once
you've fed them, you'll disappear and I'll assign a night vision project manager here to see the development
through.

" I prepared to leave his office.

"No one will know, Phil, " he said.

"Just like you thought, the Roswell night
viewer will put a seed of an idea in someone's mind over at Fort Belvoir and it will become part of along project
history.

It will disappear just like you into the history of the product development.

"
"Yes, sir, " I said.

I was beginning to realize just how lonely this job could be.

"You still have a suit that fits?" the general asked.

"I think so, " I answered.

"Maybe what I wore over at the White House is a little out of style, but it'll pass.

"
"Good luck, Phil, " General Trudeau said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Maybe what I wore over at the White House is a little out of style, but it'll pass. "
"Good luck, Phil, " General Trudeau said. "Make sure no one knows where you're going and I'll make sure you have
all the budget you need. "
This was the beginning. I saluted, but the general just stuck out his hand and I shook it. We both realized in that
moment, as we were striking out on our own, just how momentous this was about to become. A lieutenant
general allocating money for his development budget and a lieutenant colonel looking for someone to develop
an innocuous-looking eye shield an unknown GI had picked up out of the sand near a UFO crashed into a rock in
the lonely desert outside of Roswell in a lightning storm fourteen years ago. What a pair we must have made. CHAPTER 9
The Project Had Officially Begun
General Trudeau marched down the hall to his boss at the Pentagon to begin the process of funding the new
items we'd identified in our Foreign Technology budget, and I went home that evening and tried on my official
White House three piece suit. President Eisenhower once told me that he always trusted a man who wore a vest,
and I never forgot it. Although there were times when the President asked me to wear my uniform for special
meetings when I had to look military, I usually wore suits every day to work. But after my years at the Red Canyon
missile base and in combat uniform in Germany, I lost the knack of wearing civilian clothes. Nevertheless, here I
was again, after all those years, wearing a suit just like any other nine-to-five commuting Joe as I headed toward
Fort Belvoir, perhaps the army's most important base in the entire Washington Military District. 51

--- PAGE BREAK ---52
Fort Belvoir was one of those military posts where the mundane activity of training and weapons testing was
an effective cover for what came to be known as the secret life of Fort Belvoir.

It sat comfortably within thirty
minutes of the Pentagon, and it was where some of the army's most top secret research into UFO technology was
also taking place.

Belvoir housed the Army Engineering School and, for former artillery and missile officers like
myself, maintained a vital information database about ballistics testing and
the development of new weapons.

But on the secret side of the ledger, Fort Belvoir was home to the Signal
School where officers for the National Security Council who had top secret crypto clearance were trained.

Even years after I retired from active duty, stories lingered about the records of UFOs that were stored at Fort
Belvoir, including photos and even motion pictures of military retrievals of downed extraterrestrial craft.

What very
few people knew was that an elite secret air force unit operated out of Fort Belvoir - ostensibly an army base -
that was responsible for retrievals of downed UFOs.

That was how Fort Belvoir became a repository of classified
UFO footage.

Those secrets remained at Fort Belvoir over the years and were closely guarded while the
installation remained shrouded in mystery.

For those who suspect what information was kept at the base, Fort
Belvoir remains a central part of the legends surrounding the official military cover up of UFOs.

Me, I was on my way there to talk about the night vision project to see what German World War II files they
were keeping on the infrared viewfinders the Nazis were trying to deploy for their night fighting troops.

These were
cumbersome, unwieldy devices that left infantry hampered and weighed down.

They were never effective in the
war but held out the enormous promise of opening up the night as a battlefield where an army could maneuver
around its blind and helpless enemy.These were
cumbersome, unwieldy devices that left infantry hampered and weighed down.

They were never effective in the
war but held out the enormous promise of opening up the night as a battlefield where an army could maneuver
around its blind and helpless enemy.

That was the promise that tantalized both the Soviets and American forces
as we closed in on Germany's most secret weapons facilities during the final months of the war.

Our forces secured all of the German records on mountable weapons night viewers and headpieces, but it
wasn't until we looked inside the crashed Roswell vehicle and saw a hazy daylight through the view ports that we
realized just what the potential of night viewing could be.

We understood in those few moments after the vehicle
was brought back to Wright Field and General Twining made his initial report that we were the blind and helpless
enemy through the eyes of the EBEs.

These creatures controlled our night skies, observing us with an ease that we
didn't enjoy until we had deployed our own night-viewing goggles years later and leveled the playing field
against them and the Soviet client forces arrayed against us.

My very proper looking deep blue Oldsmobile might not have been a secret weapon in America's arsenal, but
it was carrying a description of one of the tiny components of what would be one of our most effective Cold War
weapons.

Guerrilla armies used the night itself on their familiar home territory as a tactical weapon that allowed
them to move right past enemy positions without being spotted.

They could secure a battlefield advantage as if
they were invisible.

But equip a patrol with night viewers, mount night viewers on tanks and observation vehicles,
hover over a battlefield at night in helicopter gunships equipped for night vision, and suddenly the night
becomes day and the invisible enemy appears in your gunsights like prey for the hunter.They could secure a battlefield advantage as if
they were invisible.

But equip a patrol with night viewers, mount night viewers on tanks and observation vehicles,
hover over a battlefield at night in helicopter gunships equipped for night vision, and suddenly the night
becomes day and the invisible enemy appears in your gunsights like prey for the hunter.

To the EBEs, we were that prey, and we knew they were monitoring our defenses, surveilling the aircraft we
scrambled to chase them, and hovering above the experimental satellites we launched.

We could see them with
our radar, I had seen them on our scopes with my own eyes, and we knew their presence wasn't benign.

But they
had an advantage over us that we couldn't overcome unless we acquired the technological ability to put up
enough of a defense to make their cost too high to engage in any large scale warfare.

Not only was it an
advantage that forced us to scrape whatever technology we could off the edge of our encounters with them; it
was one of the many factors that forced us into a silence about the alien presence.

If there was no public
enemy, there would be no pressure from the public to do anything about it.

So we simply denied all
extraterrestrial activity because no aliens meant no military responsibility to counter their threat.

But all the while
we were still planning, measuring their hostile intentions, and pushing through weapons development that might
reduce their advantage.

It would have been next to impossible to stage a military build up that would help us fight extraterrestrial
enemies had we not had a lot of help from our old adversaries, the Soviets and the Chinese.

The Soviets made no
bones about their intentions to dominate the world through Communist revolutionary coups and set about
immediately to challenge us even before World War II ended.

By 1948, the Iron Curtain had dropped over Eastern
Europe and the Soviets were trying to back us into a position of appeasement.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Soviets made no
bones about their intentions to dominate the world through Communist revolutionary coups and set about
immediately to challenge us even before World War II ended. By 1948, the Iron Curtain had dropped over Eastern
Europe and the Soviets were trying to back us into a position of appeasement. In 1949, Mao Tse-tung drove
Chiang Kai-shek out of mainland China to the island of Taiwan, and the United States had another major
Communist adversary trying to impose its will upon its Asian neighbors. We first tasted their blood in Korea and
would soon almost choke on it in Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia. Those were hard times, made even harder because the U.S. military also knew that not just the free world but
the whole world was under a military threat from a power far greater than the combined forces of the Soviet
Union and the Republic of China. We didn't know what the EBEs wanted at first, but we knew that between the
cattle mutilations, surveillance of our secret weapons installations, reports of strange abductions of human beings,
and their consistent buzzing of our unmanned and manned space launches, the EBEs weren't just friendly visitors
looking for a polite way to say "Hello, we mean you no harm. " They meant us harm, and we knew it. The problem

--- PAGE BREAK ---53
was we couldn't do anything about it at first, and anything we did try to do had to be done in complete secrecy
or it would set off a worldwide panic, we believed.

This was where the Cold War turned out to be a tremendous opportunity for us, because it allowed us to
upgrade our military, preparedness in public to fight the Communists while secretly creating an arsenal and
strategy to defend ourselves against the extraterrestrials.

In short, the Cold War, while real enough and dangerous
enough, was also a cover for us to develop a planetary tracking and defense system that looked into space as
well as into the Soviets' backyard.

And the Soviets were doing the exact same thing we were, looking up at the
same time they were looking down.

In an only tacitly acknowledged cooperative endeavor, the Soviets and the Americans, while each one was
explicitly using the Cold War to gain an advantage over the other, both sought to develop a military capability to
defend ourselves against extraterrestrials.

There were very subtle indications of this policy in the types of weapons
both countries developed as well as in our behavior toward one another every time one side came close to
pushing the button.

I can tell you definitively because I was there when we avoided nuclear war because both
military commands were able to pull back when they stared over the cliff into the flaming volcano of war that
threatened to engulf all of us at least four times between 1945 and 1975 - the Berlin airlift, the Chinese invasion of
Korea, the Cuban missile crisis, and the Yom Kippur War - and probably many more.

By the time President Nixon returned from China, having agreed to turn over Vietnam to the Communists, he
had effectively turned the Soviets' flank in the Cold War.

For the next decade, the Soviets felt caught between
the Chinese, with whom they'd fought border wars in the past, and the United States.By the time President Nixon returned from China, having agreed to turn over Vietnam to the Communists, he
had effectively turned the Soviets' flank in the Cold War.

For the next decade, the Soviets felt caught between
the Chinese, with whom they'd fought border wars in the past, and the United States.

When President Ronald
Reagan demonstrated to Mikhail Gorbachev that the United States was capable of deploying an effective
antimissile missile defense and sought Soviet cooperation in turning it against the extraterrestrials, all pretext of the
Cold War ended and the great Soviet monolith in Eastern Europe began to crumble.

But the Cold War worked its magic for both superpowers by allowing them to prepare defenses against the
extraterrestrials without ever having to disclose to the public what they were really doing.

When you examine it,
the record itself should have showed that another agenda was present throughout the Cold War.

After all, why
did each side really have ten or more times the number of warheads needed to completely destroy the other
side's nuclear missile arsenal as well as their major population centers?

The real story behind the vast missile
arsenals, the huge fleets of bombers, and the ICBM submarine platforms that both sides deployed was the threat
to the aliens that if they occupied a portion of our planet, we had the fire power to obliterate them.

If they
attacked either the United States or the Soviet Union so as to render one of the arsenals inoperable, we had
enough missiles to spare to make them pay so heavy a price for starting a war, it wasn't even worth trying.

That
was part of our secret agenda behind the huge military buildups of the 1950s and1960s: sacrifice a portion of the
planet so that the rest of us could live.

It enabled the United States and USSR to intimidate one another, but it also
worked for the heads of the military intelligence agencies as a way to intimidate any extraterrestrial cultures.That
was part of our secret agenda behind the huge military buildups of the 1950s and1960s: sacrifice a portion of the
planet so that the rest of us could live.

It enabled the United States and USSR to intimidate one another, but it also
worked for the heads of the military intelligence agencies as a way to intimidate any extraterrestrial cultures.

Nobody wrote any memos about this because weapons deployment during the Cold War was the cover for the
secret agenda against the extraterrestrials.

Sure, there was a gamesmanship going on during those forty years from 1948 through 1989, when the Berlin
Wall came down.

Each side tried to get the other to spend more money than they really had to so as to weaken
the economy.

Our CIA consistently gave us false estimates because they were feeding us KGB information while, I
know, we tried to do the same thing to the Soviets.

And if the Soviets could have won the Cold War as bloodlessly
as possible, they would have done so.

But in the end, as the futility of mutual destruction made World War III
unfightable, our real attention became more focused on the common enemy: the extraterrestrials who refused to
go away.

There were subtle and not so subtle hints during the entire Cold War that a hidden agenda was in play.

Most
people just didn't know where to look.

For those who did, and there were and are plenty of them, the answers
were in plain view.

Although there was heavy censorship and the threat of ruined careers, plenty of military and
civilian sources reported flying saucer sightings.

Stories of abductions - while most were either fantasies,
nightmares, or memory screens for other events in the so called abductee's childhood - continued to abound.

Some were true, and this caused great consternation among members of the UFO working group.

If the
government couldn't protect private citizens from abductions by extraterrestrials, then would that not signify a
breakdown in governmental authority?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some were true, and this caused great consternation among members of the UFO working group. If the
government couldn't protect private citizens from abductions by extraterrestrials, then would that not signify a
breakdown in governmental authority? That was a worry, but it didn't come to pass. Similarly, if too many flying saucers were seen by too many people at the same time, wouldn't it become
obvious that the military forces of the superpowers couldn't protect their populations? For a time it was true, but
the public never realized it. Soon we were able to upgrade our ability to defend our airspace so that we could
amass large numbers of interceptors against the EBEs' limited resources and pose a real threat to them. They
backed off and probed our defenses only when it seemed safe. Thus, the race among the superpowers to spend
billions of dollars to build the fastest and best interceptors had a true double purpose. We needed all these
planes because they gave the super powers a flexible response alternative to simply obliterating themselves with
guided missiles, but at the same time both superpowers were developing the air defense technology to defend
the planet against the extraterrestrials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---54
Everybody wants the best and fastest plane, of course, so that we can out fly and out shoot the enemy we
know about.

But we were also defending our skies against an enemy we didn't admit to having.

The second
agenda was always there and the Cold War provided the budgetary impetus the military needed : We were
building aircraft to protect against flying saucers.

And in a very real measure, we succeeded.

Both the United States and USSR were sensitive to another area where the extraterrestrials were aggressing
upon our military personnel : our respective space exploration programs.

From the very beginning of our
endeavors to put satellites in orbit, the extraterrestrials have been surveilling and then actively interfering with our
launch vehicles and in some cases the manned and unmanned payloads themselves by buzzing them, jamming
radio transmissions, causing electrical problems with the spacecrafts' systems, or causing mechanical
malfunctions.

American astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts have separately reported sightings of UFOs so
routinely that it's become commonplace.

The audio/video transmission downlink between space capsules and
NASA, however, is a secure scrambled signal so that commentary about UFOs shadowing the spacecraft can't
be picked up by private listeners.

Even then, the astronauts are specifically instructed not to report UFO sightings
until they are debriefed once they've landed.

Astronaut Gordon Cooper, for example, reported that when he was a fighter pilot over Germany in the 1950s,
he scrambled with other Sabre Jet fighter pilots to intercept a formation of UFOs flying over his base, but when his
fighter group got too close, the formation of UFOs flew away.

Cooper also described film that he saw at Edwards
Air Force base in California in 1957 of a UFO landing.

He said that he sent the film to Washington and followed up
on it with the officers at Project Blue Book, but they never responded to his queries.Cooper also described film that he saw at Edwards
Air Force base in California in 1957 of a UFO landing.

He said that he sent the film to Washington and followed up
on it with the officers at Project Blue Book, but they never responded to his queries.

Similarly, X-15 pilot Joe Walker revealed that his 1961 mission in setting a new world air speed record was also
to hunt for UFOs during his high altitude flights.

He also said that he filmed UFOs during an X-15 flight a year later in
1962.

Other reports persisted about Mercury 7 astronauts being shadowed by UFOs and about Neil Armstrong's
having seen an alien base on the moon during the Apollo 11  flyover and landing.

NASA has, of course, not
admitted to any of this, and, very correctly, it's been treated as a matter of high national security.

An extraterrestrial presence on the moon, whether it was true or not in the 1950s, was an issue of such military
importance that it was about to become a subject for National Security Council debate before Admiral
Hillenkoetter and Generals Twining and Vandenberg pulled it back under their working group's security
classification.

The issue never formally reached the National Security Council, although Army R&D under the new
command of General Trudeau in 1958 quickly developed preliminary plans for Horizon, a moon base construction
project designed to provide the United States with a military observation presence on the lunar surface.

Started in
the late 1950s and set for completion between 1965 and1967, Horizon was supposed to establish defensive
fortifications on the moon against a Soviet attempt to use it as a military base, an early warning surveillance
system against a Soviet missile attack, and, most importantly, a surveillance and defense against UFOs.

It was, to
be blunt, a plan to establish a skirmish line in space to protect the earth against a surprise attack.Started in
the late 1950s and set for completion between 1965 and1967, Horizon was supposed to establish defensive
fortifications on the moon against a Soviet attempt to use it as a military base, an early warning surveillance
system against a Soviet missile attack, and, most importantly, a surveillance and defense against UFOs.

It was, to
be blunt, a plan to establish a skirmish line in space to protect the earth against a surprise attack.

But Horizon was
side tracked when the National Space and Aeronautics Act gave control over space exploration to the civilian
NASA, effectively eliminating the military branches from pursuing their own projects until much later in the1970s.

Fears of an attack to probe our planet's ability to defend itself were running rampant at National Security and
through the military chiefs of staff during the middle 1950s.

After he retired from the army, even Gen.

Douglas
MacArthur got into the fray, urging the military to prepare itself for what he felt would be the next major war.

He
told the New York Times in 1955 that "The nations of the world will have to unite for the next war will be an
interplanetary war.

The nations of the Earth must someday make a common front against attack by people from
other planets.

" The public took little notice of that comment, but it was, in fact, a disclosure of the strategic
thinking of the military back in the 1950s and explains part of the paranoia the government was displaying about
all information relating to the flying saucers and unidentified aircraft.

Part of the military response to what they
perceived as threats from extraterrestrials was, first, to analyze the specific ways that alien spacecraft "passively"
disrupt our defenses and world wide communications through electrical and magnetic field interference and
develop circuitry hardened against it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

" The public took little notice of that comment, but it was, in fact, a disclosure of the strategic
thinking of the military back in the 1950s and explains part of the paranoia the government was displaying about
all information relating to the flying saucers and unidentified aircraft. Part of the military response to what they
perceived as threats from extraterrestrials was, first, to analyze the specific ways that alien spacecraft "passively"
disrupt our defenses and world wide communications through electrical and magnetic field interference and
develop circuitry hardened against it. Second, General Trudeau and his counterparts in the other branches of the
military at the Pentagon charged with strategic planning looked at the aggressive behaviors of the EBEs. They
didn't just shadow or surveil our spacecraft in orbit; they buzzed us and tried to create such havoc with our
communications systems that NASA more than once had to rethink astronaut safety in the Mercury and Gemini
programs. Years later, there was even some speculation among Army Intelligence analysts who had been out of
the NASA strategy loop that the Apollo moon landing program was ultimately abandoned because there was no
way to protect the astronauts from possible alien threats. The alien spacecraft were also aggressively buzzing our frontline defenses in Eastern Europe, either looking for
blind spots or weaknesses, or - which is what I believed because I was there and saw it with my own eyes -
probing our radar to see how quickly we responded. We'd see blips shoot across our screens that we couldn't
identify and suddenly they'd disappear. Then they'd reappear, only this time even closer to our airfields or missile
launchers. Once we determined that we weren't being probed by Soviet or East German aircraft, we sometimes
decided not to respond to the threats. Many times they'd just go away. But other times they would play cat and

--- PAGE BREAK ---55
mouse, edging ever closer until we had to respond.

That's what they were looking for, how quickly we could
respond and pick them upon our targeting radars or catch up to them with our interceptors.

Whenever we'd get
just about there for an aerial sighting, they'd take off out of the atmosphere at speeds over 7,500 miles an hour.

If
we tried to follow, they'd play us along until our fliers had to return.

Our only successes in defending against them, back in the late1950s and early 1960s, occurred when we were
able to get a firm tracking radar lock.

Then when we locked our targeting radars on, the signals that missiles were
supposed to follow to the target, it somehow interfered with their navigational ability and the vehicle's flight
became erratic.

If we were especially fortunate and able to boost the signal before they broke away, we could
actually bring them down.

Sometimes we actually got lucky enough to score a hit with a missile before the UFO
could take any evasive action, which an army air defense battalion did with an antiaircraft missile near Ramstein
Air Force Base in Germany in May 1974.

The spacecraft managed to crash land in a valley.

The craft was
retrieved and flown back to Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada.

The Roswell crash was different.

There was much
speculation that it was a combination of the desert lightning storm and our persistent tracking radars at
Alamogordo and the 509th that helped bring down the alien vehicle over the New Mexico desert in 1947.

Then there were the suspected cattle mutilations and reported abductions, perhaps the most direct form of
intervention in our culture short of a direct attack upon our installations.There was much
speculation that it was a combination of the desert lightning storm and our persistent tracking radars at
Alamogordo and the 509th that helped bring down the alien vehicle over the New Mexico desert in 1947.

Then there were the suspected cattle mutilations and reported abductions, perhaps the most direct form of
intervention in our culture short of a direct attack upon our installations.

While debates broke out among the
debunkers - who said these were a combination of hoaxes, attacks by every day predators on cattle,
psychological flashback memories of episodes of childhood abuse in the cases of reported abductees, and out
and out fabrications of the media - field investigators found they could not explain away some of the cattle
mutilations, especially where laser surgery seemed to be used, and psychologists found alarming similarities in the
descriptions of abductees who had no knowledge of one another's stories.

The military intelligence community
regarded these stories of mutilations and abductions very seriously.

They worked up descriptions of at least three
separate scenarios in which
(1) the EBEs were simply conducting scientific experiments on earthly life forms and collecting whatever
specimens they could without causing too much disruption and alerting us; (2) the EBEs were actively collecting
specimens and conducting experiments so as to determine whether this was a hospitable environment for them
to inhabit, and any disruption they caused was of no concern to them; and
(3) all of the experimentation and specimen collection were the prelude to some kind of infiltration or invasion
of our planet.

We did not know their motives, but could only assume the worst and, therefore, needed to defend
ourselves however we could.They worked up descriptions of at least three
separate scenarios in which
(1) the EBEs were simply conducting scientific experiments on earthly life forms and collecting whatever
specimens they could without causing too much disruption and alerting us; (2) the EBEs were actively collecting
specimens and conducting experiments so as to determine whether this was a hospitable environment for them
to inhabit, and any disruption they caused was of no concern to them; and
(3) all of the experimentation and specimen collection were the prelude to some kind of infiltration or invasion
of our planet.

We did not know their motives, but could only assume the worst and, therefore, needed to defend
ourselves however we could.

While never disclosing it publicly, military intelligence analysts supported the view that Earth was already under
some form of probing attack by one or more alien cultures who were testing both our ability and resolve to
defend ourselves.

Without ever directly addressing whether contacts between the aliens and Earth governments
had already taken place - because the notes and minutes of the Hillenkoetter working group were never
released to the Chiefs of Staff or to their intelligence officers - the heads of the armed services decided
collectively that it was better to plan for war rather than be surprised.

At the same time, the civilian leaders of the nation's space program at NASA decided that military intelligence
was overreacting to the shadowing and buzzing of our spacecraft.

NASA, which had been holding as highly
confidential any reports of extraterrestrial activity surrounding our space vehicles, nevertheless decided to adopt
an internal official "wait and watch" attitude because they believed that it would have been impossible to
launch an explicitly military defensive space program and still achieve the civilian scientific aims at the same
time.

So NASA agreed to go covert.NASA, which had been holding as highly
confidential any reports of extraterrestrial activity surrounding our space vehicles, nevertheless decided to adopt
an internal official "wait and watch" attitude because they believed that it would have been impossible to
launch an explicitly military defensive space program and still achieve the civilian scientific aims at the same
time.

So NASA agreed to go covert.

As a cover, NASA, in1961, agreed to cooperate with military planners to work
a "second tier" space program within and covered up by the civilian scientific missions.

They agreed to open up a
confidential "back channel" communications link to military intelligence regarding any hostile activities
conducted by the EBEs against our spacecraft even if these included only shadowing or surveillance.

I was aware
of this through my contacts in the military intelligence community.

What NASA didn't tell military intelligence, of
course, was that they already had an even more classified back channel to the Hillenkoetter working group and
were keeping them updated on every single alien spacecraft appearance the astronauts reported, especially
during the early series of Apollo flights when the EBE craft began buzzing the lunar modules on successive missions
after they thrusted out of earth orbit.

Even though military intelligence was kept out of the operational loop
between NASA and the working group, I and a few others still had contacts in the civilian intelligence community
that kept us informed.

And the army and air force managed to find at least 122 photos taken by astronauts on
the moon that showed some evidence of an alien presence.

It was a startling find and was one of many reasons
that the Reagan administration pushed so hard for the Space Defense Initiative in 1981.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And the army and air force managed to find at least 122 photos taken by astronauts on
the moon that showed some evidence of an alien presence. It was a startling find and was one of many reasons
that the Reagan administration pushed so hard for the Space Defense Initiative in 1981. In 1960, upon the confidential approval of the working group and at the request of the National Security
Agency, which was concerned about the vulnerability of its U2 flights, NASA agreed to allow some of its missions
to become covers for military surveillance satellites. These satellites, although approved for surveillance of Soviet
ICBM activity, were also supposed to spot alien activity in remote portions of the earth. Maybe, in the 1960s, we

--- PAGE BREAK ---didn't have the technology we have now to intercept their ships, but by using new satellite surveillance
techniques we believed we'd be able to pick up the signatures of an alien presence on the face of our planet.

If
we made it too difficult for them to set up shop with bases on Earth, military intelligence planners speculated,
maybe they would simply go away.

This was another example of how Cold War strategy was utilized for the dual
purpose of trying to surveil extraterrestrial activity under the cover of surveilling Soviet activity.

However, throughout the 1960s, critical projects were started at the Foreign Technology desk to protect vital
command and control systems, including the hardening of communications and defense computer circuitry by
burying components sensitive to electromagnetic pulses, the same kind of energy generated after a nuclear
explosion as well as by the EBE spacecraft.

In fact, so important was our research into the effects of the
electromagnetic pulse, or EMP, that ever since the late 1950s the Department of Defense has been simulating
EMP to determine how to protect the circuitry in its planes, tanks, missiles, and ships from being disabled by it.

EMP
generators were established at a number of facilities around the country, including the Harry Diamond
Laboratories in Philadelphia, Maryland, for the army and the EMP Empress I and II simulators for the navy in the
middle of Chesapeake Bay and another one at China lake in California.

The air force set up EMP simulators at
Kirkland Air Force Base in New Mexico and the army additional facilities at White Sands, New Mexico, and at the
Redstone arsenal in Alabama.

We also initiated the crash development of night vision equipment to enable our
troops to see at night the same way the EBEs did, finally enabling us to get a footing, if not an equal footing, with
the aliens so that we could force them to some kind of stale mate.The air force set up EMP simulators at
Kirkland Air Force Base in New Mexico and the army additional facilities at White Sands, New Mexico, and at the
Redstone arsenal in Alabama.

We also initiated the crash development of night vision equipment to enable our
troops to see at night the same way the EBEs did, finally enabling us to get a footing, if not an equal footing, with
the aliens so that we could force them to some kind of stale mate.

It was only then that we began to realize what
their intentions were and the startling secrets about their existence on this planet.

It was night vision that was on my mind today as I was zipped through the sentry post at the main gate and
very quickly buzzed into the development laboratories wing at Fort Belvoir by an army specialist 4 who seemed
surprised that I wasn't in uniform.

"Colonel Corso, " Dr.

Paul Fredericks, technology development consultant to the night vision section at Fort
Belvoir, said as he extended his hand and walked me over to what must have been his prized tobacco colored
leather chair.

It was way oversized for his small office and was obviously his favorite seat.

I was duly appreciative
of the honor and courtesy he was according me.

"General Trudeau told me you were bringing us some
remarkable information about one of the projects we have in development here.

"
"I hope it's helpful to you, Dr.

Fredericks, " I began.

"I'm not a physicist, but I think we have something that might
speed up the research time line and show some new possibilities.

"
"Anything that could help, Colonel, " he said as I opened up my briefcase and began to spread out what I
had.

"Anything at all.

"
CHAPTER 10
The U2 Program and Project Corona : Spies in Space
"Of course, General Trudeau has been in touch with Don and the whole development team here, "Dr.

Fredericks continued as he watched me open the night vision file that I'd taken out of my briefcase.

"And I'm
aware of the nature of the material you've got.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fredericks continued as he watched me open the night vision file that I'd taken out of my briefcase. "And I'm
aware of the nature of the material you've got. It's not something we wanted to talk about over the phone. "
"I appreciate your being discreet about this, Dr. Fredericks, " I said. "If you think what I'm about to show you
can help you in the development process, it's yours to use. But the arrangement will be that everything is
originated here at Fort Belvoir. All R&D will do will be to provide the budget necessary to fund this development. You use your own sources to manufacture the product and take all the credit for the process. "
"And this conversation?" Dr. Fredericks asked. "Once you tell me you can use what I've brought and we get you the budget you require, " I began, "this
conversation never took place and you will take my name off your appointment schedule. "
56
"Now you really do have my interest, " he said with just the edge of a bemused sarcasm in his voice as if he'd
been down this road many times before. "What did you bring in that briefcase that's so secret?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---57
And with that I held up the first of the army's 1947 sketches of the night viewer we pulled from the wreckage at
Roswell.

I handed it across to Dr.

Fredericks, who looked at it and turned it around with his fingertips as if he were
holding one of the Dead Sea Scrolls.

"You don't have to be so careful with it, Dr.

Fredericks, " I said.

"I made a few thermal copies.

"
"Do you have the actual device?" he asked.

"Back at the Pentagon.

"
"Who was wearing this?" he continued.

"At the time, nobody, " I told him.

"According to the field report, they found this in the sand near one of the
bodies.

"
"Bodies?

At the Roswell crash?" Now he was completely incredulous.

"General Trudeau didn't tell anyone
about bodies.

"
"No, that's true, " I said.

"That's not information we give out.

General Trudeau authorized me to answer any
questions you have up to a certain level of security classification.

"
"We're not there yet, " Dr.

Fredericks asked and asserted at the same time.

"But we're close, " I suggested.

"I can talk about the device, talk about where it was found, but that's probably
as far as I can go myself.

If General Trudeau wants to give a background briefing and authorizes me to do so,
then I can go deeper.

"
"Funny, but I always thought Roswell was a kind of legend.

You know, they found something but maybe it was
Russian, " Dr.

Fredericks said.

Then he asked again if anyone at the Roswell retrieval had actually seen any of the
creatures wearing the night vision device in the sketches.

"No, " I said.

"There was a lot of debris that spilled out of the craft.

The soldiers on the retrieval team looked
through one of the seams that had been split open running along the craft's lengthwise axis and they saw view
ports built into the hull.

Well, what astonished them was that when they looked through the view ports, they could
see daylight, or a greenish, hazy kind of diffused light that looked like dusk, but outside it was completely dark.The soldiers on the retrieval team looked
through one of the seams that had been split open running along the craft's lengthwise axis and they saw view
ports built into the hull.

Well, what astonished them was that when they looked through the view ports, they could
see daylight, or a greenish, hazy kind of diffused light that looked like dusk, but outside it was completely dark.

"
Paul Fredericks was on the edge of his seat now.

"No one at the crash site knew anything about the night viewers the Germans were developing during the
war, " I explained.

"So even the officers on the retrieval team were amazed at what they were seeing.

When they
autopsied the alien at the 509th and pulled off these 'eyepieces,' is the only word I can use for them, they realized
that they were a complicated set of reflectors that gathered all the available light and turned them into night
time image intensifiers.

" I continued, pointing to the sketch in Paul Fredericks's hands.

"Some medical officer tried
to look through it down a darkened hall and it made the images stand out, but nothing was ever done with it and
they packed it away with the rest of the alien.

"
"Did they perform any analysis on this when they brought it back?" Fredericks asked.

"Some, " I told him.

"But they had no facilities at the 509th and had to wait until they brought it back to Wright.

It wasn't until the intelligence boys at the Air Materiel Command got hold of it that they realized that this was
something the Germans were trying to deploy.

"
"But this is far more sophisticated, " Dr.

Fredericks said.

"The Germans weren't even close to something like this.

"
"Yes, sir, " I said.

"Not even close.

And that's what got the intelligence people at Wright so concerned.

Just how
close were the Germans about to get when the war ended?

What else had they gotten their hands on?

Did they
have help?"
"Or, " Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What else had they gotten their hands on? Did they
have help?"
"Or, " Dr. Fredericks said very slowly, "did they find a crash just like we found?"
"That's exactly the point, Dr. Fredericks, " I said. "What did they find?"
"And if the Germans could get their hands on this material, what about the Soviets?" he asked. But he was
talking to himself now, talking in a way that made him sound as if he were really thinking out loud. "Why not the
Chinese or any of our European allies? Just how much of this stuff is out there?" he finally asked me. "We don't have any of those answers, " I told him. "At least not those of us in the army. And for obvious reasons
nobody's walking around sharing this information back and forth among the services or with any other agencies. We have what we have, and that's as far as we're willing to go. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---58
"And you don't want me talking about this or trying to sniff around for any information, " he said.

"If we thought you were going to do that I wouldn't even be here, " I said.

"I have these reports here and
descriptions of the device.

I'll leave them with you.

If you think you can work these into your development
program, I'll have the material itself sent over and then it's out of our hands completely.

Farm it out to wherever
you want it developed.

Offer your defense contractor the right to patent it.

Never tell them where you got it or
what its origin might be.

As far as we're concerned whoever comes up with the night viewers you ultimately
contract with to build can own the whole product and slap their name on it.

All we want to do is get this thing
developed.

That's it.

"
"May I?" Dr.

Fredericks asked, reaching for the reports I'd spread out on the arm of the leather chair.

I handed them across in a bundle, and he flipped through them as if he were my old college professor looking
at a term paper, hrumphing, grunting, and nodding at every page.

"That's more about how they handled the alien at Wright Field than about the eyepieces themselves, " I said.

"Because in reality, they didn't know what made the thing tick and they didn't really want to tear it apart.

"
"So they just threw it in a package?" he asked.

"Basically, that's exactly what happened, " I said.

"At first they didn't know how it was supposed to work.

Or
maybe they thought it would turn human beings blind or something.

They were that afraid.

After a while, they just
let it stay in dead storage and hoped someone else would take it off their hands.

"
"And that'd be you, " Dr.

Fredericks said.

"Actually, " I told him, "that'd be you, if you want it.

"
"I need to read this material more thoroughly and see where we can slip your night vision into the project
without causing a ripple on the surface, " Dr.

Fredericks explained.

"How easy will that be?" I asked.Fredericks explained.

"How easy will that be?" I asked.

"At Fort Belvoir, " he answered, "teams here are taught to keep their own thoughts to themselves.

If you tell
them this is a piece of foreign technology our intelligence boys got from some other country and we're supposed
to make it disappear into what we're doing, that's the story.

"
"Nobody asks any questions?" I pushed.

"Nobody asks questions under any circumstances, " he said.

"It would move along faster and create its own
little development bureaucracy if we had the budget to turn it into a crash development project with a real
development phase deadline.

"
"Then what happens?" I asked.

"It's just like Santa's workshop on the first day of winter.

None of the elves looks up from his workbench until it's
done.

Then the next project comes along and everybody forgets.

By the time the troops are wearing these things
in the field and they're handing out the gold watches over a prime rib at the Potomac Inn, night vision is just one
big happy memory with the details rewritten to fit the view of history that serves the moment.

No one will ever
even guess, Colonel Corso, " he said.

"From the moment your boys hand the material over, it goes into the
developmental soup at Fort Belvoir and comes out the other end as a weapon in the field.

"
I stood up and closed my briefcase while he walked around his desk.

"So what are you going to recommend
to General Trudeau?" he asked.

"I'd like to suggest we send the device over, you come up with the budget you need, and General Trudeau
finds the allocation, " I said.

"And you?" he said.

"It was a pleasure not meeting you, Dr.

Fredericks, " I told him.

"Of course, there will be a liaison over in Army
R&D who will officially be placed in charge of night vision development.

He will report to General Trudeau and
anything I need to know I'll find out from the general.

I look forward to seeing the development reports as they
come out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He will report to General Trudeau and
anything I need to know I'll find out from the general. I look forward to seeing the development reports as they
come out. Congratulations on your new piece of technology. And congratulations to the company who winds
up with this defense contract. "
"Congratulations, indeed, " Dr. Fredericks said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---59
We shook hands and he walked me out of his office into the corridor.

For a moment, it was like stepping out of
the surreal into the real.

We'd just stitched our own piece of fabric over reality, created a piece of history.

The
technology boys in research and development at Fort Belvoir would receive a device from one of their
consultants who would whisper to them that this was liberated from one of our enemies.

Don't ask any questions.

But it was just the thing that the lab people at Fort Belvoir were looking for to show them how a finished device
might look.

Can they come up with a reverse engineering plan?

Is there a company they're already working with
on night vision?

And within a few months, some company, whoever it might be, would wind up with a plan in
place, a development budget, and a new identity for the strange looking eyepieces that turned up in my Roswell
files.

It might take five or so years, but when it came rolling off the assembly line somewhere in Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Ohio, or wherever, it would be "Made in the USA" and I'd read about it in the papers or see it on
television.

Night vision was the first project we actually seeded during the first year of my tenure at Foreign Technology.

It
would turn out to be easier than most because of the history of German development during the war and the
research already done through the 1950s.

By the time I brought the Roswell night viewer to Fort Belvoir, it fit right in
through the seam of an existing development program and no one was the wiser.

The actual weapons
development program at Fort Belvoir served as the cover for the dissemination of Roswell technology so perfectly
that the only distortion anyone could find as he went back through the history is what might seem like a sudden
acceleration in the development program itself shortly after 1961.By the time I brought the Roswell night viewer to Fort Belvoir, it fit right in
through the seam of an existing development program and no one was the wiser.

The actual weapons
development program at Fort Belvoir served as the cover for the dissemination of Roswell technology so perfectly
that the only distortion anyone could find as he went back through the history is what might seem like a sudden
acceleration in the development program itself shortly after 1961.

Night vision got a boost in funding, a new
officer was assigned to the project by General Trudeau, and General Trudeau's name starts turning up on a
regular basis as one of the apparent benefactors of the program.

By 1963, when he and I were gone from the
Pentagon, the project was at Martin Marietta Electronics - now part of Lockheed Martin - and already on its way
through the initial deployment that would take place in Europe and Vietnam..

But I didn't know that as I drove through the Fort Belvoir gate and headed back to my Pentagon office.

I only
felt satisfied that it looked like we had successfully inserted one of our own Foreign Technology projects into an
ongoing development stream already under way and had camouflaged our appropriation of a piece of alien
technology.

At this point, I believed, we'd kept it out of the hands of the Soviets for the time being, and the aliens,
if they were monitoring what we were doing, maybe didn't know what we were doing with it either.

It would give
us time.

I headed north along the Potomac and through the green woods of Fairfax County, Virginia, back to a desk
that was quickly piling up with other projects that needed disposition.

One of them, which was running parallel
with the night vision I'd just handed off, was the embryonic "Project Corona, " an idea whose time was suddenly
thrust upon us by the shooting down of a U2 surveillance plane and the capture of its pilot, Francis Gary Powers.I headed north along the Potomac and through the green woods of Fairfax County, Virginia, back to a desk
that was quickly piling up with other projects that needed disposition.

One of them, which was running parallel
with the night vision I'd just handed off, was the embryonic "Project Corona, " an idea whose time was suddenly
thrust upon us by the shooting down of a U2 surveillance plane and the capture of its pilot, Francis Gary Powers.

The air force and the CIA had been running the U2 program for awhile during the Eisenhower administration,
and the reports and photos routinely crossed my desk at the National Security Council.

Like so many other events
during the Cold War, the U2 didn't have just a single purpose, the surveillance of the Soviet Union to monitor their
guided missile development program.

It had a triple intent.

Of course, we wanted to know exactly what the
Soviets were up to, but we also wanted to test their air defense capability.

We wanted to know how accurately
their radars could track the U2 and whether any of their missiles could bring it down.

So we deliberately provoked
them by making our presence known when we wanted them to fire at us.

Could they shoot us down?

Cameras
on the U2 picked up the launch of enemy surface to air missiles as the pilot flew over sensitive installations where
the Soviets had to challenge us or cede to us the control of top classified zones in their airspace.

So we played gamesmanship with them, probing their defenses, deliberately sacrificing pilots who we
believed died when their planes were shot down, and always denying what we were doing even as Khrushchev
screamed at Eisenhower that the U2 program was putting Khrushchev himself at risk inside the Kremlin.

"We can
deal with each other, " the Communist Party chairman told Ike.

"But not if you force me out of office.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"We can
deal with each other, " the Communist Party chairman told Ike. "But not if you force me out of office. " But as
much as Eisenhower hated the U2 program and the jeopardy into which it placed our pilots, the President had to
accommodate himself to one of the other agendas of the surveillance: the ongoing search for any evidence of
extraterrestrial spacecraft landings or crashes within the vastness of the Soviet Union. We also wanted to see
whether the Soviets were harvesting any of the alien aircraft technology for themselves. That's what made the U2
program too valuable to give up until we had an alternative. And the alternative, although it was an air force
and not an army program, was part of a shared R&D between our intelligence services and the National Security
Council/CIA apparatus. And it was already in development within Lockheed in a division they called "skunk
works. "
Because we had set up our U2 flights to provoke the Soviets and because we knew that ultimately we would
start to lose pilots and planes, the National Security staff began looking aggressively for a more secure
surveillance program as early as 1957, my last year at the White House. Intelligence decided to take orbital
satellite photos of Soviet installations, but only if they could get a bird up there that would be reliable. Also, we
didn't want to let the Soviets know we were turning earth orbit into a surveillance facility because we didn't want
to encourage them to go after our satellites. So the trick was to get a satellite up there in complete secrecy. But
how could you do that with the whole world watching?

--- PAGE BREAK ---60
The army and air force had an idea.

Lockheed had already shown that it could develop a surveillance plane,
the U2 and eventually the SR71, out of the public view and run those flights without too much interference from
Senate watchdog committees and out of the presence of any newspaper reporters.

Could they do the same
thing with a satellite?

And if they could, would the satellite recon photos be as reliable as the photos we were
getting from the U2s?

Normally, I would have said that if the army were putting up a satellite, it could do anything it wanted
because everything we did under our intelligence blanket remained relatively secure.

However, both the army
and the air force were effectively put out of the satellite launching business toward the end of the Eisenhower
administration by the civilian National Aeronautics and Space Agency under a pooled resources crash program
to get satellites up into space to show the world the flag.

The Soviets had beaten us in the race initially with
Sputnik, and the failed army and navy attempts to launch satellites only made us look worse.

I learned for a fact
that when the New York Daily News  ran the full page headline, "Oh Dear, " after the Corporal rose a few inches,
fell back onto the launchpad, and blew up into smithereens, no one was laughing harder than Nikita Khrushchev.

After a few of these attempts, the National Security Council advised President Eisenhower to throw in the
towel, pool all the national scientific resources he could, and turn the U.S.

entry into the space race over to a
civilian agency.

The military services had learned their lesson about competing over the same technology the
hard way and had to stand back and watch NASA take over.entry into the space race over to a
civilian agency.

The military services had learned their lesson about competing over the same technology the
hard way and had to stand back and watch NASA take over.

NASA had some immediate successes, and before the end of the Eisenhower administration in 1960, they had
managed to put satellites in orbit and experiment with the effects of orbital flight on animals in far more
sophisticated ways than the army's V2 experiments with small primates at Alamogordo in the late 1940s and
early1950s.

As the army and air force intelligence offices looked at the successes of these NASA satellites and at
the increasing vulnerabilities of the U2 flights, they saw the possible answer to their need for a fail safe surveillance
program.

When NASA began its Discoverer orbiter program, launching a payload into low orbit and returning it,
the military services thought they saw a solution.

If they could somehow manage to build a workable photo
recon satellite small enough to fit into the very limited space inside the Discoverer payload capsule, recover the
surveillance device when the orbiter returned to Earth, and install the entire military spying program within a
civilian scientific exploration program that was getting a lot of attention from the newspapers without alerting the
public to the military's secret agenda, they would have their covert surveillance.

We knew that the Soviets would very quickly find out about the program, but that wasn't such a bad thing.

We
reasoned that there was no way, given the CIA's penetration by the KGB, to keep the program completely
covert, but if the Soviets knew we were able to watch them it might keep them honest.

And Khrushchev wouldn't
have to worry about our deliberately violating his airspace, so he was off the hook at the Kremlin and thankful for
it.

All we had to do was keep it out of the public arena and we'd be home free.And Khrushchev wouldn't
have to worry about our deliberately violating his airspace, so he was off the hook at the Kremlin and thankful for
it.

All we had to do was keep it out of the public arena and we'd be home free.

The whole program rested on our
being able to slip what we now called "Corona" into the existing Discoverer program without a whisper in the air,
the Soviets would go along without a protest, and we would get our surveillance photos.

We added an additional incentive for the Soviets to discourage them from getting their friends in the CIA to
leak the story to friendly journalists and blowing the cover on the whole operation.

We encouraged them to
participate with us in the hidden agenda of Corona: surveillance of potential alien crash landings.

Army
Intelligence, upon Eisenhower's and the NSC's express approval, let it be known to their counterparts in the Soviet
military that any aerial intelligence we developed as a result of Corona that revealed the presence of aliens on
Soviet territory would be shared with the military.

What they did with the information, we said, we really didn't
care.

But the military was more than grateful.

The professional military didn't trust the commissars in the
Communist Party anymore than we did and hated being under their collective thumb.

Thus, in a perverse way,
although we were tipping off the Russian military about alien activity in their territory, we really weren't sharing
information with the Communists because of the deep division within the Soviet government between the
Communist Party and the military.

Our incentive worked and the KGB encouraged the CIA - even I was surprised at how effectively they worked
together - not to leak the story.

Now it was up to the air force and the skunk works division at Lockheed to build
the Corona surveillance satellite out of the public arena and load the vehicle into the Discoverer rocket right
under the noses of the American press.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Our incentive worked and the KGB encouraged the CIA - even I was surprised at how effectively they worked
together - not to leak the story. Now it was up to the air force and the skunk works division at Lockheed to build
the Corona surveillance satellite out of the public arena and load the vehicle into the Discoverer rocket right
under the noses of the American press. It was one of the trickiest operations of the Cold War because the
Russians knew what we were doing, NASA was making the entire project happen, but the American press, hungry
for even the smallest tidbit of spaceflight information, had to be kept completely in the dark. If necessary, we had
to lie to them, provide them with cover stories, completely trick them into thinking that all the American people
had to think about was the little chimp that was blasted into orbit wearing his custom sized space helmet. And we
didn't have much time to do it because we knew the Soviets were trying to embarrass Ike at the end of his term
by bringing down one of our U2 planes with a live pilot inside. We were now in a race against the Soviets to
replace the U2 with the Corona, even though the Soviets understood and accepted what we were doing every
step of the way. It was one of the ironies of the Cold War. The engineers at Lockheed designed the satellite camera package to fit neatly into the payload cone of the
Discoverer capsule. They worked under brutal time constraints because President Eisenhower was putting

--- PAGE BREAK ---61
pressure on the National Security Council to cut off the U2 overnights completely.

The old general knew it was just
a matter of time before the Soviets would capture a living American pilot, extract his confession, and march him
in front of the television cameras to the humiliation of the United States.

Eisenhower was a man of his word who
disliked politicians because they always sought the expedient solution, not the most honorable one.

Eisenhower
disliked expedience for expediency's sake and always preferred to take the most directly honest path whenever
he could.

But, as Khrushchev complained about the U2 flights, Ike always denied we were sending them.

It was
such an obvious lie that Khrushchev kept goading Eisenhower about exposing himself that way.

"We will shoot
one of them down, you'll see, " he kept telling Eisenhower whenever he complained.

"Then what will you say?"
But President Eisenhower denied the existence of the U2, putdown the telephone, and turned on his own staff,
furious that they had put him into such an untenable situation.

"Stop the nights, " he ordered.

But the CIA kept
pushing for one more flight.

It was serving a purpose, they argued.

They were learning about the Russian air
defense system at the same time they were surveilling possible areas of alien spacecraft activity.

With or without
the Russians' knowledge, the U2s denied the extraterrestrials a complete camouflage because of our high
resolution aerial surveillance.

I don't know whether we actually found any evidence of an alien landing on
Russian territory from our U2 surveillance, but the extraterrestrials certainly could see that we were able to surveil
the Soviet Union, and their knowledge of our capability served as a deterrent to roaming the vast areas of the
Soviet Union with impunity.

The CIA claimed the U2s were so important to our national security that they were even ready to sacrifice one
of their own pilots.I don't know whether we actually found any evidence of an alien landing on
Russian territory from our U2 surveillance, but the extraterrestrials certainly could see that we were able to surveil
the Soviet Union, and their knowledge of our capability served as a deterrent to roaming the vast areas of the
Soviet Union with impunity.

The CIA claimed the U2s were so important to our national security that they were even ready to sacrifice one
of their own pilots.

However, I also believe that the KGB moles who had penetrated them wanted Eisenhower to
be embarrassed before the entire world.

And when Francis Gary Powers took off in May 1960, they had their
chance.

There is still a great deal of doubt about the shootdown of Powers's U2.

His mission was to fly over the most
sensitive Soviet missile installations and make himself a target.

We believed the Russian SAMs couldn't reach his
altitude.

But, whether Powers fell asleep at the stick because of oxygen deprivation or whether his CIA controllers
forced him to a lower altitude to get better photos or even to make himself a more provocative target, we'll
never know.

I believe that Powers was probably startled out of a low oxygen lethargy by the explosion of a SAM
close enough to force him to lose control.

His plane was not hit by the missile.

The U2 was the type of aircraft that
was very difficult to fly.

Powers probably pulled into a stall and was unable to bring it back.

As his plane spun
toward the ground and Powers became too disoriented to regain control, he pulled on the lever next to his seat,
blew the canopy off, and ejected.

Powers was captured alive, paraded before cameras, and forced to confess that he was spying on the Soviet
Union.

Khrushchev had his excuse to cancel a summit meeting with Eisenhower and put on one of the great
performances of his career in front of the Supreme-Soviet.Powers was captured alive, paraded before cameras, and forced to confess that he was spying on the Soviet
Union.

Khrushchev had his excuse to cancel a summit meeting with Eisenhower and put on one of the great
performances of his career in front of the Supreme-Soviet.

Eisenhower, as he had most feared, was publicly
humiliated and forced to admit to Khrushchev that he had sent the U2s over the Soviet Union.

He promised
Khrushchev that the U2 flights would end, eliminating a valuable surveillance tool and potentially blinding us not
only to what the Soviet Union was doing but potentially to what the extraterrestrials were doing in Asia as well.

It
was a terrible experience for the old man, who believed he had been compromised by his own administration.

All the while during the final months of preparations before Gary Powers's U2 flight, NASA was completing the
engineering details to insert the Corona payload into the Discoverer payload.

If all went well, the first launch of
Corona would give the National Security Council the results they wanted and the U2 program would come to an
end because it had been made obsolete by Corona.

Then Gary Powers was shot down and the U2 program
came to an end because Eisenhower terminated it.

We were blind.

Then Discoverer was launched from Cape
Canaveral and those of us in the army and airforce missile programs who were aware of Corona and what was
at stake in the mission held our collective breaths.

If it worked, we had eyes.

If it failed, our best surveillance
opportunity would have failed.

You can imagine the jubilation at the Pentagon when the Corona payload was recovered and we
developed the first photos.

They were better than what we had gotten from the U2, and the Corona was
completely invisible to the Soviets.

Khrushchev hid the information from his own Supreme Soviet, and Eisenhower
certainly didn't make a public statement to the American people.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They were better than what we had gotten from the U2, and the Corona was
completely invisible to the Soviets. Khrushchev hid the information from his own Supreme Soviet, and Eisenhower
certainly didn't make a public statement to the American people. We were back in the photo intelligence
business, and in addition to keeping tabs on Soviet missile developments, we had a way to track any possible EBE
attempt to set up a base in the remotest parts of Asia, Africa, or South America. We were gaining parity with the
EBEs, a small victory, but a victory nevertheless. What satisfied me the most about Project Corona, I thought as I reached the outskirts of Washington on my
way back from Fort Belvoir, was that it was elegant as well as successful; Just like the ease with which we had
slipped the Roswell night visor into the development and engineering stream at Fort Belvoir, so had we slipped
the Corona photo-surveillance payload directly into the ongoing Discoverer program, reverse engineering
Discoverer to make the payload fit. No one realized what we had accomplished or how effectively the military
utilized traditional programs as a cover for their own secret weapons development systems.

--- PAGE BREAK ---At the same time, we knew we were gaining on the aliens.

With each successful start of a new project, some
based on the Roswell technology, others initiated specifically to counter the alien capabilities we had discovered
at Roswell, we believed we were advancing our game piece to the next square.

We believed that no matter
how hostile the aliens' intentions were, they didn't have the raw power to launch a global war against us.

They
would study us, infiltrate us, wear us down until we might not be able to resist them, but they had neither the
intention nor the capability, we believed, of destroying the planet so as to take it for themselves.

In that, we held
the upperhand.

But what we needed was a real outpost in a location that would
enable us to establish a strategic advantage, a base to strike at them far enough away so that we wouldn't
create a panic on Earth.

We needed a base on the moon.

It was something the army had dreamed about from
the very first months after our encounters with the aliens outside of Roswell and something we had tried to fund
without the public's knowledge.

It was an ambitious project that had bounced around from skeptic to skeptic
inside the military for over a year before it landed in front of me.

And when I took over the Foreign Technology
desk, it was a project we almost had.

CHAPTER 11
Project Moon Base
"I ENVISION EXPEDITIOUS DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROPOSAL TO establish a lunar outpost to be of critical
importance to the U.S.

Army of the future.

This evaluation is apparently shared by the Chief of Staff in view of his
expeditious approval and enthusiastic endorsement of initiation of the study, " General Trudeau wrote to the chief
of ordnance in March 1959, in support of the army's "Project HORIZON, " a strategic plan for deploying a military
outpost on the surface of the moon..Army of the future.

This evaluation is apparently shared by the Chief of Staff in view of his
expeditious approval and enthusiastic endorsement of initiation of the study, " General Trudeau wrote to the chief
of ordnance in March 1959, in support of the army's "Project HORIZON, " a strategic plan for deploying a military
outpost on the surface of the moon..

It was the army's most ambitious response to the threat from extraterrestrials
and, by the time I arrived at the Pentagon, it was one of the projects that General Trudeau had handed off to
me to get moving.

"The boys at NASA are taking over the whole rocket launching business, Phil, " he said.

"And the army's not
even getting the scraps left on the table.

"
I had just left the White House when the National Aeronautics and Space Act was passed in 1958, and I knew
what that had portended.

It transferred the responsibility of space from the military services to a civilian run
agency that was supposed to fulfill the U.S.

promises to other countries for the demilitarization of space.

It was a
laudable goal, anyone would argue : demilitarize space so that countries could explore and experiment without
the risk of losing their space vehicles or satellites to hostile activities.

For the United States and the Russians the
agreement meant that our respective astronauts and cosmonauts wouldn't make war on each other.

Good
idea.

But someone forgot to tell it to the extraterrestrials, who had been systematically violating our planet's
airspace for decades, if not centuries, and had already set up a base of operations on the moon.

For General Trudeau and much of the U.S.

military command, the Soviets' ability to put high payload vehicles
and cosmonauts into orbit with relative ease was a frightening prospect.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For General Trudeau and much of the U.S. military command, the Soviets' ability to put high payload vehicles
and cosmonauts into orbit with relative ease was a frightening prospect. Unless the United States challenged
Soviet technology with our own ongoing launch program and expanded our satellite surveillance, the army
believed it would cede an all important strategic advantage to the Soviet Union. By 1960, we were reaching a
critical juncture. Because of the development window and the time it took to get projects through development,
programs started too late in the 1960s would be hopelessly obsolete by 1970, when the Soviets were expected to
have established a presence in space. As in the U2 program, we had another agenda that concerned us more than just the Soviets' ability to
threaten us with a nuclear missile capability from space. We were also very much aware of the ability of a
dominant military power on Earth to establish its own version of a treaty with extraterrestrials. We had already
seen how Stalin negotiated a separate non-aggression pact with Hitler, allowing the Germans to stabilize its
Eastern front and invade Western Europe. We didn't want to see Khrushchev gain so much unchallenged power
in space that the extraterrestrials would readily agree to some kind of accommodation with him guaranteeing
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---63
both of them a degree of freedom to dominate the political affairs of our planet.

This may seem paranoid now, in
the 1990s, but in the late 1950s this was exactly the thinking of the military intelligence community.

General Trudeau's concerns were the concerns of anybody who knew the truth about an alien presence
around our planet and their abilities to drop on top of us from out of nowhere just like they had done in Roswell, in
Washington, D.C., in 1952, and in countless other places around the world.

And we didn't know if any one of
these sightings could turn into a full-fledged landing in force or if an invasion hadn't already begun.

If they could
turn the Soviet government into a client state with a proxy army, there might be no checking their ability to
exercise their will to colonize our planet, appropriate our natural resources, or, if the cattle mutilations and stories
of abductions were true, conduct with complete impunity an organized experimentation or testing program on
the life forms of this planet.

In the absence of any information to disprove our fears, it was the military's obligation
to project the worst possible scenario.

That's why the army pushed for Project HORIZON.

We had to have a plan.

The Horizon documents were straight forward in expressing their concerns : We needed to put a fully armed
military outpost on the moon first because if the Soviets achieved this objective before we did, we would be in
the position of having to storm a hill or secure a military position.

We would rather be the defenders of a strongly
fortified enclave than the attackers.

Our outpost had to be strong enough to withstand an assault and have
enough personnel to conduct scientific experiments and continual surveillance of the earth and its airspace.We would rather be the defenders of a strongly
fortified enclave than the attackers.

Our outpost had to be strong enough to withstand an assault and have
enough personnel to conduct scientific experiments and continual surveillance of the earth and its airspace.

Initially, General Trudeau argued, the outpost must be of sufficient size and contain sufficient equipment to
permit the survival and moderate constructive activity of from ten to twenty personnel at a minimum.

It must
allow for expansion of the permanent facilities, resupply, and rotation of personnel to guarantee the maximum
amount of time for a sustained occupancy.

The general not only wanted the outpost to establish a beach head
on the moon, he wanted it to be permanent and able to sustain itself for long periods without support from the
earth.

Therefore, location and design were critical and required, in the army's view, a triangulation station of
moon to Earth baseline space surveillance system that facilitated:
(1) communication with and optimum observation of the earth,
(2) routine travel between the moon and the earth,
(3) the best possible exploration capability not only of the immediate area of the lunar surface but long range
exploration expeditions and, most importantly from the army's perspective,
(4) the military defense of the moon base.

The army's primary objective was to establish the first permanent
manned installation on the moon and nothing less.

The military potential of the moon was paramount, but the
mission allowed for an ongoing investigation of the commercial and scientific potentials of the outpost as well.

The army wanted to make Horizon conform to existing national policy on space exploration, even insofar as
the demilitarization of space was concerned.

But it was tough because all of us in the military services who had
come in contact with the Roswell file believed that we were already under some form of attack.The army wanted to make Horizon conform to existing national policy on space exploration, even insofar as
the demilitarization of space was concerned.

But it was tough because all of us in the military services who had
come in contact with the Roswell file believed that we were already under some form of attack.

Demilitarizing
space only meant playing into the hands of a culture that had displayed a hostile intent toward us.

But we also
realized that overtly establishing a military presence in space would encourage the Soviets to match us step for
step and result in an arms race in outer space that would exacerbate Cold War tensions.

Armaments in space
might be more difficult to control, and the chance of an accidental military exchange could have easily
precipitated a crisis on Earth.

Thus, the whole problem of what to do about establishing a military presence in
space was a conundrum.

Horizon was the army's attempt to accomplish its military objectives within the context
of the government's demilitarization policy.

The army faced another obstacle in its plans from the members of the Roswell working group who were still
establishing and enforcing policy at levels above top secret.

The working group correctly saw that any
independent military expedition into space, especially for the purpose of establishing an outpost on the moon,
had a high probability of encountering extraterrestrials.

In this encounter, there was no guarantee that a military
exchange would not ensue or, at the very least, a military report would be filed.

Even if these reports were kept
top secret, given the military bureaucracy and the presence of legislative oversight it was highly unlikely that the
press would not learn about military encounters with aliens.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In this encounter, there was no guarantee that a military
exchange would not ensue or, at the very least, a military report would be filed. Even if these reports were kept
top secret, given the military bureaucracy and the presence of legislative oversight it was highly unlikely that the
press would not learn about military encounters with aliens. Thus, the basic premise of the working group and its
entire mission, the camouflage of our discovery of alien life forms visiting and probably threatening Earth, would
be undermined and years of successful operations might easily be brought to an unsatisfactory end. No, the
working group would rather have the exploration of space in the hands of a civilian agency whose bureaucracy
could be more easily controlled and whose personnel would be handpicked, at least at the outset, by the
members of the working group. Thus, the stage was set for a Byzantine bureaucratic struggle among members of the same organizations but
with different levels of security clearance, policy objectives, and even knowledge of what had taken place in
years gone by. And underlying it all was the basic assumption that the world's civilian population was not ready to
learn the real truth about the existence of extraterrestrial cultures and the likely threat these cultures posed to life

--- PAGE BREAK ---64
on Earth.

General Trudeau was as undaunted as I had ever seen him.

In Korea, he charged back up Pork Chop
Hill into the face of an enemy attack so fierce that the soldiers who had volunteered to go up with him believed
they were going to breathe their last.

But they couldn't let him go up there alone, which is exactly what he was
set to do when he threw away his helmet and clasped one on from a wounded sergeant.

He chambered the first
round into his automatic and said, "I'm going.

Who's with me?" I imagined he had the same look on his face now,
as he handed me the report for Project Horizon, as he did then.

"We're going, Phil, " he said, and that was all I
needed to hear.

When the civilian space agency supporters told the army that all of the issues the military raised about the
need to establish a presence first would be accomplished with civilian missions, General Trudeau argued that the
civilian plans did not explicitly call for a base on the moon, only for the possibility of an outpost in earth orbit that
may or may not be capable of serving as a way station for flights to the moon or to other planets.

And the time
frame for the construction of an orbiting space station made it seem obsolete even before it reached the
drawing boards.

Besides, General Trudeau told the scientists on Eisenhower's aeronautics and space advisory
committee toward the end of the President's administration, you can't trust a civilian run agency to complete a
military mission.

It hadn't happened in the past and it wouldn't happen in the future.

If you wanted a military
operation completed, only the military could do it.

President Eisenhower understood that kind of logic.

In the late 1950s, the White House had forwarded queries to General Trudeau about the army's research and
development policy regarding Project Horizon and why, specifically, the military needed to be on the moon and
why a civilian mission couldn't accomplish most of the scientific objectives.President Eisenhower understood that kind of logic.

In the late 1950s, the White House had forwarded queries to General Trudeau about the army's research and
development policy regarding Project Horizon and why, specifically, the military needed to be on the moon and
why a civilian mission couldn't accomplish most of the scientific objectives.

This was at the time when the White
House was supporting the National Aeronautics and Space Act and was supporting the creation of the civilian
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

General Trudeau responded that he couldn't immediately lay out the full extent of the military potential.

"But, "
he wrote in the report, "it is probable that observation of the Earth and space vehicles from the moon will prove to
be highly advantageous.

"
Later he wrote that by using a moon to Earth baseline, space surveillance by triangulation - in other words,
using a point of reference on Earth and a point of reference on the moon to pin point the positions of enemy
missiles, satellites, or spacecraft - promised greater range and accuracy of observation.

Instead of having only
one point of observation, we would have an additional angle because we would have a base on the moon as
another point of observation.

This was especially the case for the types of lunar and Mars missions NASA was
planning as early as 1960.

He said that the types of earth based tracking and control networks currently in the
planning stages were already inadequate for the deep space operations that were also in the planning stages in
the civilian agencies.

So, it made no sense to spend money developing communications and control networks
that would be obsolete for the very purposes for which they were being designed.

Military communications
would be improved immeasurably by the use of a moon based relay station that would cover a broader range
and probably be more resistant to attack during a conventional or nuclear war that took place on Earth.So, it made no sense to spend money developing communications and control networks
that would be obsolete for the very purposes for which they were being designed.

Military communications
would be improved immeasurably by the use of a moon based relay station that would cover a broader range
and probably be more resistant to attack during a conventional or nuclear war that took place on Earth.

But
General Trudeau had the real bombshell waiting to be dropped.

"The employment of moon based weapons systems against Earth or space targets may prove to be feasible
and desirable, " he wrote the army chief of ordnance, revealing for the first time that he believed, along with
Douglas MacArthur, that the army might be called upon to fight a war in space as well as on Earth.

General
Trudeau foresaw the possibility that a moon based communications network would have an advantage in
tracking guided missiles launched from Earth, but he also realized that weapons could be fired from space, and
not just by Earth governments but by extraterrestrial craft.

It was the moon base project, he believed, that would
be able to protect civilian populations and military forces on Earth from attacks launched either from earth orbit
or from space.

But a moon based defense initiative had an added feature.

"Moon based military power will be a strong deterrent to war because of the extreme difficulty, from the
enemy point of view, of eliminating our ability to retaliate, " he hypothesized.

"Any military operations on the
moon will be difficult to counter by the enemy because of the difficulty of his reaching the moon, if our forces are
already present and have means of countering a landing or of neutralizing any hostile forces that have landed.

"And, the general told me, this would apply whether those hostile forces were the Soviets, the Chinese, or the
EBEs.

The situation would be reversed, however, "if hostile forces are permitted to arrive first.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"And, the general told me, this would apply whether those hostile forces were the Soviets, the Chinese, or the
EBEs. The situation would be reversed, however, "if hostile forces are permitted to arrive first. They can militarily
counter our landings and attempt to deny us politically the use of their property. "
The army conceived of the development of a moon base as an endeavor similar to the building of the atomic
bomb : a vast amount of resources applied to one particular mission, complete secrecy about the nature of the
mission, and a crash program to complete the mission before the end of the next decade. He said that the
establishment of the outpost should be a special project having authority and priority similar to the Manhattan
Project in World War II. Once established, the lunar base would be operated under the control of a unified space
command, which was an extension of current military command and control policy, and still is. Space,
specifically an imaginary sphere of space encompassing the earth and the moon, would be considered a
military theater governed by whatever military rules were in force at that time. The control of all U.S. military forces
by a unified command had already been in effect by the late 1950s, so General Trudeau's plan for a unified

--- PAGE BREAK ---65
military space command was no exception to an ongoing practice.

The only difference was that the general
didn't want the unified command to exercise authority solely over the moon base itself; he wanted it extended to
control and utilize exclusively military satellites, military space vehicles, space surveillance systems, and the entire
logistical network installed to support these military assets.

To the general, being second to the Soviet Union in deploying and supporting a permanent lunar outpost
would have been disastrous not only to our national prestige but to our very democratic system itself.

In Arthur
Trudeau's estimation, the Soviet Union was currently planning to fortify a lunar base by the middle 1960s and
declare it Soviet territory.

He believed that if the United States tried to land on the moon, especially if we tried to
establish a base of operations there, the Soviets would have propagandized the event as an act of war, an
invasion of its territory, and would have tried to characterize the United States as the aggressor and our presence
as a hostile act.

If they defended the moon as one of their colonies, or if they were the proxy force on behalf of
the extraterrestrials with whom they had forged a military treaty, the United States would be in a weakened
position.

Thus, General Trudeau concluded and so advised his chief of the Ordnance Missile Command, it was of
the utmost urgency that the U.S.

Army devise a feasible plan to have a manned landing on the lunar surface by
spring 1965, with a fully operational lunar outpost deployed on the moon by late 1966 at a cost over an eight and
a half year period of $6 billion.Thus, General Trudeau concluded and so advised his chief of the Ordnance Missile Command, it was of
the utmost urgency that the U.S.

Army devise a feasible plan to have a manned landing on the lunar surface by
spring 1965, with a fully operational lunar outpost deployed on the moon by late 1966 at a cost over an eight and
a half year period of $6 billion.

The first two astronauts, the spear head of the scouting crew, were scheduled to touch down on the lunar
surface in April 1965, in an area near the lunar equator where, according to the surveys, the army believed the
terrain would support multiple landing and lift off facilities and the construction of a cylindrical, ranch house type
of structure with tubular walls built beneath the surface into a crevice that would house an initial twelve
personnel.

The bulk of the construction materials for the lunar outpost, about 300,000 pounds, would already be
on the site, having been transported there over the previous three months.

According to the army plan, an
additional190,000 pounds of cargo would be sent to the moon from April1965 through November 1966.

And from
December 1966 through December 1967, another 266,000 pounds of cargo and supplies would be scheduled to
arrive at the now operational moon base.

It is April 1965, and a lunar vehicle with a crew of two astronauts has just touched down on the moon's surface.

Although the vehicle has an immediate lift off capability to return the astronauts to Earth, their scouting from orbit
has determined that the area is safe and that there are no threats from either the Soviets or any extraterrestrials.

The radio crackles with the team's first instructions.

"This is Horizon control, Moonbase.

You are go for the first twenty-four hours, " Horizon control at the Cocoa
Beach, Florida, Cape Canaveral Space Command Center advises the astronauts."This is Horizon control, Moonbase.

You are go for the first twenty-four hours, " Horizon control at the Cocoa
Beach, Florida, Cape Canaveral Space Command Center advises the astronauts.

They secure their lander,
which, if they receive the go to stay for additional periods, will ultimately become their cabin for the next two
months as the construction crews arrive from Earth to begin the assembly of the lunar outpost.

However, even before the first manned cargo ships arrive, the advance crew of two astronauts will confirm
the condition of the cargo that has already been delivered to the site, refine the environmental studies that have
been conducted by the unmanned surveillance probes, and verify that the initial measurements and
assumptions for the site of the moon base are correct.

By July 1965, the first crew of nine men arrive to begin laying the cylindrical tubes in the crevice beneath the
surface and install the two portable atomic reactors that will power the entire outpost.

A number of factors
influenced the army's decision to sink the main structures beneath the lunar surface.

The most important of these
were the uniform temperatures, the insulation of the lunar surface material itself, protection from a potentially
hazardous shower of small meteors and meteorites, camouflage and security, and protection from the kinds of
radiation particles that are normally prevented from reaching Earth by our atmosphere.

Army engineers designed the cylindrical housing units to look and act like vacuum tank thermos bottles with a
double wall with a special insulation between.

The thermos design would prevent heat loss and so insulate the
housing unit so that just the heal radiated by the internal artificial lighting system would be more than adequate
to maintain a comfortable temperature inside.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Army engineers designed the cylindrical housing units to look and act like vacuum tank thermos bottles with a
double wall with a special insulation between. The thermos design would prevent heat loss and so insulate the
housing unit so that just the heal radiated by the internal artificial lighting system would be more than adequate
to maintain a comfortable temperature inside. The crew's atmosphere was to be maintained by insulated tanks
containing liquid oxygen and nitrogen with the waste moisture and carbon dioxide absorbed by solid chemicals
and recycled through a dehumidifier. Eventually, as the base became more permanent and new crews were
rotated in and out, a more efficient recycling system was to be installed. The initial construction crew was assigned to live in a temporary configuration of cylindrical quarters as their
numbers were increased by an additional six men and more supplies. Like the permanent facility, the temporary
construction cabin would be buried in a crevice beneath the lunar surface, but it would be smaller than the
permanent cabin and have none of the laboratory facilities that were to be built in the permanent structure. From the component parts already shipped to the landing site, the construction crew was to assemble a lunar
surface rover, a digging and trenching vehicle - similar to a backhoe - and a forklift type of vehicle that would
also serve as a type of crane. With just these three devices, the army believed, a crew of fifteen workers could
assemble a permanent outpost out of prefabricated components. The Horizon plan for construction of facilities in

--- PAGE BREAK ---66
a weightless, airless environment ultimately became the model for the construction of both the Russian Mir and
American freedom space stations.

While the construction of the permanent subsurface structure was under way, other members of the crew
would lay out the multiantenna communications system that would rely on geosynchronous Earth satellites to
relay transmissions back and forth from Earth ground stations.

Lunar based tracking and surveillance radar
equipment would also maintain a constant vigilance of the earth and be able to track any orbital vehicles from
the earth's surface as well as space vehicles entering the planet's atmosphere from outer space.

Members of the
crew would communicate with each other : and with the outpost itself by radios mounted in the helmets of their
space suits.

By the time the army was proposing Project Horizon, army engineers had already selected a number of
launch sites.

Instead of Cape Canaveral, the army chose an equatorial location because the earth spins fastest
at the equator and this would provide added thrust to any rocket with an especially heavy payload.

The army
chose a secret location in Brazil where it wanted to start construction on an eight launchpad facility that would
house the entire project.

The spacecraft would be monitored and controlled from the facilities at Cocoa Beach,
where the army and navy were already launching their satellites.

We broke the program into six separate phases beginning with the June 1959 initial feasibility, which was
written in response to General Trudeau's first proposal and became Phase I of the entire plan.

Phase II, scheduled
to be completed in early 1960, when I was to take over the project, called for a detailed development and
funding plan in conjunction with preliminary experimentation on some of the essential components.We broke the program into six separate phases beginning with the June 1959 initial feasibility, which was
written in response to General Trudeau's first proposal and became Phase I of the entire plan.

Phase II, scheduled
to be completed in early 1960, when I was to take over the project, called for a detailed development and
funding plan in conjunction with preliminary experimentation on some of the essential components.

During this
phase, I had planned to use our regular Army R&D procedures to manage and review the testing and make sure
that we could do what we said we could do under the initial feasibility study.

In Phase III, we scheduled the complete development of the hardware and the system integration for the
entire project.

This included the rockets, the space capsules, all of the lunar transportation and construction
vehicles, the launch facilities at the proposed site in Brazil, and the lunar outpost components for both the
temporary and the permanent bases.

Also included in this phase was the development of all of the
communications systems, including relay stations, surveillance systems, and the personal protective and
communications gear that the astronauts would use.

And finally, Phase III called for the engineering of all the
actual procedures needed for Horizon to be successful such as the orbital rendezvous, orbital fueling of lunar
transportation vehicles, transfer of cargo in orbit, and launching and testing of cargo rockets.

Under Phase IV, scheduled for 1965, the first lunar landing was to take place.

The establishment of the first two
man lunar observation outpost and the construction of the preliminary living and working quarters for the first
detachment of the crew were all slated for completion.

The plans stated that by the end of this phase, "a
manned lunar outpost will have been established.The establishment of the first two
man lunar observation outpost and the construction of the preliminary living and working quarters for the first
detachment of the crew were all slated for completion.

The plans stated that by the end of this phase, "a
manned lunar outpost will have been established.

"
Phases V and VI were the operational phases of the project and were scheduled to be completed over a two
year period beginning in December 1966 and winding up in January 1968.

Under these phases, the lunar outpost
would progress from the preliminary construction phases to the construction of the permanent facilities.

These
facilities begin the surveillance of Earth, establish our military presence by the emplacement of fortified positions
on the moon, and begin the first scientific experiments and exploration.

In Phase VI, based upon the success of
the permanent outpost and the exploration of the lunar terrain, the army planned to expand the outpost with
more landings and additional facilities and report on the results of biological and chemical testing and the first
attempts to exploit the moon as a commercial entity.

The army also believed, because that was the way we in
R&D believed we could pay back the enormous development overhead we incurred, that by commercially
exploiting the moon, perhaps through the same kind of federal land leasing deals the Department of the Interior
currently grants for oil and mineral exploration, we could put the billions of dollars spent back into the federal
coffers.

Project Horizon also outlined the development of an Earth orbiting station as an ancillary project to support
the lunar landing missions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The army also believed, because that was the way we in
R&D believed we could pay back the enormous development overhead we incurred, that by commercially
exploiting the moon, perhaps through the same kind of federal land leasing deals the Department of the Interior
currently grants for oil and mineral exploration, we could put the billions of dollars spent back into the federal
coffers. Project Horizon also outlined the development of an Earth orbiting station as an ancillary project to support
the lunar landing missions. Under the "Orbital Station" specifications, the Army Ordnance project developers
suggested the launching and assembly of an "austere, basic" orbital platform that would provide astronaut crews
on their way to the moon with a rendezvous point for exchanging and increasing their payloads, refueling, and
relaunching their spacecraft. The orbiting station would also be important in the early cargo shipment stages of
Project Horizon where army crews could handle the cargo loading in the weightlessness of space faster and
easier than they could on Earth. Cargo could be shipped up separately, travel in earth orbit with the station, and
then be reassembled by crews who would live in their own spaceship cabins instead of in the space station and
then return to Earth when the refueling and reassembly of payloads was complete. If the preliminary basic space station were successful, the army envisioned a more elaborate, sophisticated
facility that would have its own scientific and military mission and serve as a relay station for crews on their way to
or from the lunar outpost. This station would have an enhanced military capability and enable the United States
to dominate the airspace over its enemies, blind its enemies' satellites, and shoot down its missiles. The army also
saw the enhanced orbiting space station as another component in an elaborate defense against

--- PAGE BREAK ---67
extraterrestrials, especially if the military were able to develop high energy lasers and the particle beam weapon
we had seen aboard the Roswell spacecraft.

The space station would, according to the army plan, effectively
provide the platform for testing Earth to space weapons, and these, General Trudeau and I agreed, would be
primarily directed against the hostile extraterrestrials who were the real threat to our planet.

In its plan for a separate administration and management structure within the structure of the army, Project
Horizon was designed to be the largest research, development, and deployment operation in the army's history.

Larger than the Manhattan Project, Horizon could easily have become a completely separate unit within the
army itself.

As such, Horizon was perceived as an immediate threat to the other branches of the military as well as
to the civilian space agencies.

The navy had its own pet plan for establishing undersea bases that would harvest
the commercial and scientific opportunities at the bottom of the oceans while at the same time, and more
importantly, establishing an antisubmarine defense that would counter the threat from Soviet nuclear submarines.

We suspected that the navy plans, like our own plans for a moon base, also gave the navy the capability of
carrying out surveillance tracking of unidentified undersea objects if, in fact, that's what the EBEs were sending to
Earth.

Despite the civilian opposition to the army's plan, General Trudeau wrote that the army had no choice but to
advocate its plans for a moon base.

"The United States intelligence community agrees that the Soviet Union may
accomplish a manned lunar landing at anytime after 1965.

" This, he said, would establish a Soviet precedent for
claiming the lunar surface as Soviet territory which, even in and of itself, could precipitate the next war if the
United States also tried to establish a presence there.

Being second was no option." This, he said, would establish a Soviet precedent for
claiming the lunar surface as Soviet territory which, even in and of itself, could precipitate the next war if the
United States also tried to establish a presence there.

Being second was no option.

"As the Congress has noted, "
General Trudeau continued, "we are caught in a stream in which we have no choice but to proceed.

" .

However, as hard as we tried to get Project Horizon into full funding and development, we were stopped.

The
nation's space program had become the property of the civilian space agency, and NASA had its own agenda
and its own schedule for space exploration.

We were successful in discrete projects like Corona, but it would not
relinquish to the army the control necessary to establish a moon base under the terms of a Project Horizon.

I became General Trudeau's point man for the project in Washington.

I was able to lobby for it, and Horizon
also became an effective cover for all of the technological development I was overseeing out of the Roswell file.

No one knew just how much of the Roswell technology would wind up getting into development because of the
military issues Horizon implicitly proposed about the presence of extraterrestrials and their hostile intentions.

After
his first full year in office, President Kennedy also saw the value in Project Horizon even
though he was in no position to dismantle NASA or order NASA to cede control to the army for the
development of a base on the moon.

But I think we eventually made our point to the President because he ultimately saw the value in a moon
base.

Shortly after I testified before the Senate in a closed, top secret session about how the KGB had penetrated
the CIA and was actually dictating some of our intelligence estimates since before the Korean War, Attorney
General Robert Kennedy, who read that secret testimony, asked me to come over to the Justice Department for
a visit.

We came to a meeting of the minds that day.Shortly after I testified before the Senate in a closed, top secret session about how the KGB had penetrated
the CIA and was actually dictating some of our intelligence estimates since before the Korean War, Attorney
General Robert Kennedy, who read that secret testimony, asked me to come over to the Justice Department for
a visit.

We came to a meeting of the minds that day.

I know that I convinced him that the official intelligence the
President was receiving through his agencies was not only faulty, it was deliberately flawed.

Robert Kennedy
began to see that those of us over at the Pentagon were not just a bunch of old soldiers looking for a war.

He saw
that we really did see a threat and that the United States was truly compromised by Soviet penetration of our
most secret agencies.

We didn't talk about Roswell or any aliens.

I never told him about extraterrestrials, but I was able to convince
him that if the Soviets got to the moon before we did, victory in the Cold War might just belong to them by the
end of this decade.

Bobby Kennedy suspected that there was another agenda to the army's desire to deploy a
lunar outpost for military as well as for scientific and commercial purposes and, without ever acknowledging that
agenda, promised that he would talk about it with the President.

I can only tell you that it was a mark of achievement for me personally when President John Kennedy
announced to the nation shortly after my meeting with Bobby at the Justice Department that it was one of his
goals that the United States put a manned expedition on the moon before the end of the 1960s.

He got it!

Maybe
he couldn't let the army have another Manhattan Project.

That was another era and another war.

But Jack
Kennedy did understand, I believe, the real consequences of the Cold War and what might have happened if
the Russians had put a manned lander on the moon before we did.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That was another era and another war. But Jack
Kennedy did understand, I believe, the real consequences of the Cold War and what might have happened if
the Russians had put a manned lander on the moon before we did. The way history turned out, it was our lunar expeditions, one after the other throughout the 1960s, that not only
caught the world's attention but showed all our enemies that the United States was determined to stake out its
territory and defend the moon. Nobody was looking for an out and out war, especially the EBEs who tried to
scare us away from the moon and their own base there more times than even I know. They buzzed our ships,
interfered with our communications, and sought to threaten us by their physical presence. But we continued and

--- PAGE BREAK ---persevered.

Ultimately, we reached the moon and sent enough manned expeditions to explore the lunar surface
that they effectively challenged the EBEs for control over our own skies and sphere of space, the very sphere
General Trudeau was talking about in the Project Horizon memoranda ten years earlier.

And although the Horizon
proposal projected a lunar landing by1967, it presupposed that the army would begin creating the bureaucracy
to manage the effort and build the hardware as early as1959.

Because of NASA and civilian management of
space exploration, the United States took longer to reach the moon than we had originally assumed and, of
course, never did build the permanent base we had planned for in the original Horizon proposal.

I knew, even though I was no longer in the army in 1969, that our success at lunar exploration had
demonstrated that we were exercising control and that the EBEs would not have free rein over our skies.

It also
demonstrated that if there were any deals to be made, any proxy relationships to establish, the Soviets were not
the ones to deal with.

By the beginning of the 1970s, as the Apollo lunar landings continued, it was clear that the
tide had turned and we had gained some of the advantage in dealing with the EBEs that we were seeking way
back in the 1950s.

But for me, back in 1961, staring at the mammoth Project Horizon report on my desk and realizing that the
entire civilian science establishment was mobilizing against this endeavor, I knew that small victories would have
to suffice until the big ones could be won.

And I took out the printed silicon wafers we'd pulled from the Roswell
spacecraft wreckage and told myself that these would comprise the next project I would get into development.

I
barely knew what they were, but, if the scientists at White Sands Proving Grounds were right about what they
portended, this was a victory we would relish long after the political battles over Project Horizon were over.And I took out the printed silicon wafers we'd pulled from the Roswell
spacecraft wreckage and told myself that these would comprise the next project I would get into development.

I
barely knew what they were, but, if the scientists at White Sands Proving Grounds were right about what they
portended, this was a victory we would relish long after the political battles over Project Horizon were over.

CHAPTER 12
The Integrated Circuit Chip: From the Roswell Crash Site to Silicon Valley
WITH THE NIGHT-VISION IMAGE INTENSIFIER PROJECT UNDER way at Fort Belvoir and the Project Horizon team
trying to swim upstream against the tide of civilian management of the U.S.

space program, I turned my attention
to the next of the Roswell crash fragments that looked especially intriguing: the charred semiconductor wafers
that had broken off some larger device.

I hadn't made these my priorities at first, not knowing what they really
were, until General Trudeau asked me to take a closer look.

"Talk to some of the rocket scientists down at Alamogordo about these things, Phil, " he said.

"I think they'll
know what we should do with them.

"
I knew that in the days immediately following the crash, General Twining had met with the Alamogordo group
of the Air Materiel Command and had described some of the debris to them.

But I didn't know how detailed his
descriptions were or whether they even knew about the wafers we had in our file.

"I want to talk to some of the scientists up here, too, " I said.

"Especially, I want to see some of the engineers
from the defense contractors.

Maybe they can figure out what the engineering process is for these things.

"
"Go over to Bell Labs, Phil, " General Trudeau also suggested.

" The transistor came out of their shop and these
things look a lot like transistorized circuits.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"
"Go over to Bell Labs, Phil, " General Trudeau also suggested. " The transistor came out of their shop and these
things look a lot like transistorized circuits. "
I'd heard that General Twining had worked very closely with both Bell Labs and Motorola on communications
research during the war, afterwards at the Alamogordo test site for V2 missile launches, and after the Roswell
crash. Whether he had brought them any material from the crash or showed them the tiny silicon chips was a
matter of pure speculation. I only know that the entire field of circuit miniaturization took a giant leap in 1947 with
the invention of the transistor and the first solid state components. By the late 1950s,transistors had replaced the
vacuum tube in radios and had turned the wall-sized wooden box of the 1940s into the portable plastic radio you
could hear blaring away at the shore on a hot July Sunday. The electronics industry had taken a major
technological jump in less than ten years, and I had to wonder privately whether any Roswell material had gotten
out that I didn't know about prior to my taking over Foreign Technology in 1961. 68

--- PAGE BREAK ---69
I didn't realize it at first when I showed those silicon wafers to General Trudeau, but I was to become very
quickly and intimately involved with the burgeoning computer industry and a very small, completely invisible, cog
in an assembly line process that fifteen years later would result in the first microcomputer systems and the
personal computer revolution.

Over the course of the years since I joined the army in 1942, my career took me through the stages of vacuum
tube based devices, like our radios and radars in World War II, to component chassis.

These were large circuitry
units that, if they went down, could be changed in sections, smaller sections, and finally to tiny transistors and
transistorized electronic components.

The first army computers I saw were room sized, clanking vacuum tube
monsters that were always breaking down and, by today's standards, took an eternity to calculate even the
simplest of answers.

They were simply oil filled data pots.

But they amazed those of us who had never seen
computers work before.

At Red Canyon and in Germany, the tracking and targeting radars we used were controlled by new
transistorized chassis computers that were compact enough to fit onto a truck and travel with the battalion.

So
when I opened up my nut file and saw the charred matte gray quarter sized, cracker shaped silicon wafers with
the gridlines etched onto them like tiny printed lines on the cover of a match book, I could make an educated
guess about their function even though I'd never seen anything of the like before.

I knew, however, that our
rocket scientists and the university researchers who worked with the development laboratories at Bell, Motorola,
and IBM would more than understand the primary function of these chips and figure out what we needed to do
to make some of our own.

But first I called Professor Hermann Oberth for basic background on what, if any, development might have
taken place after the Roswell crash.

Dr.But first I called Professor Hermann Oberth for basic background on what, if any, development might have
taken place after the Roswell crash.

Dr.

Oberth knew the Alamogordo scientists and probably received second
hand the substance of the conversations General Twining had with his Alamogordo group in the hours after the
retrieval of the vehicle.

And if General Twining described some of the debris, did he describe these little silicon
chips?

And if he did, in those months when the ENIAC - the first working computer - was just cranking up at the
Aberdeen Ordnance Testing Grounds in Maryland, what did the scientists make of those chips?

"They saw these at the Walker Field hangar, " Dr.

Oberth told me.

"All of them at Alamogordo flew over to
Roswell with General Twining to oversee the shipment to Wright Field.

"
Oberth described what happened that day after the crash when a team of AMC rocket scientists pored over
the bits and pieces of debris from the site.

Some of the debris was packed for flight on B29s.

Other material,
especially the crates that wound up at Fort Riley, were loaded onto deuce and a halfs for the drive.

Dr.

Oberth
said that years later, von Braun had told him how those scientists who literally had to stand in line to have their
equations processed by the experimental computer in Aberdeen Maryland were in awe of the microscopic
circuitry etched into the charred wafer chips that had spilled out of the craft.

von Braun had asked General Twining whether anyone at Bell Labs was going to be contacted about this
find.

Twining seemed surprised at first, but when von Braun told him about the experiments on solid state
components - material whose electrons don't need to be excited by heat in order to conduct current - Twining
became intrigued.

What if these chips were components of a very advanced solid state circuitry?

von Braun
asked him.What if these chips were components of a very advanced solid state circuitry?

von Braun
asked him.

What if one of the reasons the army could find no electronic wiring on the craft were the layers of
these wafers that ran throughout the ship?

These circuit chips could be the nervous system of the craft, carrying
signals and transmitting commands just like the nervous system in a human body.

General Twining's only experience had been with the heavily insulated vacuum tube devices from World War
II, where the multistrand wires were covered with cloth.

He'd never seen metallic printed chips like these before.

How did they work?

he'd asked vonBraun.

The German scientist wasn't sure, although he guessed they worked on the same principle as the transistors
that laboratories were trying to develop to the point where they could be manufactured commercially.

It would
completely transform the electronics industry, von Braun explained to General Twining, nothing short of a
revolution.

The Germans had been desperately trying to develop circuitry of this sort during the war, but Hitler,
convinced the war would be over by 1941, told the German computer researchers that the Wehrmacht  had no
need for computers that had a development timetable greater than one year.

They'd all be celebrating victory
in Berlin before the end of the year.

But the research into solid state components that the Germans had been doing and the early work at Bell
Labs was nothing compared to the marvel that Twining had shown von Braun and the other rocket scientists in
New Mexico.

Under the magnifying glass, the group thought they saw not just a single solid state switch but a
whole system of switches integrated into each other and comprising what looked like an entire circuit or system
of circuits.

They couldn't be sure because no one had ever seen anything even remotely like this before.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Under the magnifying glass, the group thought they saw not just a single solid state switch but a
whole system of switches integrated into each other and comprising what looked like an entire circuit or system
of circuits. They couldn't be sure because no one had ever seen anything even remotely like this before. But it
showed them an image of what the future of electronics could be if a way could be found to manufacture this
kind of circuit on Earth. Suddenly, the huge guidance control systems necessary to control the flight of a rocket,
which, in 1947, were too big to be squeezed into the fuselage of the rocket, could be miniaturized so that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---70
rocket could have its own automatic guidance system.

If we could duplicate what the EBEs had, we, too, would
have the ability to explore space.

In effect, the reverse engineering of solid state integrated circuitry began in the
weeks and months after the crash even though William Shockley at Bell Labs was already working on a version of
his transistor as early as 1946.

In the summer of 1947, the scientists at Alamogordo were only aware of the solid state circuit research under
way at Bell Labs and Motorola.

So they pointed Nathan Twining to research scientists at both companies and
agreed to help him conduct the very early briefings into the nature of the Roswell find.

The army, very covertly,
turned some of the components over to research engineers for an inspection, and by the early 1950s the
transistor had been invented and transistorized circuits were now turning up in consumer products as well as in
military electronics systems.

The era of the vacuum tube, the single piece of eighty year old technology upon
which an entire generation of communications devices including television and digital computers was built, was
now coming to a close with the discovery in the desert of an entirely new technology.

The radio vacuum tube was a legacy of nineteenth century experimentation with electric current.

Like many
historic scientific discoveries, the theory behind the vacuum tube was uncovered almost by chance, and nobody
really knew what it was or cared much about it until years later.

The radio vacuum tube probably reached its
greatest utility from the 1930s through the 1950s, until the technology we discovered at Roswell made it all but
obsolete.Like many
historic scientific discoveries, the theory behind the vacuum tube was uncovered almost by chance, and nobody
really knew what it was or cared much about it until years later.

The radio vacuum tube probably reached its
greatest utility from the 1930s through the 1950s, until the technology we discovered at Roswell made it all but
obsolete.

The principle behind the radio vacuum tube, first discovered by Thomas Edison in the 1880s while he
was experimenting with different components for his incandescent lightbulb, was that current, which typically
flowed in either direction across a conductive material such as a wire, could be made to flow in only one
direction when passed through a vacuum.

This directed flow of current, called the "Edison effect, " is the scientific
principle behind the illumination of the filament material inside the vacuum of the incandescent lightbulb, a
technology that has remained remarkably the same for over a hundred years.

But the lightbulb technology that Edison discovered back in the1880s, then put aside only to experiment with it
again in the early twentieth century, also had another equally important function.

Because the flow of electrons
across the single filament wire went in only one direction, the vacuum tube was also a type of automatic switch.

Excite the flow of electrons across the wire and the current flowed only in the direction you wanted it to.

You
didn't need to throw a switch to turn on a circuit manually because the vacuum tube could do that for you.

Edison had actually discovered the first automatic switching device, which could be applied to hundreds of
electronic products from the radio sets that I grew up with in the1920s to the communications networks and radar
banks of World War II and to the television sets of the 1950s.

In fact, the radio tube was the single component that
enabled us to begin the worldwide communications network that was already in place by the early twentieth
century.Edison had actually discovered the first automatic switching device, which could be applied to hundreds of
electronic products from the radio sets that I grew up with in the1920s to the communications networks and radar
banks of World War II and to the television sets of the 1950s.

In fact, the radio tube was the single component that
enabled us to begin the worldwide communications network that was already in place by the early twentieth
century.

Radio vacuum tubes also had another important application that wasn't discovered until experimenters in the
infant science of computers first recognized the need for them in the 1930s and then again in the 1940s.

Because
they were switches, opening and closing circuits, they could be programmed to reconfigure a computer to
accomplish different tasks.

The computer itself had, in principle, remained essentially the same type of
calculating device that Charles Babbage first invented in the 1830s.

It was a set of internal gears or wheels that
acted as counters and a section of "memory" that stored numbers until it was their turn to be processed.

Babbage's computer was operated manually by a technician who threw mechanical switches in order to input
raw numbers and execute the program that processed the numbers.

The simple principle behind the first computer, called by its inventor the "Analytical Engine, " was that the
same machine could process an infinite variety and types of calculations by reconfiguring its parts through a
switching mechanism.

The machine had a component for inputting numbers or instructions to the processor; the
processor itself, which completed the calculations; a central control unit, or CPU, that organized and sequenced
the tasks to make sure the machine was doing the right job at the right time; a memory area for storing numbers;
and finally a component that output the results of the calculations to a type of printer: the same basic
components you find in all computers even today.The simple principle behind the first computer, called by its inventor the "Analytical Engine, " was that the
same machine could process an infinite variety and types of calculations by reconfiguring its parts through a
switching mechanism.

The machine had a component for inputting numbers or instructions to the processor; the
processor itself, which completed the calculations; a central control unit, or CPU, that organized and sequenced
the tasks to make sure the machine was doing the right job at the right time; a memory area for storing numbers;
and finally a component that output the results of the calculations to a type of printer: the same basic
components you find in all computers even today.

The same machine could add, subtract, multiply, or divide and even store numbers from one arithmetical
process to the next.

It could even store the arithmetical computation instructions themselves from job to job.

And
Babbage borrowed a punch card process invented by Joseph Jacquard for programming weaving looms.

Babbage's programs could be stored on series of punch cards and fed into the computer to control the
sequence of processing numbers.

Though this may sound like a startling invention, it was Industrial Revolution
technology that began in the late eighteenth century for the purely utilitarian challenge of processing large
numbers for the British military.

Yet, in concept, it was an entirely new principle in machine design that very quietly
started the digital revolution.

Because Babbage's machine was hand powered and cumbersome, little was done with it through the
nineteenth century, and by the1880s, Babbage himself would be forgotten.

However, the practical application of
electricity to mechanical appliances and the delivery of electrical power along supply grids, invented by Thomas
Edison and refined by Nikola Tesla, gave new life to the calculation machine.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Because Babbage's machine was hand powered and cumbersome, little was done with it through the
nineteenth century, and by the1880s, Babbage himself would be forgotten. However, the practical application of
electricity to mechanical appliances and the delivery of electrical power along supply grids, invented by Thomas
Edison and refined by Nikola Tesla, gave new life to the calculation machine. The concept of an automatic
calculation machine would, inspire American inventors to devise their own electrically powered calculators to

--- PAGE BREAK ---71
process large numbers in a competition to calculate the 1890 U.S.

Census.

The winner of the competition was
Herman Hollerith, whose electrically powered calculator was a monster device that not only processed numbers
but displayed the progress of the process on large clocks for all to see.

He was so successful that the large
railroad companies hired him to process their numbers.

By the turn of the century his company, the Computing
Tabulating and Recording Company, had become the single largest developer of automatic calculating
machines.

By 1929, when Hollerith died, his company had become the automation conglomerate, IBM.

Right about the time of Hollerith's death, a German engineer named Konrad Zuse approached some of the
same challenges that had confronted Charles Babbage a hundred years earlier: how to build his own version of
a universal computing machine that could reconfigure itself depending upon the type of calculation the
operator wanted to perform.

Zuse decided that instead of working with a machine that operated on the decimal
system, which limited the types of arithmetic calculations it could perform, his machine would use only two
numbers, 0 and 1, the binary system.

This meant that he could process any type of mathematical equation
through the opening or closing of a series of electromagnetic relays, switches that would act as valves or gates
either letting current through or shutting it off.

These relays were the same types of devices that the large
telephone companies, like the Bell system in the United States, were using as the basis of their networks.

By
marrying an electrical power supply and electric switches to the architecture of Babbage's Analytical Engine and
basing his computations in a binary instead of a decimal system, Zuse had come up with the European version of
the first electrical digital computer, an entirely new device.These relays were the same types of devices that the large
telephone companies, like the Bell system in the United States, were using as the basis of their networks.

By
marrying an electrical power supply and electric switches to the architecture of Babbage's Analytical Engine and
basing his computations in a binary instead of a decimal system, Zuse had come up with the European version of
the first electrical digital computer, an entirely new device.

It was just three years before the German invasion of
Poland and the outbreak of World War II.

In the United States at about the same time as Zuse was assembling his first computer in his parents' living
room, Harvard mathematics professor Howard Aiken was trying to reconstruct a theoretical version of Babbage's
computer, also using electromagnetic relays as switching devices and relying on a binary number system.

The
difference between Aiken and Zuse was that Aiken had academic credentials and his background as an
innovative mathematician got him into the office of Thomas Watson, president of IBM, to whom he presented his
proposal for the first American digital computer.

Watson was impressed, authorized a budget for $1 million, and,
right before the attack on Pearl Harbor, the project design was started up at Cambridge, Massachusetts.

It was
then moved to IBM headquarters in New York during the war.

Because of their theoretical ability to calculate large sets of numbers in a relatively short period of time, digital
computers were drafted into the war effort in the United Kingdom as a code breaking device.

By 1943, at the
same time that IBM's first shiny stainless steel version of Aiken's computer was up and running in Endicott, New
York, the British were using their dedicated crypto analytical Colossus computer to break the German codes and
decipher the code creating ability of the German Enigma - the code machine that the Nazis believed made
their transmissions indecipherable to the Allies.Because of their theoretical ability to calculate large sets of numbers in a relatively short period of time, digital
computers were drafted into the war effort in the United Kingdom as a code breaking device.

By 1943, at the
same time that IBM's first shiny stainless steel version of Aiken's computer was up and running in Endicott, New
York, the British were using their dedicated crypto analytical Colossus computer to break the German codes and
decipher the code creating ability of the German Enigma - the code machine that the Nazis believed made
their transmissions indecipherable to the Allies.

Unlike the IBM-Aiken computer at Harvard and Konrad Zuse's
experimental computer in Berlin, the Colossus used radio vacuum tubes as relay switches and was, therefore,
hundreds of times faster than any experimental computer using electromagnetic relays.

The Colossus, therefore,
was a true breakthrough because it married the speed of vacuum tube technology with the component design
of the Analytical Engine to create the first modern era digital computer.

The British used the Colossus so effectively that they quickly felt the need to build more of them to process the
increasingly large volume of encrypted transmissions the Germans were sending, ignorant of the fact that the
Allies were decoding every word and outsmarting them at every turn.

I would argue even to this day that the
technological advantage the Allies enjoyed in intelligence gathering apparatus, specifically code breaking
computers and radar, enabled us to win the war despite Hitler's initial successes and his early weapon
advantages.

The Allies' use of the digital computer in World War II was an example of how a superior
technological advantage can make the difference between victory and defeat no matter what kinds of
weapons or numbers of troops the enemy is able to deploy.I would argue even to this day that the
technological advantage the Allies enjoyed in intelligence gathering apparatus, specifically code breaking
computers and radar, enabled us to win the war despite Hitler's initial successes and his early weapon
advantages.

The Allies' use of the digital computer in World War II was an example of how a superior
technological advantage can make the difference between victory and defeat no matter what kinds of
weapons or numbers of troops the enemy is able to deploy.

The American and British experience with computers during the war and our government's commitment to
developing a viable digital computer led to the creation, in the years immediately following the war, of a
computer called the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator, or ENIAC.

ENIAC was the brain child of
Howard Aiken and one of our Army R&D brain trust advisers, the mathematician John von Neumann.

Although it
operated on a decimal instead of a binary system and had a very small memory, it relied on radio vacuum tube
switching technology.

For its time it was the first of what today are called "number crunchers.

"
When measured against the way computers developed over the years since its first installation, especially the
personal computers of today, ENIAC was something of a real dinosaur.

It was loud, hot, cumbersome, fitful, and
required the power supply of an entire town to keep it going.

It couldn't stay up for very long because the radio
tubes, always unreliable even under the best working conditions, would blow out after only a few hours' work and
had to be replaced.

But the machine worked, it crunched the numbers it was fed, and it showed the way for the
next model, which reflected the sophisticated symbolic architectural design of John von Neumann.

Von Neumann suggested that instead of feeding the computer the programs you wanted it to run every time
you turned it on, the programs themselves could be stored in the computer permanently.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the machine worked, it crunched the numbers it was fed, and it showed the way for the
next model, which reflected the sophisticated symbolic architectural design of John von Neumann. Von Neumann suggested that instead of feeding the computer the programs you wanted it to run every time
you turned it on, the programs themselves could be stored in the computer permanently. By treating the
programs themselves as components of the machine, stored right in the hardware, the computer could change

--- PAGE BREAK ---72
between programs, or the routines of subprograms, as necessary in order to solve problems.

This meant that
larger routines could be processed into subroutines, which themselves could be organized into templates to solve
similar problems.

In complex applications, programs could call up other programs again and again without the
need of human intervention and could even change the subprograms to fit the application.

von Neumann had
invented block programming, the basis for the sophisticated engineering and business programming of the late
1950s and 1960s and the great, great grandmother of today's object oriented programming.

By 1947, it had all come together: the design of the machine, the electrical power supply, the radio vacuum
tube technology, the logic of machine processing, von Neumann's mathematical architecture, and practical
applications for the computer's use.

But just a few years shy of the midpoint of the century, the computer itself
was the product of eighteenth and nineteenth century thinking and technology.

In fact, given the short comings
of the radio tube and the enormous power demands and cooling requirements to keep the computer working,
the development of the computer seemed to have come to a dead end.

Although IBM and Bell Labs were
investing huge sums of development money into designing a computer that had a lower operational and
maintenance overhead, it seemed, given the technology of the digital computer circa 1947, that there was no
place it could go.

It was simply an expensive to build, expensive to run, lumbering elephant at the end of the line.

And then an alien spacecraft fell out of the skies over Roswell, scattered across the desert floor, and in one
evening everything changed.It was simply an expensive to build, expensive to run, lumbering elephant at the end of the line.

And then an alien spacecraft fell out of the skies over Roswell, scattered across the desert floor, and in one
evening everything changed.

In 1948 the first junction transistor - a microscopically thin silicon sandwich of w-type silicon, in which some of
the atoms have an extra electron, and p-type silicon, in which some of the atoms have one less electron - was
devised by physicist William Shockley.

The invention was credited to Bell Telephone Laboratories, and, as if by
magic, the dead end that had stopped the development of the dinosaur like ENIAC generation of computers
melted away and an entirely new generation of miniaturized circuitry began.

Where the radio tube circuit
required an enormous power supply to heat it up because heat generated the electricity, the transistor required
very low levels of powers and no heating up time because the transistor amplified the stream of electrons that
flowed into its base.

Because it required only a low level of current, it could be powered by batteries.

Because it
didn't rely on a heat source to generate current and it was so small, many transistors could be packed into a very
small space, allowing for the miniaturization of circuitry components.

Finally, because it didn't burn out like the
radio tube, it was much more reliable.

Thus, within months after the Roswell crash and the first exposure of the
silicon wafer technology to companies already involved in the research and development of computers, the
limitations on the size and power of the computer suddenly dropped like the removal of a roadblock on a
highway and the next generation of computers went into development.Finally, because it didn't burn out like the
radio tube, it was much more reliable.

Thus, within months after the Roswell crash and the first exposure of the
silicon wafer technology to companies already involved in the research and development of computers, the
limitations on the size and power of the computer suddenly dropped like the removal of a roadblock on a
highway and the next generation of computers went into development.

This set up for Army R&D, especially
during the years I was there, the opportunity for us to encourage that development with defense contracts
calling for the implementation of integrated circuit devices into subsequent generations of weapons systems.

More than one historian of the microcomputer age has written that no one before 1947 foresaw the invention
of the transistor or had even dreamed about an entirely new technology that relied upon semiconductors, which
were silicon based and not carbon based like the Edison incandescent tube.

Bigger than the idea of a
calculating machine or an Analytical Engine or any combination of the components that made up the first
computers of the 1930s and 1940s, the invention of the transistor and its natural evolution to the silicon chip of
integrated circuitry was beyond what anyone could call aquantum leap of technology.

The entire development
arc of the radio tube, from Edison's first experiments with filament for his incandescent lightbulb to the vacuum
tubes that formed the switching mechanisms of ENIAC, lasted about fifty years.

The development of the silicon
transistor seemed to come upon us in a matter of months.The entire development
arc of the radio tube, from Edison's first experiments with filament for his incandescent lightbulb to the vacuum
tubes that formed the switching mechanisms of ENIAC, lasted about fifty years.

The development of the silicon
transistor seemed to come upon us in a matter of months.

And, had I not seen the silicon wafers from the Roswell
crash with my own eyes, held them in my own hands, talked about them with Hermann Oberth, Wernher von
Braun, or Hans Kohler, and heard the reports from these now dead scientists of the meetings between Nathan
Twining, Vannevar Bush, and researchers at Bell Labs, I would have thought the invention of the transistor was a
miracle.

I know now how it came about.

As history revealed, the invention of the transistor was only the beginning of an integrated circuit technology
that developed through the 1950s and continues right through to the present.

By the time I became personally
involved in 1961, the American marketplace had already witnessed the retooling of Japan and Germany in the
1950s and Korea and Taiwan in the late 1950s through the early 1960s.

General Trudeau was concerned about
this, not because he considered these countries our economic enemies but because he believed that American
industry would suffer as a result of its complacency about basic research and development.

He expressed this to
me on many occasions during our meetings, and history has proved him to be correct.

General Trudeau believed
that the American industrial economy enjoyed a harvest of technology in the years immediately following World
War II, the effects of which were still under way in the 1960s, but that it would soon slow down because R&D was
an inherently costly undertaking that didn't immediately contribute to a company's bottom line.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He expressed this to
me on many occasions during our meetings, and history has proved him to be correct. General Trudeau believed
that the American industrial economy enjoyed a harvest of technology in the years immediately following World
War II, the effects of which were still under way in the 1960s, but that it would soon slow down because R&D was
an inherently costly undertaking that didn't immediately contribute to a company's bottom line. And you had to
have a good bottom line, General Trudeau always said, to keep your stockholders happy or else they would
revolt and throw the existing management team right out of the company. By throwing their efforts into the
bottom line, Trudeau said, the big American industries were actually destroying themselves just like a family that
spends all its savings. "You have to keep on investing in yourself, Phil, " the General would like to say when he'd look up from his Wall
Street Journal  before our morning meetings and remark about how stock analysts always liked to place their

--- PAGE BREAK ---73
value on the wrong thing.

"Sure, these companies have to make a profit, but you look at the Japanese and the
Germans and they know the value of basic research, " he once said to me.

"American companies expect the
government to pay for all their research, and that's what you and I have to do if we want to keep them working.

But there's going to come a time when we can't afford to pay for it any longer.

Then who's going to foot the bill?"
General Trudeau was worrying about how the drive for new electronics products based upon miniaturized
circuitry was creating entirely new markets that were shutting out American companies.

He said that it was
becoming cheaper for American companies to have their products manufactured for them in Asia, where
companies had already retooled after the war to produce transistorized components, than for American
companies, which had heavily invested in the manufacturing technology of the nineteenth century, to do it
themselves.

He knew that the requirement for space exploration, for challenging the hostile EBEs in their own
territory, relied on the development of an integrated circuit technology so that the electronic components of
spacecraft could be miniaturized to fit the size requirements of rocket propelled vehicles.

The race to develop
more intelligent missiles and ordnance also required the development of new types of circuitry that could be
packed into smaller and smaller spaces.

But retooled Japanese and German industries were the only ones able
to take immediate advantage of what General Trudeau called the "new electronics.

"
For American industry to get onto the playing field the basic research would have to be paid for by the
military.

It was something General Trudeau was willing to fight for at the Pentagon because he knew that was the
only way we could get the weapons only a handful of us knew we needed to fight a skirmish war against aliens
only a handful of us knew we were fighting."
For American industry to get onto the playing field the basic research would have to be paid for by the
military.

It was something General Trudeau was willing to fight for at the Pentagon because he knew that was the
only way we could get the weapons only a handful of us knew we needed to fight a skirmish war against aliens
only a handful of us knew we were fighting.

Arthur Trudeau was a battlefield general engaged in a lonely military
campaign that national policy and secrecy laws forbade him even to talk about.

And as the gulf of time
widened between the Roswell crash and the concerns over postwar economic expansion, even the people who
were fighting the war alongside General Trudeau were, one by one, beginning to die away.

Industry could fight
the war for us, General Trudeau believed, if it was properly seeded with ideas and the money to develop them.

By 1961, we had turned our attention to the integrated circuit.

Government military weapons spending and the requirements for space exploration had already heavily
funded the transistorized component circuit.

The radars and missiles I was commanding at Red Canyon, New
Mexico, in 1958 relied on miniaturized components for their reliability and portability.

New generations of tracking
radars on the drawing boards in 1960 were even more sophisticated and electronically intelligent than the
weapons I was aiming at Soviet targets in Germany.

In the United States, Japanese and Taiwanese radios that fit
into the palm of your hand were on the market.

Computers like ENIAC, once the size of a small warehouse, now
occupied rooms no larger than closets and, while still generating heat, no longer blew out because of
overheated radio vacuum tubes.

Minicomputers, helped by government R&D funding, were still a few years
away from market, but were already in a design phase.Computers like ENIAC, once the size of a small warehouse, now
occupied rooms no larger than closets and, while still generating heat, no longer blew out because of
overheated radio vacuum tubes.

Minicomputers, helped by government R&D funding, were still a few years
away from market, but were already in a design phase.

Television sets and stereophonic phonographs that
offered solid state electronics were coming on the market, and companies like IBM, Sperry-Rand, and NCR were
beginning to bring electronic office machines onto the market.

It was the beginning of a new age of electronics,
helped, in part, by government funding of basic research into the development and manufacture of integrated
circuit products.

But the real prize, the development of what actually had been recovered at Roswell, was still a
few years away.

When it arrived, again spurred by the requirements of military weapons development and space
travel, it caused another revolution.

The history of the printed circuit and the microprocessor is also the history of a technology that allowed
engineers to squeeze more and more circuitry into a smaller and smaller space.

It's the history of the integrated
circuit, which developed throughout the 1960s, evolved into large scale integration by the early 1970s, very large
scale integration by the middle 1970s, just before the emergence of the first real personal computers, and ultra
large scale integration by the early 1980s.

Today's 200 plus megahertz, multigigabyte hard drive desktop
computers are the results of the integrated circuit technology that began in the 1960s and has continued to the
present.

The jump from the basic transistorized integrated printed circuit of the 1960s to large scale integration
was made possible by the development of the microprocessor in 1972.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Today's 200 plus megahertz, multigigabyte hard drive desktop
computers are the results of the integrated circuit technology that began in the 1960s and has continued to the
present. The jump from the basic transistorized integrated printed circuit of the 1960s to large scale integration
was made possible by the development of the microprocessor in 1972. Once the development process of engineering a more tightly compacted circuit had been inspired by the
invention of the transistor in 1948, and fueled by the need to develop better, faster, and smaller computers, it
continued on a natural progression until the engineers at Intel developed the first microprocessor, a four bit
central processing unit called the 4004, in 1972. This year marked the beginning of the microcomputer industry,
although the first personal microcomputers didn't appear on the market until the development of Intel's 8080A. That computer chip was the heart of the Altair computer, the first product to package a version of a high level
programming language called BASIC, which allowed nonengineering types to program the machine and create
applications for it. Soon companies like Motorola and Zilog had their own microprocessors on the market, and by
1977 the Motorola 6502-powered Apple II was on the market, joined by the 8080A Radio Shack, the Commodore
PET, the Atari, and the Heathkit. Operationally, at its very heart, the microprocessor shares the same binary
processing functions and large arrays of digital switches as its ancestors, the big mainframes of the 1950s and
1960s and the transistorized minis of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Functionally, the microprocessor also shares
the same kinds of tasks as Charles Babbage's Analytical Engine of the 1830s: reading numbers, storing numbers,
logically processing numbers, and outputting the results. The microprocessor just puts everything into a much
smaller space and moves it along at a much faster speed.ading numbers, storing numbers,
logically processing numbers, and outputting the results. The microprocessor just puts everything into a much
smaller space and moves it along at a much faster speed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---74
In 1979, Apple Computer had begun selling the first home computer floppy disk operating system for data and
program storage that kicked the microcomputer revolution into a higher gear.

Not only could users input data via
a keyboard or tape cassette player, they could store relatively large amounts of data, such as documents or
mathematical projections, on transportable, erasable, and interchangeable Mylar disks that the computer was
able to read.

Now the computer reached beyond the electronics hobbyist into the work place.

By the end of the
year, MicroPro's introduction of the first fully functional word processor called WordStar, and Personal Software's
release of the very first electronic spreadsheet called VisiCalc, so transformed the workplace that the desktop
computer became a necessity for any young executive on his or her way up the corporate ladder.

And by the
early 1980s, with the introduction of the Apple Macintosh and the object oriented computer environment, not
only the workplace but the whole world looked like a very different place than it did in the early 1960s.

Even Dr.

Vannevar Bush's concept of a type of research query language based not on a linear outline but on an
intellectual relationship to something embedded in a body of text became a reality with the release of a
computer program by Apple called HyperCard.

It was as if from the year 1947 to 1980 a fundamental paradigm shift in the ability of human kind to process
information took place.

Computers themselves almost became something like a silicon based life form, inspiring
the carbon based life forms on planet Earth to develop them, grow them, and even help them reproduce.It was as if from the year 1947 to 1980 a fundamental paradigm shift in the ability of human kind to process
information took place.

Computers themselves almost became something like a silicon based life form, inspiring
the carbon based life forms on planet Earth to develop them, grow them, and even help them reproduce.

With
computer directed process control programs now in place in virtually all major industries, software that writes
software, neural network based expert systems that learn from their own experience in the real world, and current
experiments under way to grow almost microscopically thin silicon based chips in the weightless environment of
earth orbit may be the forerunner of a time when automated orbital factories routinely grow and harvest new
silicon material for microprocessors more sophisticated than we can even imagine at the present.

Were all of this
to be true, could it not be argued that the silicon wafers we recovered from Roswell were the real masters and
space travelers and the EBE creatures their hosts or servants?

Once implanted successfully on Earth, our culture
having reached a point of readiness through its development of the first digital computers, would not the natural
development stream, starting from the invention of the transistor, have carried us to the point where we achieve
a symbiotic relationship with the silicon material that carries our data and enables us to become more creative
and successful?

Maybe the Roswell crash, which helped us develop the technological basis for the weapons systems to
protect our planet from the EBEs, was also the mechanism for successfully implanting a completely alien non-
humanoid life form that survives from host to host like a virus, a digital Ebola that we humans will carry to another
planet someday.

Or what if an enemy wanted to implant the perfect spying or sabotage mechanism into a
culture?Maybe the Roswell crash, which helped us develop the technological basis for the weapons systems to
protect our planet from the EBEs, was also the mechanism for successfully implanting a completely alien non-
humanoid life form that survives from host to host like a virus, a digital Ebola that we humans will carry to another
planet someday.

Or what if an enemy wanted to implant the perfect spying or sabotage mechanism into a
culture?

Then the implantation of the microchip based circuit into our technology by the EBEs would be the
perfect method.

Was it implanted as sabotage or as something akin to the gift of fire?

Maybe the Roswell crash in
1947 was an event waiting to happen, like poisoned fruit dropping from the tree into a playground.

Once bitten,
the poison takes effect.

"Hold your horses, Phil, " General Trudeau would say when I would speculate too much.

"Remember, you've
got a bunch of scientists you need to talk to and the people at Bell Labs are waiting to see your report when
you've finished talking to the Alamogordo group.

"
It was 1961 and the miniaturization of computer and electronic circuitry had already begun, but my report to
the general and appointments he was arranging for me at Sperry-Rand, Hughes, and Bell Labs were for meetings
with scientists to determine how their respective companies were proceeding with applying miniaturized circuitry
into designs for weapons systems.

The inspiration for microcircuitry had fallen out of the sky at Roswell and set the
development of digital computers off in an entirely new direction.

It was my job now to use the process of
weapons development, especially the development of guidance systems for ballistic missiles, to implement the
application of microcircuitry systems to these new generations of weapons.

General Trudeau and I were among
the first scouts in what would be the electronic battlefield of the 1980s.

"Don't worry, General, I've got my appointments all set up, " I told him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

General Trudeau and I were among
the first scouts in what would be the electronic battlefield of the 1980s. "Don't worry, General, I've got my appointments all set up, " I told him. I knew how carried away I could get,
but I was an intelligence officer first, and that meant you start with a blank page and fill it in. "But I think the
people at Bell Labs have already seen these things before. " And they actually did - in 1947.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER 13
The Laser
AS I WORKED MY WAY THROUGH THE LIST OF ITEMS IN MY NUT file, writing advisory reports and
recommendations to General Trudeau about the potential of each item, I lost all concept of time.

I could see, as
I drove up and down the Potomac shore to Fort Belvoir to check on the progress of night vision at Martin Marietta,
that the summer was coming to an end and the leaves had started to change color.

I could also see that now it
was already dark when I left the Pentagon.

And it was dark now when I set out for the Pentagon every morning.

I'd gotten into the habit of taking different routes to work just to make sure that if the CIA had put a tail on me, I'd
make him work harder to stay up with me.

General Trudeau and I had settled down into a long daily routine ourselves at R&D.

We had our early morning
meetings about the Roswell file - he also called it the "junk pile" because it was filled with so much debris and
pieces of items that had broken away from larger components - but we had buried the Roswell material
development projects themselves so deep inside the regular functions of the R&D division that not even the other
officers who worked with us every day knew what was going on.

We'd categorized the work we did so carefully
that when it came time to discuss anything about Roswell, even if it had a bearing on some other item we were
working on at the time, we made sure that either no one was at the office, or we were at a place where we
wouldn't have to stop talking just because someone came into the room.

My responsibility at Foreign Technology was to feed R&D's ongoing project development with information and
intelligence from sources outside the regular army channels.

These ran in interconnected rings through the
Pentagon to defense industry contractors to testing operations at army bases and to researchers at universities or
independent laboratories who were under contract with us.My responsibility at Foreign Technology was to feed R&D's ongoing project development with information and
intelligence from sources outside the regular army channels.

These ran in interconnected rings through the
Pentagon to defense industry contractors to testing operations at army bases and to researchers at universities or
independent laboratories who were under contract with us.

If we were developing methods of preserving food,
always trying to come up with a better way to prepare field rations, and the Italians and Germans had a process
that seemed to work, it was my job to learn about it and slip the information into the development process.

Even
when there was no official development process underway for a specific item, if something I learned was
appropriate to anyone of the army's major commands, whether it was the Medical Corps, the Signal Corps, the
motor pool, ordnance, or even the Quartermaster Corps, it was also my job to find a way to make that
information appropriate and drop it in without so much as a splash.

This made the perfect cover for what I was
doing with the Roswell file as long as I could find ways to slip the Roswell technology into the development
process so invisibly no one would ever able to find the Roswell on ramp to the information highway.

For all the world to see, General Trudeau and I regularly met to review the ongoing projects in Army R&D,
those we had inherited from the previous command and those we wanted to initiate on our watch.

Officers
who'd been assigned to R&D before we arrived had their own projects already in development, too, and the
general had assigned me the task of feeding those projects with information and intelligence, no matter where it
came from, without disturbing either what the officers were doing or interfering with their staffs.For all the world to see, General Trudeau and I regularly met to review the ongoing projects in Army R&D,
those we had inherited from the previous command and those we wanted to initiate on our watch.

Officers
who'd been assigned to R&D before we arrived had their own projects already in development, too, and the
general had assigned me the task of feeding those projects with information and intelligence, no matter where it
came from, without disturbing either what the officers were doing or interfering with their staffs.

It was tricky
because I had to work in the dark, undercover even from my own colleagues whose reputations would have
been destroyed if word leaked out that they were dealing in "flying saucer stuff.

" Yet at the same time, most high
ranking officers at the Pentagon and key members of their staffs knew that Roswell technology was floating
through most of the new projects under development.

They were also vaguely, if not specifically, aware of what
had happened at Roswell itself and of the current version of the Hillenkoetter/Bush/Twining working group, which
had personnel stationed at the Pentagon to keep tabs on what the military was doing.

Uniting what I called my official "day job" at R&D on regular projects and my undercover job in the Roswell file,
was my official, but many times informal, role as General Trudeau's deputy at the division.

In that job, I would
carry out the general's orders as they related to the division and not specifically to any one project or another.

If
General Trudeau needed information to help him redefine his budgetary priorities or assemble information to help
compile supplementary development budgets, he'd often ask me to help or at least give him advice.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In that job, I would
carry out the general's orders as they related to the division and not specifically to any one project or another. If
General Trudeau needed information to help him redefine his budgetary priorities or assemble information to help
compile supplementary development budgets, he'd often ask me to help or at least give him advice. And I
functioned as the general's intelligence officer as well, supporting him at meetings with information, helping him
present position papers, assisting him whenever he had to hold briefings or meet with congressional committees,
and defending him and the division against the almost weekly attacks on our turf from officers in the other military
branches or from the civilian development and intelligence agencies. Everybody wanted to know what we
knew, what we were spending, and what we were spending it on. And we had no quarrel with telling anybody
who wanted to know exactly what kinds of goods the American people were getting for their money except
when it came to one category - Roswell. That's when the mantle of darkness would fall and our memories about
where certain things came from became very dim, as it did with the dramatic improvement in night vision
technology shortly after the summer of 1961. Even our own people became very frustrated with us when General
Trudeau would turn to me at a meeting and say, "You know that night vision information you sent over to Fort
Belvoir a while back? Where did you find that file, Phil?" And if I couldn't play dumb and say, "I don't think I ever
came across this before, must be someone else in charge, " then I'd simply shrug and say, "I don't know, General,
must have been in the files somewhere. I'll have to go back and look. "
75

--- PAGE BREAK ---76
It was an act, and many of the officers who suspected we had a stash of information somewhere knew we
were covering up something.

But if they were career, they also knew how to play the Pentagon version of steal
the bacon.

We had it and we were hiding it.

No one would find out anything unless we let them.

So the general
would typically hand off anything having to do with military intelligence information to me and I would usually
find a way not only to lose the answer but to lose the question as well.

We became so practiced at this that
entirely new inventions could find their way into development at many different places at the same time without
anyone's ever becoming aware of the source of the technology, especially the officer who was assigned the task
of project manager within our very own division.

The CIA got so frustrated at not getting any information out of us that they began keeping closer tabs on the
Russian attaches floating around Washington and working under their KGB controllers at the embassies and
consulates.

Because the CIA knew how thoroughly our universities had been penetrated they figured they'd get
information on the rebound by photographing what was inside the photocopiers at the Russian embassy in
Washington.

And sure enough, from the rumor mill circulating around the exchange of scientists between industry
and academia, the CIA knew that we were on to something at Army R&D and kept the circle as tight around us
as they possibly could.

So I had to keep close tabs on the general, not letting him go into meetings, any meetings,
unprotected and always making sure that the CIA knew that they would have to climb over me to get to
General Trudeau and anything he knew.

And the CIA knew that I knew what they were doing and where their
loyalties lay and also knew that it would have to come to a showdown someday.So I had to keep close tabs on the general, not letting him go into meetings, any meetings,
unprotected and always making sure that the CIA knew that they would have to climb over me to get to
General Trudeau and anything he knew.

And the CIA knew that I knew what they were doing and where their
loyalties lay and also knew that it would have to come to a showdown someday.

General Trudeau and I had quickly established our routine in early1961, and our categorization of how we did
our jobs seemed to be working.

Night vision was under development at Fort Belvoir, and researchers who worked
with us had made sure that the silicon wafer chips had gotten to their colleagues at Bell Labs and assured us that
a new generation of  transistorized circuitry was already finding its way into development.

The silicon chips were a
covert reintroduction to the people at Bell Labs because the initial introduction of the integrated circuit chips
from the Roswell crash had reached defense contractors as early as 1947 in the weeks after the material reached
Wright Field.

A similar history of introduction and reintroduction had occurred with stimulated energy radiation, a weapon
the early analysts believed they were looking at in the wreckage of the Roswell craft.

Since directed energy
radiation was a technology we'd already deployed in World War II, seeing what they thought was a super
advanced version of that technology, so advanced as to be in a completely different realm, so excited the
analysts at Wright Field that they wanted to get it out to research scientists as quickly as possible, which they did.

And by the early 1950s, a version of stimulated energy radiation had found its way into the scientific community,
which was developing new products around the process of microwave generation.

Most Americans who were alive in the 1950s remember the introduction of the microwave oven that helped
us "live better electrically" in our new modern kitchens.And by the early 1950s, a version of stimulated energy radiation had found its way into the scientific community,
which was developing new products around the process of microwave generation.

Most Americans who were alive in the 1950s remember the introduction of the microwave oven that helped
us "live better electrically" in our new modern kitchens.

One of the miracle appliances that burst onto the scene in
the 1950s promised to cook food in less than half the time of conventional ovens, even when the food had been
completely frozen.

Marketed under a variety of brand names including the now historic "Radar Range, " the
microwave oven cooked whatever was inside not by the application of pure heat, the way conventional ovens
did, but by bombarding the food with showers of tiny waves of electromagnetic radiation, usually only a
centimeter or so long.

The waves would pass through the food, exciting the water molecules deep inside and
causing them to align and realign, back and forth, with greater velocity.

The molecular activity generated heat
from within and the food cooked from the inside out.

Once you enclosed it in the right kind of container to keep
all the moisture from evaporating, you had a quick cooked meal.

The theory behind the microwave oven that started us down the long and profitable path of stimulated
energy research was formulated in 1945 with the first commercial microwave ovens rolling off the line at
Raytheon in Massachusetts in 1947 before any dissemination of either intelligence or material from the crash of
the Roswell spacecraft.

But in the wreckage of that craft, the scientists from the test firing range at Alamogordo
reported that the inhabitants of the craft seemed to use very advanced wave stimulation instrumentation that,
according to their analysis, bore a relationship to the physics of a basic microwave generator.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The theory behind the microwave oven that started us down the long and profitable path of stimulated
energy research was formulated in 1945 with the first commercial microwave ovens rolling off the line at
Raytheon in Massachusetts in 1947 before any dissemination of either intelligence or material from the crash of
the Roswell spacecraft. But in the wreckage of that craft, the scientists from the test firing range at Alamogordo
reported that the inhabitants of the craft seemed to use very advanced wave stimulation instrumentation that,
according to their analysis, bore a relationship to the physics of a basic microwave generator. The retrieval team
that pulled the wreckage out of the desert also found a short, stubby, internally powered flashlight device that
threw a pencil thin, intense beam of light for a short distance that could actually cut through metal. This, the
engineers at Wright Field believed, was also based on wave stimulation. The questions then were, how did the
EBEs use wave stimulation and how could we adapt it to military uses or slip it into the product development
already under way? By 1954, when I was at the White House, the National Security Council was already receiving reports of a
theory, developed by Charles H. Townes, that described how the atoms of a gas could be excited to
extraordinarily high energy levels by the application of bursts of energy. The gas would release its excess energy
as microwaves of a very precise frequency that could be controlled. In theory, we thought, the energy beam
could be a signal to carry communications or an amplifier for the signal. When the first maser was assembled at
Bell Laboratories in 1956, it was used as a timer because of the very exact calibration of the wave frequency.

--- PAGE BREAK ---77
The maser, however, was only a forerunner of the product that was to come, the laser, which would
revolutionize every aspect of technology it touched.

It would also prove to be a weapon that would help us
deploy a realistic threat to the EBEs who seemed poised to trigger a nuclear war between the superpowers.

Where the maser was an amplification of generated microwaves, the laser was an amplification of light, and
theories about how this might be accomplished were circulating widely throughout the weapons development
community even before Bell Labs produced the first maser.

I had seen the descriptions of the EBE laser in reports
about the Roswell crash, a beam of light so thin that you couldn't even see it until it landed on a target.

What was
the purpose of this light generator?

the Alamogordo group had asked.

It looked like a targeting or
communications device, seemed to have an almost limitless range, and, if the right power source could be found
to amplify the light beam to where it could penetrate metal, the device could be used as a drill, a welder, or
even a devastating weapon.

Even while I was at the White House, all three branches of the military were working with researchers in
university laboratories to develop a working laser.

In theory, exciting the atoms of an element to produce light
energy in the same way that atoms of a gas were excited to produce microwaves, lasers offered the tantalizing
promise of a directed energy beam that had such a wide variety of applications it could become an almost
universal utility for all divisions of the military, even controlling warehouse inventory for the Quarter master Corps.

Finally, in 1958, the year after I left the White House, there was a surge in research activity, especially at Columbia
University where, two years later, physicist Theodore Maiman constructed the first working laser.In theory, exciting the atoms of an element to produce light
energy in the same way that atoms of a gas were excited to produce microwaves, lasers offered the tantalizing
promise of a directed energy beam that had such a wide variety of applications it could become an almost
universal utility for all divisions of the military, even controlling warehouse inventory for the Quarter master Corps.

Finally, in 1958, the year after I left the White House, there was a surge in research activity, especially at Columbia
University where, two years later, physicist Theodore Maiman constructed the first working laser.

The first practical demonstration of the laser took place in 1960,and by the time I got to the Pentagon,
General Trudeau had put it on our list of priorities to develop for military purposes.

Also, because stimulated
energy radiation devices were among the cache of technological debris we recovered from Roswell, the U.S.

development or the laser encompassed the special urgent requirements of my Roswell mission.

I had to write a
report to General Trudeau suggesting ways the EBEs might have used laser technology in their missions on this
planet and how we could develop similar uses for it under the guise of a conventional development program.

In
other words, once we guessed how the aliens were using it, it was to become our developmental model for
similar applications.

We believed that the EBEs used lasers for navigation, by bouncing beams off distant objects in space and
homing in on them to triangulate a course; for communication, by using the laser beam as a carrier signal or as a
signal in and of itself; for surveillance, by painting potential targets with a beam; and for power transmission,
illumination, and even data storage.

The strength and integrity of the laser beam should have served as the EBEs'
primary method of communication over vast distances or even as a way of storing communications in packages
for later delivery.We believed that the EBEs used lasers for navigation, by bouncing beams off distant objects in space and
homing in on them to triangulate a course; for communication, by using the laser beam as a carrier signal or as a
signal in and of itself; for surveillance, by painting potential targets with a beam; and for power transmission,
illumination, and even data storage.

The strength and integrity of the laser beam should have served as the EBEs'
primary method of communication over vast distances or even as a way of storing communications in packages
for later delivery.

However, it was the EBEs' use of directed energy as a medical tool and ultimately as a potential
weapon that sent shivers up and down our spines because to our minds it was evidence of the aliens' hostile
intentions.

Whether they saw us as true enemies to be destroyed or regarded all life on our planet as laboratory
specimens to be experimented with, the results from the animal carcasses picked up in the field by our military
nuclear, biological, and chemical recovery teams and the civilian intelligence investigators could have been
very much the same.

In the Pentagon from 1961 to 1963,1 reviewed field reports from local and state police agencies about the
discoveries of dead cattle whose carcasses looked as though they had been systematically mutilated and
reports from people who claimed to have been abducted by aliens and experimented on.

One of the common
threads in these stories were reports by the self described abductees of being subjected to some sort of probing
or even a form of surgery with controlled, intense, pencil thin beams of light.In the Pentagon from 1961 to 1963,1 reviewed field reports from local and state police agencies about the
discoveries of dead cattle whose carcasses looked as though they had been systematically mutilated and
reports from people who claimed to have been abducted by aliens and experimented on.

One of the common
threads in these stories were reports by the self described abductees of being subjected to some sort of probing
or even a form of surgery with controlled, intense, pencil thin beams of light.

Local police reported that when
veterinarians were called to the scene to examine the dead cattle left in fields, they often found evidence not
just that the animal's blood had been drained but that entire organs were removed with such surgical skill that it
couldn't have been the work of predators or vandals removing the organs for some depraved ritual.

Where there
was evidence of crime of someone staging a bizarre hoax, it was usually obvious from the clumsiness of the
attempt and the deliberate staging of the carcass.

And in the overwhelming majority of instances where the
animal was killed by a predator who consumed its blood and carried away internal organs, the evidence of
teeth marks or of a brief life and death struggle was also a clear indicator of what had happened.

But in those
cases where investigators claimed to have been baffled by what they found, the removal of the organs and the
draining of the animal's blood - where blood had been completely drained - were so sophisticated that there
was almost no peripheral damage to the surrounding tissue.

There was even some speculation, in the early 1960s,
that whatever device the EBEs had employed, it didn't even cut through the surrounding tissue.

We had no
medical instruments that even remotely approached what the aliens could do.

It was as though some device
had simply excised the organs with techniques that even went beyond our own surgical precision.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We had no
medical instruments that even remotely approached what the aliens could do. It was as though some device
had simply excised the organs with techniques that even went beyond our own surgical precision. While I was on the White House National Security staff and later when I was at the Pentagon, I was intrigued by
these reports. I also remember that both civilian and military intelligence personnel attached to the staffs of
individuals who worked for the Hillenkoetter and Twining working group on UFOs in the 1950s were actively
engaging in research into the kinds of surgical methods that would produce "crime scene evidence" like this. Could have been the Russians, they thought at first. Given the tense climate of the Cold War, a fear that the
Soviets were experimenting with American livestock to develop some form of toxin or biological weapon that
would devastate our cattle population was not unduly paranoid. It's sufficient to say, without going into any

--- PAGE BREAK ---78
detail, that we were thinking about the same kinds of weapons, so it was not far fetched to say that we were
projecting our own doomsday strategies onto what the Russians might have done.

But it wasn't the Soviets who were going after our cattle.

In fact the Soviet strategy for destabilizing the United
States was so sophisticated that it was only a strategy of playing nuclear chicken with the Soviets that forced
them to back down in the end.

It was the EBEs who were experimenting with organ harvesting, possibly for
transplant into other species or for processing into some sort of nutrient package or even to create some sort of
hybrid biological entity.

This is what people attached to the working group thought in the 1950s and 1960s, and
even though we had no solid intelligence at the time that we were right, we operated on the assumption that no
one takes an organ just for the sheer pleasure of removing it.

Although the first public reports of cattle mutilations
surfaced around 1967 in Colorado, at the White House we were reading about the mutilation stories that had
been kept out of press as far back as the middle 1950s, especially in the area around Colorado.

There was
speculation, also, that maybe pharmaceutical companies were responsible because they could utilize the
organs and soft tissues in biological experimentation, but we dismissed that because the companies had their
own farms and could grow anything they wanted.

Our intelligence organizations and especially the working
group believed that the cattle mutilations that could not be obviously explained away as pranks, predators, or
ritual slaughter were the results of interventions by extraterrestrials who were harvesting specific organs for
experimentation.

So if our cattle were important enough to the EBEs to get them to expose what they were
doing, it was an important thing for us to understand why.Our intelligence organizations and especially the working
group believed that the cattle mutilations that could not be obviously explained away as pranks, predators, or
ritual slaughter were the results of interventions by extraterrestrials who were harvesting specific organs for
experimentation.

So if our cattle were important enough to the EBEs to get them to expose what they were
doing, it was an important thing for us to understand why.

The EBEs were nothing if not coldly and clinically
efficient - their methodology reminded us of the Nazis - and they didn't waste time sitting around on the ground
where they were most vulnerable to attack or capture unless they had a darn good reason for doing so.

We didn't know their reasons back in the 1950s and 1960s and can only make educated guesses about them
now, but back then we were driven by a terror that unless we found ways to defend ourselves against the EBEs
we would be corralled by them and used for replacement tissue or as a source of nutrition.

In 1997 this may sound
like a nightmare out of a flying saucer horror movie, but in1957 this was our thinking both in the White House and
in the military.

We didn't know, but we had irrefutable evidence that EBEs were landing on farms, harvesting vital
organs from livestock, and then just leaving the carcasses on the ground because they knew we couldn't do
anything about it.

The mutilations that interested the National Security personnel seemed to have the same kind of modus
operandi.

Whoever went after the animals seemed most interested in the mammary, digestive, and reproductive
organs, especially the uteruses from cows.

In many cases the eyes or throats were removed in a type of surgery in
which the demarcation line was almost microscopically thin and the surrounding tissue showed that the incision
had super heated and then blackened as it cooled.Whoever went after the animals seemed most interested in the mammary, digestive, and reproductive
organs, especially the uteruses from cows.

In many cases the eyes or throats were removed in a type of surgery in
which the demarcation line was almost microscopically thin and the surrounding tissue showed that the incision
had super heated and then blackened as it cooled.

But the crime scene and forensic specialists noted that in
any type of cut by a predatory animal or a human - even a skilled surgeon - one would find evidence of some
trauma in the surrounding tissue such as swelling, contusions, or other forms of abrasion.

In these reports of
mutilations, forensic examination showed no evidence of collateral trauma or even inflammation.

Therefore, they
believed, the cuts to extract the tissue were made so quickly and wounds were sealed so fast that the
surrounding tissue never was destroyed.

This meant that whoever was operating on these animals did so in a
matter of minutes.

It was rare, therefore, that police would ever catch them in the act.

So if we couldn't protect
our livestock or react intelligently to the stories of human abductions, except to debunk them and make the
abductees themselves think they were delusional, we had to find weapons that would put us on a more equal
footing with the EBEs.

One of those weapons, which had a wide application potential, was the laser - light
amplification through stimulated energy radiation - the device the army found in the Roswell spacecraft and
would later develop as a weapon in cooperation with Hughes Aircraft.

Shortly after the first successful demonstration of a ruby red laser at Columbia University, the three military
branches realized they had a winner.

The following year, the results of the tests at Columbia, the industry interest
in developing laser based products, and the Roswell report on stimulated energy all merged on my desk.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Shortly after the first successful demonstration of a ruby red laser at Columbia University, the three military
branches realized they had a winner. The following year, the results of the tests at Columbia, the industry interest
in developing laser based products, and the Roswell report on stimulated energy all merged on my desk. Now it
was my turn to get involved and assemble the information to support laser product development with military
funds before the whole operation was turned over to one of the R&D specialists who would take the product
through its next stages. That was the way our backfield worked: I fed the play, made sure the snap got off, and
then faded in behind the blockers. By the time the ball carrier had made his way into the secondary, I was
already off the field. I never got the Heisman Trophy, but I sure as hell moved the ball. I began by listing the needs of the army for what the laser might be able to accomplish. Based on what the
army analysts reported they saw in the Roswell ship, it seemed to me obvious that if the Roswell laser was a
cutting or surgical tool, the beam could also be utilized as an advanced rapid firing weapon. With a beam so
precise and directed, the laser would also make an excellent range finder and target manager for artillery. If the
beam was capable of instantaneous read ajustment and fed into a computer, it would also be the perfect
targeting system for a tank, especially a tank on the move. Typically, a tank must stop before it can fire because
the gunner needs to have a fixed firing platform from which he calculates range direction, and other
compensating factors. The laser can do all that while the vehicle is moving and should therefore enable a tank to
stay on the move while firing. And if a laser can paint a target from a tank and find the range, I speculated, it can
do the same for a helicopter from air to air and air to ground.

--- PAGE BREAK ---79
I suggested to General Trudeau that all the research we were conducting into helicopter tactics, especially
into the role of helicopters as infantry support gun and rocket platforms, dove tailed perfectly with the possibilities
of the laser as a range finding mechanism.

We could paint friendly troops to locate them, identify our foes, and
illuminate potential targets with light invisible to all but our own gunners.

At the same time, our own bombs or
missiles can home in on the laser image we project onto a target, like a heat seeking missile.

Once painted, the
target could evade the laser guided rocket or shell only with great difficulty.

For a stationary target such as a
fortification or artillery redoubt, a laser guided shell would be particularly devastating because we could take it
out with one or two rounds instead of having to go back again and again to make sure we'd found the target.

As a signal, a laser is so intense, refined, and perfectly stable that it is almost impervious to any kind of
disturbance.

For this reason, I wrote General Trudeau, the EBEs must have used an advanced form of a laser for
their communication, and we can, too.

The intensity of the beam and its highly refined focus mean that it can be
aimed with minute precision.

Amplifying the power to boost the signal should not distort the beam's aim, which
makes it perfect for straight line long distance communication.

Lasers also have high capacities for carrying multiple signals.

Therefore, I wrote the general, we can pack a
greater number of transmission bands into a laser signal than we can with our conventional signal carriers.

This
meant that we could literally flood a battlefield with different kinds of communication channels, each carrying
different kinds of communication, some not even invented yet, and have them securely carried by laser signals.Therefore, I wrote the general, we can pack a
greater number of transmission bands into a laser signal than we can with our conventional signal carriers.

This
meant that we could literally flood a battlefield with different kinds of communication channels, each carrying
different kinds of communication, some not even invented yet, and have them securely carried by laser signals.

For command and control on the increasingly sophisticated electronic battlefield the army was predicting for the
1970s, lasers would become the Signal Corps workhorses.

General Trudeau said that he was also interested in an item from one of the specification reports that other
military observers wrote that said that lasers could also serve as projection devices for large screen displays.

Lasers
were so bright that displays could be shown in rooms that didn't have to be darkened.

The general saw the
possibility of fully lit situation rooms with large screen displays from satellite radar transmissions.

The room would
allow computer operators to see what they were doing at their keyboards while seeing the displays and listening
to the briefing.

I suggested that the army cartography division would be particularly interested in the accuracy of the laser
derived measurements for maps.

That same measurement ability would also be able to generate digital data for
ground hugging infantry support helicopters or low flying planes.

Aircraft that could stay close to the ground
could avoid enemy radar and stay concealed until the last minute.

But unless there was a method for accurately
charting the topography, aircraft could find themselves scraping tree tops or crashing into the side of a hill.

If a
laser could accurately transmit topographic features to altitude control and navigational computers on board
attack aircraft, it would keep the aircraft safely above any ground obstacles but close enough to the ground to
remain concealed.But unless there was a method for accurately
charting the topography, aircraft could find themselves scraping tree tops or crashing into the side of a hill.

If a
laser could accurately transmit topographic features to altitude control and navigational computers on board
attack aircraft, it would keep the aircraft safely above any ground obstacles but close enough to the ground to
remain concealed.

This ground hugging capability that I suggested to General Trudeau had been suggested to
me from the analysis reports of UFOs that also had this capability.

It was what enabled them to hover close to the
ground and to move rapidly at speeds over a thousand miles an hour at treetop level without hitting anything.

The laser type devices aboard the UFO instantly fed the craft with the topographic features of the landscape and
the craft automatically adjusted to the terrain.

In late 1961, General Trudeau asked me to visit Fort Belvoir again, this time to meet a Dr.

Mark Johnston, one of
aeronautical research scientists from Hughes Aircraft.

Fort Belvoir was one of the safe houses for the Office of R&D
to conduct meetings in because it was a secure military facility.

My comings and goings there on Army R&D
business were completely routine, even to the CIA surveillance teams that would occasionally pick up my car
coming out of the Pentagon, and could be covered in our daily logs with references to the ongoing projects that
served as covers.

My meeting with Johnston, for example, was to talk about the Hughes helicopter development
program, not to give him my reports on the laser measuring devices we believed were in the Roswell spacecraft.

I
briefed Johnston on what the scientific team from Alamogordo believed was on the spacecraft, asked him not to
talk about it, and suggested that the Hughes team developing the navigational radars for the helicopter project
consider using the newly developed lasers as terrain measuring apparatus and for target acquisition.--- PAGE BREAK ---

My meeting with Johnston, for example, was to talk about the Hughes helicopter development
program, not to give him my reports on the laser measuring devices we believed were in the Roswell spacecraft. I
briefed Johnston on what the scientific team from Alamogordo believed was on the spacecraft, asked him not to
talk about it, and suggested that the Hughes team developing the navigational radars for the helicopter project
consider using the newly developed lasers as terrain measuring apparatus and for target acquisition. "Yes, of course, " I assured him. "The Office of R&D would have a development budget for the laser project if
the R&D team at Hughes thought our idea was feasible and they could develop it. "
And that's exactly what happened. Using the positive results from the Columbia University test and the army
weapons specifications we drew up in R&D for the requirements of a range finder, targeting, and tracking
weapon, and with research grants from the Pentagon, Hughes signed on as one of the contractors for the military
laser. Today, the laser has become the HEL, or High Energy Laser, deployed by the army's Space Defense
Command as, among other things, an antisatellite/antiwarhead weapon. My meeting at Hughes was quick and direct. Like so many of the research scientists I met with from Hughes,
Dow, IBM, and Bell, Johnston disappeared behind the work benches, computer screens, or test tubes of the
company's back room and out of my sight forever. When General Trudeau would ask me to follow up on the
project months later, a different company representative would meet with me and the project would look just like
any other Army R&D initiated research contract. Any traces of Roswell or the nut file would be gone, and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---project would have been slipped into the normal R&D functioning.

Of course this device didn't come out of the
Roswell incident.

The incident was only a myth; it never took place.

This came out of the Foreign Technology desk,
something the Italians or French were working on and we picked up through our intelligence sources.

Our work with laser products was becoming so successful by the end of 1961 that General Trudeau was urging
me to spread the wealth around as many army bases as I could.

I spoke to weapons experts at Fort Riley, Kansas,
for example, about the use of lasers by troops in the field.

Maybe as range finders, we suggested, or even as
ways to lock onto a target the way the air force was experimenting with something they were calling "smart
bombs.

" By 1964, after seeing the research into the feasibility of lasers that we had commissioned, hand held
range finders were being tested at army bases around the country, and today, police forces use laser sights on
their weapons.

Lasers became one of the army's great successes.

In one of our final pushes for the development of laser based weapons systems, we argued successfully for a
budget to develop laser tracking systems for incoming missiles.

This was a project we fought hard for, over
political opposition as well as opposition from the other military branches, which were looking at our proposal as a
conventional method of tracking missiles.

The laser was too new, they argued.

Atmospheric interference or heavy
clouds would distort the laser over long distances, they said.

Or, they said, it would simply take too much power
and would have no portability.

General Trudeau and I had another agenda for this project that we couldn't
readily share with anybody.

We believed that lasers could be used not just to track incoming missiles - that was
obvious.General Trudeau and I had another agenda for this project that we couldn't
readily share with anybody.

We believed that lasers could be used not just to track incoming missiles - that was
obvious.

We saw the lasers too as our best weapon for not only tracking UFOs from the ground, from aircraft, or
from satellites but, if we could boost the power to the necessary levels, for shooting them down.

Shoot down a
few of them, we speculated, and they wouldn't violate our airspaces with such impunity.

Equip our fighter planes
or interceptors with laser firing mechanisms and we could pose a credible threat to them.

Equip our satellites with
laser firing mechanisms and we could triangulate a firing pattern on the UFOs that might even keep them away
from our orbiting spacecraft.

But all of this was speculation in late 1961.

Only a very few people in the other branches of R&D even had a hint about what we were proposing.

The
National Aeronautics and Space Administration had its own plans for developing laser tracking systems and didn't
want to share any development budget with the military, so there was very little help forth coming from NASA.

The air force and navy were guarding their own development budgets for laser weapons, and we couldn't trust
the civilian intelligence agencies at all.

So General Trudeau and I began advocating a plan as a cover to
develop laser tracking and other sophisticated types of surveillance projects.

It was outrageous on the surface,
but it quickly found its adherents, and its real agenda could be completely masked.

We could never call it an
anti-UFO device so we named it the antimissile missile.

It was one of the most successful projects ever to come out
of Army R&D.

It owed most of its theory to our discovery of the laser in the Roswell wreckage.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was one of the most successful projects ever to come out
of Army R&D. It owed most of its theory to our discovery of the laser in the Roswell wreckage. CHAPTER 14
The Antimissile Missile Project
There were times during my tenure at the Pentagon when something in the Roswell file had such resonance in
my life that it made me question whether there was some larger plan for my work. I've read about the concept of
synchronicity or confluence in the years since I retired from the military and how things or events tend to cluster
around a common thread. Such a common thread was the development of the antimissile missile that
encompassed my work in R&D at the Pentagon, my brief stint as a staff adviser to Senator Strom Thurmond, and
my years in Rome during the war and occupation as the assistant chief of staff, Intelligence (G-2), Rome Area
Allied Command. In early 1963, just after I left the Pentagon, Senator Strom Thurmond asked me to join his staff as a consultant
and adviser on military and national security issues. Congress had just appropriated $300 million to turn a fledgling
plan to investigate the feasibility of an antimissile missile program into a full development project. But it ran right
into a concrete barrier just as soon as it left the Senate. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara flatly refused to
spend the money because, he said, not only would it intensify the U.S.-Soviet arms race, it would actually offend
the Kremlin because it would put them on notice that we were trying to deploy a first strike capability while
neutralizing their ICBMs. Worse, he said to the Congress, the United States military simply didn't need the weapon
in the first place. 80

--- PAGE BREAK ---81
Senator Thurmond was incensed and I was deeply worried.

McNamara just didn't get it.

He was completely
misinformed about how the Soviets reacted to any weapons deployment on our part.

They didn't negotiate with
us out of a sense of cooperation, only a sense of necessity that it was in their best interests to do so.

If they
thought we could knock out their ICBMs, that, more than anything, would keep them honest.

Hadn't they backed
down over Cuba because they saw that Kennedy actually meant business when he screwed up his resolve to
order the navy to enforce the blockade?

But the CIA had McNamara's ear and was giving him exactly the
information the disinformation specialists in the Kremlin wanted him to have: don't develop the antimissile missile.

General Trudeau and I had a secret agenda we had worked up the previous year at the Pentagon.

The
antimissile missile, utilizing laser targeting and tracking, was supposed to be the perfect mechanism for getting the
funds to develop a laser beam weapon we could ultimately use to fire on UFOs.

At least that was the way we'd
planned it.

The general had gotten it through the Pentagon bureaucracy while I covered his flank on the
legislative side, testifying before the Armed Services Committee on the efficacy of a weapon that was capable
of protecting American strategic forces with an umbrella.

If any country were foolish enough to attack the United
States, the antimissile missile would blunt their offensive and enable us not only to devastate their military forces
but hold their population centers hostage as well.

Not so, said the Defense Department.

The deployment of an antimissile missile would encourage our enemies
to attack our cities first and devastate our civilian population.

What did it matter if we had the ability to strike
back when the damage to us had already been done?The deployment of an antimissile missile would encourage our enemies
to attack our cities first and devastate our civilian population.

What did it matter if we had the ability to strike
back when the damage to us had already been done?

The only thing that was keeping our civilian population
centers safe was each side's ability to hold the other's nuclear forces hostage.

If both sides devastated one
another's nuclear forces, it would give each side time to stop before a mutual destruction of the civilian
populations.

But the secretary of defense didn't understand war.

He especially hadn't seen what lessons the Soviets learned
during World War II when their population centers had been devastated and people were
reduced to the point of starvation and cannibalized one another for food.

That kind of experience doesn't
toughen  you against the ravages of war, it educates you.

The Soviets' only hope for a victory in the Cold War
was in our putting down our guard and capitulating to them.

By refusing to go forward with the antimissile missile,
the secretary of defense was listening to arguments that were spoon fed to him, certainly without his knowledge,
by people in the civilian intelligence community who were being manipulated by the KGB.

Senator Thurmond's reaction to Bob McNamara's refusal to spend the antimissile missile appropriation was to
hold subcommittee hearings on this issue to find out why.

The Defense Department didn't want to disclose
classified information about the capabilities of a proposed weapon and our defense policy before a public
session of Congress.

So Fred Buzhardt, who years later became President Nixon's counsel, suggested that Senator
Thurmond invoke a senatorial privilege to close a session of the Senate so that the issue of the antimissile missile
could be discussed in private before the full Senate.The Defense Department didn't want to disclose
classified information about the capabilities of a proposed weapon and our defense policy before a public
session of Congress.

So Fred Buzhardt, who years later became President Nixon's counsel, suggested that Senator
Thurmond invoke a senatorial privilege to close a session of the Senate so that the issue of the antimissile missile
could be discussed in private before the full Senate.

But first, we had to request specific information from the
Department of Defense, and that task, because I was the Senator's adviser for military affairs, fell to me.

No one
knew that I was actually the officer who had initially prepared the information for the antimissile missile program
to begin with and probably knew more about the documents than anyone because less than a year earlier I had
prepared them myself.

The first meeting with the Defense Department was held in my new office in the basement of the Capitol
Building.

Secretary McNamara sent his own scientific adviser, Harold Brown, who would later become the
secretary of defense himself, along with an army colonel who had become the project officer for the antimissile
missile development program.

Brown didn't know who I was, but his assistant from the army certainly did.

"Colonel, " the army project officer began as soon as I asked him a question about the request we'd sent for
information, and Harold Brown sat up straight in his chair.

Gradually, like chipping away parts of a granite block, I
asked the project officer about the specific details of the antimissile missile program, how much of the budget
allocation from previous Pentagon funding they'd already spent, and what their development time table would
be if the current appropriation were spent for the current phase of the project.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Colonel, " the army project officer began as soon as I asked him a question about the request we'd sent for
information, and Harold Brown sat up straight in his chair. Gradually, like chipping away parts of a granite block, I
asked the project officer about the specific details of the antimissile missile program, how much of the budget
allocation from previous Pentagon funding they'd already spent, and what their development time table would
be if the current appropriation were spent for the current phase of the project. Then I asked more technical
questions about the research into ground based radars, satellite based radars, speculation into Soviet counter
antimissile missile strategies, and Soviet development of even bigger and more mobile ICBMs that would present
more imperative targets for any antimissile missile system because we couldn't take them out in a first strike. Mounted on railway cars or trucks, mobile Soviet missiles would be almost impossible to track even though they
would have to remain stationary for the liquid fueling process to be completed. "I see that my assistant keeps on calling you colonel, Mr. Corso, "Harold Brown said. "And you certainly seem to
know a lot of details on this subject. "
"Yes, sir, " I said. "I only retired from the army a couple of months ago but while I was at the Pentagon, I was the
acting projects officer for the antimissile missile program. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---82
"Then there's no use in holding back, " Harold Brown said and finally smiled for the first time in our meeting.

He
reached into his pocket and pulled out a folded envelope.

"Here are your copies of the complete details of the
project about which we briefed President Kennedy.

It's all here.

And I presume this is what you are looking for,
officially, " he said with a special emphasis on "officially.

" He knew that I knew what was in that envelope but
couldn't disclose it before the Senate because it contained classified information and I would be breaching the
National Security Act.

However, by his giving me the material, much of it based on information that I had
developed myself and had privately briefed Attorney General Robert Kennedy on in 1962, Brown was giving me
the full authorization to disclose.

He probably realized that in private sessions, I had talked generally about what
was in the army file on the antimissile missile - that was a form of senatorial privilege as long as it wasn't abused -
but that I couldn't go formal with it.

Now I could, and I appreciated Harold Brown's candor.

The battle over the appropriation was about to be joined, but I couldn't look over the contents of the
envelope, some of which were my own notes, without thinking back to the sequence of events that led to this
meeting and to the project that ultimately was developed as a result of it.

It began earlier in 1962 as I was
working down the list of the priorities I had set for myself in the nut file.

In it was a medical report about the
creatures that I was trying to save until I had gotten all of the tangible items from Roswell into the development
process.

It was a report on the possible function and apparent structure of the alien brain, a report that marveled
at the similarities between the KBH brain and the human brain.

However, one item in the report threw me for a
complete loop.It was a report on the possible function and apparent structure of the alien brain, a report that marveled
at the similarities between the KBH brain and the human brain.

However, one item in the report threw me for a
complete loop.

The medical examiner wrote that measurements of brain activity taken from the EBE who was still
barely alive at Roswell showed that its electronic signature, at least what they were able to measure with
equipment in 1947, displayed a signal similar to what we would call long, low frequency waves.

And the examiner
referred to a description by one of the Roswell Army Air Field doctors that the creature's brain lobes seem to have
been not just physiologically and neurologically integrated but integrated by an electromagnetic current as well.

I would have loved to dismiss this as the speculation of a doctor who had no experience with this type of
analysis and certainly no experience with alien beings.

Therefore, whatever he wrote was nonsense and not
worth the time it took to respond to it.

File it back in the cabinet and get on to other issues that could be turned
into viable projects.

But the medical examiner's report was more disturbing than I was ready to admit because it
took me back to a time when I was the assistant chief of staff in Rome and made friends with some of the
members of the graduate faculty at the University of Rome.

I was a twenty five  year old captain at the time, a former engineering undergraduate, way in over my head
and learning my job responsibilities each day, keeping one step ahead of my boss so he wouldn't find out that I
didn't really know anything.

In one of my visits to the university I met Dr.

Gislero Flesch, a professor of criminology
and anthropology who lectured me on what he called his theory and experiments on "the basis of life.

" It was a
wild and, I thought, supernatural theory on what he called the filament within each cell.Gislero Flesch, a professor of criminology
and anthropology who lectured me on what he called his theory and experiments on "the basis of life.

" It was a
wild and, I thought, supernatural theory on what he called the filament within each cell.

The filament was
activated by some cosmic action or form of electromagnetic radiation that bombarded the earth continuously
from outer space and resonated against a constant refresh of electrical activity from the brain.

"Captain"  he would say whenever he began some formal explanation.

I also thought that he was always
surprised that someone so young could actually be dispatched from the New World to administer law and justice
in Rome, the capital of the ancient world.

The old professor also was scrupulous about showing everyone,
including his dimmest of students, extraordinary respect.

"The electromagnetic forces in the body are the least
understood, " he continued.

"Yet they account for more activity than anyone realizes.

As an engineering student whose whole experience with energy had to do with verifiable experiments, I was
more than skeptical at first.

How can you measure an electrical activity in the brain that you cannot see?

How
can invisible waves of energy that you can't feel or see excite certain areas of the human cell, and what was
their purpose?

Professor Flesch introduced me to Professor Casmir Franck, one of the first scientists to ever photograph brain
waves.

Professor Franck became a friend because during my days in Rome, fighting off Gestapo agents,
Communist partisans, and the local crime families and crime chieftains, I was always engaged in some type of
warfare.

But when I had time off, I wanted to meet people, to stretch my experience, to fall in love with the city of
my own ancestors I had been assigned to protect.

So I sought out a network of friends to whom I could relate
and from whom I could learn.

Professor Franck was just such a man.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So I sought out a network of friends to whom I could relate
and from whom I could learn. Professor Franck was just such a man. In Franck's first experiments he had used a rabbit brain as a test subject. He measured what he said were the
long, low frequency waves animal brains generate and described how he was able to trace the paths these
waves took when they were transmitted from the brain to the animal's voluntary muscles. Certain muscles,
Professor Franck said, were attuned to respond to certain brain wave lengths, waves of a specific frequency. In

--- PAGE BREAK ---83
cases of muscle paralysis, it's not the muscle that's necessarily damaged, it's the muscle's tuning mechanism that
becomes disabled so that it no longer picks up the right frequency.

It's like a radio, he said.

If the radio can't pick
up a signal, the radio isn't necessarily broken; its antenna or the crystal may need to be adjusted to the correct
frequency.

I was a guest at his laboratory more than a few times and watched him carry out his experiments with
live rabbits, interfering with their brains' electromagnetic wave propagation by implanting electrodes and seeing
which muscles became cataleptic and which responded.

He said it was the frequency that was being altered
because once the animal was removed from the experimental table, it could walk and hop as if nothing had
ever happened.

Then Professor Franck introduced me to another one of his colleagues, the celebrated research biologist and
physician Doctor Castellani, who had many years earlier isolated and identified the disease called "sleeping
sickness" and perfected what during the1930s and 1940s became known as "Castellani Ointments" as treatments
for a variety of skin diseases.

Where other doctors, he said, had focused on treating only the symptoms they could
see on the skin, Doctor Castellani said that the problems of many skin rashes, psoriasis, or inflammations that
looked like bacterial infections were, in fact, correctable by changing the skin's electromagnetic resonance.

The
ointments, he said, didn't attack the infection with drugs; they were chemical reactants that changed the
electrostatic condition of the skin, allowing the long, low frequency waves from the brain to do the healing.

All three men were using these electromagnetic waves to promote healing in ways I considered astounding.

They made claims about the ability of electromagnetic treatments to affect the speed at which cells divide and
tumors grow.All three men were using these electromagnetic waves to promote healing in ways I considered astounding.

They made claims about the ability of electromagnetic treatments to affect the speed at which cells divide and
tumors grow.

They claimed that through directed electromagnetic wave propagation they could cure heart
disease, arthritis, all types of bacteriological infections that interfered with cell function, and even certain forms of
cancer.

If this sounds like something supernatural in 1997, imagine how it must have sounded to the ears of a young
and inexperienced intelligence officer in 1944 who was so far out of his element that the older, seasoned British
intelligence laughed at his age.

They laughed until they saw what happened to the Gestapo agents who were
trying to reinfiltrate Rome behind the Allied front lines and met up with my men on the back streets and alleys.

That's when the laughing stopped.

I spent many hours with Professors Flesch, Franck, and Castellani in Rome and watched them experiment with
all kinds of small animals.

They didn't have the research funds nor the endorsements of the medical societies to
allow them to expand their work or to treat patients with their unconventional methods.

Thus, much of their work
found its way into research monographs, articles in academic journals, or university lectures at symposiums.

And I
left Rome in the spring of 1947, said my good-byes to the friends I had made at the University of Rome, and put
their work - relegated once again to the supernatural - out of my mind as I concentrated on my new jobs at Fort
Riley, the White House, Red Canyon, Germany, and the Pentagon.

Then on the day that I came across the
speculative report on the structure of the alien brain from Roswell, everything Professors Flesch, Franck, and
Castellani said came back to me like a clap of thunder.And I
left Rome in the spring of 1947, said my good-byes to the friends I had made at the University of Rome, and put
their work - relegated once again to the supernatural - out of my mind as I concentrated on my new jobs at Fort
Riley, the White House, Red Canyon, Germany, and the Pentagon.

Then on the day that I came across the
speculative report on the structure of the alien brain from Roswell, everything Professors Flesch, Franck, and
Castellani said came back to me like a clap of thunder.

Here I was again, staring at a piece of loose leaf paper
that was staring right back at me and forcing me to consider ideas and notions from over ten years ago that
challenged everything science back then was telling us about the way the brain worked.

While I reviewed the reports about the autopsied alien brain and what the medical examiner thought the low
frequency waves meant when he applied current to the tissue, I also saw reports from an army military liaison
attached to the Stalingrad consulate office that described Soviet experiments with psychics who were
attempting to exercise some form of kinetic mind control over objects traveling through the air, directing them
from one spot to another.

These reports, written in the late 1950s, gave General Trudeau a lot of concern
because they showed the Soviets were onto something.

"These fellas don't waste their time, Phil, " the general told me a tone of our morning briefings after I had
dropped off the reports the day before so he could look them over.

"If they're looking into this stuff, then they
know there's something there.

"
"You don't think this report is just a lot of speculation?" I asked.

I knew from the expression on his face that it
was a question I shouldn't have asked.

"If you thought this was just speculation, Colonel, " he said very abruptly, "then you wouldn't be passing the
buck up to me to tell you that.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I knew from the expression on his face that it
was a question I shouldn't have asked. "If you thought this was just speculation, Colonel, " he said very abruptly, "then you wouldn't be passing the
buck up to me to tell you that. " General Trudeau had a way of bringing you up short when he thought you said
something stupid. And what I had said was very stupid for an officer with my training and experience. He also
knew I was worried or else I wouldn't have tried to back off so quickly. "You're right to be worried about this, " he
said, his tone softening when he saw how I was looking at him. "You'd be right if you sat in your office and
sweated bullets over what this means. And you know exactly what worries the both of us. Do I have to say it?"
No, he didn't. It was obvious. If the Soviets had gotten their hands on some of the apparatus from any one of
the alien spacecraft that had gone down since 1947 - and I didn't know how many there were - they'd have

--- PAGE BREAK ---84
figured out by now that the aliens had used some form of brain wave control for navigation.

How they directed
their thoughts or translated them into an electronic circuit, we didn't know.

But we knew that there were no
steering wheels or conventional methods of control on the spacecraft, and the headbands we found with the
electronic sensors on them were designed to pick up some form of signal from the brain.

The analysts at Wright
Field believed that the sensors on the headbands corresponded with points on the multi lobed alien brain that
generated low frequency waves, so the headbands formed an integral part of the circuit.

If we were able to
figure that out, the Soviets were certainly, capable of figuring that out as well.

Besides, the general didn't have to
say it because I thought it: What if the Soviets, all alone in space the way they were in the early 1960s, had some
communication with the aliens that we didn't have?

Who said the EBEs had to be anti-Communist anyway?

General Trudeau also shared with me some intelligence reports that described antimissile missile tests the
Soviets had conducted with very powerful tracking radar.

We'd known about their radars because I'd seen them
work during exercises in Germany when each side would test the other's responses over the East German border.

Their radars and their ability to lock onto aircraft was just as good as ours.

But what the general showed me were
reports that described the Soviets firing intercept missiles at incoming ICBM vehicles and exploding the intercept
warheads so as to knock out the navigational systems on the aggressor missiles.

One of those test intercepts had
been conducted successfully right through an atomic cloud on one of the Soviet missile test ranges in Asia.

This
was especially disturbing because anyone who knows anything about the nature of anatomic cloud knows that
the electromagnetic pulse immediately knocks out any form of electronics.One of those test intercepts had
been conducted successfully right through an atomic cloud on one of the Soviet missile test ranges in Asia.

This
was especially disturbing because anyone who knows anything about the nature of anatomic cloud knows that
the electromagnetic pulse immediately knocks out any form of electronics.

That's also how we knew what the
signatures were of the alien UFOs that buzzed our ships and bases.

So much of our nonhardened power was
knocked out by the pulse that we knew an electromagnetic wave had hit us.

So if the Soviets could harden their
antimissile missile guidance system to home in on a target through an electromagnetically charged atomic
cloud, they were using a technology significantly more advanced than ours, and it spelled trouble.

"When you were in Germany commanding the Nike battalion, " the general asked me, still holding the reports
in his hand, "you experimented with tight evasive maneuvers in drone target practice, didn't you?"
The general's memory served him correctly.

Our antiaircraft battalion deployed the Nike, one of the most
advanced guided antiaircraft missiles of its time.

The Nike was a radar guided missile.

And the Hawk was a heat seeking missile that could be locked onto its target by tracking radar and then,
when launched, would home in on the target's heat exhaust.

So, even if a pilot tried to evade the missiles, the fast
moving Hawk warheads would catch up to him and blow off his engine.

If it were a tail engine fighter, it would
effectively end his mission and he'd probably have to eject.

If it were a wing engined bomber, then, with one of
his wing mounted engines shot off, the pilot would probably have to turn for home because he wouldn't have the
power to carry the payload of bombs to the target.If it were a tail engine fighter, it would
effectively end his mission and he'd probably have to eject.

If it were a wing engined bomber, then, with one of
his wing mounted engines shot off, the pilot would probably have to turn for home because he wouldn't have the
power to carry the payload of bombs to the target.

"When we were shooting at drones in simulated bombing formation, we scored a perfect shoot down again
and again, but when pilots used extremely fast evasive maneuvers against our missiles, we couldn't hit them, " I
said.

"Explain how that worked, " he asked.

"Nike antiaircraft missiles move like boats on water, " I explained.

"They cut wide arcs and get an angle to
home in on their targets.

Any early evasive maneuvers the fighter pilot makes, the missile compensates for and
stays on course toward his heat source.

But if the pilot is able to evade at the very last minute of the Nike's
trajectory, the missile will fly right by and can't recover.

Bomber pilots have to stay in formation and keep on
course if they're going to hit their target and have enough fuel to get home, so their evasive patterns are strictly
limited.

For fighter pilots, it's much easier so any MiG, just like any of our Phantoms, can out maneuver a Nike any
day.

"
"So if the Soviets have something that can take out missile warheads through an atomic cloud and are using
devices that may have come from an alien technology, we have something to worry about, " the general said.

"We'd have a lot to worry about, " I agreed.

"We have nothing even remotely like this, except for the laser
tracking system, but that's years away from any sort of deployment even assuming we can get the President to
ask Congress to give us the money to develop it.

"
General Trudeau slammed his palm on the desk with enough force to shake the entire office.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"We have nothing even remotely like this, except for the laser
tracking system, but that's years away from any sort of deployment even assuming we can get the President to
ask Congress to give us the money to develop it. "
General Trudeau slammed his palm on the desk with enough force to shake the entire office. I'm sure his clerk
sitting just outside thought I was getting bawled out for something, but that was the general's way of reinforcing a
decision he was making. "Phil, you are the antimissile missile projects officer for the time being. I don't care
whatever the hell else you have to do, you write me up a report on what we discussed here and then put
together a proposal I can use to get us some money to develop this thing, " he said. "I know we're on the right
track, even if we're in a strange arena. Thought control, " he said, speculating about how the power of the
human brain could be harnessed to the navigation of a guided missile. "Well, if the Russians are looking at it
seriously, then we'd better do the same thing before they blindside us like the did with Sputnik. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---85
"Why me?" I said to myself as I walked down the stairs to my office.

This was like an assignment to write a term
paper when there wasn't even any research you could use and still be called sane.

I had to write about the
hardware and systems applications of navigational control, not medical or biological functions per se, but that
made it all the more difficult.

I remembered my son telling me that he was able to fix gasoline engines that had
broken down and electrical motors that were no longer putting out power because he believed the moving
parts spoke to him.

As way out as I thought that sounded at the time, walking back to my office now and thinking
about what the Soviets were playing with, maybe my kid didn't sound so crazy after all.

It was something I'd have
to research.

If the information that Professors Flesch, Franck, and Castellani conveyed to me back in Rome fifteen years
ago had any validity, then the vague references in the Roswell report that I'd read probably had validity as well.

So I began.

"The references to EBE brain function in the medical examiner's reports from Roswell, " I wrote in my opening
memo to General Trudeau, suggest new avenues of research to us in the guidance and navigational control of
machines.

The electromagnetic integration of the alien brain lobes and the possible integration with other brain
functions including kinesthetic capability - the ability to move objects - over long distance is startling and sounds
more like science fiction than fact.

But if we can establish a correlation with long, low frequency waves and this
electromagnetic integration, it will be a way to identify a measurable phenomenon with a process we do not
understand.The electromagnetic integration of the alien brain lobes and the possible integration with other brain
functions including kinesthetic capability - the ability to move objects - over long distance is startling and sounds
more like science fiction than fact.

But if we can establish a correlation with long, low frequency waves and this
electromagnetic integration, it will be a way to identify a measurable phenomenon with a process we do not
understand.

Initially, I recommend we study the phenomenon in an effort
to apply our findings to gathering and utilizing any data we can develop concerning long, low frequency
waves and electromagnetic integration so as to marry it to our existing guidance and control hardware systems
and create a new state of the art in missile tracking.

A caveat: The Central Intelligence Agency has begun a program in which they work with "seers, " as they call
them, parapsychologists who they expect will give them the same capability as the KGB's "Psychotronic
Technology" training.

Both intelligence agencies are skirting the edges of our military's approach and we must be
careful not to let our research fall into their cauldron.

We would be discredited and possibly stopped from
proceeding both from efforts from our own side and from protests by the Soviets should they find out.

Therefore I
recommend that the background of our experimentation with long low frequency brain waves and any source
material be completely expunged along with any historical data relevant to this analysis.

My basis for our proposed antimissile missile was the Soviets' own success with controlling the trajectory of an
ICBM warhead in flight and the success they had in targeting incoming warheads with their own antimissile missile
in development.

"In recent months, " I wrote,
it has come to our attention that the Soviets can change the trajectory of an ICBM after launch once it is on its
way to a target.My basis for our proposed antimissile missile was the Soviets' own success with controlling the trajectory of an
ICBM warhead in flight and the success they had in targeting incoming warheads with their own antimissile missile
in development.

"In recent months, " I wrote,
it has come to our attention that the Soviets can change the trajectory of an ICBM after launch once it is on its
way to a target.

In addition, the Soviets have twice tested an antimissile missile fired through an atomic cloud at
an approaching ICBM.

Therefore, a technical proposal must be drawn up as soon as possible for:
1.

An antimissile missile that will be able to lock onto an incoming ICBM and stay locked on through all evasive
maneuvers and destroy it before it reaches its target, and
2.

All circuitry must be hardened to withstand radiation, blast, heat, and electromagnetic pulse from an
atomic detonation up to and including the intensity of the Russian bomb explosion of 60 megatons.

Premise:
Our present antiaircraft missiles centered around the Nike-Ajax, Nike-Hercules, and the Hawk are not
adequate against ICBMs thus rendering us virtually defenseless against such an attack.

Present systems cannot
remain locked onto an incoming ICBM or find the target to destroy if it changes trajectory, which capability the
latest Soviet test models indicate the enemy may be able to deploy within the decade.

Our spy satellites will be
able to locate the Soviet warheads once they are launched, but the Soviets are also developing the capability
to disable our surveillance satellites either with orbiting nuclear weapons to destroy them or send them out of
orbit.

At the very least, Soviet capability to generate an electromagnetic pulse through a nuclear detonation in
space will render our satellites electronically blind.

Secret intelligence reports confirm that the Soviets have
already disabled two of our satellites and one launched by the British.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the very least, Soviet capability to generate an electromagnetic pulse through a nuclear detonation in
space will render our satellites electronically blind. Secret intelligence reports confirm that the Soviets have
already disabled two of our satellites and one launched by the British. We, therefore, have a two fold problem,
not only must the antimissile missile circuitry be hardened but the spy satellite circuitry must also be hardened
from radiation, ion emissions, and ELM pulses. But because of the nuclear test ban treaty, the United States will not
have the opportunity to run actual tests so we will have to scale our data up from our existing test results to arrive
at figures we can only assume are accurate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---86
When General Trudeau read my full report, he asked me to speak to the scientists who consulted with us as
part of a brain trust and develop a technical discussion, as speculative as we needed it to be with no restrictions
whatsoever, in which we integrated what we had in our Roswell files with what intelligence we had on the types
of testing the Soviets were conducting.

"Don't worry about how it's going to be circulated, Phil, " General Trudeau assured me.

"I want to show it to
only a few members of the House and Senate Defense appropriations committees and they've promised to keep
it confidential.

"
"I know you want this right away, General, " I said.

"Can I have the rest of the day to work on it?"
"You can have until tomorrow morning, " he said.

"Because after
lunch tomorrow you and I are meeting with the Senate subcommittee and I want to read them this report.

"
I told my wife that I'd be home late in the morning for a change of uniform and then I was going over to
Capitol Hill for a meeting.

Then I ordered up a couple of sandwiches, put a new pot of coffee on, and settled in
at the office for a long night.

"The present design and configuration of our ICBMs is adequate, " I wrote onto my legal pad, crossed out the
sentence, and then wrote it again.

"However internal changes are necessary, especially within the warhead
capsule.

"
What I would recommend would be nothing less than radical.

We needed an entirely new navigational
computer system that would take advantage of the transistorized circuitry now coming into development and
projected for the marketplace by the late 1960s.

I suggested we model the missile's on board computer on the design of an actual dual hemisphere brain with
one hemisphere or lobe receiving global positioning data from orbiting satellites.

The other hemisphere will control
the missile functions such as thrusters, positioning changes, and booster stage separation.I suggested we model the missile's on board computer on the design of an actual dual hemisphere brain with
one hemisphere or lobe receiving global positioning data from orbiting satellites.

The other hemisphere will control
the missile functions such as thrusters, positioning changes, and booster stage separation.

It will receive data
through a low frequency transmission from the other lobe.

The control lobe will also transmit missile flight telemetry
to the positioning lobe so that the two computers will function together in tandem.

This, I reasoned, would make
the system more difficult to jam.

If our global positioning satellite detected a threat from an incoming antimissile
missile, it would relay that information to the warhead, whose control computer would direct the thrusters to fire
so as to take evasive action before the final target approach.

In as much as I believed it was through the application and amplification of low frequency brain waves that
the EBEs navigated the craft that we found at Roswell, our implementation of this technology might enable us
also to use our brains to control the flight of objects.

We could use some form of a brain wave system to navigate
our ICBM warhead final stage vehicles if their on board radar detected a threat from an antiballistic missile.

We
could also use this system to home in on incoming enemy warhead launchers even if they were capable of
taking some evasive action.

If we designed the missile the way I suggested, by the time it had been locked into its final trajectory, its
detonation would be set so that even if it were knocked off course it would still explode and cause enough
collateral damage that it would count as a hit.

Enough of our ICBMs could get through, we reasoned, so as to
overwhelm not only the Soviet guided missile forces but pose a realistic threat to their population centers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If we designed the missile the way I suggested, by the time it had been locked into its final trajectory, its
detonation would be set so that even if it were knocked off course it would still explode and cause enough
collateral damage that it would count as a hit. Enough of our ICBMs could get through, we reasoned, so as to
overwhelm not only the Soviet guided missile forces but pose a realistic threat to their population centers. Meanwhile, the technology we developed for changing the flights of our incoming ICBMs could be applied as a
template to our own antimissile missiles so as to neutralize any Soviet missile threat. My conclusion: "An appropriation of $300 million must be requested for the coming FY 1963 as a urgent crash
development appropriation. "
I read my own notes from the envelope handed over by Harold Brown and looked back at him. "Colonel, " Brown's assistant said. "We understand the urgency of your request last year and we appreciate
your reasons for fighting for it now. "
"But the Defense Department is simply not going to allow the army to go forward with an antimissile missile at
this time. Not in1963, " Mr. Brown said. "When?" I asked. "At a time, " the army colonel said, "when the impact of our deploying this system will be greater than it is now. The Russians know we have a bead on the type of satellites they're putting up and we can take them out in a
heartbeat, much faster than they can take out ours. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---I began to answer, but Harold Brown got up to leave.

We shook hands and he walked toward the door.

The
army colonel remained in front of my desk.

"Maybe just you and I can have a word, Colonel Corso, " he said.

My
own associate on Senator Thurmond's committee left the office also.

"In the Pentagon, we understand that your early research into the technology of the antiballistic missile is the
real reason for your support, Colonel Corso, " the project manager said.

"It's in good hands.

"
But I can tell you he didn't know the real reason, the EBEs.

Only General Trudeau understood the secret
agenda that lay beneath the research into the project.

"But when do you think development will start?" I asked.

"In just a couple of years we'll have lunar spacecraft orbiting the moon, " he said.

"We'll have orbiting satellites
mapping every inch of the Soviet Union.

We'll see what they can throw against us.

Then we'll  have exactly the
kind of antimissile  missile you  proposed because then even the Congress will see the reason for it.

" "But until then
...

" I began.

"Until then, " the colonel said, "all we can do is wait.

"It would take another twenty years for the beginnings of
an antimissile to be deployed.

And it would also take a president who was willing to recognize the threat from the
extraterrestrials to force an antimissile weapon through a hostile Congress.

CHAPTER 15
My Last Year in R&D: The Hoover Files, Fiber Optics, Supertenacity, and Other Artifacts
I BARELY PICKED MY HEAD UP FROM THE PILES OF TECHNICAL proposals on my desk during the winter months of
1961.

The work didn't even stop for the Christmas holiday, when most of Washington likes to take a break and
head for the West Virginia mountains or the Maryland countryside.CHAPTER 15
My Last Year in R&D: The Hoover Files, Fiber Optics, Supertenacity, and Other Artifacts
I BARELY PICKED MY HEAD UP FROM THE PILES OF TECHNICAL proposals on my desk during the winter months of
1961.

The work didn't even stop for the Christmas holiday, when most of Washington likes to take a break and
head for the West Virginia mountains or the Maryland countryside.

I was traveling a lot during the final months of
1961, seeing weapons undergo testing at proving grounds around the country, meeting with university
researchers on such diverse items as the preservation of food or the conversion of spent atomic pile material into
weapons, and developing intelligence reports for General Trudeau on the kinds of technologies that might shape
weapons development into the next decade.

With my other eye, I was keeping a look out for any reports going to the Air Intelligence Command about UFO
sightings that I thought Army Intelligence should be thinking about.

The AIC was the next step in classification from
the Project Blue Book people.

Its job, besides the obvious task of moving any urgent UFO reports up the ladder of
secrecy to the next levels where they would disappear behind the veil of camouflage, was to classify the type of
event or incident the sighting seemed to indicate.

Usually that meant separating real aircraft sightings that
needed to be investigated for pure military intelligence purposes from either true UFO sightings that needed to be
processed by whatever elements of the original working group were on watch or false sightings that needed to
be sent back down to Blue Book to be debunked.

The AIC loved it when it had actual false sightings it could send
back: an obvious meteorite that they could confirm, some visual anomaly having to do with an alignment of
planets, or, best of all, a couple of clowns somewhere that decided to pull a Halloween prank and scare the
locals.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Usually that meant separating real aircraft sightings that
needed to be investigated for pure military intelligence purposes from either true UFO sightings that needed to be
processed by whatever elements of the original working group were on watch or false sightings that needed to
be sent back down to Blue Book to be debunked. The AIC loved it when it had actual false sightings it could send
back: an obvious meteorite that they could confirm, some visual anomaly having to do with an alignment of
planets, or, best of all, a couple of clowns somewhere that decided to pull a Halloween prank and scare the
locals. There were guys running around wheat fields with snowshoes or submitting photos of flying frozen pie tins to
the local papers. Then the folks at Blue Book could release the story to the press, and everybody patted
themselves on the back for the job they were all doing. Life could be fun in the early 1960s, especially if you didn't
know the truth. Moving into 1962, Army Intelligence was lit up with rumors about potential threats coming in from all over the
place. The anti-Castro Cubans were mad about the President's refusal to support the Bay of Pigs invasion and
were looking for revenge; Castro was mad about the Bay of Pigs invasion and was looking to get back at us;
Khrushchev was still furious about the U2 and the Bay of Pigs and thinking Kennedy was a pushover, would soon
jump on an opportunity to force us into some humiliating compromise. The Russians were on the verge of sending
manned spacecraft into extended orbital flights and robot probes out to explore Venus. We were way behind in
the space race and none of the services had the budget or the ability to get us back into the fight. NASA was
telling the President they would have to dig in, develop the technology base, and, by the middle of the decade,
87

--- PAGE BREAK ---88
put on a show for the whole world.

But now, as the year turned, it was all silent running until we could put
something up we could brag about.

The army was making ominous noises about events in Southeast Asia.

The more the army pushed to get troops
on the ground, the more the Kennedy administration refused to get involved.

The army was telling the President
we would eventually be sucked into a war we could not win and the events would control us instead of our
controlling them.

Later that same year, I would be offered the job of director of intelligence for the Army Special
Forces units already operating in the Southeast Asian theater.

At about the same time the army said it was going
to name Gen.

Arthur Trudeau as the commander of all U.S.

forces in South Vietnam.

As our names were being
circulated, General Trudeau confided to me that he doubted we would get the jobs.

And if we did, he said, it
would be a toss-up as to who would be the most unhappy, the Vietcong or the U.S.

Army.

"If they send us over there, Phil, " he said after one of our morning briefings, "one of two things will happen.

Either we'll both get court martialed or we'll win the damn war.

Either way the army's not going to like the way we
do business.

"
As usual, General Trudeau was right.

Before the end of 1962 and right about the time the old man was making
up his mind whether to retire or not, his name was vetoed as the commander of all U.S.

forces in Vietnam and I
was told to stay at my desk.

The handwriting was on the wall: Vietnam was going to be a political war run by the
disinformation specialists at the CIA and fought under a cloud of unknowing.

Unfortunately, history proved us to
be correct.

By the time Richard Nixon surrendered to the Chinese and we crawled out of Southeast Asia a few
years later, we would learn, I hope for the last time, what it was like to be humiliated on the battlefield and then
eviscerated at the negotiating table.

The new year brought J.By the time Richard Nixon surrendered to the Chinese and we crawled out of Southeast Asia a few
years later, we would learn, I hope for the last time, what it was like to be humiliated on the battlefield and then
eviscerated at the negotiating table.

The new year brought J.

Edgar Hoover over to the Pentagon.

The FBI director was growing increasingly anxious
at all the Roswell stories circulating like ice cold currents deep under the ocean throughout NASA and the civilian
intelligence agencies.

Somebody was conspiring about something, and that meant the FBI should get involved,
especially if the CIA was messing around in domestic issues.

Hoover didn't like the CIA and he especially didn't like
the cozy relationship he thought President Kennedy had with the CIA because he believed his boss, the
President's brother, was keeping him on a short leash when it came to taking on the agency about territorial
issues.

Hoover knew, but didn't believe, that after the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy had become very suspicious of the
intelligence information he was getting from the CIA.

By the end of 1962, the President would learn from his own
brother, who would learn from me, just how deliberately flawed the information coming out of the CIA was.

And I
would also learn, when I worked for Senator Russell on the Warren Commission in 1964, how that had sealed his
fate.

But in 1962, still near the height of his power, J.

Edgar Hoover was as territorial as any lifetime bureaucrat in
Washington could be.

And when somebody stepped on his toes, or when he thought someone had stepped on
his toes, he kept kicking them until the guy was dead.

Even his own agents knew what it was like to get on his bad
side.

I was as territorial in my own way as the FBI director was in his, and during my years at the White House under
President Eisenhower, we had established a professional relationship.Even his own agents knew what it was like to get on his bad
side.

I was as territorial in my own way as the FBI director was in his, and during my years at the White House under
President Eisenhower, we had established a professional relationship.

If he needed to know something that bore
on some KGB agent nosing around the government, I helped him out.

If I needed to find something out on the qt.

about somebody I needed to take out of the bureaucratic loop, he would tell me what he knew.

We never
established any formal relationships in the 1950s, but we let each know who we thought the bad guys were.

In the 1950s, Hoover got interested in the rumors about Roswell because anything the CIA got their teeth into
made him nervous.

If it were only the military running a cover-up, he could live with that, although he thought the
military never should have run the OSS during World War II.

But once he suspected the CIA was part of the Roswell
story, he wanted in.

But in my years on the White House staff, there wasn't much I could tell him.

It wouldn't be
until 1961 that I got my hands on what really happened at Roswell, and then I didn't have to contact him.

He
called me.

We found we could help each other.

Besides being territorial, J.

Edgar Hoover was an information fanatic.

If
there was a bit of information floating around, whether it was rumor or truth, Hoover was obsessive about putting
it into his files.

Information was such a valuable commodity to him, he was willing to trade for it with anybody in
government he trusted.

I wanted information, too.

I was going out to meetings with scientists and university
researchers whose loyalties I couldn't verify.

I had to be very circumspect about the technological information I
was delivering, and many times I needed to know whether a particular chemist or physicist had ever been
suspected of dealing with the Communists or, worse, was on the payroll of the CIA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I was going out to meetings with scientists and university
researchers whose loyalties I couldn't verify. I had to be very circumspect about the technological information I
was delivering, and many times I needed to know whether a particular chemist or physicist had ever been
suspected of dealing with the Communists or, worse, was on the payroll of the CIA. In retrospect I can see how all this smacks of the thinking of Senator Joe McCarthy, but I was at the White
House during the army McCarthy hearings and I can tell you straight out that Joe McCarthy - unwittingly - was the
best friend the Communists ever had in government. Single handedly, Senator McCarthy helped give
respectability to a bunch of people who would never have had it otherwise. He turned behaving in contempt of
Congress into a heroic act by his very tactics, and the Communists in government were laughing at the free rein

--- PAGE BREAK ---89
he gave them.

All they had to do was provide him with a human sacrifice every now and then, someone
completely unimportant or actually innocent of any wrong doing, and McCarthy pilloried them on television.

But
when he turned against the US.

Army, he crossed into my territory and we had to shut him down.

The Communists used McCarthy to give them good press and open up an area where they could work while
the anti-Communists were made to look like fools.

I told this to Robert Kennedy, who as a young lawyer had been
a member of Roy Cohn's investigative staff working for the McCarthy subcommittee and who had learned
firsthand what it was like to be completely misled into self destructive behavior.

It was a mistake, he confided to
me, that he would never make again.

Unfortunately, his brother's enemies were his own, and he was misled into
thinking that being president would allow him to settle the score.

But in January of 1962 all that was on my mind was reestablishing a relationship with J.

Edgar Hoover so that I
could pursue my agenda while keeping a lookout for who might be dangerous out there in the academic
community.

Now I had something to bargain with for the information I wanted.

Not only did I have the bits and
pieces of the Roswell story that I knew Hoover wanted, I also had information about the domestic activities of the
CIA.

Hoover was more than interested in sharing information, and we continued to talk right through 1962 until I
left the army and went over to Senator Thurmond's staff.

Our relationship continued right through1963.

And in
1964, when I was an investigator for Senator Russell on the Warren Commission and Hoover was pursuing his own
independent investigation into the President's assassination, he and I could only stare at one another again on
either side of the abyss of that crime.

Stacked up against the enormity of what had happened, Hoover and I
both understood that there are some battles you cannot win.And in
1964, when I was an investigator for Senator Russell on the Warren Commission and Hoover was pursuing his own
independent investigation into the President's assassination, he and I could only stare at one another again on
either side of the abyss of that crime.

Stacked up against the enormity of what had happened, Hoover and I
both understood that there are some battles you cannot win.

So you leave them alone so you can fight another
day.

I'm not sure whether J.

Edgar Hoover ever really believed that the Roswell story was true, an absolute
conspiracy to cover up something else, or just a delusion that became mass hysteria out there in the desert.

There
were so many details buried in army memos and maintained under layers of cover stories fabricated by military
intelligence experts that he couldn't possibly know the truth.

But like the good cop that he was, he took
information wherever he could find it and kept on searching for something that made sense.

If the army saw a
threat to our society, then Hoover thought there was a threat.

And whenever he could follow up a report of a
sighting with a very discreet appearance by a pair of FBI agents to interview the witnesses and get away with it,
he did.

He was more than willing to share that information with me, and that was how I found out about some of
the unpublicized cattle mutilation stories in the early 1960s.

My J.

Edgar Hoover connection was important to me as I began my work in the early weeks of 1962 because
the level of research into the types of projects we were developing became very intense.

The rumors of General
Trudeau's appointment to the Southeast Asia command and my selection as intelligence director for the Green
Berets in Southeast Asia, as vague and unconfirmed as they were, set a deadline for the general and me to push
our projects forward because we knew we had only a year or so left on our tenure at R&D.Edgar Hoover connection was important to me as I began my work in the early weeks of 1962 because
the level of research into the types of projects we were developing became very intense.

The rumors of General
Trudeau's appointment to the Southeast Asia command and my selection as intelligence director for the Green
Berets in Southeast Asia, as vague and unconfirmed as they were, set a deadline for the general and me to push
our projects forward because we knew we had only a year or so left on our tenure at R&D.

So when the FBI
director and I would talk, I had questions ready to ask.

No information we ever shared was in writing, and any
notes that I took from the conversations we had I later destroyed after committing them to memory or taking
action on the things he said.

Even to this day, although FBI agents have contacted me about records supposedly
still left in the old files, I don't know what notes the FBI director took about our conversations and what specific
actions he ever took.

Because we trusted each other and remained in contact once every six months or so even
after I left government service, I never followed up on anything I said and never asked for any verification of
information in the files.

I think Hoover appreciated that.

By February of 1962 I had lined my nut file projects up for an end run that would take me to the end of the
year and either South Vietnam or retirement.

The first folder on the desktop was the "glass filaments.

"
Fiber Optics
Members of the retrieval team who foraged around inside the spacecraft on the morning of the discovery
told Colonel Blanchard back at the 509th that they were amazed they couldn't find any conventional wiring.

Where were the electrical connections?

they asked, because obviously the vehicle had electronics.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Where were the electrical connections? they asked, because obviously the vehicle had electronics. They didn't
understand the function of the printed circuit wafers they found, but, even more important, they were completely
mystified by the single glass filaments that ran through the panels of the ship. At first, some of the scientists thought
that they comprised the missing wiring that also had the engineers so confused as they packed the craft for
shipping. Maybe they were part of the wiring harness that was broken in the crash. But these filaments had a
strange property to them. The wire harness seemed to have broken loose from a control panel and was separated into twelve frayed
filaments that looked something like quartz. When, back at the 509th's hangar, officers from the retrieval team
applied light to one end of the filament, the other end emitted a specific color. Different filaments emitted
different colors. The fibers - in reality glass crystal tubes - led to a type of junction box where the fibers separated

--- PAGE BREAK ---90
and went to different parts of the control panel that seemed to acknowledge electrically the different color
pulsing through the tube.

Since the engineers evaluating the material at Roswell knew that each color of light
had its own specific wavelength, they guessed that the frequency of the light wave activated a specific
component of the spacecraft's control panel.

But beyond that, the engineers and scientists were baffled.

They
couldn't even determine the spacecraft's power source, let alone what generated the power for the light tubes.

And, the most amazing thing of all was that the filaments not only were flexible but still emitted light even when
they were bent back and forth like a paper clip.

How could light be made to bend?

the engineers wondered.

This was one of the physical mysteries of the Roswell craft that stayed hidden through the 1950s until one of the
Signal Corps liaisons, who routinely briefed General Trudeau on the kinds of developments the Signal Corps was
looking for, told us about experiments in optical fibers going on at Bell Labs.

The technology was still very new, Hans Kohler told me during a private briefing in early 1962, but the promise
of using light as a carrier of all kinds of signals through single filament glass strands was holding great promise.

He
explained that the premise of optical fibers was to have a filament of glass so fine and free of any impurities that
nothing would impede the light beam moving along the center of the shaft.

You also had to have a powerful
light source at one end, he explained, to generate the signal, and I thought of the successful ruby laser that had
been tested at Columbia University.

I knew the EBEs had integrated the two technologies for their glass cable
transmission inside the spacecraft.

"But what makes the light bend?" I asked Professor Kohler, still  incredulous that the aliens seem to have been
able to defy one of our own laws of physics.I knew the EBEs had integrated the two technologies for their glass cable
transmission inside the spacecraft.

"But what makes the light bend?" I asked Professor Kohler, still  incredulous that the aliens seem to have been
able to defy one of our own laws of physics.

"Is it some kind of an illusion?"
"It's not a trick at all, " the scientist explained.

"It only looks like an illusion because the fibers are so fine, you
can't see the different layers without a microscope.

"
He showed me, when I gave him the broken pieces of filament that I still had in my nut file, that each strand,
which looked like one solid piece of material enclosing the circumference of a tiny tube, was actually double
layered.

When you looked down the center of the shaft you could see that around the outside of the filament
was another layer of glass.

Dr.

Kohler explained that the individual light rays are reflected back toward the center
by the layer of glass around the outside of the fiber so that the light can't escape.

By running the glass fibers
around corners and, in the case of the Roswell spacecraft, through the interior walls of the ship, the aliens were
able to bend light and focus it just like you can direct the flow of water through a supply pipe.

I'd never seen
anything like that before in my life.

Kohler explained that, just like lasers, the light can be made to carry any sort of signal : light, sound, and even
digital information.

"There's no resistance to the signal, " he explained.

"And you can fit more information on to the light beam.

"
I asked him how the EBEs might have used this type of technology.

He suggested that all ship's
communication, visual images, telemetry, and any amplified signals that the vehicles sent or received from other
craft or from bases on the moon or on earth would use these glass fiber cables.

"They seem to have an enormous capacity for carrying any kind of load, " he suggested.He suggested that all ship's
communication, visual images, telemetry, and any amplified signals that the vehicles sent or received from other
craft or from bases on the moon or on earth would use these glass fiber cables.

"They seem to have an enormous capacity for carrying any kind of load, " he suggested.

"And if a laser can
amplify the signal, in their most refined form, these cables can carry a multiplicity of signals at the same time.

"
I was more than impressed.

Even before asking him about the specific types of applications these might have
for the army, I could see how they could make battlefield communications more secure because the signals
would be stronger and less vulnerable to interference.

Then Professor Kohler began suggesting the uses of these
fibers to carry visual images photographed in tiny cameras from the weapons themselves to controlling devices
at the launcher.

"Imagine, " he said, "being able to fire a missile and actually see through the missile's eye where it's going.

Imagine being able to lock onto a target visually and even as it tries to evade the missile, you can see it and
make final adjustments.

" And Kohler went on to describe the potential of how fiberoptics based sensors could
someday keep track of enemy movements on the ground, carry data heavy visual signals from surveillance
satellites, and pack very complicated multichannel communications systems into small spaces.

"The whole space
program is dependent upon carrying data, voice, and image, "he said.

"But now, it takes too much space to
store all the relays and switches and there's too much impedance to the signal.

It limits what we can do on a
mission.

But imagine if we could adapt this technology to our own uses.

"
Then he looked me very squarely in the eye and said the very thing that I was thinking.

"You know this is their
technology.

It's part of what enables them to have exploration missions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"You know this is their
technology. It's part of what enables them to have exploration missions. If it became our technology, too, we'd
be able to, maybe we could keep up with them a little better. "
Then he asked me for the army's commitment. He explained that some of our research laboratories were
already looking into the properties of glass as a signal conductor and this would not have to be research that was
started from complete scratch. Those kinds of start ups gave us concern at R&D because unless we covered

--- PAGE BREAK ---91
them up completely, it would look like there was a complete break in a technological path.

How do you explain
that?

But if there's research already going on, no matter how basic, then just showing someone at the company
one of these pieces of technology could give them all they need to reverse engineer it so that it became our
technology.

But we'd have to support it as part of an arms development research contract if the company didn't
already have a budget.

This is what I wanted to do with this glass filament technology.

"Where is the best research on optical fibers being done?" I asked him.

"Bell Labs, " he answered.

"It'll take another thirty years to develop it, but one day most of the telephone traffic
will be carried on fiberoptic cable.

"
Army R&D had contacts at Bell just like other contractors we worked with, so I wrote a short memo and
proposal to General Trudeau on the potential of optical fibers for a range of products that Professor Kohler and I
discussed.

I described the properties of what had been previously called a wiring harness, explained how it
carried laser signals, and, most importantly, how these fibers actually bent a stream of light around a corner and
conducted it the same way a wire conducts an electrical current.

Imagine conducting a beam of high intensity
single frequency light the same way you'd run a water line to a new bathroom, I wrote.

Imagine the power and
flexibility it provided the EBEs, especially when they used the light signal as a carrier for other coded information.

This would enable the military to recreate its entire communications infrastructure and allow our new
surveillance satellites to feed find store potential targeting information right into frontline command and control
installations.Imagine the power and
flexibility it provided the EBEs, especially when they used the light signal as a carrier for other coded information.

This would enable the military to recreate its entire communications infrastructure and allow our new
surveillance satellites to feed find store potential targeting information right into frontline command and control
installations.

The navy would be able to see the deployment of an entire enemy fleet, the air force could look
down on approaching enemy squadrons and target them from above even if our planes were still on the ground,
and for the army it would give us an undreamed of strategic advantage.

We could survey an entire battlefield,
track the movements of troops from small patrols to entire divisions, and plot the deployments of tanks, artillery,
and helicopters at the same time.

The value of fiberoptic communication to the military would be immeasurable.

And, I added, I was almost certain that a development push from the army to facilitate research on the
complete reengineering of our country's already antiquated telephone system would not be seen by any
company as an unwarranted intrusion.

I didn't have to wait long for the general's response.

"Do it, " he ordered.

"And get this under way fast.

I'll get you all the development allocation you need.

Tell
them that.

" And before the end of that week, I had an appointment with a systems researcher at the Western
Electric research facility outside of Princeton, New Jersey, right down the road from the Institute for Advanced
Study.

I told him it came out of foreign technology, something that the intelligence people picked up from new
weapons the East Germans were developing but thought we could use.

"If what you think you have, " he said over the phone, "is that interesting and shows us where our research is
going, we'd be silly not to lend you an ear for an afternoon.

"
"I'll need less than an afternoon to show you what I got, " I said."If what you think you have, " he said over the phone, "is that interesting and shows us where our research is
going, we'd be silly not to lend you an ear for an afternoon.

"
"I'll need less than an afternoon to show you what I got, " I said.

Then I packed my Roswell field reports into my
briefcase, got myself an airline ticket for a flight to Newark Airport, and I was on my way.

Supertenacity Fibers
Even before the 1960s, when I was, still on the National Security staff, the army had begun to look for fibers for
flak jackets, shrapnel proof body armor, even parachutes, and a protective skin for other military items.

Silk had
always been the material of choice for parachutes because it was light, yet had an incredible tensile strength
that allowed it to stretch, keep shape, and yet withstand tremendous forces.

Whether the army's search for what
they called a "tenacity fiber" was prompted purely by its need to find better protection for its troops or because
of what the retrieval team found at Roswell, I do not know.

I suspect, however, that it was the discovery at the
crash site that began the army's search.

Among the items in my Roswell file that we retained from the retrieval were strands of a fiber that even razors
couldn't cut through.

When I looked at it under a magnifying glass, its dull grayness and almost matte finish belied
the almost supernatural properties of this fiber.

You could stretch it, twist it around objects, and subject it to a level
of torque that would rend any other fiber, but this held up.

Then, when you released the tension, it snapped back
to its original length without any loss of tension in its original form.

It reminded me of the filaments in a spiderweb.

We became very interested in this material and began to study a variety of technologies, including spider silks
because they, alone in nature, exhibit natural super tenacity properties.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It reminded me of the filaments in a spiderweb. We became very interested in this material and began to study a variety of technologies, including spider silks
because they, alone in nature, exhibit natural super tenacity properties. The spiders' spinning of its silk begins in its abdominal glands as a protein that the spider extrudes through a
narrow tube that forces all the molecules to align in the same direction, turning the protein into a rod like, very
long, single thread with a structure not unlike a crystal. The extrusion process not only aligns the protein molecules,
the molecules are very compressed, occupying much less space than conventionally sized molecules. This
combination of lengthwise aligned and super compressed molecules gives this thread an incredible tenacity and
the ability to stretch under enormous pressure while retaining its tensile strength and integrity. A single strand of this

--- PAGE BREAK ---92
spider's silk thread would have to be stretched nearly fifty miles before breaking and if stretched around the
entire globe, it would weigh only fifteen ounces.

Clearly, when the scientists at Roswell saw how this fiber - not cloth, not silk, but something like a ceramic - had
encased the ship and formed the outer skin layer of the EBEs, they realized it was a very promising avenue for
research.

When I examined the material and recognized its similarity to spider thread, I realized that a key to
producing this commercially would be to synthesize the protein and find a way to simulate the extrusion process.

General Trudeau encouraged me to start contacting plastics and ceramics manufacturers, especially Monsanto
and Dow, to find out who was doing research on supertenacity materials, especially at university laboratories.

My
quick poll paid off.

I not only discovered that Monsanto was looking for a way to develop a mass production process for a
simulated spider silk, I also learned that they were already working with the army.

Army researchers from the
Medical Corps were trying to replicate the chemistry of the spider gene to produce the silk manufacturing
protein.

Years later, after I'd left the army, researchers at the University of Wyoming and Dow Corning also began
experiments on cloning the silk manufacturing gene and developing a process to extrude the silk fibers into a
usable substance that could be fabricated into a cloth.

Our research and development liaison in the Medical Corps told me that the replication of a supertenacity
fiber was still years away back in 1962, but that any help from Foreign Technology that we could give the Medical
Corps would find its way to the companies they were working with and probably wouldn't require a separate
R&D budget.

The development funding through U.S.Our research and development liaison in the Medical Corps told me that the replication of a supertenacity
fiber was still years away back in 1962, but that any help from Foreign Technology that we could give the Medical
Corps would find its way to the companies they were working with and probably wouldn't require a separate
R&D budget.

The development funding through U.S.

government medical and biological research grants was
more than adequate, the Medical Corps officer told me, to finance the research unless we needed to develop
an emergency crash program.

But I still remained fascinated by the prospect that something similar to a web
spinner had spun the strands of supertenacity fabric around the spaceship.

I knew that whatever that secret was,
amalgamating a skin out of some sort of fabric or ceramic around our aircraft would give them the protection
that the Roswell craft had and still be relatively lightweight.

Again, I didn't find out about it until much later, but research into that very type of fabrication was already
under way by a scientist who would, years later, win a Nobel Prize.

At a meeting of the American Physical Society
three years before, Dr.

Richard Feynman gave a theoretical speculative assessment of the possibilities of creating
substances whose molecular structure was so condensed that the resulting material might have radically different
properties from the noncompressed version of the same material.

For example, Feynman suggested, if scientists
could create material in which the molecular structures were not only compressed but arranged differently from
conventional molecular structures, the scientists might be able to alter the physical properties of the substance to
suit specific applications.

This seemed like brand new stuff to the American Physical Society.For example, Feynman suggested, if scientists
could create material in which the molecular structures were not only compressed but arranged differently from
conventional molecular structures, the scientists might be able to alter the physical properties of the substance to
suit specific applications.

This seemed like brand new stuff to the American Physical Society.

In reality, though, compressed molecular
structures were one of the discoveries that had been made by some of the original scientific analytical groups
both at Alamogordo right after the Roswell crash and at the Air Materiel Command at Wright Field, which took
delivery of the material.

As a young atomic physicist, Richard Feynman was a colleague of many of the postwar
atomic specialists who were in the army's and then the air force's guided missile program as well as the nuclear
weapons program in the 1950s.

Although I never saw any memos to this effect, Feynman was reported to have
been in contact with members of the Alamogordo group of the Air Materiel Command and knew about some of
the finds at the Roswell crash site.

Whether these discoveries suggested theories to him about the potential
properties of compressed molecular structures or whether his ideas were also extensions of his theories about the
quantum mechanics behavior of electrons, for which he won the Nobel Prize, I don't know.

But Dr.

Feynman's
theories about compressed molecular structures dove tailed with the army efforts to replicate the supertenacity
fiber composition and extrusion processes.

By the middle of the 1960s work was under way not only at large
industrial ceramics and chemical companies in the United States but in university research laboratories here, and
in Europe, Asia, and India.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Feynman's
theories about compressed molecular structures dove tailed with the army efforts to replicate the supertenacity
fiber composition and extrusion processes. By the middle of the 1960s work was under way not only at large
industrial ceramics and chemical companies in the United States but in university research laboratories here, and
in Europe, Asia, and India. With my questions about who was conducting research into supertenacity fibers answered and learning
where that research was taking place, I could turn my attention to other applications of the technology to see
whether the army could help move the development along faster or whether any collateral development was
possible to create products in advance of the supertenacity fibers. Our scientists told us that one way to simulate
the effect of supertenacity was in the cross alignment of composite layers of fabric. This idea was the premise for
the army's search for a type of body armor that would protect against the skin piercing injuries of explosive
shrapnel and rounds fired from guns. "Now this won't protect you against contusions, " General Trudeau told me after a meeting with Army Medical
Corps researchers at Walter Reed. "And the concussive shock from an impact will still be strong enough to kill
anybody, but at least it's supposed to keep the round from tearing through your body. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---93
I thought about the many blunt trauma wounds you see in a battle and could imagine the impact a large
round would leave even if it couldn't penetrate the skin.

But through the general's impetus and the contacts he
set up for me at Du Pont and Monsanto, we aggressively pursued the research into the development of a cross
aligned material for bulletproof vests.

I hand carried the field descriptions of the fabric found at Roswell to my
meetings at these Companies and showed the actual fabric to scientists who visited us in Washington.

This was
not an item we wanted to risk carrying around the country.

By 1965, Du Pont had announced the creation of the
Kevlar fabric that, by 1973, was brought to market as the Kevlar bulletproof vest that's in common use today in
the armed Services and law enforcement agencies.

I don't know how many thousands of lives have been saved,
but every time I hear of a police officer whose Kevlar vest protected him from a fatal chest or back wound, I think
back to those days when we were just beginning to consider the value of cross aligned layers of supertenacity
material and am thankful that our office played a part in the product's development.

Our search for supertenacity materials also resulted in the development of composite plastics and ceramics
that with stood heat and the pressures of high speed air maneuvers and were also invisible to radar.

The cross
stitched supertenacity fibers on the skin of the Roswell vehicle, which I believe had been spun on, also became
an impetus for an entirely new generation of attack and strategic aircraft as well as composite materials for
future designs of attack helicopters.

One of the great rumors that floated around for years after the Roswell story became public with the
testimony of retired Army Air Force major Jesse Marcel before he died was that Stealth technology aircraft were
the result of what we learned at Roswell.

That is true, but it was not a direct transfer of technology.One of the great rumors that floated around for years after the Roswell story became public with the
testimony of retired Army Air Force major Jesse Marcel before he died was that Stealth technology aircraft were
the result of what we learned at Roswell.

That is true, but it was not a direct transfer of technology.

Army
Intelligence knew that under certain conditions the EBE spacecraft had the ability to hide their radar signature,
but we didn't know how they did it.

We also had pieces of the Roswell spacecraft's skin, which was a composite
of supertenacity molecular aligned fibers.

As far as I know, we've still not managed to recreate the exact process
to manufacture this composite, just like we've not been able to duplicate the electromagnetic drive and
navigation system that enabled the Roswell vehicle to fly even though we have that vehicle and others at either
Norton, Edwards, and Nellis Air Force bases.

But through the study of how this material worked and what its
properties are, we've replicated composites and rolled an entirely new generation of aircraft off the assembly
line.

Although the American public first heard about the existence of a Stealth technology in President Jimmy
Carter's campaign against President Ford in 1976, we didn't see the Stealth in action until the air attacks on Iraq
during the Persian Gulf War.

There, the Stealth fighter, completely invisible to Iraqi radar, launched the first high risk
assaults on the Iraqi air force air defense system and operated with almost complete impunity.

Invisible to radar,
invisible to heat seeking missiles, striking out of the night sky like demons, the Stealth fighters, with their flying wing
almost crescent shaped, look uncannily like the space vehicle that crashed into the arroyo outside of Roswell.There, the Stealth fighter, completely invisible to Iraqi radar, launched the first high risk
assaults on the Iraqi air force air defense system and operated with almost complete impunity.

Invisible to radar,
invisible to heat seeking missiles, striking out of the night sky like demons, the Stealth fighters, with their flying wing
almost crescent shaped, look uncannily like the space vehicle that crashed into the arroyo outside of Roswell.

But
appearances aside, the composite skin of the Stealth that helps make it invisible to almost all forms of detection
was inspired by the Army R&D research into the skin of the Roswell aircraft that we sectioned apart for distribution
to laboratories around the country.

Depleted Uranium Invisible Artillery Shells
For the air force, Stealth technology meant that aircraft could approach a target invisible to radar and
maintain that advantage throughout the mission.

For the army, Stealth technology for its helicopters provides an
incredible advantage in mounting search and destroy, Special Forces recon, or counter insurgency missions
deep into enemy territory.

But the possibility of a Stealth artillery shell, which we conceived of at R&D in 1962,
would have allowed us something armies have sought ever since the first deployment of artillery by a Western
European army at Henry V's victory at Agincourt in the early fifteenth century.

Certainly Napoleon would have
wanted this ability when he deployed his artillery against the British line at Waterloo.

So would the Germans in
World War I when their artillery pounded the Allied forces hunkered down in their trenches and again at the Battle
of the Bulge in 1944 when those of us stationed in Rome could only pray that our boys could hang on until the
clouds broke and our bombers could hit the German emplacements.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Certainly Napoleon would have
wanted this ability when he deployed his artillery against the British line at Waterloo. So would the Germans in
World War I when their artillery pounded the Allied forces hunkered down in their trenches and again at the Battle
of the Bulge in 1944 when those of us stationed in Rome could only pray that our boys could hang on until the
clouds broke and our bombers could hit the German emplacements. In all artillery battles, once a shell is fired, it can be tracked by an observer back to its source and then return
fire can be directed against whoever is firing. But as the range of artillery increased and we found ways to
camouflage guns, we became proficient in hiding artillery until the advent of battlefield radar, which allows the
trajectory of shells to be tracked back to their source. But imagine if the shell were composed of a material that
rendered it invisible to radar? That was the possibility we proposed to General Trudeau: an invisible artillery shell, I
suggested to him in his office one morning as we were designing the plan for research and development of
composite materials. On the night battlefield of the future you could deploy weapons that were invisible even to
radar tracking planes flying over head behind the lines. Shells would start falling, and the enemy wouldn't know
where they were coming from until after we had the advantage of five or more unanswered salvos. By then, and
with the advantage of surprise, the damage might well be done. If we were using mechanized artillery, we could
set up positions, fire a series of quick salvos, redeploy, and set up again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---94
The secret lay not just in the same Stealth aircraft technology but also in the development of a Stealth
ceramic that could withstand tremendous explosive barrel pressures and still maintain an integrity through the arc
of its trajectory.

The search for just such a molecularly aligned composite ceramic was inspired by the composite
material of the Roswell spacecraft.

In analysis after analysis, the army tried to determine how the extraterrestrials
fabricated the material that formed the hull of the spacecraft but was unable to do so.

The search for the kind of
molecularly aligned composite began in the1950s even before General Trudeau took command of R&D,
continued during my tenure at Foreign Technology when the early "Stealth" experimentation began at Lockheed
that resulted in the F117 fighter and Stealth bomber, and continues right through to today.

The general was also more than interested in the kinds of warheads we would propose for just such a shell, a
warhead that did come into use in 1961 and was successfully deployed during the Gulf War.

And we had a
suggestion for a round that we thought could change the nature of the kinds of battles we projected we'd be
fighting against the Warsaw Pact forces, a warhead fabricated out of depleted uranium.

This was a way to utilize
the stockpile of uranium we foresaw we'd have as a result of spent fuel from commercial nuclear reactors,
reactors powering U.S.

Navy vessels, and the nuclear reactors the army was developing for its own bases and for
delivery to bases overseas.

Depleted uranium was a dense, heavy metal, so dense in fact that conventional armament was no match for
a high speed round tipped with it.

Its ability to penetrate even the toughest of tank armor and detonate once it
was inside the enemy vehicle meant that a single round fired from one of our own tanks equipped with a laser
range finder would disable, if not completely destroy, an enemy tank.Depleted uranium was a dense, heavy metal, so dense in fact that conventional armament was no match for
a high speed round tipped with it.

Its ability to penetrate even the toughest of tank armor and detonate once it
was inside the enemy vehicle meant that a single round fired from one of our own tanks equipped with a laser
range finder would disable, if not completely destroy, an enemy tank.

Depleted uranium would give us a
decided advantage on a European battlefield on which we knew we'd be outnumbered two or three to one by
the Warsaw Pact or in China where sheer numbers alone would mean that either we'd be overwhelmed or we'd
have to resort to nuclear weapons.

The depleted uranium shell kept us from having to go nuclear.

Privately, I suggested to General Trudeau that depleted uranium also fulfilled our hidden agenda.

It was
another weapon in a potential arsenal we were building against hostile extraterrestrials.

If depleted uranium
could penetrate armor, might the heaviness of the element enable it to penetrate the composite skin of the
spacecraft, especially if the spacecraft were on the ground?

I suggested that it certainly merited development
at the nearby Aberdeen Proving Grounds in Maryland, and if it proved worthwhile, it was a weapon we should
deploy.

Even though the composite ceramic Stealth round is still an elusive dream in weapons development, the
depleted uranium tipped war head saw action in the Gulf War, where it didn't just disable the tanks of the Iraqi
Republican Guard, it exploded them into pieces.

Fired from the laser range finder equipped Abrams tanks, TOW
missile launchers, or even from Hedgehog infantry support aircraft, the depleted uranium tipped warheads
wreaked havoc in the Gulf.

They were one of the great weapons development successes of Army R&D that
came out of what we learned from the Roswell crash.Fired from the laser range finder equipped Abrams tanks, TOW
missile launchers, or even from Hedgehog infantry support aircraft, the depleted uranium tipped warheads
wreaked havoc in the Gulf.

They were one of the great weapons development successes of Army R&D that
came out of what we learned from the Roswell crash.

HARP -  The High-Altitude Research Project
HARP was another project whose need for research and development was suggested to us by the challenge
posed by flying saucers.

They could out fly our own aircraft, we had no guided missiles that could bring them
down, and we didn't have any guns that could shoot them down.

We were also exploring weapons systems that
had a double or triple use, and HARP, or "the big gun, " was one such system.

Essentially, Project HARP was the
brainchild of Canadian gunnery expert and scientist Dr.

Gerald Bull.

Bull had studied the threat posed by the
German "Big Bertha" in World War I and the Nazi V3 supergun toward the end of World War II.

He realized that
long range, high powered artillery was not only a practical solution to launching heavy payload shells, it was very
affordable once the initial research and development phase was completed.

Mass produced big guns and their
ordinance, assembled in stages right on the site, could provide enormous firepower well back from the front lines
to any army.

They would become a strategic weapon to rain nuclear destruction down on enemy population
centers or military staging areas
Dr.

Bull had also suggested that the gun could be retasked as a launch vehicle, blasting huge rounds into
orbit, which could then be jettisoned, like the booster stage of a rocket, so the payload warhead could thrust
itself into position.

This would require a minimum amount of rocket fuel and could effectively push a string of
satellites into orbit very quickly, almost like an artillery barrage.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bull had also suggested that the gun could be retasked as a launch vehicle, blasting huge rounds into
orbit, which could then be jettisoned, like the booster stage of a rocket, so the payload warhead could thrust
itself into position. This would require a minimum amount of rocket fuel and could effectively push a string of
satellites into orbit very quickly, almost like an artillery barrage. If the army needed to put special satellites into
orbit in a hurry or, better still, explosive satellites that would pose a threat to orbiting extraterrestrial vehicles, the
big gun was one method of accomplishing this mission. There was still a third potential to the supergun. General Trudeau foresaw the ability of this weapon to launch
rounds that could ultimately be placed into a lunar orbit. Especially if hostilities broke out between the United
States and USSR or, as we expected, between Earth military forces and the extraterrestrials, we could resupply a

--- PAGE BREAK ---95
military moon base without having to rely on rocket launch facilities, which would demand long turn around times
and be very vulnerable to attack.

A camouflaged supergun, even a series of superguns, would allow us all the
benefits of a field artillery or quick response antiaircraft unit, but with a piece that could launch payloads into
space.

It was this combination of capabilities that delighted General Trudeau because it enabled one R&D
project to help create many different systems.

The United States, Canada, and the British military combined their joint expertise to find ways to develop Dr.

Bull's supergun with General Trudeau, I believe, becoming one of Bull's staunchest supporters.

But by the time
military budget decisions had to be made to fund the weapon, all of the governments military establishments
had become committed to the guided missile and rocket launched space vehicle rather than a supergun.

While
the weapon had some potential, the United States, UK, and Canada were too far along with their own missile
programs to start up a completely new type of weapon.

And in the end, they decided to end the research while
still keeping close tabs on Bull's efforts to sell his technology to other powers, especially governments in the Middle
East.

Through the 1980s, Gerald Bull, whom I had met at a reception honoring General Trudeau in 1986, Entered into
negotiations with the Israelis as well as with the Iraqis and perhaps even the Iranians.

The decade long war
between Saddam Hussein and Iran proved a fertile sales territory for weapons merchants in general, and
particularly for Gerald Bull, who was courted by both sides.

In the end, he cut his deal with the Iranians, testing
experimental versions of a supergun and planning to build the monster weapon before the British intervened and
seized shipments of gun barrel units before they were shipped out of the country.

By this time, Dr.In the end, he cut his deal with the Iranians, testing
experimental versions of a supergun and planning to build the monster weapon before the British intervened and
seized shipments of gun barrel units before they were shipped out of the country.

By this time, Dr.

Bull may have
become a liability to the Iraqis, as well as to the Israelis and to the United States as well, and was shot to death
outside his apartment in Belgium before the outbreak of the Gulf War.

Like Jules Verne's character Barbicane in From the Earth to the Moon, Bull had a vision of the potential of a
long range artillery piece.

Unlike Barbicane, he came very close to proving it a practical way of launching
vehicles into space.

The murder of Gerald Bull has never been solved, and whatever secrets he still possessed
about the assembly of a gun to launch vehicles into space probably died with him in the hallway outside his
apartment.

List of Omissions
As I worked through the stack of projects on my desk during the spring months of 1962, I found I was devoting
more of my time to the Roswell file and less to some of the other projects under development.

It was apparent to
me that the treasure trove we'd retrieved from Roswell was beginning to pay off in ways that not even I thought
would happen.

There were so many army research projects under way, I told my boss, that were not foundering,
but sputtering along that could benefit from something similar found in the Roswell wreckage it we could find the
match between the two.

Night vision, lasers, and fiberoptic communication were obvious, I said to him, but I was
sure there were other areas we could find just by looking at the problems posed by what we discovered from
Roswell, not just retrieved from the wreckage.

"Make it specific, Phil, " the general asked.

"What do you mean?"
"If you just look at what we didn't find at the crash site, " I said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Make it specific, Phil, " the general asked. "What do you mean?"
"If you just look at what we didn't find at the crash site, " I said. "That goes a long way to explaining the
differences between what we are and what they are. It also shows us what we need to develop if we're going to
prepare for long periods of travel in space. "
"Can you make me a list?" the general asked. "There are a lot of ongoing research contracts out there that
could benefit from a list of things we'd have to concern ourselves with if we're going to be planning for space
travel in the next fifty years. "
By the time our conversation was finished, General Trudeau had asked me to prepare not only a list of what
were called the "omissions" at Roswell but a very brief report detailing the areas where I thought development
needed to take place. So I assembled all the reports and information in the Roswell file and began looking for
what was missing that I might expect to find at a space traveler's crash site. There was no mention in any of the reports of any food source or nutrient, and no one discovered any food
preparation units or stored food on board the spacecraft, nor were there any refrigeration units for food
preservation. There was no water on the ship either for drinking, washing, or flushing of waste, nor were there any
waste or garbage disposal facilities. The Roswell field reports said that the retrieval team found something they
thought was a first aid kit because it contained material that a doctor said was for bandaging purposes, but
there were no medical facilities nor any medications. And finally, the army retrieval team said there were no rest
facilities at all on board the ship; nothing that could be construed as a bunk or a bed. From this available data the army assumed that this UFO was a reconnaissance craft and could quickly return
to a larger or mothership where all of the missing items might be found. The other explanation Dr. Hermannable data the army assumed that this UFO was a reconnaissance craft and could quickly return
to a larger or mothership where all of the missing items might be found. The other explanation Dr. Hermann

--- PAGE BREAK ---96
Oberth came up with was that this was a time dimensional travel ship that didn't traverse large distances in
space.

Rather, it "jumped" from one time space to another or from one dimension to another and instantly
returned to its point of origin.

But this was just Dr.

Oberth's speculation, and he would usually discount any of it the
moment he believed I was taking it as fact.

I believed, however, that the EBEs didn't require food or facilities for waste disposal because they were
fabricated beings, just like robots or androids, who had been created specifically for space travel and the
performance of specific tasks on the planets they visited.

Just like our lunar rover in the 1970s, which was a robot,
so these creatures had been programmed with specific tasks to perform and carried them out.

Perhaps their
programming could be updated or altered from a remote source, but they weren't life forms that required
ongoing sustenance.

They were the perfect creatures for long voyages through space and for visiting other
planets.

Human beings, however, weren't robots and did require sustenance.

Therefore, it would be necessary to
provide for long term sustenance and waste disposal needs if humans were going to travel long distances in
space.

Other scientists from our R&D ad hoc brain trust suggested that, indeed, this could have only been a scout
ship that either got caught in our tracking radars from the 509th or from Alamogordo or was hit by lightning in the
fierce electrical storm that night.

They believed that the ship was navigated by an electromagnetic propulsion
system.

Other scientists suggested that even before we could generate the necessary power to drive such a
propulsion system, we would have to have developed some form of a nuclear powered ion drive first.

As for the
absence of food, scientists suggested that this would pose a major drawback for long term human space
exploration.Other scientists suggested that even before we could generate the necessary power to drive such a
propulsion system, we would have to have developed some form of a nuclear powered ion drive first.

As for the
absence of food, scientists suggested that this would pose a major drawback for long term human space
exploration.

Thus, in my quick and dirty proposal for General Trudeau, I suggested that the army had to complete
the development of at least two items that I knew had been in the R&D system for at least ten years: a food
supply that could never spoil and didn't require refrigeration and an atomic drive that could be assembled in
space out of components as the power plant for an interplanetary space craft.

Irradiated Foods
The general read my notes a few days later, and seemed impressed.

He knew from the memo I had left him
the night before that I'd be ready to talk about my omissions list the next day, but he didn't say
anything to me right away Instead, he picked up the phone, dialed a number, told someone at the other end
that he'd be right over, then looked up at me.

"Go get your hat, " he said.

"Meet me on the helipad.

We've been invited to lunch.

"
Ten minutes later after the general's helicopter had picked us up, we circled the Pentagon once and were
flown over to the Quarter master Center.

An officer who shall remain anonymous met us at the helipad.

He saluted as we got off the chopper.

"Thank
you for joining us.

"
He took us inside to a downstairs store room where he showed off shelves and shelves of all types of meat,
fruit, and vegetables.

"Look at this pork, " he said.

"It's been stored here unrefrigerated for months and it's
completely free of trichina worm.

" He held up a couple of loose eggs and a chicken breast.

"Eggs,
unrefrigerated, and chicken.

Completely free of bacterium salmonella.

And it's the same for the seafood.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Completely free of bacterium salmonella. And it's the same for the seafood. "
He escorted us along the shelves of food and, almost like a salesman, presented the virtues of each of the
items. The food was wrapped, but not vacuum sealed, in a clear cellophane to keep it free from dust and
surface dirt, but it was not preserved in any manner that I could determine. "Free of fungus or any spores, " he said about the vegetables. "No mold or any insect infestations in the fruit, "
he said. "And the milk, it's been here on the shelf for over two years and it's not even slightly sour. We've taken
great steps to preserve food completely without salting, smoking, refrigeration, freezing, or even canning. "
"Does this answer one of your questions, Colonel?" General Trudeau asked as we looked at the stocks of food
that seemed completely resistant to spoilage. The commanding general of the Quartermaster Center joined us in the stockroom. "Pick your lunch,
gentlemen, " he said and chose a thick steak for himself. "I'm going to have this and, if you don't mind, I'll take the
liberty of ordering up the same thing for you, General Trudeau, and you, too, Colonel. How about some potatoes
and maybe some strawberries for dessert. All fresh, delicious, and harmless. " Then he paused. "And completely
bombarded with what some people would call lethal doses of radiation to destroy any bacteria or infestation. "
We were escorted upstairs to the commandant's dining room,

--- PAGE BREAK ---97
where we were joined by a number of other officers and civilian research and food technology experts who
described the process of ionizing radiation to destroy the harmful bacteria while preserving the food without
canning or smoking.

The irradiation process was so complete that if the food were maintained in an antiseptic or
dust free atmosphere, it wouldn't be attacked and would remain uncontaminated.

However, because the
atmosphere was as dirty as any other atmosphere inside any other building, the food was wrapped in
cellophane.

Other foods were packaged in a clear plastic wrap and were displayed for visitors like us just as if
they were on supermarket shelves.

"We first wanted to determine whether the whole concept of irradiated food was safe, " one of the engineers
explained.

"So our first studies were made with food which was irradiated and then stored in the frozen area.

We
fed these foods to rats and noticed no harmful effects.

Then we did the same thing except this time we increased
the radiation to six mega rads and then froze the food.

Again, no harmful effects.

"
His presentation continued while we ate, accompanied by charts that showed how the sterilization rate was
increased to try to find any harmful effects on rats.

Then they tested the irradiated and then frozen food on
human volunteers.

"But wait, " I asked.

"I still don't understand why you irradiated the food and then froze it.

"
The engineer was waiting for this question because he had his answer already prepared.

He acted like he'd
been asked it many times before.

"Because, " he said, "we were testing only for harmful effects from the
radiation, not for spoilage, not for taste, not even for harmful effects from the food itself even though we knew it
had been sterilized and was tested completely free from bacteria when it was defrosted.

What we needed to
prove in field trials was the harmlessness to animals and humans of the irradiation process."Because, " he said, "we were testing only for harmful effects from the
radiation, not for spoilage, not for taste, not even for harmful effects from the food itself even though we knew it
had been sterilized and was tested completely free from bacteria when it was defrosted.

What we needed to
prove in field trials was the harmlessness to animals and humans of the irradiation process.

"
Then he described the field trials to prove that irradiation preserved food stored at room temperature.

"We
selected high spoilage foods, " he said.

"Like the meats, chicken, and especially the seafood.

We also made
composite foods like stews which we fed to rats and dogs along with straight meat and then straight tuna.

We first
irradiated a sample at three mega rads then another sample at six mega rads and tested the animals over a
period of six months to see whether radiation became concentrated in any of their organs or bones.

" He paused,
letting the dramatic effect of what he was going to say sink in while we were sinking our teeth into the irradiated
foods that resulted from the years of experimentation throughout the 1950s.

"No toxicological effects whatsoever.

And we were very thorough before we tested these foods on human volunteers.

"
"What's next?" I asked.

"We're setting taste trials of favorite foods at Fort Lee, Virginia, to see how troops in the field respond to this.

We
think that before the end of the decade we'll have a variety of Meals Ready to Eat for troops in the field who
have no benefit of cooking facilities or refrigeration.

"
General Trudeau looked across the table at me and I nodded.

This was perfectly good food that was right up
to any quality you'd care to measure.

"Gentlemen, " General Trudeau said as he stood.

As a three star general, he was the highest ranking officer in
the room, and when he spoke everyone was silent.

"My assistant believes that your work is of utmost importance
to the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As a three star general, he was the highest ranking officer in
the room, and when he spoke everyone was silent. "My assistant believes that your work is of utmost importance
to the U.S. Army, our nation, and the world, and will contribute to our travel in space. I am of the very same
opinion. We are most impressed with your test results and want to help you expand your operation and speed up
the testing process. The army needs what you've developed. In the next two weeks, submit to me your
supplementary budget to expand your operation and I want it also included into next year's budget. " Then he
turned to me, nodded, and we thanked the commanding general for lunch and walked out to General
Trudeau's helicopter. "How about that, Phil?" he asked. "I think we checked off some of the items on your list right on the spot. "
The pilot helped the general into his seat and I got around on the other side. "So what do you think?" he asked again. "I think if we move any faster we'll have the EBEs down here asking for some of our irradiated food, " I said. General Trudeau laughed as we whisked off the helipad and headed back for the short jump to the
Pentagon. "Now you have to get to work on finding out what you can about your atomic propulsion system. If
NASA ever gets it into its mind to push ahead with building its space station, I'd like the military to have a power
source that can keep us up there for a while. If we can get a surveillance window on our visitors, I want it sooner
rather than later. "
And before the week was out, I was at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, again looking at the developments the army had
made in the development of portable nuclear reactors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---98
Portable Atomics
A challenge posed to us directly by the army's retrieval of the Roswell craft and our further discovery that the
craft was not propelled by a conventional engine - either propeller, jet, or rocket - pressed upon us the critical
realization that if we were to engage these extraterrestrial creatures in space we would need a propulsion system
that gave us a capability for long distance travel similar to theirs.

But we had no such system.

The closest form of
energy we had that did not rely on a constant supply of fuel was atomic power in a controlled, sustained
reaction, and even that was far away from development.

However, at the close of the war the army had
operational control over atomic weapons because, under Gen.

Leslie Groves, director of the Manhattan Project,
the army had established the bureaucracy that developed and deployed the atomic bomb.

So for army engineers, struggling to find out how the Roswell spacecraft was powered, atomic power was the
easiest form of propulsion to seize upon, in part because it was the most immediate.

However, by 1947, a struggle
was already breaking out within the Truman administration over who would control nuclear power, a civilian
commission or the military.

As the nation was making the transition from wartime to peace time, the specter of a
General Groves secretly dictating how and in what manifestation atomic power would be used frightened
Truman's advisers.

So in the end, President Truman made the decision to turn control of the nation's nuclear
program over to a civilian commission.

Thus, by 1947, the army was getting out of running the nuclear power
business, but that didn't mean that research into the military applications of nuclear power plants stopped.So in the end, President Truman made the decision to turn control of the nation's nuclear
program over to a civilian commission.

Thus, by 1947, the army was getting out of running the nuclear power
business, but that didn't mean that research into the military applications of nuclear power plants stopped.

We
needed to develop nuclear reactors, not only to manufacture nuclear power propulsion systems for naval vessels
and for on site installation of power generating stations, but to experiment with ways nuclear power could be
made portable in
space by assembling systems in orbit from component parts.

This would enable us to maintain long term
outposts in space and even to power interplanetary vessels that could serve as a defensive force against any
extraterrestrial hostile forces.

If this sounds like science fiction, remember, it was 1947, and the nation had barely
gotten out of World War II before the Cold War had begun.

War, not peace, was on the mind of the military
officers who were in charge of the Roswell retrieval and analysis of the wreckage.

The army, I discovered from the "Army Atomic Reactors" reports at Fort Belvoir, not only had a very
sophisticated portable reactor program under way, but had already built one in cooperation with the air force
for installation at the Sundance Radar Station six miles out of Sundance, Wyoming, early in 1962.

This was a highly
sophisticated piece of power generating apparatus that provided steam heat to the radar station, electrical
power for the base, and a very precisely controlled separate power supply for the delicately calibrated radar
equipment.

But this wasn't the first portable power plant, as most people thought it was.

The first portable nuclear reactor plant anywhere was for a research facility in Greenland, under the Arctic ice
cap, designed for Camp Century, an Army Corps of Engineers project nine hundred miles from the North Pole.But this wasn't the first portable power plant, as most people thought it was.

The first portable nuclear reactor plant anywhere was for a research facility in Greenland, under the Arctic ice
cap, designed for Camp Century, an Army Corps of Engineers project nine hundred miles from the North Pole.

Ostensibly operated by the Army Polar Research and Development Center conducting experiments in the Arctic
winter, Camp Century was also a vital observation post in an early warning system monitoring any Soviet activity
at or near the North Pole and any activity related to UFO sightings or landings.

During the years when I was at the White House, the UFO working group had consistently pushed President
Eisenhower to establish a string of formal listening posts - electronic pickets staffed by army and air force
observers at the most remote parts of the planet - to report on any UFO activity.

General Twining's group had
argued that if the EBEs had any plans to establish semipermanent Earth bases, it wouldn't be in a populated area
or an area where our military forces could monitor.

It would be at the poles, in the middle of the most desolate
surroundings they could find, or even underneath the ocean.

The polar caps seemed like the most obvious
choices because during the 1950s we had no surveillance satellites that could spot alien activity from orbit, nor
did we have a permanent presence at the two poles.

It was thought that we wouldn't be able to put any
sophisticated devices at the poles, either, because doing so would require more power than we could transport.

However, the army's Nuclear Power Program, developed in the1950s at Fort Belvoir, provided us with the ability to
install a nuclear powered base anywhere on the planet.

In 1958, work was started on the Camp Century power plant, which was to be constructed beneath the ice in
Greenland.

Initially this was supposed to be top secret because we didn't want the Soviets to know what we were
up to.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1958, work was started on the Camp Century power plant, which was to be constructed beneath the ice in
Greenland. Initially this was supposed to be top secret because we didn't want the Soviets to know what we were
up to. Ultimately, however, the high security classification proved too unwieldy for the army because too many
outside contractors were involved and the logistics, transportation to Thule, Greenland, then installation on skids
beneath the ice pack created a cover story nightmare. So Army Intelligence decided to drop the security
classification entirely and treat the entire plan as a scientific information gathering expedition by its polar
research group. Just like the whole camouflage operation that had protected the existence of the working group, Camp
Century provided the perfect cover for testing out a procedure for constructing a prefabricated, prepackaged
nuclear reactor under arduous conditions and flying it to its site for final assembly. It also provided the army with a

--- PAGE BREAK ---means of testing the performance of the reactor and how it could be maintained at an utterly desolate location
in the harshest climate on the planet.

The plant was the first of its kind.

It had a completely modular construction that had separately packaged
components for air coolers, heat exchangers, switch gear, and the turbine generator.

The power plant also had a
mechanism that used the recycled steam to melt the ice cap surface to provide the camp's water supply.

The
entire construction was completed in only seventy seven days, and the camp remained in operation from
October 1960 to August 1963, when the research mission completed its work.

The entire operation was
successfully taken apart and placed in storage in 1964, and the site of Camp Century was completely restored to
its natural state.

I received reports about the camp's operation during the later months of 1962 after General Trudeau had
asked me about the feasibility of the army's portable atomics program as a way to instigate research into a
launchable atomics program for generating power in orbit.

I was so enthusiastic about the success of our
portable atomics and the way they provided the research platform for
the subsequent development of mobile atomics that I urged the general to provide as much funding as R&D
could to enable the Fort Belvoir Army Nuclear Power Program to construct and test as many mobile and portable
power plants as possible.

Each power plant gave us a kind of a beachhead into remote areas of the world where
the EBEs might have wanted to establish a presence because they believed they could go about it undetected.

They were a kind of platform.

Once we had demonstrated the ability to protect remote areas of the earth, we'd
be in a better position to establish a presence in space.They were a kind of platform.

Once we had demonstrated the ability to protect remote areas of the earth, we'd
be in a better position to establish a presence in space.

The atomics program, which was in part a direct outgrowth of the challenge posed to us from our analysis of
the Roswell craft, ultimately helped us develop portable atomic power plants, which are now used to power
Earth satellites as well as naval vessels.

It showed us that we could have portable atomic generators and gave
the army a longer reach than anybody might have thought.

Ultimately, it allowed us to maintain surveillance and
staff remote listening posts.

It also provided the basis for research into launching nuclear power facilities into
space to become the power plants of new generations of interplanetary vehicles.

The portable atomics program
allowed us to experiment with ways we would develop atomic drives for our own space exploration vehicles,
which, we believed, would enable us to establish military bases on the moon as well as on the planets near us in
the solar system.

And from our successes with atomics, we turned our attention to the development of the weapons we could
mount on surveillance satellites in orbit, weapons we developed directly from what we found in the flying saucer
at Roswell.

CHAPTER 16
"Tesla's Death Ray" and the Accelerated Particle Beam Weapon
Embedded in the army field reports and air materiel Command engineering evaluations analyzing the Roswell
craft were descriptions of how the spacecraft might have utilized a form of energy known as "directed energy, "
powerful beams of excited electrons that could be precisely directed at any target.

We didn't know very much
about directed energy back in 1947, or more precisely put, we didn't know how much we knew because in
reality we knew a lot.--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER 16
"Tesla's Death Ray" and the Accelerated Particle Beam Weapon
Embedded in the army field reports and air materiel Command engineering evaluations analyzing the Roswell
craft were descriptions of how the spacecraft might have utilized a form of energy known as "directed energy, "
powerful beams of excited electrons that could be precisely directed at any target. We didn't know very much
about directed energy back in 1947, or more precisely put, we didn't know how much we knew because in
reality we knew a lot. But the information that had been readily available since the 1930s was lying sequestered
at a public storage facility, under the authority of the federal government, over on the Lower East Side of
Manhattan in the notes of the mysterious inventor Nikola Tesla, whose experiments and reputed discoveries have
become the stuff of bizarre but exciting legend. The laser surgical cutting tool found in the Roswell wreckage was one form of directed energy beam device
whose ability to fire rapidly and with precision revealed that the extraterrestrials had a potential in weaponry far
superior to ours. However, if the craft had been brought down by lightning, itself a directed energy beam of one
of the highest magnitudes, then it revealed their vulnerability to bolts of electrons. That stimulated the thinking of
army scientists and researchers into the analysis of the potential of a directed energy beam weapon. Today, fifty
years after the crash of the spacecraft at Roswell, these weapons are far more than the device that the Emperor
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---100
Ming aimed at Earth in the Flash Gordon serials; they are a reality that can be launched on a guided missile,
separated from a booster, aimed by an internal computer guidance system at any incoming device, whether an
ICBM warhead or a space vehicle, and fired with devastating effect.

This weapon has been a true Army R&D
success story.

"The possibilities for benefits to the military are enormous, " I wrote to General Trudeau in my 1962 analysis of
the potential for directed energy weapons.

"Although, as we have seen, even the most rudimentary of directed
energy products, the microwave oven, has more than repaid the initial research and development overhead
through consumer product sales, it is the military that will see the greatest benefits from directed energy and is
already seeing the potential from it in the applications that are being projected for the laser which is only two
years old.

"
The concept of a weapon that relied on a directed energy beam, whatever the nature of that beam was,
was not a completely new concept to the military community, although its origins were totally shrouded in
secrecy.

The first test of a directed energy weapon, a particle beam accelerator code named Seesaw whose
beam was to be aimed at incoming guided missiles, was first conducted in 1958, two years before the successful
demonstration of the laser, by the Advanced Research Projects Agency.

Although the test took place the year
that I was in Red Canyon, New Mexico, I had known about the project first when I was on the National Security
Council at the White House and then again after the successful experiments against a simulated target.

In theory, the particle beam weapon looked like it would work, assuming the technological development of
power generators, electrical storage apparatus, and the computer software to aim and fire the weapon.Although the test took place the year
that I was in Red Canyon, New Mexico, I had known about the project first when I was on the National Security
Council at the White House and then again after the successful experiments against a simulated target.

In theory, the particle beam weapon looked like it would work, assuming the technological development of
power generators, electrical storage apparatus, and the computer software to aim and fire the weapon.

We
already had a rough model for the particle beam weapon in nature: the lightning bolt, a pure, intense beam of
electrons firing between opposite poles and destroying or incapacitating anything it hit that was not grounded.

Scientists from Benjamin Franklin to Nikola Tesla have tried to chain the force of lightning as a power source.

Now
the Advanced Research Projects Agency was experimenting with the theory to apply it to a new and deadly
weapon.

If they could build the hardware and write the software, the developers at ARPA decided they would
be able to generate an intense beam of either electrons or neutral hydrogen atoms, aim it at an incoming target,
and fire the particle beam inpulses that would travel near the speed of light and excite the atoms in the target
until they literally blew apart.

Whatever didn't blow up would be destroyed electronically and rendered useless.

Officially, the project would remain secret until funding could be acquired and the technological
development of the components moved far enough along to allow us to build working prototypes.

The great fear
of the developers at ARPA was that the Soviets, realizing what we were trying to construct, would maximize their
effort to build one before we did, rendering our newly developed Atlas ICBM obsolete before it even got to the
launching pad.Officially, the project would remain secret until funding could be acquired and the technological
development of the components moved far enough along to allow us to build working prototypes.

The great fear
of the developers at ARPA was that the Soviets, realizing what we were trying to construct, would maximize their
effort to build one before we did, rendering our newly developed Atlas ICBM obsolete before it even got to the
launching pad.

The Advanced Research Projects Agency was a highly secretive network of defense scientists, members of the
industrial defense contractor R&D community, and university researchers operating either under the formula of a
government grant or the tacit acknowledgment of the Defense Department that their research would come
under government control at some point.

ARPA was founded in1958, in part, I believed, because up to then Army
R&D had been a disorganized department barely able to manage the core research necessary to keep us
technologically superior to our enemies.

This created a gap in research that the Advanced Research Projects
Agency was created to fill.

Working on military defense oriented research, many times far in advance of any
concrete proposals for the development of a weapons system or a product, ARPA often acted as a forward
skirmish line for the development of military weapons or simply facilitated the basic scholarship necessary for the
more concrete items to be developed.

However, too many times it was in conflict with the military because ARPA
had its own separate agenda, especially after General Trudeau had reorganized the entire military R&D
apparatus and refocused it so that it ran like a machine.

In 1969, during the era of large main frame computers, under a contract to develop a network of networks
linking universities, defense contractors, and the military, the ARPANET was born.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, too many times it was in conflict with the military because ARPA
had its own separate agenda, especially after General Trudeau had reorganized the entire military R&D
apparatus and refocused it so that it ran like a machine. In 1969, during the era of large main frame computers, under a contract to develop a network of networks
linking universities, defense contractors, and the military, the ARPANET was born. And in the 1970s after the
Advanced Research Projects Agency changed its name to the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or
DARPA, it instituted a project to create an "internetting" of all the existing computers on its system, instituting the
software protocols that would link networks running on different operating systems. By1974, the Transmitting
Control Protocol/Internet Protocol was
born and the ARPANET became the Internet. In the late 1980s, the European laboratory for Particle Physics
launched a hypertext language, originally conceived of by Vannevar Bush, as a search mechanism on the
Internet and by 1990 married it to a graphics user Interface that combined hypertext and graphics. The World
Wide Web was born. In 1958, when it was first developing the concepts behind the particle beam weapon, ARPA was only a year
old. It was formed in1957, when I was still at the White House, in response to the Soviet Union's successful launch of
Sputnik because the government realized that the United States needed an independent research organization
to marshal the resources of the academic, scientific, and industrial communities. ARPA was formed to fund basic
research, and even though it didn't have a military orientation at the outset, it quickly became associated with

--- PAGE BREAK ---entific, and industrial communities. ARPA was formed to fund basic
research, and even though it didn't have a military orientation at the outset, it quickly became associated with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
military projects because that was where the government saw the greatest need for basic research into scientific
and technical areas.
There was another reason for the formation of ARPA that, at least in theory, had a lot to do with the perceived
threats facing the United States and the need for basic research to respond to them. ARPA, because it was a
network deep inside the government and ultimately the Department of Defense, could engage in research
ostensibly far afield from the immediate needs of the military services whose research and development
organizations were part of the command structure. ARPA wasn't. Although it reported to its own higherups in the
Defense Department and at the White House, it was not part of a command structure and didn't have to confine
itself to the agendas of the heads of the various special military corps.
ARPA didn't just come into existence out of nowhere. Its ancestor, the National Research Council, had been
formed under President Wilson to organize and marshal scientific research for defense purposes and as a rival to
the Naval Consulting Board, which was run by Thomas Edison, who had gone on record as saying that the
country didn't need a Naval Consulting Board at all. He invited scientists he called a bunch of "perfessers" down
to his laboratory in New Jersey to walk around the "scrap heap" to see how real inventions were created.
University researchers and corporate heads of research and development were naturally appalled at what
Edison thought about government sponsored research for the war effort and rallied around the NRC. If there
were government grants to be handed our for basic defense research, the scientists who worked for
corporations, who needed help in basic research no matter what its primary purpose was, were anxious to
become associated with this new organization.University researchers argued, through the prestigious National Academy of Sciences, that the National
Research Council should be an "arsenal of science" to protect the United States through the application of its
great brain trust in academia and industrial contractors to issues of national defense through technology.

President Wilson agreed, and the NRC was born.

One of the first tasks given to the National Research Council was
the development of a submarine defense.

Aircraft had not yet made a decisive appearance on the battlefield
at the outset of World War I, but the German U-boats were ravaging the Atlantic fleets.

The navy was desperately
searching for a way to detect submarines, and although Nikola Tesla had submitted his plans for an energy beam
detector that would send low frequency waves through the water to reflect off any hidden objects, the National
Research Council thought the idea too esoteric and looked for a more conventional technology.

Tesla's low
energy wave didn't work well in water anyway, but years later Tesla's description of his invention was the basis for
one of the most important devices to come out of World War II, "radar.

"
The National Research Council had established a pattern of government support for basic research when it
had an aspect to it that could be developed for military purposes.

It was the first time that research scientists from
the private sector, corporations, academicians, bureaucrats, and the military were brought together to solve
mutual problems.

Therefore, the Advanced Research Projects Agency and the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, or DARPA, son of ARPA, were natural outgrowths of an ongoing government relationship.

The problem with ARPA was that it was political and had its own agenda.Therefore, the Advanced Research Projects Agency and the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, or DARPA, son of ARPA, were natural outgrowths of an ongoing government relationship.

The problem with ARPA was that it was political and had its own agenda.

It was not uncommon for conflicts to
arise between the Office of the Chief of Research and Development, General Trudeau, who was operating
within the military command structure, and ARPA over money and the policy issues that arose between them.

The
staffs at ARPA and in the Pentagon crossed swords on a number of occasions, and more than once ARPA tried to
lay the blame for its own shortcomings and mistakes on the military.

During the early years of the Vietnam War, for
example, ARPA tried to blame General Trudeau for mistakes in the deployment of Agent Orange.

But General
Trudeau and R&D weren't responsible at all for Agent Orange.

It was ARPA's baby from the start.

But when the
field reports started coming in on the casualties Agent Orange was causing among our own troops and ARPA
said that it would testify before Congress that General Trudeau was responsible, I hit the ceiling.

I let the ARPA
staff people know that, protocol be damned, I would storm into the congressional committees on military and
veterans affairs and raise the roof of the Capitol Building until everyone knew that ARPA was trying to duck
responsibility for negligence in the deployment of a bad chemical.

ARPA backed down, but the bad blood
between us remained.

When the concept of an ARPA was first discussed at the White House, I saw the potential as well as the
problem, but I also knew that a secret agenda driving everything was the policy of the UFO working group.101
military projects because that was where the government saw the greatest need for basic research into scientific
and technical areas.
There was another reason for the formation of ARPA that, at least in theory, had a lot to do with the perceived
threats facing the United States and the need for basic research to respond to them. ARPA, because it was a
network deep inside the government and ultimately the Department of Defense, could engage in research
ostensibly far afield from the immediate needs of the military services whose research and development
organizations were part of the command structure. ARPA wasn't. Although it reported to its own higherups in the
Defense Department and at the White House, it was not part of a command structure and didn't have to confine
itself to the agendas of the heads of the various special military corps.
ARPA didn't just come into existence out of nowhere. Its ancestor, the National Research Council, had been
formed under President Wilson to organize and marshal scientific research for defense purposes and as a rival to
the Naval Consulting Board, which was run by Thomas Edison, who had gone on record as saying that the
country didn't need a Naval Consulting Board at all. He invited scientists he called a bunch of "perfessers" down
to his laboratory in New Jersey to walk around the "scrap heap" to see how real inventions were created.
University researchers and corporate heads of research and development were naturally appalled at what
Edison thought about government sponsored research for the war effort and rallied around the NRC. If there
were government grants to be handed our for basic defense research, the scientists who worked for
corporations, who needed help in basic research no matter what its primary purpose was, were anxious to
become associated with this new organization.

ARPA backed down, but the bad blood
between us remained. When the concept of an ARPA was first discussed at the White House, I saw the potential as well as the
problem, but I also knew that a secret agenda driving everything was the policy of the UFO working group. ARPA
was an asset to them because they could network through the university community and find out who had any
information about UFOs that they weren't disclosing to the military, what technology was being developed that
had any relation to the problem of UFOs or EBEs, and who in the academic or scientific community were coming
up with theories about the existence or intentions of EBEs. In other words, in addition to being a conduit for
research and research grants that fit certain government/military profiles, ARPA was another intelligence
gathering agency, but dedicated to the academic and scientific communities. If information was out there,
ARPA was going to find it and pay for its development. Therefore, when the urgency of coming up with a technological challenge to the Soviet space program arose
in 1957, it was no surprise to anyone who understood the requirements of a space defense that it would be anthe urgency of coming up with a technological challenge to the Soviet space program arose
in 1957, it was no surprise to anyone who understood the requirements of a space defense that it would be an

--- PAGE BREAK ---102
organization like ARPA that would be given the mandate to develop that military response.

And given the
challenge posed by the Soviet satellite program, a particle beam weapon was the logical direction such a
response would take.

The United States had to develop a weapon that theoretically could knock out the Soviet satellites or blind
them so they couldn't take any surveillance photos.

They had to gather resources in the academic research
community to see whether a talent pool existed for the development of such a weapon.

At the same time they
didn't want to divert military research into exotic weapons while the military was still trying to get its own satellites
into orbit.

But rather than putting the plan directly into the hands of the military R&D organizations, they followed
a course probably initially laid out for them by the protocols of the UFO working group and went outside the
formal military to an adhoc research organization that was not supposed to be involved in direct military
research.

When I was at the White House, I could see the hand of the CIA behind this, which immediately sent up
a red flag for me because I knew that the government was only creating another budget and research grant
bureaucracy the CIA would ultimately control.

It was also no surprise that the first type of weapon whose mission was directed against space vehicles and
vehicles reentering Earth's atmosphere from space was a directed energy weapon, an accelerated particle
beam, because even though it may sound like something out of a science fiction movie, it had a history that
stretched back all the way to the early twentieth century.

It's original creator was Nikola Tesla, some of whose
papers were still in my own files when I took over the Foreign Technology desk in 1961.

Tesla was theorizing about directed energy beams, including particle beam weapons, even before the
beginning of the twentieth century.It's original creator was Nikola Tesla, some of whose
papers were still in my own files when I took over the Foreign Technology desk in 1961.

Tesla was theorizing about directed energy beams, including particle beam weapons, even before the
beginning of the twentieth century.

His now famous "death ray" was essentially a version of a particle beam
weapon that he believed would bring peace to the entire world because it could destroy entire cities anywhere
in the world, instantly, and render squadrons of airplanes, naval fleets, and even entire armies completely useless.

But even before his announcement of his death ray, Tesla was making news and a fortune through his
experiments with the wireless transmission of electricity and his directed beam of electrons, which would strip the
electrons of specimen material inside a light globe.

In the 1890s, Tesla was experimenting with a device that
would become the twentieth-century cyclotron, another device that would become television, and he
formulated the ideas for what today are the worldwide television and radio networks.

Tesla, his background and
his history, are important to any history of twentieth century science and weapons because his thinking was well
advanced beyond that of any scientist of his day, including Thomas Edison, and the political implications of what
Tesla discovered mixed in with the furious attempts to manage the government cover up about UFOs and their
technological potential in the days and months after the Roswell crash.

Nikola Tesla, the son of a Serbian Orthodox minister, came to the United States from Paris in 1884 to meet and
work for the acknowledged genius of his day, Thomas Edison.

Although the two men would eventually clash like
titans over the advantages of alternating current over direct current, Tesla did manage to get a job at the Edison
offices and laboratory on what is now West Broadway, south of West Houston Street in New York City.Nikola Tesla, the son of a Serbian Orthodox minister, came to the United States from Paris in 1884 to meet and
work for the acknowledged genius of his day, Thomas Edison.

Although the two men would eventually clash like
titans over the advantages of alternating current over direct current, Tesla did manage to get a job at the Edison
offices and laboratory on what is now West Broadway, south of West Houston Street in New York City.

The two men were also very different in the way they approached their inventions.

Edison was a tinkerer who
would come up with an idea, experiment, build and rebuild, and experiment again until it worked.

Often, as in
the case of his incandescent bulb, he would go through thousands of experiments, discarding each one after it
failed, until he finally succeeded.

This was Edison's example of initial inspiration and then lots of perspiration until
the thing worked and he believed he'd gotten it right.

Tesla, on the other hand, laid the entire project out in his brain, visualizing it in its completeness, and then
assembled it from the vision in his mind.

It was unnerving to Edison, who often commented to his former assistant
Charles Batchelor that Tesla's ability to build something from what amounted to a set of schematics in his own
mind was unnatural.

Tesla was also a fastidious, formally trained academician who loved to discuss theory while
Edison was mostly a self taught workbench inventor who often worked and slept in the same clothes for days.

It is ironic that the rivalry between the two men who, by the time each of them died, had patented inventions
upon which most of modern technological industry is built, spawned two great competing companies - General
Electric and Westinghouse - whose own rivalries extend to the present day.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tesla was also a fastidious, formally trained academician who loved to discuss theory while
Edison was mostly a self taught workbench inventor who often worked and slept in the same clothes for days. It is ironic that the rivalry between the two men who, by the time each of them died, had patented inventions
upon which most of modern technological industry is built, spawned two great competing companies - General
Electric and Westinghouse - whose own rivalries extend to the present day. The rivalry between Edison and Tesla
helped define the nature of the electrical power industry in the United States, the electrical appliance and
entertainment industries, and sustained itself from the 1890s through the 1930s when Edison finally died. Tesla
himself died in New York in 1943. Tesla was an acknowledged genius, a prodigy whose predictions and patents marked him to be a man way
ahead of his time. Even before Czech playwright Karel Capek coined the word "robot" in his play R.U.R. and
American science fiction writer Isaac Asimov invented the term "robotics" in his book of short stories I Robot, Nikola
Tesla had created the first "automaton" or mechanical soldier and a robotically controlled model boat before the
turn of the century. Yet Tesla, a tall, dark, brooding, but well-educated and cultured Serbian, often times turned
out to be his own worst enemy. He became a millionaire when he was only thirty-two but ran through enormous
sums of money put up by some of the great industrialists

--- PAGE BREAK ---103
and financiers of his day, including George Westinghouse, J.

Pierpont Morgan, A.

Stanford White, and John
Jacob Astor, only to die destitute and penniless in his room at the New Yorker Hotel.

This was the man, however,
whose ideas the scientists at ARPA turned to when faced not only with the threat of the first Soviet Sputnik orbiting
the earth, but the even worse threat that the EBEs, seeing and hearing the Russian satellite, would be convinced
that if colonization of the Earth was their goal, it was the Russians who would help them accomplish it.

What was
Tesla's idea?

Consistently, throughout the 1890s, Tesla wrote and lectured about his theory of the wireless transmission of
electrical current.

Like Marconi's wireless radio, which revolutionized communication, Tesla's wireless electrical
power supply would revolutionize the growth and development of entire cities.

Not just as an extrapolation of
wireless power but as a theory in its own right, Tesla reported that he had experimented with a beam of electrical
energy, directed without wires, that could excite the atoms in a substance to the point where the substance,
even though it could resist heat in conventional ovens, would break down.

Such a beam weapon, Tesla said,
would revolutionize warfare.

In theory at least, it was a very similar device, the laser cutting tool, that the Army
retrieval team picked out of the scrub at the Roswell crash site.

One of the astounding aspects about the life and career of Nikola Tesla isn't just that he theorized about these
projects, he actually experimented with them, many times succeeding in very intriguing ways, and then patented
the important inventions that derived from his experiments.

But his ideas were so radical for the time, so far ahead
of anything his contemporaries were thinking, that they were dismissed as either the uncontrolled ravings of a
mad scientist or so wildly impractical that they amounted to nothing.One of the astounding aspects about the life and career of Nikola Tesla isn't just that he theorized about these
projects, he actually experimented with them, many times succeeding in very intriguing ways, and then patented
the important inventions that derived from his experiments.

But his ideas were so radical for the time, so far ahead
of anything his contemporaries were thinking, that they were dismissed as either the uncontrolled ravings of a
mad scientist or so wildly impractical that they amounted to nothing.

Yet, when you review the patents in his
name, his descriptions of the systems he designed, and actual results of the public experiments or exhibitions he
conducted, you find that even the most lunatic sounding ideas like his turn of the century plans for a vertical
takeoff and landing bomber actually looked as though they should work.

In some cases, like his atom smasher,
they worked better and more efficiently than the modern equivalents of these machines when they first
appeared.

When I realized that at the turn of the century Tesla had actually demonstrated a model of a remotely
piloted boat that could be controlled by radio from a distance and deliver torpedoes right into the heart of an
enemy fleet, I was amazed that the navy hadn't jumped on the idea in advance of World War I and even more
amazed that we hadn't ordered the design from Tesla in World War II when we knew the Germans were already
experimenting with one.

Yet today, we're spending hundreds of millions of dollars to develop remotely piloted
vehicle similar in concept to the one Tesla had designed almost a hundred years ago at less than a thousandth
of today's cost.

And in 1915, Tesla had written the U.S.Yet today, we're spending hundreds of millions of dollars to develop remotely piloted
vehicle similar in concept to the one Tesla had designed almost a hundred years ago at less than a thousandth
of today's cost.

And in 1915, Tesla had written the U.S.

War Department that in addition to his remotely piloted boat, they
should urgently consider his remotely piloted "aerial machines devoid of sustaining planes [wings], ailerons,
propellers, and other eternal attachments, which will be capable of immense speeds, and are very likely to
furnish powerful arguments for peace in the near future.

Such a machine, sustained and propelled entirely by
reaction [thrust rocket engines], can be controlled either mechanically or by wireless energy [radio controlled].

"
Tesla's description of the remote controlled rocket powered guided missile, which was even more advanced than
the German V2, is the forerunner of today's modern ICBMs whose targeting information can be relayed to them
after they're in flight.

As a tactical weapon, Tesla had described, over half a century earlier, the army's remotely
piloted TOW antitank missile that destroyed Saddam's armored divisions in the Persian Gulf.

Tesla's experiments with particle beam generation and direction were well under way during the 1890s when
he was invited to set up an experimental station that would prove that he could transmit electrical power using
the earth's atmosphere as the medium instead of a heavy cable.

If power could be so directed, Tesla's backers,
who included industrialist George Westinghouse and financier J.

P.Morgan, agreed, it would revolutionize the
infant electrical power industry and make whoever controlled the source of power rich beyond anyone's
imagination.If power could be so directed, Tesla's backers,
who included industrialist George Westinghouse and financier J.

P.Morgan, agreed, it would revolutionize the
infant electrical power industry and make whoever controlled the source of power rich beyond anyone's
imagination.

Tesla believed he could control that power and, with about $60,000 from his backers, traveled to
Colorado Springs, not coincidentally today's home of the Air Force North American Air Defense Command
(NORAD) and the United States Army's Space Command, to build and demonstrate his power transmission
station.

Tesla described his experiments in an article he wrote for the thirtieth anniversary edition of the Electrical World
and Engineer  in1904.

He said, "Not only was it practicable to send telegraphic messages any distances without
wires, as I recognized long ago, but also able to impress upon the entire globe the faint modulations of the
human voice, far more still, to transmit power, in unlimited amounts, to any terrestrial distance and almost without
any loss.

" In Tesla's vision, electrical transmission stations would circle the planet, storing and relaying power from
station to station so as to provide electrical power to the entire planet without the use of above or below the
ground power lines, feeder cables, and transmission lines.

He also saw that a network of relay stations could
receive and retransmit the world's breaking news stories instantly around the globe to pocket receivers, "a cheap
and simple device which might be carried in one's pocket, " which would record special messages sent to it.

Tesla
had described a modern microwave cellular telephone and remote pager system.

He also said that with relay
stations like this, " the entire Earth will be converted into a huge brain, as it were capable of response in every one
of its parts, " in other words, an Internet.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tesla
had described a modern microwave cellular telephone and remote pager system. He also said that with relay
stations like this, " the entire Earth will be converted into a huge brain, as it were capable of response in every one
of its parts, " in other words, an Internet. During his time, Tesla truly made history by showing that energy could be
directed as a beam without wires.

--- PAGE BREAK ---104
In 1899, it was rumored that Tesla was experimenting with a "death ray" in Colorado Springs.

But Tesla never
owned up to it, and in fact remained uncommunicative about any experiments he had conducted with rays
even when English, German, Russian, and American scientists in the 1920s were applying for patents on the
invention.

In the 1930s, however, Tesla wrote in his monograph that he had made a new discovery that would
make war obsolete because every nation would have the same power to destroy each other's military weapons.

It would require a large facility to generate the power, but such a facility would be able to stop entire armies and
their machines as far away as two hundred miles in all directions.

"It will, " he wrote, "provide a wall of power
offering an insuperable obstacle against any effective aggression.

"
But it was not at all a death "ray, " he said, because, as scientists working as recently as the 1970s realized, rays
tend to diffuse over distance and something is necessary to maintain the intensity of the focus.

Rather, he said,
"My apparatus projects particles which may be relatively large or of microscopic dimensions, enabling us to
convey to a small area at a great distance trillions of times more energy than is possible with rays of any kind.

Many thousands of horse power can thus be transmitted by a stream thinner than a hair, so that nothing can
resist.

"
Although Tesla went on to describe how this beam will improve television transmission and the projection of
images, he was really describing a directed, accelerated particle beam weapon that the folks at ARPA were
struggling to develop over twenty-five years after Tesla first wrote about it and eleven years after the charred
fragments of a directed-energy apparatus as well as the laser tool were discovered in the wreckage of the
spacecraft at Roswell, written up by the engineers at the Air Materiel Command, and sequestered for years in my
nut file.Many thousands of horse power can thus be transmitted by a stream thinner than a hair, so that nothing can
resist.

"
Although Tesla went on to describe how this beam will improve television transmission and the projection of
images, he was really describing a directed, accelerated particle beam weapon that the folks at ARPA were
struggling to develop over twenty-five years after Tesla first wrote about it and eleven years after the charred
fragments of a directed-energy apparatus as well as the laser tool were discovered in the wreckage of the
spacecraft at Roswell, written up by the engineers at the Air Materiel Command, and sequestered for years in my
nut file.

We were still trying to develop a workable beam when I was in the Pentagon in 1962 and only barely
developed a working model in the Reagan administration as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program.

But for Tesla, his world in the 1930s rushed toward war.

Writing J.

P.

Morgan about his vision of an H.

G.

Wells
nightmare of the destruction of the civilized world through aerial bombardment, Tesla said that his particle beam
weapon could shoot down airplanes in flight and so protect cities.

He made proposals to the Russians to develop
such a weapon because Stalin was afraid of an invasion from Japan.

He also wrote to the British prime minister
about the ability of his beam to protect London from attacks by the Germans.

But no one thought his energy
beam weapon practical, not even the Westinghouse Company, which, if they had advanced him the money to
file for the patents they would probably have controlled, might have been able to develop the weapon before
World War II had Tesla been able to complete it.

As it was, Tesla's death ray, his accelerated particle beam in which subatomic particles were excited by an
energy field and directed toward a specific target at speeds close to the speed of light, was never developed
during his lifetime.But no one thought his energy
beam weapon practical, not even the Westinghouse Company, which, if they had advanced him the money to
file for the patents they would probably have controlled, might have been able to develop the weapon before
World War II had Tesla been able to complete it.

As it was, Tesla's death ray, his accelerated particle beam in which subatomic particles were excited by an
energy field and directed toward a specific target at speeds close to the speed of light, was never developed
during his lifetime.

However, the mere hint that Tesla's theories might have found their way to the Germans or the
Russians so concerned the federal government, especially the FBI, that when Tesla died in January 1943, the FBI
immediately seized all his papers, schematics, writings, and designs and turned them over to the Office of Alien
Property, where they were officially sealed until released to the Yugoslavian ambassador, who was a
representative of Tesla's estate.

They remained in storage in Manhattan until the early1950s, when they were
returned to Yugoslavia.

Yet even after their return, the Yugoslavian government believed that the FBI had rifled
through Tesla's papers when they were in storage and had micro filmed them or photographed them.

J.

Edgar
Hoover denied this, but photostatic copies of photographs of Tesla's papers were in the possession of the Army
R&D's Foreign Technology desk when I took over in 1961.

How did they get there?

Tesla's property was officially seized by the U.S.

government two days after his death.

Even though the FBI
knew that Tesla had publicly said he'd perfected his death ray - there was no independent verification of this - no
steps had been taken by the government to prevent him from transferring his plans for the death ray to a foreign
powers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

government two days after his death. Even though the FBI
knew that Tesla had publicly said he'd perfected his death ray - there was no independent verification of this - no
steps had been taken by the government to prevent him from transferring his plans for the death ray to a foreign
powers. Vice President Henry Wallace, however, told the FBI that the government had a critical interest in
whatever papers Tesla had and instructed the FBI to seize them any way they could. That was why the FBI directed the Office of Alien Property to enter Tesla's hotel room on January 9, 1943, and
take possession. Tesla's other papers that were already in a storage warehouse were seized by the OAP as well. Over the next couple of weeks in January 1943, after a flurry of diplomatic activity between the Yugoslavian
embassy and J. Edgar Hoover's office, the FBI turned the entire matter over to the Office of Alien Property, which
also wanted to get out from under the diplomatic tug of war between Belgrade and the State Department. The
OAP, still reacting to the vice president's instructions that papers that could give aid to the enemy could not
leave the country, contacted the chairman of what would become the Office of R&D, the National Defense
Research Committee of the Office of Scientific Research and Development, Dr. John Trump. Dr. Trump examined
the papers, determined that not much of them were useful, but decided to make photocopies of a number of
papers Tesla wrote during the years preceding his death. Trump also wrote abstracts of those papers, which
included an undated monograph by Nikola Tesla entitled "New Art of Projecting Concentrated Non-Dispersive
Energy through Natural Media, " Tesla's description of how he would generate and direct a high energy beam of
electrons at a target. Though dismissed by Trump as unworkable, the paper nevertheless described Tesla's latest
thinking about a directed energy weapon, the accelerated particle beam device.beam of
electrons at a target. Though dismissed by Trump as unworkable, the paper nevertheless described Tesla's latest
thinking about a directed energy weapon, the accelerated particle beam device.

--- PAGE BREAK ---105
With the OAP's making photographs and abstracts of Tesla's papers, the entire Tesla property remained in
storage until it was sent back to Belgrade in the 1950s.

That should have put an end to the matter.

However, in
1945, just after the war ended, the Air Technical Service Command at Wright Field outside of Dayton, Ohio,
sought copies of the Tesla papers from the Office of Alien Property in Washington and sent a military courier to
take possession of them and bring them back to Wright.

Although there was some correspondence between the
OAP and the Air Technical Service Command over the next two years regarding the disposition of the papers, at
least one of Gen.

Nathan Twining's officers at the Air Materiel Command contacted the Office of Alien Property in
November1947 to tell them that the AMC at Wright Field had possession of the Tesla papers and would maintain
possession of them at least until after January 1, 1948.

Thereafter, the papers, including Tesla's own monograph on
his accelerated particle beam weapon, seem to have completely disappeared - until they appeared in my
OCRD files in1961.

But that was only one of the copies.

At least one other copy of Tesla's monograph had remained in the possession of the working group under
General Twining and had made its way to the Advanced Research Projects Agency in Washington over the
course of the next ten years.

It was pulled out when the working group realized that upon the launch of Sputnik,
the United States had absolutely no defense against war in space being initiated by the Russians, nor against the
EBEs.

We had one vital clue, however, about the only possible process that could interfere with the
electromagnetic field drive we suspected the aliens were using: a directed particle energy beam weapon that
could disrupt the electromagnetic wave formation around the spacecraft and penetrate the antigravity field.It was pulled out when the working group realized that upon the launch of Sputnik,
the United States had absolutely no defense against war in space being initiated by the Russians, nor against the
EBEs.

We had one vital clue, however, about the only possible process that could interfere with the
electromagnetic field drive we suspected the aliens were using: a directed particle energy beam weapon that
could disrupt the electromagnetic wave formation around the spacecraft and penetrate the antigravity field.

And we didn't even have to microwave the spacecraft by exciting the molecules in the composite material.

Because the accelerated particle weapon carried with it a powerful electromagnetic pulse, the effect of this
EMP - the same effect that EMPs have on any electrical equipment - was to disrupt the antigravity gravity field by
destroying the integrity of the electromagnetic wave of the spacecraft.

In this way, without exploding the
spacecraft, the particle beam could force it to crash by destroying its ability to counter gravity.

In its role as a
more conventional weapon against incoming warheads or enemy satellites, besides destroying any electronics
within the weapon through its electromagnetic pulse, the particle beam excites the atoms in the target, causes
them to disperse, and the target explodes.

In this way the particle beam has a dual destructive capability.

Tesla understood that the particle beam weapon was just like a bolt of lightning, with very much the same
destructive power only much more controlled.

A lightning bolt is a massive beam of electrons.

Scientists have
theorized that you can achieve the same destructive force with a beam of protons.

Still other scientists have
argued that because electrons carry a negative charge and protons a positive charge, they are vulnerable to
distortion within the earth's magnetic field because the beam will either be attracted to the opposite charge or
repelled by the same charge.Scientists have
theorized that you can achieve the same destructive force with a beam of protons.

Still other scientists have
argued that because electrons carry a negative charge and protons a positive charge, they are vulnerable to
distortion within the earth's magnetic field because the beam will either be attracted to the opposite charge or
repelled by the same charge.

In addition, a beam of like particles will contain a natural dispersive force because
the like charges in the beam will repel each other.

Entire hydrogen atoms are electrically neutral, however, and
make a workable beam for any weapon designed to be used outside of the earth's atmosphere because neutral
beams can be directed over the very long distances that the beam from a space weapon will have to travel.

Also, a neutral beam doesn't require the energy overhead to control dispersion because within a neutral beam
the particles are not charged and will not repeleach other.

Research and experiments on prototype models of a particle beam weapon conducted after 1980 defined
two basic types of weapons : those that would be used exclusively in space, or exoatmospheric weapons, and
those that would be deployed on Earth against targets like incoming missile warheads.

These are called
endoatmospheric weapons.

Each has enough different characteristics to make them separate weapons, but the
similarities of a particle beam weapon are common to both types.

For example, as I began work on the
development of basic research into particle beam weapons, my scientists told me that the weapon has to have
six basic characteristics that allow it to kill the target.

First, the beam must travel at such a high velocity - near the speed of light - that targets cannot evade it.

Even
UFOs travel slower than the speed of light so that in a chase, the particle beam will always win.

At the same time,
the faster the beam travels, the shorter the burst you have to have in order for it to disrupt the target.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Even
UFOs travel slower than the speed of light so that in a chase, the particle beam will always win. At the same time,
the faster the beam travels, the shorter the burst you have to have in order for it to disrupt the target. Second, the beam has to stay on the target long enough for it to do its damage. We estimated that if we
were bringing down an incoming enemy warhead, a powerful beam would disrupt the warhead's ability to
detonate almost immediately and destroy it within a few seconds. In space, where distances are greater, the
beam would have to stay on the target for a longer period of time, but it, too, would disrupt the wave
propagation of the spacecraft after a very short interval. Even if it didn't destroy the spacecraft, it would
certainly render it incapable of carrying out any offensive mission. Third, you have to be able to aim the beam immediately for it to have any effectiveness, especially if you're
targeting an incoming multiple reentry warhead vehicle such as the type deployed by the Russians and us. Unless
you took out the bus, the vehicle that carries and aims the separate warheads while still in orbit, you'd have to fire
the beam at each of the separate vehicles very quickly in succession after they've split up in orbit and begun
their separate reentry trajectories. Thus, you'd have to aim and fire, aim and fire, aim and fire, all within a matter

--- PAGE BREAK ---106
of seconds and making sure each target was destroyed.

A single fifty-kiloton detonation over New York City, for
example, would paralyze the entire American financial industry and immediately change life as we know it for a
considerable period of time.

A multiple reentry vehicle launching four 60-kiloton warheads from orbit on separate
trajectories for detonation over Boston, New York, Washington, and Miami would cripple the United States for the
ensuing five to seven years.

And the Russians wouldn't have to launch such a missile; it could easily come from
China, North Korea, or even one of the Middle East fanatic terrorist countries like Libya with lots of oil money to
spend.

A particle beam weapon that could rapidly aim and fire to take out all four warheads either before or
immediately upon reentry would effectively protect the United States and deter any country or terrorist group.

Fourth, the beam must penetrate the surface of the target in order for it to cause any real damage to the
mechanism inside the warhead.

Therefore, once the beam lands on the skin of the target, its excitation of the
target's molecules must take place not just on the outer hull or skin but deep inside the vehicle's electronics.

Therefore, even if it doesn't explode, it may either break apart into larger pieces or simply seize up and fall to
earth as a dud.

Fifth, the particle beam must also be able to kill through its electromagnetic pulse, which will render
the target's electronics inoperable by either throwing off its navigation or destroying its detonation program and
turning it into a dud.

Used as a space weapon, the electromagnetic pulse will have a similar effect on enemy
satellites, killing their control programs and rendering their computer guidance and orientation programs
inoperable and blinding them completely.Fifth, the particle beam must also be able to kill through its electromagnetic pulse, which will render
the target's electronics inoperable by either throwing off its navigation or destroying its detonation program and
turning it into a dud.

Used as a space weapon, the electromagnetic pulse will have a similar effect on enemy
satellites, killing their control programs and rendering their computer guidance and orientation programs
inoperable and blinding them completely.

Upon enemy spaceships, the pulse would act as a purely defensive
weapon that forces the ship to withdraw because its wave propagation device is rendered inoperable.

And sixth, a particle beam, unlike a laser, can operate in any weather and under any atmospheric conditions.

Lasers bounce off clouds and fog and are weakened by anything less than perfectly clear weather.

Particle
beams penetrate and can operate under all conditions.

As the scientists back in the 1950s evaluated what they would have to do to develop a working prototype,
they understood the need for a huge power generator to accelerate the particles necessary to generate the
beam, some form of target painting capability not only to acquire the target quickly and aim the weapon but to
reaim in case the first shot is a miss.

After I left the Pentagon, work continued on the theory underlying this type of
weapon but not much was done to assemble the very expensive supporting technologies such as the atomic
particle accelerators, targeting computers, high energy lasers, and a way to make the whole thing portable.

Today, however, low energy versions of these directed energy weapons, partly the great-grandchildren of the
Tesla beam and partly the descendant of the directed energy apparatus from the Roswell craft, are currently on
the market for installation in police cars as a weapon against fleeing vehicles as a way to shut down a high
speed chase before it even starts.After I left the Pentagon, work continued on the theory underlying this type of
weapon but not much was done to assemble the very expensive supporting technologies such as the atomic
particle accelerators, targeting computers, high energy lasers, and a way to make the whole thing portable.

Today, however, low energy versions of these directed energy weapons, partly the great-grandchildren of the
Tesla beam and partly the descendant of the directed energy apparatus from the Roswell craft, are currently on
the market for installation in police cars as a weapon against fleeing vehicles as a way to shut down a high
speed chase before it even starts.

The police officer in the pursuing vehicle aims his directed energy particle
beam at the fleeing vehicle and turns it on.

The electromagnetic pulse from the stream of electrons interferes with
the target's ignition system in the engine, and the car, deprived of a flow of electrical power to fire the cylinders,
rolls to a stop.

No more high speed chases on the 11:00 p.m.

news but a more effective and safer way to catch
fleeing suspects in their cars.

This was a device developed by the military initially and, now deployed out of the
Army's Space Command as a missile mounted kinetic energy beam for destroying enemy satellites, turned over
to the law enforcement community.

But its roots go back to the vision of Nikola Tesla and to what scientists
believed to be actual pieces of directed energy technology that we pulled out of the crashed space vehicle at
Roswell, reports about which turned up in the nut file carted into my office in the Pentagon in 1961 from the
Pentagon basement.

For me the irony has always been in the confluence between the historic work and discoveries of Nikola Tesla
and the technology we ascertained the extraterrestrials had developed from our evaluation of the Roswell
wreckage.But its roots go back to the vision of Nikola Tesla and to what scientists
believed to be actual pieces of directed energy technology that we pulled out of the crashed space vehicle at
Roswell, reports about which turned up in the nut file carted into my office in the Pentagon in 1961 from the
Pentagon basement.

For me the irony has always been in the confluence between the historic work and discoveries of Nikola Tesla
and the technology we ascertained the extraterrestrials had developed from our evaluation of the Roswell
wreckage.

Tesla had experimented with wireless transmission of energy, and the extraterrestrials seemed to have
employed a type of wireless transmission of energy for navigational and defensive purposes.

Tesla wrote about
the theories behind the distortion or manipulation of a gravitational field through the propagation of
electromagnetic waves, and the extraterrestrials seemed to have employed just that kind of technology for a
propulsion system.

And Tesla's descriptions of the theories behind the death ray he claimed to have perfected
ultimately became the basis for the defensive weapons we deployed to challenge the hostile intrusions of our
airspace by the extraterrestrials.

What posed a threat to us at Roswell and what we eventually learned from
Tesla's writings became two confluent streams of scientific theory that eventually became the basis of the
Strategic Defense Initiative, an antiballistic missile and space vehicle weapon.

While scientists from the 1950s through the 1970s argued over the cost of such a weapon and whether an
antiballistic missile weapon would destabilize the otherwise stable world of mutual nuclear deterrence, others
who understood the real threat from outer space argued that there were enemies besides the Soviet Union who
might someday acquire the technology to launch nuclear missiles against the United States.

No one would dare
say that we had to defend ourselves against flying saucers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While scientists from the 1950s through the 1970s argued over the cost of such a weapon and whether an
antiballistic missile weapon would destabilize the otherwise stable world of mutual nuclear deterrence, others
who understood the real threat from outer space argued that there were enemies besides the Soviet Union who
might someday acquire the technology to launch nuclear missiles against the United States. No one would dare
say that we had to defend ourselves against flying saucers. In fact, it wasn't until the election of Ronald Reagan in

--- PAGE BREAK ---1980 that the particle beam weapon received another pulse of life as part of the hotly debated but ultimately
successful strategy of the Strategic Defense Initiative, or "Star Wars.

" Amid the guffaws from some political
quarters and the hand wringing from people who thought the thing simply cost too much money, President
Reagan managed to prevail.

Just the strategy of Star Wars itself and the limited deployment and testing of some
of the components were enough to put the United States on a wartime footing with the EBEs and show the
Soviets that we finally had a real nuclear deterrent.

The full story behind the SDI and the way it changed the Cold War and forced the extraterrestrials to change
the strategies for this planet is a story that's never been told.

But as spectacular and fantastic as it may sound, the
story behind the limited deployment of the SDI is the story of how humanity won its first victory against a more
powerful and technologically superior enemy who discovered, to whatever version of shock it experiences, that
there was real trouble down on its farm.

CHAPTER 17
Star Wars
Toward the spring of 1962, General Trudeau told me of his intention to retire.

He was not going to be the
commander of U.S.

forces in Vietnam, he'd been told.

The old man had charged up too many hills during his
years in the army, rifle in hand, and fired back in the face of the enemy.

Whatever he felt inside him, and General
Trudeau was only human and nothing more, he never showed fear.

He was unrelenting in the execution of his
orders, unyielding when people opposed him, and he never ducked away from a fight.

Those who knew him
either respected or feared him, but they never discounted him.

A West Point graduate, he was born into a
generation of U.S.

military officers who had absolutely no doubts about what was right and what was wrong, and
he marched through two wars and a series of commands, including the head of U.S.A West Point graduate, he was born into a
generation of U.S.

military officers who had absolutely no doubts about what was right and what was wrong, and
he marched through two wars and a series of commands, including the head of U.S.

Army Intelligence, secure in
the knowledge that he was on the right side.

These were great qualities in a wartime commander, but, as both General Trudeau and I found out, they
could be the very things that make you vulnerable in a Cold War army of politicians angling for power as they
fought an enemy who could not be seen and whose presence was only indirectly felt.

"There are no more Pork Chop Hills, Phil, " General Trudeau told me after he had learned that General Maxwell
Taylor with the support of the army leadership had passed him over for the South Vietnam command.

It meant
that this was his last command and that he would retire as lieutenant general.

"And I'm afraid this is a war the
army's going to fight by means of a political process instead of on the killing field.

"
"We would win it if we were going there, General, " I said, fury welling up in my chest.

"You and I know what we
learned in Korea.

"
Maybe the general could see my face getting flushed because he said, "No, we probably would have gotten
court martialed because of what we learned in Korea.

Just think what they would do to us if we were to win the
war.

" Then he laughed in a way that told me he was looking forward to his retirement.

"We would have made the
Communists look bad.

You know you can't do that, Phil.

"
Even as we were speaking that afternoon toward the end of the summer, another Soviet trawler was heaving
to at the entrance to the port of Havana, awaiting instructions for the off loading of its cargo while another one
of our surveillance planes was circling high overhead snapping away its photos of the tarpaulins coming off the
ICBMs laid out on the ship's afterdeck.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You know you can't do that, Phil. "
Even as we were speaking that afternoon toward the end of the summer, another Soviet trawler was heaving
to at the entrance to the port of Havana, awaiting instructions for the off loading of its cargo while another one
of our surveillance planes was circling high overhead snapping away its photos of the tarpaulins coming off the
ICBMs laid out on the ship's afterdeck. I didn't know it yet, but a sequence of events was unfolding that would
swirl me into one of the biggest controversies of my life just as the chilling truth about the attempts to colonize our
planet and the harvesting of human beings and animals that were still going on made itself all too clear. A
showdown was coming. It was just over the horizon. No one could see it, but a handful of us knew that something
was stirring the waters just below the surface. General Trudeau was saying his good-byes and started counting the days until he would change his uniform
for civilian clothes and his office in the Pentagon for a corporate executive suite that befitted his experience as
the commanding officer of some of our military's most important divisions. He had been at the helm of R&D for six
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---108
years after having commanded Army Intelligence for three years before that.

Although the general didn't
explicitly comment much on the incredible facts we had uncovered in the Roswell file because he considered it
just part of his job, he did joke about it from time to time with his old friend Senator Strom Thurmond.

More than
once, I would take the back door into his inner office only to find Senator Thurmond and General Trudeau sitting
on his couch and looking me up and down as I walked in.

"Art, " Senator Thurmond would drawl, barely hiding his Cheshire cat smile, "what spooky things you think old
Phil's been into?"
"You been inside your junk file,' Phil?" the general would ask.

"I would guess that you're able to tell the future, Phil, " Senator Thurmond said.

"With what you're readin' you
can predict any-thing.

"
"Just acting like a good intelligence officer, Senator, " I said, being as correct and noncommittal as possible in
the presence of my commanding officer.

"My job is to read intelligence and make analyses.

"
"Well, they ain't got nuthin' on you, Phil, " the senator said, and everybody in the room knew exactly what
"they" meant even if we weren't allowed to talk about "them" in public.

As for me?

I was preparing my files for General Beech, the incoming chief of research and development,
knowing that my own retirement would come at the end of 1962.

So I would prepare to go silent about Roswell
while setting up a run of about six months to push as many projects through as I could, including whatever was
left in my nut file.

Only I didn't call it a nut file or anything after General Trudeau left.

My new boss and I had a
tacit agreement not to broadcast anything about Roswell or the files.

As the summer of 1962 came to an end, ominous reports were circulating all through Washington concerning
Soviet freighters making their way into Cuban waters.My new boss and I had a
tacit agreement not to broadcast anything about Roswell or the files.

As the summer of 1962 came to an end, ominous reports were circulating all through Washington concerning
Soviet freighters making their way into Cuban waters.

The traffic was intense, but there was no response from our
intelligence people on what was happening.

The CIA was completely mum, and the word making its way
through the Pentagon was that we were getting slapped around by the Soviets and were going to sit still for it.

Whatever it was, friends of mine in Army Intelligence were saying, the CIA was going to downplay it because the
Kennedy administration didn't want a confrontation with the Soviet Union.

What was it?

I kept asking, knowing all the while that the Soviets must have been playing around with
something in Cuba and that's why there were so many ships.

Were they massing troops there?

Was it a series of
military exercises?

My answer came in a shocking series of photographs, unmistakable surveillance photographs,
that were leaked to me by my friends in an office of Army Intelligence so deep inside the Pentagon and so
secret that you weren't even allowed to take notes inside the room.

I was asked, by officers who may still be alive
and therefore shall go unnamed, to take a good look at the photographs they had developed from the spy
planes over Cuba.

They said, "Memorize these, Colonel, because nobody can make any copies here.

" I couldn't
believe my eyes as I looked down at the glossies and then ran a magnifying glass over them just to make sure that
I wasn't seeing things.

Nope, there they were, Soviet intermediate range ballistic missiles of the latest vintage.

These babies could take out Washington in just minutes, and yet there they were, sitting outside of hangars only a
few miles from our marine base at Guantanamo Bay.

Had Gen.

Curtis LeMay seen these photos, I had to ask myself?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Had Gen. Curtis LeMay seen these photos, I had to ask myself? LeMay, a veteran of Korean bombing runs,
should have been drooling over his desk at the prospect of bombing the hell out of Castro just for thinking he
could even park IRBMs so close to U.S. airspace. Yet no reaction from Washington at all. The army had nothing to
say, the air force had nothing to say, and my navy friends were simply unresponsive. Somebody was putting the
lid on this, and I was getting deeply worried. So I called one of my friends, New York senator Kenneth Keating,
and asked him what he knew. "What do you mean missiles, Colonel Corso?" he asked. "What missiles, where?"
It was October 1962. "In Cuba, Senator, " I said. "They're sitting in Cuba waiting to be deployed on launchers. Don't you know?"
The truth was Senator Keating did not, nor did Representative Mike Feighan, whom I also called. Both
legislators knew better than to ask me where I found the photos or who gave them to me, but before they did or
said anything, they wanted to know why I believed them to be authentic. "They come from our best resources, " I told them. "I could pick out the missiles myself. I know what they look
like. And it's not just a single photo but a series over weeks of tracking the delivery of them on the decks of Soviet
freighters. They're unmistakable, very damning. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---109
Senator Keating asked whether I knew for sure that President Kennedy had been informed of the presence of
the missiles, but I told him there was no way of knowing.

Privately, I would have been shocked if intelligence
sources had kept this information away from the President because there were so many intelligence pathways to
the Oval Office the President would have found out no matter who tried to keep the information away.

So it was
pretty clear to me that the administration was trying to keep the news from the American people so that neither
the Russians nor the Cubans would be embarrassed and have their backs against the wall.

I also knew that by going to Senator Keating and Representative Feighan I was taking a huge risk.

I was
leaking information outside the military and executive chains of command to the legislative branch.

But, that
same April, I had already testified to Senator Dirksen's committee on the administration of the Internal Security Act
that it was my belief - and I had proof to back it up - that our intelligence services, particularly the Board of
Estimate, had been penetrated by the KGB and as a result we lost a war in Korea that we should have won.

The
testimony was regarded as classified and was never released.

But it made its way to Attorney General Robert
Kennedy, who promised me, in a private interview at the Justice Department, that he would personally make sure
his brother, the President, read it.

Now here it was a little more than six months later and whatever intelligence
information the President was getting about a serious Soviet threat to U.S.

security, it was clear that unless
somebody stopped them, the Russians were going to get away with it.

Not on my watch.

President Kennedy had gone up to Hyannis Port, and the vice president, Lyndon Johnson, a friend of Ken
Keating's from his days as Senate majority leader, was completely out of the decision-making loop within the
White House.Not on my watch.

President Kennedy had gone up to Hyannis Port, and the vice president, Lyndon Johnson, a friend of Ken
Keating's from his days as Senate majority leader, was completely out of the decision-making loop within the
White House.

The rumors were that because of his association with Bobby Baker, there was going to be an
investigation of the vice president and he might return as a member of the ticket in1964.

So Senator Keating
didn't recommend going to Lyndon Johnson with this information.

Besides, we had to get it right in front of the
public so it couldn't be swept away, leaving the White House free to ignore it until it was too late to force the
Soviets' hand.

This was a gamble, of course, because the whole world could explode in our faces, but I knew that
the only way to deal with the Russians was put their noses in it and teach them a lesson.

Had we done that in
Korea the way MacArthur wanted to, there probably wouldn't have been a Vietnam War.

One of my old friends in the Washington press corps was Paul Scott, the syndicated political columnist whose
pieces appeared in the Boston Globe and the Washington Post.

If we gave him the story, it would find its way into
the Globe and the Post at the same time, right in the President's face and forcing him to act.

I didn't enjoy this, but
there was no other way.

So Senator Keating, Mike Feighan, and I coordinated strategy.

I called Scott and told him
I had seen some photos and had an interpretation he needed to hear.

We met, not at the Pentagon, and I
described to him the copies of the photos that I had seen and explained, in very general terms and without
revealing anything classified about our surveillance apparatus, how they were taken, why they were authentic,
and what they meant.I called Scott and told him
I had seen some photos and had an interpretation he needed to hear.

We met, not at the Pentagon, and I
described to him the copies of the photos that I had seen and explained, in very general terms and without
revealing anything classified about our surveillance apparatus, how they were taken, why they were authentic,
and what they meant.

"You understand that when I saw these cylinders, " I said to him, drawing on a notepad the tiny barrels in the
photos on the deck of a ship, "these are intermediate range ballistic missiles that can hit Washington, New York, or
Boston within fifteen minutes after launch.

We don't even detect these babies until they're just below orbit and
coming down.

That gives us maybe five minutes to get under our desks.

But with nuclear warheads on them,
anybody sitting anywhere near where they detonate is not going to be protected.

"
"What's the point?" he asked.

"Why would the Cubans want to get into a war with the United States?"
"It's not the Cubans, " I explained.

"It's Soviet blackmail.

They're not going to turn a bunch of missiles over to
Fidel Castro and put the trigger for a nuclear war in someone else's hand.

The Soviets will have complete control,
they'll have their own troops on the island, and they'll threaten to launch them if we or anybody tries to throw
Castro out.

"
"Why are you telling me this?" he asked.

"Because, " I said hoping for a sense of outrageous indignation in him that would motivate him to action, "the
President already knows and won't do anything about it.

"
I was right; the newspaperman was in shock.

He half suspected that Kennedy wanted to avoid any and all
confrontation until he made it to his second term, but this was outright capitulation, he said.

"He can't get away
with it.

"
"Oh, yes, he can, " I warned him.

"If we don't get the story out, it goes away.

The President's sticking his head in
the sand and hoping nobody pulls it out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"If we don't get the story out, it goes away. The President's sticking his head in
the sand and hoping nobody pulls it out. You have to run this in the Globe right when he's in Massachusetts and
force him to confront it. He flies back to Washington and it's in the Post. Then the Soviets know that he knows and
it's all a complete mess. "
"But what if this sets off a war, " Scott said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---110
"Over Cuba?

Listen, not even Khrushchev's own people are  willing to sacrifice Moscow for Havana, " I told
him.

"It's a Russian gambit because the RGB told Khrushchev he could get away with it.

He's punishing us for the
U2 and the Bay of Pigs.

We have to standup to the Russians right here and now because if we don't the Cold
War's over and we lost.

It's all about territory, and if we don't defend our own hemisphere, we lose.

If we make
them back down, humiliate them, we win.

"
The story ran in the Boston Globe and the Washington Post within days, forcing the President back to
Washington to confront a crisis that would go down in history as one of the defining moments of the Kennedy
administration.

Robert Kennedy knew that the White House was getting faulty intelligence from the CIA, and John
Kennedy knew that he had to strike a middle course between the CIA people who told him everything would be
OK if he let Khrushchev off the hook and his own air force chief, Curtis LeMay, who wanted him to invade Cuba.

Very wisely, President Kennedy didn't invade Cuba.

He also didn't back down, at least in public.

Our blockade
of Cuba turned the Russian navy around and humiliated Nikita Khrushchev, whose gambit had failed.

President
Kennedy traded off some obsolete missiles in Turkey to give Khrushchev something he could take back to the
Kremlin.

But we knew all along that when we deployed our Polaris submarines in the Mediterranean and North
Seas, we'd have more firepower packed and ready to go against the Soviets than we ever had in Turkey, and
the Soviets wouldn't even know it was there.

Besides, we knew the Turks would never let us fire our missiles against
the Russians from their soil.

They were afraid that the Russians would use the missiles as an excuse to attack Turkey,
but the Kremlin knew that, too, and knew we wanted an excuse to get out of Turkey graciously.Besides, we knew the Turks would never let us fire our missiles against
the Russians from their soil.

They were afraid that the Russians would use the missiles as an excuse to attack Turkey,
but the Kremlin knew that, too, and knew we wanted an excuse to get out of Turkey graciously.

So it worked all the way around, and President Kennedy got the bragging rights to drawing a line right across
the ocean where the Russian navy could not cross, firing a shot across their bows in the open ocean, and making
them turn around in open water and sail back home.

Before the whole world the Russians had backed down.

President Kennedy was a hero.

But I had made some powerful new enemies and could see the end of my own career in the army like the
distant sign on an empty expressway coming up at eighty miles an hour that reads "Freeway
Ends.

" I now devoted myself to packing away the Roswell files for those whom they would go to after me and
writing my own notes for the work that I might find myself in after I left the army.

Who could have realized that
within months I'd be sitting in an office on Capitol Hill looking across the desk at one of my own successors who
was there as the scientific adviser to the secretary of defense.

I may have stepped on the toes of some of the
most powerful people in Washington, but it was still the good fight and I was, above all, still a soldier in the Cold
War and still fighting the stealth war against the strategies of the EBEs, who were becoming more aggressive in
their appearances over defense installations, cities, and our manned and unmanned space probes.

Even the
Russian intelligence services had begun to complain about the mysterious goings-on with their space probes.

But
they couldn't come right out and tell us the reasons why.

We had to figure those out for ourselves.But
they couldn't come right out and tell us the reasons why.

We had to figure those out for ourselves.

If the Cold War sounded complex and chaotic in the early 1960sas Kennedy juggled the strategies of Truman
and Eisenhower while recognizing that he couldn't trust his own intelligence services, imagine what it was like
when you factored in the "other" cold war or, as some have called it, the "real" cold war against the
extraterrestrials.

It was becoming like the elephant in a room that everybody knows is there but keeps denying it.

Its presence is so massive that you have to walk around it.

Its trunk swings with such a force that you have to duck
when it sweeps over your head.

Watch out that the big elephant feet don't crush your toes when he plants them,
and you don't want to step too close to the elephant's backside lest you get buried in what comes out.

In other words, dealing with the Soviets was just a big mess that we had to accommodate while we all sat
down at the same dinner table.

The Soviets and the Americans, pretending to break bread while not blowing up
the world.

Yet each of us looking for the advantage while we watched one another's hands the entire time.

You
watch your enemy's hands, he watches your hands, and whatever you can do with your feet you do.

Meanwhile
your enemy's doing the same thing.

The army's hands were tied by the cover-up, the refusal of the government to let us take on the alien threat
with our full resources because we had to pussyfoot around the truth.

But more than a few congressmen knew
about the cover-up, were as concerned as we were about the intrusions of the EBEs, the human abductions, and
the cattle mutilations, and supported the military's agenda for a program of speeded weapons development in
space.

We were convinced that whoever the UFO extraterrestrials were, they were tampering with our planet,
operating with impudence, and manipulating us constantly and secretly.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But more than a few congressmen knew
about the cover-up, were as concerned as we were about the intrusions of the EBEs, the human abductions, and
the cattle mutilations, and supported the military's agenda for a program of speeded weapons development in
space. We were convinced that whoever the UFO extraterrestrials were, they were tampering with our planet,
operating with impudence, and manipulating us constantly and secretly. But it was a secret that had our full
compliance because we were unwilling to admit the truth and fight the war. Those of us in the military who knew
what was happening also felt that we could be experiencing an invasion that was more of an infiltration. They
were compromising our very systems of defense and government, I suggested, and then, by the time the conflict
opened up, we would already be open and vulnerable. If the EBEs had been around long enough, I once

--- PAGE BREAK ---111
suggested to General Trudeau, might they have seen the Trojan stowing that huge wooden horse the Greeks left
for them right through the open gates of their city?

For his part, General Trudeau, in the months before he retired, made a number of appearances before
Congress.

He argued consistently that the army did have a real place in space and we had a capability in missile
defense that he had proven at Los Alamos and at the guided-missile and Redstone command at Huntsville,
Alabama.

Moreover, the army had been able to use German scientists in the months immediately after the
fighting in Europe had ended.

It wasn't just a matter of who could get the biggest budget, General Trudeau
testified.

In fact, he offered in a briefing before the Congressional Committee on Science and Astronautics, if the
space effort was to be completely taken away from the army, then it should be given lock, stock, and barrel to
the air force.

At least, he said, the air force was a military service and had officers and enlisted personnel who
knew how to fight.

But, at least in the early years, Congress and the President decided that NASA should control
the space program.

By the end of the 1960s, however, they had reversed that decision and realized that there
was a serious military aspect to space exploration.

General Trudeau also had his allies among the major defense contractors we worked with.

Not only scientists
but members of the boards of directors suspected that the army had an urgency in developing weapons for use
in space.

Some of them even realized that we must have had a hidden agenda because each of the projects
we proposed, like Horizon and the energy weapons, seemed de-signed for a war with enemies far more powerful
and elusive than the Soviets.

When he would address industrial groups on matters of technical intelligence and
applied engineering, General Trudeau received what I could only call a "knowing" response.Some of them even realized that we must have had a hidden agenda because each of the projects
we proposed, like Horizon and the energy weapons, seemed de-signed for a war with enemies far more powerful
and elusive than the Soviets.

When he would address industrial groups on matters of technical intelligence and
applied engineering, General Trudeau received what I could only call a "knowing" response.

He himself once
wrote in his unpublished memoirs that when he was invited to give an address to one of the companies we
worked with, the people who showed up were the decision makers.

He said:
I think on every occasion that I went out, the chairman of the board was there, the chief executive officer
who was usually the president, and an impressive cross section of their senior corporate officers or directors.

I
might say even when I went to Sperry-Rand, no less a person than General MacArthur honored me by his
presence at dinner, and he didn't turn out for many.

General Trudeau was the father of the ballistic missile and the person who, from the 1950s through the 1960s,
made sure that our armed forces adapted the ballistic missile for our own use.

His presence at Sperry-Rand with
MacArthur, his boss in Korea, was all the more important because General MacArthur knew the truth about UFOs
and commented that the army was girding itself to fight in space.

And he didn't mean fighting the Russians in
space, he meant the extraterrestrials.

But we were fighting so deeply immersed in the darkness of our own official denial that the fantastic nature of
the truth, the ongoing effects of the truth, and the capitulation of the civilian intelligence services to some crazed
blueprint they had for world order based upon an international government sometimes made us doubt our own
senses.

However, when you looked at what I called the secret history of the United States since 1947, you knew
that the invisible elephant was walking through the room.But we were fighting so deeply immersed in the darkness of our own official denial that the fantastic nature of
the truth, the ongoing effects of the truth, and the capitulation of the civilian intelligence services to some crazed
blueprint they had for world order based upon an international government sometimes made us doubt our own
senses.

However, when you looked at what I called the secret history of the United States since 1947, you knew
that the invisible elephant was walking through the room.

A better analogy is the concept of the black hole.

Black holes, the ultra dense remains of stars that have collapsed upon themselves, swallow up light and gravity
and, compressing them in like a galactic compactor into something that only subatomic particle physicists can
describe and that can't actually be "seen.

" Only their effects can be determined from the way light and gravity
seem to behave around them.

So you guess that a black hole might be present in a specific region of space
when light and gravity around it bend almost like the way water circulates around the drain at the bottom of your
sink.

That's what the truth looked like in the region around our Cold War strategy and the development of any ultra-
high-tech or exotic weapons.

It might have made sense in 1947, but by 1962, the refusal of the government to
admit the war it was fighting was getting in the way of actually fighting the war.

Since 1947 and the formation of the working group, each new layer of bureaucracy operating within the
black hole of UFO strategy and  intelligence  gathering found  itself more enmeshed in the confusion of what was
true and what was false than the previous {layer.

Like legions of blind soldiers, they bumped into one another in
the night, upset one another's plans, and thought that friends were foes and vice versa.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Since 1947 and the formation of the working group, each new layer of bureaucracy operating within the
black hole of UFO strategy and  intelligence  gathering found  itself more enmeshed in the confusion of what was
true and what was false than the previous {layer. Like legions of blind soldiers, they bumped into one another in
the night, upset one another's plans, and thought that friends were foes and vice versa. In the absence of a clear
policy that could be maintained from generation to generation, the strategy for dealing with the EBEs became
tangled up in its own web. After December 1947 when Gen. Hoyt Vandenberg, the air force chief of staff, directed the air force to
evaluate and track UFO sightings - this in response to the working group - Project "Sign" began at the Air Technical
Intelligence Center. Sign was so critical that even J. Edgar Hoover in 1947 issued Bureau Bulletin 59ordering that all
future reports of UFOs should not be investigated by FBI agents but sent, instead, to the air force. Although officially not looking for UFOs, the air force Project Sign examined 243 sightings and submitted its
report in February *1949. But at the same time Sign was doing its evaluation, the Air Technical Intelligence Center
issued its own document called an "Estimate of the Situation." Basically, but naively, the document came to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ign was doing its evaluation, the Air Technical Intelligence Center
issued its own document called an "Estimate of the Situation." Basically, but naively, the document came to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

112
conclusion that we were dealing with extraterrestrial interlopers who were observing us from UFOs. But General
Vandenberg, in the words of one of the officers I later ran into at the Pentagon, "had a cow, and not a mutilated
one. "
"Colonel, " this officer said, "steam was coming out of the old man's ears he was so furious. Just be glad you
weren't there. "
So I asked this officer why General Vandenberg was so steamed. After all, he ordered the report in the first
place. Why didn't he just agree with General Twining and Admiral Hillenkoetter to ask the President to begin
releasing the information?
"Are you crazy?" this officer said. The year was 1956 and I had been sent over from the White House for a
briefing at the Pentagon.
"Don't you remember what happened when that Orson Welles 'War of the Worlds' broadcast was on the
radio? We had near riots in the cities because they thought that thing was real. Can you imagine what would
happen if it really happened? If our own government said that flying saucers had landed just like on the radio,
only this time we caught one and they're still coming back? Think about it. Riots, looting, people going insane
because they thought aliens were destroying the planet. "
He was right. And what was worse, the aliens were setting up for some sort of hostile act, whatever it was.
When General Vandenberg read the "Estimate of the Situation, " he fumed and ordered the whole
report burned to ashes before anyone else could read it. It was one of the last official government
assessments of the UFO situation ever to get even close to being distributed before the real cover-up
clamped down.ashes before anyone else could read it. It was one of the last official government
assessments of the UFO situation ever to get even close to being distributed before the real cover-up
clamped down.

But the grumblings about the absence of government policy concerning UFO reports continued. Project
"Grudge" listed and evaluated 244 UFO sightings. Then in 1949 a memo that came out of the CIA's Office of
Scientific Investigation was very apprehensive about unexplained sightings of flying objects. Then in 1952 another
CIA memo came to light; from the head of the Office of Scientific Investigations Weapons and Equipment
Division it also complained about our lack of knowledge and police in the area of UFO sightings. Now even the
CIA, it seemed, was at odds with itself at its various levels of bureaucracy over what to do about UFOs. Generals
Twining. and Vandenberg had had enough. In 1952, the air force formally initiated Project Blue Book. At least if
we weren't going to do anything about UFOs publicly, we had to have a way to salve the public's fear about UFO
sightings. Blue Book was that salve.
Whatever the working group was supposed to be doing in 1952, it
wasn't satisfying the National Security Council, which ordered the
CIA to determine whether the existence of UFOs would create a
danger for the United States. Of course, the CIA already knew,
because two of its intelligence directors had been members of the
. working group, that UFOs were displaying hostile intentions not
I only to the United States but to the Soviets, the Italians, and the
Scandinavians as well. All of NATO was trying to figure out a
response to the UFO threat without triggering a reaction from the
Soviets. That was one of the reasons, thirty years later, President
Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev could come to a meeting of the
minds about UFOs that ultimately brought an end to the need for a Cold War.
On January 14, 1953, just before the inauguration of President Eisenhower, CIA officials and air force officers
met at the Pentagon at the CIA's invitation to discuss the UFO situation and what our working group had learned
up to that point. Officiated at first by Dr. H. P. Robertson, a CIA employee and the director of the Weaponst the CIA's invitation to discuss the UFO situation and what our working group had learned
up to that point. Officiated at first by Dr. H. P. Robertson, a CIA employee and the director of the Weapons

--- PAGE BREAK ---113
Systems Evaluation Group in the office of the secretary of defense, the group also had working group member Dr.

Lloyd Berkner, a physicist and one of the directors of the Brookhaven National Laboratories, as one of its
members.

The Robertson Panel spent the next three days reviewing case histories of UFO sightings assembled for
them by Air Force Intelligence and saw two films that contained footage of alleged flying saucers.

The panel
concluded there was no threat to the United States and recommended that the government should start
debunking UFO sightings in general.

This, the CIA reported as late as 1988, was the only official government
response to UFO sightings.

Just over a year later, the White House agreed that it was necessary to have some sort of policy governing the
release of UFO information to the press.

In order to keep lower-level officers from releasing unauthorized
information - and by unauthorized the National Security Council advising the President meant only that
information cleared by the working group - Gen.

Nathan Twining, now the airforce chief of staff, signed off on Air
Force Regulation 200-2, which said that it was permissible to release reports to the media only when the object
was identifiable, like swamp gas or a meteorite.

But only the Air Technical Intelligence Center could determine
which objects were identifiable and which weren't.

In other words, only the ATIC could authorize the release of
any information about UFOs, and they did so only when the objects were clearly identifiable as common
phenomena and not flying saucers.

Throughout the 1950s, I witnessed the government become more and more secretive about UFOs even
though privately I thought that they would get better information if they were more open about it.

But I was also a
military officer and understood the necessity of keeping information confidential until you understood what it was.Throughout the 1950s, I witnessed the government become more and more secretive about UFOs even
though privately I thought that they would get better information if they were more open about it.

But I was also a
military officer and understood the necessity of keeping information confidential until you understood what it was.

Besides, the Soviets were making great strides in the race to get into space and we didn't know if they were
getting cooperation from the EBEs.

There truly was a war on, and I followed orders on the White
House staff even as I watched the officers in the cover-up begin to trip over their own feet time and again.

The darkness was closing in all around us.

In 1961, the air force began two secret projects that, in effect, had been in operation since 1947 but had not
been committed to policy.

"Moon Dust" had to do with the establishment of recovery teams to retrieve and
recover crashed or grounded "foreign" space vehicles.

But for all intents and purposes, as far as the public was
concerned the air force was looking for Soviet satellites that had fallen out of the sky and landed on Earth.

But in
reality the air force was establishing a recovery of UFOs program just like the army had pulled the crashed UFO
out of the New Mexico desert fourteen years earlier.

Then in Project "Blue Fly, " the air force authorized the
immediate delivery of foreign crashed space vehicles and any other item of technical intelligence interest to
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio, for evaluation.

It was a repeat of General Twining's retrieval of
the Roswell space vehicle from the 509th to Wright Field in 1947.

In 1962, one of the assistants to the secretary of defense, Arthur Sylvester, told the press at a briefing that if the
government deemed it necessary for reasons of national security, it would not even furnish information about
UFOs to Congress, let alone the American public.It was a repeat of General Twining's retrieval of
the Roswell space vehicle from the 509th to Wright Field in 1947.

In 1962, one of the assistants to the secretary of defense, Arthur Sylvester, told the press at a briefing that if the
government deemed it necessary for reasons of national security, it would not even furnish information about
UFOs to Congress, let alone the American public.

Now I was at the Pentagon and I fully understood how the air
force was moving to take control of the entire UFO situation.

NASA had the mandate from the President to
manage space exploration, but the military still had to defend against the UFO threat even though we were
being hampered at every turn.

Air Force projects "Saint" and "Blue Gemini" years later were outgrowths of USAF 7795, a code number for the
USAF's first antisatellite program, an aggressive operation designed to locate, track, and destroy enemy
surveillance satellites or, and more importantly, orbiting UFOs.

Using the technology we had developed at R&D,
the air force, and then the army, was taking the initial steps to defend the U.S.

missile system against Soviet
attacks from space and defend the planet against UFO intrusions.

"Saint" was an orbital UFO inspector satellite, a version of a standard Agenda B satellite that the CIA had
been using, that had an onboard TV camera and tracking and targeting radar system.

Its job was surveillance.

Find a potential enemy satellite or UFO lurking in orbit and lock onto it with a TV camera and with radar.

Once
the lock was in place, Blue Gemini, the "killer" satellite, would move in.

One of the projects developed by
Hughes Aircraft, a prime air defense contractor and satellite builder, Blue Gemini was the military version of
NASA's manned Gemini capsule.

Its mission, purely and simply, was to swoop in from a higher orbit and kill or
disable an enemy satellite or a UFO.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the projects developed by
Hughes Aircraft, a prime air defense contractor and satellite builder, Blue Gemini was the military version of
NASA's manned Gemini capsule. Its mission, purely and simply, was to swoop in from a higher orbit and kill or
disable an enemy satellite or a UFO. If possible, the Blue Gemini would try to "capture" a UFO in orbit by rendering
it immobile and waiting for a manned military astronaut mission to "space walk" over and retrieve whatever we
could. Both of these weapons, under the cover of other missions, of course, were eventually deployed, and
today they form one of the lines of defense in an antimissile and anti-UFO surveil-lance system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---apons, under the cover of other missions, of course, were eventually deployed, and
today they form one of the lines of defense in an antimissile and anti-UFO surveil-lance system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
Saint and Blue Gemini were important first steps in our war against the UFOs. The technology that came out of
Army R&D in the 1960s, retrieved from the aliens themselves, led directly to our ability to put up such a defense
against the aliens even though in the hours after the crash at Roswell our situation looked completely hopeless.
Like many of the products that came out of R&D and were used for military purposes, they had consumer uses.
And today, if you look on the small dish digital direct broadcast television satellite antennas that are being
marketed all across the country, you'll see Hughes's own brand. It's an example of how technology originally
earmarked for the military winds up as the most basic and everyday consumer product.
On December 17, 1969, the secretary of the air force announced the termination of Project Blue Book. He said
that Blue Book's review of more than thirteen thousand cases had yielded no information that there was a threat
to national security in any way and that, in effect, since every sighting processed by Blue Book had been
identified as something earthly and not extraterrestrial, there were, by definition, no such things as unidentified
flying objects. Blue Book had done its job and now could report that our skies were safe. But Blue Book had been
pure public relations from the start, and the military's evaluation of UFOs continued uninterrupted.
In 1975 and early 1976, air force nuclear weapons repositories at Loring AFB in Maine, the all-important and
sensitive Strategic Air Command facility at Minot, North Dakota, and other facilities in Montana, Michigan, and
even the Royal Canadian Air Force Base at Falcon bridge in Ontario had been seriously encroached upon by
UFOs. These weren't just random sightings. UFOs actually conducted surveillance and scanning operations at the
bases that resulted in security alerts and classified reports to Washington about the intrusions.Then NASA finally got a project up and running to scan for radio transmissions from any advanced civilizations
whose signals we could pick up.

Called the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence and endorsed by the late Carl
Sagan, SETI, which has since been discontinued, was not only a set of receivers around the world but a set of
international protocols governing what would happen if contact was made with an extraterrestrial civilization.

For over fifty years, now, the war against UFOs has continued as we tried to defend ourselves against their
intrusions.

The Hughes hunter-killer satellites of the 1970s were our first steps in deploying a planetary defense
system that held any real threat against the EBEs.

When, late in the 1970s, we realized that a directed-energy
weapon and high-energy laser were even more effective than exploding satellites, our defensive ability was
enhanced even further.

We recognized that by applying both the technology we found at Roswell and Tesla's
vision of a particle beam to our own antisatellite missiles and laser targeting equipment, we could achieve the
rapid aim/rapid fire capability that these type of defenses demanded.

But we were still playing cover-up games
even though the Russians were now finally acknowledging that maybe cooperation between the superpowers
was called for to meet a common threat.

In the 1980s, both President Reagan and Chairman Gorbachev recognized the need for cooperation against
a common enemy.

While neither officially owned up to the threat of EBEs and alien hostilities, both
acknowledged that if the United States and the Soviet Union could lay aside their differences and participate in a
shared policy to defend the space around the earth, then both superpowers would benefit.

For his part, President
Reagan pushed hard for the rapid development and deployment of a space-based defense technology to
defend the planet.While neither officially owned up to the threat of EBEs and alien hostilities, both
acknowledged that if the United States and the Soviet Union could lay aside their differences and participate in a
shared policy to defend the space around the earth, then both superpowers would benefit.

For his part, President
Reagan pushed hard for the rapid development and deployment of a space-based defense technology to
defend the planet.

Called the Strategic Defense Initiative, and derisively dubbed "Star Wars" by the press, the SDI
was described in 1985 in President Reagan's own words as "a defensive shield that won't hurt people but will
knock down nuclear weapons before they can hurt people.

"
Briefly, the Strategic Defense Initiative was described by the White House and the military as a space-based
defense system to protect the United States from an all-out nuclear attack by the Soviet Union.

It would include
satellites that could detect a massive nuclear launch within seconds, orbiting lasers to destroy the first wave of
missiles, laser-equipped submarines that could defend against the next round of attacks, and a ground-based
missile system providing the last line of defense.

In addition, the SDI also included what I thought was the best of its
weapons, a missile-launched kinetic energy beam weapon that locked onto incoming warheads or low-orbiting
space vehicles and knocked out their electronics with a particle beam.

The elegant aspect to the kinetic energy
beam weapon was that you couldn't really defend against it.

Lasers, even high-energy lasers, had their
shortcomings in that once a laser beam bounced off a surface, the surrounding energy envelope protected the
surface from subsequent pulses.

You either knocked out your target right away or shielded it against subsequent
hits.114
Saint and Blue Gemini were important first steps in our war against the UFOs. The technology that came out of
Army R&D in the 1960s, retrieved from the aliens themselves, led directly to our ability to put up such a defense
against the aliens even though in the hours after the crash at Roswell our situation looked completely hopeless.
Like many of the products that came out of R&D and were used for military purposes, they had consumer uses.
And today, if you look on the small dish digital direct broadcast television satellite antennas that are being
marketed all across the country, you'll see Hughes's own brand. It's an example of how technology originally
earmarked for the military winds up as the most basic and everyday consumer product.
On December 17, 1969, the secretary of the air force announced the termination of Project Blue Book. He said
that Blue Book's review of more than thirteen thousand cases had yielded no information that there was a threat
to national security in any way and that, in effect, since every sighting processed by Blue Book had been
identified as something earthly and not extraterrestrial, there were, by definition, no such things as unidentified
flying objects. Blue Book had done its job and now could report that our skies were safe. But Blue Book had been
pure public relations from the start, and the military's evaluation of UFOs continued uninterrupted.
In 1975 and early 1976, air force nuclear weapons repositories at Loring AFB in Maine, the all-important and
sensitive Strategic Air Command facility at Minot, North Dakota, and other facilities in Montana, Michigan, and
even the Royal Canadian Air Force Base at Falcon bridge in Ontario had been seriously encroached upon by
UFOs. These weren't just random sightings. UFOs actually conducted surveillance and scanning operations at the
bases that resulted in security alerts and classified reports to Washington about the intrusions.

Lasers, even high-energy lasers, had their
shortcomings in that once a laser beam bounced off a surface, the surrounding energy envelope protected the
surface from subsequent pulses. You either knocked out your target right away or shielded it against subsequent
hits. But with a particle-beam weapon, you penetrated the surface, just like micro waving a piece of meat,
destroyed its electronics to render it useless, and then broke it apart or melted it from within. Amidst the warnings that the SDI wouldn't work, was a giant unscientific gamble and a corporate giveaway,
couldn't provide the massive shield against nuclear missiles, would violate the ABM treaty President Johnson had
negotiated with the Russians, and was a giant waste of the taxpayers' money, guess what? It worked!ide the massive shield against nuclear missiles, would violate the ABM treaty President Johnson had
negotiated with the Russians, and was a giant waste of the taxpayers' money, guess what? It worked!

--- PAGE BREAK ---115
We didn't have to shoot down thousands of Soviet incoming warheads, and the Soviets never really cared
about the ABM treaty in the first place because they knew they weren't going to launch a first strike and neither
would we.

We both knew who the real targets of the SDI were, and it wasn't a bunch of ICBM warheads.

It was
the UFOs, alien spacecraft thinking themselves invulnerable and invisible as they soared around the edges of our
atmosphere, swooping down at will to destroy our communications with EMP bursts, buzz our spacecraft, colonize
our lunar surface, mutilate cattle in their own horrendous biological experiments, and even abduct human beings
for their medical tests and hybridization of the species.

And what was worse, we had to let them do it because
we had no weapon to defend ourselves.

These creatures weren't benevolent alien beings who had come to enlighten human beings.

They were
genetically altered humanoid automatons, cloned biological entities, actually, who were harvesting biological
specimens on Earth for their own experimentation.

As long as we were incapable of defending ourselves, we had
to allow them to intrude as they wished.

And that was part of what the working group had to deal with.

We had
negotiated a kind of surrender with them as long as we couldn't fight them.

They dictated the terms because they
knew what we most feared was disclosure.

Hide the truth and the truth becomes your enemy.

Disclose the truth
and it becomes your weapon.

We hid the truth and the EBEs used it against us until 1974 when we had our first
real shootdown of an alien craft over Ramstein Air Force Base in Germany.

They had tried to disrupt our space program for years - Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and even the Space Shuttle.We hid the truth and the EBEs used it against us until 1974 when we had our first
real shootdown of an alien craft over Ramstein Air Force Base in Germany.

They had tried to disrupt our space program for years - Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and even the Space Shuttle.

They buzzed our capsules traveling through space, interfered with our transmissions, and pulsed us with EMP bursts
just like we used to do to the Soviet surface ships when we would hit them with a radar burst so massive it would
send their earphone-wearing radar and sonar techs howling in pain down to the ship's dispensary.

But when the
EBEs did it to us, we had no response.

That was before the SDI.

Once launched and tested, our space-based high-energy lasers, or HELs, acted like the lightning bolts on the
nights of July 3 and 4,1947, that so thoroughly disrupted the electromagnetic wave propagators in the spacecraft
flying over Roswell that the pilots couldn't retain control of their own vehicle.

We eventually realized that what
happened then was that a natural version of an advanced particle-beam burst actually brought a UFO down
even as it tried to escape.

When we deployed our advanced particle-beam weapon and tested it in orbit for all
to see, the EBEs knew and we knew they knew that we had our defense of the planet in place.

Gorbachev, believe it or not, was also pleased because President Reagan guaranteed that the United States
would throw its defensive shield around the Soviet Union, too.

Sure, the two leaders shook hands and embraced
one another in public.

What they had achieved together, cooperating when they were supposed to be fighting,
was nothing short of miraculous.

Whatever we were fighting over became minimally important in the face of a
threat from creatures who were so superior to us in technology that we were their farm animals to be harvested
as they pleased.What they had achieved together, cooperating when they were supposed to be fighting,
was nothing short of miraculous.

Whatever we were fighting over became minimally important in the face of a
threat from creatures who were so superior to us in technology that we were their farm animals to be harvested
as they pleased.

But when the United States and USSR agreed, in the early 1980s, not to fight each other over this
territory or that territory, to cooperate so as to defeat the common foe, we were unbeatable.

Now, as the
Space Shuttle docks with the Mir and the astronauts and cosmonauts share a toast of vodka from their plastic
squeeze tubes and look out into the darkest reaches of space, they know that there is an electronic shield around
them.

Now that the war is just about over and we defend our beachhead, the truth will ultimately be revealed.

The real truth behind a fifty-year history of a war that looked like the ultimate defeat for human kind amidst a Cold
War that threatened us with nuclear annihilation can now finally be told because we prevailed.

It was because in
the dark hours just before dawn in July of 1947 the army, only dimly recognizing that we were on the edge of a
potential cataclysmic event, pulled the crashed space vehicle out of the desert and harvested its parts just like
the inhabitants of that vehicle wanted to harvest us.

In those moments, even though we might have fallen over
ourselves in the darkness of the next fifty years, we set in motion the processes that brought us to an initial
resolution with a military power greater than us.

It helped us in our confrontation with the Russians and, if we don't
lose our way, will help us manage the threats to come.

When that truth of alien intervention in our planet's affairs
and our ongoing contact with an alien culture is finally revealed, it won't be frightening even though it will be a
shock.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It helped us in our confrontation with the Russians and, if we don't
lose our way, will help us manage the threats to come. When that truth of alien intervention in our planet's affairs
and our ongoing contact with an alien culture is finally revealed, it won't be frightening even though it will be a
shock. The night closes in around you in the desert, exposing your deepest terrors of childhood bogeymen to the
desolation of the landscape and the blackness of the sky. So, even inside your car you keep on chattering to
keep the night away. "And that's what I think about all of it, UFOs, the Cold War, all of it, " I told my companion in the car sitting next
to me as we drove south through the New Mexican desert toward the town of Roswell. "I may be over eighty
now, but that's what I think. "
The night was swallowing us up as our car twisted around the curves on the crowned road surface, still warm
and wet on a summer night from passing thunderstorms, heading toward lights we knew were over the horizon
but still could not see.

--- PAGE BREAK ---"The Cold War, the missile crisis of 1962, the worldwide alert in1973, all history now, don't you think?" I asked.

"Maybe it was a good thing that the aliens forced us to defend the planet.

At least it kept us in a Cold War even
though we were using real bullets.

"
"And what makes you think the Cold War is over, tovarisch?" my friend asked as he carefully took out a
cigarette, lit it, and blew the smoke out the window.

"American cigarettes, " he said.

"Am I not the most bourgeois
decadent person you've ever met?

But what would the Amerikanskis  have done without me?"
And I laughed to myself and counted the million stars across the desert sky as far as I could see.

Cattle
sleeping near the scrub and sand fences along the side of the lonely state route, a coyote now and then running
through the beams of our headlights, and the sound of my friend's breath as he blew the column of smoke into
the desert air.

It was a night just like this, lightning crackling off in the distance and a thunderclap rolling across the
desert floor, a night just like this.

And what looked like a bright shooting star blazed very bright in an arc from south to north and disappeared
over a rise as we continued toward Roswell into the darkness of the New Mexico night.

AFTERWORD
Back in the 1950s, i remember watching a television series called I Led Three Lives about the exploits of Herbert
A.

Philbrick, who described the "fantastic but true" story of his life as a member of a Communist Party cell and an
undercover operative for the FBI.

Years later, when I got to Army R&D, I remember thinking about how my own
story was also "fantastic but true" and how what General Trudeau and I did helped to change the course of
history.

Very few people knew that what was coming out of Foreign Technology during the early 1960s had
some basis in a crash of a UFO that "officially" never took place.Years later, when I got to Army R&D, I remember thinking about how my own
story was also "fantastic but true" and how what General Trudeau and I did helped to change the course of
history.

Very few people knew that what was coming out of Foreign Technology during the early 1960s had
some basis in a crash of a UFO that "officially" never took place.

Lives were distorted, careers destroyed,
children
frightened
into
submission
by
Army
Counterintelligence
bogeymen, businessmen in Roswell
threatened with financial ruination and even worse if anybody told the story of what happened.

But they
were all loyal Americans, and even though some might have had their doubts about hiding the truth, they
went along with what the army wanted.

Many people have criticized the army and the government for maintaining the Roswell cover-up not only at
the time but also through the years.

For that, I need to say a word in defense of what the army did.

It's easy to
criticize if you weren't an adult back then or someone who didn't understand the politics that governed our
thinking at that point in American history.

We had not yet fully made the transition from a nation at war to a
nation at peace.

And there was Harry Truman, still reeling from his sudden ascendancy to the presidency,
toughened into steel by his decision to drop the atomic bombs on Japan, and now faced with the monumental
impact of a crash landing of a strange craft on American soil.

Was it Soviet?

Did it belong to a foreign power?

Was it hostile?

We simply didn't know and weren't about to say anything until we knew what it was.

Was it a flying saucer?

The last time a public announcement of a landing by extraterrestrials took place, even
though it was entertainment, panic ensued.

In the aftermath of the war and the fears surrounding the Cold War,
we didn't want to risk another panic.

So the military recommended and the White House agreed to clam up.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the aftermath of the war and the fears surrounding the Cold War,
we didn't want to risk another panic. So the military recommended and the White House agreed to clam up. Just
like the secrecy surrounding the Manhattan Project, no word gets out. And for the next fifty years that policy,
once put into place, governed the behavior of the U.S. government and the military about the existence of UFOs
and the crash at Roswell. 116

--- PAGE BREAK ---for the next fifty years that policy,
once put into place, governed the behavior of the U.S. government and the military about the existence of UFOs
and the crash at Roswell. 116

--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
You can also ask how the government was able to keep this secret for so long. Has there been any other
cover-up so efficient and thorough that it went on, unbeknownst to succeeding presidents, year after year until it
was finally stopped? In fact, there was just such a cover-up, started in the war, but continued as a matter of
policy by Truman in 1947, code-named "Shamrock. " Secretary of Defense James Forrestal, one of the original
members of the UFO working group, convinced his boss President Truman in 1947 to continue working with
International Telephone and Telegraph, Western Union, and RCA to make their international communications
traffic available for inspection by U.S. military intelligence services. Even though its initial purpose was to monitor
any communications of military significance, such as the transmission of military secrets, there were no controls on
what was inspected and what was not. This program continued for the next twenty-eight years and kept secret
from every president until it was terminated under the Ford administration in 1975.
Does Shamrock mean that UFOs exist? Of course not. But it does reveal the capability of the U.S. government
to keep an ongoing operation secret from even the president of the United States, much like the UFO working
group also under James Forrestal.
So what do I think about all of this, about what happened and what I did? I believe that because at the time I
was so much in the routine of a military intelligence officer, I didn't really stop to think about the implications of
UFOs and EBEs. I understood that we were fighting a Cold War with the Soviets and a skirmish war with
extraterrestrials. I believed that their intentions were, and still are, hostile, and I believe that we took the steps
necessary to develop the weapons that can blunt their threat. In fact, the U.S. military has better, more accurate,
and more powerful weapons for killing UFOs than were deployed in the movie Independence Day.
We can knock these guys down tomorrow with high-energy lasers and directed particle-beam weapons that
come right out of a Star Wars movie. And these aren't fiction, they're fact. If you want to know more, pay a visit to
the U.S. Army Space Command Web site on the Internet. These missile-launched HELs are the pride of our
planetary defense system and a direct result of President Reagan's courage in pushing for the Strategic Defense
Initiative when every-one said it wouldn't work. And that SDI was a direct result of the work General Trudeau and I
did at Army R&D in 1962.
Sometimes things just work the way they're supposed to. Some-times, once in a very long while, you get the
chance to save your country, your planet, and even your species at the same time. And when that time comes,
as Davy Crockett once said: Be sure you're right, then go ahead.y long while, you get the
chance to save your country, your planet, and even your species at the same time. And when that time comes,
as Davy Crockett once said: Be sure you're right, then go ahead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

•-U
Volume I
SUMMARY AND
SUPPORTING
CONSIDERATIONS
r-o
STATES
ARMY

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tiNCLASSllJLD
\
CRp/l
(s)
Proposal to Establish a Lunar Outpost (C)
^bief of Ordnance
CRD
»
-
2
0
Mar 1959
1. CU) Reference letter to Chief of Ordnance from Chief of Research and
Development, subject as above.
2. (C) Subsequent to approval by the Chief of Staff of reference, repre-
sentatives of the Army Ballistic Missiles Agency indicated that supplementary
guidance would be required concerning the scope of the preliminary investigation
specified in the reference. In particular these representatives requested
guidance concerning the source of funds required to conduct the investigation.
3. (S) I envision expeditious development of the proposal to establish a
lunar outpost to be of critical importance to the U. S. Army of the future. This
evaluation is apparently shared by the Chief of Staff in view of his expeditious
approval and enthusiastic endorsement of initiation of the study. Therefore, the
detail to be covered by the investigation and the subsequent plan should be as com-
plete as is feasible in the time limits allowed and within the funds currently
available within the office of the Chief of Ordnance. In this time of limited
budget, additional monies are unavailable. Current programs have been scrutinized
rigidly and identifiable "fat" trimmed away. Thus high study costs are prohibitive
at this time.
4. (C) I leave it to your discretion to determine the source and the amount
i money to bo devoted to this purpose.
Signed
ARTHUR G. TRUDEAU
Lieutenant General, GS
Chief of Research and Developmen
Regraded
Unclassified

. by authority of
~Form DAT5_75
dtd 21 Sep 1961 _
^
by-
Lt. Col. Donald E.~-S*imon. CSSigned
ARTHUR G. TRUDEAU
Lieutenant General, GS
Chief of Research and Developmen
Regraded
Unclassified

. by authority of
~Form DAT5_75
dtd 21 Sep 1961 _
^
by-
Lt. Col. Donald E.~-S*imon. CS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

No contactr. v/ith agencies outside the Army will be made until after the results
of the preliminary investigation have been presented to the Department of
Defense. The findings of the initial investigation will be made through my
office to the Chief of Staff. No additional distribution will be made and
no public release will be nade concerning this project. Because of the sensi-
tive aspects of this proposal it is essential that this project not be dis-
closed prematurelyI
5. Your plan of accomplishment should include full utilization of the
other technical services and combat arms to the extent feasible and necessary.
In the accomplishment of this investigation the Chief of Engineers v/ill be
responsible for the design, construction, and maintenance of the base and
the Chief Signal Officer will be responsible for communications and other
support for which he is peculiarly qualified. Specific emphasis should be given
to the Army-wide capability to contribute to this project. The results of this
preliminary investigation are requested by 15 May 1959.
6. Reproduction of this letter to the extent you deem essential is au-
thorized. All copies v/ill be recorded.
1 Incl
-
- ARTHUR G. TRUDEAU
Draft Requirement
Lieutenant General, GS
Chief of Research and Development
"UNCLASSIFIED"
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---tial is au-
thorized. All copies v/ill be recorded.
1 Incl
-
- ARTHUR G. TRUDEAU
Draft Requirement
Lieutenant General, GS
Chief of Research and Development
"UNCLASSIFIED"
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

s
UNCLASSIFIED
Requirement for a Lunar Outpost
1. General
There is a requirement for a manned military outpost on the
moon. The lunar outpost is required to develop and protect potential United
States interests on the moon; to develop techniques in moon-based surveil-
lance of the earth r.nd space, in communications relay, and in operations
on the surface of the moon; to serve as a base for exploration of the moon,
for further exploration into space and for military operations on the moon
if required; and to support scientific investigations on the moon.
2. Operational Concept.
Initially the outpost will be of sufficient size and contain
sufficient equipment to permit the survival and moderate constructive
activity of a .minimum number of personnel (about 10 - 20) on a sustained
basis. It must be designed for expansion of facilities, resupply, and rota-
tion of personnel to insure maximum extension of sustained occupacy. It
should be designed to be self-sufficient for as long as possible without
outside support. In the location and design of the base, consideration will
be given to operation of a triangulation station ©f a moon-to-earth base
line space surveillance system, facilitating communications with and
observation of the earth, facilitating travel between the moon and the
earth, exploration of the moon and further explorations of space, and to
the defense of the base against attack if required. The primary objec-
tive is to establish the first permanent manned installation on the moon.
Incidental to this mission will be the investigation of the scientific,
commercial, and military potential of the moon.
3* Background of Requirement.
A. References:
C D
NSC policy on outerlspace.
(2) OCB Operations Plan on Outer Space.
b. Reason for Requirement.
(1) The national policy on outer space includes the objective
of development and exploiting US outer space capabilities as needed to
achieve scientific, military, and potential purposes. The OCB Operations
Plan to implement this policy establishes a specific program to obtain
scientific data on space environment out to the vicinity of the moon,
Regraded CONFIDENTIAL
13 March 1962.
Regraded UNCLASSIFIED
by authority of CRDolicy establishes a specific program to obtain
scientific data on space environment out to the vicinity of the moon,
Regraded CONFIDENTIAL
13 March 1962.
Regraded UNCLASSIFIED
by authority of CRD

--- PAGE BREAK ---specific program to obtain
scientific data on space environment out to the vicinity of the moon,
Regraded CONFIDENTIAL
13 March 1962.
Regraded UNCLASSIFIED
by authority of CRD

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UNCLASSIFIED
including the moon*s gravitational and magnetic fields and to explore the
characteristics of the moon's surface. There are no known technical barriers
to the estP-blishment of a manned installation on the moon.
(2) The establishment of a manned base of operations on the
moon has tremendous military and scientific potential. Because invaluable
scientific, military, and political prestige will come to the aation that
first establishes a lunar base, it is imperative that the United States be
first.
(3) The full extent of the military potential cannot be
predicted, but it is probable that observation of the earth and space vehicles
from the moon v/ill prove to be highly advantageous. By using a moon-to-
earth base line, space surveillance by triangulation promises great range
and accuracy. {The presently contemplated earth-based tracking and control
network will be inadequate for the deep space operations contemplated.
Military communications may be greatly improved by the use of a moon-based
relay station. The employment of moon-based weapons systems against earth or
space targets may prove to be feasible and desirable. Moon-based military
power ?/ill be a strong deterrent to war because of the extreme difficulty,
from the enemy point of view, of eliminating our ability to retaliate. Any
military operations on the moon will be difficult to counter by the enemy
because of the difficulty of his reaching the moon, if our forces are al-
ready present and have means of countering a landing or of neutralizing any
hostile forces that has landed. The situation is reversed if hostile forces
are permitted to arrive first. They can militarily counter our landings and
attempt to deny us politically the use of their property.
(4) Tlie scientific advantages are equally difficult to pre-
dict but are highly promising. Study of the universe, of the moon, and
of the space environment will all be aided by scientific effort on the moon.
Perhaps the most promising scientific advantage is the usefulness of a
noon base for further explorations into space. Materials on the moon itself
may prove to be valuable and commercially exploitable.
** Organizational Concept.
The establishment of the outpost should be a special project
having authority and priority similar to the Manhattan Project in World War
II. Once established, the lunar base will be operated under the control
of a unified space command. Space, or certainly that portion of outer space
encompassing the earth and the moon, will be considered a military theater.
The control of all United States military forces by unified commands is al-
ready established and military operations in space should be no exception.
A unified space command would control and utilize, besides the lunar base,
.^tm'ctiisViYjEDrces by unified commands is al-
ready established and military operations in space should be no exception.
A unified space command would control and utilize, besides the lunar base,
.^tm'ctiisViYjED

--- PAGE BREAK ---ands is al-
ready established and military operations in space should be no exception.
A unified space command would control and utilize, besides the lunar base,
.^tm'ctiisViYjED

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UNCLASSIFIED
operational military satellites and space vehicles, space surveillance systems,
and the logistical support thereof. Other space commands might be organized
as our operations extended to translunar space.
5. Degree of Urgency.
To be second to the Soviet Union in establishing an_ outpost on
the noon would be disastrous to our nation's prestige and in turn to our demo-
cratic philosophy. Although it is.contrary to United States policy, the
Soviet Union in establishing the first permanent base, may claim the noon or
critical areas thereof for its own. Then a subsequent attempt to establish
an outpost by the United States might be considered and propagandized as a
hostile act. The Soviet Union in propaganda broadcasts has announced the
50th anniversary of the present government (1967) v/ill be celebrated by Soviet
citizens on the moon. The National Space policy intelligence estimate is
that the Soviets could land on the moon by 1968.
6. Maintenance and Supply Implications.
The maintenance and supply effort to support a lunar base will
be high by present standards. Continued delivery of equipment and means of
survival will be required and each delivery will be costly. Every conceivable
solution for minimizing the logistic effort must be explored. Maximum use
of any oxygen or power source on the moon through regenerative or other tech-
niques must be exploited. Means of returning safely to earth must be avail-
able to the occupants of the outpost.
7.
Training and Personnel Implications.
The number of personnel on the base itself will be quite small,
at least initially, but the total number of personnel supporting the effort
nay be quite large. Until further study is made a realistic qualitative
and quantitative personnel estimate cannot be provided. The training require-
ments of earth based support personnel would resemble those of personnel in
long range ballistic missile units and radar tracking systems. For the re-
latively small number of personnel actually transported to the moon base,
training requirements would be exacting in many fields.
8. Additional Items and Requirements.
A complete family of requirements and supporting research and
development projects will be necessary to develop all of the supporting
equipment to establish a lunar base. Very high thrust boosters, space
vehicles, intermediate space stations, space dwellings, clothing and
3
f2i&2^s*P-rTTecessary to develop all of the supporting
equipment to establish a lunar base. Very high thrust boosters, space
vehicles, intermediate space stations, space dwellings, clothing and
3
f2i&2^s*P-rTT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VOLUME I
SUMMARY AND SUPPORTING CONSIDERATIONS (U)
9 JUNE 4 9 5 9
PROJECT HORIZON REPORT
A U. S. ARMY STUDY FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF
A LUNAR OUTPOST
I QRDE
REGRAOSD UNCIASSIRED
ORDER SEC AJLM.Y 3Y TAG ^
A ^ J 3
^

--- PAGE BREAK ---IONS (U)
9 JUNE 4 9 5 9
PROJECT HORIZON REPORT
A U. S. ARMY STUDY FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF
A LUNAR OUTPOST
I QRDE
REGRAOSD UNCIASSIRED
ORDER SEC AJLM.Y 3Y TAG ^
A ^ J 3
^

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(S) CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION
A. GENERAL,
HORIZON is the project whose objective is the establishment of a
lunar outpost by the United States.
This study was directed by letter
dated 20 March 1959, from the Chief of R&D, Department of the Army,
to the Chief of Ordnance.
Responsibility for the preparation of the
study was subsequently assigned to the Commanding General, Army
Ordnance Missile Command.
Elements of all Technical Services of the
Army participated in the investigation.
This report is a limited f e a s i -
bility study which investigates the methods and means of accomplishing
this objective and the purposes it will serve.
It also considers the sub-
stantial political, scientific and security implications which the prompt
establishment of a lunar outpost will have for the United States.
B.
JUSTIFICATION
1. The Broad Requirement
The US national policy on space includes the objective of develop-
ing and exploiting this Nation's space capability as n e c e s s a r y to achieve
national political, scientific, and security objectives.
The establish-
ment of a manned outpost in the lunar environment will demonstrate
United States leadership in space.
It will also provide a basis for
further explorations and operations on the lunar surface as well as a
supporting capability for other US operations in space.
2.
Purpose of the Lunar Outpost
The establishment of a manned US outpost on the moon will:
Demonstrate the United States scientific leadership in outer
space.
Support scientific explorations and investigations.
Extend and improve space reconnaissance and surveillance
capabilities and control of space.
Extend and improve communications and serve as a communica-
tions relay station.
n r n „
GRADED UNCLASSIFIED
0Rm SK ""* nusm^
o ft 4naissance and surveillance
capabilities and control of space.
Extend and improve communications and serve as a communica-
tions relay station.
n r n „
GRADED UNCLASSIFIED
0Rm SK ""* nusm^
o ft 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---llance
capabilities and control of space.
Extend and improve communications and serve as a communica-
tions relay station.
n r n „
GRADED UNCLASSIFIED
0Rm SK ""* nusm^
o ft 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

provide a basic and supporting research laboratory for space
research and development activity.
Develop a stable, low-gravity outpost for use as a launch site
for deep space exploration.
Providr an opportunity for scientific exploration and-develop-
ment of a space mapping and survey system.
Provide emergency staging areas, rescue capability or
navigational aid for other space activity*.
3. A Realistic Objective
Advances in propulsion, electronics, space medicine and other
astronautical sciences are taking place at an explosive rate.
As
recently asvlS^T* the first penetration of space was accomplished by
the US when a two-stage V-2 rocket reached the then unbelievable
altitude of 250 miles.
In 1957, the-Soviet Union placed the first man
made satellite in orbit. Since early 1958, when the first US earth
satellite was launched, both the US and USSR have launched additional
satellites, moon probes, and successfully recovered animals sent into
space in missiles.
In I960, and thereafter, there will be other deep
space probes by the US and the USSR, with the US planning to place the
first man into space with a REDSTONE missile, followed in 1961 with the
first man in orbit.
However, the Soviets could very well place a man
in space before we do. In addition, instrumented lunar landings pro-
bably will be accomplished by 1964 by both the United States and the
USSR. As will be indicated in the technical discussions of this report,
the first US.manned lunar landing could be accomplished by 1965. Thus,
it appears that the establishment of an outpost on the moon is a cap-
ability which can be accomplished.
4. Scientific Implications
A wealth of .scientific data can be obtained from experiments con-
ducted at a lunar outpost.
Without doubt, the scientific community will
generate many new and unique applications as man's actual arrival on
the moon draws nearer reality.
The very absence of knowledge about
the moon and outer space is scientific justifications to attempt to breach
this void of human understanding,
2actual arrival on
the moon draws nearer reality.
The very absence of knowledge about
the moon and outer space is scientific justifications to attempt to breach
this void of human understanding,
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---he moon draws nearer reality.
The very absence of knowledge about
the moon and outer space is scientific justifications to attempt to breach
this void of human understanding,
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is to be expected that civilian efforts to advance science for
the sake of science will parallel the military efforts.
It is also
expected that the National Aeronautics and Space Admini strati on will
treat those subjects in greater detail than is either possible or
desirable in this study, and that such action will further strengthen
the requirement for earliest possible establishment of an extra-
terrestrial outpost.
5. Political Implications
The political implications of our failure to be first in space
are a matter of public record.
This failure has reflected adversely
on United States scientific and political leadership.
To some extent
we have recovered the loss. However, once having been second best
in the eyes of the worlds population, we are not now in a position to
afford being second on any other major step in space.
However, the
political implications of being second in space activities accomplished
to date have not been nearly as serious as those which could result from
failure to be the first in establishing a manned lunar outpost.
The results of failure to first place man on an extra-terrestrial
base will raise grave political questions and at the same time lower US
prestige and influence.
The Soviet Union has announced openly its
intention that some of its citizens will celebrate the 50th anniversary
of the October Revolution (1967) on the moon.
The US intelligence
community agrees that the Soviet Union may accomplish a manned lunar
landing at any time after 1965. Judging from past experience, it is
not difficult to visualize all manner of political and legal implications
which _the Soviet Union might postulate as a result of such a successful
accomplishment nor the military advantages it might achieve thereby.
6. Security Implications
The extent to which future operations might be conducted in
space, to include the land mass of the moon or perhaps other planets,
is of such a magnitude as to almost defy the imagination.
In both
Congressional and military examination of the problem, it is generally
agreed that the interactions of space and terrestrial war are so great
as to generate radically new concepts.
Admittedly, the security significance of the moon, per se, in
the context of offensive and defensive operations, is a matter for con-
jecture at this time. From the viewpoint of national security, the
3ttedly, the security significance of the moon, per se, in
the context of offensive and defensive operations, is a matter for con-
jecture at this time. From the viewpoint of national security, the
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---significance of the moon, per se, in
the context of offensive and defensive operations, is a matter for con-
jecture at this time. From the viewpoint of national security, the
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

primary implications of the feasibility of establishing a lunar outpost
is the importance of being first.
Clearly the US would not be in a
position to exercise an option between peaceful and military applications
unless we are first. In short, the establishment of the initial lunar
outpost is the first definitive step in exercising our options,
7.
Summar y
Unquestionably, there are other applications of space (i.e.
reconnaisance, meteorology, communications) which will permit an
earlier attainment of meaningful accomplishments and demonstrate US
interest in space. Individually, however, these accomplishments will
not have the same political impact that a manned lunar outpost could
have on the world. In the still vague body of fact and thought "on the
subject, world opinion may view the other applications similar to action
on the high seas, but will view the establishment of a first lunar outpost
as similar to proprietary rights derived from first occupancy. As the
Congress has noted, we are caught in a stream in which we have no
choice but to proceed. Our success depends on the decisiveness with
which we exercise our current options. The lunar outpost is the most
immediate case. It is the basis for other more far-reaching actions,
such as further interplanetary exploration.
C.
CONCLUSIONS
Four major conclusions summarize the more detailed deductions
which may be drawn from the entire report:
1. Political, scientific, and security considerations indicate that
it is imperative for the United States to establish a lunar outpost at
the earliest practicable date.
2.
Project HORIZON represents the earliest feasible capability
for the U. S. to establish a lunar outpost.
By its implementation, the
United States can establish an operations lunar outpost by late 1966, with
the initial manned landings to have taken place in the Spring of 1965.
3.
The importance of an early decision to proceed with the program,
coupled with adequate funding, must be clearly understood.
Inordinate
delay will have two inescapable results:
a.
The program's ultimate accomplishment will be delayed,
thus forfeiting the change of defeating the USSR in a race which is
already openly recognized as such throughout the world.
4le results:
a.
The program's ultimate accomplishment will be delayed,
thus forfeiting the change of defeating the USSR in a race which is
already openly recognized as such throughout the world.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---program's ultimate accomplishment will be delayed,
thus forfeiting the change of defeating the USSR in a race which is
already openly recognized as such throughout the world.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

b. Delayed initiation, followed later by a crash program,
which would likely be precipitated by evidence of substantial Soviet
progress in a lunar outpost program, will not only lose the advantage
of timelir ss, but also will inevitably involve significantly higher costs
and lower reliability.
The establishment of a U. S. lunar outpost will
require very substantial funding whether it is undertaken now or ten
years hence.
There are no developments projected for the predictable
future which will provide order of magnitude type price reductions.
4.
The U. S. Army possesses the capability of making significant
contributions in all aspects of such a program.
D. ORGANIZATION AND CONTENT OF THE REPORT
The Project HORIZON report has been divided into two volumes
whichjare entitled as follow&i
Volume I
- Summary and Supporting Considerations
Volume II - Technical Considerations and Plans
Volume I is, as indicated, a document which gives a short summary
of the other volume, a discussion of non-technical considerations, and
a resume of the resources and facilities of the Army Technical
Services which can lend support to this program.
Volume II is a technical investigation of the problem. It includes
practical preliminary concepts for all elements of the program and, in
many cases, relates actual hardware available from current programs
to the solution of specific problems.
It includes a broad development
approach and a funding breakout by fiscal year. Also included are
personnel and training requirements for all segments of the operation
together with the policy of the US with respect to space and the legal
implication of a lunar outpost.
This volume was prepared by a unique
working group, comprized of a special segment of the Future Projects
Design Branch of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA), which war
augmented by highly qualified representatives of each of the seven
Technical Services of the Army.
These representatives were carefully
selected for the specific task and, during the course of the study, be-
came resident members of the aforementioned ABMA group.
The
resident representatives 01 the Technical Services were supported by
their respective services with a group of the highest caliber specialists
5ident members of the aforementioned ABMA group.
The
resident representatives 01 the Technical Services were supported by
their respective services with a group of the highest caliber specialists
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

who were made available exclusively to support the project.
Thus,
it is believed that the depth of experience, knowledge, and judgement
brought to bear on the problem by this group is commensurate with
the task of accomplishing the report objectives.
Throughout the preparation of the entire report, and especially
within this technical volume, the guiding philosophy has been_one of
enlightened conservatism of technical approach. Briefly stated, this
philosophy dictates that one must vigorously pursue research to
"advance the state-of-the-art", but that paramount to successful major
systems design is a conservative approach which requires that no item
be more "advanced" than required to do the job. It recognizes that an
unsophisticated success is of vastly greater importance than a series
of advanced and highly sophisticated failures that "almost worked. "
Established engineering principles, used in conjunction with the best
available design parameters, have been applied throughout in order to
remove the elements of science fiction and unrealistic planning.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---iples, used in conjunction with the best
available design parameters, have been applied throughout in order to
remove the elements of science fiction and unrealistic planning.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(S) CHAPTER II: TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND PLANS
A. OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE STUDY
This p. -t of the study presents applicable technical information
which substantiates the feasibility of the expedited establishment of a
lunar outpost, and it relates U. S. capabilities and developments to
the accomplishment of the task.
It is comprehensive in its scope,
covering the design criteria and requirements for all major elements
of the program including the lunar outpost, the earth-lunar transpor-
tation system, the necessary communications systems and the consid-
erable earth support facilities and their operation.
The technical
assumptions concerning design parameters for this program are
realistic yet conservative.
Likewise, the assumptions which concern
the scope and magnitude of other U. S. programs which will support
HORIZON are reasonable and in line with current and projected
programs.
_
" '
B. RESUME OF THE TECHNICAL PROGRAM
The basic carrier vehicles for Project HORIZON will be the
SATURN I and II.
The SATURN I, currently being developed under
an ARPA order, will be fully operational by October 1963.
The
SATURN II, which is an outgrowth of the SATURN I program, could
be developed during the period 1962-1964,
The SATURN II will utilize
improved engines in the booster and oxygen/hydrogen engines in all
of its upper stages.
By the end of 1964, a total of 72 SATURN vehicles should have
been launched in U. S. programs, of which 40 are expected to con-
tribute to the accomplishment of HORIZON.
Cargo delivery to the
moon begins in January 1965.
The first manned landing by two men
will be made in April 1965.
The buildup and construction phase will
be continued without interruption until the outpost is ready for bene-
ficial occupancy and is manned by a task force of 12 men in November
1966.
This buildup program requires 61 SATURN I and 88 SATURN II
launchings through November 1966, the average launching rate being
5. 3 per month.
During this period some 490,000 pounds of useful
cargo will be transported to the moon.
7URN I and 88 SATURN II
launchings through November 1966, the average launching rate being
5. 3 per month.
During this period some 490,000 pounds of useful
cargo will be transported to the moon.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---II
launchings through November 1966, the average launching rate being
5. 3 per month.
During this period some 490,000 pounds of useful
cargo will be transported to the moon.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

During the first operational year of the lunar outpost, December
1966 through 1967, a total of 64 launchings have been scheduled.
These will result in an additional 266,000 pounds of useful cargo on
the moon.
The totai cost of the eight and one-half year program presented
in this study is estimated to be six billion dollars.
This is an average
of approximately $700 million per year.
These figures are a valid
appraisal and, while preliminary, they represent the best estimates
of experienced, non-commercial, agencies of the government.
Sub-
stantial funding is undeniably required for the establishment of a
U. S. lunar outpost; however, the implications of the future impor-
tance of such an operation should be compared to the fact that the
average annual funding required for Project HORIZON would be less
than two percent of the current annual defense budget.
C.
OUTPOST
The lunar outpost proposed for Project HORIZON is a permanent
facility capable of supporting a complement of 12 men engaged in a
continuing operation.
The design of the outpost installation herein
is based on realistic requirements and capabilities, and is not an
attempt to project so far into the future as to lose reality.
The result
has been a functional and reliable approach upon which men can stake
their lives with confidence of survival.
1.
Location
The exact location of the outpost site cannot be determined
until an exploratory probe and mapping program has been completed.
However, for a number of technical reasons, such as temperature
and rocket vehicle energy requirements, the area bounded by +_ 20° •
latitude/longitude of the optical center of the moon seems favorable.
Within this area, three particular sites have been chosen which appear
to meet the more detailed requirements of landing space, surface
conditions, communications, and proximity to varied lunar "terrain."
A rather extensive lunar mapping program is already underway
in order to satisfy existing requirements in Astro-Geodesy.
Maps to
a scale of 1:5,000,000 and 1:1,000,000 are planned for completion
by December I960 and August 1962, respectively.
Larger scale
mapping will then be undertaken for several specific site selections.
8scale of 1:5,000,000 and 1:1,000,000 are planned for completion
by December I960 and August 1962, respectively.
Larger scale
mapping will then be undertaken for several specific site selections.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---and 1:1,000,000 are planned for completion
by December I960 and August 1962, respectively.
Larger scale
mapping will then be undertaken for several specific site selections.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2.. Design Criteria
The design of the lunar outpost facilities will, of course, be
dominated by the influence of two factors - the lunar environment and
the space transportation system capabilities.
A few of the more pro-
nounced primary lunar environmental parameters are lisjted below:
a.
Essentially no atmosphere.
b.
Surface gravity approximately 1/6 earth gravity.
c.
Radius of approximately 1000 miles is about 1/4 that of
earth. ' (This results in a significant shortening of the horizon as
compared to earth. )
d. Surface temperature variations between a lunar day and
night of+ 248° F to-202° F.
e.
Maximum subsurface temperature at equator is -40°F.
These and many other unfamiliar environmental conditions require
that every single item which is to be placed on the lunar surface have
a design which is compatible with these phenomena.
However, a
careful determination has been made of man's requirements to live
in this environment, and it appears that there is no area which cannot
be adequately solved within the readily available state-of-the-art.
3.
Outpost Facilities and Their Installation
_The first two men will arrive on the lunar surface in April
1965.
They will be guided to an area in which the cargo buildup for
future construction has already begun.
Their landing vehicle will
have an immediate return-to-earth capability; however, it is intended
that they remain in the area until after the arrival of the advance
party of the construction crew.
During their stay, they will live in
the cabin of their lunar vehicle which will be provided with necessary
life essentials and power supplies.
For an extended stay, these will
be augmented by support from cargo previously and subsequently
delivered to the site by other vehicles.
The mission of the original two men will be primarily one of
verification of previous unmanned environmental investigations and
confirmation of the site selection and cargo delivery.
9r vehicles.
The mission of the original two men will be primarily one of
verification of previous unmanned environmental investigations and
confirmation of the site selection and cargo delivery.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---sion of the original two men will be primarily one of
verification of previous unmanned environmental investigations and
confirmation of the site selection and cargo delivery.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 1-1 shows the HORIZON outpost as it would appear in
late 1965, after about six months of construction effort.
The basic
building block for the outpost will be cylindrical metal tanks ten feet
in diameter and 20 feet in length.
(Details of typical tanks are shown
in Fig. 1-2.)
The buried cylindrical tanks at the left-center of Fig.
1-1 constitute the living quarters of the initial construction crew of
nine men who will arrive in July 1965.
(Details in Fig. 1-3.-) During
the construction period, this force will be gradually augmented until
a final complement of 12 men is reached.
The construction camp
is a minimum facility and will be made operational within 15 days
after the beginning of active work at the outpost site.
Two nuclear
reactors are located in holes as shown in the left portion of Fig. 1-1.
These provide power for the operation of the preliminary quarters
and for the equipment used in the construction of the permanent facility.
The main quarters and supporting facilities are shown being assembled
in the open excavation to the right-center of the figure.
These cylinders
will also ultimately be covered with lunar material.
Empty cargo
and propellant containers have been assembled and are being used for
storage of bulk supplies, weapons., and life essentials such as insulated
oxygen/nitrogen tanks.
Two typical surface vehicles are shown: one
is a construction vehicle for lifting, digging,scraping, etc. , the other
is a transport vehicle for more extended distance trips needed for
hauling, reconnaissance, rescue, and the like.
In the left background,
a lunar Landing vehicle is settling on the surface.
A lightweight para-
bolic antenna has been erected near the main quarters to provide
communications with earth.
The basic completed outpost is shown in Fig. 1-4.
Significant
additions beyond the items illustrated in Fig. 1-1 are two additional
nuclear power supplies, cold storage facility, and the conversion of
the original construction camp quarters to a bio-science and physical-
science laboratory.
A number of factors influenced the decision to locate the main
structures beneath the surface.
Among these were the uniform temper-
ature available (approximately -40°F), protection from meteoroids,
security, good insulating properties of the lunar material, and radia-
tion protection.
Each of the quarters and cylinders will be a special
double-walled "thermos bottle type" vacuum tank with a special insu-
lating material in the space between the walls.
(Vacuum is easily
maintained simply by venting the tank to the lunar void. ) Despite the
ambient subsurface temperature of -40°F, the heat losses from these
special tanks will be remarkably low.
Investigations show that the
10imply by venting the tank to the lunar void. ) Despite the
ambient subsurface temperature of -40°F, the heat losses from these
special tanks will be remarkably low.
Investigations show that the
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 1-1.
HORIZON Outpost in Late 1965

--- PAGE BREAK ---

$IS£*>_
Fig. 1-2.
Cross Section of Typical Outpost Compartments
AIR LOCK a LIVING QUARTERS
Fig. 1-3.
Overall View of Initial Construction Camp
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

_ Fig. 1-4.
Layout of Basic 12-Man Outpost
incidental heat given off by an adequate internal lighting system will
nominally supply essentially all of the heat required to maintain com-
fortable "room" temperature in the outpost quarters.
A suitable atmosphere will be provided within the quarters.
The basic gas supply will stem from special insulated tanks containing
liquid oxygen or nitrogen.
The nitrogen supply needs only to provide
for initial pressurization and replacement of leakage losses; whereas,
the oxygen is, of course, continuously used to supply bodily needs.
However, the weights and volumes-of both gases are quite reasonable
and presents no unusual problem of supply.
Carbon dioxide and mois-
ture will be controlled initially by a solid chemical absorbent and
dehumidifier.
Such a scheme requires considerable amounts Of mat-
erial; therefore, a carbon dioxide freeze-out system will be installed
later.
4» Personnel Equipment
For sustained operation on the lunar surface a body confor-
mation suit having a substantial outer metal surface is considered a
necessity for several reasons: (1) uncertainty that fabrics and elasto-
mers can sustain sufficient pressure differential without unacceptable
leakage; (2) meteoroid protection; (3) provides a highly reflective surface;

--- PAGE BREAK ---tainty that fabrics and elasto-
mers can sustain sufficient pressure differential without unacceptable
leakage; (2) meteoroid protection; (3) provides a highly reflective surface;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(4) durability against abrasive lunar surface; (5) cleansing and
• erilization.
Figure 1-5 shows a cutaway and "buttoned up" concept
ior such a suit.
It should be borne in mind that while movement and
dexterity are severe problems in suit design, the earth weight of
the suit can be allowed to be relatively substantial.
For example,
if a man .nd his lunar suit weigh 300 pounds on earth,_they will
only weigh 50 pounds on the moon.
A comprehensive program will be undertaken to provide spe-
cial hand tools, load-handling gear, and dining equipment to meet
the unusual requirements.
Initially, all food will be pre-cooked; how-
ever, as water supplies increase with the introduction of a reclaiming
system, dehydrated and fresh-frozen foods will be used.
Early at-
tention will be given to hydroponic culture of salads and the develop-*
ment of other closed-cycle food product systems.
5.
Environmental Research
In order to corroborate essential environmental data, a series
of unmanned experiments are planned.
There are early data require-
ments in/the areas of radiation, meteoroid impacts, temperatures,
magnetic field, surface conditions, ionization, radio propagation and
biological effects.
D. SPACE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
*• Flight Mechanics
r
In choosing appropriate trajectories to use in this program,
one must strike a balance between the low-energy paths and the high
energy curves.
The low energy trajectories give the highest payload
capability, but are sensitive to small variations in the injection con-
ditions and can also lead to unacceptably long transit times.
The
higher energy trajectories are faster and are not as sensitive to
deviations in the injection conditions, but they result in payload
penalties and higher terminal velocities which in turn require greater
braking energy at the termination of the trip. A good compromise
appears to be a trajectory which will yield a transit time from earth
to moon of approximately 50 to 60 hours.
Several different trajectory schemes will be used in Project
HORIZON.
They include trajectories for transit: (1) direct from
the earth to the moon, (2) from earth to a 96-minute (307 nautical mile
15eral different trajectory schemes will be used in Project
HORIZON.
They include trajectories for transit: (1) direct from
the earth to the moon, (2) from earth to a 96-minute (307 nautical mile
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ANTENNA
• L O O P
^OUTER SMELL
//-SPACER
/ / / • I N N E R SHELL
.ZZ/-SEA.LANT
-*-^Z— CUSHIONING
EXCRETA
RECEPTACLES
IS??
%&«#
Fig. 1-5.
Typical Lunar Suit

--- PAGE BREAK ---E BREAK ---

ANTENNA
• L O O P
^OUTER SMELL
//-SPACER
/ / / • I N N E R SHELL
.ZZ/-SEA.LANT
-*-^Z— CUSHIONING
EXCRETA
RECEPTACLES
IS??
%&«#
Fig. 1-5.
Typical Lunar Suit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

altitude) orbit of the earth, (3) from this 96-minute earth orbit to the
moon, and (4) direct from the moon to earth. In addition, there are
special considerations for the terminal phase of each type trajectory.
Figure 1-6 illustrates the two basic schemes of transporting
man and cargo from earth to the moon.
The first scheme (1 above) is the direct approach, that is, a
vehicle would depart the earth's surface and proceed directly to the
lunar surface using a retro-rocket or landing stage for the final landing
maneuver. Since the moon has no appreciable atmosphere, a rocket
type propulsion system will be required for the landing.
The second
scheme (2 and 3 above) shown is that for proceeding first into an earth
orbit and later departing the orbit for the flight to the lunar surface,
v
again using a landing stage. In either scheme, the flight time from
the earth or earth orbit to the moon will be the same.
The direct scheme, which is the most straightforward, has two
advantages: first, it offers the shortest flight time from the earth's
surface to the lunar surface since an orbital stopover is not required.
In the orbital scheme, much larger payloads can be transported
into orbit, assuming the vehicle size to be constant, and by accumulat-
ing payloads in orbit, it is possible to transport a payload to the moon
on the order of ten times (and more if desired) the capability of a
single vehicle flying directly to the moon.
To illustrate this point, it has been assumed in the study that
the, first men arriving on the jnoon will be provided with an immediate
return capability. Figure 1-7 depicts the vehicular requirements for
the two schemes.
The direct approach would require a six stage vehicle with a lift-
off thrust of 12 million pounds, as compared to a two-million-pound
thrust vehicle for the orbital schemes.
By placing the upper stage and
payload of two-million-pound thrust vehicle into orbit, and with additional
vehicles as shown, performing a fuel transfer and checkout operation,
the same mission, that of transporting two men to the moon and
returning them to earth, could be accomplished-
It should be pointed out, however, that if the United States is
to have a manned lunar outpost by 1966, and at the same time provide
the first men arriving on the moon with the desired return capability,
17be pointed out, however, that if the United States is
to have a manned lunar outpost by 1966, and at the same time provide
the first men arriving on the moon with the desired return capability,
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*&&£*2rX?r
jaw»MiU5wiiTwiflK m i m
^ - >
[-—•POWERED FLIGHT
i---FLIGHT PATH
Fig. 1-6.
Earth - Moon Transportation Schemes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STAGE -A h-120"
i
k266"
I
438'
h3S0"
h-460"
DIRECT
TRANSFER
EARTH-MOON
2 MAW ROUt^D TRIP TO LUNAR SURFACE
120
256
304"
PROPELLANT PAYLOAD
u
A
§
1
a
\
t. u„ i
A /
T A N
twJ
t
K E R
^J
tvJ IwJ Iwi
CJ
MOON VEHICLE
WITH ORBITAL
REFUELING
UFTOFF THRUST
12 MILLION POUNDS
UFTOFF THRUST 2 MILLION POUNDS, EACH
Fig. 1-7.
Two - Man Round Trip '-> Lunar Surface

--- PAGE BREAK ---J
tvJ IwJ Iwi
CJ
MOON VEHICLE
WITH ORBITAL
REFUELING
UFTOFF THRUST
12 MILLION POUNDS
UFTOFF THRUST 2 MILLION POUNDS, EACH
Fig. 1-7.
Two - Man Round Trip '-> Lunar Surface

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the orbital approach is mandatory, since a 12-million pound thrust
vehicle will not be available to meet the required schedule.
For the return to earth, from either the earth orbit or the lunar
surface, aerodvnamic braking will be used, since it allows significant
overall payload increases when compared to rocket braking.
The
aerodynamic braking body used for this study is similar in shape to a
JUPITER missile nose cone modified by the addition of movable drag
vanes at the base of the cone.
Though the size varies, the same basic
shape was considered for use from the lunar surface to earth as was
for use from the 96-minute orbit to the earth's surface.
Studies show
that, within acceptable limits of entry angle, the vehicle can make a
successful descent which is well within the physical tolerances imposed
by man's presence,and which can be guided with acceptable accuracy
for final recovery. The recent successful flight and subsequent
recovery of two primates aboard a nose cone further substantiates the
validity of this approach to earth return braking.
This test vehicle was
fired to IRBM range and, due to the steep re-entry angle, the
decelerative forces associated with this operation were many times
greater than expected for project HORIZON trajectories.
2.
Orbital Carrier and Space Vehicles
Only two basic carrier vehicles are required to carry out Pro-
ject HORIZON - SATURN I and a further development, SATURN II.
The SATURN I vehicle, shown in Figs. 1-8 and 1-9 consists of
a clustered booster with a lift-off thrust of 1, 504, 000 pounds, a twin
engine second stage of about 360,000 pounds of thrust, and a lox/
hydrogen (0 2/H 2) third stage of 30, 000 pounds of thrust.
The initial per-
formance of this vehicle will enable it to place 30, 000 pounds of net
payload in a 96-minute orbit and 7, 500 pounds of net payload to earth
escape velocity. It will be powered by eight North American H-1
engines which are a greatly simplified version of the engine used in
JUPITER, THOR, and ATLAS.
The second stage is a modified version
of the TITAN booster.
The third stage is a modified CENTAUR
vehicle currently under development by Pratt St Whitney and Convair.
The SATURN II vehicle (Figs. I-10 and I-11) is based on a
modified SATURN I booster.
The North American H- 1 engines of the
original version will be replaced by H-2 engines which will up-rate the
total thrust by 1/3 to a sea level value of 2, 000, 000 pounds.
The sec-
ond stage will incorporate two 500, 000-pound thrust H^IO^ engines, a
20l be replaced by H-2 engines which will up-rate the
total thrust by 1/3 to a sea level value of 2, 000, 000 pounds.
The sec-
ond stage will incorporate two 500, 000-pound thrust H^IO^ engines, a
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAT
*
Of 32-»-5>
tUAT IBS*
120"J
D!A.
I
2001
256*!j
]r -vr****
Fig. 1-8.
SATURN I
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
L
7*8-
^
m

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SATJUfRN
120"
OIA.
1
m
256"
DIA.
Fig. I-10.
SATURN II
25
wmmmmm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pi "1
First SUgc (Booster)
Second Stag*
u:
Third Stags
Fourth Stag*
Fig. I-ll.
SATURN n. Stages 1 through 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---56"
DIA.
Fig. I-10.
SATURN II
25
wmmmmm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pi "1
First SUgc (Booster)
Second Stag*
u:
Third Stags
Fourth Stag*
Fig. I-ll.
SATURN n. Stages 1 through 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

third stage will utilize two 100,000-pound thrust H^/O^ engines, a
fourth stage will use one such engine.
Present feasibility studies in-
ducate a SATURN II payload capability of 70, 000 pounds into a 96-
minute orbit using three stages and 26,750 pounds to earth escape
velocity using four stages.
The development of such a vehicle will
provide
;e nation a new-optimum vehicle for the utilization of the
SATURN booster.
The prime requirement for the development of such
a vehicle'is an expansion of current high-energy O^/H- engine pro-
grams to include development of 100 K and 500 K engines.
As mentioned earlier,
6,000 pounds of useful cargo can be
soft-landed on the moon with the direct method.
As presented herein,
only cargo will be transported in this manner, although there is a
discussion of how personnel could also be transported to and from the
moon utilizing the direct method. The second form of conveyance
requires two steps.
Initially the required payloads, which will consist
of one main lunar rocket vehicle and several additional propellant
tankers, will be placed in a-96-minute orbit, of the earth. At this time,
the propellants in orbit will be transferred to the main lunar rocket
vehicle.
Figure 1-12 is a conceptual view of the operations in the equa-
torial earth orbit.
The operation in orbit is principally one of propel-
lant transfer and is not as assembly job. The vehicle being fueled is
the third stage of a SATURN II with a lunar landing and return vehicle
attached. The third stage of the SATURN II was used in bringing the
combination into orbit and has thus expended its propellants.
This
stage is fueled in orbit by a crew of approximately ten men after which
the vehicle then proceeds on the moon. It is planned to send all
personnel and approximately 1/3 of the cargo to the moon by the orbital
method.
Using this orbital system, individual payloads of 48,000 pounds
may be soft-landed on the moon. This value is especially significant,
since it represents the approximate minimum weight required for a
complete earth return vehicle, which is already assembled and loaded
with propellants and is capable of returning several men.
Thus, in
order to provide a preassembled return vehicle on the lunar surface
during the time frame under consideration, it is mandatory to go
through an initial earth orbit. In addition to providing a large
individual payload capability, the orbital transportation system offers
other important advantages. Among these are that the total number of
firings to deliver the same amount of payload to the moon is less and
29ad capability, the orbital transportation system offers
other important advantages. Among these are that the total number of
firings to deliver the same amount of payload to the moon is less and
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 1-12.
Equatorial Earth Orbit

--- PAGE BREAK ---antages. Among these are that the total number of
firings to deliver the same amount of payload to the moon is less and
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 1-12.
Equatorial Earth Orbit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

payloads may be fired for orbital rendezvous at any given pass every day
of the month.
This alleviates the launch site scheduling problems
which are associated with the restricted firing times of direct flights.
There are two versions of the lunar landing vehicle.
The first
type wil1 be used for direct trips from earth to the lunar surface.
This
vehicle has a gross weight of 26,750 pounds and will soft land some
6,000 pounds of payload. The second vehicle will be used for flights
via orbit.
It will have a gross weight of 140, 000 pounds which gives
it a capability of soft landing approximately 48, 000 pounds of payload
on the moon.
Each type of vehicle will have suitable payload compart-
ments to accomplish different mission requirements.
The lunar landing
vehicle shown in Fig. 1-13 has an earth return vehicle as a payload.
For such return vehicle payloads, the structure of the expended braking"
stage will serve as a launching platform when it is time to begin the
return journey to earth.
To sustain the orbital station crew and to provide for their safe
return to earth, an orbital return vehicle such as shown in Fig. 1-14
will be provided.
This vehicle may be used in'conjunction with another
established United States orbital station, or it may be used as a basis
for a minimum orbital station needed to support Project HORIZON. It
is capable of carrying from 10 to 16 men. It will be carried into orbit
by a SATURN I during the first part of the program and replaced by a
SATURN II in 1967.
3. Guidance and Control
An investigation of the guidance problems concerned with Pro-
ject HORIZON indicates that the necessary accuracies and reliabilities
can be met by adaptations, combination and slight extensions of known
and available guidance hardware and techniques.
Final injection
velocity, which marks the beginning of the coast phase of the trajectory
to the moon, will be controlled by conventional means.
Mid-course
guidance will assure that the lunar landing vehicle would come within
approximately 20 km (11 nautical miles) of the selected point. The
terminal guidance system, which would be target oriented, would re-
duce the three standard deviation error at landing to approximately
1.5 km.
33km (11 nautical miles) of the selected point. The
terminal guidance system, which would be target oriented, would re-
duce the three standard deviation error at landing to approximately
1.5 km.
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in •5
Fig. 1-13.
Lunar Landing Vehicle
i
•
U-
\dK?L. ,-•'•» ,** / Q*2 ,*ij
vS&}$i3 *
Fig. 1-14.
Orbital Return Vehicle

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng to approximately
1.5 km.
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in •5
Fig. 1-13.
Lunar Landing Vehicle
i
•
U-
\dK?L. ,-•'•» ,** / Q*2 ,*ij
vS&}$i3 *
Fig. 1-14.
Orbital Return Vehicle

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E.
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM INTEGRATION
The development and integration of the space carriers to support
HORIZON have been carefu^y outlined and various considerations as to
compatibility, size, development schedule, and overall mission have
been incxuded and discussed in detail in Volume II.
Personnel space transportation requirements to support HORIZON
are shown on Fig. I- 15. By the end of 1967 some 252 persons will
have been transported into an earth orbit, 42 will have continued to the
moon, and 26 will have returned from the moon. The orbital station
strength is approximately ten; however, the crew will be rotated every
several months. The space transportation system will deliver some
N
756,000 pounds of useful cargo to the lunar surface by the end of 1967.
In order to accomplish this, 229 SATURN vehicle firings will be
required. A schedule of launching and the broad mission assigned each
vehicle is shown in Fig. I- 16. U should be noted that, due to the savings
incurred by the booster recovery system which will be used, the total
number of SATURN boosters required to support the program is not
229 but only 73.
F.
COMMUNICATIONS ELECTRONICS
The communications required for Project HORIZON are logically
divided into an earth-based and lunar-based complex.
Each of these
complexes maybe considered as having two functions - communications
and surveillance.
Of particular significance for the earth-based complex
is the 24-hour communications satellite system presently under develop-
ment." As illustrated in Fig. 1-17 such a system will provide the
capability of constant communications with both space vehicles in transit
and the lunar outpost.
In addition to the 24-hour communications satellite system, the
current" development program of a world-wide surveillance net will
provide space surveillance for the United States during the I960 era.
The basic hardware and techniques used in this net are directly
applicable to HORIZON. Figure 1-18 illustrates schematically how
such a world net station could be expanded to support HORIZON by the
addition of two additional 85-foot antennas and other equipment.
Communications on the lunar surface will pose special problems
due in a large part to the lack of atmosphere and the relatively high
curvature of the surface.
However, careful investigation reveals no
35cations on the lunar surface will pose special problems
due in a large part to the lack of atmosphere and the relatively high
curvature of the surface.
However, careful investigation reveals no
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 1-15.
Project HORIZON Personnel Space Transportation Requirements

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROJECT HORIZON VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS AND LAUNCHING SCHEDULE
Flights for Designated Dates
I
VcfctcU and ML.ion
1
1964
1
1965
1
1966
1 |
1967
J Total 1
1 Flight*
I
VcfctcU and ML.ion
|J
A S O N D |J
F M A M J
J
A S
O N D j j
F M A M J
J A S
O N ' D j j
F M A M J
J
A S
O N D
J Total 1
1 Flight*
I Lunar Soft Landing Vehicle
I
(Direct)
1
|
1
SATURN U
1
1 1
1 1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2 2 2 2
2
2
2
3
2
3
2 Y
3
2
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
73
I Earth-Orbit and Return
I
(Manned)
1
i
I
SATURN I
1
1
1
1
1
1 1 1
1
1 !
i
i
i
i
i
i1
16 1
1
SATURN n
i
•
-
i |
1
1
1
1
1
1
6 1
I Earth-Orbit (Cargo)
I
SATURN I
1 3
1 3
3 4
3
3
2
2
3
2
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
i»
47 1
I
SATURN II
1
1 1 1 1
1
1
1
1
2 2 3 3 2
3
2
3
3
3
3 T
2
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
3 2 2 3
71 1
I Emergency Vehicles
1
I
SATURN I
1
1
1
1
1
1
I
i
6 1
1
SATURN II
i
1
1
1
1
1 I
i
1
1
1
1
10 J
1 Orbit-Lunar Soft Landing
I
(Cargo)
1
1
1
i'l
4 j
1 Orbit-Lunar Soft Landing
I
(Manned 1
1
1
1
1
1
1 i
1
1
1
1
10 1
1 Lunar-Earth Return
1
1
1
1
1
1 1
i
*
f
*
S 1
Total
1
SATURN I
2 3 2 3 4 5
5
3
3
3
4
3
4
3
3
2
3
1 2
2
1 2
2
1 1
'2
69 1
|
SATURN 0
1
1
1 1
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
2
4
4
5 5 5 5
5
5
6
5
6
6
6 < 4
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
160 1
Total Carrier Vehicle*
[_forJProject HORIZON
J
2 3 3 3 4
.
J
6
7
5
5
5
6
6
7
6
5
6
7
6
7
5
7
6
7
6
7
7
7 £
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
229
Fig. 1-16.
Project HORIZON Vehicle Requirements and Launching Schedule

--- PAGE BREAK ---t HORIZON
J
2 3 3 3 4
.
J
6
7
5
5
5
6
6
7
6
5
6
7
6
7
5
7
6
7
6
7
7
7 £
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
5
6
229
Fig. 1-16.
Project HORIZON Vehicle Requirements and Launching Schedule

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24 HOUR EQUATORIAL
SATELLITE
EARTH COMPLEX AND
; ^ N
LUNARCOM LINKS
• 8 y
. /
LUHARCOM SITE
24 HOUR EQUATORIAL
SATELLITE
24 HOUR EQUATORIAL
SATELLITE
,*'
TRANSPORT
VEHICLE
Fig. 1-17.
Earth Complex and Lunar com Links
LIVING
AHEA
TRACXINO
f
ADMINISTRATIVE
Amr-«w;
^L'«g^
««.Ti
<^"k
A
RECEIVING ANTENNAS
k
"I
Fig. 1-18.
Typical Tracking and Lunarcorn Site
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---plex and Lunar com Links
LIVING
AHEA
TRACXINO
f
ADMINISTRATIVE
Amr-«w;
^L'«g^
««.Ti
<^"k
A
RECEIVING ANTENNAS
k
"I
Fig. 1-18.
Typical Tracking and Lunarcorn Site
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---

problems which cannot be solved by an appropriate research program.
In a number of areas, current developments appear almost directly
applicable; for example, the small helmet-mounted radio currently in
production and troop use.
A microminiaturized version of this, pre-
sently r advanced development, will provide a basis for personal
communication between individuals clad in lunar suits. As the lunar
outpost expands, radio relay stations will extend the radio horizon as
conceived in Figure 1-19.
In addition to voice communication between members of the lunar
party, a number of other electronic devices will be used at the out-
post.
These include TV receipt and transmission, transmission of
still photographs, homing and location devices, instantaneous self-
contained emergency communications packs (for distress signals to
earth), infrared detectors, and radar detectors.
G. LAUNCH SITE
,_
' c*
A survey was made to determine the adequacy of the Atlantic
Missile Range and Pacific Missile Range for the accomplishment of
Project HORIZON. The results of this survey indicated that, all things
being considered, neither site was suitable. Since a new launch site
will be required, a study was made to determine the optimum location
and requirements for such a site.
- „ « • _ _ - _ .
~~
A*.
The results of this study are discussed in detail in Volume II and
illustrated in Fig. 1-20.
A total of eight launch pads are required.
This facility will support the requirements of HORIZON and would also
provide additional capacity for other United States programs.
The equatorial location of the new launch site would provide very
real advantages in terms of payload capability, guidance simplicity,
and operational launching schedules in terms of increased latitude of
appropriate firing times.
Two sites stand out when compared to others
Brazil and Christmas Island. Both of these locations appear feasible;
however, more detailed criterial will have to be established to make
the best choice.
Cost and early availability may ultimately be the
governing factors.
It is emphasized that site acquisition and initiation
of launch site construction is one of the most critical items in the pro-
gram with respect to leadtime.
For the purposes of this study it has
been assumed that the Brazil site would be used. ~")
39f launch site construction is one of the most critical items in the pro-
gram with respect to leadtime.
For the purposes of this study it has
been assumed that the Brazil site would be used. ~")
39

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
3
S
•AN
^i^d^LUNAR COMMUNICATION NET
GE 52-15-59
x .
Fig. 1-19.
Lunar Communication Net

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'^r&iP^
* * • * . » .
Fig. 1-20.
Terrestrial Launch Site

--- PAGE BREAK ---I
3
S
•AN
^i^d^LUNAR COMMUNICATION NET
GE 52-15-59
x .
Fig. 1-19.
Lunar Communication Net

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'^r&iP^
* * • * . » .
Fig. 1-20.
Terrestrial Launch Site

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H. PROGRAM LOGISTICS
The logistic support for Project HORIZON has been studied in
overall scope as well as detailed investigations of specific areas such
as manufacturing considerations, transportation considerations,
personnel, and personnel training.
The results of the studies show very clearly that military
participation in the logistic portion for Project HORIZON is not only
desirable, but mandatory.
No attempt has been made to determine the
level of military participation since such items as the world-wide
political situation will play an important part in the ultimate decision.
I. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Project HORIZON has been divided into six phases which include
R&D as well as the operational aspects of the overall program.
The
schedule for each phase is illustrated on Fig. 1-21 and discussed
below:
Phase I - The initial feasibility study was completed on 9 June
1959 and is contained in this two volume report.
Phase II - The detailed development and funding plan will
require a more detailed study with limited experimentation.
This
phase will require approximately eight months to complete and will
cost $5.4 million.
-
Phase III - The hardware development and system integration
phase constitutes the majority of the development effort.
In Phase III
all:
Systems (space transportation, communication outpost, etc)
Sub-systems (space vehicles, communications, ground and
relay stations, etc.)
Components (rocket engines, communication transmitters &
receivers, etc.)
Schemes and procedures (orbital rendezvous, orbital fuel
transfer, etc.)
required to accomplish the project objectives will be developed.
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---on transmitters &
receivers, etc.)
Schemes and procedures (orbital rendezvous, orbital fuel
transfer, etc.)
required to accomplish the project objectives will be developed.
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Phase IV - The construction of the lunar outpost involves the
utilization of the systems and procedures developed in Phase II and is
in actuality an operational phase of the program.
The completion of
this phase will accomplish the initial objective of the program -
"establish a manned lunar outpost. n
Phase V - The initial period of outpost operation will begin in
December i960 and will constitute the first completely operational
phase of the program.
Phase VI - The expansion of initial outpost operational
capabilities could begin at any time after December 1966.
For the
.. ..
purpose of this study it has been assumed to begin in January 1968.
1.
Basic and Supporting Research
The importance of a strong basic and supporting research
effort in support of a project of this nature cannot be over stated.
Typical areas requiring attention are food and oxygen, clothing,
,
chemical, biological, radiological"; bio-medical, vacuum conditions,
weightlessness r meteoroids, lunar-based systems, moon mapping,
explosives in lunar environment, power generation, material and
lubricants, liquid hydrogen production and handling, and lunar "soil"
mechanics.
,
2.
Project HORIZON Development Program
As mentioned above, a strong basic and supporting research
program will be required to accomplish the HORIZON development
program, and ultimately the project objectives.
The development
program for this project is basically covered by the first three phases
of the project outlined above, the first of which has been completed.
Phase II, the next step in the development program, must be accomplished
in the time scale indicated in Fig. 1-21 if the United States is to succeed
in establishing the first lunar outpost. The development plan, generated
in Phase II will spell out in considerable detail the developments re-
quired in Phase III, as well as requirements for later phases.
Basically, Phase III will be the development portion of the
project. . During this phase, all development required to accomplish
the project objectives will be satisfied.
44ents for later phases.
Basically, Phase III will be the development portion of the
project. . During this phase, all development required to accomplish
the project objectives will be satisfied.
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---s.
Basically, Phase III will be the development portion of the
project. . During this phase, all development required to accomplish
the project objectives will be satisfied.
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. Research and Development Facilities
Several unique facilities will be required to support HORIZON.
Figure 1-22 is a view of a large lunar environmental simulator which
will provide a capability for research, development, testing and
training for HORIZON as well as other projects in thenational space
program.
Figure 1-23 illustrates a space flight simulator which will
provide for research and training of effects associated with boost
acceleration, coasting, weightlessness, and braking deceleration. In
addition, medical research facility is located in conjunction with this
site.
PROJECT HORIZON
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
\
CY
PHASE
ACTIVITY
Nv
i
1959
I960
1961
1962 1
1963 '
1964
196S '
1966 1 1967
1968
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
3
i 1
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
* / ^ !
•****• "&\ -V
.11 A«i_.* *7".x /'—
**
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
I
J
1
h'
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
I
J
1
&
-,. *A
. ^ A
h'
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
I
J
1
h'
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
I
J
1
h'
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
I
J
1
h'
I
Initial Feasibility
Study
II _ Detailed Development
4 Funding Plan
III
Hardware Development
4 System Integration
IV
Construction of Lunar
Base
V
Initial Operational
Period
1
VI
Expansion of Initial
Capabilities
I
J
1
* Hardware and Systems being developed for other programs that will have direct application in
Project HORIZON.
** Development required for expansion of capability.
Fig. 1-21.
Organization for Research and Development
45ing developed for other programs that will have direct application in
Project HORIZON.
** Development required for expansion of capability.
Fig. 1-21.
Organization for Research and Development
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ESEi^^^5--- ^3&iu
m
| C >'*r*sp«._
v
v-» • ^
^
^
• • • • £ - • > >
- . . * v -
~
Fig. 1-23.
View of Flight Simulator
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 1-22.
Cross Section Through Main Facility LERUT

--- PAGE BREAK --->'*r*sp«._
v
v-» • ^
^
^
• • • • £ - • > >
- . . * v -
~
Fig. 1-23.
View of Flight Simulator
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fig. 1-22.
Cross Section Through Main Facility LERUT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(S) CHAPTER in: MANAGEMENT AND PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS
A. SCOPE OF OPERATIONS
1.
General
Having developed a requirement for the establishment of a
manned lunar outpost, we may discuss the operational concepts and
facilities necessary to fulfill that requirement.
From these, an
organizational structure can be evolved.
The treatment of the technical
concepts and facilities in this chapter will be limited to that detail
absolutely necessary to establishment of an organizational /ope rational
structure.
2.
Terrestrial Launch Site
In order to accomplish any space mission, a terrestrial launch
site will be required.
Use of any of the existing sites controlled by
the United States has several disadvantages. Among these is the fact
that all of these bases are geographically located as to limit firing times
to but a few days each month and to require wasteful expenditure of
available energy to achieve success.
This latter results from the fact
that none of the existing launch sites are located close to the equator.
Furthermore, once human beings are either placed in orbit or dispatched
on planetary missions, there can be no interfering problems regarding
scheduling of firings, either regular or emergency; physical space
difficulties resulting from supply build-up or other logistic considera-
tions, etc.
The terrestrial launch site is expected to evolve into an
operational complex supporting both continued R&D and firing by
operational units with orbital or other space missions.
Existing
United States launching complexes are devoted primarily to R&D firings
of weapons systems.
Most such complexes are rapidly becoming
saturated with such firings in the confines of their present areas. It
rapidly becomes evident that a separate site will be required in order to
support this nation's space efforts in a most economical manner.
There are a great many factors involved in this requirement.
They are discussed at length in Chapter V. Three major factors
influencing requirements are:
a.
Operational need for having an orbital station in an equa-
torial orbit to simplify the rendezvous problem.
49iscussed at length in Chapter V. Three major factors
influencing requirements are:
a.
Operational need for having an orbital station in an equa-
torial orbit to simplify the rendezvous problem.
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---n Chapter V. Three major factors
influencing requirements are:
a.
Operational need for having an orbital station in an equa-
torial orbit to simplify the rendezvous problem.
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---

b. High payload penalty and complexity of trajectory pro-
blem involved in Mdog-leggingM into equatorial orbit from a non-
equatorial launch site.
c. Magnitude of effort requred to implement the objectives
of this operation.
In addition, of course, there are other factors influencing the
attainment of such a site.
For example:
a. Diplomatic and political implications involved at some
suitable sites.
b. Military vulnerability and security requirements at all
suitable sites. (These are relative choices not necessarily consistent
with the best diplomatic or political choice.)
c. Cost: It may be reasonably assumed here, based on the
above mentioned factors and detailed technical considerations in
Volume II that an equatorial launch site will be selected. It will be the
terrestrial site from which this nation dispatches its first man destined
to set foot on the lunar surface.
This site will provide a capability to
conduct additional space.missions in fulfillment of other requirements.
For this site to be operational in sufficient time, action
is demanded immediately in negotiations required for acquisition.
Build-up of facilities must begin at an early date in order to meet the
desired operational readiness date.
A terrestrial launch site, which supports the lunar out-
post project during the early technical effort, should also support it
during the operational phase.
There will be practical requirements
for the utilization of the launch site for other projects possibly involving
military R&D, military operations, and the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration. Practical problems thus raised are subsequently
treated under organizational considerations.
3.
Orbital Station
In order to successfully accomplish lunar soft landings in the
time frame under consideration, firings may be undertaken either
directly from the earth's surface to the destination or by means of an
intermediate station in orbit about the earth. The former approach
50me under consideration, firings may be undertaken either
directly from the earth's surface to the destination or by means of an
intermediate station in orbit about the earth. The former approach
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---on, firings may be undertaken either
directly from the earth's surface to the destination or by means of an
intermediate station in orbit about the earth. The former approach
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---

requires the expenditure of tremendous amounts of energy for relatively
small payloads.
Therefore, it cannot provide an immediate return
capability in the proposed time frame, using the boosters then available.
Under those conditions, the orbital station, providing larger payloads
and immediate, emergency, return capability from the moon is the most
desirable choice for transport of personnel.
During early transit operations through the orbital station,
facilities in orbit will be on a minimum essential, austere basis.
It
will have rendezvous, refueling and launch capabilities but not a
vehicle assembly capability.
During this period, it will be little more
than an interim assembly of fuel tanks and other hardware in orbit.
Personnel involved in its operation will utilize their earth-to-orbit-to-
earth vehicle as living quarters for the duration of their stay in orbit.
Until an orbital station is developed to a higher order of operational
autonomy in support of this and perhaps other operations, it will be
under the immediate operational control of the terrestrial launch site.
Throughout the operation, assembly of equipment in orbit must
be directed toward the eventual establishment of more sophisticated
K
orbital stations. As indicated previously, an early improved station
may be constructed from 22 vehicle shells.
Prior to any expansion of
lunar outpost operations, sufficient tankage will have been placed in
orbit to permit construction of two or three such stations.
Having more
than one station in orbit enhances future operational capability and
flexibility by increasing number of possible firing times per month.
Although it is considered premature in this preliminary feasi-
bility study to establish an exact schedule for assembly of more sophis-
ticated orbital stations, the operational requirement must be recognized
now. Some considerations which affect implementation of this require-
ment are that:
a. No other program is likely to make available a similar
amount of material, in orbit, without a previously established purpose.
b. The demands of this program will use a considerable frac-
tion of foreseeable or predictable large booster resources.
c. The economy of using otherwise wasted resources to a
constructive end.
51b. The demands of this program will use a considerable frac-
tion of foreseeable or predictable large booster resources.
c. The economy of using otherwise wasted resources to a
constructive end.
51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Early attainment of more advanced operational capability in the
orbital station will contribute to other space activities as well as to
this specific operation.
Examples of such contributions are:
a.
Space laboratory, acclimatization, and training capability
for personnel.
b. Space laboratory for equipment.
c.
Materiel storage space.
d.
Low-altitude communication relay.
e.
Earth surveillance (perhaps a security consideration in
this specific operation).
f.
Space surveillance.
g.
Meteorological surveillance.
h. Survey/geodesy data collection.
i.
Instrumentation for test of earth-to-space weapon effects.
As the scope of operations at the orbital station increases, so
will the interactions with other national space activities increase,
there-
fore, it can be expected to evolve into an independent agency supporting
this terrestrial launch site, and possibly others.
4. Lunar Outpost
This goal of the project is envisioned as falling into several
basic areas as follows:
a.
Life Support and Preliminary Exploration.
In the first outpost phase, lasting from 30 to 90 days,
concern of those landed revolves primarily about life support and the
human verification of many details of information previously generated
by unmanned satellites or probes. Permanent site selection will also
depend upon such verification.
52

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
human verification of many details of information previously generated
by unmanned satellites or probes. Permanent site selection will also
depend upon such verification.
52

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
b.
Construction
During the second outpost phase, we find personnel and
cargo located in the vicinity of the permanent site capable of conduct-
ing habitable structures.
There will be a rotation of personnel during
this phase whicn will last approximately 18 months.
Maximum tour
will not ue more than one year.
Titular head of the outpost during this
period will be one whose primary speciality is construction.
c# Benefical Occupancy and Initial Operational Capability
This is the goal for Project HORIZON as set forth in
this study.
The outpost at this point can comfortably support 12 men,
six of whom will spend a large part of their time in general maintenance
and life support.
These volumes have focused on the goal of establishing a lunar
outpost capable of supporting 12 people.
This represents a large
capital expenditure. Once-established, the cost is shown decreasing
as a result of eliminating the capital expenditure and continuing only
the life support resupply. In order to realize a full return on the
investment involved, it will obviously be desired to establish additional
equipment at the outpost in quantity.
For example, the use of the moon
as a launching site for manned or unmanned planetary expeditions will
be highly desirable. As such requirements .multiply it is obvious that
construction, equipment, and personnel requirements will also multiply.
There exists an immediate requirement, therefore, to initiate
an early industrialized expansion of the outpost giving it a capability of
selfrregeneration, to the greatest extent possible, from materials at
hand.
Each returning vehicle will bring physical and biological
materials and samples back for analysis.
Each sample must be critically
analyzed to determine its utility.
Methods must then be determined and
equipment transported to the lunar outpost which will contribute to a
self-regenerative capability.
During this secondary/expansion/con-
struction period, the operational outpost will acquire an industrial
self-regenerative capability and capabilities will evolve which
manifestly justify the entire effort.
In addition, this nation will be in
the position of having contributed in an early and timely manner to the
extension of man's horizon.
53will evolve which
manifestly justify the entire effort.
In addition, this nation will be in
the position of having contributed in an early and timely manner to the
extension of man's horizon.
53

--- PAGE BREAK ---manifestly justify the entire effort.
In addition, this nation will be in
the position of having contributed in an early and timely manner to the
extension of man's horizon.
53

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B.
ORGANIZATIONAL AND OPERATIONAL CONCEPTS
1. Gene ral
As indicated earlier, it is expected that the terrestrial launch
site and the orbital station will have applications' in both R&D and
operational activities of other projects. The potential scientific
applications of the lunar outpost cover a broad spectrum of activities.
The scope of activities which must occur at the locations of the
essential elements of this specific operation call for a full range of
support including military, technical R&D; civilian (NASA) scientific
research; operational logistics; operational space activity.
This
involves full Military Air Transport Service and Military Sea Trans-
portation Service type support plus possibly civil air lift and merchant
marine.
One or more of these requirements will overlap assigned
missions of major existing unified commands extending over broad
geographical areas.
There will be requirements for support from and to other
elements of government. Such requirements will affect both technical
and operational elements of any organization set up for the accomplish-
ment of this specific mission.
One case, in point, is support of NASA
scientific programs.
Examples of other support or guidance require-
ments from or to governmental departments other than Defense are as
follows:
a.
Operations Coordinating Board, National Security
Council; overall inter-departmental coordination.
b. Central Intelligence Agency, National Security Council;
National Intelligence.
c. Department of State; relations with other interested
nations.
d. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice;
security matters.
e. U. S. Coast and Ge odetic Survey, Department of
Commerce; survey and geodesy.
f.- U. S. Geological Survey.
Department of the Interior;
selenology.
54Department of Justice;
security matters.
e. U. S. Coast and Ge odetic Survey, Department of
Commerce; survey and geodesy.
f.- U. S. Geological Survey.
Department of the Interior;
selenology.
54

--- PAGE BREAK ---e;
security matters.
e. U. S. Coast and Ge odetic Survey, Department of
Commerce; survey and geodesy.
f.- U. S. Geological Survey.
Department of the Interior;
selenology.
54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some would have special responsibilities and delegated authorities
peculiar to their particular operational situation. For example
the
launch site may have major responsibilities in inter-departmental
operations approaching that of one of the existing National Missile -
Ranges; the orbital station may have a major communications
responsibility to the entire project, etc.
Both the project management and terrestrial launch site will
require a full range of conventional and space-peculiar operational
technical support.
Technical support at the launch site must have the
capability of cross service support to military and civil departments
of government.
Technical channels of communication should prevail
on technical matters without abrogating or diluting responsibility.
3. Staff Organization
As previously noted, a full range of technical staffing and
support is required.
However, special space-peculiar operational
requirements exist and must be clearly identified and treated in future
planning documents.
It must be recognized that all planning factors
for an operation of this magnitude and significance are not firm
particularly during the early stages of feasibility demonstration and for
the operational as opposed to the purely technical.
At least in the early stages of operation of the orbital station
and the lunar outpost, a different staffing pattern will prevail.
Indi-
viduals must have a wide range of carefully selected skills.
While this
poses no insurmountable problems, it does require very careful coordina-
tion in all phases of operation from first concept approval until
expansion of operations to a considerable degree at some yet undetermined
The preceding discussions suggest that early activation, staffing
and training of the various agencies is mandatory.
Full, optimum
most-economical operations will result from a carefully planned '
activation program.
Waiting until the full requirement is imminent
would, in any given instance, delay or hazard some facet of operations
58mical operations will result from a carefully planned '
activation program.
Waiting until the full requirement is imminent
would, in any given instance, delay or hazard some facet of operations
58

--- PAGE BREAK ---l result from a carefully planned '
activation program.
Waiting until the full requirement is imminent
would, in any given instance, delay or hazard some facet of operations
58

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Appendix • 329
(S) CHAPTER IV: NON-TECHNICAL, SUPPORTING
CONSIDERATIONS
A.
GENERAL
Fro:; the viewpoint of national security, the primary implication
,
of the feasibility of establishment of a lunar outpost is the importance
of being first.
Clearly, we cannot exercise an option between peaceful
and military applications unless we are first.
For political and psychological reasons, anything short of being
first on the lunar surface would be catastrophic.
Being first will have
so much political significance that no one can say at this time what the v
absolute effects will be. However, it is apparent from past space
accomplishments that being second again cannot be tolerated.
B.
POLICY
Any new venture of the magnitude of this study creates an immed-
iate requirement for both general and specific policy guidance.
Policy
is a product of times and circumstances.
Man's experience in space
matters is short, and the circumstances of his space activities are
extensions of all the complex relations which preceded them.
Accord-
ingly, we have not evolved a comprehensive body of even controversial,
much less agreed, policy.
Both the Executive and the Legislative branches of the United States
Government have devoted considerable attention to the subject for
approximately one and one-half years.
The policy which has evolved
from Legislative or Executive action is still quite general.
No specific
policy directed at the subject of this study was found.
An effort has been made to analyze existing general policy and to
summarize it in a form suitable as background for, this study.
That
summary is in Appendix A.
There has been no conscious effort at
abstraction of points of policy pertinent only to this subject.
Rather,
the effort was to summarize the general policy.
This subject will
require an early and continuing effort aimed at development, corre-
lation, and codification of policy.
For the present, then, the policy, as the requirements, must be
judged against the background of contemporary international political
and military situations.
The genera] policy, however, is sufficiently
clear in stating the urgency of the situation., must be
judged against the background of contemporary international political
and military situations.
The genera] policy, however, is sufficiently
clear in stating the urgency of the situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ainst the background of contemporary international political
and military situations.
The genera] policy, however, is sufficiently
clear in stating the urgency of the situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

330 • Appendix
The intelligence estimates which support statements of national
policy credit the Soviet Union with a capability of accomplishing the
objectives of this study any time after 1965.
Therefore, we may infer
a requirement from national policy.
C.
POLITICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL AND SECURITY IMPLICATIONS
1. Political and Psychological
The political and psychological implications of our failure to
be first in space are a matter of public record.
This failure has
reflected adversely on United States military, scientific, and political
leadership.
To some extent we have recovered the loss.
However,
once having been second best in the eyes of the world's population,
we are not now in a position to afford being second on any other major
step in space.
We have already stretched our luck in being second with
the space probe and sun satellite.
However, the political implications
of the space activities accomplished to date have not been nearly as
serious as those which will result from failure to be first in this
operation.
The results of failure to first place man on extra-terrestrial,
naturally-occurring, real estate will raise grave political questions
and at the same time lower United States prestige and influence in
dealing with this and related problems.
The Soviet Union has announced
openly its intention that some of its citizens will celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the present government (1967) on the lunar surface.
The United States intelligence community agrees that the Soviet Union
may accomplish a manned lunar landing at any time after 1965.
Judging from past experience, it is easy to visualize all manner of
political and legal implications which the Soviet Union might postulate
as a result of such a successful accomplishment.
As is so often the
case in points of law, the effect is the derivative of the precedent.
There are possibly other applications of space which will permit
earlier derivation of meaningful military capabilities than will a success-
ful lunar outpost provided these applications are pursued vigorously.
Individually, however, they will not have the same political impact.
In the still vague body of fact and thought on the subject, world opinion
may be expected to view the other applications similar to actions on
the high seas and also to view the establishment of a first lunar outpost
similar to proprietary rights derived from first occupancy.
As the
Congress har noted, we are caught in a stream in.which we have noseas and also to view the establishment of a first lunar outpost
similar to proprietary rights derived from first occupancy.
As the
Congress har noted, we are caught in a stream in.which we have no

--- PAGE BREAK ---w the establishment of a first lunar outpost
similar to proprietary rights derived from first occupancy.
As the
Congress har noted, we are caught in a stream in.which we have no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

choice but to proceed.
Our success depends strongly on the decisive-
ness with which we exercise our current options.
The lunar outpost
is the most immediate such case.
It is the basis for others more far-
reaching iuch as further inter-planetary exploration.
More detailed coverage of legal and political implications may
be found in Appendix B.
They are directly related to policy discussions
in Appendix A.
2. National Security
Volume II of this study indicates that it has the objective of
treating the subject up to and including the establishment and mainte-
nance of a twelve-man outpost of which approximately fifty percent
(six men) would have the continued functions of life support operations.
This would include operation and maintenance of equipment with per-
haps minor technical improvements in the outpost.
While it may be
granted that this achievement will have been a major national accom-
plishment from the political and diplomatic viewpoint and will provide
the know-how for expansion, it will not satisfy all of the foreseeable
national security requirements.
It is, therefore, merely a point of
departure for security considerations.
The total extent of the military applications, which may evolve
after the establishment of the initial outpost, is a function of variables
which require operational and/or technical evaluation beyond the scope
of this study.
Some entail National Security Council type evaluation.
Examples are:
(1) Evaluation of the actual or potential threat to the continued
operation of the outpost and policy on countering the threat.
This must
include a study of interactions with other space activities.
(2) Evaluation of the significance of lunar operations within
the broader framework of the total national defense.
(3) Military evaluation of the operational and technical require-
ments to implement any National Security Council policies which are
specified.
(4) Cost of implementing military operational and technical
requirements.
61f the operational and technical require-
ments to implement any National Security Council policies which are
specified.
(4) Cost of implementing military operational and technical
requirements.
61

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(5) Utilization of knowledge gained during first phases of out-
post operation.
(6) Extent to which national policy requires attainment of
specific military or scientific capabilities.
(7) State-of-the-art improvement in rocket booster engines,
particularly in specific impulse, thrust, and weight.
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by
Philip J. Corso, USA Ret.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foreword
Acknowledgements
Introduction - Dawn of a New Age
PART I
1.
The Beginning
2.
Roswell - Fact or Fancy
3.
Golden Age of R&D - From Outer Space to R&D
4.
Omissions - A Study for R&D
5.
Probe and Challenge
6.
Lasers - D. E. W. Weapons
PART II
1.
Intentions and Hostile Acts
2.
DNA Bombs - Alien Harvest
3.
Exploration Continues
4.
Sounding Board - Views Present Generation
5.
Reflections
PART III
Conclusion
APPENDIX
A - Project Horizon
B - The Race for Time - 1963
C - ABM - Project History - Bell Laboratories
D - Conquest of Darkness
E - Redstone Arsenal - Pioneering Efforts in Space
F - Army Nuclear Power Program

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Race for Time - 1963
C - ABM - Project History - Bell Laboratories
D - Conquest of Darkness
E - Redstone Arsenal - Pioneering Efforts in Space
F - Army Nuclear Power Program

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE OPENING - 30 YEARS OF SILENCE
I was sitting in a large armchair, my three grandchildren
were with me, Philip, age 9, Nicky, age 8 , and on my lap, Andy,
age 6 .
Philip asked, "Grandad, what did you do during the war?
Then Nicholas said, "Have you ever seen a flying saucer? " and
Andy had to get his part in and asked, "Have you ever seen ET
Grandpa? "
I thought I had better leave them a legacy and so I began
to write my memoirs with the foreword:
If one passage in these memoirs helps you
survive in a troubled world, then all this
work is not in vain.
Later I added:
If one passage in the addendum helps you
recognize and survive against an enemy
from outer space, then this additional
revelation is not in vain.
And so began a work which has continued for over five
years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---m helps you
recognize and survive against an enemy
from outer space, then this additional
revelation is not in vain.
And so began a work which has continued for over five
years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to thank the sixteen various U. S- Army installa­
tions from which I requested historical and background infor­
mation on details of projects and studies in which I partici­
pated.
They went beyond their normal activities to furnish
the data which I requested, and which was invaluable in compil­
ing this book.
A list follows:
Historical Reference Branch,
U. S. Army Military History Institute, Carlisle Barracks, Carlisle,
Penna; Chief, Corps of Engineers, Wash., D. C.; Dept, of the
Army R&D, The Pentagon; U. S. Army Missile Command, Command
Historian, Redstone Arsenal, Ala.; U. S. Army Belvoir Research,
Development and Engineering Center, Ft. Belvoir, V a ; Space
and Strategic Defense CMD, Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville Ala.;
Night Vision Electronic Sensor Center, Ft. Belvoir, Va .; U. S.
Army Research Laboratory CMD., Harry Diamond Laboratories,
Adelphia, Md.; Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Wash.,
D. C.; Dept, of Army Historical Service Division, Center of
Military History, Wash., D. C.; U. S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Office of History, Ft. Belvoir, V a .; Hdqs. U. S. Army Communica­
tions - Electronic Qrtd, Research Development & Engineer Center,
Night Vision Electronic Sensors Directorate, Ft. Monmouth, N. J.;
Missile Command USASS DC-H, CSSD-PA, Huntsville, Ala.; U. S.
Army, Quartermaster Center, Ft. Lee, Va.; Hdqs, U. S. Army
Materiel Cmd , Research and Development, Alexandria, Va.;
Lincoln Labs, Lexington, Mass; and Bell Laboratories,
Westminister, Colorado.
I also wish to thank the modern military branch of the
National Archives, Wash. D. C. and the Commissioner of Patents
and Trademarks, Wash. D. C.
Last, but not least - memoirs, Lt. Gen. Arthur G. Trudeau.
He presented my copy to me personally, with instructions to
use the contents as I saw fit.
Never once did I have to use the freedom of information act.
Probably because I was deeply imbedded into the system and
could guide them to fulfill my. requests, many of which fell
under my jurisdiction while I was on duty and the service
which I served and was proud of its accomplishments.edded into the system and
could guide them to fulfill my. requests, many of which fell
under my jurisdiction while I was on duty and the service
which I served and was proud of its accomplishments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTION
DAWN OF A NEW AGE
Legend has it that centuries past (4, 000 B. C. ) the
"Gods" or extraterrestrials from another planet came to
earth, created a new "homo sapiens, " then later decided to
destroy mankind.
After a deluge of destruction they decided
to let humans survive.
The goddess Inanna/Ishtar took the
lead in insuring survival of the human race.
Millenniums later the great Chinese general Sun Tzu,
who used intelligence to win all his battles said:
If you don't know your enemy or don't
know yourself you will lose every
battle.
If you know yourself and not your
enemy or know your enemy and not
yourself, you will lose half of
your battles, but
If you know yourself and know your
enemy, you don't have to fear the
outcome of a thousand battles.
In the case of UFO's or extraterrestrials we have been
led to believe that they don't exist.
So, even before we
begin to analyze events concerning UFOs and EBEs, we have
lost half of our battle.
This is the point in time where
we are at present.
The other half whereby we don't know
ourselves, cannot be 100% ruled out since great men have
expressed themselves as believers, some of which are Gen.
Douglas McArthur, Gen. George Marshall, Werner Von Braun,

--- PAGE BREAK ---know
ourselves, cannot be 100% ruled out since great men have
expressed themselves as believers, some of which are Gen.
Douglas McArthur, Gen. George Marshall, Werner Von Braun,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

President Ronald Reagan, Gen. Nathan Twining, Gen. Walter
Bedell Smith, Dr. Carl Gustav Jung and many others.
Because of U . S. Government policy, which was and still
is that UFOs and EBEs do not exist, they could not be classi­
fied as a threat to our national security.
Hostile acts are
ignored or explained away.
Except for the exceptional men
named above,. in Sun Tzu's words, we stand to lose every
battle where this "non-existent" entity is involved.
The situation even spilled over into the realm of research
and development.
How could a development derive from something
that didn't exist?
Any hardware was an aberration.
Scientists
such as Dr. Herman Oberth, Stanton T. Friedman, Robert
Sarbacher, W. B. Smith, Dr. Werner Von Braun, etc., are dis­
regarded or ridiculed when they say, "we cannot take the credit
for our record advancements in certain scientific fields alone.
WE have been helped by people of other worlds. "
So intense was the cover-up that it out rivaled the KGB
disinformation activities in political matters.
The perpetrator
also used the Soviet technique of creating an obnoxious label,
such as the McCarthyism label, and pinning this on all opponents
In this case, it was the label of "kook" to be used against all
who believed that UFOs and EBEs were real.
These activities
might eventually prove to be dangerous, catastrophic and
certainly stupid.
However, it was appropriate for the political
climate of the era.
In 1958, the liberal elements in the U. S. policy apparatus

--- PAGE BREAK ---to be dangerous, catastrophic and
certainly stupid.
However, it was appropriate for the political
climate of the era.
In 1958, the liberal elements in the U. S. policy apparatus

--- PAGE BREAK ---

strongly recommended civilian control of all space activities.
As such, the Department of Defense quickly killed "project
Horizon, " a military colony on the moon.
This army project
used some of the best minds in the nation and was far ahead of
its time.
It was the forerunner of NASA's moon landing.
NASA
came into existence in 1958 and it was totally civilian control
and insured peaceful uses of space exploration.
They could
not believe that an enemy could have other thoughts or not fit
into our thinking or planning.
Atomic energy was taken from the U. S. Army and given to
the Atomic Energy Commission.
Again civilian control of the
only weapon the EBEs would fear.
From the period 1947-1958, military R & D was greatly dis­
organized, much pro & con maneuvering took place during this
period.
To ensure civilian control. Department of Defense
organized ARPA, (Advanced Research Project Agency).
There
were continuous clashes between ARPA and the military services,
especially army R&D.
Finally in 1960, all U. S. Army R&D was pulled under one
department (Office of the Chief of the Army R&D), all personnel,
the tech services, laboratories and installations and budget
were concentrated under a Lt. General.
The Golden Age of R&D
(1958-1963) blossomed.
However, army R&D had to work within
the framework of civilian control of space efforts, opposition
of Department of Defense, adverse policy guidance, and the
animosity of CIA-Department of State.
As a result, R&D data,
stemming from areas "out of this world" had to be carefully

--- PAGE BREAK ---Department of Defense, adverse policy guidance, and the
animosity of CIA-Department of State.
As a result, R&D data,
stemming from areas "out of this world" had to be carefully

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hidden and the information kept among a select few.
Great
efforts were made to bring large industry and select laborator­
ies into the army R&D fold.
Although our government "debunked" such events as the
Roswell UFO crash, the Soviets, namely Joseph Stalin took it
serious, and he called in his top scientist to follow the sen­
sational news, and alert their espionage agencies to gather or
steal any information on the incident.
Another important phase was German scientific developments.
Army R&D organized operation "paper clip" and brought over
Von Braun and his group.
Many German scientific documents,
even flying saucer successes of the Germans were gathered and
brought to the United States.
Since we knew the inner workings of our government, both
Congress and the Executive Branch, and the thinking of the
people in the policy making positions, we were able to move
ahead in our mission without obstruction.
To this day nothing
is known how the developments came about for many startling
discoveries which are beginning to bear fruit.
Soviet secrets,
German advances and out of this world technology was a perfect
mix to camouflage any operation.
Nov; that our base of operation was firm and strong, we
decided to marshall a preponderance of strength against which
even the civilian control and left leaning politicians could
not prevail.
The partners that we sought and gathered were
U. S. industry, a strong laboratory support, and many leading
universities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ontrol and left leaning politicians could
not prevail.
The partners that we sought and gathered were
U. S. industry, a strong laboratory support, and many leading
universities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The top 25 industries on the Fortune 500 list were con­
tacted and meetings were arranged with their board of directors,
top personnel, with the Chief of Army Research and Development.
Our laboratories were organized and strengthened whereby they
were furnished ample funds to hire top talent.
In addition,
many foreign firms and scientists were brought into the fold.
Industry's response was outstanding.
Proposals submitted
were well presented, thorough and along the lines which we
wanted.
Our laboratories began to function with a well-rounded
professionalism.
Even the highly respected Bell Laboratory
was brought into the fold.
Universities played an important
role.
This powerful array was unbeatable.
They were the
world’s best and trusted our approach and guidance.
And so
began an array of. developments such as the world had never seen.
Our guiding force was national security and preservation of our
way of life.
Among the most outstanding were:
CONQUEST OF DARKNESS - IMAGE INTENSIFIERS
They were called night viewing devices or army night vision
The night vision laboratory at Ft. Belvoir, Virginia, was organ!
zed.
German infrared technology was made available to them, as
well as cascade image tubes, Electronic multipliers (micro-
channel plates and etched fiber optics.
Information gathered
at the
Roswell Crash was fed into the system.
Forty-eight
U. S. industries participated in the development.
The Night
Viewing Lab (NVL) could never have been as successful without
their contribution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---fed into the system.
Forty-eight
U. S. industries participated in the development.
The Night
Viewing Lab (NVL) could never have been as successful without
their contribution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the Roswell Crash, what was thought to be broken wiring
harnesses was found.
But it was noted that each of the broken
ends emitted a different color.
There was no wiring in the
saucer.
The color emitting was from a type of fiber optics.
Bell Labs was in the forefront and from this came the greatest
advancement in communication that the world has ever seen.
SUPER TENACITY FIBERS
In the 1960's we began to look for fibers for flak jackets,
parachutes and other military items.
We had found a single
strand of fiber that the sharpest razor could not cut and it
could not be broken. We got interested and began to study spider
silks, with the goal of constructing super tenacity fibers.
The spider silks starts as a soluble protein in one of the
spiders abdominal glands.
As it extruded it passes through a
tubular duct on its way to the spinnerettes.
This narrow tube
forces all the protein molecules to align in the same direction,
turning it into a solid, rod-like quasi-crystalline thread. A
single strand would have to be nearly 50 miles long before
breaking under its own weight and a thread of dangling silk
stretching around the world would weigh 15 ounces.
Monsanto
is trying to mass produce a spider silk protein from a gene
cloned by U. S. Army researchers, the University of Wyoming
and Dow Corning are continuing to learn how to clone it.
Cross-
stitched fibers made possible stealth technology and thousands
of civilian aircraft are almost totally of composite manufacture.

--- PAGE BREAK ---are continuing to learn how to clone it.
Cross-
stitched fibers made possible stealth technology and thousands
of civilian aircraft are almost totally of composite manufacture.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Reports from our laboratories on a piece of metal from
Roswell showed the molecules/atoms had been aligned, this align­
ment created an incredible hardness, whereby it could not be
scratched, bent, dented and repelled cosmic action and radia­
tion, although it was paper thin.
Since CRD thought this
discovery could be bigger than Los Alamos, a special team was
organized to investigate all possibilities.
We found many
precious gems and crystals had similar properties.
A different
alignment would allow radiation to pass through or make the
element transparent.
Up until 1963 or even 1993 we have not
been able to solve this problem.
It would make possible
space vehicles of great strength, but light as a feather.
FLUID AMPLIFICATION
This control of streams by other streams eliminated the
need for mechanical moving parts.
Some of our universities,
industrial laboratories and our seven government laboratories
provided the basic development foundation.
In October 1963,
a fluid amplification symposium was held at Harry Diamond
Laboratories.
Thirty four papers were prepared and presented
by six universities.
In the audience were representatives of
150 companies and universities.
It was believed that this
technology was involved in the guidance and propulsion of UFO's
The heart pump came into being because of this technology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---companies and universities.
It was believed that this
technology was involved in the guidance and propulsion of UFO's
The heart pump came into being because of this technology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We had in our possession a transistor with hair-like wires
and leads, and a chip in a stack of thin, uniformly shaped wafer
like components.
These formed complete electrical circuits,
and developed into the micromodule concept. 'CRD said it would
take 50 years to develop the transistor and 200 years to
develop the chip.
It came in a short span of five years.
Dr.
Herman Oberth said, "we have been helped by people from outer-
space. "
The "applied engineering" made possible to achieve
ruggedness, greater reliability, increased operating speed
and designs which take advantage of automatic production methods
This led to today's supercomputers.
Progressively, in 1959
miniaturization of circuits began; in 1960 subminiaturization;
in 1961, advanced circuitry techniques and microminiaturization;
and in 1962 micromodules.
H. A. R. P.
During the period we began what was called a high altitude
research project.
We worked closely with the Canadians.
They
showed us how an electronic device, encapsulated could be fired
at very high velocity into a concrete wall (several thousand
G's) and still come out and be operative.
We could fire a con­
ventional gun into space.
One naval 16-inch gun was welded in
prolongation to another naval 16-inch gun.
It fired vertically
into space and with the appropriate encapsulated electronic
devices on the projectile put it in orbit in space.
Many use­
ful gains could have come from this, from peaceful orbits of

--- PAGE BREAK ---space and with the appropriate encapsulated electronic
devices on the projectile put it in orbit in space.
Many use­
ful gains could have come from this, from peaceful orbits of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

communication satellites, to spy satellites and ion emitting
electronic devices which could destroy other electronic
devices.
There was much resistance to this approach and the
gains were negated by NASA, DARPA and policy overrides of
civilian control.
This relatively simple approach was not
supported and the ensuing cost was in the billions to put
electronic devices into orbit by sophisticated expensive
means.
PSYCHO-CHEMICALS
There has been much written on abductions whereby the
abductee loses all track of time.
This was no great advance­
ment on the part of extraterrestrials.
We perfected psycho­
chemical gases and drugs in the early 1960's.
The label was
"a painless way to win the war. "
There was a movie made, whereby,
a cat after being administered some of these non-lethal drugs,
jumps all over the cage to get away from a mouse.
Tests on
men also showed where soldiers literally fell apart at drill.
A brigadier general was given a 4% dose in a cup of coffee and
at a briefing he forgot what he came to report on.
We were
told to halt all such experiments,
but some chemicals and drugs
were permitted to remain in our inventory.
in addition, a
political decision was made to do away with biological weapons
experiments.
To an extent we obeyed.
LASERS
Some help and a technical basis came from Roswell on "light

--- PAGE BREAK ---ddition, a
political decision was made to do away with biological weapons
experiments.
To an extent we obeyed.
LASERS
Some help and a technical basis came from Roswell on "light

--- PAGE BREAK ---

amplication through simulated emission of radiation. "
Beginning in 1958, a surge of activity began since the pre­
diction of laser feasibility.
Practical application of the
principle of laser feasibility included communication, sur­
veillance, illumination, power transmission, data processing,
guidance control and medical uses.
We felt this was the EBE's
method of communication over vast distances in space.
In later
years they applied laser surgery in the mutilation of animals.
So advanced was their technique that they did not cut through
tissue cells.
Cataract removal and surgical methods were our
contribution.
Eye surgery was made possible, i. e. torn retinas,
growth of blood vessels in eyes, and glucoma.
Also, it made
possible - tumors, removal of large benign growths; ear
surgery, throat surgery, prostate surgery, urinary stone
removal; heart surgery, migraine headache treatment, remove
stains from skin; and even hair transplants.
PURPOSE OF R Si D
The purpose of our activities were to guarantee a
superior competitive position for our army.
Given the superior
data by the accidental event at Roswell we reduced scientific
data to a definite development to fulfill a military require­
ment.
We never quibbled over who discovered or invented a
development.
The feeling was if a discovery was adapted to a
concrete development we would all be ahead in the game and the
nation would benefit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---er who discovered or invented a
development.
The feeling was if a discovery was adapted to a
concrete development we would all be ahead in the game and the
nation would benefit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gave us a thing.
Naif one scientific development or lead ever
came voluntarily from them.
We didn't expect any more than
was garnered by accident.
We were fortunate that 1958-1963
was an era of awakening.
The leadership, talent and funds
were available to take advantage of what we found in order to
1961
1960
1960
1960
Metals-molecular Alignment (Titanium)
1960
1961
1962
1959
1960
1961
1962
1952
1961
1960
Portable Atomic Generators (ion Propulsion)
1960
1960
1962
1960
1960

--- PAGE BREAK ---to
1961
1960
1960
1960
Metals-molecular Alignment (Titanium)
1960
1961
1962
1959
1960
1961
1962
1952
1961
1960
Portable Atomic Generators (ion Propulsion)
1960
1960
1962
1960
1960

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rocket Propulsion (Electromagnetic & Atomic)1961
1CBMs {Remote Brain wave control)
1961
Depleted Uranium & Atomic Projectiles
1961
HOSTILE OR WARLIKE ACTS
The EBEs, with impunity have performed many acts of war
in which they utilized advanced equipment and superior techniques
For an enemy that doesn't exist they have been extremely active.
During the 1950's and 1960's our policy makers had the same
attitude against the communist.
They didn't exist as an enemy.
This was known as the "Fig Leaf Policy. ”
The same can be said
of national policy on UFO's.
Although the Soviets threatened
our existence, they were not considered as enemies.
The same
attitude prevailed toward UFOs in face of the following acts
and activities.
Reconnaissance of our installations; tampering with earth's
environment and food supplies; abducting humans at will and
taking fluid and tissue samples; mutilations of cattle and
other animals; spying on our atomic installations; hindering
missile and space equipment testing; hampering our military
deterrent and nuclear deterrent; halting and interfering with
exploration of moon and mars; causing crashes of aircraft and
casualties among military personnel; and tampering with human
and animal genetics.
In view of the above we must ask, "will they fight a war
as we do, or will they attack in a more insidious manner on a
different level?
Folklore and history going back to the great

--- PAGE BREAK ---view of the above we must ask, "will they fight a war
as we do, or will they attack in a more insidious manner on a
different level?
Folklore and history going back to the great

--- PAGE BREAK ---

civilizations of the Sumerians tell us that the EBEs were
most advanced in the studies and manipulations of DNAs.
They
were adroit in cloning.
W e believed that the beings of the
Roswell crash were clones.
The Sumerians called them IGIGIs.
They were used to ferry the "Gods" to earth and continuously
stayed in subspace and circled the globe-earth.
Abductions of humans and animal mutations of tissue close
to that of humans were taken by the IGIGIs.
Our super computers
allowed us to find the "AIDS" virus.
It was discovered to be
a living entity in itself and attached itself to human cells.
The mutilations reached their height in the mid-1970's.
They
registered in the thousands.
The "AIDS" scourge appeared in
1981.
They once threatened to wipe out mankind.
Is this their
new insidious approach?
A serious food for thought.
JUST IN CASE - STAR WARS
We needed an advance base on the moon, but this project
was cancelled on us by the Department of Defense,
But, since
the security of the nation was uppermost, we continued our
quest.
Studies on strengthening all parts of the human body,
muscles, bone, brain, etc., so man could travel (or fight) in
space continued.
All phases of atomic energy proceed at fast
pace for heat, power, propulsion, fresh water production as
well as weapons of destruction continued.
We had an atomic
bomb the size of a football, a 280mm artillery shell, and
huge megaton bombs.
Portable nuclear power plants, a plant
6 ’x6'x6' which could be put in the ground and function for

--- PAGE BREAK ---bomb the size of a football, a 280mm artillery shell, and
huge megaton bombs.
Portable nuclear power plants, a plant
6 ’x6'x6' which could be put in the ground and function for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20 years unattended.
Nuclear propulsion systems, irradiated
foods, nuclear disposable of waste, applications to medical
needs, and disposal of human excrement and sludge, and even
how the human could restructure and sustain itself without food.
Another important project was the use of brain waves for
guidance and bodily cures.
In the destructive area, laser
was a weapon that could blind in a split second flash.
The
most frightening and destructive was (DEW) Directed Energy
Weapons.
A technological revolution was taking place in military
weaponry.
These directed energy technologies included lasers,
radio frequency weapons, high powered microwave and particle
beams.
The IGIGIs must know that a DEW weapon is transmitted to
the target at 300, 000 kilometers per second or zero flight time.
Problems of trajectory and lead are eliminated.
Targets become
thermally overloaded causing the irradiated surface to weaken
and melt.
The energy enters the UFO and explodes from within.
The energy can surround the target with an intense radiation
field that can induce lethal voltages and currents into electrical
systems.
In space applications (exoatraospheric) a particle beam
propagates well, in (endoatmospheric) it needs considerable
help.
A version of DEW could be a DNA bomb which could release
intense electro-magnetic action and could be designed to alter
or seriously affect genetic codes.
This is a frightening
thought which the IGIGIs must know.
On the surface we may appear puny and inadequate in the
face of UFO technology, but just perhaps, this is not the case.
n

--- PAGE BREAK ---his is a frightening
thought which the IGIGIs must know.
On the surface we may appear puny and inadequate in the
face of UFO technology, but just perhaps, this is not the case.
n

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We never proceeded on the premise that this enemy never
existed and so "Star Wars" was born.
THE SOVIET CONNECTION
Gorbachev assured President Reagan that if an attack
came from outer space, they would join us to counter the
threat.
The Russians have information on UFO's which they
are still treating as top secret.
This information is in the
files of the KGB and GRU-
They lost Phobos two years before
we lost Observer in August 1963.
They wanted to hit the Mars
moon Phobos, with laser beams, but we objected and stopped
them.
There have been Roswell-type incidents in Russia and
they have gathered and analyzed many items which originated
with UFO's against their people and installations.
These
incidents and outer space events have been of great interest
to their scientific community.
They out-performed, and out-
spent us in many space efforts and we should probe them to
see if they had a golden age of R&D which could match ours and
also was kept secret.
CONCLUSION
Although the heart of this story appears to be the story
of the army R&D effort and accomplishments during the period
1958-1963, the real story is the people that made it happen.
They came from all walks of life, were honed in battles, in
the desert, on the mountains, in the rice paddies, the jungle
and in the air and on the sea.
They got to know themselves

--- PAGE BREAK ---y came from all walks of life, were honed in battles, in
the desert, on the mountains, in the rice paddies, the jungle
and in the air and on the sea.
They got to know themselves

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and assured victory in half of their battles, they learned
to know the enemy well and were victorious in a thousand
battles and won the war.
They brought back a fierce patriot­
ism and love of country.
Their grateful country entrusted
them with its deepest secrets and they entered the highest
levels of government.
They learned the system and recognized
their opponents.
Again they won a thousand battles, as they
had against the enemy from without.
Another dangerous enemy,
recognized by his actions lurked over the horizon and so the
battle preparations began.
Eventually and without fanfare these
Americans retired from the scene and took on a far greater
task - to educate their children and grandchildren on how to
improve, take and hold the world they had saved for them and
that even an enemy from outer space could not prevail.

--- PAGE BREAK ---task - to educate their children and grandchildren on how to
improve, take and hold the world they had saved for them and
that even an enemy from outer space could not prevail.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

On February 23, 1942, I was inducted into the U. S. Army as a
recruit.
Two-hundred-fifty of us left on a train from a small
town in Western Pennsylvania (California, Pennsylvania} and were
sent to the induction center at Indiantown Gap.
There I was
separated from my friends because I had made the top grade in an
I.Q. test.
I was sent to Edgewood Arsenal, where I took basic
training, and again was separated from my new found friends and
kept on the cadre again, because of an I. Q. test.
This
established a pattern for the future, whereby many assignments
were caused by I. Q. data on my record.
This followed me through
officer candidate school and even with British MI-19, in England.
Much happened in the ensuing 25 years, England, North
Africa, Italy, Germany, Korea, Vietnam.
It was my great and good
fortune to be thrown in with and become close to many great men
of the era.
Often I was amazed at. meeting and being able to
listen to and learn from giants of great wisdom and intellect.
Because of this I was able to analyze and put into proper
perspective great events of the 20th century, among which was the
perplexing and mysterious problem of UFO's and extraterrestrial
beings and how they could affect our lives and world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ective great events of the 20th century, among which was the
perplexing and mysterious problem of UFO's and extraterrestrial
beings and how they could affect our lives and world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FROM CRUDE COMPUTERS TO THE CHIP
At Officer School in 1942 we had to learn the air defense
problem.
Toward the end of the course, before receiving our
commissions, we had to take an examination.
It was a three hour
ordeal.
The first hour was general artillery and air defense
questions.
The second hour was mathematics, and the third solving
the air defense problem.
I breezed through the first hour in
record time.
The second hour I finished all the math problems in
half the time.
The
instructor, a captain would wander through
the class and would assist students having problems.
He saw me
sitting and not working.
He came over and said, "Having trouble
soldier?"
He was surprised at my answer when I said, "No Sir, I
am finished. "
He said, "It would n't hurt to go over the ques­
tions. "
Maybe I shouldn't have said what I did, but
being young
and naive, I said, "I don't have to sir.
I answered them all. "
He took my paper and placed his answer template over my answers.
His puzzled look explained his thoughts.
I knew they were all
correct,
The last hour was the most difficult.
We were handed a sheet
in which the four corners of our crude computer problem solver were
drawn in.
We had to fill in the rest.
In those days we had a
contraption which we called Mickey Mouse Ears.
Its two ears like
sound receivers we pointed in the direction of an aircraft and it
picked up the sound.
Then we had
a long tube about 8" in diameter
and 12' long.
It was filled with lens, which had like a prism at
Xi

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted in the direction of an aircraft and it
picked up the sound.
Then we had
a long tube about 8" in diameter
and 12' long.
It was filled with lens, which had like a prism at
Xi

--- PAGE BREAK ---

both ends and two binocular type eye pieces in the center.
We
moved the apparatus to try to pick up an incoming aircraft.
The
data in turn was fed to a computer type problem solver.
It had a
pear shaped cam around which a needle moved.
This solved the prob­
lem by mathematics (logarithm, sines & cosines).
The data was fed
to our fuze setters on the 90 mm guns and turned the guns toward
the incoming aircraft.
Crude but the best of its time - 1942.
I easily drew in cams, wires, gears etc. connected the four
corners in about 15 minutes.
The instructor was watching me.
I
looked down pretending to study the drawing and check the wiring
diagrams.
The captain came over, looked over my shoulder, and in
a few minutes he took my paper and said, "You are excused soldier. "
He continued, "I don't know how you do it, but fine work. "
I
answered, "Thank you sir, but neither do I know how I do it, but
it seems so easy. "
The next day at drill, I saw him talking to my tactical officer.
After the drill my tactical officer came up and said, "Soldier,
from now on you will be the company guidon bearer. "
I joined a 90mm BN at Camp Edwards, Mass., but was quickly
pulled out, and sent to intelligence school at Camp Ritchie, Md.
Promoted to 1st Lt. and sent to England and joined British M-19.
I was given a top secret clearance & a cryptho-analysis clearance.
I joined 5th Army in italy and was in charge of security and
crypthographic clearances and oversaw all of the equipment in
the Rome area allied command headquarters.
I personally guarded
the plans for the invasion of southern France and its ultra code
secrets; and met Winston Churchill.
I was granted additional clearance in Korea and the Far East
%

--- PAGE BREAK ---onally guarded
the plans for the invasion of southern France and its ultra code
secrets; and met Winston Churchill.
I was granted additional clearance in Korea and the Far East
%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Command, and worked on our code telecon system.
I was given
"Eyes Only" access, at the NSC, of the White House.
At the conclusion of my NSC tour, I was given command of a
missile BN.
During my short tour we went from tubes {some 3' tall)
to chassis, which _could be easily changed, to cards and transistors.
The data was fed to computers which contained oil filled data pots.
Radars had become wonders of efficiency and missiles were reaching
a spectacular stage.
All this during an 18 month period.
Then I became Special Assistant to the Chief of Army Research
and Development, Lt. Gen. Arthur G. Trudeau.
I became his chief
confident and investigator.
One of the most interesting phases of
my life was when the General and I sat for hours in his office dis­
cussing technical matters.
If Edwin Teller could be called "father
of the "H" bomb, Gen. Trudeau
could be called the "Father of the
ballistic missile".
Many of our most important developments began
during his tour as Chief of Army Research and Development.
Many
will second and attest to my view and conclusion.
He started project
Horizon - a military landing in the moon in 1959.
I used to sit in the General's office and we had lengthy dis­
cussions.
During one such session we discussed transistors and
chips.
During 1960 Gen. Trudeau gave a speech in which he said
that, "During the last fifty years we had advanced more, scientifi­
cally, than the combined years since the known history of man".
The General then said, during one session, "Phil, you told me that
in Rome you felt that you had been programmed, and all of your plans
succeeded.
You never made a mistake and none of our soldiers were
killed or installations damaged which was almost a miracle.
And
you discussed this with Pope Paul VI.
I often wonder Phil, if wesucceeded.
You never made a mistake and none of our soldiers were
killed or installations damaged which was almost a miracle.
And
you discussed this with Pope Paul VI.
I often wonder Phil, if we

--- PAGE BREAK ---er made a mistake and none of our soldiers were
killed or installations damaged which was almost a miracle.
And
you discussed this with Pope Paul VI.
I often wonder Phil, if we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

aren't programmed'. ' In front of us we had two chips.
One brown
and charred.
(He had previously shown me this and two men were
present).
Alongside, we had another chip.
Brand new, shiny and
enclosed in plastic.
On the plastic in gold letters was written
"North American Rockwell".
The General continued, "The transistor
should have taken decades to evolve, the chip
centuries.
But,
they are here in a short period of less than five years.
He said, "I am a religious man Phil, but I have to wonder.
You and I see these wonders almost daily, but we accept them and
go about our business. "
I answered, "True, General, but as I look
at these chips I have to wonder, in themselves they are out of
this world.
They will change many facets of our daily lives, but
there is one thing that bothers me.
Computers will develop to an
advanced degree; they will make possible gadgets and new types of
machines and control mechanisms, but they are and will be only
machines.
But what will happen when the greatest computer ever
created and can think (pointed to my head) the brain, with its
power to store and analyze, intergrates with this chip. "
I
picked them up and held them.
Will it be a blessing or a curse?
The General took them.
"I see your point Phil.
Developments
beyond our comprehension, space ships, space travel, possibly
at the speed of thought and mechanical fabrications controlled
by our brain.
However, Phil, not in our lifetime, but it will
come and these chips are the beginning".
We went about our business, ICBMS, Anti-missile missiles,
smart bombs, radars, computers, new control methods, etc. etc.
Some time later, the General was on a trip.
I often
went in his office, pulled out proposals from industry and other
studies and would work on them on the conference table.
Onemethods, etc. etc.
Some time later, the General was on a trip.
I often
went in his office, pulled out proposals from industry and other
studies and would work on them on the conference table.
One

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cloudy day, I cleared the table and placed the two chips on the
table.
I kept staring at them.
A violent thunder and lightning
storm came up.
I kept looking at the North American Space division
chip.
It had a small open window with small wires, a copy of the
old one.
During each flash of lightning I imagined some movement
of the small wires, especially when I concentrated mentally on it.
When I picked it up, the plastic seemed warm.
I thought my imagi­
nation of something I wanted to see and happened.
The storm passed
and I put the chips in the cabinet.
Later, I told the General the story and said, "Sir, I think
it was my imagination and I wanted to believe it could happen.
But, chips don't get warm.
The General locked at me and said,
"Perhaps yes, perhaps no; we are working on a mechanism or guidance
device, brain wave controlled, which can control aircraft.
Put
your full story on paper and give it to me.
No typing, just write
it up. "
Twenty five years later, I went through the same ritual in
which I used all my powers of concentration during a violent Florida
storm on someone very small and dear to me.
The last bolt of
lightning and thunder was so violent that all the lights in the
hospital went out, my trance broke, but, the equipment connected
to the baby accelerated.
The end result was that something
happened.
Perhaps it was again my imagination and I wanted it to
happen and so believe that it did.
However, I will accept the
end result.
My beautiful, healthy, red-headed grandson, was cured
of his condition and what remained, he outgrew.
Now, I will reveal for the first time how leads, guidance,
material, and data from possibly extraterrestrial, was used in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ured
of his condition and what remained, he outgrew.
Now, I will reveal for the first time how leads, guidance,
material, and data from possibly extraterrestrial, was used in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

development of serious undertakings, using the best of scientific
minds and equipment and why this intelligence could not be released
at the time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NINE CLEARANCES ABOVE
TOP SECRET
During my military career at one time or another, I counted
nine clearances above "Top Secret, " granted to me.
These
included cryptographic, satellites, code and intercept, special
operational clearances and the "Eyes Only" category of special
White House (NSC) matters.
They made available to me all matters
within the government which included "UFO" information.
My
colleagues of the NSC staff did not know of my special
clearances, Only C. D. Jackson, my superior, and the President's
special assistant and President Eisenhower knew of the
clearances.
Later, I filled in Senator Strom Thurmond and the
Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Hon. John A.
McCormick.
I was granted three operational clearances which could only
evolve after granting of the other clearances.
For example, one
& two were granted after a lie detector test; three, four, five
and six were what I called the "Masonic Ritual"; seven, eight and
nine followed.
These clearances vary from time to time, change,
are dropped or added to.
Soon after, I was placed on the U. S.
Army General Staff Corp. and wore the green General Staff star
emblem on my blouse or shirt pocket.
The first and basic clearances were for data marked
restricted, confidential and secret.
After an FBI investigation,
2 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---General Staff star
emblem on my blouse or shirt pocket.
The first and basic clearances were for data marked
restricted, confidential and secret.
After an FBI investigation,
2 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

forced the compilation of the Soviet atomic shots in space with
destroyed our satellites and wrote the reports on the Soviet
anti-missile missile atomic tests m sub-space.
Details of these
reports were entered into the system, but could not be
reproduced; especially the added information of the increased UFO
activity and the subsequent destruction by unknown forces of the
Soviet complex where these test originated.
To this day the
destruction and subsequent loss of life of Soviet technicians is
a mystery.
We knew it long before the Soviet admitted the loss.
I doubt that even of this late date if they could explain the
destruction of the facility.
With all the reports and evidence
we were never able to arrive at an iron-clad conclusion.
Strange
ion emissions were detected from space just before the explosion
and destruction.
(We often discussed if a similar fate awaited
us if we detonated atomic bombs in space).
We discovered that radiation effects from atomic weapons
fired in space are far reaching and extremely damaging to
electronic devices and have almost immediate fatal effect on
human life.
We knew the dangers of unhindered radiation in the
vacuum of space.
Extensive studies had been done on the effects
of radiation on a soldier, equipment and supplies in an atomic
war.
(Perhaps the liberals in our government saved us since we
could not fire atomics into space because of the test treaty with
the USSR).
The Soviets detonated a monster bomb over the Pacific Ocean,
It was reported to be 100 megatons (actually 60).
It knocked out

--- PAGE BREAK ---to space because of the test treaty with
the USSR).
The Soviets detonated a monster bomb over the Pacific Ocean,
It was reported to be 100 megatons (actually 60).
It knocked out

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all our communications in the Pacific.
Again, intense UFO
activity.
The Soviets never fired another.
(Why? We should ask
them).
Since we have never detonated such a bomb, we do not have
any data or the effects of this size weapon. (Perhaps the EBEs
(Extra Terrestrial Biological entities) did. )
Although we knew of some the effects we do not know the
actual data and findings.
A. s explained to me by Major General
Dale Smith of Strategic Air Command, "We cannot scale up a. 22
caliber shot to give us the effect of a 10, 000 bomb.
Neither can
we scale up a small atomic blast to show us the effects of a 60
megaton blast. "
In Army R&D, I had the title of Chief of Foreign Technology
Division.
I received all reports on foreign technology which
included foreign beings and events - those not of this world.
I
often headed teams of U. S. scientists, German scientist (Von
Braun's group) and U. S. technicians.
In the foreign technology
division I set up what I called "My nut file" - every wild eyed
inventor or theorist that came or wrote to us was listened to,
the promising ones were explored.
Most were "nutty, " but the
effort was worth it because every so often we uncovered a gem.
I was always the team chief and made all decisions,
No one
except the General knew of my clearances.
It was thought that my
being team chief resulted only from my closeness with the General
as his special assistant.
However, my authority did derive from
his position as Chief of Army R&D.
Industry soon learned that I
was his special representative and my decisions stood.

--- PAGE BREAK ---special assistant.
However, my authority did derive from
his position as Chief of Army R&D.
Industry soon learned that I
was his special representative and my decisions stood.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I received a piece of information that a group of
industrialists in a northeast state were on the verge of a break-
through.
They claimed that they were on the verge of a beyond
the "state-of-the-art" discovery.
This was the alignment of
atoms or molecules in steel.
We knew that this has been done,
but didn't know how it was done.
We had a sample.
A small
piece.
The report read it was found in the Western U. S. desert.
Believed to be from an UFO (not conclusive).
Under certain
conditions it would light up.
Although beyond our state of the
art alignment of atoms in a paper thin sheet of steel would give
it such strength that it was beyond our imagination.
It would
make a spaceship "light as a feather" but of such strength that
it would be collision proof and no debris in space could harm or
even dent it.
All our weapons would be obsolete.
Radiation or
cosmic rays could not penetrate the skin.
However, a different
alignment would allow the passing of cosmic rays or radiation and
make possible a propulsion system of such force that space travel
would be simplified, and at speeds beyond our comprehension.
Another alignment, and still retaining its great strength, would
make the steel or aluminum transparent.
Conclusions for guidance
made for Chief of U. S. Army R&D were mainly from R&D
laboratories.
There was strong evidence that molecules-atoms
were aligned.
When I briefed the General, his orders were, "Get your team
together, go visit them, if there is any breakthrough in
3 °

--- PAGE BREAK ---re was strong evidence that molecules-atoms
were aligned.
When I briefed the General, his orders were, "Get your team
together, go visit them, if there is any breakthrough in
3 °

--- PAGE BREAK ---

alignment we will take it over and fund the project.
This could
be bigger than Los Alamos. "
I left the next day.
At the conference I listened
carefully.
My team asked many questions.
They showed us an iron
bar and a tunnel-like apparatus which they claimed aligned the
atoms.
Their chief engineer explained the theory and process.
That night after dinner, I asked the head German scientist to
take a walk with me.
1 asked him, "Tell me your thoughts, Hans. "
His answers was, "If what they say is true, I will have to
unlearn everything I have ever learned and start over. "
He was
surprised by my answer when I said, "Hans, someday you may have
to. "
He stopped walking and looked at me and said, "I'll
remember what you said. "
The next morning I spoke for the first time and said,
"Gentlemen, if you consent, we will pay all expenses and arrange
for you to carry on your experiments at Lincoln Laboratories.
If
our lab recommends further experiments we will fund the project. "
The tests were inconclusive, but we continued our quest into
the mystery since we knew it was possible.
This alignment of molecules-atoms project was carried on to
perfect the skin of the future space ship.
But, it was also
important in a space suit or skin of a human.
We felt that for
prolonged space travel, the human skin atoms would need a
different alignment to protect vital organs.
This was possible,
but the state of the art was beyond u s .
But we kept searching
because the future of the homo-sapiens might be at stake.
Some

--- PAGE BREAK ---ment to protect vital organs.
This was possible,
but the state of the art was beyond u s .
But we kept searching
because the future of the homo-sapiens might be at stake.
Some

--- PAGE BREAK ---

evidence came from the skin of some sort of being in a photograph
sent to us, badly burnt and decomposed.
Not 100% conclusive
although with many unknown biological factors.
Scientifically
and from a medical point of view, unexplainable.
Subsequent reports of astronauts in space for prolonged
periods showed we were not ready for space travel.
(NEWSPAPER ARTICLE)
THE WASHINGTON POST
JULY 25, 1992
ASTRONAUTS LOST 25% OF MUSCLE MASS:
Shuttle-test results surprise scientists
A space biology mission flown last year aboard the
shuttle Columbia, which used astronauts as guinea-pigs,
has revealed unexpectedly dramatic effects of
weightlessness on the human body, researchers reported
Friday.
The effects included a severe loss of muscle
tissue, unexpected blood-pressure irregularities and
reduced ability to burn stored fat for energy.
The findings could mean that extended space travel
will be more difficult for humans than previously
thought, scientists said at a NASA briefing Friday, and
only more biomedical research in orbit will resolve the
question.
Kenneth Baldwin, a physiologist from the
University of California, Irvine, reported "a
significant and dramatic" reduction of 25 percent of
the muscle mass in weight-bearing muscles such as
calves and thighs.
Muscle loss had been predicted, but
not that much.
Recovery time was also unexpectedly long.
The
crew had restored only half the muscle mass after being
on the ground for a time equal to the flight: nine
days.
The muscles also showed a decline in their ability
to burn fat for energy, he said.
This forced them to
rely on carbohydrates, which the body has a limited
capacity to store.
As a result, future crews "will
need to increase their early intake of carbohydrates, "
he said.
Columbia 'was the first U. S. bio-medical flight
since 1974, and the first in the world dedicated to
comprehensive research on physiological changes in
weightlessness.of carbohydrates, "
he said.
Columbia 'was the first U. S. bio-medical flight
since 1974, and the first in the world dedicated to
comprehensive research on physiological changes in
weightlessness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Twice while I was in command of missile units, the radar
picked up and locked on objects traveling and accelerating over
3 000 mph once in New Mexico in 1957 and once in Germany in 1958.
On both occasions, I was instructed to destroy the tape
recordings and forget the incidents.
However, I did not destroy
the 1957 tape.
During my R&D days, radio transmissions were recorded from
outer space.
They were organized and orderly.
No the
disorganized space noise we tried to answer, but without success,
and were never able to decode the transmissions or establish
contact.
Information came from the super secret National
Security Agency.
Our conclusion on UFO; 's was that they existed.
We had
reports of objects from a mother ship and we believe what was
recovered were parts of sphere type probes.
Usually four or five
of these came from every saucer.
They are for protection and
reconnaissance.
Our radar images of formations probably are
these probes surrounding one or two flying saucers.
They
dissolve in a transparent alignment of atoms.
Our radar pass
through; they disappear from our sight, and are gathered into the
mother ship and are realigned for space travel.
We estimated
that our judgement was 75% accurate (based on fact), 25%
questionable.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar from our sight, and are gathered into the
mother ship and are realigned for space travel.
We estimated
that our judgement was 75% accurate (based on fact), 25%
questionable.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I was visited by two New Mexico State Police in my
headquarters.
They had arrested one of my sergeants.
The road
leading to Red Canyon was through a mountain range and was hilly,
full of curves and treacherous.
The Sergeant had been drinking
and decided he was going to push over with his car all the road
signs denoting curves, hills, speed limits, etc.
I was told in
case of an accident, and there was no highway sign, the State
would be liable.
In an agreement with the State, all soldiers
arrested by civil authorities would be turned over to the
military.
I assured the state troopers that the sergeant would
appear
before the civil court, pay his fines and damages; then
he would be dealt military justice.
It was close to noon.
I invited the two troopers to lunch
and to tour the range and witness a missile firing.
They
accepted.
During the missile firing I explained the function of
my radars and explained the power could explode a flash bulb in
the vicinity.
I mentioned that the radars had "locked on" an
object traveling over 3000 miles an hour.
They asked if it was an UFO.
I answered that I didn't
know, but my tapes showed it was the size of a large aircraft.
The conversation turned to the UFO crash of 1947.
I told them
I would like to tour the site of the crash.
They offered to be
my guides.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed it was the size of a large aircraft.
The conversation turned to the UFO crash of 1947.
I told them
I would like to tour the site of the crash.
They offered to be
my guides.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The subsequent tour, meeting with the Sheriff's office,
the newspaper editor, and the people was most convincing.
Their presence as my guides opened up many doors.
These were
down to earth people and not prone to exaggeration.
In every
case I invited the people I talked to, to be my guest at lunch
and witness a missile firing.
Most accepted since my base was
close by.
I was convinced that a UFO had crashed in the vicinity and
this fact had a profound influence on my future life and many
of my actions and activities.
PARTIAL LIST OF ITEMS FROM UFO CRASH AT ROSWELL FROM EYEWITNESSES
A rare earth element used for coloring glass violet.
(Neodymium)
I beams pieces that were present, has strange hieroglyphic
typewriting symbols across inner surface... pink and purple.
On each of the components boxes there would be scribbling;
it was almost a pink color on sort of a brown woodlike
background, like it was writing or symbols that explained
what this was.
... You know what stainless steel is like when you put heat
on it?
How it'll turn kind of purplish, with a kind of
blue hue to it.
That he saw a row of unrecognizable symbols,
several inches high on metal devices.
A lot of it had a lot of little members (I-beams) with
symbols that we had to call them hieroglyphics because I
could not interpret them, they could not be read, they
were just symbols.... The members that this was painted on
by the way, those symbols were pink and purple... lavender.
FIBER OPTICS
COLOR TRANSMITTING FIBERS
No wiring, as we utilize, was found in
the crashed craft
at Roswell.
However, a harness type system was discovered.
At

--- PAGE BREAK ---urple... lavender.
FIBER OPTICS
COLOR TRANSMITTING FIBERS
No wiring, as we utilize, was found in
the crashed craft
at Roswell.
However, a harness type system was discovered.
At

--- PAGE BREAK ---

first, it appeared to be a bundle of wires.
They had broken
loose from a type of control panel.
The ends of the wires
(about twelve) which appeared to be frayed, were intermittently,
emitting bright colors; upon examination it was found they were
not wires, but appeared to be glass or transparent plastic
tubes.
They could not be broken or cut and thought to be a
quartz type composition.
A conclusion was reached that through them was transmitted
different electro or magnetic wave lengths which accounted for
the various colors.
A pulsing current was transmitted through
the tubes.
They gave the appearance of earthly fibers, so a
descriptive terms was applied "Optical Fibers".
In reality
they were optical tubes.
This evolved into what is now known
as "Fiber Optics".
The tubes led to a type of junction box, where certain
fibers separated, and went to mechanism which acknowledged the
color (wave length) and would be activated.
How this was done
was not known.
No clear definition was made of the power source,
type of power or how the message was carried.
Fiber
Optics began its giant step forward (1947-1968)
almost (20) twenty years after the fiber harness was found and
analyzed.
1993
We know that what evolved.
Almost the whole future of
communication revolves around the new technology that usurped
wave guides.
That technology is communication by means of light,
waves traveling through transparent Optical Fibers, and which
is now recognized as the best and most efficient known to man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---That technology is communication by means of light,
waves traveling through transparent Optical Fibers, and which
is now recognized as the best and most efficient known to man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

QUOTE:
If we knew
it could be done, we could do it.
ILLUMINATION
The craft inside was illuminated by a yellow-greenish
light.
The light appeared to emit from solid metal, possibly
a variation of the atom alignment within the structure members
of the craft.
This was discovered early from small pieces.
When a light was applied at one end the whole piece would light
up and glow.
This was thought to be a variation of the fiber
optic tubes.
It is not known if the source of the yellow-
greenish light or glow was ever found.
CRASH AT CORONA
In 1957, 1171 sightings: from October to December;
701 sightings were attributed to Sputnik.
My
radars were accurate, I could not pick up Sputnik.
I had to put a 12”xl2" 90% angle on my R-Cat and
drones to get 1 square mtr. radar reflection,
object east to west over 3,000 mph.
My radars
were functioning and locked on.
My tapes verified
fact.
I could even read altitude.
In 1957 while in command of the Army’s Missile Firing
Range at Red Canyon, New Mexico, part of the White Sands Proving
Grounds, I came up against a most perplexing problem which 1 was
not competent to answer or solve.
There had been much specu­
lation that UFOs engage in time travel.
I later discussed
this with German scientists and they were of the opinion that
this was fact - the UFOs terrific acceleration and flashy dis­
appearance and appearance is caused by exit and entry into a
time dimension.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ists and they were of the opinion that
this was fact - the UFOs terrific acceleration and flashy dis­
appearance and appearance is caused by exit and entry into a
time dimension.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The theory has been put forth that there was a crash in
the Roswell area in 1957.
Some scientists claim that there
may have been two saucers collide in 1947.
One landed at
Roswell.
The debris from the second crash was found at the
Brazel Ranch.
An interesting version which I advance is that
the two UFOs were entering our time zone at the same instant,
they collided.
One went on to crash at Roswell, the other was
damaged and debris fell into our time zone.
It accelerated at
terrific speed, exceeding its own limits, and fell, just west
of Red Canyon, in the White Sands area, but it had gained 10
years, and crashed in 1957.
I had picked up the trajectory on my radar screens, but
did not report it since a few days before I had reported some­
thing travelling 3, 000 mph, and I was told to forget about it.
I called White Sands and reported I had lost a R-CAT (radio con­
trolled small target planes).
They reported a trajectory, and
it matched the one I had. picked up earlier.
I flew over the
area the next day and saw something metallic and round on the
ground at an angle.
(My R-CATS were red).
My pilot in the
small army plane asked what I thought it was.
I answered, posssi
bly a booster from our missiles or a piece of an exploded, missile.
I wasn't too interested in UFOs at the time.
I was known
as a serious commander and a good intelligence officer, and
did not care to get involved in such reporting.
If I would have
made an issue of the incident, I surely would have been ordered
to "forget it" or be typed a kook.
I was on orders to take
command of a combat missile battalion going to Germany, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---an issue of the incident, I surely would have been ordered
to "forget it" or be typed a kook.
I was on orders to take
command of a combat missile battalion going to Germany, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the problem was not going to go away, even if I thought dis­
cretion was the better part of valor.
I flew over the area
again, in a few days and the site was swarming with activity.
I have not seriously considered time or dimensional
travel which is another story.
I have seen little evidence of
this, but do not rule it out.
This is the arena for the
future.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE SOVIET-RUSSIAN CONNECTION
In 1947, Stalin called in his top scientists after "The
f
Sensational News generated by the capture of a Saucer that
purportedly had crashed near Roswell.
The scientists he
called were:
1.
Designer of Soviet Military Rockets and Launchers {Sputnik
in 1975)
2.
Chief Scientist - Liquid Fuel Rockets
3.
President-USSR Academy of Scientist
4.
Nuclear Physicist
5.
Yuri Gagarin - Astronaut
The lead has come from Soviet spies in New Mexico.
Our
atomic installations were in the area, and Soviet agents
were very active.
The Russians have obtained and utilized materials from UFOs.
They also have much information which is still top secret and
\
is in the files of the KGB, GRU and Airforce.
They also had
progressed rapidly in developments on "new" weapons, rocket
propulsion, nuclear propulsion, GEO-magnetism and effects of
EMP on satellites, ballistic missiles and communications.
A most interesting angle would be to establish contact
( Russian-Committee of Congress) on any information that they
obtained on the Roswell crash or scientific achievements from
such data.
Some of the items found and analyzed by the Russians

--- PAGE BREAK ----Committee of Congress) on any information that they
obtained on the Roswell crash or scientific achievements from
such data.
Some of the items found and analyzed by the Russians

--- PAGE BREAK ---

possess a similarity of items gathered in the United States.
Others closely resemble material collected by the U. S. Army soon
after the crash.
'
In 1993 I thought it would be most interesting if I could
find my Russian counterpart and discover if they did much R&D
from out of this world discoveries, secretly and hidden as we
had done.
I asked an old a c q u a i n t a n c e to ask a KGB General
this question.
He did.
The answer was, yes.
They did much
R&D, but it still is held top secret by the KGB and GRU.
If I
asked questions I wouldn't last long.
I understand what you are
looking for, but cannot help you.
ITEMS AND DATA FROM UFOs FOUND IN USSR
Silvery - looking like a tube or collar (similar item found in
the United States)
Found in 1975, analyzed in 1985
Alloy of some rare elements
67% Cesium - has photoelectric properties most electropositive
element.
10% Lanthanum - one of rare earth metals
Rare earth element
Some Neodymium - used for coloring glass violet
How fused together a mystery.
Has a magnetic anomaly - magnetic field was stronger on one side
than on the other, by a factor of 14.
Complex artificial structure - a mesh with fine gold thread.
Preserved at Cosmos UFO exhibit.
Space Exhibit-City of Stars
Entire section devoted to UFOs
(Humanoid Photo Priority)
A strange piece of metal and tiny black grains resistant to
acid and heat.
They were composed of iron silicone, sodium,
lithium, titanium, and aluminum.
Sample piece of ice, when melted, left a residue of magnesium,
aluminum, calcium, barium, and titanium.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y were composed of iron silicone, sodium,
lithium, titanium, and aluminum.
Sample piece of ice, when melted, left a residue of magnesium,
aluminum, calcium, barium, and titanium.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A complex artificial structure.
Under the microscope you can.
see a mesh with fine gold thread.
Some thread like material it looks like silk, but is not silk.
A very strong material (without) strands or fibers like silk
would have.
This was more like wire - all one piece or
substance.
NOTE:
The two above closely resemble scarred chip (integrated
circuit) I had in I960, and second part - supertenacity fibers.
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---s was more like wire - all one piece or
substance.
NOTE:
The two above closely resemble scarred chip (integrated
circuit) I had in I960, and second part - supertenacity fibers.
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE GOLDEN AGE OF RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
On April 1, 1958, General Arthur G. Trudeau, became
Chief of Army R & D .
I was at the time in command of the
71st Missile BN, in Germany, and had received orders to
become Inspector General of the 7th Army.
General Trudeau
came to Germany on a visit and I met him in Heidelberg.
He
inquired into my status and let me know I would be assigned
to his staff upon my return to the states.
During 1993, I received from the Army Office of R & D
a report declassified from secret, on the history of R & D.
Army R & D until 1958 came under Logistics, which was a
secondary mission to them.
In 1960, all the technical
service, laboratories etc. were all gathered under one head,
the Office of R & D.
This included the entire R & D budget.
The Chief was Lt. General Arthur G. Trudeau.
I also found out that a jeep loaded with debris from the
crashed UFO, and driven by a Cl C agent, had disappeared.
Those unfamiliar with the system would tend to believe this
assumption.
CIC is not a separate entity.
It has no command
function and its operational orders come from the AC of SG-2,
or Chief of Intelligence.
Debris as important as in this
find, would go through intelligence operational channels to
the Pentagon.
Here the Chief of Intelligence would turn the
debris over to R & D.
Since at the time R & D was poorly

--- PAGE BREAK ---find, would go through intelligence operational channels to
the Pentagon.
Here the Chief of Intelligence would turn the
debris over to R & D.
Since at the time R & D was poorly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

organized and under Logistics AC of S, G-4, it surely got
lost in the shuffle, since there was no organization or
driving force pushing it ahead.
I believe this was most
fortunate for the newly organized Army R & D .
I inherited
these files for Army R & D and was able to find a gold mine of
items and accompanying reports.
We didn't know for certain
what we had, but fortunately with General Trudeau's foresight
and authority we were able to give many marvelous developments
a push into the future.
I joined OCRD in early 1960.
General Trudeau created
the foreign technology division of which I became its chief.
He wanted me to have every clearance that he carried in addi­
tion to being his special assistant and I was appointed to the
U. S. Army General Staff Corps.
My duties as Chief of the Foreign Technology Division were
to keep track of:
1.
Foreign development of this world.
(Armaments)
2.
Foreign intelligence
and developments not of this
world (UFO’s and development projects)
3.
Act as interim project officer on select R & D projects
(Helicopters, anti-missile missile conventional weapons
etc. )
4.
All other duties as assigned as special assistant to the
CRD U. S. Army (Budget, Gorilla warfare, liaison with
Congress etc. )
However, there was one overriding and encompassing factor -
National Security.
1, 3, and 4 fell into what we called normal
activities.
But No. 2 was another matter.
Many experts felt
we were helpless in the face of a super alien technology.
We
never felt this way and went to work with what we knew and

--- PAGE BREAK ---vities.
But No. 2 was another matter.
Many experts felt
we were helpless in the face of a super alien technology.
We
never felt this way and went to work with what we knew and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

moved ahead to protect our country and maybe the world, JUST
IN CASE.
We can look back where 1958-196^ became the golden
years of research and development. I have previously covered
transistors, chips, computers, night viewing devices, super
tenacity fibers, metals, guidance systems and study of our
possible adversaries anatomy.
In addition we jumped far and high during early stages
of missile development - inertial guidance motors, materials,
communications, photography etc. and whole systems were born:
1.
NIKE AJAX
HAWK
NIKE HERCULES
PERSHING
NIKE ZEUS (SAFEGUARD, NIKEX)
JUPITER
REDSTONE.
EXPLORER
WAC CORPORALS
2.
Ablation:
Nose cone covers & surgical removable
body parts
3.
Project Horizon - Military aspect of space moon outpost
4.
Harp Program
5.
Infra - Red Passive Devices
6.
Project Magnet - Magnet Hydro Dynamics
7.
Plasma Research - Rockets
8.
Laser - Draw Missile on Target
9.
Sub - Kiloton Plant - 2 MEGA-watt, 2000 kilowatt plant
10.
Tactical Nuclear Weapons - Spent Uranium War Heads,
Honest John & 280 mm cannon
11.
Chemical & Psycho - Chemical Weapons
12.
Brain and Anatomy Studies
13.
Army Aircraft
Helicopters
L-5s, L-16, L-17's (Improved Models)

--- PAGE BREAK ---m War Heads,
Honest John & 280 mm cannon
11.
Chemical & Psycho - Chemical Weapons
12.
Brain and Anatomy Studies
13.
Army Aircraft
Helicopters
L-5s, L-16, L-17's (Improved Models)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the most complex problems we had to solve was (EMP)
Electromagnetic pulse, a type of radiation generated by nuclear
explosions.
We were hit with a two-sided sword on this phenomena,
The Soviet 60 megaton monster bomb which knocked out all our
communications in the Pacific and UFO activity which could
stop engines, electrical transmissions and communications.
This led into looking into project magnet and (EMF) electro­
magnetic field which travels with solar winds interplanetary.
We used physics studies of (MHD) Magnetohydrodynamics.
In 1968, James E. McDonald said, "There are so many
instances in which close passage of an unidentified flying
object led to radio and TV disturbances, that this particular
mode of electromagnetic effect of UFO's seems incontrovertible.
There is perhaps enough evidence pointing toward strong magnetic
fields around it leaves some UFO's that one might hypothesize
a mechanism whereby a UFO might inadvertently trigger a power
outage (Northeast blackout Nov. 9, '65) 15 March 1954, Wilber
Smith started (project magnet).
Whether the phenomena be due to natural magnetic causes,
or alien vehicles, there would probably be associated with a
sighting some magnetic or radio noise disturbance.
Also
there is a possibility of Gamma radiation being associated with
Chinook
Caribou
DeHavilland
Buffalo
Mohawk (Gruman)
14.
Conventional weapons and limited war
Rocket Fleshettes

--- PAGE BREAK ---so
there is a possibility of Gamma radiation being associated with
Chinook
Caribou
DeHavilland
Buffalo
Mohawk (Gruman)
14.
Conventional weapons and limited war
Rocket Fleshettes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

such phenomena.
It has been suggested by some mathematicians
that gravity waves may exist in reality.
While we know
practically nothing of such waves in nature, nevertheless, if
the possibility exists, flying saucer phenomena, being largely
an unknown field, might be a good place to look for such waves.
During one of our sessions, the Chief of Army R & D
Lt. General Trudeau, showed me a charred chip (integrated
circuit), possibly from an UFO.
Our estimates were without
this knowledge. It would have taken us 200 years to pass from
tubes to transistors to chips.
The mystery of the top secret White House report Majic
still remains a Majic/Secret of the unknown.
Although I was
cleared, I never saw the report in this form at the NSC
(White House).
However, the many briefings could add up to
a similar conclusion with some additions and changes.
Consistent with our mission at Army Research and Develop­
ment, we were doing much work on electro-magnetic interference
(EMI), cosmic energy and the phenomena of gravity.
Add
magnetic action and they were all inter-related.
I left the
arena, but often wondered what strides we were making.
During the latter part of 1990, Frank Wright, the head
of the Palm Beach Round Table Forum called and invited me to
be a guest at a lecture by Dr. Edward Teller, often called
the father of the H-Bomb.
I was also invited to the reception
after the talk.
Dr. Teller's lecture concerned SDI (Star Wars).
I was
sitting in the audience when the host, Frank Wright, stood up

--- PAGE BREAK ---H-Bomb.
I was also invited to the reception
after the talk.
Dr. Teller's lecture concerned SDI (Star Wars).
I was
sitting in the audience when the host, Frank Wright, stood up

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and he said, "Phil, I want you to ask Dr. Teller the last
question. "
Dr. Teller has injured his hip and was sitting
on a small table.
I went to the microphone on the right
side of the podium.
1 asked the following, "Dr. Teller, you
know the effects of the ion emissions from the Soviet monster
bomb explosion a few years ago.
What bothers me is, that
after all these years, have we reached the point whereby we can
harden circuitry in the SDI electrical components against such
an emission? "
When he heard the question, he sort of spun to face me.
He realized this was not an ordinary question, but from one
with knowledge on the subject.
Soon he seemed to get a look
of recognition, since he had seen me with General Trudeau.
His answer was, "Colonel, I hate to answer that question with
a yes or no, but here it is.
We are acutely aware of the
problem,
but have not solved it. "
Later we met at the
reception and discussed old times.
However, I had my answer.
In thirty years we had
advanced very little.
The effects of electro-magnetic inter­
ference, radiation, cosmic action and control of gravity by
alignment of molecules-atoms, or by any other means was
still many years away.
(Perhaps we will get another windfall
from outer space).
In 1972 Dr. Herman Oberth said "Today we cannot produce
the machines that fly as UFO's do.
They are flying by means
of artificial fields of gravity.
This would explain the sudden
changes of directions.
This hypothesis would also explain the

--- PAGE BREAK ---nes that fly as UFO's do.
They are flying by means
of artificial fields of gravity.
This would explain the sudden
changes of directions.
This hypothesis would also explain the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

piling up of these disks into a cylindrical or cigar-shaped
mothership upon leaving the earth, because in this fashion
only one field of gravity would be required for all disks.
They produce high-tension electric charges in order to
push the air out of their path. *. and strong magnetic fields
influenced the ionised air at higher altitudes... This would
explain
their luminosity... Secondly, it would explain the
noiselessness of UFO flight.
Finally this assumption also
explains the strong electrical and magnetic effects sometimes,
but not always, observed in the vicinity of UFO's. "
So important was the phenomena of EMP that the Department
of Defense has been simulating EMP to determine how to protect
circuitry in its planes, tanks, missiles and ships from being
disabled by it.
So important was this research that EMP
generators were established at Harry Diamond Laboratories in
Woodbridge (we knew that a 60 megaton bomb exploding over
minuteman silos EMP would turn the missile in the silo and
render it non-operational).
In successive years the Navy set up EMP Empress I EMP
Simulator in the middle of the Chesapeake Bay and Empress II
is projected.
The Army has EMP simulators at Redstone Arsenal,
Ala. and White Sands Missile Range, N. M.
Defense nuclear
agency has an EMP simulator at Kirkland Air Force Base, N. M.
and the Navy at China Lake, California.
1?

--- PAGE BREAK ---tone Arsenal,
Ala. and White Sands Missile Range, N. M.
Defense nuclear
agency has an EMP simulator at Kirkland Air Force Base, N. M.
and the Navy at China Lake, California.
1?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FROM OUTER SPACE
TO
EARTHLY RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
While I was Chief of Foreign Technology Division, in the
Office of Chief of Army R & D, I previously mentioned that I kept
what. 1 labeled my "Nut" file.
All new information, no matter from
what source, was passed in to me.
The "Nut" file was a four
drawer file cabinet.
Because of the classification of the UFO
material which zoomed in and out of the top drawer, the safety of
the material required a combination type, dial lock.
The method I
always used in intelligence was that the reports were accurate as
reported and the burden to prove them wrong was on me.
Most all
intelligence officers worked opposite from my technique.
They oper­
ated on the premise that the reports were wrong or inaccurate and
their analysis had to prove them correct or they were discarded. I
always had something to work with.
My method made for some interest­
ing analyses, especially when I had to present my findings to a
brilliant mind such as that possessed by Lt. General Arthur G.
Trudeau, Chief of Army R & D and former head of U. S. Army Intelli­
gence.
I will re-create for the reader, the three most important
findings I presented to the General on the UFO material.
1.
 The piece of metal? supposedly from an exploded UFO,
which was of a hardness and strength beyond our "state
of the art" and whose atoms or molecules were aligned.
5 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---erial.
1.
 The piece of metal? supposedly from an exploded UFO,
which was of a hardness and strength beyond our "state
of the art" and whose atoms or molecules were aligned.
5 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2.
The photograph and findings on the supposedly alien
bodies.
3.
The chip (semi-conductor) which supposedly came from no­
where, but can revolutionize the world, our way of life
and space travel.
THE INCREDIBLE HARD METAL?
The piece of paper-thin metal? and a piece of x-ray resistant
cloth was reported to have been picked up in New Mexico from the
fragments of an UFO which exploded.
I took it from a file 13 years
after it was picked up.
Accompanying reports stated that there
appeared to be an alignment of molecules-atoms, since there was a
dense mass.
X-rays or cosmic rays could not pass through it.
How­
ever, another similar alignment like a diamond would allow x-rays
or cosmic rays to pass freely and be transparent.
Both would be ideal
for space ship construction.
Cosmic action and radiation could be
shielded out or allowed to pass.
Such a discovery could lead to
a cosmic engine and also shield space travelers from many life
endangering situations and eventualities.
Aligned atom masses could
create gravitational fields.
Military advantages are obvious and
too numerous to list.
We also had a cloth-like woven fiber shiny
piece of fabric of great strength and resilence.
CAUTION.
At face value these reports imply that the piece of
metal and fabric came from an UFO which exploded.
We know that explosions can do extraordinary things.
An atomic explosion drove a piece of straw into a tree.
I commanded the Army Missile Firing Range at Red Canyon
in New Mexico in 1957.
Missiles often got away from
us.
One landed hundreds of miles away in Mexico.

--- PAGE BREAK ---straw into a tree.
I commanded the Army Missile Firing Range at Red Canyon
in New Mexico in 1957.
Missiles often got away from
us.
One landed hundreds of miles away in Mexico.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We had a destruct button and could detonate an errant
missile.
These parts were strewn all over the desert as
were parts of missiles from white sands and atomic tests
in Nevada.
It is possible that such an explosion could
condition a piece of the missile skin to be like our piece of
evidence and the hot, dry desert environment would further
align or condition the mass.
Nature aligns atoms.
X-rays
and cosmic rays will pass through a diamond or other precious
stones.
The rays will not pass through a synthetic precious
stone.
A strand of a web strung by a spider can be stretched
for miles before breaking.
A strand around the world will
only weigh about a lb.
The molecule-atoms are aligned as
the spider spins the strand.
The quest also began for super­
tenacity fibers.
RE COMMENDATION.
It is apparent that enough evidence exists that
aligning of molecules-atoms in metal and other substances is
a reality, but at the moment beyond our "state of the art"
whether our evidence came from outer space, man made, or from
nature is not important.
What is important is that alignment
of molecule-atoms is possible.
So important are the advantages
that we must continue our quest, and pursue any avenue that
leads to this great breakthrough and continue to finance any
approach that looks promising.
This could be a greater dis­
covery than the atomic bomb.
PHOTOGRAPHS AND MEDICAL REPORTS
ON
A BEING FROM OUTER SPACE?
The photographs in my files showed a being about 4' tall.
The body seemed decomposed.
They were not of much use to me, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---GRAPHS AND MEDICAL REPORTS
ON
A BEING FROM OUTER SPACE?
The photographs in my files showed a being about 4' tall.
The body seemed decomposed.
They were not of much use to me, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the medical reports were of interest.
Organs, bone and skin composi­
tion were different.
Heart was bigger, lungs were larger and many
muscle structures were different.
Bone makeup was unique.
Skin
composition was of great interest.
It appeared that atoms were
aligned to protect vital organs from cosmic action or gravitational
pull.
Not much was said of the brain which was large compared to
the size of the body.
There were many biological surprises.
Many
individual features were different but the overall structure was not
that much different than a human.
CAUTION.
During the course of history many strange beings
have appeared on earth.
From green humans to "Extra-
Terrestrial Biological Entities".
(This term had been
used at the White House during my NSC days).
The bio­
logical and evolutionary process appeared quite diff­
erent from ordinary earth humans.
However, we have
to consider many biological human factors.
Pavo Nurmi,
the unbeatable Finnish (Finland) distance runner had
a large, slow beating heart, and never tired in his
long distance runs.
The Aztec Indians have large lungs
and it is difficult for them to live in our environ­
ment.
They bleed profusely.
Certain athletes have
a different muscle structure.
Some races are subject
to diseases which most humans and races are immune.
Brain capacities differ and dwarfs differ from average
humans.
We must consider that every 50 million humans
one could emerge different.
RECOMMENDATION.
In his present biological structure man
cannot travel for prolonged periods in space.
<
■ -n3

--- PAGE BREAK ---t consider that every 50 million humans
one could emerge different.
RECOMMENDATION.
In his present biological structure man
cannot travel for prolonged periods in space.
<
■ -n3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Whether we found an "extra-territorial biological
entity" is not as important in the R & D arena as
to ways that we can develop so that man can travel
in space.
We must discover gravitational fields
for our space ships.
Most important, we must find
ways to shield our astronauts from cosmic action
or other radiation type fields.
Perhaps alignment
of molecule-atoms will solve these problems.
We
must continue the quest and finance such ventures.
Homosapiens future and existence might depend on
the success of such development, which at the
moment are beyond our "state of the art".
We must
continue at all costs.
THE CHIP
My Army career took me through the stages of vacuum tubes,
to chassis, which were small systems and could be easily changed
in sections, then came the card and transistors.
The 1941 com­
puters were oil filled data pots.
Then in 1961 I was shown a
charred semi-conductor chip, a small wafer formed like a disc
with an integrated circuit.
Next a new shiny transistor made
by North American Rockwell - all this within three years.
The
charred chip with a printed circuit supposedly came from the
debris of the crashed UFO.
I began to discuss the potential
with the German missile scientists and other knowledgeable
engineers in some of our large industries.
My discussions with
General Trudeau gave me a good insight on the potential of this
great development which seemed to have been thrust upon us from
nowhere.
But, it was here. Could we control this discovery
in the future or because
o f
the nature of our system lose it?
O ur system was geared to product improvement and not

5
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---where.
But, it was here. Could we control this discovery
in the future or because
o f
the nature of our system lose it?
O ur system was geared to product improvement and not

5
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

long range R & D, would aggressive, intelligent
countries such as Germany and Japan take it from us
and run with it?
The
repercussions on our economy
could be disastrous.
Such a development would be
a crime if we lost it by default and greed.
We saw
possible economic chaos in thirty years.
A dangerous
situation was evolving which could have a serious
effect on our way of life and the future of our
country.
The large corporations were constantly
coming to us for R & D money.
We spent about 2
billion dollars a year.
Much was in RDT&E money.
(Research, Development, Test and Evaluation).
These
were generally the initial production cost of an
item.
We discovered that the biggest percentage of
the large contractors were no longer investing in
long term research and development, but only in
short term product improvement.
In their opinion U. S.
Military R & D money was a bottomless purse and they
could dip into it for projects which never came to
an end.
When a project reached the "state of the
art" no end was within sight.
We refused to fund
projects any longer.
We foresaw an extremely dangerous situation
within 30 years.
(The Japanese for example would
move ahead while we were mired in product improve­
ment. }
This situation was widespread since
management and Boards of Directors looked for
yearly dividends and not into something that would

--- PAGE BREAK ---le we were mired in product improve­
ment. }
This situation was widespread since
management and Boards of Directors looked for
yearly dividends and not into something that would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

pay off, 10 or 12 years down the road.
We came to
the conclusion that no holder of large chunks of
stock should not be allowed to serve in a high manage­
ment position or on a Board of Directors, but this
was wishful thinking in our system.
RECOMMENDATION.
This discovery was so important and far reach­
ing that we should invest as much R & D money as
possible.
However, we should closely monitor each
contract, since large corporations have a habit of
never ending research, especially beyond the "state
of the art", and keep coming back for more and more
1 R & D money.
This program has to be a military-
industrial complex venture since its ramifications
deeply involve national security and would take
much of our resources to develop.
It is also
fraught with dangers when we reach the point when
computers can share information such as two humans
can do.
This discovery makes it possible for the
human mind to integrate with computers.
A super
human, out of control, is unimaginable in the
damage that this could cause our way of life.
We
will reach this point since we know our brain gener­
ates electrical impulses.
At the present I cannot
visualize hew to control such a vast and promising
discovery.
But, we must stay ahead in the race for
super chips and super computers.
When computers
start giving commands to each other, mind control
is not far behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mising
discovery.
But, we must stay ahead in the race for
super chips and super computers.
When computers
start giving commands to each other, mind control
is not far behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

During my tour at the NSC, and Army; I became good
friends with Maj. Gen. Dale Smith of the U. S. A. F.
He was most
knowledgeable in atomics and was advisor to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff on atomic matters.
During a discussion of the Soviet
monster bomb explosion of 60 megatons, Gen. Smith made the
statement that we could not scale up the effects of a. 22 caliber
bullet to give us the effects of a 280mm shell or a naval 16" gun
shell, as such we could not scale up the effects of a 1 kiloton
bomb to give us the effects of a 60 megaton bomb.
The ion
emission of a 60 megaton bomb were an unknown, although we knew
it had knocked out our communications in the entire Pacific area,
tfe also knew that an atomic submarine left an ion emission tunnel
in its wake.
We often wondered if this phenomena contributed to
the loss of three submarines.
During this period the transistor and integrated circuit was
beginning to flourish.
The future was almost unlimited in the
potential of this device.
But one lingering doubt always was
imbedded in the back of our mind.
Could we always control its
functions and effects.
We had no pattern or history to fall back
on, but we knew had to move ahead and, like the atomic bomb, hope
for the best and keep it under control.
Einstein said that the physical matter was nothing more than
a concentrated field of force.
A physical substance is an
intangible concentration of wave forms.
Different combinations
of structural patterns of waves unite to form chemical and

--- PAGE BREAK ---oncentrated field of force.
A physical substance is an
intangible concentration of wave forms.
Different combinations
of structural patterns of waves unite to form chemical and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

elements which in turn react to one another to form physical
substances.
Different wave forms of matter appear to be solid
because we are constituted of similar wave forms which resonate
within a clearly defined range of frequencies.
This not only
applies to our body, organs and brain, but control the physical
process of our world and universe.
To transverse space is to possess the means of manipulating
or altering the structure of space.
The method of achieving this
lies in the alteration of frequencies controlling the matter
anti-matter cycles.
If we eliminate time then different
positions would co-exist.
This is called zero-time.
Is this the phenomena that the transistor-chip would
unleash?
Would it alternate frequencies and eliminate time?
Would it create an elementary particle characterized by speed
greater than light, with energy decreasing proportion to speed?
(Physicist Gerald Feinberg).
As in the Philadelphia Experiment, could the transistor-chip
get out of hand and cause great damage and destruction?
We would
have to learn to control this wonderful device which could alter
our world.
We came to the decision that the danger was really
"man" who would control its output and not the device itself.
So
we move ahead.
One school of thought was that controlled frequencies of
integrated circuits could contribute to healings of certain
bodily misfunctions, diseases and even viruses.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I expect to stay on top of this and keep making recommenda­
tions from time to time.
The analysis, caution notes and recommendations were written
in long hand and returned with the General’s comments.
They were
turned into R & D Guidance proposals and returned to m e .
I
destroyed them by shredding and burning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---written
in long hand and returned with the General’s comments.
They were
turned into R & D Guidance proposals and returned to m e .
I
destroyed them by shredding and burning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When I reported to Lt. General Trudeau, I walked into his
office, saluted and said, "Reporting for duty, sir".
He
looked up and said, "I see you are aboard, Phil, watch things
for me.
The others do not understand. "
He placed a great
burden on me.
His trust in my word meant
that I could never
mislead him with my findings and recommendations.
I sat in my office one day and cleared my desk.
I placed
three items on it.
A small piece of a grayish type metal, a
faded photograph and a small charred piece of silicon with an
integrated circuit.
To the casual observer it would appear
that I had scoured through a trash bin.
However, I thought,
these three innocuous bits of seemingly trash could change
the future of the world as we knew it.
Years before I told a story to Pope Paul VI.
I was handed
the responsibility for intelligence and security of Rome, a
city in chaos.
I didn't know what to do.
The lives of my
people in Rome was my responsibility.
In anger, self-pity and
ignorance, I said to him (Pope Paul VI) I challenged your God
and mine, thinking, "Did you (God) put me here as a joke".
Pope Paul's answer was, "You were chosen. "
I answered, "He
must have programmed me and bears no malice towards me, my
record was 0-0-0 in 3 years.
No Americans killed, none of
my agents killed, none of our installations damaged and I
restored law and order.
Now in my office at the Pentagon, I
looked up, pleading to Pope Paul VI, as I had previously to
his God.
"Why me?
What do I do? "
Then I remembered General

--- PAGE BREAK ---red law and order.
Now in my office at the Pentagon, I
looked up, pleading to Pope Paul VI, as I had previously to
his God.
"Why me?
What do I do? "
Then I remembered General

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Trudeau’s words to me, "It's not important how you get a
position, but what you do after you get there. "
I reached down and formed a triangle.
The photo at the
top, the piece of metal at the bottom and the chip on the
other bottom side.
Three equal sides and three equal angles.
All three of equal importance but integrated.
Man would be
able to travel in space, in a space ship so strong and light
that it could resist all eventualities, with a guidance,
propulsion and problem-solving system that could get him to
his destination and safely back to his world.
This was what
I presented to my General along with appropriate recommenda­
tions.
The key was here, but would we see the results of
what we started in our life times?

--- PAGE BREAK ---is world.
This was what
I presented to my General along with appropriate recommenda­
tions.
The key was here, but would we see the results of
what we started in our life times?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The problem of solving how to harden circuitry against ion
emissions or radiation from atomic blasts is a formidable one.
In my "Junk Pile" was a piece of silver colored fabric.
Its
fibers were woven at different angles.
A type of angular cross­
weave.
A report speculated that each fiber or thread was composed
of a linear type atomic-molecular alignment.
It was of great
strength and was most difficult to cut.
It would often blunt any
shear type instrument.
We had discovered, in nature a substance
closely resembling the structure of the "Junk" fiber.
It was the
strand of a spider web.
This is a starting point for research and development.
We
must find a way to produce a duplicate of the spider web or find
a way for a natural product, similar to the production of silk
or a synthetic such as rayon.
Computers, electronic devices and wiring and cable must be
enclosed in a radiation or cosmic ray repellent case or cage.
It
is necessary to divert damaging outside interference from intermingl­
ing or damaging vital guidance systems, or the electronic brain in
an anti-missile-missile, or even in a vehicle designed for space
trave1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---outside interference from intermingl­
ing or damaging vital guidance systems, or the electronic brain in
an anti-missile-missile, or even in a vehicle designed for space
trave1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PLASMA
In 1960, General Trudeau said, "At that time as interested
as we were in space, it was quite evident that we weren't the
only people there. "
{Page 296, Memoirs)
Plasma--An ionized gas produced at very high temperatures
(in the stars) containing about equal numbers of positive and
negative charges, which is a good conductor of electricity,
and is affected by a magnetic field.
Plasma Engine--A rocket engine utilizing thrust from mag
netically accelerated ionized gases.
Magnetic Field--Exerts a force on a charged particle only
if it is in motion and charged particles produces magnetic
fields only when they are in motion.
Magnetic Encephalogram--A chart of the brain's magnetic
field.
ABLATION
A report on the piece of metal I had in my possession
stated that it possibly had a thin imbedded cover, over the
metal? or substance.
The nearest it came in analysis was
something like a mixture of plastic or ceramic.
From, this
information v? e developed a nose cone for our explorer
missiles which were Jupiter missiles based on our Redstone
elements.
This nose cone was a plastic or ceramic which
would melt away slowly, absorb the tremendous heat of going
through our atmosphere, at a slow rate, melt slowly with little
or no damage to the nose cone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---astic or ceramic which
would melt away slowly, absorb the tremendous heat of going
through our atmosphere, at a slow rate, melt slowly with little
or no damage to the nose cone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We began work on propulsion systems both fission and
fusion. This showed promise for space travel, but needed much
more development beyond 1963.
The most intriguing and
exciting fact was what we believed the UFO approach to high
speed and space propulsion, i. e. Plasma adjacent to the
vehicle to produce thrust or lift and change of direction
which we also needed on our anti-missile missile and anti-. -
satellite development.
This led to an amazing discovery.
A magnetic field on
plasma around a vehicle resulted in a glow and changes in
color as it picked up speed.
This suggested an intelligence
or extra terrestrial using a type of EMP propulsion system.
In color films often a halo or glow in colors appeared around
the boundaries.
We deduced in a solar (EMF) wind (Plasma) that a space; -
vehicle using magnetic propulsion could travel in space at
speeds approaching that of light, all other factors remaining
constant, such as the strength of the skin, of the vehicle and
man's ability to survive.
Above all this
remained the prob­
lem of gravity (spacetime) and free float.

--- PAGE BREAK ---remaining
constant, such as the strength of the skin, of the vehicle and
man's ability to survive.
Above all this
remained the prob­
lem of gravity (spacetime) and free float.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the perplexing problems that we faced, was how the
UFO saucers with their superhard atom aligned skin was put
together.
There were no seams, joint lines, rivets or weld
joints.
The same was apparent in the skin tight space clothes
they wore.
The silver strands of fibers possessed great strength
on the same order as the saucer skin components?, Metal?
We knew that strands if spider webs had great longitudinal
strength, but were not sure of their multi-directional strength.
We began research on supertenacity fibers.
Along with this
we hit upon a new technology or a new scientific direction.
Also at the time, for want of a better description we came
upon electromagnetic welding or reaching down to the atom level,
where atoms-molecules were always in motion and would allow
an electromagnetic action, which would take like atoms and fuse
their fields together. No seams - No separation, only one entity.
In 1962, I received information that a small firm near
Winchester, Va. had perfected a type of electromagnetic welder.
I took off alone and found an unpretentious group of wooden
buildings.
I entered a small office.
Since I was in uniform
I was given a warm greeting.
After a short briefing I was given
some literature and a brochure.
Next I was taken to another
building for a demonstration.
A piece of equipment about
10' x 10' x 8 ’ high with a control panel set to one side was

--- PAGE BREAK ---me literature and a brochure.
Next I was taken to another
building for a demonstration.
A piece of equipment about
10' x 10' x 8 ’ high with a control panel set to one side was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the building two pieces of metal were inserted.
They turned
on a type of generator called an electromagnetic generator.
It hummed softly and ran smoothly.
A button was pressed and
I heard a loud bang which sounded like it came from a powerful
force.
It was unlike the sound of a large cannon, or thunder
but more concentrated and localized.
I was a little startled
by the intensity of the loud sledge hammer type bang.
I was
used to artillery, missile boosters and rocket fire and showed
no emotion.
The test was repeated many times.
Each time with
the loud, intense; powerful, concentrated, implosion.
Each time
the two pieces of metal which I had placed in the machine and
marked; came out, with no seams, welds or joints.
I felt no
vibration or tremors or after effects of the powerful force
and resulting implosion.
The next day I returned to my office, wrote a report,
attached the literature and gave it to General Trudeau.
Unfortunately, the General was getting ready for retirement.
I followed in retirement a few months later.
I don't know if
the report with my recommendations was filed away into oblivion.
I will attempt to find out, if the system set back a most
promising development, or if it fell through the cracks and
got burned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y recommendations was filed away into oblivion.
I will attempt to find out, if the system set back a most
promising development, or if it fell through the cracks and
got burned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NIGHT VIEWING DEVICE
EYE BALL TO EYE BALL
The photograph didn't mean too much to me, but again one of
the medical reports intrigued my imagination.
It discussed the
eyes.
In itself the report was vague and inconclusive, but one item
was most interesting.
It said that there appeared to be a transparent
film over the eyeball.
It didn't say whether it was a type of con­
tact lens and described a lens such as in eyeglasses.
The appearance
of some layers appeared to be random, no pattern, but reflected
light. '
It was believed only in black and white.
Years before I had been issued a patent, based upon an experi­
ment by Leonardo DiVinci, which at random, reflected light, inten­
sified the image.
I had never seen a report where occupants coming
from a supposed airship used any type of flashlight or illumination
while moving in the dark.
I was especially interested in the men­
tion of some sort of film over the eyeball.
Nature provides some
of its creatures with an extra eyelid to protect against blowing sand,
cold, snow, etc. to protect the eye.
In this case it could be an eye
cover or eyelid with a two-fold mission.
One a random layered lens
type affair with some sort of electronic magnification to intensify
an image in the dark and an atomic alignment cover to protect the
eye against cosmic action or other harmful radiation.
This was
consistent with the skin structure which was designed to protect
vital body parts.
I wrote a report based upon this flimsy evidence that it was
possible to collect some light., even when it appeared to our eyes that
4 '7

--- PAGE BREAK ---as designed to protect
vital body parts.
I wrote a report based upon this flimsy evidence that it was
possible to collect some light., even when it appeared to our eyes that
4 '7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it was pitch dark-
The quest began for a night viewing device
or image intensifier.
This project would not illuminate the target,
but only intensify natural light.
We had reports that the Russians were working on such a device
for their tanks and in combat it would give the user a decided
advantage in night fighting.
A decision was made to set up a
special night viewing research unit at Ft. Belvoir, to speed up
development of such a device.
And so another project was set up on
what we called another "gift from heaven".
General Trudeau sent for me and handed me an envelope.
In it
was authority for an appropriation
to move ahead
rapidly to perfect a night viewing device.
He said to take a team
to Ft. Belvoir - they expect you.
If you
are satisfied on their
progress and approach, the decision is yours on whether we move
ahead or reorganize.
If you and your team are satisfied, then you
may tell them that the money is available and they are to move full
speed ahead.
I felt good, because of the General's confidence in me,
but again I got that sinking feeling in my stomach - "What if I
make a mistake".
I immediately called HANS Kohler, one of the German Scientists.
The youngest of the group, but I considered him the best of them and
a brilliant individual.
We spent the entire day at the lab and at
the end of the inspection sat down at what we called the exit inter­
view.
I began, "Gentlemen, my friend, Hans, is all smiles, I know that
look and need to ask him no questions.
In college I had a Speech
Professor, who never gave an "A".
He called me one day and said I am
going to give you an "A".
Your speech was one of the best I have
heard and you gauged the audience reaction perfect.
My speech was

--- PAGE BREAK ---e an "A".
He called me one day and said I am
going to give you an "A".
Your speech was one of the best I have
heard and you gauged the audience reaction perfect.
My speech was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

titled "Is There a Santa Claus? " and I went ahead to prove there
was.
I turned to the head of the lab and said, "I will act as
Santa Claus and you will be all smiles. "
He opened the envelope
and read the appropriation.
It was for a total of 6. 6 million
approved by General Trudeau.
He looked at me and said, "we were
a little apprehensive when we were told you were coming because
of your reputation. "
I said, "Yes, I have heard that I am at
times hard to deal with, that is true.
I hate stupidity, but
I always feel good when I deal with true professionals who know
what they are doing.
Congratulations, now give us a night
viewing device this year. "
I reported my findings to General Trudeau and he was
pleased.
Then I said, "Sir, we have just received reports from
a tank crew member who deserted, that the Soviet device is crude,
but works although it needs improvement.
I have prepared a
memo for your approval that we offer a premium of $250, 000. 00
for anyone, no questions asked, that brings one of the devices
to us.
It could save us much time and money;
although General
you will be called "immoral" by the do gooders if this is made
public.
Also, the Soviets have been nosing around since the
Roswell incident, so we will play the same game.
Our money in
this area was well spent.
As head of foreign technology, I had access to German dis­
coveries we captured after WWII, I also had the advantage of
discussing certain subjects with the German scientists.
One of
these was the infra-red image converter.
This information was
made available to our scientists.
The Russians also sought
this information.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s with the German scientists.
One of
these was the infra-red image converter.
This information was
made available to our scientists.
The Russians also sought
this information.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Soon after I retired from the Army -in early 1963, I was asked
by Senator Strom Thurmond to join his staff.
Congress had approp­
riated $300, 000, 000. 00 to continue research on the anti-missile-
missile.
The administration and mainly Secretary of Defense, Robert
McNamara, refused to spend the money which had been appropriated.
The reasons given were that it wasn't needed, might offend the Soviets
and intensify the arms race.
Senator Thurmond's Legislative Assist­
ant, later President Nixon's Council, and a graduate of West Point,
Fred Bruzhardt, found a little used senate regulation, whereby a
senator could close a session of Congress to discuss a classified
matter before the full Senate.
We asked for information from the
Department of Defense.
I prepared the request.
A few days before
the closed Senate session we had a meeting in my office in the base­
ment of the Capitol Building.
Department of Defense sent their scientific adviser, Harold Brown, and an Army
Colonel, the project officer.
During the session the scientific
adviser said, "I see my Assistant is calling you, Colonel, and you
seem to know a lot of details on the subject. "
I replied, "Yes,
I retired two months ago and I was the Acting Project Officer before
retiring. "
He reached into his pocket and said, "There is no use
in holding back, in this envelope are the complete details on which
we briefed President Kennedy.
I presume this what you are looking
for, officially. "
The sequence of events leading to this meeting began over a
year back.
I was looking through my "Nut File" and what the
General called my "Junk Pile".
I found a report on a brain different

--- PAGE BREAK ---of events leading to this meeting began over a
year back.
I was looking through my "Nut File" and what the
General called my "Junk Pile".
I found a report on a brain different

--- PAGE BREAK ---

but similar
to ours.
This seemed to me like a conclusion which
cancelled itself,
However, there were some words
and observations which were most interesting and aroused in my mind
some of my past experiences in Italy.
One was a weak signal given
off by the brain which was similar to what I had learned and typed
long, low frequency waves.
There also was a : mention of EMI, not
electro-magnetic interference, but electro-magnetic integration of
brain lobes.
Years before when I was the Chief of Intelligence and Security
of the ACofS G-2 (Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence of the Rome
Area Allied Command), I met a most interesting individual, Gislero
Flesch, a Professor of Criminology and Anthropology at the University
of Rome.
He taught me what he called the basis of life, or the
filament within each cell which was activated by cosmic action or
electro-magnetic waves from outer space and a balance of resonance
furnished electrically by the brain.
Professor Casmiro Franck was
one of the first scientists to photograph brain waves and became a
friend.
In his first experiments he used a rabbit brain.
Professor
Frank used long low frequency waves and was able to trace t h e m from
the brain to the body organs and muscles controlled by brain action.
He said and proved that paralysis is not that, no brain waves reach
the muscle to control it, but the wrong wave length is reaching
the muscle, and he corrected it many times.
Then, I became friends
with the famous Professor Castellani who had isolated sleeping sick­
ness and perfected the Castellani ointments for skin treatments.
He
said chemical reactants giving off electro-magnetic long low frequency
waves did the healing.
Ail three men were using long, low frequency
electro-magnetic waves in a miraculous manner effecting even cures
of cancer.
I fgiving off electro-magnetic long low frequency
waves did the healing.
Ail three men were using long, low frequency
electro-magnetic waves in a miraculous manner effecting even cures
of cancer.
I f

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I began to wonder if what we believed was a guidance system
was really a mechanism controlled by long, low waves emitting from
the brain that had been examined.
One report had mentioned what
appeared to be an electrical system which had been damaged.
We
could get no reaction by normal means.
In this period we had received reports that the Soviets could
change the trajectory of an I CBM in flight.
This posed serious
problems for our defenses and in addition, we know that the Russians
had conducted two very sophisticated anti-missile-missile test
firings and fired an intercept missile through an atomic cloud.
The General and I during one of our sessions sat down and
discussed this problem.
We concluded that abrupt and quick, tight
maneuvers could only be done by thought control, which in our think­
ing was the beginning of research in another dimension, and we often
speculated if this dimension could be in the realm of the so-called
UFOs.
I also told the General of my bout with the Gestapo hitman in
Rome.
Pure instinct saved my life and one of the learned professors
that I previously discussed, told me that instinct came about in
layers from another dimension.
At the time, because of my youth, I
didn't pay much attention to his words, but now the meaning of their
knowledge, to put it in clear wording, had taken on a different mean
ing or another dimension.
I had, a few years before {1957) commanded the Army's Missile
Firing Range in New Mexico, at the Red Canyon Range Battalion which
was in the white Sands area.
Also, later I commanded the Army's
first operational Missile Battalion in Germany, the 552 Missile Bn.
Upon our return to New Mexico, the 552 made the first perfect missile

--- PAGE BREAK ---rea.
Also, later I commanded the Army's
first operational Missile Battalion in Germany, the 552 Missile Bn.
Upon our return to New Mexico, the 552 made the first perfect missile

--- PAGE BREAK ---

shoot in the history of the U. S. Army.
Our targets were R-Cats
(radio controlled planes) and rocket drones.
These were targets
which flew in a constant flight path, but my Nike missiles could not
make quick and abrupt maneuvers.
They were something like a boat -
they could change trajectory, but slow and not abruptly and limited
in the angle of attack.
A fast moving aircraft, making violent and
quick, abrupt maneuvers, before arrival of the missile could avoid
and out-maneuver the incoming projectile.
General Trudeau made a decision, he said, "Phil, you are the
anti-missile-missile project officer, write me up a proposal on
what we have discussed.
I believe we are on the right track, and
we will, for the first time, be moving research into a new arena,
the realm of another dimension - a type of thought control of mechan­
ical items. "
As I left the General's office, I thought again, "Now what did
I get myself into?
Is this what those great men in Rome had in
mind when they confided in a young novice? "
As in the past, a flash
in my mind, "Why me), but if not me, who? "
But as General Trudeau
has said, "It's not how you get a position that's important, but
what you do when you get there".
I returned to my office and began to write.
(Although there
were medical implications, I would have to leave this to others.
My approach and mission was control of hardware, not bodily functions).
Before I began my proposal, I remembered an incident between myself
and the General.
We were walking down the Pentagon corridor toward
the helicopter pad, when I said, "General, sometimes I think my

--- PAGE BREAK ---posal, I remembered an incident between myself
and the General.
We were walking down the Pentagon corridor toward
the helicopter pad, when I said, "General, sometimes I think my

--- PAGE BREAK ---

son is a little kooky.
He tells me that engines talk to him,
so he can always find the trouble and correct it".
The General
stopped in his tracks, turned to me and said, "Phil, don't ever
say that again about your son.
Certain people have relationships
with material things which we don't understand.
He is one of them".
I asked myself, I wonder if this is what we were discussing to­
day.
The brain and its electro-magnetic integration with material
things - another dimension.
And so I began to write.
If the information, which three of Italy's most brilliant men
conveyed to me in Rome have any validity (which I am sure it was
valid) then, the vague reference to functions of the brain of an
unknown entity, open up many new avenues of research to us.
Long,
low frequency waves controlling organs and muscles of the human
body is a startling discovery.
Electro-magnetic integration of
brain lobes and possible integration with other brains functions,
close by and at a distance, is equally startling.
This approach
opens up the realm of another dimension.
I am sure we will never
unravel these secrets in our lifetime, but perhaps we can open the
door ever so slightly.
Initially we can apply our findings to the
easier task of improving and utilizing the data of long, low
frequency waves and electro-magnetic integration to existing hard­
ware, and still remain within our "state of the art".
MEMO FOR RECORD
Subject:
Anti-Missile-Missile
For:
Lt. Gen. Arthur G. Trudeau

--- PAGE BREAK ---electro-magnetic integration to existing hard­
ware, and still remain within our "state of the art".
MEMO FOR RECORD
Subject:
Anti-Missile-Missile
For:
Lt. Gen. Arthur G. Trudeau

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CAUTION:
)
NOTE:
I
CIA is working on what they call "Parapsychology"
and the Soviets on "Psychotronic Technology. "
They
are skirting the edges of our approach.
We should
be careful not to get mixed up into their cauldron.
We would be discredited and possibly stopped from
proceeding.
have not had this memo typed and recommend it be destroyed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ould
be careful not to get mixed up into their cauldron.
We would be discredited and possibly stopped from
proceeding.
have not had this memo typed and recommend it be destroyed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROPOSAL
ANTI-MISSILE-MISSILE
)
PROBLEM:
In recent months it has come to our attention that the Soviets can
change the trajectory of an I CBM after launch, once it is on its way to
a target.
In addition the Soviets have twice tested an anti-missile-missile
fired through an atomic cloud at the approaching I CBM,
Therefore, a
technical proposal must be drawn up as soon as possible for:
1.
An anti-missile-missile that will
be able to lock onto an
incoming I CBM and stay locked on through all evasive maneuvers
and destroy it before it reaches its target, and -
2.
All circuitry must be hardened to withstand radiation, blast,
and heat from an atomic detonation up to and including the
intensity of the Russian monster bomb explosion of 60 megatons.
DISCUSSION:
Our present anti-aircraft missiles centered around the nike-ajax,
nike hercules and hawk are not adequate against ICBMs.
We are virtually
defenseless against such an attack.
Present systems cannot remain locked
onto an incoming I CBM or find the target to destroy it once it changes
trajectory.
Spy satellites can find the I CBM once it is launched, but
here also we have a problem.
The Soviets have conducted two tests
into outer space with missiles containing atomic warheads.
In the
second test they were able to knock out two of our satellites.
The
damage was done mostly by radiation from an atomic blast.
Herewith we
have a two-fold problem, not only must the anti-missile-missile circuitry
be hardened, but the spy satellite circuitry must also be hardened from
all radiation or ion emissions.
Because of the Test Ban Treaty, we
7 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---the anti-missile-missile circuitry
be hardened, but the spy satellite circuitry must also be hardened from
all radiation or ion emissions.
Because of the Test Ban Treaty, we
7 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cannot perform similar test.
We will have to scale up data from
our testing to arrive at figures that we must assume are accurate
and shield against these eventualities.
The Soviets have suffered a severe setback from a mysterious
explosion at a nuclear plant near Kyshtym-Argayash area.
This
will give us time to move full speed ahead.
NARRATIVE (TECHNICAL)
The present design and configuration of our ICBMs is adequate;
however, internal changes are necessary, especially within the
warhead capsule.
A new computer (brain) and back-up computers
will be developed.
With the advent of the transistor and integrated
circuit chip such computer (brain) is within our capability.
Two
sections or lobes are visualized.
Both will be interfaced.
The
right lobe will receive positioning data from the orbiting
satellite.
This data will be electronically integrated into the
left lobe.
This computer or brain section through a harness
resembling our spinal and nervous system will transmit data to the
capsule controls through long low frequencies.
These will be more
difficult to jam, since the wave lengths will sweep within a cer­
tain range.
This lobe must be able to separate the booster and
separate the capsule once the incoming missile begins to change
trajectory or course.
It also must compute an immediate change in
intercept point, by firing rocket thrusters for an immediate change
in course of the outgoing anti-missile missile.
It will also give t
detonation command just before contact.
All data must be simul­
taneously integrated into the backup computer (brain) lobes.
(There will be a third computer aboard.
It will be inter­
faced with the other two.
This guidance will require special

--- PAGE BREAK ---aneously integrated into the backup computer (brain) lobes.
(There will be a third computer aboard.
It will be inter­
faced with the other two.
This guidance will require special

--- PAGE BREAK ---

clearance to be granted to all recipients and will be distributed
separately. )
OMITTED
THE THIRD BRAIN
CONCLUSION:
An appropriation of $300, 000, 000. 00 was requested for the
coming year (1963).
This requirement was treated as urgent and a
"crash" program was initiated.
At this stage I had to move on to other duties.
I was called upon
to testify before the U. S. Senate Judiciary Committee on events of
the four years that I spent at the White House.
I asked General Trudeau to appoint a full time project officer
on the Anti-Missile-Missile Project, which he did.
The war in Vietnam
was beginning to heat up.
We had established a special weapons labor­
atory in Vietnam.
I was assigned the initial task of compiling a feasi­
bility study on arming helicopters for combat roles which included the
study of the French approach on how they used helicopters against
guerillas in the Sahara Desert.
I was also assigned the counter­
insurgency problem.
I was assigned the task of getting a better fuse for the 40mm
grenade, since the one we were using was dangerous.
I got involved in the Tow-missile development spent uranium
projecticles and many other developments.
Dept, of Defense requested
I be assigned as Intelligence Officer of Special Forces in Vietnam.
During this period General Trudeau was considered as Deputy at CIA
or Commander of Army in Vietnam and it was agreed I would go with

--- PAGE BREAK ---ligence Officer of Special Forces in Vietnam.
During this period General Trudeau was considered as Deputy at CIA
or Commander of Army in Vietnam and it was agreed I would go with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

him.
I acted as Liaison with Capitol Hill and became friends with
many great men, such as John A. McCormick, Senator Thurmond, Senator
Russell and many others.
General Trudeau soon after decided to retire and within six months
I followed into retirement.
The gauntlet was passed on to others.
We stayed in touch with
them and many were capable individuals and friends, built up through
many years of service together.
1
-"7I
O
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt.
The gauntlet was passed on to others.
We stayed in touch with
them and many were capable individuals and friends, built up through
many years of service together.
1
-"7I
O
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Third Brain
The third computer must be a development beyond the "State
of the Art".
We have for some time been looking into an
apparatus which could fit into a pilot's helmet and through brain
waves (long, low frequency transmissions) control an aircraft
guidance system.
In this aircraft control the command module
in the helmet will be directly tied into the guidance system.
The third computer brain system in an anti-missile-missile may
be. thousands of miles away.
This confronts us with a most
difficult problem whereby the command (low long way, low
intensity wave) must be transmitted a long distance to the anti­
missile-missile or to a satellite then to the missile.
We could transmit sound with an electric current and
through a fiber optic, why not brain wave.
In 1960-61 we
started laser experiments with this in mind since EBEs had such
a beam.
They also had a head band which could intensify brain
waves possibly for mental telepathy.
Experiments in Europe show that the brain frequency can be
intensified from an outside source and then passed through the
brain to an organ out of resonance.
The intensifier would sweep
through a range of frequencies and the receiving brain mechanism,
would only accept the proper frequency that matched that of the
organ it controlled.
A constant sweep back and forth of the
proper wave length would bring the organ back to normal vibration.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cept the proper frequency that matched that of the
organ it controlled.
A constant sweep back and forth of the
proper wave length would bring the organ back to normal vibration.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Another theory, of the vague study of the Roswell Brain,
suggested that thought, a brain function, could be aimed at
a specific target anywhere on earth and bring about a desired
effect.
However, this theory delves into another dimension.
Part of this discussion would be similar to instinct, which
is claimed to be a brain function or the build-up or sharpening
process of the not too clear approach of layers? of another
dimens ion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ussion would be similar to instinct, which
is claimed to be a brain function or the build-up or sharpening
process of the not too clear approach of layers? of another
dimens ion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To remain within our "State of the Art" we should attack the
problem by intensifying the brain wave and projecting the energy
to the missile's third brain.
By radar, laser, radio waves or
other electronic means, this would allow instantaneous response to changes
in trajectory or angle of attack of the intercept missile.
In conclus­
ion, a control exercised by the human brain on an electro-mechanical
device,
Transmittal of radio waves or radar to control a distant object
is within our "state of the art. "
In 1947 during my visit to the
Italian Naval Academy, I was shown that all clocks in the Academy were
controlled by one radio beam.
Radio control of aircraft and even model
aircraft is a simple fact.
The Nike missiles were under control until
the moment of detonation.
But, the superimposing of a brain wave is a
factor beyond the "State of the Art".
Perhaps such a development could
lead us into another dimension and even overcome gravity.
Einstein in
his theory of relativity found in his geometric theory that, "space
time tells mass how to move, and mass tells spacetime how to curve. "
Perhaps a brain or thought wave integrated in an electromagnetic
wave could overcome gravity and eliminate the spacetime curve and travel
straight to the missile.
Science says mass against mass creates
gravity.
Could the insertion of a thought wave move into the fourth
dimension and create an artificial gravity so that man could travel
in space.
A gravity magnetic field controlled by man himself (mass
against zero).
Mv analysis of the Rose well mystery leads me to
believe that the above is a reality.
NOTE:
FOR GEN. TRUDEAU -
At your discretion, you should destroy the above.
The data comes
to me as I write, just as all my plans in Rome.
I can add nothing
8 2
further.
This is only guidance for others to continue or discard.our discretion, you should destroy the above.
The data comes
to me as I write, just as all my plans in Rome.
I can add nothing
8 2
further.
This is only guidance for others to continue or discard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R&D ADVANCES DERIVED
FROM A STUDY OF OMISSIONS
Periodically, I would sit in my office, close the door and
pick out an important project, and pile all information on my
desk-
Then I would begin a systematic evaluation.
Was I
correct in my conclusions?
Had I missed anything?
Was my
approach accurate, consistent and realistic?
I had learned
through this process
that often I found glaring omissions,
which just weren't there.
These often were as important as the
factual data.
Often I had to enter a part of an equation, like
a mathematical problem, to arrive at an answer to justify con­
tinuation of the project.
On this particular day I assembled all the information from
my UFO file.
I found some perplexing and important omissions,
or lack of information on the Roswell crashed saucer.
1.
No mention of subsistence or nourishment to sustain a
biological entity.
No mention of any foodstuff or necessi­
ties of life.
2.
No mention of water or drinking or cleansing of the body.
3.
No mention of refrigeration equipment.
4.
No mention of medical facilities except for a type of first
aid kit.
5.
No availability of toilet or waste disposal facilities.
6.
No rest or recreational facilities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---pment.
4.
No mention of medical facilities except for a type of first
aid kit.
5.
No availability of toilet or waste disposal facilities.
6.
No rest or recreational facilities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I would have to begin with certain assumptions or con­
jectures and then come up with some conclusion, and a course
of action.
From data available we could assume that the UFO's
were reconnaissance craft and could quickly return to a mother
ship to receive the necessities of life.
The other was that
they had solved gravity-time dimensional travel and could
instantaneously return to their base.
However, if I advanced
these theories, I could be placed in the category of a science-
fiction writer.
I ruled these assumptions - out, for the present.
I thought back a few years, to what I had been taught in
Italy, by some of the world's most famous doctors - the basis of
life.
The answer must lie in the nuclear area and types of
electro-magnetic energy.
In 1957, just before I took command
of the Army’s missile firing range at Red Canyon, New Mexico
and later the 71st Missile BN in Germany, I had extensive courses
in nuclear weapons and radiation.
I had learned not only the
destructive qualities, but the beneficial action of radiation.
The Army had been in charge of Los Alamos and perfection
of the atom bomb.
We also had built smaller nuclear power
plants which could be transported on barges.
(This led to a
reactor 6' x 6 ’ weighing 6 tons, is self operating, requires no
attending, will produce electricity for 20 years and is safe. )
Nuclear propulsion for ships and submarines is well known.
We had built an atom bomb the size of a football and a 280 mm
artillery shell.
Radio-isotopes have powered dozens of space
missions.
Plutonium-230 was used in the interplanetary space
craft
to Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune and Uranus.
There

--- PAGE BREAK ---lery shell.
Radio-isotopes have powered dozens of space
missions.
Plutonium-230 was used in the interplanetary space
craft
to Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune and Uranus.
There

--- PAGE BREAK ---

have been no failures.
They will function for 20 years without
refueling.
They function unattended, are safe, and the isotopes
come from nuclear waste.
We knew the answers were in the nuclear field, but here we
were against one giant obstacle which could stop everything we
were doing.
This obstacle was man's stupidity.
The environ­
mentalists warped concept or radiation we had to watch closely.
A good example is DDT.
It was a remarkable pesticide yet
ended in tragedy.
During WWII we carried a small OD color can
of DDT.
Often I sprinkled down my chest and back and then loosen
my belt to let it fall lower.
No allied soldier was stricken
with Typhus which had in the past decimated armies.
This
marvelous pesticide which almost eradicated Malaria, was stopped
by stupidity.
Millions of deaths can be attributed to this
gross stupid act.
(Bird population to which it was suppose
to be harmful has actually increased where it was used. )
"Lead Time" on a development, i. e. from the time it was
conceived, until it was in the hands of troops was 8 to 12 years.
In special cases we were able to reduce it to 5-6 years.
But
this was an exception to the rule.
Some of the Roswell develop­
ments were beginning to show promise in 1959-1960.
We were
able to add an impetus to certain projects.
This was especially
in the nuclear area.
We had begun important projects of
irradiation of food projects - meat, fruit, vegetables, grains,
etc.
This was most important for the world and for our
astronauts.
(Presently our astronauts eat irradiated foods).
Also on our agenda was nuclear medicine, nuclear disposal of
waste and pollution and. the far fetched, nuclear renourishment
and rebuilding of bacteriological functions.
n<

--- PAGE BREAK ---ds).
Also on our agenda was nuclear medicine, nuclear disposal of
waste and pollution and. the far fetched, nuclear renourishment
and rebuilding of bacteriological functions.
n<

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I laid my thinking or findings before the General.
I
said if my evaluation is true we are dealing with intellect
sending these expendable creatures to earth.
We must proceed
to send our humans into space, to challenge them.
Therefore,
food and water irradiation is most important.
This also would
eliminate the cumbersome, inefficient system of refrigeration.
At this moment the General stopped me and made a phone
call.
He said go get your hat, we have been invited to lunch.
Our helicopter picked us up at the pentagon and we flew to
the Quartermaster Center.
When we arrived we were met in style and escorted to the
laboratory.
We were shown a huge room full of shelves in which
were all types of meat, fruit and vegetables.
The pork was free
of trichina worm, chickens and eggs were free of bacterium
salmonella and so was sea food.
Fungus spores, insects and
their eggs were gone, fruits and vegetables were tree or vine
ripe and free of rot.
Even milk was not sour, although every
item in the room had been in an open shelf at room temperature
for over two years.
In these few years a great step forward had
been accomplished to replace refrigeration, freezing, canning,
frying, salting or smoking.
The Commanding General took us to an open shelf and said
"Gentlemen, pick your lunch, steak, beans, potatoes, strawberries,
all fresh, delicious and palatable, and harmless.
The year was
1961, the lunch was delicious, the steak tender, juicy and tasty.
Despite Nader's misgivings after 32 years, I am still healthy
and alive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---palatable, and harmless.
The year was
1961, the lunch was delicious, the steak tender, juicy and tasty.
Despite Nader's misgivings after 32 years, I am still healthy
and alive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the lunch General Trudeau said, "Gentlemen, my assistant
believes your work is of utmost importance to the U. S. Army, our
nation and the world, and will contribute to our travel in space.
1 am of the same opinion.
In the next two weeks submit to me
a supplement budget to expand your operation and I want it also
included into next year's budget. "
This series of events with the U. S. Army Quartermaster Corp.
gave a decided impetus to 1, 2, & 3 of my omission findings.
Developments were in good hands and well on their way.
The
next two, nuclear medicine and waste disposal, were another matter.
These were vast and specialized fields in many areas beyond my
competency.
OCRD had over 3000 officers with a degree as a pre­
requisite.
My duties, such as testifying before Congress, budget,
policies etc. took much of my time.
However, competent men were
chosen and the projects moved forward.
I kept a watch and
followed most projects with great interest.
One area began to show great immediate promise; the other
end of the nutrition scale, human excrement of sewage.
In Asian
countries sewage has and is being used as fertilizer and soil
conditioner.
In Japan and Korea I have seen giant carrots,
onions, turnips, etc. - two or three feet long and 5"-6" across.
In Korea giant garlic is used to make their national food Kim-
Chi.
However, in this country such a use is out of the question.
Public opposition and possible disease-causing organism rule out
its use.
Cesium-137 solved the problem.
Packaged in an
irradiator.
Sludge is run through the irradiator.
The product
becomes sterile, harmless and an additive fodder.

--- PAGE BREAK ---le out
its use.
Cesium-137 solved the problem.
Packaged in an
irradiator.
Sludge is run through the irradiator.
The product
becomes sterile, harmless and an additive fodder.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Another by-product became apparent and of importance to
the military.
Electronic lights of Krypton-85 or Tritium glow
with a yellow-green radio luminescence endure a wide range of
temperature, cannot cause fires, are visible for miles and last
close to 20 years.
(Possibility light found in ancient caves
or inside UFO crafts. )
The most startling developments began to appear in the
area of nuclear medicine, specifically in the knowledge of
medical diagnosis and therapy.
Detailed pictures of any part
of the human body could be obtained.
x-rays known for many
years originate outside of the body, nuclear scanning techniques
use radioactive materials inside, through the circulatory
system.
Nuclear magnetic resonance imagining builds up a three
dimensional image.
Here again man's stupidity or lack of
knowledge had to be considered.
The word nuclear was dropped.
As stated by the medical profession, "Not to offend the
sensitivity of emotional patients. "
(A courteous or nice way
to cover up the real description-the stupid patient).
Many of the R&D officers were extremely intelligent
men and the projects were moving at a good pace.
It w? as
discovered that many of the elements did not occur in nature
but created in a nuclear reactor.
Technetium-99
For brain scans, lungs & liver
For soft tumors
For the heart
Cancer & Sterilization
For lodges in bone marrow
liver
prostate
Technetium-99
For brain scans, lungs & liver
Galluim-67
For soft tumors
Thallium-201
For the heart
Colbalt-60
Cancer & Sterilization
Phosphorus - 3 2
For lodges in bone marrow
Yttrium-9 0
liver
Palladium-103
prostate

--- PAGE BREAK ---& liver
Galluim-67
For soft tumors
Thallium-201
For the heart
Colbalt-60
Cancer & Sterilization
Phosphorus - 3 2
For lodges in bone marrow
Yttrium-9 0
liver
Palladium-103
prostate

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were many other elements in nuclear medicine and they
are too numerous to mention here.
Number 6, on my list, lack of rest and recreation facilities,
was not a difficult problem.
Nuclear power solved the problem
of heat and air conditioning.
The rest was left to the astronaut
or space traveler himself and to psychological experts.
Although we were delving onto the basic structure of matter
and the atomic-molecular structure of the human anatomy, one
basic question remained.
If the extra-terrestrials were clones,
how did they reconstitute or restructure themselves?
Were they
expendable and only used to perform a mission and then replaced?
The former question seemed to be more logical and better
fitted our thinking and our approach.
They were delicate creatures
and faded quickly, but still they were humanoids.
I remember
the chemistry classes of my younger days, when chemical reactions
were described in plus or minus, or electrical patterns.
I
had many conferences with project officers and the German
scientists.
We invariably agreed the cells and even organs
could be replaced by cloning and sustained by electro-magnetic
means, applied to the basic structure.
Research took me to
medical libraries, but I did not learn much more.
General Trudeau retired, then in April 1963 Lt. General
Dwight Beach awarded me my Fifth Army Commendation Medal and I
left the search to others.
Every so often I would return for
a visit and was always well received with dignity and respect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ach awarded me my Fifth Army Commendation Medal and I
left the search to others.
Every so often I would return for
a visit and was always well received with dignity and respect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROBE AND CHALLENGE
The Apollo Moon program came to an abrupt halt with
Apollo-17, in 1972.
No clear explanation was given and the
U. S. continued with manned Earth orbits only, by the Shuttle
Program.
Even the Russians curtailed and halted their Moon-
Mars program.
During the Geneva Summit Conference in November
1985 President Regan made this point to Soviet Chairman
Mikhail Gorbachev.
He said, "How much easier his task and
mine might be in these meetings that we held.
If suddenly
there was a threat to this world from another species from
another planet outside the universe.
We'd forget all the
little local differences that we have between our countries,
and we would find out once and for all that we really are all
human beings here on the earth together. "
In view of this, were we threatened by superior beings
with super technology; were we scared off and did we decide not
to fight and sit and hope for the best.
We never had this
view in the military and as far back as 1960 were preparing,
"Just in Case".
However, diplomats and civilian officials were
often not of this opinion.
During the Geneva Conference in the
1950's, a Naval Commander, in charge of the U. S. Dispensary at
Geneva, came to us at the NSC and said in disgust, every time
Molotov pounded the table, my dispensary was crowded with our
negotiators seeking tranquilizers. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---S. Dispensary at
Geneva, came to us at the NSC and said in disgust, every time
Molotov pounded the table, my dispensary was crowded with our
negotiators seeking tranquilizers. "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

During the Korean War, I was on Gen. Douglas McArthur's
staff.
He was a brilliant individual and did not scare before
the enemy.
His decisions and directives were clear, precise
and well thought out.
In 1955 he made an astonishing statement
, "The Nations of the world will have to unite, for the
next war will be an interplanetary war.
The nations of the
earth must someday make a common front against attack by people
from other planets. "
UFOs produce high tension electric charges and strong
magnetic fields.
Strong electrical and magnetic effects,
affect the electrical systems on our space craft, often with
serious and devastating results.
Therefore, we must produce
radiation or EMI hardened sensors, integrated circuits and other
electrical equipment which cannot be harmed or distorted by
electro magnetic forces.
We will then be able to compete
against their artificial fields of gravity.
Until such a time
we might be compelled to play a waiting game.
This is what we
meant when we surmised we will continue to develop aerospace
craft and weapons.
"Just in Case. "
It appears that NASA and the politicians backed off.
with a "Wait and Watch" attitude.
The space station was billed
as the next logical step in the exploration and journeys to the
Moon and Mars.
NASA's office of exploration has been abolished.
For the last 15 years the exploration, the organization planning
human missions to the Moon and Mars has been a small study
office in the Office of Space Science.
One glimmer of positive thinking remains and may rise in
importance of our enemy attacks in the biological area.
Bio-

--- PAGE BREAK ---s been a small study
office in the Office of Space Science.
One glimmer of positive thinking remains and may rise in
importance of our enemy attacks in the biological area.
Bio-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

medical research to help understand the role of gravity on
living systems is continuing.
Importance is being attached
to maintaining astronauts' health and productivity, understand­
ing biological responses to weightlessness and develop systems
for long term human space flight.
The micro gravity research
program is being funded.
This is a good sign.
All the biomedical, micro gravity and long term support
systems will be most important if we have to fight in space
or on the moon.
Congress wants to know what the new NASA will
do with a space station.
They should be told that we might have
to fight in space and not just spend the money to support 17, 000
prime contractors,
thousands of subcontractors and 2, 300 govern­
ment employees.
NASA should stop the impression of having no
strategy and stop irregular and disconnected strategic planning
and publicize advanced concepts and technology just as the
tremendous push NASA gave the computer ship and software section.
Above all, they should reveal the truth of their findings on
Moon and Mars gravity and other objects (UFO’s construction,
atmosphere, etc. ) found and seen on the Moon and Mars.
There
is ample evidence of alien activity on the Moon.
122 photographs
from NASA's science data center were examined and analyzed by
photographic experts with startling findings.
The authors of
"Alien Activity of the Moon" Fred Steckling, himself, was a
trained observer in astronomical studies.
Moongate, the NASA
military cover-up book contains 20 color photographs of U. S.
astronauts on the moon.
Various treaties demilitarizing the Moon, have been signed

--- PAGE BREAK ---ical studies.
Moongate, the NASA
military cover-up book contains 20 color photographs of U. S.
astronauts on the moon.
Various treaties demilitarizing the Moon, have been signed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by the U. S., USSR and other countries of this world, but I
wonder if the aliens recognize these treaties.
They have
violated our air space with impunity and even landed on our
territory.
Whether intentional or not, they have performed
hostile acts.
Our citizens have been abducted and killed.
They have endangered our space vehicles and the occupants;
scouted our sensitive bases and probed at will.
They have
mutilated animals on our territory and removed organs, possibly
for study, for ulterior motives.
The above are acts of war
which we would not tolerate from any worldly source.
It also
appears they do not tolerate any such acts on our part on
their bases.
We, in the military, long ago concluded they have voluntar
ily given us nothing.
What we gained from their presence we
obtained by accident and moved forward enough to challenge them
with their own technology.
The question is, will we continue to watch and wait until
it is too late?
Will we probe and challenge and upset their
timing?
Or will they force our hand?
The U. S. military has long known (1959) of the special
needs for man's mastery of space.
(1)
Means of inducing hibernative slowing down of body
processes without injury to the individual for long
space voyages.
(2)
Means of raising human alertness to the highest level
without impairing physical reactions.
(3)
Means of protecting human tissue, especially brain

--- PAGE BREAK ---l for long
space voyages.
(2)
Means of raising human alertness to the highest level
without impairing physical reactions.
(3)
Means of protecting human tissue, especially brain

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and eye, against nuclear cosmic or magnetic
radiation.
We not only have to harden electrical circuitry on our
hardware, but have to harden man’s tissue against the electro­
magnetic forces, such research was started in 1958, by sub­
ordinate units to U. S. Army Research and Development.
The Soviet-U.S. cooperation in the late 1980s showed
evidence that there was threat from another planet.
On Sept.
21, 1987, President Regan again said, "I occasionally think how
quickly our differences would vanish if we were facing an alien
threat from outside this world. "
On May 1988, Pres. Regan
added, "What would happen if all of us in the world discovered
we were threatened by an outer-- a power from outer space -
from another planet. "
In a February 1987 address, Gorbachev, chose not to dispute
such a threat on an invasion by extraterrestrials.
On Sept. 5
his foreign minister said, "Yes, absolutely, " that they would
join the U. S. against an alien threat from outer space.
Within
days of phobos 2 incident, unexpected steps reversed a DOD
decision to build two x-39 hypersonic planes, which would be
self-launching spaceships for military space defense.
The U. S. and USSR are aligning their space program against
a common enemy.
Fortunately, we enter the 1990s with a better
understanding of the biological processes of cell replication,
the function and code of genes and many inherited defects and
illnesses we still don't know enough, but enough to be able to
evaluate many maladies and diagnose their causes and effects.
Q Li

--- PAGE BREAK ---and code of genes and many inherited defects and
illnesses we still don't know enough, but enough to be able to
evaluate many maladies and diagnose their causes and effects.
Q Li

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wishful thinkers comment that extraterrestrials may be
benevolent.
However, there is no evidence of such benevolency.
We always kept in mind that the extraterrestrials- never
gave us a thing.
Not one scientific development or lead
ever
came
voluntarily from them.
What we did pick up was pure
accident.
It appears that there may have been a directive from
possibly their higher ups, not to pass any technology to us,
which was indeed a fact.
We were fortunate that 1958 to 1963
was a transit era of awakening.
The leadership and talent
(U. S. and Germany) was available to take advantage of what little
we found to proceed into a new scientific age.
We didn't expect any more than we garnered by accident,
because to whom could they give or entrust such advancements.
To civilizations which had killed millions of its people in
divesting wars and had just perfected weapons of mass destruc­
tion.
Who among the world's people could be trusted?
We
didn't know of any, not even us.
We would put it to military
use.
Get large industry aerospace to build it.
Here it would
stop and possibly never be utilized in the civilian market, or
delay for years.
In 1963, Senator Strom Thurmond accompanied
me to a meeting with Mr. Webb, head of NASA on this subject
which they called their "Tech Brief" program.
Although many hostile acts by extraterrestrials could be
considered accidental some were regarded as suspicious, such
as:
1.
Von Braun's reference to the deflection from orbit
of the U. S. Juno 2 rocket in late 1950's.

--- PAGE BREAK ---trials could be
considered accidental some were regarded as suspicious, such
as:
1.
Von Braun's reference to the deflection from orbit
of the U. S. Juno 2 rocket in late 1950's.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr- Robert Sarbacher
Research and Develop­
ment Board under
Dr- Compton during
Eisenhower Adminis­
tration
The only thing I remember at this
time is that certain materials
reported to have come from flying
saucer crashes were extremely
light and very tough.
I am sure
our laboratories analyzed them
very carefully.
Dr. W. B. Smith
We believe that we are on the
track of something which may
well prove to be the introduction
to a new technology.
The existence
of a different technology is borne
out by the investigations which
are being carried on at the present
time in relation to flying saucers
10 August 1953, Dr. Wilber Smith
It appears then, that we are faced with a substantial probability
of the real existence of extraterrestrial vehicles, regardless
of whether they fit into the scheme of things.
Such vehicles
of necessity must use a technology considerably in advance of
what we have.
It is therefore submitted that the next step in
this investigation should be a substantial effort toward the
acquisition of as much as possible if this technology, which
would without doubt be of great value to us.
1959
Dr. Wernher Von Braun
If the military has now acquired new technology as a result of
top secret research in UFO's and I am inclined to support this
hypothesis, we are now engaged in entering in closer.
We find
ourselves faced by powers which are far stronger than we had
hither to assumed.
In 1959 Dr. Wernher Von Braun, another great space pioneer,
made an intriguing statement, reported in Germany.
Referring
to the deflection from orbit of the U. S. Juno 2 Rocket, he stated:
We find ourselves faced by powers which are far stronger than
we had hitherto assumed, and whose base is at present unknown
to us.
More, 1 cannot say at present.
We are now engaged inhe stated:
We find ourselves faced by powers which are far stronger than
we had hitherto assumed, and whose base is at present unknown
to us.
More, 1 cannot say at present.
We are now engaged in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

entering into closer contact with those powers and in six
or nine month's time it may be possible to speak with more
precision on the matter. "
(Neves Europa, 1 Jan 1959. )
"It is impossible to confirm them in the present as it
will be to deny them in the future. "
Albert M. Chop - Deputy Public Relations Director NASA
We are being watched by beings from outer space.
U. S. GEMINI - Apollo Problems
GEMINI
7
Encountered UFO
GEMINI
9
1966
Scrubbed due to interference with radio hookup
APOLLO
1
1967
Jan
APOLLO
8
Intolerably high-frequency noise-A wave of
internal heat-Water in cooling system
evaporated,
APOLLO
10
APOLLO
11
Trouble with high gain system at the time
of fighting felt a bump through MESA
(Modularized Equipment Stowage System
had come off.
Weird radio noises came
from outside space craft.
Two UFO's
watching upon landing.
APOLLO
12
Complete electrical shutdown, ship appeared
to be hit by lightning.
Two UFOs followed,
one in front, one in back.
Static, whistles
and constant beeping.
APOLLO
13
Mysterious explosion of one of oxygen tanks.
APOLLO
14
Seismometer station went off has been operatic
for (4) years.
Later mysteriously, it came
back on.
APOLLO
15
Landed on moon, gravity and weight problems.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oxygen tanks.
APOLLO
14
Seismometer station went off has been operatic
for (4) years.
Later mysteriously, it came
back on.
APOLLO
15
Landed on moon, gravity and weight problems.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1
APOLLO 16
Problems with guidance system and navigation
system.
No attitude indication gimbal platform
had locked.
Electronic glitch.
Bad circuit
in steering system.
APOLLO 17
Program ended abruptly 1972.
NOTE
FIREFLIES
Yellowish green luminous particles can
penetrate into our spacecraft.
Effect
of particles from UFO's cause overloading
of electrical systems and electronic noise.
MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION
April 11, 1993
Japan's Hiten orbiter crashed near the moon's
furnerius crater.
It was the first spacecraft
from Earth to reach lunar surface since 1976.
Its purpose was to study how gravity assists
as opposed to engine firing could be used
to change a satellite orbit.
April 9, 1991
Mission sponsored by strategic defense
initiative wants to test a new lightweight
spacecraft components such as radiation hardened
sensors and autonomous guidance instruments.
SOVIET PROBLEMS
July 4, 1969
Super Booster 1
The explosion was first noticed by a U. S.
Air Force satellite (Ferret) as an electro­
magnetic disturbance, and was reportedly
observed by the NASA Nimbus 3 weather satellite
(Lunar orbit test. )
ZOND 5 B
The spacecraft made a course correction
maneuver at the moon to quicken the return and
make course more accurate, rather than
relying on the moon's unequal gravity.
SOYVZ 11
There are rumors that several problems includ­
ing a serious electrical fire on June 27
caused a premature end of the mission.
This
caused the cabin to lose all its atmosphere,
in about 30 seconds while at 168 km high.
This killed the crew.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

April 8, 1993
NASA administrator D. Goldin said NASA
was "Putting Off" plans for a return to the
moon and a mission to Mars, until w e ’re ready.
Aug. 24, 1993
Observer went dead on Mars.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1993
NASA administrator D. Goldin said NASA
was "Putting Off" plans for a return to the
moon and a mission to Mars, until w e ’re ready.
Aug. 24, 1993
Observer went dead on Mars.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LASERS
Lt. Gen. Dwight Beach, OCRD, Department of the Army
and my last Commanding General said in April, 1963, "The
first practical demonstration of the laser as a future tool of
man dates only from 1960. "
Lasers have undergone an intensive development since
1959 when Columbia University discovered that the principle
was sound.
The first practical demonstration of a laser beam
took place in 1960.
A technological accomplishment that came
as a direct result of research sponsored by the Army, Navy
and Air Force.
The Electronics Command was instrumental in
establishing the feasibility and practicability of laser range
finding in 1961.
In 1962, nine portable range finders capable
of being carried on tanks or helicopter were developed for
Army Signal Corps by Radio Corporation of America.
Also in 1962
GE Company engineers have used a beam of light from lasers to
strike holes in diamonds.
The 15 million laser research was
more than doubled in fiscal 1963.
Hundreds of industries were involved in laser research
and development.
Some were Hughes Aircraft Co., Sperry Rand and
Raytheon.
The Army's main research was conducted at Electronics
Command, Ft. Monmouth, N. J., The Missile Command, Huntsville;
the Night Vision Laboratory, Ft. Belvoir, VA: the Harry Diamond
Laboratories, Washington, D. C.; Frankford Arsenal, Philadelphia,
PA., the Army Research Office, Durham, S. C. ; Ballistic Research
Laboratories, Aberdeen Proving Ground, and U. S. Army Engineer
Research, and Development at Ft. Belvoir.
Medical effects of

--- PAGE BREAK ---y Research Office, Durham, S. C. ; Ballistic Research
Laboratories, Aberdeen Proving Ground, and U. S. Army Engineer
Research, and Development at Ft. Belvoir.
Medical effects of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

laser beams were carried out at Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research at Ft. Knox Office of the Surgeon General and
Lincoln Laboratory.
The pressure for progress was on.
Russia was experimenting
with lasers.
In the sixties Soviet scientist announced the
development of an extremely high-power crystal laser that used
fluoride doped with the RNRE metal dysprosium and that could
penetrate fog and clouds without attenuation.
They are also
working with O-switched lasers to cause detonations by a focused
laser beam - a development that would eliminate the use of wire
cable between detonator and firing sites.
They experimented
with liquid mirrors and have reported obtaining giant pulses.
We were able to vaporize carbon steel by a focused beam
emitted from a high-energy neodymium-doped glass laser.
Certain glasses serve as host materials with doping materials.
Neodymium is one of these rare earths.
The Russians found
neodymium in a piece of metal that they claim fell from a
flying saucer.
We also found this rare earth in metal from a
UFO.
It is readily apparent that the high energy and power densi­
ties, combined with the focus ability of the energy into
narrow beams make it possible to inflict damage at a distance
with the speed of light.
Incendiary damage could be produced
by laser devices with a 1 second-of-arc beam of various
energy levels.
Accordingly, a 50-Joule laser could set fires
at distances up to a mile.
Because of the narrow beam width,
essentially all of the energy can be brought to bear on the
target.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Accordingly, a 50-Joule laser could set fires
at distances up to a mile.
Because of the narrow beam width,
essentially all of the energy can be brought to bear on the
target.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lasers are able to produce temperatures in target
materials many times hotter than the surface of the sun.
The high intensity of the electromagnetic energy results
in extremely high voltage gradients and radiation pressures
of many atmospheres.
These three effects provide destructive
mechanisms capable of breaking down all kinds of materials.
In a test in which a laser beam impinged upon a stainless steel
sample, a crater was formed on the surface where the metal
was completely vaporized or blown away, and the effect of the
beam extended far below the surface damage.
Immediately
below the crater the steel had melted and been transformed to
cast steel.
Below the molten zone the material had been
partially annealed, thus voiding the effects of any heat
treatment.
A 0. 1 percent bandwidth would be sufficient to carry
100, 000, 000 simultaneous telephone conversation on a single
light beam.
A one second-of-arc beam could be detected at a
distance of 30 billion nautical miles by a 3" diameter
collecting lens.
During the decade 1960-1970, military scientists sought a
"Breakthrough into Practicality'' for the amazing
phenomenon (laser) that could revolutionize gun and missile fire,
communications, mapping, computer operation, medicine and
other fields.
It may even develop into a ray gun or "zap”
weapon.
The advances, without exaggeration could be spectacu­
lar and even miraculous.
In 1964, the army devised a range finder small enough
to be carried by a soldier.
In 1965 a laser light beam no

--- PAGE BREAK ---, without exaggeration could be spectacu­
lar and even miraculous.
In 1964, the army devised a range finder small enough
to be carried by a soldier.
In 1965 a laser light beam no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

thicker than a pencil relayed simultaneously the video
and audio signals received from seven television channels
broadcasting from the Empire State Building.
In 1966 the army
had an experimental high data rate communication link capable
of transmitting 10 million pulses per second.
Also, in 1966,
the Harry Diamond Laboratories were working on laser beam
technologies applied to intrusion detection, including area
surveillance through limited range radar and short range
altitude measurement.
In 1967 the army was using laser guns
as standard equipment to simulate heavy tank cannon in train­
ing gunners.
In 1968, the U. S. put into orbit
a space craft
to measure the earth's size and shape; the vehicle carried
special quartz mirrors to reflect laser beams sent from
ground stations to pinpoint the vehicle's position in space.
The method was called "interferometry. "
However, in 1968 it was determined that there were major
dangers inherent in the use of lasers.
The beam is so intense
that it can damage the retina of the eye.
Most human tissue
has the capacity to regenerate and heal, but not the retina.
Exposure for even a fraction of a second may suffer permanent
blinding burns.
Much of the retinal damage resembles that
caused by thermal effects, such as that brought about by too
close observation of atomic fireball or unprotected observa­
tion of the sun.
Even more disturbing is the fact that a
person accidentally absorbing damaging radiation would not be
even aware of it.
There is no pain associated with exposure -
not even noticeable flash-blindness nor after damage.
In

--- PAGE BREAK ---on accidentally absorbing damaging radiation would not be
even aware of it.
There is no pain associated with exposure -
not even noticeable flash-blindness nor after damage.
In

--- PAGE BREAK ---

addition to the thermal effects arising from pressure and
shockwaves, they also may cause photochemical and photo-
biological effects on the human body, (i. e. effects of
light on life, plants and electromagnetic radiation on
chemical reactivity).
Conversely, in 1968 it was concluded that lasers
offered the hope of interesting and significant medical
advances.
Controlled doses of laser radiation have been
used with great success to spot-weld and restore detached
retinas and cauterize wounds in fractions of a second.
In
experimental work finely focused laser energy has been used
to destroy and remove malignant tissue.
In other experi­
mental efforts, tumor implants in the liver, and abdomen,
difficult to reach and normally not removed in standard
surgery, have been eliminated by means of the laser pulse.
Lasers have removed tatoos and tumors from the skin and have
rejoined blood vessels without halting the flow of blood.
In the important area of eye, treatment is facilitated by the
fine focusing of the laser beam, by the fact that the beam may
be transmitted through the front of the eye and the surgeon
can observe instantly the effect of the beam.
When the beam struck my eye I heard a distant
popping sound, caused by a laser-induced
explosion at the back of my eyeball.
My
vision was obscured almost immediately by
streams of blood floating in the vitreous
humor, and by what appeared to be particu­
late matter suspended in the vitreous
humor.
It was like viewing the world
through a round fishbowl full of glycerol
into which a quart of blood and a handful
of black pepper have been partially mixed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he vitreous
humor.
It was like viewing the world
through a round fishbowl full of glycerol
into which a quart of blood and a handful
of black pepper have been partially mixed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was local pain within a few minutes
of the accident, but it did not become ex­
cruciating.
The most immediate response
after such an accident is horror.
As a
Vietnam War veteran, I have seen several
terrible scenes of human carnage, but none
affected me more than viewing the world
through my blood filled eyeball.
In the
aftermath of the accident I went into shock,
as is typical in personal injury accidents.
Dr. C. David Decker
With low-power laser hazards, the eye is the most
vulnerable part of the human anatomy.
Laser eye risk
primarily involves the cornea and retina including the
fovea.
The cornea might blister or burn, or laser induced
cataracts could form.
Ultraviolet holds the additional
characteristic of inflicting delayed injury, a phenomena
roughly parallel to sunburn in which the damage is not
always immediately apparent.
The threat of accidental or
deliberate injury from low-power laser irradiation is real,
and a means of protection must be developed before soldiers
suffer laser injury in combat.
Since 1980 we have come a long
way in offering this protection to our combat troops.
DEW
DIRECTED ENERGY
STAR WARS WEAPONS
The possibility for the military was enormous.
It is
only natural that the army's interest lies in weapons, which
are the tools of the trade.
Directed energy in the form of
lasers, microwaves (radio frequency) and particle beams
show great promise in developing the weapons future armies will
use to fight.
In the ensuing twenty years from 1980, great

--- PAGE BREAK ---asers, microwaves (radio frequency) and particle beams
show great promise in developing the weapons future armies will
use to fight.
In the ensuing twenty years from 1980, great

--- PAGE BREAK ---

advances were made along this line.
A technological revolution
was taking place in the field of military weaponry.
This
entirely new concept of weaponry promises to give the military
a new improved battlefield capability.
DEW weapons are transmitted to the target at 300, 000
kilometers per second.
In engaging a target at the speed of
sound, 331 meters per second.
The time it takes a DEW energy
to the target, it would have moved one millimeter.
The weapon
would virtually have zero time of flight.
Problems of trajector
and lead are eliminated.
High energy lasers cause targets to
be thermally overloaded, causing the target to melt. The laser
beam will cause optical target to "crazy."
The optical target
will craze in less time than needed to blink an eye.
Radio frequency weapons surround a target with intense
radiation that will introduce lethal voltages into electronic
circuits.
All unhardened systems are incorporating integrated
circuits are particularly susceptible.
In 1966 command status consoles at the launch center in
Great Falls Montana indicated that none of the ten missiles
could be launched because a "fault condition" existed in the
missiles and guidance systems.
The identical failures appeared
on March 5 and 20, 1967 at Malstrom AFB, Montana.
It was
reported that UFOs were detected by radar in the area.
Excess
radiation could also cause "unhardened" minute man missiles to
turn in their silos, causing serious damage.
In 1964, UFOs
destroyed an Atlas Missile at Vandenberg AFB.
Again, in 1973
interference took place in a Minuteman firing from Vandenberg

--- PAGE BREAK ---in their silos, causing serious damage.
In 1964, UFOs
destroyed an Atlas Missile at Vandenberg AFB.
Again, in 1973
interference took place in a Minuteman firing from Vandenberg

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to Kwajalein.
Identical interference can be caused by
beam type lasers in our radio frequency weapons.
In space application a particle beam propagates well
(exoatmosphere) in the atmosphere (endoatmosphere).
An
ionized charged particle beam must clear the path in front of
the high-powered laser.
Therefore, the DEW technology
requirements in space are not those needed for a tactical
battlefield.
DEW in space could provide us with a new
capability against space-based offensive weapons since these
weapons effects could enter a space vehicle and cause it to
explode from within.
Space applications for DEW is a highly desirable goal.
Shorter wave length chemical and excimer lasers are desirable
for use in space since they do not penetrate the lower
atmosphere.
The army has made a new giant leap forward by
seizing this new technology and these beam type weapons are
no longer a part of science fiction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t penetrate the lower
atmosphere.
The army has made a new giant leap forward by
seizing this new technology and these beam type weapons are
no longer a part of science fiction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What are the UFO-EBEs doing?
What do they want?
And what
are their intentions?
Because of their actions we assume they are superior beings
of superior intellect.
Are they?
Their activities include:
I)
hostile acts and use of advanced
equipment
2}
reconnaissance activity
3)
advanced propulsion systems
4)
superior medical techniques
5}
tampering with earth environment & food supply
6}
abduction humans at will and taking
fluid and tissue
7)
mutilations of cattle and other
animals
8)
surveying (spying} on our atomic
installations
9)
hindering missile and space
equipment testing
10)
hampering our military preparedness
and nuclear deterrent
II)
halting reconnaissance of the moon
and mars
12)
causing crashes of aircraft and
casualties among our military and
civilian population
13)
tampering with human and animal genetics

--- PAGE BREAK ---ting reconnaissance of the moon
and mars
12)
causing crashes of aircraft and
casualties among our military and
civilian population
13)
tampering with human and animal genetics

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At first look, we appear sort of puny and inadequate in the
face of the above.
But let us examine each in turn from our side
and point of view.
1)
RECONNAISSANCE:
Reconnaissance is a survey
of an enemy held area to procure military
information concerning the enemy's position,
strength and intentions.
In the military, we
viewed their activities and intentions as
hostile.
Plans were made for a military
presence in space and a study of their bases.
Star Wars was the outcome.
2)
SUPERIOR TECHNOLOGY:
Our radar upset their
plans and we moved full speed ahead from the
knowledge gained from their equipment which
we captured.
3)
SUPERIOR MEDICAL TECHNIQUES:
We have made
great advances in the last two decades in
bio-medical and study of the nuclear-
molecular base of genetics. Twenty years ago
we wouldn't have been able to isolate and
study viruses.
4}
SUPER PROPULSION SYSTEMS:
We have advanced
in rocket propulsion, nuclear and anti­
gravity systems.
5)
TAMPERING WITH EARTH'S ENVIRONMENT:
We have
tampered with their environment.
It appears
that they have bases on the Moon and Mars and
we have scouted the areas.
If they inhabit
large ships like phobos we have sent radio
and radar signals, which are a form of
electromagnetic action.
6)
ABDUCTION OF HUMANS:
We have studied their
EBE's and learned much of their biological
composition.
7}
MUTATIONS:
This has given us an insight into
their intentions.
They are studying the
animal tissues and organs nearest to human
types.
If this is to upgrade themselves or
to attack us, we don't know, but we should
keep our guard up.
They attempted some
secrecy by camouflage of the crews of the
black helicopters, which are believed to
disguised reconnaissance aircraft.

--- PAGE BREAK ---now, but we should
keep our guard up.
They attempted some
secrecy by camouflage of the crews of the
black helicopters, which are believed to
disguised reconnaissance aircraft.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8)
SPYING ON OUR ATOMIC INSTALLATIONS:
This
shows a concern and some fear on their part
that we have such a capability.
9)
HINDERING MISSILE AND SPACE ACTIVITY:
This
again shows a concern on their part.
Do they
fear military forays against their bases
which could cause them great harm?
10}
TAMPERING WITH GENETICS:
This is a two-way
street.
If their approach is a cleansing or
harvest of the human race, we are acquiring
enough knowledge to play the same game
against them.
CONCLUSION:
In all areas we are moving so that we could
challenge them on their own grounds.
However, we have one great
weakness which could give them superiority and we could lose our
existence - WE REFUSE TO BELIEVE THAT THEY EXIST.
This gives
them a clear field to operate without a challenge and all their
actions are of a secretive and hostile type.
If their intentions
are to take over this world and humanity, we are leaving them an
unopposed field of operation.
RECOMMENDATION:
In war, when in doubt about the enemy's
intentions, strength, etc., you must probe or force his hand.
Since, there is so much doubt in the UFO-EBE area we should force
them to react to our efforts:
1)
We should intensify "Star Wars"
efforts and fire at their UFO's or
mother ship.
2}
We should send a nuclear armed
probe at phobos on Mars.
3)
We should send an electromagnetic
probe at the moon.
De Gaussers as
used in the Philadelphia
experiment.
NOTE: The above should be done together with the Russians who
^ have a capability in this area and in some aspects surpass ours.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Gaussers as
used in the Philadelphia
experiment.
NOTE: The above should be done together with the Russians who
^ have a capability in this area and in some aspects surpass ours.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FLYING SAUCERS
(Germ an);
* F e b ru a ry 14, 1945
* Three m in u te c lim b
a t 1 2 , 400m
* speed 2 , 000km/h -
4 , 000 km/h
INFRARED DEVICES AND
CONVERTERS (German)
ROCKETS AND MISSILES
FLYING SAUCER
(R o s w e ll) :
* T r a n s is to r - c h ip
* Super te n a c ity
f ib e r s
* N ig h t v ie w in g
d e vic e
* F ib e r o p tic s
* M e ta l atoms a lig n e d
* A b la tio n
* Plasma re s e a rc h
* E le c tro m a g n e tic and
a n t ig r a v it y
p ro p u ls io n
d e vic e s
* Thought wave
in t e n s if ie r
* Humanoids - anatomy
and b ra in
* Lase rs
TIME TRAVEL
FLYING SAUCER
(G erm an):
* From B re s la u p la n t
a n t i- g r a v it y machine
and guidance system
PROJECT PHOBOS
VOSKHUD I
ROCKETS AND M ISSILES
OUTPOST ON MARS
ZAP GUN AND NEUTRON
RAYS
ION EMISSIONS FROM
NUCLEAR BOMBS IN 60
MEGATON RANGE
FORCE RAYS AND DEATH
RAYS

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce system
PROJECT PHOBOS
VOSKHUD I
ROCKETS AND M ISSILES
OUTPOST ON MARS
ZAP GUN AND NEUTRON
RAYS
ION EMISSIONS FROM
NUCLEAR BOMBS IN 60
MEGATON RANGE
FORCE RAYS AND DEATH
RAYS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pete Lorie, in his book interpreting Nostradamus, said
the 1990s effectively form a kind of positive echo of the
1960s.
The clairvoyant, Jean Dixon, also said, UFOs are
real.
But, I do not wish to deal in the paranormal or
abstract, but only in the area in which I have been trained -
intelligence.
This training covered a lifetime.
Among my
mentors were the British, Italians and many astute and pro­
fessional Americans, both civilian and military.
For the
purposes of this conclusion, I will dwell on UFOs and national
security.
For this task, I believe I was well qualified.
Besides the military aspects, I
chaired working groups on
national policy as a staff member of the National Security
Council under President Eisenhower.
FRIEND OR FOE?
UFOs have posed a threat to our national security.
They
have displayed effects (electromagnetic) on compass, radio,
ignition systems -and engines, both conventional and rocket.
They have displayed plasma glows around the perimeters of
their ships and extend and retract solid tubes of light,
inhibiting voluntary motion.
They have aboard sensors that react to radar surveillance,
and can pull up in close proximity of aircraft and vehicles

--- PAGE BREAK ---retract solid tubes of light,
inhibiting voluntary motion.
They have aboard sensors that react to radar surveillance,
and can pull up in close proximity of aircraft and vehicles

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and not disturb their instruments.
In the early-1950s an
Air Force General stated, "We have lost many men and planes
trying to intercept them."
They were able to fault our
minutemen missiles at will.
Each fault was traced to the
guidance and control system.
During ICBM test, unexplained
aerial vehicles interfered with the firing.
Automatic track
ing devices often would lock on UFOs.
I experienced this
phenomena twice while commanding U. S. Army Missile units.
Similar occurrences have taken pice in numerous foreign
countries.
A confrontation occurred at a NATO missile base which gave
evidence that either a force field or a "Star Wars" device is
aboard which can destroy projecticles fired at the ship.
They
can also disarm missiles fired from aircraft.
This shows
they have a vulnerability and must destroy our armament before
it strikes their ship.
Classified messages to the NSC were
the rule and not the exception of these incursions in our air
space.
Some reports and actual occurrences indicated that UFOs
are not infallible.
An explanation to the public from the
operational intelligence field would be unwise and create many
questions which could not be answered fully and comprehensible.
Pictures have been taken by some of our space craft, but
these are only pictures, subject to many interpretations, and
their value is extremely limited because they give no clue as
to what is inside of the craft or what makes it function.
The
attempt to explain such a sighting would not be worth the
effort to try to explain all the ramifications which at this
time are unknown or uncertain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat makes it function.
The
attempt to explain such a sighting would not be worth the
effort to try to explain all the ramifications which at this
time are unknown or uncertain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although the intelligence I had available added up to
hostile acts from a military point of view, I wasn't sure of
their intentions or mission.
Were they leading up to destroy
mankind and take over our world; harvest part of the popula­
tion and live among us, or permit us to advance, regenerate
their species and then leave.
These theories all have been
advanced, but none were certain.
They were only speculation.
I can only point to two events in which I had first hand
experience, i. e., the one thought planted in the middle of
the New Mexico desert, not far from the crash sites.
(During
World War XI after an artillery barrage, I was sitting, propped
against a tree.
I don't know if my eyes were open or shut.
One of my sergeants came and sat alongside of me and said,
"A penny for your thoughts, sir. "
I replied, "Sergeant, you
wouldn't gain a penny, my mind was a blank completely shut off)"
I don't know if this was normal, unique or abnormal.
But,
if they communicated by mental telepathy, it would be difficult
to penetrate to something shut off or register a message to a
blank memory.
However, one message came through, "A New World
If You Can Take It".
What did this mean.
Since 1957, we have
made great technical advances,
from items we gathered by
accident.
I often wonder was this planned? Was it a test and
are they pleased?
If so, do they want us to come up. to their
level by us lifting our own bootstraps?
This bodes well because
they may be preparing us, so they can live among us.
But, this
has a dark side, the alien harvest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---up. to their
level by us lifting our own bootstraps?
This bodes well because
they may be preparing us, so they can live among us.
But, this
has a dark side, the alien harvest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Later, as I was riding in my jeep, a rushing gust of wind
swept past me and the thought, "I return your salute. "
A
salute is a greeting between men at arms.
Does this mean that
the EBEs or IGIGIs are men at arms or soldiers, and as such,
will they fight if attacked?
I don't think so, since they have
let us develop many marvelous items such as super-computers,
Star Wars - ICBNS and "Dew" laser weapons.
Is there another
enemy lurking in space, and will the EBEs be our allies?
I
don't believe they will fight a war as we do with weapons of
mass destruction.
I cannot answer these questions, but one I can answer of
a certainty.
We have made quite a mess of our beautiful world
and our society is degenerating fast, and so a truism - "A New
World If You Can Take It. "
We must fight hard to take back our
world and regenerate our society.
It will take much more than
weapons and armies.
Since I spent a lifetime as a soldier, I like to think
that the EBE is a soldier; therefore, we have something in
common.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ciety.
It will take much more than
weapons and armies.
Since I spent a lifetime as a soldier, I like to think
that the EBE is a soldier; therefore, we have something in
common.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A bomb is an explosive missile delivered from the air and
has a point detonating delayed action fuse.
A bomb may contain
high explosives, thermite or fire bombs, nuclear explosives or
biological or germ warfare ingredients.
A new type or one not
yet perfected my man could be of a type which could release
intense electromagnetic activity either instantaneous by point
detonating or by delayed action, or a DNA bomb designed to alter
or seriously affect genetic codes.
While I was the A C /S , G2 of the Rome Area Allied Command, I
was most fortunate to meet and listen to lengthy discussions on
the basis of life and the human cell.
The filament of each cell
was activated by cosmic action or electromagnetic long low waves.
Each cell filament was kept in normal resonance by human brain
waves.
The most prominent was Professor Castelliani, who isolated
sleeping sickness and perfected the Castellani ointments for skin
treatments.
Prof. Casmiro Franck, who was the first to
photograph brain waves.
He perfected an electromagnetic
resonator which he aimed at the brain to cure bodily ailments.
And then the marvelous Prof. Gislero Flesch, who taught
•criminology and anthropology at the University of Rome.
He
lectured me all night sitting on a wall at the Isle of Capri on
the basis of life.
I made the stupid error of asking, "Where did
U 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---anthropology at the University of Rome.
He
lectured me all night sitting on a wall at the Isle of Capri on
the basis of life.
I made the stupid error of asking, "Where did
U 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

you learn all this? "
His answer, "Does it matter? "
I was
intelligent enough to answer, "No. "
He taught me the details of cancer.
I did not realize that
here in the early 1940' s, these men were delving into genetics.
(I turned over the books they gave me to U. S. doctors just before
I left for Korea).
At the time of their private discussions with me centered
around the human cell and its electromagnetic action tied in with
the brain through our nervous system down to the molecular
structure.
A study and laboratory reports show that the tissue taken
from animals and humans by the alien EBEs also centers around
cell structure.
So delicate and perfected is their advanced
approach that when they cut out the private reproductive parts
(vagina, penis, testicles) and the rectum, eyes ears, udders,
etc., they do not cut through cells.
The cells are separated not
cut through.
Even the brain is taken in a manner where there is
no cerebral trauma.
In their animal and human mutilations, the aliens have shown
a callous indifference concerning their victims.
Their behavior
has been insidious and it appears they might be using our earth
and manipulating earth life.
Skeptics will excuse them that
possibly they are benevolent and want to help, however, there is
no evidence they have healed anyone or alleviated human ailments.
On the other hand, they have caused pain, suffering and even
death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---evolent and want to help, however, there is
no evidence they have healed anyone or alleviated human ailments.
On the other hand, they have caused pain, suffering and even
death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We were convinced that UFO aliens were tampering with our
earth and they were operating with impudence and manipulating us
constantly and secretly.
We felt also that we could be
experiencing an invasion from without, but also there was the
possibility of an invasion from within.
Taunting us before our
very nose and we could end up in a conflict.
We felt the army did have a real place in space and we
really had a capability in this area which we had proven at Los
Alamos and Huntsville and use of German scientists.
(Gen.
Trudeau even suggested before the Congressional Committee on
Science and Astronautics that if space effort was taken away from
the army, that it be given to the air force).
At least they were
a military service and would fight if need be.
However, we lost
and space was turned over to civilian control - NASA.
But,
1 s
within a decade they began to realize there is a military aspect in
space.
Gen. Trudeau, Chief of the Army R&D, had a program of
addressing industry on R&D matters, technical intelligence and
applied engineering.
On page 30 of his memoirs, he said:
I think on every occasion that I went out,
the chairman of the board was there, the
chief executive officer who was usually the
president, and an impressive cross section of
their senior corporate officers or directors.
I might say even when I went to Sperry-Rand,
no less a person then Gen. McArthur honored
me by his presence at dinner, and he didn't
turn out for many. "
Sir Isaac Newton once told his colleagues, " I can see
further than most of you because I have stood on the shoulder of

--- PAGE BREAK ---his presence at dinner, and he didn't
turn out for many. "
Sir Isaac Newton once told his colleagues, " I can see
further than most of you because I have stood on the shoulder of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

giants. "
I have been fortunate and blessed that in my lifetime I
sat with princes, kings, prime ministers, popes, presidents,
great politicians, famous doctors and others and they conveyed to
me some of their wisdom.
For this I am forever grateful.
I was
a very raw recruit and my ego was flushed, that I was standing
with and conversing with probably the world's greatest soldier. '
and the chief of army R&D, father of the ballistic missile.
General McArthur I am sure knew or suspected what we were
doing.
W e believed as he did, when he said, "We may have to
fight in space."
DROPPING DNA BOMBS
The Philadelphia Experiment proved that tampering with
electromagnetism can be dangerous and not only lead to serious
effects on the brain, but great loss of life.
The Italian
professors when utilising their resonators on the brain,
fluctuated the long, low waves in a searching pattern and never
kept the patient longer than 15 minutes between the two spiral
type vibrators.
The affected cell would find its own wave length
and then to go back to normal.
This system was also used against
cancerous cells.
Although the AIDS-HIV virus is the most highly publicized
and politicized, there are others just as deadly and many
replicate and hide between epidemics.
The Ebola and Marburg
virus {hemorrhagic fever) has appeared in five different years -
1967, 1975, 1980, 1983, 1987.
HTLV-1, Human leukemia Virus I, hit

--- PAGE BREAK ---hide between epidemics.
The Ebola and Marburg
virus {hemorrhagic fever) has appeared in five different years -
1967, 1975, 1980, 1983, 1987.
HTLV-1, Human leukemia Virus I, hit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Japan in 1977.
Others are the influenza-A virus 1968-1986.
Nine
different virus samples were obtained from local epidemics - Hong
Kong, England, Port Chalmers, Victoria, Texas, Bangkok,
Philippines, Mississippi and Leningrad.
Then Hepatitis-B, 176
million carriers in China, Taiwan, South East Asia, Africa and
Greenland.
There are many, many others to numerous to name in
this study.
The origins of many viruses remain a mystery.
A new virus
replication and evolution becomes independent of the molecule
from which it came.
It acquires information needed to duplicate
itself and can determine its own destiny.
It achieves the status
of a new and independent life form.
An abductee, under hypnosis, revealed that the aliens were
working feverishly, in their laboratory upon human and animal
tissue and organs.
By telepathy they conveyed the message that
new strains of disease loose in this world could effect them.
A
question is did they intentionally release certain maladies
designed for a cleansing or harvest, or unintentionally through
intense radioactive or electromagnetic activity, unloose a new
life form which threatens their existence.
In the movie WAR OF THE WORLDS, the aliens were winning the
war to take over our world.
When strains of bacteria and
microbes which they never knew existed, destroyed them, the EBEs
fear a great epidemic coming with originates from poisoned water,
human waste and other pollution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---bacteria and
microbes which they never knew existed, destroyed them, the EBEs
fear a great epidemic coming with originates from poisoned water,
human waste and other pollution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Most of our epidemics begin in Asia, spread to Russia,
through Europe to the United States.
Three patterns of HIV
infections and transmissions have been observed in the U. S.,
Mexico, Canada, Western Europe, Australia and parts of Central
and South America.
HIV began to spread extensively in the late
1970's.
In the early 1980's, the pattern was Africa, Caribbean
and Haiti.
In the middle 1980's, the spread was Eastern Europe,
North Africa, Middle East and Asia.
The Congo, Rwanda, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zaire and Zambia have been devastated by AIDS.
In 1986, a second AIDS virus was isolated in West Africa.
It is now known that the virus crosses the blood barrier into the
brain.
These viruses may well change the way the world looks.
Virus infections select the host that survives, the aliens by
alternating the field, may be selecting the virus that survives.
In 1975-1976, there was intense mutilation activity.
This
continued until over 10, 000 cases were recorded.
This mutilation
did not involve only animals but humans as well.
Fluid and
tissue was taken from humans.
The mutilations were done with
precision and using advanced technology.
It appeared as laser
rh A’ VJ;
cutters were used,, bat this would have involved heavy, large,
expensive equipment supported by special wiring and heavy current
supporting equipment.
They took pains to keep their involvement
secret even to the point of using silent black helicopters and
disguised crew members carrying out the mutilations.
Of a certainty they were using this planet and earth life
including plants and vegetation.
They completely disregard human

--- PAGE BREAK ---d
disguised crew members carrying out the mutilations.
Of a certainty they were using this planet and earth life
including plants and vegetation.
They completely disregard human

--- PAGE BREAK ---

free will and performed other acts of aggression.
Introduction
of the AIDS-HIV virus, which appeared from nowhere in 1981,
whether intentional or accidental was an act of mass murder with
untold suffering and continues to mount unabated.
All indica­
tions are that they have launched an attack through our means
of reproduction which can spread to the eyes, brain and our
other senses.
They possess the electromagnetic means and know
how, for just such an operation.
Attacks and forays against their
bases should be launched and on a crash basis.
DNA electro­
magnetic bombs should be perfected to be launched against them
if the situation so warrants.
Skeptics and debunkers will certainly come forward.
If we
listen to them or continue the one-sided approach with the alien
EBEs then we can expect millions upon millions of deaths through
epidemics and pandemic.
A new cholera warning has been issued,
as well as a swine flu warning, and others will run rampant.
In our ignorance, we will continue to call them "plagues of our
own making. "
Tuberculosis is back assisted by AIDS causing two
million deaths a year.
GENETIC ENGINEERING - INSECTS AND FOOD
Many mutations in human DNA cause disease.
They are mapped
in the genome.
The caterpillar has the same DNA as the butter­
fly.
If you implement the DNA code that's inside a butterfly
egg, you build a caterpillar.
If you implement it inside a
pupated caterpillar you build a butterfly.
Because of super
computers, a double helix structure of the DNA molecule was

--- PAGE BREAK ---g, you build a caterpillar.
If you implement it inside a
pupated caterpillar you build a butterfly.
Because of super
computers, a double helix structure of the DNA molecule was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

found.
Therefore, complicated organisms must contain more
information.
Also, it has been discovered that besides the birds, bees
and humans, our food can be genetically engineered into forms
that not even mother nature can create.
Virus destroy 80% of a
typical squash growth each year.
Potatoes, tomatoes and melons
fight viral destruction, just as the AIDS victim fights viral
destruction.
Biotechnology called genetic engineering allows
breeders to insert fragments of plant viruses into a crop plan
to provide viral immunity.
However, some risks are involved such as an introduction of
allergy causing substances.
The new technology improves the
practice of the movement of specific and desirable fragments
of genetic material easily between unrelated organisms.
But
the system should be closely watched against the movement of
undesirable fragments between unrelated organisms.
There is
cross-breeding between similar species, but mixing of genes
from different species could be dangerous and purity
of foods
could be destroyed.
We must never forget that down through the ages it has been
a matter of historical record that the EBEs (or IGIGIS) are
masters of genetic manipulation.
A SIXTH SENSE IN THE NOSE
A study or examination of abductees has uncovered that a
type of electronic device has been installed within human nasal
passages.
Descriptions of the device closely resemble the
small transistor that I had during my R&D tour of duty,
(A

--- PAGE BREAK ---of electronic device has been installed within human nasal
passages.
Descriptions of the device closely resemble the
small transistor that I had during my R&D tour of duty,
(A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

small square shaped object with two lead wires coming out of the
top and a window in the center with fine wires imbedded).
This
proved to be a transistor or an integrated circuit.
Such a
device is not unknown today, but the question remained, if aliens
used this to send control signals to the abductees brain, how
is the signal transmitted?
Is it sent by an electromagnetic
transmitter or mental telepathy vibrations?
In 1994 a startling discovery was made by science.
Two clefts
were found just a few hundredths of an inch wide and about three
inches up the human nostrils.
Cells lining the ducts looked
like nerve cells.
They looked like receptor cells which pick
up sensory information and pass it on to the brain.
The organ
could send signals to the brain frontal lobes and the brain stem.
Thin wire electrodes could generate electric impulses at the
organs entrance which are sent to the olfactory bulb.
The
organ is called VNO (Vomeronasal).
The impulses go directly
to the command center for basic body functions, such as sleeping,
eating and mating.
They may also go to the limbic system where
emotions originate.
Experiments continue if the impulses can
evoke other physiological reactions.
If the aliens are using such a device, then they have dis­
covered a direct internal channel to the brain.
What use can
they make of this?
Control to impose their will on the human
subject for ulterior motives or can it be use for beneficial
effect by medical science.
They have pointed the way and we
should keep a close watch, to use the discovery or find counter­
measures if used against humanity.
However, the question

--- PAGE BREAK ---ct by medical science.
They have pointed the way and we
should keep a close watch, to use the discovery or find counter­
measures if used against humanity.
However, the question

--- PAGE BREAK ---

following is found in the book ALIEN HARVEST:
EXTRATERRESTRIALS:
Sexual organs atrophied
(159); number of eyelids vary with light
intensity; three eyelids move sideways (ISO) ;
no food or water found inside retrieved craft
(161).
MUTILATIONS: Human (60) map showing
mutilation area (104); taking fluid and
tissue from humans - why? (110); in gathering
tissue out of parts, but did not cut through
cells (75); something injected into brain
causing no cerebral trauma (82); laser
surgical instruments, beyond our technology
(103).
OVERT ACTS: Operating outside of and beyond
human race, manipulating us constantly and
secretly (47); disregard for human free will
(126); using this planet, manipulating earth
life (127); tampering with planet (227);
insidious behavior conflict (225).
HIGHER OCTAVE-ALIENS:
Sophisticated invasion
(111); biomedical robots-humanity (129);
engineered human life or earth (130-131);
exterminate imperfect humanity {226}.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lict (225).
HIGHER OCTAVE-ALIENS:
Sophisticated invasion
(111); biomedical robots-humanity (129);
engineered human life or earth (130-131);
exterminate imperfect humanity {226}.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EXPLORATION (SCIENCE)
CONTINUES
During the past 40 year period the U. S. Government agencies
have been accused of cover-up, lies, distortions and just plain
stupidity over the question of UFO's or extra terrestrial beings.
However, despite outward appearances a close scrutiny has shown
that the U. S. Government is still very much involved in the search.
Since 1947, numerous activities support this conclusion.
The
employment of resources, money and personnel is apparent and real.
Even today there are, in existence, surveillance centers and
systems, projects, working groups, reconnaissance activities,
evaluation centers, technical, panels of scientists, regulations
dealing with release of information, monitoring and assessment
centers, research centers and bureau bulletins.
Anyone familiar with the government knows that any of the
above listed organizations, groups, surveillance systems, etc.
require extensive studies and justification for funding and
assignment of personnel.
The underlying purpose is the existence
of UFO's, must be studied and monitored.
Without some hard basis
of fact, resources, heavy expenditures and large numbers of people
would be hard to justify.
The government system of studies, memos for record, coordi­
nation among interested agencies,
budget approval and personnel
assignments would be most difficult to justify without hard-real
facts as a basis for the request.
Approving authorities would
not sign the final paper without a listing of background data and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ld be most difficult to justify without hard-real
facts as a basis for the request.
Approving authorities would
not sign the final paper without a listing of background data and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

supporting evidence for a project or continuing study.
The continuation of U. S. government interest year after year,
in itself is evidence enough that a basis does exist for this
across the board activity.
A list follows:
.
The U. S. Space Command's Space Surveillance Center is located
deep inside Cheyenne Mountain, near Colorado Springs, Colorado.
The Center operates a Space Detection and Tracking System, a world­
wide network of radars, telescopes, cameras and radio receiving
equipment.
.
The U. S. Naval Space Surveillance System, headquartered in
Dahlgren, Virginia, operates an "electronic fence" stretching three
thousand miles across the southern U. S. and extending a thousand
miles off each coast.
The "fence" is a man-made energy field reach­
ing out nearly fifteen thousand miles into space.
.
The Defense Intelligence Agency's Directorate for Management
and Operations established "Project Aquarius" in the mid-1980s to
evaluate many of the "bogeys" detected by radar screens at
Cheyenne Mountain.
In February 1987, Colonel Harold E. Phillips of the DIA
chaired the first Pentagon meeting of a new organization called
the UFO Working Group.
.
The UFO Working Group, which is still in existence today, origi­
nally consisted of seventeen men: one Army and three Air Force
generals, DIA scientists, an Army colonel, three NSA officials, a
supervisor from the CIA's Domestic Collection Division, as well
as a technical team from the CIA's Science and Technology Directorate.
.
In 1986, Phillips held the title of Associate Coordinator of
Space Reconnaissance Activities and served as assistant to the
DIA's representative to the National Foreign Intelligence Board's

--- PAGE BREAK ---illips held the title of Associate Coordinator of
Space Reconnaissance Activities and served as assistant to the
DIA's representative to the National Foreign Intelligence Board's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Committee on Imagery Requirements and Exploitation (COMIREX), which
determined missions for U. S. spy satellites.
.
In March 1987, to get a handle on nuggets of hard information
that might be buried in the government's mountains of abandoned UFO
files, the UFO Working Group recruited the participation of Major
General James C. Pfautz, U. S. Air Force (Ret-), former chief of
Air Force Intelligence.
.
The UFO Working Group sought funding for its research.
A logical
candidate was BSA,
but General Pfautz was at odds with MSA Director
General William Odum.
Years earlier, Pfautz had critized security
procedures of an operation under Odum's command in West Germany.
(PHIL:
DO YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT THIS ITEM?? )
.
INSCOM, the Army's Intelligence and Security Command, headed
by Major General Albert Stubblebine, provided some funding to the
UFO Working Group.
.
In 1961, the CIA had issued a secret monograph titled The
Investigation of UFOs.
On December 30, 1947, the Air Force Chief of Staff directed
that a project be established to track and evaluate UFO sightings
that could be of concern to national security.
Project, code-named
"Sign, " was given to the Air Technical Intelligence Center.
Project Sign looked at 243 sightings and submitted its findings in
February 1949.
In 1948, the Air Technical Intelligence Center issued a classi­
fied "Estimate of the Situation" which concluded that the UFOs
were of extraterrestrial origins.
But Air Force Chief of Staff
General Hoyt Vandenberg ordered the Estimate to be burned before
it could be distributed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---concluded that the UFOs
were of extraterrestrial origins.
But Air Force Chief of Staff
General Hoyt Vandenberg ordered the Estimate to be burned before
it could be distributed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.
Later, another government task force, "Project Grudge, "
evaluated 244 sightings.
.
A 1949 memo by a Dr. Stone of the CIA's Office of Scientific
Investigation (OSI) was full of apprehension about unexplained
UFO sightings.
So, too, was a 1952 internal memo from Edward
Tauss, then acting chief of OSI's Weapons and Equipment Division.
.
In March 1952, the Air Force began its "Project Blue Book. "
.
Toward the end of 1952, the National Security Council had
ordered the CIA to determine if the existence of UFOs would create
a danger to the security of the U. S.
On January 14, 1953, a panel of scientists, CIA officials and
Air Force officers convened at the CIA's request for a series of
classified meetings (precursors of UFO Working Group) at the
Pentagon.
Chairman of the group's Scientific Advisory Panel was
CIA employee and director of the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group
in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Dr. H. P. Robertson.
Other panel members:
Dr. Luis Alvarez; Dr. Lloyd Berkner, physicist
and one of the directors of the Brookhaven National Laboratories;
Dr. Thornton Page, former professor of astronomy at University of
Chicago; and Dr. Samuel Goudsmit, specialist in atomic structure
and statistical problems at Brookhaven.
.
Robertson Panel spent twelve hours over three days reviewing
about 20 UFO case histories prepared by Air Force Intelligence and
two films of alleged flying saucers.
Panel concluded that reason­
able explanations could be suggested for most sightings and that
there was no evidence of direct threat to national security.
Furthermore, the Panel recommended a policy of "debunking" UFO
reports should be instigated.
(In 1988, 35 years later, the CIA

--- PAGE BREAK ---no evidence of direct threat to national security.
Furthermore, the Panel recommended a policy of "debunking" UFO
reports should be instigated.
(In 1988, 35 years later, the CIA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was still citing the Robertson Panel Report to the UFO Working
Group as the agency's only and final analysis of UFOs!!! )

On August 12, 1954, Air Force Chief of Staff General Nathan
Twining signed Air Force Regulation 200-2, part of which dealt with
release of information to the public.
It was permissible to inform
local news media when an object was positively identified as a
familiar object (such as a weather balloon).
But for unexplainable
objects, only the Air Technical Intelligence Center could determine,
after analysis, which data are worthy of release to the public.
.
By the end of the Eisenhower Administration, UFO sightings
had become "serious USAF business. "
.
Official secretiveness became even tighter in the 1960s.
Withholding news from the public concerning UFOs, Defense Depart­
ment Assistant Secretary Arthur Sylvester announced to the press
on October 29, 1962, was justified if the ends necessitated it.
He cited Air Force Regulation 11-7:
In certain situations infor­
mation requested by Congress may not be furnished "even in con­
fidence. "
In November 1961, Air Force Intelligence initiated two secret
projects: (1) "Moon Dust, " to locate, recover and deliver descended
foreign space vehicles; and "Blue Fly, " to facilitate expeditious
delivery to Air Force's Foreign Technology Division at Wright-
Patterson Field in Dayton, Ohio, of Moon Dust or other items of
great technical intelligence interest.
USAF 7795 was code number for one of Air Force's earliest
anti-satellite weapons systems.
USAF 7795 led to plans for "Project
Saint" and "Project Blue Gemini. "
Saint was an orbital UFO
inspector consisting of a TV camera and radar system to be affixed

--- PAGE BREAK ---pons systems.
USAF 7795 led to plans for "Project
Saint" and "Project Blue Gemini. "
Saint was an orbital UFO
inspector consisting of a TV camera and radar system to be affixed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to standard Agenda B satellite already in use by CIA.
Blue
Gemini was the "killer, " a military version of NASA's manned
Gemini capsule to approach, capture arc disable an uncooperative
satellite or UFO.
.
In 1968, NSA official Lambros D. Callimahos, founder of the
Dundee Society, an elite group of NSA career officers, circulated
a classified monograph entitled "UFO Hypothesis and Survival
Questions."
.
On December 17, 1969, the Secretary of the Air Force announced
termination of Project Blue Book.
Earlier that year, the Project's
study of more than 13, 000 cases had concluded there was no threat
to national security, that no sightings categorized as "unidentified"
represented any technological developments beyond range of present-
day scientific knowledge, and that r. c evidence existed that indi­
cated unidentified objects were extraterrestrial vehicles.
.
The National Security Agency, contrary to all its public
statements, has since 1972 been secretly monitoring and often
assessing worldwide allegations of UFC activity.
,
In late 1975 and early 1976, UFCs encroached upon Air Force
nuclear weapons supply depots at Loring AFB, Maine; SAC facility
in Minot, North Dakota; Malmstrom AFB, Montana; Grand Rapids AFB,
Michigan; and Canadian Forces Station, Falconbridge, Ontario,
Canada.
.
NASA scientists, convinced that intelligent extraterrestrial
life exists, established a program for detecting advanced inter-
galactic civilizations: Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
(SETI).
A $100, 000, 000 project.
The "SETI Protocol" is an international agreement that would
go into effect the moment contact was made with an alien civilize-

--- PAGE BREAK ---al Intelligence
(SETI).
A $100, 000, 000 project.
The "SETI Protocol" is an international agreement that would
go into effect the moment contact was made with an alien civilize-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tion.
It had been drafted by Michael A. G. Michaud, director
of State Department's Office of Advanced Technology.
.
At the NASA Ames Research Center at Moffett Field Naval
Base in Mountain View, California, is an exobiology laboratory where
scientists spend their days trying to imagine how a creature
on a planet in the Andromeda Galaxy might appear.
.
J. Edgar Hoover had originally wanted the FBI to play a
large role in UFO investigations, but was thwarted by an equally
ambitious Air Force.
In 1947, Hoover issued Bureau Bulletin 59,
which said that all future reports of UFOs should not be investi­
gated by Bureau agents, but, instead, be referred to the Air Force.
In the fall of 1988, two agents of the FBI's Foreign Counter
intelligence division appeared at Room 3E258 in the Pentagon.
They had come to ask the director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency whether an incredible UFO document had been stolen from
the U. S. government and whether the document was genuine.
The
document was entitled "Briefing Document:
Operation Majestic 12
Prepared for President-Elect Dwight D. Eisenhower (Eyes Only)
18 November 1952. "
The document told of U. S. government recovery
of a crashed flying saucer and bodies of four extraterrestrial
creatures in New Mexico in 1947.
/
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---Eyes Only)
18 November 1952. "
The document told of U. S. government recovery
of a crashed flying saucer and bodies of four extraterrestrial
creatures in New Mexico in 1947.
/
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I had to be always careful that my story would be marked by
intellectual rather than passionate qualities.
Just as in my
military intelligence reports, I had to eliminate my own thinking
and only report basic facts.
In ensuing years, periodically, I
had excellent forums to test my approach.
I was invited to a
farewell dinner by my ex-operations chief of the missile
battalion which I commanded, Murray Richman.
His eldest son had
just been appointed to the U. S. Air Force Academy.
During a lull
after dinner, Murray told his son, "You know the Colonel has been
on President Eisenhower's staff, why don't you and your two
friends go in the other room and ask the colonel questions on
policy, foreign affairs, congress, atomic weapons, etc.
I assure
you he know plenty. "
The three potential officers gathered around and the
discussion began.
I warned them, "remember, I am not one of your
college professors.
I will hit you with reality, not theory, or
fuzzy intellectual thinking. "
I tried nicely to explode what
they had learned.
I think I won their respect because they all
three asked if they could call on me whenever they needed to know
reality.
I told them anytime.
I noticed that as our discussions
were going on, the room began to fill up with adults.
First the
men, then the women.
It ended up that I had to explain and field
questions from the grown-ups as well as the three young men.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, the room began to fill up with adults.
First the
men, then the women.
It ended up that I had to explain and field
questions from the grown-ups as well as the three young men.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Years later, I attended a birthday party for my youngest
grandson, Andrew.
He was a little imp type, redheaded with
freckles.
Since, it was his party, naturally he was the king.
He called all his little friends together and said to them "my
grandfather will tell you about when he met ET's grandfather. "
Naturally, they all gathered around.
I told them a tale about
meeting an extraterrestrial in a gold mine, near the army's only
firing missile range which I commanded in 1957.
(Red Canyon,
White Sands, New Mexico, not far from Roswell, New Mexico).
They
were thrilled, to them it was an up-to-date fairy tale.
At this stage, the older boys, Nicky and Philip joined us.
Nicky said, "Grandpa, tell us about the UFO's. "
Upon hearing
these magical words, the grown-ups joined our group.
I had a
cute blond little girl sitting on my lap.
She said, "What did
ET's grandfather look like? "
I answered her "Your mommy is an
artist, if she gets a pencil and paper, I will describe him and
she can draw a sketch. "
The mother, Amy O'Brien, did just that.
The little ones, as well as the adults, were fascinated.
The
COM L 0
sketch could open
up a pandora's box.
To this audience I described only the positive side.
I
reserve for a more mature audience the negative aspect of the
EBEs unfriendly nature and activities which we could type as
hostile acts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce I described only the positive side.
I
reserve for a more mature audience the negative aspect of the
EBEs unfriendly nature and activities which we could type as
hostile acts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

years of age I had to explain many
things in their simplest detail.
I had to explain as a commander, X was like their teacher
who told them what to do.
In the same manner I taught my
soldiers and told them what to do .
A missile was like a Fourth
of July rocket that their daddy propped up in a bottle and it
"whooshed" up into the air then exploded in a bright light.
My
radars were electricity that lights your house, we throw it up in
the air like a flashlight beam.
It hits an airplane then bounces
back like a rubber ball.
ET's grandfather and I never talked.
It was like when you do something bad.
Your mother puts her hand
on her hips, looks at you with a hard look.
You know she is
angry, but you both don't say a word.
You know what she wants,
like pick up your toys or clothes.
My electrical radars could hurt their flying saucers, so I
turned them off and allowed him to go home and be with his
friends.
I don't know if he became my friend.
Perhaps someday
you will meet him and ET and find out if you are friends.
Maybe
he meant you to take this world and make it a better place to
live and be able to hold more birthday parties like this one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eet him and ET and find out if you are friends.
Maybe
he meant you to take this world and make it a better place to
live and be able to hold more birthday parties like this one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VIEWS
YOUNGER GENERATION
In a subject such as the one under discussion, it is
most important to exchange views with the younger generation
who are taking up the gauntlet.
For the moment, I will not
reveal their names, since the debunkers and detractors are
always present.
I don't want to and nor should I subject them
to such attacks.
They are not as firmly established to counter
such antics.
Because of the positions I have held and my
knowledge I can always counter and deflect such attacks and
would be most pleased to do so.
In time their names will be
revealed.
Their thinking and approach is most interesting
and heartening.
THE NEW AGE THINKING
Your work is certainly fascinating, especially to me.
People have often asked me if I would like to time travel into
the past.
No, I want the future because I always seek answers
to questions and I've always been impatient with the non-
scientific and mundane methods used by our government to try
to explain extraordinary phenomenon.
Perhaps there are some
elements of society that can't handle the truth, but I don't
see us running around tearing our clothes off and shooting each
other at some UFO revelation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Perhaps there are some
elements of society that can't handle the truth, but I don't
see us running around tearing our clothes off and shooting each
other at some UFO revelation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I really enjoyed your writing and cannot wait for the book
or movie.
It creates a lot of 'what ifs'.
Often the answers
to certain questions gives rise to multitudes of others.
"In
the beginning God created the heavens and the earth ........
and on the seventh day He rested. "
NOTE - it does not say He
retired.
We've got to quit being so self-oriented.
One theory on the origin of UFO's is that they are time
travellers from our own planet's future, but if the elements
contained in the parts of their craft do not appear on our
periodic chart, assuming we have identified all earth elements
which may be a fairly large assumption, that rather discredits
the theory of time travel unless sometime in the future we
throw out the laws of physics and learn to alter substances so
that new elements are created; lead into gold as the old
alchemists tried unsuccessfully for years.
We have a tendency to always consider the ’unknown' or
'little known' based on our knowledge and habits.
We are an
egocentric society.
We are obviously not alone in the universe
and we are certainly not the center of all that happens or has
happened; we are relatively insignificant and should be in
the position of observers of what goes on around us so that
we can better cope.
We can't even get along in our own environ­
ment, why would advanced intelligences want to have anything
to do with us?
Reluctance to accept the overwhelming evidence you have
THEORY OR EVIDENCE

--- PAGE BREAK ---et along in our own environ­
ment, why would advanced intelligences want to have anything
to do with us?
Reluctance to accept the overwhelming evidence you have
THEORY OR EVIDENCE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

presented would lead one to believe he is afraid of something.
There are certain people who cannot accept the presence of the
snake until it bites them.
I have dealt with this level of
mentality for many years.... it has been dubbed "the anti-
scientific attitude. "
Large companies like the one I work for
have a lot of these people, usually and unfortunately in high,
key positions.
They make inane statements for us to live by,
like, "the customer always comes first. "
Bullshit, if the
customer is an idiot, I am not going to give him what he wants.
I am going to develop what he needs, what the world needs, then
show him why.
If you give the customer what he wants, and it
flops, he does not admire you for having supplied it.
He
transfer his stupidity onto you.
I further disagree with the general's statement that the
earth is unique and that we are the only ones.
That is the
"egocentric theory. "
Copernicus dealt with that when the people
of his day assumed we were the center of the universe and the
sun and stars and all the planets revolved around us.
He proved
them wrong and was called a heretic.
(antiscientific attitude)
The organized church, faced with the building evidence
that we are not alone, have made statements that the extraterres­
trials are demons; workings of Satan.
But, if the devil has
the power that they claim, the demon helpers of Satan don't
need flying saucers.
Again the egocentric theory comes in.
The church thinks that we are all there is.
The bible does
not state anywhere that creation stopped with us, nor that we
were first; only in our solar system.
The evidence that we
✓? T
^ /

--- PAGE BREAK ---hinks that we are all there is.
The bible does
not state anywhere that creation stopped with us, nor that we
were first; only in our solar system.
The evidence that we
✓? T
^ /

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are faced with has shaken their paradigms, their mindsets
and has caused them to think which they do not like to do;
they would rather contemplate.
That's why the hardcore Jews
never accepted Christ.
This type of thinking amazes me.
You move these people's
dinner plate over 12 inches and they would starve to death,
It is human nature to reduce ambiguity, to seek the truth.
Our observation ability is modified by the sum of our exper­
iences since conception; our genetic background, culture,
language, education, profession, and an infinity of other
factors.
One expects that an engineer will always think like
an engineer, likewise, a chemist, designer, etc.
Many break­
throughs however, are made by someone far from his own domain
(example:
the superplastic discovered by a baker in England
recently).
Scientific objectivity is a delusion.
We must
think "out of the box" if we are going to advance.
Unfortunately
the world seems to be controlled by people with tunnel vision
tempered by ignorance and fear.
Fear of the criminal element;
organized crime?
No, fear of the scientific community, the
thinkers that can obsolete their toys in the blink of an eye.
ROSWELL AND COVER UP
In the books and other articles about the Roswell incident,
there seems to be quite a bit known of the craft and its ele­
ments.
Pieces of the superstrong thin metallic material still
exist outside the U. S. Government but nothing is known of the
beings that were aboard.
The cover-up was thorough but there

--- PAGE BREAK ---ieces of the superstrong thin metallic material still
exist outside the U. S. Government but nothing is known of the
beings that were aboard.
The cover-up was thorough but there

--- PAGE BREAK ---

has evidently been contact in other areas and people are
beginning to demand release of government information on
ET contacts and confirmed UFO sightings.
Even WWII pilots
are resurfacing the "Foo-fighters" incidents and want to know
what the Military Intelligence determined in Europe and the
South Pacific during the early 40’s.
The Government approach should be a carefully thought-
out policy for contact.
If they can get here, obviously
defense security is a mute point.
They could probably destroy
us at will, thus any contact should be scientific and not
belligerent.
People contacted should not fear coming forward
with information.
Of course, it would take quite a staff to
separate the kooks from the genuine.
SPACE TRAVEL PROBLEMS
Your letter about the radiated food was very interesting.
True, if you kill all the bacteria by irradiation and do not
store food in an oxygen environment, (nitrogen would be
better), then it could, in a sterile environment, last
indefinitely.
My personal theory, however, is that if superintelligent
beings from, who knows where, are capable of interstellar
travel, food, as we know it, probably does not exist but
rather concentrated nutrients in a small wafer or pill form
taken periodically could well sustain life.
Let's face it,
our society is extremely food oriented; billboards, magazines
and newspapers, TV and radio.
It is very big business and we

--- PAGE BREAK ---periodically could well sustain life.
Let's face it,
our society is extremely food oriented; billboards, magazines
and newspapers, TV and radio.
It is very big business and we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are inundated by its images.
Also, we enjoy it to the point
that it becomes almost a vice.
It would be considered by an
advanced culture to be primitive and a waste of time.
We do
spend a lot of time purchasing, storing, preparing, eating
and eliminating.
An advanced culture may even employ time-
release nutrient injections or implanted nutrient pumps.
Or
they may even derive nourishment from breathing and not from
eating as we do.
We have a tendency, at least in our semi-scientific
society, to try to reduce everything to the simplest possible
terms; lowest common denominator.
We talk of everything as
being animal, vegetable, or mineral.
Also, we have a tendency
to be very egotistic.
For centuries man thought the earth was
the center of the universe.
For centuries man thought he was
the ultimate creation; all powerful in intelligence.
I've
studied sea creatures whose intelligence we can't even compre­
hend.
Dolphins can communicate with autistic children when we
cannot.
Baby whales are born with a knowledge of the ocean
bottom; genetic intelligence?
Anyone who has tried to train
killer whales ends up being trained by them.
I studied geology at the U. of Delaware under Johann Groot,
an Austrian cataclysmic geologist.
This type of geology holds
that geologic events occur rather rapidly and not necessarily
over thousands of years.
This theory states that the Rocky
Mountains were formed by a tectonic push-up over a few hours
ENVIRONMENT

--- PAGE BREAK ---ents occur rather rapidly and not necessarily
over thousands of years.
This theory states that the Rocky
Mountains were formed by a tectonic push-up over a few hours
ENVIRONMENT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

or days at the most.
There is a lot of evidence that civiliza­
tions existed on this planet periodically over a much longer
timespan than our recorded history.
Example:
a rock collector
found what he thought to he a recces in southern California a
few years ago.
He couldn't split it, discovered it was not a
geode, but something quite curious.
He sent it to the
Smithsonian.
They X-rayed and dismantled and discovered an
object inside that upon analysis, proved to be a spark plug.
Radioactive carbon dating fired its age at 26, 000 years.
There
are lots of other examples.... topper wire in the Egyptian
pyramids graded by its electrical resistance...
The cataclysmic geologists claim that we are about to be
radically changed again.
We have extremely unusual and unlikely
weather patterns.
Consider the continual rains and flooding
in Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, Minnesota, and Nebraska.
Millions
of tons of water putting pressure on the midcontinental tectonic
plates; increased earthquake activity as in northern Japan
which created tsunami's that wiped out coastal villages in
Korea.
Look for some new v: I cartes this year or next.
What
is causing this.
Do some chronicliers of our environment create
global disasters when we get too involved in wars or when our
scientific Industrial-military- capabilities become too danger
ous?
I look for the U. S. map to change drastically by the
year 2000.
ELECTROMAGNETISM AND METALS
Why do we separate b
rms animal, vegetable, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---y- capabilities become too danger
ous?
I look for the U. S. map to change drastically by the
year 2000.
ELECTROMAGNETISM AND METALS
Why do we separate b
rms animal, vegetable, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mineral?
Animals are composed of energetic little particles
called atoms, constantly in movement.
But, name something
that isn't.
Electromagnetic energy - we all have it.
It comes
in different forms.
We don’t understand that much about it
although it has been used since before 1200.
We can pass an elec­
tric current through a piece of metal and render it magnetic;
polar.
And not just metal.
I work with rubber compounds and
plastics that are polar in nature.
When we try to adhere substrates; plastic to rubber, rubber
or plastic to metals or to fabrics such as Kevlar or Nomex; the
first thing we always do is look for an adhesive.
Why don't we
try to adhere electromagnetically on an atomic level?
With the
clean air act and new emission standards our solvent based
adhesives won't be around much longer.
Perhaps by sheer necessity
we will be forced to look at a more advanced adhering method.
Perhaps the metals on the extraterrestrial craft are electro-
magnetically adhered.
Perhaps the reason they crashed is that
our dense atmosphere caused their craft to heat above the Curie
temperature that destroys magnetism (ca. 770d. C).
They have
probably perfected this fault.
Sightings seem to be on the
increase with no apparent recent crashes.
Perhaps they can
molecularly align for a frictionless surface.
I recently saw the report on the Philadelphia Experiment
that I mentioned on the phone.
This reportedly occurred
aboard the U. S. S. Eldridge in 1943.
Four powerful electro­
magnetic generators were placed aboard the vessel.
Their
purpose was, when activated and properly directed, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---rred
aboard the U. S. S. Eldridge in 1943.
Four powerful electro­
magnetic generators were placed aboard the vessel.
Their
purpose was, when activated and properly directed, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

camouflage the ship by electromagnetic molecular alterations.
They were studying Einstein's unified field theory of magnetic
concentrations.
The main thrust of the experiment evidently
worked quite well but the side effects were disastrous.
The
ship actually hazed out for a few minutes then reappeared.
Much of the crew ended up with mental problems due to trans-
dimensional phenomena.
They would, in fact, continue to dis­
appear for short periods of time.
When we strengthen our rubber or plastics by drawing, we
hot pull from a large diameter to a very small diameter.
This
provides some degree of molecular alignment which improves
strength but when we make a belt using Kevlar for reinforcement,
you cannot break the belt by pulling on it but in use those
fibers that cross break one another.
We need to do something
besides drawing down for strength, something that will arrange
electrons on an atomic level, not only to produce multidirec­
tional strength but to adhere fibers to themselves and to a var­
iety of other materials.
Can this be done with an intense electro­
magnetic field; ultrasound?
Perhaps in the past we have thought
of fibers, whether they be metallic, or synthetic, only in terms
of industrial or consumer and not enough emphasis on aerospace.
Cost has been a factor in a lot of the things we pass up.
We also make "barrier" hoses.
We have made hoses for years
to convey liquids and gasses but not necessarily to contain
them.
Vapors and gasses permeate the hose wall and escape
into the atmosphere.
With the ozone layer depletion the
environmentalists now turn their attention to "fugitive

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntain
them.
Vapors and gasses permeate the hose wall and escape
into the atmosphere.
With the ozone layer depletion the
environmentalists now turn their attention to "fugitive

--- PAGE BREAK ---

emissions" seemingly innocuous tiny leaks that collectively
dump tons of lighter than air trash each year.
At any rate,
we now extrude layers of denser materials in our hose walls
so that these materials are contained.
A European method for
encapsulating these often thin gases, is plasma deposition.
One can extrude a tube of ultra high molecular weight
polyethylene (UHMW-PE) then depose the same material on
the surface, but it becomes much more dense; an almost perfect
barrier.
This method produces a seamless coating and has
probably been used for coating shuttle nose cones.
The make-up of the Russian fragment is composed of earth
elements.
You reported Cesium, Lanthanum, and Neodymium; all
rare earths.
Cesium, #55 on the periodic chart is one of the
main elements in radioactive fallout.
Interestingly, it is
the most electropositive of the metals.
It is a silver-white
ductile metal and fractures hexagonally.
Lanthanum, #57 on the
periodic chart is also a silver-white hexagonal ductile metal.
Neodymium, #60 on the periodic chart is similar, silver-white
and hexagonal.
Its oxide is a blue powder and its chloride
NdCl3 forms large purple prisms.
These rare earth metals are
all related chemically.
I apologize for not responding sooner but I have been check­
ing our suppliers such as DuPont, Calenese, and Heathcoat for
work on super high tenacity fibers.
Either they are doing noth
ing or they are being very quiet about their work.
Spider webs are very interesting.
They evidently achieve
their properties by their molecular configuration; bar, hairpin

--- PAGE BREAK ---g noth
ing or they are being very quiet about their work.
Spider webs are very interesting.
They evidently achieve
their properties by their molecular configuration; bar, hairpin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turn, bar as described in the article you sent explains when
stretched some of these hairpins would engage others explaining
their strength; other hairpins would miss, straightening out,
explaining elasticity.
Brilliant in design but very difficult
to synthesize.
TELEPATHIC COMMUNICATION
I have been reading quite a bit.
There's a woman in
Missouri who comes to a psychiatrist in Springfield for
hypnotic regression.
She and a friend claim to have been
abducted on their way to Colorado by "bug-eyed" featureless
creatures who implanted a small microchip up her friend's nose.
These beings communicated telepathicaliy and informed the
ladies that they have been guardians of the planet earth for
millions of years.
Guardians from what?
Probably ourselves.
If there is any truth at all to this claim (there are many
others, similar) perhaps that was the origin of the ion
bombardment that dusted the Soviet missile installation after
our military satellite was destroyed.
Certain people have relationships with inanimate things...
always; why do men have a feel for a car, they become a part
of it, they use their senses to detect problems.
I can tell
when my cars need an oil change by sound and feel.
I can
locate a mechanical problem without getting out and under.
R&D OR PRODUCT IMPROVEMENT

--- PAGE BREAK ---es to detect problems.
I can tell
when my cars need an oil change by sound and feel.
I can
locate a mechanical problem without getting out and under.
R&D OR PRODUCT IMPROVEMENT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

contractors are no longer investing in long term research and
development.... absolutely correct.
They want absolute maxi­
mum 12 month return on investment.
I cannot develop any
sound technology in 12 months, thus, my hands are tied.
I can
only improve products for profitability or invent little geegaws
to bring a quick return.
If we don’t meet bottom line at the
end of each fiscal year, they demand more and more cuts in
personnel and services.... in short they are bleeding us and
will likely destroy many industries in the next 5 to 10 years,
because these cuts ultimately cost us customers.
We don't
just sell products, we sell service and that is what we are
losing,
PROPULSION
What is a UFO?
What forces power UFO's?
How is it able
to defy the known laws of physics?
Why is it sometimes a
religious experience?
The answer to these questions aren't readily available so
let's look at these answers by deducing what we don't know or
the opposite side of the equation.
First of all, let's review
some known physical laws such as:
In elementary flight review for airplanes.
An airplane
flies because its lift exceeds weight, thrust exceeds drag.
Does an UFO have weight?
The answer must be no.
How can
this be?
All mass has weight, but a UFO is capable of turning
right angles at extremely high speeds.
It also must have
thrust.
The answer again logically deduced is no.
It must

--- PAGE BREAK ---is be?
All mass has weight, but a UFO is capable of turning
right angles at extremely high speeds.
It also must have
thrust.
The answer again logically deduced is no.
It must

--- PAGE BREAK ---

have lift.
For we see it in the atmosphere.
Again the answer
is no-
Let me explain why I say no to these common laws.
First of all an aircraft is flying within our system we call
earth.
It is subject to all the physical laws of our earth.
Now let's substitute the word earth for the word field
as relativity theory of Albert Einstein tells us that mass is
where the field is particularly strong and that either or
absence of mass is where the field is partially weak.
So to
isolate a craft from the field you must have a field density
device.
To stop all outward influences such as gravity,
centrifical force, light, radiation, and time, etc.
Imagine a strong explosion during this nano second all
mass and energy is moving outward from the center of the
explosion and expanding.
Also during the temporary explosion
no outward forces can penetrate this temporary field density
device.
UFOs are able to extend the time of this temporary explos­
ion.
Since there are no determining factors such as gravity
within this field density device a UFO is capable of creating
its own determining factors such as gravity light centrificial
force in a manner to eliminate these forces or combine these
forces or control the intensity of these forces.
The end
result is a field.
A.
UFO operating within a field.
B.
Earth with no outside influences from field B - Earth.
According to the big bang theory which is the origin of
the universe.
There was a large explosion at the beginning of
time, screwing out all mass and energy.
The big bang theory

--- PAGE BREAK ---ccording to the big bang theory which is the origin of
the universe.
There was a large explosion at the beginning of
time, screwing out all mass and energy.
The big bang theory

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is acceptable by science because of the red shift.
Red
Shift means that most of the energy of the stars energy is
carried within the infra red spectrum which translates that
all stars are moving away from us and from each other.
This
confirms the big bang theory.
Imagine a field so strong and
so well isolated that it can stand still in space and time
while the objects such as planets and stars go rushing by.
This would give the relative speed between a UFO. and a planetary
destination at the speed of light, 186 thousand mph per
second, and also slowing relative time.
A UFO appearing in
our atmosphere and moving itself a few seconds ahead or
behind our earth time.
The UFO would have the appearance of
being translucent or blurred according to our eyes.. A few more
seconds ahead would seem to disappear which is confused by humans
as acceleration.
Our classical views of gravity or the word electro
magnet forces are as crude as finding a dinosaur bone and
trying to visualize what the dinosaur looked like.
Our
classical view's of an atomic structure which are made of
electrons, protrons, and nutrons and newly discovered Gluits
and Quirks is so incomplete that it becomes hard for us to
understand the construction and explanation of a field density-
device.
Let me give one more explanation which will clarify
the terms of a field density device.
Flash Gordon in the 1930's called his beam coming from
his gun a heat ray.
We now call such a device a laser - light
amplification by simulated emissions of energy.
Can you see

--- PAGE BREAK ---Flash Gordon in the 1930's called his beam coming from
his gun a heat ray.
We now call such a device a laser - light
amplification by simulated emissions of energy.
Can you see

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the difference of 50 years of development.
This is the same
comparison as you would use the word Electromagnism to the
term Field Density Device.
According to relativity theory the 4th dimension is
defined as time in a particular place a UFO is time traveler
because of its ability to shield itself from field influences.
So it literally has all the time in the world.
Now we will
go into an actual physical field density device.

--- PAGE BREAK ---veler
because of its ability to shield itself from field influences.
So it literally has all the time in the world.
Now we will
go into an actual physical field density device.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The main theme of this dissertation is U. S. Army Research
and Development during the golden years of R&D 1959-1963, and
the projects that were born and conceived during the period.
The refinement and development of these marvelous concepts con­
tinue
to this day and will continue into and affect our future.
The main purpose which made the effort possible was national
security, to give our army the competitive edge, and to move
these great discoveries by "applied engineering" into industry
to benefit the U. S. civilian arena and the world.
The true
story, therefore, is the people and individuals who had the
foresight, knowledge and courage to move forward against any
and all opposition and obstacles.
First of all, we were well versed in the tactics of our
opposition and especially the policy makers.
I was most fortu­
nate that 1953-1957, as a member of the National Security Council
Staff, I met these individuals face to face, day in and day out,
and recognized them for what they were.
This recognition
included the Department of State and CIA, as well as elements
in the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
Their policy was
complete civilian control of all space and R&D efforts and share
all R&D with the "evil empire", the USSR, dedicated to our
destruction.
We learned how to camouflage our efforts, especially those
attributed to an alien power.
Unless we covered this assist 100%

--- PAGE BREAK ---evil empire", the USSR, dedicated to our
destruction.
We learned how to camouflage our efforts, especially those
attributed to an alien power.
Unless we covered this assist 100%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

we would have been labeled as "kooks" and lost our budget and
our organization would have been stripped completely and made
ineffective.
In arriving at this conclusion we offer our thanks to the
"debunkers".
No one searched for or even suspected our
approach.
The "debunkers" through their shrill outcries and
energy created the atmosphere that UFOs didn't exist.
Our govern
ment and the liberals, adopted this policy and we quietly went
along.
If the UFOs, by virtu e of national policy didn't exist,
Roswell never happened and as a policy reality there were no
aliens or hardware, or any other by-product.
Therefore, why
suspect anything or even think of any type of investigation.
We also wish to thank the "skeptics".
The more they blared
out, "show me something tangible, " and it never appeared, the
safer was our approach.
Also, I wish to thank the "skeptics, "
because they made it possible not to share our discoveries
from outer space with the scientific community since they would
never have kept it quiet.
We knew that many were Soviet agents.
This has been confirmed by a high KGB official.
However, we had
to be alert, because Stalin had an interest and they were con­
stantly probing U. S. Army Intelligence and U. S. Army R&D.
The "debunkers'' and "skeptics" were most useful.
They did
%
their job, so well, that we never had to set up or use "disinfor­
mation" tactics.
Most were honest and sincere in their beliefs
and activities.
This would have been most difficult to match
by a plan, or a "black" propaganda operation.
For this we were
most grateful and even of this late date, I wish to thank them

--- PAGE BREAK ---ties.
This would have been most difficult to match
by a plan, or a "black" propaganda operation.
For this we were
most grateful and even of this late date, I wish to thank them

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for the assistance.
Without them it surely would have been most
difficult to accomplish what we did.
I do not wish to imply that all "skeptics" and "debunkers"
fit the previous description of agents of the USSR.
Most were
loyal Americans, sincere and intelligent.
However, they must
realize that most of us had been combat commanders and during
the Korean War had evidence that our battle plans had been
passed to the communists on almost a daily basis.
We were in a
most delicate, volatile and dangerous situation, not only as
far as the communists were concerned, but with our own policy
makers.
Our work, we felt, was of utmost importance for national
security, and the U. S. Army's competitive edge.
We also tried
to look ahead.
The R&D of 1959-1963 was the beginning of the
future and its miraculous ramifications would continue long after
our lifetime.
We had no other choice but strict secrecy and held
our knowledge only among a select few.
Even my own son has made the statement, "Why did you keep
this to yourself for 30 years, you didn't even talk to your own
family? "
This was true, why should I have discussed the program
with anyone?
The General and I discussed it many tiroes, but
only among the two of us.
The debunkers and skeptics will say, "Why
didn't you show us? "
The answer is, Why?
Curiosity,
raise
your ego, etc.
I ask, who are you? "
I am sure an extra terres­
trial would say the same, why?
Who are you?
And why should I
even talk to you, let along show you our secrets?
Realistically,
they should say the same to me.
Who am I?
And why should they
approach me?
What we had was garnered by accident and used only

--- PAGE BREAK ---, let along show you our secrets?
Realistically,
they should say the same to me.
Who am I?
And why should they
approach me?
What we had was garnered by accident and used only

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for purposes of national security, enhance the Army's competi­
tiveness and further the R&D program for a leap into the
future-
All else was of no importance.
I have been ashed many times if I have seen an UFO.
My
answer is no.
Then the question, aren't you interested to see
one flying?
The answer again is no.
There are thousands of
sightings, my only interest is, "What
is inside of the UFO? "
This is of interest to me, "What and how does it fly?
There is a
theory that there were two crashes in the Roswell area.
One in
1947, the second in 1957.
The theory is that they collided as
they were entering our time zone.
One crashed immediately.
Debris fell just about 100 miles from the first crash.
The
second accelerated, skipping like a flat stone over water,
moved into a future time zone and crashed 10 years later in 1957,
in the same area (I offer no explanation of the event).
However,
in 1957, I was in command of the Army's Missile Firing Range at
Red Canyon, part of White Sands, and south of Los Alamos.
The
crash was only a few miles from my command post.
I was the
Senior Commander and made all military decisions.
Red Canyon was
in the desert 140 miles, from Ft. Bliss and 100 miles from
Roswell.
My radars picked up the event.
I took my small military
plane with pilot and headed for the area where my radars last
located the object.
We flew over the site and I saw a bright,
shiny saucer shaped object on the ground.
The pilot, a young
lieutenant asked, "What is it sir? "
I answered, "I don't know,
perhaps one of our missile boosters"
We often fired over the area

--- PAGE BREAK ---aped object on the ground.
The pilot, a young
lieutenant asked, "What is it sir? "
I answered, "I don't know,
perhaps one of our missile boosters"
We often fired over the area

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and it was not unusual for debris from our missiles and R-Cats
{Radio controlled target planes) to be in this area.
My
computer tapes recorded the incident.
Upon return to my base, I had a message to fly to Ft. Bliss
for a brigade meeting.
The session lasted through the next day.
I flew back the following morning and upon my arrival I went
down range since we were preparing for a missile firing sequence.
While down range, I received a phone call that two range riders
from White Sands were waiting to talk to me.
As I arrived in my office I invited them into my office.
They said, "That under the Maverick Laws of the State of New
Mexico, we couldn't keep our burro, that my men had picked up down
range and kept as a mascot. "
I said, "Gentlemen, I'll take care
of this matter and write to the Governor. ”
Then I added, "I am sure you didn't make this trip for such
a trivial matter. "
They looked at each other and said, "Two
days ago you were flying around the area northwest of here, what
did you see? "
I said, "A booster from one of my missiles. "
One of them with a threatening voice, "There could be. dire
consequences for not telling us what you saw. "
I leaned back, opened my desk drawer, which contained my
. 45 pistol, and said, "I am the Commander of this U. S. Army
installation, and don't like threats in my command post.
If
I press this button a dozen armed men will surround this office.
Consider yourself in protective custody,
you will leave when I
say so.
In my day, we undressed intruders, tied them up, and laid

--- PAGE BREAK ---on a dozen armed men will surround this office.
Consider yourself in protective custody,
you will leave when I
say so.
In my day, we undressed intruders, tied them up, and laid

--- PAGE BREAK ---

them on the floor naked.
This isn't a threat.
It is a fact.
Now, give me your identification and the name of your Command­
ing Officer. "
Please, for your own good, move carefully. "
They followed my instructions.
I called their Commander.
I told him I took adversely to threats and have been threatened
by the best, Nazi's, S.. S. Gestapo, KGB, North Koreans and
Chinese, and resented the approach of his young agents.
He
apologized and I told him I had White House "Eyes Only" clear­
ance and all the other clearances necessary and knew how to
keep a secret and when to keep quiet.
He said.
He understood
and I released his men.
They left in a hurry and the Governor
gave us custody of our burro as long as we were in the area.
I flew over the area again and could see from the air
that it had been swept clean.

--- PAGE BREAK ---left in a hurry and the Governor
gave us custody of our burro as long as we were in the area.
I flew over the area again and could see from the air
that it had been swept clean.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

While I was in command of the U. S. Army's Missile firing
range at the Red Canyon Range, I had one very annoying problem.
The range was part of the White Sands complex.
I could not
fire a missile unless they gave me what was called "green" time.
This coordination was necessary so there would be no radar
interference.
At times they held me up for hours, keeping
hundreds of men on hold.
One hot day, during one of these lulls, I was down range
in my command car, with two of my sergeants (my command post was
a white shack on a high hill overlooking the range).
Red
Canyon was only a few miles from Roswell and Los Alamos.
First Sergeant Willis asked me if I wanted to visit the
gold mine, only a few miles from the range area.
I told him,
"Let's go. "
A mile or so from the "D" Battery firing site, we
turned off the dusty desert road into what seemed like a moon
"rille."
Dark rocks on both sides, then into a sloping area
with a dark outcropping like a cliff.
We stopped and walked
about 100 feet to a simmering pool of water.
In the cliff
area was an opening, we entered the mine shaft.
Trickling
water ran down the floor of the shaft.
My men said antelopes,
burros, coyotes, jack rabbits, birds and even large rattle
snakes came here to partake of the cool water.
It was like an
oasis in the desert.
There was little vegetation since the
area was almost all dark, lava type rock.

--- PAGE BREAK ---large rattle
snakes came here to partake of the cool water.
It was like an
oasis in the desert.
There was little vegetation since the
area was almost all dark, lava type rock.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A week or so later, I was in my command shack during one
of these White Sand generated lulls.
I decided to take a jeep
and go visit the gold mine alone.
When I arrived, some animals
were around the pond.
I drove up to the opening, went in and
sat down and cooled off in the natural air conditioning.
The
soft dripping water sound was almost hypnotic.
I dozed off.
As the Italians had told me in Rome, my 6th dimensional
layer(? ) instinct took over.
My right hand slowly went to my
holster.
I drew my. 45 and snapped off the safety.
(Every
other cartridge had a buckshot type used to shoot rattlers. )
In this cave like structure, I couldn't miss.
I drew the gun
and rolled on my side.
Suddenly, a word registered in my head -- "Don't. "
In
mental telepathy I responded, "Friend or Foe. "
The reply came
back, "Neither. "
1 was impressed.
In the shimmering half light, bouncing off the moving water,
I saw a figure which appeared transparent.
It had on a helmet,
silver in color, large slanted eyes and a bright red spot on a
band across the forehead.
The message continued as our eyes met in the semi-light,
"Will you give me 10 minutes, radar free, after green time? "
I thought back, "10 minutes could be an eternity, what do
you offer? "
"A new world if you can take it. "
I got up, put my pistol back in the holster, walked to the
jeep and by radio called range headquarters.
"Capt. Williams, do you have green time? "
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---ew world if you can take it. "
I got up, put my pistol back in the holster, walked to the
jeep and by radio called range headquarters.
"Capt. Williams, do you have green time? "
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

No, sir, but White Sands said in the next 15 minutes.
"I am on my way.
When they give you "green time, " make
sure their radars are down, then hold our radars for 10 minutes.
I repeat, hold our radars for 10 minutes. "
I started the jeep, looked back and saw a figure in the
simmering light of
the mine opening.
I saluted and took off.
When I arrived at the range headquarters, Capt. Williams
reported, "Sir, "D" Battery, locked on, for 60 seconds, on an
object 50 miles out, traveling 3000 mph. "
"Tell "D" Battery to send me the tape. "
The downed radars must have cleared an opening to let in a
reported UFO.
Did it pick up my new found friend? or enemy?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

By instinct, I did reach for my. 45 pistol.
Every other
bullet was a. 45 shell with a tip of pellets, like a shot­
gun shell.
We shot rattle snakes with it.
The rattlers were
huge.
They would curl up alongside the road, head sticking
out in the center, rattler at bottom.
They couldn't strike
in this position.
As I flattened out and drew my. 45, I pointed toward the
back side at a l e d g e I saw something like the coil or the
draped helmet over EBES shoulder.
I didn't fire because in
an area closed in and rock, pellets could ricochet.
So the
mental thought "Don't" fire.
The light simmered in waves off the water.
I thought I
saw eyes above the coil and a possible oval helmet.
Since we surmised that possibly radar caused the Roswell
crash, Ial thought "Don't" fire.
The light simmered in waves off the water.
I thought I
saw eyes above the coil and a possible oval helmet.
Since we surmised that possibly radar caused the Roswell
crash, I

my. 45 and thought, "After green time,
ten minutes free radar time".
I had the means and authority
to give such an order.
As I walked out of the cave and toward
my jeep, I thought, so, I will give the order.
What do X have
to lose.
I went to my radio and gave the order.
On the way
back I kept thinking, what, if anything, did I gain from such
a hallucination?
Subconsciously, was there a deal?
"A New World
If You Can Take It".
In ensuing years this phrase was repeated
over and over again in my mind.
As for the coiled snake (caduceus) sign of healing.
We compiled quite a list of medical by-products and other
advances of our R&D.
The mental conversation, I dismissed
this, at the time, as figments of my imagination.
In 1960 I
f £ 2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---piled quite a list of medical by-products and other
advances of our R&D.
The mental conversation, I dismissed
this, at the time, as figments of my imagination.
In 1960 I
f £ 2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

discovered that without vocal cords they probably communicated
by mental telepathy.
The "Don't" - a natural inclination on
my part, a coiled snake couldn't strike and ricochets could
be dangerous.
The "Friend or Foe" exchange.
We had discussed
this often.
My inclination always was "Foe. "
But, why hadn’t
they attacked, or had they on another level, not militarily,
as we knew war.
On the Other hand, I thought, if a "super
intellect" is involved, why should they think, in our terms.
"Neither" is most logical on their part.
I reflected back -
a good answer.
Was it part of my own thinking or planted on
me.
Perhaps, both.
Then, "Upon green time give 10 minutes free radar"
Normal
terms for an exchange of thoughts for the time and place.
In
my mind had been imbedded that radar caused loss of control
and the crash.
A logical build up in my mind or exchange,
"Give 10 minutes. "
Again, logical I should ask for something
in return.
Time is relative, I added, “10 minutes could be
an eternity, what do you offer. "
My way of thinking, and
analyzing if there was a mental exchange, it had to be {the
answer).
"A new World If You Can Take It".
There was no other
reply possible.
The debris, R&D, new concepts, etc., were
nothing else except the beginning of the challenge.
"If You
Can Take It".
Many men have taken up the challenge.
New
developments are coming so fast, after a slow start (1947-1960)
that we can hardly keep up with them.
If the alternate is
//
/ £>
destruction we are progressing well toward "Taking It".

--- PAGE BREAK ---ents are coming so fast, after a slow start (1947-1960)
that we can hardly keep up with them.
If the alternate is
//
/ £>
destruction we are progressing well toward "Taking It".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Like Herman Oberth said, "We have been helped by those
from outer space. "
Most of what I did during my R&D tour
were just concepts, but many are working out.
Could it be
that we could take our world back and they will leave us and
go away?
/ /

--- PAGE BREAK ---ace. "
Most of what I did during my R&D tour
were just concepts, but many are working out.
Could it be
that we could take our world back and they will leave us and
go away?
/ /

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Upon my return from the flight over the area where the
UFO had landed, I decided to take my command car and visit the
site on the ground.
My sedan was no good in the desert.
It
could not go off of the dirt roads and the dust even came up
through the floor boards.
I asked Ft. Bliss to send me an
old World War II command car.
It was built high off the ground,
had large tires, and four-wheel drive.
It was ideal for cross
country over the desert and required no trails.
So I set off
for the area about 10 to 15 miles from the down range launching
sites and well within my area of jurisdiction.
I decided to
go alone.
I took my belt with pistol and canteen,
a map and
compass and a geiger counter which we used to test stray voltage
in the connection between the booster and missile.
Now I will move ahead to 1960 and recount what I saw and
my thoughts.
I was in my office, the Foreign Technology Divi­
sion of the Office of the Chief of Research and Development.
Seated before me were two German scientists, members of my
inspection team.
I reminded Hans of the night after looking into the align­
ment of molecules/atoms in metal, and he said, "If I believed
everything I heard today I might have to unlearn everything I
have ever learned".
Hans, you remember my answer, "You might
have to" and you answered "I’ll remember what you said. "
Now, I want you to listen to a tale and then tell me what
you think.
I might have to embark on a new learning curve. "
In 1957, I drove out into the New Mexico desert alone.
I had flown over my destination the same morning.
When I

--- PAGE BREAK ---what
you think.
I might have to embark on a new learning curve. "
In 1957, I drove out into the New Mexico desert alone.
I had flown over my destination the same morning.
When I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

arrived at the spot I had marked on my map, there was nothing
there but desert.
I sat in my command car and surveyed the
area with binoculars.
Finally, I saw something simmering like
a heat wave.
I could see through the simmering waves.
Suddenly
it materialized.
It looked like a metal object on the order of
a saucer, like your scientist Victor Schauberger had built for
Germany.
Seconds ticked away and abruptly it disappeared.
I approached closer.
I stopped and waited.
Then again
after about 10 minutes it materialized in the same simmering
manner, then quickly it disappeared.
I timed its appearance
(48 seconds).
Again after about 12 minutes it appeared again.
I picked up a desert rock and threw it at the solid metal
appearing object.
The stone bounced off but made no sound.
It disappeared again.
I placed a large rock in the spot and
some sagebrush.
When it reappeared, it crushed both stone and
sagebrush.
By the time interval I figured, I had a total of
about five minutes to observe the object in its solid state.
On this appearance 1 gathered my nerve and went and placed my
hand on it.
In the hot desert sun it was cool, the surface
was smooth, and felt like a highly varnished table top.
It
had no rough edges, no seams and no rivets or screws.
When
it disappeared, I went back to my command car and sat to observe
the see, no see sequence.
Each time it appeared to shake but
more like a shiver or tremble.
Suddenly on the next appear­
ance my army compass started to spin and my geiger counter
began to fluctuate.
I thought, discretion is the better part
of valor.
I started the engine, put the command car in reverse,

--- PAGE BREAK ---army compass started to spin and my geiger counter
began to fluctuate.
I thought, discretion is the better part
of valor.
I started the engine, put the command car in reverse,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and gunned it.
After about three or four hundred yards the
engine stopped.
The object slowly rose, turned on edge and
with a streak disappeared.
It seemed as if a giant bubble
closed around a tunnel.
Then, there was nothing but sky and
desert.
The bright colored streak as it disappeared remained
embedded in my memory.
I started the engine and made four or five widening circles
around the site.
I stopped and. got down and thought I saw
footsteps on the ground.
They looked like they were made with
a soft moccasin.
I placed my foot alongside.
I wear an 8C.
They were half the size.
I put the geiger counter leads on
one.
There was no reaction.
I placed my compass.
They were
pointing east toward my missile firing sites, about ten miles
away.
I looked at both of my friends, very serious, intelligent
and disciplined individuals, and said, "I am very happy to see
by the looks on your faces, you both don't think I am crazy. "
Hans spoke up, "On the contrary, I am most pleased to hear
such a marvelous story and want to thank you for your confidence
in us. "
I laughed and said, "Welcome aboard Brother Kooks.
We must be a breed in
ourselves".
Now gentlemen, in a serious
vein, what did I see and stumble into, I trust your judgement. "
Hans spoke up first.
"I believe you came upon a time
travel machine.
For some reason its time travel mechanism
had malfunctioned and it was adjusting itself.
And that accounts
for the appearance
and disappearances.
It was moving in and
out of our time frame.
You witnessed a most remarkable

--- PAGE BREAK ---alfunctioned and it was adjusting itself.
And that accounts
for the appearance
and disappearances.
It was moving in and
out of our time frame.
You witnessed a most remarkable

--- PAGE BREAK ---

phenomena.
I feel exhilarated just to think that such a
thing is possible. "
Then Max spoke up.
"The object was experiencing and
flying by artificial fields of gravity which accounts for
the luminosity,
as it was leaving.
That also explains the
strong electrical and magnetic fields picked up by your
compass and Geiger counter.
These fields can produce speeds
approaching the speed of light and beyond, which makes time
travel possible. "
I then arose and said, "Thank you gentlemen.
We will
continue these conversations.
We can do a lot of good even
if we don't understand all that we see and hear.
And as your
associate, Dr. Herman Oberth has stated, 'We have been helped'
Lt. General Arthur G. Trudeau once told me, "If its
possible, we can do it".
Perhaps, in the future, some enter­
prising young army officer will find an anonymous report in
the archives from which he can develop a new concept of time
travel.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e can do it".
Perhaps, in the future, some enter­
prising young army officer will find an anonymous report in
the archives from which he can develop a new concept of time
travel.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nostradamus in one of his interpretations said -
The 1990s effectively form a kind of
positive echo of the 1960s.
In many ways this is true, but we have a long way to go
to make this prophecy fully valid.
A partial fulfillment is
apparent.
Developments such as fiber optics, supercomputers,
lasers, many advances in medical science, image intensifiers
and super tenacity fibers have become realities.
However, in
many areas we have not progressed.
Some advancements have
been hampered by our own lack of knowledge to proceed beyond
"the state of the art. "
Most notable are the alignment of
atoms in metals and other substances, new methods of propul­
sion and man’s ability to travel in space.
In other areas
such as irradiated foods and nuclear energy we have been
sabotaged by political environmentalist and radical environ-
\ L
mental stands, such as, to take action in advance of understanding
standing.
Preconceived concepts have caused a snail’s pace
advance in the area of medical science, especially in the under­
standing of brain waves and their control over bodily functions
and in the fight against viral infections.
I will have to leave a discussion on the alignment of
molecules; 'atoms, new methods of propulsion and man’s ability
to travel in space to others.
Irradiated foods, nuclear
energy and the approach to viral infections I will elaborate
consistent with my knowledge and experience.
Last, but not
least, are my ideas on continued space exploration, both for
the common good and from a military point of view.
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---ate
consistent with my knowledge and experience.
Last, but not
least, are my ideas on continued space exploration, both for
the common good and from a military point of view.
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We reached the moon, then turned back home.
Why?
Were we scared off?
Was it politics or just plain
ineptness
or stupidity?
Will we be judged by later generations as a
wavering society without a goal or foresight?
Did we make
many discoveries then because of lack of ’‘Applied Engineer­
ing", do like the ancient Greeks, discover steam, then use
it to only open or close doors?
During the early 1960s upon a visit to NASA I got exas
pirated trying to find a technical office.
I went into an
office where a young lady was sitting and asked directions.
She didn't know.
Disgusted, I asked "What do you do, may I
ask? "
She said, "Yes, sir, I just pass papers from one office
to another".
I found out this was true of most of NASA's giant
bureaucracy.
I never went back.
This was also true in many
respects of the Department of Defense.
Once, walking through
the halls with General Trudeau, I asked, "General, we have both
been combat commanders, these offices are supposed to support
us, but what the hell do they do? "
The General dismissed the
question by saving, "I don't have the foggiest idea, Phil. "
I think this is one of the reasons for the sorry state of
space exploration.
A reorganization is needed, much on the
same order as U. S. Army R&D in 1959.
Everything under one
Chief, one budget, with clear-cut objectives.
The technical
services of the government, the best laboratories, industry
and universities should be brought together in an R&D effort
much as we did in Army R&D in 1959.
The drift should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---services of the government, the best laboratories, industry
and universities should be brought together in an R&D effort
much as we did in Army R&D in 1959.
The drift should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

halted and the White House and Congress should be forced to
rekindle the spark, and a reasonable budget be established
without frills.
Project Horizon, putting a military colony on the moon
should be revived and brought up-to-date,
by adding the best
of NASA’s findings in past successful projects.
All work and
developments should be explained to the public even if it
includes taboo, UFO information.
Let the chips fall where
they may, and let's make a fresh start,
not a forced secrecy
which we were compelled to exercise because of the climate of
opinion and a political, ideological aberration.
This would
open up the arena and the door to the future.
For man to travel in space he will need two basic ingred­
ients.
One will be food and the other energy or a power source.
The Army perfected and moved ahead with nuclear energy and
also pioneered irradiated foods.
Appendix F covers the Army's
nuclear program begun in the 1950s to supply energy for the
Army in isolated locations.
A six foot high, six foot wide apparatus weighing six
tons was built at Los Alamos.
It could produce 15 to 40 kilo­
watts.
It was encased in a concrete vault-like body contain­
ing the nuclear reactor core.
It is placed in the ground and
the only thing emerging is an electrical outlet.
It will pro­
duce electricity for 20 years, needs no attention and is proven
safe.
It was called the compact nuclear power source.
There
was also a thermohydraulically controlled reactor for purposes
MAN, SPACE AND NUCLEAR POWER

--- PAGE BREAK ---attention and is proven
safe.
It was called the compact nuclear power source.
There
was also a thermohydraulically controlled reactor for purposes
MAN, SPACE AND NUCLEAR POWER

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of heating water.
It had a power range 10 to 50 megawatts
and a core life of 15 years.
It operates in an almost complete
absence of attendance.
Active environmentalist and political
environmentalist have virtually put a halt to this activity
in the United States.
Space nuclear fields even reflect a greater uncertainty
in which direction we are heading.
The U. S. space nuclear
power program is tottering toward oblivion.
Even today,
Russian achievements surpass the United States.
The rest of
the world is moving ahead while through twisting thinking our
effort is shutting down.
This is a giant step toward a
second rate power status.
This do-gooder exercise in stupidity is nowhere more
apparent than in the process of irradiated food.
This process
for preserving food has demonstrable advantages over refrigera­
tion, freezing, canning, drying, salting or smoking.
The U. S.
Army Quartermaster Corp. began the process almost a half a
century ago.
I ate an irradiated steak over 30 years ago,
that had been on the shelf for two years.
The process, gamma
radiation kills the trichina worm in pork, and bacterium
salmonella in chicken, eggs, other poultry and fish.
It
does not destroy quality or the taste and is safe.
Again,
we are losing this advantage which we founded.
Shades of
another step towards a second rate power.
This same radiation is helpful at the other end of the
food chain - sewage.
Again the professional and political
environmentalist by their destructive and stupid thinking are

--- PAGE BREAK ---r.
This same radiation is helpful at the other end of the
food chain - sewage.
Again the professional and political
environmentalist by their destructive and stupid thinking are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

passing their stupidity on to all of us.
This is another
nail in the coffin of a dying space age.
MISSION AND OBJECTIVE
NASA or the space program need a new objective and
mission, understandable and beneficial to all.
Besides
space exploration and national security objectives, future
space platforms should contain full fledged medical facilities,
laboratories and a military presence
and participation, just
in case we have to fight in space.
This combination will
cover all eventualities just in case the aliens decide to
carry on warfare on another level.
Abductees have stated that the EBE's (IGIGI/s) are busy
studying tissues and biological functions of the human body.
They are masters of genetics; therefore, we must consider they
can manipulate mutations and DNA
arrangements.
This is a
logical assumption and conclusion.
Other discoveries point
to an advanced use of brain waves.
Some evidence exists of
uses of brain functions and brain waves.
A new program should be the by-product of high quality
science.
We should consider they are working in a micro­
gravity environment and should overcome the constraints and
match their effort.
Life science research in space is already
contributing to our knowledge of disease.
We know crystals
from space are of higher quality than those on earth.
The
AIDS gene can crystallize better in space than on land.
Space research could lead to breakthroughs.
We have spent
billions on AIDS research and came up with nothing.
What can

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Published by
Luminous Moon Press, Boulder, CO
All text and photographs (except where noted)
Copyright © 2017 Paola Leopizzi Harris
All Rights ReservedWhat can

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Published by
Luminous Moon Press, Boulder, CO
All text and photographs (except where noted)
Copyright © 2017 Paola Leopizzi Harris
All Rights Reserved

No portion of this book may be reproduced or used in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without
prior written permission of the author.

Original Cover design: Paola Leopizzi Harris
New Cover: Matt Lacasse
Interior layout & design: Carolyn Oakley, Luminous
Moon Design
Ebook layout and Design: Desta Barnabe
ISBN-13: 978-0-9968600-5-5
Printed and bound in the United States of America

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
Interior layout & design: Carolyn Oakley, Luminous
Moon Design
Ebook layout and Design: Desta Barnabe
ISBN-13: 978-0-9968600-5-5
Printed and bound in the United States of America

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Paola Harris has succeeded brilliantly in exposing the truth about the
extraterrestrial presence and how that may affect our lives and future
relationships. Reading Paola’s work will open your eyes to the reality of
what you have only dared to imagine.”
––The Honorable Paul Hellyer, Former Minister of National Defence,
Canada
“I was greatly honored to spend time with Colonel Philip Corso in San
Marino during 1998 where we were part of a delegation of researchers who
signed an initiative the Principality planned to take to the General Assembly
at the United Nations. I was extremely impressed with his clarity of mind
and sincerity during his public presentations and during personal
discussions. These two qualities became even more prominent when I sat at
his side for dinner one evening, along with Paola Harris and his family
members. This was a casual environment where the Colonel shared a few
experiences that I had not heard stated publicly before. His family members
nodded knowingly in agreement as if confirming the accuracy of these
accounts, which they clearly had heard before. His accounts remain to this
day controversial but there is no doubting that this courageous man endured
dreadful abusive and insulting commentary from some of the UFO research
community at the end of his life, which I will forever feel so sorry about.
Engaging the UFO and Extraterrestrial reality is not easy. The bigger your
story, the harder the journey and that is the price some pay for a shifting
consciousness.”
—Colin Andrews, February 25, 2017

--- PAGE BREAK ---Extraterrestrial reality is not easy. The bigger your
story, the harder the journey and that is the price some pay for a shifting
consciousness.”
—Colin Andrews, February 25, 2017

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“We will never fail to support Paola, who is the real driving force of Italian
Ufology, the free and independent Ufology of this country where, in order to
survive, at times you have to compromise your integrity, as researcher and
journalist. We have done some amazing work together, of which our dear
friend Colonel Philip Corso would be proud.”
––Maurizio Baiata, Editor, Area 51 Magazine, Italy (2005)
“I found Corso to be steel-eyed tough, and one who never backed down
from what he was trying to say. An acknowledged expert on our
involvement in the Korean War, his then-outrageous statements about our
POWs being left behind for “political expediency” were substantiated by
later documentation, just for starters. He was combative with his enemies,
Philip Klass being the best example of someone Corso KNEW was a
disinformation agent, a reason Klass always feared a face-to-face
confrontation with him. All of the recent scientific claims that Corso’s “alien
technology” is a false story rail to indicate an essential fact: Corso NEVER
indicated “where” these items and their immense potential came from! He
called it “industrial espionage” when dealing with the scientists, contractors,
etc., so they’d think it was captured British, French, Russian weaponry,
technology, etc., from which to develop a quantum leap in science for the
latter 20th century. I loved “the ol’ Colonel” as he called himself. Paola
Harris, around 2004 or so, managed to get me a contact with a then 83-year-
old civilian contemporary of Corso who had worked alongside him in the
Pentagon in the early 50s. This contact, face to face, told me Corso basically
was “right on” and did, in fact, work on secret matters related to Roswell.
Corso, in fact, was part of this man’s wedding party around the same time
(photograph verified this). It was an inspirational moment for me in Dec.
1997 to sit with Lt. Col. Corso, in the presence of Linda Moulton Howe, and
learn some more startling revelations not part of The Day After Roswell. I’ll
never forget his forthrightness, his determination to get the truth out, and his
devotion to America.”
—Bob Vanderclocknd
learn some more startling revelations not part of The Day After Roswell. I’ll
never forget his forthrightness, his determination to get the truth out, and his
devotion to America.”
—Bob Vanderclock

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DEDICATION
To Colonel Philip J. Corso (U.S. Army, Ret.),
with gratitude for trusting me to report his
story.
To Nick, Philip and Andrew, and all your
children and grandchildren.
To all the young people of the world who can
handle the truth that Colonel Corso
revealed.
To Maurizio Baiata and Adriano Forgione, my
Italian editors, and collaborators who went on this
journey with me.
I thank you for giving me the assignment and for
your passion in the search for truth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Philip J. Corso, Sr. (U.S. Army, Ret.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents
DEDICATION
INTRODUCTION
The Mandate
Preface by Dr. Michael Salla
Chapter 1
A SYNCHRONISTIC MEETING
Chapter 2
THE GREATEST GIFT
Chapter 3
HANGING OUT WITH COLONEL CORSO
Chapter 4
THE PESCARA CONFERENCE
Chapter 5
EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW WITH
Chapter 6
1998 —THE SAN MARINO INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM
Chapter 7
The Second Visit— Easter In Italy, 1998
Chapter 8
TIME FOR TRUTH
Chapter 9
GOING OFF THE RESERVATION
Chapter 10
MILITARY RECORDS AND PHOTOS
HISTORICAL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS FROM COLONEL PHILIP
CORSO
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Philip J. Corso. Photo from Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ION
Chapter 10
MILITARY RECORDS AND PHOTOS
HISTORICAL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS FROM COLONEL PHILIP
CORSO
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Philip J. Corso. Photo from Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTION
I have decided to write this book about my friend, Col. Philip Corso,
nineteen years after his death in order to honor him. This book is not in any
way a biography. It is merely a sharing of conversations and experiences
with a great man and confidante, spanning only a two-year period. It is a
stream of consciousness memoir and not a literary work. It is a sort of diary
for people who did not know him well.
Although it was my job to cover his story in 1997, we became good
friends. We had great conversations. I was able to ask him many questions
that would make me understand more about why the government is hesitant
to disclose the UFO phenomena. I now understand why the secret was
secret. I also understood that certain people are placed in history to
influence certain events. This man was one of those people and he was well
aware of his role in the disclosure process.
It is important that all those who read the book understand that I am
merely sharing what the Colonel said to Maurizio Baiata, the editor in chief
for the magazine Dossier Alieni, and me. They were mostly conversations
transcribed from video and audiotapes we made with him in Italy. But they
were interesting conversations. I believe them to be historic and I am happy
to share them with the reader.
I mainly dedicate this book about granddad to his three grandsons
and future great-grandchildren. He believed you all could handle the truth
and he welcomed you to A New World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---er.
I mainly dedicate this book about granddad to his three grandsons
and future great-grandchildren. He believed you all could handle the truth
and he welcomed you to A New World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Mandate
From Colonel Corso at San Marino conference in
1998.
In Korea, I was head of General MacArthur’s Special Projects
Branch. I used to get the young officers, young lieutenants from West
Point after they enlisted—about two or three weeks. I would call them in
one at a time. I’d say, “Tomorrow we’re doing a briefing to General
MacArthur and the Chief of Staff. And I’m not going to give the briefing,
you are.” These young men would answer that they could not do it. “No,
no, Commandant, you go give the briefing.” But I would say, “I want the
General to know you. He knows me and I want him to know you. So,
you’re going to give the briefing. That’s enough. You’re going to give the
briefing tomorrow.” So, I’d get them up there and give the briefing and
then General MacArthur would thank them. And they’d come back really
happy. Then they’d want to brief all the time because the General would
know them. But I told them, “You can do it. Don’t call me all the time.
You do it, that’s why I’ve got lieutenants.” Now this whole story here,
I’m eighty-three years old, so I have to get you younger ones tell the
story. Like today, Maurizio could have done the job. A couple of times he
continued explaining where I left off.
Now, Paola and Adriano, I am telling you now, pick it up and
continue what I say. And I want it on TV shows, radio, and other media.
When I say something and you say something, I want you to pick it up
and explain it just like you did today on the TV. You explained the part
about extraterrestrials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---other media.
When I say something and you say something, I want you to pick it up
and explain it just like you did today on the TV. You explained the part
about extraterrestrials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preface by Dr. Michael Salla
During his assignment from 1961 to 1963, Corso claims to have
regularly passed on to various corporations’ key “foreign technologies”
that were, in fact, extraterrestrial in origin.
This led to breakthroughs in developing the integrated circuit, night
vision technology, fiber optics, super tenacity fibers, lasers, and other
cutting-edge technologies. Corso’s book details a remarkable case: a
former senior military official emerging as a whistleblower to reveal
information about classified projects involving extraterrestrial vehicles
(ETVs) or extraterrestrial biological entities (EBEs). Since the
publication of his book, there has been much controversy between those
believing Colonel Corso was blowing the whistle on classified U.S. Army
activities involving seeding extraterrestrial technologies into private
industry, and those believing Corso distorted his distinguished military
service in order to assume a historical role far beyond his actual
achievements.
Those most critical of Colonel Corso believe that he was prone to
embellishing his service record. Most criticism has centered on a number
of public statements Corso made that appear to be inconsistent with what
can be verified in public documentation.
Some of the most significant of Corso’s claims that have been
subjected to intense criticism is that:
1.    He served as a staff member of President Eisenhower’s National
Security Council.
2.    He was head of the Foreign Technology Desk at the Army
Research and Development for two years.
3.    He disseminated extraterrestrial technologies to private industry.
4.    He witnessed an extraterrestrial biological entity (EBE) being
shipped overland from Roswell Army Air Force Base to Wright-
Patterson Air Force base.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ies to private industry.
4.    He witnessed an extraterrestrial biological entity (EBE) being
shipped overland from Roswell Army Air Force Base to Wright-
Patterson Air Force base.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Further criticisms include Corso’s claim:
•       to having been associated with a covert control group created to
oversee the UFO phenomenon, MJ-12.
•       to have served as commander of White Sands Missile Range.
•       to have concocted an alleged confrontation with the CIA’s
director of covert operations.
•       to have been promoted to full Colonel upon retirement.
I will discuss each of these criticisms in order to assess their:
•       validity.
•       damage to Corso’s credibility as a whistleblower.
•       discrepancies with available documentation.
•       impact on his central claim of having been part of a highly
classified effort by the U.S. Army to seed civilian industries with
extraterrestrial technologies.
Corso’s credibility as a distinguished military officer coming forward
to reveal his role in such a classified program shortly before his death is at
the center of the debate of whether his claims are valid or not.  Colonel
Corso’s claims placed a number of veteran researchers of the UFO
phenomenon in the uncomfortable position of dismissing the testimony of a
highly decorated officer. Documentation does put him in places and
positions where the events he claims to have witnessed could have occurred
as he described.
Nevertheless, there have been some inconsistencies found in what
Colonel Corso claimed and what can be documented. This has led to an
intense debate between those who consider these inconsistencies to be
minor, and those believing the inconsistencies to be sufficiently significant
to warrant dismissing Corso’s credibility and testimony entirely.
Some of Corso’s critics have gone as far as publicly dismissing
Colonel Corso as a fraud and “literary hoaxer.” Corso’s strongest critics
include veteran UFO researchers such as Stanton Friedman, Dr. Kevin
Randle and Brad Sparks who collectively have expressed their skepticism.
Many of the criticisms made against Corso cross the Rubicon dividing
objective criticism and outright debunking.
This invites speculation of the motivations of Corso’s critics whoed their skepticism.
Many of the criticisms made against Corso cross the Rubicon dividing
objective criticism and outright debunking.
This invites speculation of the motivations of Corso’s critics who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

undertake such a concerted debunking effort against a highly decorated
military whistleblower whose revelations do much to clarify the UFO
phenomenon. Files on Colonel Corso gained through FOIA include his
service record and a declassified FBI report. To assist my evaluation, I use
statements from an Italian version of Col. Philip Corso’s original notes that
were published in Italy as L’Alba di Una Nuova Era [Dawn of a New Age].
These notes have not been published in English. They comprise Corso’s
raw beliefs on a number of UFO issues prior to his collaboration with
cowriter William Birnes in The Day After Roswell.
I examined each of the most significant criticisms raised against Col.
Corso’s credibility as a whistleblower and assessed whether Corso’s critics
cross the line between objective criticism and debunking.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 1 Colonel Corso's dedication to me

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paola Harris and Colonel Corso in Rome, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 2 "Dawn of a New Era" translated into Italian

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Richard Sigismond and Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Boulder, Colorado

--- PAGE BREAK ---onel Corso in Rome, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 2 "Dawn of a New Era" translated into Italian

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Richard Sigismond and Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Boulder, Colorado

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 1
A SYNCHRONISTIC MEETING
Sometime in 1995, I found out that my dad in Italy was suffering from
a lung tumor, so I packed my things and moved to Rome to be with him in
his last days and to explore a new love relationship with an Italian
gentleman. This is important because, it seems that at this crisis point in my
life, my journalistic and research career began quite by accident, without
planning or premeditation.
I had been working with Dr. J. Allen Hynek until 1986 when he did of
a brain tumor. It was just so sad that I left the field for a while.
My life in Rome was normal. With a multi-disciplinary master's
degree from Leslie College, I accepted the job as principal at AOSR
(American Overseas School of Rome), a prestigious high school in Rome
with a student body of international students. I was living with my
marvelous new man, whom I considered to be “the love of my life,” and we
were doing a lot of world traveling.
All at once my dad died of lung cancer and the roof caved in. To
make things worse, my boyfriend and I terminated our relationship. I
returned to teach at AOSR where I taught high-school photojournalism,
American literature, and ancient history. It was very rewarding and I loved
the kids. Although I rarely talked about my stories or UFOs, this weird
teacher fascinated those kids who saw my web site. There is no money in
ufology and my day job helped fund the numerous investigations and on-
site interviews I had done for my four books. I was depressed and reclusive
after my tragedies, but then the most amazing thing happened.
The year 1997 was the 50th anniversary of the Roswell crash,
coinciding with the release of Col. Corso’s blockbuster book, The Day After
Roswell, at the Roswell conference. I was working for an Italian UFO
magazine in Italy at that time, with no desire to travel, when I received a fax
from Hynek’s friend Richard Sigismond inviting me to fly to Boulder,
Colorado in America and then drive the 600 miles to Roswell for this
historic occasion. The fax arrived at the offices of my friend, Maurizio
Baiata, editor of the magazines Notiziaio UFO and Dossier Alieni. At the
time, Maurizio was partners with Dr. Roberto Pinotti, who I had brought to
meet J. Allen Hynek in Chicago in 1981. Both men were consulting with
me on some UFO stories.
The invitation changed my life forever and hurled me into a greater
UFO research journey than I ever could imagine. But I did not want to go. I1. Both men were consulting with
me on some UFO stories.
The invitation changed my life forever and hurled me into a greater
UFO research journey than I ever could imagine. But I did not want to go. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---sulting with
me on some UFO stories.
The invitation changed my life forever and hurled me into a greater
UFO research journey than I ever could imagine. But I did not want to go. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was healing from personal trauma and not interested in doing anything.
Richard and his good friend Ron Keith, who would be doing the driving,
insistently faxed again, saying I could sleep on the floor in their motel in
Artesia, 40 miles away from the event because all the rooms in Roswell
proper had been booked since February for this momentous event! This
detail is important for the synchronistic things that occurred later. I
hesitatingly agreed to meet them on July 3, 1997. It was a long, hot drive,
and I was ill-prepared. I was told to look for a man named Philip Corso and
another named Robert Dean. I was to invite them to Italy to a major
conference on the Adriatic, in the province of Pescara, called “Il Contatto.”
I was also to cover the event and take photos for the magazine. I had long
done all my own photography and I was fairly good at it. As we drove
toward Roswell in the van, many thunderstorms unexpectedly arose—weird
storms with strange lightning. The Colonel later wanted to talk to me about
these events common to those in New Mexico.
I told Richard Sigismond that I had to check-in at the press section to
get my press pass and see if I could sleep in Roswell, otherwise, I would
never get to attend the morning press conference. I would be late if I had to
come all the way from Artesia, and I felt bad making them rise early.
They waited for me in the van as I ran to the press area and told the
people there that I was a foreign journalist covering this historic event, and
I needed a place to stay. They just wished me good luck and handed me the
infamous yellow pages. So, I placed my index finger at random on the first
hotel. The Sallyport Inn. Sure enough, they had a room for three nights. It
turned out that all the major speakers lodged there, but what was incredible
was that my room was right next to Corso’s. I had no idea who he was,
what he even looked like, or even what he had written, but some of my best
interviews have happened this way, as I am open to anything and do not
have a preconceived direction.
I said good-bye to Richard and the guys and threw my equipment and
suitcase on the bed and looked for a ride to the Roswell Museum where
Colonel Corso was to have a press conference. I hitched a ride in a red
sports car with William Birnes, Corso’s co-author. I did not really
understand who he was until I saw him later on stage. There was a huge
crowd around the press table and it was impossible to approach the Colonel
because his press agents from Simon and Schuster did not want him to
speak to individual people or reporters.
Fate would have it that a young man with blonde hair noticed my
press badge and asked me about Italy. He said that I should ask the Colonel
a question in Italian because the Colonel had been there in 1944. I hesitated
to speak in Italian in front of all the TV cameras in that incrediblee about Italy. He said that I should ask the Colonel
a question in Italian because the Colonel had been there in 1944. I hesitated
to speak in Italian in front of all the TV cameras in that incredible

--- PAGE BREAK ---

confusion. So, this man, who turned out to be the Colonel’s son Phil Corso,
Jr., smiled, said “Go on!” and gave me a gentle push, which shoved me into
the limelight. In Italian, I asked the Colonel about the Santilli alien autopsy
footage. My magazine in Italy had dedicated pages and pages to examining
it and Maurizio Baiata believed that there was some truth to that footage.
Surprisingly, the Colonel, being of Sicilian descent, answered in Italian. He
said that if it were not real, it was a good facsimile, due to a particular detail
he noticed. He explained that, in the film, he saw an eye covering removed
that was similar to the eye lens covering in his Roswell artifact file, from
which Army Research and Development had developed today’s night
screening devices. It all seemed incredibly programmed.
I got close enough to him to talk for several minutes and he said to me
“I know you!” I answered, “I don’t think so.” He proceeded to say that he
had to tell me about his friend Wilbur Smith, and the electromagnetic
“pillars” that were spinning in the Roswell desert. When I saw him in the
hallway of the Sallyport Inn, it was easy to get him next door for an
interview. At seven o’clock the next morning, he knocked on the door with
two books, one dedicated to me and one for his Italian military friend Ezio
Rapanelli that he wanted me to deliver to Ezio in Italy.
The Colonel sat at a table in my room and gave me the following
interview that I would not publish until after his death because of the nature
of what he said. I was not ready for this story of extraterrestrial contact and
thought it would hurt his credibility. It was a huge mistake.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interview of Colonel Corso
by Paola Harris
Sallyport Inn, Roswell, New Mexico July 3, 1997traterrestrial contact and
thought it would hurt his credibility. It was a huge mistake.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interview of Colonel Corso
by Paola Harris
Sallyport Inn, Roswell, New Mexico July 3, 1997

Paola Harris (PH): I hear you were part of the Allied forces in 1944
and you helped put Rome back on its feet in 1945.
Colonel Corso: That’s right. I was talking to God and I asked him, “Did you
put me here as a joke? This is your Eternal city, not mine. I am an
American. But since you put me here, I show you. I will show everybody.”
I was talking to God like a crazy man. I said, “I’ll put this city back on its
feet. I’ll give it back to you better than it was.”
Then I went to work. I called in the three chiefs of the black market,
commodities, and moneychangers. I reorganized the Ombra. All the
doormen were working for me.
PH: I heard some of those fantastic war stories but the question I have
is, “How come it is you? Why you?”
C: I used to say, “Why me? How come? What am I doing here?” It’s
uncanny. My whole life is uncanny. In Rome, I didn’t lose a man. None of
my CIC (Counter Intelligence Corps)[1] agents got killed. That’s impossible.
It shouldn’t have happened. I used to look at the orders I’d write about
communist arms. Nothing went wrong. That’s impossible.
It is not right.
I walked at times on Via Sicilia at two, three in the morning and down
the street like I was in another world. Nobody around. No noise. Nothing
around. Uncanny. Chief of police, Luigi Ferrari told me, “You have been
here before.
Yes. You’ve been here before.”
So, I told Gen. Trudeau “How’d I get these big positions, White
House, big commands? I was drafted in the Army. I am not a career
soldier.” So, the general said “it doesn’t matter how you got the job. We
won’t try to figure that out. What’s important is what you do after you get
the job.” All my life, even now, I’ve always felt like somebody’s been
manipulating me. Who is it? I don’t know.
PH: Do you honestly realize what your book means? I know manywhat you do after you get
the job.” All my life, even now, I’ve always felt like somebody’s been
manipulating me. Who is it? I don’t know.
PH: Do you honestly realize what your book means? I know many

--- PAGE BREAK ---u get
the job.” All my life, even now, I’ve always felt like somebody’s been
manipulating me. Who is it? I don’t know.
PH: Do you honestly realize what your book means? I know many

--- PAGE BREAK ---

researchers, Robert Dean, Stanton Friedman, Linda Moulton Howe
have been trying to bring forth the truth. This book is the key to unlock
the mystery.
C: My background, my positions, my integrity. They can’t touch that. My
experiences fit like a glove with the positions I was in. Something’s been
guiding me. I don’t know what. I can’t figure that out.
PH: What gave you the courage to write the book apart from the fact
that you said that you owed it to your men? Are you fascinated by the
fact that there is extraterrestrial life or did you already know it?
C: I knew it. I was pretty hardened to the fact.
PH: When? Before 1947
C: Oh no! Years ago. My mother told me, poor woman, that every time she
saw a thunder and lightning storm, she used to pray, because she had a
crazy little son, and when the lightning started, he had to run outside in the
storm to watch the lightning. She couldn’t believe it. She used to say,
“What is the matter with you. You love lightening; it will kill you.” I said
that it won’t kill me. My son claimed one time he saw me hit by lighting
and I kept walking.
PH: So, when you were young around 20 or 30 years old, you felt there
was something?
C. Yes. In fact, one time I had an experience at night. I described the inside
of a UFO; I was the only one on it. But really my life is uncanny. The
positions I held. I stood one day at Sperry Rand when myself, General
Trudeau and General Douglas MacArthur, the greatest soldier we ever had,
was chairman of the board and I said, “What am I doing here? How did I
get here? I don’t belong here.”
These two men were asking for my advice. I was just a draftee from
the northern town in Pennsylvania.
PH: Let’s return to the Roswell crash. What happened with the
dimensional gates in that area of New Mexico? (He had described
dimensional, electromagnetic pillars when I first met him at the UFO
museum.)
C: The night when this crash happened, Mac Brazel said there was a bolt of
lightning hit. Wilbur Smith, the Canadian physicist told me about the
electrically charged electromagnetic pillars. If a plane or a ship is in water,
and there is a lighting hit, the nuclear binding comes apart. When one of
these electromagnetic pillars is moving and something hits it, it can cause
wildfires, they can become invisible. The electromagnetic binding dissolvesit, the nuclear binding comes apart. When one of
these electromagnetic pillars is moving and something hits it, it can cause
wildfires, they can become invisible. The electromagnetic binding dissolves

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and a human can disappear. So, on that particular night on 1947, when all
these storms happened and, there was three craft, and they must have come
through the gate and they must have hit them, one just a fraction of a
second behind another, and possibly one ship became two and appeared ten
years later. I saw it and I went out to it

--- PAGE BREAK ---h the gate and they must have hit them, one just a fraction of a
second behind another, and possibly one ship became two and appeared ten
years later. I saw it and I went out to it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PH: Ten years later? You saw a craft?
C: I saw it right there in the desert, right near the Trinity site. I put my hand
on it and it kept disappearing and coming back.
PH: How did you know to go there? Was it on the radar, was it
mathematical or was it intuitive?
C: My radars kept picking it up. It was on my trajectory.
PH: So, were you with someone else?
C: No. I was alone. I was on the plane first. I have been flying across the
desert. Then I requested a command car and I went to the location by
myself. It was appearing and disappearing. At first, I did not go near it. I
was a bit scared. Then I threw some cactus in there and it was crushed. It
was solid. It was 110 degrees in the shade and I put my hand on it. It was as
cool as ice, right there in the desert near the Trinity site.
PH: It was real. But did you write this in your book?
C: No.
PH: Colonel, you act like this is normal. It doesn’t scare you at all?
C: I was in combat. If you don’t act normal, you’re in trouble. You go out
of your mind. On the left, a being came out of an abandoned gold mine. I
first pulled out the gun. Do you know what I asked the being? I asked him,
“Friend or foe?” Guess what the answer was?
PH: Neither.
C: You are right. Neither. Wilber Smith said, “You have experienced one of
the truly great events that ever happened.” In a gold mine, I met one of
those things. I pointed a gun at him and he wanted me to shut down my
radars so he could leave and then I put it down and asked, “What do you
have to offer me?” Do you know what message he gave me? I’ll write it
down for you. He said, “A new world if you can take it.”
PH: Was it like a grey?
C: Yes. He asked me to come aboard. I said to him, “I know what you can
do to my people.” Then, he asked me to shut down my radars for ten
minutes. I said to myself, “If I shut down my radar, ten minutes could be an
eternity.” How did that thing know that I was the only man that could give
that order? I asked him, “What do you have to offer?”
PH: “A new world if you can take it,” you said.ten minutes could be an
eternity.” How did that thing know that I was the only man that could give
that order? I asked him, “What do you have to offer?”
PH: “A new world if you can take it,” you said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C: Well, I walked back from the cave put my gun and knife away and I
walked over to the Jeep. I picked up my radio and I called range
headquarters and gave the order, “Capt. Williams, this is the Colonel. Shut
the radar off for ten minutes. I’m on my way.” But as I looked back, the
thing was still at the entrance to the gold mine. What the hell. It was
standing at the entrance and there is water in there. I looked back and I
saluted him.
PH: And he let you go? Sometimes they tried to control you.
C: Yes. When I got back the sergeant said, “Colonel you’d better pick up
the range headquarters tape. Something is going 3,000 or 4,000 miles an
hour on the screen.” When I was there on-site, I saw a green light flashing
and I heard in my mind, “I’ll return your salute.” Was it military or was I
just imagining that this thing was a soldier, too?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

POSTSCRIPTere on-site, I saw a green light flashing
and I heard in my mind, “I’ll return your salute.” Was it military or was I
just imagining that this thing was a soldier, too?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

POSTSCRIPT

On later occasions, the Colonel told me that they were ordered to shut
their radars off during the day. He knew that radar interfered with the
navigation systems of these crafts. Obviously, he had not always done that
and we know there were several UFO crashes in New Mexico.
I have always protected the Colonel, and I was worried about his
credibility, so when I was first given this interview in Roswell in 1997, I
decided against publishing it because of the ridicule factor. I was afraid
skeptics might think he was crazy. It was one of the greatest mistakes of my
career.
In any case, Colonel Corso came to Italy twice to speak at
conferences, and on those occasions, he told many others this story. It was
important to him that he disclosed it because of the importance of the
message stated here. He also wrote it as part of the dedication to me in the
translated Roswell book, for which I had written the preface in Italian.
I feel that there is a slow process of the release of information and this
is the time to consider full disclosure.
I was lucky to have known the Colonel. I miss the war stories that he
used to tell over and over again. I miss

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Drawing by Colonel Corso of the EBE (Extraterrestrial Biological Entity) that he met at Red Canyon near the
Trinity site, White Sands, New Mexico.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell interview printed in Dossier Alieni after Colonel Corso’s death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ical Entity) that he met at Red Canyon near the
Trinity site, White Sands, New Mexico.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell interview printed in Dossier Alieni after Colonel Corso’s death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

his honesty. When I asked him why he came out with this disclosure, he
told me that he thought the world could handle it. But he added that he was
giving me a “hot potato.”
He said I would know what to do. He told me to continue to speak at
conferences even after he was gone because I was one of his soldiers.
The being that met Colonel Corso was a small entity, a small person
that was wearing a one-piece outfit. It had slanted eyes and its fingers
appeared to have something like suction cups on them. And this was a
being that had a band around its head with a stone in the middle of it, an
interface. (The Colonel said they had several of these headbands at the
Pentagon.) It was a small being whom Colonel Corso always considered a
pilot or a warrior because he felt that the being respected him when he let
him go during that communication at Red Canyon when he shut down the
radar.
Then finally, as he promised in Roswell, the Colonel spoke about the
electromagnetic “pillars.” He said that in 1947, Roswell had radar blips that
indicated that there was unidentified craft flying around. He said that one
night, two craft smashed into two whirling electromagnetic pillars that held
a storm-induced gateway between them, which was caused by the same
kind of unusual electrical demonstrations that I had personally witnessed on
my 1997 trip to Roswell. He added that in the past they had lost planes,
which simply disappeared. He said one UFO crashed, and one showed up
ten years later near Red Canyon, N.M. He says he saw it! The account in
the previous section is what he told me at Roswell in 1997, and he
personally faxed to my home the drawing of the entity pictured there.
My job as a journalist is to put forth the “word-for-word” interviews
painstakingly collected for this book and to let the reader form the
conclusions. It is not my job to draw conclusions or to convince anyone! I
believe that any serious researcher can figure this out and see the
connections. I thank Colonel Corso and all these other researchers for
trusting me to share the story as accurately as I could.
At the very end of Colonel Corso’s life, I remember sitting in a car
with him as he was saying, “All those wars that I was in. All they did was
make a predator out of me. I was a soldier; I was kind of like a hired killer.”
And he felt sorry that he didn’t see the whole picture. He was a decorated
military man following orders, especially under General Douglas
MacArthur. He was very angry about how the Korean War ended because
initially it was supposed to be ideological and then it ended for political
reasons after a great deal of damage had been done—blowing up villageswas very angry about how the Korean War ended because
initially it was supposed to be ideological and then it ended for political
reasons after a great deal of damage had been done—blowing up villages

--- PAGE BREAK ---how the Korean War ended because
initially it was supposed to be ideological and then it ended for political
reasons after a great deal of damage had been done—blowing up villages

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and so forth. His life was dedicated to enhancing the competitive edge of
the Army to following the orders he was given.
Colonel Corso had an overall picture at the end of his life of what he
had accomplished as a military man, but he also had the talent of possessing
a nearly photographic memory. He said that he could look at documents and
remember every word. He had an astute type of strategic sense about things.
He could read people accurately and be able to tell whether someone was
lying or telling the truth. He knew human nature and had a keen mind. He
also had a great deal of compassion. He talked about the WWII battle of
Monte Casino in Italy (which is near Naples) and how the boys climbed
uphill only to be mowed down and shot. He knew the toll of the ravages of
war and what it did to this planet. The ravages of war are what Colonel
Corso was involved within World War II and in the Korean War.
I wonder why so many of these whistleblowers, these people who
leave the military, would go into the military/ industrial complex to work—
because it is those very those military-industrial complexes are the
structures which finance all of this. I know Colonel Corso and General
Trudeau consulted for Sperry-Rand after leaving the military.
When Colonel Corso began working on R&D projects at the Pentagon
in the 1960s, we justified the back-engineering of this foreign technology,
namely the Roswell artifacts which he considered gifts to humanity.
Colonel Corso was amazed by the fact that in the 1960s, he had a microchip
in his hand and that it had multilayers—he even drew a picture for us.
British science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke once said, “Any
sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.” Like all
advanced technology, it could be used for the benefit or the detriment of
mankind. This was an inner conflict that the Colonel expressed on many
occasions.
Since Colonel Corso was told by General Trudeau that these artifacts
were from UFO crashes, he was given the mandate to develop them for the
military and lastly to release them to the general public. He was particularly
worried about the use of the microchip. He was worried about artificial
intelligence and he talked to me about what would happen if we ever put a
microchip in a human, and would we make robots out of people. What
would happen if we make super soldiers out of people? He looked at all the
ethical questions behind the advanced technology. He and I had several
powerful conversations about the ethics involved in this such as using a
microchip for good and using a microchip for control of humanity. But he
also had to justify the fact that he was giving the money to the
military/industrial complex and he is quoted as saying, “We made the night-good and using a microchip for control of humanity. But he
also had to justify the fact that he was giving the money to the
military/industrial complex and he is quoted as saying, “We made the night-

--- PAGE BREAK ---crochip for control of humanity. But he
also had to justify the fact that he was giving the money to the
military/industrial complex and he is quoted as saying, “We made the night-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

screening devices out of the extraterrestrial’s lens cover so our soldiers
were able to see in the dark in Vietnam, so I did something good.”
In retrospect, I think Corso’s “going off the reservation” may have
cost him an early death and I believe that this closed that particular chapter
in the revelations about back-engineering. The exception is that, later on in
his life, more witnesses came forth to talk about black projects, to talk
about their involvement, to talk about crash retrieval—one of them being
Clifford Stone, who logically is telling the world that in crash retrieval,
what is retrieved is the craft. To the military that is the biggest treasure of
all because that’s where the technology lies.
Colonel Corso was an absolutely complex man, a Renaissance man.
He had a strong Italian background, a military mind, and a sense of
empathy for the common man. He loved his grandchildren and wished that
he would never see future generations go through the “war mentality,” the
real earth-bound infighting and the bloodshed that he went through in his
lifetime, although he still was an excellent soldier, a real patriot. He would
tell me over and over again, “I did what I was told. I was a patriot.”
But sometimes you have to go “off the reservation” to reveal the truth
and risk everything. That is a phrase coined by Dr. Steven Greer when
people reveal too much. Perhaps the Colonel did just that. I believe that he
had a great influence on UFO research in Europe. I was so very fortunate to
be there with him to watch this. He had an incredible sense of conveying
what the mystery was behind the UFO phenomenon and the fact that this is
an interdimensional world that includes ESP, reincarnation, the paranormal,
and things that we can’t absolutely fathom. His favorite topic was time
travel, and he believed the ETs were time travelers.
Another detail he told me was that the outfits or the suits that the
beings wore were made of strong intertwining different kinds of fabric and
that the only similar thing he could think of was a spider web. So, he said
that the Army invested a large amount of money for a University in
Wyoming study of spider webs so that they could duplicate intertwining
fabric like that. He explained that if you look at the atoms, they seem to go
one way, and when you look at it again and they were aligned in another
way. It’s obvious that he had an absolutely wonderful, curious mind. He
wanted to know everything.
He was adamant about my researching the Castellani Ointments and
the electromagnetic properties in the creams sold in Rome during World
War II, which would balance the electromagnetic field around a person to
cure them of disease, and he talked about the young soldier that he sent to
these Italian doctors so he could be cured. And he said, “Well, the soldiernce the electromagnetic field around a person to
cure them of disease, and he talked about the young soldier that he sent to
these Italian doctors so he could be cured. And he said, “Well, the soldier

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was allergic to his own dandruff.” But these creams that you could apply
topically would re-align the electromagnetic field around the body.
Cellular imbalance around one’s electromagnetic field or the
imbalance of any kind of field, including our environment and our bodies—
cell, body, whatever—is going to cause disease or some kind of illness, or
natural phenomena. He was interested in medical advancements and
claimed that the pen-like instrument he had from the Roswell artifacts could
cut and also suture a wound. This interested a doctor in Durango, Colorado
who contacted me and sent me an audiotape of a conversation Colonel
Corso had with him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Colonel with Paola Harris on Monte Mario, Rome, taking a break during a TV interview.
The Colonel in downtown Rome.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso: When I say something and you say something, I want you
up and explain it just like you did today on the TV. You explained the p
extraterrestrials.
Paola: I did it.
Colonel Corso: Yes, you did it. You did all right.
Paola: Yes, because I’ve heard it so many times that I knew it.
Colonel Corso: And then little by little, I’ll tell you more and more and
you put more on.
Paola: Okay. Yes, which thing did you give Adriano Colonel Corso: He’s
part on the craft.
Paola: And you gave me the….
Colonel Corso: The extraterrestrial.
Paola: The body.
Colonel Corso: The body.
Paola: Yes, but I don’t like the body. How can I explain it?
Colonel Corso: You’ll learn.
Paola: Maybe I’ll learn.
Colonel Corso: You’ll learn, that’s it. You know what that word means, do
You learn.

--- PAGE BREAK ---on’t like the body. How can I explain it?
Colonel Corso: You’ll learn.
Paola: Maybe I’ll learn.
Colonel Corso: You’ll learn, that’s it. You know what that word means, do
You learn.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is the analysis of the Extraterrestrial Body done by Colonel Philip Corso. He told us he saw the autopsy
reports. He says the clone had a four-lobed brain, one lung, four fingers, and implants in the brain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso’s letter to Durango doctor discusses the Castellani Ointments that cured his men, the litigation
over his book, and the stupidity of the skeptics.

--- PAGE BREAK ------ PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso’s letter to Durango doctor discusses the Castellani Ointments that cured his men, the litigation
over his book, and the stupidity of the skeptics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 2
THE GREATEST GIFT
Interview of Colonel Philip Corso by Dr. X
Corso: Colonel Philip J. Corso
Dr. X: A doctor from Durango, Colorado who had contacted the Colonel.
(Author’s Note: I received the audiotape and decided it best to keep the
doctor’s name anonymous.)
Corso: My knowledge of the extraterrestrial body and how the skin was
composed and all. And I’m just now working on how the cloners made him
and the specific purpose they made him for—what they look like.[2]
Dr. X: I see.
Corso: Because I was really very remiss on this, you know, and I always
figured that the artifacts were important that we had but the most important
gift they gave us, was that body, that extraterrestrial body and I’m the one
possibly responsible but I didn’t do enough. I started a project on that.
Dr. X: Right
Corso: Because that was the greatest gift they gave us. That’s a marvelous
cloning job. That was a humanoid, you know, and they did design him
specifically for space travel. It was a marvel. And I didn’t do anything
about it. I was totally oriented towards the hardware, armaments, and things
of that type. I was sort of remiss on this and I blame myself. I had the
talent; I had the organization and I had the money to do it. But I didn’t do it.
Dr. X: Do we still have this body?
Corso: No, they faded pretty fast. What I have been doing lately is trying to
recollect. I was very fortunate and I thank my mother and father that I did
have a type of photographic brain.
Dr. X: I see.
Corso: I recollected over the past couple of months, everything that I know
about the body, the autopsy reports and so forth. From there, I’ve been
composing what they were built for and how they did it. And this might be
worthwhile. I have some scientist friends of mine, really intelligent enough
to get into this. And I reversed the fact because I wanted to know what the
cloners of the pattern look like.[3]
My own doctor here, who operated on my stomach, Dr. M. He is one of theelligent enough
to get into this. And I reversed the fact because I wanted to know what the
cloners of the pattern look like.[3]
My own doctor here, who operated on my stomach, Dr. M. He is one of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---et into this. And I reversed the fact because I wanted to know what the
cloners of the pattern look like.[3]
My own doctor here, who operated on my stomach, Dr. M. He is one of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

best. And when I showed him the drawing of the extraterrestrial and what
they did for space travel, and he looked at the drawing, he said, “Well,
somebody solved the problem.” That was right.
Dr. X: Yes.
Corso: So, we should solve this problem. We have to go back to the fact
that man can’t travel in space. So, this will be the next thing. I’m just
finishing it up now.
Dr. X: Well. Back to this laser item? Do you feel that this apparatus is
what was used on the cattle mutilations?
Corso: Yes, I had two apparatuses. One I talked about was a little pen-like
object, and the other I didn’t talk about. But I mention it; I describe it in this
letter I’m sending you.
Dr. X: Okay, great.
Corso: It could repel human cells. It did something to the cells. And that’s
in the letter, also, that I’m sending you. I am taking you away from your
patients.
Dr. X: No, not at all. We just had a little office meeting this morning
and we are getting ready for next week. Phil, are these objects still
around or what? Where are they?
Corso: Well, I put it in the letter. What I did with these two objects I had, on
both objects and like typical thinking of a stupid human being, I thought the
batteries were dead, they couldn’t come on. And when I took them to a
radiological lab down at Fort Belvoir, we put radiation in long low waves on
them, and they came on. And like a stupid human, I thought the batteries
were dead. You know, typical thinking, and I finally took them down there
and they came on and these are marvelous instruments. I passed them on.
The General asked me to pass them on to the laboratory at Walter Reed and
from there they sent them to Fort Monmouth (a US Army installation in
New Jersey). And you see the way I operated. I wrote the proposals and
we’d farm these out to people working on these things. That’s the way we
did the whole operation. Well, you’ve read the book and you see how we did
it and we had to cover our tracks because the opposition was looking down
our throats. I think we did a good job of covering our tracks. Now this thing
with Bell Laboratory.
Dr. X: Yes.
Corso: Well I gave them the transistor and I gave them the integrated
circuit.
So that is true. We don’t ask anything for it; we were military. We couldn’tthis thing
with Bell Laboratory.
Dr. X: Yes.
Corso: Well I gave them the transistor and I gave them the integrated
circuit.
So that is true. We don’t ask anything for it; we were military. We couldn’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---Laboratory.
Dr. X: Yes.
Corso: Well I gave them the transistor and I gave them the integrated
circuit.
So that is true. We don’t ask anything for it; we were military. We couldn’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

put it on the market or make money from it. We gave it out to people with
the provision that they feed it back to us for a competitive edge to the Army
and give it to the people. That was the only provision we made, and then we
financed them.
Dr. X: I see.
Corso: And if they could make money, it wasn’t our concern at all, just so
they put it out. See, that’s the way we operated in those days. And I think
they were smart enough to know that and they used it but we wanted them
to use it.
Dr. X: Is this cutting laser being back-engineered to present-day or is it
still lying dormant?
Corso: I’m not sure. Dr. L told me a story, maybe you know this. In the
1960s a group of Russian doctors took him to the hospital and an operation
was going on. And the American doctors backed away, thinking blood
would spurt all over the place. The doctor said, “Oh, no.” So, they had an
instrument that they used and no blood came out and it cut and sealed and
in fact, they wanted that in the commissary and the Russian doctors spoke
up and said “no.” So they went downtown. They went downtown to one of
these medical supplies stores and they saw one of these instruments and
they bought it. They brought it back and they brought it back here and the
Russians sued them. But the American court decided in favor of the
doctors. And then my doctor looking at me and he said, “Phil, I used that
instrument on you.” On my stomach and they cut and sealed it. They came
back with it. I gotta get a picture of that and I don’t know if you are familiar
with this.
Dr. X: Could I possibly talk with this him.
Corso: Oh, yes. I’ll see him here in a day or two and I’ll tell him. You see
this doctor; he and I are good friends in addition to being my doctor. He
saved my life really. We are good friends. Dr. R. Oh Yes. I will see him in
a day or two and I will tell him that I discussed this with you. He is a
vascular surgeon, what he and I discuss a lot is the lymphatic system.
Dr. X: Yes, what about it?
Corso: It’s different in the extraterrestrials from humans.
Dr. X: I see.
Corso: They’re not like humans. So, I’d discuss that with him because after
all, with a doctor and he’s an expert at this and we discuss it quite often.
Dr. X: Well, where is Dr. R?ans.
Dr. X: I see.
Corso: They’re not like humans. So, I’d discuss that with him because after
all, with a doctor and he’s an expert at this and we discuss it quite often.
Dr. X: Well, where is Dr. R?

--- PAGE BREAK ---orso: They’re not like humans. So, I’d discuss that with him because after
all, with a doctor and he’s an expert at this and we discuss it quite often.
Dr. X: Well, where is Dr. R?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Corso: He is right here near Palm Beach
Dr.
X:
Jupiter
Corso:Jupiter,Florida
Dr. X: Oh, Jupiter.
Corso: West Palm Beach. That’s where I’m located. And Dr. R and I are
good friends and he is still my doctor. Because he’s one of the best and he
told me a strange thing, he said when he took the x-rays of my stomach and
he knew what to do. I’ll talk to him and tell him that you’d like to talk to
him.
Dr. X: I would really like to because he and I can have a discussion,
doctor to doctor, really about the cutting of tissue and this area that I
am really fascinated with.
Corso: I think in the book I mentioned Doctor Castellani when I was in
Rome and I was head of Security and Intelligence. I became great friends
with him and he was in his 60s then while I was in my 20s. He was world-
famous with the Castellani Ointments and he told me what the ointments
were and they let the body go to rest. And also, he said there were patients
that had swelling and itching at the Army Hospital. Skin patients treated
with penicillin became worse. I went down and one of my men, a boy, and
they told me he was worse. So, I told my driver to take my car and go back
and get Doctor Castellani. And he brought him to the American hospital.
About half an hour later, I get a call from Doctor Castellani in my office
and he said, “Corso, I’ll have your man back to work tomorrow.” And I
asked him what was the matter with him, Doc? He said, “It’s very simple. I
put the ointment along his hair and he was allergic to his own dandruff.
Now it’s all better.” And he cured the boy in one day. That’s the type of
man he was.
They ran a little clinic in Rome for the poor. The man could probably
work in any hospital in the world, but he didn’t.
I used to send him a lot of medical supplies from the hospital and he was
very grateful for that. And I’d get penicillin in raids and penicillin in those
days was more valuable than gold. And I’d send him down penicillin and
when he really needed it, I could get something from the US hospital for
him. Because I was in charge of Security and Intelligence you know. And I
could do things like that. I knew that anytime anything happened to one of
my boys, he was always there for me.
Dr. X: That’s amazing Phil. One more thing where are these cutting
objects now?w. And I
could do things like that. I knew that anytime anything happened to one of
my boys, he was always there for me.
Dr. X: That’s amazing Phil. One more thing where are these cutting
objects now?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ings like that. I knew that anytime anything happened to one of
my boys, he was always there for me.
Dr. X: That’s amazing Phil. One more thing where are these cutting
objects now?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Corso: I don’t know, Doctor. I’ve been retired since 1963. But since the
objects and the reports. I tell people here in my lectures, and you gotta
remember we were army officers… The material wasn’t mine and did not
belong to me. I had no right to steal it or take it because it really did not
belong to me. I was Intelligence; I was the kinda guy that was supposed to
stop people from stealing from the army.
Dr. X: Yes. I understand.
Corso: In those days, and we were together and there was still a lot of
honesty and integrity around. And when I...we gave them to the people who
were supposed to have them and use them. We made the first heart pump
and the first respirator, you know. We made that in the Army.
Dr. X: I didn’t know that.
Corso: I have pamphlets that describe that. We made the first heart pump
and the first respirator. You know of any Army in the world who does this?
Most people don’t know this. It’s mentioned in this new book.
Dr. X: I’d like to have this.
Corso: I’ll send it to your home. I’ll mail it today.
Dr. X: Thank you very much.
Corso: Usually I don’t bother with people—the skeptics and debunkers. I
always tell them; I don’t want you to pass your stupidity on to me. I won’t
even answer you.
Dr. X: I hope to personally, hopefully, to see your lecture some time.
Corso: When you get this letter, look it over and then we can talk from
there.
Dr. X: Is your address on there?
Corso: Yes, in the letter.
Dr. X: All right. Well, thank you for your support.
Corso: Thank you for calling me. I’m glad you did.
Dr. X: I took a chance at calling you. The pleasure is truly mine. Thank you
very much. Bye, bye.
The Colonel was fascinated with electromagnetism. He learned about
the properties of these special Castellani Ointments in 1945 when he was
28 years old. He was totally amazed by it and was also fascinated with
people coming in and out of dimensions. He discovered a portal on Via
Sicilia, where he took me. Much of this happened in Italy where he
appeared to have obtained a background for questioning reality. He used tong in and out of dimensions. He discovered a portal on Via
Sicilia, where he took me. Much of this happened in Italy where he
appeared to have obtained a background for questioning reality. He used to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

say, “Well, I will live through this anomaly and put it in the back of my
mind for later.” And those were the words he used when he described the
alien body he saw in the veterinary quarters at Fort Riley, Kansas in 1947.
It’s almost like he stored all these anomalies in his life. He’d say “I can’t
deal with it right now; I don’t have enough information.”
In his later years, Colonel Corso drastically changed his position on
space and the weaponization of space. He was quite disillusioned with the
human race and he really felt that the “visitors” had the ability to annihilate
us and wondered why they did not already do it. He was convinced that
they had done this in our history. He saw corruption, greed and a lack of
values on Earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The articles we published about the encounter with Colonel Corso and an Extraterrestrial Biological Entity (EBE)
in Red Canyon, near the Trinity site in New Mexico.
Translation: “Corso: An undiluted memorandum on Extraterrestrials”
Magazine: Dossier Alieni, November/December 1999

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Writings of Colonel Corso in his own words and in his own handwriting. The Colonel saw things from an
Extraterrestrial perspective and he issued warnings to humanity in his text.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Illustration by Colonel Corso of the power of ET technology on planet Earth. Could the EBE, the integrated circuit
and the piece of metal be components of the new world?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso chats with Ursula Andress in Rome.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---uld the EBE, the integrated circuit
and the piece of metal be components of the new world?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso chats with Ursula Andress in Rome.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 3
HANGING OUT WITH COLONEL CORSO
Dinner with the Colonel and editor Maurizio Baiata in one of Rome’s famous pizzerias.
Maurizio, Adriano and I used to take the Colonel to Rome’s great
pizzerias, where he would talk all night. I must have heard his war stories
dozens of times. His war experiences alone would fill a book.
He was at the famous battle of Monte Cassino. His intelligence career
and his adventures fighting crime, communists, and spies would make 007
seem like a kid in comparison. During WWII, he even used to carry a little
stiletto knife hidden in his arm, which alarmed both friend and foe. I saw a
facsimile of the knife in a glass case in the Corso home in Florida.
Perhaps the most powerful memories I have of him in Italy were his
intimate conversations with Desmond Leslie, British ex-fighter pilot of
George Adamski fame. Leslie, who is of noble heritage, knew about aliens
and UFOs and was close with Adamski. If those two were talking, no one
interrupted them. They would go on until the wee hours of the morning.
The Colonel’s daughter-in-law Liz and one or two grandsons were always
present.
It was part of the agreement that the Colonel would travel with
family, and my editor Maurizio paid their way because the Colonel wanted
the boys to understand Italy and his Sicilian heritage. I became really close
to these teenaged boys who adored their “grandad.” I felt like a bodyguard

--- PAGE BREAK ---because the Colonel wanted
the boys to understand Italy and his Sicilian heritage. I became really close
to these teenaged boys who adored their “grandad.” I felt like a bodyguard

--- PAGE BREAK ---

at times, always taking his arm. I was afraid he was going to trip and fall,
and I remembered my promise to Phil, Jr. to protect him.
In a sense, I was a bodyguard. I remember when we were filming an
interview for state television channel RAI. This was to promote the San
Marino conference.
They wanted to do it on top of the mountain called Monte Cavo,
outside of Rome. It was a stormy blustery

--- PAGE BREAK ---

day and the station sent us a limousine with the driver. I remember
Maurizio Baiata and I were sitting in the backseat with the Colonel. The
chauffeur was in the front seat with the president of our UFO Society CUN
(Centro Ufologico Nationale). He was an elderly military general.
We had learned at the gate that the winds were so high that the metal
towers were toppling over. They asked us if we were sure that we really
wanted to go up the mountain.
I turned to Maurizio said, “Do we really need to do this? It is so
dangerous!” I was digging my fingernails into him out of fear. He said that
the RAI wanted to stage an event that represented the Roswell UFO crash.
The weather in 1947 was a lightning storm like this one. They were using
these big lights called overalls.
As we made our way up the mountain, I noticed that several metal
radio towers were swaying and several had blown down. The wind was
terrible.
When we got to the top. Maurizio Baiata and the General left the car
to go into the white TV van. They left me with the Colonel in the backseat
with the driver smoking a cigarette in the front.
I saw that the Colonel sitting beside me was immobile stoically sitting
silently. I began to talk to the driver because I was nervous. I found out he

--- PAGE BREAK ---king a cigarette in the front.
I saw that the Colonel sitting beside me was immobile stoically sitting
silently. I began to talk to the driver because I was nervous. I found out he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was from Naples and we were conversing for a little while.
All in an instant, without warning, the driver opened the car door, left
it open and disappeared into the storm. Immediately my reflexes told me to
jump out of the limousine, go around it and pull the Colonel out of the car
and take him to the white commercial TV Van.
I was very well aware of car bombs in Rome as it happened twice in
front of my apartment near Ponte Milvio. It is a common occurrence. It was
pouring rain as I brought the Colonel over to the white van and got in with
him. From that moment on, I made it a point to stay together. I never really
found out why the driver jumped out, leaving his door open.
Nothing happened but I noticed that the General who was with us
never actually came to the San Marino conference.
I think he thought that the situation could possibly be very dangerous, and
the Colonel was a liability. Later, I realized that we were over at an
underground facility. There was a military base under the mountain. That
day we went to a lot of trouble to film a UFO crash simulation in the
middle of a terrible rainstorm. It did air on the Italian RAI Television but I
think the Colonel was very stressed during the interview in the white van. I
still remember that incident today.
When we were at Italian dinners, which are often made up of five
courses, the Colonel would not eat. So, I began cutting up his meat and
forcing him to eat. He loved the attention so much that at one point, he
wanted to change his ticket to remain in Rome. The Colonel maintained that
overeating makes you tired and zaps your strength. His incredible energy
was derived from his eating almost nothing. While all of us were tired and
exhausted at night, he was still talking and raring to go. I observed that he
had great intuition, ESP and dimensional awareness, which I will cover in a
later chapter. I noticed that he loved our Italian strawberry gelato.
The Colonel was very generous with gifts for his family and his
friends. Once he came off the plane at Rome’s Leonardo Da Vinci Airport
gently carrying an unwrapped, porcelain red rose in his hand for me.
Another time he handed me a long, black, laser-pointer pen, telling me it
was just like the artifact in his Roswell “nut file.” This one did have
batteries.
He said he had taken the original artifact to the Army Labs at Ft.
Belvoir, Md., to have long, low waves put on it. When it was activated, it
produced a fine laser light. He said that they did not realize the importance
of what they had back then, and also that they should have paid more
attention to the Extraterrestrial Biological Entity (EBE) body, the most
precious cargo of all because a careful study of its makeup would enablead back then, and also that they should have paid more
attention to the Extraterrestrial Biological Entity (EBE) body, the most
precious cargo of all because a careful study of its makeup would enable

--- PAGE BREAK ---

humans to travel in space. He confided to me that quite possibly the
Roswell aliens were humans coming back from the future to warn us. After
his first heart attack, he mentioned to me that he had had a dream in which
he received a warning of future events and he gave me April 17, 2003, as a
possible date to watch. He was very disappointed with humanity and
regretted the death and carnage of wars, but he knew he had played an
important role in unfolding events on the planet by saving thousands of
Jews during WWII, negotiating with key historical figures such as the
Montini Pope, saving entire villages from disease and starvation, and
fatefully being present in 1947 at Ft. Riley, Kansas when he viewed the
alien “cargo” stored in the veterinary quarters.
Later, when he actually viewed the autopsy papers, he recalled seeing
the actual alien body floating in blue liquid, in Ft. Riley, Kansas. He said
the Pentagon was more concerned with its creators than the small EBE
because he believed

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecalled seeing
the actual alien body floating in blue liquid, in Ft. Riley, Kansas. He said
the Pentagon was more concerned with its creators than the small EBE
because he believed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

they looked like us and could walk the halls of the Pentagon unnoticed.
Like Dr. Michael Wolf in later years, anything Colonel Corso
recounted, he repeated exactly, without changing the details. These were
experiences he had lived. He had papers and documents that later were
either destroyed or denied to him. He said that in the intelligence network,
you could not leave a paper trail. You must claim plausible deniability. It is
incredible to me that so-called skeptics who have never met the people they
are debunking use the lack of documents as their chief argument to claim
disinformation and fraud. Corso’s documented Italian and American careers
are impeccable. One need only to have spoken with the man to realize who
he was. The release of The Day After Roswell took the study of the UFO
phenomenon to a new and more concrete level for us journalists. It helped
us figure it out.
As a journalist, who observes and knows these people well, I am
appalled at how few researchers do their homework. Although I am

--- PAGE BREAK ---vel for us journalists. It helped
us figure it out.
As a journalist, who observes and knows these people well, I am
appalled at how few researchers do their homework. Although I am

--- PAGE BREAK ---

highlighting some particular people in this book, I have consulted and
spoken with so many more. Sgt. Major Robert Dean, Bill Hamilton and his
wife Pamela, Wendelle Stevens, Carlos Diaz, Desmond Leslie, Yvonne
Smith, Michael Hesseman, Budd Hopkins, Michael Lindemann, and Jim
Courant were present with Col. Corso in Pescara, Italy, in 1997 and in 1998
at San Marino. These are some formidable people. In San Marino, Corso
met with Sun Shilli (China), Roberto Pinotti (Italy), Boris Shurinov
(Russia) and Gildas Bourdais (France), Antonio Huneas and others. When
these people sat with him, they all exchanged ideas and, since I was always
present, I saw the enormous respect expressed for him. I also saw a
synthesis of research and ideas that I rarely see today in this always
competitive and sometimes backstabbing field.
I believe that it is time to unite and share research. There is such a
wealth of information in this group of people that one might consider it a
“think tank” or a meeting of the minds, with each person having his or her
expertise. If one considers using the method my mentor and teacher, Dr.
Hynek, taught me of compassion and good listening skills, there is no way
that some truth will not emerge. Since I have now become a frequent
speaker at Dr. Roberto Pinotti’s San Marino conference, I can truly say that
it is the “United Nations” of Ufology and a dignified arena for world
discussion.
It is important for contactees, scientists and military leaders to come
together, and I saw this at the Pescara conference in 1997 where Colonel
Corso explained the propulsion systems on the lightships seen by Mexican
contactee Carlos Diaz. He said the craft in Roswell was similar.
Diaz, who was a personal friend of mine at the time, told me that
Corso helped him enormously to understand the technical aspects. He is
forever grateful to the colonel foraft in Roswell was similar.
Diaz, who was a personal friend of mine at the time, told me that
Corso helped him enormously to understand the technical aspects. He is
forever grateful to the colonel for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso explains the propulsion system in Carlos Diaz's lightship photos.
The sharing of ideas. Desmond Leslie and Colonel Corso at Pescara Conference in 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

verifying his photographs. He did this publicly in front of a packed
audience in Pescara.
Corso also believed that the EBE would nourish itself with
electromagnetism, and taking him away from his environment in the craft
would cause him to disintegrate and die. He believed electromagnetism was
the key. The EBE and the craft were one unit.
The office of Dossier Alieni and Notizari di UFO. Paolo Pucerelli, Paola Harris, Pietro Ponzo, Maurizio Baiata,
Colonel Corso.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Philip Corso, restaurant “Lo Zodiaco” in Monte Mario during a press conference about the release of
the Italian edition of The Day After Roswell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Calm. Colonel Corso in Rome, Monte Mario.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Press conference at restaurant “Lo Zodiaco,” Rome, 1998.
Press conference. Paola Harris, Colonel Corso, editor Maurizio Baiata.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Pescara Conference program.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---restaurant “Lo Zodiaco,” Rome, 1998.
Press conference. Paola Harris, Colonel Corso, editor Maurizio Baiata.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Pescara Conference program.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 4
THE PESCARA CONFERENCE
This chapter is dedicated to Colonel Corso. I remember a lot of things
about him. All the visits to Italy put me in a position of being a host to him
and his family. I was always accompanying him; almost a bodyguard,
attending to him. He loved talking to people, especially doctors and
scientists.
When we at Dossier Alieni brought Corso to Rome on the first
occasion in 1997, he got together with Desmond Leslie, an RAF pilot and
co-author of the book Flying Saucers Have Landed with George Adamski.
These two old soldiers were able to reminisce about the incidents that
occurred in World War II. Colonel Corso was the head of Intelligence CIC
during 1944-45 and one of the things that he talked about with Desmond
concerned the whole George Adamski contact story.
At that time, I didn’t know a thing about George Adamski and didn’t
choose to do any research about him. Back then I felt these stories were too
difficult to prove. I have since come a long way. Contact is now the focus
of my most important contributions to the field. In the intervening years, I
have spent hours with an Adamski representative, Glenn Steckling, who
was given all of Adamski’s materials. He is a fellow researcher and I
realized that not only was George Adamski a key figure in our history, but
the messages given to him were meant to save this planet and create this
new world of which Colonel Corso spoke.
I remember Desmond Leslie telling Colonel Corso that Adamski
didn’t even have an umbilical cord—he had no belly button—and that he
stated he was “one of them.” So, I think Colonel Corso probably shared his
own New Mexico contact story with Leslie. They both got a clearer idea
about alien contact and how it all related to a pre-programmed situation
where the extraterrestrials chose key figures to take the responsibility to
speak out. Both took this position.
Desmond Leslie was very, very flamboyant when I met him. My
editor invited a powerful list of speakers. Among them were Bill Hamilton,
Carlos Diaz, Robert Dean and the great researcher Colonel Wendelle
Stevens. Wendelle probably had a more comprehensive, international view
of the field and brought incredible UFO photos to Italy. When we would sit
at dinner with the speakers, Desmond Leslie designated our table The
Citadel. It was like these people, he, Wendelle Stevens and Colonel Corso,
were the last real vestiges of another era of disclosure—the last stronghold,eakers, Desmond Leslie designated our table The
Citadel. It was like these people, he, Wendelle Stevens and Colonel Corso,
were the last real vestiges of another era of disclosure—the last stronghold,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ie designated our table The
Citadel. It was like these people, he, Wendelle Stevens and Colonel Corso,
were the last real vestiges of another era of disclosure—the last stronghold,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the last fortress of truth.
Our office hosted Colonel Corso, accompanied by his daughter-in-law
and grandson Nick, at the 1997 Pescara conference held on the Adriatic
Coast in Italy. In the meantime, they were with me in Rome. I and many
others gave the Corso family a tour of the fountains of Rome and the
Coliseum. After all, this was my backyard, because I lived in the center of
the Eternal City.
It was a wonderful trip for the Colonel because he was returning to his
roots to share his story with people who were really interested. Desmond
Leslie and Colonel Corso put their heads very close together as they talked
at the hotel. They had even agreed to write a book together. I think that
Corso, after having been silent for so many years, was getting some
answers.
Since the Colonel was interested in alien contact itself, he asked
Desmond about George Adamski and his meeting the extraterrestrial
spaceman, named Orthon, in Desert Center, California on November 20,
1952. Desmond told him about the human-looking ETs who accompanied
Adamski and who appeared to be just like ordinary people. I remember
being at the table while they were talking, and the conversation went
beyond normal discourse.
In talking to Desmond Leslie about his years with George Adamski
and the Giant Rock contactees like Howard Menger, George Van Tassel,
Orfeo Angelucci, we received new source information. The idea that
contact had an important message and was an agent for transformation and
evolution interested Corso. The new world was coming to light.
It took many years before I would interview contactees and cover that
particular era and the early days of humanoid contact, which would evolve
my thinking. In 1997 I was still about “nuts and bolts” research.
In this book, it is now important that I include my new, 2014 research
which covered extraterrestrial visitations in the 1950s. I was later told by
the Adamski representative, Glenn Steckling, that the main message gave
humanity a choice. The space people told George Adamski, “You have a
window of opportunity here where you can take the funds given to the
military/industrial complex and use that money and that technology to
travel among the stars and leave your planet, and to discover the cosmos.
Then, you will find us. Or you can take that technology and develop
weapons of war so you keep your power as a country and develop a war
economy. Then you will need to create more wars.”
That period of history was an important economic benchmark and, of
course, everybody knows which way we decided to go. It seems the ETsdevelop a war
economy. Then you will need to create more wars.”
That period of history was an important economic benchmark and, of
course, everybody knows which way we decided to go. It seems the ETs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

always present us with a choice. This is extremely relevant to the message
Corso received about the new world if you can take it.
Maurizio Baiata introducing Colonel Corso, Paola Harris, Cecilia Dean, Robert Dean, Pamela Hamilton and Bill
Hamilton at the Hotel Adriatico in Pescara, Italy, 1997.
Colonel Corso and Colonel Wendelle Stevens sharing information in Pescara.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Citadel: Bill Hamilton, Wendy D’Olive, Michael Hesseman, Liz Corso, Vladimiro Bibolotti, Carlos Diaz,
Desmond Leslie, Cecilia Dean, Cristoforo Barbato, Carlos’s wife Margarita, Pamela Hamilton, Etta, Pietro
Ponzo, Colonel Corso and Paola Harris.
Speakers at the 1997 Pescara conference: Bill Hamilton, Michael Hesseman, Liz Corso, Desmond Leslie, Pamela
Hamilton, Colonel Corso and Paola Harris.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paola Harris with Maurizio Baiata introducing Colonel Philip Corso at the conference “Il Contatto” in Pescara,
1997.
Press Conference, Hotel Adriatico. Paola Harris, Colonel Corso, Maurizio Baiata, Roberto Pinotti.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Adriano Forgione (my editor, 2016, Phoenix Publishing, X-Times Magazine) with Colonel Corso, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ola Harris, Colonel Corso, Maurizio Baiata, Roberto Pinotti.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Adriano Forgione (my editor, 2016, Phoenix Publishing, X-Times Magazine) with Colonel Corso, 1997.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 5
EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW WITH
Colonel Philip Corso given to Paola Harris and
Maurizio Baiata (transcription from videotape)
It’s obvious that no one is using logic here because we’re talking only
Army. And if the Army and Air Force split in 1948 and the Air Force was
involved in some crash retrievals (Roswell was not the only one), then they
were going to have an advantage by secretly taking these artifacts, back-
engineering them before anyone else, and using them for Air Force
research. They’re not going to have a Colonel Corso come forth. They’re
not going to have somebody talk about it. Colonel Corso was perhaps one
of the most courageous men in UFO history in this disclosure process.
Corso encouraged us to invest the time in a “new” scientific approach
that takes us past the paper-pushing and laboratory-experimentation stages
and leads us, instead, into a serious discipline, which could include
adaptation to an inter-dimensional phenomenon. He said the answer was in
time travel, understanding the mystery of space and time, and of course
electromagnetism.
Colonel Corso said—and this was probably the bottom line for all of
the back-engineering of all the artifacts that are found in crashes—he said
they were first used as arms and for the purpose of the military. After that,
they were farmed out to the general public for whatever uses they had.
This is where we’re a little different. The mentality is a little different
—this mentality is to have superior knowledge of technology for bellicose
reasons, for use in war, for using even to gain an advantage over other
divisions of the military. So, the argument always comes down to if Colonel
Corso had the transistor, if he had the integrated circuit, if he had all of that,
it was already in the mainstream from prior military research dating back to
1947.
Following is an unedited, original interview that
Colonel Corso gave to Editor Maurizio Baiata and me at the Buena’s Aires
Hotel in a hotel in Rome. I remember it well!
“In the end, the greatest gift was the extraterrestrial
itself, not the hardware.”
Colonel Corso: I’ve just mentioned crop circles, mutilations of animals and
abductions of humans. When I was Chief of the Foreign Technologyst gift was the extraterrestrial
itself, not the hardware.”
Colonel Corso: I’ve just mentioned crop circles, mutilations of animals and
abductions of humans. When I was Chief of the Foreign Technology

--- PAGE BREAK ---aterrestrial
itself, not the hardware.”
Colonel Corso: I’ve just mentioned crop circles, mutilations of animals and
abductions of humans. When I was Chief of the Foreign Technology

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Division, I went to the General one day and it was agreed that we would
start no projects in the
Army, in our organization, on those three items: crop circles, mutilations,
and abductions, but we would watch them. We would keep getting the
reports and we would watch them because our main objective in those days
was weapons of war. We did it to enhance the competitive edge of the
Army. Even with the beings, it did not matter to us if they were real or not
and it didn’t matter if they came by accident or design. Our motive was: if
they are real, we are going to be ready. We are not going to sit here like
stupid humans and say they are not around. We have to work on the
assumptions that they are there and they might be enemies. So, I told the
General, our main thrust must be that, and I hardly had time to do what I’m
doing but I would read the documents because I could read documents in a
minute or so. I said: “I’ll keep getting these reports and watch this but we’ll
do nothing about it, only collect information,” and for years I collected
documents, at the White House, which talked about mutilations. We knew
about them. We made the decision that crop circles were nothing else but
integrated circuits. When we’d put in an integrated circuit, they’d give us a
message. Abductions, we came to the conclusion they’re happening but that
we were not going to do anything about it. We were receiving materials so I
did get two of the implants. There are other implants, which I’ve never
talked about, which we knew were real. You could not take them in your
hand because they were microscopic, but they were there.
So, the future has to go along those lines. When I was working in this
field, I know they were real. They happened. I don’t think that any other of
those people can say this. They weren’t cleared. They didn’t get the reports.
They did not have access to them.
They talk to an abductee and what happens? The critic says,
“hallucination, self-hypnotism” and you’re finished. How are you going to
get past that? Well, if I tell you that the abductee had two implants, it makes
it real. You can say, “Colonel Corso told me.” It was an area that we never
did anything about. We never found out the reason for it because we had
our hands full with what we were doing. That wasn’t my job to do that. We
spent money on the night-viewing device; millions of dollars. That was a
product of war. The soldiers of Vietnam could see the enemy at night.
Lasers, Fiber Optics: that was the main thrust of our organization. The
extraterrestrial himself. I would always say, was the greatest gift they gave
us and we did nothing with it. So, who was in charge? I was, so that meant I
did nothing with it. So, in my old age maybe I feel guilty and I have been
writing about it now. I realized experts have to come into this and look at
this entity, this Being. I know nothing about lungs, the lymphatic system,in my old age maybe I feel guilty and I have been
writing about it now. I realized experts have to come into this and look at
this entity, this Being. I know nothing about lungs, the lymphatic system,

--- PAGE BREAK ---I feel guilty and I have been
writing about it now. I realized experts have to come into this and look at
this entity, this Being. I know nothing about lungs, the lymphatic system,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and the body. This Being is, after all, a biological entity. All these stories of
clones that it is against religion; that man wants to live forever, that’s all
baloney. That clone was made for another purpose: to travel in space. They
want to see what space is like. They came here. Without the
relationship of the clone with the flying saucer, they never would have
made it here.
Paola: Will they attack us?
Colonel Corso: There’s no way in the world that I can tell you that they
won’t attack us but, from a soldier’s point of view, I’ve got to be ready for
any attack that might come. If I’m not, I’m negligent and I shouldn’t be
dressed in a military uniform. You have got to be ready for any eventuality
or you’ll be destroyed and your country will go with it. If they fight a war,
we need to realize that their super-intellect is on a different level and I don’t
think they would fight on our level, with bombs and cannons. Why should
they? They could not carry enough bombs and cannons on their space ships
to fight us. They might fight us with our bodies, with something that uses
no weight, like a type of biological weapon. I think that the super-intellect
will fight us on that level. Using bombs and guns is like fighting barbarians.
The problem is those people that think that the scenario is like this are
thinking like human beings and not like the aliens. One example is a
mistake I made: I had a pen-like artifact I received from the Roswell Crash
and it would not go on and I thought the battery was dead so I put it away.
See how stupid that was? As if a “Super Race” would use a battery that
would wear out in two months! That is ridiculous thinking and yet it
happened to me. I am telling you what the British taught me in Intelligence,
years ago. Yes, you look for targets and things like that but the main things
you look for are “intentions.” They were right. You defeat the enemy by
knowing his intentions, not by one bomb. It took my guesswork to build up
the mosaic because I have to think in my own brain, “What is his
intention?” Naturally, I’m going to make mistakes because I don’t know
too much about him, but at least I can try. Whereas this new science could
fill in and correct the mistakes I made because of a lack of knowledge. And
this is what I think it has to come to. I’ve really never talked like this to
anybody, well, maybe with a couple of scientist friends, but usually, I don’t.
My scientist friends are calling me and you know why they are calling me?
Because in the book I stated that this extraterrestrial is part of the flying
saucer. It is all one. So, these are another intelligence. They are ahead of us.
They have proven it. One simple reason: they can fly in space and we can’t.
In the end, the greatest gift was the extraterrestrial, not the hardware.se are another intelligence. They are ahead of us.
They have proven it. One simple reason: they can fly in space and we can’t.
In the end, the greatest gift was the extraterrestrial, not the hardware.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 6
1998 —THE SAN MARINO INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM
In 1998, Col. Philip Corso came to Italy with two of his grandsons,
Philip and Andrew, and his daughter-in-law, Liz. He was officially invited
to a symposium on UFOs and related phenomena at the independent
Republic of San Marino that was held on April 4 and 5, 1998. He was a
guest along with many researchers including Colin Andrews, Michael
Lindeman, Jim Currant, Michael Hesseman, and Budd Hopkins. I have
included the program in my book because the event was a historic occasion
for these illustrious participants. It was created for them to sign the San
Marino Paper, a disclosure resolution from the Independent Republic of San
Marino, that was supposed to go the United Nations much like the Grenada
resolution initiated by Sir Eric Gairy on October 12, 1978. Colin Andrews
references this in the introductory endorsement of Corso because he was
there in San Marino.
This resolution never reached the general assembly because of a
change in the political structure of the principality. But it was organized by
Dr. Roberto Pinotti, Director of our UFO society CUN. Colonel Corso was
a very special guest for Italian ufology. The following interviews that he

--- PAGE BREAK ---cipality. But it was organized by
Dr. Roberto Pinotti, Director of our UFO society CUN. Colonel Corso was
a very special guest for Italian ufology. The following interviews that he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gave us come from this meeting. He was asked many questions by the press
and he was very open with the answers. He proceeded to tell the group that
he could not put everything in The Day After Roswell book because it was
too much to absorb.
Like many others, he spent his life connecting these dots. Many
experiences he had in his career led to his conclusions and, whether they be
right or wrong, I consider it all a part of history. He answered many of my
questions. As I listened to the audiotape, I realized I did not give him a
minute to breathe. I was asking questions constantly and following up with
the next question before he had a chance to answer the first. I realized I was
getting this information from a seasoned veteran, responsible commander,
and intelligent thinker; a very special man who believed he was placed at
the right place at the right time. Corso always questioned why he was
involved with these historical events, whether they be the second world
war, the commander of a nuclear missile Battalion, a soldier who fought the
war in Korea, a consultant at Sperry Rand Corporation, or in R&D in the
Pentagon, in the 1960s.
It was obvious from speaking to Colonel Corso that he and General
Trudeau had a very close relationship and each one would bounce ideas
back and forth. They tried to figure out the many unanswered questions.
When he would talk to me and Maurizio, he was stressed that he would be
advised by some of his German scientists so we knew that German
scientists were involved in some of these projects, in particular, Hermann
Oberth.[4] He also mentioned Wilbur Smith, the Canadian physicist, many
times. So, what was happening was that Colonel Corso had the benefit of
exchanging ideas with insiders who already knew somewhat what the UFO
scenario was. But Colonel Corso did not hypothesize much. He only talked
about what he knew. He made that clear to us many times.
Later, he told me that Jacques Valle, the prominent scientist, and author who
he considered the foremost authority on UFOs, analyzed his encounter in the
gold mine camp at White Sands and stated to him that probably the
extraterrestrial was not interested only in having him shut down the radar for
10 minutes, but the being was probably testing him on his offer to enter “a
new world if you can take it.”
Colonel Corso’s theory was that by bringing fresh water running
through an electromagnetic field, with its conducting properties, it would
lead to the opening of dimensional portals. He developed these theories
because he knew the terrain in New Mexico and was puzzled by so many
anomalous events. He insisted that an interdenominational chapel near his
base, built by soldiers, was taken off its foundations and disappeared. He
sent me all the newspaper articles so I know it happened. Corso said it wasisted that an interdenominational chapel near his
base, built by soldiers, was taken off its foundations and disappeared. He
sent me all the newspaper articles so I know it happened. Corso said it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---enominational chapel near his
base, built by soldiers, was taken off its foundations and disappeared. He
sent me all the newspaper articles so I know it happened. Corso said it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the sign he was waiting for to understand the power of these
Extraterrestrials. He insisted we research that too.
I must admit that I have, many times, been in New Mexico—Roswell,
Socorro, all over—and I have wondered the same thing. This state is a
mystery and possesses many geological and atmospheric anomalies. It is a
desert and quite desolate. Maybe material can appear and disappear and
maybe extraterrestrials were very interested in, above all, our atomic bomb
testing. It changed our destructive capabilities and someone noticed. It
changed the perception of humanity and we became a dangerous species.
Corso always believed that, from his youth, he was being conditioned
for his later experiences. He said, “I have been a soldier whose profession
was death and destruction. These beings want to reprogram me. Did these
beings know that it would be my job to work with integrated circuits, fiber
optics, lasers and night screening devices and did these beings know that it
was important for me to not only help the Army but to put these
technologies in the general public?”
As I have written before, the role of water in the creation of the
multidimensional world and the creation of a magnetic envelope around
matter was a mystery to the Colonel. Down through the ages, water has
always been associated with megalithic structures, whether those at Coral
Castle in Florida, Stonehenge, or Giza. There is evidence that water was
once present, for some reason, to create a process to move and construct
these stone structures.
I think the Colonel believed that water helped to make these structures
weightless so that they could be moved. He said something about water
creating the wave motion perpendicular to the Earth’s surface so that matter
becomes weightless. Many of these concepts I do not understand. But the
Colonel would discuss them as a matter of curiosity when we had downtime
in Italy.
One of the reasons I feel the obligation to write this book is an
encouragement for someone to continue this research in his place.
Colonel Corso stated, “I am 83 years old. I want you and the younger
ones to continue the job. I want you to explain these things and an example
I will give you is that I used to pull in my young soldiers to give a briefing
to the generals in my place. At first, they said we cannot do it but once they
get there, they had confidence in their abilities, they could brief the generals
in my place.
“That is why I want to encourage you, Paola and Adriano, to take
over because I will not always be here. Look for the empty chair in the front
row and know that I will be sitting there watching you. You must go on, tont to encourage you, Paola and Adriano, to take
over because I will not always be here. Look for the empty chair in the front
row and know that I will be sitting there watching you. You must go on, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---Paola and Adriano, to take
over because I will not always be here. Look for the empty chair in the front
row and know that I will be sitting there watching you. You must go on, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tell the truth.”
For many years after 1998, when I would lecture about Colonel
Corso, I would look for that empty chair. It was there.
I knew that we lived through a historic time in Italy because we had
him with us. I knew that it was important to link all UFO research in order
to understand the timeline that all these things occurred. I also knew that
some people were key figures in advancing the understanding of the
disclosure process. There is timing to this and the celebration of the 50th
anniversary of Roswell opened this door. Inadvertently, I am publishing this
work on the 70th anniversary of the Roswell crash.
I can honestly say that I understand the Colonel’s contact experience
with the E.B.E. much better today than I did in 1997. Then, I could not
digest that reality nor could I understand how it could come from such a
responsible military man.
Today is a totally different story. Many scientists, military, and even
many researchers have had contact and are destined to reveal this reality.
Today things are making sense to me. Today, I feel the obligation to make
sure that what the Colonel shared with us gets archived somewhere as a part
of human history.
That is the chief motivation for this book. It is also a thank you to a
man who trusted in us. It is a thank you to a man who gave his life for the
truth. This material is coming from the source itself. It is not entertainment.
It is his truth. Controversial as it may seem, I have only to say to the
skeptics and debunkers, who I am sure will come out of the woodwork, the
same thing I’d hear Corso say, “Were you there?”
I have no doubt that the debunkers, unfortunately, our own
researchers who never spent the hours either verifying or conversing with
this man, will have their say. The opinion is not research. Informed opinion
based on years of study and discourse is educational.
Unfortunately, because of the court case against the book, Colonel
Corso did not feel free to lecture very much in the United States. In Italy, he
was in his own element (after all, he was of Sicilian heritage) and he spent a
great deal of time among the Italians.
Destiny had it that my boss, magazine editor Maurizio Baiata, would
be the one to publish Corso’s original manuscript, Dawn of a New Age in
Italy. Unlike The Day after Roswell, which was co-written by Bill Birnes,
Dawn of a New Age is all in Colonel Corso’s own words. Again, if one
wants to make an informed opinion, one should read it. It is available in its
entirety on the OpenMinds TV website. One can judge for oneself theAge is all in Colonel Corso’s own words. Again, if one
wants to make an informed opinion, one should read it. It is available in its
entirety on the OpenMinds TV website. One can judge for oneself the

--- PAGE BREAK ---l Corso’s own words. Again, if one
wants to make an informed opinion, one should read it. It is available in its
entirety on the OpenMinds TV website. One can judge for oneself the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sincerity of this man.
Skeptics and debunkers always assume that Colonel Corso published
the book to make tons of money. When he died, he did not make money.
We talked often on the phone. His motivation was different. Secrecy takes a
toll on these men and I have interviewed so many military and intelligence
operatives who break down when they tell their story. I have seen them cry.
I know the Colonel’s motivation was to leave a legacy for his
grandsons. We had these young boys with us on those occasions in Italy. He
was proud of them and I am proud of them too. I leave them this testimony.
Colonel Philip Corso was sincere, he was curious and he was a highly
unusual man. I finally understood the mechanism for the secrecy and it was
not the extraterrestrials. When a country possesses this kind of technology,
when it possesses this kind of supremacy over other countries, it does not
release it to the general public, especially if this technology is not using gas
or oil. It affects the petrodollar. It would destroy a total planetary economy.
We all know that.
Conversely, the release of these technologies would save the planet. It
would open up the new world that the ET being was talking about. The
release of these technologies is an obstacle to disclosure. It is useless for
anyone to talk about disclosure and not realize that the whole reason for the
UFO cover-up is about back-engineering technologies, hidden in Black
Projects inside the Military/Industrial Complex knows that:
It is not about the aliens. It is about the craft.
That reality changed my whole world and the direction of my
research. The books I published from 2003 and after contain many
whistleblower testimonies. I also published Eyes Only, the story of Clifford
Stone and crash retrieval.
I would come to believe that my research was also being guided and
orchestrated by a greater force. There were too many coincidences, too
many synchronicities. It is just information from the source, the
whistleblowers themselves.y research was also being guided and
orchestrated by a greater force. There were too many coincidences, too
many synchronicities. It is just information from the source, the
whistleblowers themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The San Marino Conference. Colonel Corso and Paola Harris. Photo courtesy of Carol Rainey, writer, producer,
director of documentary films.
Colonel Corso and Michael Hesseman with Liz Corso and Desmond Leslie.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The San Marino Conference. Colonel Corso and Paola Harris. Photos courtesy of Carol Rainey, writer, producer,
director of documentary films.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paola Harris, Colonel Corso, Dawn Bissell in San Marino.
Colonel Corso, Paola Harris and Michael Lindemann in Rome.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Boris Shurinov and Dr. Roberto Pinotti signing the UN resolution, which Colonel Corso also signed, in San
Marino.
Boris Shurinov and Dr. Roberto Pinotti, San Marino.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pietro Ponzo, Paola Harris, Adriano Forgione and Colonel Corso celebrating in Rome.
Colin Andrews, Michael Hesseman, Yvonne Smith, Colonel Corso in San Marino, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---o Ponzo, Paola Harris, Adriano Forgione and Colonel Corso celebrating in Rome.
Colin Andrews, Michael Hesseman, Yvonne Smith, Colonel Corso in San Marino, 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 7
The Second Visit— Easter In Italy, 1998
The Colonel and Paola Harris, Foligno, Easter 1998.
What I remember the most about Colonel Corso is spending an Easter
in Foligno with him—Foligno because his former military friend, Ezio
Rapanelli, lived there. Rapanelli was a good friend with whom Colonel
Corso bonded during WWII and the Colonel knew all of Rapanelli’s family.
They had a mill that was turned into a very unique hotel. So, we spent
Easter there with daughter-in-law, Liz Corso, and grandsons, Andrew and
Philip.
The unique architecture gave this old stone building a mysterious
aura. There was no TV in the rooms, which contributed to our having some
enlightening conversations at night to entertain ourselves. It was very quaint
and the Rapanelli’s were going to cater to an incredible Easter meal for us. I
remember vividly the day of Easter, itself when they asked me to go and get
the Colonel because Easter dinner was ready. They had set up all the tables
and I was invited. I felt very honored to be part of that group and to be part
of the Corso family at that time.
I remember opening the door and seeing the Colonel sitting in a chair,
staring into space, just staring. He had his eyes wide open like he was in a
trance and it almost scared me because he had talked about going into these
trans dimensional states in which he had visions. For instance, he told me

--- PAGE BREAK ---es wide open like he was in a
trance and it almost scared me because he had talked about going into these
trans dimensional states in which he had visions. For instance, he told me

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that he could see documents, which he tried to pull out with his hands, but
was unable to do so. In retrospect, I think he was living between worlds.
I remembered his stories of when he was a child. He recalled an
incident in his hometown in Pennsylvania when he was hit by a Town car,
driven by his doctor. The doctor saw a 3-year old Philip playing with
marbles on the road just before he hit him, but the child disappeared and
reappeared without a scratch. The doctor took little Philip to his Italian
grandmother and the Colonel said she cried.
I just assumed that the Colonel was a dimensional jumper. In other
words, the Colonel could walk between two worlds. He talked often of
reincarnation and remembered fighting a battle with Cesare Borgia (Duke
of Valentinois, 1475-1507) during the Renaissance. He was perfect for
contact; he was perfect to have met the being in the desert; he was perfect
for the military because of having that kind of talent—the dimensional
jumping plus the idea of extrasensory perception (ESP). He possessed a
consciousness and an awareness that was far more defined than that of the
average person, and it could be developed for any purpose. Remote viewing
has been developed for the military and it was used. It can influence world
events and perhaps even change a timeline. At that Easter dinner, I was
aware of the Colonel’s abilities to see.
I think Colonel Corso realized that this could go either way—who he
was and what he could do—that what he perceived and lived through…it
could go either way. So, at the end of his life, he wanted to go the right
way. Basically, he wanted to be a disclosure witness, so he was present to
sign the San Marino UN Resolution to discuss UFOs. He was a hero to
most of us.
I had always thought the Colonel was a gift to humanity, that he was
the one to really tell us why the secret was secret because he had first-hand
knowledge, not only of the artifacts that he was given from General
Trudeau and where they went. In addition to being trained in intelligence,
he had first-hand knowledge of how our politics worked. He was on the
Warren Commission to investigate the death of President Kennedy. He
worked under the Kennedy administration in the 1960s and was able to
perceive that there was a threat against Kennedy and had told Robert
Kennedy to watch out for his brother. He was even able to give information
(and this is a matter of public record) to Jeanne Dixon. He told me that he
helped her with several of her books. I think Jeanne Dixon was not only an
excellent psychic but probably received some intelligence information.
Colonel Corso knew her well because she was in Washington, D.C. and he
spoke extensively about her to me in Foligno. Remember, she is the only
psychic who predicted that Kennedy would be assassinated.Colonel Corso knew her well because she was in Washington, D.C. and he
spoke extensively about her to me in Foligno. Remember, she is the only
psychic who predicted that Kennedy would be assassinated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Later on, Colonel Corso was on the Warren Commission. The Colonel
wrote three books in all: the one on Roswell, another one titled The Day
After Dallas which will probably never appear in print, and The Man Who
Saved Rome, in which he talks about his historic role during World War II,
Italian politics after the war and the inception of the CIA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Portrait of Colonel Philip Corso, Foligno, Easter 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The following transcript is from a conversation that my editor
Maurizio Baiata and I had right after the Colonel was on Maurizio
Costanzo’s TV talk show on Mediaset Channel 5 in Italy. It is the
equivalent of The Tonight Show in the US.
In the spring of 1998, Maurizio and I had accompanied the Colonel
there and he was very talkative. The Maurizio Costanzo Show was one of
the highest-rated, most-watched shows in Italy. It was where Mr. Costanzo
announced to the world that the Colonel had seen an alien body at Fort
Riley, Kansas in 1947 in the veterinary quarters. It was also there on stage
where Costanzo asked if there were other crashes and the Colonel replied,
“Yes!” Maurizio Costanzo then said, “Don’t say anything more.” I think the
host knew that he would be on unstable ground if they elaborated on live
TV. We all knew that disclosure needed to happen in baby steps for the
general public. However, after the show, I grilled the Colonel on things he
had only alluded to. This was 1998 and, at that time, there were not many
credible whistleblowers who had revealed much. There are many more
collaborating today and we know that more will be revealed. But in 1997,
the Colonel laid the groundwork for this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---redible whistleblowers who had revealed much. There are many more
collaborating today and we know that more will be revealed. But in 1997,
the Colonel laid the groundwork for this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Conversation with Colonel Corso following the
Maurizio Costanzo tv show appearance, 1998
Colonel Corso on the night-time television talk show “The Maurizio Constanzo Show.”
C: Colonel Philip Corso
P: Paola Harris
M: Maurizio Baiata
Corso: I think that Maurizio Constanzo did a fine job with his questions and
I could tell by his expression that he believed me to be truthful. We can
give him more. We can give him the information. But anyone of you can
take my place and speak for me. He can send for me but if I’m not here or
somebody else could go on take my place and…
P: Who else can go on and take your place? Who can take your place?
C: Come on, you!
M: It is not the same.
P: No, no. It’s not the same.
C: I’m sure that here’s a lot of things that I’m sure he would like to know to
put on his show. You know when people come up, even children. They
meet me in a restaurant or something and they want me to sign their book,
and you see the looks on their faces. They thank me. They are really
interested.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e up, even children. They
meet me in a restaurant or something and they want me to sign their book,
and you see the looks on their faces. They thank me. They are really
interested.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. Costanzo…he is a showman, he realizes that. He knows we have
to do something. And there’s a lot of things that I haven’t talked about,
even follow-up. When I talked about that atomic stuff, even Paolo Rapanelli
was interested, the cleaning up of the water and things like that. They were
interested in that. They wanted to hear more. There is no secret about that.
The Army gave it to me, in fact. We can bring that out at that time. I gave it
to you...
P: But he wants to know. He asked you, if you remember, at the end of
that show, “Were there other crashes?”
And you said, “Yes.”
C: Yes.
P: He said, “More than one?” And you said, “Yes.”
C: Yes.
P: And then he said, “Don’t go on.”
M. He wanted to know where the materials went and your interpreter
said “a base.” She could not understand that.
P: She didn’t understand what Wright-Patterson was.
C: The woman translator did a fine job. But she could not translate Wright-
Patterson and other names of places and locations.
M: But she did a good job. But the poor girl, she was on the spot. She
doesn’t really know all… She could not understand the electromagnetic
envelope and other terms…
P: But Maurizio, do you know that he’s been inside a craft? He’s seen a
craft? Do you know that?
M: No.
P: Well, tell him, please.
C: Well, there’s a lot to tell.
P: Well, can you tell Maurizio now that you’ve seen the craft that you
went inside the hangar?
C: Yes. I saw a craft.
P: Where did you see it?
C: On certain air bases. I used to travel quite a bit. It was part of my job.
P: And when you saw the craft, how much damage was there done to
it?

--- PAGE BREAK ---a craft.
P: Where did you see it?
C: On certain air bases. I used to travel quite a bit. It was part of my job.
P: And when you saw the craft, how much damage was there done to
it?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C: On one side. There was a crack that was all. It wasn’t damaged hardly at
all.
P: Why did you go there to see it?
C: Oh, that was my job. You don’t think I only went to see a craft? I didn’t
just sit in a chair in the Pentagon, I used to move around a lot. I used to go
to a lot of atomic laboratories all the time. They were our laboratories. I
used to go to Walter Reed Hospital. I used to go visit big industries.
P: But does he also know you saw the second body?
That you saw a second body? Does Maurizio know that?
C: Yes. I saw a third body.
P: What? Colonel, was the third body a live one?
C: No, the second.
P: The second one was.
C: It was pretty well decomposed. They would fade fast.
P: Okay. The second one was a live one. Was the second one like in the
hospital? Or could he communicate?
C: No. The two in the hospital were dead. That was one of the problems.
They were brain-dead, and we couldn’t quite get enough of the brain. But it
was figured out by intelligent people that the brain was sort of a magnetic
instrument and they didn’t know what it was. There were measurements
made.
P: So, it was brain-dead.
C: They were both brain-dead that I saw.
P: Were any of them able to communicate?
C: You know about the one in the cave. He was alive.
P: Yes, but we don’t mean about that. That’s not a body that was in a
hospital. Did you see anyone that was able to communicate?
C: No.
P: And the one that was in the cave, did it look like the ones that you
had in the hospital?
C: Exactly like them.
P: Exactly like them.
C: The only thing, it had a helmet on.

--- PAGE BREAK ---No.
P: And the one that was in the cave, did it look like the ones that you
had in the hospital?
C: Exactly like them.
P: Exactly like them.
C: The only thing, it had a helmet on.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P: It had a helmet on like one in the cave? (This was referring to 1957
encounter with the EBE in White Sands.)
C: With a band.
P: Okay. (Later he told me that, at the Pentagon, they had several of
those silver-like headbands with the stone in the middle. He believed it
was an interface.) C: That’s all I saw.
P: Then the craft that you saw in Red Canyon, were you able to walk in
it? Or did you just see it from the outside?
C: No, I didn’t go in it.
P: Was there a place to go in? Was there a door?
C: Yes. The thing opened up, like. When it closed you couldn’t see it was
there?
P: You couldn’t tell where the closing was?
C: No.
P: How did they know how to open it again?
C: I don’t know how they got it open. Because, in the first stages, they
couldn’t even get them open. (Now I think the Colonel is referring to seeing
the craft at Wright-Patterson Air Base.)
P: They couldn’t get them open. No?
C: No. It might have been something like what I did with that little
flashlight. I took it for granted that the batteries were dead. I was thinking
like a stupid human being.
P: Oh, you put the long low waves on it at Fort Belvoir.
C: When they put radiation on it and long low waves, then it came on.
P: So, when you saw the craft when you actually saw an entire craft,
how big was it?
C: About 30 feet long, a little bigger than this room.
P: Were there any windows on it?
C: No, it was solid.
P: It was solid. Was it a gray metallic craft?
C: No, I don’t remember. I saw one in the desert, the time machine. That
was in 1957.
P: No, but you were the only one there, you were the only one in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---it a gray metallic craft?
C: No, I don’t remember. I saw one in the desert, the time machine. That
was in 1957.
P: No, but you were the only one there, you were the only one in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

desert. There were other people with you when you saw the one in the
hangar, right?
C: Sure there were. When I went to one of those places, I was treated…I
was one of those honored guys who had already come from the place that
gave them the money.
P: To do it, to back engineer this stuff.
C: When I went to Fort Belvoir, sure I was seen by the commander. One of
the trips I made down there, I went to Fort Belvoir, General Trudeau sent
me down and I took one of my German scientists with me.
P: Do you remember his name?
C: Hans Kohler was his name. I had two of them. When I went to Belvoir,
on this particular instance, the General called me and he told me, he says,
“Look, it’s your decision whether to give it to them or not.”
(It is difficult to hear the correct name and the Colonel is referring to the
envelopes of money he was authorized to give. But he used the word
“budget.”)
P: Well, then what?
C: Budget.
P: Money.
C: So, I went to Belvoir and the Vietnam War was just beginning, it was
1961 or 1962. So, I went down there and I went down there specifically to
the image intensifier and night viewing device in my laboratory. We had it
there. I had a whole booklet on this. I’ve got to give it to you. And I went
there for the purpose of investigating and seeing how they were doing. I
took the German scientist with me.
We went through the whole laboratory. The commander and we sat
down for the exit interview and he said, “We were a little concerned when
we heard you were coming down for inspection.”
I told him, “It’s standard procedure for being in the lab. I said, “You
probably got me figured as the hatchet man” and he said, “Well…” So, I
told him, “Well, we better sit down,” and we had the exit interview. I said,
“Look at my friend there (referring to the German scientist). He hardly ever
smiles. He likes what he saw and so do I.”
So, I sat down and I talked and I told this commander, “You might be
concerned about me but there were some models that might work. You
thought I would upset things but I am going to play Santa Claus.” Then I
told him, “I’ve got something for you and the decision is going to be minet me but there were some models that might work. You
thought I would upset things but I am going to play Santa Claus.” Then I
told him, “I’ve got something for you and the decision is going to be mine

--- PAGE BREAK ---some models that might work. You
thought I would upset things but I am going to play Santa Claus.” Then I
told him, “I’ve got something for you and the decision is going to be mine

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to make.”
M: How much did you give him?
C: Sixty million dollars. You should have seen the smile on his face.
P: Oh, my God.
C: You should have seen the smile on his face.
P: Sixty million dollars?
C: We had two-hundred million dollars; we had a two-hundred-million-
dollar budget out there. The budgets I controlled; I could even stop budgets.
I could stop bids. I went to one big corporation, I won’t tell you which one,
and in the contracts but it was such a thing that I had to go local. The first
production model that came off the line...
P: Of what?
C: Research projects would like transistors because they made some for us,
special. It was anything, could even be laser arms…and some of the other
medical things. So, I would go there the moment the first production copy
came off the line…I went to one unit where the president of a big
corporation came out and I looked at what came off the line and I told him,
“That’s not what we contracted for!” Oh, geez, you should have seen him.
It was as if I had hit him across the mouth. I told him, “You don’t have to
get angry about it. The day of cost overruns is finished. We won’t give you
cost overruns.” Also, they had a gimmick and they were doing product
improvement. Wait until we get up to the area of “state of the art.” They’d
do “state of the art” and we’d come back and they’d use this as an excuse
and they’d want more money. So, I told him again, this one particular head
of the corporation got angry. He said, “I’m going to call General Trudeau
and tell him what you did.” I told him, “Be my guest. Where’s the nearest
telephone? I’ll call him myself.”
P: Colonel, about the craft though. Were they trying to make a copy of
that? I mean, they say the Stealth is as close as they came.
C: I told my son Phil Jr. one day to watch the Stealth at an air show.
P: Air show, right?
C: There’s something in the front wings. So, I called my friend in Colorado
Springs who was also the editor of an air and space magazine, and I called
him. He’s a pilot of the B-2, a pilot. He was a test pilot. So, I asked him,
“When you were a test pilot, did you ever see what is upfront in the
wings?” And he said, “Why?” So, he said, “I always wondered why they
kept that so damned secret. They didn’t even tell us, the pilots, what itere a test pilot, did you ever see what is upfront in the
wings?” And he said, “Why?” So, he said, “I always wondered why they
kept that so damned secret. They didn’t even tell us, the pilots, what it

--- PAGE BREAK ---d you ever see what is upfront in the
wings?” And he said, “Why?” So, he said, “I always wondered why they
kept that so damned secret. They didn’t even tell us, the pilots, what it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was.” I told him there was an antigravity device on them. So, he went on.
The second day Phil Jr. was very, very calm. He said, “What you said was
true.” (We need to remember that the Colonel was not involved in this
aspect. It is hypothetical and he kept denying to us that AREA 51 even
existed. That was not his area.)
P: Do you remember the date?
C: What gave you this great information? He said, “That thing came over
and flew, slowed down, and maneuvers at night are an impossibility. An
ordinary airplane would crash. We knew an airplane would crash. And this
thing made those maneuvers.” He said, “You must be right. You’re right.”
And so finally he admitted it now. I told him, “I was right. You don’t know
everything.” And he said, “No, it has to be or they couldn’t fly it.
P: Yes.
C: Which is an impossibility.
P: But let’s go to the original question then. Did the government
develop a craft as a model from a flying saucer?
C: Let me move ahead.
P: Yes, but you didn’t answer that yet.
C: I’ll answer it now. Let me move ahead to 1998. I’d been getting calls.
Burt (Elbert) Rutan,[5] the number one designer of aircraft in America. He’s
now working on, for $100,000 he’ll book you passage in space.
P: Yes, I know that, but….
C: He came to my house, stayed there for seven hours. And why he came...
P: To find out what aviation device, how they traveled.
C: It won’t fly.
P: What won’t fly?
C: The flying saucers that they have. They are somewhere in the Mohave
Desert. They won’t fly
(Note: The “they” is the Government that recovered and probably tried to
replicate craft.)
P: But they did they back-engineer them? But the material, you have to
imitate the lightweight material. Right?
C: Yes, they could have done it all. But they can’t fly. Do you know what
they didn’t have?But they did they back-engineer them? But the material, you have to
imitate the lightweight material. Right?
C: Yes, they could have done it all. But they can’t fly. Do you know what
they didn’t have?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ck-engineer them? But the material, you have to
imitate the lightweight material. Right?
C: Yes, they could have done it all. But they can’t fly. Do you know what
they didn’t have?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P: What?
C: They didn’t have the pilot or the propulsion system to make them fly.
P: The pilot. But the material, but the material that it’s made of. Did
they have that?
C: He wanted to know how this extraterrestrial could make it fly. That’s all
I’m going to tell you, Paola. The problem is not to duplicate the flying
saucer. The problem is how does it fly. How can you make it fly?
P: Yes, I understand that. But the material needs to be duplicated.
Remember? The material, the lightweight material, do you think they
were able to duplicate that?
C: No. They’re starting to work now on something that I failed at, this
aspect that the scientists at IBM are just beginning to align atoms in metals.
P: So, the thing that they built is heavy. Is that right? The flying
saucers that they have are heavy.
C: They didn’t build flying saucers just like that one. They tried to fly what
they had.
P: But what did they build?
C: B-2, things like that.
P: They never copied the actual saucer? They never copied that?
C: No.
P: They’ve never been able to copy something without any seams or
lightweight, or where the atoms were aligned. They haven’t been able
to copy that?
C: I had information that they have three of them. I know they have two of
them. They were trying to make those fly, couldn’t do it.
P: In other words, they were trying to make fly what they already had.
C: Yes. And it’s important. It doesn’t work. That’s why so many experts
came to my house.
P: Okay, I understand.
C: Because there’s the problem of getting it to fly.
P: But we never tried to imitate the material.
C: Oh, we tried to imitate some. I did. Why do you think Trudeau called me
and wanted to give me a piece of metal? He said, “This was bigger than Los
Alamos.” He said, “This will make it possible to build flying saucers ortate some. I did. Why do you think Trudeau called me
and wanted to give me a piece of metal? He said, “This was bigger than Los
Alamos.” He said, “This will make it possible to build flying saucers or

--- PAGE BREAK ---y do you think Trudeau called me
and wanted to give me a piece of metal? He said, “This was bigger than Los
Alamos.” He said, “This will make it possible to build flying saucers or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

aircraft for space as light as a feather. And nothing can penetrate it.”
P: Light as a feather?
C: Yes, it was.
P: That’s right. That’s what I’m curious about.
C: Well, you see, all this fits together. You asked me these questions and
they were trying to duplicate the material. Oh, I did, some of this stuff but
this also happening and goes to the present.
P: What year are we talking?
C: 1961, 1962, 1963. This also goes to the present. In fact, the Germans had
one and they tried to fly it.
P: But they had one from a crash?
C: Another crash. In Europe.
P: Do you know what year we are talking?
C: In the late ‘40s. Hermann Oberth Austro-Hungarian-born German
physicist and engineer told me this. He is considered one of the founding
fathers of rocketry and astronautics.
P: And before Roswell.
C: Let me tell you, the Germans.
P: But how did you know all this?
C: I showed Maurizio the information on the Foo fighters.
P: Really?
Maurizio: We talked about the Foo fighters.
C: You know who the Foo pilot was? An electromagnetic glowing device.
If it got near our bombers it would knock their readings off. They were
unmanned spheres. And we were fortunate; General Patton knew who was
doing it.
They had a bunch of lights that glowed that could have destroyed all
our bomber aircraft. Oberth told me all about this. No weight. The Germans
created something and flew it. The fuel and the engine, but enough stuff
made it weightless. They tried to make it zero gravity and how it pushed out
the air in front of it. It was their own government and they had access.
Overall, they had access. And they developed something. But they were
defeated; like the Foo fighters were overcome by General Patton’s tanks
overran the factories and destroyed them. No more Foo Fighters. Their
engines were weightless. They were small spheres, not balls. They lookedthe Foo fighters were overcome by General Patton’s tanks
overran the factories and destroyed them. No more Foo Fighters. Their
engines were weightless. They were small spheres, not balls. They looked

--- PAGE BREAK ---re overcome by General Patton’s tanks
overran the factories and destroyed them. No more Foo Fighters. Their
engines were weightless. They were small spheres, not balls. They looked

--- PAGE BREAK ---

small in the air. I showed you that picture of a Foo fighter at 20,000 feet.
Their purpose was to kill the engines on our bombers with electromagnetic
frequencies. They were radio-controlled.
P: You mean, there was no pilot inside.
C: No pilot inside. You know the little engine I talked about that we built in
1965?
P: Yes.
C: A little one-engine. That 60-pound atomic engine?
P: Right.
C: That was used in one of the unmanned probes that we sent to Mars. Do
you know why we built that engine?
P: Why?
C: We would try to put an electromagnetic flux around that to create
electromagnetism so that we could fly the darned thing. But there was one
problem. We couldn’t harden the circuitry. What I mean by hardening…
what that meant was that we couldn’t shut out the radiation so we couldn’t
put a man next to that little engine or it would have killed him. So, we
didn’t solve all these problems. By using these lasers, we would have
blinded our soldiers. We were not able to do that. Just like I’ve told you
about the laser weapons. During first the experiments, it was dangerous. It
would blind anybody that even dared look at it. Instantaneous, we couldn’t
use the weapon until we solved that problem. We could blind our own
soldiers if they tried to use it. It was like developing radar detectors until we
solved the problem.
P: Do you know first-hand if you were ever, or anybody other than and
you, and you can’t talk about it necessarily the 1957 cave incident…
that’s apart from everything… was able to communicate with an
extraterrestrial? Do you know first-hand if that was the case?
M: Like James Forrestal?
C: James Forrestal. (James Vincent Forrestal was the last Cabinet-level
United States Secretary of the Navy and the first United States Secretary of
Defense. Forrestal was a supporter of naval battle groups centered on
aircraft carriers.) He did not commit suicide. He was a believer.
P: Forrestal?
C: Forrestal, maybe now. The whole Forrestal mystery. He was one that
was going to be there at the installation. That’s why Forrestal was killed.
Know how he was killed? A shot of air in his nerve.l?
C: Forrestal, maybe now. The whole Forrestal mystery. He was one that
was going to be there at the installation. That’s why Forrestal was killed.
Know how he was killed? A shot of air in his nerve.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M: Yes. You said that once.
C: And it was never…it was actually proven.
P: Yes, you told us.
C: And the doctors…I’ve asked doctors about that. It makes you go crazy
once you get air in the nerve… P: Yes, he jumped out a window, is what
he did.
M: That was the official story.
C: Yes.
P: Did he try to communicate with the EBE?
C: You don’t know the whole story.
P: Yes, but did anybody ever communicate with an extraterrestrial that
you know of?
C: I saw some reports that they tried to communicate with them.
P: Telepathically?
C: But I never saw anything definite that was said.
P: But you’re saying that, though, that there’s some alive that were
hanging around alive.
C: No, they weren’t alive. Their bodies faded fast.
P: At some point, they must have been alive.
C: Earlier they were alive. They stayed at Wright-Patterson.
P: Right. But temporarily they were alive, right?
C: Yes, but their bodies faded fast. Oh, there was one or two at the crash at
St. Augustine. There was one on the ground like he was hurt. I remember a
thing I read recently. Never did I see a report. There was no report, which is
an impossibility. This thing fell out of the crash, was laying there injured
until he was taken. And there were no cuts, no blood. It’s impossible in a
crash. There was no blood because he didn’t have any blood in him.
P: So, you’re saying this being faded fast because it was created with
electromagnetic energy. But there was some alive.
C: Temporarily. There were six dead at St. Augustine. He was sitting up,
sort of shaky and alive. In the past, I’d seen these beings, and one was alive.
P: Shaky. But could he communicate telepathically? Maybe?
C: Oh, he was alive. I guess he tried to. Maybe they were created not to.

--- PAGE BREAK ---past, I’d seen these beings, and one was alive.
P: Shaky. But could he communicate telepathically? Maybe?
C: Oh, he was alive. I guess he tried to. Maybe they were created not to.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P: You said to me once that you all at the Pentagon were more afraid of
the creators who could pass for human.
So, the little being is basically a clone created to fly the ship?
C: I can’t say. I wasn’t there. But if he was wounded and died in the crash, I
think he would have tried to say something. Although we were thinking in
human terms, too, at the beginning.
P: But you don’t know, except for your experience, for sure.
C: No. Not from my experience I don’t know. Like I said on the stage, I
only know what I know. If I don’t know, I’ll tell you that I don’t know.
How many people have you been asking me for the last few days? Where’d
they come from? I wish I knew.
Like they say, from the Pleiades like that Swiss man.
P: Oh, you mean Billy Meier?
M: Desmond told you his story about Adamski and the landing of the
craft seen by five people. It is a historical account. There are signed
affidavits to this.
C: It could be true. It’s not logical. It could be hallucination or self-
hypnotism. I never told Desmond this about Adamski. My experience was
with the real thing. We could not take reports like that at face value in
Intelligence. We had to be very careful and check it out. Sometimes there
would be five or ten people checking for little details.
Much of this is the reality and we could take the forthright, seemingly
credible reports when they came to us the first time and I say it’s true.
Remember what I told you in Korea when the four-star generals were
around. They’d say, “Corso, how do you do this?” I used to go up and face
them. I told them, “General, your people work the opposite of what I do.
When I look at a report, I say it’s true. Like if I saw the report. I say it’s
true. Now the burden is on me to prove it wrong and if I can’t prove it
wrong, it has to be right. Now maybe I can prove it wrong.” I told the
general that. I said, “Your people take that report and say its wrong and
throw it in the wastebasket. Then they got nothing to work with.” I always
have something. Yes, sometimes it is nothing but more often I say that there
is something to it.
In one case this man described strange mountains and streams but
even when they saw a report, they said he was crazy, that there was no such
thing. So, I called my photo interpreters and I said, “I want you to get
photographs of aerial views up at 5000 feet and I want you to look at
everything that looks like what he said. Not one place, but look around. Ifd my photo interpreters and I said, “I want you to get
photographs of aerial views up at 5000 feet and I want you to look at
everything that looks like what he said. Not one place, but look around. If

--- PAGE BREAK ---ers and I said, “I want you to get
photographs of aerial views up at 5000 feet and I want you to look at
everything that looks like what he said. Not one place, but look around. If

--- PAGE BREAK ---

there’s a man on the ground, if they catch him, they’re going to kill him.
Now, we had to think, consider what the man was like that was looking for
us. He’s no brilliant observer; he’s maybe a “contadino” or a peasant
looking around on the ground.
All at once, one of the Majors comes walking in. “We found it. Here
it is.” They were in these straw huts. I saw it. I called the Airborne and they
sent a flight of dive-bombers in. Under every damned tent that flew up,
there was a tank inside them. And we destroyed 20 tanks immediately. On
the reports, the people said the man was crazy because they never saw straw
huts on the maps. It wasn’t on the maps. But we did not look at the maps
the way the man on the ground reported it to us. He saw them so what does
the General do? So, you see, I can’t tell you the report is wrong without
evaluating it myself.
But, you see, what I’m telling you is that I’m not going to tell you that
Adamski's report is wrong. But I can’t say it’s 100% right until I can
confirm it myself and make an evaluation. Until that point, I can’t go out
and give for-certain advice. I hope you understand the system, the way it
works. And you have to do that. You can’t take things at face value.
I couldn’t.
Well, sure, Desmond Leslie is sincere about that case. Maybe we got
to go back to Einstein. Einstein said reality, as we know it, doesn’t exist,
but maybe nothing does. I don’t know. I’m trying to explain as she asked
me a question. These questions aren’t easy to answer. And not only that,
even after I answer them, Paola can still question me.
P: I know.
C: I had to live with this.
M: Oh, yes. I wonder what your friend Ezio Rapanelli thinks of your
TV appearance?
C: Let me tell you what he said. Now, remember, he is a hard man. He fills
up some big boots A tough man. He has built a big enterprise here. I
remember when I met him when we were in the Army together. This man is
fearless. Hell, I used to get mad. I’d tell him, “You know, you’re going to
get me killed.” His father said, “I want to meet the man who ran around
with my crazy son if he’s still alive.” He said, “I want to meet you.” So,
concerning my experience, he said, “I don’t believe it. I don’t believe
anything like that. If it were you said it, I’d believe it. I have known you too
long.” Those were his exact words.
P: Yes, I was there. I was there. He was there. We all were there. I
heard him.ieve
anything like that. If it were you said it, I’d believe it. I have known you too
long.” Those were his exact words.
P: Yes, I was there. I was there. He was there. We all were there. I
heard him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C: I don’t believe it but I believe you.
P: He said, he was exactly like Maurizio Constanzo. He walked around
on the stage there. My God, it was the first time I met someone who
saw an alien body.
Costanzo was in shock.
C: What do you think in Roswell, they made me an honorary hero, they
wanted me to come out, they wanted me to talk. Because at their museum,
they were operating for many years on theory.
P: Right.
C: People went in there, didn’t even believe. It says they’re having
something concrete. Now, this is a follow-up. Paola, some of the things I’ve
told you here, even Liz and the kids have not heard.
Liz Corso: We were just discussing this. You tell us stories about Rome
that we have heard 100 times. All we hear is about is Pork Chop Hill. I
could have been there myself.
We all laughed!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssing this. You tell us stories about Rome
that we have heard 100 times. All we hear is about is Pork Chop Hill. I
could have been there myself.
We all laughed!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 8
TIME FOR TRUTH
We, here in Rome, got to know Colonel Corso very well. He spoke in
Pescara, on the Adriatic Coast, in 1997 with many other renowned
researchers at a conference called “Il Contatto” organized by our editors at
Il Futuro and in 1998 at the World Symposium in San Marino. Those
present were impressed with his credentials, his honesty, and his testimony.
He would say to anyone who was a skeptic and who confronted him, “Were
you there?”
Before I begin to defend Colonel Philip Corso, I want to ask the
following questions: Why has this man been the object of such negative
controversy among the UFO community? Why criticize the dead, who
cannot defend themselves? Why go on with this debate, unless it is fueled
by economic reasons since the commonality seems to be the selling of
Roswell books? Why put so much energy into this, unless there are ulterior
motives? It does not take a genius to figure out that the motives of these
skeptics may not be the most “noble.” Both Dr. Michael Salla and Colin
Andrews make reference to this in their endorsements of my book.
Some of the arguments are ridiculous. We, researchers, do not just
base veracity only on documents, especially when dealing with the black
ops world or with people who had high intelligence positions. “The
evidence of absence is not the absence of evidence,” as Sgt. Clifford Stone
states. We all know this. So why allow people who never questioned
Colonel Corso themselves, nor knew him, have the final word on his
character? This book is my effort to stop this.
I have spoken to these major researchers, Bob and Ryan Wood were
two, who have recently cited The Dawn of a New Age, Corso’s original
manuscript published in Italian, as a viable resource. We are all puzzled as
to why the Corso “bashing” went on. It is obvious that Colonel Philip Corso
was very credible. His extensive background proves he was aware of the
geopolitical situations of his time. He had many clearances and was privy to
information that certainly the average UFO researcher would never have
access to. At 83 years old, he had little to lose as a whistleblower.
As I stated over and over, Corso’s motivation was revealing this story
for his three grandsons Nick, Philip, and Andrew, who questioned him and
asked if he had ever met ET. It was “time” to tell his story, but only after
the death of General Trudeau, as agreed. Colonel Corso told me that he
thought that humanity could handle the truth. We know that manyhad ever met ET. It was “time” to tell his story, but only after
the death of General Trudeau, as agreed. Colonel Corso told me that he
thought that humanity could handle the truth. We know that many

--- PAGE BREAK ---was “time” to tell his story, but only after
the death of General Trudeau, as agreed. Colonel Corso told me that he
thought that humanity could handle the truth. We know that many

--- PAGE BREAK ---

inconsistencies in the book may possibly be attributed to his co-writer Bill
Birnes, but the core story is true if one compares the manuscripts. Dawn of
A New Age is available on OpenMinds TV.
Why do these debunkers criticize former Minister of Defence, Paul
Hellyer, for citing the credibility of the Corso book? We know that, besides
calling that “four-Star General” to verify Corso’s role in Army R&D, the
honorable Paul Hellyer must have known “something” of this matter in the
National Security discussions which were obviously part of his position in
the Canadian government.
So why are these few people still fueling this Corso controversy?
Why not speak to the researchers above—most very experienced in their
field—and interview the people who knew him well? I find that the real
story was mostly told in Italy, where he was on a Prime-Time television
talk show and an honored guest at two conferences. I accompanied him
there in 1998 and spent a week at Easter with the Colonel and his daughter-
in-law Liz and his grandsons Andrew and Philip. We had some very
revealing conversations. He would talk about conversations he had with the
Canadian scientist Wilber Smith, and what he called his “German
Scientists.” These men came from Operation Paperclip, which was
launched by the US Government to bring German scientists to the USA in
the interest of National Security. Some of them, including Werner von
Braun, the “father” of the rocket science and US space exploration
program; Siegfried Knemeyer, the former head of the RLM (Ministry of
Aeronautics); Hans Amtmann; Alexander Lippisch; Robert Sarbacher; and
others; seem to have been in possession of critical knowledge in the field of
aeronautics, space flight, and UFO technologies. They came to America in
1946. Some of them worked at Air Material Command (AMC) at Wright
Field (later Wright-Patterson) in Ohio. The Colonel had been to Ohio, to the
base at Wright Field. At one point, in an informal conversation with us in
Italy, he said he saw craft there.
Colonel Corso himself says it all in his manuscript, and his
handwritten notes, titled The Dawn of a New Age. It is a tragedy that it has
not been published in English as we have it for sale in Italian in all the
bookstores. However, it is best to read it online on the Open Minds-TV
website.
The Colonel emphasized that it was essential that humanity adopt a
“new” scientific approach that takes us past the paper-pushing and
laboratory-experimentation stages and instead leads us into a serious
discipline that could encompass the inclusion of inter-dimensional
phenomena. The key elements are time travel, understanding the mystery of
space-time, and the study of electromagnetism.to a serious
discipline that could encompass the inclusion of inter-dimensional
phenomena. The key elements are time travel, understanding the mystery of
space-time, and the study of electromagnetism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some back-engineering projects, according to NSC’s (National
Security Council) and at one time the special assistant to General Trudeau,
head of the Pentagon’s Foreign Technology Desk, Colonel Philip Corso and
others, includes special materials (ceramics, alloys, bio-textiles), lasers,
fiber-optics, solid-state electronics, compact discs, supercomputers,
biotronic and bio-computer devices, magneto-aero and hydro-dynamics,
magneto-gravitation, particle beam weapons, electromagnetic pulse (EMP)
engines, stealth technology, night-vision technology, cold fusion, neutronic
reactors, etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 9
GOING OFF THE RESERVATION
Give this information to the young people of the world and this
country. Don’t lie to them. They want to hear it. They can handle it.
—Colonel Philip CorsoEAK ---

Chapter 9
GOING OFF THE RESERVATION
Give this information to the young people of the world and this
country. Don’t lie to them. They want to hear it. They can handle it.
—Colonel Philip Corso

This is a man who has an incredible background. However, what we
need to look at is, the fact that Corso’s contribution would have been fine
had he stayed within the parameters of what he was allowed to say in 1997.
Times have changed, so I think we’re allowed to say more today.
In the disclosure movement, Dr. Steven Greer has a very interesting
phrase in this respect. He says, “Everybody is safe as long as they don’t go
off the reservation.” I believe in the case of Colonel Philip Corso who
understood the secrecy, he could look at the human condition with its many
aspects. He was aware of reincarnation. He knew geopolitics and he
experienced many unusual events in his lifetime. He knew why countries
were fighting. He knew who had a stake in everything. He knew the
intelligence community because he was the head of the CIC in Rome plus
he knew all about Jesse Jesus Angleton, head of the CIA in Europe, and the
CIA. He knew Vatican procedures and the problems with communism. He
was well aware of the Nazi’s role in advanced technologies, always
referring to “his German scientists” in his research.
This is a man who had a background and was starting to put two and
two together. He even went into the esoteric so he knew how
dimensionality worked. I also believe there was a part of him that “went off
the reservation.” Furthermore, I think his death was very premature.
“Our agreement was not to speak out until our conscience forced us
to,” Corso said. “And my time came when Trudeau died, but there was still
a lot to say, and above all, to do for the good of the next generation.” These
were the last words that Colonel Philip Corso said to me.
As I have stated before, the term “going off the reservation” means
talking too much about state secrets. Well, I think Colonel Corso spoke far
more than he was supposed to. In Italy, he definitely did this because he
was comfortable with the kind reception he received. He talked about a new
world, “if you could take it.” He talked about advanced technology,
especially medical technologies, that he hadn’t spoken about in the United
States. The danger when you’re talking about technologies that belong tocould take it.” He talked about advanced technology,
especially medical technologies, that he hadn’t spoken about in the United
States. The danger when you’re talking about technologies that belong to

--- PAGE BREAK ---alked about advanced technology,
especially medical technologies, that he hadn’t spoken about in the United
States. The danger when you’re talking about technologies that belong to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the military/industrial complex is that someone does not want the world to
know. This reality brings up the black budget programs that are extremely
secret and hidden from the US Congress, as well as the people. This is a
massive secret on which a world economy is based. There is so much
secrecy about what they really were able to back-engineer and where it
went and what it was used for. The irony was that Corso believed that any
back-engineered craft, whether at Area 51, at Groom Lake or anywhere
else, could not fly without the EBE, the pilot because he insisted that they
were one and the same. They were two parts of a unit. I used to laugh when
he would tell people who asked that Area 51 did not exist. After all, he was
a military man. Much of this was bureaucracy and extremely
compartmentalized. He could not ever know the bigger picture.
So, I think “going off the reservation” caused Corso an early death. I
remember when he had his first heart attack. I was devastated because I was
in close touch with this man. He recounted to me on the phone a weird
occurrence, a vivid dream.
From the hospital, he picked up a phone and he told me, he said, “You
know, Paola, last night I had a dream.” And I asked, “What was it?” And he
said, “I was taken aboard a space ship and an alien doctor in a white coat
grabbed a new heart and shoved it into my chest,” he said. “Where, the day
before, I was critical and said goodbye to my family, the next day I was fine
and I was walking around and the nurses were probably tired of my talking,
so they called my family to come and take me home.” So, he went home
and lead a normal life, and was seemingly was fine, but within two weeks
he felt dizzy, he was back in an ambulance, back at the hospital, back to a
situation that he would not escape this time.
Maurizio Baiata had a very special, personal relationship with the
Colonel. They were perhaps closer in a familial way. The Colonel
resembled Maurizio’s late father. He looked like him. Maurizio used to call
the Colonel “the old man” in an affectionate way. He loved him as I did and
Corso helped Maurizio become an excellent researcher with the capacity to
see where all the pieces of the puzzle fit. I did not know much about Italian
history or politics or the war although I was born in Rome in 1945 and my
father was a cavalry officer under Fascism and Benito Mussolini. Maurizio
could verify the Colonel’s war record in Italy. He had a more mature and
historical perspective than I.
This was the official notice given to my editor and boss, Maurizio
Baiata, by the family:
Colonel Philip J. Corso suffered a heart attack in the morning
of June 9, 1998. He was in his house in Port St. Lucie, Floridaicial notice given to my editor and boss, Maurizio
Baiata, by the family:
Colonel Philip J. Corso suffered a heart attack in the morning
of June 9, 1998. He was in his house in Port St. Lucie, Florida

--- PAGE BREAK ---o my editor and boss, Maurizio
Baiata, by the family:
Colonel Philip J. Corso suffered a heart attack in the morning
of June 9, 1998. He was in his house in Port St. Lucie, Florida

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and his close relatives were with him. They decided to rush
him to the best medical facility in the area, the Jupiter
Medical Center, located less than fifty miles south from Port
St. Lucie. According to the Jupiter medical staff, the Colonel
arrived already in critical condition and thought there was no
hope of Corso surviving such a massive heart failure. Philip
Jr. was informed that there was nothing the family could do
and they should go home. So, in their heart, they said goodbye
to the old man and returned home. But that same afternoon,
the hospital called to notify the family that an unexpected and
miraculous improvement had occurred! The doctors had no
explanation for it. A nurse found Corso sitting in his bed. He
felt perfectly well and he wanted to be discharged
immediately, but they kept him there for three days before he
was sent back home in Port St. Lucie. All the family was in
awe witnessing his spectacular recovery!
I asked him about the vision because I’m always curious when people
have contact and he said, “I was aboard a ship when they made me well. I
saw on a screen war, catastrophes, and disasters. This humanity, this human
race doesn’t deserve to know about it. I don’t feel like telling them.” He
was extremely angry in his last days.
He called me on Monday because there was a lawsuit against the
people that were dealing with the book, but I’m not going to go into the
details here. It was a lawsuit that really forced Colonel Corso to be silent
and a lawsuit is one way to force a witness to maintain silence. His lawyer
had told him not to talk about it. So, the lawsuit was settled after Corso’s
death but he was angry not only at the people that the lawsuit was against—
he was angry at the UFO community in general. He called some researchers
a bunch of vultures that do not support the truth and he said that the way it
was going, everybody was fighting against everybody else and that really
was a good way to keep the truth hidden because nobody was on the same
page. He even said he was sorry he wrote the book. I was very distressed by
his anger and I told him I hoped he realized I was not part of that. Those
were his last words to me. He told me this on Monday. He died the
following Thursday, July 16, 1998. His birthday was May 22, 1915. I met
him in 1997 when I was 52 years old.
From Rome, Maurizio Baiata wrote the following, remembering that
day:n Monday. He died the
following Thursday, July 16, 1998. His birthday was May 22, 1915. I met
him in 1997 when I was 52 years old.
From Rome, Maurizio Baiata wrote the following, remembering that
day:

“Colonel Corso, the author of The Day After Roswell, passed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

away 12 years ago today. It was around 8 p.m. in Rome, the
evening of July 17, 1998, when I received a frantic phone call
from fellow journalist and friend Paola Harris. She was
calling from Boulder, Colorado. Just a few minutes before,
Paola had been informed of the death of Colonel Philip J.
Corso. Stunned and shocked, I couldn’t say anything to
comfort her. The next morning, I was able to reach Philip
Corso, Jr., who confirmed the sad news. It was the first time I
ever spoke to Philip Jr. and he very kindly detailed the chain
of events surrounding his father’s passing.”
A year later, I visited the Colonel’s family in Port St. Lucie. They
hosted me and gave me his little poolside apartment. I slept in that
bedroom. I could feel his presence there. His family was very kind to me.
They gave me his suitcase, his famous briefcase and many of his UFO
books. He had given me that famous red and blue tie he is wearing in the
photos taken in Italy. Later in life, Philip, his grandson, got married and I
hosted him and his wife in my apartment in Rome.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Funeral program for Colonel Philip J. Corso, Sr.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Italy. Later in life, Philip, his grandson, got married and I
hosted him and his wife in my apartment in Rome.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Funeral program for Colonel Philip J. Corso, Sr.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I wished to visit Corso’s grave where I would place individual roses
there from his surrogate family in Italy, Maurizio Baiata and Adriano
Forgione. We all grieved for him so much. He was another incredible
master teacher for us and we all loved him.
One thing I know from so many of my whistleblower cases is that
Maurizio Baiata and I will remain inexorably linked and together, always,
although we live on different continents. All those years, from 1997 to the
present, we worked diligently together with Adriano Forgione in Rome to
bring out the truth and the Italians have expressed their sincere appreciation
for our investigative journalism. We are a team. We did the work and I
hope that the Colonel is looking down on us, fairly pleased.
After his death, in these nineteen years, I presented many lectures in
which I had to go up against my own colleagues as being the greatest
skeptics. The whole UFO field is full of this, and that is why we can’t
progress. Unfortunately, the people who are the debunkers do not do their
homework. Just having an opinion is not valid. Having an informed opinion
is something else. They pounce on one little nit-picky thing and run with it.
Interrogating a witness is a logical, intellectual procedure.
I think, and this is my own opinion, that this is due to the fact that
there is little support or money in this field, so there is almost a ravenous
hunger for notoriety and money. Logically, if you have many researchers
choosing to research

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Liz Corso and Paola Harris visiting the grave of Colonel Corso.

--- PAGE BREAK ---us
hunger for notoriety and money. Logically, if you have many researchers
choosing to research

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Liz Corso and Paola Harris visiting the grave of Colonel Corso.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

only the Roswell incident, then all the Roswell authors are going to fight
among themselves to convince you to buy their books and believe their
research. I could see this as counterproductive as the need to study all of it
and where it fits. The competition for media attention at the 50th
anniversary of the Roswell crash was obvious. That’s life and it happens.
I must credit Paul Hellyer, the former defense minister of Canada,
who has become a dear friend. He investigated the book. He told me he
called a former general to ask about the veracity of the book. He was told
that “Colonel Corso was telling the truth and there was more.” Mr. Hellyer
has since heard more corroborating evidence but that still won’t quiet
skeptics.
In other words, to say that the Roswell incident is the main focus of
Colonel Philip Corso’s co-authored book is false. I think it was such a
misnomer. The title refers to the back-engineering of alien technology.
Colonel Corso was never at Roswell in 1947. He was at Fort Riley,
Kansas in 1947. He was at Red Canyon Missile Base, White Sands, New
Mexico in 1957. He was not at Roswell, even though what he believed he
received in 1960 at the Pentagon were the Roswell artifacts or, in other
words, foreign technology. It may have been from other of the New Mexico
UFO crashes known to have happened at the time, although he maintained
it was from Roswell. So, he was really not as big of a threat to the Roswell
researchers as they perceived him to be. It would have been much more
productive to have had an insider conversation with him on how funding for
black-ops projects works and what we have already back-engineered.
We know that there is little cooperation in the UFO field and to
question the experiences of this whistleblower and military officer when we
are civilians is a bit arrogant. Corso’s classic retorts were, “Were you there?
Did you have the clearances I had? Did you also work in the Pentagon on
these programs?”
What should happen, as happens with any other area of academic
study, is that research should be shared. People should gather around a table
and share their findings so they can all proceed to the next level and
discover what the truth is. However, that never happens with the Roswell
case, nor do the researchers look into other crashes. We have no idea what,
exactly, occurred in those years.
I have done extensive work on the San Antonio crash that occurred on
August 18, 1945, and was witnessed by two little Mexican boys. In 2013, I
was lucky enough to question these witnesses. One has since passed away.ensive work on the San Antonio crash that occurred on
August 18, 1945, and was witnessed by two little Mexican boys. In 2013, I
was lucky enough to question these witnesses. One has since passed away.

--- PAGE BREAK ---an Antonio crash that occurred on
August 18, 1945, and was witnessed by two little Mexican boys. In 2013, I
was lucky enough to question these witnesses. One has since passed away.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It took five years to do a thorough job and I did it with the help of Jan
Harzan, current director of MUFON, and on location. New Mexico had a
wealth of mysterious occurrences back in the 1940s and ‘50s.
There is much discord in UFO research—discord in every area of it,
and most of all in contact research, which mainly deals with “abductions.”
As evidenced by Colonel Corso’s contact, all contact is not abduction. Still,
“abductions” led by little grey aliens now has become the trademark for the
whole entire field of ufology; a situation that is absolutely filled with
silliness, ignorance and fear.
If some of these beings are truly extraterrestrial biological entities
(EBEs) or clones created to fly the ship, why are we creating this other
mythology? It is serious disinformation.
If nothing else, I hope the general public will dig deeper into the
revelations of Colonel Philip Corso and herald his bravery and courage in
coming forth. It was an honor for me to have shared time with him. I am
including this last exchange as part of this book. I still have the audiotape. It
was a sort of mandate to Maurizio Baiata, Adriano Forgione and me. I hope
he is proud of us.
I find some of the things that Colonel Corso told us to be very relevant
today, and so it was time to write this book. They are fundamental choices
for humanity and suggestions on how to transition to a new world. I want to
leave the reader with these thoughts.
In particular, he wrote these words using the perspective of an
extraterrestrial race. I think it important to repeat them because they are
warnings for the future.
To humanity:
Instead of moving ahead 500 years and traveling into space, you, through your
stupidity, your greed and your lack of knowledge, moved yourselves back 50 years and
now I leave you with this:
1.    Since you have weapons of mass destruction, shall we let you destroy
yourselves?
2.    Or shall we destroy you as we almost did once before?
3.    Or shall we do as your Jesus Christ did and drive the moneylenders and
those that use the power of money from your temple and let you advance?
4.    Or create a mixed-race and the society which we envision?
The choice is yours.s Christ did and drive the moneylenders and
those that use the power of money from your temple and let you advance?
4.    Or create a mixed-race and the society which we envision?
The choice is yours.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Choice Is Yours.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Portrait of Colonel Corso in Foligno, Italy, in 1998.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso’s reflections

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 10
MILITARY RECORDS AND PHOTOS
DA Form 66 (page 1). Image: Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DA Form 66 (page 2). Image: Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DA Form 66 (page 3). Image: Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DA Form 66 (page 4). Image: Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DA Form 66 (page 5). Image: Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso in Tokyo, 1953. Photo: Wikipedia.
Edward O’Connor, Colonel Philip Corso, General Arthur Trudeau, and Victor Fediay. Photo: Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Colonel Corso in Germany, 1960. Photo: Wikipedia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Service/branch
United States Army
Years of service
February 23, 1942 – March 1, 1963
Rank
Lieutenant Colonel
Commands held
Battalion Commander of European Air
Defense

Intel Staff Officer Plans & Estimate Branch
GHQ Far East Command

Chief Special Project Branch G-2
Section of the HQ AFFE 8000th
AU Command

Chief Foreign Technology Division of the
United States Department of Defense

Staff Officer in the Plans Division OCRD
Washington DC, Fort Riley
Battles/wars
World War II

Korean War
Awards
American Campaign Medal

American Defense Service Medal

Bronze Star

Commendation Ribbon

EAME Campaign Medal

Legion of Merit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

World War II Victory Medal
His service number on his id card was 01047930 as shown on TV.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion Ribbon

EAME Campaign Medal

Legion of Merit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

World War II Victory Medal
His service number on his id card was 01047930 as shown on TV.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HISTORICAL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS FROM
COLONEL PHILIP CORSO
I wish to thank the sixteen various U.S. Army installations from
which I requested historical and background information on details of
projects and studies in which I participated. They went beyond their normal
activities to furnish the data which I requested, and which was invaluable in
compiling this book. A list follows: Historical Reference Branch, U.S.
Army Military History Institute, Carlisle Barracks, Carlisle, Penna; Chief,
Corps of Engineers, Wash., D. C.; Dept. of the Army R&D, The Pentagon;
U.S. Army Missile Command, Command
Historian, Redstone Arsenal, Ala.; U.S. Army Belvoir Research,
Development, and Engineering Center, Ft. Belvoir, Va; Space and Strategic
Defense CMD, Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville Ala.; Night Vision Electronic
Sensor Center, Ft. Belvoir, Va.; U.S. Army Research Laboratory CMD.;
Harry Diamond Laboratories, Adelphia, Md.; Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research, Wash., D. C.; Dept. of Army Historical Service Division,
Center of Military History, Wash., D. C.; U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Office of History, Ft. Belvoir, Va.; Hdqrs.
U.S. Army Communications – Electronic Cmd, Research Development &
Engineer Center, Night Vision Electronic Sensors Directorate, Ft.
Monmouth, N.J.; Missile Command USASS DC-H, CSSD-PA, Huntsville,
Ala.; U.S. Army, Quartermaster Center, Ft. Lee, Va.; Hdqs, U.S. Army
Materiel Cmd, Research and Development, Alexandria, Va.; Lincoln Labs,
Lexington, Mass; and Bell Laboratories, Westminister, Colorado.
I also wish to thank the modern military branch of the National
Archives, Wash. D. C. and the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks,
Wash. D. C.
Last, but not least – memoirs, Lt. Gen. Arthur G. Trudeau. He
presented my copy to me personally, with instructions to use the contents as
I saw fit.
Never once did I have to use the freedom of information act. Probably
because I was deeply embedded into the system and could guide them to
fulfill my requests, many of which fell under my jurisdiction while I was on
duty and the service which I served and was proud of its accomplishments.embedded into the system and could guide them to
fulfill my requests, many of which fell under my jurisdiction while I was on
duty and the service which I served and was proud of its accomplishments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Colonel’s briefcase, tie an autographed copy of the Italian edition of The Day After Roswell. From the
author’s private collection.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Paola Leopizzi Harris (Italy/Europe/Vatican) is an Italo-American
photojournalist and investigative reporter in the field of extraterrestrial
related phenomena research.  She is also a widely published, free-lance
writer, especially in Europe.  She has studied extraterrestrial related
phenomena since 1979 and is on personal terms with many of the leading
researchers in the field.  From 1980-1986 she assisted Dr. J. Allen Hyneck
with his UFO investigations and has interviewed many top military
witnesses concerning their involvement in the government truth embargo.
In 1997, Ms. Harris met and interviewed Col. Philip J. Corso in Roswell,
New Mexico and became a personal friend and confidante.  She was
instrumental in having his book The Day After Roswell, for which she wrote
the preface, translated into Italian.
She returned to Roswell in the summer of 2003 for the American debut of
her book of interviews, Connecting the Dots: Making Sense of the UFO
Phenomena. She is a key figure in the world of Exopolitics. Her second
book entitled, UFOs: How does one speak to a Ball of Light - Exopolitical
Challenges and Protocols for Future Contact, speaks of the Orb and Light
Sphere Phenomena including the light phenomena seen during StS-75
NASA Footage. She has recently completed a textbook in Exopolitics which
is called Exopolitics: All the Above. Her latest book Exopolitics: Stargate to
a New Reality includes some amazing military witness Testimony.
Paola appears with Monsignor Corrado Balducci in the DVD “Fast

--- PAGE BREAK ---l the Above. Her latest book Exopolitics: Stargate to
a New Reality includes some amazing military witness Testimony.
Paola appears with Monsignor Corrado Balducci in the DVD “Fast

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Walkers” created by Safespace producer Robert Miles. She also has
appeared in a recent Norwegian documentary called “The Day Before
Disclosure”. As a leading investigative journalist in the UFO field, her two
comprehensive interviews with Canadian former defense minister Paul
Hellyer have become a benchmark in her career. Her books have been
translated into 4 languages and her video interviews are currently available
on YOUTUBE.
She has spoken all through Europe, (Ireland, England Switzerland, Spain,
France, Germany, and Belgium) of the importance of full disclosure. She
was recently given a recognition award at the International Ovni conference
in Mexico City in March 2010, by renowned journalist Jaime Maussan.
She has a regular column in X-times UFO Magazine, has written for Nexus,
Australia, Explora, and Open Minds Magazine among other publications.
She is a regular contributor on Coast to Coast A.M. with George Noory.
Paola lives in Boulder, Colorado and has a Masters degree in Education.
She teaches Exopolitics and Hollywood and Disclosure as online classes for
Dr. Michael Salla’s Exopolitics Institute for which she an International
liaison director. She also teaches for the International Metaphysical
University online program

--- PAGE BREAK ---classes for
Dr. Michael Salla’s Exopolitics Institute for which she an International
liaison director. She also teaches for the International Metaphysical
University online program

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[1] Counter Intelligence Corps (CIC) was a World War II and early Cold War intelligence
agency within the United States Army. Its role was taken over by the U.S. Army
Intelligence Corps in 1961 and, in 1967, by the U.S. Army Intelligence Agency. Its
functions are now performed by the United States Army Intelligence and Security
Command and by counterintelligence agents assigned to Army tactical units. The
National Counter Intelligence Corps Association (NCICA), a veterans’ association, was
established in the years immediately following World War II by Military Intelligence
agents who had served in every area of military and domestic operations.
[2] The examination of the clone and the Colonel’s assessment is based on seeing autopsy
reports.
[3] See the chart on page 49 to see the qualities of “the cloner,” that is, whoever created
the EBE. Colonel Corso was more interested in who is the cloner.
[4] (1)
Hermann Julius Oberth was an Austro-Hungarian-born German physicist
and engineer. He is considered one of the founding fathers of rocketry and astronautics.
[5] Elbert Leander “Burt” Rutan is a retired American aerospace engineer noted for his
originality in designing light, strong, unusual-looking, energy-efficient aircraft.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Reverse Engineering Roswell UFO Crash
Technologies - ET Contact
Col Philip Corso Revelations

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTZQSunuhP4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Aug 14, 2023   61 min.
Paola Harris, M.Ed., (Italy/Europe/Vatican) is an Italo-American
photojournalist and investigative reporter in the field of extraterrestrial
related phenomena research. She has studied extraterrestrial related
phenomena since 1979 and is on personal terms with many of the leading

--- PAGE BREAK ---eporter in the field of extraterrestrial
related phenomena research. She has studied extraterrestrial related
phenomena since 1979 and is on personal terms with many of the leading

--- PAGE BREAK ---

researchers in the field and has traveled extensively to interview leading
UFO whistleblowers, researchers, and ET contactees worldwide. From
1980-1986 she assisted Dr. J. Allen Hyneck with his UFO investigations and
has interviewed many top military witnesses concerning their involvement
in the government truth embargo.
In 1997, Ms. Harris met and interviewed Col. Philip J. Corso during the 50th
anniversary of the Roswell UFO Crash in July 1997 and became a personal
friend and confidante. He was the author of the newly released New York
Times bestseller, The Day After Roswell, where he revealed his participation
in the classified study and reverse engineering of captured extraterrestrial
technologies from the Roswell UFO crash. In addition to disclosing that he
was confidentially briefing Attorney General Robert Kennedy on UFOs
during the Kennedy Administration, Corso also told Harris about his direct
physical contact with a stranded extraterrestrial while a commander of an
Army missile facility at White Sands Missile Range in the 1950s.   She was
instrumental in having his book The Day After Roswell, for which she wrote
the preface, translated into Italian.
She was a confidante of Philip Corso and wrote Conversations with Colonel
Corso; A Personal Memoir and Photo Album. She has written multiple other
books based on her recorded interviews.
Paola Harris' website is PaolaHarris.com
Dr. Michael Salla, PhD has held academic appointments in the School of
International Service, American University, Washington DC (1996–2001),
and the Department of Political Science, Australian National University,
Canberra, Australia (1994–96). He taught as an adjunct faculty member at
George Washington University, Washington DC, in 2002. He is the author
of about a dozen major exopolitics book titles starting with Exopolitics:
Political implications of the extraterrestrial presence in 2004. He has
written extensively about the Secret Space Program. His website is
Exopolitics.org
= = = = = =
Dr. Salla: Paola Harris has been working on UFOs since 1979. She's
done some breakthrough interviews with a number of leading
whistleblowers, including the legendary Philip Corso, a lieutenant
colonel that was one of the first to report about reverse engineering
projects concerning extraterrestrial technologies.r of leading
whistleblowers, including the legendary Philip Corso, a lieutenant
colonel that was one of the first to report about reverse engineering
projects concerning extraterrestrial technologies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---blowers, including the legendary Philip Corso, a lieutenant
colonel that was one of the first to report about reverse engineering
projects concerning extraterrestrial technologies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Announcer: You are listening to Exopolitics Today with Dr. Michael
Salla. Your source for the uncensored truth regarding the human
extraterrestrial global and political agenda. Click the Like button and
subscribe to this channel. And now here's Dr. Michael Salla.
Dr. Salla: Well. Welcome, Paola. back to Exopolitics Today. How are
you doing?
Paola: I'm doing well. There's a lot of exciting things going on,
Michael, that we can talk about, but we're going to talk about the
past.
Dr. Salla: Well, we're talking about the past, but a lot of that is now
relevant because now people are finally paying attention to
whistleblower testimony. And, of course there was a disclosure
project press conference that Steven Greer organized and he
brought forward a number of whistleblowers. But the one that's really
captured the public's attention is David Grush, who has been given
extensive exposure. But all of them really bring this issue of
extraterrestrial technologies that have been reverse engineered into
the public limelight. So why don't you tell us about how you got to first
learn about some of these UFOs being reverse engineered
extraterrestrial technologies?
Paola: Yes you're absolutely right. What the current exopolitics news
and UFO news is, is that it's okay to talk about it now and there's less
ridicule. I agree with that. But I have a certain amount of frustration
because I already knew and was working with whistleblowers and the
one that was the most important, Michael, was Colonel Philip Corso.
Colonel Philip Corso was Army. He was a retired Army colonel and
he had a background that was incredible. He was the head of
intelligence in Rome in 1945. He was at Fort Riley, Kansas in 1947
when the he said there was a cargo in the veterinary quarters that
had an extraterrestrial that he saw. In fact, he testified to that in Italy.
And then somehow in 1960 and remember, 1960 is the Kennedy
administration, he was asked by General Trudeau to back engineerhad an extraterrestrial that he saw. In fact, he testified to that in Italy.
And then somehow in 1960 and remember, 1960 is the Kennedy
administration, he was asked by General Trudeau to back engineer

--- PAGE BREAK ---ial that he saw. In fact, he testified to that in Italy.
And then somehow in 1960 and remember, 1960 is the Kennedy
administration, he was asked by General Trudeau to back engineer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

artifacts that the Army had. And the reason I keep saying Army is
because I'm sure the Air Force had artifacts, too. Since the first
crash, the Jacques Vallee and I testified to was 1945. So Colonel
Corso used to tell me, he said, Trudeau said that, “the last one alive
in research and development was to tell the truth, to tell what we
were doing.” In other words, they had a file of artifacts from Roswell
that had gone out to big companies and asked the companies to look
at these things and that included microchip, fiber optics, high tenacity
fibers.
He told me individual stories about them, Michael.
And he said he also had German scientists with him and he would go
to something like Monsanto, show them the fibers. And also the night
screening vision device they were doing. And that was, he said, the
cover of like a lens from the alien body that was a light collector
explained to me how they peeled it off and then used that lens. And
we're playing around with it at the Pentagon. So these artifacts that
he had were in 1960.
I keep reminding everybody of that because it was during the
Kennedy administration. The thing you should remember is he was
working in intelligence. So he briefed Bobby Kennedy. So if Bobby
Kennedy knows, Jack Kennedy knows. And they wanted to, he said,
the reason why they were doing this is they wanted to have more
power with competitive edge with army contracts and it was that on a
cash basis. He told me it was done on a cash basis so there was no
paper trail.
Because in the United States, you know this as much as I do, a lot of
people came after Colonel Corso, called him a liar, did not believe
anything. And I sent you all his army military records. So you know
that he said and did what he what he said he did and the places he
said he was. His military records show that he was in Germany. It
shows that he was at Fort Riley, Kansas. It shows that he was in
Rome. He was the head of the CIC, that was the precursor to the
CIA.
So the man, apart from having been a contactee, he himself was
brilliant and I was lucky enough to be the journalist that was closest
to him all by accident because I had the room next to him at the Sally
Port in in 1997 during the 50th anniversary of Roswell. I'll just end by
saying one thing. I didn't understand why the secret was secret until Iccident because I had the room next to him at the Sally
Port in in 1997 during the 50th anniversary of Roswell. I'll just end by
saying one thing. I didn't understand why the secret was secret until I

--- PAGE BREAK ---d the room next to him at the Sally
Port in in 1997 during the 50th anniversary of Roswell. I'll just end by
saying one thing. I didn't understand why the secret was secret until I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

met Colonel Corso. And I realize today it's not about religion. It's not
about scaring the general public. It's about the fact that there's
money being made off of back engineering. And nobody in these last
50 years is about to talk about that, I think, today.
Dr. Salla: Well, let's talk about how you met with Philip Corso,
because I think that's a fascinating story in itself. Now, his book, The
Day After Roswell, that that came out in 1997, which was the 50th
anniversary of the Roswell UFO crash. And so there was a
conference and Colonel Corso, he was really the star attraction. And
you got to meet him because everyone wanted to interview him, but
Simon and Schuster, the book publisher, were there and so people
weren't able to interview him, but yet you got to do it. So how did that
happen?
Paola: Well, it's all synchronicity, like my whole entire life. It's all by
accident. I was sent from Italy. I was working in Italy. I didn't come
back from Italy until 2007. But in 1997, my boss, Maurizio Baiata,
whom you know, sent me to cover the story, and everybody in the
world was there from John Mac and Whitley Strieber, Linda Hall,
Budd Hopkins, you name them. Everybody was there and I didn't
want to do the story because I wasn't prepared. I didn't read the
book, I didn't even know Colonel Corso looked like. But there was a
fax that came in that said that from Boulder that said they would take
me there. So it was the last minute thing, Michael. And from Boulder.
It's over a 13 hour drive. It's so long. And we got there and I didn't
have a place to sleep. And when I went to the media center there, the
press center, they said to me, “Well, good luck, because this has
been booked. Everybody in the world is here. And all their fans since
February”. This was on July 4th, 1997. What happened was they
said, “Just open up the phone book and try to get a place.” And I
opened up the phone book and my finger went on  the Sally Port Inn,
which is on Main Street there.
And I called them and they had a room for three nights and I didn't
know it at the time, but the room was right next to Colonel Corso. And
what happened was there was a press conference there and I was in
the middle of everybody and all the people that asked questions. And
I hadn't read the book. I didn't have any knowledge of what wasd
what happened was there was a press conference there and I was in
the middle of everybody and all the people that asked questions. And
I hadn't read the book. I didn't have any knowledge of what was

--- PAGE BREAK ---there was a press conference there and I was in
the middle of everybody and all the people that asked questions. And
I hadn't read the book. I didn't have any knowledge of what was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

going on. And but a blonde man came up to me and he said, “You're
from Italy” because I had a press badge. And I said, “Yes.” He said,
“Ask my father a question. in Italian,” and it was his son, Phil Corso
Jr. And I said, “Well, I'm embarrassed. I don't want to do it.” So he
took his hand and he pushed me in the middle of the crowd with all
the cameras. And I asked Colonel Corso about the Santilli autopsy
footage because we had been discussing it in Italy. In fact, we had
put it out on our major channels. And Corso looked at me and he
said, “Well,” he said “I saw that.” He said, “That sounds, that looked
familiar, because when they peeled off the lens from the beings eye,”
he said, “We had that as part of the artifacts that we back
engineered.”
Now the Army, remember, back engineered night screening devices,
he said “for the soldiers in Vietnam”. We're dealing 1960 here when
he had those artifacts.
So I realized… and then he said “I want to speak to you. I have
something to tell you.” And I thought, how is that going to happen? I
mean, nobody could get to him. And so when I saw him coming out
of the room next door, I knew and I said, “Can you talk to me?” And
he said, “Yes, I'll come tomorrow at 7:00.”
That was early in the morning. “I'm going to give you three books for
my friends in Italy, because” he said “I was there during World War
Two”. He had a book for Rafanelli and had dedicated them all.
But when he sat down to talk to me, he gave me an interview that I
didn't want to print and I wanted just to print the back engineering
story. I had the opportunity to invite him to Italy twice. He spoke in
Italy in Pescara in 1997 and 1998, and San Marino, which is an
independent republic. So what happened is Corso did most of his
speaking and most of his meeting of scientists and so forth in Italy
because of all this synchronicity.
Dr. Salla: You got to spend time with Philip Corso and you obviously
got to learn a lot more about what he was doing at the Army's
Foreign Technology desk, which he headed up for that two year
period during the Kennedy administration. So that's a very important
point that you already mentioned, that he was briefing Robert
Kennedy, the attorney general at the time, about the what was reallyperiod during the Kennedy administration. So that's a very important
point that you already mentioned, that he was briefing Robert
Kennedy, the attorney general at the time, about the what was really

--- PAGE BREAK ---ennedy administration. So that's a very important
point that you already mentioned, that he was briefing Robert
Kennedy, the attorney general at the time, about the what was really

--- PAGE BREAK ---

happening with UFOs, because the CIA weren't telling the president
and they weren't telling him. So they got Corso to come in and give
briefings to Robert Kennedy and as I recall, Paola, he gave those
briefings, I guess for the two years that he was still active. I think he
was active in the Kennedy administration from ‘61 to ‘63. And so
maybe you can say a little bit more about what it was that he was
telling Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy about the foreign
technologies that they had recovered from Roswell and that they
were kind of like reverse engineering.
Paola: He never went into detail because Colonel Corso was very
careful. I mean, he was the head of intelligence, but he had a dislike,
I'm just going to say dislike for Jesse Jesus Angleton, who was the
head of the CIA. And if you read Kennedy's letters to Angleton and I
know of Angleton because of the Michael Wolff case, it was Jesse
Angleton that found Dr. Michael Wolff and sent him to Princeton.
Angleton was into UFOs very much. And I saw a letter where
Kennedy had asked that he be directly briefed on UFOs by Angleton,
and that was not a friend of Colonel Corso's. So he never told me
details except he said, and actually, I think I have film, we filmed him
at the hotel in Rome where Colonel Corso talks about going to Bobby
Kennedy and talking about this. Well, if Bobby Kennedy knows, Jack
Kennedy knows. And not only that, I mean, I have to laugh at who
really knows?
They all knew because I'm convinced all the presidents knew. It's just
that they couldn't do anything about it. I don't know how far Kennedy
had asked Angleton for the files directly because he was curious.
And I know Michael Wolff had met Kennedy himself. So the thing is,
it's really amazing because for me in my research, Michael, I turn the
corner there because I couldn't understand the secrecy.
And then when I understood it, that the big top companies had these
artifacts and it had gone to the military industrial complex, and you
remember Eisenhower's warning there that you can't touch it
because it's moneymaking.
It isn't like it has to do... And it's also if you study Richard Dolan's
work, you know that the deep black projects, they're very hard to get
the real story. What shocked me about Corso apart from his…isn't like it has to do... And it's also if you study Richard Dolan's
work, you know that the deep black projects, they're very hard to get
the real story. What shocked me about Corso apart from his…

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I see him in that picture. I have the tie that he's wearing right here.
He gave me his tie and he said to me, “Look, Paola,” he said, “I'm
telling you, this is real. This is back in 1980 when nobody's thinking
about this.” He said, “this is real. I won't be around for very long. I
would like you to keep talking about it.” He said, “You're one of my
soldiers.”
And I said, “I'm not a soldier. I'm a woman and I can't do it”.
And he said, “Yes, you can. I will be sitting in the front row when you
lecture about it”. He said, “But you must tell the world, because I'm
doing it for my grandchildren and my three grandsons.”
And that was his motivation. Now, our own researchers, they were all
jealous of this or thinking he was making tons of money. But he kept
telling me that Colonel Corso kept telling me, “the world can handle it,
they can handle it, the young people can handle it”. So he kind of
gave me the mandate to keep me and Adriano Forgione, with whom I
worked, he gave us a kind of a mandate to keep doing it.
So we translated Corso's original manuscript, The Dawning of a New
Age in Italian. And what the Americans were going was there's
mistakes in the. Well, of course. Of course. He never was in Roswell.
He was at Fort Riley, Kansas. So, yes, mistakes were made by his

--- PAGE BREAK ---And what the Americans were going was there's
mistakes in the. Well, of course. Of course. He never was in Roswell.
He was at Fort Riley, Kansas. So, yes, mistakes were made by his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

co-writer. And so when you get one mistake, everybody cancels
everything. It's happening with Trinity. It's ridiculous. The mistakes
with the book, because the book came from the original manuscript.
We just printed the original manuscript, which is called The Dawn of
a New Age. And if you want to go to the original manuscript, I think
OpenMinds.tv has it on their website and that those are his exact
words. And the Colonel never lied.
Dr. Salla: One thing that is very significant here is that Lieutenant
Colonel Philip Corso was probably the most highly credentialed
individual to come forward to say that, yes, we have extraterrestrial
craft that have been retrieved and that they're being studied in
various corporations and they're being reverse engineered and army
intelligence and other military intelligence are involved in that. So he
was saying that in 1997. And, of course people are coming forward
and saying the same thing. But he was he was definitely one of the
very first to do that. And you're kind of. Interviews with him, your
conversations with him. You also have a book about that. I think it's
Conversations with Colonel Corso. So why don't you tell us about the
book.
Paola: Yes, well when I do any kind of work, whether with a
whistleblower or not, I have to have a tape recorder because I can't
remember anything. And if I make a mistake, I get in trouble. So it's
all tape recorded. It's got a different cover what's on Amazon right
now, but it's all tape recorded interviews. It's called Conversations
with Colonel Corso, and it has his military records in it because I'd be
sitting in a car with him and he'd be telling me things and I would not
remember. So I when I took the audio tapes, I just transcribed them
all. And that's mostly my work. Even my new book, Connecting the
Dots is all audiotapes of what the actual source told me. And I got to
get the dates right. I've got to realize and people that are listening to
this, please realize that you have to look at disclosure in a historical
context. I mean, people think of Colonel Corso, but they don't
remember it's 1960 and it would be stupid if some other branch of the
military were back engineering, starting with 1945. So the thing is,
you have to look at the context of the chronology of all of the history
of ufology. So what shocked me, Michael, and it's in this book, waswere back engineering, starting with 1945. So the thing is,
you have to look at the context of the chronology of all of the history
of ufology. So what shocked me, Michael, and it's in this book, was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

when he first talked to me, it's taken me a long time to get to contact
talking about ETs and everything. I was just black and white, nuts
and bolts.
That's how I'd been trained by Allen Hynek. But when I went to
interview him, I wanted to know about what he did. Instead. he told
me he had had contacted White Sands when he was the head of a
missile battalion in 1957 and ten years after Roswell, because he has
this theory that the two the two craft crashed and one ended up ten
years later and that he saw it. Colonel Corso, a little bit like me,
thinks his life was totally guided to do these things and to be part of
history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t crashed and one ended up ten
years later and that he saw it. Colonel Corso, a little bit like me,
thinks his life was totally guided to do these things and to be part of
history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He said that he saw the craft. He went up to the cave. He told me
where it was near a red canyon. He said that a being came out. I
think you've seen the image of the being in the Italian book. And he
said the being asked that he shut his radars down.
And I said, first of all, “I don't want to hear this” because I thought it
was crazy at the time. I wasn't open to a lot of things.
And he said he knew that he would be the one to lift the radars. He
said because he [the ET] said, “Would you shut down your radars?”
And he said, We had been told to shut down our radars during the
day at certain times, he said. So he called the military man, had the
radar shut down, but he said to the being, “if I do this, what do you
have to offer me?”
And the being said, “Would you like to come aboard?” And he said,
“What I have to offer you is a New World if you can take it.”
And those words have been used by all my colleagues, but they
come from Colonel Corso talking to the beings. So here he is
dedicating a book to me. Actually, he wrote it on a napkin too. He
said, “What do you think ‘A new world, if you could take it means?’”
And I didn't even want to go there. I said, “I have no idea”.
He also asked the being if he was a friend or a foe, and he asked me,
“What do you think he answered?,
And I said, “He answered, ‘Neither, I'm not your friend and I'm not
your enemy.’”
And Colonel Corso said, that's true. He when he saw the being, he
pulled out his Beretta. He had a knife, always in his boot. He was
Sicilian. When we brought him to Italy, we had a Sicilian come up
and meet him. And the man was a very powerful man. And he talked
about this encounter. Michael, which was really hard for me because
I wasn't going to print it. I wanted the other interview that he gave me
on back engineering because I thought if I print the encounter, they're
going to think he's crazy and they're going to discredit him. Now I'll
never do that again.
I've learned a lot. I've learned a lot. But this was 1997, and he had
since given that testimony to Bigelow, to Jacques Vallee, to other
people. He was not embarrassed to say he was contacted.
And also for him, he looked at his work career with a little bit of regretad
since given that testimony to Bigelow, to Jacques Vallee, to other
people. He was not embarrassed to say he was contacted.
And also for him, he looked at his work career with a little bit of regret

--- PAGE BREAK ---testimony to Bigelow, to Jacques Vallee, to other
people. He was not embarrassed to say he was contacted.
And also for him, he looked at his work career with a little bit of regret

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and wanted to kind of change things so that we could develop a new
science, a new way of thinking and accommodate kind of a new
consciousness to create this new world.
I'm only realizing this in the last couple of years. The other thing that
some people might be interested in, he believed in in reincarnation
because he made me stop the car from Pescara to Rome when he
was on our major television station. And he walks out into the field
and he says, “I was here. I had a battle. I killed somebody here”. And
it made me look up the history of that battle with Cesare Borgia
(Duke of Valentinois, 1475-1507), the Borgias, which were the
children of Pope Alexander. And he said, “Paola, I remember.”
I think I wrote it in the book.  And I remember Patton or somebody
else remembering their reincarnated selves. So the man was really,
really interesting. He encompassed a lot of knowledge. And he said “I
was here at a period of history that I was supposed to do this”. So for
me, it was an honor to be his close friend. And I really, really miss
him.
Dr. Salla: This is, I think, very, very significant because Colonel
Corso's testimony, as you said, in the 1990s when he came out,
people were wanting to criticize and ridicule and dismiss it. But now
with this new openness, it's worth relooking at Colonel Corso's
testimony because he was very high ranking and he was actually in
charge of a military facility in the 1950s at Red Rock. I think it might
have been White Sands. I mean, you can correct me where was.
Paola: It was White Sands. Yes.
Dr. Salla: Okay. So he was in charge of a missile facility there at
White Sands, and he had a contact experience, which you just
described, which is itself very significant. But what I think is very, very
helpful and for people to know is that so he was there in the 1950s.
He had this contact experience with this gray looking extraterrestrial.
And the extraterrestrial at the end of the conversation said, “Well, if
you turn off the tracking the radar or the active tracking radar that
they have there, I'll be able to leave. So can you do that?” And soxtraterrestrial at the end of the conversation said, “Well, if
you turn off the tracking the radar or the active tracking radar that
they have there, I'll be able to leave. So can you do that?” And so

--- PAGE BREAK ---he end of the conversation said, “Well, if
you turn off the tracking the radar or the active tracking radar that
they have there, I'll be able to leave. So can you do that?” And so

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that was part of the agreement. So I thought that was really very
important because it showed that in the 1950s the U.S. military had
various types of electronic radar tracking, active radar technology,
directed energy weapons, if you want to say that could actually
impede or even take down extraterrestrial spacecraft. And that was in
the 1950s. So yes, maybe you want to talk about that because there
have been a lot of crashes and people often say, well if they're
coming from other solar systems, how can they be crashing here? I
mean, how could that be possible? Well, one of the things is that
they're being targeted by these sophisticated radar active radar
tracking systems and now more recently directed energy weapons.
Paola: Yes. If they listen to Dr. Greer's disclosure conference, I think
it was around June 9th, it was a man that worked in the South Pole
and they were working. They had directed neutrino weapons. So, I
mean, you have to study all of it to connect the dots. Yes, But also,
like in our case, the Trinity case, that Jack and I did. I'm convinced
that was meant to be because that was one month after the atomic
bomb and that craft, when it crashed, it was entirely together. There
was no debris. There was one panel missing with the angel hair that
was strewn all over the desert, but it hit a radio tower. That was a
radio tower that it had hit. But I've talked to people in New Mexico.
I've spent a lot of time in New Mexico. And evidently the radar
towers, some of them were mobile. You could move them and that
caused a problem. Now anymore. I don't know whether all this was
targeted for disclosure. If there's in other words, if this was a gift to
humanity. What is ironic to me is in 2023, we're looking at Tic Tacs
and we're looking at high flying craft. And we don't look back at what
was done and who the whistleblowers were in the early days,, the
real heroes of this who not only worked in the government and were
sanctioned by the government to talk, but the guys were actually in
the programs like Colonel Corso, who was in research and
development, who worked with General Trudeau, who did the Korean
War, and Michael Wolfe and Clifford Stone and my God, a list of
whistleblowers that spent their whole life before the government
disclosure now telling the people, look, UFOs are real. It's a
complicated subject. I remember blaming the government for
everything. And Colonel Corso said, “What are you talking about?”
He said “it changes every four years” He said, “Stop using the wordIt's a
complicated subject. I remember blaming the government for
everything. And Colonel Corso said, “What are you talking about?”
He said “it changes every four years” He said, “Stop using the word

--- PAGE BREAK ---subject. I remember blaming the government for
everything. And Colonel Corso said, “What are you talking about?”
He said “it changes every four years” He said, “Stop using the word

--- PAGE BREAK ---

government”. And I realized he was right. What government is
keeping the secret, because if it changes and it's also subcontractors
and it's also the military industrial complex, we're blaming the wrong
people. We're looking at the wrong thing as to secrecy.
Colonel Corso was okay with disclosure. The problem was there was
a lot of jealousy around the book. And Colonel Corso, when he died,
didn't have enough money. I mean, they didn't make enough money
to bury him.
So it was not until after his death that the book, because there was a
lawsuit against the book. And so it wasn't about money that
everybody thinks everything is about money. Sometimes there are
people in history who are destined to tell the truth. And I really
recommend that people read books and read the source of the
books. And his again, his manuscript is on Open Minds,tv, to read his
original manuscript, The Dawn of a New Age. If it's the dawn of a new
age, it must be a new world if you can take it. In other words, he's
looking at the world changing.
Dr. Salla: Well, these whistleblowers that have come forward, I
mean, they are brave and they also put their credibility and their
reputations on the line. So people like Philip Corso, they did actually
risk their reputation in coming forward and putting out this
information. But as you said they thought it was much more important
for the future of humanity to reveal this. Now you mentioned some of
the other whistleblowers you've worked with, but one of the ones that
you also got to interview and befriended Colonel Corso was
Command Sergeant Major Robert Dean. So you want to tell us about
that?
Paola: Well, God bless you, Michael, for mentioning Robert Dean.
My God, he was beautiful person. Robert Dean came to Italy early on
because I had invited him and Stephen Greer to a conference and
Robert Dean stayed at my apartment in Rome on Ponte Milvio, And
then he stayed at my apartment near the Vatican. And Robert Dean
was one of the most articulate spiritual people. He had worked in
NATO, in Brussels and he had seen paperwork that was called the
assessment. And actually, we had a copy of that in Italy and this is in
the 60s because this was the Cold War. So I remind everybody, youATO, in Brussels and he had seen paperwork that was called the
assessment. And actually, we had a copy of that in Italy and this is in
the 60s because this was the Cold War. So I remind everybody, you

--- PAGE BREAK ---he had seen paperwork that was called the
assessment. And actually, we had a copy of that in Italy and this is in
the 60s because this was the Cold War. So I remind everybody, you

--- PAGE BREAK ---

look at the disclosure now, but disclosure was happening in the 60s
about 40 years ago. And he understood that this was the problem
because when these UFOs used to go over East Berlin or Eastern
Germany, they thought they were American craft. And when the
UFOs used to come over Western Germany, they thought they were
Russian craft. So we could have started a Third World war. I mean,
this is serious. It was serious. So NATO, where he worked in in
Brussels, was looking at this because they were very interested in
UFOs. And later on, Robert, who was very spiritual, talked about
beings actually being on earth that he had had interchanges with.
He came out as a military man and was an incredible spokesman.
Most of these people are military men. I mean, look, Apollo 14
astronaut Edgar Mitchell actually went to the Press Club. I was there
when he was there and asked that this be taken seriously and
nothing was done until today. So these are serious people who
necessarily don't want their own TV shows or money or fame or
fortune. They figure what they want is real disclosure because they
really worked in these projects. They really were part of it. And thank
you. And he loved Colonel Corso. We invited Robert Dean, Wendell
Stevens, Carlos Diaz, and Bill Hamilton to Pescara. He was an
incredible researcher, Bill Hamilton. We invited all these guys in the
Congress and Desmond Leslie, Desmond Leslie, who wrote the
books on Adamski. The conversation that Desmond Leslie had with
Colonel Corso was incredible. Of course, I didn't know anything about
Adamski at the time, so when they were talking about him, I had to
go do my research later on. But these are important personages that
got together in Pescara in 1997 at a conference and exchanged. I
mean, they're all serious people. They're all military people. Wendell
Stevens. I mean, Colonel Wendell Stevens.
Dr. Salla: A very important I think that we remember these historic
whistleblowers that have come forward because their testimonies
were groundbreaking and they're still groundbreaking now because
as the media today is really fixated on people like David Fravor, Ryan
Graves, David Grush and others that are coming forward now. But
we need to remember that whistleblowers have been coming forward
for decades now. And in the 1990s, you were among the very, very
few people that would interview these whistleblowers and get their
stories and put it out there. And I remember Robert Dean, I did havefor decades now. And in the 1990s, you were among the very, very
few people that would interview these whistleblowers and get their
stories and put it out there. And I remember Robert Dean, I did have

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the 1990s, you were among the very, very
few people that would interview these whistleblowers and get their
stories and put it out there. And I remember Robert Dean, I did have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the privilege of interviewing him once, and he truly was very
articulate. And he really kind of like made it very clear that in the
1960s that there was a NATO document called the Assessment,
which actually described at least four different extraterrestrial
civilizations visiting and interacting with the Earth. And he said that
one of those civilizations looked so human that they could infiltrate
NATO itself, they could infiltrate political circles. And that freaked the
generals out. But that was really amazing. And he was saying that in
the 1990s. So the fact that you're. Bringing that you met these people
at that time that you interviewed them and that you're keeping their
memories alive. And I think it's very important today that we kind of
revisit people like Philip Corso, like Robert Dean and some of the
others that you mentioned.
Paola: Yes, well, actually, they stayed at my house in Rome. I mean,
my. My apartment in Rome was where they would stay when they'd
do a conference. So, I mean, I'd have dinner with them. I had Jesse
Marcel Jr and his family there, so I'm asking him about when he was
nine years old. I have a wealth of knowledge of first hand sources.
That's why I get so frustrated because I talk to the actual people. I
know what they said and I just released Connecting the Dots, which
has everybody from Hynek to Sitchin to Uri Geller to John Mack and
everything, because John Mack also stayed with me. So I did this
only for one reason. I feel like I always say I'm Barbara Walters, I just
want to archive what they actually said, not what the rumor was, what
we think, what their fans say, but what the actual people said. It's
historical for me. It's historical data. And yes, I was lucky enough, but
then I think to myself, was that luck or is someone pulling the strings
here? Because I'm doing the best I can to in chronology, to put all
those whistleblowers that I met and talked to keep their stories alive. I
mentioned Edgar Mitchell because he was Apollo 14 astronaut. If you
don't take him seriously, who do you want to take seriously? It's and
what's his name? God bless him, Clifford Stone. I don't know how
many times I was at his house, I don't know, in New Mexico.
And he's the one that is talking about having the manual for 57
different races so they could do first aid. He's not making that up. He
said there were drawings of these beings. Colonel Corso once said to
me, he said Paola, he said, I believe he said that the little gray is a
clone. He said, because we and the autopsy of the one that he sawhere were drawings of these beings. Colonel Corso once said to
me, he said Paola, he said, I believe he said that the little gray is a
clone. He said, because we and the autopsy of the one that he saw

--- PAGE BREAK ---f these beings. Colonel Corso once said to
me, he said Paola, he said, I believe he said that the little gray is a
clone. He said, because we and the autopsy of the one that he saw

--- PAGE BREAK ---

at Fort Belvoir is in the book Conversations with Colonel Corso. It's in
there. He compared him to a human. He saw bodies. In other words,
he said to me, but he said “we were terrified in the halls of the
Pentagon because we were afraid of who made them. We thought
that who made them could look like us and they would be walking
free in the in the halls of the Pentagon. We wouldn't be able to
recognize them. For Colonel Corso to say that that he also they were
nervous wreck about that.” They knew that there are cultures, cosmic
cultures, that look like us and are probably among us. So you have to
listen to what these very important people say and also you have to
see their records. I mean, I helped publish Clifford Stone's book. I
made him talk into a microphone for like five days. And I published
his book, Eyes Only. And he has his military records. I mean, he was
hired as a clerk and he ends up in Vietnam doing three crash
retrievals. These are historical facts of really important
whistleblowers.
Dr. Salla: Yes, I agree. I think these are whistleblowers that are
groundbreaking. And it's worth mentioning, I mean today because
David Grush spoke at a congressional hearing and talked about his
kind of like secondhand knowledge of these reverse engineering
projects concerning captured extraterrestrial technologies. But he
doesn't have first-hand evidence or he's not a direct witness of this.
But you spoke with Clifford Stone, who worked for 22 years with the
Army, and he was sent, as I recall, on a dozen crash retrieval
missions around the world where he brought back captured
extraterrestrial technologies. And you got, as you said, you got the
book based on his conversations, on his responses to your questions
and that's publicly available. And so people are saying, well where's
the evidence for David Gross's claims? Well, here you have firsthand
eyewitness testimony from Clifford Stone that you recorded. His book
is out there. So, yes, I think as people are starting to reconsider or
look at this issue again, especially concerning the capture of
extraterrestrial spacecraft or non-human craft, as they say that they
got to start really looking at these people like Clifford Stone, Colonel
Corso and others. So, yes, you want to just tell us your thoughts on
that?spacecraft or non-human craft, as they say that they
got to start really looking at these people like Clifford Stone, Colonel
Corso and others. So, yes, you want to just tell us your thoughts on
that?

--- PAGE BREAK ---man craft, as they say that they
got to start really looking at these people like Clifford Stone, Colonel
Corso and others. So, yes, you want to just tell us your thoughts on
that?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paola: Well Clifford Stone, I have to look at dates because anymore I
look at things in chronology during the Cold War. Well, a lot was
going on. I remember what I was doing in the 1960s. I was in high
school and I'm thinking, oh my God, this was all going on. Clifford
Stone told me that his first crash retrieval was in Indiantown Gap,
Pennsylvania, and I'm going 1969. My God, and then Colonel Corso
in 1960s and then Robert Dean, 1960s.
I'm going. Okay. What else was going on in the 1960s? And then
when we got to the 70s, I went back, of course, Michael, for you that I
love. It's called human type aliens and the early days and it starts
with Giant Rock. It's all a human space brother movement that was
there during the time that we had Yogananda because I think
whoever was coming was looking at the New age movement. And
then they stopped with the Betty and Barney Hill situation and went to
South America. And Michael, you and I have a background with the
South American contactees. They went to the Chilca Desert in Chile.
So I'm going, okay, so you got to do a timeline. The 1960s were very
important. It’s Clifford Stone's first crash retrieval that he did, because
he's a whistleblower, is 1969. The last one he said was in Georgia.
And one thing that he said that was really interesting for the people
and it's not out there, it's in my conversations with him, was that
anymore they didn't need to take bodies, that they would leave them
if the bodies were dead. They would leave them there and their own
would come and get them the next day.
And I said, “You have an agreement like that. I mean, you guys have
worked out all these years an agreement that they've got enough
bodies so you can just leave them out there?”
And he said, “Yes,” and he was talking about that with great respect.
No fear, great respect, just like Colonel Corso said. “Friend” he said
“neither”. If I could get the original people that worked and that don't
have their own bias, that don't have that, don't do it for fame, fortune
or their own TV show. Poor Clifford Stone was always, I helped him
with the book and that he got something from the book, but he was
always living in very dire straits there. And I even spent my birthday
with him and his wife, Hon. from Vietnam.
And when you hear the real people and their real intent, Colonel
Corso is real. And his intention was his three grandsons. You cannd I even spent my birthday
with him and his wife, Hon. from Vietnam.
And when you hear the real people and their real intent, Colonel
Corso is real. And his intention was his three grandsons. You can

--- PAGE BREAK ---

kind of…I will support these people. And I guess I've become their
voice, because they're telling you the truth, in a timeline. And again,
please look at the timeline for the people that are listening to this.
Dr. Salla: I'd like to bring up now your most recent book that you co-
wrote with Jacques Vallée Trinity. And right now there is a lot of
interest in Robert Oppenheimer, the developer and the pioneer
behind the Atomic bomb. And so, yes, you mentioned Oppenheimer
in this book, and you got to interview some survivors who saw a
crashed spacecraft back in, I think it was 1945. So you want to tell us
about your latest book?
Paola: Well, it's so funny because our latest book cover looks like the
Playbill of the movie. And we did this years ago. I'm wondering what's
going on. Oppenheimer and the Manhattan Project scientists would
go to a place called the Owl Bar and Cafe. It's on the outskirts of the
Pan-American highway. It's on the crossroads there. It was the only
watering hole, and it had groceries. And behind there was the
headquarters of these scientists. So I learned about these two little
boys who saw this crash a month after the bomb. But I was in Italy,

--- PAGE BREAK ---it had groceries. And behind there was the
headquarters of these scientists. So I learned about these two little
boys who saw this crash a month after the bomb. But I was in Italy,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and my first thought was, why doesn't somebody cover this? They're
still alive. And I didn't realize that Destiny would have it, just like I
ended up in the next to Colonel Corso, that it would be me because
the son of the pilot contacted me, the pilot that flew over and told me
about this. And they're not Indian boys. They were Hispanic. They
were on horseback. One was seven, one was nine. But the thing is
this that I want to impress on people when we went there, I started
working on it in 2013 when Remy died. Remy was and I'll be honest
about it, he wanted to kind of cash in on this and I said, “No, take me
to the place” and so forth. So the thing is that everybody knew Remy
before me because Timothy Good went to see Remy, and Timothy
Good was one of the best researchers. He went to see him in Gig
Harbor. Jaime Maussan went to see Remy. James Fox went to see
Remy, but Remy wouldn't disclose where the location was.
So when it was time, I went with Jose, who was open to all the
questions. But Jose knew the people at the Owl Bar and Cafe. So
when I went there, he knew their cousins. He was friends with
everybody is, what do you call it, related to everybody. So I was able
to ask about Oppenheimer. I was able to ask about the scientists.
They did not know. The scientists were scientists. They thought they
were salesmen because they carry briefcases that were tied to their
wrists. And they were they were in Oppenheimer's case, he wore a
hat, and that was the only place they could buy groceries when they
came to the Trinity site. So I could do research on a whole
background that you see in the movie. And the boys knew saw
Oppenheimer in there. And because Jose used to buy the hamburger
for the Owl Bar and Cafe. I mean, you have to do field research. Jose
has a photographic memory. He can tell you the day that it
happened, not only the date, but was a Thursday or a Tuesday. I
don't know how he got that. Maybe he got it because he had contact.
I don't know how he got that. The guy is incredible. And so he was
able to tell us about the contact. They didn't know what it was. There
was no Kenneth Arnold there was no UFO in anywhere. They didn't
even use the word yet. There was no Roswell. Just saw an avocado
with a dome on it. And Jose, to this day, to this day, and I've been
working on it for ten years says “they were crying like babies or like
when you shoot a rabbit and it's dying”. Now for somebody that gave
me that detail. It's in his mind. He thought they were hurt. He was
going to go in there. And then the younger kid starts crying and hisyou shoot a rabbit and it's dying”. Now for somebody that gave
me that detail. It's in his mind. He thought they were hurt. He was
going to go in there. And then the younger kid starts crying and his

--- PAGE BREAK ---and it's dying”. Now for somebody that gave
me that detail. It's in his mind. He thought they were hurt. He was
going to go in there. And then the younger kid starts crying and his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

eyes are filled with smoke because of the burning mesquite. Then we
go and find two other witnesses that were present, not at the crash,
but five years later, that saw the burnt crash site.
Sabrina played with the foil because they had no they had no toys,
she said. She put it back in the plastic. She and Faustina, her cousin,
would play with the fiber optic. While they're not fiber optics, they
were angel hair. I don't know what it was that was lit up all the time.
They decorated the trees with it because there was no electricity.
Sabrina had not seen her cousin for about 40 years, and they had the
reunion in front of us and they and Faustino did not know we wrote a
book. He did not know there was a crash and repeated the same
story about the angel hair. So the work was done meticulously,
meticulously. Some of the details may not be perfect, but the fact that
Remy and Josie did not see each other for 50 years had the exact
same story, because I flew also to Gig Harbor to interview Remy
before I got involved with Josie. So it's an incredible story, but it
shows me that you exploded an atomic bomb. You catch somebody's
attention. And maybe those beings wanted the story told that we are
not alone.
Dr. Salla: Now you've been interviewing whistleblowers since the mid
1990s. And before that you were researching the UFO phenomenon.
So was it really working with the whistleblowers that kind of brought
in this element of personal danger for you? I mean, you mentioned
that a little bit. So maybe just say you personally dedicating yourself
to this research. How dangerous was it for you?
Paola: Well I never think about that. It's like I’m doing the work. I'm
going and I don't have a stake in the outcome. I'm not making money.
All came from my pocket. I want to donate. I spent all… my kids are
so angry. I never think about the danger. My kids do, though. And
when I was doing the Michael Wolff case, I had two car bombs, I just
did a master class on Michael Wolff, by the way, go off on two
different occasions near my apartment in Ponte Milvio. It was only
four stories, but I didn't understand what was happening. And I was
flying to Hartford, Connecticut. And he had been in the CIA and he
was talking to Hal Puthoff and he was all involved with Stubblebine
and him and all those guys. And I didn't realize. I just recorded whatg to Hartford, Connecticut. And he had been in the CIA and he
was talking to Hal Puthoff and he was all involved with Stubblebine
and him and all those guys. And I didn't realize. I just recorded what

--- PAGE BREAK ---cticut. And he had been in the CIA and he
was talking to Hal Puthoff and he was all involved with Stubblebine
and him and all those guys. And I didn't realize. I just recorded what

--- PAGE BREAK ---

they told me. That was all I was interested in.
And then with Colonel Corso, I had been warned off him. They told
me to stop talking about Corso when I moved back into the United
States. Well, it's out there like, who cares? I'm convinced a very few
people care. And when I was working on Trinity and I was about to
go to question Sabrina. She was back in LA. She got a call that said,
“Paula Harris is not coming. We're going to take care of this.”
And I'm wondering who we were, who “we are going to take care of
this”. And just before Clifford Stone died, confessing all the
dangerous stuff, but two weeks before he died, two men in black
vans went up to his door and said, “We came here to collect your
files. Paula Harris sent us.” Well, of course that isn't true. So God
bless him. Clifford took a gun and said, “No, Paula Harris did not
send you.”
So that caused a problem for me. I didn't know who the two guys in
the black vans were, but I had to make sure that right after he died,
just like with Remy and so forth, that we could get those so we could
box up those files and get them to Rice University. So we boxed up
23 boxes, thanks to his friend from Bulgaria. We boxed them up and
sent them to Rice. So there's archives of Clifford Stone’s at Rice and
there's John Mack, there's Whitley Strieber, there's Wendell
Stephens, there's me. All this stuff is at Rice.
I don't think they know what they have because they don't know the
stories. But all this stuff is now at Rice University, and those are the
cases that I can remember of possible danger. But that's not… I don't
even think about that. I'm of the opinion, Michael, you're going to
laugh that really nobody cares. It doesn't matter to the average
person. So I'm just doing historical stuff.
Dr. Salla: Well, I think it is very important for people that are now
starting to pay attention to this. And they are they are wanting to dig
deeper into what is the backstory? What's what has really happened
that goes much further than just the 2004 Tic tac sighting off the
coast of San Diego, that there's a big, big history here now. You've
written, I don't know, is it about a dozen books now? And a lot of
those books have your recorded interviews with quite a few of the
people that we've been talking about. So where do people go to findwritten, I don't know, is it about a dozen books now? And a lot of
those books have your recorded interviews with quite a few of the
people that we've been talking about. So where do people go to find

--- PAGE BREAK ---w, is it about a dozen books now? And a lot of
those books have your recorded interviews with quite a few of the
people that we've been talking about. So where do people go to find

--- PAGE BREAK ---

your books Paola?
Paola: Well the ones that we've been talking about now, Trinity is on
Amazon Conversations with Colonel Corso. I have just released, I
think, the most complete book. It's brand new, updated because it
has the daughter of Kenneth Arnold. I'm the only journalist that ever
interviewed her and it has Jacques Vallee in there, and that's called
Connecting the dots. Making sense of the UFO phenomenon. It has
Hynek. It has Monsignor Balducci. It has everybody that I
interviewed, especially when I was in Europe. And How do you speak
to A Ball of Light is another one I did. I did the Dan Burisch case. I did
the Charles Hall case and Stargate to a New Reality is another book
that I did. And I don't know whether the Dan Burisch, by the way,
that's another interesting case. A man who worked at S-4 and I have
to laugh. I really have to laugh to share with you because on social
media, there's this picture of Bob Lazar and it says, I told you so. I'm
going. Yes. To me. And I had gone to the Little Alien Inn and I had
spoken to his mother in law. So I talked to the families of these
people. And I and I was thinking to myself most people just have an
opinion based on nothing. They don't read the interviews. They don't
they don't know the people. They just have this opinion. No bubbles
are flying and so forth and whatever. Billy Meier, don't even go there.
Jaime Maussan just told me he redigitized and went back to Billy
Meier to do some work. And I'm going. America will never see it.
What a shame. I went to see Billy Meier and Schmitt Rudy in
Switzerland. All of these things that are so important that people just
blow off. They blow them off without going there or checking on it or
anything are coming up to light. And I have to thank you, Michael, for
looking at the historical angle of this and for realizing the disclosure
came before 2023.
Dr. Salla: Yes. Well, it's happened many decades ago. I mean, you
definitely have been on the cutting edge of finding these
whistleblowers and contactees and bringing their testimony into the
public arena. You've got about a dozen books that people can find.
And also you teach courses. You teach courses. The Exopolitics
Institute has a certificate program and a diploma program. And so I
think you teach about four courses, 4 or 5 courses as part of that..
And also you teach courses. You teach courses. The Exopolitics
Institute has a certificate program and a diploma program. And so I
think you teach about four courses, 4 or 5 courses as part of that.

--- PAGE BREAK ---courses. You teach courses. The Exopolitics
Institute has a certificate program and a diploma program. And so I
think you teach about four courses, 4 or 5 courses as part of that.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And so you want to tell us about what you're teaching. I think the next
semester begins in early September. So what course are you going
to be teaching next September?
Paola: Well, you know, I it' I think it's called Quantum Disclosure.
And it's basically what I was talking to Edgar Mitchell and he told me
about his epiphany. And then he started talking about quantum
physics and how he had Noetic Sciences and Dean Raden and so
forth. I thought we should look at the scientific part and how it leads
to consciousness. And I'm going to tell everybody right now, I've
done all the data work. I probably won't do this, that kind of work
again. I've kind of graduated to consciousness research. So
Quantum Cosmology talks about what Edgar Mitchell told me about
looking at everything, being connected and his experience in space.
But also I think quantum cosmology talks about what other
whistleblowers and what people like looking at the Mars situation,
other people that have come and connected dots and connected with
a spirituality of some kind or raising of consciousness. So that, of
course, I think is 106. I told you that I would do the human type alien
course to the cosmic Brother course, which is my favorite of all
because I have details from all over the world of contact. But I think
we're coming to a point where I had this conversation with Jacques
Vallee, which is really incredibly deep about the reason for sightings,
the reason for contact, and it is to get your attention. And when they
get your attention, your whole life changes. And Jacques has his
thoughts about it being a simulation. And it's very interesting because
if this is about consciousness, then I got to get off the data stuff that
I've been doing and start to switch over into consciousness. So I just
did a show out of Japan and I plan on, I think, going to Japan and
talking about consciousness. But in the meantime, the Exopolitics
Institute has legitimate courses you can take for a certificate and my
students are amazing and they're from all over the world. All over the
world.
Dr. Salla: So yes, people can go to ExopoliticsInstitute.org to learn
more about the Institute's certificate program, the different courses
that are taught. I think we have about ten courses now that are
available to get a certificate and diploma. You're one of the keymore about the Institute's certificate program, the different courses
that are taught. I think we have about ten courses now that are
available to get a certificate and diploma. You're one of the key

--- PAGE BREAK ---

instructors. And Paola, I just want to kind of acknowledge the
incredible work you've done. I mean, you've been working in this field
from 1979. It was a labor of love at the beginning and continues to be
a labor of love. Also living life on the bleeding edge sometimes with
the all experiences that you took. So I just want to kind of thank you
for your dedication to this field, for bringing out all of these incredible
whistleblower testimonies. More recently, you're bringing out a lot of
contactee testimonies. That's wonderful. And so, yes, I think you're a
national treasure and I hope people go visit your site paolaharris.com
and kind of like support your work and buy your books and register
for your courses and just get the word out. So I want to thank you,
Paola, for being on Exopolitics Today.
Paola: No, thank you for asking me. Michael.
Announcer: You have been listening to Exopolitics Today with Dr.
Michael Salla. Please remember to like share and subscribe to this
channel. Join or start a conversation in the comments. Take the time
to explore the vast library of bestselling books, webinars and
podcasts by Dr. Salla, visit exopoliticstoday.com.