AT THE TEXAS THEATRE
Statements of Witnesses - Mrs. Julia POSTAL, April 2, 1964* 7 H 8-14
She began by describing her long experience working for motion
picture theatres in various places, and said this was the slack season
and after working in the office she opened the box office at 12:45 and
remained there until hbout f>. She sold tickets and asked, nIs there a
ticket-taker inside the theatre?" she replied affirmatively and described
him as "just an usher who works the concession and tears the tickets ..."
On the day of the assassination, she opened the box office as
usual and the usher, whose name is Warren Burroughs, nicknamed flButoh",
was stationed inside the door at the entrace to the theatre.
She had a transistor radio in her box office and turned it on upon
hearing the bad news from her daughter. She had not heard that the
President was dead. She was listening to KLIP. (p.9)
She heard what she described as the official announcement of the
President's death "just about the time all chaos broke loose."
about
For reasons that are not clear. Ball asked her/how many people had
gotten into the theatre abemtz by "about 1:15 or so?" This certainly
was lfcter than i:i5. she estimated "14 or 24. I believe it was 24."
She said she heard the sirens "just about the time we opened ..." She
said, "police were racing back and forth ... on Jefferson." Then this
exohange:
"Mrs. Postal. This man, yes; he ducked into the box office and -
I don't know if you are familiar with the theatre. '
Mr. Ball. Tea; I have seen the theatre.
Mrs. Postal. You have? Well, he was coming from east going west.
In other words, he ducked right in.
Mr. Ball. Ducked in, what do you mean? He bad come around the
corner -

--- PAGE BREAK ---tre.
Mrs. Postal. You have? Well, he was coming from east going west.
In other words, he ducked right in.
Mr. Ball. Ducked in, what do you mean? He bad come around the
corner -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 - Postal
Mrs. Postal, Yes; and when the sirens went by he had a panicked
look on his Pace, and he ducked in,
Mr, Ball. Now, as the car went by, you say the man ducked in, had
you seen him before the car went by, the police went by?
Mrs. Bostal. No, sir; I was looking up, as I say, when the cars
passed, as you know, they make a tremendous noise, and he ducked in as
my boss went that way to get in his car." (p.10)
Note this is in clear contradiction to Brewer*s testimony in
several respects. Brewer had clearly stated the police car with the
siren blowing were receding into the distance at the time the man moved
toward the movie. Mrs. Postil describes the look on the man*s face when
the oars went by. Also, dearly, she jaw the man, unless she is making
all of this up. (p.10)
In saying "ducked in", she meant not into the theatre but "into
i;he outer part of it", which she calls "Just around the comer" presumably
off the straight sidewalk and into the theatre area.
says.
She said that after Brewer went in to look around "he came and juidpc
//ell, he didn't see him, and I says, 'Well, he has to be there.*" Althoug
the outside doors of the theatre were closed, she neither saw nor heard
him enter. Ihls is because she had left the box office to look west in
the direction the police oars had gone*
She then recounts her call to the police and ctuotes them as sayingf
"Well, it fits the description," but she had given no description, and
Brewer's description, while close to that of Oswald, is completely dif-
ferent from the broadcast description. Why, then, if the polled said it,
should they have said that it fit the description? Unless at that point
anybody would have fit the description. Then she said she told the police
what he looked like. She said he was medium height, ruddy looking (p.ll).that it fit the description? Unless at that point
anybody would have fit the description. Then she said she told the police
what he looked like. She said he was medium height, ruddy looking (p.ll).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 - Postal
After the apprehension of Oswald, she said "some officers came In
the box office and used the phone, said, *1 think we have got our man
ac
on both/counts.* 'What two accounts?* and said, 'Well, Officer Tlpplt's,*
shocked me,because Officer Tlpplt used to work part time for us years ago,
I didn't know him personally,"
Why should any policeman, with all those police cars and all those
police radios there, have used the theatre phone? Unless he wanted no
record of the call perhaps? And how could any policeman then have decided
that the one man committed both crimes on the basis of the descriptions
available to the police, assuming he had and remembered both?
Tlpplt had moonlighted at the theatre on Friday and Saturday nights.
She had stayed In the box office after the police arrived. She describes
ftswald as being held by 4 or 5 officers, with his ams behind his back,
and one officer holdinghlm underneath the ohln because he had used "pro-
fuse" language.
She said Oswald did not have any bruises or cuts onhls face.
In several different ways, she said Oswald couldn't have said any-
thing because the polioe were holding him in a manner to preclude his
making any sound, (p.12)
She said that on or about Dec. 4 she went down to the "homicidal
bureau". Ball had her affidavit In his hand.
Asked about the call to the police department by the policeman,
she said It was before Oswald was taken from inside the theatre. Asked
how Oswald got Into the theatre without Burroughs seeing him, she
recounts the disousslon she and Burroughs had In which they concluded
he could have done so as children had, by winning right up into the
baloony. (p.13)
She says Exhibit 150, the shirt, is something like the shirt theon she and Burroughs had In which they concluded
he could have done so as children had, by winning right up into the
baloony. (p.13)
She says Exhibit 150, the shirt, is something like the shirt the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 _ Postal
man was wearing, but she couldn't say it was the same. She said his
shirt was not tucked into his pants andJ
"Mr. Ball. When he went in was it tuoked in his pants when he
went in?
Mrs/Postal. No, sir; because I remember he came flying around
the corner, because his hair was and shirt was kind of waving. "(p.Uj.)
This is net hing like what she, or Brewer, or anybody else said.
It's pure imagination whioh Ball ignores without correcting.