Statement of Witnesses-Inspector J.Herbert SAwYER,April/i96l
8
Deposition to Belin
6H315-25
If there were nothing else about the Warren Cormission and its
work to make an investigator suspicious (and unfortunately,there is
almost nothing that does not make an investigator suspicious),the
deposition of Inspector Sawyer would make him worry about both the Cpm-
mission and its staff and the police.The nature of the questions
asked,more important, the nature of the questions not asked, the
nature of the answers, and the nature of the missing answers,all of
these things are so flagrantly incompetent and incomplete as to clearly.
infer collusion between the Commission's staff and the police.
Collaterally, in this deposition it becomes clear that the so-
called complete log of all radio transmissions by all police agencies
inDa11as (17H 363-494;Exhbit 705,dated March 23, 1963) isianything
butcomplete.
During Sawyer's deposition, two exhibits were mentioned
numbered A and B,and they appear in 21 H 388-l4o0.This one is signed
by Sgt.G.D.Henslee,and on December 23,1963,was addressed to Chief
Curry.
In Vol.XXIII, Exhibit 1974, pp.832-940, accompanied by an FBI
memorandum dated August ll, 196l (it may eventually become necesaary
to do a comparison and analysis of all three of these).I have sum-
marized the first one.)
Sawyer lacked a half year of completing highschool.He is a 23-
year veteran of the Dallas police force, whose previous service after
business school was as credit manager in a jewelry store and as "a door
man at the Muralof theBakerHotel.
He was on Main Street where he "had charge of the crowd detail"

--- PAGE BREAK ---vice after
business school was as credit manager in a jewelry store and as "a door
man at the Muralof theBakerHotel.
He was on Main Street where he "had charge of the crowd detail"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2Sawyer
was real thick and completely surrounded the car,but I did as soon as
      o     g  s 4
portant because he was the one who set up "the" or "a2 commaad post,
it is never made clear whether or notthis was the only command post,
according to the Commission,he is the.one who broadcast the description
the Commission says was "most probably" Brennan's and which clearly was
not Brennans.It may have contained information from Brennan,but if
it came in its entirety Erom Brennan,it contained.information that
Brennan did not give the Commission and at no point said he gave the
police.
Saayer headed west on Main Street as soon as the crowd cleared
for no special reason-just because the car was pointed that way.He

the crowd "at the time,the radio broadcast came in about a lot of ac-
tivitydown on.thelower end around Houston and
Elm”
He is not asked
to even approximate the time.Belin asked mim if he remembers "what
Decker tell his office to get all his men over to the Depository Build-
ing (p.316). If the sheriff didn't mention the Depository Building;
there was another broadcast at about this time that did.This was on
here nor elsewhere is he asked to state the time ofhis arrival.He
parked in frnnt of the main eentrance.Asked what he did then,he said
"immediately went into - well, talked to some of the officers around
there who told methe storythat theyhad thought some shots had come
from one of the floors in the building,.and I think the fifth floor was

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll, talked to some of the officers around
there who told methe storythat theyhad thought some shots had come
from one of the floors in the building,.and I think the fifth floor was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3-Sawyer
what had actually happened,except there had been a shooting there at
the time the Presidentis motorcade had gone by."
Ina later reconstruction,the Commission attempts to establish
the time ofhis arrival at 12:37,and Ibelieve it was later.But is
it not incredible that with all the people so anxious to talk about the
shooting of the President,including those who had seen his head almost
blown off, that none of the police could tell Insp. Sawyer what had
Sawyer's
happened?Without xxk omission, the following is quoted from Mr.xfawgxrx
believed worked in the building.The elevator was just to the right of
the main entrance,and we went to the top floor,which was pointed out
tome by this other man as being the floor that we were talking about.
We had talked about the fifth floor.yAnd we went back to the storage
area and looked around and didn't see anything."
Note the generality of his language, the lack of identification
ofeither"aman"or the policeofficers.Note also the failure ofthe
Commission to ask for identification. Note the lack of any effort to
find out from him from whom he obtained his information.
But the mostglaring thing of all is why,when he had reason to
believe the shots had come,as he says it here,from the fifth floor,
he wentup to the top floor.Why in the world should he have gone ang
place except thatplace from which he thought the shots had comeBut
Mr.Belin seems to think it perfectly natural to.go someplace else,for
he asked no questions about it.He asks about the route;he was anxious
to know whether it was a freight or passenger elevator that was right
inside the front door,whether or not it was pushbutton operatpred;and
Sawyer can't even be specific about these inconsequential questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L-Sawyerssenger elevator that was right
inside the front door,whether or not it was pushbutton operatpred;and
Sawyer can't even be specific about these inconsequential questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L-Sawyer

again he is not asked what man. He is not asked a description,but as
it later turns out it would have served no purpose to ask him for any
kind of description.
So they went up to the top floor.(p.317)
Doyou think he went to where the shots came from then?No.
When he didn't see anything'"that was out of the ordinary," on the top
floor,"I immediately came back downstairs to check the security on the
building.
Imagine an inspector who hadn't checked on the security of the
building as the fery first thing when he heard shots had come from there!
He posted 2 men at the front entrance "with instructions not to
let anyone in or out." Asked abo ut the rear entrance, he said "well, I

they
were covered, although he told me that ye were already covered."
In its repwrt the Commission has already shown that, as a matter
of fact; the rear door was not covered, the Commissinn·refers to only
one door,a walk-through door.Neither the Cormission nor the inspector
the front entrance of the building?", he does not give an answer in
terms of timd, and in fact he really doesn't give an answer in any kind
 o
there.There were officers all around the front.The only thing I dont
think had been done by the time I got there, was the snstructions not to
letanybody in'or out."
Howin theworld is abuildingcovered ifthere isfree ingress
and egress? And what good did all of the officers do there if they
weren't ppb preventing people from going in or out? How in the world
can this be considered as covering the building?There are no questions

--- PAGE BREAK ---did all of the officers do there if they
weren't ppb preventing people from going in or out? How in the world
can this be considered as covering the building?There are no questions

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5-Sawyer
from Mr.Belin who says,"all right..." Asked if he gave the instructions
before or after he went up to.the top floor,Sawyer said it was after he
came down.
 Jo a  z,     4a ses u u
ing off the building." Belin's very next sentence is a convenim t mis-
representation of Sawyer's previous testimony. Belin said,"I believe
you said thatbefore you got to the buildingor atabout the time you got
to the building, you thought that you heard something about theTexas
School
Rbx Book Depository over the radio?" and Sawyer agreed.This is not
what Sawyer had testified to.He had testified(pp.3l6-7) that while
he was still going "real slow down the street because of the people
crossing...
."he heard.the broadcast in question.
Belinis trying hard
the building before it was sealed,if,in fact,it was ever sealed。
Belin then refers to the radio log which,asI have already indicated,
In
a different version,as soon becomes clear, amd the very first sentence
ofmquotation from it,there is a reference to a“station break"which
does not appear in the Commission's version,Exhibit 7o5. The version
from which Sawyer now testifies has. important information also missing
from Exhibit 705,the identification of the various code numbers.（p.3l8)
After some confusing remarks about the log,Belin quotes from the
ait."
seemed toknow who the shots had been aimed at,etc.
Of course,Belin doesn'tquestion him about this,even though.he
has been listening to the radio,and even though he has been testifying

--- PAGE BREAK ---med toknow who the shots had been aimed at,etc.
Of course,Belin doesn'tquestion him about this,even though.he
has been listening to the radio,and even though he has been testifying

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6-Sawyer
aboutwhathe hears.
Then Belin quotes the 1a:34 entry in which No.136 states,"A
ing."
So before Sawyer got there,he should have,and others certainly
did know,that thepolicehadbeen informedofthe origin ofthe shots
in this building.y This addresses itself to his failure to ascertain
very
security as the/first step.Belin says,and Sawyer agrees, this this
was the first reference in the log to the Texas School Book Depository
Building.So from this we know, from Sawyer's
owntebtimonyonpp.3l6-7,
that at 12:3l Sawyer was still bogged down in the crowd some place on
Msin Street.
Now Sawyer says that when he got outof the car,he spoke not to
people but to officers who told him "that their infornation was that the
note the
Again kkxsxxs clear contraxt with his pre vious statement.Whether or not
the shots came from the fifth floor,he knew the building ana the offi-
cers there knew.Note he still is not asked the time of his arrival at
thebuilding.
Now Belin gets him back in the elevator and tells him his purpose
(p.319).Sawyer places the total elapsed time at 3 minutes,which would
seem like a fast trip, for even a Dallas cop, with the conditions that
obtainedthereand thecharacteroftheelevators。
Belin then pulls a slick one which,apparently,up until this time
he has gotten away with.In an effort to establish the time the buiiding
he
The ever-willing Sawyer agreed. But of course, as we have already seen,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich,apparently,up until this time
he has gotten away with.In an effort to establish the time the buiiding
he
The ever-willing Sawyer agreed. But of course, as we have already seen,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7-Sawyer
this is not the cased We haw no idea how far away, how bogged down in
traffic Swayer was at 12:3l,but we do know that he was bogged down and
was not at the Depository Building at 12:34. Nonetheless, this language
isquoted in the rpport at the top ofp.l56 as the earliest time atwhich
the building could have been sealed. In conceding that the time might
have been later, the Commisioon cannot avoid the charge that it deliber-
ately liKed.The question is not howlate the building was sealed,but
how early.Note also that this is in reference to only the front door.
Sawyer has no knowledge of what happened at any place where he personally
while he said, "when I arrived, the sergeant told me he had the building
sealed off",both he and the Commission knew this was false.The Com-
mission in its report at the same pomnt notes that at 12:36 the building
was not sealed (which suits the Commission's purposes at that point very
nicely)and,of course,Sawyer himself had stationed officers at the
frontdoor。
In addition, Sawyer concedes his were "the first instructions to
stop traffic from coming in and out of the front door".(p.320)
He identifies his regular radio code call as No. 9. Consulting
the log,the first reference to Sawyer is after l2:lo.It is before
12:43,but the traffic reflected in the log.indicates it was very close
to 12:43 and not close to 12:40.His first broadcast asked for morep
manpower which he said was available on Main Street.
The nextentry for-No.9isafter12:l3and before12:l5.It
reads, "The wanted person in this is a slender white male about 30,
five feet ten,165,carrying what looks tobea30-30or some type of
winchester."
AsI haveelsewhere,
want to point out again, thisis not Brennan's
description; not only of the man,but of the weapon. Brenan made not ten,165,carrying what looks tobea30-30or some type of
winchester."
AsI haveelsewhere,
want to point out again, thisis not Brennan's
description; not only of the man,but of the weapon. Brenan made no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8-Sawyer
reference to a weapon. The home office then asks, "Any clothing descrip-
tion?" and he replied, "Current witness can't remember that."
 a
in his testimony as,for example,on p.ll5 of Vol.III where he.described
the clothing in irmmediate response to a question as "light-colored clothes
more of.a khaki color." Brennan also refers to the clothes at other point
in his testimony。
broadcast information?  Remember, this is basic in the Cormission's
reconstruction-and in its report.Sawyer concedes he also rebroadcast
using both chennels.And then there is something about the srrest of
Charles Givens, described by Sawyer as having "a previous record in the
narcotics." Sawyer also says of Givens, "he was supposed to have been
a witness to the man being on that'floor."
Here it becomes apparent that not Oswald, but Givens, was the first
one reported missing. Sawyer's language is specific in referring to this
"colored Boy" as "the one employee who was missingy... "  (p.321)

reads, "He.(Givens) wasn't accounted for, and that he was suppose to have
some information about the man that did the shooting." This was too ob-

did the shooting,did you know at that time who did the shooting? Sayer
replied, "No." Sawyer never does find this reference in the log.So
either the log is wrong or Sawyer is wrong.There can be no excuse for
thelogbeingwrong.
Again,on the question of Brennan being the
"mostprobable"
source
with the specific nature of Brennan's testinony about the sixth floor,

--- PAGE BREAK ---There can be no excuse for
thelogbeingwrong.
Again,on the question of Brennan being the
"mostprobable"
source
with the specific nature of Brennan's testinony about the sixth floor,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9-Sawyer
this excerpt from the log at about 12:l5"A11 the information we have
received,indicates it did come from the fifth or fourth of that build
ing."
This was from headquarters to Sawyer.Sawyer agrees to this
12:45 p.m., and before 12:48 p.m.?"
As I have already indicated, Sawyer doesn't remember anything spe-
asks, "where did you get that description from?"
"Mr. Sawyer. That description came to me mainly from one witness
Mr. Belin. Do you know this person's name?
Mr.Sawyer.I do not.
Mr.Belin..Do you know anything about him, what he was wearing?
Mr.Sawyer.Except that he was-I donit remember what he was
wearing.I remember that he was a white man and that he wasn't young and
heAwasn't old. He was there. That is the only two things that I
Icanre-
member about him.
Mr. Belin. What age would you categorize as young? (p.322)
Mr.Sawyer..Around 35 would be my best recollection of it,but
ut could be a few years either way.
Mr.Belin.Do you remember if he was tall or short, or can't you
rememberanything about him?

aboutthat.
Mr.Belin.Do you remember where he said he was standing when he
θ
saw thay person with the'rifle?
Mr.Sawyer.I'didnt go into detail with him except that from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---out him?

aboutthat.
Mr.Belin.Do you remember where he said he was standing when he
θ
saw thay person with the'rifle?
Mr.Sawyer.I'didnt go into detail with him except that from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10-Sawyer
best of my recollection, he was standing where he could have seen him.
But there were too many people coming up with questions to go into de-
tail. I got the description and sent him on over to the Sheriffis
Office."
It is obvaaus that Sawyer is not being truthful。He is not asked
person's name?" and he replied,"I do not." Unless he is lying,he is
saying it could not have been Brennan because by the time of his testi-
mony he certainly knew all about Brennan.Note also his reponse to the
question about clothing.Brennan, as the Commission has gone to great
pains to point out in seeking his identification by himself and by others
was wearing a helmet.A helmet on a civilian is aconspicuous item of
clothing.Brennan'sown testimony had him dogging theheels of the
police.If this had been Brennan, Sawyer is a liar.He could never have
ignored or forgotten thehelmet.And note how conspicuous it is that
Belin never asks any question intended to find out whether or not Brennan
was wearing a helmet or, in fact, the direct question, "Was he wearing a
helmet? This is such an obvious thing for Belin to do that his failure
to do so certainly cannot be considered an oversight.
And here we have a police inspector, notjust an ordinary flatfoot,
to whom identificatb ns are part ofhiseveryday life,who not only re-
membered nothing about the man,but won't even approximate.He can't.
remember,for exaraple,whether the man was tall or short.All he will
be specific about is "I was real hazy about that." Sawyer then says,
about the source of the shots, "The ones that I talked to were pointing
out one of the uppper floors ... I thought was the fifth floor."
But even here,having avoided it all the way through the testimony
up to this point, how can Belin avoid the question that was just crying
to be asked, "Did you send anybody to search that floor?" Neither thishere,having avoided it all the way through the testimony
up to this point, how can Belin avoid the question that was just crying
to be asked, "Did you send anybody to search that floor?" Neither this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1l-Sawyer
question, nor any question about when any organized search was ordered,
teered when Sawyer is asked for any.additional infomation he might have.
Again, the obviousness of this question is so clear that the famlure
to ask it cannot be regarded as an oversight.

primary description witness". Of him in response Sawyer says, "pointed
out the window which I now note to be the sixth floor,but when I talked
to him,I thought it was the fifth floor."Belin then asks if Sawyer
spoke to people who tried to identify the source of the shots by the
direction from which they thought the sounds came.  Sawyer is emphatic
in his answer, which is, "Correct. That is correct..Some of them
claimed that they had heard shots,or thought they heard shots from over
other sources were given.(p.32o) Sawyerl's reply was, "No." And then
he says even the number of these was.very small.
Again we have such an obvious question forBelin to have asked
and this deals with the specific eyewitness descriptions in the Commis-
sion's possession of people who saw puffs of smoke from trees xn and
the shooting had come from the arcade. No o question here about the
arcade or the trees or otherpoints that other witnesses had testified
to,thefence,etc。
In reference to whatSawyerdid when he heard about an unidentified
tween this and the police attitude toward other situations,such as the
misrepresented one about Benavides and the reasons for his not appearing
at the lineup to identify Oswald.（Benavides was far and away the closest

--- PAGE BREAK ---oward other situations,such as the
misrepresented one about Benavides and the reasons for his not appearing
at the lineup to identify Oswald.（Benavides was far and away the closest

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12-Sawyer
person to the shooting scene,a distance of from 15 to 25 feet,and
gave by far the best description of the man who did the shooting.)
 o
with instructions to bring that man and his pictures to me."
Sorrels,
of the Secret Service, had the man.
The one time that Sawyer does rememberis 4 o'clock.That was
quitting time,and he quit.(p.32l)
At the end of the deposition,Belin asked the question asked of
all witnesses, do they want to waive signature or would they prefer to
read theirdepositions after the stenographer typed them,and both Belin
and Sawyer said it made no difference.Thereupon, Belin said,"why
don't we say you read it and sign it,and it will be sent to us.
Sawyer's reply was, "okay.
If Sawyer ever made any additions or changes, there is no refer-
ence to them anywhere that I have seen.The index of witnesses, which
also includes affidavits supplied after testimony and depositions,does
not'listany.
gation to understand what Belin's performance here means.The Commission
was avoiding the taking of testimony to the p extent possible.It
never really asked searching questions of Sawyer.In fact,it never
asked the obvious questions.It avoided all of them. It knew nothing
when it finished with Sawyer that it didn't know before it questioned
him. The failings here are so obvious that it is absolutely shocking.
Belin had either or both of two motivas:To protect the Commission or
to protect Sawyer and the police.The only way he could do this was by
avoiding allof the painfully obvious things he did avoid.
Such a performance would have been sad with an ordinary person,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13-Sawyer
type of activity.But when it is.with an inspector of police,one of
thedeepestsuspicion.