CD
3.72
maNo le Revag
3-1-10s
MITED STATES SECRET SERVICE
TREASURY DEPARTMENT
12-2412-29-63
ChiergOrrice
Hleml,
Morida
ORIGIN
FLE No. C0-2-34,151
CAIS
SraTU
C0-2-34,030
Protective Resear
CLosed
Conversation Hotel Euployee,
INVESTIGATION JHADE AT
PERIOD COVERED
Hiami, Florida
Mlari"
na
12-11-63/1-8-6
INVESTIGATICN MADE BY
SAEE
mestI.
TAILS
SYNCPSIS
Inveatigation of the information Aurnishod by the
Department of the Army, San Jope, Costa Rica, has
idontified Hortencia Piard deDiaz as the person
allegedly makding the remark that the President
would be assassinated.Mrs. Hortencia de Dias
has been personally intervietod and she has denied
tho allegation.
(A)
INTAODUCFION:
This investigation originated upon roferral of a communication received
relates to information Mumished by Rodolfo Robles indicating that his business
partner, Joaouin Micdesto mizondo and his wdfe, vhile on a recent visit to Miami
learncd from a Cuban female hotel enployee that President Kennedy might soon be
killed.
According to the Aray coumnication, Mr. and Mrs. Elizondo stayed at the
Hotel Belfort mhile In Hiami, Fla. Aocording to Rodolfo Robles, Mrs. Eizondo
while in the Belfart Hotel,Miami, Fla. engaged in a conversation with a
cleaning woman whon Hrs. Fiiaondo described as Cuban, short and fat, approxcimately
40 to 45; brom/red hair, dressed in white uniform.
During the conversation, the visit of President Kennedy to Costa Rica wes
allegedly discussed and in the same conversation the unlmowm Cuban homan is
alleged to have made the renark that "wnat a pity that soon they will kill
President Kennedy"
DISTRIBUTION
OOPIES
REPORT MADE BY
DATE
8.81
Chiel
orig.
 Miami
100
sPEcAL Acor Ernest I. Aragon
1-15-64
APPROVED
DATE
ETA:RA
srEaA Aczr In chARcE John A.Marshall
1-15--64

--- PAGE BREAK ---Kennedy"
DISTRIBUTION
OOPIES
REPORT MADE BY
DATE
8.81
Chiel
orig.
 Miami
100
sPEcAL Acor Ernest I. Aragon
1-15-64
APPROVED
DATE
ETA:RA
srEaA Aczr In chARcE John A.Marshall
1-15--64

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C0--2-34,151
2。
(B)
GENERAL INQULRIES:
On December 1l, 1963, at the Hotel Bolfort, 252 N.E. Second St.,
Miami, Flgrida, the records reveal that on September l, 1963, Joaquin
Elizondo Solano and Belen Canpos Candano Elizondo_registered at the hotel
and remained there umtil September 8,1963.
the description furmished by Mrs. Elizondo vas one Hortencia Diaz, who was
that ebout tuo weeks previously, representatives of the FBI had also made
inquiry for a person fitting the saro description.
On the same date I interviowod SA Gcorge Davis, FBI, Miami, Fla..
and he adviscd that they had previously interviewed Hortencia Diaz incident
Jose, Costa Rica. According to the FBI, Mrs. Diaz identified herself as
Hortencia Piard de Diaz. No further description was obtained. SA Davis
said that during questioning, Mrs. Diaz denied making any statements which
indicated that the President would be 2ssassinated and denied having any
prior knowlcdge that the President would be assassinated.
On the same date the records of the I&NS, Miami, Fla. were checked
for Hortencia Piard de Diaz and no file under that name could be located.
On Jenuary 8, 1964, Mrs. Diaz was personally interviowed at her
rosidence, 92l N.W. 20th Ave., Miami, Fla. Mr3. Diaz when learming the
reason for the interview stated that she had already been interviewcd
she had to be assistcd to a chair in order to calm her emotions.She stated
that she has interpreted the allegation to indicate that she herself is
      e     y
since the events of the President's assassination the matter has affected
he. to such an extent that she has required medical attention and hospital-
ization.
Mrs. Diaz said that she recalls numerous occasions when she conversed
with guests at the Belfort Hotel and also renembers Mrs. Elizondo but that
she at no tine remarked to Mrs. Elizondo that the President will be killed
and again denied that she had any prior kmowledge that the President would
be ascassinated. She emphasized that had she known of the information she
is alleged to have disclosed, she certainly would have notified the proper
.authorities.She stated that she could not understand why Mrs.Elizondo
would indicate that such a statement had been made by her.
Mrs. Diaz stated th-t oth she and her husband greatly admired Presi-
dent Kennedy and were both loyal and faithrul adherents to the democratic
principles of this country.
All of the above information was secured from Mrs. Diaz during a
very emotional state'.
891.resi-
dent Kennedy and were both loyal and faithrul adherents to the democratic
principles of this country.
All of the above information was secured from Mrs. Diaz during a
very emotional state'.
891.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c0-2-34,151
3.
She requestcd ard pleaded that she not be confronted with this
big medical epenses, khich chc and hor husband would be wnable to meet
at this time.
Duo to hor highly emotional state, Mrs. Diaz was unable to furnish
the investigating cgont with her personal description or her IgNS number.
She did indicate that her full none is Hortencia Plard Aoosta Diaz.
Re-check of the I&NS files umder the above name also failed to
disclose any file for the subject.
(J)
CONCLUSION:
Inasmuch as Hortencia Piard Acosta Diaz has denied the allegation,
and there being no other supporting evidence to indicate that she in fact
had prior kmowledge of the Dallas events, this matter is being closed
vithout further investigation.
891