Emil Cioran
THE EVIL DEMIURGE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE EVIL DEMIURGE
With the exception of a few aberrant cases, man is not inclined
towards goodness: what god would drive him to it? He has to
overcome himself, do violence to himself, to be able to perform the
slightest act that is not tainted by evil. Whenever he succeeds, he
provokes and humiliates his creator. And if he happens to be good,
not through effort or calculation but by nature, it is due to an
oversight from above: he is outside the universal order, he was not
foreseen in any divine plan. It is hard to see what place he occupies
among beings, or even if he is one. Could he be a ghost?
What is good is what was or will be, what never is. A parasite of
memory or presentiment, bygone or possible, it cannot be actual,
nor subsist by itself: as long as it is, consciousness ignores it, and
only grasps it when it disappears. Everything proves its
insubstantiality; it is a great unreal force, it is the principle that
aborted at the beginning: a failure, an immemorial bankruptcy,
whose effects become apparent as history unfolds. In the beginning,
in that promiscuity where the slide towards life took place,
something unspeakable must have happened, which continues in
our discomfort, if not in our reasoning. How can we help but
suppose that existence and its very elements have been vitiated at
their source? Anyone who has not been led to consider this
hypothesis at least once a day will have been sleepwalking.
It is difficult, impossible to believe that the good god, the
“Father”, was involved in the scandal of creation. Everything
suggests that he had no part in it, that it was the work of an
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---cult, impossible to believe that the good god, the
“Father”, was involved in the scandal of creation. Everything
suggests that he had no part in it, that it was the work of an
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unscrupulous god, a mad god. Goodness does not create: it lacks
imagination, and imagination is needed to make a world, however
slapdash it may be. If anything, an act or a work of art can emerge
from the mixture of goodness and badness. Or a universe. In any
case, starting with our own, it's much easier to find a suspect god
than an honourable one.
The good god was definitely not equipped to create: he possesses
everything except omnipotence. Great because of his deficiencies
(anaemia and goodness go hand in hand), we only cling to him
when we strip away our historical dimension; as soon as we
reintegrate it, he is alien to us, incomprehensible to us: there is
nothing fascinating about him, he is nothing like a monster. And
that's when we turn to the creator, the inferior, busy god, the
instigator of events. To understand how he was able to create, we
need to imagine him in the grip of evil, which is innovation, and
good, which is inertia. This struggle was undoubtedly harmful to
evil, because it had to suffer the contamination of good: which
explains why creation cannot be entirely evil.
Since evil presides over everything that is corruptible, in other
words everything that is alive, it is a ridiculous attempt to try to
demonstrate that it contains less being than good, or even that it
contains none at all. Those who equate it with nothingness imagine
that they are thereby saving this poor good god. We can only save
him if we have the courage to separate his cause from that of the
demiurge. For refusing to do so, Christianity had to spend its entire
career striving to impose the inevitability of a merciful creator: a
desperate undertaking that exhausted Christianity and compromised
the god it sought to preserve.
We can't help thinking that creation, which remained in a state
of sketch, could not be completed, nor did it deserve to be, and that
on the whole it is a fault, the famous crime committed by man thus
2n't help thinking that creation, which remained in a state
of sketch, could not be completed, nor did it deserve to be, and that
on the whole it is a fault, the famous crime committed by man thus
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---at creation, which remained in a state
of sketch, could not be completed, nor did it deserve to be, and that
on the whole it is a fault, the famous crime committed by man thus
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

appearing as a minor version of a much more serious crime. What
are we guilty of, if not of having followed, more or less slavishly, the
example of the creator? We recognise the fatality that was his: it is
not for nothing that we came out of the hands of an unhappy and
wicked god, a cursed god.
Predestined, some of us, to believe in the supreme but powerless
god, others in the demiurge, others in the devil, we do not choose
our worship or our blasphemies.
The devil is the representative, the delegate of the demiurge
whose affairs he manages here below. Despite his prestige and the
terror attached to his name, he is no more than an administrator, an
angel assigned to a menial task, to history.
The scope of the demiurge is different: how would we face our
trials if he were absent? If we were equal to them, or simply
somehow unworthy of them, we could refrain from invoking him.
Faced with our obvious inadequacies, we cling to him, we even
implore him to exist: if he turned out to be a fiction, how distressed
and ashamed we would be! Who else can we unburden our
shortcomings, our miseries, ourselves to? Set up by our decree as the
author of our shortcomings, he serves as our excuse for everything
we have not been able to be. When, in addition, we make him take
responsibility for this failed universe, we taste a certain peace: no
more uncertainty about our origins or our prospects, but full
security in the insoluble, out of the nightmare of promise. His merit
is truly inestimable: he even relieves us of our regrets, since he has
taken upon himself even the initiative of our failures.
It is more important to find our vices in the divinity than our
virtues. We resign ourselves to our qualities, while our defects
pursue us, work on us. To be able to project them onto a god who is
capable of falling as low as we have, and who is not confined to the
3s. We resign ourselves to our qualities, while our defects
pursue us, work on us. To be able to project them onto a god who is
capable of falling as low as we have, and who is not confined to the
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---es to our qualities, while our defects
pursue us, work on us. To be able to project them onto a god who is
capable of falling as low as we have, and who is not confined to the
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

blandness of commonly accepted attributes, relieves and reassures us.
The bad god is the most useful god that ever was. Wouldn't we have
him on hand, where our bile could flow? Any form of hatred is
ultimately directed against him. Since we all believe that our merits
are unrecognised or scorned, how can we admit that such a general
iniquity is the work of man alone? It must go back further, to some
ancient scheme, to the very act of creation. So we know who to
blame and who to revile: nothing flatters and sustains us more than
being able to place the source of our unworthiness as far away from
us as possible.
As for God proper, good and stupid, we come to terms with him
whenever there is no trace left in us of any world, in those moments
that postulate him, that, fixed on him from the outset, give rise to
him, create him, and during which he rises from our depths to the
greater humiliation of our sarcasm. God is the mourning of irony.
But all it takes is for irony to seize hold of us again, for our
relationship with him to blur and come to a halt. We are fed up
with wondering about him, we want to banish him from our
preoccupations and our fury, from our contempt even. So many
others before us have dealt him blows that it seems pointless for us
now to come and rage over a corpse. And yet he still means
something to us, if only through regret.
that we didn't shoot it ourselves.
To avoid the difficulties inherent in dualism, we could conceive
of a single god whose history would unfold in two phases: in the
first, wise, bloodless, withdrawn, with no desire to manifest himself:
a god asleep, exhausted by his eternity; – in the second, enterprising,
frenetic, committing error after error, he would indulge in activity
condemnable to the highest degree. On reflection, this hypothesis
seems less clear-cut and less advantageous than that of two
4frenetic, committing error after error, he would indulge in activity
condemnable to the highest degree. On reflection, this hypothesis
seems less clear-cut and less advantageous than that of two
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---g error after error, he would indulge in activity
condemnable to the highest degree. On reflection, this hypothesis
seems less clear-cut and less advantageous than that of two
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

completely distinct gods. But if we find that neither of these
accounts for what this world is worth, then we will always have the
resource of thinking, with certain Gnostics, that it was drawn by lot
among the angels.
(It is pitiful and degrading to equate the divinity with a person.
It will never be an anonymous idea or principle for anyone who has
practised the Testaments. Twenty centuries of conflict cannot be
forgotten overnight. Whether inspired by Job or Saint Paul, our
religious life is quarrelsome, outrageous and unbridled. Atheists,
who are so happy to use invective, prove that they are targeting
someone. They should be less proud; their emancipation is not as
complete as they think: they have exactly the same idea of God as
believers).
The Creator is the absolute for the outer man; the inner man, on
the other hand, regards creation as an annoying detail, a useless,
even harmful episode. All profound religious experience begins
where the reign of the demiurge ends. It has no use for him, it
denounces him, it is his negation. As long as we are obsessed with
him and the world, there is no way of escaping both, and in a burst
of annihilation, join the uncreated and dissolve into it.
Through ecstasy – the object of which is a god without
attributes, an essence of god – we rise to a form of apathy purer than
that of the supreme god himself, and if we plunge into the divine,
we are nonetheless beyond any form of divinity. This is the final
stage, the point of arrival of mysticism, the point of departure being
the break with the demiurge, the refusal to deal with him again and
to applaud his work. No one kneels before him; no one worships
him. The only words spoken to him are backward supplications –
the only means of communication between a creature and its creator
equally fallen.
5s work. No one kneels before him; no one worships
him. The only words spoken to him are backward supplications –
the only means of communication between a creature and its creator
equally fallen.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---s before him; no one worships
him. The only words spoken to him are backward supplications –
the only means of communication between a creature and its creator
equally fallen.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

By inflicting on the official god the functions of father, creator
and manager, he was exposed to attacks to which he was bound to
succumb. What would have been the longevity of Marcion, of all
the heresiarchs, the one who most vigorously opposed the
concealment of evil and who contributed most to the glory of the
evil god by his hatred of him! There is hardly an example of another
religion which, in its early days, squandered so many opportunities.
We would certainly be quite different if the Christian era had been
inaugurated by the abhorrence of the creator, for the permission to
accuse him would not have failed to lighten our burden, and also to
make the last two millennia less oppressive. The Church, by refusing
to incriminate him and to adopt doctrines that were in no way
repugnant to him, was going to engage in cunning and lies. At least
we can take comfort in the fact that the most seductive aspect of its
history is that of its intimate enemies, all those whom it fought and
rejected and who, in order to safeguard the honour of God, denied,
at the risk of martyrdom, that He was its creator. Fanatics of divine
nothingness, of the absence in which supreme goodness delights,
they knew the joy of hating one god and loving another without
restriction or ulterior motive. Carried away by their faith, they
would have been unable to detect the hint of jugglery that enters
into even the most sincere torment. The notion of pretext had not
yet been born, nor had the modern temptation to hide our agonies
behind some theological acrobatics. Yet there was a certain
ambiguity among them: these Gnostics and Manichaeans of all
kinds, what were they if not perverts of purity, obsessed with horror?
Evil attracted them, almost filled them: without it, their existence
would have been empty. They hunted it down, never letting it go
for a moment. And if they maintained so vehemently that it was
uncreated, it was because they secretly wished that it would subsist
forever, so that they could enjoy it, so that they could exercise their
combative virtues throughout eternity. Having, for love of the
6d, it was because they secretly wished that it would subsist
forever, so that they could enjoy it, so that they could exercise their
combative virtues throughout eternity. Having, for love of the
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---ey secretly wished that it would subsist
forever, so that they could enjoy it, so that they could exercise their
combative virtues throughout eternity. Having, for love of the
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Father, given too much thought to the Adversary, they were bound
to end up understanding damnation better than salvation. This is
why they understood the essence of this world so well. Will the
Church, after vomiting them out, be clever enough to appropriate
their theses, and charitable enough to put the Creator in the
spotlight, to excommunicate him at last? It can only be reborn by
unearthing the heresies, by cancelling its old anathemas and
pronouncing new ones.
Shy and lacking in dynamism, good is incapable of
communicating itself. Evil, on the other hand, is eager to
communicate itself, and it succeeds in doing so because it possesses
the double privilege of being both fascinating and contagious. It is
therefore easier to see an evil god spreading than a good one.
We have all inherited this inability to remain within ourselves,
which the creator had to demonstrate in such an unfortunate way:
to beget is to continue in another way and on another scale the
enterprise that bears his name; it is to add to his “creation” in a
deplorable way. Without the impetus he gave, the desire to lengthen
the chain of beings would not exist, nor would the need to subscribe
to the vagaries of the flesh. All childbirth is suspect; angels,
fortunately, are unfit for it, the propagation of life being reserved for
the fallen. Leprosy is impatient and greedy; it loves to spread. It is
important to discourage generation, since the fear of seeing
humanity become extinct has no foundation: whatever happens,
there will be enough idiots everywhere who will only ask to
perpetuate themselves, and if they themselves end up shirking this
task, there will always be some hideous couple to devote themselves
to it.
It's not so much the appetite for life that we need to fight, as the
taste for “offspring”. The parents, the progenitors, are provocateurs
or madmen. The fact that the last of the runts has the ability to give
7ch the appetite for life that we need to fight, as the
taste for “offspring”. The parents, the progenitors, are provocateurs
or madmen. The fact that the last of the runts has the ability to give
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---life that we need to fight, as the
taste for “offspring”. The parents, the progenitors, are provocateurs
or madmen. The fact that the last of the runts has the ability to give
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

life, to “give birth” – is there anything more demoralising? How can
we think without dread or repulsion of this prodigy that makes the
first person a demiurge on the edges? What should be a gift as
exceptional as genius has been conferred indiscriminately on
everyone: a misguided liberality that forever disqualifies nature.
The criminal injunction of Genesis: “Be fruitful and multiply”
could not have come from the mouth of the good god. “Be rare,” he
would have suggested, had he had a say in the matter. Nor was he
ever able to add the fatal words: And fill the earth. These words
should be erased from the Bible to wash away the shame of having
collected them.
Flesh is spreading like gangrene across the globe. It doesn't know
how to limit itself, it continues to rage despite its setbacks, it takes
its defeats for conquests, it has never learned anything. Above all,
she belongs to the reign of the creator, and it is in her that he has
projected his evil instincts. Normally, it should not so much appall
those who contemplate it as those who make it last and ensure
progress. This is not the case, because they do not know what
aberration they are accomplices to. Pregnant women will one day be
stoned to death, maternal instinct outlawed and sterility acclaimed.
In sects where fertility was held in suspicion, such as the Bogomils
and Cathars, marriage was rightly condemned, an abominable
institution that all societies have always protected, to the great
despair of those who do not give in to the common vertigo. To
procreate is to love the plague, to want to maintain and increase it.
The ancient philosophers who equated fire with the principle of the
universe and desire were right. For desire burns, devours,
annihilates: both agent and destroyer of beings, it is dark, it is
infernal in essence.
This world was not created with joy. Yet we procreate with
pleasure. Yes, undoubtedly, but pleasure is not joy, it is a
8both agent and destroyer of beings, it is dark, it is
infernal in essence.
This world was not created with joy. Yet we procreate with
pleasure. Yes, undoubtedly, but pleasure is not joy, it is a
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---royer of beings, it is dark, it is
infernal in essence.
This world was not created with joy. Yet we procreate with
pleasure. Yes, undoubtedly, but pleasure is not joy, it is a
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

simulacrum of it: its function is to give the impression, to make us
forget that creation bears, down to the smallest detail, the mark of
the initial sadness from which it springs. Necessarily deceptive, it is
also what enables us to perform certain acts that in theory we reject.
Without it, continence, gaining ground, would even seduce rats. But
it is in voluptuousness that we understand the extent to which
pleasure is illusory. It reaches its peak, its maximum intensity, and it
is there, at the height of its success, that it suddenly opens up to its
unreality, that it collapses into its own nothingness. Voluptuousness
is the disaster of pleasure.
We cannot agree that a god, or even a man, should proceed from
gymnastics crowned with a grunt. It is strange that, after such a long
period of time, “evolution” has not succeeded in perfecting another
formula. Why should it have got tired, when the current one works
perfectly and suits everyone? Let's be clear about this: life itself is not
in question, it is mysterious and tiresome as hell; what is not in
question is the exercise in question, which is unacceptably easy,
given its consequences. When you know what fate has in store for
each and every one of us, you can't help but be struck by the
disproportion between a moment's forgetfulness and the prodigious
amount of disgrace that results. The more we look into this subject,
the more we find that the only people who have heard anything
about it are those who have opted for orgies or asceticism, the
debauched or the castrated.
Since procreation implies a nameless folly, it is certain that if we
were to become sensible, that is to say indifferent to the fate of the
species, we would be in error. Let's keep just a few samples, like we
keep specimens of endangered animals. Let's stand in the way of
flesh, let's try to paralyse its frightening thrust. We are witnessing a
veritable epidemic of life, a profusion of faces. Where and how can
we come face to face with God?
9t's stand in the way of
flesh, let's try to paralyse its frightening thrust. We are witnessing a
veritable epidemic of life, a profusion of faces. Where and how can
we come face to face with God?
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---of
flesh, let's try to paralyse its frightening thrust. We are witnessing a
veritable epidemic of life, a profusion of faces. Where and how can
we come face to face with God?
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

No one is constantly subject to the haunting of horror; we
sometimes turn away from it, almost forget about it, especially when
we contemplate a landscape where our fellow human beings are
absent. As soon as they appear, it settles back into our minds. If we
were inclined to absolve the creator, to consider this world
acceptable and even satisfying, we would still have to make
reservations about man, that black spot in creation.
We are free to imagine that the demiurge, realising the
inadequacy or harmfulness of his work, one day wants to destroy it,
and even arranges to disappear with it. But it is also conceivable that
from time immemorial he has worked only to destroy himself, and
that becoming can be reduced to the process of this slow self-
destruction. Whether the process is slow or breathless, in both cases
it is a matter of self-reflection, of self-examination, the outcome of
which would be the rejection of creation by its author. What is most
deeply rooted in us, and least perceptible, is the feeling of an
essential failure, the secret of all, gods included. And the remarkable
thing is that most of us have no idea that we feel this way.
Moreover, by a special favour of nature, we are doomed not to be
aware of it: the strength of a being lies in its inability to know how
alone it is. Blessed ignorance, thanks to which he can move and act.
When his secret is revealed to him, his strength is immediately and
irrevocably shattered. This is what happened to the creator, or what
will happen to him, perhaps.
It's easy to go from unbelief to belief, or vice versa. But what is
there to convert to, and what is there to abjure, in the midst of
chronic lucidity? Devoid of substance, it offers no content that can
be denied; it is empty, and emptiness cannot be denied: lucidity is
the negative equivalent of ecstasy.
10jure, in the midst of
chronic lucidity? Devoid of substance, it offers no content that can
be denied; it is empty, and emptiness cannot be denied: lucidity is
the negative equivalent of ecstasy.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---f
chronic lucidity? Devoid of substance, it offers no content that can
be denied; it is empty, and emptiness cannot be denied: lucidity is
the negative equivalent of ecstasy.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He who coincides with nothing will not coincide with himself
either; hence the faithless appeals, the wavering convictions, the
fevers devoid of fervour, the splitting of our ideas and even our
reflexes. The equivocation that governs all our relations with this
world and the next, we kept to ourselves at first; then we spread it
around, so that no one escapes it, so that no one alive knows where
they stand. Now there's nothing clear anywhere: because of us,
things themselves are wavering and sinking into perplexity. What we
need is the gift of imagining the possibility of prayer, which is
indispensable to anyone seeking salvation. Hell is inconceivable
prayer.
The establishment of universal equivocation is the most
calamitous feat we have ever achieved, and it makes us rivals of the
demiurge.
We have only been happy at times when, eager to erase
ourselves, we accepted our nothingness with enthusiasm. Religious
sentiment does not emanate from an acknowledgement but from a
desire for our insignificance, a need to wallow in it. How will this
need, inherent in our nature, be satisfied now that we can no longer
live at the heels of the gods? In other times, it was they who
abandoned us; today it is we who are abandoning them. We have
lived with them for too long for them to still be in our sight; always
within reach, we could hear them stirring ; they were watching us,
spying on us: we were no longer at home... Now, as experience
teaches us, there is no being more odious than our neighbour.
Knowing that they are so close in space makes it hard for us to
breathe, and also makes our days and nights impractical. No matter
how much we ponder its ruin, hour after hour, it is there,
agonisingly present. All our thoughts invite us to eliminate it; when
we finally decide to do so, we are seized by a surge of cowardice, just
11ch we ponder its ruin, hour after hour, it is there,
agonisingly present. All our thoughts invite us to eliminate it; when
we finally decide to do so, we are seized by a surge of cowardice, just
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

before the act. So we are potential murderers of those who live in
our vicinity; and not being able to be, in fact, gnaws at us and
embitters us, vain and bloodthirsty failures.
If, with the gods, everything seemed simpler, it was because their
indiscretion was immemorial, and we had to get it over with
whatever it took: weren't they too cumbersome for us to be able to
spare them any longer? This explains why none of us could fail to
add our little voice to the general clamour against them.
When we think of these companions or enemies of thousands of
years, of all the patrons of sects, religions and mythologies, the only
one we are reluctant to part with is the demiurge, to whom we are
attached by the very evils we want him to be the cause of. It is to
him that we think about the slightest act of life and life itself. Every
time we consider it, every time we look at its origins, it amazes us
and frightens us; it is a frightening miracle, which must come from
him, a special god, completely apart. There is no point in
maintaining that he does not exist, when our daily amazement is
there to demand his reality and proclaim it. They would not let
themselves be discouraged, they would work to resurrect him, and
he would last as long as our wonder and fear, as long as our
frightened curiosity about everything that is, everything that lives.
We would say: “Triumph over fear, so that only wonder remains”.
But to overcome it, to make it disappear, we would have to attack it
in principle and demolish its foundations, rebuild the world in its
entirety, cheerfully change demiurge, in short hand over to another
creator.
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---r, we would have to attack it
in principle and demolish its foundations, rebuild the world in its
entirety, cheerfully change demiurge, in short hand over to another
creator.
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE NEW GODS
Anyone interested in the parade of irreducible ideas and beliefs
should take a closer look at the spectacle offered by the first
centuries of our era: there you will find the very model of all the
forms of conflict that can be found, in a lesser form, at any time in
history. This is understandable: it was the period when people hated
the most. The credit for this goes to the Christians, who were
feverish and intractable, and from the outset experts in the art of
detestation, whereas the pagans knew only how to wield contempt.
Aggression is a trait shared by both men and the new gods.
If a monster of kindness, unaware of huffing and puffing,
nevertheless wanted to learn it, or at least to know what it is worth,
the simplest thing for him would be to read a few ecclesiastical
authors, starting with Tertullian, the most brilliant of them all, and
ending with, say, Saint Gregory of Nazianzus, who is feisty and yet
insipid, and whose speech against Julian the Apostate makes you
want to convert to paganism on the spot. There is no recognition of
the emperor's qualities; with undisguised satisfaction, it disputes his
heroic death in the war against the Persians, where he was allegedly
killed by “a barbarian who worked as a jester and who followed the
army in order to make the soldiers forget the fatigue of war through
his jokes and his good words”. No elegance, no concern to appear
worthy of such an adversary. What is unforgivable in the case of the
saint is that he had known Julian in Athens when, as young men,
they attended the philosophical schools there.
There is nothing more odious than the tone of those who defend
a cause, compromised in appearance, winning in fact, who cannot
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---they attended the philosophical schools there.
There is nothing more odious than the tone of those who defend
a cause, compromised in appearance, winning in fact, who cannot
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

contain their joy at the idea of their triumph nor prevent themselves
from turning their very fears into so many threats. When Tertullian,
sardonic and trembling, describes the Last Judgement, the greatest
of spectacles, as he calls it, he imagines the laughter he will have as
he contemplates so many monarchs and gods “uttering dreadful
groans in the deepest abyss...”. This insistence on reminding pagans
that they and their idols were lost was enough to exasperate even the
most moderate minds. A series of libels disguised as Christian
apologetics represents the pinnacle of the bilious genre.
We can only breathe in the shadow of worn-out divinities. The
more we convince ourselves of this, the more we remember with
terror that if we had lived when Christianity was on the rise, we
might have been fascinated by it. The beginnings of a religion (like
the beginnings of anything) are always suspect. Yet they alone
possess some reality, they alone are true; true and abominable. You
can't witness the establishment of a god with impunity, whoever he
is and wherever he appears. This is not a recent problem:
Prometheus, the victim of Zeus and the new clique on Olympus,
was already pointing it out.
Much more than the prospect of salvation, it was the fury
against the ancient world that drew the Christians together in a
single impulse of destruction. Since most of them came from
elsewhere, their fury against Rome is understandable. But what kind
of frenzy could the natives be involved in when they converted? Less
well endowed than others, they had only one recourse: to hate
themselves. Without this deviation of hatred, unusual at first, then
contagious, Christianity would have remained a simple sect, limited
to a foreign clientele, the only one capable of exchanging the old
gods for a nailed corpse without pain or torment. Anyone wishing to
know how they would have reacted to Constantine's about-turn
should put themselves in the shoes of a traditionalist, a proud pagan:
14for a nailed corpse without pain or torment. Anyone wishing to
know how they would have reacted to Constantine's about-turn
should put themselves in the shoes of a traditionalist, a proud pagan:
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---without pain or torment. Anyone wishing to
know how they would have reacted to Constantine's about-turn
should put themselves in the shoes of a traditionalist, a proud pagan:
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

how could they have consented to the cross, how could they have
tolerated the symbol of a dishonourable death on Roman banners?
Yet they resigned themselves to it, and this resignation, which was
soon to become general, it is difficult for us to imagine the sum total
of internal defeats from which it resulted. If, from a moral point of
view, it can be seen as the culmination of a crisis, and thus given the
status or excuse of a conversion, it appears as a betrayal as soon as we
consider it only from a political angle. To abandon the gods who
made Rome was to abandon Rome itself, to ally oneself with this
“new race of men born of yesterday, without homeland or
traditions, united against all religious and civil institutions, pursued
by justice, universally noted for infamy, but glorying in common
execration”. Celsus’ diatribe dates from 178. Almost two centuries
later, Julian was to write: “If during the reign of Tiberius or
Claudius a single distinguished mind was seen to convert to
Christian ideas, consider me the greatest of impostors.”
The “new breed of men” would struggle for a long time before
conquering the delicate. How could we trust these strangers from
the depths of the earth, whose every gesture invited contempt? But
that's just it: how could we accept the god of those we despised and
who, to make matters worse, was of recent manufacture? Since
antiquity alone guaranteed the validity of gods, they were all
tolerated, provided they were not of recent origin. What was
particularly annoying in this case was the absolute novelty of the
Son: a contemporary, a parvenu... It was he, an off-putting
character, whom no wise man had foreseen or prefigured, who
“shocked” most. His appearance was a scandal that took four
centuries to get used to. The books that celebrated him, and whose
spirit was perpetuated in the Gospels, were, according to Tertullian,
centuries older than the temples, oracles and pagan gods? The
apologist, once in a frenzy, went so far as to maintain that Moses
15it was perpetuated in the Gospels, were, according to Tertullian,
centuries older than the temples, oracles and pagan gods? The
apologist, once in a frenzy, went so far as to maintain that Moses
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the Gospels, were, according to Tertullian,
centuries older than the temples, oracles and pagan gods? The
apologist, once in a frenzy, went so far as to maintain that Moses
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

preceded the ruin of Troy by several millennia. Such ramblings were
intended to counteract the effect of remarks such as that of Celsus:
“After all, the Jews, many centuries ago, formed themselves into a
body of a nation, established laws for their use, which they still
retain today. The religion they observe, whatever its value and
whatever may be said about it, is the religion of their ancestors. By
remaining faithful to it, they do nothing that other men do not also
do, who each keep the customs of their country.
Sacrificing to the prejudice of antiquity meant implicitly
recognising the indigenous gods as the only legitimate ones. By
calculation, Christians were willing to bow to this prejudice as such,
but they could not, without destroying themselves, go further and
adopt it in its entirety, with all its consequences. For Origen, the
ethnic gods were idols, remnants of polytheism; St Paul had already
reduced them to the rank of demons. Judaism held them all to be
false, except for one, its own. “Their only fault,” says Julian of the
Jews, “is that while seeking to satisfy their god, they do not at the
same time serve the others. However, he praises them for their
reluctance to follow fashion in matters of religion. “I shun
innovation in all things, especially where the gods are concerned”, is
an admission that has discredited him and is used to label him a
“reactionary”. But what “progress”, one wonders, does Christianity
represent in relation to paganism? There is no “qualitative leap”
from one god to another, nor from one civilisation to another. Nor
from one language to another. Who would dare to proclaim the
superiority of Christian writers over pagans? Even the Prophets,
though written in a different style from the Fathers of the Church,
were averse to reading, as St Jerome confides to us, after having
immersed himself in Cicero or Plautus. The “progress” of the time
was embodied in these illegible Fathers: to turn away from them was
to turn to “reaction”? Julian was quite right to prefer Homer,
16mersed himself in Cicero or Plautus. The “progress” of the time
was embodied in these illegible Fathers: to turn away from them was
to turn to “reaction”? Julian was quite right to prefer Homer,
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---cero or Plautus. The “progress” of the time
was embodied in these illegible Fathers: to turn away from them was
to turn to “reaction”? Julian was quite right to prefer Homer,
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thucydides and Plato. The edict by which he forbade Christian
teachers to explain Greek authors has been roundly criticised, not
only by his opponents but by all his admirers, in every age. Without
wishing to justify it, we cannot help but understand it. He was up
against fanatics; to win their respect, he had to exaggerate like them
from time to time, spouting some nonsense at them, otherwise they
would have scorned him and taken him for an amateur. So he asked
them “But if they believe that these writers were wrong on the most
important point, let them go to the churches of the Galileans and
comment on Matthew and Luke. “But if they believe that these
writers were wrong on the most important point, let them go to the
churches of the Galileans and comment on Matthew and Luke!“
In the eyes of the ancients, the more gods you recognised, the
better you served the Divinity, of which they were only the aspects,
the faces. To want to limit their number was impiety; to abolish
them all for the sake of a single one, a crime. This was the crime of
the Christians. It was no longer appropriate to be ironic about them:
the evil they were spreading had gained too much ground. Julian's
bitterness stemmed from his inability to treat them lightly.
Polytheism is more in tune with the diversity of our tendencies
and impulses, offering them the opportunity to be exercised and
manifested, each of them free to move, according to its nature,
towards the god that suits it at the time. But what can we do with
just one god? How can we envisage him, how can we use him? We
are always under pressure. Monotheism compresses our sensibility: it
deepens us by constricting us; a system of constraints that gives us
an inner dimension to the detriment of the development of our
strengths, it constitutes a barrier, it stops our expansion, it derails us.
We were certainly more normal with several gods than we are with
one. If health is a criterion, what a step backwards monotheism is!
17constitutes a barrier, it stops our expansion, it derails us.
We were certainly more normal with several gods than we are with
one. If health is a criterion, what a step backwards monotheism is!
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---er, it stops our expansion, it derails us.
We were certainly more normal with several gods than we are with
one. If health is a criterion, what a step backwards monotheism is!
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Under the rule of several gods, fervour is shared; when it is
directed at a single god, it becomes concentrated and exasperated,
and ends up turning into aggression and faith. Energy is no longer
dispersed; it is all directed in the same direction. What was
remarkable about paganism was that there was no radical distinction
between believing and not believing, having or not having faith.
Faith, moreover, is a Christian invention; it presupposes the same
imbalance in man and God, carried away by a dialogue that is as
dramatic as it is delirious. That's why the new religion is such a force
to be reckoned with. The old religion, which was otherwise human,
let you choose the god you wanted; as it didn't impose any, it was
up to you to incline towards this or that one. The more capricious
you were, the more you needed to change, to move from one to
another, being sure to find a way to love them all in the course of a
lifetime. What's more, they were modest, demanding only respect:
you bowed to them, not knelt before them. They were ideally suited
to people whose contradictions were unresolved and unresolvable,
whose minds were torn and unquenchable: how lucky they were, in
their itinerant disarray, to be able to try them all out and be almost
certain of finding the one they needed most immediately! After the
triumph of Christianity, the freedom to move among them and
choose one as one wished became inconceivable. Their cohabitation,
their admirable promiscuity, was over. Would a certain aesthete,
tired of paganism but not yet disgusted, have embraced the new
religion if he had guessed that it was going to last for so many
centuries? Would he have swapped the fantasy inherent in the
system of interchangeable idols for a cult whose god was to enjoy
such terrifying longevity?
In appearance, man gave himself gods out of a need to be
protected and guaranteed; in reality, out of a greed to suffer. As long
as he believed that there were a multitude of gods, he allowed
18y?
In appearance, man gave himself gods out of a need to be
protected and guaranteed; in reality, out of a greed to suffer. As long
as he believed that there were a multitude of gods, he allowed
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---n gave himself gods out of a need to be
protected and guaranteed; in reality, out of a greed to suffer. As long
as he believed that there were a multitude of gods, he allowed
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

himself freedom of play and loopholes; by limiting himself to a
single god, he inflicted on himself an additional burden of shackles
and torments. Only an animal that loves and hates itself to the point
of vice could afford the luxury of such heavy bondage. How cruel to
ourselves to bind ourselves to the great Spectre and tie our fate to
his! The one god makes life unbreathable.
Christianity used the legal rigour of the Romans and the
philosophical acrobatics of the Greeks, not to set the mind free but
to bind it. By shackling it, it has forced it to go deeper, to descend
into itself. At the same time, they leave him free to explore his own
universe, to explore his own dizziness and, to escape the tyranny of
doctrinal certainties, to seek being – or its negative equivalent – at
the extreme point of all sensation. An adventure of the bound spirit,
ecstasy is necessarily more frequent in an authoritarian religion than
in a liberal one, because it is a leap towards intimacy, a recourse to
the depths, a flight towards oneself.
Having had no other refuge than God for so long, we have
plunged as far into him as we have into ourselves (this plunge
represents the only real feat we have accomplished in two thousand
years), we have probed his abysses and our own, ruined his secrets
one by one, exhausted and compromised his substance by the
double assault of knowledge and prayer. The ancients did not
overwork their gods: they were too elegant to harass them or to
make them an object of study. As the disastrous transition from
mythology to theology had not yet taken place, they were unaware
of this perpetual tension, present in the accents of the great mystics
as well as in the banalities of the catechism. When this world is
synonymous with impracticability, and we feel that the contact that
connects us to it has been physically severed, the remedy lies neither
in faith nor in the denial of faith (both expressions of the same
infirmity), but in pagan dilettantism, or rather in the idea we have of
19it has been physically severed, the remedy lies neither
in faith nor in the denial of faith (both expressions of the same
infirmity), but in pagan dilettantism, or rather in the idea we have of
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---lly severed, the remedy lies neither
in faith nor in the denial of faith (both expressions of the same
infirmity), but in pagan dilettantism, or rather in the idea we have of
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it.
The most serious disadvantage for the Christian is that he can
consciously serve only one god, although he has the latitude to
subordinate himself in practice to several (the cult of the saints!).
This is a salutary subjection that has allowed polytheism to continue
indirectly despite everything. Otherwise, an overly pure Christianity
would not have failed to establish a universal schizophrenia.
Tertullian notwithstanding, the soul is naturally pagan. Any god,
when he responds to our immediate and pressing demands,
represents for us an additional source of vitality, but this is not the
case if it is imposed on us or if it does not correspond to any
necessity. The fault of paganism was to have accepted and
accumulated too much: it died of generosity and excessive
understanding, it died of a lack of instinct.
If, in order to overcome the ego, this leprosy, we rely solely on
the appearances, it is impossible not to deplore the disappearance of
a religion without drama, without crises of conscience, without
incitements to remorse, equally superficial in its principles and
practices. In Antiquity, philosophy, not religion, was profound; in
the modern age, Christianity alone was the cause of the “depths”
and the rifts of all kinds inherent in them.
It is eras with no specific faith (the Hellenistic period and our
own) that try to classify the gods, while refusing to divide them into
true and false. On the contrary, the idea that they are all equal is
unacceptable at times when fervour dominates. Prayer cannot be
addressed to a god who is probably true. It does not stoop to
subtleties or tolerate gradations within the supreme: even when it
doubts, it does so in the name of Truth. We don't beg for nuance.
All this has only been true since the monotheistic calamity. For
pagan piety, it was a different matter. In Minucius Felix's Octavius,
20, it does so in the name of Truth. We don't beg for nuance.
All this has only been true since the monotheistic calamity. For
pagan piety, it was a different matter. In Minucius Felix's Octavius,
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---name of Truth. We don't beg for nuance.
All this has only been true since the monotheistic calamity. For
pagan piety, it was a different matter. In Minucius Felix's Octavius,
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the author, before defending the Christian position, has Cecilius, the
representative of paganism, say: “We see national gods worshipped:
in Eleusis, Ceres; in Phrygia, Cybele; in Epidaurus, Aesculapius; in
Chaldea, Belus; in Syria, Astarte; in Taurides, Diana; Mercury
among the Gauls and in Rome all these gods combined.” And he
adds, on the subject of the Christian god, the only one not to be
accepted: “Where does he come from, this single, solitary,
abandoned god, known to no free nation, no kingdom...?“
It was an old Roman rule that no one in particular should
worship new or foreign gods unless they were admitted by the State,
or more precisely by the Senate, which alone had the power to
decide which gods deserved to be adopted or rejected. The Christian
god, who had arisen on the periphery of the Empire and reached
Rome by unconcealed means, was bound to take revenge later on for
having been forced to enter by fraud.
You can only destroy a civilisation when you destroy its gods.
The Christians, not daring to attack the Empire head-on, attacked
its religion. They allowed themselves to be persecuted only to be
able to fulminate against it, to satisfy their irrepressible appetite for
hatred. How unfortunate they would have been if no one had
deigned to promote them to the rank of victims! Everything about
paganism, even tolerance, exasperated them. Strengthened by their
certainties, they could not understand how anyone could resign
themselves, in the manner of pagans, to verisimilitude, or follow a
cult whose priests, simple magistrates in charge of the rituals, did
not impose on anyone the drudgery of the sincerity.
When we keep telling ourselves that life is only bearable if we
can change gods, and that monotheism contains the seeds of all
forms of tyranny, we stop feeling sorry for ancient slavery. It was
better to be a slave and be able to worship whatever deity you
wanted, than to be “free” and have only one and the same variety of
21s of tyranny, we stop feeling sorry for ancient slavery. It was
better to be a slave and be able to worship whatever deity you
wanted, than to be “free” and have only one and the same variety of
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---p feeling sorry for ancient slavery. It was
better to be a slave and be able to worship whatever deity you
wanted, than to be “free” and have only one and the same variety of
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the divine before you. Freedom is the right to difference; being
plurality, it postulates the scattering of the absolute, its resolution
into a dusting of truths, equally justified and provisional. There is an
underlying (or unconscious, if you prefer) polytheism in liberal
democracy; conversely, every authoritarian regime is a disguised
monotheism. The curious effect of monotheistic logic is that as soon
as a pagan became a Christian, he became intolerant. Rather go
down with a mass of accommodating gods than thrive in the shadow
of a despot! At a time when we are witnessing ideological conflicts
rather than religious ones, the question we need to ask ourselves is
the same one that haunted the late Antiquity: “How can we
renounce so many gods for one god? – but with the correction that
the sacrifice we are being asked to make is at a lower level, at the
level of opinions rather than gods. As soon as a deity, or a doctrine,
claims supremacy, freedom is threatened. If tolerance is seen as the
supreme value, then everything that stands in the way of it must be
considered a crime, starting with those efforts at conversion in which
the Church has remained unequalled. And if the Church has
exaggerated the seriousness of the persecutions to which it was
subjected and ridiculously increased the number of martyrs, it is
because, having been an oppressive force for so long, it needed to
cover up its crimes under noble pretexts: to allow pernicious
doctrines to go unpunished, was it not on its part a betrayal of those
who sacrificed themselves for it? It was therefore in a spirit of fidelity
that she proceeded to annihilate those who had “gone astray”, and
that, after being persecuted for four centuries, she was able to
persecute for fourteen. This is the secret, the miracle of its
durability. Never were martyrs avenged more systematically and
relentlessly.
Since the advent of Christianity coincided with that of the
Empire, some Fathers (Eusebius, among others) argued that this
22ility. Never were martyrs avenged more systematically and
relentlessly.
Since the advent of Christianity coincided with that of the
Empire, some Fathers (Eusebius, among others) argued that this
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---rtyrs avenged more systematically and
relentlessly.
Since the advent of Christianity coincided with that of the
Empire, some Fathers (Eusebius, among others) argued that this
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

coincidence had a profound meaning: one God – one emperor. In
reality, it meant the abolition of national barriers, the possibility of
travelling across a vast state without having to worry about the
consequences. Without this ease of spreading, it would have
remained a simple dissidence within Judaism, instead of becoming
an invading religion and, what is more unfortunate, a religion of
propaganda. It did everything it could to solicit, to assert itself and
to spread, right down to those daytime funerals, the apparatus of
which was a real offence to both the pagans and the Olympian gods.
Julian observed that, according to the legislators of old, “since life
and death differ in every respect, the acts relating to one and the
other must be performed separately”. The Christians, in their
unbridled proselytising, were not prepared to make this separation:
they were well aware of the usefulness of the corpse and the profit
that could be made from it. Paganism did not ignore death, but it
was careful not to make a show of it. It was a fundamental principle
of paganism that death did not fit in with daylight, that it was an
insult to the light; it belonged to the night and the infernal gods.
The Galileans have filled everything with sepulchres,” said Julian,
who never called Jesus anything other than the “Holy One”. For
pagans worthy of the name, the new superstition could only appear
to be an exploitation, an enhancement of the hideous. All the more
reason to deplore the progress it was making in all circles. What
Celsus was not able to know, but what Julian knew perfectly well,
were the wannabes of Christianity, those who, unable to subscribe to
it entirely, nevertheless strove to follow it, fearing that, if they
remained on the sidelines, they would be excluded from the
“future”. Whether it was opportunism or fear of solitude, they
wanted to walk alongside these men “born yesterday”, but soon to
be called upon to play the role of masters and torturers.
However legitimate his passion for the dead gods, Julian had no
23e, they
wanted to walk alongside these men “born yesterday”, but soon to
be called upon to play the role of masters and torturers.
However legitimate his passion for the dead gods, Julian had no
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---alk alongside these men “born yesterday”, but soon to
be called upon to play the role of masters and torturers.
However legitimate his passion for the dead gods, Julian had no
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

chance of resurrecting them. Instead of trying in vain, he would
have done better to ally himself in rage with the Manichaeans and
undermine the Church with them. Thus, by sacrificing his ideal, he
would at least have satisfied his resentment. What card was left for
him other than that of revenge? A magnificent career as a demolisher
was opening up before him, and he might well have embarked on it,
had he not been obsessed by nostalgia for Olympus. You don't fight
battles in the name of regret. It is true that he died young, barely
two years into his reign; had he had ten or twenty years ahead of
him, what a service he would not have done us! No doubt he would
not have stifled Christianity, but he would have forced it to be more
modest. We would be less vulnerable, because we would not have
lived as if we were the centre of the universe, as if everything, even
God, revolved around us. The Incarnation is the most dangerous
flattery of which we have ever been the object. It has given us an
inordinate status, out of all proportion to what we are. By elevating
the human anecdote to the dignity of a cosmic drama, Christianity
has deceived us about our insignificance; it has plunged us into
delusion, into that morbid optimism which, in defiance of the
evidence, confuses progress with apotheosis. The more reflective
pagan antiquity put man in his place. When Tacitus wonders
whether events are governed by eternal laws or whether they move at
the whim of chance, he does not really answer the question; he
leaves it undecided, and this indecision expresses well the general
feeling of the ancients. More than anyone else, the historian,
confronted with this mixture of constants and aberrations of which
the historical process is composed, is necessarily led to oscillate
between determinism and contingency, laws and caprice, physics
and fate. There is scarcely a misfortune that we cannot relate as we
please either to a distraction of providence, or to the indifference of
chance, or finally to the inflexibility of fate. This trinity, which is so
convenient for anyone, especially a disillusioned mind, is the most
24istraction of providence, or to the indifference of
chance, or finally to the inflexibility of fate. This trinity, which is so
convenient for anyone, especially a disillusioned mind, is the most
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---ence, or to the indifference of
chance, or finally to the inflexibility of fate. This trinity, which is so
convenient for anyone, especially a disillusioned mind, is the most
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

consoling thing that pagan wisdom has to offer. Modern people are
loath to resort to it, just as they are loath to the specifically ancient
idea that goods and evils represent an invariable sum that cannot be
modified in any way. With our obsession with progress and
regression, we implicitly accept that evil changes, either decreases or
increases. The identity of the world with itself, the idea that it is
condemned to be what it is, that the future will add nothing
essential to the existing data, this beautiful idea no longer holds
sway; it is precisely because the future, object of hope or horror, is
our true place; we live in it, it is everything to us. The Christian
obsession with the future, by reducing time to the concept of the
imminent and the possible, renders us incapable of conceiving of an
unchanging moment, resting in itself, free from the scourge of
succession. Even devoid of the slightest content, waiting is an
emptiness that fills us, an anxiety that reassures us, so unsuited are
we to a static vision. “There is no need for God to correct his work”
– this opinion of Celsus, held by an entire civilisation, runs counter
to our inclinations, our instincts, our very being. We can only ratify
it in an unusual moment, in a fit of wisdom. It even
because what God is criticised for in religious circles more than in
others is his good conscience, his indifference to the quality of his
work and his refusal to mitigate its anomalies. We need the future at
all costs. Belief in the Last Judgement has created the psychological
conditions for belief in the meaning of history; better still, the whole
philosophy of history is simply a by-product of the idea of the Last
Judgement. We may lean towards this or that cyclical theory, but on
our part this is no more than an abstract adherence; in fact, we
behave as if history followed a linear course, as if the various
civilisations that succeed one another were merely stages through
which some grand design, whose name varies according to our
beliefs or ideologies, passes in order to manifest itself and be
fulfilled.
25ations that succeed one another were merely stages through
which some grand design, whose name varies according to our
beliefs or ideologies, passes in order to manifest itself and be
fulfilled.
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---one another were merely stages through
which some grand design, whose name varies according to our
beliefs or ideologies, passes in order to manifest itself and be
fulfilled.
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is there any better proof of the deficiency of our faith than that
we no longer have false gods? It is hard to see how, for a believer, the
god he prays to and another, quite different god, can be equally
legitimate. Faith is exclusion, challenge. It is because it can no longer
hate other religions, because it understands them, that Christianity
is finished: the vitality from which intolerance springs is increasingly
lacking. Intolerance was its raison d'être. To its misfortune, it has
ceased to be monstrous. Like polytheism in decline, it has been
affected, paralysed by too great a breadth of vision. His god has no
more prestige for us than Jupiter had for the discomfited pagans.
What does all the chatter about the “death of God” boil down
to, if not a death certificate for Christianity? We don't dare attack
religion outright, we attack the boss, who is criticised for being
timid, timid, moderate. A god who has squandered his capital of
cruelty, nobody fears or respects him any more. We are scarred by
all those centuries when believing in him meant dreading him, when
our fears imagined him to be both compassionate and unscrupulous.
Who would be intimidated by him now, when believers themselves
feel that he is out of date, that we can no longer connect him to the
present, let alone the future? And just as paganism had to give in to
Christianity, so Christianity will have to give in to some new belief;
stripped of its aggression, it no longer constitutes an obstacle to the
irruption of other gods; all they have to do is appear, and perhaps
they will. All they have to do is emerge, and they may emerge. They
may not have the face or even the mask of the gods, but they will be
no less formidable.
For those who value freedom and vertigo equally, a faith,
wherever it comes from, even if it is anti-religious, is a salutary
obstacle, a desired, dreamed-of chain whose function is to curb
curiosity and fever, to suspend the anguish of the indefinite. When
this faith prevails and takes hold, the immediate result is a reduction
26a desired, dreamed-of chain whose function is to curb
curiosity and fever, to suspend the anguish of the indefinite. When
this faith prevails and takes hold, the immediate result is a reduction
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---of chain whose function is to curb
curiosity and fever, to suspend the anguish of the indefinite. When
this faith prevails and takes hold, the immediate result is a reduction
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the number of problems you have to ask yourself, and an almost
tragic reduction in your options. The burden of choice is lifted from
you; the choice is made for you. The refined pagans who allowed
themselves to be tempted by the new religion expected it to choose
for them, to show them where to go, so that they would no longer
have to hesitate at the threshold of so many temples or wander
between so many gods. The religious effervescence without a creed
that characterised the Alexandrian period ended in weariness and a
refusal to wander. The coexistence of truths was denounced, because
people were no longer satisfied with the little that each offered; they
aspired to the whole, but to a whole that was limited, circumscribed
and certain, so great was the fear of falling from the universal to the
uncertain, from the uncertain to the precarious and amorphous.
Christianity is experiencing the same downward spiral that paganism
experienced in its day. It is falling apart, it is in a hurry to fall apart;
this is what makes it bearable for unbelievers, who are becoming
more and more disposed towards it. Paganism, even when defeated,
was still hated; Christians were furious and could not forget, whereas
today everyone has forgiven Christianity. By the eighteenth century,
the arguments against it had been exhausted. Like a poison that has
lost its virtues, it can no longer save or damn anyone. But it has
overthrown too many gods for it to be able to escape the fate it has
reserved for them. The hour of revenge has come for them. Their
joy must be great to see their worst enemy as low as they are, since
he accepts them all without exception. At the time of his triumph,
he demolished temples and violated consciences wherever it pleased
him to appear. A new god, even one who has been crucified a
thousand times, shows no mercy, crushes everything in his path and
strives to occupy as much space as possible. And so he makes us pay
dearly for not having recognised him sooner. As long as he was
obscure, he might have had a certain appeal: we didn't yet see the
marks of victory on him.
27ace as possible. And so he makes us pay
dearly for not having recognised him sooner. As long as he was
obscure, he might have had a certain appeal: we didn't yet see the
marks of victory on him.
27

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Never is a religion more “noble” than when it comes to believing
itself to be a superstition, and watches, detached, its own eclipse.
Christianity was formed and flourished in hatred of everything that
was not Christian; this hatred sustained it throughout its career, and
now that its career is over, his hatred also comes to an end. Christ
will not return to the Underworld; he has been returned to the
tomb, and this time he will remain there, never to emerge again: he
has no one to deliver either on the surface or in the depths of the
earth. When we think of the excesses that accompanied his
accession, we can't help but recall the exclamation of Rutilius
Namatianus, the last pagan poet: “Would to the gods that Judea had
never been conquered!”
Since it is accepted that the gods are true indiscriminately, why
stop there, why not extol them all? That would be a supreme
achievement on the part of the Church: it would perish by bowing
before its victims. There are signs that it is feeling the temptation.
And so, like the temples of antiquity, it would make a point of
collecting deities and wrecks from all over. But, once again, the true
god must fade away so that all the others can re-emerge.
28

--- PAGE BREAK ---temples of antiquity, it would make a point of
collecting deities and wrecks from all over. But, once again, the true
god must fade away so that all the others can re-emerge.
28

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PALEONTOLOGY
It was the chance of a shower one autumn day that brought me
into the Museum for a few moments. In fact, I was to stay for an
hour, two hours, maybe three. Months separate me from that
accidental visit, and yet I'm not about to forget those eye sockets
that stare at you, more insistent than eyes, that skull fair, that
automatic sniggering at all levels of zoology.
Nowhere is the past better served. What is possible here seems
inconceivable or outlandish. You get the impression that flesh
disappeared as soon as it appeared, that it never even existed, that it
could never have been attached to these solemn, self-important
bones. It appears to be a sham, a deception, a disguise that covers up
nothing. Is that all it was? And if she's no better, how does she
manage to inspire repulsion or terror in me? I've always felt a
predilection for those who were obsessed by its worthlessness, who
made a great deal of it: Baudelaire, Swift, the Buddha... It is so
obvious, yet it is an anomaly; the more we consider it, the more we
turn away from it with dread, and, by dint of weighing it down, we
move towards the mineral, we become petrified. To bear the sight or
the thought of it requires more than courage: it requires cynicism.
To call it nocturnal, as one of the Fathers of the Church did, is to
misjudge its nature; it is also to do it too much honour; it is neither
strange nor dark, it is perishable to the point of indecency, to the
point of madness, it is not only the seat of disease, it is disease itself,
incurable nothingness, fiction degenerated into calamity. The vision
I have of it is that of a gravedigger steeped in metaphysics. No doubt
I'm wrong to think about it all the time; you can't live and dwell on
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---nerated into calamity. The vision
I have of it is that of a gravedigger steeped in metaphysics. No doubt
I'm wrong to think about it all the time; you can't live and dwell on
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it: a colossus would perish in it. I feel it in a way that it's not allowed
to be felt; it takes advantage of me, it forces me to give it a
disproportionate status, and it so monopolises and dominates me
that my mind is nothing but viscera. Compared to the solidity and
seriousness of the skeleton, it seems ridiculously temporary and
frivolous. It flatters and satisfies the precariousness junkie in me.
That's why I feel so at home in this museum, where everything
invites us to the euphoria of a universe cleansed of flesh, to the
jubilation of the afterlife.
At the entrance, the man stands upright; all the other animals,
hunched over, overwhelmed, slumped over, even the giraffe, despite
its neck, even the iguanodon, grotesque in its desire to stand
upright. Closer to home, the orang-utan, the gorilla, the chimpanzee
– it's clear that their efforts to stand upright were in vain. Their
efforts having failed, they just stand there, miserable, stopped
halfway, thwarted in their pursuit of verticality. Hunchbacks, in
short. We would still be like them, no doubt about it, were it not for
the chance we had to take a decisive step forward. Since then, we've
struggled to erase all traces of our low extraction; hence that
provocative air so characteristic of man. Even dinosaurians seem shy
around him, with his posture and the kind of person he makes
himself out to be. As his real setbacks have only just begun, he will
have time to settle down. Everything suggests that, returning to its
initial phase, it will join the chimpanzee, the gorilla, the orang-utan,
that it will once again resemble them, and that it will become
increasingly difficult for it to wiggle in its upright position. Perhaps
even, bending under the strain, he will be even more stooped than
his former companions. When he reaches the threshold of senility,
he'll resign himself, because it's hard to see what he could do better.
Much more than the skeleton, it is the flesh, by which I mean
30former companions. When he reaches the threshold of senility,
he'll resign himself, because it's hard to see what he could do better.
Much more than the skeleton, it is the flesh, by which I mean
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---hen he reaches the threshold of senility,
he'll resign himself, because it's hard to see what he could do better.
Much more than the skeleton, it is the flesh, by which I mean
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

carrion, that disturbs and alarms us – and also soothes us. The
Buddhist monks were fond of mass graves: where could desire be
more safely trapped and emancipated? Horror being a means of
liberation, our remains have enjoyed great favour in all periods of
fervour and interiority. In the Middle Ages, people strived for
salvation, they believed energetically: the corpse was fashionable;
faith was vigorous and indomitable, it loved the livid and the fetid,
it knew the benefits that could be derived from decay and
hideousness. Today, a watered-down religion is attached only to nice
fantasies, to Evolution and Progress. It is not religion that would
provide us with the modern equivalent of the Danse macabre.
A Buddhist text reads: “Let him who aspires to nirvana make
nothing dear to him”. It is enough to consider these spectres, to
think of the fate of the flesh that adhered to them, to understand the
urgency of detachment. There can be no asceticism without the
double ruminations on the flesh and the skeleton, on the frightening
caducity of the one and the useless permanence of the other. As an
exercise, it's a good idea from time to time to separate ourselves
from our face, from our skin, to remove this deceptive covering, and
then to put down, even if it's only for a moment, this jumble of
flesh that prevents us from discerning what's fundamental in us.
Once the exercise is over, we are freer and more alone, almost
invulnerable.
To overcome attachments and the inconveniences they entail,
you have to contemplate the ultimate nakedness of a being, pierce
with your gaze its entrails and the rest of it, roll around in the horror
of its secretions, in its physiology of an imminent corpse. This vision
should not be morbid but methodical, a directed haunting,
particularly salutary in times of trial. The skeleton encourages
serenity; the corpse, renunciation. In the lesson in inanity that both
teach us, happiness merges with the destruction of our bonds. To
31ularly salutary in times of trial. The skeleton encourages
serenity; the corpse, renunciation. In the lesson in inanity that both
teach us, happiness merges with the destruction of our bonds. To
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---imes of trial. The skeleton encourages
serenity; the corpse, renunciation. In the lesson in inanity that both
teach us, happiness merges with the destruction of our bonds. To
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---

have overlooked every detail of such a lesson and yet still be dealing
with simulacra!
It was a blessed time when loners could plumb their depths
without appearing obsessed or deranged. Their imbalance was not
weighted down as it is for us. They sacrificed ten, twenty years, a
whole life, for a presentiment, for a flash of the absolute. The word
“depth” only makes sense when applied to times when the monk
was considered to be the noblest human exemplar. That the monk is
an endangered species is beyond dispute. For centuries, they have
merely survived. Who would he turn to, in a world that calls him a
“parasite”? In Tibet, the last country where it still counted, it was
discarded. Yet it was a rare consolation to think that thousands and
thousands of hermits could meditate there today on the themes of
Prajnâpâramitâ. Even if it had only odious sides, monasticism would
still be better than any other ideal. More than ever, monasteries
should be built... for those who believe in everything and for those
who believe in nothing. Where to flee? There's nowhere left where
you can professionally abhor this world.
In order to conceive of unreality and to penetrate it, it must be
constantly present in the mind. The day you feel it, the day you see
it, everything becomes unreal, except this unreality, which alone
makes existence tolerable.
It's a sign of awakening to have an obsession with the aggregate,
the increasingly vivid feeling of being no more than the meeting
place of a few elements, welded together for an instant. The “I”
conceived as a substantial and irreducible given is more
disconcerting than it is reassuring: how can we accept the fact that
the “I” is an entity? How can we separate ourselves from what
remains, from what is? We can leave behind an illusion, however
inveterate it may be; but what can we do when faced with something
consistent, something lasting? If there is nothing but what exists, if
32, from what is? We can leave behind an illusion, however
inveterate it may be; but what can we do when faced with something
consistent, something lasting? If there is nothing but what exists, if
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---an leave behind an illusion, however
inveterate it may be; but what can we do when faced with something
consistent, something lasting? If there is nothing but what exists, if
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---

being is everywhere, how can we tear ourselves away from it without
getting bogged down? Let us postulate universal deception as a
precaution or for therapeutic purposes. The fear that there is
nothing is succeeded by the fear that there is something. A farewell
to non-being is much more acceptable than a farewell to being. It's
not that this world doesn't exist, but its reality isn't one. Everything
seems to exist and nothing exists.
Any concerted pursuit, that of nirvana itself, if one is not free to
turn away from it, is a hindrance like any other. Knowledge that is
converted into an idol degrades into non-knowledge, as the Vedic
wisdom already taught: “Those who abandon themselves to
ignorance are in thick darkness; those who take pleasure in
knowledge are in even thicker darkness”. To think without knowing
it, or rather not to think at all but to stand there and devour the
silence, that is what clairvoyance should lead to. No pleasure can
compare with the pleasure of knowing that you are not thinking.
Some will object: isn't knowing that you don't think still thinking?
Undoubtedly, but the misery of thought is overcome as long as,
instead of jumping from idea to idea, we deliberately remain within
a single idea, which rejects all the others and cancels itself out, as
soon as it gives itself as content its own absence. This interference in
the normal mechanism of the mind is only fruitful if we can renew it
at will: it must cure us of subjection to knowledge, of superstition of
any system whatsoever. Deliverance that seduces us, that obsesses us,
is not deliverance. Let us make nothing our own, starting with
desire, that generator of fear. When everything makes us tremble,
our only recourse is to think that if fear is real, because it is a
sensation, the sensation par excellence, the world that causes it is
reduced to a transitory assemblage of unreal elements, that in short
fear is all the more vivid the more we give credence to the self and
the world, and that it must inevitably diminish when we detect the
33a transitory assemblage of unreal elements, that in short
fear is all the more vivid the more we give credence to the self and
the world, and that it must inevitably diminish when we detect the
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---lage of unreal elements, that in short
fear is all the more vivid the more we give credence to the self and
the world, and that it must inevitably diminish when we detect the
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

imposture of both. Only our triumph over things is true, only the
recognition of unreality that our clairvoyance draws up every day,
every hour. To free ourselves is to rejoice in this unreality and to
seek it out at every moment.
Seen from the outside, every being is an accident, a lie (except in
love, but love stands outside knowledge and truth). Perhaps we
should look at ourselves from the outside, in much the same way as
we look at others, and try to have nothing in common with
ourselves: if I were to behave like a stranger to myself, I would see
myself dying with total carelessness; my life would be nothing more
than my death. Both, as long as they belong to me and I take them
on, represent trials beyond my strength. When, on the other hand, I
convince myself that they lack intrinsic existence and should not
concern me at all – what a relief! Why then, knowing that in the
final analysis everything is unreal, should I still get carried away by
this or that trifle? I get carried away, of course, but I'm not
passionate about it, in other words I take no real interest in it. I only
achieve this selflessness when I swap my old self for a new one, the
self of distorted vision, which triumphs here, in the midst of these
ghosts, where everything cripples me, where the person I used to be
appears distant and incomprehensible. The obvious things I turned
my back on before, I now see in all their clarity. The advantage is
that I no longer feel any obligation to my flesh, to all flesh. What
better setting for rehashing the eighteen varieties of emptiness set
out in the Mahayana texts, which are so keen to catalogue the
various types of deficiency! But here we immediately find ourselves
in an acute state of unreality.
It's hard to believe the extent to which fear adheres to flesh; it's
glued to it, inseparable from it and almost indistinguishable from it.
These skeletons don't feel it, happy skeletons! It is the only fraternal
34ve the extent to which fear adheres to flesh; it's
glued to it, inseparable from it and almost indistinguishable from it.
These skeletons don't feel it, happy skeletons! It is the only fraternal
34

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch fear adheres to flesh; it's
glued to it, inseparable from it and almost indistinguishable from it.
These skeletons don't feel it, happy skeletons! It is the only fraternal
34

--- PAGE BREAK ---

link that binds us to the animals, although they only know it in its
natural, healthy form if you like; they ignore the other, that which
arises without reason, which we can reduce, according to our whims,
either to a metaphysical process or to demented chemistry, and
which, every day, at an unpredictable hour, attacks us and
overwhelms us. To subdue it, we would need the help of all the
former gods. It appears at the very bottom of our daily failings, at
the very moment when we would be on the verge of collapsing if
nothing prevented us; this nothing is the secret of our verticality.
Remaining upright implies a dignity, a discipline that has been
painstakingly instilled in us and that always saves us at the last
moment, when we are startled into grasping what could be wrong in
the career of the flesh, threatened and boycotted by all the elements
that define it. Flesh has betrayed matter; the discomfort it feels and
suffers is its punishment. Life is a state of guilt, a state that is all the
more serious because no one is really aware of it. But a guilt that is
coextensive with the individual, that weighs on him without his
knowing it, that is the price he has to pay for his promotion to
separate existence, for the crime he has committed against the
undivided creation, this guilt, though unconscious, is no less real,
and it is evident in the creature's despondency.
As I walk among these carcasses, I try to imagine the burden of
fear they must have carried, and when I stop in front of the three
monkeys, I can't help but attribute the halt in their evolution to a
similar burden, which, weighing down on them, gave them that
obsequious and frightened look. And even these reptiles, was it not
under a similar burden that they had to grovel shamefully and start
producing venom in the dust to avenge their ignominy? Everything
that lives, even the most repulsive animal or insect, twitches, only
twitches; everything that lives, by the simple fact of living, deserves
commiseration. And I think of all those I have known, of all those
who are no longer, long since wallowed in their coffins, forever free
35ything that lives, by the simple fact of living, deserves
commiseration. And I think of all those I have known, of all those
who are no longer, long since wallowed in their coffins, forever free
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---y the simple fact of living, deserves
commiseration. And I think of all those I have known, of all those
who are no longer, long since wallowed in their coffins, forever free
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of flesh – and fear. And I feel relieved by the weight of their death.
Anxiety is an awareness of fear, a fear in the second degree,
reflecting on itself. It stops the current flowing from the world to us,
from us to the world, and only encourages us to think, the better to
destroy its momentum. It constantly sobers the mind; yet there is no
speculation of any significance that does not stem from intoxication,
from a loss of control, from the ability to lose our way, and therefore
to renew ourselves. Inspiration in reverse, anxiety calls us to order at
the slightest flight, the slightest rambling. This surveillance is
disastrous for thought, which is suddenly paralysed, trapped in a
cursed circle, condemned to be able to escape from itself only in fits
and starts and by stealth. So it is true that although our
apprehensions make us seek liberation, it is they that prevent us
from achieving it. Although he dreads the future to the point of
making it the sole object of his preoccupations, the anxious person is
a prisoner of the past, indeed he is the only man who really has a
past. His ills, of which he is a slave, do not make him a prisoner of
the past. He comes to miss the raw, anonymous fear He comes to
miss the raw, anonymous fear from which everything starts, which is
the beginning, the origin, the principle of all that lives. However
atrocious it may be, it is nonetheless bearable, since all living things
resign themselves to it; it shakes and ravages them, but does not
destroy them. The same is not true of this refined, “recent” fear,
which arose after the appearance of the “I”, where the danger,
diffuse and omnipresent, never materialises, a fear that is turned in
on itself and which, for want of any other nourishment, devours
itself.
If I didn't go back to the Museum, I was there in spirit almost
every day, and not without feeling some benefit: what could be more
soothing than chewing on this ultimate simplification of beings?
Suddenly, with your imagination untangled, you see yourself as you
36day, and not without feeling some benefit: what could be more
soothing than chewing on this ultimate simplification of beings?
Suddenly, with your imagination untangled, you see yourself as you
36

--- PAGE BREAK ---t feeling some benefit: what could be more
soothing than chewing on this ultimate simplification of beings?
Suddenly, with your imagination untangled, you see yourself as you
36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will be: a lesson, no, a burst of modesty. On the proper use of the
skeleton... We should use it in difficult times, especially as we have it
to hand.
I don't need Holbein or Baldung Grien; when it comes to the
macabre, I leave it to my means. If I see the need or if I feel like it,
there's no one I can't strip of their camel skin. Why should I envy or
fear these bones that bear such and such a name, this skull that
doesn't love me? Why should I also love someone or love myself,
suffering in any case, when I know the image I need to conjure up to
soften these miseries? A keen awareness of what lies in wait for the
flesh should destroy both love and hate. In reality, it only manages
to attenuate them, and, in rare moments, to tame them. Otherwise
it would be too simple: all we would have to do is imagine death to
be happy, and the macabre, fulfilling our most secret desires, would
be all profit.
I doubt that I would have returned to these places so often if
they had not obviously flattered my ineptitude for illusion. Here,
where man is nothing, we realise the extent to which the doctrines
of deliverance are incapable of grasping him, interpreting his past
and deciphering his future. This is because deliverance has content
only for each of us, individually, and not for the mob, which is
incapable of understanding the relationship between the idea of
emptiness and the sensation of freedom. It is hard to see how
humanity can be saved as a whole; swallowed up in falsehood,
doomed to an inferior truth, it will always confuse semblance with
substance. Even if, against all evidence, humanity were to follow an
ascending path, it would not be able to acquire, at the end of its
ascent, the degree of clairvoyance of the most obtuse Hindu
sannyâsin. In existence what we can do, what we actually do, is to
keep switching from one thesis to the other, all too happy to dodge a
choice that would solve none of our immediate problems.
37u
sannyâsin. In existence what we can do, what we actually do, is to
keep switching from one thesis to the other, all too happy to dodge a
choice that would solve none of our immediate problems.
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---stence what we can do, what we actually do, is to
keep switching from one thesis to the other, all too happy to dodge a
choice that would solve none of our immediate problems.
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Awakening is independent of intellectual capacity: you can have
genius and be a fool, spiritually that is. On the other hand, you are
not much further ahead with knowledge as such. An illiterate person
can possess the “Eye of Knowledge” and thus be above any scholar.
Discerning that what you are is not you, that what you have is not
yours, no longer being an accomplice to anything, not even your
own life – that is seeing rightly, that is going down to the root of
everything. The more you open yourself up to emptiness and the
more you immerse yourself in it, the more you escape the fatality of
being yourself, of being human, of being alive. If everything is
empty, this triple fate will also be empty. As a result, the magic of
tragedy is undermined. Is the hero who collapses worth as little as
the one who triumphs? There's nothing more prestigious than a
happy ending, if this world is real; if it's not, it's sheer nonsense to
rave about any outcome whatsoever. To deign to have a “destiny”,
to be blinded or merely tempted by the “extraordinary”, proves that
we remain closed to any higher truth, that we are far from possessing
the “eye” in question. To situate someone is to determine their
degree of awakening, the progress they have made in perceiving the
illusory and the false in others and in themselves. No communion is
conceivable with someone who is mistaken about who he is. As the
gap between us and our actions widens, we find ourselves with fewer
subjects for dialogue and fewer fellow human beings. This solitude
does not make us bitter, because it does not derive from our talents
but from our renunciations. But it does not exclude the danger of
spiritual pride, which exists as long as we reflect on the sacrifices we
have made and the illusions we have rejected. How can we defeat
ourselves unknowingly, when detachment requires insistent
awareness? The very thing that makes detachment possible also
threatens it. In the order of inner values, any superiority that does
not become impersonal turns to perdition. How can we tear
ourselves away from the world without realising it! We should be
38threatens it. In the order of inner values, any superiority that does
not become impersonal turns to perdition. How can we tear
ourselves away from the world without realising it! We should be
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---he order of inner values, any superiority that does
not become impersonal turns to perdition. How can we tear
ourselves away from the world without realising it! We should be
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---

able to forget that detachment is a merit; otherwise, instead of
delivering, it poisons. According to Ignatius of Loyola, attributing
our successes of all kinds to God, believing that nothing emanates
from us, that everything is given to us, is the only effective way to
fight superbness. This recommendation applies to all states, but not
for detachment, a long and painful process of undermining, of
which the ego is the victim: how can we not take pride in this? Our
spiritual level may have risen, but that doesn't mean we have
changed qualitatively; we remain prisoners of our limitations: the
impossibility of eradicating spiritual pride is one of the most
unfortunate consequences of this. “No creature,” observes Saint
Thomas, “can attain a higher degree of nature without ceasing to
exist”. However, if man is intriguing, it is precisely because he
wanted to overcome his nature. He did not succeed, and his
inordinate efforts were bound to alter and denature it. That's why
we can't ask questions about him without torment and passion. No
doubt it is also more decent to feel sorry for him than for ourselves
(as Pascal understood so well). In the long run, this passion becomes
so tiresome that all you can think about is how to escape it. Neither
the inevitability of being oneself, nor that of being alive, can
compare with that of being a man; as soon as it nips at my heels, in
order to escape it, I mentally retrace my steps through these bones
which, in recent times, have so often helped me; I see them, I cling
to them: By confirming my belief in emptiness, they help me to
foresee the day when I will no longer have to put up with the
obsession with the human, the most terrible of all chains. If you
want to be free, you have to free yourself from it at all costs; but to
be truly free, you have to go one step further: free yourself from
freedom itself, reduce it to the level of a prejudice or a pretext so
that you no longer have to idolise it... Only then will you begin to
learn how to act without desiring. Meditating on the horrible
prepares you for this: to turn around the flesh and its decrepitudes is
39no longer have to idolise it... Only then will you begin to
learn how to act without desiring. Meditating on the horrible
prepares you for this: to turn around the flesh and its decrepitudes is
39

--- PAGE BREAK ---dolise it... Only then will you begin to
learn how to act without desiring. Meditating on the horrible
prepares you for this: to turn around the flesh and its decrepitudes is
39

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to initiate yourself into the art of dissociating desire and action – an
operation that is harmful to restless minds, but indispensable to
contemplative ones. As long as we desire, we live in subjection, we
are left to the world; as soon as we stop desiring, we accumulate the
privileges of an object and a god: we no longer depend on anyone.
That desire is ineradicable is only too true; yet what peace it is to
imagine being free of it! Peace so unusual that a perverse pleasure
creeps in: wouldn't such a suspicious sensation amount to nature's
revenge against the person guilty of aspiring to such an unnatural
state? Apart from nirvana in life – a rare feat, practically unattainable
– the suppression of desire is a chimera; we don't suppress it, we
suspend it, and this suspension, very strangely, is accompanied by a
feeling of power, of a new, unknown certainty. The vogue for
monasticism, in other centuries; can it not be explained by this
dilation following the reflux of appetites? It takes strength to fight
against desire; this strength increases when desire withdraws; when it
stops, fear also stops. For anxiety, for its part, to lend itself to a
similar truce, we must go further, approach a space that is otherwise
rarefied, approach an abstract elation, an exaltation equally granted
to being and non-being.
The Katha-Upanishad says that âtman is “joyful and joyless”.
This is a state that can be reached through the affirmation or
negation of a supreme principle, both through the Vedânta and the
Mahâyâna. However different they may be, the two paths converge
in the final experience, in the slide out of appearances. The essential
thing is not so much to know in the name of what we want to be
liberated as how far we can advance on the path to deliverance.
Whether we dissolve into the absolute or into emptiness, in both
cases it is a neutral joy that we reach: a joy without any
determination, as bare as the anxiety for which it is intended as a
remedy, and of which it is only the outcome, the positive
conclusion. The symmetry between them is obvious; they look like
40ny
determination, as bare as the anxiety for which it is intended as a
remedy, and of which it is only the outcome, the positive
conclusion. The symmetry between them is obvious; they look like
40

--- PAGE BREAK ---

they do not need any external stimulus, they are self-sufficient, they
correspond and communicate in depth. For just as concrete joy is
nothing more than conquered fear, neutral joy is nothing more than
transfigured anxiety. And it is from their affinities, from their
permeability, that we derive the possibility of rising from one to the
other, and the danger of going backwards, of falling back into a
previous state that we thought we had overcome. This shows the
extent to which all spiritual progress is threatened at the base. For
the unaccomplished deliverer, for the nirvana wannabe, nothing is
easier or more frequent than to retreat into his old terrors. But when
from time to time he manages to hold firm, he makes his own the
exhortation of the Dhammapada: “Shine for yourself, as your own
light” and, as long as he adopts it and follows it, he understands
from within those who always follow it.
41

--- PAGE BREAK ---the
exhortation of the Dhammapada: “Shine for yourself, as your own
light” and, as long as he adopts it and follows it, he understands
from within those who always follow it.
41

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ENCOUNTERS WITH SUICIDE
We only kill ourselves if, in some ways, we have always been
outside everything. This is an original inappropriateness of which we
may not be aware. Those who are called upon to kill themselves
belong only by accident to this world; they do not belong to any
world at all.
We are not predisposed, we are predestined to suicide, we are
doomed to it before any disappointment, before any experience:
happiness pushes us towards it as much as unhappiness, it pushes us
even more towards it, because amorphous, improbable, it requires
an exhausting effort to adapt, whereas unhappiness offers the
security and rigour of a ritual.
There are nights when the future is abolished, when of all its
moments only the one we choose to be no more remains.
“I've had enough of being me”, we repeat to ourselves when we
want to escape from ourselves; and when we irrevocably flee from
ourselves, the irony is that we commit an act in which we find
ourselves again, in which we suddenly become totally ourselves. The
fate that we wanted to escape, we fall back into the moment we kill
ourselves, suicide being only the triumph, the celebration of this
fate.
The further I go, the less likely I am to be dragged from one day
to the next. To tell the truth, it's always been like that: I haven't
lived in the possible, but in the inconceivable. My memory piles up
42

--- PAGE BREAK ---kely I am to be dragged from one day
to the next. To tell the truth, it's always been like that: I haven't
lived in the possible, but in the inconceivable. My memory piles up
42

--- PAGE BREAK ---

collapsed horizons.
There is within us a temptation, rather than a will, to die. For if
we were given the will to die, who wouldn't take advantage of it at
the first upset? There is yet another impediment: the idea of killing
oneself seems incredibly new to the person who is possessed by it; he
therefore imagines himself performing an unprecedented act; this
illusion occupies and flatters him, and wastes precious time.
Suicide is a sudden achievement, a dazzling deliverance: it is
nirvana through violence.
The simple fact of looking at a knife and realising that it's up to
you to use it in a certain way gives you a feeling of sovereignty that
verges on megalomania.
When we are seized by the idea of ending things, a space
stretches out before us, a vast possibility outside time and eternity
itself, a dizzying opening, a hope of dying beyond death.
To kill yourself is, in effect, to compete with death, to show that
you can do better than it, to play a trick on it and, not least, to
redeem yourself in your own eyes. You reassure yourself that you are
not the last, that you deserve some respect. Now everything changes:
by destroying myself, I destroy all the reasons I had to despise
myself, I regain my confidence, I am someone forever...
Since my mission is to suffer, I don't understand why I try to
imagine my fate any other way, still less why I get angry at
sensations. Because all suffering is just that, at the beginning and at
the end anyway. In the middle, of course, it's a bit more: a universe.
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, still less why I get angry at
sensations. Because all suffering is just that, at the beginning and at
the end anyway. In the middle, of course, it's a bit more: a universe.
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This fury in the middle of the night, this need for a final
explanation with yourself, with the elements. Suddenly, your blood
comes alive, you tremble, you get up, you go out, you tell yourself
there's no reason to procrastinate or put it off any longer: this time
it's going to be for real. As soon as you step outside, you feel an
imperceptible sense of calm. You're moving forward with a sense of
the gesture you're about to make, of the mission you've taken on. A
hint of exultation replaces the fury when you tell yourself that you
have finally reached the end, that the future has been reduced to a
few minutes, an hour at most, and that you have decreed, on your
own authority, the suspension of all time.
Then there's the reassuring feeling of the absence of the next
person. Everyone is asleep. How can you leave a world where you
can still be alone? This night, which was supposed to be our last, we
can't get away from it. We can't conceive that it might fade away.
And we want to defend it against the day that undermines it and
soon submerges it.
If we could change our nature, become anyone, we would
immediately be among the chosen. Since metamorphosis is
impossible, we cling to Predestination, the magic word if ever there
was one. Just uttering it gives you the feeling that you've passed the
stage of questioning and perplexity, and finally found the key to any
impasse.
When we feel the urge to end things, whether weak or strong,
we are inclined to think about it, to explain it, to explain it to
ourselves. We are much more inclined to do so when the urge is
weak, because, being too intense, it invades the mind and leaves it
neither space nor leisure to consider it or avoid it.
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---. We are much more inclined to do so when the urge is
weak, because, being too intense, it invades the mind and leaves it
neither space nor leisure to consider it or avoid it.
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To wait for death is to endure it, to relegate it to the level of a
process, to resign oneself to a denouement whose date, mode and
setting are unknown. It's a far cry from the absolute act. There is
nothing in common between the obsession with suicide and the
feeling of death – by which I mean the deep, constant feeling of an
end in itself, of the inevitability of perishing as such, inseparable
from a cosmic background and independent of this drama of the
ego, at the centre of all forms of self-destruction. Death is not
necessarily experienced as deliverance; suicide always delivers: it is
the summum, the paroxysm of salvation. For the sake of decency,
we should choose the moment to disappear. It is degrading to be
extinguished in the same way that you are extinguished; it is
intolerable to be exposed to an end over which you have no control,
which lies in wait for you, knocks you down, precipitates you into
the unspeakable. Perhaps the time will come when natural death will
be completely discredited, when catechisms will be enriched with a
new formula: “Grant us, O Lord, the favour and strength to come to
an end, the grace to fade away in time”.
The age-old conspiracy against suicide is the cause of the clutter
and sclerosis of our societies. It is up to us to learn to destroy
ourselves at the right moment, to run cheerfully towards our spectre.
As long as we fail to do this, we will deserve our humiliations. When
we have exhausted our raison d'être, it is odious to persist. But it is
indeed the indignity of natural death that we see, whichever way we
look at it.
     “When you meet up with someone you used to know, after many
years, it's a real pleasure. As a child, the first glance almost always
leads us to suppose that some great misfortune must have befallen
her” (Leopardi). To last is to diminish: existence is a loss of being.
Since no one disappears when they should, anyone who survives
should be called to order, encouraged and, if necessary, helped to
45(Leopardi). To last is to diminish: existence is a loss of being.
Since no one disappears when they should, anyone who survives
should be called to order, encouraged and, if necessary, helped to
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---is to diminish: existence is a loss of being.
Since no one disappears when they should, anyone who survives
should be called to order, encouraged and, if necessary, helped to
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

shorten their days. At some point, to persevere is to consent to
decline. But how can you be sure of your decline? Can't we
misinterpret the symptoms? Doesn't the awareness of falling into
decay imply a superiority over one's own decline? Once again, how
can we know when we've started to fall, how can we determine
when? – It's undoubtedly possible to make a mistake, but it doesn't
really matter because, in any case, you never die in time. You go
adrift, and it's only when you sink that you admit you're a wreck.
And then it's too late to sink of your own accord.
It's good to think you're going to kill yourself. No subject is
more relaxing: as soon as you broach it, you can breathe. Meditating
on it makes you almost as free as the act itself.
The more I'm on the margins of time, the more the prospect of
abstaining from it forever reincorporates me into existence, puts me
on a level with the living, gives me a kind of honourability. This
prospect, which I cannot do without, has lifted me out of all my
despondency, and above all it has enabled me to get through those
periods when I had no grievance against anyone, when I was
fulfilled. Without its help, without the hope it gives, heaven would
seem to me the worst of torments. How many times have I said to
myself that, without the idea of suicide, one would kill oneself on
the spot! The mind that it takes hold of, pampers it, idolises it,
expects miracles from it. Like a drowning man clinging to the idea
of drowning.
There are as many reasons to do away with ourselves as there are
reasons to continue, but with the difference that the latter are older
and more solid; they carry more weight than the others because they
blend in with our origins, whereas the former, the fruit of
experience, are necessarily more recent, and are both more pressing
46nd more solid; they carry more weight than the others because they
blend in with our origins, whereas the former, the fruit of
experience, are necessarily more recent, and are both more pressing
46

--- PAGE BREAK ---carry more weight than the others because they
blend in with our origins, whereas the former, the fruit of
experience, are necessarily more recent, and are both more pressing
46

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and more uncertain.
The same person who says: “I don't have the courage to kill
myself” will, the next moment, brand as cowardice a feat before
which the bravest shrink back. “We kill ourselves,” we keep saying,
“out of weakness, so that we don't have to face the consequences of
pain or shame”. But what we fail to see is that it is precisely the weak
who, far from trying to escape it, accommodate themselves to it on
the contrary, and that it takes strength to tear oneself away from it
decisively. In truth, it is easier to kill oneself than to overcome a
prejudice as old as man, or at least as old as religions, so sadly
impervious to the supreme gesture. As long as the Church prevailed,
only the insane enjoyed privileged treatment, only they had the right
to kill themselves: their bodies were not desecrated or hanged.
Between ancient stoicism and modern “free thought”, between, say,
Seneca and Hume, suicide underwent, apart from the Cathar
interlude, a long eclipse – a dark age indeed for all those who,
wanting to die, dared not violate the prohibition against taking one's
own life.
Once observed and analysed, infirmities lose their severity and
strength; once examined, they are better tolerated. Except for
sadness. The playfulness that goes to make up melancholy is exempt;
intransigent, intractable, it ignores fantasy and caprice. With her,
there is no escape, no coquetry. And no matter how much we talk
about it or comment on it, it neither diminishes nor increases. It just
is.
The person who has never considered killing himself will make
up his mind much more quickly than the person who never stops
thinking about it. Since any crucial act is easier to accomplish by
thoughtlessness than by examination, the mind that has never
47ke
up his mind much more quickly than the person who never stops
thinking about it. Since any crucial act is easier to accomplish by
thoughtlessness than by examination, the mind that has never
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---more quickly than the person who never stops
thinking about it. Since any crucial act is easier to accomplish by
thoughtlessness than by examination, the mind that has never
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

considered suicide, once it feels impelled to do so, will have no
defence against this sudden impulse; it will be blinded and shaken
by the revelation of a definitive outcome that it had not considered
before; – whereas the other will always be able to delay a gesture that
it has weighed and reweighed indefinitely, that it knows thoroughly
and to which it will resolve itself dispassionately, if it ever does.
The horrors with which the universe abounds are an integral
part of its substance; without them, it would physically cease to
exist. Drawing the final conclusions is not the same as committing
“beautiful” suicide. The only kind of suicide worthy of the epithet is
that which arises out of nothing, for no apparent reason: pure
suicide. It is suicide – defying all capital letters – that humiliates,
that crushes God, Providence and even Destiny.
We don't kill ourselves, as is commonly thought, in a fit of
dementia, but rather in a fit of unbearable lucidity. The climax of
the decision does not, however, reflect any obscurity: idiots almost
never kill themselves, but they can kill themselves out of fear, out of
a premonition of idiocy. The culminating moment of the decision is
not, however, one of obscurity: idiots almost never kill themselves;
but we can kill ourselves out of fear, out of a premonition of idiocy.
The act itself, then, is the last gasp of the mind that pulls itself
together, gathers all its powers, all its faculties, before annulling
itself. On the threshold of the ultimate defeat, he proves to himself
that he is not completely lost. And he loses himself, in full
instantaneous possession of all his means.
We have unlearned the art of killing ourselves in cold blood.
The ancients were the last to excel at it. We now only conceive of
passionate, feverish suicide, suicide as an inspired state; as for
detachment, we dream of it as convulsionaries. These wise men
48he ancients were the last to excel at it. We now only conceive of
passionate, feverish suicide, suicide as an inspired state; as for
detachment, we dream of it as convulsionaries. These wise men
48

--- PAGE BREAK ---

before the Cross knew how to break with this world or resign
themselves to it, without drama or lyricism. Their way has been lost,
as has the basis of their imperturbability: a usurping Providence
came to dislodge Fatum from everywhere. And we run back to it,
looking for support when no other can help or seduce us.
There is nothing deeper or more incomprehensible than Desire.
That's why we only feel alive when we despair of destroying it.
Whether we delete ourselves or not, everything remains
unchanged. But the decision to do away with oneself seems to
everyone to be the most important that has ever been taken. It
shouldn't be this way. And yet it is, and nothing can stand against
this aberration or mystery.
Having only ever coincided with the interval that separates me
from beings and things, with the void that opens up in the middle
of each of my sensations, how could I not be surprised to see myself
subscribing to anything, endorsing my words, rallying to my
vacillations, even my convictions? Such naivety both distresses and
reassures me.
You have to be hungry for the absolute to contemplate suicide.
But you can envisage it also by doubting everything. This is
understandable: the more we seek the absolute, the more, out of
spite at not being able to attain it, we sink into doubt, which would
be the flip side of a quest, the negative conclusion of a great
undertaking, of a great passion. The absolute is pursuit; doubt,
retreat. This retreat, pursuit in reverse, when it does not know how
to stop, hits extremities inaccessible to a rational approach. In the
beginning it was merely a process; now it is vertigo, like everything
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---reverse, when it does not know how
to stop, hits extremities inaccessible to a rational approach. In the
beginning it was merely a process; now it is vertigo, like everything
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that moves beyond itself. To advance or retrograde towards limits,
to plumb the depths of anything, is necessarily to encounter the
temptation of self-destruction.
On this little island in the Mediterranean, long before daylight,
on the path that led me to the steepest cliff, I was thinking like a
caretaker on holiday: I'd get this villa, I'd paint it ochre, I'd have
another fence put up, and so on. In spite of my idea, I clung to the
slightest trifle: I contemplated the agaves, dawdled, digressed the
urgency of my subject. A dog started barking, then gave me a treat
and followed me. You can't imagine, unless you've felt it, the
comfort you get from a beast that comes to keep you company when
the gods have turned their backs on you.
Faced with a landscape obliterated by light, to remain serene
presupposes a temperament that I do not possess. The sun is my
supplier of dark thoughts, and summer is the season when I've
always reconsidered my relationship with this world and with
myself, much to the chagrin of both.
When you understand that nothing is, that things don't even
deserve the status of appearances, you no longer need to be saved,
you are saved, and unhappy forever.
I try – unsuccessfully – not to take pride in anything. When I
do, however, I feel that I no longer belong to the gang of mortals.
I'm above everything, above the gods themselves. Maybe that's what
death is: a feeling of great, extreme superiority.
Jean-Paul called the most important evening of his life the one
when he discovered that there was no difference between dying the
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---is: a feeling of great, extreme superiority.
Jean-Paul called the most important evening of his life the one
when he discovered that there was no difference between dying the
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---

next day or thirty years from now. This revelation is as important as
it is useless. The difference in question appears to everyone to be
irreducible, even absolute: to exist is to prove that we have not
understood the extent to which it is one and the same thing to die
now or at any time.
I may know that I am nothing, but I have yet to really convince
myself of this. Something inside me refuses to accept the truth of
which I am so sure. This refusal indicates that I am partly escaping;
and what in me evades my jurisdiction and my control means that I
can never be sure of being able to fully dispose of myself. This is
how, by harping on the pros and cons of the only gesture that
matters, we come to have a guilty conscience about still being alive.
An obsession with suicide is the hallmark of someone who can
neither live nor die, and whose attention never wavers from this
double impossibility.
As long as I'm acting, I believe that what I'm doing has
“meaning”, otherwise I wouldn't be able to do it. As soon as I stop
acting, and transform myself from agent to judge, I can no longer
find the meaning in question. Alongside the self that follows my
drives, there is another self (the self of the self) that is superior to
them: for it, what I do, and even what I am, implies neither
meaning nor reality: it is as if they were distant events, forever past,
whose apparent reasons we unravel without perceiving their intrinsic
necessity. They could simply not have been, so external are they to
us. This same perspective, applied to the whole of an existence, leads
straight to rumination on the extravagance of having been born.
In the same way, if we were to ask ourselves what the result of
any action would be in a year, ten years, a hundred years or a
51ads
straight to rumination on the extravagance of having been born.
In the same way, if we were to ask ourselves what the result of
any action would be in a year, ten years, a hundred years or a
51

--- PAGE BREAK ---ination on the extravagance of having been born.
In the same way, if we were to ask ourselves what the result of
any action would be in a year, ten years, a hundred years or a
51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

thousand years, it would be impossible to complete it, or even to
sketch it out. Every act presupposes a limited vision, except that of
killing oneself, because it is based on a vast vision, so vast that it
renders all other acts futile and unattainable. Next to it, all is futility
and derision. It alone offers a way out, by which I mean an abyss – a
liberating abyss.
To expect anything, here or elsewhere, is to provide proof that
you are still dragging chains. The reprobate aspires to heaven; this
aspiration demeans and compromises him. To be free is to rid
oneself forever of the idea of “being free”. Reward means expecting
nothing from men or the gods, it means renouncing not only this
world and all worlds but salvation itself, it means breaking the very
idea of it, the chain between chains.
The instinct for self-preservation – pure stubbornness and
nothing else – must be fought and its ravages denounced. We can do
this all the better if we rehabilitate suicide, highlight its excellence,
make it a joyful act accessible to all. Suicide is by no means a
negative act; on the contrary, it redeems and transfigures all acts
committed before it.
By the most inexplicable of misunderstandings, existence has
been declared sacred; but not only is it not sacred, it is only
worthwhile to the extent that we work to rid ourselves of it. It is at
best an accident – an accident that little by little everyone converts
into fate. When we know where we stand on it, we are ashamed to
be attached to it, and yet we become attached to it by a long and
insensitive process that leads even the most informed to take it
seriously. We should, by an opposite process, bring it back to its
original state, to its primitive insignificance. An effort bordering on
the prodigious would be required: the person who made it would
52ly. We should, by an opposite process, bring it back to its
original state, to its primitive insignificance. An effort bordering on
the prodigious would be required: the person who made it would
52

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cease to be a slave; master of his own days, he would stop the
succession of them whenever he wished; his existence would be at
his own discretion; in other words, it would have returned to its
starting point, its true status: that of an accident.
To live completely without purpose! I have glimpsed this state,
and have often reached it, without managing to remain in it: I am
too weak for such happiness.
If this world emanated from an honourable god, killing oneself
would be an audacity, a nameless provocation. But since there is
every reason to believe that it is the work of a sub-god, we don't see
why we should bother. Who should we spare? The great profiteer of
the obliteration of faith, suicide will be increasingly easy and, by the
same token, less mysterious since it will have used up its prestige as
anathema. Once piquant and meritorious, it is now becoming part
of everyday life, gaining ground, and if it ceases to be unusual, its
future seems assured. Within the religious world, it was seen as an
insanity and a betrayal, as a crime par excellence. How can we
believe and be destroyed? Let's fall back on the hypothesis of the
sub-god, which has the advantage of allowing extreme gestures,
radical victory over a crazy world.
We can imagine this creator, finally aware of his error, declaring
himself guilty: he withdraws, withdraws, and, in a final gesture of
elegance, takes justice into his own hands. He disappears with his
work, through no fault of his own. This would be an improved
version of the Last Judgement.
Those who commit suicide foreshadow the distant destinies of
humanity. Their time will come; they will be celebrated, they will be
53

--- PAGE BREAK ---an improved
version of the Last Judgement.
Those who commit suicide foreshadow the distant destinies of
humanity. Their time will come; they will be celebrated, they will be
53

--- PAGE BREAK ---

paid public homage and it will be said that they alone, in the past,
had glimpsed and guessed at everything. It will also be said that they
took the lead, that they sacrificed themselves to show the way, that
they were martyrs in their own way: didn't they kill themselves at a
time when no one was obliged to, when natural death was in full
swing? They knew before anyone else that sheer impossibility would
one day be the lot of everyone, instead of being a curse, a privilege.
They were precursors, as we shall call them, and they were on a
par with those who, aware of the sovereignty of evil, incriminated
Creation: the Manicheans at the beginning of the Christian era, and
particularly their later disciples, the Cathars. Admirably, this
incrimination was more common among the common people than
among the educated. To be convinced of this, one need only consult
Bernard Gui's Manuel de l'Inquisiteur or any report from the time
on the ideas and actions of the “heretics”. A comforting detail is that
we can see the wife of a lumberjack or wood merchant at odds with
Lucifer, or denouncing our first ancestors as guilty of “the most
satanic act imaginable”. These sectarians, or rather visionaries, who
were so strangely disillusioned in the midst of their fervour, gifted
with the ability to detect the diabolical traps behind all our
important acts, knew how to let themselves starve to death if need
be, and this feat, by no means unusual among them, marked the
pinnacle of their doctrine. Putting oneself into endura, fasting to the
point of complete exhaustion, was a practice that followed initiation,
and whose mission was to preserve the spirit. He was “consoled”, by
a quick death, from the danger of apostasy or all sorts of
temptations.
The disgust with the useful side of sexuality, the horror of
procreating, is part of the questioning of Creation: what is the point
of multiplying monsters? Had it triumphed and remained true to
itself, Catharism would have ended in mass suicide. Such a success
54ating, is part of the questioning of Creation: what is the point
of multiplying monsters? Had it triumphed and remained true to
itself, Catharism would have ended in mass suicide. Such a success
54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was hardly possible: if advanced minds were not sufficiently mature.
Even today, they are still a long way from being mature, and it will
be a long time before mankind begins to endure. If it ever does.
At the Council of 1211 against the Bogomils, they
anathematised those who maintained that “the woman conceives in
her womb through the cooperation of Satan, that Satan dwells there
from then on without withdrawing until the birth of the child”.
I dare not imagine that the Demon could be so interested in us
as to keep us company for months on end; but I cannot doubt that
we were conceived under his gaze and that he did indeed assist our
dear progenitors.
This feeling of being stuck for eternity, of having done one's
time before being born, of being too fallen to have anyone to feel
sorry for, this certainty that by killing oneself one kills no one – this
is the temptation of bad suicide, the kind that arises not from
sadness according to God but according to the devil, to keep the
Apostle's distinction. It is also inconsolation in its highest degree,
and it seems so beyond remedy that it would remain intact,
untouched, even if another universe were created.
What is this “brief and vehement” prayer that the Philocalia
recommends against failures and terrors?
Why don't I kill myself? – If I knew exactly what was stopping
me, I wouldn't have to ask myself any more questions, because I'd
have answered them all.
To stop tormenting ourselves, we have to let ourselves go into a
state of profound disinterest, cease to be intrigued by the here below
or the hereafter, and fall into the carefree attitude of the dead. How
55

--- PAGE BREAK ---have to let ourselves go into a
state of profound disinterest, cease to be intrigued by the here below
or the hereafter, and fall into the carefree attitude of the dead. How
55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

can you look at a living person without imagining them to be a
corpse, and how can you contemplate a corpse without putting
yourself in its place? Being is beyond comprehension, being is
frightening.
A perfectly good person will never decide to take his own life.
This feat requires a background – or remnants – of cruelty. Those
who kill themselves could, under certain conditions, kill: suicide and
murder are in the same family. But suicide is more refined, because
cruelty to oneself is rarer and more complex, not to mention the
exhilaration of feeling crushed by one's own conscience.
The man whose instincts are compromised by goodness does not
intervene in his destiny, nor does he wish to create a new one for
himself; he endures his own, resigns himself to it and carries on, far
from the exasperation, arrogance and malignity that together invite
self-destruction and facilitate it. The idea of hastening his demise
never enters his mind, so modest is he. Indeed, it takes a sickly
modesty to agree to die by any means other than one's own hand.
How can we conceive that a prayer is anything other than a
monologue, that an ecstasy has a value beyond itself, that our
salvation or our loss matters to a god?
And yet that's what we should be able to admit, if only for a
second a day.
The future is such a precipice that I'd like to see the very idea of
it disappear. For it is this idea, far more than the slide into the abyss
that it covers, that sends me into a trance and prevents me from
savouring the present. My reason falters in the face of everything
that happens, everything that has to happen. It's not what's waiting
56

--- PAGE BREAK ---me into a trance and prevents me from
savouring the present. My reason falters in the face of everything
that happens, everything that has to happen. It's not what's waiting
56

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for me, it's the waiting itself, it's the imminence itself, that's
gnawing at me and terrifying me. To find a semblance of peace, I
have to cling to a time without a tomorrow, a time that has been
decapitated.
No matter how many times I repeat the formula of the triple
renunciation: “I reject this world, I reject the world of the ancestors,
I reject the world of the gods”, – when I measure the space that
separates me from the bure and the desert, I feel like a fairground
sannyâsin.
Isn't regret a sign of premature ageing? If that's true, I'm senile
from birth.
You can't get to the bottom of something if you haven't
considered it in the light o f despondency.
The only things that count are those moments when the desire
to be with you is so strong that you'd rather blow your brains out
than exchange a word with someone.
The difficult thing for someone who has half given up is to do
the rest. Existence undoubtedly weighs heavily on him, but he has
not exhausted his surprise at existing. That's where his irresolution
comes from, and the repentance he feels for having stopped halfway,
with no chance of bringing to fruition a long-conceived plan. A
failed renunciation.
It is our suffering that gives weight to our thoughts and prevents
them from turning into pirouettes; it is also our suffering that makes
us proclaim that there is no reality anywhere, that they themselves
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---weight to our thoughts and prevents
them from turning into pirouettes; it is also our suffering that makes
us proclaim that there is no reality anywhere, that they themselves
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lack reality. So they suggest a defence stratagem: we triumph over
them by declaring them unreal, by linking them to the general
deception. If they were bearable, what need would there be to
diminish and unmask them? Since we have no alternative but to
equate them with either nightmare or whim, the most convenient
option is to opt for the latter.
All things considered, it's better if there's nothing. If something
were, we would live in apprehension of not being able to grasp it.
Since nothing is, all moments are perfect and null, and it makes no
difference whether you enjoy them or not.
In the depths of my self-loathing, I say to myself that perhaps
I'm slandering myself, that I can't think of anyone who, plagued by
the same obsessions, could have looked so alive for so many years.
The only way to dissuade someone from suicide is to drive them
to it. He will never forgive you for your action, he will abandon his
plan or delay its execution, he will regard you as an enemy, as a
traitor. You thought you were coming to his rescue, saving him, and
he sees in your eagerness nothing but hostility and contempt. The
strangest thing is that he was begging for your approval, begging for
your complicity. What exactly did he want? Didn't you misjudge
the nature of his distress? What a mistake for him to come to you!
At this stage of his loneliness, what should have struck him was the
impossibility of getting along with anyone other than God.
We're all affected, we just take for granted what isn't real. The
living being as such is both a fool and a blind man: unable to discern
the illusory side of things, he sees solidity and fullness everywhere.
As soon as he miraculously sees things clearly, he opens up to
emptiness and blossoms in it. Richer than the reality it replaces, it
58ory side of things, he sees solidity and fullness everywhere.
As soon as he miraculously sees things clearly, he opens up to
emptiness and blossoms in it. Richer than the reality it replaces, it
58

--- PAGE BREAK ---

takes the place of everything without the everything, it is foundation
and absence, an abysmal variant of being. But unfortunately, we
regard it as a deficiency; hence our fears and failures. So what is it
for us? At best, a diaphanous impasse, an impalpable hell.
In his efforts to exhaust his appetites, to reduce them to nothing,
he has succeeded only in derailing them, in stripping them of
everything that was healthy and stimulating: a thwarted beast of
prey, undermined, regretting his former instincts. Its claws dulled,
but not the desire to use them, all its violence turned to desolation
(for desolation is nothing other than broken, humiliated aggression,
powerless to assert itself).
He began by sabotaging his passions; then it was the turn of his
beliefs. The process was inexorable. The revelation that presided
over his life – that adhering to anything is childish or delusional –
may have been legitimate; he may still subscribe to it, but it is no
less atrocious, no less intolerable. It allows us to endure but not to
exist; it is one of those certainties from which we never recover.
A fighter and quarreler by nature, he no longer fights or
quarrels; at least not with others. The blows that were intended for
them are dealt to himself, and he takes them himself. His ego is the
target. His ego? What ego? He no longer has anyone to hit: no
longer a victim, no longer a subject, nothing but a succession of
agentless acts, an anonymous parade of sensations...
Delivered? A ghost? A wreck?
What does it profit a man to gain the world, if he comes to lose
his soul?“
Win the world, lose your soul! – I've done better: I've lost both.
Whatever I try, it will never be anything other than the
59

--- PAGE BREAK ---n to gain the world, if he comes to lose
his soul?“
Win the world, lose your soul! – I've done better: I've lost both.
Whatever I try, it will never be anything other than the
59

--- PAGE BREAK ---

manifestation of a decline, overt or covert. For a long time I've been
theorising about the man- beyond-everything. I have become this
man, I now embody him. My doubts have come to an end, my
denials have taken shape. I'm living what I once thought I'd live. I
finally found myself a disciple.
60

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave become this
man, I now embody him. My doubts have come to an end, my
denials have taken shape. I'm living what I once thought I'd live. I
finally found myself a disciple.
60

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE INDELIVERSE
The more we consider the Buddha's final exhortation: “Death is
inherent in all composite things. Work tirelessly for your salvation”,
the more we are troubled by the impossibility of feeling ourselves to
be an aggregate, a transitory, if not fortuitous, meeting of elements.
We can easily conceive of ourselves as such in the abstract; in the
immediate, we physically refuse to do so, as if it were a matter of
unassimilable evidence. Until we overcome this organic repugnance,
we will continue to suffer from the bewitching scourge that is the
appetite for existence.
It hardly matters that things are unmasked, that they are
stigmatised by the name of appearances, because we automatically
admit that they contain being. We cling to anything, as long as we
don't have to tear ourselves away from the fascination that drives our
actions and our very nature, from that primordial dazzle that
prevents us from discerning the non-reality in everything.
I am a “being” by metaphor; if I were one in fact, I would
remain one forever, and death, devoid of meaning, would have no
hold on me. “Work tirelessly for your salvation” – in other words,
don't forget that you are a fleeting whole, a compound whose
ingredients are just waiting to come apart. Salvation, in fact, only
makes sense if we are provisional to the point of derision; if there
were the slightest principle of duration in us, we would always be
saved or lost: no more quest, no more horizon. If deliverance
matters, our unreality is a godsend.
We should strip being of all its attributes, ensure that it is no
longer a support, the place of all our attachments, the eternal
61

--- PAGE BREAK ---verance
matters, our unreality is a godsend.
We should strip being of all its attributes, ensure that it is no
longer a support, the place of all our attachments, the eternal
61

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reassuring impasse, a prejudice, the most deeply rooted of all, the
one we have become most accustomed to. We are accomplices of
being, or of what seems to us to be being, because there is no being,
there is only ersatz being. Were there any real being, we would still
have to free ourselves from it and extricate ourselves from it, since
everything that is turns into a subjection and a hindrance. Let's give
others the status of shadows. We will separate ourselves from them
all the more easily. If we are foolish enough to believe that they exist,
we expose ourselves to untold misfortune. Let us have the prudence
to recognise that everything that happens to us, every event, like
every link, is inessential, and that if there is knowledge, what it must
reveal to us is the advantage of moving among ghosts.
Thought, too, is a prejudice and a hindrance. After that, all it
can do is absorb our energy and paralyse our attempts at
emancipation. That it can't help us in any way is proven by the
happiness we feel when we suspend it. Like desire, to which it is
similar, it feeds on its own substance, it likes to manifest itself, to
multiply; at a pinch it can tend towards truth, but what defines it is
the affair: we think out of a taste for thought, just as we desire out of
a taste for desire. In both cases, a fever in the midst of fictions, an
overwork within non-knowledge. The person who knows has come
out of all the fables generated by desire and thought, he has left the
current, he no longer consents to deception. Thinking is part of the
inexhaustible illusion that gives birth to and devours itself, eager to
perpetuate and destroy itself; to think is to compete with delirium.
In so much fever, all that makes sense are the pauses when we
breathe, the moments of pause when we are justified in our panting:
the experience of emptiness – which merges with the totality of these
pauses, these intervals of delirium – implies the momentary
suppression of desire, because it is desire that plunges us into not-
knowing, makes us ramble, and pushes us to project being
62f these
pauses, these intervals of delirium – implies the momentary
suppression of desire, because it is desire that plunges us into not-
knowing, makes us ramble, and pushes us to project being
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---se intervals of delirium – implies the momentary
suppression of desire, because it is desire that plunges us into not-
knowing, makes us ramble, and pushes us to project being
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---

everywhere around us.
The void allows us to ruin the idea of being; but it is not itself
dragged into this ruin; it survives an attack that would be self-
destructive for any other idea. It is true that it is not an idea but
what helps us to get rid of all ideas. Each idea represents an
additional attachment; we need to unclutter our minds of them, just
as we need to unclutter ourselves of all beliefs, obstacles to
withdrawal. We can only achieve this by rising above the operations
of thought: as long as it is exercised, as long as it rages, it prevents us
from unravelling the depths of emptiness, perceptible only when the
fever of the mind and of desire diminishes.
Since all our beliefs are intrinsically superficial, and have a grip
only on appearances, it follows that both are at the same level. We
are constituted to live with them. We are constituted to live with
them, we are forced to: they form the elements of our ordinary, daily
curse. This is why, when we happen to see through them and sweep
them away, we enter into something unheard of, into a dilation that
makes everything else seem pale and episodic, even this curse. Our
borders are receding, if we still have any. The void – me without me
– is the liquidation of the adventure of the “I”, it is being without
any trace of being, a blissful engulfment, an incomparable disaster.
(The danger is of converting emptiness into a substitute for
being, and thus diverting it from its essential function, which is to
hinder the mechanism of attachment. But if it itself becomes an
object of attachment, wouldn't it have been better to stick to being
and the trail of illusions that follows it? To overcome our
attachments, we must learn to adhere to nothing, except the
nothing of freedom).
The ideal would be to lose our taste for people and things
without suffering. Every day we would have to honour someone, be
63s, we must learn to adhere to nothing, except the
nothing of freedom).
The ideal would be to lose our taste for people and things
without suffering. Every day we would have to honour someone, be
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---adhere to nothing, except the
nothing of freedom).
The ideal would be to lose our taste for people and things
without suffering. Every day we would have to honour someone, be
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it a creature or an object, by renouncing them. In this way, by going
around appearances and dismissing them one by one, we would
arrive at a perpetual withdrawal, the very secret of joy. All that we
appropriate, knowledge even more than material acquisitions, only
feeds our anxiety; in exchange, what peace of mind, what radiance
when this frantic quest for goods, even spiritual goods, subsides! It's
bad enough to say “me”, but it's even worse to say “you”. It's a
consolation to have the idea that you have nothing, that you are
nothing. The idea that we possess nothing, that we are nothing, is a
consolation; the supreme consolation lies in the victory over this
very idea. Anxiety is so attached to being that it has to tear itself
away from it if it wants to conquer itself. It succeeds only insofar as
He is superior to being, or at least insofar as He contains a zone
where being is diminished and rarefied. It is there, no longer having
anything to hold on to, that anxiety frees itself and approaches those
confines where God, liquidating the last remnants of His being,
allows Himself to be tempted by emptiness.
The wise man, as the East has always known, refuses to make
plans, never projects. So you would be a kind of wise man... To tell
the truth, you do make plans, but you are reluctant to carry them
out. The more you meditate on one, the more, when you abandon
it, you feel a sense of well-being that can rise to the level of ecstasy.
Everyone lives and breathes the project, the consequence of not
knowing: metaphysical obnubilation on the scale of the Species. For
the disobnubilated, becoming and, even more so, any act that fits
into it, is nothing but a delusion, a deception that generates disgust
or horror.
The important thing is not to produce, but to understand. And
understanding means discerning the degree of awakening a being has
reached, its capacity to perceive the sum of unreality that goes into
64important thing is not to produce, but to understand. And
understanding means discerning the degree of awakening a being has
reached, its capacity to perceive the sum of unreality that goes into
64

--- PAGE BREAK ---ot to produce, but to understand. And
understanding means discerning the degree of awakening a being has
reached, its capacity to perceive the sum of unreality that goes into
64

--- PAGE BREAK ---

every phenomenon.
Let's stick to the concrete and the empty, let's outlaw everything
that falls between the two: “culture”, “civilisation”, “progress”, let's
rehash the best formula we've found here on earth: manual labour in
a convent... There is no truth except in physical exertion and
contemplation; the rest is accidental, useless, unhealthy. Health
consists in exercise and emptiness, in muscles and meditation; in no
way in thought. To meditate is to become absorbed in an idea and
lose oneself in it, whereas to think is to leap from one idea to
another, to indulge in quantity, to store up nothings, to pursue
concept after concept, goal after goal. Meditating and thinking are
two divergent, even incompatible activities.
Isn't forcing oneself into emptiness also a form of pursuit?
Undoubtedly, but it is pursuing the absence of pursuit, aiming for a
goal that dismisses all others from the outset. We live in anxiety
because no goal can satisfy us, because all our desires and, even more
so, our very being, are subject to a fatality that inevitably affects the
accidents that are individuals. Nothing that is actualised escapes
decay. The void – the leap out of this fatality – is, like all the
products of quietism, antitragic in essence. Thanks to it, we should
learn to find ourselves by going back to our origins, to our eternal
virtuality. Doesn't it put an end to all our desires? And what are
those desires, as a whole, compared to a single moment when we
don't pursue any of them, when we don't experience any of them!
Happiness lies not in desire but in the absence of desire, or more
precisely, in the infatuation with this absence – in which we would
like to roll around, sink, disappear, exclaim...
When the void itself seems too heavy or too impure, we rush
towards a nakedness beyond any conceivable form of space, while
65e – in which we would
like to roll around, sink, disappear, exclaim...
When the void itself seems too heavy or too impure, we rush
towards a nakedness beyond any conceivable form of space, while
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---d
like to roll around, sink, disappear, exclaim...
When the void itself seems too heavy or too impure, we rush
towards a nakedness beyond any conceivable form of space, while
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the last instant of time joins the first and dissolves into it.
Let's cleanse our consciousness of everything it encompasses, of
all the universes it drags along with it, let's purge it at the same time
as our perception, let's confine ourselves to white, let's forget all
colours except the one that denies them. What peace there is when
diversity is annulled, when we escape the ordeal of nuance and rush
into unity! Consciousness as pure form, then the very absence of
consciousness.
To escape from the intolerable, we need to look for a diversion,
an escape, a region where no sensation deigns to take on a name, nor
any appetite to become incarnate, to recover our initial rest, to
abolish, along with the past, the odious memory, and above all
consciousness, our eternal enemy, whose mission it is to impoverish
us, to wear us down. Unconsciousness, on the other hand, is
nourishing, it strengthens, it makes us participate in our beginnings,
in our primitive integrity, and plunges us back into the beneficial
chaos before the wound of individuation.
Nothing matters: a great discovery if ever there was one, and one
that no one has been able to take advantage of. This discovery,
which is reputed to be depressing, can be given an exhilarating twist
only by the void, whose motto it is: it alone converts the negative
into the positive, the irreparable into the possible. We know that
there is no self, but this knowledge is fraught with ulterior motives.
Fortunately, the void is there, and when the self disappears, it takes
its place, it takes the place of everything, it fulfils our expectations, it
brings us the certainty of our non-reality. The void is the abyss
without vertigo.
It satisfies our demands for continuity and solidity, and gives us,
against the evidence, a timeless dimension. It's only natural that we
should cling to it, even when we question it and expose its
66satisfies our demands for continuity and solidity, and gives us,
against the evidence, a timeless dimension. It's only natural that we
should cling to it, even when we question it and expose its
66

--- PAGE BREAK ---s for continuity and solidity, and gives us,
against the evidence, a timeless dimension. It's only natural that we
should cling to it, even when we question it and expose its
66

--- PAGE BREAK ---

imposture: The self is the reflex of all living beings... Yet it is
inconceivable to us as soon as we consider it coldly: it crumbles, it
vanishes, it is no more than the symbol of a fiction.
Our first movement is towards the intoxication of identity,
towards the dream of indistinction, towards the âtman, which
responds to our deepest, most secret calls. As soon as we sober up,
we step back and abandon the supposed depths of our being, to turn
towards fundamental destructibility, the knowledge and experience
of which, the disciplined haunting of which, leads us to nirvana, to
fullness in emptiness.
It is because it gives us the illusion of permanence, because it
promises what it cannot deliver, that the idea of the absolute is
suspect, not to say pernicious. Damaged at the root, by no means
fashioned to last, perishable to the core, what we need is not
consolation but healing. The absolute does not resolve our
perplexities or remove our ills: it is only a stopgap and a palliative. A
doctrine that advocates it is true as long as it confines itself to
analysis, as long as it denounces appearances; it inspires doubts as
soon as it opposes them with an ultimate reality. As soon as you
leave the realm of the illusory and try to replace it with the
indestructible, you slip into a lie. If we lie less with emptiness, it's
because we don't seek it for its own sake, for the truth it is supposed
to contain, but for its therapeutic virtues; we make a cure out of it,
imagining that it will rectify the most ancient deviation of the mind,
which consists in supposing that something exists… Man has gone
beyond the stage where we are content with a mere cure. What he is
waiting for is not another artifice, but deliverance. Who will bring it
to him? On this point, the only one that matters, Christianity has
proved less helpful than Buddhism, and Western speculation less
effective than Eastern. Why should we bother with abstractors who
are insensitive to our cries or redeemers who are eager to irritate our
67less helpful than Buddhism, and Western speculation less
effective than Eastern. Why should we bother with abstractors who
are insensitive to our cries or redeemers who are eager to irritate our
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---ddhism, and Western speculation less
effective than Eastern. Why should we bother with abstractors who
are insensitive to our cries or redeemers who are eager to irritate our
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---

wounds? And what else can we expect from this part of the world
that sees the contemplative as an abulic and the awakened as a flayed
person?
We need some kind of saving jolt. It is incredible that a Saint
Thomas should have seen stupor as an “obstacle to philosophical
meditation”, when it is precisely when we are “stupefied” that we
begin to understand, that is to say, to perceive the inanity of all the
“philosophical meditations” of the past. “truths”. Stupefaction stuns
us only to wake us up: it opens us up, delivers us to the essential. A
full metaphysical experience is nothing other than an uninterrupted
stupor, a triumphant stupor.
It is a sign of indigence not to be able to open up to the
purifying emptiness, the soothing emptiness. We are so low and so
entangled in our philosophies that we have only been able to
conceive of nothingness, the sordid version of emptiness. All our
uncertainties, all our miseries and our terrors, we have projected into
it, for what is nothingness in the final analysis if not an abstract
complement to hell, a performance by the reprobate, the maximum
effort towards lucidity? What can beings unfit for deliverance
provide? Too tainted by our impurities for it to allow us to make the
leap towards a virgin concept such as emptiness is for us (which, for
its part, has not inherited hell, is not contaminated by it), –
nothingness, in truth, only represents a sterile extremity, a
disconcerting, vaguely funereal outcome, very close to those
attempts at renunciation that turn sour because there is too much
regret involved.
Emptiness is nothingness stripped of its negative qualities,
nothingness transfigured. If we happen to taste it, our relationship
with the world is altered, something in us changes, even though we
retain our old defects. But we don't belong here in the same way we
68ss transfigured. If we happen to taste it, our relationship
with the world is altered, something in us changes, even though we
retain our old defects. But we don't belong here in the same way we
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---we happen to taste it, our relationship
with the world is altered, something in us changes, even though we
retain our old defects. But we don't belong here in the same way we
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---

used to. That's why it's salutary to have recourse to emptiness in our
fits of rage: our worst impulses are dulled by contact with it.
Without it, who knows? we might now be in prison or in some
shack. The lesson of abdication that he teaches us also invites us to
adopt a more nuanced attitude towards our denigrators, our
enemies. Should we kill them or spare them? Which does more
harm, which eats away more: revenge or victory over revenge? How
do we decide? In the face of uncertainty, let us prefer the torment of
not taking revenge.
That's the limit to the concessions you can make if you're not a
saint.
Only those oppressed by the universality of torment are ripe for
deliverance. To seek deliverance without the awareness of this
torment is impossible, or a vice. There is no such thing as gratuitous
deliverance; we have to free ourselves from something, in this case
the omnipresence o f the intolerable – which we feel as much in the
hypothesis of being as of non-being, since things and semblances of
things also cause suffering. But the emptiness hypothesis does have
one advantage: it sheds a clearer light on the excessiveness of
torment, on the proportions it assumes and the inanity of the cause
that provokes it. We always torture ourselves too much, whether the
world is real or unreal. It is true that most people are unaware of the
extent of their suffering. It is the privilege of consciousness to
awaken to the atrocious, to perceive the haunting illusion to which
beings are prey.
The same is true of deliverance as of Christian salvation: a
theologian, in his scandalous naivety, believes in redemption while
denying original sin; but if sin is not consubstantial with humanity,
what meaning can be attributed to “redemption”? When the
Redeemer came, what did he come to redeem? Our corruption is
69while
denying original sin; but if sin is not consubstantial with humanity,
what meaning can be attributed to “redemption”? When the
Redeemer came, what did he come to redeem? Our corruption is
69

--- PAGE BREAK ---nal sin; but if sin is not consubstantial with humanity,
what meaning can be attributed to “redemption”? When the
Redeemer came, what did he come to redeem? Our corruption is
69

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not accidental, it is permanent, it has always been so. Likewise
iniquity: wrongly labelled a “mystery”, it is an obvious fact, it is even
the most visible thing here on earth, where putting things right
would require a saviour for each generation, or rather for each
individual.
As soon as you stop desiring, you become a citizen of all worlds
and of none; it is through desire that you belong here; once you
have overcome desire, you belong nowhere and have nothing to
envy a saint or a spectre.
It may happen that there is happiness in desire, but beatitude
only appears where all attachment is broken. Bliss is not compatible
with this world. It is for this that the hermit destroys all his ties, it is
for this that he destroys himself.
Cow's urine was the only medicine that monks were allowed to
use in early Buddhist communities. A very sensible restriction. If we
want peace, we can only achieve it by rejecting everything that
causes trouble, everything that man has grafted onto simplicity, onto
original health. Nothing reveals our decline better than the spectacle
of a pharmacy: all the desirable remedies for each of our ailments,
but none for our essential ailment, the one that no human invention
can cure.
If believing oneself to be unique is due to an illusion, it is, let us
agree, so total, so imperious, that it is legitimate to ask ourselves if
we can still call it that. How can we let go of what we will never find
again, of this unheard-of and pitiful nothingness that bears our
name? The illusion in question, the source of all the torments we
have to endure, is so deeply rooted in each of us that we can only
overcome it with the help of a sudden whirlwind that, taking our
ego with it, leaves us alone, without anyone, without ourselves...
70e to endure, is so deeply rooted in each of us that we can only
overcome it with the help of a sudden whirlwind that, taking our
ego with it, leaves us alone, without anyone, without ourselves...
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---eeply rooted in each of us that we can only
overcome it with the help of a sudden whirlwind that, taking our
ego with it, leaves us alone, without anyone, without ourselves...
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unfortunately, we cannot exterminate our desires; we can only
weaken and compromise them. We are cornered by the ego, by the
venom of the “I”. It is when we escape it, it is when we imagine we
are escaping it, that we have some right to use the big words that
true, and false, mysticism uses. There is no such thing as
fundamental conversion: we convert with our nature. Even the
Buddha after enlightenment was only Siddhartha Gotama with the
added knowledge.
Everything you think you've suppressed rises to the surface after
a while: flaws, vices, obsessions. The most obvious imperfections
that you had “corrected” come back disguised, but just as annoying
as before. But the trouble you've taken to get rid of them hasn't
been in vain. It no longer works on us in secret or catches us
unawares; it dominates us, subjugates us; we are still its slaves, it's
true, but non-consenting slaves. Every conscious sensation is one
that we have fought unsuccessfully. We are not otherwise saddened,
since its victory will have driven it out of our deepest life.
In every encounter we have chosen the easiest: God or his
surrogates, people in any case, with whom to chat or argue. We have
replaced contemplation with tension, creating a relationship
between the divinity and ourselves that is annoyingly passionate.
Only men who seek but do not want to find have been able to
become virtuosos of the inner drama. The great modern discovery is
the spiritual malaise, the split between substance and emptiness, or
more precisely between simulacra of the one and the other. Hence
the cult of singularity, in every field. In literary terms, a rare error is
better than a tried and tested, known and accepted truth. The
unusual, on the other hand, has no value on the spiritual level,
where the only thing that counts is the degree of deepening of an
experience.
71n a tried and tested, known and accepted truth. The
unusual, on the other hand, has no value on the spiritual level,
where the only thing that counts is the degree of deepening of an
experience.
71

--- PAGE BREAK ---, known and accepted truth. The
unusual, on the other hand, has no value on the spiritual level,
where the only thing that counts is the degree of deepening of an
experience.
71

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to the Bhagavadgîtâ, he who is “given over to doubt”
is lost, both in this world and in the next, the same doubt that
Buddhism cites as one of the five obstacles to salvation. Doubt is not
deepening but stagnation, the vertigo of stagnation... With it, it is
impossible to move forward or reach a conclusion; it is gnawing and
nothing else. When you think you're the furthest away from it, you
fall back into it, and it starts all over again. It has to explode before
we can embark on the road to emancipation. Without this
explosion, which must pulverise even the most legitimate reasons for
doubt, we linger in the malaise, we cultivate it, we avoid major
resolutions, we eat away at ourselves and we delight in eating away
at ourselves.
The passion to fade away, to leave no trace, is inappropriate
here. Anyone who attaches himself to his name and his work, and
even more so, anyone who dreams of a name or a work, the
wannabe in short: if he persists in striving for salvation, he will at
best only get bogged down in nirvana...
It's hard to imagine a bitter mystic. Knowledge according to the
world, clairvoyant dryness, excess of lucidity without an inner
dimension, bitterness is the prerogative of those who, having cheated
in their relationship with the absolute and with themselves, no
longer know what to take or who to turn to. Despite this, it is more
common than you might think; it is normal, everyday, everyone's
lot. Joy, on the other hand, the fruit of an exceptional hour, seems
to emerge from an imbalance, from a disorder at the most intimate
level of our being, so much so that it contradicts the obvious in
which we live. What if it came from elsewhere, from further away
than ourselves? It is dilation, and all dilation is part of another
world, whereas bitterness is constriction, even if the infinite stands
in the background. But it's an infinity that crushes rather than
72elves? It is dilation, and all dilation is part of another
world, whereas bitterness is constriction, even if the infinite stands
in the background. But it's an infinity that crushes rather than
72

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, and all dilation is part of another
world, whereas bitterness is constriction, even if the infinite stands
in the background. But it's an infinity that crushes rather than
72

--- PAGE BREAK ---

liberates.
It is so full, so enveloping, so marvellously unbearable that we
cannot face it without some supreme reference. In any case, it is this,
and this alone, that makes it conceivable that we could forge gods
out of a need for gratitude.
It's not hard to imagine what a man of today would say if he had
to give his opinion on the only religion that has provided a radical
formula for salvation:
“The quest for deliverance is only justified if we believe in
transmigration, in the indefinite wandering of the self, and if we
aspire to put an end to it. But for those of us who don't believe in it,
what can we put an end to? To this unique, infinitesimal duration?
It is clearly too short to be worth the effort of escaping it. For the
Buddhist, the prospect of other existences is a nightmare; for us, the
cessation of this one, of this nightmare. When it comes to
nightmares, give us another one instead,” we might be tempted to
say, “so that our disgraces don't end too soon, so that they have time
to follow us through several lifetimes.”
    Deliverance is a necessity only for those who feel that they are
being delivered, threatened with an additional existence, who dread
the drudgery of dying and to die again. For us, condemned not to be
reincarnated, what is the point of struggling to free ourselves from
nothing? to free ourselves from a terror whose end is in sight? What
is the point of pursuing a supreme unreality, when everything here
below is already unreal? We don't bother to get rid of something so
unjustified, so unfounded.
“A surfeit of illusion and torment, that's what each of us yearns
for, each of us who are not lucky enough to believe in the endless
round of births and deaths. We long for the curse of being reborn.
The Buddha really went to too much trouble to achieve what?
73for, each of us who are not lucky enough to believe in the endless
round of births and deaths. We long for the curse of being reborn.
The Buddha really went to too much trouble to achieve what?
73

--- PAGE BREAK ---are not lucky enough to believe in the endless
round of births and deaths. We long for the curse of being reborn.
The Buddha really went to too much trouble to achieve what?
73

--- PAGE BREAK ---

definitive death; something that the rest of us are sure to achieve
without meditation or mortification, without any effort whatsoever.
... That's more or less how this fallen man would express
himself, if he were willing to reveal the depth of his thoughts. Who
could blame him? Who hasn't spoken to themselves like that? We
are so immersed in our own history that we would like it to go on
forever. But whether we live once or a thousand times, whether we
have one hour or all of them, the problem is the same: an insect and
a god should not differ in their way of looking at the fact of existing
as such, which is so terrifying (as only a miracle can be) that when
we dwell on it we conceive the desire to disappear forever, so as not
to have to consider it again in other existences. It is this fact that the
Buddha dwelt on, and it is doubtful that he would have modified
his conclusions if he had ceased to believe in the mechanism of
transmigration.
To find that everything lacks a foundation and not to end it all,
this inconsistency is no inconsistency at all: taken to the extreme,
the perception of emptiness coincides with the perception of the
whole, with entry into the whole. You finally begin to see, you stop
groping, you feel reassured, you become more solid. If there is a
chance of salvation outside faith, it is in the ability to be enriched by
contact with unreality.
Even if the experience of emptiness were a deception, it would
still be worth trying. What it sets out to do, what it tries to do, is to
reduce both life and death to nothing, with the sole aim of making
them bearable for us. If it sometimes succeeds, what else can we
hope for? Without it, there is no remedy for the infirmity of being,
no hope of returning, if only for brief moments, to the sweetness of
before birth, the light of pure anteriority.
74else can we
hope for? Without it, there is no remedy for the infirmity of being,
no hope of returning, if only for brief moments, to the sweetness of
before birth, the light of pure anteriority.
74

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRANGLED THOUGHTS
I
A question brooded over indefinitely undermines you as much
as a dull ache.
     In which author did I once read that sadness was due to the
“slowing down” of blood?
That's what it is: stagnant blood.
We are finished, we are the living dead, not when we stop loving
but when we stop hating. Hatred preserves: it is in hatred, in its
chemistry, that is found the “mystery” of life. It's not for nothing
that it's still the best tonic ever found, and tolerated by every
organism, no matter how stupid.
We must think of God and not religion, of ecstasy and not
mysticism.
The difference between the theorist of faith and the believer is as
great as between the psychiatrist and the madman.
It is the hallmark of a rich mind not to shy away from silliness,
that scarecrow of the delicate; hence their sterility.
75

--- PAGE BREAK ---s as
great as between the psychiatrist and the madman.
It is the hallmark of a rich mind not to shy away from silliness,
that scarecrow of the delicate; hence their sterility.
75

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Forming more projects than an explorer or a swindler can
conceive, and yet being reached at the very root of the will.
What is a “contemporary”? Someone you'd like to kill, but don't
really know how.
Refinement is a sign of deficient vitality, in art, in love and in
everything.
A constant tug-of-war between the nostalgia of the flood and the
exhilaration of routine.
To have the vice of scruples, to be an automaton of remorse.
Terrifying happiness. Veins where thousands of planets expand.
The most difficult thing in the world is to be in tune with your
being, and to catch its tone.
Illness adds flavour to deprivation, spices it up, lifts it up.
The mind moves forward only if it has the patience to go round
in circles, that
is to say in depth.
The first thing you have to do when you get up is blush.
Fear was the inexhaustible food of his life. He was swollen,
stuffed, obese with fear.
The lot of someone who has rebelled too much is to have no
76

--- PAGE BREAK ---do when you get up is blush.
Fear was the inexhaustible food of his life. He was swollen,
stuffed, obese with fear.
The lot of someone who has rebelled too much is to have no
76

--- PAGE BREAK ---

energy left for anything but disappointment.
There is no more false statement than that of Origen, according
to which each soul has the body it deserves.
In every prophet there coexists a taste for the future and an
aversion to happiness.
To wish for glory is to prefer to die despised than forgotten. To
suddenly think you have a skull – and not lose your mind!
Suffering makes you experience time in detail, moment by
moment. That's how much time exists for you! It creeps up on
others, on those who don't suffer; so it's true that they don't live in
time, and even that they have ever lived.
The feeling of being cursed is known only to those who know
they would feel it in the very heart of paradise.
All our thoughts are a function of our misery. If we understand
certain things, the credit goes to the shortcomings of our health
alone.
If you didn't believe in your “star”, you wouldn't be able to
perform the slightest act without effort: drinking a glass of water
would seem a gigantic and even insane undertaking.
They ask you for deeds, for proof, for works, and all you can
produce is transformed tears.
The ambitious only resign themselves to obscurity once they
77

--- PAGE BREAK ---ven insane undertaking.
They ask you for deeds, for proof, for works, and all you can
produce is transformed tears.
The ambitious only resign themselves to obscurity once they
77

--- PAGE BREAK ---

have exhausted all their reserves of bitterness.
I dream of a language whose words, like fists, would shatter jaws.
A taste for nothing but hymns, blasphemy and epilepsy...
To conceive a thought, a single thought, – but one that would
tear the universe apart.
It is only to the extent that we do not know ourselves that it is
possible for us to be fulfilled and productive. He who is mistaken
about the motives for his actions, who is reluctant to weigh up his
faults and merits, who senses and fears the impasse to which the
exact view of our capacities leads us, is fruitful. The creator who
becomes transparent to himself no longer creates: to know himself is
to stifle his gifts and his demon.
There is no way of proving that it is better to be than not to be.
“Never let melancholy get the better of you, for it prevents all
good”, says Tauler in his sermon on the “good use of the day”.
The misuse I will have made of each of my days!
I've repressed all my enthusiasms, but they exist, they are my
reserves, my untapped reserves, my future, perhaps.
The mind blown by lucidity.
My doubts have not been able to overcome my automatisms.
I'm still doing things I can't believe I'm doing. To overcome the
78

--- PAGE BREAK ---ves, my future, perhaps.
The mind blown by lucidity.
My doubts have not been able to overcome my automatisms.
I'm still doing things I can't believe I'm doing. To overcome the
78

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tragedy of this insincerity would be to deny myself and cancel myself
out.
You don't really believe until you know who you're supposed to
pray to. A religion is only alive when prayers are being prayed.
Every form of impotence and failure has a positive character in
the metaphysical order.
Nothing can take my mind off the fact that this world is the
fruit of a dark god whose shadow I prolong, and that it is up to me
to exhaust the consequences of the curse hanging over him and his
work.
Psychoanalysis will one day be completely discredited, no doubt
about it. Nevertheless, it will have destroyed our last vestiges of
naivety. After it, we can never be innocent again.
The same night that I decided that our dreams had nothing to
do with our deepest lives and were bad literature, I fell asleep only to
witness the parade of my oldest and most hidden terrors.
What we call  “fortitude”  is the courage not to imagine that
we're in the same
boat; to imagine our destiny differently.
A writer worthy of the name confines himself to his mother
tongue and does not go poking around in this or that idiom. He is
limited and he wants to be, by self-defence. Nothing ruins talent like
being too open-minded.
79

--- PAGE BREAK ---to his mother
tongue and does not go poking around in this or that idiom. He is
limited and he wants to be, by self-defence. Nothing ruins talent like
being too open-minded.
79

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The moralist's primary duty is to depoetise his prose; only then
to observe men.
An old lady once said to me: “Sir, nature has designed us badly!”
– “Nature itself is ill-conceived”, I should have replied, had I
listened to my Manichean reflexes.
Irresolution became a mission for him. Anybody made him lose
his nerve. He was incapable of making a decision in front of a face.
All things considered, it is more pleasant to be surprised by
events than to have foreseen them. When one's strength is exhausted
in the vision of misfortune, how can one face misfortune itself?
Cassandra is doubly tormented: before and during the disaster, while
the optimist is spared the pangs o f foreknowledge.
According to Plutarch, by the 1st century AD, people were only
going to Delphi to ask petty questions (marriage, purchases, etc.).
The decline of the Church imitates that of the oracles.
“The naive is a nuance of the low,” said Fontenelle. There are
words that are the key to a country, because they reveal the secret of
its limits.
Napoleon, on St Helena, liked to leaf through a grammar book
from time to time... By doing so, at least, he proved that he was
French.
Sunday afternoon. Streets clogged with haggard, exhausted,
pitiful crowds – runts everywhere, remnants of continents, vomit
from the globe. You think of the Rome of the Caesars, submerged
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---oon. Streets clogged with haggard, exhausted,
pitiful crowds – runts everywhere, remnants of continents, vomit
from the globe. You think of the Rome of the Caesars, submerged
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by the dregs of the Empire. Every centre in the world is its dumping
ground.
The disappearance of animals is unprecedentedly serious. Their
executioner has invaded the landscape; there is now no room for
anything but him. The horror of seeing a man where you could see a
horse!
The role of insomnia in history, from Caligula to Hitler. Is the
inability to sleep the cause or consequence of cruelty? The tyrant
stays awake – that's what defines him.
As one beggar put it: “When you pray next to a flower, it grows
faster.”
Anxiety isn't difficult; it puts up with everything, because there's
nothing it doesn't like. The first pretext that comes along, an
eminently ordinary news item, she squeezes it, pampers it, extracts
from it a mediocre but sure malaise that she feasts on. She is truly
content with little, everything being good for her. Vague,
unfinished, it lacks class: it would like to be anguish and is only
anxiety.
Why is it that, in life as in literature, rebellion, even pure
rebellion, has something of the false about it, while resignation, even
if it comes from cowardice, always gives the impression of truth?
Huddled on the banks of the Seine, a few million bitter people
work together to create a nightmare that is the envy of the rest of the
world.
81

--- PAGE BREAK ---ys gives the impression of truth?
Huddled on the banks of the Seine, a few million bitter people
work together to create a nightmare that is the envy of the rest of the
world.
81

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is commonly called “having breath” is being prolix.
His sterility was infinite: it was part of his ecstasy.
I'm sure that I'm failing in my duty, that I'm not doing what I
was born to do, that I'm letting the hours go by without taking
advantage of them, even if it's negative. This last criticism is
unjustified, however, as boredom, my bane, is exactly this
paradoxical benefit.
To be naturally combative, aggressive, intolerant – and to have
no dogma!
In front of this insect, as big as a dot, which was running on my
table, my first charitable reaction was to crush him, but then I
decided to leave him to his own devices. What was the point of
rescuing him? I just wanted to know where he was going!
Anxious people build up their fears and then settle into them:
they're dizzy people.
It's impossible to know why an idea takes hold of us and won't
let go. It seems to come from the weakest point of our mind or,
more precisely, the most threatened point of our brain.
An expert at concealing his sullenness, the wise man is someone
who does not deign to hope.
This sudden tension, this waiting for something to happen, for
the fate of the mind to be decided...
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---ealing his sullenness, the wise man is someone
who does not deign to hope.
This sudden tension, this waiting for something to happen, for
the fate of the mind to be decided...
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Perhaps madness is just grief that never changes.
Those moments when it seems impossible to ever disappear,
when life and death lose all reality, when neither can touch us...
It's a mistake to confuse depression with thinking. Anyone who
suffers from depression automatically becomes a thinker.
And the worst thing is that it is, in fact.
The experience of inanity, which is sufficient in itself, also has
such philosophical virtues that we see no reason to look elsewhere.
What does it matter if we discover nothing through it, if we
understand everything thanks to it?
Living is an impossibility that I've been aware of day after day
for, let's say, forty years...
The only function of memory is to help us regret.
I can clearly imagine the moment when there will be no trace of
flesh anywhere, and yet I carry on as if nothing had happened. How
can we define this state where consciousness does not weaken desire,
but rather stimulates it, in the way, it is true, that the worm awakens
the fruit?
The continuity of thought is impeded, and even broken, every
time the physical presence of the brain is felt. Perhaps this is why
mad people only think in flashes.
Sometimes you feel like shouting to the former gods: “Make a
little effort, try to think again!”
83

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I may grumble against everything that is, but I'm still attached
to it – judging by these discomforts, which are like the first
symptoms of being.
The sceptic is the least mysterious man alive, and yet, from a
certain point onwards, he no longer belongs to this world.
84

--- PAGE BREAK ---comforts, which are like the first
symptoms of being.
The sceptic is the least mysterious man alive, and yet, from a
certain point onwards, he no longer belongs to this world.
84

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II
A work cannot emerge from indifference or even from serenity,
from indifference that has been decanted, completed and victorious.
At the height of a trial, we are surprised to find so few works that
can soothe and console. How could they, when they are themselves
the product of unnappeasement and inconsolation?
Every new idea corresponds to an imperceptible lesion in the
mind.
On the mantelpiece, the image of a chimpanzee and a statuette
of Buddha. This accidental rather than deliberate proximity means
that I'm constantly asking myself where I fit in between these two
extremes, between the pre- and trans-figuration of man.
Excess is not so much morbid as the absence of fear. I think of
that friend of mine whom nothing ever frightened, who couldn't
even imagine a danger of any kind. So much freedom, so much
security would one day lead her straight into a straitjacket.
In the certainty of being misunderstood, there is as much pride
as shame. Hence the equivocal nature of any failure. On the one
hand, you take pride in it; on the other, you mortify yourself. All
defeat is impure!
Incurable – an adjective of honour that should benefit only one
disease, the most terrible of all: Desire.
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---ide in it; on the other, you mortify yourself. All
defeat is impure!
Incurable – an adjective of honour that should benefit only one
disease, the most terrible of all: Desire.
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the contrary, they are all too real, since they originate in our
mind, the only regulator of our equilibrium and health.
Any newcomer is a spoilsport, and as soon as someone gets
carried away by anything, even my whims, I'm ready to break it off,
until I'm ready to take the next step, to take my revenge.
Given to resentment, I often give in to it and chew it over, and
only stop when I remember that I envied this or that wise man, that
I even thought I was like him.
Those moments when you want to be absolutely alone because
you're sure that, face to face with yourself, you'll be able to find rare,
unique, unheard-of truths – then disappointment, and soon
bitterness, when you discover that from this solitude you've finally
achieved, nothing comes out, nothing could have come out.
At certain times of the day, instead of the brain, there is a very
specific sensation of usurping nothingness, of steppe that has
replaced ideas.
To suffer is to produce knowledge.
Thought is destruction in its essence. More exactly: in its
principle. We think, we begin to think, in order to break ties,
dissolve affinities, compromise the framework of the “real”. It is only
afterwards, when the work of undermining is well under way, that
thought recovers and rebels against its natural movement.
Whereas sadness can be justified by both reasoning and
observation, joy has no basis in fact; it is a matter of rambling. It is
86

--- PAGE BREAK ---covers and rebels against its natural movement.
Whereas sadness can be justified by both reasoning and
observation, joy has no basis in fact; it is a matter of rambling. It is
86

--- PAGE BREAK ---

impossible to be joyful by the mere fact of living; on the other hand,
we are sad as soon as we open our eyes. Perception as such makes
you gloomy, as animals can testify. Only mice seem to be cheerful
without effort.
On a spiritual level, all pain is an opportunity, but only on a
spiritual level.
I can't do anything without ignoring what I know. As soon as I
contemplate it and think about it, even for a second, I lose heart, I
give up.
As things continue to deteriorate from generation to generation,
predicting disasters is a normal activity, a duty of the mind.
Talleyrand's view of the Ancien Régime is appropriate for any
period, except the one in which we live, and the one in which we
will live. The “sweetness” in question is diminishing; one day it will
have disappeared altogether. In history, we are always on the
threshold of the worst. That's what makes it interesting, that's what
makes us hate it, that's why we can't get away from it.
We can be sure that the 21st century, which is far more
advanced than ours, will regard Hitler and Stalin as choirboys.
Basilides, the Gnostic, was one of the rare minds to have
understood, at the beginning of our era, what is now commonplace,
namely that if humanity wants to save itself, it must return to its
natural limits by returning to ignorance, the true sign of
redemption.
This commonplace, we hasten to add, is still clandestine:
everyone whispers it but is careful not to proclaim it. When it
87

--- PAGE BREAK ---returning to ignorance, the true sign of
redemption.
This commonplace, we hasten to add, is still clandestine:
everyone whispers it but is careful not to proclaim it. When it
87

--- PAGE BREAK ---

becomes a slogan, a considerable step forward will have been taken.
In everyday life, people act by calculation; when it comes to
making decisive choices, they do as they please, and we understand
nothing of individual or collective dramas if we lose sight of this
unexpected behaviour. No one should look at history without seeing
how rarely the instinct for self-preservation manifests itself. It's as if
the defensive reflex only kicks in when faced with some kind of
danger, and stops when faced with a major disaster.
Look at the face of someone who has succeeded, or struggled, in
any field. You won't find the slightest trace of pity. He has the
makings of an enemy.
For days on end, I wanted to carry out an attack on the five
continents, without thinking for a moment about the means.
My energy only comes to life outside of time, and I feel like a
veritable Hercules as soon as I transfer myself in my imagination to a
universe where the very conditions of the act are eliminated.
“The horror and the ecstasy of life” – experienced
simultaneously, as one
experience within the same moment, within each moment.
The amount of fatigue resting in my brain!
What I have in common with the Devil is a bad temper, and like
him I'm a cockroach by divine decree.
88

--- PAGE BREAK ---same moment, within each moment.
The amount of fatigue resting in my brain!
What I have in common with the Devil is a bad temper, and like
him I'm a cockroach by divine decree.
88

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The books I read with the most interest are on mysticism and
dietetics. Is there a connection between them? Yes, undoubtedly,
insofar as mysticism implies asceticism, i.e. dieting.
“Eat nothing until you have sown it and reaped it with your
own hands” – this recommendation of Vedic wisdom is so
legitimate and so convincing that, out of rage at not being able to
comply with it, we would like to starve ourselves to death.
Lying down, I close my eyes. Suddenly, a chasm opens up, like a
well that, in search of water, pierces the ground with a vertiginous
speed. Drawn into this frenzy, into this void that endlessly gives
birth to itself, I merge with the generating principle of the abyss,
and, an unexpected joy, I find myself an occupation and even a
mission.
When Pyrrhon was talking to someone, if his interlocutor left,
he continued to speak as if nothing had happened. I dream of this
strength of indifference, this discipline of contempt, with the
impatience of a madman.
What a friend expects is gentleness, lies and consolation – all
things that require effort, reflection and self-control. The constant
concern for delicacy that friendship implies is unnatural. We can't
wait for the indifferent or the enemies to breathe a sigh of relief!
By dwelling so much on my past and future miseries, I have
neglected those of the present: which has enabled me to bear them
more easily than if I had devoted my reserves of attention to them.
There would be no point in sleeping if every time you fell asleep
89

--- PAGE BREAK ---resent: which has enabled me to bear them
more easily than if I had devoted my reserves of attention to them.
There would be no point in sleeping if every time you fell asleep
89

--- PAGE BREAK ---

you awoke. After a few years of training, death would lose all
prestige and appear to be no more than a formality or a hassle.
In the career of a mind that has disposed of prejudice after
prejudice, there comes a time when it is just as easy to become a
saint as a crook of any kind.
Cruelty – our most ancient trait – is rarely described as
borrowed, simulated or apparent, by contrast with goodness, which
is recent, acquired and has no deep roots: it is a late invention,
untransmissible, that each of us strives to reinvent and succeeds only
in fits and starts, in those moments when our nature is eclipsed,
when we triumph over our ancestors and ourselves.
I often imagine myself climbing onto the roof, getting dizzy and
then, about to fall, letting out a scream. “Imagine” is not the right
word, because I have to imagine it. The thought of murder must
come in the same way.
If you never want to forget someone, if you want to think about
them all the time, if you want to be forever attached to them, you
must not love them but hate them. According to a Hindu belief,
some demons are the result of a vow made in a previous life to
incarnate in a being bent on attacking God, so as to be better able to
think about him and keep him constantly in mind.
Death is the aroma of existence. It alone lends flavour to
moments, it alone combats their dullness. We owe it almost
everything. This debt of gratitude that we agree to pay it from time
to time is the most comforting thing about this world.
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---, it alone combats their dullness. We owe it almost
everything. This debt of gratitude that we agree to pay it from time
to time is the most comforting thing about this world.
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is during our waking hours that pain accomplishes its mission,
that it comes to fruition and blossoms. It is then as boundless as the
night, which it imitates.
We should not feel any kind of anxiety as long as we have the
idea of bad luck. As soon as you invoke it, you calm down, put up
with everything, and are almost happy to suffer injustice and
infirmity. Since it makes anything intelligible, it's not surprising that
both the stupid and the enlightened use it in the same way. It is not
an explanation, it is the explanation itself, reinforced by the
inevitable failure of all the others.
As soon as you dig up the slightest memory, you're ready to
burst with rage.
Where does this monotonous vision come from, when the evils
that gave rise to and sustained it are so diverse? It is because it has
assimilated them and retained only their essence, which is common
to them all.
A chat is any conversation with someone who has not suffered.
Midnight. Tension bordering on high malaise. I feel like
blowing everything up, trying not to burst into pieces. Chaos
imminent.
You can be worthless on your own, and still be someone
through what you feel. But it's also possible not to live up to your
feelings.
In theory, I don't care whether I live or die; in practice, I'm
plagued by all the anxieties that open up a chasm between life and
91

--- PAGE BREAK ---o possible not to live up to your
feelings.
In theory, I don't care whether I live or die; in practice, I'm
plagued by all the anxieties that open up a chasm between life and
91

--- PAGE BREAK ---

death.
Animals, birds and insects have always solved everything. Why
try to do better? Nature loathes originality, it refuses, it hates man.
For some, torment is a need, an appetite and a fulfilment.
Everywhere they feel diminished, except in hell.
An inexhaustible drop of vinegar in the blood: to which fairy am
I indebted?
The envious one forgives you nothing, and will envy you even to
the point of your failure, even to the point of your shame.
The mediocrity of my grief at funerals. It's impossible to feel
sorry for the dead; conversely, any birth throws me into
consternation. It’s incomprehensible, it's insane that we can show a
baby, display this virtual disaster and rejoice in it.
You are haunted by detachment, purity, nirvana, and yet
someone inside you whispers: “If you had the courage to formulate
your most secret wish, you would say: ‘I wish I had invented all the
vices’”.
There's no point in being a monster if you're not accompanied
by a theorist of the “monstrous”.
You let the best in you wither away. If you had been more
careful, you wouldn't have betrayed your true vocation, which was
that of tyrant or hermit.
92

--- PAGE BREAK ---orist of the “monstrous”.
You let the best in you wither away. If you had been more
careful, you wouldn't have betrayed your true vocation, which was
that of tyrant or hermit.
92

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To lash out at oneself at every turn is to show great concern for
truth and justice; it is to reach out and strike at the real culprit.
Unfortunately, it also intimidates and paralyses them, making them
incapable of improving.
Anger that strips you of your skin and flesh, reducing you to a
trembling skeleton!
After certain nights, you should change your name, because
you're not the same person any more.
Who are you? – I'm a stranger to the police, to God, to myself.
For years I've been raving about the virtues of impassivity, and
not a day goes by that I don't experience a violent outburst that, if
left unchecked, would justify internment. These convulsions usually
take place without witnesses but, to tell the truth, almost always
because of someone. My delusions lack staying power: they are too
plebeian, too down-to-earth to know how to emancipate themselves
from a cause.
It's impossible for me to deal with anything external, objective,
impersonal, unless it's evils, that is to say, with what in others makes
me think of myself.
The desolation expressed in the gorilla's eyes. A funereal
mammal. I come down from his gaze.
Whether we consider the individual or humanity as a whole, we
must not confuse progress with advancement, unless we accept that
going towards death is not progress.
93

--- PAGE BREAK ---his gaze.
Whether we consider the individual or humanity as a whole, we
must not confuse progress with advancement, unless we accept that
going towards death is not progress.
93

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The earth is said to be five billion years old, life two or three.
These figures contain all the consolation we could wish for. We
should remember them when we take ourselves seriously, when we
dare to suffer.
The more you stammer, the more you force yourself to write
better. This is revenge for not being able to speak. A stammerer is a
born stylist.
What's hard to understand are the fertile, generous natures that
are always happy to bustle about and produce. Their energy seems
inordinate, and yet we can't envy it. They can be anything, because
in the end they are nothing: dynamic puppets, nobodies with
inexhaustible gifts.
What stops me from going down into the arena is that I see too
many minds there that I admire but don't esteem, so naive do they
seem to me. Why provoke them, why measure myself against them
on the same track? My weariness gives me such superiority that it
hardly seems possible that they will ever catch up with me.
You can think about death every day and still persevere
cheerfully in your being; but the same cannot be said if you think
incessantly about the hour of your death; if you had only that
moment in mind, you would be committing an offence against all
your other moments.
People have been surprised that France, a light-hearted nation,
produced Rancé, founder of the most austere order; perhaps we
should be even more surprised that Italy, an otherwise frivolous
nation, produced Leopardi, the most serious of all poets.
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rancé, founder of the most austere order; perhaps we
should be even more surprised that Italy, an otherwise frivolous
nation, produced Leopardi, the most serious of all poets.
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The tragedy of Germany is that it never had a Montaigne.
France is lucky to have started with a sceptic!
Disgusted by the nations, I turn to Mongolia, where life must be
good, where there are more horses than men, and where the yahoo
has not yet won.
Every fruitful idea turns into a pseudo-idea, degenerates into a
belief. Only a sterile idea retains its status as an idea.
I thought I was more free of vanity than most: a recent dream
was to prove me wrong. I had just died. A white wooden coffin was
brought to me. “You could have put a bit of varnish on it! – I
exclaimed before rushing at the undertakers and hitting them. A
fight ensued. Then I woke up and felt ashamed.
This fever that doesn't lead to any discoveries, that doesn't carry
any ideas but gives you an almost divine feeling of power, which
vanishes as soon as you try to define it – what is it, and what can it
be worth? Maybe it doesn't mean anything, maybe it goes further
than any metaphysical experience.
Happiness is being outside, walking, looking, blending in with
things. Sitting down, you fall prey to the worst of yourself. Man was
not created to be tied to a chair. But perhaps he didn't deserve
anything better.
During the sleepless nights, I tell myself, by way of consolation,
that these hours that I become aware of, I am tearing them out of
nothingness, and that, if I were asleep, they would never have
belonged to me, they would never even have existed.
95

--- PAGE BREAK ---these hours that I become aware of, I am tearing them out of
nothingness, and that, if I were asleep, they would never have
belonged to me, they would never even have existed.
95

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Losing oneself in God” – this cliché for the believer takes on a
revelatory value for the non-believer, who discerns in it a desired and
impracticable adventure, desperate as he is not to be able to lose
himself in something or, preferably, in someone.
Who is superficial? Who is profound? – To go very far in
frivolity is to cease being frivolous; to reach a limit, even in farce, is
to approach extremes which, in one's own sector, a metaphysician is
unable to reach, capable of anything.
An elephant would succumb to these indistinct bouts of
despondency of a cruelty on the verge of dissolving, and which, in
dissolving, would take flesh and marrow with it. All the organs go:
visceral calamity, a feeling of gastric chaos, of being unable to digest
this world.
Man, the exterminator, has a grudge against everything that
lives, everything that moves: soon we'll be talking about the last
louse.
In the Trojan War, there were as many gods on one side as on
the other. This was a fair and elegant view, of which moderns, too
passionate or too vulgar, are incapable, they who want reason to be
partisan at all costs. Homer, at the beginning of our civilisation, had
the luxury of objectivity; at the antipodes, in a late period like ours,
there is only room for attitude.
Alone, even if inactive, you don't waste time. It is almost always
wasted in company. No conversation with yourself can be
completely sterile: something is bound to come out of it, if only the
hope of finding yourself again one day.
96

--- PAGE BREAK ---t always
wasted in company. No conversation with yourself can be
completely sterile: something is bound to come out of it, if only the
hope of finding yourself again one day.
96

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As long as you envy the success of another, even a god, you are a
vile slave like everyone else.
Each being is a hymn destroyed.
If Tolstoy is to be believed, we should only desire death, since
this desire, when it inevitably comes true, will not be a deception
like all the others.
But isn't the essence of desire to strive for anything but death?
To desire is not to want to die. So if we start wishing for death, it's
because desire has been diverted from its proper function; it's a
deviated desire, set against other desires, all destined to disappoint,
whereas it always keeps its promises. To bet on it is to play for sure,
to win in any case: it does not deceive, it cannot deceive. But what
we expect of a desire is that it deceives us. Whether or not it comes
true is secondary; the important thing is that it conceals the truth
from us. If it reveals the truth, it fails in its duty, compromises and
denies itself, and must therefore be struck off the list of desires.
Whether it's Buddhism or Catharism or any other system or
dogma that attracts me, I retain a deep-seated scepticism that
nothing can ever shake and to which I always return after each of my
outbursts. Whether this scepticism is congenital or acquired, it
nonetheless appears to me as a certainty, even as a liberation, when
all other forms of salvation fade or reject me.
The others don't feel they're charlatans, and they are; me... I'm
as much a charlatan as they are, but I know it and I suffer for it.
That I keep sabotaging my faculties, isn't it childish to worry
about it? And yet, instead of flattering me, the evidence of my
97

--- PAGE BREAK ---as they are, but I know it and I suffer for it.
That I keep sabotaging my faculties, isn't it childish to worry
about it? And yet, instead of flattering me, the evidence of my
97

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unaccomplishment discourages and shatters me. To have become
intoxicated with clairvoyance to have come to this! I drag around
remnants of dignity that disgrace me.
Only a writer without an audience can afford the luxury of being
sincere. He addresses no one: at most, himself.
A full life is, at best, a balance of disadvantages.
When you know that every problem is just a false problem,
you're dangerously close to salvation.
Scepticism is an exercise in defascination.
In short, everything boils down to desire or the absence of
desire. The rest is nuance.
I've said so much about life that, hoping to do it justice at last, I
can't find a word that doesn't sound wrong.
98

--- PAGE BREAK ---down to desire or the absence of
desire. The rest is nuance.
I've said so much about life that, hoping to do it justice at last, I
can't find a word that doesn't sound wrong.
98

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III
Sometimes we think it's better to be fulfilled than to let
ourselves go, sometimes we think the opposite. And in both cases,
you're absolutely right.
Our virtues, far from reinforcing each other, on the contrary,
envy and exclude each other. When it becomes clear that they are at
war with each other, we begin to denounce them one by one, only
too happy not to have to go to any more trouble for any of them.
We're not asking for freedom, we're asking for the semblance of
freedom. It is for these simulacra that man has always struggled.
Besides, since freedom is, as has been said, no more than a sensation,
what difference is there between being free and believing oneself to
be free?
Any act as an act is only possible because we have broken with
Paradise, the memory of which, poisoning our hours, turns each of
us into a demoralised angel.
Our repressed prayers burst into sarcasm.
You only feel like you're someone when you're meditating on
some package.
If we make doubt a goal, it can be as consoling as faith. It too is
capable of fervour, it too, in its own way, triumphs over all
perplexities, it too has the answer to everything. So where does its
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---it can be as consoling as faith. It too is
capable of fervour, it too, in its own way, triumphs over all
perplexities, it too has the answer to everything. So where does its
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bad reputation come from? Because it is rarer than faith, more
inaccessible and more mysterious. It's hard to imagine what goes on
in the house of the doubter...
At the market, a boy, no more than five years old, struggles,
contorts and screams. Some women run over and try to calm him
down. He goes on and on, exaggerating, overstepping all limits. The
more you look at him, the more you want to wring his neck. His
mother, realising at last that he had to be taken away, begged him to
leave, furiously: “Come my precious”! – One thinks – with what
satisfaction! – Calvin, for whom children are “little scum”, or Freud,
who calls them “polymorphous perverts”. Both would gladly have
said: “Let the little monsters come to me!”
There is no diabolical element in the decision to renounce
salvation, because if there were, where would the serenity that
accompanies this decision come from? There is nothing diabolical
about serenity. When you're around the Devil, you're morose.
That's my case... So my serenity is short-lived: just long enough for
me to decide to do away with salvation. Fortunately, I often decide
to do so, and each time, what peace!
Waking up early, full of energy and drive, wonderfully capable
of committing some egregious villainy.
“I am free to the last degree” – this word raised the tramp who
uttered it that day above philosophers, conquerors and saints, since
none of them, at the height of their careers, dared to invoke such a
success.
The fallen one is a man like the rest of us, with the difference
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---, conquerors and saints, since
none of them, at the height of their careers, dared to invoke such a
success.
The fallen one is a man like the rest of us, with the difference
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that he didn't deign to play the game. We blame him and shun him,
we resent him for revealing and exposing our secret, and we rightly
consider him a wretch and a traitor.
Rushed from sleep by the question: “Where is this moment
going?” – “To death”, was my reply, and I fell back asleep
immediately.
Only physiological and theological explanations should be given
credence. What lies in between is of little importance.
The pleasure we derive from anticipating a catastrophe
diminishes as it approaches, and ceases altogether as soon as it
occurs.
Wisdom disguises our wounds: it teaches us how to bleed in
secret.
The critical moment for a prophet is when he finally becomes
convinced by what he is saying, when he is won over by his rantings.
A slave and an automaton from then on, he will be busy regretting
the time when, free, he announced calamities without really
believing in them, when he created his own fears.
It's not easy to play the Isaiah and Jeremiah sincerely. That's
why most prophets prefer to be impostors.
Everything that happens to us, everything that matters to us, is
of no interest to others: it is on the basis of this evidence that we
should draw up our rules of conduct. A thoughtful mind should
banish the word event from its intimate vocabulary.
101

--- PAGE BREAK ---erest to others: it is on the basis of this evidence that we
should draw up our rules of conduct. A thoughtful mind should
banish the word event from its intimate vocabulary.
101

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Anyone who hasn't died young deserves to die.
Nothing makes you feel better than to fall asleep with a clear
view of one of your faults, which you didn't dare admit to yourself
until now, and which you didn't even know you had.
Everything about people fades and disappears, except their eyes
and their voices: without both, you wouldn't be able to recognise
anyone after a few years.
At this very moment, all over the world, thousands and
thousands of people are dying, while I clutch my pen in vain for a
word to comment on their agony.
To dwell on an act, even an unspeakable one, to invent scruples
and become entangled in them, shows that you still care about your
fellow human beings, that you enjoy torturing yourself because of
them.
... I will only consider myself liberated on the day when,
following the example of murderers and wise men, I have cleansed
my conscience of all the impurities of remorse.
I'm tired of being me, and yet I keep praying to the gods to give
me back to myself.
To regret is to deliberate in the past, to substitute the eventual
for the irreparable, to cheat by tearing oneself apart.
Delusion is undoubtedly more beautiful than doubt, but doubt
is more solid.
102

--- PAGE BREAK ---te in the past, to substitute the eventual
for the irreparable, to cheat by tearing oneself apart.
Delusion is undoubtedly more beautiful than doubt, but doubt
is more solid.
102

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Scepticism is the faith of wavering minds.
Seeing slander as words, nothing but words, is the only way to
bear it without suffering. Let's dismantle any statement made against
us, let's isolate each word, let's treat it with the disdain that an
adjective, a noun, an adverb deserves.
... If not, let's liquidate the slanderer at once.
Our pretensions to detachment always help us not to ward off
blows but to “digest” them. In every humiliation, there is a first and
a second stage. It is in the second that our coquetry with wisdom
proves useful.
The place you occupy in the “universe': one point, and then
some! Why beat yourself up when you're obviously so little? Once
you've made that realisation, you immediately calm down: no more
worries in the future, no more metaphysical or any other kind of
panic. And then this point expands, swells, replaces space. And
everything begins again.
To know is to discern the scope of illusion, a key word as
essential to the Vedânta as it is to the Chanson, the only ways of
translating the experience of unreality.
At the British Museum, in front of the mummy of a singer
whose little fingernails can be seen peeking out from the bandages, I
remember swearing that I would never again say: me...
There's a sure sign that you've understood everything: crying
without a reason.
103

--- PAGE BREAK ---be seen peeking out from the bandages, I
remember swearing that I would never again say: me...
There's a sure sign that you've understood everything: crying
without a reason.
103

--- PAGE BREAK ---

For many, the need to pray stems from the fear of an imminent
collapse of the brain.
Happiness and unhappiness are almost equal evils, so the only
way to avoid them is to make yourself external to everything.
When I spend days and days in the midst of texts that are all
about serenity, contemplation and simplicity, I get the urge to go
out into the street and beat the shit out of the first passer-by.
The proof that this world is not a success is that we can
compare ourselves without indecency to the One who is supposed to
have created it, but not to Napoleon or even to a tramp, especially if
the latter is unequalled in his kind.
No Father of the Church has been honest enough to apply this
pagan word of Providence to God.
Speech and silence. We feel safer with a madman who speaks
than with a madman who cannot open his mouth.
If a Christian heresy, any heresy, had prevailed, it would not
have lost itself in nuances. More daring than the Church, it would
also have been more intolerant, because more convinced. There can
be no doubt: victorious, the Cathars would have surpassed the
Inquisitors.
Let us feel pity for every victim, no matter how noble.
What remains of a philosopher is his temperament, which
causes him to forget himself, to indulge in contradictions, whims
104

--- PAGE BREAK ---us feel pity for every victim, no matter how noble.
What remains of a philosopher is his temperament, which
causes him to forget himself, to indulge in contradictions, whims
104

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and reactions that are incompatible with the fundamental lines of
his system. If he aims for the truth, he must free himself from any
concern for coherence. He should only express what he thinks, not
what he has decided to think. The more alive he is, the more he will
let himself go, and he will only survive if he disregards what he
should believe.
When it comes to meditating on emptiness, impermanence and
nirvana, lying down or squatting is the best position. It is the very
position where these themes were designed.
Only in the West do people think on their feet. Perhaps that's
why his philosophy is so annoyingly positive.
We can only endure an insult by imagining the scenes of
revenge, of the triumph we will one day have over the wretch who
has scorned us. Without this perspective, we would fall prey to
troubles that would radically renew Madness.
All agony is in itself curious; the most interesting, however, is
that of the cynic, the one who despises it in theory.
What is the name of this bone I am touching? What can it
possibly have in common with me? We'd have to repeat the
operation with another part of the body and go on like this until
nothing is ours anymore.
To have both a taste for provocation and a taste for obliteration,
to be a troublemaker by instinct and a corpse by conviction!
After so many living people, all dead, – how tiring to die in turn
105

--- PAGE BREAK ---for provocation and a taste for obliteration,
to be a troublemaker by instinct and a corpse by conviction!
After so many living people, all dead, – how tiring to die in turn
105

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and to suffer, like them, this inane fear! How can we explain the fact
that it still persists, that it has not been exhausted or discredited, and
that we can still experience it like the first mortal?
The hermit takes responsibility only for himself or herself or for
everyone else, and never for anyone else. You take refuge in solitude
so that you have no one to look after you: yourself and the universe
are enough.
If I were sure of my indifference to salvation, I would be by far
the happiest man alive.
There's no better way to find yourself than to be “forgotten”.
No one to come between us and what matters. The more others
turn away from us, the more they work towards our perfection: they
save us by abandoning us.
My doubts about Providence never last long: who else but
Providence would be able to hand out our daily ration of defeat so
punctually?
“You mustn't take anything to heart” – repeats the man who
blames himself every time he suffers and never misses an
opportunity to suffer.
The battle between the fanatic and the impostor in each
individual is such that we never know who to turn to.
“What are you working on? What are you up to?“
Would we have dared to approach Pyrrhon or Lao-tsu in this
way? The questions we couldn't ask our idols, we can't imagine
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---n to.
“What are you working on? What are you up to?“
Would we have dared to approach Pyrrhon or Lao-tsu in this
way? The questions we couldn't ask our idols, we can't imagine
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---

being asked ourselves.
By nature I'm so resistant to the slightest undertaking that to
resolve to carry one out I have to first read some biography of
Alexander or Genghis Khan.
What should make old age bearable is the pleasure of seeing all
those who believed in us disappear one by one, and whom we can
no longer disappoint.
I like to talk about decay, I like to live as a parasite of Original
Sin.
If only we could make ourselves inhumiliable !
Contrary to the common allegation, suffering attaches us, nails
us to life: it is our suffering, we are flattered to be able to endure it,
it testifies to our quality as beings and not as spectres. And the pride
of suffering is so virulent that it is only surpassed by the pride of
having suffered.
Striving to save the past, regret is our only recourse against the
manoeuvres of oblivion: what is it, in essence, if not memory going
on the attack? By resurrecting many, many episodes and distorting
them, he offers us all the versions of our lives we want, so it's fair to
say that it's thanks to him that our lives seem both pitiful and
fulfilled.
Any theoretical formula that arises during sleep interrupts its
course. Dreams are events. As soon as one of them turns into a
problem, or ends with a discovery, we wake up with a start.
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---al formula that arises during sleep interrupts its
course. Dreams are events. As soon as one of them turns into a
problem, or ends with a discovery, we wake up with a start.
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Thinking” while we sleep is an anomaly, common among the
oppressed, those who sleep badly because their misery culminates in
definitions, night after night.
We torment ourselves, we create a “conscience” for ourselves,
and then we realise with horror that we can't get rid of it.
The discomfort resulting from a lowliness is the state most
conducive to self-reflection, and even merges with it. So it's hardly
surprising that every time we feel it, we feel as if we've finally got to
know ourselves.
“Only the spirit that challenges the obligation to exist is
subversive; all the others, led by the anarchist, make a pact with the
established order.
My favourites: the Cave Age and the Age of Enlightenment.
But I'm not forgetting that caves led to history and living rooms
to the Guillotine.
Flesh for money everywhere. But what is subsidised flesh worth?
– In the past, we begot children out of conviction or by accident;
today, we do it to get subsidies. This over-calculation is bound to
affect the quality of the sperm.
Looking for meaning in anything is less the work of a naive
person than of a masochist.
Becoming aware of our complete, radical destructibility is
salvation itself. But to know that we are destructible at every
moment is to encounter our deepest tendencies. Salvation, an
108

--- PAGE BREAK ---ware of our complete, radical destructibility is
salvation itself. But to know that we are destructible at every
moment is to encounter our deepest tendencies. Salvation, an
108

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unnatural feat?
Frivolous and disjointed, an amateur at everything, all I really
knew was the inconvenience of being born.
We should philosophise as if “philosophy” didn't exist, like a
troglodyte dazzled or frightened by the parade of plagues unfolding
before his eyes.
Enjoying one's pain – the sentiment and even the expression
appear in Homer, albeit on an exceptional basis. As a general rule,
we will have to wait until more recent times. It's a long way from
epic to diary.
You wouldn't be interested in people if you didn't hope one day
to meet someone more uptight than you.
Rats, confined to a small space and fed only on the chemicals we
gorge ourselves on, are said to become much nastier and more
aggressive than usual.
Condemned, as they multiply, to pile up on top of each other,
men will hate each other much more than before, they will even
invent unusual forms of hatred, they will tear each other apart as
they never have before, and a universal civil war will break out, not
because of demands but because of the impossibility of humanity
witnessing the spectacle it is offering itself. Even now, if for a
moment it could see the whole future, it would not go beyond that
moment.
There is no true solitude except when we think of the urgency of
a prayer – a prayer after God and after Faith itself.
109

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We need to tell ourselves over and over again that everything
that makes us happy or unhappy is pointless, that it's all completely
derisory and pointless.
... Well, I say it to myself over and over again every day, and I
don't stop rejoicing and mourning.
We're all at the bottom of a hell, where every moment is a
miracle.
END
“Those who did not live before 1789 do not know the sweetness of life”
(N.d.N.)
110