Very little of the official version is true, but unfortunately it is the 
only account that has appeared in the history books.

The massive crisis 
that we are in today is a direct result of a covert plot that brought that 
war to a conclusion.

Closely related to this are numerous political 
assassinations that go back for several decades.

Unless we confront this 
problem/ we are not going to solve it.

The truth, however, is so grotesque 
and unbelievable that it requires considerable courage to face it, accept 
it, and stay with it.

Even as I write this I shake my head and tell myself 
that it can't be, but 1 know it is.

As you can probably tell by now, we 
are dealing with massive repression rather than with a lack of facts.

I 
know that once you have this "framework," you'll see the evidence all over 
the place.

It has been hard work keeping the truth out of our conscious 
awareness all these years, but now it is time to let it in.

I stepped into all this back in the l960's when I was a foreign service 
officer.

While 1 was editor of the Secretary of State's Daily Summary, 
the first thing I had to write up each day was the body count in the Vietnam 
War, separated into A groups—American, South Vietnamese, Viet Cong, and 
North Vietnamese.

(I'm glad now that the Vietnam Memorial Wall is so close 
to the State Department building in Washington.) I knew that all that death 
would not have been taking place if Roosevelt had lived through his fourth 
term.

FDR had been pressuring the French and British to grant independence 
to their colonies well before W.W.II ended.

I kept thinking over and over 
that if Roosevelt had only lived, we would not be having the Vietnam War, 
and so many lives would have been saved.

And during the time I was "on 
the inside," I also had some experiences with CIA political assassinations, 
overseas and here in the U.S.

I personally blocked the CIA from murdering 
one well-known American politician.And during the time I was "on 
the inside," I also had some experiences with CIA political assassinations, 
overseas and here in the U.S.

I personally blocked the CIA from murdering 
one well-known American politician.

I have always detested the taking of 
human life for business or political reasons, and so I decided to resign 
from State to get away from so much unnecessary killing.

I found a job 
in the Labor Department, and started attending law school at night.

But 
in May, 1970, when President Nixon invaded Cambodia and had the protestors 
deliberately shot to death at Kent State, I decided I would have to become 
politically active in my "spare time," even at the risk of my personal 
well-being, and so I joined a national group of lawyers and writers called 
the "Committee to Investigate Assassinations," headquartered in Washington, 
D.C.

Three years later, during Watergate, we found out that our committee 
was a CIA front.

I was unceremoniously expelled from the board of directors, 
and fired from my job at the Labor Department.

Times have been pretty tough 
since then.

I returned to Minnesota and found a job editing law books.

On my own time I organized a state-wide group of "assassination buffs," 
and became president of it.

But pressure was put on my employer, and I 
was forced to choose between my job and the assassination work.

I chose 
the latter.

Our group fell apart when the treasurer, who many suspected 
was "government," destroyed a bundle of checks that we had gotten in a 
campaign to raise funds.

1 have spent thousands of hours researching the JFK murder and other 
dirty tricks carried out by the CIA and its parent group, the "Corporate 
Elite," headquartered in New York City, David Rockefeller, "Chairman of 
the Board." For many years I knew that there was something behind the JFK 
assassination that was even more horrid and fundamental “than Kennedy's 
slaying in Dallas.Our group fell apart when the treasurer, who many suspected 
was "government," destroyed a bundle of checks that we had gotten in a 
campaign to raise funds. 1 have spent thousands of hours researching the JFK murder and other 
dirty tricks carried out by the CIA and its parent group, the "Corporate 
Elite," headquartered in New York City, David Rockefeller, "Chairman of 
the Board." For many years I knew that there was something behind the JFK 
assassination that was even more horrid and fundamental “than Kennedy's 
slaying in Dallas. To my shock 1 discovered that the Corporate Elite had 
in 1945 murdered President Franklin Roosevelt and cut a deal with the German 
Nazis to quietly close down W.W.II and turn the U.S. and U.K. against the 
Soviet Union. So here we are half a century later, after killing millions 
of human beings and wasting 6 trillion dollars on the Pentagon and CIA, 
and in the process wrecking our economy. But David Rockefeller will whine 
that it was their predecessors in the Corporate Elite, now all dead, who 
were solely responsible. Don't believe it for a single minute) The 
successors of the Corporate Elite have continued with their covert fascism, 
supporting every dictator they could find overseas, and mucking around with 
domestic politics, doing everything from rigging polls to stealing elections 
to murdering the two Rennedys, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, and many other 
politicians. David Rockefeller's veto would have stopped the JFK murder 
when the Corporate Elite voted on it. Stop and think hard about that. The lie is "lone assassin"; the truth, David Rockefeller, is that your "lone 
veto" would have saved John Kennedy's life. In the name of decency, David 
Rockefeller, speak no more about "lone assassin") 
This conspiracy was organized in 1943, although the same group of 
billionaires had attempted to overthrow FDR in the mid-1930's in the plot 
involving Gen. Smedley Butler, and the Corporate Elite considered kidnaping 
Page 1ized in 1943, although the same group of 
billionaires had attempted to overthrow FDR in the mid-1930's in the plot 
involving Gen. Smedley Butler, and the Corporate Elite considered kidnaping 
Page 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Roosevelt in 1940.

The players in the 1943 plot were the German Nazis, 
British Conservatives, led by Winston Churchill, and the American Corporate 
Elite, with Allen Dulles in a key role.

They not only concluded a covert 
peace settlement with Germany but started the Cold War, and came very close 
on dozens of occasions to launching a nuclear war, which would have killed 
us all.

This danger remains, as does the mountainous spending on militarism 
and ClAism.

I cannot afford to send out more than 4 legal-size pages in this 
mailing, so it's necessary to eliminate almost all footnotes and to cut 
out a great deal of the substantive matter and proof.

This means that I*m 
going to have to paint the picture with some pretty broad strokes.

My 
purpose here is to break through our repression.

To open this subject up.

Please help me out by removing the staple and xeroxing these pages.

And 
then sending copies of this paper to the history departments and political 
science departments of all the colleges and universities in your area.

Also, please feel free to distribute copies to your teaching colleagues, 
students, reporters and friends.

I would appreciate hearing your criticism, 
pro and con.

I'll also ask you for your emotional support.

This is a 
dangerous thing to be doing, and I know that I'm going to be in for real 
trouble for some time.

I'm not Superman.

I can't do this all alone.

It 
may take years to get any of this in print, so let's start an informal 
exchange of letters and papers and ideas, as Otto Fenichel did after coming 
to America, or as the Founding Fathers did in the years before the American 
Revolution.

(Let's not forget that the Revolution came about because of 
George Ill's militarism.

The purpose of the tea tax or the stamp tax was 
to raise money for a standing army of 10,000 Redcoats in the colonies.(Let's not forget that the Revolution came about because of 
George Ill's militarism.

The purpose of the tea tax or the stamp tax was 
to raise money for a standing army of 10,000 Redcoats in the colonies.

I do not advocate violence, but if we don't straighten out our country, 
there certainly will be violence, on both sides, with the Corporate Elite 
possibly deciding on the use of open fascism to control the 90% of us who 
are in the middle class and the poor class.

It's often been said that verbal 
violence—debate--is the only substitute for physical violence in the 
political realm.

But the Corpoarate Elite has virtually shut down such 
debate in America by making sure critics don't get a foot on the poltical 
ladder, and by "diselecting" any office holders who become critics.

And 
the Corporate Elite tightly controls the media.) 
Let's get into substance.

Winston Churchill seems to be central figure 
in this plot.

He had always been extremely disturbed over the Communist 
victory in Russia in 1917.

Right away he and British intelligence went 
to work to overthrow the Communists.

They lined up a "lone assassin" to 
shoot Vladimir Lenin on August 30, 1918, as he was getting into his car.

(I wonder whether the CIA didn't use that blueprint when it had Reagan shot 
in 1981, just as he was getting to his car.

In both cases, the victims 
came within a hair's breadth of dying.) Churchill was also the one who 
cooked up the idea of invading the Soviet Union, and troops from over a 
dozen nations did so.

President Wilson opposed that, but finally acceded 
to sending in American troops when it appeared the Japanese would grab all 
of Siberia.

Wilson's purpose was not to overthrow the Communists, but to 
block the Japanese.

The British were also supporting the "White Russian 
Army," which came very close to beating the Communists in the Civil War 
of 1918-20.Wilson's purpose was not to overthrow the Communists, but to 
block the Japanese.

The British were also supporting the "White Russian 
Army," which came very close to beating the Communists in the Civil War 
of 1918-20.

The Communists were driven so far back that they were down 
to holding about only 8% of the Soviet territory, before the White Russian 
effort collapsed in 1920.

But Churchill and British intelligence continued 
to plot the overthrow of the Soviet Union.

Apparently, most of the plots 
in the 1930's against Stalin were real and were subsidized by the British.

We have been told that they were merely a figment of Stalin's imagination, 
but our own Ambassador in Moscow at the time of the "Show Trials," Joseph 
Davies,reported that the defendants were in fact guilty.

Who knows but 
that the recent collapse of the Soviet Union and Communism were not 
"engineered" by the CIA?

Economists were saying back in the 1950's that 
if we raised our defense budget high enough, the Soviets would follow suit, 
and that that would bankrupt them.

Another important factor in the collapse 
was the massive foreign debt David Rockefeller and his fellow bankers 
"arranged" for the Soviet Union.

The CIA lied about the amount in several 
annual issues of its World Fact Book until the press found out that the 
total sum was $87 billion dollars!

Winston Churchill was also a prominent participant in the negotiations 
that resulted in the Versailles Treaty.

The then-British Prime Minister, 
David Lloyd George, had difficulty controlling Churchill, who teamed up 
with French Premier Georges Clemenceau, to scuttle the democratic efforts 
of Wilson.

Wilson and Lenin were the two idols of the Europian masses 
yearning to be free, and Churchill was not going to allow democracy to gain 
a foothold in Europe over the old system.

Conventional wisdom also tells 
us another lie, that Wilson went down to defeat with his 14 Points because 
he was an inflexible moralist.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wilson and Lenin were the two idols of the Europian masses 
yearning to be free, and Churchill was not going to allow democracy to gain 
a foothold in Europe over the old system. Conventional wisdom also tells 
us another lie, that Wilson went down to defeat with his 14 Points because 
he was an inflexible moralist. In fact, Churchill and Clemenseau were 
plotting in the shadows with Americans to torpedo Wilson completely. The 
Dulles brothers, Allen Dulles and John Foster Dulles, were at Versailles 
Page 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---H^iKn^aMr^T* »■ 
along with their uncle, Secretary of State Robert Lansing.

None of them 
were tans of Wilson, and 1 suspect all three colluded against him, along 
with Churchill.

Wilson was talked into sacrificing 12 of his Points at 
Versailles in order to save his idea of a League of Nations, and then, of 
course, the League was later rejected in the U.S.

In all likelihood, this 
plot was a '’package deal," orchestrated by Churchill, but without the 
knowledge or concurrence of Lloyd George.

The schemers did not, however, 
anticipate that President Wilson would take his case to the people in his 
famous railroad trip around the country.

Wilson was overwhelmingly 
convincing the American public to support the League of Nations when, very 
conveniently for the plotters, he suffered a "stroke" and was put out of 
cor mission permanently.

And, of course, the Versailles Treaty was then 
defeated in the U.S.

Senate.

I suspect that Wilson was actually poisoned 
with arsenic tri-oxide, which can give symptoms of stroke for the 
unsuspecting.

And while I'm on this subject, I might add that Churchill 
and British intelligence probably also assassinated Lenin with arsenic.

He died at a relatvely young age, 53.

But it will be difficult to prove, 
if his body was preserved with arsenic, the universal practice used by 
museums to preserve their animal specimens*'.

But Wilson's body is entombed 
in the National Cathedral in Washington, and could be easily tested now 
lor arsenic or any other poison.

A related point which I should have mentioned above was that President 
Wilson did not want to take the U.S.

into W.W.I.

He was dragged into it.

When that war began, we were in a mild depression.

The British started 
to buy massive amounts of American goods.

This ended our economic downturn, 
but then the British ran out of hard currency and gold to pay us.

New York 
bankers rushed in to make loans to American manufacturers so that our 
factories would not be shut down again.This ended our economic downturn, 
but then the British ran out of hard currency and gold to pay us.

New York 
bankers rushed in to make loans to American manufacturers so that our 
factories would not be shut down again.

But the war dragged on, and American 
bankers were beginning to fear that if Germany won, they would lose all 
their money.

It wouldn't surprise me to find out that they worked on the 
Q.T.

to have the Lusitania sunk in order to turn Americans against Germany.

Anti-British feeling had been a staple of American political thought since 
the American Revolution.

(I can even remember how strong it was in 1939, 
and 1 was only 4 years old at the time!) In addition, more Americans were 
(and probably still are) of German descent than British.

When the British found themselves at war with Germany in 1939, it was 
ironic that Churchill had to turn to President Roosevelt and Joseph Stalin 
to save England.

Churchill had always called Roosevelt "America's Kerensky." 
The two leaders had never been friends.

Roosevelt disliked Churchill from 
the first time they met, two decades earlier.

Before the war started 
Churchill oftimes expressed his admiration for fascism.

At one time he 
had even said that if he were an Italian he would have become a member of 
Mussolini's party!

A related point is the real significance of the Munich 
Conference.

The lie that we have been told over and over is that it was 
learning the lesson that we have to stand up to dictators.

What really 
happened there was that the French and British spent the whole time trying 
to convince Hitler to attack the Soviet Union and smash Communism.

One 
should recall that the British and French kept the Americans and Soviets 
out of the Munich Conference, and with plenty of reason!What really 
happened there was that the French and British spent the whole time trying 
to convince Hitler to attack the Soviet Union and smash Communism.

One 
should recall that the British and French kept the Americans and Soviets 
out of the Munich Conference, and with plenty of reason!

It's also significant that Churchill sent his agent, William Stephenson, 
also known as "Intrepid," to the Rockefeller Center in New York City, rather 
than to Washington, to enlist the Americans in the war against Hitler.

In a book published in 1991, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor, British authors James 
Rusbndger and Eric Nave state that British intelligence had broken the 
Japanese code, and that Churchill accordingly knew that Pearl Harbor was 
to be attacked but kept the information from Roosevelt in order to rouse 
the American public and thereby pull us into the war.

If this is true, 
and I suspect it is, then 2,500 U.S.

Navy men died needlessly in the 
conflagration at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.

Churchill has been held up to us as the great leader of the alliance 
against Germany and Japan.

This is but another lie of the Corporate Elite, 
who don't want the credit to go where it belongs: to the Soviet Union that 
did most of the fighting and lost 20 million of its citizens, and to the 
U.S., which supplied most of the war goods to the Soviets, and lost 
400,000 of its own soldiers and sailors.

Churchill certainly spun some 
catchy phases during the war, but he had virtually nothing to do with 
achieving the final victory.

My friend, Tris Coffin, the writer, once told 
me that it was also Churchill who talked Truman into dropping the two atom 
bombs on Japan.

More needless killing.

Is it no wonder that Churchill 
belted down two bottles of brandy every single day of his life?

But that 
isn't even the half of it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is it no wonder that Churchill 
belted down two bottles of brandy every single day of his life? But that 
isn't even the half of it. After the Soviet Union and the United States 
entered the war, Churchill schemed to postpone the Normandy Invasion as 
long as possible, hoping that the Germans would destroy the Soviet Union. He probably was responsible for getting America engaged in the fighting 
in North Africa, Sicily, Italy, and Southern France so that the Germans 
could decimate the Soviets along the Eastern Front. But Churchill was busy 
Page 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---S.

v.

T 
_ }r,r'' !

* 
with other plotting too.

When Roosevelt wanted to work with the French 
Admiral Jean Darlan in the North African campaign, Churchill had the Admiral 
assassinated.

The turning point of the war came with the Soviet victory at Stalingrad 
on February 2, 1943.

'Churchill panicked as he envisioned the Russians 
marching all the way across Europe right up to the English Channel.

He 
frantically tried to talk Roosevelt into an invasion that would move straight 
up Eastern Europe to cut off the Soviets.

That was his nonsense about 
invading the Balkans in order “to hit the Nazis at the soft underbelly of 
Europe." Churchill failed with that idea, but he continued to work 
feverishly to stall the Normandy landing, something that greatly angered 
Roosevelt, Gen.

Dwight Eisenhower, and Stalin.

Meanwhile, FDR was doing all he could to reassure Stalin of America's 
good intentions, and his plans to work with the Soviet Union after the great 
war to bring lasting peace to the world.

Roosevelt went quite far.

For 
example, when security officials at the 1943 Tehran Conference told him 
he was not safe at the American Embassy, which was located a good distance 
from dowr.town Tehran, he choose to accept Stalin’s offer to stay at the 
Soviet Embassy, rather than Churchill's offer.

The British Embassy was 
located next door to the Soviet Mission.

Roosevelt also took Stalin's side 
time after time with regard to substantive issues, and he joined Stalin 
in ribbing Churchill on numerous occasions.

Finally, Stalin did come to 
trust Roosevelt, but he continued to keep a watchful eye on Churchill.

Soon after the Stalingrad victory, Churchill enlisted the U.S.

Corporate 
Elite in behind-the-scenes talks with the German Nazis.

Allen Dulles, the 
OSS point men in Switzerland became deeply involved in this covert operation 
behind Roosevelt's back.

Rudolf Hess, who had flown to England on a peace 
mission in May, 1941, was enlisted to help.Allen Dulles, the 
OSS point men in Switzerland became deeply involved in this covert operation 
behind Roosevelt's back.

Rudolf Hess, who had flown to England on a peace 
mission in May, 1941, was enlisted to help.

(It is yet another lie that 
Hitler knew nothing of Hess's plans to fly to England.

Hitler had spies 
everywhere in Germany, and would have learned of the plan sometime during 
the two weeks that were required to prepare Hess's aircraft for the 
extra-long trip.) Hess was apparently kept in England after the war ended.

The "Hess" who went on trial at Nuremburg was somebody else.

Reichsmarschall 
Hermann Goering, who sat next to "Hess" during the trial, kept nudging him 
and asking, "Who are you?

You're not Rudolf Hess." This "Hess" also refused 
to see "his family," and answered most of the questions put to him during 
the trial by saying he didn't remember.

The Corporate Elite told us for 
decades that the only reason he was being kept as the lone inmate at Spandau 
Prison in Berlin was that the Soviets didn’t want him released.

But, in 
1987 when Mikhail Gorbachev announced that "Hess" could be let out of prison, 
British intelligence agents promptly assassinated him!

How on earth could 
the caballists keep an innocent man from spilling the beans all those years?

They used a ploy known as "Adolf's Persuader," in which they tell a person 
to do what they order him to do or they will kill his children.

Like some 
in the Corporate Elite and the CIA brag, "It works every time." And lest 
anyone think it's not used in the U.S., 1 can report to you that it was 
recently used here in Minnesota to force a politician out of the race for 
governor, because the Corporate Elite feared he would become the 1996 
Democratic Party candidate for president of the United States, and win.

Churchill did manage to stall the Normandy invasion for a couple of 
years, thus adding millions to the Soviet death toll.Like some 
in the Corporate Elite and the CIA brag, "It works every time." And lest 
anyone think it's not used in the U.S., 1 can report to you that it was 
recently used here in Minnesota to force a politician out of the race for 
governor, because the Corporate Elite feared he would become the 1996 
Democratic Party candidate for president of the United States, and win.

Churchill did manage to stall the Normandy invasion for a couple of 
years, thus adding millions to the Soviet death toll.

Meanwhile, his 
colleague, Allen Dulles, was busy setting up a secret communications line 
to Hitler using an SS General, who had once been an aide to Himmler, Gen.

Karl Wolff.

Churchill and Dulles and the others thought that they could 
get away with setting up Heinrich Himmler as the new German Chancellor to 
replace Hitler, who could not stay on after the war because he "had bad 
press." (Imagine that!

They were ready to install Himmler in power, even 
though he had been running the concentration camps and murdering millions 
of innocent Jews!

They based this decision solely on the fact that Himmler 
was not widely known in the U.S.

at that time, and they thought they could 
fob him off on the American public.

After the war ended, the British said 
that they had captured Himmler, but that he committeed suicide.

That's 
yet another lie.

"Himmler's body" was that of his double, and that 
body had papers on it identifying it with the actual name of the double.) 
1 won't go into the secret negotiations in Sweden and elsewhere, except 
to say that Count Folke Bernadotte may have been assassinated in 1948 by 
the CIA or British intelligence because "he knew too much" about the 
Himmler plan.

He was a go-between during some of those negotiations.

Well, if all these shenanigans were not enough, the conspirators started 
to poison Franklin Roosevelt with intermittent doses of arsenic tri-oxide.

And to add insult to injury they started the rumors about FDR being a dying 
man.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Well, if all these shenanigans were not enough, the conspirators started 
to poison Franklin Roosevelt with intermittent doses of arsenic tri-oxide. And to add insult to injury they started the rumors about FDR being a dying 
man. The first dosage was apparently given to FDR at the Tehran Conference 
in 1943. With each subsequent dose, FDR would show the typical symptoms 
of such poisoning, such as upper respiratory difficulty and heart trouble, 
but then he would recover, only to take another turn for the worse 
with the next dose of poison. Unfortunately, Roosevelt's physicians did 
Page 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---not suspect poisoning.

They were concerned enough about him to bring in 
a heart specialist, Dr.

Howard Bruenn, a young Kavy physician at Bethesda 
Naval Hospital.

(Dr.

Bruenn was with FDR in Warn.

Springs when the President 
died on April 12, 1945, and expressed surprise that it was not Roosevelt s 
heart that killed him,' but his lungs which stopped functioning.

More on 
this later.) _ 
Another important part of the plot was to substitute Harry Truman on 
the ticket in 1944 for Henry Wallace, who was even further to the left tnan 
Roosevelt.

(This is known inside the beltway as “The Vice President Trick, 
and was later used on Eisenhower and Kennedy.

Here in Minnesota, the CIA 
attempted to use it against the liberal Republican candidate for governor 
in 1990, Arne Carlson.) I’m sure that Truman did not know that he was being 
used in this way, but the Corporate Elite had done its homework and knew 
Truman * s psychology well enough to know that he would, as President, allow 
them to create the first era of peacetime militarism in our 350 years of 
existence.

Truman unknowingly went along with them later, as expected, 
hut after leaving the White House, he seemed to have second thoughts about 
it.

He expressed bitter criticism of Pentagon generals, and in 1961 stated 
that he was sorrv that he had let the CIA be created in 1947.

(The Corporate 
Elite had earlier asked Roosevelt to do so, but he had the good sense to 
say no.) But back to the 1944 Democratic Convention.

I was 9 years old 
and happened to listen on the radio to the knock-down-and-drag-out fight 
to dump Vice President Henry Wallace.

Roosevelt felt guilty about going 
for the fourth term, and left it up to the Convention to pick his running 
mate, just as he had done in the 1940 Convention.I was 9 years old 
and happened to listen on the radio to the knock-down-and-drag-out fight 
to dump Vice President Henry Wallace.

Roosevelt felt guilty about going 
for the fourth term, and left it up to the Convention to pick his running 
mate, just as he had done in the 1940 Convention.

The Corporate Elite 
surmised that he would do that again in 1944, and so early on it recruited 
Bob Hannegan, the crooked political operator from Missouri, to secure the 
Truman nomination by covertly getting the necessary commitments months in 
advance from big-city organized-crime groups and their political machines 
in the North ana from conservative Southerners, who made up a substantial 
block of the Democratic Party.

After he was chosen, the Corporate Elite's 
propaganda machine went to work peddling lies about how Truman would 
strenghthen the ticket, etc.

None of this was true.

Before the convention, 
Truman was favored by only 2% of the voters, but Wallace was extremely 
popular all over the country, and especially so with farmers, who otherwise 
might have voted Republican.

In those days, farmers constituted 20% of 
the population, and they loved Wallace for what he had done for them during 
the 1930's when he was Secretary of Agriculture.

(Something related to 
all this is the 1948 presidential campaign, in which the Corporate Elite 
had its candidates heading the tickets of both major parties.

Truman was 
despised by voters, and probably would have lost to Tom Dewey, another 
riglitist, but Clark Clifford figured out that Truman could win if he changed 
his campaign to sound like Roosevelt, so during the last 4 weeks, he talked 
New Deal exclusively, and narrowly won.

Let's call this trick 'Both Our 
Boys." With the exception of Eisenhower and JFK, we've been given this 
choice ever since the death of Roosevelt.

Clinton is no exception.) 
In 1945 the war was drawing to an end.

Allen Dulles, in Switzerland, 
was staying in close contact with Hitler, using Gen.Clinton is no exception.) 
In 1945 the war was drawing to an end.

Allen Dulles, in Switzerland, 
was staying in close contact with Hitler, using Gen.

Wolff as his messenger.

Hitler had often boasted that he would eventually split the Allies and cut 
a deal with either the Soviets or with the British and Americans as the 
war round down.

Dulles and Churchill did their utmost to make certain that 
it was with the U.K.

and the U.S.

Roosevelt, would soon be dead, and the 
U.S., the U.K.

and Germany would turn on the Soviets to destroy the evil 
of Communism.

But then suddenly something went wrong.

Stalin's spies in 
Switzerland discovered the Dulles operation.

Stalin fired off a telegram 
to Roosevelt to complain.

FDR knew nothing of the Dulles plot, and so in 
his response he expressed surprise to Stalin that he (Stalin) would distrust 
him.

That was the last thing President Roosevelt ever did.

Realizing that 
they were in danger of being exposed, the conspirators decided to kill FDR 
immediately.

They would have to use a poison that would act much more 
quickly than arsenic, so they settled on cyanide which they put into the 
gruel that Roosevelt ate around noon each day to stimulate his appetite.

FDR ate a spoonful of the gruel, and passed out.

He died at 3:35 p.m.

Dr.

Bruenn had no reason to suspect poison and no autopsy was done.

But 
Michael Reilly, chief of the White House Secret Service Detail, did suspect 
poison, and sent the unwashed breakfast dishes to a chemist to have the^ 
food scaps tested.

He got a negative report.

It's too bad that 1 wasn t 
there to help him, with all the knowledge I've recently learned about various 
poisons.

With one exception, cyanide compounds have to cause death within 
4 hours or the intended victim survives.

Going back 4 hours from the time 
of FDR's death, the earliest he could have ingested the cyanide was 11:35 
a.ra., and that ruled out the breakfast food.

Dr.

Bruenn was surprised to see Roosevelt's lungs give out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. Bruenn was surprised to see Roosevelt's lungs give out. He had 
thought that the President would die from heart trouble, but his heart kept 
beating for 5 minutes after his breathing stopped! Lung failure and FDR's 
other dying symptoms are definitely those that are caused by cyanide 
Page 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---polaonihg.

And once again the Corporate Elite fed us disinformation, 
reporting that FDR, like President Wilson, had been afflicted with a stroke.

About a week later, Allen Dulles had Gen.

Wolff carry an escape message 
to Hitler in the Berlin bunker.

One of Hitler's two pilots would land near 
the bunker, pick up the fuhrer, and fly him to a secret OSS landing field 
near Wiesbaden.

Dulles would be there to greet him, and forward him on to 
safety in the U.S.

The thinking was that America would be the best place 
to secret Hitler, something later proved when Israeli agents nabbed Adolf 
Eichmann in South America.

I believe that Hitler was set up in a mansion 
on the Virginia side of the Potomac River, somewhere between Washington and 
Leesburg.

I don’t imagine that it would take much effort to locate his 
dwelling, because of the way it had to be guarded and the recluse manner 
in which he was forced to live.

If I am correct, Hitler did not die until 
the early 1970's.

I am aware of how unbelievable this is, but all 1 can 
say is take some time and try to prove me wrong.

Churchill and Dulles and the other conspirators moved on to get no less 
than 50,000 other Nazi war criminals to safe havens in the Western Hemishere.

Only about 2,000 were sent to Canada and the U.S.

for fear that any more 
would give away the plan.

It's interesting to watch the Corporate Elite 
squirm about these war criminals when they are brought to light.

Invariably, 
we are told they lied on their individual immigrant visa applications, 
denying membership in the Nazi Party.

They were told to do so.

By 1952, 
the Corporate Elite managed to change the U.S.

Immigration Act, so that Nazis 
were no longer barred from the U.S.

Recently, when liberals raised a fuss 
about that "gap," the Corporate Elite told us that it was a mere oversight, 
but this was yet another lie.Immigration Act, so that Nazis 
were no longer barred from the U.S.

Recently, when liberals raised a fuss 
about that "gap," the Corporate Elite told us that it was a mere oversight, 
but this was yet another lie.

Churchill and Dulles et al also helped Martin Bormann escape to South 
America where he became leader of the "Fourth Reich." (When I was in the 
State Department 1 once saw CIA photographs of his house, which was located 
next to the Pilcomayo River or the Parana.) Disinformation was put out that 
Bormann had died in Berlin after escaping from Hitler's bunker via a secret 
door to an underground subway tube.

Reporters proved that the source had 
lied.

Dulles had also laid plans to get the gold out of the Reichsbank 
(the German Central Bank) in Berlin before the Soviet troops captured the 
city.

That gold, worth in today's value of the dollar about $70 billion, 
was shipped to Bormann and his fellow Nazis in South America.

Is it any 
wonder that the "Fascist International" is thriving to this very day?

And 
is it any wonder that every Nazi war criminal captured since W.W.II has had 
ties to the CIA?

But of course the Corporate Elite lies about the reason, 
saying they had special knowledge or skills needed in the fight against 
Communism.

Lies, lies, lies, and more lies] "Oh what a web we weave when 
at first we attempt to deceive." 
Before I tripped onto this plot, I had always wondered why Churchill 
had not traveled to Washington to attend Roosevelt's funeral.

The ancients 
used to believe that the murderers would not attend the funeral.

Churchill 
certainly had no pressing business in London.

The war was winding down.

And Churchill was in as good health as any souse could expect to be.

The next year he managed to travel to Westminster College in Missouri where 
he gave his famous "Iron Curtain" speech.

He stole that phrase from Hitler's 
propaganda chief.

Dr.

Joseph Goebbels.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. Joseph Goebbels. But what does a little plagiarism 
matter, when that phrase served so well to ignite the Cold War? (More 
recently George Bush appropriated the phrase "New World Order" from the title 
of a 1941 book by Adolf Hitler.) 
There are many other questionable deaths, which the Corporate Elite 
may have caused. Gen. Butler, who the Corporate Elite tried to get to lead 
a fascist coup in the U.S. in 1934 , died in 1940. (See George Wolfskin's 
book, The Revolt of the Consevatlves.) Wendell Willkie, the liberal 
Republican nominee for President in 1940, died unexpectedly in 1944 at the 
age of 43. Roosevelt liked him so much that they were planning to jointly 
organize a "Liberal Party" after the war. It's not a well-known fact but 
FDR planned not to run in 1940. He had decided to enlist either Harry Hopkins 
or Minnesota Governor Floyd Olson. Both however were stricken with "stomach 
cancer," which happens to be a common misdiagnosis for arsenic poisoning. (Edsel Ford died of "stomach cancer" too. Somebody ought to check out his 
rival for the presidency of Ford Motors, Harry Bennett, the thug who did 
all of Henry Ford's dirty work.) Olson died, and Hopkins became disabled. So Roosevelt was forced to run again in 1940 to forestall a conservative 
victory with Democrat James Farley, who- had been lined up by the Corporate 
Elite. For decades the Corporate Elite castigasted FDR for going for the 
third term, against all tradition, but now it turns out that the blame really 
belongs on the Corporate Elite itself. You may be asking whether there is 
any limit to the Corporate Elite's lying and denying. No. The United Nations was an idea of President Roosevelt, but one would 
never know that reading our school books. But Americans are told over and 
over that the Rockefellers donated the land along the East River on which 
the U.N. buildings were constructed. This is another trick of the Corporate 
Page 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---'Elite to snatch credit away from "radicals" or "leftists' or liberals.

(A 
good example of this wae the work of the Corporate Elite to make sure that 
liberal senators such as George McGovern and Charles Godell and student 
demonstrators did not get any of the credit when the Corporate Elite decided 
to terminate the Vietnam War.

We might call this trick "Don't Give Credit 
Where Credit Is Due.") .

As soon as Harry Truman became President, Churchill telephoned him in 
order to talk him into turning the entire war effort against the Soviet 
Union.

As you can see, the plotters apparently thought that it would take 
the big enchilada himself to convince Truman.

(See p.

416 of Elliott 
Roosevelt's book A Rendezvous with Destiny.) In Austria, U.S.

troops were 
even put on the alert to get ready to turn their guns on the Russians!

Fortunately, Truman said no to Churchill.

Eduard Schulte, the German 
businessman who risked his life to get the first word to Americans about 
the slaughter of the Jews, thought that he would be chosen for the cabinet 
in the first post-war German government.

But he wasn't.

Nor were several 
other Germans who had had contact with Dulles during the war: Eduard Waetjen, 
Gero von Gaevernitz, and Hans Gisevius.

After W.W.II Americans started to ask who had financed Hitler from about 
1920 until lie assumed power on.Jan.

30, 193*3.

By 1923 Hitler was awash 
in big money.

He had a chauffeur-driven Mercedes limousine, and an apartment 
that covered an entire floor of a downtown building in Munich.

Not bad for 
an uneducated person!

As I mentioned above, U.S.

bankers and industrialists 
forced President Wilson to enter W.W.I on the side of the British because 
that was where their money was.

At that time they had very little invested 
in Germany.

But they began to flood Germany with their money in 1923, because 
they had nowhere else to invest it, and because they wanted to prevent a 
take-over by Communists.At that time they had very little invested 
in Germany.

But they began to flood Germany with their money in 1923, because 
they had nowhere else to invest it, and because they wanted to prevent a 
take-over by Communists.

About that time they also began to finance Hitler 
and his Nazi Party.

Henry Ford alone gave Hitler one-fourth of all the money 
he raised up until 1933.

The Rockefellers gave Hitler one-third of a billion 
dollars, in today's value of the dollar.

Hitler also received huge 
contributions from officers of the J.P.Morgan Bank.

(See the books Facts 
and Fascism by George Scldes, and Hitler's Secret Backers by Sidney Warburg.

The latter is available from Tom Davis Books, Box 1107, Aptos CA 95001.

I should warn you that there is some question about its authenticity, but 
I would say that it probably is true in general terms at the least.) The 
Elite has, however, lied to us about this important point, saying 
that Hitler was financed by German industrialists and bankers, and primarily 
by Fritz Thyssen.

But Thyssen gave Hitler only $3 million dollars, in today'F 
value of the dollar.

And much of that money was qiven after Hitler became 
Chancellor, not before.

Stop and think about this: the Rockefellers qave 
Hitler more than 100 times as much money as did Thyssen!

But you'll say 
that that^can’t be because the Rockefellers are "Eastern Establishment 
Liberals." That phrase was coined by the public relations expert, Ivy Lee, 
who just happened to be one of America's leading fascists in the 1930's!

And don't forget that Allen Dulles always called himself a liberal.

I think 
that he confused sociopathy with liberalism, but the two are different.

Hitler was a sociopath but not a liberal.

Does Allen Dulles sound like a 
liberal in what he had said in 1943 according to German Prince von Hohenlohe, 
who was a "peace emissary" from Hitler: "He (Allen Dulles) was led up with 
listening all the time to outdated politicians, emigres and prejudiced Jews.Hitler was a sociopath but not a liberal.

Does Allen Dulles sound like a 
liberal in what he had said in 1943 according to German Prince von Hohenlohe, 
who was a "peace emissary" from Hitler: "He (Allen Dulles) was led up with 
listening all the time to outdated politicians, emigres and prejudiced Jews.

In his view a peace had to be be made in Europe in the preservation of which 
all concerned would have a real interest." Von Hohenlohe also reported Allen 
Dulles as saying that "...while he (Dulles) had 'scant sympathy' for Soviet 
Russia, he did not 'reject National Socialism in its basic ideas and 
deeds'..."!

Some liberal!

Some member of the Warren Commssion!

Before closing, I should explain the recent book describing the Soviet 
autopsy on Hitler's body." Part of the Dulles plan to fool the Russians 
was the planting of false dental records in the bunker.

These were captured 
by the Soviets.

They matched the teeth of the body they recovered in the 
Chancellory garden.

But that body was the body of Hitler's double.

To help 
fool the Soviets, two SS dental technicians, Kaethe Heusemann and Fritz 
Echtmann, were instructed as to what to say.

(N.B.

that all the German 
players in the plot are SS.) But during the 1980's a Canadian dental forensic 
expert, Dr.

Robert Dorion, stated that, after studying thousands of pictures 
of Hitler speaking, the dental "evidence" that the Soviets got was not that 
of Hitler's!

Now you know why.

The British had also sent the famous 
historian, Professor Hugh Trevor-Roper, to examine and report on Hitler's 
demise.

He too fell for the planted evidence, but he apparently learned 
his lesson, because he refused to accept the findings of the Warren Report.

There's no getting around the fact that Hitler was extremely popular 
with Germans by 1935, and the question is often asked why.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He too fell for the planted evidence, but he apparently learned 
his lesson, because he refused to accept the findings of the Warren Report. There's no getting around the fact that Hitler was extremely popular 
with Germans by 1935, and the question is often asked why. Hitler knew 
nothing about economics, but he was fortunate to have an economics czar who 
did, Dr.Hjalmar Horace Greeley Schacht, who had grown up in Brooklyn. Schacht 
knew Keynesian economics well before Lord Keynes published his famous book 
in 1936. Schacht borrowed enormous sums of money and Hitler spent it on 
Page 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---w&jmn: nwayffl 
mBB^ ijsaai WBWI 
 I 
rearmament.

But this did get everyone back to workr and people gave Hitler 
the credit.

This was paradoxical, because Hitler did not like Schacht, 
and eventually forced him out of office.

By 1939 the German economy was 
on the verge of collapsing, however, because of the heavy borrowing.

Hitler 
invaded Poland and thys started W.W.II to either cover up the crisis or 
to prevent the collapse, or for both reasons.

Think hard about this because 
the U.S.

is in that position right now.

There was this degree of 
"rationality" to Hitler’s act, but the Corporate Elite has ever told us 
that Hitler can be explained by psychology alone—in other words that he 
was nuts, case closed.

I hope we solve our crisis in a more constructive 
way, but time is running out.

COMPARISON OF FDR * s DYING SYMPTOMS WITH THOSE CAUSED BY CYANIDE POISONING: 
"The accuracy of death certificates in indicating the precise cause 
of death has been assailed so often that it is hardly necessary to consider 
it in detail." Huchinson and Acheson, Strokes.

Philadelphia, 1975.

"A 
case of cyanide poisoning can be easily missed, not only because poisoning 
with cyanides is uncommon, but also because there may not be any 
characteristics to arouse suspicion." P.362, Fatteh and Abdullah, Handbook 
of Forensic Pathology, Philadelphia, 1973.

"Death occurs within 4 hours 
with all cyanide derivatives except sodium nitroprusside." Handbook of 
Poisoning, 9th ed., Los Altos CA.

"The Nazis used cyanide in their 
extermination camps." Poison and Tattersall, Clinical Toxicology.

"Death 
at the time of stroke is not common." Miller, Symptoms, New York, 1976.

„ 30$ 
Unless otherwise indicated, the symp- 
toms of cyanide poison shown in this 
column are from Gosselin, Smith and 
Hodge, Clinical Toxicology of Com- 
mercial Products.

5th ed., Baltimore, 
1984: 
A.

Headache.

Sitting, Handbook of 
Toxic and Hazardous Chemicals, Park 
Ridge NJ, 1981.

B.

Sudden loss of consciousness.

C.Sudden loss of consciousness.

C.

Skin is covered with sweat.

D.

Violent convulsions, epileptiform 
or tonic, sometimes localized but 
usually generalized.

Also palpi- 
tations (tremblings).

E.

Respirations become rapid and 
then slow and irregular.

F.

In the early stages of poisoning 
an increase in vasoconstrictor tone 
causes a rise in blood pressure.

G.

This is followed by a weakening 
of the pulse.

H.

Involuntary urination and defe- 
cation occur.

I.

Paralysis follows the convulsive 
stage.

"Paralysis was present." Mclntire.

J.

Dr.

Paullin, called in from 
Atlanta, said both of FDR's pupils 
were dilated.

Dr.

Bruenn reported 
that the right pupil was fully 
dilated, but the left partially.

X.

FDR was at first quite pale, 
but then "his color quite improved." 
Mclntire, cited above, said that 
FDR's skin then became cyanotic.

L.

Dr.

Bruenn gave Roosevelt amyl 
nitrate.

M.

Breathing stopped suddenly.

Dr.

Bruenn pronounced FDR dead.

President Roosevelt’s body was quickly embalmed.

"Embalming with formal- 
dehyde makes it difficult to detect cyanide." Forensic Medicine, 
Vol.IlI.

"Avoid embalming if you suspect cyanide poisoning." Poison, 
cited above, at p.

149.

J.

Dilated pupils.

K.

Skin turns a bright pink.

Just 
before death, cyanosis becomes 
marked.

Fatteh, cited above.

L.

Treatment: administer amyl 
nitrate.

M.

Administer artificial respiration.

These are FDR's dying symptoms as 
reported by Dr.

Bruenn on p.

590 
of his article that appeared in 
Annals of Internal Medicine.

April, 
1970, except for the citations 
from Dr.

Mclntire.

A.

FDR had a "terrific occipital 
headache." 
B.

The President became unconscious 
"a minute or two later." 
C.

FDR was sweating profusely.

D.

FDR had fairly frequent gener- 
alized "tetanic" (tonic?) contrc- 
tions of a mild degree and occa- 
sional spasms of rigidity.

E.

At first, FDR breathed stertor- 
ously but regularly.

Then his 
breathing became irregular.

F.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then his 
breathing became irregular. F. Systolic pressure rose to over 
3001 This is intense vasocon- 
striction. G. Blood pressure showed signs of 
falling. Mclntire, White House 
Physician, New York, 1946. H. He voided involuntarily. I. Reflexes were unobtainable in 
the legs. Right elbow was 444.