SW7cl

DEFENCE  OF  MORMONISM,     '^^


^^^'^


IN    A    LETTER

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  HURKARU  ;

BEING    A    REFUTATION    OF    THE    SLANDEROUS    ACCUSATIONS    WHICH    APPEARED    IN
THE    AMOVE    NEWSPAPER    UNDER   THE    ANONYMOUS    SIGNATURE

OF

A  VISITOR  OF  NAUVOO,

Grounded  on  a  review  by  the  Editor  of  a  Novel
"PEMALB   LIFE   AMONG  THE   MORMONS.'*

BY

ROBERT  SKELTON  AND  J.  P.  MEIK,

Elders  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,

OF

Latter-day  Saints.

CALCUTTA :
1855.

Price : — 4  Annas.


Historian's  Office  Library

t^^      The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
\/c-x  of  Latter-day  Saints

P

M230.9

S627d

1855


f1


PREFACE.

The  following  letter  was  sent  to  the  Editor  of  the  Bengal  Hurkaru
to  meet  the  accusations  advanced  by  an  anonymous  writer  styling  himself
"  a  Visitor  of  Nauvoo"  in  letters  published  in  that  Paper  on  the  26lh  of
October,  and  on  the  1st  and  3rd  of  November  1855,  but  from  the  length
of  the  communication  which  the  subject  demanded,  it  could  not  be  conve-
niently inserted  in  the  Hurkaru,  and  was  returned  to  us  on  that  plea,
which  has  led  to  its  appearance  in  this  form.  The  evidences  referred  to
in  the  body  of  the  letter  have  been  added,  as  also  the  article  on  Polygamy
by  Milton.

All  who  wish  to  procure  the  Standard  works  of  the  Mormons,  will  do
well  to  apply  to  the  Agents  of  the  Latter  Day  Saints,  Book  depot,
36,  Islington,  Liverpool ;  or  at  No.  35,  Jevvin  Street,  London.

A  small  variety  of  Books  containing  the  doctrines  of  the  Latter  Day
Saints,  can  be  had  at  No.  20,  Curreembux  Khansamah's  Lane,  Wellesley
Street,  in  this  City.

The  delays  which  have  occasioned  the  late  appearance  of  this  pam-
phlet, have  been  unavoidable.

R.  Skelton,

J.  P.  Meik,


Calcutta^  December y  1855.


To


THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  BENGAL  HURKARU.


Sir, — A  slanderous  misrepresentation
of  ihecbancter  and  doctrines  of  Joseph
Smith  and  his  followers,  grounded  upon
the  remarljs  in  ihe  review  of  the  Nuvel
"  Female  life  amongst  the  Mormons,''
wliich  lately  occupied  a  portion  of  your
va'uahle  columns,  leads  us  t'>  trouble
you  wiih  a  f^w  lines  on  the  subject.

Inasmuch  as  the  writer  of  the  anony-
mous commnnieatioiis  who  styles  him-
self "  a  visitor  of  Nauvoo" — has  not
Bcrupled  to  impeach  the  character  of  an
abused  but  innicent,  yes  !  innocent  and
amiable  people  ;  we  feel  it  an  impera-
tive duty  as  lovers  nf  truth  and  justice,
and  having  a  perfect  knowledge  of  ihe
game,  to  defend  the  doctrines  hel'i  by
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter  day
Saints  ;  whicli  we  trust  we  may  do  on
just  and  cnirt^et  principles,  ami  that  you
wi'l  allow  our  defence  a  place  in  your
columns,  for  which  we  shall  feel  great-
ly obliged.

As  the  "  visitor  of  Nauvoo"  himself
condemns  the  fiction  professing  to  be
the  autn-bi^graphy  of  a  female  while
with  the  Mormons,  and  points  to  dis-
crppanries  to  prove  that  ii  could  not  be
the  result  of  personal  experience  but
was  a  forged  narrative  written  by  an
Englishman;  we  need  not  dwell  on  the
contents  i  f  that  abominable  work  further
than  to  express,  from  the  intimate  and
personal  knowledoe  we  have  more  or
less  had  (f  the  penple.  our  condemna-
tion '  f  it  as  a  worthless  and  lying  pro-
duction ;  tiot  founded  even  on  facts  as
the  '  visitor"  would  have  it,  but  altoge-
ther false;  being  a  base  and  malicious
tissue  of  untruths  purporting  to  describe
the  acts  and  practices  of  the  Mormon
leaders  and  people,  with  the  evident
view  to  injure,  and  if  possible  extin-
guish them  as  a  community  not  worthy
to  live  upon  the  face  "f  the  earth.

We  acknowledge  that  similar  reports
were  generally  current  in  the  United
States  whpo  the  Mormons  were  compa-
ratively unknown  and  their  character
and  motives  misunderstood  ;  but  with
the  better  classes,  including  the  Presi'


dent  of  the  Slates  and  many  of  the
officers  of  Government,  these  reports
have  in  a  measure  been  exploded  as
erroneous  impressions;  proofs  of  w  hick
we  are  ready  to  give  in  testimonials
from  official  and  other  gentlemen  who
have  been,  and  yet  are,  residents  in
Utah

We  have  stated  that  the  whole  nar-
rative of  *•  Female  life  amongst  the
Mormons"  is  an  evident  f  ibrication — as
such  it  is  altogether  destitute  of  dates;
and  even  the  naiies  of  the  localities
and  scenes  pictured  in  it  are  not  given,
rendering  it  a  very  jumble  and  maze
that  cannot  be  traced  by  any  searcher
of  truth.  The  only  individuals  ku'wu
ill  the  Church  whose  names  are  men-
tioned are  Joseph  Smith,  Brigham
Youtig,  and  an  Elder  Pratt  w  ho  is  twade
to  say  a  few  words  ;  but  no  one  could
recognize  any  of  these  by  the  descrip-
tions given  evidently  by  one  who  had
never  seen  them  ;  and  the  other  charac-
ters are  altogether  fabulous,  as  are  ail  the
statements  made  in  it.  We  will  only
iTieniion  one  with  its  bearings.  In  their
Exodus,  Mrs.  Ward  after  journeying
some  time  with  them  in  the  wilderness,
describes  the  beaten  roads  and  encamp-
ments as  strewed  with  the  bones  of  the
foimer  emigrants  that  had  passed
through  the  country  to  Calif 'rnia  !  Nov«r
it  is  a  known  fact  that  the  Mormons
were  the  first  pioneers  in  that  direction  ;
had  to  make  their  own  roads  where  no
body  of  Americans  had  previously  tra-
velled ;  and  that  it  was  not  till  the  next
season  that  the  gold-seekers  followed  in
their  tracks,  the  Californian  gold  h  >ving
been  first  discovered  by  some  of  the
IMormon  battalion  on  their  return  from
service  in  Mexico,  Of  the  formation
of  this  battalion — one  of  the  most  im-
portant  incidents  in  their  Exodus —
which  consisted  chiefly  of  the  heads  of
families  and  materially  thinned  and
weakened  their  camp,  Mrs.  Ward  does
not  mention  a  word,  but  passes  it  over  in
silence  ;  because,  not  having  been  there,
she  knew  nothing  of  it,  while  the  ex-


traordinary  circumstances  6ontiected
with  it  are  noted  and  coraraentcd  on  by
Colonel  Thos.  L.  Kane,  who  tiiongh
not  a  M'irmon,  journeyed  with  them,
sympathised  wiih  iheir  undeserved  ex-
pulsion r.nd  persecutions,  and  appreci-
ated and  admired  the  spirit  with  which
they  bore  their  deep  afflictions  and  sore
and  fiery  trials.  Indeed  such  a  perfect
ignorance  is  shown  in  the  work  of  pal-
pable facts  and  of  the  leading  incidents
and  features  of  the  fortunes  of  the
Mormon  body,  that  it  would  be  sintiply
ridiculous  to  any  one  having  the  slight-
est linowledge  of  the  same,  were  it  not
for  the  utter  and  bare-faced  imposition
and  presumption  of  the  production,  and
the  slanderous,  malicious,  and  evil  in-
tent of  the  producer,  which  must  grieve
any  one  who  knows  ought  of  the  Mor-
mons, those  excepted  who  "  love  not
the  truth  but  a  lie  :"  but  notwithstand-
ing all  this  we  do  not  anticipate  much
harm  from  it,  for  it  renders  us  as  a
people  too  black  for  reasonable  belief
and  its  alleged  facts  are  altogether  too
gross  and  overdone,  and  far  too  impro-
bable to  have  weight  with  or  impose
on  any  but  the  most  ignorant  or  those
unacquainted  with  even  the  name  of
Mormonism  ;  and  consequently  cannot,
as  intended,  injure  the  cause  but  the
contrary;  for  should  light  or  any  par-
ticle of  truth  afterwards  break  in  upon
the  minds  of  those  who  have  formed
their  estimate  of  the  Mormon  character,
faith,  and  practices  from  this  untruth-
ful work,  the  reaction  will  be  the  strong-
er ;  and  they  will  be  ashamed  of  having
credited  so  flagrant  a  production:  and
may-hap,  be  led  to  inquire  further  into
the  true  state  and  bearings  of  our  much
vilified  church.  We  have  thus  alluded
to  and  touched  this  revolting  work  with
the  unqualified  disgust  of  those  forced
to  handle  unclean  things,  and  gladly
drop  it,  in  faith  consigning  it  to  the  pit
from  whence  it  emanated.

Being  evil  spoken  of,  Mr.  Editor,
by  all  men  (with  few  exceptions)  is  no
proof  of  guilt,  or  of  the  condemnaiian
of  heaven  ;  but  is,  and  must  be,  a  por-
tion of  the  cross  to  be  taken  up  by
Christ's  true  Church,  wherever,  and
whenever  it  exists  upon  the  earth,  until
the  consummation  of  all  things  takes
place.  It  was  so  in  our  Lord's  day  in
regard  to  Himself;  who,   though  he


walked  about  openly,  and  mixed  with
the  people,  bors  the  character  of  a  wine-
bibber,  or  drunkard,  an  associate  of
publicans  and  harlots  ;  a  blasphemer  of
God,  and  deceiver  of  the  people  ;  who
had  a  devil,  to  whom  His  works  were
attributed,  and  who  was  cried  d'lwn  as
a  seducer  and  an  abomination  by  the
pious,  the  respectable,  and  the  learned
of  the  age;  and  by  their  influence  was
finally  as  a  malefactor  put  to  death !
and  His  diciples  also,  whatever  might
have  been  their  previous  characters  and
standing,  as  soon  as  they  became  fol-
lowers of  the  crucified  one.  were  look-
ed upon  as  the  scum  and  offscouring  of
all  things  by  the  wise,  the  noble,  the
honourable,  and  the  religious  of  their
times.

It  may  be  very  well  for  ns  to  believe
otherwise  reonrding;  Christ  and  His
disciples  now;  and  as  the  Pharisees
Shid  of  the  ancipnt  Prophets,  to  say,
'*  if  we  had  lived  in  the  days  of  the
"  Son  of  God  we  would  not  have  per-
''  seculed  Him  and  His  followers,  but
''  have  received  the  truths  they  taught,
"  and  honoured  them  as  we  now  do
"  their  memories;"  but  we  suspect  we
little  think  ^ou>  we  have  attained  to  this
belief— how  it  has  conne  to  us  through
the  teaching  and  traditinns  of  our  fathers,
derived  from  the  testimony  of  these  same
once  traduced  Jpostles  and  disciples,
whose  works  have  outlived  the  vilifica-
tions, malicious  representations,  and
lying  descriptions  of  their  enemies,
and  not  frohi  those  enemies  themselves,
who  have  long  since  passed  away  and
gone  to  their  account.

Thus  professing  Christendom  beMevea
in  the  Revelations  of  the  New  Testa-
ment from  the  testimony  of  the  follow-
ers and  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;
but  we  cannot  give  more  credit  to  them
in  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament,
than  the  Jews  gave  to  the  writinsrs  of
Moses  and  others  in  the  old.  They
received  and  reverenced  the  old  commu-
nications made  by  God  to  the  ancient
prophets,  and  obeyed  them  to  the  best
of  their  knowledge  and  ability,  so  that
Christ  could  say  of  the  scribes  and
Pharisees.  "  If  I  had  not  come  among
you.  ye  would  not  have  had  sin ;"  but
wlien  new  light  was  offered  and  reve-
lotions  were  made  to  them  in  their  own
day  the  result  was  to  bring  out  and  ex-


pose  tlie  latent  unbelief  and  hatred  of
heavenly  tliinorg  lurkinv  in  their  minds
under  the  professed  faith  and  sanctity
which  ahne  were  visible  to  men ;  so
tliat  when  they  (same  to  be  tried  as
their  forefathers  with  direct  comuni-
caiions  from  heaven,  they  proved  them-
selves no  better  than  them,  and  per-
secuted the  truth  even  unto  death  ;  in
somuch  that  Jesns  could  say  of  them
that  iliey  were  whiied  sepulchres,  fair
indeed  outwardly,  but  foul  and  full  of
dead  men's  bones  within.

Now  all  this  is  strictly  applicable  to
this  day,  although  we  cannot  enlarge
on  it  here.

It  is  easy  to  »ail  with  the  tide;  and
fall  in  with  a  religinn  and  faith  derived
from  teachings  of  men,  which,  founded
on  tradition,  and  confined  to  ancient
inspiration,  denins  immediate  revela-
tion and  disallows  livingoracles — Such
a  religion  affects  not  man's  inde-
pendence; allows  the  mind  to  rest  on
a  bare  belief,  or  in  a  form  of  godliness
without  the  power ;  disturbs  it  not  by
contact  witli  heavenly  powers  ;  and
leaves  it  free  from  the  authority  of  those
Cfimmissinned  from  above,  who  pro-
claim the  laws  of  God  as  revealed  from
day  to  day.  to  meet  the  circumstances
of  the  generation  they  live  in,  and  who
require  complete  and  unhesitaling  com-
pliance ami  submission  thereto.  As  man
must  believe  and  quiet  his  conscience
with  something ;  and  as  the  former
interferes  little  wiih  his  pleasures  and
pursuits,  it  suits  him  well  ;  and  we  do
not  wonder  at  such  being  so  popular,
as  to  form  broad  ways,  in  which  the
multitude  walk  with  little  thought,  but
witheaseand  satisfaction  to  themselves,
but  when  we  touch  upon  the  latter — it
is  a  far  different  thing; — a  strait  gate,  a
narrow  way,  that  requires  the  child
like  spirit;  the  impli' it  obeilience:  the
emptying  of  self;  and  the  total  conse-
cration <  f  all  always  on  the  altar,  from
th  se  who  believe  the  teachings  of
immediate  revelation,  and  of  command-
ments viud  precepts  referring  to  dully
oei'urrenres,  given  with  authority,  not
to  be  re-isted  ;  the  authority  of  heaven.
This  last  was  the  position  the  Lord
Jesus  would  have  brought  the  scribes
a  d  Pharisees  to,  bu  ihet/  would  not
Independent,  resptcied,  self-sufficient.
aud  wise  in  their  own  conceits ;  limited


and  contracted  in  their  faith,  and  em-
bedded in  the  traditions  of  their  fore-
fathers ;  they  rejected  the  light  and
interference  of  immediate  revelation,
and  with  it  their  Saviour!  Thus  it  has
been  from  the  beginning,  when  God
would  speak  to  men  ;  and  thus  we  are
told  it  will  always  be; — rejection  by
the  multitude,  reception  by  the  very
few— thus  it  was  with  the  Pharisees,
and  thus  it  is  with  professing  Christen-
dom and  its  teachers  in  this  day  :  who
conceive  like  them,  that  they  are  serv-
ing God,  and  that  they  would  have
received  and  honoured  former  revela-
tions, had  the  messengers  lived  in  their
time;  but  when  tried  as  of  old  with
messages  and  coinmandments  direct
from  heaven,  and  the  liglit  of  immedi-
ate revelation,  what  has  been  the  result  ?
they  have  been  proved  to  be  no  better
than  their  predecessors ;  and  have  treat-
ed Joseph  Smith,  and  the  other  Pro-
phets sent  to  declare  God's  mind  in  re-
gard to  them  and  the  times  they  live  in,
with  the  same  scorn  and  contumely;  in
like  manner  rejecting  them  utterly  as
immoral  blasphemers  of  God,  and  de-
ceivers of  the  people;  speaking  all
evil  falsely  of  them,  as  the  Lord  Him-
self predicted,  who  said,  that  a  "  prophet
is  not  without  honour  except  in  his
own  house,"  or  what  is  equally  true,
except  iti  his  own  generation,  and  a-
mong~t  the  people  he  is  sent  to  ;  and
that  such  must  expect  no  better  treat-
ment than  their  Lord,  for  "  if  ihey
call  the  master  Beelzebub,  how  muck
more  they  of  His  household."

All  this  we  find  exemplified  in  the
Mormon  Churoh,  which  alone  professes,
as  the  Churches  of  old,  to  befounded
on  immediate  revelation,  and  is  therefore
like  them  calumniated,  yiersecuted,  and
warred  against  by  all  destituie  of  the
knowledge  of  the  mind  of  God.  Hut,
in  spite  of  all  opposition,  the  truth
spread  in  Apostolic  days,  and  was  the
saving  of  many ;  so  we,  by  revela-
tion, first  given  bt/  pr  pheci/  when  there
inere  only  six  members  in  this  Church —
have  the  assurance,  that  nothing  will
prevent  its  progress  and  high  and  noble
destiny  in  these  the  last  days,  when
the  Chnrch  and  Kingd 'm  of  the  most
High  God  have  been  re-estnblished  on
earth  for  the  last  time,  as  foretold  by
I  the  prophet  Daniel,  to  overcome,  and


increase,  and  endtire  till  her  Head  and
King  comes  for  her  f«U  and  complete
salv  iiion.

We  therefore  fcnr  not  to  have  the
dociriops  and  pr.iriices  of  the  Latter
day  Saints  scruiinizfid  ;  all  we  wish  is.
ih  il,  with  all  other  thiiiors.  afcordingr
to  the  Aposile  Paul's  insiructioMs,  ihey
mav  he  investigated  and  proved  ;  and
it  found  g'lod,  eidhraced,  and  held  fast.
We  challenge  the  inquirv,  and  fear
not  the  results  in  honesi  hearted  men

As  among  the  doctrine-?  held  hy  the
Church  of  Jr'jsus  Christ  of  latter  Days
Saints,  Pnlynnmif  is  that  most  carped
at  a  id  distorted,  hy  the  author  </f  the
Novel,  as  well  as  by  "  the  visitor"
and  all  who  profess  to  be  loo  hnltf  \o
abide  ii;  we  will  at  present  cnfine
ourselves  to  a  few  remirUs  on  its
nature,  as  held  by  us,  being  quite
differHUt  in  it-?  ends  and  us^*,  from  the
gratification  of  the  lusts  alluded  to  by
ihem.  We  acknowledge  that  il  is  a
true  doctritie;  and  is  practised,  noi
only  by  thu  expressed  permission,  hut
coirim  nlment  if  God.  We  will  first
however  premise,  that  the  whole  sub-
ject is  clerirly  a  id  fully  treated  in  a
work  published  bv  KIder  Orson  Pratt,
cal  ed  ilie  "  Seer,"  which  is  available
to  the  Public,  who  may  wish  for  fur-
ther information  on  the  subject;  as  in
the  limited  space  that  may  be  a  lotted
to  us  ill  your  columns,  we  can  only
give  a  sliaht  sketch,  with  a  few
Scripture  references  as  proofs  of  its
divine  orioin.

That  we  hold  a  plurality  of  wives
to  be  one  of  ihe  principles  of  the  gos-
pel of  Christ,  is  verily  true;  hui  to
have  indiscriminate  i  itercourse  wi  h
the  femah  sex,  as  accused — irres-
pective if  the  law  of  marriage,  is  as
utterly  false;  which  is  known  to  all
acquainted  with  our  doctrines  and
practices;  neither  is  aduliery  known
amongst  us  as  a  people;  because  all
who  commit  this  crime,  subject  them-
selves to  the  peniiUy  «f  deulh,  as  of
old.

In  the  revelation  given  to  Joseph
Smith,  God  saw  fit,  with  the  restoration
of  other  trushs.  to  re-establish  amongst
His  people  Polygamy  as  practised  by
Hs  a  iproved  friend  and  father  of  the
faithful,  Abraham  ;  as  well  as  by  his
descendants  while  they  remained  God's


chosen  people;  while  He  also,  at
siraitly  condemned  fornication  and
adultery,  as  He  did  of  old,  when  found
am  mgr-t  them.

If  Polygamy  is  an  abomination  in
the  sight  of  God  naw.  ii  w;is  s»  then;
if  oiherwise.  who  will  pretend  to  i  ave
purer  eyes  than  the  Huly  One  of  Israel
and  irondemn  it  ■?

We  will  here  quote  from  an  article
published  in  a  periodical  lately  start-d
in  N>  w  York  city  U.  S.  A.  by  *»  .lohu
Taylor,"  one  of  the  twelve  apostles
of  he  Mormon  Church,  who  was  in
prison  wiili  Joseph  Smith  when  he  was
martyred,  and  at  the  time  received
four  balls  in  his  body.

*'  We  are  not  asliamed  to  proclaim
•'to  this  great  nation;  to  rulers  and  peo-
"  pie  ;  to  the  President,  Senators,  Legis-
"  latois,  and  .ludges  ;  to  hinh  and  I  )vv,
"  rich  atid  poor,  priests  and  people;  that
*•  we  are  firm  and  consnientious  be-
"  lievers  in  polygamy  ;  that  it  is  part
''  and  parcel  of  our  religious  creed.  We
"do  this  calmly,  seriously,  and  under-
"  s'amlingty,  after  due  deliberation,
"careful  examination,  and  close  inves-
"  tigation  (fits  principles  and  bearings,
'•  reliiiously,  socially,  morally,  phvsi-
"cally,  and  practically;  —  we  unhesila-
"  tintrly  pronounce  our  full  and  implicit
"f.iiihin  this  principle,  as  emanating
"  from  God  ;  and  that  ni^der  \.\s
"  direction,  n  would  be  a  blessing  to
"  the  human  family.

"  We  have  not  room  to  enter  into  the
"  merits  of  this  subject  this  issue  but
"shall  touch  upon  a  few  item*  which
'*  circumstances  ret  der  necessary,  and
'•  leave  the  details  f  r  another  lime.

"  We  are  aware  that  strong  preju-
"  dices  exist  in  the  minds  of  the  g  'od
"  and  virtuous,  the  h'nourab'e  and  high
"minded  of  our  land,  in  relation  to
"this  subject;  and  we  think  we  can
"respect  a  d  appreciate  all  rncU  ft-el-
"  ings,  when  honestly  and  candidly  ex-
"  pressed.  These  are  serious  matters,
"  precrnant  with  importance,  and  not
"  to  be  trifled  with.  They  enter  into
"  the  domestic  circle,  and  sinuate
"  themselves  into  all  the  conditions  and
"relationships  of  life;  and  therefore
"demand  the  most  serious,  calm,  and
"dispassionate  consideration,  Socie-
"  ty  is  already  corrupt  enough,  Gud
•'  knows  ;  and  to  seek  to  tear  down  the


••  flimsy  barriers   that  so  feebly  gnard
••our   wenk   and    rickety    standard    of
*»  mxraliiy.  would    be  a  ihin"   to  be  de-
"  (irpc^ted    by  e"ery   honourable    man.
•'  These  ihin>;s  are   not  with   us  a  nn  ii-
*' ler  of   theory  or   sneculaiion;    n^  r  a
"  system  ■  f  loath«nrne  sensual  aralifica-
"  lion.      We    have    higher    aim?,    and
*'  more   rxilied   views  of   the  relation-
"  sliip  uf  man    and    wife;  and   ii   pains
"  us   lo    see    the    fountain  of  life  thus
•'  corrnpieil.      We  cinnoi  without  sym-
••pailiy  heh'ild    man  who  was  created
••  in  the  ifn^ige  of   God  to  stand   at  the
**  h  ad  <'f  creation,  become  a   poor,  » f-
•*  feie,    degraded     beinij;    and    woman.
"  chas'p.  be  lUtifii'  and  lively,  deneived,
"  crushed,  bartered,    betrayed,    sunk  in
*'  crime,  a    cr-^aiure  of  and    for  lust,  or
"  view    the    povver-«    eiven   of   God    to
"  man  for  the  propagation    of  his  spe-
'*  c  es,     perverted     t'>    debauchery     and
•'  la>civi()US'ies9,  with  all  ii^  rt-V'lting,
"deady,  corrupt  ad    d^ninini/ effer.is;
"  without  S'lme  regard  for  fallen  humani-
*•  ty.     Neither  can    we  behold   wiihont
•*  emotion,  that    body,  which  christians
*' exp'^ct    lobe    the   residence    of  ilieir
•'spirit  in   the  resurrection  of  ihe  ju^st.
•'wliieh  ought  to  be  pure,  chaste,  vir-
•'tuons  a"d  noble,  become  pillu'ed  an  i
•♦  degraded  ;    a  reoepiacl-  of  disease—
•*  the  effects  of    iransaressi   n — unheal-
"  thy.  w-ak.  emaciated,  a  living,  loaih-
"  S' me  crawling    mass;    and    rhild'en.
•*  inheriiinsr    fr -m    their    binh    diseases
*' entailed  by  their   parents   to  the  third
"and   f  urth   generations.      We  as  eler-
"  nal    bciiigs  believe    in   eternal    laws.
"  covf'iiuits  and  unions  emanating  from
'♦  G>d  and    b-fsed   upon    i-urity  and  vir-
*»  lue  ;  we  are  not  uoiied  fplv  •*  till  death
"  d'l  us  part,"  but  expert  an  eternal  uni
••  on  ii  ihe    eternal  world,    based    upon
•'living,  imelligent.  eternal,  principle-;
"  our  Gospel,  our   relioi.,n,    our    cove-
"  I  ants    and    marriages  ;    all     onr    acts
**  refer    ti>  this  ;    and  no    one  can  deiest
"  ihf'  1  'aihsoine    d'-gradnd,  corrupt  and
•' mi-ierahle   stale   of  ihe  world,  in  rela-
•»  lion  tolewdiiHPs,  'ascivioiisness.  adu'-
"  lery  and    debauchery    more    ilian    we
•'  do;    and    were    women    ireateil    with
*'  us,    as    they  are  in    thousands  of  in-
"  stances  here,  it  would  cost  a  man  his
"  head  "—

The  "  visitor  of  Nauvoo"  advances  the
following  propositions,  viz,,   1st,  «'  No


one  is  wild  enough  to  aflirm  that  Poly-
eamy  is  any  where   commanded    in  the
Bible  ;''  and   "  2nd.  Iiis  borne   wiih  in
the   darkest   times,    but   always  with  a
view    to  prohibition.       *'  In    answer   to
iliese,  we  will  n<  w    proceed  to  prr>duce
sf>me    PC  ipiure  proofs   thai    Polygamy
is  of  God.''    and  was    prHCii^ed  by  his
people    wiih    Hi*   pcrmiysinn  und  sune-
lion,   which   the  "  Visiu.r*'  must  either
acknowledge  or  deny  his  Bible  ;  or*"read
it   in  a  less    strange  way"    thati   he   ac-
cuses   the    "Reader"   of  doing    in  liis
attack  upon  the  article  in  the  ''  En-j  lish-
man.''      As  one  of  the  chief  polyiramisiSi
we  will  begin  with  Abraham,  the  father
'f  the  faithful,  and   the   personni  friend
of  God.      We  find    that    in    his  old  age,
having  no  rhi  dren,  aid  his  wife  Sarah,
on  account  of   her  barreniiess  seeing  no
prosoects    of  any    through    herself,   to
meet  the  promi-es    of   an    innumerable
progeny    made  by    God    to    Ahraliam;
gave    her  handmaid    Haoar  to  him,  her
hu-band.  that  she  miuhi  hear  him    seed.
Srt>.  m^de  this  sacrifice  of  her  feelings  at
the    siirine  of   fmh    and    duiy,    not    at
ihe  insiiuaiion    <f   Abraham  to    pander
to  his   hists  but  to  brii  g     n  pass    he
iiiird  if  the    Lord,     and     that    chi'dren
might     be     raised     up     to    Abraham;
which  step  and  cnnseqient  union    was
appoved     and    blessed     of    Gou  ;     for
while  Ishmael,    the    fruits    of   it,   was
yet  in    Hagar's     womb,     the    anael  of
the    L  rd    appeared    to   her.  and    said,
"  i  will  multiply  thy  se«-d  ^xc  edmg  y,
that  ii  cannoi  he   numbered   for  mulii-
inde  "      He  alst  told  her  h'  w  t'«  name
lue  child  ;  and    Haijar  called  the  name
of  the    Lord    who    then    spoke    to    her
'•  Thiiu  God  seest  me  "      Cati  any    thing
else  he  made  of    his,  than  that  ihe  om-
niscient   God,  the  sf-apher  of    h<^aris,
.tanc/ioufd  and  blessed  ihe    act  ?    Again
when  Ishmael  «  a-  about  f  urict-n  years
old.    and    with    Hagar   was    about     to
perish  in   'he   wilderne-s.   God   *'  heard
the  voice  of  the    lad."    and   interposed,
and  saved    iheir   lives  ;  and    said    unto
airar,    "  Feor    not.    arise  lift    up     the
lad,  -.11. 1  hold  him  i     ihtne  hand'— pre-
paraloiy    to    the    covenant    about    to  be
tnade— •'  ft  I  will  make  of  bin  a  great
nation,"  and  "  God  was  tb^-  I  d.  and  he
grew."     Does  not  this  confirm  the  first
approval  and  blessing,  and  furiher  prove
that  God,  from  whom  it  emanated,  had


Bnt  ehanned  iiis  opinion  of  the  act.
Abraham  did  not  divorce  his  first  wife
ijarah,  to  marry  Haaar.  bat  nfierwnrds
had  a  chilli  a/s'  I'y  htr ;  which  cliild
was  l)lef-sfd  by  God  with  far  greater
blessiiicj-s  ihaii  even  Ishmael  ;  as  were
also  Alirahum  and  Sarah  themselves  ;
anil  God  s^id  to  Abraham  conceniiig
Sarah  — nfier,  and  in  approval  of  the
BBCritice  she  had  made  of  her  husband
lo  Hrtijar — •*  1  will  hjess  her,  atul  give
thee  >i  son  al-o  of  hi-r,  yea  I  will  b  es<;
her  and  she  shall  he  a  mother  of  nations."
Gen.  xvii.  16.

Here  God  instead  of  pondemnii  g
Abraham's  previous  imcrcourse  with
HaiT^r,  and  Sarah's  connivance  and
as^i<tanl•e  in  it,  Himsf/f  refers  to  it
in  eayino.  I  will  aive  Uiee  a  son  n/^o  i>f
Safrth  :  h"w  t  even  as  I  gnve  thee  if
JJagnr  ;  the  i  fereiK  e  <!ann"t  hn  set  asiiie
or  any  dnuhis  remain  that  the  transac-
lion  was  of  (5'd  and  was  ap|ir'  bnted
and  sanciimied  by  Mitn.  —  Gn<l  did  not
wilhdra  V  the  liijht  of  His  cnutitenanne
from  this  holy  family  after  these  necur-
ence-.  bni  c  nsanily  revealed  Himself
to  Abraham,  who  conijnned  t'  walk
with  Him  as  His  Friend  and  from
whom  He.  (God.)  Concealed  noihina,
*»and  the  Lord  s^id.  f  ha  I  I  hide  from
** Mraham  thu  thing  thai  I  do,  seeing
•'that  Abrihum  shall  snrely  becntne  a
"  oreat  and  mi^hiy  nation,  and  all  the
*'  nations  •  f  itie  earth  shall  h-  blessed  in
"him;  F  r  I  k't'iW  him  that  he  will
*'  commmid  his  children  and  his  hnuttho'd
*'  after  him.  and  ihey  shall  k^ep  the  wit/
*•  vf  the  Lord  and  do  justice  and  jndg^
"  ineit,  that  the  L"rd  many  bring  npnn
•'Abraham  thai  which  is  spoken  of  him,"
Gen :  xviii.  |7.

I'he  apostle  .Fames  says  *'  if  a  man  is
an  offeider  in  one  p.  int."  in  regard  to
God's  kn  wn  comirMndments,  *•  he  is
an  offender  in  all."  Ifiherefjre  Polyg^-
my  was  evil  in  the  sight  ot  the  Lord,
how  cnuld  Abraham,  who  was  then  liv-
ing ami  continued  I  live  in  then  en'-nm-
mission  thereof,  dbiain  this  great  hles-
sina?  and  if  it  was  a  crime,  m  other-
wise h(in  vtirl  and  parcel  f  G  d  s  re-
veaifd  will,  how  could  he  c  rnniand  hi>
children  f'^'er  him  anti  \' e  know  they
were  a  naiion  of  p  lygamisis — 'o  kep
the  wiiy  of  the  L->rd?  unless  like  son, e
flkodern  lewnliers  he  sai<l,  ■*  Do  as  I  say.
but  not  as  I  do."  Abraham  was  not  such


an  hypocrite;  but  in  the  way  of  Poly-
gainy  as  well  as  In  fither  things,  did
right  in  the  sight  of  God  :  for  the  Lord
Jesus  Himself  stated,  and  all  believers
in  the  liihle  confess,  that  he  kept  the
wni/ (f  the  L'nd  to  the  end,  atid  afer
(le.iih.was  saved  and  exalted  in  'he  king-
dom of  G  d's  glory.  But  more — 'his
sameAbraham, while  walking  with  God,
hi<l  afierwards  other  wives  and  concu-
bines ;  and  mflny  children  by  them,
who  bar!  grown  up  to  inan's  estate  he-
fore  he  died.  Gen  :  xxv,  I  to6!  all  which
could  not  have  taken  place,  except  with
the  consent  and  approb  ition  of  the  God
he  serveil  ;  and  wimse  commandments
he  f'beyed.  Now  all  the  above  facts,
and  inferences,  are  indisputiihle,  and
clearly  prove,  if  they  prove  any  thing,
ihat  Foly^nmu  vpas  viewed  very  diffe,-
rently  by  God  and  those  directly  in-
structed by  him  from  what  it  is  by
modern  <"hristians — that  it  was  not
considered  a  crime,  but  on  the  contrary
had  the  expre*n  sanction  and  appro'-al
of  Ike  M'lsf.  Hiiik,  whose  ways  far
exceed  those  of  man;  and  who.  if
man  does  not.  ever  dtstinvuishes  between
good  and  evil,  and  in  this  respect
chnntrelh  not.

We  will  now  proceed  lo  Jacob,  on
whom  the  blessings  ff  Abraham  were
confirmed  ;  a  careful  perusal  of  whose
history  will  show,  that  his  marrying  all
his  tour  wives  was  ajiproved  of  God  ;
whose  blessing  was  upon  him  and  his,
while  living  in  a  sta'e  pronounced  sin-
ful, detestable,  abonimable  and  bea.stly
in  these  refined  days;  let  us  look  into
it.  Uach  lel.  one  of  his  wives,  when
she  herself  bare  not,  gave  Bilhah  her
handm-iid  lo  Jncob;  and  said,  when
Bilhah  bore  him  a  son,  *'God  hath  judg-
ed me:"  does  this  mean  pronounced
judgment  on  me,  and  condemned  me?
i\  !  but  has  approved  (f  my  act.  and
rewarded  me;  and  "  ha'h  also  heard
my  voice,  and  hath  given  rne  a  son;
and  she  called  his  name  Dan" — 'gain,
(JoH  hearkened  unto  another  of  Jacob's
wives,  and  she  cooreived.  and  bare
J«coh  a  fif  h  son  and  Le;ih  said.  *'  God
"  h'lih  ^ivfin  mf  my  hire,  becnune  I  have
■'  given  nil/  moiden  to  my  husband  f^  how
i'xinbitahlv.  ami  exinessly  ihese  show
G  id's  npprnval  of  the  ads  referred   lo  !

Of     J.ic  b's      wives     it      is     said.
"  These  did  build  the  house  of  Israel;''


—and  their  immediate  progeny  gave
namei)  to  tlie  twehe  tribea  of  Israel,  to
last  for  evpr ;  for  they  are  writtpn  on
the  waies  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;
the  Jinal  goal  and  habitation  we  all  hope
to  reach.  Jacob's  course  bpinj  ap-
proved of  God,  He  proteced  him  and
his  from  his  enemies,  and  cauiinped
Laban  not  to  hurt  iiim  ;  and  He  himself
met  him,  and  blessed,  and  conferred  on
him  a  new  name,  as  He  had  f  rmerly
done  on  Abraham  and  Sarah  ;  and,
confirming  the  pmmises  and  hlessingq
of  Abraham  upon  him,  commanded
him,  as  he  had  done  them,  to  be  fruit-
ful and  mnliiply.  All  these  were  bless-
ed as  workers  of  righteousness,  and
keepers  of  the  wni^s  and  commandments
of  the  Lord  ;  and  if  so.  pidygatnv  must
have  been  7\mong%t  these  cimmntidmenls,
and  have  been  looked  upon  by  God  as
righteous ;  else  they  could  not  have
been  so  commended  ;  nor  could  they
who  had  lived  the  greater  part  of  their
lives, and  died  polygamists,  if  that  state
was  wrong — have  been  taken  to  hea-
ven without  repentance :  we  know
ihey  did  not  repent  on  earth,  and  they
could  not  afterwards  ;  f  )r,  according  to
the  belief  of  Christendom,  in  the  irrave
there  is  no  repentance.  The  conclu>ioii
is,  either  thui  these  holy  God-fearing
patriarchs,  if  polygamy  is  wrong,  are
in  hell,  or  that,  as  polygamists.  they
did  riijht,  and  were  blessed  for  ii  !

Referring  to  Moses,  we  find  among
the  laws  given  by  him,  that,  "  should
"  a  man  die  childless. and  Isiive  a  widow,
•'his  brother  was  bound,"  whether  mar-
•'  tied  or  not,  "  to  take  her  to  wife,  and
••  raise  up  seed  to  his  brother."  This
was  not  a  new  rule,  bnt  inerely  the
confirmati'n  of  an  observance  th-it  had
formerly  been  practised,  and  as  poly-
gamy had  long  been  a  Jewish  institu-
tion, God's  people  were  enabled  to
keep  the  above  law,  without  breaking
another ;  for,  had  it  been  otherwise,
and  they  been  monogamists,  Moses
would  not  have  given  it;  nor  ordered,
that  "  if  a  man  took  another  wife  to
"  himself,  bis  attention  and  duties  to  his
•'  first  one  should  not  thereby  be  dimi-
"  nished."  By  another  law,  a  Bastard
was  not  to  enter  God's  house  to  the
tenth  generation ;  and  we  see,  from
sacred  history,  that  the  prohibition  did
not  include  the  fraits  of  polygamy;


who  were  all  legalized,  as  well  as  ths
children  of  concubines  ;  for  instance,
Gideon,  Samuel,  Solomon,  and  many
others,  whom  the  Loid  visited  and
blessed,  and  made  priests  and  rulers
in  His  House  and  Kingdom.  That  a
concubine  was  something  vastly  differ-
ent from  the  kept  mistresses  of  Chris-
tenditnn ;  and  that  they  were  he  d  aa
sacred  to  n  man  as  a  wife  ;  and  that  ano«
iher  having  connexion  with  ih^m  was
considered  as  inucb  adultery  a«  if  ihey
had  been  called  wive>,  is  evideit  from
the  \Tord  ;  a  remarkabL-^  i  .stance  of
which,  we  have  in  the  histoiy  of  the
Le,vite  and  his  concubine,  in  the  book
of  Judges;  whose  humiliation,  by  some
of  the  wicked  of  the  people  led  to  aU
most  the  total  exterrninati  n  "f  the
tribe  of  Benjamin,  «  ho  seemingly  ap-
proved, and  took  up  arms  to  defend
their  bre'hien,  the  perpetrators  of  the
act,  thus  awfully  punished  by  the
Almiuh'y.

God  Himself  gave  the  wives  of  Saul
into  the  bosom  of  Davi'l,  and  told  him,
through  His  prophet  Nathan,  that  he
would  have  given  him  many  more  had
he  reqttirfd  il  atid  iisked  Iiim  ;  but  seeing
that  instead  of  doing  so,  led  by  hia
own  passions,  he  had  unanthorizedly
taken  anQther  man's  wife— Baih-heha—
and  thereby  committed  adultery,  wnd
the  murder  it  led  to;  He  (Gnd)  W'  u'd
lake  away  all  the  wives  he  had.  and  g  ve
them  1 1  a  nfi^hhour  better  ihnn  he!  Did
God  give  David  wives  as  a  snare,  and
curse,  and  mark  of  His  displeasure?  or
take  th^^m  away  from  him,  because  F^e
was  pleas^d  with  his  conduct  1  No  f
surely  No  !  He  acted  quite  otherwise;
but  how  ?  Is  God  a  mioist'T  of  siiil
according  to  modern  ideas  He  was  in
acting  so  contrary  to  the  superior  and  re«
fined  purity  of  His  creatures  now  ^dave*

We  think  we  have  now  snflficienily
proved  that  nothing  can  be  clearer  frina
God's  dealings  with  His  people,  as  re*
corded  in  the  Old  Testament,  than  Hia
approval  of  a  plurality  nf  wives,  when
obtained  according  toHis  will,  and  held
in  righleonsness.

The  fact  is  so  perspicuous  and  incon-
trovertible, that  there  is  no  use  of
mnltiplyin?  and  adducing  further  pas-
sages to  prove  the  purity,  and  righte-
ousness of  the  practice  in  the  sight  of
the  Most  High,


We  will  now  notice  what  has  been
advanced  by  the  Visitor  of  Nauvoo  and
other  (ibjeclois,  thai  all  these  worthies
ennmprated, '*  lived  in  an  inferior  dis-
»•  pensaiion  ;  and  were  in  iiriiorarice  and
"  darkness,  compared  with  the  supe-
**  rinr  lijrhi  (]liri>tians  nnw  enjoy  ;  and
*'  that  tlieref 're  <iod  winkt'd  at  these
•'  thinas  ;  and  alloweil  them,  beftanse
•'  of  the  hininess  of  their  hearts  :  the
"  inf-iiicy  of  the  hnnnan  mind  ;  and  the
"  rude  and  childish  slate  they  w  ere  in  ;
'•  but  that  such  practices  have  since
*'  been  condemned  ;  and  are  done  away
*'  with  io  the  New  Testament;  not  bf'-
*' in  f  suited  to  i  ur  present  stage  of
*'  pro  X  ih  in  enlightened  Christendom  !"

Tl>i'<  aruu  pent,  specious  as  it  is.  will
not  bear  scrutiny,  nnr  can  it  stand.

Has  the  »*  Visitf^T  of  Nhuvdo"  seen
G"d  1  or  have  any  favoured  ones  of  the
pariy  tie  belonjs  lo.  or  any  other  sect,
had  direct  cimmunicat  ons  from  Him.
as  ihfise  wi T'hies  had  ?  if  not,  is  not
their  boast  of  light  and  knowledge  vain?
How  oiherwisH  do  they  kriow  God's
will  in  relation  to  this  or  any  oiht^r  of
His  ordinances?  from  the  New  'I'esia-
meni?  whf^re  is  its  interpreter?  for
from  ihfi  various  readings,  explanations
and  opinions  that  have  ^plil  Christen-
dom into  intmmerablu  parties,  separat-
ing from  and  accusing  one  another  of
schisms,  heresies,  ignorance  of  the
trnih,  &c.,  it  is  evident  that  an  interpre-
ter it  needed,  and  that  the  trxte  "nd
inf^Uih/e  one  is  wanting!  Where  is  he?
Wlto  e  .n  find  hirn  ?  ask  Ohri-tians,  tiiey
tell  you  that  ihe  f»pirit  of  God  is  he  !
and  they  have  His  influences  !  impos-
Eiblf !  the  Spirit  of  Gnd  is  'tie,  and
canimt  leich  cfiniradicmrv  things.  It
cannot  be  the  author  of  666  opposing
sects,  but  only  of  ime  true  undivided
church — nor  was  it  the  Spirit  of  God
that  led  to  the  divisions,  variances,  dis-
order and  confusion,  evidenced  in  the
broken  fraomental  sections  of  modern
Chrisiinnity;  but  the  devil,  who  has
made  them  as  much  the  chi  dren  of
disobedience  as  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's
day  ;  leading  them  to  conceive  that
they  are  in  the  full  and  broad  blaze  of
Christian  light,  and  are  rich  an. I  in-
creased in  goods,  and  have  need  of  no-
thing—of no  further  cnrnmunications
or  teachinga  from  heaven— while  they
know  not  that  they  are  wretched,  and


miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and
naked!  they  have  shut  out  the  light  of
immerlinte  revelation,  and  darkness  has
covered  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness
the  people,  and  they  know  it  not!

St.  Paul  tells  us,  that  ♦'  the  Gospel
was  preached  to  Abraham,"  by  whom  ?
by  God  Hims'  If— for  we  d  >  not  read
of  his  havinj  any  otiier  insiructor — and
Jesus  said,  "  Abraham  saw  mv  day
and  was  g'ad."  He  w.is  taught  direct-
ly by  the  Most  Hii>h  God.  tlie  Possessor
of  the  heavens  and  eath;  who  knew,
and  kn"weih  the  end  from  the  beiiii-
ning;  light  and  darkties-;  evil  and
good  ;  and  if  so,  how  could  he  possi-
bly be  i"  ignorance  and  d  irkness.  who
wisthe/'tenrf  of  this  God,  and  the
Father  and  chief  of  b-lievers?  Wiilv
whom  God  talked  f  ce  t<>  face  as  with
Moses,  and  not  as  the  "  Visitor"  ex-
presses it,  mere'y  *•  brought  th»^m  up
from  a  lower  hell  lo  a  less  foul  place  v'*
telling  them  they  were  righieous,  ac-
cepted and  ble-sed,  whilst,  they  were
living,  through  ignorance,  or  otherwise,
in  immoral  anil  unclean  practices  ?  No  I
whatever  men  may  be.  Gnd  is  no  iiypo-
criie — He  cruld  not  act  so;  nor  could
He,  being  Himself  their  instructor,
possibly  wink  at  evil  in  Abraham,  and
others  He  Himself  taught ;  a-id  at 'he
same  time  be  a  just,  fiithful,  and  truth-
loving  being!  hut  the  '-V'sitor''  talking
unadvisedly  as  he  does,  virtually,  n
spit'^  of  ihi-s-^  ihiogs.  accuses  ilie  Al-
mighty of  deception  towards  His  friends
and  those  Herpmfesses  to  love;  and  of
acting  in  a  way  a  virtuous  and  honest
man  vvi  uM  b«  ashamed  <  f .

Christ  and  His  disciples  did  not  dif-
fer ill  any  respec  from  Ahraham  in  their
faith  ;  but  always  held  him  up  as  an
example  to  their  followers;  nor  did
they  c  indemn  him,  and  do  away  wiih
the  laws  of  polygnmy  h"  practise!.
Christ  come  not  to  desir  y  the  law  and
the  Prophets,  but  to  fulfil  them  ;  and
as  polygamy  cannot  be  classed  amongst
the  types,  shadows,  and  ceremonial
observances  introduced  hy  Moses,  and
fulfilled  and  done  away  in  Christ  ;  l)ut
formed  part  if  the  moral  I  tw,  ordered
by  God,  and  practised  by  His  peculiar
people  long  before  the  institutions  of
Moses  ;  it  culd  not  have  been  abrogat-
ed in  Christ,  nor  by  Him;  nor  was  it
forbidden  to  the  gentile  converts  by  the


d


apostles,  when  they  were  required  «'  to
*'  abstain  from  fornication,  eatina[  of
"  blood  and  things  offered  to  idols."

Christ  Himself  came  from  a  long
line  of  polygaraists ;  lived  amongst
them  ;  saw  its  practice  every  day  ;  and
never  disapproved  of  it ;  at  least,  it
cannot  be  shown  from  the  writings  of
the  New  Testament,  that  lie  ever  did  so.

The  passage  in  Matt.  xix.  3,  in  which
the  expression  "they  twain  shall  be
one  flesh,"  so  much  dwelt  on  by  "  the
Visitor"  as  the  foundation  of  all  his
arguments,  refers  in  its  context  to  put-
ting away,  the  very  opposite  of  marri-
age ;  which  former  alone,  was  con-
demned by  Christ  in  His  address  to
these  polygaraists  : — "  they  twain  shall
be  one  flesh;"  that  is,  become  so  on  iheir
connexion  consequent  on  marriage,  and
expressly  so  in  their  children — does
r\ot  imply  thata  man  may  not,  as  Jacob,
become  one  flesh  with  many,  as  well  as
with  one  ;  for  a  man  becomes  one  flesh
with  every  woman  with  whom  he  may
connect  himself;  as  we  see  acknow-
ledged every  day;  for,  is  it  not  said  of
a  man  who  marries  consecutively  many
wives,  on  the  demise  of  former  ones,
that  he  was  one  flesh  with  each  and  all?
and  does  not  Paul  say  of  what  is  now
the  crying  sin  of  monogamic  Christen-
dom, "  know  ye  not  that  he  that  is
joined  to  an  harlot  is  one  flesh  %"

"  In  the  New  Testament  the  wife  of
''  a  man,  not  wives,  is  always  mention-
*'  ed,  which  proves,"  say  some,  "  that
•*  polygamy  was  not  practised  by  the
"  Christian  Church"  ;  but  such  proves
nothing,  and  as  the  erudite  Poet
Miltnn  says,  "  is  used  as  a  ge-
"  neric  word  in  the  Old  Testament,
"  as  well  as  in  New,  for  instance —
"  Thou  shall  not  covet  they  neighbour's
"  wife,  nor  his  house ;  nor  his  man  ser-
•'  vant,  nor  his  maid  servant,  nor  his
"  ox,  nor  his  ass,  &c.  all  put  in  the
"  singular,  which  does  not  infer,  that
"  a  man  was  only  to  have  one  wife,  any
"  more  than  that  he  was  to  be  limited
*'  to  one  ox  or  ass  :"  The  Poet  also  in
his  first  book  on  Christian  Doctrine,
treating  on  polygamy,  further  states
on  this  passage;  "  it  would  be  ridicu-
"  lous  to  argue  that  it  is  not  said  houses,
"  but  house*;  not  man-servants,  but
"man-servant;  not  even  neighbours,
['  but  neighbour ;  as  if  it  were  cot  the


**  general  custom  in  laying  down  com-
*'  mandments  of  this  kind,  to  use  the
"  singular  number,  not  in  a  numerical
"  sense,  but  as  designating  the  species
"  of  the  tiling  intended.  With  regard
•'  to  the  phrase  they  twain,  and  not
"  more,  sliall  be  oneflesh,  it  is  to  be  ob-
"  served  first, — that  the  con/ea;/ refers  to
"  the  husband,  and  that  wife  only  whom
"  he  was  seeking  to  divorce,  without
"  intending  any  allusion  to  the  number
"  of  his  wives;  whether  one  or  more.
«'  Secondly,  marriage  is  in  the  nature  of
"  a  relation,  and  to  one  relation  there
"  can  be  no  more  than  two  parties.  If
"  a  man  has  many  sons,  his  paternal
'<  relation  towards  them  all  is  manifold,
"  but  towards  each  individually,  is  sin-
"  gle  and  complete  in  itself;  by  parity
"  of  reasoning  if  a  man  had  many
«'  wives,  the  relation  which  he  bears  to
"  each  will  not  be  less  perfect  in  itself,
"  nor  will  the  husband  be  less  oneflesh
"with  each  of  them,  than  if  he  had
•'  only  one  wife.  Thus  it  might  be
"  properly  said  of  Abraham  with  re-
"  gard  to  Sarah  and  Hagar  respectively,
"  these  twain  were  oneflesh.''^

Another  passage  urged,  (Tim  :  iii.  2.)
is  that  a  Bishop  was  to  be  chosen  only
from  those  who  had  but  one  wife.
Now  it  does  not  read,  nor  are  we  to
understand  it,  as  only  one  wife,  in  con-
tradistinction to  others  who  had  more ;
but  it  simply  means,  from  the  nature  of
the  duties  a  Bishop  had  to  (lerform,  it
was  desirable  that  he  should  be  a  mar-
ried man  ;  that  he  should  have  at  least
one  wife  ;  but  there  is  no  limitation  to
the  one.  The  same  Apostle  says—
"  marriage  is  honourable  in  a/f — he
does  not  exclude  polygamic  marriages —
'*  and  thebedundefiled" — which  Jacob's
and  David's  were  till  Reuben  and  Absa-
lom defiled  them — "  but  whoremongers
and  adulterersGod  will  judge";  with  re-
ference to  which, and  to  the  many  wives
the  people  of  God  formerly  had  it  could
be  said  with  far  more  propriety  than
now,  "  what  God  hath  joined  let  not
man  put  asunder  ;"  for  dark  as  we  call
those  ages,  they  had  divine  laws  re-
garding marriage  ;  and  had  wives  seal-
ed to  them  by  those  who  had  authority
from  God  to  do  so ;  and  could,  accord-
ing to  His  will  join  a  man  and  a  wo-
man together;  which  divine  authority,
Christian  nations  have  not    naw  got,


10


there  being  no  divine  rule  laid  down  for
ihein  how  to  marry  or  give  in  marriage
acceptably  to  God,  in  the  written  frag-
ments of  revelation  they  are  alone  pos-
sessed   of;  in  consequence  of  which,
different  forms  are  used  by  different  na-
tions, and  at  different  times,  aa  the  civil
powers  may  direct ;  many  of  whom  do
not  allow  marriage  to  be  a  religious  rite
at  all ;  nor  even  profess  to  believe  that
God  hath  joined   the  parlies  interested
in  it ;  and  yet  they  boast  of  their  light,
having  forgotten    even   the    design   of
marriage  ;  if  they  ever  knew  it ;  it  being
with  them  but  a  temporary  connexion
—it  may  be  for  a  few  days  only — end-
ing in  death.     It  was  not  so  with  our
first  father  Adam,  who,  as  an  immortal
being,  was  married  for  eternity,    when
no  death  existed  ;  and  the  word  of  God
nowhere  informs  us  that  this  marriage
was  ever  rendered   null   and  void,   or
dissolved,    and    Adam    remarried    for
time. — His  union  with  Eve  formed  the
crowning  bliss    of  paradise ; — it   was
interrupted   for  a   season,   but   is   not
thereby  done  away  ;  for  if  Christ  carae-
to     restore  all   things  that   were  good,
and  raise  man  to  a  higher  estate,   and
make  him   a   possessor  of  more  than
was  lost   by  the  fall,    surely   his  chief
blessing  will  be  restored  to  him;  and  Eve
and   Adam  be  everlastingly  re-united  ;
else  there   will  be  a  deficiency,  a  want,
an  imperfection,   felt    by   man  to   his
eternal  loss,  in   the  perfected  plans  of
the  Almighty  !  True  there  is   no  mar-
riage in  heaven ;  but  that  makes  it  only
the  more   needful  and   imperative   for
men  while   on  earth  to  be   married  for
eternity,     according    to    the    revealed
laws    of  God ;  otherwise    they    must
remain  for  ever  single.   Paul  knew  this
doctrine  of  perfection,  when   he   wrote
"  the  man  is  not  without  the  woman  in
the  Lord,  nor  the   woman  without    the
man.''

If  so,  and  if,  after  a  long  night  of
darkness,  light  on  this  subject  has  been
again  revealed  from  heaven;  we  sure'y
ought  anxiously  to  give  heed  to  it  and
consider  it  worthy  at  least  of  investi-
gation. It  may  seem  strange  ;  but  we
nevertheless  afRrm,  that  light  has  been
manifested  on  this,  as  well  aa  on
many  other  long  hidden  truths,  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  despised
though    he  be;  and    the    nature,  the


end,  2nd  the  oidinances  of  true  marriage?,
have  been  restored  in  these  days  ;  and
with  them  polygamy,  designed  by   God
not   to   defile,   but  heal  and   keep  the
people    pure ;    that   a    numerous    and
righteous  seed  might  be    raised    up    to
serve    him. — We     consequently     find,
when  those  laws  were  formerly  known
and  practised,    that   good  men,  such  as
Abraham    and   a  host  of  others,    were
desired  to  take   many  wives ;    and   as
an   especial  blessing,  were  promised  a
numerous  progeny  ;  while  those  who  fell
under  the  displeasure  of  the  Almighty
had  their  wives  taken  away  as  a  punish-
ment,   and   given    to  others  better  than
they  were.     As  there  are  always  many
wicked  men,  who  do  not  in  reality  fear
and  serveGod,(in  the  best  communities,)
by    no  other  way   could  the  numerous
believing  females  of  God's  people  have
found   God-fearing   husbands,    through
whom   they   could    possibly    have  ful-
filled the  end  of  their  creation,  and   the
first   pure  law  of  God,  to  multiply  and
bear  righteous  seed  who  should  be  reared
in  (he  ways  of  the  Lord  ;  which  requires
the  faith  of  both  parents    to  effect. — If
not,  then  the  daughters  of  Israel  must
have  been  either  united   to,  and   placed
under  the  rule  oibad  men,  or  have  gone
without  husbands.    They  were  not  creat-
ed  for   the   former ;    which   would   be
only   multiplying     transgression,     and
tend  to  the  deterioration   and  destruction
of  the   community  ,-    and    the  latter  was
always  reckoned  a  calamity, and  shunned
and  dreaded  as  a  reproach  among  God's
people.     How   otherwise    then    could
such  be   enabled  to   fulfil   God's  law  to
"  multiply   and     replenish   the   earth "
in    righteousness,     and    in    a    manner
pleasing  to  himi    what  other  method
could  he    devised    than    God's  plan,  to
meet  the  evil  ?  even  the  plan  which  he
commanded  his  people  to  carry  out  of
old,  and  in  setting  up  his  kingdom  again
upon  the  earth  in  these  days,  has  rein-
stituted,  not  for  the  gratification  of  the
lusts  and   passions  of  fallen  men,   but
that  a  numerous  seed    should  be  raised
up  to  serve   him  ;    to  be  obedient  to  his
teachings  through  his  apostles  and  pro-
phets in  these  days  ;   and  thus,  in  their
measure,  hasten  the   full  establishment
of  his  kingdom,  and  fulfil  his  will  upon
the  earth.
That  it  was  to  be  so  in  the  latter  days,


11


was  foreseen  of  old  by  the  Prophet
Isaiah,   who  foretold  the  time  when,
after  the  judgments  of  God  should  have
been  executed  on  the  rebellious,  there,
should  he  few  men  left;  when  a  man
would   be  precious  as  a  wedge  of  gold
of  Ophir;  and  when  many  of  the  wo-
men, spared  from  their  not  having  been
so  wicked,  for  women  naturally  depen-
dant, are  more  submissive,  and    unless
led    away   by    men,  yield   themselves
more    readily     and    implicitly    to    the
laws  of  their    Maker — When   the  wo-
men, the  prophet  says,   "  by  sevens,"
or  in  numbers,  •'  should   take  hold   of
one  man"  of  the  righteous  who  survive
saying,    "  We  will  eat  our  own  bread,
"  and  wear  our  own  apparel,  only  let  us
"  be  called  by  thy  name",  or  be  married
to  you,  "  to  take  away  onr  reproach  ;"
and  what  is  this  reproach?  Barrenness,
childlessness,  from  any  cause ;  not  to  be
obliged,  like  Jephthah's  daughter,  tobe-
wail  their  virginity.     Immediately  af-
ter, in   the  connexion  of  ihe  passage,
and  in   the  remainder  of  the  chapter,
we   see  the   fruits,  or  results   of  the
same,  in  beauty  and  glory,  in  excellence
and  comeliness;  and  in  holiness  written
on  all;  "when  theLord  shall  havepurged
away  the  filth  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  ;"
for  they  shall  all  be  called  holy.    How
different  from  the  spurious  and    squea-
mish holiness  of  Christendom  1  How
different   to  its  plans   and    its  human
institutes,    and  their  results — teeming
corruptions,  whoredoms,    disease  and
death  !

That  the  practice  of  polygamy  as
now  existing  in  Utah,  in  like  manner
proceeds  not  from  fallen  lustful  desires,
is  evident  from  the  fact,  that  it  was  not  j
sought  for,  or  acted  on,  till  after  a  re-
velation was  given  by  the  Lord  au-
thorizing it ;  the  first  believers  in  the
divine  mission  of  Joseph,  having  join-
ed the  Church  when  nothing  but  self-
denial,  persecution,  loss  of  goods,  cha-
racter, wives,  children,  houses,  and  all
they  had,  stared  them  in  the  face.
Cleaving  to  every  word  that  proceeds
from  the  mouth  of  God,  they  obey  in
this  as  in  all  other  things  ;  and  attend
to  the  object,  as  well  as  the  restrictions
contained  in  the  modern  revelations  of
God  on  the  subject;  which  bear  as
hard  on  adultery, and  fornicalion,as  those
of  old  did.    From  these  crimes,  they


keep  themselves  pure,  and  believe,  that
even    "  to  look  on   a  woman  to  lust
after    her,    is    adultery."    Therefore,
when  on  missions,   the  Elders  abstain
even  from  the  appearance  of  evil ;  and
from  any  familiarity  or  intercourse  with
females,  that    could   possibly  lead  to
ensnareraent   through    them ;    waiting
till  the  Lord  gives  them  wives  lawfully
through  the  prophet:  for  by  the  reve-
lation, only  one  man  at  a  time  on  earth,
is  authorized  to  marry  God's  people  for
eternity  ;  which  man  at  present  is  Brig-
ham  Young  the  Seer,  the    Revelator
and   prophet  of  the  Church.     So  that
none  can,  according  to   the  decrees  of
heaven,  be  legally  married  for  eternity,
nor  Polygamy  be  lawfully   practised,
except  where  the  Saints  are  gathered  ;
the    Lord's  kingdom  set  up  ;  and  his
people    governed     by     a    Theocracy,
through    immediate  revelation.    This
is  the  only  remedy  for  the  disorganised,
disordered,  degraded,  and  earthly   go-
verned states  of  Christendom.     God's
plan,   by  which  its  impurities  and  cor-
ruptions  may  be  swept  away,  and  its
multiplied   diseases  healed,  if  healed,
at  all  :  for  the  workings  of  men,  left
to  themselves,  tried  for  the  last  1700
years,  have  utterly  and  signally  failed
to  cleanse  and  restore  to  good  the  ac-
cumulating evils,  or  even  to  arrest  their
progress;    all   their   salves,   specifics,
partial  renovations,  have  failed  to  pro-
duce health  in    the  body — the  plague
spots  still  exist,  and  the  cankering  and
festering  sores  refusing  to  be  healed,
ever  manifest  disease   and   corruption
within,  and  this,  because  they  scoff  at
God's   plans;  and    reject  the  humble
ministers  of  His  salvation,    who  have
got  the  balm  of  Gilead  to  restore  them,
if  they  would  :  but  though   professing
Christendom  will  not,  another  people,
come  from  out  of  her  midst,  has  tried  ;
and  the  wonder  of  the  age,  a  nation  ga-
thering  at  Utah,    is  now  showing  the
experiment  to  mankind.     How    has  it
worked  even  in  its  infancy  amongst  the
40   or  50,000   of    all    classes   of   men
already     collected      there?     some    of
its    fruits  are    these — not  a  house   of
ill   fame   is   to  be  found  there;   no  se-
ductions take  place  amongst  themselves;
no  prostitution,  or  destitution  that  can
lead  to  it,  no  drunkenness,  swearing,  or
debauchery  ;  nor  hosts  of  pettifogging


12


lawyers,  with  their  concomitant  evils  ;
no  idlers    of   high    or    low     degree ;
no  beggary,  or   want  in  the  midst  of
plenty;  but  all  is  order  under  the  go-
vernment of  heaven  ;  industry  and   so-
briety prevail ;  and  the  people  are  bre-
thren under  one  common  head,  seeking
the    public   weal ;     and   consequently
dwell  in  a  comparative  peace  and   har-
mony, which  no   other  body  on  earth
can  equal.    Testimonials  of"  this  we  ad-
duce from  the  present  Chief  Justice  of
Utah,  as  well  as  his  predecessor,  both  of
whom  were  appointed  by  the  U.  S.  go-
vernment ;  also  from  Capt.   Stansbury,
the  officer  deputed  to  survey  the  coun-
try—  from  Col.   Thos.  L.    Kane   who
travelled  with,  and  was  intimately  ac-
quainted with  their  condition  ;  and  from
Colonel  Steptoe   who   commanded   the
troops  there,  and  was  to   have  been  ap-
pointed governor,  but  refused  ;  and  with
others  recommended  Brigham  Young
as  the  most  competent  man   to  be  con-
tinued in  that  office. — All  of  whom, with
many  others,  not  only  speak  well  of
the  people,  hut  in  the  highest  terms  of
Brigham  Young  their  leader  and  go-
vernor.     We  also  draw  your  attention
to  a  letter  from  a  lady,  married  to  a
Polygamist  at  Utah,  which  is  no  ficti-
tious narrative  ;  but  an  undisguised  and
certified  fact,  describing  her  situation
and   feelings,  which  is  a  true  index  of
those  of  the   body    of  married  females
there  ;  all  which,  ought  to    tell    on   the
minds  of  those  desirous  of   attaining  to
the  truth  of  this,  as  well  as  of  all  other
things.

We  cannot  close  without  noticing
the  bigoted  remarks  cf  the  "  Visitor  of
Nauvoo"  in  his  communications,  find-
ing fault  with  your  liberality,  in  say-
ing, "  that  had  the  Mormons  professed
"  to  be  Christians  in  any  other  way  than
"  that  called  the  way  of  Mormon
"  their  wonderful  fortitude  would  have
"been  adduced  as  an  incontestable  proof
"of  divine  support."  Also  "  never  did,
*'  religious  emigrants,  flying  from  perse-
*'  cution,  encounter  hardships  with  no-
"bler  fortitude.''  These  are  truths  which
we  appreciate  ;  but  what  says  the  "  Vi-
sitor?" "Flagrant  oflFeiiders  against  pub-
"  lie  morality  and  common  decency,  fly-
"  ing  from  deserved  public  indignation
«'  hardly  merit  such  praise  ;"  and  that
•'the  horrors"  the  novel  professes  to  de-


pict cannot  be  made  worse  than  they
are.  These  assertions  we  defy  the
"  Visitor"  to  prove  from  any  unprejudic-
ed, undoubted,  and  authentic  evidence;
and  if  he  supposes  that  by  such  false-
hoods he  c^n  materially  injure  Mormon-
ism  we  would  remind  him,  of  his  own
remark,  "  What  falsehood  ever  added
to  the  cause  of  truth?"  and  advise  him
in  future  to  produce  his  accusations  and
proofs  togeiher.

He  states  in  his  second  letter,  "  He,
"  Joseph  Smith,  was  shot  I  believe,  by
"  the  mob  on  his  attempting  to    break
"jail.    Very  likely  that  he   would  at-
tempt to   do  so  in  the   face  of  a  mob  !
the  assertion  refutes  ilseir;but  we  want
proofs  for  we  know  tlie  Vis  tor's  belief
to  be  a  fiction.    It  has   been  published
far   and   wide,   and  is  so   well  known,
that  we  wonder  at  the  "Visitor's"  igno-
rance of  it,  that  Joseph  Smith,  to  save
bloodshed  gave  himself  up   to   the  au-
thorities of  the  state  of  Illinois,  under
a  guarantee  from  the  Governor  of  safe-
ty from    the  personal  violence  of  the
people,   to   stand  his  trial  on  the  lalse
accusations  brought  against  him  by  his
old   persecutors    of  the  state    of  Mis-
souri ;  and  that  the  small  guard  of  the
jail    of  Carthage,    in    which    he    was
lodged,  having  been  either  overawed
or     purposely    withdrawn,     (for   they
offered   no  resistance)  about  200  mob-
bers,  part  of  the  many  who  had  all  along
been  headed  by  professed  ministers   of
God  disguised  and  painted  like  Indians,
broke     into^  the    jail,    and    murdered
Joseph  and  his  brother  Hyrum  in  cold
blood,   thus   fulfilling  the  threat  they
had  made  lonu  before,  that  "  if  the  law
could  not  reach  him,  powder  and    ball
should."     For  previous  to  this,  Joseph
had  been    legally,   or  rather  illegally,
tried    upwards    of  50    times   on    false
accusations ;  not  one  of  which  could  be
proved    against    him,    or    any     thing
worthy   of    bonds;    the   Lord  having
been    with   him  — all   which,   with  his
life  in  full,  will  shortly  be  published  by
the  authorities  of  this   Church,  to  the
confusion    of   her    enemies,    atid    the
extinction  of  {he  many  Jloatins;  and  visi-
onary beliefs,  like  those  expressed  by
the  "  Visitor  of  Nauvoo."

We  cannot  say  much  for  the  "  Visi-
tor's" divinity,  or  oi  his  judgment  who
could  write,  that  "  a  man  is  responsible


13


•'  for  a  moral  sense ;  but  the  case  is  quite
"  different  with  human  opinions  concern-
"  ing  God^s  Unity,  Trinity,  or  Multipli-
city ;"  i.  e.  virtually,  that  a  man  is  not
responsible  and  it  matters  not  whether
he  worship  a  true  or  false  God  !  Does
the  '*  Visitor"  expect  eternal  life?  or  does
he  believe  our  Lor'l  when  He  says
"  this  is  Eternal  life  to  know  thee
^Hheonly  true  God.and  Jesus  Christ  whom
** Thou  hast  sent  ?  We  hardly  think  so;
for  he  makes  it  clear  that  he  is  yet  igno-
rant of  Him  ;  and  is  the  worshipper  of
an  unknown  God  ;  who  may,  or  miy
not  be,  one  or  three  or  many  more!  If
soijinorant,  and  indifferent,  and  accomo-
dating, how  can  he  be  a  teacher  sent  of
God  ?  but  this  we  suppose  he  does  not
profess  to  be;  and  if  not,  what  busi-
ness has  he  to  teach  and  preach  about
God?  How.  without  the  true  know-
ledge of  God,  or  knowledge  of  the
only  true  God,  can  he  in  all  things  pos-
sibly distinguish  truth  from  error?  How
does  he  know  but  that  the  "  moral
sense"  he  talks  of  may  not  have  been
imbihed  by  him  through  the  traditions
and  teachings  of  his  forefathers  I  and
that  had  he  been  born  a  heathen, or  a  can-
nibal, he  would  have  partaken  greedily
of  their  sins,  without  ihe  slightest  com-
punction 1  and  known,  or  felt  little  or
nothing  of  the  moral  sense  he  harps
upon  ■?  And  how,  ignorant  of  God's  na-
ture and  ways,  can  he  make  sure  that
he  does  not  now  call  good  evil,  and  evil
good,  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet
for  bitter  1  for  has  not  Jesus  said  that
*'  what  is  honourable  with  men  is  abomi-
nation in  the  sight  of  God "?"  and  that
"  no  mwn  can  knaw  God,  except  He  the
Lord  reveal  Him?"  And  if  the  teach-
ings of  mere  uninspired  men  have  alone
been  prevalent  for  the  last  seventeen
centuries  ;  and  immediate  revelation  deni-
ed i  how  does  the  "  Visitor"  or  any
other  professed  teacher,  know,  that  he
will  not  come  under  condemnation  on
"  that  day  when  the  Lord  Jesus  will
"  return  in  flaming  fire,  taking  venge-
'•  ance  on  them  who  know  not  God,  and
"obey  not  the  Gospel  of  His  Son"?
That  such  may  be  the  case  is  very  like-
ly ;  for  the  "  Visitor"  further  says, "  we
"may  or  we  may  not  know  about  Ciirist's
"  reign  &c.!"  and  how  one,  who  counts
His  truth  and  word  so  lightly,  is  likely
to  be  accepted,  we  leave  to  himself  to


answer.  We  fear  he  will  find  nature's
moral  sense,  will  prove  but  a  poor  and
indifferent  substitute  for  revelation  ;  and
do  little  for  him  then,  if  it  do  not  utter-
ly condemn  him.  We  advise  him  to
repent,  and,  becoming  as  a  little  child,
to  have  faith  in  all  God's  revelations
modern  as  well  as  ancient,  and  be  bap-
tized for  the  remission  of  his  sins,  by
those  having  authority  that  he  may  re-
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  and  see  and  en-
ter into  the  kingdom  of  God.

His  arguments  regarding  Rahab,
Abraham,  David,  and  Solomon,  are  so
puerile  and  flimsy,  that  a  child  may
upset  them.  Kabab,  he  states,  was  not
justified  on  account  of  her  iiarlotry  I
Who  ever  advanced,  or  dreamed  that
she  was?  her  belief  in  the  God  of
Israel;  and  her  aiding  His  servants
and  cause,  were  the  works  that  proved
her  faith,  and  justified  and  saved  her.

The  "  Visitor"  says,  "  it  seems
*'  strangely  assumed  that  Abraham  had
"  many  wives,  and  if  he  had  concubines
"  (which  does  not  appear  .'J  See  Gen  :
xxvi.  vi. — "  they  were  not  wives,  nor
"is  concubinageChristianity"? — He  has
however  to  acknowledge,  however  reluc-
tantly, that  Abraham  had  one  bastard
child  by  Hagar ;  for  "  Sarah  o»)/y"  he
says  "  was  Abaham's  wife";  and  as  a
curious  proof,  he  quotes  the  prophet
Isaiah,  telling  the  Jews  to  ''  looli  to
"Abraham  your  f?itlier  and  to  Sarah  who
"  bare  you"  !  Who  does  not  know  that
the  Israeliiies  were  descended  from
Sarah  ?  and  to  whom  else  were  they  to
look  ?  they  had  nothing  to  do  with  Ha-
gar, or  Keturah,  or  Abraham's  other
wives  and  concubines,  or  with  the  nume-
rous children  these  also  bare  to  Abra-
ham ?  Gen  :  xxv.  1  to  6.  In  what  other
way  could  Isaiah  speak  t  He  was  not
trying  to  show  or  prove,  like  the  "Visi-
tor," that  Abraham  was  not  a  polyga-
mist,  on  at  least  a  large  scale;  or  that
he  liveii  in  sin  in  having  numerous  bas-
tards, which  was  winked  at  by  God  only
on  account  of  his  ignorance,  and  the
infantile  and  dark  state  of  his  mind  ;
which  God  failed  to  enlighten,  and
which  prevented  God  from  showing
him,  or  making  him  understand  the  evil
of  his  course  ?  No!  Isaiah  knew  bet-
ter, though  he  also  lived  in  a  dark  age,
ami  like  Abraham,  was  only  brought
into  "  a  less  foul  place  than  the  foul-


14


est"!  No!  tliis  Prophet,  and  all  sent
of  God,  knew  that  Abraham  had  the
true  faith  and  knew  the  true  God,  and
Jesus  whom  he  sent ;  which  was  vouched
for  by  Christ  Himself,  who  said  "  Abra-
ham saw  my  day  and  was  glad"  and
held  him  forth  as  worthy  of  example —
"  If  ye  were  Abraham's  seed,"  said  he
to  the  Jews,  "  ye  would  do  the  works
of  Abraham,"  and  these  works  were  of
God,-  being  contrasted  by  our  Lord  with
those  of  the  Jews  to  whom  he  spake,
saying,  "  ye  are  cf  your  father  the
devil,  and  his  works  will  ye  do."  But
we  are  no  more  sure  of  this,  than  we
are  that  the  "  Visitor"  knows  nothing
of  the  matter  he  has  presumed  so  dog-
matically to  write  on.  Of  David  he  says,
"  when  David  took  an  added  wife,  Bath-
"  6heba,it  is  expressly  written  the  thing
"displeased  the  Lord."  This  is  a  gloss,
or  perversion  of  the  word  of  the  Lord,
and  an  attempt  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes
of  his  readers,  whom  he  must  consider
remarkably  ignorant  of  their  Bible  ;  an
added  wife!  as  if  Bathsheba  was  the
only  one  David,  (till  then  a  monoga-
mist ! )  had  ever  taken  !  We  wonder  at
the  "  Visitor's"  attempting  to  write  so
deceitfully,  when  every  child  is  acquain-
ed  with  the  sacred  history  of  David,
and  knows  that  he  had,  long  before
Bathsheba's  case,  taken  many  wives;
and  that  God  was  displeased  with  him,
not  for  adding  to  his  wives,  which  God
Himself  had  done  for  him,  as  before
shown,  but  because,  led  by  passion
alone,  and  without  divine  authority,  he
took  another  man''s  wife ;  and  thereby
committed  adultery,  and  the  murder  it
led  to;  therefore  God  was  displeased
with  him,  and  as  a  punishment,  took
away  the  wives  He  had  given  him,  and
gave  them  to  a  neighbour  of  his  belter
than  he.

Of  Solomon,  the  "  Visitor"  talks  in
the  same  disingenuous  way,  as  if  the
Lord  was  angry  with  him  simply  for
taking  many  wives  !  His  case  may  be
read,  and  is  as  well  known  as  David's
— known  to  all,  that  it  was  not  beuause
he  was  a  polygamist,  that  the  Lord  was
displeased  with  him  ;  but  because  he
loved  many  strange  women  ;  women  of
the  Moabites,  Edomites,  Zidonians,  and
and  Hittites,  of  the  nations  of  which
the  Lord  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel,
'•  ye  shall  not  go  in  to  them,  nor  shall


"they  come  in  to  you,for  surely  they  shall
•'turn  away  your  heart  after  their  gods.
"Solomon  clave  to  these  in  love,  and  his
"wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  their
"Gcds;"  therefore  was  the  Lord  angry
with  him,  and ybr  no  other  cause.

The  "  Visitor's"  other  remarks  are  on
a  par  with  these,  either  "  twists,"  as
he  calls  it,  of  scripture  ;  puerile  argu-
ments; or  bare  and  presumptuous  asser-
tions ;  which  we  have  not  time,  nor
much  more  inclination  to  touch  further
upon,  we  will  therefore  close  with  a  no-
tice of  a  few  of  his  assertions :

"  Mormonism,"  he  states,  "  is  a  des-
"  tructive  policy — how  can  one  call  it
"  a  religious  movement  1"  "  spirit  wife
''  hood,  alias  boundless  self  abandon-
"  ment,  Dagon,  Belial,  Moloch  all  in
"  one"  !  like  the  ''Visitor's"  Unity,  Tri-
nity, and  Multiplicity  !  "Joseph  Smith
"  was  a  fighter  and  a  drunkard  ;  so
"openly,  that  no  creature  of  common
''  sense  could  see  him  reeling  about
"  the  streets  of  Nauvoo,  and  then  hear
"  his  "  thus  saith  the  Lord"  without
"  disgust."

"  I  know  enough  of  the  man  and
"and  place,  to  believe  that  such  were  said
''of  him''

Belief  not  knowledge ;  no  proof  at
all  given.

"  I  have  pity  on  the  woman  who  is
"stripped  of  every  thing  but  her  virtue,
"and  finds  that  assailed  in  the  deep  woods
"■of  Utah,  or  in  the  great  Salt  city."

"  That  woman  too  is  terribly  guilty,
"the  moment  she  knows  the  knavish
"managers  of  tJieMormon  movement  are
''using  their  female  converts  for  their
"lusts,  if  she  puts  forth  one  single  step
"towards  them."

''  No  opinion  can  justify  a  disobe-
"dience  of  what  God  has  written  on
"every  human  heart."  Has  God  writ-
ten on  every  human  heart  that  Polyga-
my is  sin  ?  We  simply  ask  the  ques-
tion—If written  on  the  ''Visitor  of
Nauvoo's"  human  teachers  and  tradition
wrote  it.

Females,  by  his  account,  are  first
stripped  of  every  thing  but  virtue — i.  e.
the  Mormons  first  rob  them  of  every
thing  they  have,  and  then  assail  them,
and  assault  their  virtue  in  the  deep
woods  of  Utah,  or  even  in  the  city  itself,
so  thai  they  cannot  escape!  Strange!
and  all  known  to  the  ♦•  Visitor"  if  not


15


from  personal  knowledge,  at  least  from
true  and  credible  evidences ;  which
he  choses  however,  for  the  best  of
reasons,  to  keep  secret ;  which  we
suppose  he  will  do  till  the  great  day
of  judgment  reveals  them.

We  quite  agree  with  him  in  saying,
that  **  a  woman  is  terribly  guilty  did
"  she  know  the  Mormon  leaders  nsed
"their  female  converts  for  their  lusts  ;
"and  put  forth  a  singe  step  towards
*'  them  ;"  but  that  a  wom^n  prostitutes
herself  in  receiving  the  truths  and  doc-
trines of  Mormonism,  none  but  a  bigot
would  recklessly  advance  and  affirm —
so  we  leave  this  matter.

As  for  Joseph  Smith's  character,
like  our  Lord's,  it  will  stand  pure
when  all  his  vilifiers  have  passed  away,
and  have  been  forgotten. — We  are  the
less  careful  about  it,  having  the  testi-
mony of  hundreds  of  unimpeachable
witnesses  who  knew  him  personally,
and  revered  him  as  a  man  of  God  ;
which  we  believe  rather  than  tie  un-
supported assertions  of  the  ''  Visitor."
We  are  willing  that  he  and  Mormonism
should  be  tried  here  and  hereafter  by
their  fruits;  for  our  Saviour  says,  "do
"  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of
"  thistles?  So  a  corrupt  tree  cannot
"  bring  forth  good  fruit.  Wherefore  by
*»  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."

The  "  Visitor"  believes  he  is  guided
by  a  purer  rule  and  superior  light  than
Abraham  had  ;  — does  he  expect  to
reach  a  higher  heaven  %  or  is  he  igno-
rant, or  has  he  forgotten,  that  Paul  and
the  other  disciples  of  Jesus  thought
otherwise;  the  former  of  whom  tells
us,  "  the  gospel  was  preached  to  Abra-
ham,'' and  says  "  know  ye  not  that
'*  they  which  are  of  faith  are  the  children
"  of  Abraham?"  "  so  then  they  which  be
"  of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abra-
"  ham."  He  did  not  entertain  the  pre-
sumptuous idea  of  outstripping  or
superseding  that  po'ygamist  in  the  glory
and  favour  of  God  he  had  attained  to ;
for  he  knew  that  the  God  of  his  fathers,
had  called  Himself  "  the  God  of  Abra-
*'  ham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of
"  Jacob"  and  said  "  this  is  my  name  for
"  ever,  and  this  is  my  memorial  to  all
"  generations."  Ex.  iii.  15.  We  Mor-
mons, in  like  manner,  are  quite  content
to  have  our  lot  and  part  under  Abraham
as  our  father  in  the  kingdom  of  God,


whatever  the  ''  Visitor"  or  others  may
think,  say,  or  publish  to  the  contrary  ;
for,  unless  we  have  the  faith  and  works
of  Abraham,  we  cannot  expect  to  be
found  amongst  those  who  shall  sit
down  with  that  Patriarch  and  Tsanc
and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
Should  however  any  with  the  "  Visi-
tor's" views  chance  to  get  there,  would
they  not  be  sorely  annoyed  at  the  pre-
senceof  these  great  polygamists  ;  would
not  their  divine  purity  be  shocked  and
they  be  out  of  their  element  ?  or  what
is  more  to  the  point ;— made  sensible  of
their  awful  wickedness  and  folly  in
repudiating  the  plans  of  the  Almighty,
and  lifting  up  their  puny  hands  and
polluted  tongues  against  the  Lord  and
His  anointed  ones  ;— would  they  not
find  the  place  in  reality  a  hell,  instead
of  a  heaven;  and  if  so,  do  they  know
of  any  other  heaven  they  can  go  to  ?

But  now  for  the  fruits,  by  which  the
"  Visitor"  and  Mormonism  are  to  be
tried.  Of  the  former  we  know  nothing
except  that  he  has  made  unfounded
and  unproved  accusations  ;  unrighteous
and  unadvised,  and  uncalled  for  asser-
tions ;  and  borne  false  witness  and
taken  up  a  reproach  against  his  neigh-
bours, the  Mormons  ;  for  we  claim  this
title  in  accordance  with  our  Lord's
parable  of  the  good  Samaritan.

All  which  we  conceive  are  not  the
choice  fruits  of  the  spirit ! — On  the
other  side,  how  is  it  that  the  evil  doc-
trines, teachings,  organization,  practices
and  life,  of  Joseph  ismith  have  brought
forth  good  fruits  1  and  that  a  body  of
his  followers,  gathered  together  from
all  quarters  of  the  globe,  to  the  amount
of  about  40,000  souls, — many  of  them
as  intelligent  men  as  are  to  he  found
on  the  earth — are  living  as  a  peculiar
people,  zealous  of  good  works ;  who
have  forced  the  world  to  acknowledge
that  they  are  not  to  be  equalled  for
their  industry,  energy  and  indomitable
perseverance]  How  is  it  that  their  chief
Judges  sent  by  the  supreme  government
and  other  officials  and  strangers  residing
amongst  them,  have  given  strong  tes-
timony in  their  favour,  in  order  if  possi-
ble to  disabuse  the  minds  of  those
ignorant  of  their  walk,  which  have  been
prejudiced  by  the  vile,  slanderous,  and
groundless  reports  of  their  enemies  1
How  is  it   that  they  speak  highly  of


16


their  sobriety,  uprightness,  unity,  bro-
therly love  and  confidence  in  each  other,
and  tried  hospitality  and  kindness  even
to  their  enemies  the  mobber  emigrants  !
nay  more,  of  the  harnaony  existing  in
their  families ;  of  the  modesty  and
irreproachable  conduct  of  their  females;
of  the  evident  dependence  on,  and  fear
of  God,  and  devotion  to  his  will  mani-
fested by  them  as  a  community  ;  of
their  private  as  well  as  public  acknow-
ledgment of  him  in  all  their  acts  ;  and
the  prominent  observance  of  all  his
known  commands;  evidenced  by  the  ab-
sence of  drunkenness,  strumpets,  grog-
shops  and  houses  of  ill-fame  and  multipli-
city of  lawyers  with  all  their  concomitant
strife  and  evils,  so  rife  in  the  highly
civilized  and  Christianized  cities  of
Europe  and  America  1  how  is  it  that
good  fruits  are  manifested  in  the  order
and  heavenly  rule  that  prevails;  and
the  wisdom,  plainness,  and  simplicity
of  their  laws,  which  give  no  room  for
lawyers  to  subvert,  and  turn  them  into
a  source  of  personal  gain?  How  is  it
that  the  situations  of  the  Judges  are
perfect  sinecures,  except  when  adjudg-
ing the  disputes  of  the  emigrants  pass-
ing through  the  country  1  the  saints
having  bound  themselves  not  to  go  to
law  with  their  brethren— and  how  is  if,
that  from  their  exodus  and  settlement
in  Utah,  there  have  been  no  cases  of
seduction  amongst  themselves,  and  but
a  solitary  one  of  adultery,  which  was
punished  with  death,  until  the  avatar  of
the  U.  S.  troops?  and  if  these  brought
the  old  habits  of  professing  Christen-
dom, drunkenness,  seduction,  whore-
doms, corruption  and  death  with  them  ;
and  succeeded,  in  however  small  a  mea-
sure, in  inoculating  some  of  the  most
ignorant  and  weakest  of  the  Mormon
body,  itought  surely  to  be  anything  but
a  credit,  and  source  of  joy  and  boasting  ;
though  used  as  such  by  their  enemies  !
but  here  in  this  last  reproach,  as  well  as
in  all  other  cases,  truth  will  prevail  ;
and,as  of  the  ApostolicChristians  of  old,
the  fair  fame  of  the  Latter  Day's  Saints
will  out  live  the  slanders  of  their  defa-
raers  ;  and  in  due  course  of  time  their
real  characters  will  be  acknowledged
even  by  Christendom,  when  troubled,
humbled,  and  brought  low  by  the  judg-
ments of  the  Almighty.


Talk  of  the  boundless  self-abandon-
ment of  the  Mormon  Elders  !  what
other  community  of  men  in  the  known
world,  indiscriminately  taken,  will
produce  devoted,  self-sacrificing  men
like  them  1  What  body  numbering
thousands,  would  admit  of  hundreds
being  suddenly  called  from  their  midst
to  go  to  distant  and  strange  lands,
without  purse  or  pcrip,  to  preach  the
gospel  they  profess  to  prize?  and
where  could  such  be  found,  who,  with-
out a  murmur,  would  joyfully  leave
their  comfortable  homes,  their  farms,
their  business,  their  wives,  children,
friends  and  associates,  and  every  earthly
thing  they  hold  dear,  to  go  forth
amongst  their  enemies;  to  encounter,
for  a  series  of  years  till  honourably
released, — r?proaeh,  revilings,  bufFet-
ings,  scorn,  privations,  and  deprivations
of  all  the  blessings  they  were  in  undis-
turbed and  lawful  enjoyment  of  in  their
homes  ?  and  this,  that  haply  they  may
save  some  of  these  enemies — that  they
may  bring  the  light  of  truth  and  free-
dom to  honest-hearted,  but  Priest-ridden
men-taught  souls,  who  are  being  led  by
blind  men; — that  they  may  make  known
the  will  of  God  in  these  days,  and  to  this
generation,  as  revealed  to  Joseph  Smith
and  His  prophets;  and  tell  them  of
what  Jesus,  the  living  Saviour,  has
commissioned  them  to  proclaim  for  the
salvation  of  men,  and  the  honour,  up-
building, and  righteousness  of  His
kingdom,  set  np  for  the  last  time  on  this
earth  !  Yet  all  this  is  done  !  and  men
are  thus  called  every  few  months  at
Utah  !  and  chosen  Elders  to  go  forth  in
faith,  and  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  whom
they  know  ha«,  through  the  instrumen-
tality of  His  Prophets,sent  them;  not,  as
falsely  stated,  to  creep  into  houses  as  de-
ceivers, to  lead  astray  silly  women  laden
with  divers  lusts:  no  !  but, as  the  order  of
righteousness  pervades  the  whole  sys-
tem, they  are  enjoined  not  to  preach  the
gospel  privately  to  individual  women
dependant  on  parents  or  husbands  !  or  to
baptize  such  without  the  consent  of
their  natural  protectors!  and  in  visiting
families,  cr  households,  they  are  told
to  go  to  the  head  of  the  same,  be  they
men  or  women,  and  first  offer  the  truth
to  them,  who  thenceforth  are  answer-
able for  its  rejection,  not  only  in  regard


17


to  themselves,  but  for  all  under  their
authority — The  Elders  are  also  en-
joined to  keep  themselves  pure  !  and  to
refrain  from  any  familiarity,  or  inter-
course wiih  females,  that  might  lead
even  to  the  appearance  of  evil  !  remem-
bering that  ihey  have  been  baptized
■with  ihe  Holy  Ghost,  aid  that,  should
they,  through  transgression  lose  it,
they  will  cease  to  be  ministers  of  the
spirit  as  well  as  of  the  letter,  to  their
own  destruction  for  they  will  be  cast
out — whereas,  if  faithful,  they  will  ob-
tain an  abundant  reward  from  the  pos-
sessor of  heaven  and  of  earth.  In  this
spirit  they  go  f  rth  !  and  the  world  is
challenged  and  defied  to  convict  ihe;n
of  immoralities. — Thirteen  have  come
to  this  oountry;  and  on  the  rejection  of
their  testimony,  have  chiefly  returned.
These  have  come  in  contact  with  large
bodies  of  the  community — have  been
evil  spoken  against  as  blasphemers
and  deceivers;  but  who  can  lay  any
moral  evil  to  their  charge,  except  false-
ly? righteously  it  cannot  be  done  ;  and
we  challenge  the  communities  they  have
appeared  amongst  to  name  aught
against  them  of  a  private  immoral  na-
ture ;  or  to  charge  them  with  crime!
On  the  contrary,  those  with  whom  they
have  mingled  cannot  but  have  remarked
the  temperance  in  ^\[  things  ;  the  hu-
mility ;  self  denial  for  the  truth's  sake  ;
patience,  devotedness,  purity  of  life
and  conduct;  and  other  virtues  that
distinguished  them. —  Now  what  has
all  this  to  do  with  the  Visitor's  false
accusation  of  boundless  self-abandon-
ment ?  and  how  are  all  these  fruits  to
be  reconciled  with  an  evil  and  corrupt
source]  Will  not  the  Elders  bear  com-
parison with  those  who  "  divine  for
money  and  preach  for  hire"  ?  who  first
make  their  bargain  in  pounds,  shillings,
and  pence,  be  it  more  or  less,  and  on
the  understanding  thereof,  go  forth  in
professed  faith  to  preach  their  Gospel  ?
or  will  the  above  mentioned  fruits  of
Mormonism  compare  with  the  beggary,
squalid  poverty  and  misery  ;  with  the
drunken  and  lustfnl  haunts  ;  the  ine-
briety and  prostitution;  the  pride  and
evil  speaking;;  hatred  and  alienation;
strife,  litigation,  and  endless  law  suits,
so  rife  in  enlightened  and  boastino-
Christendom  ?  We  leave  the  public  to
judge.


Once  for  all ;  if  polygamy  is  so  very
obnoxious  as  the  'Visitor"  and  the  re-
fined clergy  of  modern  Christianity
affirm,— if^God  is  so  displeased,  man
so  degraded,  and  a  community  so  de-
based by  it  as  they  assert,  let  them,
like  men  of  God,  point  out  chapter  and
verse  condemning  it.  Let  the  scrip-
tures have  their  simple,  literal  and  only
true  way  of  interpretation ;— let  them
for  once  appeal  to  the  law  and  the  testi-
mony, and  adopt  the  Bible  as  the  stand-
ard by  which  to  decide  ;  instead  of  the
foul,  scandalous,  and  scurrilous  asper-
sions hurled  forth  with  hurricane  and
insane  violence  both  from  Press  aud
Pulpit,  to  annihilate,  if  possible,  us
poor  Mormons!  as  if  truth  would  bow
and  yield  to  the  mere  opinions  of  a
capricious,  wavering,  and  hireling:
Priesthood,  making  merchandise  of  the
souls  of  men  ;  irritated  and  trembling
for  the  stability  and  prophesied  down-
fal  of  their  systems,  powerless  to  save
as  that  of  the  great  goddess  Diana!
No!  if  they  cannot  conform  to  these
conditions,  let  them  frankly  acknow-
ledge and  renounce  their  errors,  and
cease  to  pervert  the  ways  of  the  Lord,
or  His  withering  blast  shall  overtake
them  for  their  arrogance  in  opposing
the  plans  and  work  of  the  Almighty —
for  we  declare  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ,  whose  servants  we  are ;  that
the  principles  of  the  Gospel  as  taught
by  the  ministers  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter  Day  Saints,  are  true;
—that  Joseph  Smith  was  a  true  Pro-
phet, called  by  the  voice  of  God,  and
the  visions  of  the  Most  High;  that
the  Book  of  Mormon  is  a  divine  and
inspired  work,  containing  an  abridged
history  of  the  Aborigines  of  the  Conti-
nent of  America  ;— that  the  statements
relative  to  the  characier  of  Joseph
Smith  and  the  people  of  Utah  are  fla-
grant untruths,  vFhich  we  positively
know  from  the  experience  we  have
had; — that  the  character  of  Brigham
Young  has  never  been  impeached  by
the  President  of  the  United  States,  or
any  other  virtuous  individual,  who  had
the  opportunity  of  judging  of  it  from
personal  observation,  or  trustworthy
evidence  ; — that  a  house  of  ill-fame
never  existed  amongst  the  Mormons  ;
nor  was  fornication  known  till  the  U.
S.  troops,  with  similar  kindred  spirits,


18


aking  adrantage  of  their  hospitality,
Rucceetled,  to  a  small  extent,  in  seduc-
inor  and  decoying  innocent  and  inexpe-
rienced females,  with  whom  they  ab-
sconded to  the  remoter  settlements ;
such,  like  midnight  assassins  prowled
round  and  insinuated  themselves  into
the  honses  of  widows  and  orphans,
seeking  to  take  advantage  of  their  com-
paratively defenceless  conditions,  to
satiate  their  lusts ;  leaving  the  rela-
tives of  injured  humanity,  and  the
Mormons  at  large,  to  declaim  loudly
against  their  infamous  doings.  But
these  were  not  of  them,  though  they
came  in  amongst  them;  and  they  have
gone  out,  never,  it  is  hoped,  to  return.
It  is  from  men  like  these,  either  disap-
pointed in  the  gratification  of  their  ac-
customed lusts,  and  other  vices,  or
seeking  to  justify  themselves  on  their
success,  and  cloak  their  own  misdeeds,
that  most  of  the  false  and  slanderous
reports  against  the  Mormons  have  ori-
ginated ;  which  time  only  will  effectu-
ally obliterate.

We  again  leave  the  public  to  judge
of  all  these  things,  having  wre  are  afraid
trespassed  far  too  long  on  your  and
their  patience.  However,  as  we  do  not
wish  to  renew  our  correspondence,  but
to  make  this  article  serve  once  for  all
as  an  expos6,  as  far  as  regards  poly-
gamy, of  our  views  and  doctrines  ;  be-


ing sensible  that  a  pnblic  Newspaper
is  no  place  for  lengthened  controversy,
we  trust  you  will  injustice  insert  thisas
a  solitary  communication  ;  as  you  have
done  the  numerous  anonymous  articles
of  our  opposers ;  and  thanking  you  for
the  liberal  Sj-irit  you  have  shown
towards  Mormonism,  in  professing  "  to
give  even  the  Devil  his  due,"  ^hd  look-
ing to  the  same  liberality  to  afford  space
for  this;

We  are  Sir,  with  best  wishes,

Yours  faithfully,

R.  Skelton,
J.  P.  Mejk.

Elders    of  the    Church   of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter  Day  Saints.

Calcutta,  December,  1855.

Having  perused  the  above  letter,  I
hereby  notify  to  all  men  my  entire  and
hearty  concurrence  in  the  views  ^herein
advocated ;  and  add  my  testimony  to
the  truth  of  the  statements  made  by  the
writers  thereof.

W.  H.  C.  Smith,

Elder    of  the  Church   of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter  Day  Saints.


APPENDIX.


EXTRACT  FROM  THE  "  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS'  MILLENNIAL
STAR."— No.  40,  Vol.  XV.  Dated  1st.  October,  1853.


UTAH-ITS  GOVERNOR,  SOCIETY,  AND  INSTITUTIONS.

{Extract  of  a  Letter  from  the  Hon'ble  L.  H.Read,  Chief  Justice  of  Utah.)

(From  the  Bath  (U.S.)  Advocate.)

Great  Salt  Lake  City,  Tuesday,  June,  23,  1853.


W.  C.  Rhodes— Dear  Sir— On  Mon-
day morning  (6tli)  I  waited  on  his  Ex-
cellency, Governor  Young,  exhibited  to
him  my  commission,  and  was  by  him
duly  sworn  and  installed  as  Chief  Jus-
tice of  Utah.  I  was  received  by  Go-
vernor Young  -with  marked  courtesy
and  respect.  He  has  taken  pains  to
make  my  residence  here  agreeable.
The  Governor,  in  manners  and  conver-
sation, is  a  polished  gentleman.  Very
neat  and  tasty  in  dress,  easy  and  plea-
sant in  conversation,  and  I  think  a  man
of  decided  talent,  and  strong  intellec-
tual qualities.  In  jjerson,  he  very
strongly  resembles  oar  deceased  fellow
citizen,  W.  W.  McCay.  I  have  heard
him  address  the  pc  pie  once  on  the
subject  of  Man's  Free  Agency.  He
is  a  very  excellent  speaker.  His  ges-
ture uncommonly  graceful,  articulation
distinct,  and  speech  pleasant.  His
voice  resembles  very  much  Judge
Hiram  Gray,  of  Elmira.  I  was  ex-
tremely edified  by  his  address  and
manner.  Tlie  Governor  is  a  first  rate
business  man.  As  Civil  Governor  of
the  Territory,  and  Superintendent  of
Indian  Affairs,  we  would  naturally  sup-
pose he  had  as  much  to  do  as  one  man
could  well  attend  to;  but  in  addition
to  those  employments  he  is  also  Pre-
sident of  the  Church — a  station  which
is  no  sinecure  by  any  means.  His
private  business  is  extensive  ;  he  owns
several  grist  and  saw  mills,  is  exten-
sively engaged  in  farming  operations,
all  which  he  superintends  personally.
I  have  made  up  my  mind  that  no  man
has  been  more  grossly  misrepresented
than  Governor  Young,  and  that  he  is  a
man  who  will  reciprocate  kindness  and
good  intentions  as  heartily  and  as  free-
ly as  any  one— but  if  abused,  or  crowd-


ed  hard,  I  think  he  may  be  found  ex-
ceedingly hard  to  handle.

Salt  Lake  City  is  a  wonder.  It  ia
not  quite  six  years  since  the  first  pio-
neers entered  this  valley.  There  was
not  then  one  civilized  inhabitant  with-
in five  hundred  miles,  nor  the  least
vestige  of  civilization  or  improvement.
The  people  had  nothing  in  the  world,
except  what  they  brought  with  them
in  their  wagons,  across  the  plains  from
the  States.  The  soil  is  naturally  hard
and  dry,  and  very  little  is  produced
without  irrigation.  For  the  first  year
or  two,  the  settlers  suffered  very  severe-
ly from  want  of  provisions  and  pro-
per shelter.  They  subsisted  mainly  up-
on roots,  and  were  sometimes  compelled
to  eat  horses  and  dogs.  At  present,
however,  the  people  raise  an  abundance
of  all  kinds  of  vegetables,  and  a  large
surplus  of  wheat  and  coarse  grain,
some  of  the  finest  beef  I  ever  saw.
The  city  is  laid  out  in  squares,  and  the
whole  number  of  acres  in  the  corporate
limits  is  not  less  than  two  thousand;
each  lot  contains  about  one  acre.  Any
person  of  good  character  and  industri-
ous habits  can  have  a  lot  for  a  very
small  sum,  provided  he  will  settle  on
it  and  build  a  house.  Every  lot  in  the
city  can  be  irrigated  without  much  ex-
pense or  trouble.  The  city  proper  con-
tains about  7,000  permanent  inhabi-
tants. I  have  noticed  a  large  number
of  very  well  built  and  comfortable
dwelling-houses,  and  some  excellent,
well  cultivated  gardens.  The  public
buildings  already  completed  are  conve-
nient, well  constructed,  and  present  a
very  creditable  outside  appearance.  The
city  and  country  are  well  provided  with
ingenious  mechanics  of  every  branch
cf  trade.


20


The  people  all  appear  to  be  doing
well.  They  are  very  industrious  and
orderly,  and  I  see  no  reason  why  they
cannot  enjoy  themselves  as  well  as
their  fellow-citizens  in  any  other  part
of  the  Union.  1  have  attended  church
twice.  The  mode  of  worship  is  very
like  (hat  of  other  denominations.  The
sermons  I  heard,  were  well  delivered,
and  creditable.  The  music  excellent,
being  vocal  and  instrumental.  The
house  of  worship  is  very  commodious,
and  the  congregation  usually  numbers
about  one  thousand.

The  principal  men  are  New-Yorkers
and  New-Englanders,  but  a  majority
of  Western  New-Yorkers,  I  have  got
acquainted  with  most  of  them,  and  find
them  all  courteous,  kind,  and  gentle-
manly. We  have  here  a  few  Steuben
people.  Governor  Young  and  his
brothers,  Phineas,  John,  Joseph,  and
Lorenzo,  formerly  resided  in  Tymne,
near  Captain  Sebring's.  'I'heir  father
settled  there  about  1819,  and  owned  a
farm  there  for  some  time.  Phineas  is
a  printer,  and  formerly  worked  in  Bath
for  our  esteemed  feUow-cilizen,  David
Rumsey,  deceased.  John  Barnard,
formerly  of  Jasper,  is  here  and  doing
well,  I  hate  also  become  acquainted
•with  an  aged  lady,  a  Mrs.  Cory,  sister
of  John  R.  Stephens,  of  Hornellsville,
and  daughter  of  Mr.  Uriah  Stephens,
late  of  Carnisteo.  I  find  also  a  large
number  from  right  around  Steuben,
Yates,  Alleghany,  Ontario,  Tompkins,
Chemung,  and  Livingston.  These  are
all  New-Yorkers  still,  and  make  ray
residence  much  more  pleasant  than  it
otherwise  would  be.     We  get  together


occasionally,  and  talk  about   "  the  old
country''  and  old  friends.

Nearly  tlie  whole  population  of  Salt
Lake  City  and  Utah  Territory  aie
Mormons,  I  doubt  whether  more  than
two  hundred  outsiders  can  he  found.
The  slate  of  society  is  different  from
anything  we  have  been  accustomed  to.
All  matters,  or  nearly  so.  pertaining  to
religious  and  domestic  affairs,  are  re-
gulated by  the  Church,  controversies
of  every  kind  are  settled  by  the  Ec-
clesiastical Councils.

The  plurality  system,  as  it  is  called
here,  (or  polygamy  in  fact)  prevails
extensively;  but  those  who  suppose
that  licentiousness  or  looseness  of
manners  or  morals  prevails  to  any  ex-
tent, are  very  mncli  mistakpp.  The
women  are  exceedingly  modest  and
circumspect  in  their  deportment.  I
have  had  the  pleasure  of  an  introduc-
tion to  a  number  who  are  very  sensible
and  agreeable,  and  1  think,  compare
fully  with  the  well-bred  ladies  of  the
States.  Ttiey  are  from  New  York
and  New  England,  (those  I  am  speak-
ing of,)  and  differ  in  nothing  from  their
sisters  in  the  Eastern  States.  From
all  I  can  see  and  learn,  there  is  less
licentiousness  and  vulgarity  in  this
city  and  territory  than  any  other  place
of  equal  population  in  the  United
States.  The  men  are  jealous  of  all
interference  in  their  domestic  affairs,
and  seduction  and  adultery,  if  dis-
covered are  apt  to  be  punished  by  death
of  the  offender.  Some  cases  of  this
kind  have  happrned  here.  Truly  your
friend,

Laz.  p.  Read.


EXTRACT    FROM    »  THE  MORMON."— Dated  I8th  Aug.  1855.


A  FEW  FACTS  FOR  THE  CONSIDERATION    OF  THE    EDITORS

OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  AND  OF  ALL  HONEST  MEN.

A  GREAT  hue  and  cry  has  been
raised  lately  about  the  Mormons.
One  would   think,  if  there  was  any


credit  to  be  placed  in  the  press,  that
they  were  the  most  corrupt  debauch-
ees, the  most  infamous  impostors,
the  blackest-hearted  traitors  in  ex-
istence; and,  in  fact,  that  Utah  was
an  ulcer;   a  canker  in  the  nation;


that  her  citizens  were  the  greatest
miscreants  and  scamps,  and  that  her
cities  were  dens  of  infamy  more  de-
generate than  Sodom :  dangerous
alike  to  the  morals,  chastity,  and
political  integrity  of  this  great  nation.
Either  the  above  is  true,  or  many
of  the  public  journals  are  maligners,
makers   and  issuers  of  falsehoods ;


21


or,  to  say  the  least,  most  egregiously
ignorant  of  the  subjects  about  which
they  write.  Now  we  have  no  objec-
tions to  men  speaking  the  truth  about
the  Mormons^  truth  in  its  fullest
sense  ;  we  have  no  objections  to  our
religion,  morals,  politics,  and  general
deportment  being  canvassed  ;  we
don't  object  to  men  differing  with
us  in  opinion— it  is  their  right;  and
furthermore,  it  is  manly  and  just  to
express  fairly  a  candid,  honest  senti-
ment ;  but  when  we  see  men  control-
ling the  public  press,  collecting  and
publishing  every  petty  story  and
statement,  however  foolish  and  ri-
diculous, and  then,  with  uplifted
hands  and  turned  up  eyes,  expressing
a  holy  horror  at,  and  endorsing,
things  which  they  positively  know  to
be  lies,  and  got  up  either  out  of  sheer
malice,  religious  acrimony  for  politi-
cal motives,  or  to  make  a  penny,  what
can  we  think  1

We  have  no  apology  to  make  for
the  Mormons.  These  statements  are
either  true  or  false;  if  true,  they  are
susceptible  of  proof;  if  false,  then
why  this  clamor  1  Maligners  gene-
rally do  not  take  the  trouble  to  investi-
gate ;  the  truth  is  not  a  part  of  their
creed,  or,  if  a  part,  it  is  only  used
when  falsehood  and  detraction  will
not  serve  their  purpose  better.  With
such  characters,  then,  we  have  nothing
to  do;  we  leave  them  to  their  fate.
There  is  another  class,  however,  that
we  feel  inclined  to  disabuse,  by  laying
before  them  correct  principles,  and
putting  them  in  possession  of  facts  ;
such  are  either  honest  men  or  saints,
who,  in  many  instances,  stand  in
amazement  at  the  bold,  audacious
falsehoods  that  are  unblushingly  ut-
tered by  corrupt  men,  and  endorsed
by  a  venal  press.  We  wish  to  throw
a  mantle  of  protection  around  them
by  giving  them  truths  that  would
make  their  maligners  blush,  if  shame
indeed  has  any  part  in  their  compo-
sition.

No  editor  of  common  sense  need  be
told  that  he  knows  he  is  publishing
and  endorsing  falsehood,  when  he
tells  nine-tenths  of  the  cock-and-bull
stories  'that  are  in  circulation  about
the  Mormons.  No  man  in  a  public
capacity,  and  that  is  acquaiated  with


current  events,  but'must  know  better  ;
he  cannot  conduct  a  public  journal
without  being  in  possession  of  this
information.  Where,  then,  does  this
puerile  and  fretful  malice  come  from  1
Is  it  in  retaliation  for  some  real  or
imaginary  wrong?  Whom  have  the
Mormons  injured?  Has  any  body
been  robbed,  plundered,  despoiled,
or  anywise  injured  by  the  Mormons,
in  the  United  States?  Have  any  of
the  citizens  of  the  United  States,  in
p.Tssing  through  Utah  Territory,  been
injured  in  property,  freedom,  life,  or
character  1  We  know  that  many  at-
tempts have  been  made  to  show  this  ;
in  most  instances,  for  the  paltry  con-
sideration of  selling  a  book  ;  in
others,  from  religious  and  social  pre-
judices, and  yet  in  others,  retaliation
for  the  exposure  of  their  vice,  lasci-
viousness,  and  corruption  ;  and  we
are  sorry  to  have  to  say  that  for  kind-
ness, courtesy,  and  benevolence,  in
many  instances,  the  blackest  and  bas-
est ingratitude  has  been  returned  ;
but  we  are  at  the  defiance  of  the  world
to  prove  that  any  man  has  been  in-
jured, or  jeopardized,  in  life,  liberty,
limb,  property,  or  character,  by  any
authorized  act  of  the  Mormons.  Seve-
ral cases  have  been  sought  to  be  made
out,  but  they  have  all  signally  failed.
Is  it  a  crime  to  be  in  Utah  1  If  so,
whois  to  blame  for  it  ■?  Our  very  exis-
tence there  is  through  coercion.

But  the  Mormons  are  disloyal.
Was  it  disloyal  in  the  Mormons,
when  disfranchised  and  driven  from
their  homes,  when  among  the  Indians
in  the  desert,  and  called  upon  to  send
five  hundred  men  to  the  Mexican  war
— (their  quota,  according  to  the  ratio
of  assessment  of  the  States,  would
have  been  from  one  to  four.) — they
sent  five  hundred  1  Why  is  it  that
other  States  are  not  accused  of  dis-
loyalty 1  They  are  several  hundred
times  behind  the  Mormons  in  this  in-
stance, in  sustaining  the  national
honor.

We  quote  th^  following  extract  of
a  Lecture  delivered  before  the  Histo-
rical Society  of  Pennsylvania,  by  Col.
T.  L.  Kane,  on  his  return  from  Win-
ter Quarters  on  the  Missouri  River:


22


«•  And  now  tbey  were  asked,  in  the
midst  of  the  Indian  country,  to  surrender
over  five  hundred  of  their  best  toen  for  a
war  march  of  thousands  of  miles  to  Ca-
lifornia, without  the  hope  of  return  till
after  the  conquest  of  that  country.  Could
they  view  such  a  proposition  with  favor  ?

"  But  the  feelings  of  country  trium-
phed. The  Union  had  never  wronged
them  :  '  You  shall  have  your  battalion  at
once,  if  it  has  to  be  a  class  of  our  Elders,'
said  one,  a  ruling  Elder.

"  A  central  '  mass  meeting'  for  council,
some  harangues  at  the  more  remotely
scattered  camps,  an  American  flag  brought
out  from  a  storehouse  of  things  rescued,
and  hoisted  to  the  top  of  a  tree  mast,  and
in  three  days  the  force  was  reported,  mus-
tered, organized,  and  ready  to  march."

The  following  Petition  will  throw
some  light  upon  our  late  official  doings:

TO  HIS  EXCELLENCY  FRANK-
LIN PIERCE,

PHESIDENT    OF    THB    UNITED    STATES.

Your  petitioners  would  respectfully
represent;  that

Whereas,  Governor  Brigham  Young
possesses  the  entire  confidence  of  the
people  of  this  Territory,  without  dis-
tinction of  party  or  sect;  and  from
personal  acquaintance,  and  social  in-
tercourse, we  find  him  to  be  a  firm
supporter  of  the  Constitution  and
Laws  of  the  United  States,  and  a  tried
pillar  of  Republican  Institutions  ;  and
having  repeatedly  listened  to  his  re-
marks, in  private  as  well  as  in  public
assemblies^  do  know  he  is  the  warm
friend  and  able  supporter  of  Consti-
tutional Liberty,  the  rumours  pub-
lished in  the  States  to  the  contrary
notwithstanding ;  and  having  canvass-
ed to  our  satisfaction  his  doings  as
Governor,  and  Superintendent  of  In-
dian AlFairs,  and  also  the  disposition
of  the  appropriation  for  public  build-
ings for  the  Territory  ;

We  do  most  cordially  and  cheer-
fully represent,  that  the  same  has
been  expended  to  the  best  interest  of
the  nation  ;  and

Whereas  his  re-appointment  would
better  subserve  the  Territorial  inter-
est than  the  appointment  of  any  other
man,  and  would  meet  with  the  grati-
tude of  the  entire  inhabitants  of  the
Territory,    and    his  removal    would


cause  the  deepest  feelings  of  sorrow
and  regret ;  and  it  being  our  unquali-
fied opinion,  based  upon  the  personal
acquaintance  which  we  have  formed
with  Governor  Young,  and  from  our
observation  of  the  results  of  his  influ-
ence and  administration  in  this  Terri-
tory, that  he  possesses  in  an  eminent
degree  every  qualification  necessary
for  the  discharge  of  his  official  duties,
and  unquestioned  integrity  and  abi-
lity ;  that  he  is  decidedly  the  most
suitable  person  that  can  be  selected
for  that  office.

We  therefore  take  great  pleasure
in  recommending  him  to  your  favora-
ble consideration,  and  do  earnestly
request  his  re-appointment  as  Gover-
nor, and  Superintendent  of  Indian
Affairs  for  this  Territory.

Great  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah  Terri-
tory,

December  30,  1854.
J.  T.  Kinney,  Vh.  Justice  U.  S.  Su-
preme Court  Utah.
E.  J.  Steptoe,  Lt.  Col.  U.  S.  Army.
John  F.   Reynolde,    Bvt.    Maj.    3d

Arty.  U.  S.  Army.
RuFUs  Ingalls,  Capt.  U.  S.  Army.
Sylvester     Mowby,    Lieut.    U.    S.

Army.
Lathett  L.  Livingston,  Lt.  3rd  U.

S.  Arty.
Jno.  G.  Chandler.  Lt.  3d  U.  S.  Arty.
RoBT.  O.  Tylek,  Lt.  3d  Arty.
Benjn.    Allston,    Bvt.    2nd    Lt.  1st.

Dgs.  U.  S.  Army.
Chas.  a.  PeuiiY,  Sutler  U.  S.  Army.
Wm.   G.    Rankin,    (Quartermaster's

Clerk.)
HoaACR  R.  Wirtz,  Medical  Staff  U.

S.  Array.
Leo,  Shaver,   Asst.  Jus.  S.  C.  of  U.

S.  Ter.  of  Utah.
Wm.  I.  Appleby,  Clerk  Supreme  and

First  District  Courts  U.  S.  Ter.  of

Utah.
CuKTis    E.    Bolton,  (Book-keeper  of

Mr.  Perry.)
A.  W.   Babbitt,  Secretary   of  Utah

Territory.
Joseph  Hollman,  U.  S.  District  Atty.

for  Utah.

Beside  the  above  names  were  also
attached  the  signatures  of  allthe  Ter-
ritorial Officers  and  Associate  Justices
of  the  Supreme  Court,  with  some
twenty  names  of  Merchants  doing  bu-


23


siness  in  the  Territory,  not  members
of  (he  Church.

Again,  after  being  ostracised  by
the  Government,  and  virtually  banish-
ed the  United  States,  and  obliged  to
locate  in  the  wilderness,  having  no
resting  place  but  the  valleys,  no  so-
ciety but  Indians — exiles,  wanderers
and  outcasts  ;  every  attempt  having
been  made  by  our  enemies  to  sever
fraternal  relations  ; — having  no  go-
vernment, no  society,  no  brothers,  no
home.  Was  it,  under  these  peculiar
circumstances,  disloyal  to  organize  a
provisional  government,  with  avowed
attachment  to  that  government  by
whom  we  had  thus  been  treated  1
Was  it  disloyal,  after  such  organiza-
tion, to  seek  for  and  obtain  acknow-
ledgment by  the  United  States?  Or
further,  was  it  disloyal  to  seek  a  ter-
ritorial organization  ;  or  is  it,  to  seek
for  admission  into  the  Union  as  a
State?  In  what  does  disloyalty  con-
sist? Is  it  a  phantom  in  some  body's
brain,  or  a  living,  tangible  reality  ?

But  we  are  mixed  up  with  the  In-
dians. We  can't  help  that,  gentle-
men— you  forced  us  into  the  position
that  we  now  occupy.  However,  we
are  no  more  mixed  up  with  them  than
Oregon,  Minesota,  and  some  parts  of
Iowa,  Nebraska.  Kansas,  California
and  Texas  are.  But  you  are  friendly
with  the  Indians.  So  are  the  United
States,  or  profess  to  be  ;  they  make
treaties  with  (hem,  build  them  mills,
place  farmers  in  their  midst,  raise
them  grain,  and  teach  (hem  to  culti-
vate the  earth  ;  they  send  missionaries
and  plant  schools  among  them. Some-
times the  United  States  do  this,  and
sometimes  make  war  with,  and  chas-
tise them.  So  do  we.  For  such  pur-
poses are  appropriations  made  to
Territories  by  Congress.  In  these
matters,  like  every  other  Territory,
we  are  governed  by  the  policy  of  the
Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs,  ap-
pointed by  the  President  of  the  United
States.  Our  superintendent  is  not
quite  as  sanguinary  as  some,  but  we
think  quite  as  efficient,  as  the  returns
will  show.

California  has  expended  during  the
last  three  years,  as  duplicated  by
Lieutenant  Beals,  three  hundred
thousand  dollars,  Oregon,  one  hun-


dred and  seventy  five  thousand  dol-
lars, besides  the  military  expenses
paid  by  the  Commissioners  of  Indian
Affairs  in  Washington  ;  while  Utah,
as  statistics  will  show,  expended  only
thirty-one  thousand  dollars  ;  of  which
only  $24,600  has  been  received  up  to
the  present  time,  and  there  are  as
many  Indians  in  Utah  as  there  are
in  California.  The  jurisdiction  of  the
superintendency  of  Gov.  Young  ex-
tends over  the  tribes  of  the  Shoshones
as  well  as  the  Utahs.  California  has
had  an  army  to  sustain,  and  we  have
sustained  ourselves,  and  done  our
own  fighting.  All  (he  miii(ary  de-
fence has  been  done  by  the  "  Nauvoo
Legion."  for  which  (here  has  been  an
appropriation  of  twenty  thousand  nine
hundred  and  forty  dollars;  but  never
yet  paid  up,  or  was  not  up  to  the  14th
of  last  June.  Instead  of  Gov.  Young
having  over-drawn  upon  these  small
appropriations,  there  is  now,  to  the
credit  of  Utah,  twenty-five  thousand
dollars  not  yet  disbursed.  Whereas
California,  besides  the  enormous  sum
of  three  hundred  thousand  dollars
duplicated  by  Lieutenant  Beats,  has
placed  the  Government  under  about
two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dol-
lars to  sustain  Col.  Steptoe's  com-
mand for  one  winter  only,  and  that
merely  while  on  the  way  to  fulfil
their  heavier  duties  in  that  State.
All  these  expenses,  when  compared
with  the  expenses  of  Utah,  while
under  the  administration  of  Gov.
Young,  display  an  economy  seldom
found  in  either  State  or  Territorial
departments.  Is  it  disloyal  to  econo-
mise the  funds  of  the  United  States.

In  view  of  the  above  we  had  antici-
pated more  honor  ;  we  are  aware  that
popular  journals  have  to  be  sustained,
and  that  men  having  both  property
and  political  position  at  stake  cannot
be  expected  to  sustain  principles  that
they  perhaps  don't  believe,  and  that
are  unpopular;  granted — what  then?
We  don't  seek  to  make  proselytes  of
editors,  nor  to  find  fault  with  their
views  ;  all  we  ask  is  common  honesty,
in  the  room  of  detraction  and  false-
hood. It  surely  has  not  become
unpopular  to  tell  the  truth.  Or  if  so,
is  it  unpopular  to  suppress,  or  avoid
telling  falsehood.


24


You  are  polygamista  ;  admitted,  so
was  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  the  Pro-
phets. David,  and  a  host  of  others  in
the  old  testament,  and  their  practices
in  this  respect,  are  no  where  repudia*
led  in  the  new  ;  if  you  have  changed
the  order  of  God  and  introduced
monogamy  you  have  done  it  upon  your
own  responsibility, and  the  corruption,
lasciviousness  and  abominations  that
every  where  prevail  among  you  show
Low  futile  the  philosophy  of  man  is
when  opposed  to  the  order  of  God.

But  it  is  so  funny.  Be  it  so,  we
are  no  way  puritanical  in  our  feelings,
and  can  enjoy  and  perpetrate  a  joke,
as  well  as  our  neighbors,  all  in  good
feelings;  talk  about  us,  caricature  us
if  you  like,  make  and  have  your  fun  ;
we  must  also  claim  the  same  privi-
lege ;  but  don't  make  use  of  misre-
presentation, detraction,  and  false-
hood ;  don't  "  steal  the  livery  of  God
to  serve  the  devil  in,"  turn  up  holy
eyes  and  exclaim  against  the  abomi-
nations of  the  Mormons,  when  you
know  that  you  are  a  great  deal  more
corrupt,  and  that  independent  of  your
thousands  of  nymphs  dupave,yQu  have
other  cyprians,  in  every  nook  and
corner.  You  do  things,  and  admit,
without  censure,  of  things  being  done
in  secret,  which  we  despise  ;  and  you
honor  many  of  those  concerned  in
these  abominations  by  admitting  them
into  what  is  termed  the  best  of  society  ;
this  you  know  and  submit  to,  whether
of  necessity  or  by  choice  others  as
well  as  yourselves  know.  Now  such
a  state  of  wretchedness,  hypocrisy,
and  adultery  does  not  exist  in  Utah  ;
there  is  no  necessity  for  it,  for  while
the  physical  laws,  governing  and  con-
trolling mankind  beyond  the  modern
counter-laws  of  man,  are  observed  by
the  advocates  of  polygamy,  the  higher
law,  as  carried  out  in  the  Abrahamic
policy  under  God,  before  the  Mosaic
law,  from  which  you  affirm  springs  all
your  laws  ;  and  which  law,  in  res-
pect to  polygamy,  it  confirms.  Nor
can  a  law  of  God  since  given  be  pro-
duced, repudiating  the  former  law  or
changing  it  to  new  relations.  This
higher  law,  in  which  exists  perfect
order,  without  which  it  is  not  the
same  in  which  God  gives  to  man  a
companion  or   more  than  one,  you


repudiate,  and  live  under  all  its  corr*
sequent  hypocrisy,  abomination,  bro-
ken vows,  and  shame,  and  attempt
with  debauched  hands  and  corrupt
soul  to  sustain  a  state  of  society  of
all  things  most  abominable  in  the
sight  of  God  ;— none  of  which  is
found  in  Utah.  For  there  those  as-
sociations legitimately  entered  into
and  honorably  carried  out,  in  view
and  with  sufficient  guarantee  that  a
progeny  well  provided  for,  and  ho-
norably introduced  into  the  world,
shall  not  entail  the  withering  curse  of
illegitimacy  upon  the  coming  genera-
tion that  now  exists  with  you.  But
you  do  not  acknowledge  these  things
by  law,  nor  acknowledge  them  in
your  family — so  much  the  worse,  and
so  much  more  hypocritical.  You
profess  one  thing  and  practise  another;
you  profess  to  sustain  laws  that  you
daily  violate.  You  profess  chastity,
truth,  and  conjugal  fidelity  to  your
wives,  which  you  have  pledged  before
God,  and  which  before  that  same
God  you  violate  ;  forsaking  and  leav-
ing the  company  of  a  truthful,  con-
fiding wife,  you  illicitly  seek  the
embraces  of  an  acknowledged  harlot ;
your  conduct  is  a  living  lie,  you  pro-
fess truth  with  lips,  and  break  it  to
the  heart;  time  rolls  on,  you  are  ex-
posed, and  with  that  exposure  stand
proclaimed  a  hypocrite,  and  the  con-
fidence and  happiness  of  a  loving,
confiding  wife  gone — gone  for  ever;
but  if  not  exposed  you  are  none  the
less  a  hypocrite.  8uch  is  the  case
with  thousands,  and  corruption  and
deceit  isentailed,  with  all  the  horrors
of  disease  in  arithmetical  progression
upon  the  generations  that  follow.

You  say  we  are  immoral.  We
quote  the  following,  as  we  prefer  the
testimony  of  others  to  our  own,  on
this  subject.

(From  the  Missouri  Republican,  1847.^
"  We  notice  in  the  papers  of  Philadel-
phia, that  T.  L.  Kane,  Esq.,  delivered  a
lecture  on  Tuesday  last,  before  the  Histo-
rical Society  of  this  city,  on  v?hich  occa-
sion he  reviewed  the  history  of  the  Mor-
mon people  from  the  period  of  their
ejection  from  Nauvoo,  to  the  time  of  their
settlement  in  Deseret.  *****
*'  I  have  given  you  in  terms,  the  opini-
on my  four  years  experience  has  enabled


25


me  to  form  of  the  Mormons,  preferring  to
force  you  to  deduce  it  for  yourselves  from
the  facts.  But  I  will  add,  that  I  have  not
yet  heard  a  single  charge  against  them  as
a  community — against  their  habitual  pu-
rity of  life,  their  willing  integtity,  their
toleration  of  religious  differences  of  opi-
nion,  their  regard  for  the  laws,  their  devo-
tion to  the  constitutional  government
under  which  we  live — that  I  do  not,  from
my  own  observation,  or  upon  the  testimo-
ny of  others,  know  to  be  unfounded."

The  following  is  from  the  speech
of  the  Hon.Trueman  Smith,  deliver-
ed in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States,
July  8,  1850.  Published  in  Wash-
ington.    Gideon  &  Co  ,  Printers.

After  reading  a  letter  from  Dr.  Bernhi-
sel,  of  whom  he  says,  "  Dr.  Bernhisel  is
the  agent  of  the  people  of  Deseret,  he  is
a  native  of  the  city  of  New  York,  a  gen-
tleman of.  respectability  and  intelligence,
and  worthy  of  all  confidence,''  he  conti-
nues, "  The  statement  of  Dr.  Bernhisel
touching  the  wonderful  progress  made  by
the  people  of  Deseret,  within  a  space  of
time,  incredibly  brief,  is  abundantly  con-
firmed by  a  letter  which  I  received  from
General  John  Wilson,  dated  at  Salt  Lake
City,  Sept.  6th,  1849,  from  which  I  sub-
mit the  following  extract  :

"  A  more  orderly,  honest,  industrious,
and  civil  people  I  have  never  been  among
than  these,  (meaning  the  inhabitants  of
Great  Salt  Lake  City,)  and  it  is  incredible
how  much  they  have  done  here  in  so
short  a  time.  In  this  city,  which  con-
tains  now,  as  I  believe,  about  four  to  five
thousand  inhabitants,  I  have  not  met  in  a
citizen  a  single  idler,  or  any  person  who
looks  like  a  loafer.  Their  prospects  for
crops  are  fair,  and  there  is  a  spirit  and
energy  in  all  that  you  see  that  cannot  be
equalled  in  any  city  of  any  size  that  I
have  ever  been  in,  and  I  will  add,  not
even  in  old  Connecticut.  Gen.  Wilson  is
now  Navy  Agent  at  San  Francisco,  and  is
a  citizen  of  the  first  respectability."

The  following  is  from  the  pen  of
Mr.  Fuller,  editor  of  the  New  York
Mirror,  who  visited  Salt  Lake— not
the  present  Mr.  Fuller,  his  former
colleague,  under  date  of :

A  more  industrious,  honest,  law-abid-
ing community  can  hardly  be  found.  The
municipal    regulations  of  Salt  Lake  City


are  admirable,  and  more  moral  (barring
their  open  polygamy)  and  orderly  citizens
we  have  never  seen  in  any  part  of  the
world.  They  number  very  many  men  of
intelligence  and  education,  and  a  residence
of  several  weeks  among  them  failed  to
note  a  single  "  vagabond"  in  their  midst.
They  are  exceedingly  hospitable  to  Cali-
fornia emigrants,  and  furnish  them  sup-
plies at  reasonable  rates.  Their  settlement
is  a  great  benefit  to  "  overland  travellers."

At  the  Legislative  party,  given  in
Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Social  Hall,
on  the  Ist  of  January.  1855,  an
address  from  Hon.  J.  F.  Kinney,
Chief  Justice  United  Slates  Supreme
Court,  Utah  Territory,  being  announc-
ed, he  rose  and  said  :

"  This  is  to  be  an  occElsionof  rejoicing
— this  a  time  when  the  mind  will  reflect
on  the  past  history  of  this  country.  I
can  scarcely  realize  that  we  are  here,  ten
or  fifteen  hundred  miles  from  civilization,
and  yet  we  are  in  the  very  midst  of  it —
not  only  civilization,  but  the  most  perfeci
refinement.  I  am  reminded  of  the  words
of  Daniel  Webster,  on  the  occasion  of
celebrating  the  landing  of  the  Pilgrim
Fathers.  "The  same  heaven,"  he  re-
marked, "  is  over  our  heads,  the  same
earth  under  our  feet ;  but  all  else,  how
changed  !  The  same  remarks  may  appro-
priately be  applied  to  this  Territory,  when
we  consider  only  seven  years  have  gone
since  this  people  landed  here,  without
food  to  support  them,  living  on  herbs  and
roots,  and  behold  now  the  splendor,  the
magnificence  and  taste  that  has  been
displayed  here,  we  may  wonder  and  be
astonished.''

On  another  occasion,  at  the  re-union
of  the  Members  of  the  Assembly,  at
the  dwelling  of  the  Hon.  A.  W.
Babbitt,  Judge  Kinney  spoke  as  fol-
lows :

"  I  do  not  rise  to  tell  a  story,  to  offer
a  toast,  or  propose  a  conundrum,  but  to
express  my  feelings.  I  have  watched  the
doings  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  dur-
ing  the  past  session.  I  see  you  have  a-
dopted  the  wise  policy  of  enacting  few  and
simple  laws.  Those  governments  are  ac-
counted the  most  wise  which  have  enacted
the  fewest  and  simplest  laws.  You  do
not  wish  to  rule  your  people  by  law  -,  you
try  to  rule  them  by  love.  1  speak  this
not  merely  to  eulogise  Gov.  Young,  or.


26


his  council.  Everything  in  this  Valley
bespeaks  the  enterprise,  the  industry,  the
refinement,  and  the  intelligence  of  this
people.  Your  fine  settlements,  unsurpass-
ed in  loveliness  and  beauty,  your  public
buildings,  your  machinery,  and  the  union
and  good  feeling  pervading  throughout
your  Territory,  are  all  monuments  of  the
wisdom  and  power  that  influence  and
control  every  department.  No  stranger
coming  into  this  Territory  but  w\l\  be
struck  at  the  luxury,  magnificence,  sym-
metry,  and  ingenuity  that  exists  through-
out this  Valley.

"I  was  one  of  the  Judges  of  the  Supreme
Court  in  Iowa  for  seven  years  ;  my  salary
was  $1,000  per  year;  the  salary  of  Chief
Justice  in  Utah  was  then  $1,800.  I  had
a  delightful  home  in  Iowa,  as  many  of
you  have  here.  My  appointment  to  Utah
was  soon  rumored,  and  my  friends,  the
members  of  the  bar,  reasoned  with  me  on
the  propriety  of  leaving  Iowa  ;  my  post
was  flooded  with  letters  from  my  friends
on  the  subject ;  my  old  friends  in  New
York,  with  whom  I  studied  law  for  years,
informed  me  that  I  could  not  live  here
and  discharge  the  official  duties  assigned
me.  If  I  examine  my  own  feelings  in
relation  to  coming  to  this  place,  I  was
actuated  by  one  feeling,  which  was  to
show  to  the  world  the  slanders  that  had
been  heaped  upon  the  people,  than  by  any
other  motives.  It  could  not  be  for  wealth
or  honor.  I  have  a  wife  and  five  children,
one  daughter  grown  to  womanhood  ;  and
I  can  say  there  is  less  immorality,  less
drunkenness,  and  less  licentiousness  here,
than  anywhere  I  have  ever  been.  I  turn-
ed my  back  on  the  advice  of  my  friends  ;
1  have  never  regretted  the  step  I  took.
They  tried  to  stay  my  family,  but  I  con-
trolled them  enough ;  I  left  it  to  their
choice  to  come  or  stay.  If  you  call  this
a  compliment  to  your  Territory,  you  are
welcome  to  it,  and  I  am  proud  of  it."

In  addition  to  these  we  might  refer
to  the  remarks  made  by  Judge  Laza-
rus Reid;  (now  dead,)  of  New  York,
Judge  Leo.  Shaver,  and  hundreds  of
disinterested  witnesses,  who  have
resided  in  Utah,  and  are  acquainted
with  the  state  of  affairs  in  that  Ter-
ritory; but  space  will  not  admit  of
introducing  one  titbe  of  their  testi-
mony.

We   think  that    at   least   common
honesty   demands      that    journalists  •
should   turn    the   attention    of    their
leisure  moments  to  the  correction   of


morals  and  good  breeding,  in  com-
munities they  are  so  well  acquainted
witl»,  and  leave  those  tliey  know  so
little  about,  until  they  are  better
informed,  or  more  disposed  to  do
them  justice.


EPISODE  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF
THE  REFORMATION.

Philip,  Landgrave  of  Hesse,  one  of
the  principal  Lords  and  princes  of
Germany,  wrote  to  the  great  Refor-
mer, Martin  Luther,  and  to  the  prin-
cipal heads  of  the  Protestant  Refor-
mation, desiring  the  privilege  of  a
second  wife.  Many  arguments  were
urged  by  Philip,  showing  that  the
practice  was  iu  accordance  witli  the
Bible,  and  not  prohibited  under  the
Christian  dispensation.  Luther  met
in  Council  witii  the  principal  Divines
to  consult  upon  the  propriety  of  grant-
ing the  request  of  the  Landgrave.
After  a  thorough  investigation  of  the
subject  they  granted  his  request  in  a
lengthy  letter  from  which  tlie  follow-
ing is  an  extract.  The  letter  com-
mences as  follows  :

"To  the  most  Serene  Prince  and
Lord  Philip,  Landgrave  of  Hesse,
Zenlembogon,  of  Diets  of  Z'\egen-
haia  and  Nedda,  our  gracious  Lord,
we  wish  above  all  things  the  grace  of
God  through  Christ  Jesus.''

"  1st.  We  have  been  informed  by
Bucer,  and  in  the  instruction  your
Highness  gave  him,  have  read  the
trouble  of  mind  and  uneasiness  of
conscience  your  Highness  is  under  at
this  present  ;  and  although  it  seemed
to  us  very  difficult  so  speedily  to  an-
swer the  doubts  proposed  ;  neverthe-
less we  should  not  permit  the  said
Bucer,  who  was  urgent  for  his  return
to  your  Highness,  to  go  away  without
an  answer  in  writing.

2d.  If  your  Highness  is  resolved  to
marry  a  second  wife,  we  judge  it
ought  to  be  done  secretly,  that  is  that
none  but  the  person  you  shall  wed,
and  a  few  trusty  persons,  know  of  the
matter,  and  they,  too,  under  the  seal
of  confession.  Hence  no  contradic-
tion nor  scandal  of  moment  need  be
apprehended  ;  for  it  is  no  extraordi-
nary thing  for  princes  to  keep  con-
cubines; and  though  the  vulgar  should


27


be  scandalised  thereat,  the  more  in-
telligent would  doubt  of  the  truth,
and  prudent  persons  would  approve
of  this  moderate  kind  of  life,  prefer-
able to  adultery  and  other  brutal  ac-
tions. There  is  no  need  of  being
concerned  for  what  men  say  provided
all  goes  right  with  conscience.  So
far  do  we  approve  of  it,  and  in  those
circumstances  only  by  us  specified,
for  the  gospel  hath  neither  recalled
nor  forbid  what  was  permitted  in  the
law  of  Moses  with  respect  to  marriage
"Your  Highness  bath,  therefore,
in  this  writing  not  only  the  approba-
tion of  us  all,  ill  case  of  "necessity,
concerning  what  you  desire,  but  also
the  reflections  we  have  made  there-
upon. We  beseech  you  to  weigh
them  as  becometh  a  wise,  virtuous,
and  Christian  Prince.  We  also  beg
of  God  to  direct  all  for  his  glory  and
your  Highness  salvation.  May  God
preserve  your  Highness.  We  are
most  ready  to  serve  your  Highness.


"  Given  at  Wittemberg,  the  Wed-
nesday after  the  fast  of  Saint  Nicho-
las, 1539.

'Your  Highness's  most  humble
and  most  obedient  subjects,

Martin  Luther

Philip  Melancthon

Martin  liucer

Antony  Corvin

Adam

John  Levengue

Justus  Wartfute

Dennis  Melanther"

This  letter  was  in  Melancthoti's
own  hand-writing,  attested  by  Georga
Nuspicher,  Notary  Imperial,  and
has  been  taken  from  the  1st  vol.
of  a  work  entitled  "  History  of  the
Variations  of  the  Protestant  Church-
es" by  James  Benign  Bossuef.

The  marriage  contract  of  Philip
with  Margaret  de  Saal  his  second
wife,  was  attested  by  Belthasar
Rand,  of  Feeld,  Notary  Public  Im-
perial.


EXTRACT  FROM  THE  "  LATTER  DAY  SAINTS'  MILLENNIAL
STAR."— Nu.  30,  Vol.  XVI.  Dated  29th  Jcjly,  1854.      ♦


DEFENCE  OF  POLYGAMY.


BY  A  LADY  OF  DTAH,  IN  A  LETTER

Dear  Sister. — Your  letter  of  Oct.
2,  was  received  on  yesterday.  My
joy  on  its  reception  was  more  than  I
can  express.  I  had  waited  so  long
for  your  answer  to  our  last,  that  I  had
almost  concluded  my  friends  were
offended,  and  would  write  to  me  no
more.  Judge,  then,  of  my  joy  when
I  read  the  sentiments  of  friendship
and  of  sisterly  affection  expressed  in
your  letter.

We  are  all  well  here,  and  are  pros-
perous and  happy  'in  our  family  circle.
My  children,  four  in  number,  are
healthy  and  cheerful,  and  fast  ex-
panding their  physical  and  intellec-
tual faculties.  Health,  peace,  and
prosperity  have  attended  us  all  the
day  long.

it  seems,  my  dear  sister,  that  we
are  no  nearer  together  in  our  religi-
ous views  than  formerly.  Why  is
this?    Are  we  not  all  bound  to  leave


TO    HER    SISTER    IN    NEW    HAMPSHIRE.

Great  Salt  Lake  City.  Jan.  12,  1854.

this  world,  with  all  we  possess  there-
in, and  reap  the  reward  of  our  doings
here  in  a  never  ending  hereafter  ?  If
so,  do  we  not  desire  to  be  undeceived
and  to  know  and  to  do  the  truth  1  Do
we  not  all  wish  in  our  very  hearts  to
be  sincere  with  ourselves,  and  to  he
honest  and  frank  with  each  other.

If  so,  you  will  bear  with  me  pati-
ently, while  I  give  a  few  of  my  rea-
sons for  embracing,  and  holding
sacred,  that  particular  point  in  the
doctrine  of  the  Church  of  the  Saints,
to  which  you,  my  dear  sister,  together
with  a  large  majority  of  Christen-
dom, so  decidedly  object.  I  mean,  a
"  plurality  of  wives."

I  have  a  Bible,  which  I  have  been
taught,  from  my  infancy,  to  hold
sacred.  In  this  Bible,  I  read  of  a
holy  man  named  Abraham,  who  is
represented  as  the  friend  of  God,  a
faithful  man  in  all  things,  a  man  who


28


kopl  (lie  commanditipnts  of  God,  and
Avlio  is  called,  in  the  New  Testament,
Ibe  "  father  of  the  faithful."  See.
James  ii.  23.  Rom.  iv.  16.  Gal.  iii.
is,  9,  16,  29.

1  find  this  mail  had  a  plurality  of
uives,  some  of  which  were  called
concubines.  See  Book  of  Genesis;
and  for  his  concubines,  see  xxv.  G.

1  also  find  his  grandson  Jacob  pos-
sessed of  four  «ives,  twelve  sons,  and
a  dauojhter.  These  wives  are  spoken
very  liighly  of  by  the  sacred  writers,
as  honourable  and  virtuous  women-
•'  77/ofi,"  say  the  Scriptures,  "  did
hiiild  the  House  of  I  ,rnfl."

Jacob  himself  was  also  a  man  of
God,  and  the  Lord  blessed  him  and
liis  house,  and  commanded  him  to  be
fruitful  and  multiply.  See  Gen.  xxx.
to  XXXV.  and  particularly  xxxv.10,1 1,

I  find  also  that  the  twelve  sons  of
Jacob,  by  these  four  wives,  became
princes,  heads  of  tribes.  Patriarchs,
whose  names  are  had  in  everlasting
remembrance  to  all  generations.

Now  God  talked  with  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob  frequently  :  and  His
angels  also  visited  and  talked  with
them,  aud  blessed  them  and  their
M'ives  and  children.  He  also  reproved
the  sins  of  some  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,
for  hating  and  selling  their  brother,
and  for  adulterj'.  But  in  all  His
communications  with  them.  He  never
condemned  their  family  organization  ;
but  on  the  contrary,  always  approved
of  it,  and  blessed  them  in  this  respect
He  even  told  Abraham,  that  He
would  make  him  the  father  of  many
nations,  and  that  in  him  and  his  seed
nil  the  nations  and  kindreds  of  the
larth  should  be  blessed.  See  Gene-
sis xviii.  17 — 19;  also  xii.  1 — 3.  In
later  years  I  find  the  plurality  of
wives  perpetuated,  sanclioned,  and
provided  for,  in  the  law  of  Moses.

David  the  Psalmist  not  only  hnd  a
plurality  of  wives,  but  the  Lord  Him-
self spoke  by  the  mouth  of  Nathan
the  Prophet,  and  told  David,  that  He
(the  Lord)  had  given  his  master's
wives  into  his  bosom  ;  but  because  he
liad  committed  adultery  with  the  wife
of  Uriah,  and  had  caused  his  murder,
He  would  take  his  wives  and  give
them  to  a  neighbour  of  Lis,  &c.  See
2  Samuel,  xii.  7—11.


Here,  then,  we  have  the  word  of
the  Lord,  not  only  sanctioning  poly-
gamy, but  actually  giving  to  king
David  the  wives  of  his  master,  (Saul.)
and  afterward  taking  the  wives  of
David  from  him,  imd  giving  them  to
another  man.  Here  we  have  a  sam-
ple of  severe  reproof  and  punishment
for  adultery  and  murder  :  while  poly-
gamy is  authorized  and  approved  by
the  word  of  God.

But  to  come  to  the  NewTestament.
I  find  Jesus  Christ  speaks  very  highly
of  Abraham  and  his  family:  he  says,
"  Many  shall  come,  from  the  east,  and
from  the  west,  and  from  the  north,  and
from  the  south,  and  shall  sit  down
with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in
the  kinqdom  of  Gudy  Luke,  xiii.  28,
29.

Again,  he  said,  "  If  ye  were  Abra-
ham's seed,  ye  would  do  the  ivorhs  'f
Abraham."

Paul  the  Apostle,  wrote  to  the
Saints  of  his  day,  and  informed  them
as  follows  :  "  As  many  of  you  as
have  been  baptized  into  Christ  have
put  on  Christ;  and  if  ye  are  Christ's,
then  are  ye  Abahman's  seed,  and
heirs  according  to  the  promise."

He  also  sets  forth  Abraham  and
Sarah  as  patterns  of  faith  and  good
works,  and  as  the  father  and  mother
of  faithful  Christians,  who  should,  by
faith  and  good  works,  aspire  to  be
counted  the  sons  of  Abraham,  and
daughters  of  Sarah.

Now  let  us  look  at  some  of  the
works  of  S'arah,  for  which  she  is  so
highly  commended  by  the  Apostles,
and  by  them  held  up  as  a  pattern  for
Christian  ladies  to  imitate,  *'  Now
Sarah,  Abrains  wife,  bare  him  nn
children;  and  she  had  a  handmaid,  an
Egyptian,  whose  name  was  Hnfjar.
And  Sarah  said  unto  Abram,  behold
now,  the  Lord  hath  restrained  me
from  bearinfi  :  I  pray  thee  f/o  in  unto
my  maid  ;  it  may  be  that  I  may  ob-
tain children  by  her.  And  Abram
hearlifned  unto  the  voice  of  Sarah.
And  Sarah,  Abrani's  wife,  took  Ha-
yar  her  mnid.  the  Egyptian,  after
Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the
land  of  Canaan,  and  gave  her  to  her
husband,  Abram,  to  be  his  wife"  See
Genesis,  xvi.  1 — 3.

According   to  Jesus  Christ  and  the


29


Apostles,  then,  the  only  way  to  be
saved  is  to  be  adopted  into  the  great
family  of  poiyo^aniists,  by  the  Gospel,
and  then  strictly  follow  their  exam-
ples.

Again,  John  the  Revelator  des-
cribes the  Holy  City  of  liie  heavenly
Jerusalem,  with  the  names  of  the
twelve  sons  of  Jacob  inscribed  on
tlie  gates.     Rev    xxi.   12.

To  sum  u|)  the  whole,  then,  I  find
that  polygamists  were  the  friends  of
God  ;  that  the  family  and  lineage  of
a  polygamist  were  selected,  in  which
all  nations  should  be  blessed  ;  that  a
polygamist  is  named  in  the  New  Tes-
ment  as  the  father  of  the  faithful
Christians  of  after  ages,  and  cited  as
a  pattern  for  all  generations  ;  that
the  wife  of  a  polygamist,  who  encou-
raged her  husband  in  the  practice  of
the  same,  and  e^^en  urged  him  into  it,
and  officiated  in  giving  him  another
wife,  is  named  as  an  honorable  and
virtuous  woman,  a  pattern  for  Chris-
tian ladies,  and  the  very  mother  of
all  holy  women  in  the  Christian
Church!  whose  aspiration  it  should
be,  to  be  called  her  daughters  ;  that
Jesus  Christ  has  declared,  that  the
great  fathers  of  the  polygamic  family
stand  at  the  head  in  the  kingdom  of
God:  in  short,  that  all  the  saved  of
after  generations  should  be  saved  by
becoming  members  of  a  polygamic
family  ;  that  all  those  who  do  not
become  ;nembers  of  it  are  strangers
and  aliens  to  the  covenant  of  promise,
the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  not
heirs  according  to  the  promise  made
to  Abraham  ;  that  all  people  from  the
east,  west,  north,  or  south,  who  enter
into  the  kingdom,  enter  into  the  society
of  polygamists.  and  under  their  patri-
archial  rule  and  government;  indeed
1)0  one  can  even  approach  the  gates  of
heaven  without  beholding  the  names
of  twelve  polygamists,  (the  sons  of
four  different  women  by  one  man,)
engraven  in  everlasting  glory  upon
the  pearly  gates.

My  dear  hister,  with  the  Scriptures
before  me,  I  could  never  find  it  in  my
lieart  to  reject  the  heavenly  vision
which  has  restored  to  man  the  fulness
of  the  Gospel,  or  the  Latter-day
Prophets  and  Apotles,  merely  be-
cause in  this  restoration  is  included


the  ancient  law  of  matrimony  and
of  family  organization  and  govern-
ment, prepratory  to  the  restoration
of  all  Israel.

But,  leaving  all  Scripture,  history,
or  precedent,  out  of  the  question,  let
us  come  to  nature's  law.  What  then,
appears  to  be  the  great  object  of  the
marriage  relation  ?  1  answer — the
multiplying  of  our  species,  the  rear-
ing and  training  of  children.

To  accomplish  this  object,  natural
law  would  dictate,  that  a  husband
should  remain  apart  from  his  wife  at
certain  seasons,  which,  in  the  very
constitution  of  the  female,  are  un-
timel}'.  Or  in  other  words,  indul-
gence should  not  be  merely  for  plea-
sure, or  wanton  desires,  but  mainly
for  tiie  purpose  of  piocreation.

The  mortality  of  nature  would  teach
a  mother,  that  during  nature's  pro-
cess in  the  formation  and  growth  of
embryo  man,  her  heart  should  be
pure,  her  thoughts  and  affections
chaste,  her  mind  calm,  her  passions
without  excitement  ;  while  her  body
sliould  be  invigorated  with  every  ex-
ercise conducive-  to  health  and  vi-
gour; but  by  no  means  subjected  to
anything  calulated  to  disturb,  irri-
tate, weary,  or  exhaust  any  of  its
functions.

And  while  a  kind  husband  should
nourish,  sustain,  and  comfort  the
wife  of  his  bosom,  by  every  kindness
and  attention  consistent  with  her  si-
tuation, and  with  his  most  tender
aflfection;  still  he  should  refrain  from
all  those  untimely  associations  which
are  forbiden  in  the  great  constitution-
al laws  of  female  nature  ;  which  laws
we  see  carried  out  in  almost  the  en-
tire animal  economy,  human  animals
excepted.

Polygamy,  then,  as  practised  under
the  Patriarchal  law  of  God,  tends  di-
rectly to  the  chastity  of  women,  and
to  sound  health  and  morals  in  the
constitutions  of  their  oflspring.

You  can  read,  in  the  law  of  God,
in  your  Bible,  the  times  and  circum-
stances under  which  a  woman  should
remain  apart  from  her  husband,  dur-
ing which  limes  she  is  considered  un-
clean ;  and  should  her  husband  come
to  her  bed  under  such  circumstances,
he   would  commit   a   gross  sin   both


30


ngnin«t  the  laws  of  nature,  and  the
wise  provisions  of  God's  law,  as  re-
vealed ill  His  word  ;  in  short,  he
would  commit  an  abomination  ;  he
would  sin  bolh  Hgnjnst  his  own  body,
against  the  body  of  his  wife,  and
against  the  laws  of  procreation,  in
which  the  health  and  morals  of  his
oftspring-  are  directly  concerned.

The  polygamic  law  of  God  opens
to  all  vigorous,  healthy,  and  virtuous
females,  a  door  by  which  they  may
become  honourable  wives  of  virtuous
men,  and  mothers  of  faithful,  virtu-
ous, healthy,  and  vigorous  children.

And  here  let  me  ask  you,  my  dear
sister,  what  female  in  all  New  Hamp-
shire would  marry  a  drunkard,  a  man
of  hereditary  disease,  a  debauchee,
an  idler,  or  a  spendthrift;  or  what
woman  would  become  a  prostitute  ;  or
on  the  other  hand,  live  and  die  sin-
gle ;  or  without  forming  those  inex-
pressibly dear  relationships  of  wife
and  mother  ;  if  the  Abrahamic  cove-
nant,or  Patriarchal  laws  of  God,  were
extended  over  your  State,  and  held
sacred  and  honourable  by  all  ?

Dear  sister,  in  you  thoughtlessness,
you  inquire,  "  Why  not  a  plurality
of  husbands  as  well  as  a  plurality  of
wives?''  To  which  1  reply:  1st,  God
has  never  commanded  or  sacfioned  a
plurality  of  husbands;  2nd,  '■'Man
is  the  head  of  the  woman,'"  and  no  wo-
man can  serve  two  lords  ;  3rd,  Such
an  order  of  things  would  work  death
and  not  life,  or,  in  plain  language,  it
would  multiply  disease  instead  of
children.  In  fact,  the  experiment  of
a  plurality  of  husbands,  or  rather  of
one  woman  for  many  men,  is  in  active
operation,  and  has  been  for  centuries
in  all  the  principal  towns  and  cities
of  " C/«/i«<enc/«7n .'"  It  is  the  genius
of  "  iUiristian  Institutions,']  falsely
so  called.  It  is  the  result  of  "  Mi/s-
tery  Bnbi/lon,  the  great  whore  of  all
the  earthy  Or  in  other  words,  it  is
the  result  of  making  void  the  holy
ordinances  of  God  in  relation  to  ma-
trimony, and  introducing  the  laws  of
Rome,  in  which  the  clergy  and  nuns
are  forbidden  to  marry,  and  other
members  only  permitted  to  have  one
wife."  This  law  leaves  females  ex-
posed to  a  life  of  single  ''blessedness,^^
without   husband,   child,  or  friend  to


provide  for  or  comfort  them;  or  to  a
life  of  poverty  and  loneliness,  expos-
ed to  temptation,  to  perverted  affec-
tions, to  unlawful  means  to  gratify
them,  or  to  the  necessity  of  selling
themselves  for  lucre.  Wiiile  the  man
who  has  abundance  of  means  is  tempt-
ed to  spend  it  on  a  mistress  in  secret,
and  in  a  lawless  way,  the  law  of  God
would  have  given  her  to  him  as  an
honorable  wife.  These  circumstances
give  rise  to  murder,  infanticide,  sui-
cide, disease, remorse, despair,  wretch-
edness, poverty,  untimely  death,  with
all  the  attendant  train  of  jealousies,
heartrending  miseries,  want  of  con-
fidence in  families,  contaminating  dis-
ease, &c.  ;  and  finally,  to  the  horri-
ble license  system,  in  which  govern-
ments, called  Christian,  license  their
fair  daughters,  I  will  not  say  to  play
the  beast,  but  to  a  degradation  far
beneath  them  ;  for  every  species  of
the  animal  creation,  except  man,  re-
frain from  such  abominable  excesses,
and  observe  in  a  great  measure  the
laws  of  nature  in  procreation.

I  again  repeat,  that  nature  has
constituted  the  female  differently  from
the  male;  and  for  a  different  purpose.
The  strength  of  the  female  constitu-
tion is  designed  to  flow  in  a  stream
of  life,  to  nourish  and  sustain  the
embryo,  to  bringit  forth,  and  to  nurse
it  on  her  bosom.  When  nature  is
not  in  operation  within  her  in  these
particulars,  and  for  these  heavenly
ends,  it  has  wisely  provided  relief  at
regular  periods,  in  order  that  her
system  may  be  kept  pure  and  heal-
thy, without  exhausting  the  fountain
of  life  on  the  one  hand,  or  drying
up  its  river  of  life  on  the  other;  till
mature  age,  and  an  approaching
change  of  worlds,  render  it  necessa-
ry for  her  to  cease  to  be  fruitful,  and
give  her  to  rest  awhile,  and  enjoy  a
tranquil  life  in  the  midst  of  that  fa-
mily circle,  endeared  to  hep  by  so
mnny  ties,  and  which  may  be  sup-
posed, at  this  period  of  her  life,  to  be
approaching  the  vigor  of  /nanhood,
and  therefore  able  to  Comfort  and
sustain  her.

Not  so  with  man.  He  has  no  such
drawback  upon  his  strength.  It  is
his  to  move  in  a  wider  sphere.  If
God  shall  count  him    worthy  of  an


nl


hundred  fold,  in  this  life,  of  wives
and  children,  and  houses,  and  lands,
and  kindreds,  he  may  even  aspire  to
Patriarchal  sovereignty,  to  empire  ;
to  be  the  prince  or  head  oF  a  tribe,
or  tribes;  and  like  Abraham  of  old,
be  able  to  send  forlh,  for  the  defence
of  his  country,  hundreds  and  thou-
sands of  his  own  warriors,  born  in
his  own  house.

A  noble  man  of  God,  who  is  full  of
the  Spirit  of  the  Most  High,  and  is
counted  worthy  to  converse  with  Je-
hovah, or  with  the  son  of  God  ;  and
to  associate  with  angels,  and  the  spi-
rits of  just  men  made  perfect;  one
who  will  teach  his  children,  and
bring  them  up  in  the  light  of  unadul-
terated and  eternal  truth  ;  is  more
worthy  of  a  hundred  wives  and  chil-
dren, than  the  ignorant  slave  of  pas-
sion, or  of  vice  and  folly,  is  tu  have
one  wife  and  one  child.  Indeed  the
God  of  Abraham  is  so  much  better
pleased  with  one  than  with  the  other,
that  he  would  even  take  away  the  one
talent,  which  is  habitually  abused,
neglected,  or  put  to  an  improper  use,
and  give  it  to  him  who  has  ten  talents.

In  the  Patriarchal  order  of  family
government,  the  wife  is  bound  to  the
Jaw  of  her  husband.  She  honors,
"  calls  him  loi(l,"even  as  Sarah  obey-
ed and  honored  Abraham.  She  lives
for  him,  and  to  increase  his  glory,
his  greatness,  his  kingdom,  or  family.
Her  affections  are  centered  in  her
God,  her  husband,  and  her  children.

The  children  are  also  under  his
government,  worlds  without  end.
*'  While  life  or  tjioiir/ht,  or  htiiig  lasts,
or  immortalittf  endures."  they  are
bound  to  obey  him  as  their  father  and
king.

He  also  has  a  head,  io  whom  he  is
responsible.  He  must  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  and  observe  His  •
laws.  He  must  not  take  a  wife  unless
she  is  given  to  him  by  the  law  and
authority  of  God.  He  must  not  com-
mit adultery,  nor  take  liberties
with  any  women  except  his  own,  who
are  secured  to  him  by  the  holy  ordi-
nances of  matrimony.

Hence  a  nation  organized  under
the  law  of  the  Gospel,  or  in  other
words,  the  law  of  Abraham  and  the
Patriarchs,   would   have   no    institu-


tions tending  to  licentiousness;  no
adulteries,  fornications  &c.,  would
be  tolerated.  No  houses  or  institu-
tions would  exist  for  traffic  in  shame
or  in  the  life  blood  of  our  fair  daugh-
ters. Wealthy  men  would  have  no
inducement  to  keep  a  mistiess  in
secret,  or  unlawfully.  Females  would
have  no  grounds  for  temptation  in
any  such  lawless  life.  Neither  money
nor  pleasure  could  tempt  tlieno,
nor  poverty  drive  them  to  any  such
excess  ;  because  the  door  would  be
open  for  every  virtuous  female  to
form  the  honorable  and  endearing
relationships  of  wife  and  mother,  in
some  virtuous  family,  where  love,  and
peace,  and  plenty,  would  crown  her
days,  and  truth  and  the  practice  of
virtue  qualify  her  to  be  transplanted
with  her  family  circle  in  that  eternal
soil,  where  they  might  multiply  their
children,  without  p^iin,  or  sorrow,  or
death  ;  and  go  on  increasing  in  num-
bers, in  wealth,  in  greatness,  in
glory,  might,  majesty,  power,  and
dominion,  in  worlds  without  end.

O  my  dear  sister  I  could  the  dark
veil  of  tradition  be  rent  from  your
mind  !  could  you  gaze  for  a  moment
on  the  resurrection  of  the  just!  could
you  behold  Abraham,  Isaac,  and
Jacob,  and  their  wives  and  children,
clad  in  the  bloom,  freshness,  and
beauty  of  immortal  ^esA  and  bones;
clothed  in  robes  of  fine,  white  linen,
bedecked  with  precious  stones  and
gold;  and  surrounded  with  an  off-
spring of  immortals  as  countless  as
the  stars  of  the  firmament,  or  as  the
grains  of  sand  upon  the  sea  shore  ;
over  which  they  reign  as  kings  and
queens  for  ever  and  ever  1  you  would
then  know  somethinu;  of  the  weight  of
those  words  of  the  sacred  writer
which  are  recorded  in  relation  to  the
four  wives  of  Jacob,  the  mothers  of
the  twelve  Patriarchs,  namely:
"77ic5e  did  build  the  house  of  Israel.^'

O  that  my  dear  kindred  could  but
realize  that  they  have  need  to  repent
of  the  sins,  ignorance,  and  traditions
of  those  perverted  systems  which  are
misnamed  "  Chrislinnily"  and  be
baptized— turierf  in  the  water,  in  the
likeness  of  the  death  and  burial  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  rise  to  newness
of  life  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrcc-


32


tlon  ;  receive  his  spirit  by  the  laying
'on  of  tlie  hands  of  an  Apostle,
according  tQ  promise,  and  forsalce  the
world  and  the  pride  thereof.  Thus
they  would  be  adopted  into  the-family
of  Abraham,  become  his  sons  and
daughters,  see  and  enjoy  for  them-
selves tlie  visions  of  the  spirit  of  eter-
nal truth,  which  bear  witness  of  the
family  order  of  heaven,  and  the  beau-
ties and  glories  of  eternal  kindred
ties;  for  my  pen  can  never  describe
them.

Dear,  dear  kindred  :  remember,
according  to  the  New  Testament,  and
the  testimony  of  an  ancient  Apostle,
if  you  are  ever  saved  in  the  king-
dom of  God,  it  must  be  by  being
adopted  into  the  family  of  polyga-
mists — the  family  of  the  great  Patri-
arch Abraham  :  for  in  his  seed,  or
family,  and  not  out  of  it,  "  shall  all
the  nations  and  kindreds  of  the  earth
be  blessed^

You  say  you  believe  polygamy  is
"  licentiousness  ;"  that  it  is  "  abotni-
nahle,"  "  beasih/,  &c  ;  "  the  practice
only  of  the  most  barbarous  nations,
or  of  the  dark  ages,  or  some  great  or
good  men  who  were  left  to  commit
gross  sins."  Yet  you  say  you  are
anxious  for  me  to  be  converted  to
your  faith  ;  and  that  we  may  see  each
other  in  this  life,  and  be  associated
in  one  great  family  in  that  life  which
has  no  end.

Now  in  order  to  comply  with  your
wishes,  I  must  renounce  the  Old  and
New  Testaments ;  must  count  Abra-
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  their
families,  as  licen'ious,  wicked,  beast-
ly, abominable  characters;  Moses,
Nathan,  David,  and  the  Prophets,  no
better.  I  must  look  upon  the  God  of
Israel  as  partaker  in  all  these  abo-
minations, by  holding  them  in  fellow-
ship ;  and  even  as  a  ministrr  of  such
iniquity,  by  giving  king  Saul's  wives
into  king  David's  bosom;  and  after-
wards by  taking  David's  wives  from
him,  and  giving  them  to  his  neighbour.
I  must  consider  Jesus  Christ,  and
Paul,  and  John,  as  either  living  in  a
dark  age,  as  full  of  the  darkness  and
ignorance  of  barbarous  climes,  or
else  wilfully  abominable  and  wicked,
in  fellowshipping  polygamists,  and
representing   them    as  fathers  of  the


faithful,  and  rulers  in  heaven,  [
must  doom  them  all  to  hell,  with
adulterers,  fornicators,  &c  ,  or  else,
at  least,  assign  to  them  some  nook  or
corner  in  heaven,  as  ignorant  persons
who,  knowing  but  little,  were  beaten
with  few  stripes.  While  by  analogy,
I  must  learn  to  consider  the  Roman
Popes,  clergy,  and  nuns  who  do  not
marry  at  all,  as  foremost  in  the  ranks
of  glory  ;  and  those  Catholics  and
Protestants  who  have  but  one  wife,
as  next  in  order  of  salvation,  glory,
immortality,  and  eternal  life.

Now,  dear  friends,  much  as  I  long
to  see  you,  and  dear  as  you  are  to  me
I  can  never  come  to  these  terms.  I
feel  as  though  the  gospel  had  intro-
duced me  into  the  right  family,  into
the  right  lineage,  and  into  good  com-
pany. And  besides  all  these  consi-
derations, should  I  ever  become  so
beclouded  with  unbelief  of  the  t^cri[)-
tures  and  heavenly  institutions,  as  to
agree  with  my  kindred  in  New  Hamp-
shire, in  theory,  still  my  practical  cir-
cumstances are  difterent,  and  would
I  fear  continue  to  separate  us  by  a
wide  and  also  impassable  gulf.

For  instance,  I  have,  (as  you  see,
in  all,  good  conscience,  founded  on
the  word  of  God,)  formed  family  and
kindred  ties,  which  are  inexpressibly
dear  to  me,  and  which  I  can  never
brini;'  my  feelings  to  consent  to  dis-
solve. I  have  a  good  and  virtuous
hushatid  whom  I  love.  We  have
four  little  children  which  are  mutual-
ly and  inexpressibly  dear  to  us.  An
besides  this,  my  husband  has  sevea
other  living  v\ives,  and  one  who  has
departed  to  a  better  world.  He  has
in  all  upwards  of  twenty-five  children.
All  these  mothers  and  children  are
endeared  to  me  by  kindred  ties,  by
mutual  affection,  by  acquaintance  and
association  ;  and  the  mothers  in  par-
ticular, by  mutual  and  long  continu-
ed exercises  of  toil,  patience,  long-
suffering,  and  sisterly  kindness.  We
all  have  our  imperfections  in  this
life;  but  I  know  that  these  are  good
and  worthy  women,  and  that  my  hus-
band is  a  good  and  worthy  man  :  one
who  keeps  the  commandments  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  presides  in  his
family  like  an  Abraham.  He  seeks
to  provide  for  them  with  all  diligence  :


33


he  loves  them  all,  and  seeks  to  com-
fort them  and  make  them  happy.  He
teaches  them  the  commandments  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  g^athers  them  about
him  in  the  family  circle  to  call  upon
his  God,  both  morning  and  evening.
He  and  his  family  have  the  confi-
dence, esteem,  good-will,  and  fellow-
ship of  this  entire  territory,  and  of  a
wide  circle  of  acquaintances  in  Eu-
rope and  America.  He  is  a  practical
teacher  of  morals  and  religion,  a  pro-
moter of  general  education,  and  at
present  occupies  an  honourable  seat
in  the  Legislative  Council  of  this
territory.

Now,  as  to  visiting  my  kindred  in
New  Hampshire,  I  would  be  pleased
to  do  so,  were  it  the  will  of  God.  But
first,  the  laws  of  that  state  must  be  so
modified  by  enlightened  legislation,
and  (he  customs  and  consciences  of  its
inhabitants,  and  of  my  kindred,  so
altered,  that  my  husband  can  accom-
pany me  with  all  his  wives  and  chil-
dren, and  be  as  much  respected  and
honoured  in  his  family  organization,
and  in  his  holy  calling,  as  he  is  at
home  ;  or  in  the  same  manner  as  the
Patriarch  Jacob  would  have  been  res-
pected, had  he,  with  his  wives  and
children,  paid  a  visit  to  his  kindred.
As  my  husband  is  yet  in  his  youth,
as  well  as  myself,  I  fondly  hope  we
shall  live  to  see  that  day.  For  already
the  star  of  Jacob  is  in  the  ascen-
dancy ;  the  house  of  Israel  is  about
to  be  restored :  while  "  Mystery
Babylon"  with  all  her  institutions,
awaits  her  own  overthrow.  Till  this
is  the  case  in  New  Hampshire,  my
kindred  will  be  under  the  necessity
of  coming  here  to  see  us,  or  on  the
other  hand  we  will  be  mutually  com-
pelled to  forego  the  pleasure  of  each
other's  company.

You  mention,  in  your  letter,  that
Paul,  the  Apostle,  recommended  that
Bishops  be  the  husband  of  one  wife.
Why  this  was  the  case,  I  do  not
know,  unless  it  was  as  he  says  that,
while  he  was  among  Romans  he  did
as  Romans  did.  Rome,  at  that  time,
governed  the  world,  as  it  were  ;  and
although  gross  idolaters,  they  held  to
the  one  wife  system.  Under  these
circumstances,  no  doubt,  the  Apostle
Paul,  seeing  a  great  many  polyga-


mists  in  the  Church,  recoraraended
that  they  had  better  choose  for  this
particular  temporal  office,  men  of
small  families,  who  would  not  be  in
disrepute  with  the  government.  This
is  precisely  our  course  in  those  coun-
tries where  Roman  institutions  still
bear  sway.  Our  Elders  there  have
but  one  wife,  in  order  to  conform  to
the  laws  of  men.

You  inquire  why  Elder  W.,  when
at  your  house,  denied  that  the  Church
of  this  age  held  to  the  doctrine  of
plurality.  I  answer,  that  he  might
have  been  ignorant  of  the  fact,  as  our
belief  on  this  point  was  not  published
till  1852.  And  had  he  known  it.  he
had  no  right  to  reveal  the  same  until
the  full  time  had  arrived.  God  kind-
ly withheld  this  doctrine  for  a  time,
because  of  the  ignorance  and  preju-
dice of  the  nations  of  mystic  Babylon,
that  peradventure  he  might  save  some
of  them.

Now,  dear  sister,  I  must  close.  I
wish  all  my  kindred  and  old  acquain-
tances to  see  this  letter,  or  a  copy
thereof;  and  that  they  will  consider
it  as  if  written  to  themselves.  I  love
them  dearly,  and  greatly  desire  and
pray  for  their  salvation,  and  that  we
may  all  meet  with  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  God.

Dear  sister,  do  not  let  your  preju-
dices and  traditions  keep  you  from
believing  the  Bible  ;  nor  the  pride,
shame,  or  love  of  the  world  keep  you
from  your  seat  in  the  kingdom  of
heaven,  among  the  royal  family  of
polygamists.    Write  often  and  freely.

With  sentiments  of  the  deepest
affection  and  kindred  feeling,  I  re-
main dear  sister,  your  affectionate
sister,

Belinda  Marden  Pratt.

Mrs.  Lydia  Kimball,  Nashua,  H.  N.


MILTON  ON  POLYGAMY.

Fron  the   First  Book  on  "  Christian

Doctrine,"     Translated     from   the

Latin,  by  Charles  R.   Sumner,  D.

D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester.

In  the  definition  which  I  have  given

[of  marriage]   I  have  not   said,    in

compliance  with  the  commonopinion,

of  one  man  with  one  woman,  lest  I

should  by  implication  charge  the  holy


34


pafriarcbs  and  pillars  of  our  faith,
Abraham,  and  the  others  who  had
more  than  one  wife  at  the  same  time,
with  habitual  fornication  and  adultery;
and  lest  I  should  be  forced  to  ex-
clude from  the  sanctuary  of  God  as
spurious,  the  holy  offspring  which
sprang  from  them,  yea,  the  whole  of
the  sons  of  Israel,  for  whom  the  sanc-
tuary itself  was  made.  For  it  is
said,  Deut.  xxiii,  2,  "  a  bastard  shall
not  enter  into  the  congregation  of
Jehovah,  even  to  his  tenth  gene-
ration." Either  therefore  polygamy
is  a  true  marriage,  or  all  children
born  in  that  state  are  spurious  ;  which
would  include  the  whole  race  of
Jacob,  the  twelve  holy  tribes  chosen
by  God.

But  as  such  an  assertion  would  be
absurd  in  the  extreme,  not  to  say
impious,  and  as  it  is  the  height  of
injustice,  as  well  as  an  example  of
most  dangerous  tendency  in  religion,
to  account  as  sin  what  is  not  such  in
reality  ;  it  appears  to  me  that,  so  far
from  the  question  respecting  the
lawfulness  of  polygamy  being  trivial,
it  is  of  the  highest  importance  that  it
should  be  decided.

Those  who  deny  its  lawfulnees,  at-
tempt to  prove  their  position  from
Gen.  ii,  24,  "  a  man  shall  cleave
unto  his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  one
flesh,  compared  with  Matt,  xix,  6,
*'  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh."  A
man  shall  cleave,  they  say,  to  his
wife,  not  to  his  wives,  and  they  twain,
and  no  more,  shall  be  one  flesh.  This
is  certainly  ingenious  ;  and  I  there-
fore subjoin  the  passage  in  Exod,
XX,  17,  "  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy
neighbor's  house,  nor  his  man-ser-
vant, nor  his  maidservant,  nor  his
ox,  nor  his  ass  ;"  whence  it  would
follow  that  no  one  had  more  than  a
single  house,  a  single  man-servant,  a
single  maid-servant,  a  single  ox  or
ass.  It  would  be  ridiculous  to  argue,
that  it  is  not  said  houses,  but  house  ;
not  man-servants,  but  man-servant;
not  even  neighbors,  but  neighbor  :  as
if  it  were  not  the  general  custom,  in
laying  down  commandments  of  this
kind,  to  use  the  singular  number,  not
in  a  numerical  sense,  but  as  designa-
itng  the  species  of  the  thing  intended.


With  regard  to  the  phrase,  they
twain,  and  not  more,  shall  be  one
flesh,  it  is  to  he  observed,  first,  that
the  context  refers  to  the  husband  and
that  wife  only  whom  he  was  seeking
to  divorce,  without  intending  any
allusion  to  the  number  of  his  wives,
whether  one  or  more.  Secondly,
marriage  is  in  the  nature  of  a  rela-
tion :  and  to  one  relation  there  can
be  no  more  than  two  parties.  In  the
same  sense  therefore  as  if  a  man  has
many  sons  his  parental  relation  to-
wards them  all  is  manifold,  hut  to-
wards each  individually  is  single
and  complete  in  itself  ;  by  parity  of
reasoning,  if  a  man  has  many  wives,
the  relation  which  he  bears  to  each
will  not  be  less  perfect  in  itself,  nor
will  the  husband  be  less  one  flesh
with  each  of  them,  than  if  he  had  only-
one  wife.  Thus  it  might  be  properly
said  of  Abraham,  with  regard  to
Sarah  and  Hagar  respectively,  these
twain  were  one  flesh.  And  with
good  reason  ;  for  whoever  consorts
with  harlots,  however  many  in  num-
ber, is  still  said  to  be  one  flesh  with
each  :  1  Cor.  vi,  16,  "  what,  know  ye
not,  that  he  which  is  joined  to  an
harlot  is  one  body  1  for  two,  saith  he,
shall  be  one  flesh."  The  expression
may  therefore  be  applied  as  properly
to  the  husband  who  has  many  wives,
as  to  him  who  has  only  one.

Hence  it  follows  that  the  command-
ment in  question  (tho'  in  fact  it  is  no
commandment  at  all,  as  has  been
shown)  contains  nothing  against
polygamy,  either  in  the  way  of  direct
prohibition  or  implied  censure  ;—
unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  the  law
of  God  as  delivered  to  Moses,  was  at
variance  with  his  prior  declarations;
or  that,  tho'  the  passage  in  question
had  been  frequently  looked  into  by
a  multitude  df  Priests,  and  Levites.
and  Prophets,  men  of  all  ranks  of
holiest  lives  and  most  acceptable  to
God,  the  fury  of  their  passions  was
such  as  to  hurry  them  by  a  blind
impulse  into  habitual  fornication  ;  for
to  this  supposition  are  we  reduced,
if  there  be  anything  in  the  present
precept  which  renders  polygamy
incompatible  with  lawful  marriage.

Another  text  from  which  the  un-
lawfulness of  polygamy  is  maintain-


35


ed,  is  Lev.  xviii,  18,  "neither  shall
thou  take  a  wife  to  her  sister,  to  vex
her,  to  uncover  her  nakedness,  beside
the  other  in  her  life  time.''  Here
Junius  translates  the  passage,  mulie-
rem  unam  ad  alteram,  [one  woman
to  another]  instead  of  mulierem  ad
sororem  suam,  [a  woman  to  her  sis-
ter] in  order  that  from  this  forced
and  inadmissible  interpretation,  he
may  elicit  an  argument  against
polygamy.

In  drawing  up  a  law,  as  in  com-
posing a  definition,  it  is  necessary
that  the  most  exact  and  appropriate
words  should  be  used,  and  that  they
should  be  interpreted  not  in  their
metaphorical,  but  in  their  proper
signification.  He  says,  indeed,  that
the  same  words  are  found  in  the
same  sense  in  other  passages.  This
is  true  ;  but  it  is  only  where  the  con-
text precludes  the  possibility  of  any
ambiguity,  as  in  Gen.  xxvi,  3i,jura-
verunt  vir  frdtri  sua,  that  is  alteri,
they  sware  one  to  another.  No  one
would  infer  from  this  passage,  that
Isaac  was  the  brother  of  Abimelech  ;
nor  would  any  one.  on  the  other
hand,  entertain  a  doubt  that  the  pas-
sage in  Leviticus  was  intended  as
a  prohibition  against  taking  a  wife
to  her  sister ;  particularly  as  the
preceding  verses  of  this  chapter
treat  of  the  degrees  of  affinity  to
which  intermarriage  is  forbidden.
Moreover,  this  would  be  to  uncover
her  nakedness, the  evil  against  which
the  law  in  question  was  intended  to
guard;  whereas  the  caution  would  be
unnecessary  in  the  case  of  taking
another  wife  not  related  or  allied  to
the  former  ;  for  no  nakedness  would
be  thereby  uncovered.  Lastly,  why
is  the  clause  in  her  lifetime  added  I
For  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  its
being  lawful  after  her  death  to  marry
another  who  was  neither  related  nor
allied  to  her,  though  it  might  be
questionable  whether  it  were  lawful
to  marry  a  wife's  sister.

It  is  objected,  that  marriage  with  a
wife's  sister  is  forbidden  by  analogy
in  the  sixteenth  verse,  and  that  there-
fore a  second  prohibition  was  un-
necessary. I  answer,  first,  that  there
is  in  reality  no  analogy  between  the
two   passages ;  for  that  by  marrying


a  brother's  wife,  the  brother's  naked-
ness is  uncovered  ;  whereas  by  mar-
rying a  wife's  sister,  it  is  not  a  sis-
ter's nakedness,  but  only  that  of  a
kinswoman  by  marriage,  which  is  un-
covered. Besides,  if  nothing  were
to  be  prohibited  which  had  been  be-
fore prohibited  by  analogy,  why  is
marriage  with  a  mother  forbidden,
when  marriage  with  a  father  had  been
already  declared  unlawful  1  or  why
marriage  with  a  mother's  sister,  when
marriage  with  a  father's  sister  had
been  prohibited  1

If  this  reasoning  be  allowed  it  fol-
lows that  more  than  half  the  l^ws  re-
lating to  incest  are  unnecessary.  Last-
ly, considering  that  the  prevention
of  enmity  is  alleged  as  a  principal
motive  for  the  law  before  us,  it  is
obvious  that  if  the  intention  had  been
to  condemn  polygamy,  reasons  of  a
much  stronger  kind  might  have  been
urged  from  the  nature  of  the  original
institution,  as  was  done  in  the  ordi-
nance of  the  Sabbath.

A  third  passage  which  is  advanced,
Deut.  xvii.  17,  is  so  far  from  condemn-
ing polygamy,  either  in  a  king,  or  in
any  one  else,  that  it  expressly  allows
it;  and  only  imposes  the  same  res-
traints upon  this  condition  which  are
laid  upon  the  multiplication  of  horses,
or  the  accumulation  of  treasure,  as
will  appear  from  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  verses.

Except  the  three  passages  which
are  thus  irrelevantly  adduced,  not  a
trace  appears  of  the  interdiction  of
polygamy  thoughout  the  whole  law  ;
nor  even  in  any  of  the  prophets,  who
were  at  once  the  rigid  interpreters  of
the  law,  and  the  habitual  reprovers  of
the  vices  of  the  people.  The  only
shadow  of  an  exception  occurs  in  a
passage  of  Malachi,  the  last  of  the
prophets,  which  some  consider  as  de-
cisive against  polygamy.  It  would
be  indeed  a  late  and  postliminous
enactment,  if  that  were  for  the  first
time  prohibited  after  the  Babylonish
captivity,  which  ought  to  have  been
prohibited  many  ages  before,  For  if
it  had  been  really  a  sin,  how  could  it
have  escaped  the  reprehension  of  so
many  prophets  who  preceded  him  ?
We  may  safely  conclude  that  if  poly-
gamy be  not  forbidden  in  the  law,


36


neither  is  it  forbidden  here  :  for  Ma-
lachi  was  not  the  author  of  a  new
Jaw.

Let  us  however,  see  (he  words
themselves  ad  translated  by  Junius,
ii.  15,  nonne  unum  eff'ecit  ?  quamvis
reliqui  spiritus  ipsi  cssent :  quid  au-
tem  unum?  [Malachi,  chap.  II,  v.  15,
three  first  lines.]  It  would  be  rash
and  unreasonable  indeed,  if  on  (he
authority  of  so  obscure  a  passage,
.which  has  been  tortured  and  twisted
by  different  interpreters  into  such  a
variety  of  meanings,  we  were  to  form
a  conclusion  on  so  momentous  a  sub-
ject, and  to  impose  it  upon  others  as
an  article  of  faith.

But  whatever  be  the  signification
of  the  words,  nonne  unum  effecit,
•what  do  they  prove?  Are  we,  for  the
sake  of  drawing  an  inference  against
polygamy,  to  understand  the  phrase
thus — did  he  not  make  one  woman?
But  the  gender,  and  even  the  case,
are  at  variance  with  this  interpreta-
tion ;  for  nearly  all  the  other  commen-
tators render  the  words  as  follows  :  —
annon  unus  fecit  ? — et  residuum  spiri-
tus ipsi  ?  el  quid  ille  unus  ?  We  ought
not  therefore  to  draw  any  conclusion
from  a  passage  like  the  present  in  be-
half of  a  doctrine  which  is  either  not
mentioned  elsewhere,  or  only  in
doubtful  terms;  but  rather  conclude
that  the  prophet's  design  was  to  re-
prove a  practice  that  the  whole  of
Scripture  concurs  in  reproving,  and
which  forms  the  principal  subject  of
the  very  chapterin  question,  ii.  1 1-16
namely,  marriage  with  the  daugh-
ter of  a  strange  god — ai  corruption
very  prevalent  among  the  Jews  of
that  lime,  as  we  learn  from  Ezra  and
and  Nehemiah.

With  regard  to  the  words  of  Christ,
Matt.  v.  32,  and  xix.  5,  the  passage
from  Gen.  ii,  24,  is  repeated,  not  for
the  purpose  of  condemning  polygamy,
hut  of  reproving  the  unrestrained
liberty  of  divorce,  which  is  a  very
difi'erent  thing:  nor  can  the  words  be
made  to  apply  to  any  other  subject
withoutevident  violence  to  their  mean-
ing. For  the  argument  which  is  de-
duced from  Matt,  v,  32.  that  if  a  man
who  marries  another  after  putting
away  his  first  wife,  committeth  adul-
tery, much   more    must   he  commit


adultery  who  retains  the  first  and
marries  another,  ought  itself  to  be
repudiated  as  an  illegitimate  conclu-
sion. For  in  the  first  place,  it  is  the
divine  precepts  themselves  that  are
obligatory,  not  the  consequences  de-
duced from  them  by  human  reason-
ing; for  what  appears  a  reasonable
inference  to  one  individual,  may  not
be  equally  obvious  to  another  of  not
inferior  discernment.

Secondly,  he  who  puts  away  his
wife  and  marries  another,  is  not  said
to  commit  adultery  because  he  mar-
ries another,  but  because  in  conse-
quence of  his  marriage  with  another
he  does  not  retain  his  former  wife,  to
whom  also  he  owed  the  performance
of  conjugal  duties  :  whence  it  is  ex-
pressly said,  Mark  X.  11,  "  he  com-
mitteth adultery  againgt  her."  That
he  is  in  a  condition  to  perform  conju-
gal duties  to  the  one  after  liaving
taken  another  to  her,  is  shewn  by  God
himself,  Exod.  xxi.  H),  "  if  he  take
him  another  wife,  her  food,  her  rai-
ment, and  her  duty  of  marriage,  shall
he  not  diminish,"  It  cannot  be  sup-
posed that  the  divine  forethought  in-
tended to  provide  for  adultery.

Nor  is  it  allowable  to  argue,  from  I
Cor.  vii.  2,  '  let  every  man  have  his
own  wife,"  that  therefore  none  should
have  more  than  one  :  for  the  meaning
of  the  precept  is,  that  every  man
should  have  his  own  wife  to  himself —
not  that  he  should  have  but  one  wife.
That  bishops  and  elders  should  have
no  more  tban  one  wife,  is  explicitly
enjoined,  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  and  Tit.  i  G,
"  he  must  be  the  husband  of  one
wife  :"  in  order  probably,  that  they
may  discharge  with  greater  diligence
the  ecclesiastical  duties  which  they
have  undertaken.  The  command  it-
self, however,  is  a  sufficient  proof
that  polygamy  was  not  forbidden  to
the  rest,  and  that  it  was  common  in
the  church  at  that  time.

[  "  He  must  be  the  husband  of  one
wife,"'  does  not  in  the  least  imply  that
he  was  not  at  liberty  to  have  more
wives,  — Ed. J

Lastly,  in  answer  to  what  is  urged
from  1  Cor.  vii,  4,"  likewise  also  the
husband  hath  not  power  of  his  own
body,  but  the  wife,  it  is  easy  to  reply,
as  was  done  above,  that  the  word  wife


37


in  tliis  passage  is  used  with  reference
to  the  species,  and  not  to  the  number.
Nor  can  the  power  of  the  wife  over
the  body  of  her  husband  be  different
now,  from  what  it  was  under  the  law,
Exod.  xxi,  which  signifies  "  her  stated
times,"  expressed  by  St.  Paul  in  the
present  chapter  by  the  phrase,  "  her
due  benevolence."  With  regard  to
what  is  due,  the  Hebrew  word  is
sufficiently  explicit.

On  the  other  hand,  the  following
passages  clearly  admit  the»lawfulness
of  polygamy,  Exod.  xxi,  10,  "  if  he
take  him  another  wife,  her  food,  her
raiment,  and  her  duty  of  marriage,
shall  he  not  diminish."  Deut.  xvii,
17,  *'  neither  shall  he  multiply  wives
to  himself,  that  his  heart  turn  not
away."  Would  the  law  have  been
so  closely  worded,  if  it  had  not  been
allowable  to  take  more  wives  than
one  at  the  same  time  ?  Who  would
venture  to  subjoin  as  an  inference
from  this  language,  therefore  let  him
have  one  only  ?  In  such  case,  since
it  is  said  in  the  preceding  ver.8e,  "  he
shall  not  multiply  horses  (o  himself,"
it  would  be  necessary  to  subjoin
there  also,  therefore  he  shall  have
one  horse  only.

Nor  do  we  want  any  proof  to  as-
Bure  us,  that  the  first  institution  of
marriage  was  intended  to  bind  the
prince  equally  with  the  people :  if
therefore  it  permits  only  one  wife,  it
permits  no  more  even  to  the  prince.
But  the  reason  given  for  the  law  is  this,
that  his  heart  turn  not  away  ;  a  dan-
ger which  would  arise  if  he  were  to
marry  many,  especially  strange  wo-
men, as  Solomon  afterwards  did.
Now  if  the  present  law  had  been  in-
tended merely  as  a  confiivqiation  and
vindication  of  the  primary  institution
of  marriage,  nothing  could  have  been
more  appropriate  than  to  have  recited
the  institution  itself  in  this  place,  and
not  to  have  advanced  that  reason  alone
which  has  been  mentioned.

Let  us  hear  the  words  of  God  him-
self, the  author  of  the  law,  and  the
bestinterpreter  of  his  own  will,  2  Sam.
xii.  8  "I  gave  thee  thy  master's
wives  into  thy  bosom.. and  if  that  had
been  too  little,  1  would  moreover  have
given  unto  thee  such  and  such  things."
Here  there  cau  be  no  subterfuge ;  God


gave  bim  wives  ;  he  gave  them  to  the
man  whom  he  loved,  as  one  among  a
number  of  great  benefits  ;  he  would,
have  given  him  more,  if  these  had
not  been  enough.  Besides,  the  very
argument  which  God  uses  towards
David,  is  of  more  force  when  applied
to  the  gift  of  wives,  than  to  any  other,
— thou  oughtest  at  least  to  have  ^b-.
stained  from  the  wife  of  another  per-
son, not  so  much  because  I  had  given
thee  thy  master's  house,  or  thy  mas-
ter's kingdom,  as  because  I  had  given
thee  the  wives  of  the  King.

Beza  indeed  objects,  that  David-
herein  committed  incest,  namely,  with
the  wives  of  his  father-in-law.  But
he  had  forgotten  what  is  indicated  by
Esther  ii,  12,  13,  that  the^kings  of
Israel  had  two  houses  for  the  women,
one  appointed  for  the  virgins,  the
other  for  the  concubines,  and  that  it
was  the  former  and  not  the  latter
which  were  given  to  David.  This
appears  also  from  1  Kings  i,  4,  "  the
king  knew  her  not.''  Cantic.  vi,  8,
"  there  are  fourscore  concubines,  and
virgins  without  number."  At  the
same  time,  it  might  be  said  with  per
feet  propriety  that  God  had  given
him  his  master's  wives,  even  suppos-
ing that  he  had  only  given  him  as
many  in  number  and  of  the  same
description,  tho*  not  the  very  same  ;
even  as  he  gave  him,  not  indeed  the
identical  house  and  retinue  of  his
master,  but  one  equally  magnificent
and  royal-
It  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  that
what  the  authority  of  the  law,  anid
the  voice  of  God  himself  has  sanct-
oned,  should  be  alluded  to  by  the
holy  prophets  in  their  inspired  hymns
as  a  thing  lawful  and  honorable. —
Psal.  xlv,  9,  (which  is  entitled,  a  song
of  loves)  "  kings'  daughters  were
among  thy  honorable  women."  v.  14,
*'  the  virgins  her  companions  that
follow  her  shall  be  brought  unto  thee."
Nay,  the  words  of  this  very  song  are
quoted  by  the  Apostle  to  the  Hebrews,
i.  8,  "  unto  the  Son  he  saith,  Thy
throne,  O  God."  &c.,  as  the  words
wherein  God  the  Father  himself  ad-
dresses the  Son,  and  in  which  his
divinity  is  asserted  more  clearly  than
in  any  other  passage.  Would  it  have
been  proper   for  God  the  Father  to


38


speak  by  the  mouth  of  harlots,  and  to
manifest  bis  holy  Son  to  mankind  as
God  in  the  amatory  songs  of  adulter-
esses?       *         *

Nor  must  we  omit  2  Chron.  xxiv,
2,  3, — "  Joash  did  that  which  was
right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  all  the
days  of  Jehoiada  the  priest;  and  Je-
faoiada  took  for  him  two  wives."  For
the  two  clauses  are  not  placed  in  con-
trast, or  disjoined  from  each  other,
but  it  is  said  in  one  and  the  same  con-
nection that  under  the  guidance  of
Jehoiada  he  did  that  which  was  right,
and  that  by  the  authority  of  the  same
individual  he  married  two  wives.  This
is  contrary  to  the  usual  practice  in  the
eulogies  of  the  kings,  where,  if  any-
thing blameable  be  subjoined,  it  is
expressly  exct^pted  from  the  present
character  :  I  Kings,  xv.  5,  save  only
in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hittite."
V.  11,   14,   and    Asa   did    that   which

was  right but   the  high    places

were  not  removed  :  nevertheless  Asa's
heart  was  perfect."

Since  therefore,  the  right  conduct
of  Joash  is  mentioned  in  unqualified
terms,  in  conjunction  wi;h  his  double
marriage,  it  is  evident  that  the  latter
was  not  considered  matter  of  censure  ;
for  the  sacred  historian  would  not
have  neglected  so  suitable  an  oppor-
tunity of  making  the  customary  ex-
ception, if  there  had  really  been  any
thing  which  deserved  disapprobation.

Moreover,  God  himself,  in  an  alle-
gorical fiction,  Ezek.  xxiii,  4,  repre-
sents himself  as  having  espoused  two
wives,  Aholah  and  Aholibah,  a  mode
of  speaking  which  he  would  by  no
means  have  employed,  especially  at
such  length,  even  in  a  parable,  nor
indeed,  have  taken  on  himself  such  a
character  at  all,  if  the  practice  which
it  implied  had  been  intrinsically  dis-
honorable or  shameful.

On  what  grounds,  however,  can  a
practice  be  considered  dishonorable  or
shameful,  which  is  prohibited  to  no
one  even  under  the  gospel  1  for  that
dispensation  annuls  none  of  the  mere-
ly civil  regulations  which  existed  pre-
vious to  its  introduction.  It  is  only
enjoined  that  elders  and  deacons
should  be  chosen  from  such  as  were
husbands  of  one  wife,  I  Tim.  iii.  2,
and  Tit.  i,  G.     This  implies,  not  that


to  be  the  husband  of  more  than  one
wife  would  be  a  sin,  for  then  the  res-
triction would  have  been  equally  im-
posed Oil  all  ;  but  that,  in  proportion
as  they  were  less  entangled  in  domes-
tic affairs,  they  would  be  more  at  lei-
sure for  the  business  of  the  church.
*         *         *

[It  implies  they  must  have  at  least
one. — Ed.

Lastly,  I  argue  as  follows  from
Heb.  xiii,  4.  Polygamy  is  either
marriage,  or  fornication,  or  adultery  ;
the  Apostle  recognizes  no  fourth  state.
Reverence  for  so  many  patriarchs
who  were  polygamists  will,  I  trust,
deter  any  one  from  considering  it  as
fornication  or  adultery  ;  for  "  whore-
mongers and  adulterers  God  will
judge  ;"  whereas  the  patriarchs  were
the  objects  of  his  special  favor,  as  he
himself  testifies.  If  then,  volygamy
be  marriage  properly  so  called,  it  is
also  lawful  and  honorable,  according
to  the  same  apostle:  "  marriage  is
honorable  in  all,  and  the  bed  unde-
filed."

It  appears  to  me  sufficiently  esta-
blished by  the  above  arguments,  that
polygamy  is  allowed  by  the  law  of
God,  Lest  however  any  doubt  should
remain,  I  will  subjoin  abundant  ex-
amples of  men  whose  holiness  renders
them  fit  patterns  for  imitation,  and
who  are  among  the  lights  of  our  faith.

Foremost  1  place  Abraham,  the
father  of  all  the  faithful,  and  of  the
holy  seed,  Get),  xvi,  1,  &c  :  Jacob,
chap.  XXX,  and,  if  I  mistake  not,
Moses,  Numb.  xii.  1,  "  for  he  had
married  [a  Cushite,  Marginal  Trans-
lation, or]  an  Ethiopian  woman."  It
is  not  likely  that  the  wife  of  Moses,
who  had  been  so  often  spoken  of  be-
fore by  her  proper  name  of  Zippo-
rah,  should  now  be  called  by  the  new
title  of  the  Cushite  ;  or  that  the  anger
of  Aaron  and  Miriam  should  at  this
time  be  suddenly  kindled,  because
Moses  forty  years  before  had  married
Zipporah  ;  nor  would  they  have  acted
thus  scornfully  towards  one  whom  the
whole  house  of  Israel  had  gone  out
to  meet  on  her  arrival  with  her  father
Jethro.  If  then  he  married  the  Cus-
hite during  the  lifetime  of  Zipporah,
his  conduct  in  this  particular  received
the  express  approbation  of  God  him-


39


self,  who  moreover  punished  with
severity  the  unnatural  opposition  of
Aaron  and  his  sister.

Next  I  place  Gideon,  that  signal
example  of  faith  and  piety,  Judg.  viii,
30  31,  and  Etkanah,  a  rigid  Levite,
the  father  of  Samuel  ;  who  was  so  far
from  believing  himself  less  accepta-
ble to  God  on  acrount  of  his  double
marriage,  that  he  took  with  him  his
two  wives  every  year  to  the  sacrifices
and  annual  worship,  into  the  imme-
diate presence  of  God.  Nor  was  he
therefore  reproved,  but  went  home
blessed  with  Samuel,  a  child  of  excel-
lent promise,  1  Sam   ii,  10.

Passing  over  several  other  exam-
ples, tho'  illustrious,  such  as  Caleb,  1
Chron.  ii,  46,  48,  vii,  1,4:  the  sons
of  Issachar,  in  number  "  six  and
thirty  thousand  men,  for  they  had
many  wives  and  sons."  contrary  to
the  modern  European  practice,  where
in  many  places  the  land  is  suffered  to
remain  uncultivated  for  want  of  popu-
lation :  and  also  Manasseh,  the  son  of
Joseph,  1  Chron.  vii,  14  ;  I  come  to
the  prophet  David,  whom  God  loved
beyond  all  men,  and  who  took  two
wives,  besides  Michal ;  and  this  not
in  a  time  of  pride  and  prosperity,  but
when  he  was  almost  bowed  down  by
adversity,  and  when,  as  we  learn  from
many  of  the  Psalms,  he  was  entirely
occupied  in  the  study  of  the  word  of
God  and  in  the  regulation  of  his  con-
duct, 1  Sam.  XXV,  42,  43.  and  after-
wards, 2  Sam.  V,  12,  13,  "  David  per-
ceived that  Jehovah  had  established
him  king  over  Israel,  and  that  he  had
exalted  his  kingdom  for  bis  people
Israel's  sake ;  and  David  took  him
more  concubines  and  wives  out  of
Jerusalem."

Such  were  the  motives,  such  the
honorable  and  holy  thoughts  whereby


he  was  influenced,  namely  by  the  con-
sideration of  God's  kindness  towards
him  for  his  people's  sake.  His  hea-
venly and  prophetic  understanding
saw  not  in  that  primitive  institution
what  we  in  our  blindness  fancy  we
discern  so  clearly  :  nor  did  he  hesitate
to  proclaim  in  the  supreme  council  of
the  nation  the  pure  and  honorable
motives  to  which,  as  he  trusted,  bis
children  born  in  polygamy  owed  their
existence.  I  Chron.  xxviii,  5,  of  all
my^  sons,  for  Jehovah  hath  given  ma
many  sons,  he  hath  chosen."  &c.

I  say  nothing  of  Solomon,  notwith-
standing his  wisdom,  because  he  seems
to  have  exceeded  due  bounds;  altho*
it  is  not  objected  to  him  that  he  had
taken  many  wives,  but  that  he  had
married  strange  women  ;  1  Kings,  xi.
1,  Nehem.  xiii.  26.  His  son  Rehoboam
desired  many  wives,  not  in  the  time
of  his  iniquity,  but  during  the  three
years  in  which  he  is  said  to  have
walked  in  the  way  of  David,  2  Chron.
xi,  17,  21,  23.

OfJoash  mention  has  already  been
made  ;  who  was  induced  to  take  two
wives,  not  by  licentious  passion,  or
the  wanton  desire  incident  to  uncon-
trolled power,  but  by  the  sanction  and
advice  of  a  most  wise  and  holy  man,
Jehoiada  the  priest.

Who  can  believe,  either  that  so
many  men  of  the  highest  character,
should  have  sinned  thro'  ignorance
for  so  many  ages  ;  or  that  their  hearts
should  have  been  so  hardened  ;  or  that
God  should  have  tolerated  such  con-
duct in  his  people  1  Let  therefore  the
rule  received  among  theologians  have
the  same  weight  here  as  in  other  cases:
—  "The  practice  of  the  saints  is  the
best  interpretation  of  the  command-
ments."
