r
.

(r*‘
A-
6/?/68
Door Jim,
In between cthsr thinks today 1 hove given a hrsty reeding to the
Hov'urd interrogation of Jfebruery *25.

1 have not yet had a chance to resd my oTO.

They ore, for the most p$rt, pretty consistent.

There is much you Mve not on the tape
and of thiB I have no knowledge.

Gome place you should have a memo from me of about February 1?

in vdiich
I r- a; ' Jerry Cohen's confirmation of the essence of Howard's story that Cohen end
others influenced them to go to court against you.

He did not confirm and Howard
pic not tell me that Shaw's lawyers v/ould be involved (there were inferences of
Jensen).

Hell had earlier told me this, hence my questioning of Howard.

However,
Cohen did confirm it.

.Ve had lunch the next day at the LATimes cafeteria, I took
Steve Burton, who was o witness.

It wes ^ohen1 s lame excuse that this was a journalists
device.

At seme time, thepapere being what they are, it may be desiresble for you
to recall this.

.

On page 2, the bit about Jack Martin is interesting.

How did Howard end
Martin get together?

Is this Warden of the discussion Bill Warden?

If so, * have
information from one of my west-coast friends that one Bill Warden had rented space
in the Trade Mart, had one J’ohn ^unley as his assistant, and his source is now, or
was recently, available to him.

also quotes this source as knowing thst a
St.

Charles ^ve.

heeuty shop run by a "Mr.

Dee", really Edwin Davis, was really owned
by a lover of Clay Shaw.

This may be known to you, may not be of interest, but I
he ve asked for all the available information, "he owner is said to maintain a
social relationship with Shaw,
Page 5: Howard should he asked about Joseph Moore by his real name or a
variant he also used, Jose Morejon (Morel.

You have a memo on this from me dated,
I think, in April, confirming an earlier one.

Page 8: I do not recall whether I ask9d Howard, but I should have.You have a memo on this from me dated,
I think, in April, confirming an earlier one. Page 8: I do not recall whether I ask9d Howard, but I should have. By
then I leie* of the boat owned by the man John George 8eid he had worked for, the
See Raider of Rider, la I recall the name is 1horntoft. He has a plant in Midlothian,
S3o if you cannot find the memo I left, I think last ovamber, Penn will know Ms name,
e is a clothing manufacturer. Perhaps thio man was to have provided or had been
expected to provide a boat. I recell his ntae as ^hcrnton(cldse enough to Thornley
to cause confusion)•
/age 15: I had hod the same question about abandoning the trailer In
Dallas. Ha\l gave me exactly this explanation, that if they took it to Florida
without provision for o safe piece, Shere wes too gr ;*et e chance of having it taken
by federal authorities. Page 22: Although ha is unsure of the date, ani the script here ha a
Joaquin for h0urke, note that Howard believes it was October ^my recollectjen
of tba ds&e Hall gave me, coinciding with Ferrie'a " ©mala. Page 32: I have n6 way of knowing act*vlty Soing
from your office in Baton Rouge, but 1 have beepLd of False Biv °rQ uul38n
training activity in that ares, in the neifchlx ~ 0r*
tnere is casual ref^aa
i-age afl:
uo, that Hall m syaour got bac!; for £1 ce this in fsacinatin* n7*° ls becau
of something I dc act know, but oa^ f not bs, now? 6* a you carry **
any further elaewhars? If not, ah>* <

--- PAGE BREAK ---Beginring here the Masferrer story is consistent with what he gave me.

Missing is the name of the owner of the island, or that part, whose permission he,
not ^sferror, h&d to use it.

That name is on my tapes end should be in the
transcripts.

What seems inconsistent is the 1963 date for an operation that didn't
cone off for four more years, unless Masferrer had an identical operation planned
against Haiti both years.

I cannot say’.'he didn't, but I have no reason to believe
he did.

That parley invasion was 1967, early, as I recall it.

As his story of the key and his operation continues, it fascinates me
th8t he indicates he was under Tony Varona, which would mean that the CRC was kind
of overseeing at least that part of the raids and planned reids.

Now the CRC was
in thepey of the CIA until April of 1963.

Beginning on 81 there is, I think, some
confusion about two things: when T0ny Verona took command of the CRC, which was
much earlier -well before Arcacha left it- and about Arcadia's connection with
Varone.

I have several independent, identical reports that Varona never appointed
Arcacha, that somehow Arcohca just came in and took over.

One may have been from
Alberto, or mey have been from aaother who attributed it to his father.

Another
was from Oreste, who went toMfcfemi to complain about Arcacha and was told he was
unknown, ^his should be in the statement I got from him.

Is it not even more interesting if a) the CRC was still being financed
by the CIA end b)Arcacha Just went there and took over -and is sheltered by
^onnally when others are not?

My source of the intelligence that the CRC was still on the tftfet is the
New York ^mes, copy enclosed.

In getting it to make a copy for you, 1 disco^r
that apparently Verona wss not the head, as 1 had recalled, and I can only wonder
wfcy Pena went to see Vapona in late 1961 or early 1962 about Arcacha 3nd why Howard
makes these references to him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

My source of the intelligence that the CRC was still on the tftfet is the
New York ^mes, copy enclosed. In getting it to make a copy for you, 1 disco^r
that apparently Verona wss not the head, as 1 had recalled, and I can only wonder
wfcy Pena went to see Vapona in late 1961 or early 1962 about Arcacha 3nd why Howard
makes these references to him. It is possible ^ceo was succeeded by Varona, which
would explain Howard hut not Pena. Vsrona, I now recall, was of the Frente at the
time the CRC was organized, ^arch 18, 1961. I will be getting photocopies of these NYTimes stories end when I do
I'll send you copies. Is not the bottom note interesting? After reading your questioning of Howard I feel the same as I did when
I completed my own. I do not say he wasn't truthful. I do feel he is holding took. Perhaps, not on the tape, you got whet I feel is missing. I have the definite feeling
he knows things thet are pertinent and that he hasn't said. I can understand his
desire to shelter others, fthen I turned him on, one of the things I suggested to
him, to which he seemed receptive, is that the FBI really framed him. He gives no
reflection of this in your interrogation. I think that .s of the time I questioned
him, less than ten days earlier, he believed that the moat likelji explanation. One other thought: could there have been Frente-Varona activity in N.O. coinciding with CRC and for which we have been giving CRC credf$°