FD-302 (H«v. 3-3-S9)


FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION


- D... 3/26/64

j

; Mrs. A. C. (GLADYS) JOHNSON^ 1026 North Beckley, and owner

i of that residence, advised she and her husband reside at that address
j and in addition rent several rooms to the public. Mrs. JOHNSON
I exhibited the room \diich was previously rented ito, and occupied by,

I LEE HARVEY OSWALD immediately prior to the assassination of President
! JOHN F. KENNEDY, to interviewing agents. This room is located on the
north side of the house and access to it is gainbd from the dining
room through two thirty- two inch solid wooden double doors. The room
measures approximately five feet in width and approximately thirteen
I and one-half feet in length. The entry doors are located on the south
! wall of the room and the north wall is comprised of four double-hung
I wooden sash windows each approximaitely thirty- two inches in width gnri
! equally spaced along the wall. The f ivfe foot east wall likewise has
I one thirty-two inch double-hting wooden sash' window centered in the
I wall. The west wall is solid and the entire room is painted a light
j aqua ’color. All of the five windows are fitted with Venetian

I blinds and the entire north wall is spanned with a room- length traverse
I rod on vdiich is hving floor length draperies covering the entire north
I wall. The east wall is similarly spanned by a floor length drapery of
j the same material.

The room is furnished with a singla iron- rail bed located
in the northeast comer of the room, a large wooden movable wardrobe
in the southwest comer of the room, a small plastie-toj^ table north
of the wardrobe, and a night stand next to the head of the bed in the
I southeast comer on which sets a table lamp. On the linoleum tiled
floor are two small throw rugs. A light fixture containing only a
light bulb and no shade is fastened in the center of the north wall,

Mrs. JOHNSON advised the room is in essentially the same
condition as when occupied by LEE HARVEY OSWALD with the exception of
j the new window coverings, \diich,she has since replaced.

I Mrs. JOHNSON advised that the room formerly occupied by T.F.y.

I HARVEY OSWALD at that address had curtains over all the windows at
I the time OSWALD occupied it. Mrs. JOHNSON said double doors opened
j into Oswald's room and directly aczidss from these doors runnlx^ the


-1 '-}9
.1 ^

3/20/64 Dallas, Texas ^ DL 100-10461

FiU ff '

j A. RAYMOND SWITZER and

I by Special Agent EUGENE F. PETRAKTS:vm Date dictated 3/25/64

)

j Thu docum»n« contain* nalther rocommendations nor conclusions of th* FBI. It Is th* property of ths FBI and Is leaned to
your agoncy; It and Its contents ars not to b# distributed outside your agency*

i


2

DL 100-10461


. entire length of the room were a series of \^oden dotible-hung widows.
^.Above these windows , ihrs . JOHNSON stated, was one' flat' type curtain
rod composed of a ntmier of sections of the five and ten~cent store* —
variety, \dilch was fastened above the windows and extended the entire
length of the room. At each end of the rod thirty-inch pink side-
drapes were hung with white lace curtains in between. She advised
.. that Venetian blinds covered each window. Mrs. JOHNSON said upon
entering this room there was on the right, or en^ wall, one wooden
double -hung window which was also covered by a Venetian b](ind and
over which hung a white lace curtain. Mrs. JOHNSON said that because,
of all of the windows in this ^smisll room, it was very light and
cheerful.

Mrs. JOHNSON stated that when the Dallas, Texas, police
- searched this room following OSWALD'S arrest, they bent the rod which
held the drapes and curtains. Consequently, she stated, she had the
old rod taken down and rep.laced -it with a traverse rod and aqua-
colored acetate drapes. A traverse rod and the same color drapes
replaced the lace ciurtain lidiich was on the end wall window.

Mrs . JOHNSON said OSWALD had not been engaged by her to
hang any curtain rods nor did he ask her permission to hang any
curtain rods. Further, she stated, OSWALD did not at any time make
any mention to her of replacing the curtains in his room.


1al3
