Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/menwhostareatgoa0000rons_f805

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EMENStace 
G@ATS 
Jon Ronson 
is an 
award-winning 
non-fiction 
writer 
and 
documentary maker. He is the author of four bestsellers, Them: 
- 
Adventures with Extremists, The Men Who Stare at Goats, The 
Psychopath Test and Lost at Sea: The Jon Ronson Mysteries, and 
two collections, Out of the Ordinary: True Tales of Everyday 
Craziness 
and What I Do: More 
True 
Tales of Everyday 
Craziness. His latest book is the short story Frank: The True 
Story that Inspired the Movie. His first fictional screenplay, 
Frank, co-written with Peter Straughan, has been directed by 
Lenny Abrahamson and stars Michael Fassbender. He lives in 
London and New York City.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ALSO BY JON RONSON 
Them: Adventures with Extremists 
Out of the Ordinary: True Tales of Everyday Craziness 
What I Do: More True Tales of Everyday Craziness 
The Psychopath Test: A Journey Through the Madness Industry 
Frank: The True Story that Inspired the Movie

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EMENSikte 
COATS 
JON RONSON 
PICADOR

--- PAGE BREAK ---day Craziness 
The Psychopath Test: A Journey Through the Madness Industry 
Frank: The True Story that Inspired the Movie

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EMENSikte 
COATS 
JON RONSON 
PICADOR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

First published 2004 by Picador 
First published in paperback 2005 by Picador 
This edition first published 2005 by Picador 
an imprint of Pan Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited 
Pan Macmillan, 20 New Wharf Road, London Ni 9RR 
Basingstoke and Oxford 
Associated companies throughout the world 
www.panmacmillan.com 
ISBN 978-0-330-37548-1 
Copyright © Jon Ronson 2004 
The right of Jon Ronson to be identified as the 
author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance 
with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written 
permission of the publisher. Any person who does any unauthorized 
act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal 
prosecution and civil claims for damages. 
26 28 29 27 25 
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from 
the British Library. 
Typeset by SetSystems Ltd, Saffron Walden, Essex 
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, cro 4xy 
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, 
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, 
or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior consent 
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which 
it is published and without a similar condition including this 
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. 
Visit www.picador.com to read more about all our books 
and to buy them. You will also find features, author interviews and 
news of any author events, and you can sign up for e-newsletters 
so that you’re always first to hear about our new releases.ooks 
and to buy them. You will also find features, author interviews and 
news of any author events, and you can sign up for e-newsletters 
so that you’re always first to hear about our new releases.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

For John Sergeant and also for General Stubblebine

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS 
1. The General 1 
2. Goat Lab 9 
3. The First Earth Battalion 29 
4. Into the Heart of the Goat 59 
5. Homeland Security 75 
6. Privatization 97 
7. The Purple Dinosaur 127 
| 
8. The Predator 145 
9. The Dark Side 161 
10. A Think Tank 169 
tr. A Haunted Hotel 181

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12. The Frequencies 189 
13. Some Illustrations 207 
14. The 1953 House. 217 
15. Harold’s Club or Bust! 239 
16. The Exit 257 
Acknowledgments and Bibliography 275

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1. THE GENERAL 
This is a true story. It is the summer of 1983. Major 
General Albert Stubblebine III is sitting behind his desk 
in Arlington, Virginia, and he is staring at his wall, 
upon which hang his numerous military awards. They 
detail a long and distinguished career. He is the US 
army’s chief of intelligence, with 16,000 soldiers under 
his command. He controls the army’s signals intelli- 
gence, 
their photographic and technical 
intelligence, 
their numerous 
covert counter-intelligence 
units and 
their secret military spying units, scattered throughout 
the world. He would be in charge of the prisoner-of-war 
interrogations too, except this is 1983, and the war is 
cold, not hot. 
He looks past his awards to the wall itself. There is 
something he feels he needs to do even though the 
thought of it frightens him. He thinks about the choice 
he has to make. He can stay in his office or he can go 
into the next office. That is his choice. And he has made 
it. 
He is going into the next office.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e thinks about the choice 
he has to make. He can stay in his office or he can go 
into the next office. That is his choice. And he has made 
it. 
He is going into the next office.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
General Stubblebine looks a lot like Lee Marvin. In 
fact, it is widely rumoured throughout Military Intelli- 
gence that he is Lee Marvin’s identical twin. His face is 
craggy and unusually still, like an aerial photograph of 
some mountainous terrain taken from one of his spy 
planes. His eyes, forever darting around and full of 
kindness, seem to do the work for his whole face. 
In fact he is not related to Lee Marvin at all. He likes 
the rumour because mystique can be beneficial to a 
career in intelligence. His job is to assess the intelligence 
gathered by his soldiers and pass his evaluations on to 
the deputy director of the CIA and the Chief of Staff for 
the Army, who in turn pass it up to the White House. 
He commands soldiers in Panama, Japan, Hawaii and 
across Europe. His responsibilities being what they are, 
he knows he ought to have his own man at his side in 
case anything goes wrong during his journey into the 
next office. 
Even so, he doesn’t call for his assistant, Command 
Sergeant George Howell. This is something he feels he 
must do alone. 
Am I ready? he thinks. Yes, I am ready. 
He stands up, moves out from behind his desk and 
begins to walk. 
I mean, he thinks to himself, what is the atom mostly 
made up of anyway? Space! 
He quickens his pace. 
What am I mostly made up of? he thinks. Atoms! 
He is almost at a jog now. 
What is the wall mostly made up of? he thinks.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mostly 
made up of anyway? Space! 
He quickens his pace. 
What am I mostly made up of? he thinks. Atoms! 
He is almost at a jog now. 
What is the wall mostly made up of? he thinks.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The General 
Atoms! All I have to do is merge the spaces. The wall is 
an illusion. What is destiny? Am I destined to stay in this 
rooms: Ha, no! 
Then General Stubblebine bangs his nose hard on the 
wall of his office. 
Daman, he thinks. 
General Stubblebine is confounded by his continual 
failure to walk through his wall. What’s wrong with him 
that he can’t do it? Maybe there is simply too much in 
his in-tray for him to give it the requisite level of 
concentration. There is no doubt in his mind that the 
ability to pass through objects will one day be a common 
tool in the intelligence-gathering arsenal. And when that 
happens, well, is it too naive to believe it would herald 
the dawning of a world without war? Who would want 
to screw around with an army that could do that? 
General Stubblebine, like many of his contemporaries, is 
still extremely bruised by his memories of Vietnam. 
These powers are attainable, so the only question is, 
by whom? Who in the military is already geared towards 
this kind of thing? Which section of the army is trained 
to operate at the peak of their physical and mental 
capabilities? 
And then the answer comes to him. 
Special Forces! 
This is why, in the late summer of 1983, General 
Stubblebine flies down to Fort Bragg in North Carolina. 
Fort Bragg is vast — a town guarded by armed soldiers, 
with a mall, a cinema, restaurants, golf courses, hotels, 
swimming pools, riding stables and accommodation for

--- PAGE BREAK ---h Carolina. 
Fort Bragg is vast — a town guarded by armed soldiers, 
with a mall, a cinema, restaurants, golf courses, hotels, 
swimming pools, riding stables and accommodation for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
45,000 soldiers and their families. The general drives 
past these places on his way to the Special Forces Com- 
mand Centre. This is not the kind of thing you take into 
the mess hall. This is for Special Forces and nobody else. 
Still, he’s afraid. What is he about to unleash? 
In the Special Forces Command Centre, the general 
decides to start soft. ‘’'m coming down here with an 
idea,’ he begins. The Special Forces commanders nod. 
‘If you have a unit operating outside the protection of 
mainline units, what happens if somebody gets hurt?’ he 
says. ‘What happens if somebody gets wounded? How 
do you deal with that?’ 
He surveys the blank faces around the room. 
‘Psychic healing!’ he says. 
There is a silence. 
‘This is what we’re talking about,’ says the general, 
pointing to his head. ‘If you use your mind to heal, you 
can probably come out with your whole team alive and 
intact. You won’t have to leave anyone behind.’ He 
pauses, then adds, ‘Protect the unit structure by hands- 
off and hands-on healing!’ 
The Special Forces commanders don’t look particu- 
larly interested in psychic healing. 
‘OK,’ says General Stubblebine. The reception he’s 
getting is really quite chilly. ‘Wouldn’t it be a neat idea 
if you could teach somebody to do this?’ 
General Stubblebine rifles through his bag and pro- 
duces, with a flourish, bent cutlery. 
‘What if you could do this?’ says General Stubblebine. 
‘Would you be interested?’

--- PAGE BREAK ---is?’ 
General Stubblebine rifles through his bag and pro- 
duces, with a flourish, bent cutlery. 
‘What if you could do this?’ says General Stubblebine. 
‘Would you be interested?’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The General 
There is a silence. 
General Stubblebine finds himself beginning to stam- 
mer a little. They’re looking at me as if I’m nuts, he 
thinks to himself. I am not presenting this correctly. 
He glances anxiously at the clock. 
‘Let’s talk about time!’ he says. ‘What would happen 
if time is not an instant? What if time has an X-axis, a 
Y-axis and a Z-axis? What if time is not a point but 
a space? At any particular time we can be anywhere in 
that space! Is the space confined to the ceiling of this 
room, or is the space twenty million miles?’ The general 
laughs. ‘Physicists go nuts when I say this!’ 
Silence. He tries again. 
‘Animals!’ says General Stubblebine. 
The Special Forces commanders glance at one another. 
‘Stopping the hearts of animals,’ he continues. ‘Burst- 
ing the hearts of animals. This is the idea I’m coming in 
with. You have access to animals, right?’ 
‘Uh,’ say Special Forces. ‘Not really...’ 
General Stubblebine’s trip to Fort Bragg was a disaster. 
It still makes him blush to recall it. He ended up taking 
early retirement in 1984. Now, the official history of 
army intelligence, as outlined in their press-pack, basi- 
cally skips the Stubblebine years, 1981-4, almost as if 
they didn’t exist. 
In fact everything you have read so far has for the past 
two decades been a military intelligence secret. General 
Stubblebine’s doomed attempt to walk through his wall

--- PAGE BREAK ---’t exist. 
In fact everything you have read so far has for the past 
two decades been a military intelligence secret. General 
Stubblebine’s doomed attempt to walk through his wall

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
and his seemingly futile journey to Fort Bragg have 
remained undisclosed right up until the moment that he 
told me about them in room 403 of the Tarrytown 
Hilton in upstate New York on a cold winter’s day two 
years into the War on Terror. 
‘To tell you the truth, Jon,’ he said, ‘?ve pretty much 
blocked the rest of the conversation I had with Special 
Forces out of my head. Whoa, yeah. I’ve scrubbed it 
from my mind! I walked away. I left with my tail 
between my legs.’ 
He paused, and looked at the wall. 
‘You know,’ he said, ‘I really thought they were great 
ideas. I still do. I just haven’t figured out how my space 
can fit through that space. I simply kept bumping my 
nose. I couldn’t ... No. Couldn’t is the wrong word. I 
never got myself to the right state of mind.’ He sighed. 
‘If you really want to know, it’s a disappointment. Same 
with the levitation.’ 
Some nights in Arlington, Virginia, after the general’s 
first wife Geraldine had gone to bed, he would lie down 
on his living-room carpet and try to levitate. 
‘And I failed totally. I could not get my fat ass off the 
ground, excuse my language. But I still think they were 
great ideas. And do you know why?’ 
‘Why?’ I asked. 
‘Because you cannot afford to get stale in the intelli- 
gence world,’ he said. ‘You cannot afford to miss 
something. You don’t believe that? Take a look at terror- 
ists who went to flying schools to learn how to take off 
but not how to land. And where did that information

--- PAGE BREAK ---rd to miss 
something. You don’t believe that? Take a look at terror- 
ists who went to flying schools to learn how to take off 
but not how to land. And where did that information

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The General 
get lost? You cannot afford to miss something when 
you’re talking about the intelligence world.’ 
There was something about the general’s trip to Fort 
Bragg that neither of us knew the day we met. It was a 
piece of information that would soon lead me into what 
must be among the most whacked-out corners of George 
W. Bush’s War on Terror. 
What the general didn’t know — what Special Forces 
kept secret from him — was that they actually considered 
his ideas to be excellent ones. Furthermore, as he pro- 
posed his clandestine animal heart-bursting programme 
and they told him that they didn’t have access to animals, 
they were concealing the fact that there were a hundred 
goats in a shed just a few yards down the road. 
The existence of these hundred goats was known only 
to a select few Special Forces insiders. The covert nature 
of the goats was helped by the fact that they had been 
de-bleated; they were just standing there, their mouths 
opening and closing, with no bleat coming out. Many of 
them also had their legs in plaster. 
This is the story of those goats.

--- PAGE BREAK ---leated; they were just standing there, their mouths 
opening and closing, with no bleat coming out. Many of 
them also had their legs in plaster. 
This is the story of those goats.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rer 
Ye 
a 
ae ay 
7 
ml 
i. 
<= 
? 
i 
. 
- 
a 
ae 
1» 
r 
4 
iv 
- 
P 
7 
fi 
% ss), thee 
* 
ae) 
iret 
rs 
Sees 
i 
wo 
07 
‘Sy 
heey weet 
ir 
b 
J 
~ 
Yc 
t 
5 
= 
_ 
5s 
bh 
aes 
_ 
» 
ee 
: 
7 
dvs 
5 
1 Xe 
- 
x 
a 
: 
a 
7 
> 
: 
nee 
2 
- 
4 
=" P 
€ 
a? 
74 
okt 
* 
7 
‘ 
ae 
- 
- 
‘1 
7 
t 
Toa 
E 
ey 
syag 
bs 
raragy 
ssesil ee 
7 
arti 
ah: 
ar 
ith tiga 
ct ten ae Mizat 
7 
tee 
= 
al 
_ 
* 
cw 
* 
: 
Pl 
spe 
oan, a a 
ee, 
=7" 
— 
: 
- 
4 
ier 
Ee: 
beet 
et 
ee) 
» 
7 
The 
Ven 
i 
aur 
Pee 
} 
2 
ra 
' 
‘ 
MEU, 
hee 
; 
12°; 
es 
al 
Si Ts 
we. 
‘ 
« 
oy 
i 
4 
“ 
: 
= > 
a? 
see 
re 
; 
al 
| 
or a 
Se 
Cd 
’ 
e 
2 
Ui Hi pe a 
a 
7 
. 
. beat 
* 
a 
= 
= 
ro 
; 
xs 
a 
~ 
7 
~—<_ 
F 
- 
G 
1 
: 
al 
: 
= 
— 
i 
- 
i 
:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. GOAT LAB 
It was Uri Geller who set me on the trail that led to the 
goats. I met him on the roof terrace of a central London 
restaurant in early October 2001, less than a month into 
the War on Terror. There had long been rumours (circu- 
lated on the whole, it must be said, by Uri himself) that 
back in the early 1970s he had been a psychic spy 
working secretly for US intelligence. Many people have 
doubted his story — the Sunday Times once called it ‘a 
bizarre claim’, arguing that Uri Geller is nuts whereas 
the intelligence establishment is not. The way I saw it, 
the truth lay in one of four possible scenarios: 
1 It just never happened. 
2 A couple of crazy renegades in the higher levels of the 
US intelligence community had brought in Uri Geller. 
3: US intelligence is the repository of incredible secrets, 
which are kept from us for our own good; one of 
those secrets is that Uri Geller has psychic powers,

--- PAGE BREAK ---t in Uri Geller. 
3: US intelligence is the repository of incredible secrets, 
which are kept from us for our own good; one of 
those secrets is that Uri Geller has psychic powers,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
which were harnessed during the Cold War. They just 
hoped he wouldn’t go around telling everybody. 
4 The US intelligence community was, back then, 
essentially nuts through and through. 
Uri was quiet in the restaurant. He wore big, wrap- 
around mirrored sunglasses. His brother-in-law, Shipi, 
was equally unforthcoming, and the whole thing was a 
bit awkward. I had met them once or twice before and 
had found them to be infectiously ebullient people. But 
there was no ebullience today. 
‘So,’ I said, ‘let’s start. How did you first become a 
psychic spy for the US government?’ 
There was a long silence. 
‘I don’t want to talk about it,’ Uri said. 
He sipped his mineral water and glanced over at Shipi. 
‘Uri?’ I said. ‘What’s wrong? You often talk about it.’ 
‘No I don’t,’ he said. 
‘Yes you do!’ I said. 
I had been researching this for two weeks, and I had 
already amassed a file an inch thick of his reminiscences 
about his psychic spying days, dictated to journalists 
throughout the 1980s and 1990s, who then added 
sarcastic asides. In more or less every article, the line 
of reasoning was the same: 
the intelligence services 
wouldn’t do that. There was an almost frantic reluctance 
to accept Uri’s word, or even make a few calls to verify 
or refute it. For all our cynicism, we apparently still 
invested the intelligence services with some qualities of 
rigour and scientific methodology. The few journalists 
Io

--- PAGE BREAK ---rify 
or refute it. For all our cynicism, we apparently still 
invested the intelligence services with some qualities of 
rigour and scientific methodology. The few journalists 
Io

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
who accepted Uri’s claim implicitly expressed relief that 
all this happened a long time ago, back in the 1970s. 
‘T never talk about it,’ Uri said. 
“You spoke about it to the Financial Times,’ I said. 
‘You said you did a lot of psychic work for the CIA in 
Mexico.’ 
Uri shrugged. 
A plane flew low overhead and everyone on the terrace 
stopped eating for a moment and looked up. Ever since 
9/11, the US Attorney General John Ashcroft had been 
warning of imminent terrorist attacks — on banks, apart- 
ment blocks, hotels, restaurants and shops in the US. On 
one occasion President Bush announced that he couldn’t 
say anything at all about a particular looming cataclysm. 
Equally non-specific high alerts were occurring in Lon- 
don too. Then, suddenly, Uri took off his sunglasses and 
he looked me squarely in the eye. 
‘If you repeat what I am about to tell you,’ he said, ‘I 
will deny it.’ 
‘OK,’ I said. 
‘It will be your word against mine,’ said Uri. 
‘OK,’ I said. 
Uri moved his chair closer to mine. He glanced around 
the restaurant. 
‘This,’ he said, ‘is no longer a history story.’ 
‘T’m sorry?’ I said. 
‘I have been reactivated,’ said Uri. 
‘What?’ I said. 
I looked over at Shipi. He nodded gravely. 
‘I don’t suppose it was you who told John Ashcroft 
Il

--- PAGE BREAK ---y.’ 
‘T’m sorry?’ I said. 
‘I have been reactivated,’ said Uri. 
‘What?’ I said. 
I looked over at Shipi. He nodded gravely. 
‘I don’t suppose it was you who told John Ashcroft 
Il

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
about the hotels and the banks and the apartment 
blocks?’ I asked. 
‘I am saying nothing else,’ said Uri. 
‘Uri,’ I said, ‘please give me something to go on. Please 
tell me one more thing.’ 
Uri sighed. 
‘OK,’ he said. ‘I will tell you one more thing only. The 
man who reactivated me is .. .’ Uri paused, then he said, 
‘called Ron.’ 
And that was it. I have not spoken to Uri Geller since. 
He has not returned my calls. He refused to divulge 
anything further about Ron. Was Ron FBI? CIA? Mili- 
tary Intelligence? Homeland Security? Could Ron be 
MI5? MI6? Was Uri Geller playing a part in the War on 
Terror? 
I had a minor breakthrough a year later, in a hotel in 
Las Vegas, when I was interviewing one of General 
Stubblebine’s former military spies, Sergeant Lyn Buch- 
anan. I said, ‘Uri Geller says that the man who reacti- 
vated him is called Ron.’ Sergeant Buchanan fell silent 
and then he nodded enigmatically and said, ‘Ah, Ron. 
Yes. I know Ron.’ 
But he wouldn’t tell me anything more-about him. 
General Stubblebine wouldn’t talk about Ron either. 
“The damn psychic spies should be keeping their damn 
mouths shut,’ he said, ‘instead of chit-chatting all over 
town about what they did.’ 
The general, I discovered in the weeks after I met Uri, 
had commanded a secret military psychic spying unit 
between 1981 and 1984. The unit wasn’t quite as glam- 
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---they did.’ 
The general, I discovered in the weeks after I met Uri, 
had commanded a secret military psychic spying unit 
between 1981 and 1984. The unit wasn’t quite as glam- 
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
orous as it might sound, he said. It was basically half 
a dozen soldiers sitting inside a heavily guarded, con- 
demned clapboard building in Fort Meade, Maryland, 
trying to be psychic. Officially the unit did not exist. The 
psychics were what is known in military jargon as Black 
Op. Because they didn’t ‘exist’ they were not permitted 
access to the US army’s coffee budget. They had to bring 
their own coffee into work. They had come to resent 
this. Some of them were in there, trying to be psychic, 
from 1978 until 1995. From time to time, one of them 
died or went stir-crazy, and a new psychic soldier would 
be brought in to replace the casualty. When one of them 
got a vision — of a Russian warship, or a future event — 
he would sketch it, and pass the sketches up the chain of 
command. 
And then, in 1995, the CIA closed them down. 
Many of the psychic soldiers have subsequently pub- 
lished their autobiographies, such as The Seventh Sense: 
The Secrets of Remote Viewing as Told by a “Psychic 
Spy” for the U.S. Military by Lyn Buchanan. 
‘Everybody wants to be the first on the publicity 
stump,’ said General Stubblebine. ‘I could wring some of 
their necks.’ 
And that was all the general would say about the 
psychic spies. 
‘Are they back in business?’ I asked him. 
‘I hope so,’ he said. 
‘Was Uri Geller one of yours?’ I asked. 
‘No,’ he said, ‘but I wish he had been. I am a great 
fan of his.’ 
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 
‘Are they back in business?’ I asked him. 
‘I hope so,’ he said. 
‘Was Uri Geller one of yours?’ I asked. 
‘No,’ he said, ‘but I wish he had been. I am a great 
fan of his.’ 
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
And so it was that my quest to track down Ron took 
me to Hawaii, to a house on the road between Honolulu 
and Pearl Harbor, the home of retired Sergeant First 
Class — and one time Special Forces psychic spy — Glenn 
Wheaton. Glenn was a big man with a tight crop of red 
hair and a Vietnam-vet-style handlebar moustache. My 
plan was to ask Glenn about his psychic spying days, 
and then try to broach the subject of Ron, but from the 
moment I sat down, our conversation veered off into a 
wholly unexpected direction. 
Glenn leant forward in his chair. ‘You’ve gone from 
the front door to the back door. How many chairs are in 
my house?’ 
There was a silence. 
‘You probably can’t tell me how many chairs are in 
my house,’ said Glenn. 
I started to look around. 
‘A super soldier wouldn’t need to look,’ he said. ‘He 
would just know.’ 
‘A super soldier?’ I asked. 
‘A super soldier,’ said Glenn. ‘A Jedi Warrior. He 
would know where all the lights are. He would know 
where all the power outlets are. Most people are poor 
observers. They haven’t got a clue about what’s really 
happening around them.’ 
‘What’s a Jedi Warrior?’ I asked. 
‘You’re looking at one,’ said Glenn. 
In the mid-1980s, he told me, Special Forces under- 
took a secret initiative, codenamed Project Jedi, to create 
super soldiers — soldiers with super powers. One such 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---Glenn. 
In the mid-1980s, he told me, Special Forces under- 
took a secret initiative, codenamed Project Jedi, to create 
super soldiers — soldiers with super powers. One such 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
power was the ability to walk into a room and instantly 
be aware of every detail; that was level one. 
‘What was the level above that?’ I asked. 
‘Level two,’ he said. ‘Intuition. Is there some way we 
can develop you so you make correct decisions? Some- 
body runs up to you and says, “There’s a fork in the 
road. Do we turn left or do we turn right?” And you go’ 
— Glenn snapped his fingers — ‘“We go right!” ’ 
“What was the level above that?’ I asked. 
‘Invisibility,’ said Glenn. 
‘Actual invisibility?’ I asked. 
‘At first,’ said Glenn. ‘But after a while we adapted it 
to just finding a way of not being seen.’ 
‘In what way?’ I asked. 
‘By understanding the linkage between observation 
and reality, you learn to dance with invisibility,’ said 
Glenn. ‘If you’re not observed, you are invisible. You 
only exist if someone sees you.’ 
‘So, like camouflage?’ I asked. 
‘No,’ sighed Glenn. 
‘How good are you at invisibility?’ I asked. 
‘Well,’ said Glenn, ‘I’ve got red hair and blue eyes, so 
people tend to remember me. But I get by. I’m alive today.’ 
‘What was the level above invisibility?’ I asked. 
‘Uh,’ said Glenn. He paused for a moment. Then he 
said, ‘We had a master sergeant who could stop the heart 
of a goat.’ 
There was a silence. Glenn raised an eyebrow. 
‘Just by...’ I said. 
‘Just by wanting the goat’s heart to stop,’ said Glenn. 
a5

--- PAGE BREAK ---ter sergeant who could stop the heart 
of a goat.’ 
There was a silence. Glenn raised an eyebrow. 
‘Just by...’ I said. 
‘Just by wanting the goat’s heart to stop,’ said Glenn. 
a5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘That’s quite a leap,’ I said. 
‘Right,’ said Glenn. 
‘And did he make the goat’s heart stop?’ I asked. 
‘He did it at least once,’ said Glenn. 
‘Huh,’ I said. I really didn’t know how to respond to 
this. 
‘But it’s not really an area you want to...’ 
‘Go to,’ I said. 
‘That’s right,’ said Glenn. ‘Not an area you want to 
go to, because as it turned out in the evaluation he 
actually did some damage to himself as well.’ 
‘Huh,’ I said again. 
‘Sympathetic injury,’ said Glenn. 
‘So it’s not as if the goat was psychically fighting 
back?’ I asked. 
‘Goat didn’t have a chance,’ said Glenn. 
‘Where did this happen?’ I asked. 
‘Down in Fort Bragg,’ he said, ‘at a place called Goat 
Lape 
‘Glenn,’ I said, ‘will you tell me everything about Goat 
Lab?’ 
And so Glenn began. 
Goat Lab, which exists to this day, is secret. Most of 
the soldiers who live and work within Fort Bragg don’t 
even know of its existence. Those military personnel not 
in the loop, said Glenn, assume that the rickety clap- 
board hospital buildings dating from the Second World 
War, situated down an unpaved track in an overgrown 
wooded area, are derelict. In fact, they are filled with one 
hundred de-bleated goats. 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---dings dating from the Second World 
War, situated down an unpaved track in an overgrown 
wooded area, are derelict. In fact, they are filled with one 
hundred de-bleated goats. 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
The goats weren’t covertly herded into these buildings 
just so the Jedi Warriors could stare at them. Goat Lab 
was originally created as a clandestine laboratory to 
provide in-the-field surgical training for Special Forces 
soldiers. During this more conventional phase of the 
goats’ lives, each one was taken through a heavy steel 
soundproofed door into a bunker and shot in the leg 
using a bolt gun. Then the Special Forces trainees would 
rush the goat into an operating theatre, anaesthetize it, 
dress the wound and nurse it back to health. Goat Lab, 
used to be called Dog Lab, but it turned out that nobody 
wanted to do all that to dogs, so they switched to goats. 
It was apparently determined within Special Forces that 
it was just about impossible to form an emotional bond 
with a goat. In fact, according to People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals (PETA), goats have historically 
made up an unusually large percentage of the estimated 
million or so animals on the receiving end of covert 
experiments within the US army. Most goat-related mili- 
tary activity remains highly classified, but from time to 
time some details have leaked out. When an atomic 
bomb was detonated in the sky near Bikini Atoll in the 
South Pacific in 1946, for example, most of the 4,000 
animals that had been dispatched by the military to float 
around underneath the explosion on a boat known as 
the Atomic Ark were goats. They wanted to see how the 
animals would fare with the fallout. They fared badly. 
Additionally, several thousand goats are currently being 
transformed — on a US air force base - into a weird 
kind of goat/spider hybrid. ‘Spider-silk is truly a prized 
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---adly. 
Additionally, several thousand goats are currently being 
transformed — on a US air force base - into a weird 
kind of goat/spider hybrid. ‘Spider-silk is truly a prized 
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
biomaterial that’s really been kept from mankind simply 
because, up until now, only spiders can make it, an 
Air Force spokesperson has explained to CBC news in 
Canada. ‘Once a spider-cell gene has actually become 
part of the goat’s genetic make-up, that goat will produce 
spider silk on a very cost-effective basis for many years 
to come. The magic is in their milk. A single gram of 
it will produce thousands of metres of silk thread that 
can be woven into bullet-proof vests for tomorrow’s 
military.’ 
And now there was the work undertaken inside Goat 
Lab — the de-bleatings and shootings and so on. Could 
all this, I wondered, explain how a master sergeant had 
managed to kill a goat just by staring at it? Perhaps, 
before he got to his goat, it was already in a shaky 
medical condition: some goats were recovering amputees; 
others had been cut open, had their hearts and kidneys 
scrutinized, and were then closed up again. Even the 
luckier goats — the ones that had only been shot — were 
presumably hobbling around Goat Lab in eerie silence 
with their legs in plaster. Perhaps the master sergeant 
had been staring at a particularly sickly goat? But Glenn 
Wheaton said he couldn’t remember anything about the 
health of the goat in question. 
‘How did the master sergeant get sick as a result of 
stopping its heart?’ I asked. 
“To generate enough power,’ Glenn replied, ‘to gener- 
ate enough force of intent to damage the goat, he 
damaged himself. Everything goes with a cost, see? You 
pay the piper.’ 
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---To generate enough power,’ Glenn replied, ‘to gener- 
ate enough force of intent to damage the goat, he 
damaged himself. Everything goes with a cost, see? You 
pay the piper.’ 
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
‘What part of him got damaged?’ I asked. 
‘His heart.’ 
‘Huh,’ I said. 
There was a silence. 
‘Can you stop a goat’s heart?’ I asked Glenn. 
‘No!’ said Glenn, startled. ‘No! No, no, no!’ 
Glenn looked around him, as if he was afraid that the 
very question might implicate him in the act and put him 
in the bad books of some unseen spiritual force. 
‘Do you just not want to do it?’ I asked. ‘Do you have 
the power to stop a goat’s heart?’ 
‘No,’ said Glenn. ‘I don’t think I have the power to 
stop a goat’s heart. I think that if one trained oneself to 
get to that level, one would have to say, “What did the 
goat ever do to me? Why that goat?”’ 
‘So who did achieve that level?’ I asked. ‘Who was the 
-master sergeant?’ 
‘His name,’ said Glenn, ‘was Michael Echanis.’ 
And that, said Glenn, was all he knew about Goat 
Lab. 
‘Glenn,’ I said, ‘are goats being stared at once again 
post-September 11?’ 
Glenn sighed. 
T’m out of the military,’ he replied. ‘I’m out of the 
loop. I know no more than you do. If I phoned Special 
Forces I’d get the same response they’d give you.’ 
‘Which is what?’ 
‘They would neither confirm nor deny. The very exist- 
ence of the goats is hush-hush. They won’t even admit to 
having goats.’ 
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---me response they’d give you.’ 
‘Which is what?’ 
‘They would neither confirm nor deny. The very exist- 
ence of the goats is hush-hush. They won’t even admit to 
having goats.’ 
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
This, I later learnt, was the reason for the de-bleating. 
It was done not because the Special Forces soldiers were 
required to learn how to cauterize the vocal cords of the 
enemy, but because Special Forces were concerned that a 
hundred bleating goats on base could come to the atten- 
tion of the local ASPCA. 
Glenn was looking a little panicked. “This is Black-Op 
stuff,’ he said. 
‘Where can I go from here?’ I asked. 
‘Nowhere,’ said Glenn. ‘Forget it.’ 
‘T can’t forget it,’ I said. ‘It is an image I am unable to 
get out of my head.’ 
‘Forget it!’ said Glenn. ‘Forget I ever said anything 
about the goats.’ 
But I couldn’t. I had many questions. For instance, 
how did all this begin? Had Special Forces simply stolen 
General Stubblebine’s idea? It seemed possible, given 
the timeline I was beginning to piece together. Perhaps 
Special Forces feigned chilly indifference to the gen- 
eral’s animal-heart bursting initiative and subsequently 
instructed Michael Echanis, whoever he was, to begin 
staring. Maybe they simply wanted the glory for them- 
selves in the event that staring an enemy to death became 
a tool in the US military arsenal and changed the world 
for ever. 
Or was it a coincidence? Were Special Forces, unbe- 
known to General Stubblebine, working on the goats 
already? The answer to this question, I felt, might pro- 
vide some insight into the US military mind. Is this the 
kind of idea that people routinely have in those circles? 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---s 
already? The answer to this question, I felt, might pro- 
vide some insight into the US military mind. Is this the 
kind of idea that people routinely have in those circles? 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
After I left Glenn Wheaton I tried to find out every- 
thing I could about Michael Echanis. He was born in 
1950, in Nampa, Idaho. The old lady who lived down 
the street from him was ‘a real grouch’, according to a 
childhood friend, ‘so Michael blew up her woodshed’. 
He fought in Vietnam for two months in 1970, during 
which time he shot twenty-nine people — ‘confirmed kills’ 
— but then parts of his foot and calf were blown off and 
he was shipped back home to San Francisco, where the 
doctors told him he’d never walk again. But he con- 
founded them and by 1975 had instead become the 
USA’s leading exponent of the Korean martial art of 
Hwa Rang Do, teaching such techniques as invisibility 
to Special Forces at Fort Bragg. 
‘If you have to be by a wall with horizontal brickwork, 
don’t stand vertically,’ he’d tell his Green Beret trainees. 
‘In a tree, try to look like a tree. In open spaces, fold up 
like a rock. Between buildings, look like a connecting 
pipe. If you need to pass along a featureless white wall, 
use a reversible piece of cloth. Hold up a white square 
in front of you as you move. Think black. That is the 
nothingness.’ 
This nothingness was important to Echanis. Within 
that nothingness, he found that he could kill. A former 
martial arts colleague of Echanis’s called Bob Duggan 
once told Black Belt magazine that he considered Echanis 
to be basically psychotic. He said Echanis was always on 
the verge of creating mayhem, always thinking about 
death and the process of death, and that this character 
trait had lodged itself in Echanis’s psyche around the 
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---always on 
the verge of creating mayhem, always thinking about 
death and the process of death, and that this character 
trait had lodged itself in Echanis’s psyche around the 
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
time of his twenty-nine confirmed Vietnam kills and the 
subsequent blowing off of his foot. 
‘Look at your target’s arms or legs,’ Echanis would 
tell his Green Beret trainees. ‘Don’t look at his eyes until 
the last second. You can freeze a person by locking onto 
him with your eyes for a split second. I walk up to a 
person not looking at him, suddenly I look intently at 
him. As our eyes make contact, he looks at me. At that 
split second, his body is frozen, and that is when I hit 
him. You can talk smoothly. Go into a monotone. “No, 
I’m not going to stab or attack you.” Then do it. If 
you're totally relaxed in eyes, body, voice, it will not 
occur to the other person that you are ready to move on 
him.’ 
In the mid-1970s, Echanis published a book called 
- 
Knife Self-Defense for Combat which controversially 
advocated the technique of noisily leaping in the air 
and spinning around while attacking an enemy with a 
knife. This approach was hailed by some knife-fighting 
aficionados but criticized by others who believed that the 
leaping and the spinning might lead one accidentally to 
stab oneself, and that one should keep one’s footwork 
simple when armed with a knife. 
Nonetheless, Echanis’s superpowers become the stuff 
of legend. One former Green Beret has reminisced on the 
Internet: 
I was open-mouthed and slack-jawed. I watched as he 
lay on a bed of nails while a trainee broke a cinder 
block on his stomach with a sledgehammer, he put 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---d on the 
Internet: 
I was open-mouthed and slack-jawed. I watched as he 
lay on a bed of nails while a trainee broke a cinder 
block on his stomach with a sledgehammer, he put 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
steel spokes through the skin of his neck and forearms 
and lifted buckets of sand, then removed them with 
no 
bleeding and very 
little physical evidence 
of 
trauma, he had a tug of war with a dozen men who 
could not budge him a single inch, he even hypnotized 
a couple of the peopie in attendance. Green Berets 
were tossed around like rag dolls. The pain he could 
inflict was surreal. He could hurt someone badly with 
a finger. Mike, you’re not forgotten. The knife you 
gave me lies next to my beret. You tempered my soul 
for life. God bless Mike Echanis! 
Echanis spent some time as the martial arts editor of 
Soldier of Fortune magazine, the ‘journal of professional 
adventurers’. He became something of a poster boy for 
American mercenaries, quite literally, in fact, because he 
frequently appeared as the cover star of Soldier of For- 
tune and Black Belt. If you ever chance upon a 1970s 
photograph of a handsome and wiry American mercen- 
ary with a handlebar moustache, lying vigilant and 
armed in jungle terrain, wearing khaki and a bandana 
and clutching a knife with a vicious serrated edge, the 
chances are that it is Michael Echanis. All this made him 
even more famous, which is not a good strategy for a 
mercenary, and possibly led to his mysterious death at 
the age of twenty-eight. 
There are a number of versions out there of how 
Echanis came to die. What is definite is that it hap- 
pened in Nicaragua, where he had hooked up, in a 
professional capacity, with its then dictator Anastasio 
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---t there of how 
Echanis came to die. What is definite is that it hap- 
pened in Nicaragua, where he had hooked up, in a 
professional capacity, with its then dictator Anastasio 
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Somoza. Some reports say that it was the CIA who 
brokered the meeting between the two men, and that the 
agency gave Echanis a $5 million budget to teach esoteric 
martial arts techniques to Somoza’s Presidential Guard 
and anti-Sandinista commandos. 
Echanis told one Somoza biographer that the reason 
why he loved being in Nicaragua was that at home in 
the US it was really hard to walk down the street and get 
into a fight. But in Nicaragua, he said, he could get into 
fights almost every day. 
It could be argued that being paid by Somoza to help 
crush peasant insurrection was somewhat un-heroic, but 
fans of Echanis told me, when I tentatively put this 
to them, that it made Echanis’s courage all the more 
outstanding, as the American people were not exactly 
enamoured of Somoza, and the press ‘made the Sandinis- 
tas into saints’. 
One version of the events surrounding Echanis’s death 
goes like this: Echanis and a few fellow mercenaries were 
in a helicopter, on their way to perpetrate some Somoza- 
inspired horror. The helicopter exploded, either as a 
result of a bomb planted by anti-Somoza rebels, or 
because the passengers were messing around with gre- 
nades and one of them went off, and everyone on board 
was killed. 
In the other version, told to me by martial arts master 
Pete Brusso, who teaches at the Camp Pendleton Marine 
Training Base in San Diego, Echanis was not in a heli- 
copter. He was on the ground, acting too big for his 
boots regarding his superhuman powers. 
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Camp Pendleton Marine 
Training Base in San Diego, Echanis was not in a heli- 
copter. He was on the ground, acting too big for his 
boots regarding his superhuman powers. 
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
‘He used to let jeeps run over him,’ explained Pete 
Brusso. ‘Special Forces would get a jeep, and he’d lie 
down on the ground, and the jeep would go slowly over 
him. That isn’t too hard to do. Two-thousand-five- 
hundred-pound jeep, four wheels, you divide. that by 
four. If it goes slow enough over you, the body can 
pretty much take it. But if you hit the body with any 
speed, you’ve got a kinetic energy shock to it.’ 
Pete said that Echanis challenged some fellow merce- 
naries to drive over him so he could prove that his fear- 
some reputation was warranted. 
‘Well, whoever was driving the jeep didn’t realize he 
was supposed to slow down,’ said Pete Brusso. ‘Oops!’ 
He laughed. ‘Yeah, so he took internal injuries and died. 
That’s what IJ heard.’ 
‘Do you think they subsequently made up the helicop- 
ter story to spare everyone’s blushes and possible legal 
recriminations?’ I asked. 
‘Could be,’ said Pete Brusso. 
But in none of the stories I read or heard about 
Michael Echanis could I find any reference to him killing 
a goat just by staring at it, and so I was at a dead end 
regarding Goat Lab. 
Strangely, in fact, whenever I broached the subject of 
goat staring in my email exchanges with former friends 
and associates of Echanis, they immediately, on every 
single occasion, stopped emailing me back. I started to 
think that perhaps they thought I was nuts. This is why, 
after a while, I began avoiding crazy-sounding words 
like ‘goat’ and ‘staring’ and ‘death’, and instead asked 
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted to 
think that perhaps they thought I was nuts. This is why, 
after a while, I began avoiding crazy-sounding words 
like ‘goat’ and ‘staring’ and ‘death’, and instead asked 
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
questions like, ‘Do you happen to know whether or not 
Michael was ever involved attempting to influence live- 
stock from afar?’ 
But even then the email exchanges abruptly halted. 
Perhaps I had indeed stumbled on a secret so sensitive 
that nobody wanted to admit to any knowledge of it. 
So I called Glenn Wheaton again. 
‘Just tell me whose original idea the goat staring was,’ 
Isaid. ‘Just tell me that’ 
Glenn sighed. He said a name. 
Over the next few months, other former Jedi Warriors 
gave me the same name. It kept coming up. It is a name 
few people outside the military have ever heard. But it 
was this man who inspired the Jedi Warriors to do what 
they did. In fact, this one man, armed with a passion for 
the occult and a belief in superhuman powers, has had 
a profound and hitherto unchronicled impact on almost 
every aspect of US army 
life. General Stubblebine’s 
doomed attempt to pass through his wall was inspired 
by this man, as was — at the other end of the scale of 
secrecy — the US army’s famous TV recruitment slogan, 
‘BezAlleYou CamBe® 
You’re reaching deep inside of you 
For things you’ve never known. 
Be all that you can be 
You can do it 
In the Army. 
This slogan was once judged by Advertising Age maga- 
zine to be the second most effective jingle in the history 
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---er known. 
Be all that you can be 
You can do it 
In the Army. 
This slogan was once judged by Advertising Age maga- 
zine to be the second most effective jingle in the history 
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goat Lab 
of US television commercials (the winner being ‘You 
Deserve a Break Today, so Get Up and Get Away, to 
- 
McDonald’s’). It touched the Reaganite soul of college 
graduates across the US in the 1980s. Who would have 
believed that the soldier who helped inspire the jingle 
had such a fabulous idea of what ‘All You Can Be’ might 
include? 
Although this man was filled with the kindest of 
intentions and thoughts of peace, he was also, I would 
later discover, the inspiration behind 
a really quite 
bizarre form of torture undertaken by US forces in Iraq 
in May 2003. This torture did not take place in the Abu 
Ghraib prison, where naked Iraqi detainees were forced 
to masturbate and simulate oral sex with one another. 
It occurred instead inside a shipping container behind a 
disused railway station in the small town of al-Qa’im, 
on the Syrian border. It was really just as horrific, in its 
own way, as the Abu Ghraib atrocities, but because no 
photographs were taken, and because it involved Barney 
the Purple Dinosaur, it wasn’t greeted with the same 
blanket coverage nor universal revulsion. 
All these things, and the goat staring, and much more 
besides were inspired by a lieutenant colonel whose name 
is Jim Channon. 
27

--- PAGE BREAK ---ame 
blanket coverage nor universal revulsion. 
All these things, and the goat staring, and much more 
besides were inspired by a lieutenant colonel whose name 
is Jim Channon. 
27

--- PAGE BREAK ---

oe 
edmcest ose a 
“isan it alee i 
hae aaa 
nerd oe naka 
(eae nt ee WER AOR: 
i's odin sacks tha eisuancuegiiedgenanele 
Line). 
cme: teal 
tone to wilgurathe bees eiieeriial 
Pad oitnwe a! Saige! onimeneheh wi pawnae sone 
Hap deetyihd Aye aminoacid 
aah aati ae 
at ke wether 
or bi yale width 9 
iach oti: crass iv 
ndatantaleseiaeiae eel 
POAT Tee BOK Log 20 en buen lai tse hommenbine 
+ eres) isis ora bien pean a 
are bliin eo Oun Helena: 
ae manine, oir 
aitebaaeated ata 
banner 
el: 
tot “usta 
Clea: Ui tae 
brainy vee icilinbina renee: 
| 
pigs addi stig ee 
en tga 
ae 
«a 
semi sen Qoenegielvere ato aioe ann 
we 
Gl 
ee Ros ee obs 
7 
. 
; 
* 
7 
aes stray 
lee 
ce atl Unt 22 ce he <a 
ie eee 
%, 
<a 
Be 
7. eT 
J 
i 
mye ies i 
\. 
gid 
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. THE FIRST EARTH BATTALION 
It was a Saturday morning in the winter and Lieutenant 
Colonel Jim Channon (retired) was strolling through the 
grounds of his vast estate — it stretches across much of 
a Hawaiian hilltop — yelling above the wind, ‘Welcome 
to my secret garden, my eco-homestead. Fresh straw- 
berry? There’s nothing like eating something that’s just 
been alive. If the ships stop coming, if history disappears 
and the world crushes us to death, I shall feed myself. I 
invite the wind! The wind will come if you ask it to. Do 
you believe that? Come to my banyan tree. Come this 
way!’ 
‘Coming!’ I said. 
© 
The banyan tree was split down the middle, and a 
crooked cobblestone path wove its way through the 
roots. 
‘If you want to pass through these gates,’ said Jim, 
‘you must be part mystic and part visionary and there- 
fore able to create your best shopping list. So welcome 
to my sanctuary, where I mend my wounds and dream 
my dreams about better service.’ 
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---stic and part visionary and there- 
fore able to create your best shopping list. So welcome 
to my sanctuary, where I mend my wounds and dream 
my dreams about better service.’ 
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Why are you so unlike my mental picture of a lieuten- 
ant colonel in the US army?’ I asked. 
Jim thought about this. He ran his hand through his 
long silvery hair. Then he said, ‘Because you haven’t met 
many of us.’ 
This is Jim now. But it wasn’t Jim in Vietnam. Photo- 
graphs of him back then show a clean-cut young man in 
military uniform, wearing a badge in the shape of a rifle 
surrounded by a wreath. Jim still has the badge. He 
showed it to me. 
‘What does it mean?’ I asked him. 
‘It means thirty days under combat conditions,’ he said. 
Then he paused and pointed at his badge and said, 
‘This is real stuff.’ 
-Jim can remember exactly how it all began, the one 
precise: moment that sparked the whole thing off. It was 
his first day in combat in Vietnam, and he found himself 
flying in one of 400 helicopters, thundering above the 
Song Dong Nai River, towards a place known to him as 
War Zone D. They landed among the bodies of the 
Americans who had failed to capture War Zone D four 
days earlier. 
‘The soldiers,’ said Jim, ‘had been cooked in the sun 
and laid out like a wall.’ 
Jim smelt the bodies, and in that instant his sense of 
smell shut off. He regained it some weeks later. 
An American soldier to Jim’s right jumped out of 
his helicopter and immediately began firing wildly. Jim 
shouted at him to stop but the soldier couldn’t hear him. 
So Jim leapt on him and wrestled him to the ground. 
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---out of 
his helicopter and immediately began firing wildly. Jim 
shouted at him to stop but the soldier couldn’t hear him. 
So Jim leapt on him and wrestled him to the ground. 
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
Jesus, thought Jim. 
And then a sniper fired a single shot from somewhere 
into Jim’s platoon. 
Everyone just stood there. The sniper fired again, and 
the Americans started running towards the one and only 
‘palm tree in sight. Jim was running so fast that he 
skidded face first into it. He heard someone behind him 
shout: ‘VC in black pyjamas one hundred metres.’ 
About twenty seconds later, Jim thought to himself, 
Why is nobody shooting? What are they waiting for? 
They can’t be waiting for me to instruct them to shoot, 
can they? 
“TAKE HIM OUT? screamed Jim. 
And so the soldiers started shooting, and when it was 
over a small team walked forward to find the body. But, 
for all the gunfire, they had failed to hit the sniper. 
How had that happened? 
Then a soldier yelled, ‘It’s a woman!’ 
Oh shit, thought Jim. How do we deal with this? 
Moments later, the sniper killed one of Jim’s soldiers 
with a bullet through his lungs. His name was Private 
First Class Shaw. 
‘In Vietnam,’ said Jim, ‘I felt like tyre rubber. The 
politicians just waved me off. I had to write the letters 
to the mothers and the fathers of the soldiers who were 
killed in my unit.’ 
And when he got home to America it was his job to 
drive out into the countryside to meet these parents and 
give them citations and the personal belongings of their 
dead children. It was during these long drives that Jim 
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---to 
drive out into the countryside to meet these parents and 
give them citations and the personal belongings of their 
dead children. It was during these long drives that Jim 
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
replayed in his mind the moments that had led to the 
death of Private First Class Shaw. 
Jim had yelled for his soldiers to kill the sniper, and 
they had all, as one, and with every shot, fired high. 
‘This came to be understood as a common reaction 
when fresh soldiers fire on humans,’ Jim said. ‘It is not a 
natural thing to shoot people.’ 
(What Jim had seen tallied with studies conducted 
after the Second. World War by the military historian 
General S. L. A. Marshall. He interviewed thousands of 
American infantrymen and concluded that only 15-20 
per cent of them had actually shot to kill. The rest had 
fired high or not fired at all, busying themselves however 
else they could. 
And 98 per cent of the soldiers who did shoot to kill 
were later found to have been deeply traumatized by 
their actions. The other 2 per cent were diagnosed as 
‘aggressive psychopathic personalities’, who basically 
didn’t mind killing people under any circumstances, at 
home or abroad. 
The conclusion — in the words of Lieutenant Colonel 
Dave Grossman of the Killology Research Group 
—- 
was ‘there is something about continuous, inescapable 
combat which will drive 98 per cent of all men in- 
sane, and the other 2 per cent were crazy when they got 
there’.) 
For a while after Vietnam, Jim suffered from depres- 
sion; he found he couldn’t watch his daughter being 
born. He couldn’t see anything that reminded him of 
pain. The midwives in the hospital thought he was crazy 
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---from depres- 
sion; he found he couldn’t watch his daughter being 
born. He couldn’t see anything that reminded him of 
pain. The midwives in the hospital thought he was crazy 
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
because this kind of thing hadn’t been explained in 
the media. It was heartbreaking for Jim to realize that 
Private First Class Shaw had died because his fellow 
soldiers were impulsively guileless and kind-hearted, and 
not the killing machines the army wanted them to be. 
Jim took me into his house. It looked as though it 
belonged to some benevolent wizard from a fantasy 
novel; it was full of Buddhist art, paintings of all-seeing 
eyes atop pyramids and so on. 
‘The kind of person attracted to military service has a 
great deal of difficulty being ... cunning. We suffered 
in Vietnam from not being cunning. We just presented 
ourselves in our righteousness and we got our butts shot 
off. You might get some cunning out of other agencies 
in the American government, but you’d have a hard time 
finding it in the army.’ 
And so it was, in 1977, that Jim wrote to Lieutenant 
General Walter T. Kerwin, the Vice Chief of Staff for 
the Army in the Pentagon. He wrote that he wanted the 
army to learn how to be more cunning. He wanted to 
go on a fact-finding mission. He didn’t know where. 
But he wanted to be taught cunning. The Pentagon 
agreed to pay Jim’s salary and expenses for the duration 
of the journey. And Jim got into his car and he began to 
drive. 
Steven Halpern is the composer of a series of meditation 
and subliminal CDs, sold over the Internet, with titles 
like Achieving Your Ideal Weight (‘Play this program 
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---drive. 
Steven Halpern is the composer of a series of meditation 
and subliminal CDs, sold over the Internet, with titles 
like Achieving Your Ideal Weight (‘Play this program 
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
during mealtimes. You chew your food slowly. You love 
and accept your body fully.’), Nurturing Your Inner 
Child (‘You release any resentment or hurt toward your 
parents for not meeting your needs.’), and Enhancing 
Intimacy (‘Your body knows just where to touch me. 
You love holding and cuddling me.’). 
‘For over 25 years,’ reads Steven’s website, “his music 
has touched the lives of millions, and is used in homes, 
yoga and massage centres, hospices and innovative busi- 
ness offices worldwide.’ 
It was at the beginning of Steven’s career, in 1978, at 
a New Age conference in California, that he met Jim 
Channon. Jim said he wanted somehow to use Steven’s 
music to make the American soldier more peaceful, and 
he also hoped to deploy Steven’s music in the battlefield 
to make the enemy feel more peaceful too. 
Steven’s immediate thought was, I don’t want to be 
on a list. 
‘Sometimes you end up on a list, you see?’ said Steven. 
‘They monitor your activities. Who was this guy? Was 
he posing as someone who wanted to learn the good 
things, but was planning to use them against me?’ 
I was 
struck by how vividly Steven recalled 
his 
encounter with Jim. This is, Steven explained, because 
people who work in the ambient music field don’t get 
approached by the military all that often. Plus, Jim 
seemed to walk the walk in terms of inner peace. Jim 
was very charismatic. And anyway, Steven added, these 
were paranoid times. ‘We’d just come out of Vietnam,’ 
he said. ‘It turned out that some of the most violent anti- 
34

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Jim 
was very charismatic. And anyway, Steven added, these 
were paranoid times. ‘We’d just come out of Vietnam,’ 
he said. ‘It turned out that some of the most violent anti- 
34

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
war agitators were double agents. It was the same in the 
UFO community.’ 
‘The UFO community?’ I said. ‘Why would govern- 
ment spies want to infiltrate that?’ 
‘Oh, Jon,’ said Steven. ‘Don’t be naive.’ 
‘Why, though?’ I asked. 
‘Everyone kept tabs on everyone,’ said Steven. ‘It got 
so paranoid that UFO speakers would start by asking 
all the government spies to stand up and identify them- 
selves. The more you know the more you don’t know, 
see? Anyway, there was a lot of paranoia. And then some 
guy came over and said he was from the military and 
he wanted to learn about my music, and that was Jim 
Channon.’ 
‘Why do you think he approached you in particular?’ 
I asked. 
‘Someone once said that my music allows people to 
have a spiritual experience without naming it,’ Steven 
replied. ‘I think that was 
it. He said he needed to 
convince the higher-up military brass; the top ranks. 
These are people who had never known a meditative 
state. I think he wanted to get them into it without 
naming it.’ 
‘Or maybe he wanted to hypnotize his leaders with 
subliminal sounds,’ I said. 
‘Maybe so,’ said Steven. 
‘They’re very powerful 
things.’ 
Steven told me a little about the power of sublimi- 
nal sounds. One time, he said, an American evangelical 
church blasted the congregation with silent sounds 
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---erful 
things.’ 
Steven told me a little about the power of sublimi- 
nal sounds. One time, he said, an American evangelical 
church blasted the congregation with silent sounds 
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
during the hymns. At the end of the service, they found 
their donations had tripled. 
‘Tactical advantage, you see?’ said Steven. “You want 
to know why evangelical churches are making so much 
money while regular churches are failing? Maybe that’s 
your answer.’ 
And recently, he added, he visited a friend’s office. ‘As 
soon as I walked in there, I felt irritated. I said, “Your 
office is making me feel irritated.” He said, “That’s my 
new subliminal peak-efficiency tape.” I said, “Well, take 
it off.” Steven paused. ‘I spotted it right away,’ he said, 
‘because I’m attuned. But most people aren’t.’ 
Steven told Jim Channon about the power of sublim- 
inal sounds too, and Jim thanked him and left. They 
never met again. 
‘This was twenty-five years ago,’ said Steven. ‘But I 
remember it as if it was yesterday. Jim seemed such a 
gentle soul.’ Steven fell silent for 
a moment. Then he 
said, ‘You know what? Now I think back, I’m not sure 
I ever asked him what he planned to do with all that 
information.’ 
Almost all the people Jim visited during his two-year 
journey were, like Steven Halpern, Californians. Jim 
dropped in on 150 New Age organizations in all, such 
as the Biofeedback Center of Berkeley, the Integral 
Chuan Institute (‘Just as the bud of a flower contains 
within it the innate form of the perfect flower, so do we 
all contain within ourselves the innate form of our own 
perfection.’), Fat Liberation (“You CAN Lose Weight!’), 
Beyond Jogging and, in Maine, the Gentle Wind ‘World 
36

--- PAGE BREAK ---so do we 
all contain within ourselves the innate form of our own 
perfection.’), Fat Liberation (“You CAN Lose Weight!’), 
Beyond Jogging and, in Maine, the Gentle Wind ‘World 
36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
Healing Organization’ (‘If you attended school in Amer- 
ica or a country with similar education practices before 
the age of ten to twelve years, you suffered severe forms 
of mental and emotional damage ... The Gentle Wind 
healing technology can help.’). 
Gentle Wind presumably offered Jim, as they have 
offered all who’ve passed through their gates, their Heal- 
ing Instruments, the magic ingredients of which have 
always been a closely guarded secret, although a clue 
offered by the company is that they are derived ‘from the 
Spirit World, not the human world’. Imagine something 
that looks like a largish bar of white hand soap painted 
to look like a computer circuit board. That is Gentle 
Wind’s Healing Bar 1.3, ‘Requested donation $7600’. 
Although pricey, it ‘represents the new leading edge of 
the healing technology, significantly surpassing the Rain- 
bow Puck III and IV’ and includes ‘well over 6-60 Mhz 
minimum of temporal shifting combined with millions of 
predefined etheric modifications’. 
Gentle Wind’s publicity material assures potential 
purchasers and company recruits that ‘There Are No 
Messiahs Here ... NO MESSIAHS at the Gentle Wind 
Project. Please do not waste your time looking for any. 
There are none here.’ 
Nonetheless, some former members have alleged to me 
that Gentle Wind’s chief guru, John Miller, has over the 
past few years ordered his entire staff to go on the Atkins 
diet and wear only beige, and that the mysterious spirit- 
world ingredient incorporated into their Healing Bars is 
actually group sex. The alleged scenario is apparently 
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---ins 
diet and wear only beige, and that the mysterious spirit- 
world ingredient incorporated into their Healing Bars is 
actually group sex. The alleged scenario is apparently 
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
something like this: John Miller sidles up to a female 
staff member and says — and I am paraphrasing, based 
on allegations made to me by former members of the 
group — ‘Congratulations. You have been selected by the 
spirit world to take part in our top secret energy work. 
Don’t tell your husband because he wouldn’t understand 
the energy work.’ 
_ 
She is then led into John Miller’s bedroom, has sex 
with him and various other female selectees, and then, 
the moment it is over, John Miller says, ‘Quick. Build a 
Healing Bar.’ Gentle Wind are contesting these alle- 
gations and have, in 2004, launched a lawsuit against 
the former members who have made them. 
One Gentle Wind customer review — from a couple in 
Bristol — reads, ‘We have noticed remarkable improve- 
ments to our cat Moya who virtually changed overnight 
from a neurotic timid rescue cat into a friendly confident 
adventurer after we used one of the Gentle Wind healing 
instruments on her.’ 
Another customer, however, has noted, ‘At first I was 
pleased that the device did have a noticeable effect on 
my aura [but when I turned it over to the label marked 
tranquillity] it left me feeling inwardly unresponsive to 
the experience. To cut a long story short, I have been 
using Equilibria’s Universal Harmonizers for the past five 
months instead and now feel very much myself again.’ 
Gentle Wind says that over 6 million people in more 
than 150 countries throughout the world have used their 
products. They also told me that they don’t remember 
meeting Jim, and perhaps it was a different Gentle Wind 
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---in more 
than 150 countries throughout the world have used their 
products. They also told me that they don’t remember 
meeting Jim, and perhaps it was a different Gentle Wind 
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
he came across during his Pentagon-funded odyssey. 
They could be right, but I have not managed to find 
another Gentle Wind operating within the New Age or 
Human Potential movement at that time. 
Jim Channon couldn’t remember much about Gentle 
Wind either, although the group must have made an 
impact on him because he gave them a special mention in 
the confidential report he later prepared for the Pentagon. 
Jim went through Reichian rebirthing, primal arm- 
wrestling, which was regular arm-wrestling accompanied 
by guttural screaming, and naked hot-tub encounter 
sessions at the Esalen Institute for the Advancement of 
Human Potential in Big Sur, where he was counselled by 
Esalen’s founder, Michael Murphy, the man credited 
with inventing the New Age movement. At no time did 
Jim reveal to the therapists and gurus he met how he 
imagined their techniques might be adapted to teach the 
American soldier to be more cunning. 
‘It is often ten years,’ Jim wrote in his diary at the time, 
‘before the values developed in Los Angeles find themselves 
into rural Arkansas. What is developing today on the 
Coast will be the national value set ten years from now.’ 
This is how Jim visualized the America of the 1980s: 
the government would no longer have an ‘exploitative 
view of natural resources’. Instead, its emphasis would 
be on ‘conservation and ecological sanity’. The economic 
system would cease to ‘promote consumption at all 
costs’. It would be neither aggressive nor competitive. 
3?

--- PAGE BREAK ---asis would 
be on ‘conservation and ecological sanity’. The economic 
system would cease to ‘promote consumption at all 
costs’. It would be neither aggressive nor competitive. 
3?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
This, Jim prophesised, was the new value system, poised 
to sweep America. 
Jim needed to believe all this would happen. He was 
working for what his then chief of staff, General Edward 
Meyer, had called a ‘hollow army’. This was a term 
Meyer had coined to describe the military state of mind, 
post-Vietnam. It wasn’t only individual veterans who 
were suffering from post-combat depression and post- 
traumatic stress. The army, as an entity, was traumatized 
and melancholic and suffering from a crippling infer- 
iority complex. Budgets were being slashed everywhere. 
The draft had been abolished, and the army was not an 
enticing career option for young Americans. Things were 
in a really bad state. Jim saw himself as a potential New 
Age phoenix, rising from the ashes to bring joy and hope 
to the army, and to the country he loved so much. 
‘It is America’s role,’ wrote Jim, ‘to lead the world to 
paradise.’ 
Jim returned from his journey in 1979 and he wrote a 
confidential paper for his superiors. The first line read, 
‘The US army doesn’t really have any serious alternative 
than to be wonderful.’ 
A disclaimer at the bottom read, ‘[This] does not 
comprise an official position by the military as of now.’ 
This was Jim Channon’s First Earth Battalion Oper- 
ations Manual. 
The manual was a 125-page mixture of drawings and 
graphs and maps and polemical essays and point by 
point redesigns of every aspect of military life. In Jim 
Channon’s First Earth Battalion, the new battlefield uni- 
40

--- PAGE BREAK ---ings and 
graphs and maps and polemical essays and point by 
point redesigns of every aspect of military life. In Jim 
Channon’s First Earth Battalion, the new battlefield uni- 
40

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
form would include pouches for ginseng regulators, 
divining tools, foodstuffs to enhance night vision and a 
loudspeaker that would automatically emit ‘indigenous 
music and words of peace’. 
Soldiers would carry with them into hostile countries 
‘symbolic animals’ such as baby lambs. These would be 
cradled in the soldiers’ arms. The soldiers would learn to 
greet people with ‘sparkly eyes’. Then they would gently 
place the lambs on the ground and give the enemy ‘an 
automatic hug’. 
peace technolgy 
“. 
a 
: 
} Count, 
Hes 
ie 
| 
fttas 
Vs 
< 
bie 
= e “spate 
: 
dt tplutUs WWAsiC 
i 
x 
| 
and etyhs O peace 
Us 
“Me 
symbids 
i 
THE FIRST EARTH BATTALION 
There was, Jim accepted, a possibility that these meas- 
ures might not be enough to pacify an enemy. In that 
eventuality, the loudspeakers attached to the uniforms 
would be switched to broadcast ‘discordant sounds’. 
41

--- PAGE BREAK ---t these meas- 
ures might not be enough to pacify an enemy. In that 
eventuality, the loudspeakers attached to the uniforms 
would be switched to broadcast ‘discordant sounds’. 
41

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Bigger loudspeakers would be mounted on military 
vehicles, each playing acid rock music out of synch with 
the other to confuse the enemy. 
In case all that didn’t work, a new type of weaponry 
— non-lethal or ‘psycho-electronic’? weapons — would be 
developed, including a machine that could direct positive 
energy into hostile crowds. 
If all else failed, lethal weapons would be used, 
although ‘no Earth soldier shall be denied the kingdom 
of heaven because he or she is used as an instrument of 
indiscriminate war’. 
Back on base, robes and hoods would be worn for the 
mandatory First Earth Battalion rituals. The misogynistic 
and aggressive old chants (‘I don’t know but I’ve been 
told, Eskimo pussy is mighty cold... .”) would be phased 
out and replaced by a new one: ‘Om.’ 
Military marching bands would learn how to become 
more like travelling minstrels. ‘Singing and dancing’ and 
‘the elimination of the desire for lust’ would be as 
important a part of training as martial arts. 
‘A Warrior Monk is one who has no dependence on 
lust,’ wrote Jim. ‘A Warrior Monk is one who has no 
dependence on status. This regimen is not meant to pro- 
duce puritanical fanatics but is clearly designed to exclude 
the soldier of fortune.’ 
(This portion of the manual was, presumably, disre- 
garded by Michael Echanis, who became America’s most 
famous soldier of fortune in the years between allegedly 
staring a goat to death at Fort Bragg and dying in 
mysterious circumstances in Nicaragua.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---is, who became America’s most 
famous soldier of fortune in the years between allegedly 
staring a goat to death at Fort Bragg and dying in 
mysterious circumstances in Nicaragua.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
First Earth Battalion trainees would learn to fast for 
a week drinking only juice and then eat only nuts and 
grains for a month. They would: 
fall in love with everyone, sense plant auras, organize 
a tree plant with kids, attain the power to pass through 
objects such as walls, bend metal with their minds, 
walk on fire, calculate faster than a computer, stop 
their own hearts with no ill effects, see into the future, 
have out-of-body experiences, 
live off nature 
for 
twenty days, be 90%+ a vegetarian, have the ability 
to massage and cleanse the colon, stop using mindless 
clichés, stay out alone at night, and be able to hear 
and see other people’s thoughts. 
Now all Jim had to do was sell these ideas to the 
military. 
I think Jim Channon is a wealthy man. He certainly 
owns pretty much an entire Hawaiian hillside, with an 
amphitheatre, a village-worth of outbuildings, yurts and 
gazebos. Nowadays he does for corporations what he 
did for the army: he makes their employees believe they 
can walk through walls and change the world, and he 
does it by making those things sound ordinary. 
‘Do you honestly believe,’ I asked Jim at one point 
during our day together, ‘that somebody can reach such 
a high level of warrior monkdom that they can actually 
become invisible and walk through walls?’ 
Jim shrugged. 
‘Women have been known to lift up an automobile 
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---an reach such 
a high level of warrior monkdom that they can actually 
become invisible and walk through walls?’ 
Jim shrugged. 
‘Women have been known to lift up an automobile 
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
single-handed when their child is under it,’ he said. ‘Why 
not expect the same from a Warrior Monk?’ 
Jim told me — just as he told his commanding officers 
back in 1979 — that warrior monk might sound like a 
crazy new military prototype, but was it any more crazy 
than the old prototypes, like cowboy, or football player? 
‘A Warrior Monk,’ said Jim, ‘is someone who has the 
presence of the monk, the service and the dedication of 
the monk and the absolute skill and precision of the 
warrior.’ 
He told his commanders this at the officers’ club in 
Fort Knox in the spring of 1979. He had arrived there a 
few hours earlier and had dragged in as many pot plants 
as he could find around the base. He arranged them into 
a circle, a ‘pseudo-forest’. In the centre of the circle he lit 
a single candle. 
When the commanders arrived, he said to them, “To 
begin the ceremony, gentlemen, we’re going to do a 
mantra. Take a deep breath and as you let it out sound 
Eeeeeeee.’ 
‘At this point,’ Jim told me, ‘they laughed. A few of 
them chuckled, a little bit embarrassed. So I was able to 
say, “Excuse me! You’ve been given a set of instructions 
and I expect them to be carried out at high level.” See? 
Tapping right into the military mindset. Second time we 
did it, the place became unified.’ 
And then Jim began his speech. He said, ‘Gentlemen, 
it is a great honour to have you in this place of sanctuary 
where we can mend our wounds and dream our dreams 
of better service. Together, with all the other armies of 
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---emen, 
it is a great honour to have you in this place of sanctuary 
where we can mend our wounds and dream our dreams 
of better service. Together, with all the other armies of 
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
the world, we will turn this place around, and a new 
civilization can be born that does not know boundary 
lines but knows better how to live in the garden and 
knows that we are one thought away from paradise.’ 
The commanders were not laughing any more. In fact, 
Jim found some were almost in tears. Like Jim, they had 
been crushed by their experiences in Vietnam. Jim was 
speaking to four-star generals and major generals and 
brigadier generals and colonels — ‘the top people’ — and 
he had them captivated. In fact, one colonel present, 
Mike Malone, was so moved that he leapt to his feet and 
yelled, ‘I am mullet man!’ 
Noticing the perplexed expressions on the faces of his 
fellow military commanders, he elucidated. ‘I push the 
cause of the mullet because he is a low-class fish. He is 
simple. He is honest. He moves around in great forma- 
tions and columns. He does damn near all the work. But 
he is also noble. He is like another noble thing I once 
loved, called “soldier”.’ 
Jim continued his speech: ‘The only time that rose- 
coloured glasses don’t work is when you take them off,’ 
he said. ‘So join me in this vision of being all that we can 
be, for this is the place where the First Earth Battalion 
begins. This is the place where you have the right to 
think the unthinkable, to dream the impossible. You 
know we’re here to create the most powerful set of 
tools for the individual and his team, for that is the 
difference between where the American soldier is today 
and where he needs to be to survive on the battlefield of 
the future.’ 
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---or the individual and his team, for that is the 
difference between where the American soldier is today 
and where he needs to be to survive on the battlefield of 
the future.’ 
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
“You know what this story is about?’ Jim asked me, in 
his garden in Hawaii. ‘It’s the story of the creativity of 
an institution you would expect to be the Jast to open 
the door to the greater realities. Because you know what 
happened next?’ 
‘What?’ I asked. 
‘I was immediately appointed Commander of the First 
Earth Battalion.’ 
The disclaimer at the bottom of Jim’s Operations 
Manual had read that this was not the official position 
of the United States military. Nonetheless, within weeks 
of its publication, soldiers throughout the army began 
seriously to try and implement his ideas. 
Somewhere in a strip mall in the heart of Silicon Valley 
is a building that looks like a long-abandoned and 
entirely undistinguished warehouse. Nonetheless, bus- 
loads of tourists turn up from time to time to photograph 
the exterior because this is the building where Silicon 
Valley began. It started life as an apricot storage ware- 
house, but then Professor William Shockley moved in 
here and co-invented the transistor and grew silicon 
crystals in the back room and won the Nobel Prize for 
his work in 1956. 
By the late 1970s this building — 391 San Antonio 
Road — had a new owner called Dr Jim Hardt. He was 
just as much of a pioneer in his field as Shockley, just as 
much of a visionary, but his science was, and remains, 
somewhat weirder. 
46

--- PAGE BREAK ---a new owner called Dr Jim Hardt. He was 
just as much of a pioneer in his field as Shockley, just as 
much of a visionary, but his science was, and remains, 
somewhat weirder. 
46

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
Dr Hardt still works here, charging civilians $14,000 
for a week-long brain-training retreat — ‘Mention the 
keyword “hemi-coherent” and get a $500 discount!’ says 
the publicity pack — in a series of tiny offices at the back. 
They are dark, lit only in fluorescent purple, the clocks 
have no hands, and the place reminded me a little of 
Disney World’s Twilight Zone Tower of Terror ride. 
I had come to believe that Michael Echanis was not, 
after all, the fabled goat starer. 
I had decided Glenn 
Wheaton had been mistaken, beguiled by the Echanis 
legend, and that it was another Jedi Warrior altogether. 
Perhaps Dr Hardt might be able to provide the answer, 
for it was he who re-tuned the brains of the Jedi Warriors 
in the late 1970s, and took them to a level of spiritual 
enlightenment within which staring a goat to death was, 
apparently, possible. 
Dr Hardt sat me down and he told me the story of his 
‘fascinating, 
yet somewhat melodramatic’ 
adventures 
with Special Forces. 
? 
It all began with a visit from a colonel called John 
Alexander, who turned up one day at Jim Hardt’s door 
with a few other military men. Colonel Alexander had 
headhunted Dr Hardt, having been deeply moved by Jim 
Channon’s First Earth Battalion Operations Manual. He 
wanted to know if Dr Hardt could really turn ordinary 
soldiers into advanced Zen masters in just seven days, 
and give them the power of telepathy simply by plugging 
‘them into his brain machine. 
Dr Hardt said it was indeed true, and so the quest 
to create a super soldier, a soldier with supernatural 
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---power of telepathy simply by plugging 
‘them into his brain machine. 
Dr Hardt said it was indeed true, and so the quest 
to create a super soldier, a soldier with supernatural 
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
powers, was set into motion right here in this building in 
Silicon Valley. 
The colonel told Jim Hardt that Special Forces had, 
ever since the publication of Jim’s manual, invited one 
peak-performance guru after another from the New Age 
and Human Potential movements of California to lecture 
the soldiers on how to be more attuned with their inner 
spirits, and so on, but it had not been a success. The 
gurus had routinely been greeted with boos, cat calls and 
theatrical yawns by Special Forces. 
Now, Colonel Alexander wanted to know, would Dr 
Hardt be willing to give it a try? Would he bring his 
portable brain-training machine to Fort Bragg? 
Jim Hardt showed me the machine. You strap elec- 
trodes onto your head and your alpha waves are fed into 
a computer. Knobs are tweaked and your alpha waves 
are attuned. When this has been achieved your IQ is 
boosted by twelve points and you effortlessly reach a 
spiritual level unusually only attainable through a life- 
time’s diligent study of Zen techniques. If two people are 
strapped to the machine simultaneously, they get to read 
one another’s minds. 
Dr Hardt explained all this to Colonel Alexander, and 
he offered to give him a demonstration but Colonel 
Alexander declined. He said there was a lot of classified 
military information stored in his brain, and he couldn’t 
risk telepathically revealing it to Dr Hardt. 
Dr Hardt said he understood. 
Colonel Alexander felt obliged to tell Dr Hardt that 
Special Forces were really quite hostile to the whole idea, 
48

--- PAGE BREAK ---cally revealing it to Dr Hardt. 
Dr Hardt said he understood. 
Colonel Alexander felt obliged to tell Dr Hardt that 
Special Forces were really quite hostile to the whole idea, 
48

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
which they considered to be mumbo-jumbo. They would 
in fact be ‘uncontrollable’ and refuse to ‘sit still and 
listen’. 
In that case, Dr Hardt replied, he would only accept 
the challenge if the soldiers were first sent on a month- 
long meditation retreat. 
‘Well,’ Dr Hardt said to me now. ‘First of all, they 
wouldn’t call it a meditation retreat, because retreat is a 
no-no word in the army. So it was called a meditation 
encampment. And it was hugely unsuccessful.’ 
‘How come?’ J asked. 
‘The soldiers actually brawled with each other in the 
meditation 
setting,’ 
he said. ‘They brawled 
out of 
boredom.’ 
And so, by the time Dr Hardt arrived at Fort Bragg, 
Special Forces were still ‘extremely hostile’, blaming Dr 
Hardt for their month’s enforced meditation, which they 
had considered ‘nonsense’ and ‘a waste of time’. 
The small, thin and delicate Dr Hardt anxiously sur- 
veyed the hostile soldiers, then he gently strapped the 
electrodes onto their heads, and onto his head too. He 
switched on the alpha-wave brain-training computer, 
and the tuning began. 
‘And then suddenly,’ said Jim Hardt, ‘a tear came out 
of my eye and it rolled down my face and it splashed 
onto my tie.’ 
A tear almost formed in his eye now, as he recalled 
this moment of emotional telepathy. 
‘So I picked up my tie, it was still wet, and I said, “I 
telepathically know that somebody in this room 
is 
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---n his eye now, as he recalled 
this moment of emotional telepathy. 
‘So I picked up my tie, it was still wet, and I said, “I 
telepathically know that somebody in this room 
is 
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
experiencing sadness.” And I slammed my hand down 
on the table and I said, “We are not leaving this room 
until whoever it is owns up to it.” Well. Two minutes of 
total silence. And then this hard-bitten colonel raised his 
hand and he said, “That was probably me.”’ 
And then the colonel told Jim Hardt, and his fellow 
Special Forces soldiers, the story of his sadness. 
This colonel had sung in his Glee Club at college. He 
had sung folk and choral music and, as his brain was 
being tuned, his mind filled with the memories of his 
Glee Club days some twenty years earlier. 
‘He experienced such joy in that,’ said Jim Hardt. ‘But 
then he went straight from college to officer training 
school and he made an intellectual decision to give up 
on joy. He decided upon graduating from college that 
joy had no role in the life of an army officer and so he 
consciously and wilfully, click, turned joy off. Now it 
was twenty years later, and he came upon the realization 
that it wasn’t necessary. He had lived twenty years with- 
out joy. And it wasn’t necessary.’ 
On day two of the brain tuning, the soldiers strapped 
the electrodes to their heads once again. 
‘And this time,’ said Jim Hardt, ‘both of my eyes were 
like faucets. And I took my tie and I wrung it. That’s 
how soaked it was with my tears, and so again I said, 
“Who is it? Who is experiencing sadness?” And again it 
was two minutes before the same guy raised his hand 
and this time he recounted a story that he had lived 
through.’ 
It was the Tet offensive in 1968. The colonel was in a 
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---it 
was two minutes before the same guy raised his hand 
and this time he recounted a story that he had lived 
through.’ 
It was the Tet offensive in 1968. The colonel was in a 
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
small forward firebase up by the demilitarized zone when 
the Viet Cong attacked. 
‘And this colonel single-handedly saved their little 
firebase from being overrun,’ said Jim Hardt, ‘and the 
way he did this was by running the machine-gun all 
night long. And then, when dawn came, he looked out 
at the piles of bleeding, dying bodies that he had caused, 
and he had feelings that are larger than one heart can 
encompass.’ 
At the end of day three of the brain tuning, Jim Hardt 
studied the alpha-wave computer print outs, and he saw 
— 
something that amazed him. 
‘In one of the soldiers,’ he said, ‘I saw a pattern of 
brainwaves which is found only in people who have 
experience of seeing angels. We call it “perception of 
astral plane beings”, beings that are discorporate but 
have a luminous body. So I was sitting across the desk 
from this soldier who had been trained to kill, and I 
asked him, in a very calm voice, “Do you talk to beings 
that other people don’t see?” 
‘And he spun back in his chair. He almost tipped over. 
It was like I had hit him with a two-by-four! And he was 
all nervous and alarmed and his breathing was heavy, 
and he looked left and right, to ensure that nobody else 
was in the room. Then he leaned forward and admitted 
it, “Yes.” He had a martial arts spirit guide who would 
appear to him alone. And he had only told his best 
buddy about this, and he had sworn that he would cut 
his throat if his friend breathed a word of this to anyone.’ 
And that was the end of the story. That was all Dr 
51

--- PAGE BREAK ---his best 
buddy about this, and he had sworn that he would cut 
his throat if his friend breathed a word of this to anyone.’ 
And that was the end of the story. That was all Dr 
51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Hardt could tell me. He left Fort Bragg, never returned, 
and he said he didn’t know which, if any, of the Jedi 
soldiers whose brains he tuned had gone on to stare a 
goat to death. 
‘Non-lethals 
only!’ yells the evil medical researcher 
Glenn Talbot. ‘I repeat, non-lethals only! I must have a 
sample of him. Hit him with the foam!’ 
In the underground Atheon military base, hidden 
beneath a disused cinema in a desert somewhere, the 
Incredible Hulk has escaped and is destroying all in his 
path. The soldiers do what Glenn Talbot has ordered. 
They take up position and spray the Hulk with Sticky 
Foam, which expands and hardens the moment it hits 
his body. The foam succeeds where all previous weapons 
have failed. The Hulk is stopped in his tracks. He strug- 
gles, roaring, against the foam, to no avail. 
‘So long, big boy...’ snarls Glenn Talbot. He shoots 
the Hulk in the chest with some kind of hand-held missile 
launcher. This is a mistake. It makes the Hulk angrier — 
so angry, in fact, that he summons enough power to 
break through the foam and continue his rampage. 
This foam is not an invention of the writers of the 
Hulk 
movie. 
It is the invention 
of Colonel John 
Alexander, the same man who recruited Dr Jim Hardt to 
re-tune the brains of the Jedi Warriors. Colonel Alex- 
ander developed the Sticky Foam as a result of reading 
Jim’s First Earth Battalion Operations Manual. 
The army leaders present at Fort Knox back in 1979 
52

--- PAGE BREAK ---riors. Colonel Alex- 
ander developed the Sticky Foam as a result of reading 
Jim’s First Earth Battalion Operations Manual. 
The army leaders present at Fort Knox back in 1979 
52

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
had been so taken with Jim’s speech that they offered 
him the opportunity to create and command a real First 
Earth Battalion. But he turned them down. Jim had 
higher ambitions than that. He was rational enough to 
realize that walking through walls, sensing plant auras 
and melting the hearts of the enemy with baby lambs 
were good ideas on paper, but weren’t, necessarily, 
achievable skills in real life. 
Jim’s superiors were literal-minded men (hence Gen- 
eral Stubblebine’s many determined 
efforts to walk 
through his wall), but Jim’s real vision was more 
nuanced. He wanted his fellow soldiers to find a higher 
spiritual plane by reaching for the impossible. Had he 
accepted the offer of leading a real First Earth Battalion, 
his superiors would have demanded measurable results. 
They would have wanted to see Jim’s soldiers demon- 
strably stopping their own hearts with no ill effects, and 
when they failed, the unit would most probably have 
been shut down, in ignominy, without anyone really 
knowing it had even existed. 
This was not what Jim had in mind. He wanted his 
ideas to float out there and take root wherever fate 
decreed. The First Earth Battalion would exist wherever 
someone 
read the manual and became 
inspired to 
implement its contents however they chose. He imagined 
it would be assimilated into the fabric of the army so 
successfully that the soldiers of the future would act on 
it without knowing anything about its fantastic prov- 
enance. And so it was that Sticky Foam became an early, 
real-life, First Earth Battalion weapon. 
oe

--- PAGE BREAK ---he future would act on 
it without knowing anything about its fantastic prov- 
enance. And so it was that Sticky Foam became an early, 
real-life, First Earth Battalion weapon. 
oe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
The foam has had a rocky history. In Somalia in 
February 1995, United Nations peacekeeping forces were 
attempting to hand out food when the crowd began to 
riot. US Marines were bought in to calm things down 
and aid in the UN’s withdrawal. 
‘Use the Sticky Foam!’ ordered the commanding offi- 
cer. And the Marines did. They sprayed the foam not 
into the crowd, but in front of it so it would harden and 
produce an instant wall between the rioters and the food. 
The Somali crowd paused, looked at the bubbling, 
expanding, hardening, custard-like substance, waited for 
it to solidify, climbed over it and carried on rioting. All 
this occurred in front of the TV cameras. That night, 
news broadcasts across America ran the footage along- 
side a clip from Ghostbusters in which Bill Murray was 
slimed. 
(One of the deployers of the Sticky Foam in Somalia — 
Commander Sid Heal — later warned me against portray- 
ing the incident as an unmitigated disaster. He said they 
had hoped it would take the rioters twenty minutes to 
figure out how to scale the foam, but instead it took 
them five minutes, and so the worst you could say was 
that it was a three-quarter disaster. It was, however, the 
first and last time that the foam was deployed in a 
combat situation.) 
Unperturbed by the Somali incident, the US penal 
authorities introduced Sticky Foam into prisons in the 
late r990s to subdue violent inmates before they were 
transported elsewhere. The practice was quickly discon- 
tinued, however, because it was impossible to move the 
54

--- PAGE BREAK ---s in the 
late r990s to subdue violent inmates before they were 
transported elsewhere. The practice was quickly discon- 
tinued, however, because it was impossible to move the 
54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
foamed prisoners from their cells once they’d been immo- 
bilized. They were just stuck there. 
But now, unexpectedly, the foam is enjoying a renais- 
sance. Bottles of the stuff were taken to Iraq in 2003. 
The idea was that once US troops found the weapons of 
mass destruction, Sticky Foam would be sprayed all over 
them. But the weapons of mass destruction were never 
found, and so the foam remained in its bottles. 
Of all Jim’s ideas, the most fruitful was his insistence 
that military operatives and scientists should journey to 
the wildest corners of their imaginations, unafraid to 
appear harebrained and half-baked in their pursuit of a 
new kind of weapon, something cunning and big-hearted 
and non-lethal. 
The foam is one of hundreds of similar inventions 
mentioned in a leaked 2002 US air force report — Non- 
Lethal Weapons: Terms and References — which compre- 
hensively details the latest endeavours in this field. There 
are a number of Acoustic Weapons: the Blast Wave 
Projector, the Curdler Unit and the low-frequency Infra- 
sound which, according to the leaked report, ‘easily 
penetrates most buildings and vehicles’ and creates ‘nau- 
sea, loss. of bowels, disorientation, vomiting, potential 
internal organ damage or death’. (Jim Channon’s succes- 
sors seem more laissez-faire about their definition of the 
term ‘non-lethal’ than he was.) Then there are the Race- 
Specific Stink Bomb and the Chameleon Camouflage 
Suit, neither of which has got off the ground yet, because 
nobody can work out how to invent them. 
There is a special pheromone that ‘can be used to 
55

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Chameleon Camouflage 
Suit, neither of which has got off the ground yet, because 
nobody can work out how to invent them. 
There is a special pheromone that ‘can be used to 
55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
mark target individuals and then release bees to attack 
them’. There’s the Electric Glove, the Electric Police 
Jacket ‘which jolts anyone who touches it’, the Net Gun, 
and the Electric Net Gun, which is the same as the Net 
Gun but ‘will release an electric shock if the target tries 
to struggle’. There are all manner of holograms, includ- 
ing the Death Hologram — ‘used to scare a target individ- 
ual to death. Example, a drug lord with a weak heart 
sees the ghost of his dead rival appearing at his bedside 
and dies of fright? — and the Prophet Hologram, ‘the 
projection of the image of an ancient god over an enemy 
capital whose public communications have been seized 
and used against it in a massive psychological operation’. 
The First Earth Battalion’s Colonel John Alexander is 
named as a co-author of the report. He lives in the 
suburbs of Las Vegas, in a large house filled with Bud- 
dhist and aboriginal art and military awards. There were 
also, I noticed, a number of books written by Uri Geller 
on his shelf. 
‘Do you know Uri Geller?’ I asked him. 
‘Oh yes,’ he said. ‘We’re great friends. We used to 
have metal-bending parties together.’ 
Colonel Alexander has been a special adviser to the 
Pentagon, the CIA, the Los Alamos National Laboratory 
and NATO. He is also one of Al Gore’s oldest friends. 
He is not completely retired from the US military. A 
week after I met him, he flew to Afghanistan for four 
months to act as a ‘special adviser’. When I asked him 
who he was advising and on what, he wouldn’t tell me. 
For much of the afternoon, instead, John reminisced 
56

--- PAGE BREAK ---tan for four 
months to act as a ‘special adviser’. When I asked him 
who he was advising and on what, he wouldn’t tell me. 
For much of the afternoon, instead, John reminisced 
56

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The First Earth Battalion 
about the First Earth Battalion. His face broke into a 
broad smile when he recalled the secret late-night rituals 
that he and some fellow colonels would enact on military 
bases, after reading Jim’s manual: 
‘Big bonfires!’ he said. ‘And guys with snakes on their 
heads!’ 
He laughed. 
‘Have you heard of Ron?’ I asked him. 
‘Ron?’ said Colonel Alexander. 
‘Ron who reactivated Uri,’ I said. 
Colonel Alexander fell silent. I waited for him to 
respond. After about thirty seconds, I realized that he 
wasn’t going to say another word until I asked him a 
different question. So I did. 
‘So did Michael Echanis really kill a goat just by 
staring at it?’ I asked. 
‘Michael Echanis?’ he said. He looked perplexed. ‘I 
think you’re talking about Guy Savelli.’ 
‘Guy Savelli2?’ I asked. 
‘Yes,’ said the Colonel. ‘The man who killed the goat 
was definitely Guy Savelli.’ 
| 
a7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ah alts nee 
‘yon ‘ 
1. 
tye 
a 
e 
} 
ita aia 
i 
7 
eke 
Tiere ee iMEge 
7 
~ 
4 
a 
7 
ent 13 sana 
2 
} 
; 
ii 
- 
; 
cae: 
ne 
REA, 
i Nate es wal ie 
. 
i srt 
’ 
> 
Ss 
- 
LPs : 
oe: 
$5430) 1, ie ele mo 
Ls paiva 
’ 
Pie 
~~ 
i 
s 
wd 
Y 
. 
— 
(eae See fea 
Tt llevan obverael OR 
Bu 
7] 
. 
4 
+ 
. 
: 
= 
a 
‘3 
a 
a 
itis i 
id 
j 
. 
— 
: 
~ , 
x 
Niue 
ieee 
eae: 
t 
pstingh 
al 
a 
| 
ay 
me 
’ 
ee 
: 
lars 
‘ 
} 
ut 
j 
7 A) 
x 
, 
i” 
4 
’ 
oo 
7 
; 
mia 
bee 
5 
. 
i. 
yh et 
4 
» 
Fa 
a 
- 
“a. 
is 
: 
» 
3 
cs 
om 
~ 
aes 
. 
’ 
- 
(oud 
bi 
y 
‘ 
Vay 
> 
al

--- PAGE BREAK ---y 
me 
’ 
ee 
: 
lars 
‘ 
} 
ut 
j 
7 A) 
x 
, 
i” 
4 
’ 
oo 
7 
; 
mia 
bee 
5 
. 
i. 
yh et 
4 
» 
Fa 
a 
- 
“a. 
is 
: 
» 
3 
cs 
om 
~ 
aes 
. 
’ 
- 
(oud 
bi 
y 
‘ 
Vay 
> 
al

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. INTO THE HEART 
OF THE GOAT 
The Savelli Dance and Martial Arts Studio stands around 
the corner from a Red Lobster, a TGI Friday’s, a Burger 
King and a Texaco garage, in the suburbs of Cleveland, 
Ohio. The sign on the door advertises lessons in ‘Ballet, 
Tap, Jazz, Hip-Hop, Aerobatics, Pointe, Kickboxing, and 
Self-Defense’. 
I had telephoned Guy Savelli a few weeks earlier. 
I told him who I was and asked if he might describe 
the work he had undertaken inside Goat Lab. Colonel 
Alexander had told me that Guy was a civilian. He 
was under no military contract. So it seemed possible 
that he might talk. But instead there was a very long 
silence. 
‘Who are you?’ he finally asked. 
I told him again. Then I heard a profoundly sad sigh. 
It was something more than ‘Oh no, not a journalist’. It 
sounded almost like a howl against the inescapable and 
unjust forces of destiny. 
‘Have I called at a bad time?’ I asked him. 
‘No.’ 
Ze,

--- PAGE BREAK ---more than ‘Oh no, not a journalist’. It 
sounded almost like a howl against the inescapable and 
unjust forces of destiny. 
‘Have I called at a bad time?’ I asked him. 
‘No.’ 
Ze,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘So were you at Goat Lab?’ I asked. 
‘Yes.’ He sighed again. ‘And yes, I did drop a goat 
when I was there.’ 
‘I don’t suppose you still practise the technique?’ I 
asked him. 
‘Yes, I do,’ he said. 
Guy fell silent again. And then he said — and his voice 
sounded sorrowful and distressed — ‘Last week I killed 
my hamster.’ 
‘Just by staring at it?’ I asked. 
‘Yes,’ confirmed Guy. 
Guy was a little more relaxed in the flesh, but not 
much. We met in the foyer of his dance studio. He is a 
grandfather now, but still jumpy and full of energy, 
moving around the room as if possessed. He was sur- 
rounded by some of his children and grandchildren, and 
half a dozen of his Kun Tao students stood anxiously 
around the edges of the studio. Something was up, this 
was clear, but I didn’t know what. 
\ 
‘So you did this to your hamster?’ I asked Guy. 
‘Huh?’ he said. 
‘Hamsters,’ I said, suddenly unsure of myself. 
‘Yes,’ he said. ‘They...’ A look of bewilderment 
crossed his face. ‘When I do it,’ he said, ‘the hamsters 
die.’ 
‘Really?’ I asked. 
‘Hamsters drive me nuts,’ said Guy. He began talking 
very fast. ‘They just go around and around. I wanted to 
stop it from going around and around. I thought, ’m 
60

--- PAGE BREAK ---y?’ I asked. 
‘Hamsters drive me nuts,’ said Guy. He began talking 
very fast. ‘They just go around and around. I wanted to 
stop it from going around and around. I thought, ’m 
60

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
going to make it sick so it'll burrow under the sawdust 
or something.’ 
‘But instead you made it die?’ 
Tve got it on tape!’ said Guy. ‘I taped it. You can 
watch the tape.’ He paused. ‘I had a guy take care of the 
hamster every night.’ 
‘What do you mean?’ I asked. 
‘Feed it. Water it.’ 
‘So you knew it was a healthy hamster,’ I said. 
‘Yes,’ said Guy. 
‘And then you started staring,’ J said. 
‘Three days,’ sighed Guy. 
“You must hate hamsters,’ I said. 
‘Tt’s not that I want to do that to hamsters,’ Guy 
explained. 
‘But supposedly, 
if you’re a master, you 
should be able to do that kind of stuff. Is life just a 
punch and a kick and that’s it? Or is there more to it 
than that?’ 
Guy jumped in his car and went off to find his home 
video of the hamster being stared to death. While he was 
gone, his children, Bradley and Juliette, set up a video 
camera and began to film me. 
‘Why are you doing that?’ I asked them. 
There was a silence. 
‘Ask Dad,’ said Juliette. 
Guy returned an hour later. He was carrying a sheaf 
of papers and photographs along with a couple of video 
cassettes. 
‘Oh, I see Bradley has set up the camera,’ he said. 
61

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. 
Guy returned an hour later. He was carrying a sheaf 
of papers and photographs along with a couple of video 
cassettes. 
‘Oh, I see Bradley has set up the camera,’ he said. 
61

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Don’t worry about that! We film everything. You don’t 
mind, do you?’ 
Guy put the tape into the VCR, and he and I began to 
watch. 
The video showed two hamsters in a cage. Guy 
explained to me that he was staring at one, trying to 
make it sick and visibly paranoid about its wheel, while 
the other was to remain throughout an un-stared-at 
control hamster. Twenty minutes passed. 
‘ve never known a hamster,’ I said, ‘so I—’ 
‘Bradley!’ 
interrupted 
Guy. 
‘You 
ever 
own 
a 
hamster?’ 
‘Yes,’ replied Bradley. 
‘You ever see one do that before?’ 
Bradley came into the room and watched the video 
for a moment. 
‘Never,’ he said. 
‘Look at the way it’s glaring at the wheel!’ said 
Guy. 
The target hamster did indeed seem suddenly mistrust- 
ful of its wheel. It sat at the far end of the cage, looking 
at it warily. 
‘Usually that hamster loves its wheel,’ explained Guy. 
‘It does seem odd,’ I said, ‘although I have to say that 
emotions such as circumspection and wariness are not 
that easy to discern in hamsters.’ 
‘Yeah, yeah,’ said Guy. 
‘There will be some people reading this who own 
hamsters,’ I said. 
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns such as circumspection and wariness are not 
that easy to discern in hamsters.’ 
‘Yeah, yeah,’ said Guy. 
‘There will be some people reading this who own 
hamsters,’ I said. 
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
‘Good,’ said Guy. ‘Then they’ll know how rare that 
is. Your hamster people will know that.’ 
‘My hamster-owning readers,’ I agreed, ‘will know 
whether or not this is aberrant behaviour 
... He’s 
down!’ I said. 
The hamster had fallen. Its legs were in the air. 
‘Tm accomplishing the task I wanted to do,’ said Guy. 
‘Look! The other one has run right over it! He’s right on 
top of the other hamster! That’s bizarre! That’s kind of 
nuts isn’t it? He’s not moving! I’m accomplishing my 
task right there.’ 
The other hamster fell over. 
“You’ve dropped both hamsters!’ I said. 
‘No, the other one has just fallen over,’ explained 
Guy. 
‘OK,’ I said. 
There was a silence. 
‘Is he dead now?’ I asked. 
‘It gets more bizarre in a minute,’ said Guy. He seemed 
to be dodging the question. ‘Now! Its more bizarre now!’ 
The hamster was motionless. And it remained that 
way — utterly immobile — for fifteen minutes. Then it 
shook itself down and began eating again. 
And then the tape ended. 
‘Guy,’ I said. ‘I don’t know what to make of this. The 
hamster did seem to be behaving unusually in compari- 
son with the control hamster, but on the other hand it 
definitely didn’t die. I thought you said I was going to 
watch it die.’ 
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---did seem to be behaving unusually in compari- 
son with the control hamster, but on the other hand it 
definitely didn’t die. I thought you said I was going to 
watch it die.’ 
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
There was a short silence. 
‘My wife said, “No”,’ he explained. ‘Back at the house. 
She said, “You don’t know if this guy’s a bleeding-heart 
liberal.” She said, “Don’t show him the hamster dying. 
Don’t show him that. Show him the tape where the 
hamster acts bizarre instead.” ’ 
Guy told me that what I had just seen was the 
edited highlights of two continuous days of staring. It 
was on the third day, Guy said, that the hamster dropped 
dead. 
‘Tam a ghost,’ said Guy. 
We were in the foyer of his dance studio, standing 
underneath the notice board. It is covered with memen- 
tos of Savelli family successes. Jennifer Savelli, Guy’s 
daughter, danced with Richard Gere in Chicago. She 
danced in the 75th Academy Awards. But there was 
nothing much on the wall about Guy — no newspaper 
cuttings or anything like that. 
‘You would never have known about me if Colonel 
Alexander hadn’t told you my name,’ he said. 
It was true. All I could find about Guy in the news- 
papers was the odd notice from the Cleveland Plain 
Dealer concerning awards won by his students in local 
tournaments. This other side of his life was entirely 
unchronicled. 
Guy riffled through the papers and the photographs. 
‘Look!’ he said. ‘Look at this!’ 
He handed me a diagram. 
‘Guy,’ I said. ‘Is this Goat Lab?’ 
‘Yes,’ said Guy. 
64

--- PAGE BREAK ---hronicled. 
Guy riffled through the papers and the photographs. 
‘Look!’ he said. ‘Look at this!’ 
He handed me a diagram. 
‘Guy,’ I said. ‘Is this Goat Lab?’ 
‘Yes,’ said Guy. 
64

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
empty room 
test animal 
experimental room 
X Mr. Savelli 
Bradley silently filmed me studying the Goat Lab 
diagram. 
Then Guy dropped the papers and the photographs. 
They scattered all over the floor. We both bent down to 
pick the stuff up. 
‘Oh,’ murmured Guy. ‘You weren’t supposed to see 
that.’ 
I quickly looked over. In the moments before Guy hid 
it between some documents, I caught a glimpse of what 
I wasn’t supposed to see. 
‘Bloody hell,’ I said. 
‘Right,’ said Guy. 
It was a blurry snapshot of a soldier crouched in a 
frosty field next to a fence. The photograph appeared to 
have captured the soldier in the act of karate-chopping 
a goat to death. 
‘Jesus,’ I said. 
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---f a soldier crouched in a 
frosty field next to a fence. The photograph appeared to 
have captured the soldier in the act of karate-chopping 
a goat to death. 
‘Jesus,’ I said. 
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘You really weren’t supposed to see that,’ said Guy. 
Guy’s story began with a telephone call he received, 
out of the blue, in the summer of 1983. 
‘Mister 
Savelli?? said a voice. 
‘I’m phoning from 
Special Forces.’ 
It was Colonel Alexander. 
Guy was not a military man. Why were they calling 
him? The colonel explained that since their last martial 
arts teacher, Michael Echanis, died in Nicaragua back in 
1978, Special Forces had basically stopped incorporating 
those kinds of techniques into their training programmes 
down at Fort Bragg, but they were ready to give them 
another try. They had chosen him, he explained, because 
the branch of martial arts he practises - Kun Tao — has 
a uniquely mystical dimension. Guy teaches his students 
that ‘only with total integration of the mental, physical 
and spiritual can one hope to come away unscathed. Our 
intention is to teach this integrated way and show others 
how to have exceptional paranormal results that are 
usually associated with fables for the young.’ 
The colonel asked Guy if he could come down to Fort 
Bragg for a week or so, to test the waters. Could he step 
into Michael Echanis’s shoes? Guy said he’d give it a try. 
On the first day, Guy taught the soldiers how to break 
slabs of concrete with their bare hands, how to withstand 
being whacked on the back of the neck with a thick 
metal rod and how to make a person forget what he is 
about to say. 
‘How do you make a person forget what he’s about to 
say?’ I asked Guy. 
66

--- PAGE BREAK ---the back of the neck with a thick 
metal rod and how to make a person forget what he is 
about to say. 
‘How do you make a person forget what he’s about to 
say?’ I asked Guy. 
66

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
‘Easy,’ he said. ‘You just do this —’ Guy scrunched up 
his face and yelled, ‘Noooo0000!’ 
‘Really?’ I asked. 
“You ever play pool and you miss your shot and you 
want your opponent to miss his shot and you go, 
“Nooooooo0o”? And then they miss their shot! It’s the 
same thing.’ 
‘Is it all in the tone of voice?’ I asked. 
“You say it inside your head,’ said Guy, exasperated. 
‘You get that feeling inside of you.’ 
And so it was, on the evening of the first day, that 
Special Forces mentioned to Guy that they had goats. 
Guy said he couldn’t remember who steered the conver- 
sation then, but he did recall, at some point during the 
evening, announcing, ‘Let’s give it a try.’ 
‘So the next morning,’ Guy said, ‘they got a goat, they 
set it up, and we started.’ 
As Guy recounted this story, the atmosphere inside 
the dance studio remained apprehensive. Bradley con- 
tinued to film me. From time to time, when we made 
small talk about holidays or the weather, I could see 
what a lovely family the Savellis were — close-knit, tough 
and intelligent. But whenever we returned to the subject 
of goats, the mood instantly hardened. 
It turns out that the goat Guy stared at had not been 
de-bleated or shot in the leg. Guy had said he wanted a 
normal healthy goat, so that’s what they gave him. It 
was herded into a small room, which was empty but for 
a soldier with a video camera. Guy knelt on the floor in 
another room. 
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---l healthy goat, so that’s what they gave him. It 
was herded into a small room, which was empty but for 
a soldier with a video camera. Guy knelt on the floor in 
another room. 
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
And he began to get that feeling inside him. 
‘I pictured a golden road going up into the sky,’ he 
said. ‘And the Lord was there, and I walked into His 
arms, and I got a chill, and I knew it was right. I wanted 
to find a way to knock that goat down. We have this 
picture of St Michael the Archangel with a sword. So I 
thought about that. I thought about St Michael with this 
sword going...’ 
Guy mimed the action of St Michael violently thrust- 
ing his sword downwards into a goat. 
‘... through the goat and...’ 
Guy smacked his hands together. 
‘,.. knocking it down to the ground. Inside of me I 
couldn’t even breathe. I was going...” 
Guy mimed struggling for breath. 
‘... And you believe it,’ he said. “You believe it. And 
after about fifteen minutes I said, “Lenny, you better go 
see. | don’t know for sure.”’ 
Lenny from Special Forces disappeared into the room 
where the goat was. He came back and announced, with 
surprise and solemnity, “The goat is down.’ 
‘And that was it?’ I asked. 
‘That was it,’ said Guy. ‘It lay there for a while, and 
then it got up again.’ 
‘Is that the end of the story?’ I asked. 
‘No,’ said Guy sadly. ‘I wish it was. But the next day 
they wanted me to do it again. But this time they wanted 
me to kill the goat. They said, “Kill the goat!”’ 
He fell silent, as if to say, ‘See what I had to deal 
with?’ 
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---day 
they wanted me to do it again. But this time they wanted 
me to kill the goat. They said, “Kill the goat!”’ 
He fell silent, as if to say, ‘See what I had to deal 
with?’ 
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
‘Why kill the goat?’ I asked. 
‘Military people,’ sighed Guy. ‘I guess they thought 
you could ... whatever...’ 
"OK, I said: 
So on day three a new experiment was devised. Guy 
told Special Forces to round up thirty goats. 
‘Thirty goats,’ he told them. ‘Put numbers on them. 
Pll pick a number. I'll drop the goat.’ 
On this occasion, Special Forces stationed armed 
guards all around the Goat Lab perimeter. There had 
been no such security the day before, presumably because 
they hadn’t really imagined a goat would topple. But this 
time, Guy told me, the mood was far more sombre. 
Thirty goats, all with numbers strapped to their backs, 
were herded inside. Guy randomly chose number 16. 
And he began. 
But this time, he said, he just couldn’t concentrate. 
Whenever he pictured himself walking into the arms of 
the Lord, his meditation was disrupted by the memory 
of a Special Forces soldier yelling ‘Kill the goat’ at him. 
He got as far as picturing St Michael the Archangel, but 
just as he was about to thrust his sword downwards, the 
cry of ‘Kill the goat’ again interrupted the psychic path 
between Guy and the animal. 
‘I was just so pissed off,’ Guy said. ‘Anyway, when 
Lenny went next door to look it turned out that number 
seventeen had dropped dead.’ 
‘Collateral damage?’ I said. 
‘Right,’ said Guy. 
And that, he said, was the end of his story. 
69

--- PAGE BREAK ---y went next door to look it turned out that number 
seventeen had dropped dead.’ 
‘Collateral damage?’ I said. 
‘Right,’ said Guy. 
And that, he said, was the end of his story. 
69

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Except for one last thing. Ten years later, Guy said, 
three Special Forces soldiers covertly travelled to Cleve- 
land from Fort Bragg, having heard on the grapevine 
that Guy had once successfully stared a goat to death on 
their base. They wanted to know if the rumour was true. 
They wanted to see it for themselves. They wanted Guy 
to kill a goat for them. 
But Guy said no. He had killed enough goats for one 
lifetime. He was beginning to feel the dark forces of 
karma descend upon him. So he offered them a compro- 
mise. He would teach the soldiers how to do it for 
themselves. So the Special Forces men arranged to meet 
Guy at the office of a local veterinarian, who had agreed 
to provide a goat and an ECG machine. 
‘You brought a veterinarian into this?’ I asked, sur- 
prised. 
‘Yeah, the guy was a friend of mine,’ said Guy. 
‘And he provided the goat?’ 
‘Yeah.’ 
‘What about the Hippocratic oath?’ I asked. 
‘What?’ said Guy, a little crossly. 
‘’m just surprised that a civilian veterinary surgeon 
would provide a healthy goat so some soldiers could try 
and stare it to death.’ 
But Guy shrugged and said I didn’t have to take his 
word for it and he put a cassette into his VCR and 
pressed play. 
And I saw that it was true. A strange tableau flickered 
onto the screen, the opening scene of a goat snuff 
movie. A goat was strapped to an ECG machine. The 
7O

--- PAGE BREAK ---d 
pressed play. 
And I saw that it was true. A strange tableau flickered 
onto the screen, the opening scene of a goat snuff 
movie. A goat was strapped to an ECG machine. The 
7O

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
veterinarian was nowhere to be seen, but the office was 
clearly a veterinary office, with certificates on the wall 
and various animal medical-type implements scattered 
around. Two soldiers in combat fatigues sat on plastic 
chairs taking notes. The goat bleated. The soldiers 
continued to take notes. The goat bleated again. The 
ECG machine bleeped. The soldiers took more notes. 
Guy nudged me in the ribs. 
‘Ha!’ he said. ‘Dear me!’ He chuckled. ‘This isn’t even 
the best part yet.’ 
‘Is somebody staring at the goat?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah,’ he said. ‘That guy.’ 
‘Which one?’ I asked. “That one or that one?’ 
‘Neither,’ said Guy. ‘That one.’ 
Guy pointed to the corner of the screen at something I 
hadn’t noticed — the shoe of a third man, just off camera. 
For another ten minutes the bleating, bleeping and 
note taking continued on the VCR. 
‘Am I going to see some kind of physical response on 
the goat’s part?’ I asked Guy. 
‘It’s happening now!’ said Guy. ‘Look at the machine. 
The heart rate was around the mid-sixties. Now it’s 
dropped to fifty-five.’ 
(Ob? 1 said, 
The video ended. Guy turned off the TV. He seemed a 
little annoyed at my disappointed tone of voice. 
‘Let me get this completely clear,’ I said. ‘What I just 
saw was level one.’ 
‘Right,’ said Guy. ‘The goat was attached to the life- 
force of the man off screen.’ 
iM

--- PAGE BREAK ---of voice. 
‘Let me get this completely clear,’ I said. ‘What I just 
saw was level one.’ 
‘Right,’ said Guy. ‘The goat was attached to the life- 
force of the man off screen.’ 
iM

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘And if you carry that further,’ I said, ‘to level two, 
the goat will drop, or fall, or topple over, or tumble.’ 
‘Yes,’ said Guy. 
‘So the hamster was level two?’ I asked. 
‘Right,’ said Guy. 
‘And if you go even further than that, the goat or the 
hamster will die.’ 
‘Yes.’ Guy paused. ‘But level one is high!’ he said. 
‘Hey! Level one is high!’ 
‘Does it hurt to be the recipient of level one?’ I asked. 
‘No,’ said Guy. 
‘Guy,’ I said recklessly, ‘will you freeze me?’ 
There was a silence. 
‘Not this time,’ said Guy softly. ‘When you come back 
I will. This time, my wife said, “No.” She said, “You 
don’t know this person.” Which is true. She said, “Don’t 
do anything this time.” She said I have too much trust in 
everybody. And I do. I do, I do.’ 
My day with the Savellis was over, so I thanked them 
and got ready to leave. It was then that Guy gently 
tapped my shoulder and said, “There’s something you 
should know.’ 
‘Mmm?’ I said. 
And he told me. 
And then it all made sense — the profound sigh I had 
heard down the phone when I'd first called Guy, the 
shock on everyone’s face when I saw the snapshot of the 
goat being karate-chopped to death in a frozen field, 
Bradley’s constant filming of me. Guy told me everything, 
and when he finished explaining, I said, ‘Oh my God.’ 
72

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
Guy nodded. 
‘Bloody hell,’ I said. ‘Really?’ 
‘Really,’ said Guy. 
‘Jesus,’ I said. 
1,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ished explaining, I said, ‘Oh my God.’ 
72

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Into the Heart of the Goat 
Guy nodded. 
‘Bloody hell,’ I said. ‘Really?’ 
‘Really,’ said Guy. 
‘Jesus,’ I said. 
1,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“A 
nv 
Pal 
= 
i ct 
. 
. 
7 
Now sO 
ee 
es 
‘ 
=i. 
te 
oad 
-) 
ape 
\ 
‘a 
5 
- 
ied 
' 
- 
A 
x 
es 2 
: 
" 
ne. 
@ 
8 
ei 
4 
eee 
AY 
ohh 
. 
J 
y 
i 
| 
ae 
Ye 
abow 
ra Pike Ps i 
- 
1 
fo 
ox. 
is 
F 
At 
= 
2 
’ 
7 
ay 
——- 
- 
= 
4 
1 
= 
Ponts 
- 
- 
i 
= 
< 
a Te 
P 
af 
? 
d 
AS 
i 
ie, 
ay 
é 
= 
= 
r 
1g 
ww 
+ 
* 
. 
Ls 
~ 
> 
‘ 
b.. 
has 
Ae 
ae I 
« 
‘" 
, 
f 
“ve 
f 
[ 
‘ 
42 
7 
».5 
aa! 
Pe 
ws 
a 
‘ 
: 
, 
“4 
> 
= 
a, 
‘ 
‘ 
a 
& 
<u 
nee 
CiM 
= 
eee 
x 
= 
_ 
f 
a 
j 
' 
cs 
aaa: “wha 
Sie ah 
7 
a 
bh 
, 
5 
—— 
= 
co 
ieee va 
ey 
y 
1 
rare 
, 
, 
. 
ie 
ee 
a 
CG 
‘i 
5 
a 
i 
A 
‘ 
Bb 
* 
beens 
* 
‘ 
iW 
Win 
' 
a 
i} 
a 
1 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---_ 
f 
a 
j 
' 
cs 
aaa: “wha 
Sie ah 
7 
a 
bh 
, 
5 
—— 
= 
co 
ieee va 
ey 
y 
1 
rare 
, 
, 
. 
ie 
ee 
a 
CG 
‘i 
5 
a 
i 
A 
‘ 
Bb 
* 
beens 
* 
‘ 
iW 
Win 
' 
a 
i} 
a 
1 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5. HOMELAND SECURITY 
Six years before Major General Albert Stubblebine III 
failed to walk through his office wall in Arlington, 
Virginia, his office didn’t exist. There was no INSCOM 
— the US army Intelligence and Security Command. There 
were just military intelligence units scattered haphazardly 
around the world. It was — according to the author 
Richard Koster, who served with the 470th Counter 
Intelligence Corps Detachment in Panama during the 
pre-Stubblebine days — chaos. 
‘In the late nineteen fifties,’ Koster told me when I 
phoned him to ask about life in Military Intelligence 
before Stubblebine, ‘there were frantic calls from com- 
mander to commander. “We need to greatly expand 
Military Intelligence. We want you to release X number 
of officers. We need a colonel, three majors, six captains 
and fifteen lieutenants to be immediately reassigned to 
Military Intelligence.” So what do you do if you get a 
call like that? You think, “Ha! Let’s give them all our 
bindlestiffs and stumblebums.” So they did. And that’s 
who went to army intelligence, more or less globally.’ 
io)

--- PAGE BREAK ---get a 
call like that? You think, “Ha! Let’s give them all our 
bindlestiffs and stumblebums.” So they did. And that’s 
who went to army intelligence, more or less globally.’ 
io)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘What was it like in Panama before General Stubble- 
bine?’ I asked him. 
‘This was not a tight ship,’ he said. ‘We had a riot one 
year here in Panama City. My colonel came running up 
to me. “Where is this riot?” I said, “It’s right in front of 
the Legislative Palace.” He said, “Where’s that?” I said, 
“Go to the Tivoli Hotel. You’ll see it out the balcony.” 
He looked at me like I was Einstein because I had this 
... knowledge.’ 
In the late 1970s a brigadier general called William 
Royla was given the job of tidying the whole mess up. 
He was to form a kind of CIA for the army; it would be 
called INSCOM. And in 1981 General Stubblebine, who 
had been deeply moved by Jim Channon’s First Earth 
Battalion Operations Manual and was filled with the 
conviction that. America, the great superpower, needed 
to be defended by people who actually had superpowers, 
was appointed its commander. 
Stubblebine was a West Point man with a masters 
degree in chemical engineering from Columbia. He learnt 
about the First Earth Battalion when he was stationed at 
the army’s Intelligence School in Arizona. It was his 
friend and subordinate, Coloriel John Alexander, the 
inventor of Sticky Foam, who first drew his attention to 
it. 
Now, General Stubblebine was determined to turn his 
16,000 troops into a new army, an army of soldiers who 
could bend metal with their minds and pass through 
objects and consequently never have to go through the 
76

--- PAGE BREAK ---d to turn his 
16,000 troops into a new army, an army of soldiers who 
could bend metal with their minds and pass through 
objects and consequently never have to go through the 
76

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
chaotic trauma of a war like Vietnam again. Who would 
want to mess with an army like that? 
Plus, Stubblebine’s tenure as commander of Military 
Intelligence coincided with huge slashes in his budget. 
These were the post-Vietnam ‘draw down’ days, and the 
Pentagon wanted their soldiers to achieve more with less 
money. Learning how to walk through walls was an 
ambitious but inexpensive enterprise. 
And so it was that Jim Channon’s madcap vision, 
triggered by his post-combat depression, found its way 
into the highest levels of the United States military. 
Twenty years later, in room 403 of the Tarrytown 
Hilton, in upstate New York, just as General Stubblebine 
had finished describing his failed attempts 
to walk 
through his wall, he glanced out of the window. 
‘A cloud,’ he said. 
The three of us — the general, his second wife Rima 
and IJ - rose from our chairs. 
‘Jesus, Jon, I don’t know,’ said the general. ‘I’ve never 
done one that big.’ 
All day we had been waiting for the right sort of cloud 
to come along, a cumulus, in fact, so he could show me 
that he could burst it just by staring at it. Of all his 
powers this was, he said, the easiest to demonstrate. 
‘Anyone can see it,’ he had promised me, ‘and anyone 
can do it.’ 
‘Right in the notch, way over where the pine trees 
are,’ said Rima. ‘Do that one.’ 
‘Let me see,’ said the general. 
ATE

--- PAGE BREAK ---can see it,’ he had promised me, ‘and anyone 
can do it.’ 
‘Right in the notch, way over where the pine trees 
are,’ said Rima. ‘Do that one.’ 
‘Let me see,’ said the general. 
ATE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
He stood very still and began to stare upwards into 
the sky. 
‘Are you trying to burst that one over there?’ I asked. 
‘Isn’t it too far away?’ 
General Stubblebine looked at me as if I was nuts. 
‘They’re all far away,’ he said. 
‘Over there!’ said Rima. 
I darted my eyes back and forward across the sky, trying 
to work out which cloud the general was trying to burst. 
‘It’s gone!’ said Rima. 
‘The cloud,’ confirmed the general, ‘appears to have 
gone.’ 
We sat back down. Then the general said he wasn’t 
sure. The clouds had been moving so fast, he said, it 
wasn’t possible to conclude 100 per cent that he had 
caused the disappearance. It might have just been meteo- 
rology. 
‘Hard to tell,’ he said, ‘who was doing what to whom.’ 
Sometimes on long car journeys, he said, Rima would 
drive and he would make the clouds go away, and if it 
was a puffy cloud alone in a blue sky, it is unequivocal. 
He stares: the cloud bursts. But this wasn’t one of those 
moments. 
In 1983, two years into his tenure as the commander 
of Military Intelligence, General Stubblebine’s pursuit 
of an indisputable miracle became an urgent one. He 
needed something to satisfy his commanding officers in 
the Pentagon, and he needed it fast, because his job was 
in jeopardy. 
General Stubblebine was confounded by his continual 
78

--- PAGE BREAK ---ded something to satisfy his commanding officers in 
the Pentagon, and he needed it fast, because his job was 
in jeopardy. 
General Stubblebine was confounded by his continual 
78

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
failure to walk through his wall. What was wrong with 
him that he couldn’t do it? Perhaps there was simply too 
much in his in-tray to give it the required level of 
concentration. General Manuel Noriega, principally, was 
causing him significant trouble in Panama. Noriega had 
been on the US intelligence payroll since the 1970s - 
since CIA director George Bush had authorized his 
recruitment — but now he was out of control. 
General Stubblebine’s 
CIA counterparts had been 
using Panama’s network of hidden airstrips to transport 
guns to the Contras in Nicaragua. Once the weapons 
had been delivered, the planes returned to Panama to re- 
fuel for their journey back home to the United States. 
Noriega seized the opportunity to fill them with cocaine. 
And so 
it was that the CIA became implicated in 
Noriega’s cocaine racket. This awkward alliance was 
making both sides paranoid, and when General Stubble- 
bine visited Panama, he discovered to his fury that 
Noriega had his hotel room bugged. 
It was at this point that the battle between the two 
generals — Noriega and Stubblebine —- shifted into the 
supernatural. 
Noriega 
took 
to tying black 
ribbons 
around his ankles and placing little scraps of paper in his 
shoes with names written on them to protect him against 
spells cast by his enemies. He was possibly walking 
around Panama City with the word Stubblebine secreted 
inside his shoe at the very moment that the general was 
trying to walk through his wall. How could General 
Stubblebine concentrate on passing through objects with 
that sort of craziness going on around him? 
vo

--- PAGE BREAK ---t that the general was 
trying to walk through his wall. How could General 
Stubblebine concentrate on passing through objects with 
that sort of craziness going on around him? 
vo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
General Stubblebine countered by setting his psychic 
spies on Noriega. This was the Fort Meade team, who 
worked out of a condemned clapboard building down a 
wooded track in Maryland and who, as a result of not 
officially existing, had no coffee budget, a fact they had 
come to resent. They were also going stir-crazy. Their 
offices were claustrophobic, and many of them didn’t 
much like each other to begin with. One, a major called 
Ed Dames, had taken to psychically spying on the Loch 
Ness monster during the fallow months, when there 
wasn’t much official military psychic work. He deter- 
mined it was a dinosaur’s ghost. This finding irritated 
some of the others, who considered it unscientific and 
frankly implausible. Another psychic spy, David More- 
house, was soon to check himself into a psychiatric 
hospital as a result of an excess of psychic spying. 
They couldn’t get their back door open. It had been 
locked and painted shut dozens of times over the years. 
Nobody knew where the key was. During one particu- 
larly hot day they began almost to faint in there, and so 
the talk got around to whether they should kick the door 
open and get a breeze going through. 
‘We can’t,’ said Lyn Buchanan. ‘We don’t exist. If we 
kick it open, nobody will come and fix it.’ 
(It was Lyn Buchanan who recounted this story to me, 
when I met him in the summer of 2003 at a hotel in Las 
Vegas.) 
‘Leave it to me,’ said psychic spy Joe McMoneagle. 
He disappeared and returned twenty minutes later with 
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---me, 
when I met him in the summer of 2003 at a hotel in Las 
Vegas.) 
‘Leave it to me,’ said psychic spy Joe McMoneagle. 
He disappeared and returned twenty minutes later with 
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
a detailed and psychically divined sketch of the missing 
key. Joe McMoneagle then drove into town to a local 
locksmith, got the key made from the sketch, returned to 
the unit, unlocked the back door and prised through the 
paint. 
‘Oh, Joe’s good,’ said Lyn Buchanan. ‘Joe is very 
good.’ 
I visited Joe McMoneagle a few months later. He lives 
in Virginia now. I mentioned Lyn Buchanan’s story 
about the key. After I told him what Lyn had said, Joe 
smiled somewhat guiltily. 
‘T, uh, actually picked the lock,’ he admitted. 
He explained that Lyn had seemed so _bedazzled, 
and it had given the flagging morale of the psychic spies 
such a boost, he didn’t have the heart to disabuse them 
of the fact that the door was opened using non-psychic 
means. 
Working conditions at Fort Meade were so grim that 
a conspiracy theory began to flourish within its con- 
demned 
walls. There 
they were, 
hitherto 
ordinary 
soldiers who had been handpicked and initiated into a 
fabulously secret military psychic elite, which turned out 
to be utterly humdrum. Lyn Buchanan and some of his 
colleagues had consequently come to believe that there 
must be another secret psychic unit, even more deeply 
embedded, and presumably with more glamorous offices 
than theirs. 
‘I got to think that we were there in order to be 
caught,’ Lyn said when I met him in Las Vegas. 
8I

--- PAGE BREAK ---re deeply 
embedded, and presumably with more glamorous offices 
than theirs. 
‘I got to think that we were there in order to be 
caught,’ Lyn said when I met him in Las Vegas. 
8I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Lyn is a soft-eyed, folksy-looking man, who — for all 
the dismal working conditions — sees his time in the old 
unit as the happiest days of his life. 
‘What do you mean, “there to be caught”?’ I asked 
him. 
‘You know,’ said Lyn. ‘If the National Enquirer ever 
got wind of it, the army could have said to them, “Yes, 
we do have a secret psychic unit. Here they are.”’ 
Hang the psychics out to dry — postulated Lyn with 
some bitterness — so the other psychics, whoever they 
were, would be left in peace to continue their even more 
secret work. 
So in the summer of 1983, when General Stubblebine 
asked the team to divine in which room of a particular 
villa in Panama City Noriega was staying in, and what 
Noriega was thinking about while he was there, they 
sprang into action, delighted for some distraction. 
General Stubblebine simultaneously ordered a team of 
non-psychic spies to rent an apartment down the road 
from Noriega’s 
villa. The timing was 
critical. The 
moment the Fort Meade psychics delivered their divina- 
tions, General Stubblebine phoned the non-psychics in 
Panama and ordered them to climb over the wall, get 
inside the villa, and plant bugs in Noriega’s rooms. 
Unfortunately, two of Noriega’s guard dogs were alerted 
during the covert raid, and the non-psychics were chased 
back over the wall. 
General Noriega responded to this assault by placing 
a huge amulet around his neck and driving to a nearby 
beach where his personal sorcerer, a Brazilian named 
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---ver the wall. 
General Noriega responded to this assault by placing 
a huge amulet around his neck and driving to a nearby 
beach where his personal sorcerer, a Brazilian named 
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
Ivan Trilha, erected an illuminated cross to ward off 
American intelligence operatives. 
General Stubblebine had his adversaries 
at home 
too. His superior officer, General John Adams Wickham, 
the US army’s Chief of Staff, was not a fan of the 
paranormal. 
General 
Stubblebine 
had attempted 
to 
captivate him at a high-level black-tie party in a Wash- 
ington hotel by producing from his tuxedo pocket a 
piece of bent cutlery, but General Wickham recoiled, 
horrified. 
The reason General Wickham felt the way he did 
about bent cutlery can be found in Deuteronomy chapter 
18, verses IO-IT: 
There shall not be found among you any one that 
maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the 
fire, or that useth divination ... or an enchanter, or 
a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar 
spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. 
-General Wickham 
believed, and in fact told col- 
leagues, that Satan had somehow taken over General 
Stubblebine’s soul. It was Satan, not General Stubble- 
bine, who had bent the fork. 
In later White House administrations, including that 
of George W. Bush, General Wickham has continued to 
command respect. In his autobiography, Colin Powell 
twice refers to him as ‘my mentor’, and in June 2002 he 
received 
George 
W. 
Bush’s 
‘American 
Inspirations 
Award’ for his work as part of The Presidential Prayer 
Team, a 3-million-strong community of Americans who 
83

--- PAGE BREAK ---June 2002 he 
received 
George 
W. 
Bush’s 
‘American 
Inspirations 
Award’ for his work as part of The Presidential Prayer 
Team, a 3-million-strong community of Americans who 
83

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
log onto presidentialprayerteam.org every week to be 
told what to pray for: 
Pray for the ongoing efforts in the war on terror, that 
the President and all his intelligence sources will obtain 
the most helpful information in safeguarding America. 
Pray for them to have godly wisdom in the manner 
in which they handle each bit of information. Pray for 
the effectiveness of a new fingerprinting initiative that 
will screen foreign travellers entering America. Pray 
for the strong relationship between Mr. Bush and Mr. 
Blair. Pray that the President will continue to be 
guided by the Lord in his deliberations with the U.K. 
And so on. General Stubblebine might have suggested 
to General Wickham that prayer groups were not dis- 
similar to spoon-bending type initiatives, both being 
attempts to harness the power of the mind to influence 
things from afar, but the general’s unassailable enemy 
regarding this logic was Deuteronomy chapter 18, verses 
IO-II. 
Funnily enough, and unbeknown to General Wick- 
ham, General Stubblebine had in fact undertaken every 
one of the above abominations before the Lord during 
his tenure as head of army intelligence, with the excep- 
tion of making his son or daughter pass through fire, 
although he had fire-walked himself in the mountains of 
Virginia, under the tutelage of the self-help guru Anthony 
Robbins. 
General Wickham’s hard-line interpretation of Deuter- 
onomy 
was 
making 
General 
Stubblebine’s 
position 
84

--- PAGE BREAK ---irginia, under the tutelage of the self-help guru Anthony 
Robbins. 
General Wickham’s hard-line interpretation of Deuter- 
onomy 
was 
making 
General 
Stubblebine’s 
position 
84

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
untenable, hence his urgent need to come up with an 
indisputable miracle. Back home in Arlington his late- 
night attempts at levitation met with no success. The 
general put this failure, too, down to his ever-burgeoning 
in-tray, which is why he eventually flew to Fort Bragg in 
an attempt to convince Special Forces to burst the hearts 
of animals just by staring at them. If he didn’t have the 
time to perfect these powers, perhaps they might. 
It is hard to predict whether General Stubblebine 
might have found a kindred spirit in his commander in 
chief, President Reagan. The president seemed to have a 
foot in both camps. His chief of staff Donald Regan 
wrote in his memoirs that ‘virtually every major move 
and decision the Reagans made during my time as White 
House chief of staff was cleared in advance with a 
woman in San Francisco who drew up horoscopes to 
make certain that the planets were in a favourable align- 
ment for the enterprise.’ 
This woman, whose name was Joan Quigley, fixed the 
exact time that the president would sign the Intermediate 
Nuclear Forces treaty in 1987. Joan Quigley now goes 
by the presumably unauthorized title ‘Presidential Astrol- 
oger Joan Quigley’. 
But the president also shared, with his friend General 
Wickham, an abiding respect for the fundamentals of 
the Bible. When the states of Arkansas and Louisiana 
passed a law stating that creationism be taught in public 
schools, the president cheered the initiative, announcing, 
‘Religious America is awakening!’ 
When I telephoned General Wickham to ask for his 
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---creationism be taught in public 
schools, the president cheered the initiative, announcing, 
‘Religious America is awakening!’ 
When I telephoned General Wickham to ask for his 
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
account of that black-tie party, he said he remembered it 
well. It was a big dinner at a place called Quarters One. 
Yes, he had recoiled, he said, because as a Christian you 
have to accept that the supernatural is alive, and it 
sometimes manifests itself in eerie ways. But General 
Stubblebine was, broadly speaking, ‘one of the good 
guys’. 
‘I became actually kinda intrigued,’ he told me. 
General Stubblebine had spotted a flash of curiosity 
cross General Wickham’s face at the party, and he 
recognized that this could be a watershed moment in 
military history. If he could only beguile his famously 
Christian chief of staff by performing an on the spot 
paranormal demonstration, might this be the moment 
that the supernatural began its journey towards official 
recognition by the US army? 
This is why General Stubblebine seized the oppor- 
tunity to say to General Wickham, ‘I can do it for you 
now if you like. I can bend a spoon for you right now, if 
you like.’ 
And this, General Wickham told me, was General 
Stubblebine’s error. 
‘T didn’t want him to bend a spoon in the middle of a 
party, he said. ‘It was an inappropriate place to do it.’ 
It was exactly this sort of over-enthusiasm that led to 
General Stubblebine’s enforced early retirement. 
But the supernatural war against Manuel Noriega did 
not end with General Stubblebine’s departure. Five years 
later, in December 1989, the US launched Operation Just 
Cause to depose Noriega and put him on trial for cocaine 
86

--- PAGE BREAK ---did 
not end with General Stubblebine’s departure. Five years 
later, in December 1989, the US launched Operation Just 
Cause to depose Noriega and put him on trial for cocaine 
86

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
smuggling. But when American troops arrived in Pan- 
ama, they discovered that Noriega had gone into hiding. 
An agency within the US government (Sergeant Lyn 
Buchanan told me he couldn’t remember which it was, 
and anyway, he said, the information was probably still 
classified) 
called 
up the psychic 
spies. Where was 
Noriega? Lyn Buchanan sat inside the clapboard building 
in Fort Meade, put himself into a trance and received ‘a 
powerful impulse regarding Noriega’s location’. 
‘Ask Kristy McNichol,’ he kept writing on a piece of 
paper. ‘Ask Kristy McNichol.’ 
Sergeant Buchanan was certain that the TV actress 
Kristy McNichol, who appeared in Starsky & Hutch, 
the ABC mini-series Family, The Bionic Woman and The 
Love Boat II, held the key to the whereabouts of General 
Noriega. At that time, in December 1989, Kristy Mc- 
Nichol had just recorded the CBS special, Candid Cam- 
era! The First 40 Years, had a guest role in Murder, She 
Wrote and had starred in the erotic thriller Two Moon 
Junction. 
‘Ask Kristy McNichol,’ Lyn continually wrote, in his 
trance state. 
Lyn Buchanan stopped at this point and said he didn’t 
know whether anyone had acted on his divination. The 
way the secret psychic unit was structured, he explained, 
meant 
that 
once 
his divinations 
had 
been passed 
upwards, he was rarely given feedback about what hap- 
pened next. He had no idea if US authorities subse- 
quently contacted Kristy McNichol. 
So I attempted to ask her myself. I emailed her to 
87

--- PAGE BREAK ---rely given feedback about what hap- 
pened next. He had no idea if US authorities subse- 
quently contacted Kristy McNichol. 
So I attempted to ask her myself. I emailed her to 
87

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
enquire whether by chance she had known where Gen- 
eral Manuel Noriega was holed up in December 1989. 
In addition, was I the first person to have approached 
her about this matter, or had others, perhaps US intelli- 
gence operatives, contacted her in the past? 
I never got a reply. 
For everyday agnostics, it is not easy to accept the 
idea that our leaders, and the leaders of our enemies, 
sometimes seem to believe that the business of managing 
world affairs should be carried out within both standard 
and supernatural dimensions. 
Over the course of a year or two I contacted everyone I 
could find who had met Jim Channon during his late- 
1970s Californian odyssey. One of them was Stuart 
Heller. Stuart had been introduced to Jim by their mutual 
friend Marilyn Ferguson — the renowned author of The 
Aquarian Conspiracy. Stuart told me that Jim was ‘just 
marvellous’. 
These days, Stuart teaches business executives the art 
of stress control. He visits Apple and AT&T and the 
World Bank and NASA and he coaches their managers 
in how to remain centred and tranquil in the midst of 
the workplace hurly-burly. He is one of scores of similar 
gurus who travel from business to business throughout 
the Western world, fulfilling Jim’s 1979 prophecy that 
‘what is developing today on the Coast will be the 
national value set ten years from now.’ 
At one point during my conversation with Stuart I 
88

--- PAGE BREAK ---filling Jim’s 1979 prophecy that 
‘what is developing today on the Coast will be the 
national value set ten years from now.’ 
At one point during my conversation with Stuart I 
88

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
happened to ask him if he knew anyone who was the 
living embodiment of the First Earth Battalion. Stuart 
instantly replied, ‘Bert Rodriguez.’ 
‘Bert Rodriguez?’ I said. 
‘He’s a martial arts guy down in Florida,’ Stuart said. 
‘My younger brother is one of his students. I’ve never 
met anybody like Bert. His gym is always full of ex- 
military guys, ex-Special Forces. Spooks. And in the 
middle there’s my skinny little brother.’ 
I typed Bert Rodriguez’s name into a search engine 
and my screen filled with a picture of an intense-looking 
shaven-headed Cuban with a black moustache, frozen in 
the act of slamming a huge and sweaty man into the wall 
of his gym — the US 1 Fitness Center in Dania Beach, 
Florida. 
‘Bert once got my brother to lie on the floor,’ Stuart 
said, ‘and he put a cucumber on his chest, and he 
blindfolded himself and wham! He sliced the cucumber 
in half with a samurai sword. Didn’t cut my brother at 
all. Blindfolded!’ 
‘Bloody hell,’ I said. 
‘Bert’s one of the most spiritual guys [ve ever met,’ 
said Stuart. ‘No. Spiritual is the wrong word. He’s 
occultic. He’s like a walking embodiment of death. He 
can stop you at a distance. He can influence physical 
events just with his mind. If he catches your attention he 
can stop you without touching you.’ 
Stuart paused. 
‘But he doesn’t talk like this. He’s the most First Earth 
Battalion guy I know but he’s incapable of verbalizing it. 
89

--- PAGE BREAK ---n he 
can stop you without touching you.’ 
Stuart paused. 
‘But he doesn’t talk like this. He’s the most First Earth 
Battalion guy I know but he’s incapable of verbalizing it. 
89

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
He’s a street fighter from Cuba. With Bert it’s just 
instinctive. But everyone can see it. That’s why people 
come and train under him.’ 
In April 2001, Bert Rodriguez took on a new student. 
His name was Ziad Jarrah. Ziad just turned up at the US 
1 Fitness Center one day and said he had heard that Bert 
was good. Why Ziad chose Bert, of all the martial arts 
instructors scattered around the Florida shoreline, is a 
matter of speculation. Maybe Bert’s uniquely occultic 
reputation preceded him, or perhaps it was Bert’s mili- 
tary connections. Plus, Bert had once taught the head of 
security for a Saudi prince. Maybe that was it. 
Ziad told Bert that he was a businessman who trav- 
elled a great deal and he wanted to learn how to defend 
himself if a group attacked him. 
‘T liked Ziad a lot,’ Bert Rodriguez said when I called 
him. ‘He was very humble, very quiet. He was in good 
shape. Very diligent.’ 
‘What did you teach him?’ I asked. 
‘The choke hold,’ said Bert. “You use it to put someone 
to sleep or kill them. I taught him the choke hold and 
the kamikaze spirit. You need a code you'd die for, a do- 
or-die desire. And that’s what gives you the sixth sense, 
the ability to see into the opponent and know if he’s 
bluffing. Yeah. I taught him the choke hold and the 
kamikaze spirit. Ziad was a soccer player. I'd much 
rather have a soccer player beside me in a fight than a 
black belt in Tae Kwon Do. The soccer player can dodge 
and dive.’ 
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---kamikaze spirit. Ziad was a soccer player. I'd much 
rather have a soccer player beside me in a fight than a 
black belt in Tae Kwon Do. The soccer player can dodge 
and dive.’ 
90

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
There was a silence. 
‘Ziad was like Luke Skywalker,’ said Bert. ‘You know 
when Luke walks the invisible path? You have to believe 
it’s there. And if you do believe it, it is there. Yeah. Ziad 
believed it. He was like Luke Skywalker.’ 
Bert trained Ziad for six months. He liked him, sym- 
pathized with his tough upbringing in Lebanon. He gave 
Ziad copies of three of his knife-fighting training manu- 
als, and Ziad passed them on to a friend of his, Marwan 
al-Shehhi, who was staying up the road in room 12 of 
the Panther Motel & Apartments in Deerfield Beach, 
Florida. 
We know 
this because when Marwan 
_al-Shehhi 
checked out of the Panther Motel on 1o September 2001, 
he left behind him a flight manual for a Boeing 757, a 
knife, a black canvas bag, an English-German dictionary 
and three martial arts manuals written by Bert Rodri- 
guez, the man Stuart Heller had called ‘the most First 
Earth Battalion guy I know’. 
Marwan al-Shehhi was twenty-three years old when 
he checked out of the Panther Motel, flew to Boston, 
changed planes, took control of flight 175 and crashed it 
into the south tower of the World Trade Center. 
Ziad Jarrah was twenty-six when he took control of 
United Airlines flight 93, the plane that came down in a 
field in Pennsylvania on its way to Washington DC. 
‘You know what?’ said Bert. ‘I think Ziad’s role was 
to be the hijacker with brains. He’d hang back to ensure 
that the job was done properly, that the takeover of the 
91

--- PAGE BREAK ---on DC. 
‘You know what?’ said Bert. ‘I think Ziad’s role was 
to be the hijacker with brains. He’d hang back to ensure 
that the job was done properly, that the takeover of the 
91

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
plane was completed.’ Bert paused. ‘If you love a son 
and he becomes a mass murderer, you don’t stop loving 
your son, do you?’ 
Guy Savelli’s role within the War on Terror began when 
half a dozen strangers, within days of one another, 
contacted him via email and telephone in the winter of 
2003. They asked him if he had the power to psychically 
kill goats. Guy was bewildered. He did not go around 
publicizing this. Who were these men? How did they 
know about the goats? He feigned a casual tone of voice 
and said, ‘Sure I can.’ 
Then he got straight on the phone and called Special 
Forces. 
Everyone who had contacted him, he told them, was 
Muslim, with the possible exception of some British guy 
(me). The others were certainly emailing from Muslim 
countries, axis of evil countries, in fact. This had never 
happened to Guy before. Might they be al-Qaeda? Might 
they be bin Laden operatives hoping to learn how to 
stare people to death? Was this the start of a whole new 
paranormal subdivision of al-Qaeda? 
Special Forces instructed Guy to meet me, because in 
all probability I was al-Qaeda too. 
‘Be careful what you say to him,’ they advised. 
Special Forces had even — I was startled to learn — 
been on the phone to Guy the very morning I had visited 
him. While I was getting coffee at the Red Lobster, they 
had phoned Guy and said, ‘Has he turned up yet? Be 
92

--- PAGE BREAK ---o learn — 
been on the phone to Guy the very morning I had visited 
him. While I was getting coffee at the Red Lobster, they 
had phoned Guy and said, ‘Has he turned up yet? Be 
92

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
careful. And film him. Get him on tape. We want to 
know who these people are...’ 
Pm not sure at what stage during the day we spent 
together Guy decided that I wasn’t an Islamic terrorist. 
Perhaps it was when I discovered that his daughter 
danced with Richard Gere in the movie Chicago and I 
screeched, ‘Catherine Zeta Jones was brilliant in it!’ 
Even a deep-cover al-Qaeda terrorist wouldn’t think 
to go that fey. 
I do know that throughout our entire hamster con- 
versation, Guy was still convinced I wasn’t an actual 
journalist. When I spoke of my ‘hamster-owning readers’ 
Guy had glanced dubiously at me because he believed I 
had no readers at all, and would be reporting the events 
of the day not to the public, but to a terrorist cell. 
This is the reason — Guy explained - why such a 
panicked scramble had ensued when I spotted the snap- 
shot of the soldier karate-chopping a goat to death. It 
was no ordinary karate-chop, Guy revealed. It was the 
death touch. 
‘The death touch?’ I asked. 
Guy told me about the death touch. It was, he said, 
the fabled Dim Mak, also known as the quivering palm. 
The death touch is a very light strike. The goat is far 
from whacked. Its skin isn’t broken. There isn’t even a 
bruise. The goat will then stand there with a dazed 
expression on its face for about a day, before it suddenly 
topples over dead. 
‘Imagine if al-Qaeda had that kind of power,’ Guy said. 
‘Staring is one thing. The death touch is quite another. 
93

--- PAGE BREAK ---face for about a day, before it suddenly 
topples over dead. 
‘Imagine if al-Qaeda had that kind of power,’ Guy said. 
‘Staring is one thing. The death touch is quite another. 
93

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
That’s why we were all so freaked when you saw the 
picture. We still didn’t know if you were al-Qaeda.’ 
And so it was that Guy’s life had taken a strange new 
twist. Was he to be a dance and martial arts instructor 
by day and a covert agent infiltrating a hitherto unknown 
paranormal unit of Al-Qaeda by night? 
Over the next few weeks Guy and I kept in touch. 
‘I met with another department,’ he told me during 
one call. 
‘Homeland Security?’ I asked. 
‘I can’t tell you that,’ said Guy. ‘But they’re sure one 
of the guys who contacted me is al-Qaeda. They’re sure 
of it.’ 
‘How do they know?’ I asked. 
‘The name checks out,’ said Guy. ‘The phone number 
too. The phone number is on a ist.’ 
‘What did the intelligence people say to you?’ I asked. 
‘They said, “Yeah, yeah. He’s one of the guys for 
a3) 
sure. 
‘Al-Qaeda?’ 
‘Al-Qaeda,’ said Guy. 
‘Are you bait?’ I asked. 
‘That’s what it looks like,’ said Guy. ‘It’s getting kinda 
hairy here.’ 
‘You’re bait,’ I said. 
Tl tell you, Jon,’ said Guy, ‘these intelligence people 
see me as a dog. A dog! I said to them, “I have a family.” 
“Yeah yeah,” they said. “Having a family is very, very 
nice.” We’re really expendable. ’m going to end up 
hanging from a lamp post. A fucking lamp post.’ 
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---“I have a family.” 
“Yeah yeah,” they said. “Having a family is very, very 
nice.” We’re really expendable. ’m going to end up 
hanging from a lamp post. A fucking lamp post.’ 
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Homeland Security 
At this point I heard Guy’s wife say, ‘Very fucking 
funny.’ 
‘Hang on,’ said Guy. 
Guy and his wife had a muffled conversation. 
‘My wife says I shouldn’t be talking like this on the 
phone,’ he said. ‘I’m hanging up now.’ 
‘Keep me informed!’ I said. 
And Guy did. As the various schemes to ensnare the 
possible al-Qaeda paranormal subdivision changed, Guy 
kept me informed of the developments. Plan A was for 
Guy to invite these people to America. Then the intelli- 
gence people had a change of heart, telling Guy, ‘We 
don’t want them here.’ 
The much riskier Plan B was for Guy to travel to their 
country. He would teach them a relatively benign psychic 
power and report back everything he saw and heard. 
Guy told them, ‘No fucking way.’ 
Plan C was for Guy to meet them on neutral ground — 
maybe London. Or France. Plan C suited both camps 
and seemed the most likely to proceed. 
‘I would fucking love to have you there,’ Guy said. 
Guy sent me a scrap of an email that, he told me, was 
‘absolutely, positively’ written by an al-Qaeda operative. 
It read: 
Dear sir Savelli, 
| hope you are fine and fit. | am bussy in my 
champion ship my champion ship is going sucsess ful. 
Sir Savelli, please tell me if | apply to affiliation in your 
Federation so what is a prosiger please tell me a detal. 
2p)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
And that was it. It seemed that one of two scenarios 
was unfolding. Guy was either in the midst of a sensa- 
tional sting operation; or a hapless young martial arts 
enthusiast who only wanted to join Guy’s federation was 
about to be shipped off to Guantanamo Bay. All we 
could do was wait. 
96

--- PAGE BREAK ---sting operation; or a hapless young martial arts 
enthusiast who only wanted to join Guy’s federation was 
about to be shipped off to Guantanamo Bay. All we 
could do was wait. 
96

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6. PRIVATIZATION 
This has so far been a story about secret things under- 
taken clandestinely inside military bases in the United 
States. From time to time tangible results of these covert 
endeavours have made their way into everyday life, 
but always far removed from their supernatural roots. 
Nobody who came into contact with Colonel Alex- 
ander’s Sticky Foam, for example - not the prisoners 
who were glued to their cells by it, nor the TV crews 
who filmed its partially disastrous deployment in Soma- 
lia, nor even, I would guess, the soldiers who carried it 
into Iraq in the hope of spraying it all over the WMDs — 
were aware that it was the product of a paranormal 
initiative from the late 1970s. 
All of a sudden, though, in 1995, a palpable chunk of 
the craziness leaked from the military community into 
the civilian world. The man who did the leaking was an 
errant prodigy of General Stubblebine. 
This is what happened. 
Asa 
child, growing up in the 1970s, Prudence Calabrese 
loved watching Dr Who and science documentaries. 
Oy

--- PAGE BREAK ---as an 
errant prodigy of General Stubblebine. 
This is what happened. 
Asa 
child, growing up in the 1970s, Prudence Calabrese 
loved watching Dr Who and science documentaries. 
Oy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
She grew up in a run-down mansion in New England. 
When her parents went out on Saturday nights, the 
children would whip out their home-made Ouija board 
and try to contact the ghost of the previous owner who 
had apparently hung herself in the barn as a result of 
being alcoholic and unpopular with the neighbours. They 
held pyjama party séances. 
‘We wanted to have unusual experiences,’ Prudence 
told me as we sat at her kitchen table in Carlsbad, San 
Diego. ‘We would all get together and light candles and 
turn the lights down and try to make a table rise just by 
touching it.’ 
‘Did it ever rise?’ I asked her. 
‘Well, yes,’ said Prudence. ‘But we were kids. Looking 
back I’m not sure if everybody just added a little bit of 
effort and that made it rise.’ 
‘With your knees?’ I said. 
‘Yeah,’ said Prudence. ‘Hard to tell.’ 
Sometimes Prudence and her friends would run out- 
side and try and spot UFOs. They thought they saw one 
once. 
Prudence went to the local university but she got 
pregnant when she was eighteen, so she dropped out and 
began managing a local trailer park with her first hus- 
band, Randy. She moonlighted as a dancer in a pig 
costume at the state fair, went back to college, studied 
physics, dropped out, had another four children, taught 
belly dancing to pensioners in Indiana and finally ended 
up with a new husband called Daniel in an apartment in 
Atlanta, running a website-design business. It was here, 
98

--- PAGE BREAK ---ught 
belly dancing to pensioners in Indiana and finally ended 
up with a new husband called Daniel in an apartment in 
Atlanta, running a website-design business. It was here, 
98

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
in 1995, that Prudence turned on the TV one night. A 
military man was on the screen. 
“What was he saying?’ I asked Prudence. ‘Didn’t he 
say he was a real-life Obi-Wan Kenobi?’ 
‘That’s exactly the words he used,’ said Prudence. ‘A 
“real-life Obi-Wan Kenobi”.’ 
‘Working for the US military?’ 
‘Working for the US military,’ said Prudence. 
‘And until that moment nobody even knew that these 
people existed?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah,’ said Prudence. ‘Until that time they had been 
kept completely secret. He was talking about how he 
used just his mind to access anything in the whole 
universe. And how the military used him, and other 
psychic spies like him, to avert wars and discover secret 
things about other countries. He said they were called 
remote viewers. Yeah. According to his story, he was 
part of a secret team of psychic spies, and he was one of 
the leaders of the unit. And he just didn’t look like what 
you’d expect. He didn’t look like he had super secret 
powers.’ 
‘What did he look like?’ 
Prudence laughed. 
‘He was short and scrawny and he had this crazy hair- 
do from the seventies, and a moustache. And he didn’t 
even look like a military guy, let alone a psychic spy. He 
just looked like a weird person, a person you’d see on 
the street.’ 
The man on the TV said he had top-level clear- 
ance. He said he knew the exact location of Saddam 
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---py. He 
just looked like a weird person, a person you’d see on 
the street.’ 
The man on the TV said he had top-level clear- 
ance. He said he knew the exact location of Saddam 
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Hussein and the lost ark of the covenant. Prudence was 
transfixed. As she watched the TV, her long-forgotten 
childhood passions came back to her: the Ouija board, 
Dr Who, the science projects she used to do at school. 
‘I remembered why I was so excited about science 
fiction and reading all those stories about psychics and 
aliens,’ she said. 
Prudence determined in that moment that this was 
what she wanted to do with her life. She wanted to be 
like the man on the TV, to know the things he knew, to 
see the things he could see. 
His name was Major Ed Dames. 
General Albert Stubblebine had been happy to discuss 
with me his inability to pass through walls and levitate, 
and his apparent failure to interest Special Forces in his 
animal-heart bursting initiative. He recounted those inci- 
dents to me in a jolly way, even though they can’t have 
been good memories for him. The only time during our 
meetings that an anguished look crossed his face was 
when the conversation turned to the subject of his prod- 
igy, Major Ed Dames. 
‘It bothered me so badly that he talked,’ he said. 
‘There he was, yap, yap, yap, yap, yap.’ The general 
paused. ‘Yap, yap, yap, yap, yap,’ he said, sadly. ‘If 
anybody should have had a gag put in his mouth it was 
Ed Dames. He clearly was out talking when he should 
have been listening. Very upsetting, incidentally.’ 
‘Why?’ 
I0o

--- PAGE BREAK ---y. ‘If 
anybody should have had a gag put in his mouth it was 
Ed Dames. He clearly was out talking when he should 
have been listening. Very upsetting, incidentally.’ 
‘Why?’ 
I0o

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
‘He’d taken the same oath I took: “I swear I will not 
divulge”. But he ran over everyone to talk. He puffed up 
his chest. “I was one of them!” He wanted to be king.’ 
Ed Dames had been one of General Stubblebine’s 
personal recruits. When the general took command of 
the secret psychic unit in 1981, he allowed a bunch of 
fellow enthusiasts from within the military to join the 
programme. The US government’s psychic research had, 
until that time, basically centred on three men: an ex- 
policeman and building contractor called Pat Price; and 
two soldiers, Ingo Swann and Joe McMoneagle. These 
three were regarded by all but the most hardened sceptics 
to have some kind of unusual gift. (Joe McMoneagle’s 
gift apparently manifested itself after he fell out of a 
helicopter in Vietnam.) 
But General Stubblebine passionately believed the First 
Earth Battalion doctrine that every human being alive 
was capable of performing supernatural miracles, and so 
he opened the doors of the secret unit wide, and Ed 
Dames was one of his people. 
As a child, Ed Dames had been a great fan of Bigfoot, 
UFOs and sci-fi shows. He had heard rumours about the 
unit while he was stationed, conventionally, up the road 
from the psychic spies at Fort Meade, and so he peti- 
tioned General Stubblebine to let him in. Perhaps this is 
why the general remains so angry with Ed Dames nine 
years after Prudence watched him reveal the secrets of 
the unit on TV that night. Maybe he feels partly respon- 
sible for the terrible things — involving Prudence — that 
happened next. 
IOL

--- PAGE BREAK ---Prudence watched him reveal the secrets of 
the unit on TV that night. Maybe he feels partly respon- 
sible for the terrible things — involving Prudence — that 
happened next. 
IOL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
In 1995 Ed suddenly, and repeatedly, spilled the beans 
in a big way. He took to appearing on TV shows and 
radio shows. He didn’t mention the goat-staring, nor the 
wall-walking, nor the First Earth Battalion, but he spoke 
with relish about the secret psychic unit. 
But it was the Art Bell show that really turned Ed into 
a superstar. 
Art Bell broadcasts from the very small desert town 
of Pahrump, Nevada. Pahrump seldom hits the news, 
although it did once make the headlines for having 
America’s highest suicide rate per capita. Nineteen of 
Pahrump’s 30,000 townspeople are inclined to kill them- 
selves each year. Pahrump is also home to the world’s 
most famous brothel, the Chicken Ranch, a few dusty 
streets away from which lies Art Bell’s house. This is 
blue and sprawling and fenced off and surrounded by 
aerials. Art Bell may be situated 
in the middle of 
nowhere, and his show may go out in the dead of night, 
but he is syndicated across more than 500 AM stations 
to an audience of something like 18 million Americans. 
At his peak, I have been told, Art Bell had 40 million 
listeners, many of whom were attracted by the appear- 
ance of Ed Dames. Dames became something of a regular 
fixture on the show. Here is a typical excerpt from one 
of his appearances in 1995. 
ART BELL: If you’ll recall, the government, over 
many years now, has dumped a lot of money and 
time and effort into remote viewing. So, it’s not as 
crazy as it might seem. I managed to get Major 
102

--- PAGE BREAK ---call, the government, over 
many years now, has dumped a lot of money and 
time and effort into remote viewing. So, it’s not as 
crazy as it might seem. I managed to get Major 
102

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
Dames on the line. I know it’s very, very late. 
Major, welcome to the programme. 
ED DAMES: Thank you, Art. 
ART BELL: What can you tell us? 
ED DAMES: Well, in addition to our training, 
and our high-level contracts that we perform 
for various agencies — tracking terrorists for the 
government — we have data indicating that human 
babies will be dying soon, many human babies 
.. 
. 
It appears there is a bovine AIDS virus developing. 
This bovine AIDS will become a toxicological 
insult to human babies and they will die in 
relatively large numbers. 
ART BELL: God. Whew! .. 
. No escape, huh? 
ED DAMES: No, there doesn’t appear to be an 
escape. 
ART BELL: Oh, God, this is horrible news. 
Art Bell has played host to many prophets of doom 
over the years, but this one, sensationally, was a major 
in the US army with top-level security clearance. Ed 
continued. Yes, millions of American babies were immi- 
nently to develop AIDS from drinking infected cows’ 
milk. This was, he said, something he had psychically 
perceived while still in the army, and he had passed the 
information to his superiors. 
103

--- PAGE BREAK ---DS from drinking infected cows’ 
milk. This was, he said, something he had psychically 
perceived while still in the army, and he had passed the 
information to his superiors. 
103

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
So the highest-ranking Military Intelligence officers 
knew this too. 
Art Bell gasped at the revelation that pre-knowledge 
of this impending cataclysm went to the very top. 
Furthermore, Ed said, 300 mph winds were soon to 
ravage America, wiping out all the wheat, and everyone 
would have to stay indoors for pretty much the rest of 
their lives. 
‘It was great!’ reminisced Prudence at her kitchen table 
in San Diego. ‘These were the glory days of remote 
viewing. People were so excited about it. It seemed so 
fantastic. Ed Dames immediately became one of Art 
Bell’s very favourite interviewees ever. He was on all the 
time. He said we were going to be scorched by this huge 
solar flare, which was going to wipe out most of life on 
Earth. And he said that an incoming comet, Hale-Bopp, 
was going to drop a plant pathogen.’ 
‘Really?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah. He said an alien race had attached a canister to 
Hale-Bopp and it was going to drop this canister on the 
Earth and some kind of virus was going to come out and 
eat all the plant life and we’d have to live on earthworms 
and live underground.’ Prudence laughed. 
‘Ed Dames said that?’ 
‘Oh yeah! And he had specific dates for this. He said 
it was going to happen by February 2000.’ 
We both laughed. 
‘And what about the bovine AIDS?’ I asked. 
‘Bovine AIDS! said Prudence. She turned serious. 
‘Mad Cow,’ she said. 
104

--- PAGE BREAK ---it was going to happen by February 2000.’ 
We both laughed. 
‘And what about the bovine AIDS?’ I asked. 
‘Bovine AIDS! said Prudence. She turned serious. 
‘Mad Cow,’ she said. 
104

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
Between 1995 and today, in addition to the bovine 
AIDS and the 300 mph winds, Major Ed Dames has 
publicly. predicted the following, mostly on the Art Bell 
show: pregnant Martians 
living underground in the 
desert will emerge to steal fertilizer from American com- 
panies; AIDS will be found to have originated in dogs, 
not monkeys; flying fungus from outer-space cylinders 
will destroy all crops; the existence of Satan, angels and 
God will be proved beyond all doubt; and lightning on a 
golf course in April 1998 would kill President Clinton. 
‘And mixed up with this,’ said Prudence, ‘he talked 
about his experiences with the military, which made all 
that wacky stuff seem so much more real and tangible. 
The government did not dispute that he was a psychic spy; 
they lauded his efforts; he won medals. He was honour- 
ably discharged. Everything about him checked out.’ 
‘It must have sometimes sounded to some of Art Bell’s 
listeners like they were eavesdropping on top-level meet- 
ings inside the Pentagon,’ I said. 
‘It sounded so real,’ said Prudence. ‘He would talk 
about how the military had put twenty million dollars of 
tax-payers, money into the research, so it all made sense.’ 
What Art Bell’s listeners didn’t know was that Ed 
Dames was an atypical military psychic spy. Most of 
Ed’s colleagues in the secret unit at Fort Meade spent 
their time psychically viewing extremely boring things, 
mostly map coordinates. Ed, meanwhile, was psychically 
concluding that the Loch Ness Monster was the ghost of 
a dinosaur. Had one of Ed’s less colourful contemporar- 
ies chosen to spill the beans instead, and gone on Art 
105

--- PAGE BREAK ---ically 
concluding that the Loch Ness Monster was the ghost of 
a dinosaur. Had one of Ed’s less colourful contemporar- 
ies chosen to spill the beans instead, and gone on Art 
105

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Bell to talk about map coordinates, I doubt the listening 
millions would have been so spellbound. 
Ed’s media appearances may have hastened the demise 
of the secret unit. The CIA officially declassified it and 
shut it down in 1995. General Stubblebine’s footsoldiers 
had been trying to be psychic for the best part of their 
careers, and now it was over. After years of living 
simultaneously in a world where they routinely shot 
forward and back in time and space — inside Noriega’s 
living room in Panama City one minute, psychically 
creeping through Saddam Hussein’s palaces in Iraq the 
next — and in a more banal world, where their Black-Op 
status denied them a coffee machine and a building 
maintenance budget, they emerged into perhaps the 
strangest world of all: the civilian world. 
For a while in the mid-1990s it looked like there might 
be a lot of money to be made. Ed Dames moved to Beverly 
Hills, where he took high-level meetings with Hollywood 
executives. He began dealing with Hanna-Barbera, the 
makers of Scooby Doo, about the prospect of transform- 
ing himself into a cartoon character for a Saturday morn- 
ing kids’ show about super soldiers who used their psychic 
powers to defeat evil-doers. He set up a psychic spying 
training school, charging students $2,400 for a ‘highly 
personalized (one on one), rigorous four-day program’. 
His company slogan was ‘Learn Remote Viewing from 
the Master’. 
On a Saturday in the summertime, Ed Dames and I 
roared through Maui in his jeep. (Like Jim Channon, 
and Sergeant Glenn Wheaton, who first let slip to me 
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---from 
the Master’. 
On a Saturday in the summertime, Ed Dames and I 
roared through Maui in his jeep. (Like Jim Channon, 
and Sergeant Glenn Wheaton, who first let slip to me 
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
that Special Forces had undertaken covert goat-staring 
activities in Fort Bragg, Ed has set up home in the 
Hawaiian Islands.) 
Ed wore big wraparound sunglasses — his eyes were the 
only part of his face that looked his age. Ed is fifty-five 
now, but everything else about him is teenage — his surfer 
hair, his torn jeans, his manic energy. He held a Starbucks 
coffee in one hand and steered the jeep with the other. 
‘Were people in the military cross with you for spilling 
the beans about the existence of the secret unit on the 
Art Bell show?’ I asked him. 
‘Cross?’ he said. ‘Irate? Angry? You bet.’ 
‘What was your motive for doing it?’ I asked. 
‘I didn’t have any motive.’ Ed shrugged. ‘I didn’t have 
any motive at all.’ 
We carried on driving. We were on the beach road. 
‘I moved here for the peace and the beauty,’ said Ed. 
‘But, yes, over the horizon there are some very, very 
nasty things coming. Things will get grim. Things will 
get ugly. This is a good place to be when that happens.’ 
‘What’s going to happen?’ 
‘We’re all going to die!’ said Ed. He laughed. 
But then he said he meant it. 
‘In the next decade, humanity will see some of the 
most catastrophic changes to civilization it’s seen in all 
of its recorded history. Earth-changes. Biblically pro- 
phetic types of things.’ 
‘Like plagues?’ I asked. 
‘No, that’s minor,’ said Ed. 
‘Worse than plagues?’ 
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---s seen in all 
of its recorded history. Earth-changes. Biblically pro- 
phetic types of things.’ 
‘Like plagues?’ I asked. 
‘No, that’s minor,’ said Ed. 
‘Worse than plagues?’ 
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Diseases will ravage humankind, but I’m talking 
about actual Earth changes and I’m not kidding.’ 
‘Volcanoes and earthquakes?’ 
‘The axis of the Earth will wobble and that’ll shake 
up the oceans,’ said Ed. ‘Geophysically we’re in for Mr 
Toad’s wild ride within the next decade.’ 
‘These are things you’ve psychically viewed?’ I asked. 
‘Many, many times,’ said Ed. 
‘Prudence says it was turning on the TV one day in 
Atlanta and seeing you that first got her interested in 
remote viewing,’ I said. 
There was a silence. I wanted to gauge Ed’s reaction 
to hearing the name Prudence. So many terrible things 
had happened, I was curious to see if he would flinch, 
but he didn’t. Instead he turned vague. 
‘Most of the people practising remote viewing on the 
streets today are either my students or students of my 
students,’ he said. 
This was true. Although many of Ed’s former military 
associates eventually set up their own training schools 
after the unit’s closure, Ed ran a campaign implying that 
all the other secret psychics were psychically inferior 
to him. It worked. While Ed’s house in Maui is in a 
fabulously opulent gated community near the beach, some 
of his former colleagues — like psychic Sergeant Lyn 
Buchanan — are compelled to struggle through as com- 
puter engineers, and so on. Lyn Buchanan is a legendary 
figure on the UFO circuit, but his gentle personality has 
denied him the opportunity to carve himself a niche in 
the increasingly cut-throat psychic spying private sector. 
108

--- PAGE BREAK ---figure on the UFO circuit, but his gentle personality has 
denied him the opportunity to carve himself a niche in 
the increasingly cut-throat psychic spying private sector. 
108

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
Prudence wanted Ed to teach her how to be a psychic 
spy, ‘But Ed didn’t have any openings,’ she said. ‘He was 
booked solid for two years straight. Everybody wanted 
to be a psychic spy like Ed Dames.’ 
So she settled for second best — an Atlanta-based lecturer 
in political science. His name was Dr Courtney Brown. 
Courtney Brown’s credentials were impressive. He 
may not have been a top-level military spy, but he was 
an academic from a well-regarded university whose 
‘vision statement’, as outlined in their prospectus, was 
‘to excel at discovery, generate wisdom, instil integrity 
and honour, set standards followed by others, be sought 
and prized for its opinions, and make discoveries that 
benefit the world.’ 
‘It was amazing to me,’ said Prudence. ‘Dr Courtney 
Brown was just about Ed Dames’s very first ever civilian 
student, then he set up his own training school, the 
Farsight Institute, in Atlanta. 
J was in Atlanta. I was 
living in the only city outside of LA where you could get 
training in remote viewing. So I signed up right away!’ 
Dr Courtney Brown is handsome and clever, doe- 
eyed and tweedy. Having taken an eight-day one-on-one 
psychic-spying course with Ed Dames, he began teaching 
his version of the Dames method to scores of students. 
He and Prudence became great friends. She ran his 
website and his diary. Together they sat in Dr Brown’s 
basement and psychically spied on their favourite targets, 
aliens and mythical beasts and so on, the same fantastical 
things that Ed Dames used to remote view inside the 
military unit. 
109

--- PAGE BREAK ---psychically spied on their favourite targets, 
aliens and mythical beasts and so on, the same fantastical 
things that Ed Dames used to remote view inside the 
military unit. 
109

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
In July 1996, Prudence got a call from Art Bell. His 
millions of listeners had gone crazy for Ed Dames and 
were keen to hear anything related. Was Dr Brown 
available to appear on his show? 
‘Every day was a new adventure,’ Prudence told me, 
‘but this was the greatest adventure so far.’ 
On the show, Art Bell asked Courtney Brown if he 
agreed with Major Dames about the ‘massive numbers 
of babies dying’ and the imminent ‘tremendous winds on 
earth’? 
COURTNEY BROWN: There definitely are 
climactic changes coming. 
ART BELL: Like what? 
COURTNEY BROWN: Within our children’s 
— 
lifetime we will start entering a Mad Max scenario. 
It’s quite clear at this point that civilization has to 
hunker down and go into underground shelters. 
ART BELL: Underground shelters, Professor 
Brown? 
COURTNEY BROWN: Yes. The population 
comes apart. The political systems fall apart. There 
are roving gangs on the surface. The population 
basically survives in underground bunkers. And not 
everybody gets to go in the bunkers. Most people 
have to slug it out on the surface. 
IIo

--- PAGE BREAK ---gangs on the surface. The population 
basically survives in underground bunkers. And not 
everybody gets to go in the bunkers. Most people 
have to slug it out on the surface. 
IIo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
ART BELL: Well, excuse me if I say holy smoke, 
Dr Brown. If you knew how much what you just 
said sounds like what Major Dames said, I guess 
you'd probably start digging. 
The civilians who had trained under Ed Dames seemed 
to inherit their teacher’s disdain for his former colleagues. 
On the Art Bell show, Courtney Brown said they weren’t 
‘intellectually equipped to engage with the more profound 
by-products of their divinations. For instance, if the CIA 
asked a psychic spy to hunt for Saddam Hussein, and 
while psychically creeping through a Baghdad palace 
the spy chanced upon an extra-terrestrial hiding in the 
shadows, he’d just keep on walking until he found 
the dictator. Surely, Courtney Brown suggested to Art 
Bell’s listeners, any psychic spy worth his salt would 
stop and engage with the extra-terrestrial, but oh no, not 
the military psychics. Art Bell agreed that this seemed 
crazy — and talk about wasted opportunities. 
ART BELL: You did a serious professional project 
of Mars, didn’t you? 
COURTNEY BROWN: Well, I studied two ET species 
—a 
species called the Greys, and the Martians. Long 
ago, at the time when dinosaurs roamed on Earth, 
there was an ancient Martian civilization 
. 
. 
. 
When the Martian civilization was wiped out by some 
planetary cataclysm on Mars back during dinosaur 
times, explained Dr Courtney Brown, ‘the Galactic Fed- 
eration sanctioned a rescue group of Greys’ to save them. 
ED

--- PAGE BREAK ---out by some 
planetary cataclysm on Mars back during dinosaur 
times, explained Dr Courtney Brown, ‘the Galactic Fed- 
eration sanctioned a rescue group of Greys’ to save them. 
ED

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Many Martians were rescued,’ he said. 
‘Taken off planet?’ asked Art Bell. 
‘Yes,’ said Courtney Brown. ‘But they are now in 
underground caverns back on Mars. They’re happy to 
have been rescued, but they’d love to have been brought 
to Earth instead. The problem is, they’re basically on a 
dead planet. They must leave. They’re between a rock 
and a hard place. They’ve got to leave Mars. They 
must come here. But this planet is populated with an 
aggressive, hostile human species that has movies about 
invasions from Mars, and the Martians themselves are 
terrified. The remote-viewing results on this are absol- 
utely unequivocal.’ 
Courtney Brown said that the Martians would cer- 
tainly be arriving on Earth within two years. Art Bell 
immediately asked the question that was presumably 
haunting the more right-wing anti-immigration listeners 
among his audience: 
ART BELL: Important question. How many 
Martians are there? 
COURTNEY BROWN: It’s not going to cause a 
population problem. We’re probably talking 
enough to populate a reasonable city. 
ART BELL: That’s a small number, really. 
COURTNEY BROWN: You may say, what is the 
incentive? Why should we help them? People have 
actually said to me, ‘Forget the altruism of us having 
a good name in the galaxy. Why should we help 
riz

--- PAGE BREAK ---ou may say, what is the 
incentive? Why should we help them? People have 
actually said to me, ‘Forget the altruism of us having 
a good name in the galaxy. Why should we help 
riz

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
anybody? We had trouble accepting Cambodian 
and Vietnamese refugees at the end of the Vietnam 
War, so why should we help Martians of all people?’ 
Courtney’s answer to these Earthling isolationists: for- 
get altruism. The Martians have a ‘one-hundred-and- 
fifty-year technological advantage over us. Imagine if 
somebody like Saddam Hussein says to them, “Hey! You 
want a place to land? Just come on over here.”’ 
This is why, Courtney Brown 
stated, with some 
urgency in his voice, it was imperative for the United 
States government to seize the opportunity and ‘get 
those Martian ships under NATO command. Get those 
Martians in through the proper immigration processes.’ 
At this point, Art Bell expressed concern that ‘desper- 
ate people do desperate things’. Even if the Martians 
were inherently peaceful, perhaps their hopeless living 
conditions inside the caves of Mars might render them 
unexpectedly and ungratefully violent when the Ameri- 
cans come to save them. Isn’t that essentially what had 
happened in Grenada and Vietnam? 
Courtney Brown assured him that he understood his 
concern, but that this would not happen. 
Prudence thought Courtney did brilliantly on the Art 
Bell show. 
‘Courtney’s charisma leapt off the airwaves and into 
your lap,’ she said. ‘You could feel his sincerity and 
tenderness as he spoke his words.’ 
And, as Prudence listened to the show that night, her 
telephone rang. 
113

--- PAGE BREAK ---es and into 
your lap,’ she said. ‘You could feel his sincerity and 
tenderness as he spoke his words.’ 
And, as Prudence listened to the show that night, her 
telephone rang. 
113

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Pru,’ said the voice. ‘It’s Wolfie.’ 
Wolfie was, according to Prudence, the Internet nick- 
name of a woman called Dee, the fiancée of a Houston- 
based radio newsreader called Chuck Shramek. Prudence 
had met Dee and Chuck in an Internet chat room; they 
had exchanged emails but never spoken in person. 
‘Pru,’ said Dee, ‘there’s something you have to see. 
Chuck got a picture of the Hale-Bopp comet, and there’s 
something next to it. ’'m going to send it to you.’ 
At that moment Prudence’s email inbox flashed. She 
opened the attachment to find a photograph. Chuck, Dee 
said, had taken it from a telescope in his back garden. 
He was an amateur astronomer. Next to the Hale-Bopp 
comet, to the right of the frame, there seemed to be some 
kind of object. 
Chuck Shramek’s photograph. 
II4

--- PAGE BREAK ---his back garden. 
He was an amateur astronomer. Next to the Hale-Bopp 
comet, to the right of the frame, there seemed to be some 
kind of object. 
Chuck Shramek’s photograph. 
II4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
When Prudence saw this photograph, she cried. 
‘The companion object,’ she told me, ‘glowed brighter 
than any star.’ 
In the days that followed, Prudence and Courtney 
Brown and Courtney’s other students began to work 
seriously on psychically viewing the Saturn-shaped object 
next to the Hale-Bopp comet. 
‘And we found,’ said Prudence, ‘that it was artificial. 
And it wasn’t a mistake on Chuck’s camera. It was an 
actual object. And it was alien in origin. It looked like a 
huge round metal object and it had all these dents in it. 
Concave indentations. And it had antennae sticking out, 
tubes sticking out. And it was coming right towards us! 
And we were so excited. Courtney Brown phoned Art 
Bell right away.’ 
On 14 November 1996, Art Bell announced two guests 
on his show: Chuck Shramek and Courtney Brown. 
ART BELL: Chuck, welcome to the programme. 
CHUCK SHRAMEK: Thanks, Art, great to be 
here. 
ART BELL: You are an amateur astronomer, right? 
CHUCK SHRAMEK: Have been since I was eight 
years old. Now I’m forty-six. 
ART BELL: So not such an amateur! 
CHUCK SHRAMEK: Ha ha ha! 
115

--- PAGE BREAK ---: You are an amateur astronomer, right? 
CHUCK SHRAMEK: Have been since I was eight 
years old. Now I’m forty-six. 
ART BELL: So not such an amateur! 
CHUCK SHRAMEK: Ha ha ha! 
115

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Chuck began to describe his photograph, how he had 
come to take it, how his heart had started pounding 
when he realized that the object — the ‘companion’ to 
Hale-Bopp — wasn’t a star, because he checked his star 
chart and there was no star like that in the comet’s 
vicinity. 
CHUCK SHRAMEK: This is a big thing. And there 
appear to be Saturn-like rings. This is amazing. 
ART BELL: What could it be? 
CHUCK SHRAMEK: Well, I think that might be 
an area for Courtney to get into. I have no idea. 
ART BELL: So there you go, that’s Chuck in 
Houston. We’re going to ask Courtney Brown 
what it’s all about. Maybe he can help. I suspect 
he can. 
After the break, Courtney Brown offered the knock- 
out — the result of his and Prudence’s and the Farsight 
Institute’s psychic study of Chuck Shramek’s photo- 
graph. 
ART BELL: I’ve seen the Hale-Bopp photograph 
and it really is odd. There’s something really big 
out there. ’ve no idea what it is, but whatever it is, 
it’s real. Well, Professor, what the hell is it? 
COURTNEY BROWN: I’m willing to tell you. 
Do you want me to tell you? 
ART BELL: Tell me. 
I16

--- PAGE BREAK ---ea what it is, but whatever it is, 
it’s real. Well, Professor, what the hell is it? 
COURTNEY BROWN: I’m willing to tell you. 
Do you want me to tell you? 
ART BELL: Tell me. 
I16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
Courtney attempted to sound scientific and _level- 
headed but he was unable to conceal his excitement. 
COURTNEY BROWN: The information ’'m 
about to give you is so far reaching, so incredible, 
you’re going to be saying, how could this be? 
Remember, I’m a PhD. 
ART BELL: Right. 
COURTNEY BROWN: This object is 
approximately four times the size of the planet 
Earth, and it’s headed our way. It apparently has 
tunnels in it. And it is moving by artificial means. 
It is under intelligent control. It’s a vehicle. And 
there is a message coming from it. 
ART BELL: Oh boy! There’s a message coming 
from it? 
COURTNEY BROWN: These beings are trying to 
communicate with us. This object is sentient. It is 
alive. It is knowing. It’s something like the obelisk 
from 2001: A Space Odyssey. It has hallways in it. 
This is good news. Our time of ignorance, our time 
of darkness, is coming to a close. We are entering a 
time of greatness. There are more of them coming! 
ART BELL: What? 
COURTNEY BROWN: My Lord... My Lord... 
ART BELL: There are more of these coming? 
Folks, this is not a fake War of the Worlds 
ra7

--- PAGE BREAK ---There are more of them coming! 
ART BELL: What? 
COURTNEY BROWN: My Lord... My Lord... 
ART BELL: There are more of these coming? 
Folks, this is not a fake War of the Worlds 
ra7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
broadcast. This is breaking news. I feel like 
I have been hit by a sledgehammer. 
COURTNEY BROWN: Art, this one is real. 
There was a short silence then, and then Art Bell 
spoke, and his voice trembled slightly. 
ART BELL: Somehow I always felt I’d be on hand 
for this. 
That night, Art Bell’s website crashed with the volume 
of traffic — listeners trying to log on so they could view 
Chuck Shramek’s photograph. Finally, in just a few 
months time — approximately mid-March 1997, in fact — 
the Martians were coming. 
An extraordinary thing about the Internet is how it 
can freeze and preserve moments in time. If you look 
hard enough, you can find the thoughts of some of Art 
Bell’s listeners that night as they typed passionately with 
the radio playing in the background: 
Is this really happening? Oh man, this is incredible!! 
On Art Bell it was announced that some astronomers 
are now SUDDENLY seeing a Saturn-like huge object 
near our Comet Hale-Bopp! It is under intelligent 
control and it is connected to ETs!! 
Dear Friends, 
As this incredible news is breaking | am typing 
wildly. 
FLASH!!! Moving toward Earth a celestial object 
118

--- PAGE BREAK ---der intelligent 
control and it is connected to ETs!! 
Dear Friends, 
As this incredible news is breaking | am typing 
wildly. 
FLASH!!! Moving toward Earth a celestial object 
118

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
four times the size of Earth tracking right behind 
Comet Hale-Bopp; a ringed sphere, self-emitting light 
source, surface uniformly smooth and luminescent. 
Is this the coming of the anti-Christ? 
Prudence went on Art Bell too, a few days later, to 
clarify her psychic findings about the Hale-Bopp com- 
panion. She and Courtney were inundated with phone 
calls and emails. 
. 
‘Thousands of emails,’ said Prudence. ‘We sent out a 
standard response to many of them because you just 
can’t answer the whole world. You have to pick and 
choose.’ 
One email, among the thousands of others, seemed 
particularly odd to Prudence. It asked, ‘Will the com- 
panion raise us to the level above human?’ 
Prudence stared at this email for a moment, and then 
sent the standard reply: “Thank you for your interest 
in the Farsight Institute. Here’s our upcoming class 
schedule...’ 
In a pristine white house in a very rich suburb of San 
Diego, California, in mid-March 1997, a former music 
teacher from Texas called Marshall Applewhite turned 
on his video camera, pointed it at himself, and said: 
‘We’re so excited we don’t know what to do because 
we’re about to re-enter the level above human!’ 
He turned the video camera away from himself to a 
room full of people. They were all dressed exactly the 
119

--- PAGE BREAK ---what to do because 
we’re about to re-enter the level above human!’ 
He turned the video camera away from himself to a 
room full of people. They were all dressed exactly the 
119

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
same, in buttoned-up uniforms of their own design, like 
something out of Star Trek, with a patch on the arm that 
read, ‘Heavens Gate Away Team’. 
They were all, like Marshall Applewhite, grinning. 
‘“Heavens Gate Away Team!”’ 
said Marshall Apple- 
white into the video camera. “That’s exactly what that 
means to us. We’ve been away, and now we’re going 
back. I'm very proud of these students of the evolution- 
ary level above human. They’re about to leave, and 
they’re excited about leaving!’ 
Someone from this group had posted a message on 
their website. It read: ‘Red Alert! Hale-Bopp brings 
closure to Heavens Gate.’ 
The website also included a link to Art Bell’s site. 
Marshall Applewhite and his thirty-eight disciples 
went to a local restaurant for their last supper. They all 
ordered exactly the same thing from the menu — iced tea, 
salad with tomato vinaigrette dressing, turkey, and blue- 
berry cheesecake. 
Then they returned to their communal ranch. 
A few nights later, as Hale-Bopp drew close enough 
to Earth to be seen with the naked eye, Prudence stood 
on the balcony of a Holiday Inn in Atlanta and arched 
her neck uncomfortably to see over the trees, the iron 
railing digging into her chest. And then she saw the 
comet. 
‘It was so beautiful,’ she said. 
‘But it was by itself,’ I said. 
‘It was by itself,’ said Prudence. ‘I was just standing 
I20

--- PAGE BREAK ---igging into her chest. And then she saw the 
comet. 
‘It was so beautiful,’ she said. 
‘But it was by itself,’ I said. 
‘It was by itself,’ said Prudence. ‘I was just standing 
I20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
there, trying to figure out where the companion object 
went, and then someone came running up the stairs.’ 
Thirty-nine people had died. 
Marshall Applewhite and his thirty-eight disciples had 
all put on the exact same Nike sneakers. They all put a 
roll of quarters in their pockets. They lay down on their 
bunk beds and each took a lethal cocktail of sedatives 
and alcohol and painkillers because they believed that 
doing so would get them a ride to the level above human 
on Prudence and Courtney’s Hale-Bopp companion 
object. 
‘It was awful,’ said Prudence. ‘It was...’ 
She fell silent and put her head in her hands, staring 
off into the distance. 
‘They believed they were going to join the companion 
object to the comet,’ she said. 
‘Hmm,’ I said. 
‘All those people,’ she said. 
‘Uh,’ I said. 
‘It’s kind of stressful to talk about,’ she said. ‘I don’t 
really know what to say.’ 
‘I guess you weren’t to know that all the excitement 
would, uh, lead to a mass suicide,’ I said. 
*You’d think that if you’re a remote viewer you should 
have been able to figure that out ahead of time,’ said 
Prudence. 
Chuck Shramek — the man who took the ‘companion’ 
photograph — died of cancer in 2000. He was forty-nine. 
After his death, a childhood friend of his called Greg 
m2

--- PAGE BREAK ---id 
Prudence. 
Chuck Shramek — the man who took the ‘companion’ 
photograph — died of cancer in 2000. He was forty-nine. 
After his death, a childhood friend of his called Greg 
m2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Frost told UFO Magazine that Chuck had always been 
an inveterate prankster. ‘I was there on one occasion 
when he ran his voice through a filter that made him 
sound like Zontar the Warp Master while he communi- 
cated with some gullible ham-radio operators. Chuck 
had convinced a whole flock of them that he was a space 
alien from Venus.” 
My guess is that Chuck Shramek heard Ed Dames and 
then Courtney Brown on Art Bell and decided to play a 
trick on the remote viewers. So he doctored a photo- 
graph and got his fiancée to telephone Prudence. If this 
is what happened, I have no idea whether Dee was in on 
the scam. 
Art Bell banned Prudence and Courtney Brown from 
ever again appearing on his show. Major Ed Dames 
is still a regular and popular guest. He is routinely 
introduced by Art Bell as ‘Major Edward A. Dames, 
US Army, retired now, a decorated Military Intelligence 
officer, an original member of the US Army prototype 
remote-viewing training programme, the training and 
operations officer for the Defence Intelligence Agency, 
or 
DIA, 
psychic 
intelligence, 
or 
PSIINT 
collection 
unit®.. 
Military acronyms are truly mesmerizing. 
Ed’s most recent appearance on Art Bell at the time of 
writing was in the spring of 2004. He told the listeners, 
‘Now this is important. Before everybody goes to bed, 
listen to this. When you see one of our space shuttles 
being forced to land because of a meteor shower, that is 
I22

--- PAGE BREAK ---eners, 
‘Now this is important. Before everybody goes to bed, 
listen to this. When you see one of our space shuttles 
being forced to land because of a meteor shower, that is 
I22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
the beginning of the end. That is the harbinger. Immedi- 
ately after that will begin some 
drastic geophysical 
changes in the Earth, resulting in a wobble and possibly 
an entire pole-shift—’ 
‘God!’ interrupted Art Bell. ‘There will be some who 
live through this, Ed? Or will no one live through it?’ 
‘We’re looking at a couple of billion people who are 
going to get crisped,’ Ed replied. 
I have noticed, however, a certain irreverence creep- 
ing into Art Bell’s more recent interviews with Major 
Dames. Nowadays, amid the mesmerizing military acro- 
nyms, Art Bell sometimes refers to Major Dames as ‘Dr 
Doom’. 
Dr Courtney Brown’s Farsight Institute dwindled from 
thirty-six students to twenty students to eight students to 
no students at all during the months that followed the 
suicides. He stopped giving interviews. He hasn’t spoken 
about what happened for seven years. (I think he went 
on Art Bell one more time to be shouted at.) I visited 
him in the spring of 2004. 
He still lives in Atlanta. He is very thin now. He took 
me into his basement. 
‘Heavens Gate?’ he said. 
He acted for a moment as if he couldn’t quite remem- 
ber who they were. He was wearing a tweed jacket with 
leather patches on the elbows. 
‘Heavens Gate?’ he said again. His look suggested that 
he had the memory of a vague academic and that I 
should bear with him for a moment. 
123

--- PAGE BREAK ---h 
leather patches on the elbows. 
‘Heavens Gate?’ he said again. His look suggested that 
he had the memory of a vague academic and that I 
should bear with him for a moment. 
123

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Oh!’ he said. ‘Oh, yes. That was an interesting group. 
They were eunuchs. That’s what I read in the newspaper. 
They castrated themselves and eventually they killed them- 
selves.’ 
Dr Brown fell silent. 
‘It was like Jim Jones,’ he said. ‘Their leader was 
probably a crazy type of guy who was getting older and, 
seeing that his group was going to unravel in front of 
him, he was probably looking for some opportunity to 
finalize it.’ 
Dr Brown took off his glasses and rubbed his eyes. 
‘Eunuchs!’ He chuckled dryly and shook his head. 
‘That’s pretty heavy psychological control to get people 
to castrate themselves, and eventually he had them all 
kill themselves as well, looking for an opportunity. You 
know, uh. That was an interesting group. That was a 
wild, wild group. That was a crazy group. That was a 
... that was a tragedy waiting to happen.’ 
Dr Brown made me some herb tea. 
He said, ‘You have to understand, I’m an academic. 
I’m not trained in dealing with masses of people. I found 
out through the school of hard knocks that it is better 
not to deal with masses of people. It’s not that they don’t 
deserve the information but they really react in very 
strange ways. They get panicky and excited, or over- 
excited, and it is so easy for academics to forget that. 
We're trained in math. We’re trained in science. We’re 
not trained in the masses.’ 
He paused. 
124

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Privatization 
‘The public is extremely wild,’ he said, ‘uncontrollably 
wild.’ 
Then he shrugged his shoulders. 
“You have to understand,’ he said, ‘I’m an academic.’ 
125

--- PAGE BREAK ---AK ---

Privatization 
‘The public is extremely wild,’ he said, ‘uncontrollably 
wild.’ 
Then he shrugged his shoulders. 
“You have to understand,’ he said, ‘I’m an academic.’ 
125

--- PAGE BREAK ---

oi" 
9 ht shores 
* tach 
t 
‘, 
> 
q ee 
a 
4! 
*» 
‘ 
y=) 
BY 
- 
st 
red 
- 
a 
’ 
' 
4 
| 
eh 5 
* 
} 
a4 
* eta? 
rab 
a oa 
it i lh 
wes 
am 
i 
Saaeee ~~ wi aig Ww si 
@a 
~ 
= 
a 
md 
(evagloy 
Wy Teli 
(ers 
© 
a 
. 
AY 
i @ 
2 
i: 
Pe 
a 
oe 
‘ 
= 
‘ 
> 
~ 
era" 
¥ 
i; 
‘ 
* 
we" 
a 
i 
4 
. 
a? 
av ~¢ 
v 
Pa 
. 
- 
Wain 4, 
“i 
it . : 
wae 
gg) avers Be 
fy cei: Bs i 
nag perry 
a rab = 
ec 
Fond * 
iJ 
suck 
at 
he 
® 
a 
aS 
ee 
Oe 
7 
* 
; 
r 
iy 
ve 
na 
L = 
Ce 
Pes!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7. THE PURPLE DINOSAUR 
If you walk down about 500 yards down the road from 
the Fort Bragg goats, you come to a large modern grey 
brick building with a sign at the front that reads ‘C 
Company gth PsyOps Battalion H-3743’. 
This 
is the US army’s Psychological 
Operations 
headquarters. 
In May 2003, a little piece of the First Earth Battalion 
philosophy was put into practice, by PsyOps, behind a 
disused railway station in the tiny Iraqi town of al- 
Qa’im, on the Syrian border, shortly after President Bush 
had announced ‘the end of major hostilities’. 
The story begins with a meeting between two Ameri- 
cans — a Newsweek journalist called Adam Piore and a 
PsyOps sergeant called Mark Hadsell. 
Adam was travelling in a PsyOps Humvee, driving 
into al-Qa’im, past the coalition checkpoints, past the 
main road sign into town which was shot up and dilapi- 
dated and now read a Q m. They pulled up in front of 
a police station. It was Adam’s second day in Iraq. He 
knew virtually nothing about the country. He badly 
£27

--- PAGE BREAK ---p and dilapi- 
dated and now read a Q m. They pulled up in front of 
a police station. It was Adam’s second day in Iraq. He 
knew virtually nothing about the country. He badly 
£27

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
needed to urinate, but was worried that if he peed in 
front of the police station or in the bushes, he might 
offend someone. What were the protocols regarding 
public urination in Iraq? Adam mentioned his concern to 
the PsyOps soldier sitting next to him in the Humvee. 
This was PsyOps’ job — to understand and exploit the 
psyche and the customs of the enemy. 
‘Just go on the front tyre,’ the soldier said to Adam. 
So Adam jumped out of the Humvee, and that’s when 
PsyOps Sergeant Mark Hadsell wandered over and 
threatened to kill him. 
Bd 
Adam was telling me this story two months later, back 
in the Newsweek offices in New York. We were upstairs 
in the boardroom, which was decorated with blow-ups 
of recent Newsweek covers: a masked Islamic fundamen- 
talist with a gun under the headline WHY THEY HATE 
us, and President and Mrs Bush in the White House 
garden, under 
the headline WHERE 
WE 
GET 
OUR 
STRENGTH. Adam is twenty-nine, he looks younger, and 
he trembled a little as he recounted the incident. 
‘So that’s how I met the guy,’ said Adam. He laughed. 
‘He said did I want to get shot? So I quickly zipped 
upa.. 
“Was he smiling as he said it?’ I asked. 
I pictured Sergeant Hadsell, whoever he was, with a 
big, friendly smile on his face asking Adam if he wanted 
to be shot. 
‘No,’ Adam said. ‘He just said, “Do you want to be 
shot?” ’ 
Adam and Sergeant Hadsell ended up friends. They 
128

--- PAGE BREAK ---riendly smile on his face asking Adam if he wanted 
to be shot. 
‘No,’ Adam said. ‘He just said, “Do you want to be 
shot?” ’ 
Adam and Sergeant Hadsell ended up friends. They 
128

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
bunked together in the PsyOps squadron command cen- 
tre in a disused train station in al-Qa’im, and borrowed 
DVDs from one another. 
‘He’s a very gung-ho type of guy,’ said Adam. ‘The 
squadron commander used to call him Psycho Six, 
because he was always ready to go in with firepower. 
Ha! He once told me that he pointed a gun at someone 
and pulled the trigger, and the gun wasn’t loaded, and 
the guy peed in his pants. I don’t know why he told me 
that story, because I didn’t think it was funny. In fact I 
thought it was somewhat twisted and disturbing.’ 
‘Did he think it was funny?’ I asked Adam. 
~ 
‘T think he thought it was funny,’ Adam said. ‘Yeah. 
He was an American-trained killer.’ 
The people of al-Qa’im didn’t know that Baghdad had 
fallen to coalition troops, so Sergeant Hadsell and his 
PsyOps unit were there to distribute leaflets bearing this 
news. Adam was tagging along, covering the ‘end of 
major hostilities’ from the PsyOps perspective. 
May 2003 was a pretty calm month in al-Qa’im. By 
the end of the year, US forces would be under frequent 
guerrilla bombardment in the town. In November 2003, 
one of Saddam Hussein’s air defence commanders 
—- 
Major General Abed Hamed Mowhoush - would die 
under interrogation right there at the disused train 
station. (‘Natural causes,’ said the official US military 
statement. ‘Mowhoush’s head was not hooded during 
questioning.’) 
But for now it was peaceful. 
‘At one point,’ Adam said, ‘somebody ran by and 
129

--- PAGE BREAK ---said the official US military 
statement. ‘Mowhoush’s head was not hooded during 
questioning.’) 
But for now it was peaceful. 
‘At one point,’ Adam said, ‘somebody ran by and 
129

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
grabbed a pile of leaflets. Hadsell talked about how 
important it was, the next time that happened, to find 
the guy and beat the shit out of him so he wouldn’t do it 
again. That was probably to do with studying Arabic 
culture. You have to show that you’re strong.’ 
One night, Adam was hanging out in the squadron 
command centre when Sergeant Hadsell wandered over 
to him. Hadsell winked conspiratorially and said, ‘Go 
look out by where the prisoners are.’ 
Adam knew that the prisoners were housed in a yard 
behind the train station. The army had parked a convoy 
of shipping containers back there, and as Adam wan- 
dered towards them he could see a bright flashing light. 
He could hear music too. 
It was Metallica’s ‘Enter 
Sandman’. 
From a distance it looked as though some weird and 
slightly sinister disco was taking place amid the shipping 
containers. The music sounded especially tinny, and the 
light was being joylessly flashed on and off, on and off. 
Adam walked towards the light. It was really bright. 
It was being held by a young American soldier, and he 
was just flashing it on and off, on and off, into the 
shipping container. ‘Enter Sandman’ was reverberating 
inside the container, echoing violently around the steel 
walls. Adam stood there for a moment and watched. 
The song ended and then, immediately, it began again. 
The young soldier holding the light glanced over at 
Adam. He carried on flashing it and said, ‘You need to 
go away now.’ 
130

--- PAGE BREAK ---e song ended and then, immediately, it began again. 
The young soldier holding the light glanced over at 
Adam. He carried on flashing it and said, ‘You need to 
go away now.’ 
130

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
‘Ha!’ said Adam to me, back in the Newsweek offices. 
‘That’s the term he used. “You need to go away.”’ 
‘Did you look inside the container?’ I asked him.. 
‘No,’ said Adam. ‘When the guy told me that I had to 
go away, I went away.” He paused. ‘But it was kind of 
obvious what was going on in there.’ 
Adam 
called Newsweek 
from 
his cellphone and 
pitched them a number of stories. Their favourite was 
the Metallica one. 
‘I was told to write it as a humorous thing,’ said 
Adam. “They wanted a complete play-list.’ 
So Adam asked around. It turned out that the songs 
being blasted at prisoners inside the shipping container 
included Metallica’s ‘Enter Sandman’; the soundtrack to 
the movie XXX; a song that went ‘Burn Motherfucker 
Burn’; and, rather more surprisingly, the ‘I Love You’ 
song from Barney @ Friends, the Barney the Purple 
Dinosaur show, along with songs from Sesame Street. 
Adam emailed the article to New York, where a 
~ Newsweek editor phoned the Barney people for a com- 
ment. He was put on hold. The on hold music was the 
Barney ‘I Love You’ song. 
The last line of the article, written by the Newsweek 
editor, was: ‘It broke us too!’ 
I first learnt about the Barney torture story on 19 May 
2003, when it ran as a funny, ‘And finally . 
. .’-type item 
on NBC’s Today show: 
13%

--- PAGE BREAK ---k 
editor, was: ‘It broke us too!’ 
I first learnt about the Barney torture story on 19 May 
2003, when it ran as a funny, ‘And finally . 
. .’-type item 
on NBC’s Today show: 
13%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
ANN CURRY (news anchor): US forces in Iraq are 
using what some are calling a cruel and unusual 
tool to break the resistance of Iraqi POWs, and 
trust me, a lot of parents would agree! Some 
prisoners are being forced to listen to Barney the 
Purple Dinosaur sing the ‘I Love You’ song for 
twenty-four straight hours .. 
. 
NBC cut to a clip from Barney, in which the purple 
dinosaur flopped around amidst his gang of ever-smiling 
stage-school kids. Everyone in the studio laughed. Ann 
Curry put on a funny kind of ‘poor-little-prisoners’-type 
voice to report the story. 
ANN CURRY: ... according to Newsweek 
magazine. One US operative told Newsweek that 
he listened to Barney for forty-five minutes straight 
and never wanted to go through that again! 
STUDIO: (laughter) 
Ann Curry turned to Katie Couric, her co-host. 
ANN CURRY: Katie! Sing it with me! 
KATIE COURIC (laughing): No! I think after about 
an hour they’re probably spilling the beans, don’t 
you think? Let’s go outside to Al for the weather. 
AL ROKER (weatherman): And if Barney doesn’t 
get ’em, they switch to the Teletubbies, and that 
crushes ’em like a bug... ! 
132

--- PAGE BREAK ---ou think? Let’s go outside to Al for the weather. 
AL ROKER (weatherman): And if Barney doesn’t 
get ’em, they switch to the Teletubbies, and that 
crushes ’em like a bug... ! 
132

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
It’s the First Earth Battalion! I thought. 
I had no doubt that the notion of using music as a 
form of mental torture had been popularized and per- 
fected within the military as a result of Jim’s manual. 
Before Jim came along, military music was confined to 
the marching-band-type arena. 
It was all about pag- 
eantry and energizing the troops. In Vietnam, soldiers 
blasted themselves with Wagner’s ‘Ride of the Valkyries’ 
to put themselves in the mood for battle. But it was Jim 
who came up with the idea of loudspeakers being used 
in the battlefield to broadcast ‘discordant sounds’ such 
as ‘acid-rock music out of synch’ to confuse the enemy, 
and the use of similar sounds in the interrogation arena. 
Jim got these ideas in part, as far as I could tell, after 
he met Steven Halpern, the composer of ambient CDs 
such as Music For Inner Peace, in 1978. And so I called 
Jim right away. 
‘Jim!’ I said, ‘would you say that blasting Iraqi pris- 
oners with the theme tune to Barney is a legacy of the 
First Earth Battalion?’ 
‘Tm sorry?’ said Jim. 
‘They’re rounding people up in Iraq, taking them to 
a shipping container, and blasting them repeatedly with 
children’s music while repeatedly flashing a bright light 
at them,’ I said. ‘Is that one of your legacies?’ 
‘Yes!’ Jim said. He sounded thrilled. ‘I’m so pleased to 
hear that!’ 
‘Why?’ I asked. 
‘They’re obviously trying to lighten the environment,’ 
he said, ‘and give these people some comfort, instead of 
133

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed thrilled. ‘I’m so pleased to 
hear that!’ 
‘Why?’ I asked. 
‘They’re obviously trying to lighten the environment,’ 
he said, ‘and give these people some comfort, instead of 
133

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
beating them to death!’ He sighed. ‘Children’s music! 
That will make the prisoners more ready to divulge 
where their forces are and shorten the war! Damn good!’ 
I think Jim was imagining something more like a 
créche than a steel container at the back of a disused 
railway station. 
‘I guess if they play them Barney and Sesame Street 
once or twice,’ I said, ‘that’s lightening and comforting, 
but if they play it, say, fifty thousand times into a steel 
box in the desert heat, that’s more... uh... torturous?’ 
‘’m no psychologist,’ said Jim, a little sharply. 
He seemed to want to change the subject, as if he were 
in denial about the way in which his vision was being 
interpreted behind the railway station in al-Qa’im. He 
reminded me of a grandparent who wouldn’t counten- 
ance the idea that his grandchildren would ever mis- 
behave. 
‘But the use of music...’ I said. 
‘That’s what the First Earth Battalion did,’ said Jim. 
‘It opened the military mind to how to use music.’ 
‘So,’ I said, ‘it’s all about getting people to talk in a 
...in a what?’ 
‘A psycho-spiritual dimension,’ said Jim. ‘Besides the 
basic fear of being hit, we have a mental, spiritual and 
psychic component. So why not use that? Why not go 
straight for the place where the being actually decides 
whether to say something or not?’ 
‘So are you certain,’ I asked Jim, ‘given what you 
know about how your First Earth Battalion has dissem- 
inated its way into the fabric of the military, that blasting 
134

--- PAGE BREAK ---not?’ 
‘So are you certain,’ I asked Jim, ‘given what you 
know about how your First Earth Battalion has dissem- 
inated its way into the fabric of the military, that blasting 
134

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
Iraqis with Barney and Sesame Street is one of your 
legacies?’ 
Jim thought about this for a moment and then he said, 
“¥es.’ 
Christopher Cerf has been composing songs for Sesame 
Street for twenty-five years. His large Manhattan town- 
house is full of Sesame Street memorabilia — photographs 
of Christopher with his arm around Big Bird, etc. 
‘Well, it’s certainly not what I expected when I wrote 
them,’ Christopher said. 
‘I have to admit, my first 
reaction was, “Oh my gosh, is my music really that 
terrible?”’ 
I laughed. 
‘I once wrote a song for Bert and Ernie called “Put 
Down The Ducky”,’ he said, ‘which might be useful for 
interrogating members of the Ba’ath Party.’ 
‘That’s very good,’ I said. 
‘This interview,’ Christopher said, ‘has been brought 
to you by the letters W, M and D.’ 
‘That’s very good,’ I said. 
We both laughed. 
I paused. 
‘And do you think that the Iraqi prisoners, as well as 
giving away vital information, are learning new letters 
and numbers?’ I said. 
‘Well, wouldn’t that be an incredible double win?’ 
said Christopher. 
Christopher took me upstairs to his studio to play me 
135

--- PAGE BREAK ---, are learning new letters 
and numbers?’ I said. 
‘Well, wouldn’t that be an incredible double win?’ 
said Christopher. 
Christopher took me upstairs to his studio to play me 
135

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
one of his Sesame Street compositions, called ‘Ya! Ya! 
Das Is a Mountain!’ 
‘The way we do Sesame Street,’ he explained, ‘is that 
we have educational researchers who test whether these 
songs are working, whether the kids are learning. And 
one year they asked me to write a song to explain what 
a mountain is, and I wrote a silly yodelling song about 
what a mountain was.’ 
Christopher sang me a little of the song: 
Oompah-pah! 
Oompah-pah! 
Ya! Ya! Das is a mountain! 
Part of zee ground zat sticks way up high! 
‘Anyway,’ he said, ‘forty per cent of the kids had 
known what a mountain was before they heard the song, 
and after they heard the song, only about twenty-six 
per cent knew what a mountain was. That’s all they 
needed. You don’t know what a mountain is now, right? 
It’s gone! So I figure if I have the power to suck infor- 
mation out of people’s brains by writing these songs, 
maybe that’s something that could be useful to the CIA 
for brainwashing techniques.’ 
Just then, Christopher’s phone rang. It was a lawyer 
from his music publishers, BMI. I listened into Christo- 
pher’s side of the conversation: 
‘Oh really?’ he said. ‘I see... Well, theoretically they 
have to log that and I should be getting a few cents for 
every prisoner, right? Okay. Bye, bye...’ 
‘What was that about?’ I asked Christopher. 
136

--- PAGE BREAK ---e... Well, theoretically they 
have to log that and I should be getting a few cents for 
every prisoner, right? Okay. Bye, bye...’ 
‘What was that about?’ I asked Christopher. 
136

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
‘Whether ’'m due some money for the performance 
royalties,’ he explained. ‘Why not? It’s an American 
thing to do. If I have the knack of writing songs that can 
drive people crazy sooner and more effectively than 
others, why shouldn’t I profit from that?’ 
This is why, later that day, Christopher asked Danny 
Epstein — who has been the music supervisor of Sesame 
Street since the very first programme was broadcast in 
July 1969 — to come to his house. It would be Danny’s 
responsibility to collect the royalties from the military if 
they proved negligent in filing a music-cue sheet. 
For an hour or so, Danny and Christopher attempted 
to calculate exactly how much money Christopher might 
be due if — as he estimated — his songs were being played 
on a continuous loop in a shipping container for up to 
three days at a time. 
‘That’s fourteen thousand times or more over three 
days,’ said Christopher. ‘If it was radio play I’d get three 
or four cents every time that loop went through, right?’ 
‘It would be a money machine,’ concurred Danny. 
‘That’s what I’m thinking,’ said Christopher. ‘We could 
be helping our country and cleaning up at the same time.’ 
‘I don’t think there’s enough money in the pool to pay 
for that rate,’ said Danny. ‘If I’m to be negotiating for 
ASCAP [American Society of Composers, Authors and 
Publishers], I’d say it would come in the category of a 
theme or jingle rate, some kind of knock-down...’ 
‘Which is an appropriate term because there’s evidence 
that the prisoners are being knocked down as they listen 
to the music,’ said Christopher. 
137

--- PAGE BREAK ---some kind of knock-down...’ 
‘Which is an appropriate term because there’s evidence 
that the prisoners are being knocked down as they listen 
to the music,’ said Christopher. 
137

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
We all laughed. 
The conversation 
seemed 
to 
be shifting uneasily 
between satire and a genuine desire to make some money. 
‘And that’s just in one interrogation room,’ said 
Danny. ‘If there’s a dozen rooms, you’re talking money. 
This is non-sponsored?’ 
‘That’s a good question,’ said Christopher. ‘It’s state 
sponsored, I think. Would I get more money if it is or it 
isn’t?’ 
‘Now, would we have a special rate for Mossad?’ said 
Danny. 
We laughed. 
‘I think we ought to collect royalties,’ said Christo- 
pher. ‘If I’d written the songs directly for the army they 
would pay me, I presume?’ 
‘No,’ said Danny. ‘You’d be a work for hire. You’d 
be in their employ.’ 
‘Well, ’m not a work for hire in this case,’ said 
Christopher. 
‘’m not so sure,’ said Danny. ‘As a citizen you are 
subject to work for hire, if the military needs you.’ 
‘Well they could have asked me to volunteer,’ said 
Christopher. 
He was more serious now. Danny took off his glasses 
and rubbed his eyes. 
‘Wanting money for the use of your music in a time 
of crisis,’ he said, after a moment, ‘seems a little shabby 
to me.’ 
And the two men collapsed into helpless laughter. 
+ 
138

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘Wanting money for the use of your music in a time 
of crisis,’ he said, after a moment, ‘seems a little shabby 
to me.’ 
And the two men collapsed into helpless laughter. 
+ 
138

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
In the late autumn of 2003, after many faxes and emails 
had gone back and forth, and I had been security 
screened by various offices within the Pentagon and the 
American Embassy, PsyOps consented to show me their 
CD collection. 
Adam Piore, the Newsweek journalist, had said the 
play-list of songs used to blast at the prisoners had been 
chosen here at PsyOps headquarters. The collection was 
housed in a series of radio-production suites inside a low 
brick building in the middle of Fort Bragg, some 500 
yards up the road from where, it was rumoured, Goat 
Lab was situated. I kept looking out of windows in the 
hope of spotting dazed or hobbling goats, but there were 
none in evidence. 
PsyOps began by showing me their sound-effects CDs. 
‘Primarily deception,’ explained the sergeant who 
guided me during this portion of the day, ‘designed to 
make enemy forces think they’re hearing something that 
doesn’t exist.’ 
One sound-effect CD was labelled ‘Crazy Woman 
Says “My Husband’s Never Liked You”’. 
‘We purchased a job lot,’ explained the sergeant. 
We laughed. 
‘Many Horses Galloping By’ read another, and we 
laughed again and said this would have been deployable 
300 years ago, but not now. 
Then he played me an applicable one: “Tank Noises’. 
The radio suite filled with the rumblings of tanks. 
They seemed to be coming from everywhere at once. The 
sergeant explained that sometimes PsyOps hide behind a 
139

--- PAGE BREAK ---nk Noises’. 
The radio suite filled with the rumblings of tanks. 
They seemed to be coming from everywhere at once. The 
sergeant explained that sometimes PsyOps hide behind a 
139

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
hill to the east of the enemy and they blast their tank 
noises, as the real tanks rumble in, more silently, from 
the west. 
Then he showed me their Arabic music CDs (‘Our 
analysts and our specialists are familiar with what may 
be popular and culturally relevant, and we purchase that 
music in order to appeal to the population.’), followed 
by their collection of Avril Lavigne and Norah Jones 
Sle, 
‘How might Avril Lavigne be deployed in hostile 
countries?’ I asked. 
There was a silence. 
‘In some parts of the world Western music is popular,’ 
he replied. ‘We try to stay current.’ 
‘Who chooses the play-list?’ I asked. 
‘Our analysts,’ he said, ‘in conjunction with our 
specialists.’ 
‘Which countries?’ I asked. 
‘I don’t want to go into that,’ he said. 
My tour of PsyOps was a well-rehearsed whirlwind — 
the same tour that a visiting dignitary or a congressman 
would get. A PsyOps soldier knows how to design a 
leaflet and burn a CD and operate a loudspeaker and 
take a photograph and snap into formation for the 
official tour. 
They showed me their radio studios and their TV 
studios and their archive library, with shelves full of 
videos labelled ‘Guantanamo Bay’, and so on. I noticed 
a poster on a wall reminding the soldiers of PsyOps’ 
140

--- PAGE BREAK ---their TV 
studios and their archive library, with shelves full of 
videos labelled ‘Guantanamo Bay’, and so on. I noticed 
a poster on a wall reminding the soldiers of PsyOps’ 
140

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
official functions: ‘Surrender appeals. Crowd control. 
Tactical deception. Harassment. Unconventional war- 
fare. Foreign internal defense.’ 
They showed me their leaflet printing presses, and 
their canisters. These are dropped from planes and are 
designed to split open mid-air, and then tens of thousands 
of leaflets float down into enemy territory. 
The Americans have always been better than the Iraqis 
at the leaflets. Early on in the first Gulf War, Iraqi 
PsyOps dropped a batch of their own leaflets on US 
troops, designed to be psychologically devastating. They 
read ‘Your wives are back at home having sex with Bart 
Simpson and Burt Reynolds.’ 
Then I was led into a PsyOps conference room where 
I was introduced to the specialists and the analysts. Some 
were in uniform. Others looked like friendly eggheads, 
bespectacled and in business suits. 
The specialists showed me some of their leaflets that 
had floated down from PsyOps helicopters into Iraqi 
. 
forces just a month or two earlier. One read, ‘Nobody 
benefits from the use of Weapons of Mass Destruction. 
Any unit that chooses to use Weapons of Mass Destruc- 
tion will face swift and severe retribution by coalition 
forces.’ 
‘This product,’ explained a specialist, ‘is making a 
clear link between their unfulfilled need and our desired 
behaviour.’ 
‘What do you mean?’ I asked him. 
‘Their unfulfilled need,’ he said, ‘was that they didn’t 
I4I

--- PAGE BREAK ---is making a 
clear link between their unfulfilled need and our desired 
behaviour.’ 
‘What do you mean?’ I asked him. 
‘Their unfulfilled need,’ he said, ‘was that they didn’t 
I4I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
want to face severe retribution. And our desired behav- 
iour was that we didn’t want them to use weapons of 
mass destruction.’ 
I nodded. 
‘Our most effective products are the ones which link 
an unfulfilled need on their part with a desired behaviour 
on our part,’ he said. 
There was a silence. 
‘And weapons of mass destruction were not used on 
American forces,’ the specialist added, ‘so this leaflet 
may very well have been effective.’ 
‘Do you really ... 2?’ I started. ‘Oh, nothing,’ I said. 
I picked up another leaflet. It read: “You people aren’t 
being fed. Your children are going hungry. While you 
live in squalor, Saddam’s generals are so overweight and 
fat he has to fine them to keep them in fighting shape.’ 
As I read this leaflet I had a short conversation with a 
PsyOps analyst called Dave. He wasn’t in uniform. He 
was a friendly, middle-aged man. What he said to me 
didn’t seem particularly significant at the time, so I just 
nodded and smiled, and then I was bustled out of the 
conference room and into an oak-lined office where a 
tall handsome man wearing khaki shook my hand and 
said, ‘Hi, I’m Colonel Jack N....’ 
He blushed, disarmingly. 
‘NY He laughed. ‘Middle name! Jack N. Summe. I’m 
the commander of the 4th Psychological Operations 
Airborne, Fort Bragg, North Carolina.’ 
‘Are you in charge of all of PsyOps?’ I asked him. 
My hand was still being vigorously shaken. 
142

--- PAGE BREAK ---der of the 4th Psychological Operations 
Airborne, Fort Bragg, North Carolina.’ 
‘Are you in charge of all of PsyOps?’ I asked him. 
My hand was still being vigorously shaken. 
142

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Purple Dinosaur 
‘Tm in charge of the active-duty Psychological Oper- 
ations group in the United States army,’ he said. ‘Our 
job is to convince our adversaries to support US policies 
and to make the battlefield a less dangerous place using 
multi-media techniques.’ 
‘Colonel Summe,’ I said. ‘What can you tell me about 
the deployment of Barney and Sesame Street, by PsyOps, 
inside shipping containers in al-Qa’im?’ 
Colonel Summe didn’t miss a beat. 
‘I was at the Joint Staff headquarters and I took 
command of the 4th PsyOps Group on 17 July so I have 
not had the ability to operationally deploy into Iraq and 
find out at what level we’re doing things.’ He paused to 
take a very short breath and continued, ‘We serve as 
force providers. When there is a requirement — a crisis 
requirement — we are tasked to send PsyOpers forward 
to support. When Psychological Operations deploys .. 
.’ 
Colonel Summe’s words,. delivered like machine-gun 
fire, swam around my head. I smiled and nodded blankly 
at him. 
‘... we are always in support of the commander. The 
senior commander or manoeuvre commander or area 
commander is never a PsyOps officer. We are always a 
support force. So when we attach that PsyOps force to a 
commander he may identify a use of Psychological Oper- 
ations loudspeaker capability for that very reason...’ 
I continued nodding. It was almost as if Colonel 
Summe wanted to tell me something, but he wanted to 
say it such a way that he didn’t want me to understand 
it. Maybe, I thought, as my mind drifted, and I glanced 
143

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Colonel 
Summe wanted to tell me something, but he wanted to 
say it such a way that he didn’t want me to understand 
it. Maybe, I thought, as my mind drifted, and I glanced 
143

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
out of his window to the lawn outside his office in the 
vain hope of spotting injured goats, he was performing 
some kind of PsyOp on me. 
‘...If we have combat forces in the field I would 
rather see our PsyOps capability being used to support 
those combat forces as opposed to some other mission 
like you’ve kind of outlined.’ 
Then Colonel Summe coughed and he shook my hand 
again and he thanked me for my interest and I was 
bustled out of the door. 
144

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8. THE PREDATOR 
Martial arts master Pete Brusso, who teaches hand-to- 
hand combat at the Camp Pendleton Marine base in San 
Diego, has read Jim Channon’s First Earth Battalion 
Operations Manual ‘cover to cover’. Just a week before 
I met Pete, in March 2004, he had had a long telephone 
conversation with Jim, during which they discussed how 
First Earth principles might be deployed in Iraq today. 
Pete had a ‘number of my operatives’ in Iraq ‘right now’, 
he told me. 
We were cruising through the Camp Pendleton inside 
Pete’s $167,000 Hummer Hr. His licence plate read My 
Other Car Is A Tank. Pete’s Hummer is something like 
a nightmare version of the Chitty Chitty Bang Bang car, 
in that it can swim, effortlessly navigate the most treach- 
erous terrain on the planet, and has a number of places 
scattered around the bodywork on which to mount one’s 
weaponry. Pete turned the music up loud to demonstrate 
his state-of-the-art sound system. He played me a very 
loud, crystal clear, but weird song, which basically went 
bling blong bling blong. 
145

--- PAGE BREAK ---d the music up loud to demonstrate 
his state-of-the-art sound system. He played me a very 
loud, crystal clear, but weird song, which basically went 
bling blong bling blong. 
145

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘I COMPOSED THIS MYSELF,’ shouted Pete. 
‘WHAT?’ I said. 
Pete turned the music down. 
‘I composed this music myself,’ he said. 
‘It’s interesting,’ I said. 
T’ll tell you why it’s interesting,’ said Pete. ‘It thwarts 
bugs. Someone’s bugging this Hummer? Just turn up the 
music. The bugging device can’t cope. Usually spies can 
take a bugging tape, strip out the music and hear the 
conversation. Not with this music.’ 
Pete does for US Marines at Camp Pendleton what 
Guy Savelli used to do for Special Forces at Fort Bragg. 
He teaches them martial arts techniques with a First 
Earth Battalion dimension. But unlike Guy, Pete is a 
military veteran. He fought in Cambodia for ten months. 
His combat experience has made him sniffy about Guy’s 
goat-staring capabilities. Violent goats don’t come run- 
ning at you in the battlefield. Guy’s goat staring may be 
fabled, but it is basically a party trick. 
Then Pete turned the music up loud and told me a 
secret, which I couldn’t hear a word of, so he turned the 
music back down and told me it again. The secret was 
that he and Guy Savelli are competitors. Military com- 
manders have been considering a mandatory post-9/11 
martial arts training programme. The two sensei — Pete 
and Guy — were vying with one another for the contract. 
Pete basically said there was no contest. Would the 
military really want a civilian, like Guy, with his party 
tricks? 
In short, Pete is a pragmatist. He’s an admirer of 
146

--- PAGE BREAK ---t. 
Pete basically said there was no contest. Would the 
military really want a civilian, like Guy, with his party 
tricks? 
In short, Pete is a pragmatist. He’s an admirer of 
146

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Predator 
the First Earth Battalion but has taken it upon himself 
to adapt Jim’s ideas into practical applications for the 
battlefield Marine. 
I asked Pete to give me an example of a practical 
application. 
‘Okay,’ he said. “There’s a gang of insurgents standing 
in front of you. You are alone. You want to dissuade 
them from attacking you. What do you do?’ 
I told Pete I didn’t know. 
Pete said the answer lay in the psychic realm — specif- 
ically the use of visual aesthetics to instil psychically in 
the enemy a disincentive to attack. 
‘Can you be more explicit?’ I asked. 
‘Okay,’ said Pete. ‘What you do is grab one of them, 
rip out his eyeballs and stab him in the neck, the blood 
squirts out like a fountain — really, a fountain — get the 
blood to spurt over his friends. Just punish the bejesus 
out of him, right there in front of his friends.’ 
‘Okay,’ I said. 
‘Or go for the lungs,’ said Pete. ‘Create a gaping chest 
wound. What you'll have then is lots of sucking in air 
and frothing. Or scrape a knife across the face. Here’s a 
clever thing. Get your knife inside the clavicle. That’s the 
collarbone. Once you’re in there you can scrape most of 
the tissue away from that side of the neck. Separate his 
brain stem from the back of his neck. Doesn’t take much 
movement, physics-wise.’ Pete paused. ‘What I’m doing, 
you see, is creating a powerful visual psychic disincentive 
for the other insurgents to attack me.’ 
Pete turned the music up loud. 
147

--- PAGE BREAK ---sics-wise.’ Pete paused. ‘What I’m doing, 
you see, is creating a powerful visual psychic disincentive 
for the other insurgents to attack me.’ 
Pete turned the music up loud. 
147

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘THAT’S A...’ I shouted. 
“WHAT?” shouted Pete. 
‘... BROAD INTERPRETATION OF JIM’S IDEALS,’ 
I yelled. 
Pete turned down the music again and shrugged to 
say, there you go. That’s warfare. 
We pulled up outside a hangar. A half-dozen of Pete’s 
trainees were waiting for him. We wandered inside. Then 
Pete said, ‘Choke me.’ 
‘Tm sorry?’ I said. 
‘Choke me,” said Pete. ‘I’m old and fat. What can I 
do? Choke me. Right here.’ 
Pete pointed at his neck. 
‘Now choke,’ he said, softly. ‘Choke. Choke.’ 
‘You know,’ I said to Pete, ‘I feel that neither of us 
has anything to prove here.’ 
‘Choke me,’ said Pete. ‘ “Attack me”.’ 
When he said the words “attack me” he did that 
quotation mark thing in the air with his fingers, which 
angered me a little because it implied I was incapable of 
mounting anything more than a figurative attack. I was 
indeed incapable, but I had known Pete only for a few 
minutes and I felt he was jumping to conclusions about 
me. 
‘If I do choose to choke you,’ I said, ‘what do you 
intend to do?’ 
‘T’m going to interrupt your thought pattern,’ said 
Pete. ‘It'll take your brain three tenths of a second to 
realize what is happening to you. And after that three 
148

--- PAGE BREAK ---to do?’ 
‘T’m going to interrupt your thought pattern,’ said 
Pete. ‘It'll take your brain three tenths of a second to 
realize what is happening to you. And after that three 
148

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Predator 
tenths of a second you'll be mine. I’m going to touch you 
and that’s it. I’m not going to move even my feet. But 
I’m going to project myself into you, and you will fly.’ 
‘Well,’ I said. ‘If I do decide to choke you, will you 
bear in mind that I am not a Marine?’ 
‘Choke me,’ said Pete. ‘Choke.’ 
I looked behind me and I saw a number of sharp 
edges. 
. 
‘Not into sharp edges,’ I said. ‘Not sharp edges.’ 
‘Okay,’ said Pete. ‘No sharp edges.’ 
I raised my hands in readiness to choke Pete, and I 
was surprised to see how violently they were trembling. 
I had assumed until that moment that we were essentially 
kidding around, but the sight of my hands made me 
realize we weren’t. At that moment of realization, the 
rest of my body caught up with my hands. I felt incred- 
ibly weak. I put my hands back down. 
‘Choke me,’ said Pete. 
‘Before I choke you,’ I said, ‘I would like to ask you 
one or two other questions.’ 
‘Choke me,’ said Pete. ‘Come on. Choke me. Just 
choke me.’ 
I sighed, placed my hands around Pete’s neck, and I 
began to squeeze. 
I didn’t see Pete’s hands move. All I know is that both 
my armpits, my neck and my chest began to hurt enor- 
mously, all at once, and then I was flying, flying across 
the room, flying towards two Marines, who stepped 
gently out of the way, and then I was skidding, skidding 
149

--- PAGE BREAK ---t enor- 
mously, all at once, and then I was flying, flying across 
the room, flying towards two Marines, who stepped 
gently out of the way, and then I was skidding, skidding 
149

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
like a sore ice-skater towards sharp edges, and I came to 
rest a few inches from those edges. I was in great pain 
but also impressed. Pete was truly a maestro of violence. 
‘Fuck,’ I said. 
‘Does it hurt?’ asked Pete. 
‘Yes,’ I said. 
‘I know it does,’ said Pete. He seemed pleased. ‘It 
fucking hurts like hell, doesn’t it?’ 
eV eS slcsaicl: 
‘You felt fear,’ said Pete, ‘didn’t you? Beforehand.’ 
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘I was debilitated with fear beforehand.’ 
‘Would you say that level of fear was abnormal for 
you?’ asked Pete. 
I thought about this. 
‘Yes and no,’ I said. 
‘Explain further,’ said Pete. 
‘I do sometimes experience fear when something bad 
is happening to me, or is about to happen to me,’ I 
explained, ‘but on the other hand, the amount of fear I 
felt in the run up to the choking seemed unusual. I was 
definitely more scared than I ought to have been.’ 
“You know why?’ said Pete. ‘It wasn’t you. It was me. 
It was thought projection. I was inside your head.’ 
I was, he explained, a real-life plaything of a practical 
application of Jim Channon’s vision. I was the Iraqi 
insurgent being sprayed with the fountain of blood ema- 
nating from the neck of his friend. I was the hamster. I 
was the goat. 
And then Pete produced, from his pocket, a small 
yellow blob of plastic. It had pointed edges and smooth 
150

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing from the neck of his friend. I was the hamster. I 
was the goat. 
And then Pete produced, from his pocket, a small 
yellow blob of plastic. It had pointed edges and smooth 
150

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Predator 
edges and a hole in the middle. It looked like a children’s 
toy, albeit one with no obvious means of being fun. This 
yellow blob, Pete said, was his own design, but it was an 
embodiment of Jim Channon’s vision, and it was being 
carried right now in the pockets of the 82nd Airborne 
in Iraq, and soon, Pentagon willing, it would be in the 
pockets of every soldier in the United States army. His 
blob, Pete said, ‘is friendly to the Earth, it has a spirit to 
it, it is as humane as you want it tobe, the pointed bits 
go into people, it can snuff your life out in a heartbeat, 
and it looks a little bit funny. It is,’ he said ‘the First 
Earth Battalion.’ 
‘What’s it called?’ I asked. 
‘The Predator,’ said Pete. 
For the next hour or two, Pete hurt my chakra points, 
in many, many ways, with his Predator. He grabbed my 
finger, placed it in the hole, and twisted it 180 degrees. 
*You’re mine now,’ he said. 
‘Stop hurting me,” I said. 
He grabbed my head, stuck the pointed bit in my ear, 
and lifted me up from the floor, as if I were a fish on a 
hook. 
‘For Christ’s sake,’ I said. ‘Stop.’ 
‘This is a great Iraqi story by the way,’ said Pete. 
‘The ear thing?’ I asked, getting up from the floor and 
brushing myself down. 
‘Yeah,’ said Pete. 
‘What does the Iraqi story have to do with putting the 
Predator in someone’s ear?’ I asked. 
Pete began to tell me, but a Marine commander 
LS a

--- PAGE BREAK ---myself down. 
‘Yeah,’ said Pete. 
‘What does the Iraqi story have to do with putting the 
Predator in someone’s ear?’ I asked. 
Pete began to tell me, but a Marine commander 
LS a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
standing near us shook his head, barely perceptibly, and 
Pete fell silent. 
‘Sufficient to say,” Pete said, ‘the Iraqi who didn’t want 
to stand up stood up.’ He paused. ‘You want a bit of 
pain compliance?’ he asked me. 
‘No,’ I said. 
Pete rapidly rubbed the serrated edge of the Predator 
against a part of my temple and, as I let out a blood- 
curdling scream, he grabbed my fingers and squeezed 
them agonizingly against the smooth edge. 
‘STOP!’ I yelled. 
‘Picture this scenario,’ said Pete. ‘We’re in a bar in 
Baghdad and I want you to come with me. Are you 
coming now?’ 
‘Stop hurting me all the time,’ I said. 
Pete stopped and looked at his Predator fondly. 
‘What’s cool about it,’ he said, ‘is that if you found it 
on the ground no one would know what it was, yet it 
has such lethality.’ 
Pete paused. ‘Eyeballs,’ he said. 
‘NOP I said. 
‘You can take eyeballs right out,’ said Pete, ‘with this 
bit.’ 
On the 34th floor of the Empire State Building, in New 
York City, Kenneth Roth, the Director of Human Rights 
Watch, realized that he was in an awkward situation. 
Ever since the Barney story had broken, journalists had 
been calling him for his comment. It was an engagingly 
152

--- PAGE BREAK ---n Rights 
Watch, realized that he was in an awkward situation. 
Ever since the Barney story had broken, journalists had 
been calling him for his comment. It was an engagingly 
152

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Predator 
surreal joke, but there was also a comforting familiarity 
to it. It was the comedy of recognition. If Barney was 
involved, the torture didn’t sound that bad. In fact, 
an article in the Guardian, published on 21 May 2003, 
a newspaper that usually found little to be funny: or 
upbeat about regarding the Iraqi war, said as much: 
What the former Fedayeen and Republican Guard are 
going through now is nothing. So they’re being played 
the Barney song. At what time? Middle of the day? 
Meaningless. Only when you’ve been dragged from 
sleep before dawn, day after day for months on end, to 
enter Barney's Day-Glo world . 
. 
. only then do you know 
the full horror of the psychological warfare that is life 
with a pre-school child. 
It had become the funniest joke of the war. Within 
hours of Adam Piore’s Newsweek article appearing, the 
Internet was aflame with Barney torture-related wise- 
cracks such as ‘An endless loop of the theme song from 
Titanic by Celine Dion would be infinitely worse! They’d 
confess everything within ro minutes!’ 
And, from a different discussion group: ‘I think 12 
hours of Celine Dion would be needed on the really 
tough ones!’ 
A third discussion group I saw had the following 
message posted on it: ‘Why didn’t they just go all out 
and play them some Celine Dion? Now that would be 
cruel and unusual punishment!’ 
And so on. 
Celine Dion’s theme from Titanic was, in fact, being 
#53

--- PAGE BREAK ---idn’t they just go all out 
and play them some Celine Dion? Now that would be 
cruel and unusual punishment!’ 
And so on. 
Celine Dion’s theme from Titanic was, in fact, being 
#53

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
played in Iraq, albeit in a different context. One of 
PsyOps’ first jobs, once Baghdad had fallen, was to seize 
Saddam-controlled radio stations and broadcast a new 
message — that America was not the Great Satan. One 
way in which they hoped to achieve this was by playing 
‘My Heart Will Go On’, over and over. How could a 
country that produced melodies such as this be all bad? 
This sounded a lot to me like Jim Channon’s vision of 
‘sparkly eyes’ and ‘baby lambs’. 
Adam Piore himself had told me that he was finding 
the impact of his Barney story quite baffling. 
‘It has had a tremendous amount of attention,’ he 
said. ‘When I was in Iraq my girlfriend called to tell me 
she’d seen it scroll across the CNN ticker. I didn’t believe 
her. I thought there must be some mistake. But then Fox 
News wanted to interview me. Then I heard it was on 
the Today show. Then I saw it in Stars & Stripes.’ 
‘How did they report it?’ I asked him. 
‘As humorous,’ said Adam. ‘Always as humorous. It 
was sort of outrageous to be in this shit hole up on the 
border in an abandoned train station, totally uncomfort- 
able, unable to take showers, sleeping on cots, and when 
we finally got cable a couple of days later, scrolling 
across the screen is this . .. Barney story.’ 
Kenneth Roth, of Human Rights Watch, could read 
the mood. He realized that if his responses to the jour- 
nalists were overly austere, it would seem as if he wasn’t. 
getting it. He would sound like a sourpuss. 
So he said to journalists, myself included, ‘I have small 
154

--- PAGE BREAK ---the jour- 
nalists were overly austere, it would seem as if he wasn’t. 
getting it. He would sound like a sourpuss. 
So he said to journalists, myself included, ‘I have small 
154

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Predator 
kids. I can understand being driven crazy by the Barney 
theme song! If I had to have “I Love You, You Love 
Me” played at high decibel over and over for hours, I 
might be willing to confess to anything as well!’ 
And the journalists laughed, but he would quickly 
add, ‘And I wonder what else is going on in those 
shipping containers while the music is being played! 
Perhaps the prisoners are being kicked around. Perhaps 
they’re naked with a bag on their head. Perhaps they’re 
chained and hanging upside down .. 
.” 
But the journalists rarely, if ever, included those possi- 
bilities in their stories. 
By the time I met Kenneth Roth he was clearly sick of 
talking about Barney. 
‘They have,’ said Kenneth, ‘been very savvy in that 
respect.’ 
‘Savvy?’ I said. 
He seemed to be implying that the Barney story had 
been deliberately disseminated just so all the human 
rights violations being committed in post-war Iraq could 
be reduced to this one joke. 
I put this to him and he shrugged. He didn’t know 
what was going on. That, he said, was the problem. 
What I did know was that Sergeant Mark Hadsell, the 
PsyOps soldier who approached Adam Piore that night 
and said to him, ‘Go look out by where the prisoners 
are’, had been given nothing more than a light reprimand 
for his indiscretion. Was Kenneth Roth right? Had Bar- 
ney been chosen to torture people in Iraq simply because 
#55

--- PAGE BREAK ---ers 
are’, had been given nothing more than a light reprimand 
for his indiscretion. Was Kenneth Roth right? Had Bar- 
ney been chosen to torture people in Iraq simply because 
#55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
the dinosaur provided that powerful thing: a funny story 
for the people back home? 
There is a room in a police building on top of a hill in 
Los Angeles that houses an array of pepper sprays and 
stun guns and malodorants — tiny capsules of powdered 
‘faecal matter, dead mammals, sulphur and garlic’ which 
are ‘great at crowd dispersement’ and ‘will gag a mag- 
got’. The man who showed me these things was Com- 
mander Sid Heal of the LA Sheriff’s Department. After 
the First Earth Battalion’s Colonel John Alexander, Sid 
is America’s leading advocate of non-lethal technologies. 
Sid and Colonel Alexander - ‘my mentor’ Sid called 
him — frequently get together at Sid’s house to test out 
various new electronic zappers on one another. If the 
two men are impressed, Sid introduces them into the 
LA law-enforcement arsenal. Then, like the now wide- 
spread TASER stun gun, the weapons sometimes spread 
throughout the entire US police community. One day, 
somebody might calculate how many people are alive 
today, having not been shot dead by police officers, 
because of Sid Heal and Colonel Alexander. 
Sid Heal had dedicated his life to researching new 
non-lethal technologies, so I assumed that he would 
know all about the Barney torture, but when I described 
to him what I knew — the flashing light, the repetitive 
music, the shipping container — he looked perplexed. 
‘I don’t know why they’re doing it,’ I said. 
‘T don’t either,’ he said. 
156

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat I knew — the flashing light, the repetitive 
music, the shipping container — he looked perplexed. 
‘I don’t know why they’re doing it,’ I said. 
‘T don’t either,’ he said. 
156

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Predator 
There was a silence. 
‘Do you think they know why they’re doing it?’ I 
asked. 
‘Oh yeah.’ Sid smiled. ‘I don’t think anybody would 
go to those lengths to set up that elaborate a system 
without some ultimate scheme in mind. We don’t experi- 
ment on each other. Not in our culture.’ 
Sid fell silent. He thought about the Barney technique, 
and the accompanying flashing lights, and a startled look 
suddenly crossed his face. 
‘Tsuppose it could . 
. .. He paused and then said, ‘Nah.’ 
‘What?’ I said. 
‘It could be the Bucha Effect,’ he said. 
‘The Bucha Effect?’ I said. 
Sid told me about the first time he ever heard about 
the Bucha Effect. It was in Somalia, he said, during the 
partially disastrous deployment of Colonel Alexander’s 
Sticky Foam. The non-lethal-technology experts who had 
accompanied the foam to Mogadishu were understand- 
ably down in the dumps that night, and the talk got 
around to what might be the Holy Grail of these exotic 
technologies. It was then that a Lieutenant Robert Ire- 
land spoke of the Bucha Effect. 
It all began in the 1950s, Sid told me, when helicopters 
started falling out of the sky, just crashing for no appar- 
ent reason, and the pilots who survived couldn’t explain 
it. They had just been flying around as normal and then 
suddenly they felt nauseous and dizzy and debilitated 
and they lost control of their helicopters and they went 
down.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ain 
it. They had just been flying around as normal and then 
suddenly they felt nauseous and dizzy and debilitated 
and they lost control of their helicopters and they went 
down.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
So a Dr Bucha was called in to solve the mystery. 
‘What Dr Bucha found,’ said Sid, ‘was that the rotor- 
blades were strobing the sunlight and when it reached 
the approximation of human brainwave frequency it was 
interfering with the brain’s ability to send correct infor- 
mation to the rest of the body.’ 
As a result of Dr Bucha’s findings, new safety measures 
were introduced, such as tinted glass and helmet visors 
and so on. 
‘Believe me,’ said Sid Heal, ‘there are easier ways of 
doing sleep deprivation than going to all those great 
lengths. Barney music? Flashing lights? Sleep deprivation 
may be a part of it, but it’s got to have some deeper 
hidden effect. My guess is that this is the Bucha Effect. 
My guess is that they’re going for the amygdala.’ 
‘Picture this,’ said Sid. ‘You’re walking down a dark 
hallway, and a figure jumps out in front of you, and you 
scream and jump back and all of a sudden you realize 
it’s your wife. That’s not two pieces of information,’ he 
said. ‘It’s the same information being processed simul- 
taneously by two different parts of the brain. The part 
where the judgement is takes three or four seconds. But 
the part that’s reactionary — the amygdala — just takes a 
split second.’ 
The quest for seizing that amygdala moment, those 
crushing seconds of unbearable, incapacitating shock, 
seizing those moments and not letting them go, dragging 
them out for as long as is operationally necessary, that, 
said Sid, is the aim of the Bucha Effect. 
‘It would be the ultimate non-lethal,’ he said. 
158

--- PAGE BREAK ---etting them go, dragging 
them out for as long as is operationally necessary, that, 
said Sid, is the aim of the Bucha Effect. 
‘It would be the ultimate non-lethal,’ he said. 
158

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Predator 
‘So,’ I said, ‘the Barney strobe-light musical torture 
inside a shipping container at the back of a railway 
station in al-Qa’im may in fact be the ultimate non- 
lethal?’ 
‘T don’t know anyone that’s succeeded,’ said Sid. ‘The 
problem is that the threshold between it being effective 
and permanently disabling is so narrow!...’ 
Then Sid fell silent I think because he realized that if 
he completed his sentence it would take his mind to a 
place he didn’t want to go, a place where soldiers in Iraq 
didn’t actually care, like he cared, about that threshold. 
‘But they might have succeeded,’ I said. 
‘They might have succeeded,’ 
said Sid, wistfully. 
‘Yeah.’ Then he added, ‘But any sort of non-lethal 
weapon that would force compliance in interrogation 
wouldn’t be appealing to us at all, because the resulting 
evidence couldn’t be used in court.’ 
‘But they don’t have those constraints inside a ship- 
ping container in al-Qa’im,’ I said. 
‘No, they don’t,’ said Sid. 
‘Huh,’ I said. 
‘You know what you’ve stumbled into here?’ said Sid. 
‘What?’ I asked. 
‘The dark side,’ he said. 
I left Sid and returned to the UK to find that I had been 
sent seven photographs. They were taken by a Newsweek 
photographer, Patrick Andrade, in May 2003, and were 
captioned, ‘An escaped detainee is returned to a holding 
159

--- PAGE BREAK ---had been 
sent seven photographs. They were taken by a Newsweek 
photographer, Patrick Andrade, in May 2003, and were 
captioned, ‘An escaped detainee is returned to a holding 
159

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
area in al-Qa’im, Iraq.’ There is no sign of loudspeakers, 
but the photographs do show the interior of one of the 
shipping containers behind the disused railway station. 
In the first of the photographs, two powerfully built 
American 
soldiers 
are pushing the detainee through 
a landscape of corrugated iron and barbed wire. He 
doesn’t look hard to push. He is as skinny as a rake. A 
rag covers his face. One of the soldiers has a handgun 
pressed to the back of his neck. His finger is on the 
trigger. 
In all the other photographs, the detainee is inside the 
shipping container. He is barefoot, a thin plastic strap 
binds his ankles and he’s crouched in the corner, up 
against the silver corrugated wall. The metal floor is 
covered with brown dust and pools of liquid. Right at 
the back of the shipping container, deep in the shadows, 
you can just make out the figure of another detainee, 
lying in a huddle on the floor, his face masked by a 
hood. 
Now the rag only covers the first man’s eyes, so you 
can see his face, which is deeply lined, like an old man’s, 
but his wispy moustache reveals that he’s probably about 
seventeen. He’s wearing a torn white vest, covered in 
yellow and brown stains. There’s an open wound on one 
of his skinny arms, and above it someone has written a 
number with a black marker-pen. 
He might have done terrible things. I know nothing 
about him other than these seven fragments of his life. 
But I can say this. In the last photograph he is screaming 
so hard it almost looks as if he’s laughing. 
160

--- PAGE BREAK ---know nothing 
about him other than these seven fragments of his life. 
But I can say this. In the last photograph he is screaming 
so hard it almost looks as if he’s laughing. 
160

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9. THE DARK SIDE 
“We don’t experiment on each other,’ Sid Heal had said 
to me in Los Angeles in early April 2004. ‘Not in our 
culture.’ 
A week or two passed. And then the other photo- 
graphs appeared. They were of Iraqi prisoners in the Abu 
Ghraib jail on the outskirts of Baghdad. A twenty-one- 
year-old US reservist called Private Lynndie England had 
been snapped dragging a naked man across the floor on 
a leash. In another photograph she stood grinning, a 
cigarette dangling from her mouth, while she pointed at 
the genitals of a row of naked, hooded men. 
Lynndie England, with her pixie haircut and sweet 
young face, was the star of many of the photographs. It 
was she who knelt laughing behind a pile of naked 
prisoners. They had been forced to build themselves into 
some kind of human pyramid. Perhaps it was her under- 
wear that was draped over the head of a naked Iraqi, 
who was tied to a metal bed frame, his back arched 
excruciatingly. 
It seemed as if a small group of military guards, with 
I6I

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar that was draped over the head of a naked Iraqi, 
who was tied to a metal bed frame, his back arched 
excruciatingly. 
It seemed as if a small group of military guards, with 
I6I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Lynndie England at their centre, had used Abu Ghraib 
to fulfil their sexual fantasies, and that their downfall 
had been their desire to take trophy photographs. 
The US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld flew to 
the jail. He told the assembled troops that the events 
shown in the pictures were the work of ‘a few who have 
betrayed our values and sullied the reputation of our 
country. It was body blow to me. Those who committed 
crimes will be dealt with, and the American people will 
be proud of it, and the Iraqi people will be proud.’ 
The army hung a sign on the gate of the jail that read, 
‘America is a friend of all the Iraqi people.’ 
Lynndie England was arrested. By then she was back 
in the US, five months pregnant, performing desk duties 
at Fort Bragg. It turned out that she came from a poor 
town in deepest West Virginia and she had lived for a 
time in a trailer. For some commentators, that explained 
everything. 
‘DELIVERANCE COMES TO IRAQ’ ran one head- 
line. 
In the 1972 American film Deliverance, Bobby the over- 
weight insurance salesman (Ned Beatty) is made to strip. 
He is then raped from behind by the bigger of the two 
hillbillies, all the while being forced to squeal like a pig. 
Maybe it’s time to rethink whether these characters were 
exaggerations. Ms. England definitely does hail from 
hillbilly country. 
The pictures could hardly have been more repulsive, 
but they were especially so for the people of Irag, who 
162

--- PAGE BREAK ---ations. Ms. England definitely does hail from 
hillbilly country. 
The pictures could hardly have been more repulsive, 
but they were especially so for the people of Irag, who 
162

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Dark Side 
had long been force-fed Saddam’s view that America 
was, at its heart, uncontrollably depraved and imperial- 
istic. Here were young Muslim men - captives — being 
humiliated and overwhelmed by what looked like gro- 
tesque US sexual decadence. It struck me as an unhappy 
coincidence that young Lynndie England and her friends 
had created a tableau that was the epitome of what 
would most disgust and repel the Iraqi people, those 
people whose hearts and minds were the great prize 
for the coalition forces and also for the Islamic funda- 
mentalists. 
But then word got out through Lynndie England’s 
lawyers that her defence was that she had been acting 
under orders, softening the prisoners up for interroga- 
tion, and that the people giving the orders were none 
other than Military Intelligence, the unit once com- 
manded by Major General Albert Stubblebine III. 
It was sad to remember all that nose-banging and 
cutlery-bending, and to think of how General Stubble- 
bine’s good intentions had come to this. His soldiers 
would never have resorted to such terrible acts. They 
would have instead performed breathtaking psychic feats 
coupled with remarkable acts of philanthropy. 
I called General Stubblebine. 
‘What was your first thought when you saw the photo- 
graphs?’ I asked him. 
‘My first thought,’ he said, ‘was “Oh shit!”’ 
‘What was your second thought?’ 
‘Thank God that’s not me at the bottom of that 
pyramid.’ 
163

--- PAGE BREAK ---aw the photo- 
graphs?’ I asked him. 
‘My first thought,’ he said, ‘was “Oh shit!”’ 
‘What was your second thought?’ 
‘Thank God that’s not me at the bottom of that 
pyramid.’ 
163

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘What was your third thought?’ 
‘My third thought,’ said the general, ‘was “This was 
not started by some youngsters down in the trenches. 
This had to have been driven by the intelligence com- 
munity.” I told Rima. I said, “You watch. This was 
intelligence.” Yep. Someone much higher in intelligence 
deliberately designed 
this, advocated 
it, directed 
it, 
trained people to do it. No doubt about it. And whoever 
that is, he’s in deep hiding right now.’ 
‘Military Intelligence?’ I asked. ‘Your old people?’ 
‘It’s a possibility,’ he said. ‘My guess is no.’ 
‘Who then?’ 
‘The Agency,’ he said. 
‘The Agency?’ 
‘The Agency,’ he confirmed. 
‘In conjunction with PsyOps?’ I asked. 
‘’m sure they had a hand in it,’ said the General. 
‘Sure. No doubt about it.’ 
There was a silence. 
‘You know,’ said General Stubblebine, ‘if they’d just 
stuck to Jim Channon’s ideas, they wouldn’t have needed 
all that crap.’ 
‘By Jim Channon’s ideas, do you mean the loud 
music?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah,’ said the General. 
‘So the idea of blasting prisoners with loud music,’ 
I said, ‘definitely originated with the First Earth Bat- 
talion?’ 
‘Definitely,’ said the general. ‘No question. So did the 
frequencies.’ 
164

--- PAGE BREAK ---asting prisoners with loud music,’ 
I said, ‘definitely originated with the First Earth Bat- 
talion?’ 
‘Definitely,’ said the general. ‘No question. So did the 
frequencies.’ 
164

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Dark Side 
‘The frequencies?’ I asked. 
“Yeah, the frequencies,’ he said. 
“What do the frequencies do?’ I asked. 
‘They dis-equilibrate people,’ he said. ‘There’s all 
kinds of things you can do with the frequencies. Jesus, 
you can take a frequency and make a guy have diar- 
rhoea, make a guy sick to the stomach. I don’t under- 
stand why they even had to do this crap you saw in the 
photographs. They should have just blasted them with 
frequencies!’ 
There was a silence. 
‘Come to think of it, though,’ he added, a little 
ruefully, ‘I’m not sure what the Geneva Convention 
would say about something like that.’ 
‘The loud music and the frequencies?’ 
‘I guess no one’s even thought about that,’ said the 
general. ‘That’s probably an untested set of waters from 
a Geneva Convention perspective.’ 
On 12 May 2004 Lynndie England gave an interview 
to a Denver-based TV reporter called Brian Maas: 
BRIAN MAAS: Did things happen in this prison to 
those Iraqi prisoners worse than what we’ve seen 
in these photographs? 
LYNNDIE ENGLAND: Yes. 
BRIAN MAAS: Can you tell me about that? 
LYNNDIE ENGLAND: No. 
165

--- PAGE BREAK ---n this prison to 
those Iraqi prisoners worse than what we’ve seen 
in these photographs? 
LYNNDIE ENGLAND: Yes. 
BRIAN MAAS: Can you tell me about that? 
LYNNDIE ENGLAND: No. 
165

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
BRIAN MAAS: What were you thinking when 
those photographs were taken? 
LYNNDIE ENGLAND: I was thinking it was kind 
of weird... 
. I didn’t really, I mean, want to be in 
any pictures. 
BRIAN MAAS: There’s a photograph that was 
taken of you holding an Iraqi prisoner on a leash. 
How did that come about? 
LYNNDIE ENGLAND: I was instructed by 
persons in higher rank to ‘stand there, hold this 
leash and look at the camera’. And they took a 
picture for PsyOps and that’s all I know . . 
. I was 
told to stand there, give the thumbs-up, smile, 
stand behind all of the naked Iraqis in the pyramid 
[have my picture taken]. 
BRIAN MAAS: Who told you to do that? 
LYNNDIE ENGLAND: Persons in my higher 
chain of command ... They were for PsyOps 
reasons and the reasons worked. So to us, we were 
doing our job, which meant we were doing what 
we were told, and the outcome was what they 
wanted. They’d come back and they’d look at the 
pictures and they’d state, ‘Oh, that’s a good tactic, 
keep it up. That’s working. This is working. Keep 
doing it, it’s getting what we need.’ 
Lynndie England seemed to be saying that the photo- 
graphs were nothing less than an elaborate piece of 
166

--- PAGE BREAK ---working. This is working. Keep 
doing it, it’s getting what we need.’ 
Lynndie England seemed to be saying that the photo- 
graphs were nothing less than an elaborate piece of 
166

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Dark Side 
PsyOps theatre. She said the PsyOps people who told her 
to ‘keep doing it, it’s getting what we need’ did not wear 
name tags. I was beginning to wonder whether the 
scenarios had, in fact, been carefully calculated by a 
PsyOps cultural specialist to present a vision that would 
most repel young Iraqi men. Could it be that the acts 
captured in the photographs were not the point at all, 
and the photographs themselves were the thing? Were 
the photographs intended to be shown only to individual 
Iraqi prisoners to scare them into cooperating, rather 
than getting out and scaring the whole world? 
After I heard the interview with Lynndie England, I 
dug out my notes of my time at PsyOps. The unit had let 
me into their Fort Bragg headquarters to show me their 
CD collection in October 2003, the same month that the 
Abu Ghraib pictures had been taken. I-skimmed through 
all the talk of ‘unfulfilled needs’ and ‘desired behaviour’ 
until I found my conversation with the friendly boffin in 
civilian clothing, the ‘senior cultural analyst’ called Dave, 
who specializes in the Middle East. 
Our conversation had at the time seemed innocuous. 
We were talking about PsyOps ‘products’ in general. All 
PsyOps materials are known as ‘products’ — their radio 
shows, their leaflets, and so on. 
As I re-read my notes, what he had said to me took 
on a whole new resonance. 
‘We think about how an Iraqi will react to our prod- 
ucts, not how an American will react to our products,’ 
he said. 
He told me they had boards — committees of military 
167

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. 
‘We think about how an Iraqi will react to our prod- 
ucts, not how an American will react to our products,’ 
he said. 
He told me they had boards — committees of military 
167

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
analysts and specialists - who look at each product to 
see whether it furthers the cause of US foreign policy. 
‘And if it passes muster,’ he said, ‘we’ll produce it, 
either here or forward [in Iraq].’ 
Then Dave spoke about how the target audience for 
their ‘products’ — Iraqi forces or Iraqi civilians or Iraqi 
detainees — are not always the most willing customers. 
‘It’s not like selling Coke,’ he said. ‘Sometimes you’re 
trying to sell someone something that you know they 
might not want in their hearts. So it causes ambiguities, 
and problems. And they have to think about it. It’s more 
like selling someone Vitamin D to drink. Something they 
may not want, but they need it to survive.’ 
‘Interesting,’ I said. 
‘It causes ambiguities,’ he said. 
168

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10. A THINK TANK 
In early 2004 I heard a rumour that Jim Channon had 
begun privately meeting with General Pete Schoomaker, 
* 
the new Chief of Staff of the United States Army. 
President Bush had appointed General Schoomaker 
to the post on 4 August 2003. His ‘arrival message’, to 
use the military vernacular for an acceptance speech, 
included the following sentences: 
War is both a physical reality and a state of mind. 
War is ambiguous, uncertain and unfair. When we are 
at war, we must think and act differently. We must 
anticipate the ultimate reality check — combat. We 
must win both the war and the peace. We must be 
prepared to question everything. Our soldiers are war- 
riors of character.... Our azimuth to the future is 
good. 
Azimuth? I looked it up. It is ‘the direction of a 
celestial object’. News of General Schoomaker’s meetings 
with Jim Channon did not come as a great surprise to 
me. 
(In addition to the linguistic clues, in fact, the 
169It is ‘the direction of a 
celestial object’. News of General Schoomaker’s meetings 
with Jim Channon did not come as a great surprise to 
me. 
(In addition to the linguistic clues, in fact, the 
169

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
timeline of General Schoomaker’s career fitted. He had 
been a commander of Special Forces 
at Fort Bragg 
between February 1978 and August 1981, and also in 
the latter half of 1983, during the periods that the Jedi 
Warriors and the goat starers were at their most active 
within his corner of the base. I can’t believe he hadn’t 
known about, or indeed sanctioned, their endeavours.) 
The rumour was that General Schoomaker was con- 
sidering bringing Jim back from retirement to create, or 
contribute to, a new and secret think tank, designed to 
encourage the army to take their minds further and 
further outside the mainstream. 
Jim had been a member of a similar group back in the 
early 1980s. It was called Task Force Delta, and it 
comprised 300 or so high-ranking soldiers who met four 
times a year for rituals and brainstorming sessions at 
Fort Leavenworth, and spent the time in between com- 
municating with one another through something they 
called the Meta Network, which was an early incarna- 
tion of the Internet. 
It was a Task Force Delta soldier called Colonel Frank 
Burns, 
one 
of Jim Channon’s 
oldest 
friends, who 
launched this technology for the US army in the late 
1970s. In 1983 Colonel Burns published a poem in 
which he envisioned how his fledgling communications 
network might one day influence the world: 
Imagine the emergence of a new meta-culture. 
Imagine all kinds of people everywhere 
getting committed to human excellence, 
170

--- PAGE BREAK ---tions 
network might one day influence the world: 
Imagine the emergence of a new meta-culture. 
Imagine all kinds of people everywhere 
getting committed to human excellence, 
170

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Think Tank 
getting committed to closing the gap 
between the human condition 
and the human potential. . 
. 
And imagine all of us hooked up 
with a common high tech communications system. 
That’s a vision that brings tears to the eyes. 
Human excellence is an ideal 
that we can embed 
into every formal human structure 
on our planet. 
And that’s really why we’re going to do this. 
And that’s also why 
The Meta Network is a creation 
we can love. 
Notwithstanding Colonel Burns’s failure to foresee that 
people would use the Internet mostly to access porn and 
look themselves up on Google, his prescience was admir- 
able. This same colonel is also widely believed, along with 
Jim Channon, to be the inspiration behind the recruitment 
slogan ‘Be All You Can Be’, and the related jingle that all 
but single-handedly transformed the army’s fortunes in 
the 1980s. Colonel Burns attributed his ideas to reading 
Jim’s First Earth Battalion Operations Manual. 
A lack of recruits had been the great crisis facing the 
army back then. It was no wonder, now that General 
Schoomaker, a Jim Channon fan, was in charge of the 
US army that these men would be enlisted once again 
to contribute their ideas to the new crisis, the War on 
Terror. 
171

--- PAGE BREAK ---ral 
Schoomaker, a Jim Channon fan, was in charge of the 
US army that these men would be enlisted once again 
to contribute their ideas to the new crisis, the War on 
Terror. 
171

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Jim emailed to say that the General Schoomaker think- 
tank rumours were true. The idea had come about, he 
explained, ‘because Rumsfeld has now openly asked for 
creative input on the war on terrorism... mmmm_’. 
Jim added that he didn’t want me to contact General 
Schoomaker for a comment: ‘I cannot bear the thought 
you would interrupt this man’s important day with such 
a gratuitous request. Get a grip! This is media sickness 
and is grinding the world to a halt! I know you under- 
stand.’ 
But Jim did offer some information about his input 
into George W. Bush’s foreign policy: 
The Army has requested my services to teach the 
most highly selected Majors. The First Earth Battalion 
is the teaching exemplar of choice. | have done that in 
the presence of General Pete Schoomaker ...| am 
in contact with players who are or have recently 
been in Afghanistan and Iraq. | have sent in exit 
strategy plans based on Earth Battalion ideals. 
| talk weekly with a member of a stress control 
battalion in Iraq who carries the manual and uses it 
to inform his team-mates of their potential service 
contribution. Remember, the battalion mythology 
operates like folklore. It is passed [on] in stories, not 
assignments or real world artefacts. The results are 
ubiquitous, infectious, but not archived well by 
definition. 
Although Jim professed no interest in the ‘real world 
artefacts’ inspired by him, scattered around the War on 
72,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ubiquitous, infectious, but not archived well by 
definition. 
Although Jim professed no interest in the ‘real world 
artefacts’ inspired by him, scattered around the War on 
72,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Think Tank 
Terror, I had become somewhat obsessed with identify- 
ing them. 
Little pieces of the First Earth Battalion were turning 
up all over post-war Iraq. A former military spy I spoke 
to divided Jim’s modern-day fans into two categories — 
the Black Ninjas and the White Ninjas — and that’s how 
I came to see them too. 
The 785th Medical Company Combat Stress Control 
unit, based in Taji, twenty miles north of Baghdad, were 
White Ninjas. One of their soldiers, Christian Hallman, 
emailed me: 
| utilize many FEB technologies - meditation, yoga, 
qigong, relaxation, visualization — all part of the FEB 
toolbox for treating combat stress. It would be great if 
you came over to Iraq to interview me, but | have to 
clear it with my commander first. He has read some of 
the FEB literature that | gave him and has even 
spoken with Jim over the telephone. 
The next day Christian emailed me again: ‘My com- 
mander needs to speak with the XO before making his 
decision.’ 
And then, on the third day: 
My commander has declined permission. He doesn't 
want to run the risk of possibly distorting what we do 
and our reputation. Sometimes politics wins out. 
Peace in the Middle East, 
Christian. 
173

--- PAGE BREAK ---eclined permission. He doesn't 
want to run the risk of possibly distorting what we do 
and our reputation. Sometimes politics wins out. 
Peace in the Middle East, 
Christian. 
173

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
A few weeks after I received this email I learnt of a 
fact that struck me as so bizarre, so incongruous, that I 
didn’t know what to do with it. It was at once banal and 
extraordinary, and utterly inconsistent with the other 
facts that encircled it. It was something that happened to 
a Mancunian called Jamal al-Harith in a place called the 
Brown Block. Jamal doesn’t know what to make of it 
either, so he has put it to one side, and only mentioned 
it to me as an afterthought when I met him in the coffee 
bar of the Malmaison Hotel, near Manchester Piccadilly 
Station, on the morning of 7 June 2004. 
Jamal is a website designer. He lives with his sisters in 
Moss Side. He is thirty-seven, divorced, with three chil- 
dren. He said he assumed MIS had followed him here to 
the hotel, but he’s stopped worrying about it. He said 
he keeps seeing the same man watching him from across 
the street, leaning against a car, and whenever the 
man thinks he’s been spotted he looks briefly panicked 
and immediately bends down to fiddle casually with his 
tyre. 
Jamal laughed when he told me this. 
Jamal was born Ronald Fiddler into a family of 
second-generation Jamaican immigrants. When he was 
twenty-three he learnt about Islam and converted, chang- 
ing his name to Jamal al-Harith for no particular reason, 
other than that he liked the sound of it. He says al- 
Harith basically means ‘seed planter’. 
| 
In October 2001, Jamal visited Pakistan as a tourist, 
he says. He was in Quetta, on the Afghanistan border, 
four days into his trip, when the American bombing 
174

--- PAGE BREAK ---planter’. 
| 
In October 2001, Jamal visited Pakistan as a tourist, 
he says. He was in Quetta, on the Afghanistan border, 
four days into his trip, when the American bombing 
174

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Think Tank 
campaign began. He quickly decided to leave for Turkey 
and paid a local truck driver to take him there. The 
driver said the route would take them through Iran, but 
somehow they ended up in Afghanistan, where they were 
stopped by a gang of Taliban supporters. They asked to 
see Jamal’s passport, and he was promptly arrested and 
thrown in jail on suspicion of being a British spy. 
Afghanistan fell to the coalition. The Red Cross 
visited Jamal in prison. They suggested he cross the 
border into Pakistan, and make his own way back home 
to Manchester, but Jamal had no money, so instead he 
asked to be put in contact with the British Embassy in 
Kabul. 
Nine days later — while he waited in Kandahar for the 
embassy to transport him home — the Americans picked 
him up. 
‘The Americans,’ Jamal said, ‘kidnapped me.’ When 
he said ‘kidnapped’ he looked surprised at himself for 
using such a dramatic word. 
The Americans in Kandahar told Jamal he needed to 
be sent to Cuba for two months for administrative 
processing, and so on, and the next thing he knew he 
was on a plane, shackled, his arms chained to his legs, 
and then chained to a hook on the floor, his face covered 
in earmuffs and goggles and a surgical mask, bound for 
Guantanamo Bay. 
In the weeks after Jamal’s release, two years later, he 
gave a few interviews, during which he spoke of the 
shackles and the solitary confinement and the beatings — 
the things the outside world had already imagined about 
¥75

--- PAGE BREAK ---ter, he 
gave a few interviews, during which he spoke of the 
shackles and the solitary confinement and the beatings — 
the things the outside world had already imagined about 
¥75

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
life inside that mysterious compound. He said they beat 
his feet with batons, pepper-sprayed him and kept him 
inside a cage that was open to the elements, with no 
privacy or protection from the rats and snakes and 
scorpions that crawled around the base. But these were 
not sensational revelations. 
He spoke with ITV’s Martin Bashir, who asked him 
(off-camera), ‘Did you see my Michael Jackson docu- 
mentary?’ 
Jamal replied, ‘I’ve, uh, been in Guantanamo Bay for 
two years.’ 
When I met Jamal he began to tell me about the more 
bewildering abuses. Prostitutes were flown in from the 
States — he doesn’t know whether they were there only 
to smear their menstrual blood on the faces of the more 
devout detainees. Or perhaps they were brought in to 
service the soldiers, and some PsyOps boffin — a resident 
cultural analyst — devised this other job for them as an 
afterthought, exploiting the resources 
at the army’s 
disposal. 
‘One or two of the British guys,’ Jamal told me, ‘said 
to the guards, “Can we have the women?” But the guards 
said, “No, no, no. The prostitutes are for the detainees 
who don’t actually want them.” They explained it to us! 
“If you want it, it’s not going to work on you.”’ 
‘So what were the prostitutes doing to the detainees?’ 
I asked. 
‘Just messing about with their genitals,’ said Jamal. 
‘Stripping off in front of them. Rubbing their breasts 
in their faces. Not all the guys would speak. They’d 
176

--- PAGE BREAK ---I asked. 
‘Just messing about with their genitals,’ said Jamal. 
‘Stripping off in front of them. Rubbing their breasts 
in their faces. Not all the guys would speak. They’d 
176

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Think Tank 
just come back from the Brown Block [the interrogation 
block] and be quiet for days and cry to themselves, 
so you know something went on but you don’t know 
what. But for the guys who did speak, that’s what we 
heard.” 
I asked Jamal if he thought that the Americans at 
Guantanamo were dipping their toes into the waters of 
exotic interrogation techniques. 
‘They were doing a lot more than dipping,’ he replied. 
And that’s when he told me about what happened to 
him inside the Brown Block. 
Jamal said that, being new to torture, he didn’t know 
whether the techniques tested on him were unique to 
Guantanamo, or as old as torture itself, but they seemed 
pretty weird to him. Jamal’s description of life inside 
the Brown Block made Guantanamo Bay sound like an 
experimental interrogation lab, teeming not only with 
intelligence agents, but also with ideas. It was as if, for 
the first time in the soldiers’ careers, they had prisoners 
and a ready-made facility at their disposal, and they 
couldn’t resist putting all their concepts — which had 
until then languished, sometimes for decades, in the 
unsatisfactory realm of the theoretical — into practice. 
First there were the noises. 
‘I would describe them as industrial noises,’ Jamal 
said. ‘Screeches and bangs. These would be played across 
the Brown Block into all the interrogation rooms. You 
can’t describe it. Screeches, bangs, compressed gas. All 
sorts of things. Jumbled noises.’ 
‘Like a fax machine cranking up into use?’ I asked. 
177

--- PAGE BREAK ---the interrogation rooms. You 
can’t describe it. Screeches, bangs, compressed gas. All 
sorts of things. Jumbled noises.’ 
‘Like a fax machine cranking up into use?’ I asked. 
177

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘No,’ said Jamal. ‘Not computer-generated. Industrial. 
Strange noises. And mixed in with it would be something 
like an electronic piano. Not as in music, because there 
was no rhythm to it.’ 
‘Like a synthesizer?’ 
‘Yes, a synthesizer mixed in with industrial noises. All 
a jumble and a mish-mash.’ 
‘Did you ever ask them, “Why are you blasting these 
strange noises at us?”’ I said. 
‘In Cuba, you learn to accept,’ said Jamal. 
The industrial noises were blasted across the block. 
But the strangest thing of all happened inside Jamal’s 
own interrogation room. The room was furnished with 
a CCTV camera and a two-way mirror. Jamal would be 
brought in for fifteen-hour sessions, during which time 
they got nothing out of him because, he said, there was 
nothing to get. He said his past was so clean — not even 
a parking ticket — that at one point someone wandered 
over to him and whispered, ‘Are you an MIS asset?’ 
‘An MIS asset!’ said Jamal. He whistled. ‘Asset!’ he 
repeated. “That was the word he used!’ 
The interrogators were getting more and more cross 
with Jamal’s apparent steely refusal to crack. Also, Jamal 
used his time inside the Brown Block to do stretching 
exercises, keeping himself sane. Jamal’s exercise regime 
made the interrogators more angry, but instead of beat- 
ing him, or threatening him, they did something very 
odd indeed. 
A Military Intelligence officer brought a ghetto blaster 
into his room. He put it on the floor in the corner. He 
178

--- PAGE BREAK ---im, or threatening him, they did something very 
odd indeed. 
A Military Intelligence officer brought a ghetto blaster 
into his room. He put it on the floor in the corner. He 
178

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Think Tank 
said, ‘Here’s a great girl-band doing Fleetwood Mac 
songs.’ 
He didn’t blast the CD at Jamal. This wasn’t sleep- 
deprivation, and it wasn’t an attempt to induce the 
Bucha Effect. Instead, the agent simply put it on at 
normal volume. 
‘He put it on,’ said Jamal, ‘and he left.’ 
‘An all-girl Fleetwood Mac covers band?’ I said. 
‘Yeah,’ said Jamal. 
This sounded to me like the tip of a very strange 
iceberg. 
‘And what happened next?’ I asked. 
‘When the CD was finished, he came back into the 
room and said, “You might like this.” And he put on 
Kris Kristofferson’s greatest hits. Normal volume. And 
he left the room again. And then, when that was finished, 
he came back and said, “Here’s 
a Matchbox Twenty 
CDr< 
‘Was he doing it for entertainment purposes?’ I asked. 
‘It’s interrogation,’ said Jamal. ‘I don’t think they were 
trying to entertain me.’ 
‘Matchbox Twenty?’ I said. 
I didn’t know much about Matchbox Twenty. My 
research reveals them to be a four-piece country rock 
band from Florida, who do not sound particularly abra- 
sive (like Metallica and ‘Burn Motherfucker Burn!’) nor 
irritatingly repetitive (like Barney and ‘Ya! Ya! Das Is a 
Mountain’). They sound a bit like REM. The only other 
occasion when I had heard of Matchbox Twenty was 
when Adam Piore from Newsweek told me that they too 
179

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘Ya! Ya! Das Is a 
Mountain’). They sound a bit like REM. The only other 
occasion when I had heard of Matchbox Twenty was 
when Adam Piore from Newsweek told me that they too 
179

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
had been blasted into the shipping containers in al- 
Qa’im. 
I mentioned this to Jamal and he looked astonished. 
‘Matchbox Twenty?’ he said. 
‘Their album More Than You Think You Are,’ I said. 
There was a silence. 
‘I thought they were just playing me a CD,’ said Jamal. 
‘Just playing me a CD. See if I like music or not. Now 
I’ve heard this I’m thinking there must have been some- 
thing else going on. Now I’m thinking, why did they 
play that same CD to me as well? They’re playing this 
CD in Iraq and they’re playing the same CD in Cuba. It 
means to me there is a programme. They’re not playing 
music because they think people like or dislike Matchbox 
Twenty more than other music. Or Kris Kristofferson 
more than other music. There is a reason. There’s some- 
thing else going on. Obviously I don’t know what it is. 
But there must be some other intent.’ 
‘There must be,’ I said. 
_ 
Jamal paused for a moment and then he said, ‘You 
don’t know how deep the rabbit hole goes, do you? But 
you know it is deep. You know it is deep.’ 
180

--- PAGE BREAK ---There must be,’ I said. 
_ 
Jamal paused for a moment and then he said, ‘You 
don’t know how deep the rabbit hole goes, do you? But 
you know it is deep. You know it is deep.’ 
180

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11. 
A HAUNTED HOTEL 
Joseph Curtis (not his real name) worked the night shift 
at the Abu Ghraib prison in the autumn of 2003. Now 
he had been exiled by the army to a town in Germany. 
The threat of a court martial hung over him. He had 
given an interview about what he had seen to an inter- 
national press agency, thus incurring the wrath of his 
superiors. Even so, against his own better judgement, 
and against his lawyers’ advice, he agreed to meet me, 
secretly, at an Italian restaurant on a Wednesday in June 
2004. I’m not entirely sure why he was willing to risk 
further censure. Perhaps he felt he couldn’t sit back and 
watch Lynndie England and the other military police 
officers captured in the photographs be scapegoats just 
for following orders. 
We sat on the balcony of the restaurant and he pushed 
his food around his plate. 
‘You ever see The Shining?’ he said. 
‘Yes,’ I said. 
‘Abu Ghraib was like the Overlook Hotel,’ he said. ‘It 
was haunted.’ 
181

--- PAGE BREAK ---staurant and he pushed 
his food around his plate. 
‘You ever see The Shining?’ he said. 
‘Yes,’ I said. 
‘Abu Ghraib was like the Overlook Hotel,’ he said. ‘It 
was haunted.’ 
181

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘You mean...’ I said. 
I assumed Joseph meant the place was full of spooks: 
intelligence officers — but the look on his face made me 
realize he didn’t. 
‘It was haunted,’ he said. ‘It got so dark at night. So 
dark. Under Saddam, people were dissolved in acid there. 
Women raped by dogs. Brains splattered all over the 
walls. This was worse than the Overlook Hotel because 
it was real.’ 
‘In The Shining,’ I said, ‘it was the building that turned 
Jack Nicholson insane. Was it the building that turned 
the Americans crazy at Abu Ghraib?’ 
‘It was like the building wanted to be back in busi- 
ness,’ said Joseph. 
Joseph wore a University of Louisiana athletics depart- 
ment T-shirt. He had the US soldier’s jarhead haircut — 
shaved at the sides, a short crop on top. He said he 
couldn’t believe how much money was floating around 
the army these days. These were the golden days, in 
budgetary terms. One day he had taken his truck in for 
repairs, and the soldier who looked it over had said, 
‘You need new seats.’ 
Joseph said 
it didn’t look 
like the seats needed 
replacing. 
The soldier replied that they had $200,000 in their 
budget and if they didn’t spend it by the end of the 
month they had to give it back. 
‘So,’ the soldier slowly repeated, ‘you need new seats.’ 
Joseph said I wouldn’t believe how many plasma 
screens there were in Iraq, for teleconferencing purposes 
132

--- PAGE BREAK ---e it back. 
‘So,’ the soldier slowly repeated, ‘you need new seats.’ 
Joseph said I wouldn’t believe how many plasma 
screens there were in Iraq, for teleconferencing purposes 
132

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Haunted Hotel 
and so on. They’d had perfectly good TVs, but trucks 
full of plasma screens just arrived one day, because that’s 
how much money was floating around. 
In January 2004, the influential think tank and lobby- 
ing group, 
GlobalSecurity, revealed that George W. 
Bush’s government had filtered more money into their 
Black Budget than any other administration in American 
history. 
The amount of money an administration spends on its 
Black Budget can be seen as a tantalizing barometer of 
its proclivity towards weirdness. Black Budgets often just 
fund Black Ops —- highly sensitive and deeply shady 
projects such as assassination squads, and so on, which 
remain secret not only to protect the Black Operators, 
but also to protect Americans, who generally don’t want 
to think about such things. But Black Budgets also fund 
investigations into schemes so bizarre that their disclo- 
sure might lead voters to believe that their leaders have 
taken leave of their senses. George W. Bush’s adminis- 
tration had, by January 2004, channelled approximately 
$30 billion into the Black Budget - to be spent on God 
knows what. 
I had to strain to hear Joseph over the late-night road 
works as he told me about the darkness at Abu Ghraib, 
and how that darkness led to ‘the beast in man really 
coming out there’ and the never-ending, bountiful budget. 
‘Abu Ghraib was a tourist attraction,’ he said. ‘I 
remember one time I was woken up by two captains. 
“Where’s the death chamber?” They wanted to see the 
rope and the lever. When Rumsfeld came to visit, he 
183

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion,’ he said. ‘I 
remember one time I was woken up by two captains. 
“Where’s the death chamber?” They wanted to see the 
rope and the lever. When Rumsfeld came to visit, he 
183

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
didn’t want to talk to the soldiers. All he wanted to see 
was the death chamber.’ 
Joseph took a bite of his food. 
‘Yeah, the beast in man really came out at Abu 
Ghraib,’ he said. 
‘You mean in the photographs?’ I asked. 
‘Everywhere,’ he said. “The senior leadership were 
screwing around with the lower ranks .. .” 
I told Joseph I didn’t understand what he meant. 
He said, ‘The senior leaders were having sex with the 
lower ranks. The detainees were raping each other.’ 
‘Did you ever see any ghosts?’ I asked him. 
He stopped eating and pushed his food around the 
plate again. 
‘There was a darkness about the place,’ he replied. 
‘You just got this feeling there was always something 
there, lurking behind you in the darkness, and that it 
was very mad.’ 
I asked Joseph if there was anything good at Abu 
Ghraib, and he paused and said it was good that ama- 
zon.com delivered there. Then he remembered something 
else that was good. He said there was a genius at making 
model planes there. He made them out of old ration 
boxes, and he hung them from the ceiling in the isolation 
block. One time, Joseph said, someone came up to him 
and said, ‘You’ve got to see these model planes! They’re 
incredible! One of the guards in the isolation block has 
hung a bunch of them on the ceiling. Hey, and while 
you’re there you can take a look at the high values!’ 
The ‘high values’ were what the US army called the 
184

--- PAGE BREAK ---ation block has 
hung a bunch of them on the ceiling. Hey, and while 
you’re there you can take a look at the high values!’ 
The ‘high values’ were what the US army called the 
184

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Haunted Hotel 
suspected terrorists, insurgent leaders, rapists or child- 
molesters, although things were so out of control in post- 
war Iraq that many of the ‘high values’ might have just 
been passers-by picked up at checkpoints because the 
soldiers didn’t like the look of them. 
Joseph was in charge of the super-classified computer 
network at Abu Ghraib. He had set up the system and 
handed out the user names and passwords. His job didn’t 
take him into the isolation block, even though it was just 
down the corridor. So he accepted the invitation. He got 
up from behind his desk and walked towards the model 
planes and the ‘high values’. 
A few weeks before I met Joseph it was revealed, by 
Seymour Hersh in the New Yorker, that on 9 April 2004 
Specialist Matthew Wisdom told an Article 32 hearing 
(the military equivalent of a grand jury): ‘I saw two 
naked detainees [in the isolation block at Abu Ghraib], 
one masturbating to another kneeling with its mouth 
open. I thought I should just get out of there. I didn’t 
think it was right ... I saw SSG [Ivan] Frederick walk 
towards me, and he said, “Look what these animals do 
when you leave them alone for two seconds.” I heard 
PFC [Lynndie] England shout out, “He’s getting hard.”’ 
The isolation block was where all the photographs 
were taken — Lynndie dragging a naked man across the 
floor on a leash, and so on. 
185

--- PAGE BREAK ---England shout out, “He’s getting hard.”’ 
The isolation block was where all the photographs 
were taken — Lynndie dragging a naked man across the 
floor on a leash, and so on. 
185

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Joseph turned the corner into the isolation block. 
‘There were two MPs there,’ he told me. ‘And they 
were constantly screaming. “SHUT THE FUCK UP!” 
They were screaming at some old guy, making him repeat 
a number over and over. 
““1 56403. 156403. 156403.” 
‘The guy couldn’t speak English. He couldn’t pro- 
nounce the numbers. 
‘“T CAN’T FUCKING HEAR YOU.” 
*“156403. 156403.” 
‘“TOUDER. FUCKING LOUDER.” 
‘Then they saw me. “Hey, Joseph! How are you? I 
CAN’T FUCKING HEAR YOU. LOUDER.” 
#56403 1156403: 
Joseph said that the MPs had basically gone straight 
from McDonald’s to Abu Ghraib. They knew nothing. 
And now they were getting scapegoated because they hap- 
pened to be identifiable in the photographs. They just did 
what the Military Intelligence people, Joseph’s people, told 
them to do. PsyOps were just a phone call away, Joseph 
said. And the Military Intelligence people all had PsyOps 
training anyway. The thing I had to remember about 
Military Intelligence was that they were the ‘nerdy-type 
guys at school. You know. The outcasts. Couple all that 
with ego, and a poster on the wall saying ‘By CG Approval’ 
— Commanding General Approval - and suddenly you 
have guys who think they govern the world. That’s what 
one of them said to me. “We govern the world.” ’ 
‘Were there many intelligence officers at Abu Ghraib?’ 
I asked Joseph. 
25")3; 
186

--- PAGE BREAK ---who think they govern the world. That’s what 
one of them said to me. “We govern the world.” ’ 
‘Were there many intelligence officers at Abu Ghraib?’ 
I asked Joseph. 
25")3; 
186

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Haunted Hotel 
‘There were intelligence people turning up there I 
never even knew existed,’ he said. ‘There was a unit 
from Utah. All Mormons. It was a real casserole of 
intelligence, and they all had to come to me to get their 
user names and passwords. They were from all kinds of 
units, civilian guys, and translators. Two British guys 
showed up. They were older, in uniform and were getting 
themselves properly installed. They had laptops and a 
desk.’ 
An aide 
to Condoleezza 
Rice, the White House 
national security adviser, visited the prison also, to 
inform the interrogators sternly that they weren’t getting 
useful enough information from the detainees. 
‘Then,’ Joseph said, ‘a whole platoon of Guantanamo 
people arrived. The word got around. “Oh God, the 
Gitmo guys are here.” Bam! There they were. They took 
the place over.’ 
Perhaps Guantanamo 
Bay was 
Experimental Lab 
Mark 1, and whatever esoteric techniques worked there 
were exported to Abu Ghraib. I asked Joseph if he knew 
anything about the music. He said, sure, they blasted 
loud music at the detainees all the time. 
‘What about quieter music?’ I said, and I told him 
Jamal’s story about the ghetto blaster and the Fleetwood 
Mac all-girl covers band and Matchbox Twenty. 
Joseph laughed. He shook his head in wonderment. 
‘They were probably fucking with his head,’ he said. 
‘You mean they did it just because it seemed so weird?’ 
I asked. ‘The incongruity was the point of it?’ 
“Yeah,” he said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t. 
‘They were probably fucking with his head,’ he said. 
‘You mean they did it just because it seemed so weird?’ 
I asked. ‘The incongruity was the point of it?’ 
“Yeah,” he said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘But that doesn’t make sense,’ I said. ‘I can imagine 
that might work on a devout Muslim from an Arab 
country, but Jamal is British. He was raised in Man- 
chester. He knows all about ghetto blasters and Fleet- 
wood Mac and country and western music.’ 
‘Hm,’ said Joseph. 
‘Do you think. . 
; ?’ I said. 
Joseph finished my sentence for me. 
‘Subliminal messages?’ he said. 
‘Or something like that,’ I said. ‘Something under- 
neath the music.’ 
‘You know,’ said Joseph, ‘on a surface level that 
would be ridiculous. But Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib 
were anything but surface.’ 
188

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12. THE FREQUENCIES 
Perhaps, I thought, one way of solving this mystery was 
to follow the patents, follow them like a tracker follows 
footprints in the snow, and then, like in a horror film, 
see how the footprints vanish. Was there, somewhere out 
there, a paper trail of patents for subliminal sound 
technologies, or frequency technologies, that simply van- 
ished into the classified world of the United States 
government? 
Yes. There was. And the inventor in question was a 
mysterious and somewhat slippery figure called Dr Oli- 
ver Lowery. 
On 27 October 1992 Dr Oliver Lowery of Georgia, 
USA, was the recipient of US Patent #5,159,703. His 
invention was something he called a ‘Silent Subliminal 
Presentation System’: 
A silent communications system in which non-aural 
carriers, in the very low or very high audio-frequency 
range or in the adjacent ultrasonic frequency spectrum 
are amplitude or frequency modulated with the desired 
189

--- PAGE BREAK ---on-aural 
carriers, in the very low or very high audio-frequency 
range or in the adjacent ultrasonic frequency spectrum 
are amplitude or frequency modulated with the desired 
189

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
intelligence and propagated acoustically or vibration- 
ally, for inducement into the brain, typically through 
the use of loudspeakers, earphones, or piezoelectric 
transducers. The modulated carriers may be transmit- 
ted directly in real time or may be conveniently 
recorded and stored on mechanical, magnetic or opti- 
cal media for delayed-or repeated transmission to the 
listener. 
The publicity material that accompanied this patent 
put it into plainer language. He had invented a way in 
which subliminal sounds could be put onto CD where 
they ‘silently induce and change the emotional state in a 
human being’. 
The following emotional states could, according to Dr 
Lowery, be induced by his invention: 
Positive emotions: 
CONTENTMENT, DUTY, FAITH, FRIENDSHIP, 
HOPE, INNOCENCE, JOY, LOVE, PRIDE, 
RESPECT, SELF-LOVE and WORSHIP. 
Negative Emotions: 
ANGER, ANGUISH, ANXIETY, CONTEMPT, 
DESPAIR, DREAD, EMBARRASSMENT, ENVY, 
FEAR, FRUSTRATION, GRIEF, GUILT, HATE, 
INDIFFERENCE, INDIGNATION, JEALOUSY, 
PITY, RAGE, REGRET, REMORSE, 
RESENTMENT, SADNESS, SHAME, SPITE, 
TERROR and VANITY. 
190

--- PAGE BREAK ---MENT, ENVY, 
FEAR, FRUSTRATION, GRIEF, GUILT, HATE, 
INDIFFERENCE, INDIGNATION, JEALOUSY, 
PITY, RAGE, REGRET, REMORSE, 
RESENTMENT, SADNESS, SHAME, SPITE, 
TERROR and VANITY. 
190

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
12 positive emotions, 26 negative ones. 
Four years later, on 13 December 1996, Dr Lowery’s 
company, Silent Sounds Inc., posted the following mess- 
age on their website: ‘All schematics have [now] been 
classified by the US Government and we are not allowed 
to reveal the exact details 
... we make tapes and CDs 
for the German Government, even the former Soviet 
Union countries! All with the permission of the US State 
Department, of course . 
. 
. The system was used through- 
out Operation Desert Storm (Iraq) quite successfully.’ 
For weeks on end I repeatedly telephoned the number 
I had found for Dr Oliver Lowery — it was a Georgia 
area code, somewhere on the outskirts of Atlanta — but 
nobody picked up the phone. 
Until, one day, someone did. 
‘Hello?’ said the voice. 
‘Dr Lowery?’ I said. 
‘T’d prefer you didn’t call me that,’ he said. 
‘What can I call you?’ I said. 
‘Call me Bud,’ he said. 
I could almost hear him smile down the phone. 
‘Call me Hamish McLaren,’ he said then. 
I told Hamish/Bud/Dr Oliver Lowery what I was 
doing, and he, in return, whoever he was, told me 
something about his life. He said he was seventy-seven 
years old, a Second World War veteran, a former Hughes 
aerospace engineer, and he had endured numerous oper- 
ations, heart bypasses, et cetera. Then he said, ‘You’re 
the first journalist to find us in four years.’ 
I9I

--- PAGE BREAK ---former Hughes 
aerospace engineer, and he had endured numerous oper- 
ations, heart bypasses, et cetera. Then he said, ‘You’re 
the first journalist to find us in four years.’ 
I9I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Find “us”?’ I said. 
‘You think you’re talking to Georgia?’ he said. 
There was a faint mocking tone to his voice. 
‘T’m sorry?’ I said. 
He laughed. 
‘I phoned a Georgia area code,’ I said. 
There seemed to be voices in the background, a lot of 
commotion, as if Oliver/Bud/Hamish was speaking from 
the midst of a busy office. 
‘You'll never be able to print what I am about to tell 
you,’ he said, ‘because there is no way you'll be able to 
prove that this conversation ever took place.’ 
‘So I’m not talking to someone in Georgia?’ I said. 
‘You are talking to someone in a lab where there are 
numerous PhDs from sixteen countries, including Brits, 
and the lab is in a fourteen-storey building behind three 
layers of barbed-wire defences that sure as hell isn’t 
Georgia,’ he said. 
There was a long pause. 
‘So you’re using call divert?’ I said, weakly. 
I had no idea if this was true. Maybe he was a 
fantasist, or perhaps he was playing with me for the fun 
of it, but, as I say, there seemed to be many voices in the 
background. (Maybe he was just putting those voices in 
my head.) 
The man said that the US military has been research- 
ing silent-sound technologies for twenty-five years. He 
likened this ‘massive’ research to the Manhattan Project. 
He said there were good silent sounds — ‘children 
192

--- PAGE BREAK ---esearch- 
ing silent-sound technologies for twenty-five years. He 
likened this ‘massive’ research to the Manhattan Project. 
He said there were good silent sounds — ‘children 
192

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
exposed to the good sounds in the womb turn out 
remarkably bright’ — and bad silent sounds. 
‘We only use the bad stuff on the bad guys,’ he said. 
He said the Americans used bad subliminal sounds on 
Iraqi soldiers during the first Gulf War (‘We warped 
their brains for a hundred days’) but they have had 
‘serious problems getting the subliminally implanted 
fears out of their heads’ during the years that followed. 
‘Negative things are a devil to get out.’ He chuckled. 
He said ITN news once broadcast a story on the use 
of silent sounds in the first Gulf War. 
(ITN later told me, categorically, that they had never 
run such a story. Nowhere within their archive database 
could I find anything approaching it.) 
He said, ‘You can transmit silent sounds into people’s 
heads via a window in the same way you can fire a laser 
beam through a window to eavesdrop on a conversation. 
Conversely, the sounds can be transmitted through the 
crummiest media — a satellite telephone or a crappy old 
tape recorder or a ghetto blaster.’ 
He said New Scotland Yard uses the technology, but 
he wouldn’t tell me how. He said the Russians use it too. 
And that was 
it. He cut the conversation short. He 
wished me the best and he hung up and I was left reeling 
and entirely unsure of everything he had said. 
This man seemed to have verified one of the world’s 
most enduring and least plausible conspiracy theories. 
For me, the idea that the government would surrep- 
titiously zap heads with subliminal sounds and remotely 
193

--- PAGE BREAK ---he world’s 
most enduring and least plausible conspiracy theories. 
For me, the idea that the government would surrep- 
titiously zap heads with subliminal sounds and remotely 
193

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
alter moods was on a par with the idea that they were 
concealing UFOs in military hangars and transforming 
themselves into twelve-foot lizards. This conspiracy 
theory has persisted because 
it contains all the crucial 
ingredients — the hidden hand of big government teaming 
up with Machiavellian scientists to take over our minds 
like body snatchers. 
The thing is, in this context, Jamal’s Fleetwood Mac 
all-girl-covers-band-ghetto-blaster experience inside the 
Brown Block at Guantanamo Bay suddenly made sense. 
Jamal seemed fine when I met him in Manchester. I 
asked him if he felt at all unusual after listening to 
Matchbox Twenty and he said no. But one shouldn’t 
read too much into this. There is a very strong chance, 
given the history of the goat staring and the wall walking 
and so on, that they blasted Jamal with silent sounds and 
it just didn’t work. 
There was one thing I could chase up. Dr Oliver Lowery 
(or whoever he was) had name-checked to me a Dr Igor 
Smirnov. He said Igor Smirnov had undertaken similar 
US government work 
in the field of silent sounds. 
I looked Dr Smirnov up. I found him in Moscow. I 
corresponded with his office, and his assistant (Dr Smir- 
nov speaks little English) told me the following curious 
story. 
It is a story the FBI has never denied. 
Igor Smirnov was not prospering in the post-Cold 
War Moscow of 1993. His finances were so bleak that 
194

--- PAGE BREAK ---e the following curious 
story. 
It is a story the FBI has never denied. 
Igor Smirnov was not prospering in the post-Cold 
War Moscow of 1993. His finances were so bleak that 
194

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
when the Russian mafia turned up at his laboratory one 
evening, pressed the bell marked, somewhat ominously, 
Institute for Psycho-Correction, and told Igor they’d pay 
him handsomely if he could subliminally influence cer- 
tain unwilling businessmen to sign certain contracts, he 
almost accepted their offer. But in the end it seemed just 
too frightening and unethical and he turned the gangsters 
down. His regular clients — the schizophrenics and the 
drug addicts - may have been poor payers but at least 
they weren’t the mafia. 
Igor’s day-to-day work in the early 1990s was some- 
thing like this: a heroin addict would turn up at his lab 
very upset because he was a father-to-be but try as he 
might he cared more about the heroin than his unborn 
child. So he’d lie on a bed, and Igor would blast him 
with subliminal messages. He’d flash them onto a screen 
in front of the addict’s eyes and blast them through 
earphones, disguised by white noise, and the messages 
would say ‘Be a good father. Fatherhood is more import- 
ant than heroin’. And so on. 
This was a man once féted by the Soviet government, 
which — ten years earlier — had instructed him to blast 
his silent messages at Red Army troops on their way to 
Afghanistan. Those messages said, ‘Do not get drunk 
before battle’. 
But the glory days were long gone by March 1993 - 
the month Igor Smirnov received a telephone call, out of 
the blue, from the FBI. Could he fly to Arlington, Vir- 
ginia right away? Igor Smirnov was intrigued, and quite 
amazed, and he got on a plane. 
195

--- PAGE BREAK ---ived a telephone call, out of 
the blue, from the FBI. Could he fly to Arlington, Vir- 
ginia right away? Igor Smirnov was intrigued, and quite 
amazed, and he got on a plane. 
195

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
The US intelligence community had been spying on 
Igor Smirnov for years. It seemed he’d succeeded in 
creating a system of influencing people from afar — 
putting voices into their heads, remotely altering their 
outlook on life — perhaps without the subject even know- 
ing it was being done to them. This was a tangible, real- 
life, mechanistic version of General Wickham’s prayer 
groups, or Guy Savelli’s goat staring, the kind of system 
the ambient composer Steven Halpern had suggested to 
Jim Channon back in the late 1970s. The question was: 
could Igor do it to David Koresh? 
Could he put the voice of God into David Koresh’s 
head? 
The Branch Davidians, an offshoot of the Seventh Day 
Adventists, had been living around Waco, predicting an 
imminent Judgement Day, since 1935. When Vernon 
Howell took over the church’s leadership in the late 
1980s, and declared himself a Christ-figure, the anointed 
one, the seventh and final messenger as outlined in the 
Book of Revelation, and changed his name to David 
Koresh and started selling weapons illegally to fund 
his congregation’s separatist lifestyle, the US Federal 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms began to 
take an interest. They imagined that a high-profile raid 
on the church would be good for agency morale and 
PR. So they tipped off the local media, told them the 
Branch Davidians were theologically incomprehensible, 
nuts and heavily armed (they were, but basically in the 
196

--- PAGE BREAK ---rale and 
PR. So they tipped off the local media, told them the 
Branch Davidians were theologically incomprehensible, 
nuts and heavily armed (they were, but basically in the 
196

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
way that gun shops are heavily armed) and they were 
going in. 
What the BATF failed to predict was that Koresh had 
been waiting for a confrontation like this, and relished 
the prospect. It was his destiny to be attacked by a 
hostile army representing an out-of-control, 
sinister, 
heavy-handed 
new-world-order-type 
Babylon govern- 
ment. 
On 28 February 1993 a hundred or so BATF agents 
stormed the church, but the raid turned into a gun battle, 
during which four agents were killed, and the gun battle 
turned into a siege. 
There is something far too familiar, in retrospect, 
about the whole thing. At Waco, just as at Abu Ghraib, 
the US government behaved like a grotesque caricature 
of itself. The anti-big-government American right-wing 
had harboured paranoid fantasies about the Clinton 
administration heavy-handedly destroying the lives of 
simple people who wanted to live free, and Waco was 
the place where those conspiracy theories came true. 
Much of the Iraqi population had been fed similarly wild 
conspiracy theories about American imperialistic hedon- 
ism — that the United States was violently out of control 
and determined to force its corruption and decadence on 
the devout — and Abu Ghraib was the place where those 
conspiracy theories came true. 
But there is a more disturbing parallel. David Koresh’s 
Branch Davidians also seem to have been considered 
guinea pigs in the midst of a long-awaited golden oppor- 
tunity, an opportunity to try stuff out. 
197

--- PAGE BREAK ---arallel. David Koresh’s 
Branch Davidians also seem to have been considered 
guinea pigs in the midst of a long-awaited golden oppor- 
tunity, an opportunity to try stuff out. 
197

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Back in 1993, the problem for advocates of out-of- 
the-box thinking within the US government and military 
establishments was 
that there was nobody suitably 
wicked out there on whom to test their ideas. The 
outlook was so hopeful, in fact, that a US State Depart- 
ment social scientist called Francis Fukuyama declared in 
1989, to widespread international acclaim, that it was 
the end of history. Western democratic capitalism had 
proved so superior to all its historical rivals, wrote 
Fukuyama, that it was finding acceptance everywhere 
in the world. There was simply nothing nefarious out 
there on the horizon. Although this eventually turned 
out to be just about the worst prediction ever, in 1993 it 
seemed too real. These were the fallow years for those 
who wanted to experiment with new ideas on suitable 
adversaries. 
And then the Waco siege came along. 
First there were the noises. Midway through the siege 
— in the middle of March 1993 — the sounds of Tibetan 
Buddhist chants, screeching bagpipes, crying seagulls, 
helicopter rotorblades, dentist drills, sirens, dying rab- 
bits, a train and Nancy Sinatra’s ‘These Boots Are Made 
for Walking’ began to blast into the church. It was the 
FBI, in this instance, who did the blasting. There were 
seventy-nine members of David Koresh’s congregation in 
there, including twenty-five children (twenty-seven if you 
count the unborn ones). Some of the parishioners put 
cotton wool in their ears, a luxury that was later unavail- 
able to Jamal at Guantanamo and the prisoners inside 
the shipping containers in al-Qa’im. Others apparently 
- 
198

--- PAGE BREAK ---t 
cotton wool in their ears, a luxury that was later unavail- 
able to Jamal at Guantanamo and the prisoners inside 
the shipping containers in al-Qa’im. Others apparently 
- 
198

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
tried to enjoy it by ironically pretending it was a disco. 
This wasn’t easy, as one of them, Clive Doyle, told me 
when I telephoned him. 
Clive Doyle is one of the very few survivors of the fire 
that ended the siege. 
‘Very rarely did they play a song straight through,’ he 
said. “They distorted it by slowing it down or speeding it 
up. And the Tibetan monks were pretty ominous.’ Then, 
apropos of nothing, he said, ‘Do you think they blasted 
us with those subliminal sounds?’ 
‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘Do you?’ 
‘I don’t know,’ he said. ‘We figured they were experi- 
menting in a lot of different areas. They had a robot 
that came down the drive one day, with a big antenna 
sticking out the top. What was that about?’ 
‘I don’t know,’ I said. 
‘Sometimes,’ said Clive Doyle, ‘I think that the FBI 
were just like idiots, and it was just chaos out there.’ 
It did seem somewhat chaotic. Most of the noises 
blasted at the Branch Davidians, I have learnt, came 
from the wife of an agent in charge. She worked in a 
local museum. She just scooped them up and gave them 
to her husband. The dying rabbit noises were the excep- 
tion. They came from an FBI agent who used the tape, 
under normal circumstances, to ferret out coyotes during 
his regular hunting trips. Furthermore, the FBI carried 
on blasting the Buddhist chants even after the Dalai 
Lama had written a letter of complaint because the agent 
in charge of the speaker system ‘didn’t have anything 
else to do at night’. 
199

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Buddhist chants even after the Dalai 
Lama had written a letter of complaint because the agent 
in charge of the speaker system ‘didn’t have anything 
else to do at night’. 
199

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
My guess is that, just like at Abu Ghraib, there was a 
‘casserole of intelligence’ present, each with their own 
idea about how to direct the siege. Some of the ideas 
were inspired by Jim Channon, or inspired by people 
who were inspired by him. Others were more random. 
The FBI negotiators taped their telephone conversations 
with David Koresh and his deputies. Excerpts from 
these tapes illustrate two things: the people within 
the church were, somewhat alarmingly, of one mind — 
David Koresh’s mind; the people on the outside of the 
church were, even more alarmingly, of no cohesive mind- 
set whatsoever. 
STEVE SCHNEIDER (Branch Davidian): Who’s 
controlling these guys? You’ve got guys out there 
right now pulling their pants down, men that are 
mature, sticking their butts in the air and flipping 
the finger. 
FBI NEGOTIATOR: Uh. Give me a moment. 
The guys that gravitate towards riding in tanks, 
jumping out of airplanes, have a little different 
mindset to you and I, would you agree? 
STEVE SCHNEIDER: I agree with you. But 
somebody’s gotta be above these guys. 
FBI NEGOTIATOR: Sure. 
JIM CAVANAUGH (FBI Negotiator): I think we 
need to set the record straight. There were no guns 
on those helicopters. 
200

--- PAGE BREAK ---ody’s gotta be above these guys. 
FBI NEGOTIATOR: Sure. 
JIM CAVANAUGH (FBI Negotiator): I think we 
need to set the record straight. There were no guns 
on those helicopters. 
200

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
DAVID KORESH: That’s a lie. That is a lie. Now, 
Jim, you’re a damn liar. Let’s get real. 
JIM CAVANAUGH: David, I— 
DAVID KORESH: No, you listen to me. You’re 
sitting there telling me that there were no guns on 
that helicopter? 
JIM CAVANAUGH: I said they didn’t shoot. 
DAVID KORESH: You are a damn liar. 
JIM CAVANAUGH: Well, you’re wrong, David. 
DAVID KORESH: You are a liar. 
JIM CAVANAUGH: Okay. Well, just calm down... 
DAVID KORESH: No! Let me tell you something. 
That may be what you might want the media to 
believe, but there’s other people that saw too. Now 
tell me, Jim, you’re honestly going to say those 
helicopters didn’t fire on any of us? 
JIM CAVANAUGH (after a long silence): David? 
DAVID KORESH: I’m here. 
JIM CAVANAUGH: Uh, yeah, uh what I’m saying 
is those helicopters did not have mounted guns. 
Okay? I’m not disputing the fact that there might 
have been fire from the helicopters. Do you 
understand what I’m saying? 
DAVID KORESH: Uh, no. 
201

--- PAGE BREAK ---did not have mounted guns. 
Okay? I’m not disputing the fact that there might 
have been fire from the helicopters. Do you 
understand what I’m saying? 
DAVID KORESH: Uh, no. 
201

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
UNIDENTIFIED LITTLE GIRL: Are they going 
to come in and kill me? 
UNIDENTIFIED NEGOTIATOR: No. Nobody’s 
coming. Nobody’s coming. 
And this, from a press conference that occurred mid- 
way through the siege: 
JOURNALIST: Mr Ricks is there a consideration 
to use psychological warfare? Have you discussed 
it at all? 
BOB RICKS (FBI spokesman): I don’t know what 
psychological warfare is. 
JOURNALIST: It was reported in the paper that 
you would play loud music, put bright lights on 
the compound all night, to try to agitate the entire 
group. Is that possible? 
BOB RICKS: We will not discuss tactics of that 
sort, but I would say the chances of doing that sort 
of activity are minimal. 
I have met Bob Ricks, He has been one of the FBI’s 
most outspoken critics of the Waco siege, and he all but 
single-handedly prevented a similar raid occurring on a 
group of white supremacists in Northern Oklahoma, at 
a place called Elohim City. I don’t think that Bob Ricks 
was lying during the press conference. I think the FBI’s 
left hand didn’t know what its right hand was up to. 
At Waco, just like at Abu Ghraib, the Jim Channon- 
202

--- PAGE BREAK ---t Bob Ricks 
was lying during the press conference. I think the FBI’s 
left hand didn’t know what its right hand was up to. 
At Waco, just like at Abu Ghraib, the Jim Channon- 
202

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
like thinkers seem to have had to bide their time, wait 
for the finger-flippers and the helicopter snipers to have 
their turn. 
My guess 
is that the musical bombardment was 
inspired by a similar event that occurred four years 
earlier in Panama City. The battle between General 
Stubblebine and General Manuel Noriega had long been 
fought like two wizards standing atop mountains throw- 
ing thunderbolts at one another. General Stubblebine 
had set his psychic spies onto Noriega, who had coun- 
tered by inserting little slips of paper into his shoes, and 
so on. 
In the end, Noriega turned up at the Vatican Embassy 
in Panama City, and PsyOps arrived on the scene with 
loudspeakers attached to their trucks, which were used 
to repeatedly blast the building with Guns N’ Roses’ 
‘Welcome to the Jungle’. If this event was inspired 
(directly or indirectly) by Jim Channon’s manual, it 
is appropriate that Noriega — who had given General 
Stubblebine so much hassle that he couldn’t concentrate 
on walking through his wall - was finally felled by 
another First Earth Battalion idea. 
I telephoned a dozen witnesses to the siege at Waco — 
journalists and intelligence agents — and I asked them if 
they knew of any strange goings-on beyond the music 
and the robot with the antenna. Three of them told 
me the same story. I can’t prove it, so it remains a 
rumour — one that sounds plausible but, then again, 
entirely implausible. 
The rumour I heard involves a man [ll call Mr B. He 
203

--- PAGE BREAK ---same story. I can’t prove it, so it remains a 
rumour — one that sounds plausible but, then again, 
entirely implausible. 
The rumour I heard involves a man [ll call Mr B. He 
203

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
enlisted in the US military in 1972, and between 1973 
and 1989 he was in the Special Forces unit at Fort Bragg, 
where he took part in the various General Stubblebine 
inspired super-soldier programmes. As a result he be- 
came — in the words of one man I spoke to — ‘not only 
the greatest surreptitious break-in guy in the armed 
forces, but in the whole government’. 
Mr B could break in anywhere, unseen and unheard. 
He had, to all intents and purposes, wholly and extra- 
ordinarily mastered level three of Glenn Wheaton’s Jedi 
Warrior code: invisibility. But Mr B used his powers for 
bad. He was 
convicted, 
in 1989, of breaking into 
women’s apartments and raping them. He was sentenced 
to life imprisonment. 
A soldier I cannot name swears that, on 18 April 
1993, he spotted Mr B surreptitiously entering David 
Koresh’s church. Perhaps his four years in prison had 
diminished his powers, for the soldier recognized him 
immediately. He said nothing at the time, because he 
knew he had witnessed a Black Op. An intelligence 
agency must have sprung Mr B from jail. 
The rumour ends like this: Mr B entered the Koresh 
compound, checked that the bugging devices were in 
good working order, fixed those that weren’t, crept out 
again, was transported back to his jail cell in Colorado, 
found God. He refused to grant me an interview because 
he said he no longer wanted to dwell on his past. 
He remains to this day in a maximum-security prison. 
That story remains a rumour, whereas Dr Igor Smir- 
204

--- PAGE BREAK ---interview because 
he said he no longer wanted to dwell on his past. 
He remains to this day in a maximum-security prison. 
That story remains a rumour, whereas Dr Igor Smir- 
204

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frequencies 
nov’s involvement in the Waco siege can safely be con- 
sidered true. 
The FBI flew Dr Smirnov from Moscow to Arlington, 
Virginia, where he found himself in a conference room 
with representatives of the FBI, the CIA, the Defense 
Intelligence Agency and the Advance Research Projects 
Research Agency. 
The idea, the agents explained, was to use the tele- 
phone lines. The FBI negotiators would bargain with 
Koresh as usual but, underneath, the silent voice of God 
would tell Koresh whatever the FBI wanted God to say. 
Dr Smirnov said this was possible. 
But then bureaucracy crept into the negotiations. An 
FBI agent said he was concerned that the endeavour 
might somehow lead to the Branch Davidians commit- 
ting mass suicide. Would Dr Smirnov sign something to 
the effect that if they did kill themselves as a result of the 
voice of God being subliminally implanted in their heads, 
he would take responsibility? 
Dr Smirnov said he wouldn’t sign something like that. 
And so the meeting broke up. 
| 
An agent told Dr Smirnov it was a shame it didn’t 
work out. He said they had already co-opted someone to 
play the voice of God. 
Had Dr Smirnov’s technology been put into practice 
at Waco, the agent said, God would have been played by 
Charlton Heston. 
205

--- PAGE BREAK ---ready co-opted someone to 
play the voice of God. 
Had Dr Smirnov’s technology been put into practice 
at Waco, the agent said, God would have been played by 
Charlton Heston. 
205

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
I was passing through Georgia, and thinking a lot about 
my telephone conversation with Dr Oliver Lowery, and 
so I decided to drive past the address I had for him. 
It was somewhere in the suburbs of Atlanta. I wondered 
if I’'d find a normal house or something like a fourteen- 
storey 
building behind 
three layers of barbed-wire 
defences. A gale was blowing so strongly I thought it 
would tip over my car. 
It was a normal, slightly dilapidated wooden house on 
a middle-class leafy street, and the leaves were swirling 
around so violently I had to switch on my windscreen 
wipers. 
I parked the car and walked up his drive, shielding 
myself against the gale. I was feeling quite nervous. I 
knocked. The whole thing happened so fast I can’t even 
describe the person who opened the door. I have an 
impression of a craggy-looking man in his seventies, his 
white hair blowing in the wind. 
| 
I said, ‘I’m really sorry to just turn up at your house. 
If you remember we—’ 
He said, ‘I hope the wind doesn’t blow you over on 
your journey back to your car.’ 
And then he closed the door on me. 
I walked back down his drive. And then I heard his 
voice again. I turned around. He was shouting something 
through a crack in his door. He was shouting, ‘I hope 
the wind doesn’t blow you away.’ 
I smiled uneasily. 
‘You'd better take care,’ he shouted. 
206

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13. SOME ILLUSTRATIONS 
The shipping container behind the disused railway station 
in al-Qa’im, Iraq, in which the ‘I Love You’ song from 
Barney the Purple Dinosaur was played through a 
loudspeaker to detainees. 
In late June 2004 I sent an email to Jim Channon and 
everyone else I had met during my two-and-a-half year 
207

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Purple Dinosaur was played through a 
loudspeaker to detainees. 
In late June 2004 I sent an email to Jim Channon and 
everyone else I had met during my two-and-a-half year 
207

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
journey who might have some inside knowledge about 
the current use of the kinds of psychological interro- 
gation techniques that had first been suggested in Jim’s 
manual. I wrote: 
Dear --- 
| hope you are well. 
| was talking with one of the British Guantanamo 
detainees [innocent - he was released) and he told me 
a very strange story. He said at one point during the 
interrogations the MI officers left him in a room - for 
hours and hours - with a ghetto blaster. They played 
him a series of CDs - Fleetwood Mac, Kris 
Kristofferson, etc. They didn't blast them at him. They 
just played them at normal volume. Now, as this man 
is Western, I’m sure they weren't trying to freak him 
out by introducing him to Western music. Which leads 
me to think... 
... Frequencies? Subliminal messages? 
What's your view on this? Do you know any time 
when frequencies or subliminal sounds have been 
used by the US military for sure? 
With best wishes, 
Jon Ronson 
I received four replies straight away. 
COMMANDER SID HEAL (The Los Angeles 
Sheriff’s Department non-lethals expert who told 
me about the Bucha Effect): ‘Most interesting, but 
I haven’t a clue. I know that subliminal messages 
208

--- PAGE BREAK ---HEAL (The Los Angeles 
Sheriff’s Department non-lethals expert who told 
me about the Bucha Effect): ‘Most interesting, but 
I haven’t a clue. I know that subliminal messages 
208

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Illustrations 
can be incorporated and that they have a powerful 
influence. There are laws prohibiting it in the US, 
but I’m not aware of any uses like you describe. 
I would imagine, however, that it would be 
classified and no one without a “need to know” 
would be aware anyway. If it were frequencies, it 
would probably need to be in the audible range or 
they wouldn’t need to mask them with other 
sounds.’ 
SKIP ATWATER: (General Stubblebine’s former 
psychic spying headhunter): ‘You can bet this 
activity was purposeful. If you can get anybody to 
talk to you about this, it would be interesting to 
know the “success rate” of this technique.’ 
JIM CHANNON: ‘Strikes me the story you tell is 
just plain kindness (which still exists).’ 
I couldn’t decide if Jim was being delightfully naive, 
infuriatingly naive, or sophisticatedly evasive. (Major Ed 
Dames, the mysterious Art Bell psychic unit whistle- 
blower and a neighbour of Jim’s, had once described him 
to me in an unexpected way. He’d said, ‘Don’t be taken 
in by Jim’s hippy demeanour. Jim isn’t airy at all. He’s 
like the local warlord. He runs that part of Hawaii. Jim 
is a very shrewd man.’) 
Then Colonel John Alexander responded to my email. 
Colonel Alexander remains the US army’s leading pio- 
neer of non-lethal technologies, a role he created for 
209

--- PAGE BREAK ---shrewd man.’) 
Then Colonel John Alexander responded to my email. 
Colonel Alexander remains the US army’s leading pio- 
neer of non-lethal technologies, a role he created for 
209

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
himself in part after reading and being inspired by Jim’s 
manual. 
COLONEL ALEXANDER: ‘Re your assertion he 
was innocent. If so, how did he get captured in 
Afghanistan? Don’t think there were many British 
tourists who happened to be travelling there when 
our forces arrived. Or maybe he was a cultural 
anthropologist studying the progressive social 
order of the Taliban as part of his doctoral 
dissertation and was just mistakenly detained from 
his education. Perhaps if you believe this man’s 
story you’d also be interested in buying a bridge 
from me? As for the music, I have no idea what 
that might be about. Guess hard rockers might 
take that as cruel and unusual punishment and 
want to report it to Amnesty International as proof 
of torture.’ 
Jokes about the use of music in interrogation didn’t 
seem that funny any more — not to me, and I doubt they 
did to him either. Colonel Alexander has spent a lifetime 
in the world of plausible deniability and I think he’s got 
to the stage where he just trots these things out. Colonel 
Alexander has just returned from four months in Afghan- 
istan advising the army on something he wouldn’t talk 
about. 
I emailed him back: 
Is there anything you can tell me about the use of 
subliminal sounds and frequencies in the military's

--- PAGE BREAK ---dvising the army on something he wouldn’t talk 
about. 
I emailed him back: 
Is there anything you can tell me about the use of 
subliminal sounds and frequencies in the military's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Illustrations 
arsenal? If anyone alive today is equipped to answer 
that question, surely you are. 
His response arrived instantly. He said my assertion 
that the US army would ever entertain the possibility of 
using subliminal sounds or frequencies ‘just doesn’t make 
sense’. 
Which was strange. 
I dug out an interview I’d conducted with the colonel 
the previous summer. I hadn’t been that interested in 
acoustic weapons at that point — I was trying to find out 
about Sticky Foam and goat staring — but the conver- 
sation had, I now remembered, briefly touched on them. 
‘Has the army ever blasted anyone with subliminal 
sounds?’ I had asked him. 
‘I have no idea,’ he said. 
‘What’s a “psycho-correction” device?’ I asked him. 
‘I have no idea,’ he said. ‘It has no basis in reality.’ 
‘What are silent sounds?’ I asked. 
‘I have no idea,’ he said. ‘It sounds like an oxymoron 
to me.’ 
He gave me a hard look, which seemed to suggest that 
I was masquerading as a journalist, but was, in fact, a 
dangerous and irrational conspiracy nut. 
‘What’s your name again?’ he said. 
I felt myself blush. I was suddenly finding Colonel 
Alexander quite frightening. Jim Channon has a page in 
his manual dedicated to the facial expression a Warrior 
Monk should adopt when meeting an enemy 
or 
a 
stranger for the first time. ‘A consistent, subtle and 
211

--- PAGE BREAK ---has a page in 
his manual dedicated to the facial expression a Warrior 
Monk should adopt when meeting an enemy 
or 
a 
stranger for the first time. ‘A consistent, subtle and 
211

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
haunting smile,’ Jim wrote. ‘A deep and unblinking 
look indicating the real person is home and comfortable 
with all. A quiet and calm stare indicating a willing- 
ness to be open.’ Colonel Alexander was now giving me 
what I can only describe as a haunting and unblinking 
stare. 
I told him my name again. 
He said, ‘Pixie dust.’ 
‘Sorry?’ I said. 
‘This is not something that has been brought up or 
addressed, and we have covered the waterfront of non- 
lethal technologies,’ he said. ‘We are not warping peo- 
ple’s brains or monitoring people or da da da da da. It’s 
just nonsense.’ 
‘lm confused,’ I said. ‘I don’t know much about this 
subject but I’m sure I’ve seen your name linked with 
something called a “psycho-correction device”.’ 
‘It makes no sense,’ he said. He looked baffled. 
Then he said: yes, he had sat in on meetings where this 
sort of thing was discussed, but there was no evidence 
that machines like this would ever work. ‘How would 
you do that [blast someone with silent sounds] with- 
out it affecting ws? Anybody who’s out there would hear 
i: 
‘Earplugs?’ I said. 
‘Oh, come on,’ he said. 
‘Of course,’ I said. ‘You’re right.’ 
And then the conversation had moved on to the 
subject of staring goats to death - ‘In a scientifically 
controlled environment,’ said Colonel Alexander - and 
212

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘You’re right.’ 
And then the conversation had moved on to the 
subject of staring goats to death - ‘In a scientifically 
controlled environment,’ said Colonel Alexander - and 
212

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Illustrations 
that’s when he told me that the man who achieved this 
feat was not Michael Echanis but Guy Savelli. 
How could you blast someone with silent sounds 
‘without it affecting us?’ 
This struck me at the time as an unassailable argu- 
ment, and one that cut through all the paranoid theories 
circulating on the Internet about mind-control machines 
putting voices into people’s heads. Of course it couldn’t 
work. In fact, it was a relief to believe Colonel Alexander 
because it made me feel sensible again, and not the nut 
his look had suggested I was. Now we were once again 
two sensible people — a colonel and a journalist — dis- 
cussing rational things in a sagacious manner. 
The thing is, I now realized, if silent sounds had been 
used against Jamal inside an interrogation room 
at 
Guantanamo Bay, there was a clue in Jamal’s account, a 
clue which suggested that military intelligence had craft- 
ily solved the vexing problem highlighted by Colonel 
Alexander. 
‘He put the CD in,’ Jamal had said, ‘and he left the 
room.’ 
Next, I dug out the recently leaked military report 
entitled Non-Lethal Weapons: Terms and References. 
There were a total of twenty-one acoustic weapons listed, 
in various stages of development, including the Infra- 
sound (‘Very low-frequency sound which can travel 
long distances and easily penetrate most buildings and 
vehicles ... biophysical effects: nausea, loss of bowels, 
disorientation, vomiting, potential internal organ dam- 
age or death may occur. Superior to ultrasound . ..’). 
ze

--- PAGE BREAK ---and 
vehicles ... biophysical effects: nausea, loss of bowels, 
disorientation, vomiting, potential internal organ dam- 
age or death may occur. Superior to ultrasound . ..’). 
ze

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
And then the last but one entry — the Psycho-Correc- 
tion Device, which ‘involves influencing subjects visually 
or aurally with embedded subliminal messages’. 
I turned to the front page. And there it was. The co- 
author of this document was Colonel John Alexander. 
And so our emails continued. 
I asked for the colonel’s permission to include in 
this book his views on the Guantanamo story, and he 
replied: 
Not sure what you mean by the Guantanamo story. My 
take on this whole thing is much bigger. IMHO [in my 
humble opinion] World War X is on, and it is religious. 
We are now faced with a problem of how to handle 
prisoners caught in a war that never ends. Nobody has 
asked that before. The traditional response lover 
millennia) is to kill them or put them into slavery. 
Tough to do in today’s environment. 
It seemed obvious to me what his alternative was, 
knowing what I did about his area of expertise. If you 
couldn’t kill your adversaries, or keep them imprisoned 
° 
for ever, there was surely only one option left in the 
Colonel Alexander canon: you change their minds. 
The First Earth Battalion Operations Manual had 
encouraged the development of devices that could ‘direct 
energy into crowds’. History seems to show that when- 
ever there is a great American crisis — the War on Terror, 
the trauma of Vietnam and its aftermath, the Cold War 
— its military intelligence is drawn to the idea of thought 
control. They come up with all manner of hare-brained 
214

--- PAGE BREAK ---ror, 
the trauma of Vietnam and its aftermath, the Cold War 
— its military intelligence is drawn to the idea of thought 
control. They come up with all manner of hare-brained 
214

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Illustrations 
schemes to try out, and they all sound funny until the 
schemes are actually implemented. 
I emailed Colonel Alexander to ask if he was indeed 
advocating 
the use 
of some 
kind 
of mind-control 
machine and he replied, somewhat ruefully, and a little 
guardedly: ‘If we do go to scrambling minds, then the 
whole mind-control conspiracy issues arise.’ 
What he meant was, MK-ULTRA. 
It was really just about the worst PR the US intelli- 
gence services had ever suffered, certainly until the Abu 
Ghraib photographs came along in 2004. Jim Channon 
might have pretty much single-handedly invented the 
idea of the US army thinking outside the box (as one of 
his admirers had once told me), but the CIA had been 
there before him. 
Everyone was still bruised over MK-ULTRA. 
215

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[= wey 
Fes sath 
4 
: 
; y 
7 
\, 
4 
me + 
« 
- 
aii conte tent ial its 
x tank 
— 
‘ks apy Teer ae 
i 
caster pe 
conieeid 
i! (nat Yanra’ Va port aie se 
ai hae; 4 Teamtagvesiiely 
sel fava tte SoBe ad 9 rere 
Ae "eh sueteneee 
| te nine Leese SPADA 
tht rid = at reyes tate nerd 
en 
arya toe: Mi. 
! 
2 hiatueeg via Feu nH 
He ae, ay: 
Seal xii Bey i) 
A 
Hp Ca Hey ft OF ofa + uot, 33 omy 
a 
wise We 
ethene ae 
a 
4 Si an Mirae ike 
70 236 
Faaah 
i 
legs pag I ergs 
ti 
coi eet) bes) bcp 
‘ 
7 
a 
1 pha Orth aed 
ae ont Ai ts 
: 
hich re 
(tame, ‘ees wee 
a 
Via” tact dead + 
F 
eer

--- PAGE BREAK ---ae 
a 
4 Si an Mirae ike 
70 236 
Faaah 
i 
legs pag I ergs 
ti 
coi eet) bes) bcp 
‘ 
7 
a 
1 pha Orth aed 
ae ont Ai ts 
: 
hich re 
(tame, ‘ees wee 
a 
Via” tact dead + 
F 
eer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14. THE 1953 HOUSE 
There is a house in Frederick, Maryland, that has barely 
been touched since 1953. It looks like an exhibit in a 
down at heel museum of the Cold War. All that brightly 
coloured Formica, and the kitschy kitchen ornaments — 
breezy symbols of 1950s American optimism — haven’t 
stood the test of time. 
Eric Olson’s house — and Eric would be the first to 
admit this — could do with some re-decoration. 
Eric was born here, but he never liked Frederick and he 
never liked this house. He got out as quickly as he could 
after high school and ended up in Ohio and India and 
New York and Massachusetts, back in Frederick and Stock- 
holm and California, but in 1993 he thought he would just 
crash out for a few months, and then ten years passed, 
during which time he hasn’t decorated for three reasons: 
1 He hasn’t any money. 
2 His mind is on other things. 
3 And, really, his life ground to a shuddering halt on 28 
November, 1953, and if your living environment is 
7 
Weg

--- PAGE BREAK ---asons: 
1 He hasn’t any money. 
2 His mind is on other things. 
3 And, really, his life ground to a shuddering halt on 28 
November, 1953, and if your living environment is 
7 
Weg

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
meant to reflect your inner life, Eric’s house does the 
job. It an inescapable reminder of the moment Eric’s 
life froze. Eric says that if he ever forgets ‘why ’m 
doing this’, he just needs to look around his house, 
and 1953 comes flooding back to him. 
Eric says 
1953 was probably the most significant year 
in modern history. He says we’re all stuck in 1953, in 
a sense, because the events of that year have a con- 
tinual and overwhelming impact on our lives. He rattled 
through a list of key events that occurred in 1953. 
Everest was conquered. James Watson and Francis Crick 
published, 
in Nature magazine, 
their famous paper 
mapping the double helix structure of DNA. Elvis first 
visited a recording studio, and Bill Haley’s ‘Rock Around 
the Clock’ gave the world rock and roll, and, subse- 
quently, the teenager. President Truman announced that 
the United States had developed a hydrogen bomb. The 
polio vaccine was created, as was the colour TV. And 
Allen Dulles, the director of the CIA, gave a talk to his 
Princeton alumni group in which he said, ‘Mind warfare 
is the great battlefield of the Cold War, and we have to 
do whatever it takes to win this.’ 
On the night of 28 November 1953, Eric went to bed, 
as normal, a happy nine-year-old child. The family home 
had been built three years earlier, and his father Frank 
was still putting the finishing touches to it, but now he 
was in New York on business. Eric’s mother Alice was 
sleeping down the hall. His little brother Nils and his 
sister Lisa were in the next room. 
218

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng touches to it, but now he 
was in New York on business. Eric’s mother Alice was 
sleeping down the hall. His little brother Nils and his 
sister Lisa were in the next room. 
218

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
And then, somewhere around dawn, Eric was woken 
up. 
‘It was a very dim November pre-dawn,’ Eric said. 
Eric was woken up by his mother and taken down the 
hall, still wearing his pyjamas, towards the living room — 
the same room where the two of us now sat, on the same 
sofas. 
Eric turned the corner to see the family doctor sitting 
there. 
‘And,’ Eric said, ‘also, there were these two...’ Eric 
searched for a moment for the right word to describe the 
others. He said, ‘There were these two... men... there 
also.’ 
The news that the men delivered was that Eric’s father 
was dead. 
‘What 
are you talking about?’ 
Eric asked them, 
crossly. 
‘He had an accident,’ said one of the men, ‘and the 
accident was that he fell or jumped out of a window.’ 
‘Excuse me?’ said Eric. ‘He did what?’ 
‘He fell or jumped out of a window in New York.’ 
‘What does that look like?’ asked Eric. 
This question was greeted with silence. Eric looked 
over at his mother and saw that she was frozen and 
empty-eyed. 
. 
. 
‘How do you fall out of a window?’ said Eric. “What 
does that mean? Why would he do that? What do you 
mean: fell or jumped?’ 
‘We don’t know if he fell,’ said one of the men. ‘He 
might have fallen. He might have jumped.’ 
219

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat 
does that mean? Why would he do that? What do you 
mean: fell or jumped?’ 
‘We don’t know if he fell,’ said one of the men. ‘He 
might have fallen. He might have jumped.’ 
219

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Did he dive?’ asked Eric. 
‘Anyhow,’ said one of the men, ‘it was an accident.’ 
‘Was he standing on a ledge and he jumped?’ asked 
Brice 
‘It was a work-related accident,’ said one of the men. 
‘Excuse me?’ said Eric. ‘He fell out a window and 
that’s work related? What?’ 
Eric turned to his mother. 
‘Um,’ he said. ‘What is his work again?’ 
Eric believed his father was a civilian scientist, work- 
ing with chemicals at the nearby Fort Detrick military 
base. 
Eric said to me, ‘It very quickly became an incredibly 
rancorous issue in the family because I was always the 
kid saying, “Excuse me, where did he go? Tell me this 
story again.” And my mother very quickly adopted the 
stance, “Look, I’ve told you this story a thousand times.” 
And I would say, “Yeah, but I don’t get it.” 
Eric’s mother had created — from the same scant facts 
offered to Eric — this scenario: Frank Olson was in New 
York. He was staying on the tenth floor of the Statler 
Hotel, now the Pennsylvania Hotel, across the road from 
Madison Square Gardens, in midtown Manhattan. He 
had a bad dream. He woke up confused, and headed in 
the dark towards the bathroom. He became disorientated 
and fell out of the window. 
It was 2 a.m. 
Eric and his little brother Nils told their school friends 
that their father had died of a ‘fatal nervous breakdown’ 
although they had no idea what this meant. 
220

--- PAGE BREAK ---t was 2 a.m. 
Eric and his little brother Nils told their school friends 
that their father had died of a ‘fatal nervous breakdown’ 
although they had no idea what this meant. 
220

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
Fort Detrick was what glued the town together. All 
their friends’ fathers worked at the base. The Olsons still 
got invited to neighbourhood picnics and other com- 
munity events, but there didn’t seem any reason for them 
to be there any more. 
When Eric was sixteen, he and Nils, then twelve, 
decided to cycle from the end of their driveway to San 
Francisco. Even at that young age, Eric saw the 2,415- 
mile journey as a metaphor. He wanted to immerse 
himself in unknown American terrain, the mysterious 
America that had, for some impenetrable reason, taken 
his father away from him. He and Nils would ‘reach the 
goal’ — San Francisco — ‘by small continuous increments 
of motion along a single strand’. This was in Eric’s mind 
a test-run for another goal he would one day reach in an 
equally fastidious way: the solution to the mystery of 
what happened to his father in that hotel room in New 
York at 2 a.m. 
I spent a lot of time at Eric’s house, reading his docu- 
ments and looking though his photos and watching his 
home movies. There were pictures of the teenage Eric 
and his younger brother Nils standing by their bikes. Eric 
had captioned the photograph ‘Happy Bikers’. There 
were 8mm films shot two decades earlier of Eric’s father, 
Frank, playing with the children in the garden. Then there 
were some films Frank Olson had shot himself during a 
trip he made to Europe a few months before he died. 
There was Big Ben and Changing the Guard. There was 
the Brandenberg Gate in Berlin. There was the Eiffel 
Tower. It looked like a family holiday, except the family 
221

--- PAGE BREAK ---he died. 
There was Big Ben and Changing the Guard. There was 
the Brandenberg Gate in Berlin. There was the Eiffel 
Tower. It looked like a family holiday, except the family 
221

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
weren’t with him. Sometimes, in these 8mm films, you 
catch a glimpse of Frank’s travelling companions, three 
men, wearing long dark coats and trilby hats, sitting in 
Parisian pavement cafes, watching the girls go by. 
I watched them, and then I watched a home movie 
that a friend of Eric’s had shot on 2 June 1994, the day 
Eric had his father’s body exhumed. 
There was the digger breaking through the soil. 
There was a local journalist asking Eric, as the coffin 
was hauled noisily into the back of a truck, ‘Are you 
having second thoughts about this, Eric?’ 
She had to yell over the sound of the digger. 
‘Ha!’ Eric replied. 
‘I keep expecting you to change your mind,’ shouted 
the journalist. 
Then there was Frank Olson himself, shrivelled and 
brown on a slab in a pathologist’s lab at Georgetown 
University, Washington, his leg broken, a big hole in his 
skull. 
And then, in this home video, Eric was back at home, 
exhilarated, talking on the phone to Nils: ‘I saw Daddy 
today!’ 
After Eric put the phone down he told his friend with 
the video camera the story of the bicycle trip he and Nils 
took in 1961, from the bottom of their driveway all the 
way to San Francisco. 
‘I’d seen an article in Boys’ Life about a fourteen-year- 
old kid who cycled from Connecticut to the West Coast,’ 
Eric said, ‘so I figured my brother was twelve and I was 
sixteen and that averaged out at fourteen, so we could 
222

--- PAGE BREAK ---ear- 
old kid who cycled from Connecticut to the West Coast,’ 
Eric said, ‘so I figured my brother was twelve and I was 
sixteen and that averaged out at fourteen, so we could 
222

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
do it. We got these terrible heavy two-speed twin bikes, 
and we started off right here. 40 West. We heard it went 
all the way! And we made it! We went all the way!’ 
‘No!’ said Eric’s friend. 
‘Yeah,’ said Eric. ‘We cycled across the country.’ 
‘No way!’ 
‘It’s an incredible story,’ said Eric. ‘And we’ve never 
heard of a younger person than my brother who cycled 
across the United States. It’s doubtful there is one. When 
you think about it, twelve, and alone. It took us seven 
weeks, and we had unbelievable adventures all the way.’ 
‘Did you camp out?’ 
“We camped out. Farmers would invite us to stay in 
their houses. In Kansas City the police picked us up, 
figuring we were runaways, and when they found out we 
weren’t they let us stay in their jail.’ 
‘And your mom let you do this?’ 
‘Yeah, that’s a kind of unbelievable mystery.’ 
(Eric’s mother Alice had died by 1994. She had been 
drinking on the quiet since the 1960s, and had be- 
gun locking herself in the bathroom and coming out 
mean and confused. Eric would never have exhumed his 
father’s remains while she was alive. His sister Lisa had 
died too, together with her husband and their two-year- 
old son. They’d been flying to the Adirondacks, where 
they were going to invest money in a lumber mill. The 
plane crashed, and everyone on board was killed.) 
‘Yeah,’ said Eric, ‘it’s an unbelievable mystery that my 
mother let us go, but we called home twice a week from 
different places, and the local paper, the Frederick paper, 
223

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘Yeah,’ said Eric, ‘it’s an unbelievable mystery that my 
mother let us go, but we called home twice a week from 
different places, and the local paper, the Frederick paper, 
223

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
twice a week had these front-page articles like Olsons 
Reach St Louis! All across the country back then there 
were billboards advertising a place called Harold’s Club, 
which was a big gambling casino in Reno. It used to be 
the biggest casino in the world. And their motif was 
HAROLD’S CLUB OR BUST! Every day we'd see these 
billboards, HAROLD’S CLUB OR BUST! It became a kind 
of slogan for our journey. When we got to Reno we 
realized we couldn’t get into Harold’s Club because we 
were too young. So we decided to make a sign that said 
HAROLD’S CLUB OR BUST! tie it to the back of our 
bikes, go over to Harold’s Club and tell Harold, whoever 
he might be, that we’d carried this across the whole 
United States and we were just crazy to see Harold’s 
Club. So we went into a drugstore. We got an old 
cardboard box and bought some crayons, and we started 
writing this sign. The woman who sold us the crayons 
said, “What are you guys doing?” 
‘We said, “We’re going to make a sign, HAROLD’S 
CLUB OR BusT!, and tell Harold that we cycled all the 
way from...” 
‘She said, “These people are very smart. They’re not 
going to fall for this.” 
‘So we made this thing, took it out onto the streets, 
scuffed it up, tied it to the back of our bikes, went over to 
Harold’s Club, got to this big entryway — Harold’s Club 
was this gigantic thing, literally the biggest gambling 
casino in the world — and there was a doorperson there. 
‘He said, “What do you boys want?” 
‘We said, “We want to meet Harold.” 
224

--- PAGE BREAK ---igantic thing, literally the biggest gambling 
casino in the world — and there was a doorperson there. 
‘He said, “What do you boys want?” 
‘We said, “We want to meet Harold.” 
224

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
‘He said, “Harold is not here.” 
“We said, “Well, who is here?” 
‘He said, “Harold senior is not here but Harold junior 
is here.” 
‘We said, “That’s fine, we'll take Harold junior.” 
‘He said, “Okay, I’ll go in and see.” 
‘Pretty soon out strides this dude in a fancy cowboy 
suit. Handsome guy. So he comes out and looks at our 
bikes and he says, “What are you guys doing?” 
‘We said, “Harold. We’ve been cycling across the 
United States and we’ve wanted to see Harold’s Club the 
whole time. We’ve been sweating across the desert.” 
‘And he said, “Well, come on in!” 
‘We ended up staying for a week at Harold’s Club. He 
took us up in a helicopter around Reno, put us up in a 
fancy hotel. And when we were leaving he said, “I guess 
you guys want to see Disneyland, right? Well, let me call 
up my friend Walt!” 
‘So he called up Walt Disney — and this is one of the 
great disappointments of my life — Walt wasn’t home.’ 
I have wondered why Eric spent the evening of the day 
he had his father’s body exhumed telling his friend the 
story of Harold’s Club or Bust. Maybe it’s because Eric 
had spent so much of his adult life failing to be offered 
the kindness of strangers, failing to benefit from anything 
approaching an American dream, but now Frank Olson 
was out there, lying on a slab in a pathologist’s lab, and 
perhaps things were about to turn around for Eric. 
22s

--- PAGE BREAK ---om anything 
approaching an American dream, but now Frank Olson 
was out there, lying on a slab in a pathologist’s lab, and 
perhaps things were about to turn around for Eric. 
22s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Maybe some mysterious Harold junior would come 
along and kindly explain everything. 
Happy Bikers. 
In 1970, Eric enrolled at Harvard. He went home every 
Thanksgiving weekend, and because Frank Olson went 
out of the window during the Thanksgiving holiday of 
1953, the family invariably ended up watching old home 
movies of Frank, and Eric inevitably said to his mother, 
‘Tell me the story again.’ 
During Thanksgiving weekend 1974, Eric’s mother 
replied, ‘’ve told you this story a hundred times, a 
thousand times.’ 
226

--- PAGE BREAK ---itably said to his mother, 
‘Tell me the story again.’ 
During Thanksgiving weekend 1974, Eric’s mother 
replied, ‘’ve told you this story a hundred times, a 
thousand times.’ 
226

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
Eric said, ‘Just tell me it one more time.’ 
And so Eric’s mother sighed and she began. 
Frank Olson had spent a weekend on an office retreat 
in a cabin called the Deep Creek Lodge in rural Mary- 
land. When he came home, his mood was unusually 
anxious. 
He told his wife, ‘I made a terrible mistake and I’ll tell 
you what it was when the children have gone to bed.’ 
But the conversation never got around to what the 
terrible mistake had been. 
Frank remained agitated all weekend. He told Alice he 
wanted to quit his job and become a dentist. On the 
Sunday night Alice tried to calm him down by taking 
him to the cinema in Frederick to see whatever was on, 
which turned out to be a new film called Martin Luther. 
It was the story of Luther’s crisis of conscience over 
the corruption of the Catholic Church in the sixteenth 
century, when its theologians claimed it was impossible 
for the Church to do any wrong, because they defined 
the moral code. They were fighting the Devil, after all. 
The film climaxed with Luther declaring, ‘No. Here I 
stand, I can do no other.’ The moral of Martin Luther is 
that the individual cannot hide behind the institution. 
(TV Guide's movie review database gives Martin 
Luther 2 out of 5 stars and says, ‘It is not “entertain- 
ment” in the usual sense of the word. One wishes there 
— 
might have been some humour in the script, to make the 
man look more human. The film was made with such 
respect that the subject matter seems gloomy when it 
should be uplifting.’) 
pe 
Ne

--- PAGE BREAK ---been some humour in the script, to make the 
man look more human. The film was made with such 
respect that the subject matter seems gloomy when it 
should be uplifting.’) 
pe 
Ne

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
The trip to the cinema didn’t help Frank’s mood, and 
the next day it was suggested by some colleagues that 
he go to New York to visit a psychiatrist. Alice drove 
Frank to Washington DC and dropped him off at the 
offices of the men who would accompany him to New 
Yorke 
This was the last time she ever saw her husband. 
On the spur of the moment, during that Thanksgiving 
weekend in 1974, Eric asked his mother a question he’d 
never thought to ask before: ‘Describe the offices where 
you dropped him off.’ 
So she did. 
‘Jesus Christ,’ said Eric, ‘that sounds just like CIA 
headquarters.’ 
And then Eric’s mother became hysterical. 
She screamed, ‘You will ever find out what happened 
in that hotel room!’ 
Eric said, ‘As soon as I finish at Harvard I’m going to 
move back home and I’m not going to rest until I find 
out the truth.’ 
Eric didn’t have to wait long for a breakthrough. He 
received a telephone call from a family friend on the 
morning of 11 June 1975: ‘Have you seen the Washing- 
ton Post? | think you’d better take a look.’ 
It was a front-page story, and the headline read: 
SUICIDE REVEALED 
A civilian employee of the Department of the Army 
228

--- PAGE BREAK ---Washing- 
ton Post? | think you’d better take a look.’ 
It was a front-page story, and the headline read: 
SUICIDE REVEALED 
A civilian employee of the Department of the Army 
228

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
unwittingly took LSD as part of a Central Intelligence 
Agency test, then jumped 10 floors to his death iess 
than a week later, according to the Rockefeller Commis- 
sion report released yesterday. 
(The Rockefeller Commission had been created to 
investigate CIA misdeeds in the aftermath of the Water- 
gate scandal.) 
The man was given the drug while attending a meeting 
with CIA personnel working on a test project that 
involved the administration of mind-bending drugs to 
unsuspecting Americans. 
‘This individual was not made aware he had been given 
LSD until about 20 minutes after it had been adminis- 
tered, the commission said. ‘He developed serious side 
effects and was sent to New York with a CIA escort for 
psychiatric treatment. Several days later, he jumped from 
a tenth-floor window of his room and died as a result.’ 
The practice of giving drugs to unsuspecting people 
lasted from 1953 to 1963, when it was discovered by the 
CIA’s inspector general and stopped, the commission 
said. 
Is this my father? thought Eric. 
The headline was misleading. Not much was ‘revealed’ 
— not even the name of the victim. 
Is this what happened at the Deep Creek Lodge? 
thought Eric. They slipped him LSD? No, but it has to 
be my father. How many army scientists were jumping 
out of hotel windows in New York in 1953? 
229

--- PAGE BREAK ---at the Deep Creek Lodge? 
thought Eric. They slipped him LSD? No, but it has to 
be my father. How many army scientists were jumping 
out of hotel windows in New York in 1953? 
229

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
On the whole, the American public reacted to the Frank 
Olson story in much the same way they responded, fifty 
years later, to the news that Barney was being used to 
torture Iraqi detainees. Horror would be the wrong word. 
People were basically amused and fascinated. As in the 
case of Barney, this response was, I think, triggered by 
the disconcertingly surreal combination of dark intelli- 
gence secrets and familiar pop culture. 
‘For America it was lurid,’ said Eric, ‘and exciting.’ 
The Olsons were invited to the White House so Presi- 
dent Ford could personally apologize to them — ‘He was 
very, very sorry,’ said Eric — and the photographs from 
that day show the family beaming and entranced inside 
the Oval Office. 
‘When you look at those photographs now,’ I asked 
Eric one day, ‘what do they say to you?’ 
‘They say that the power of that Oval Office for 
seduction is enormous,’ Eric replied, ‘as we now know 
from Clinton. You go into that sacred space — that oval 
— and yourre really in a special charmed circle and you 
can’t think straight. It works. It really works.’ 
Outside the White House, after their seventeen-minute 
meeting with President Ford, Alice Olson gave a state- 
ment to the press. 
‘I think it should be noted,’ she said, ‘that an American 
family can receive communication from the President of 
the United States. I think that’s a tremendous tribute to 
our country.’ 
‘She felt very embraced by Gerald Ford,’ said Eric. 
“They laughed together, and so on.’ 
230

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
The Olsons back at home. 
23%

--- PAGE BREAK ---to 
our country.’ 
‘She felt very embraced by Gerald Ford,’ said Eric. 
“They laughed together, and so on.’ 
230

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
The Olsons back at home. 
23%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
The president promised the Olsons full disclosure, and 
the CIA provided the family, and America, with a flurry 
of details, each more unexpected than the last. 
The CIA had slipped LSD into Frank Olson’s Coin- 
treau at a camping retreat called the Deep Creek Lodge. 
The project was code-named MK-ULTRA, and they did 
it, they explained, because they wanted to watch how a 
scientist would cope with the effects of a mind-altering 
drug. Would he be unable to resist revealing secrets? 
Would the information be coherent? Could LSD be used 
as a truth serum for CIA interrogators? 
And there was another motive. The CIA later admitted 
that they very much enjoyed paranoid thrillers like The 
Manchurian Candidate, and they wanted to know if they 
could create real-life brainwashed assassins by pumping 
people with LSD. But Frank Olson had a bad trip, 
perhaps giving rise to the legend that if you take LSD 
you believe you can fly and you end up falling out of 
windows. 
Social historians and political satirists immediately 
labelled these events ‘a great historical irony’, and Eric 
repeated these words to me through gritted teeth because 
he doesn’t appreciate the fact that his father’s death has 
become a fragment of an irony. 
‘The great historical irony,’ Eric said, ‘being that the 
CIA brought LSD to America thereby bringing a kind 
of enlightenment, thereby opening up a new level of 
political consciousness, thereby sowing the seeds of its 
own undoing because it created an enlightened public. It 
232

--- PAGE BREAK ---a kind 
of enlightenment, thereby opening up a new level of 
political consciousness, thereby sowing the seeds of its 
own undoing because it created an enlightened public. It 
232

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
made great copy, and you'll find that this theme is the 
motif of a lot of books.’ 
The details kept coming, so thick and fast that Frank 
Olson was in danger of becoming lost, swept away like 
a twig in the tidal wave of this colourful story. The CIA 
also told the Olsons that in 1953 they created an MK- 
ULTRA brothel in New York City, where they spiked 
the customers’ drinks with LSD. They placed an agent 
called George White behind a one-way mirror where he 
moulded, and passed up the chain of command, little 
models made out of pipe cleaners. The models repre- 
sented the sexual positions considered, by the observant 
George White, to be the most effective in releasing a flow 
of information. 
When George White left the CIA his letter of resig- 
nation read, in part, ‘I toiled wholeheartedly in the 
vineyards because it was fun, fun, fun ... Where else 
could a red-blooded American boy lie, kill, cheat, steal, 
rape and pillage with the sanction and blessing of the all- 
highest?’ 
George White addressed this letter to his boss, the 
very same CIA man who had spiked Frank Olson’s 
Cointreau: an ecology-obsessed Buddhist named Sidney 
Gottlieb. 
Gottlieb had learnt the art of sleight of hand from 
a Broadway magician called John Mulholland. This 
magician is all but forgotten today but back then he was 
a big star, a David Copperfield, who mysteriously bowed 
out of the public eye in 1953, claiming ill health, when 
233

--- PAGE BREAK ---is 
magician is all but forgotten today but back then he was 
a big star, a David Copperfield, who mysteriously bowed 
out of the public eye in 1953, claiming ill health, when 
233

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
the truth was that he had been secretly employed by 
Sidney Gottlieb to teach agents how to spike people’s 
drinks with LSD. Mulholland also taught Gottlieb how 
to slip bio-toxins into the toothbrushes and cigars of 
America’s enemies abroad. 
It was Gottlieb who travelled to the Congo to assas- 
sinate the country’s first democratically elected Prime 
Minister, Patrice Lumumba, by putting toxins in his 
toothbrush (he failed: the story goes that someone else, 
a non-American, managed to assassinate Lumumba first). 
It was Gottlieb who mailed 
a monogrammed handker- 
chief, doctored with brucellosis, to Iragi colonel Abd 
al-Karim Qasim. Qasim survived. And it was Gottlieb 
who travelled to Cuba to slip poisons into Fidel Castro’s 
cigars and his diving suit. Castro survived. 
It was like a comedy routine — the Marx Brothers 
Become Covert Assassins — and sometimes it seemed to 
Eric as if his family were the only people not laughing. 
‘The image that was presented to us,’ Eric said, ‘was 
fraternity boys out of control. “We tried some crazy 
things, and we made errors of judgement. We put various 
poisons in Castro’s cigars but none of that worked. And 
then we decided that we weren’t really good at that sort 
of thing.” ’ 
‘A clown assassin,’ I said. 
‘A clown assassin,’ said Eric. ‘Ineptitude. We drug 
people and they jump out of windows. We try to assas- 
sinate people and we get there too late. And we never 
actually assassinated anybody.’ 
23.4

--- PAGE BREAK ---said Eric. ‘Ineptitude. We drug 
people and they jump out of windows. We try to assas- 
sinate people and we get there too late. And we never 
actually assassinated anybody.’ 
23.4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
Eric paused. 
‘And Gottlieb turns up everywhere!’ he said. ‘Is Gott- 
lieb the only person in the shop? Does he have to do 
everything?’ Eric laughed. ‘And this is what my mother 
was seizing on when she talked to Gottlieb. She said, 
“How could you do such a hare-brained scientific exper- 
iment? Where’s the medical supervision? Where’s the 
control group? You call this science?? And Gottlieb 
basically replied, “Yeah, it was a bit casual. We’re sorry 
for that.”’ 
As I sat in Eric Olson’s house and listened to his story 
I remembered that I had heard Sidney Gottlieb’s name 
mentioned before, in some other faraway context. Then 
it came to me. Before General Stubblebine came along, 
the secret psychic spies had another administrator: Sid- 
ney Gottlieb. 
It took me a while to remember this because it seemed 
so unlikely. What was someone like Sidney Gottlieb, a 
poisoner, an assassin (albeit a not particularly good one), 
the man indirectly responsible for the death of Frank 
Olson, doing in the middle of this other, funny, psychic 
story? It seemed remarkable to me that the organiza- 
tional gap in the intelligence world between the light side 
(psychic supermen) and the dark side (covert assassina- 
tions) has been so narrow. But it wasn’t until Eric 
showed me a letter his mother received out of the blue 
on 13 July 1975 that I began to understand just how 
narrow it was. The letter was from the Diplomat Motor 
Hotel, in Ocean City, Maryland. It read: 
235

--- PAGE BREAK ---received out of the blue 
on 13 July 1975 that I began to understand just how 
narrow it was. The letter was from the Diplomat Motor 
Hotel, in Ocean City, Maryland. It read: 
235

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Dear Mrs Olson, 
After reading the newspaper accounts on the tragic 
death of your husband, I felt compelled to write to 
you. 
At the time of your husband’s death, I was the 
assistant night manager at the Hotel Statler in New 
York and was at his-side almost immediately after his 
fall. He attempted to speak but his words were 
unintelligible. 
A priest was summoned and he was 
given the last rites. 
Having been in the hotel business for the last 36 
years and witnessed innumerable unfortunate 
incidents, your husband’s death disturbed me greatly, 
due to the most unusual circumstances of which you 
are now aware. 
If I 
can be of any assistance to you, please do not 
hesitate to call upon me. 
My heartfelt sympathy to you and your family. 
Sincerely 
Armond D. Pastore 
General Manager. 
The Olsons did phone Armond Pastore to thank him 
for his letter, and it was then that Pastore told them 
what happened in the moments after Frank had died in 
his arms on the street at 2 a.m. 
Pastore said he went back inside the hotel and he 
spoke to the telephone switchboard operator. He asked 
her if any calls had been made from Frank Olson’s room. 
She said that there was just one call, and she had 
236

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 1953 House 
listened in to it. It was very short. It was made immedi- 
ately after Frank Olson went out of the window. 
The man in Frank Olson’s room said, ‘Well, he’s 
gone.’ 
The voice on the other end of the phone said, “That’s 
too bad.’ 
And then they both hung up. 
237

--- PAGE BREAK ---went out of the window. 
The man in Frank Olson’s room said, ‘Well, he’s 
gone.’ 
The voice on the other end of the phone said, “That’s 
too bad.’ 
And then they both hung up. 
237

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ial i 
vapid Heat ies Resi a 
> iam ‘sad wade Sie 
bir 
Ak Gener etka Bal ~ 
a 
rata Sage Bee “oop 
fe: 
5 
ot, tara eines, 
; 
oe. 
ign <op ita wast Egoth dooney a ia 
in Hie ee ei aioe 
poke. 
oop Natlecnd lene 
aia ie 
108 Apa Rae aRlgES Satine sicnicd 
Ne (esr h Ae,’ 
"Vek 400 
C1. 50 See in ana a 
Part 
Niel ned at aed & WAL. 
ary 
mg ie Pres teri wr Tiss ae) ae 
a 
V4 ee fs 
a 
- 
\o pohly are pay 
_ 
= 
“ 
— 
fe 
ae 
~ 
Nee sit oat 
~ i 
a 
ee nd 
Rah. 
W 
7 
. 
~ 
ee 
aa 7 
Yin 
ay ines AE 
iy 
ole mes 
ee a 
ee 
yibiy Cage eed 10 Fie ae Fenene 
tet 
cota 
otha Ate Ce ii eat ate RLA Se ae 7 Koa 
(OO ad Nase i et 
ae 
se-thulae 
pag 
a Yh 
et 
MA. 
She 
Nepal 
i 
; 
; 
CC ee, Ae 
(laa Dwitis 
0 
wt 
eds 
a 
; 
a" 
‘ 
-o 
a 
4 
wis wal Cope 
° 
; 
: 
| 
tt _ = eae 
oe 
: 
7 
: - 
=) 
ali 
“ 
& By 
- 
= 
. 
an 
f 
. 
ay 
i 
y ON le 
a 
ia dy %, 
i. mt 
7 
7 
fl Ps 
a 
ay 
g “ 
) 
a 
( . 
mnt 
m 
\ 
ry 
ca 
ae 
5 
on 
sed 
e

--- PAGE BREAK ---: 
| 
tt _ = eae 
oe 
: 
7 
: - 
=) 
ali 
“ 
& By 
- 
= 
. 
an 
f 
. 
ay 
i 
y ON le 
a 
ia dy %, 
i. mt 
7 
7 
fl Ps 
a 
ay 
g “ 
) 
a 
( . 
mnt 
m 
\ 
ry 
ca 
ae 
5 
on 
sed 
e

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15. HAROLD’S CLUB OR BUST! 
Eric Olson has a swimming pool in his back garden — 
one of the very few additions to the house made since 
1953. On a hot day in August, Eric, his brother Nils, 
Eric’s son, who usually lives in Sweden, and Nils’s wife 
and their children, and some of Eric’s friends and I, 
were sunbathing by the pool, when a truck covered with 
pictures of party balloons - Capital Party Rentals — 
pulled up in his driveway to drop off roo plastic seats. 
‘Hey! Coloured chairs!’ yelled Eric. 
“You want the coloured chairs?’ said the driver. 
‘Nah,’ said Eric. ‘Inappropriate. 
I’ll take the grey 
ones.’ 
Eric had brought a ghetto blaster down to the poolside 
and he tuned it to National Public Radio’s All Things 
Considered because the legendary reporter Daniel Schorr 
was going to deliver 
a commentary about him. Daniel 
Schorr was the first man to interview Khrushchev, he 
won three Emmys for his coverage of Watergate, and 
now he was turning his attention to Eric. 
His commentary began. 
259

--- PAGE BREAK ---iel 
Schorr was the first man to interview Khrushchev, he 
won three Emmys for his coverage of Watergate, and 
now he was turning his attention to Eric. 
His commentary began. 
259

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
... Eric Olson is ready to charge, in a news conference 
tomorrow, that the story of a suicide plunge makes no 
SENSE 20 
Eric leaned up against the wire fence that surrounded 
his swimming pool and grinned at his friends and family, 
who were listening intently to this broadcast. 
... and that his father was killed to silence him about 
the lethal activities he’d been involved in, projects 
codenamed Artichoke and MK-ULTRA. Today, a 
spokesman for the CIA said no congressional or exec- 
utive branch probes of the Olson case have turned up 
any evidence of homicide. Eric Olson may not have 
the whole story. The thing is, the government’s lid on 
its secrets remains so tight, we may never know the 
whole story... 
Eric flinched. 
‘Don’t go there, Dan,’ he muttered to himself. ‘Don’t 
go there.’ 
*.. Lhis is Daniel Schorr... 
‘Don’t go there, Dan,’ Eric said. 
He turned to us all, sitting by the pool. We sat there 
and said nothing. 
‘See?’ said Eric. ‘That’s what they want to do. “We 
may never know the whole story.” And there’s so much 
comfort they take in that. Bullshit. Bullshit. “Oh, it could 
be this, it could be that, and everything in the CIA is a 
hall of mirrors ... layers ... you can never get to the 
240

--- PAGE BREAK ---omfort they take in that. Bullshit. Bullshit. “Oh, it could 
be this, it could be that, and everything in the CIA is a 
hall of mirrors ... layers ... you can never get to the 
240

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
bottom...” When people say that, what they’re really 
saying is, “We’re comfortable with this because we don’t 
want to know.” It’s like my mother always said, “You’re 
never going to know what happened in that hotel room.” 
Well, something did happen in that room and it is 
knowable.’ 
Suddenly, Eric is sixty years old. Decades have gone 
by, and he has spent them investigating his father’s 
death. One day I asked him if he regretted this, and he 
replied, ‘I regret it al/ the time.’ 
Piecing together the facts has been hard enough for 
Eric, the facts being buried in classified documents, or 
declassified documents covered with thick black lines 
made with marker pens, or worse. Sidney Gottlieb ad- 
mitted to Eric during one meeting that he had, on his 
retirement, destroyed the MK-ULTRA files. When Eric 
asked him why, Gottlieb explained that his ‘ecological 
sensitivity’ had made him aware of the dangers of ‘paper 
overflow’. 
Gottlieb added that it didn’t really matter that the 
documents were ruined, because 
it was 
all a waste 
anyway. All the MK-ULTRA experiments were futile, 
he told Eric. They had all come to nothing. Eric left 
Gottlieb realizing he’d been beaten by a truly first-class 
mind. 
What a brilliant cover story, he thought. In a success- 
obsessed society like this one, what’s the best rock to 
hide something under? It’s the rock called failure. 
So most of the facts were retained only in the memor- 
ies of men who did not want to talk. Nonetheless, Eric 
241

--- PAGE BREAK ---est rock to 
hide something under? It’s the rock called failure. 
So most of the facts were retained only in the memor- 
ies of men who did not want to talk. Nonetheless, Eric 
241

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
has constructed a narrative that is just as plausible, even 
more plausible, than the LSD suicide story. 
Collecting the facts has been difficult enough, but 
there has been something even harder. 
‘The old story is so much fun,’ Eric said, ‘why would 
anyone want to replace it with a story that’s mot fun. 
You see? The person who puts the spin on the story 
controls it from the beginning. Its very hard for people 
to read against the grain of what you’ve been told the 
narrative is about.’ 
‘Your new story is not as much fun,’ I agreed. 
‘This is no longer a happy, feel-good story,’ Eric said, 
‘and I don’t like it any better than anyone else does. It’s 
hard to accept that your father didn’t die because of 
suicide, nor did he die because of negligence after a drug 
experiment, he died because they killed him. That’s a 
different feeling.’ 
And, vexingly for Eric, on the rare occasions he’s 
convinced a journalist that the CIA murdered his father, 
the revelation has not been greeted with horror. One 
writer declined Eric’s invitation to attend his press con- 
ference saying, ‘We know the CIA kills people. That’s 
old news.’ 
In fact, Eric told me, this would be the first time 
anyone had ever publicly charged the CIA with murder- 
ing an American citizen. 
‘People have been so brainwashed by fiction,’ said Eric 
as we drove to the local Kinko’s to pick up the press 
releases for the conference, ‘so brainwashed by the Tom 
242

--- PAGE BREAK ---tizen. 
‘People have been so brainwashed by fiction,’ said Eric 
as we drove to the local Kinko’s to pick up the press 
releases for the conference, ‘so brainwashed by the Tom 
242

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
Clancy thing, they think, “We know this stuff. We know 
the CIA does this.” Actually, we know nothing of this. 
There’s no case of this, and all this fictional stuff is like 
an immunization against reality. It makes people think 
they know things that they don’t know and it enables 
them to have a kind of superficial quasi-sophistication 
and cynicism which is just a thin layer beyond which 
they’re not cynical at all.’ 
It isn’t that people aren’t interested: it’s that they’re 
interested in the wrong way. Recently, a theatre director 
approached Eric for his permission to turn the Frank 
Olson story into ‘an opera about defenestration’, but 
Eric declined, explaining that this was a complex enough 
tale anyway even without having the facts sung at an 
audience. Tomorrow’s press conference was really Eric’s 
last chance to convince the world that his father was not 
an LSD suicide. 
There were so many ways for Eric to recount his new 
version of the story at the press conference. 
It was 
impossible for him — for anyone — to know how to do it 
in the most coherent and still entertaining way. Eric’s 
new story is not only no longer fun, it is also exasperat- 
ingly intricate. There’s so much information to absorb 
that an audience could just glaze over. 
Really, this story begins with the proclamation deliv- 
ered by the CIA director Allen Dulles to his Princeton 
alumni group in 1953. 
243

--- PAGE BREAK ---that an audience could just glaze over. 
Really, this story begins with the proclamation deliv- 
ered by the CIA director Allen Dulles to his Princeton 
alumni group in 1953. 
243

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Mind warfare,’ he said, ‘is the great battlefield of the 
Cold War, and we have to do whatever it takes to win 
this.’ 
Before Jim Channon and General Stubblebine and 
Colonel Alexander came along, there was Allen Dulles, 
the first great out-of-the-box thinker in US intelligence. 
He was a great friend of the Bushes, and was once 
the Bush family lawyer, a pipe-smoking patriarch who 
believed that the CIA should be like an ivy league univer- 
sity, taking inspiration not only from agents, but also 
from scientists, academics and whoever else might come 
up with something new. It was Dulles who moved the 
CIA’s headquarters from central Washington DC to sub- 
urban Langley, Virginia (now renamed the George Bush 
Center for Intelligence), because he wanted to create a 
thoughtful, out-of-town campus milieu. It was Dulles 
who sent undercover CIA agents out into the American 
suburbs in the 1950s and 1960s to infiltrate séances in 
the hope of unearthing and recruiting America’s most 
talented clairvoyants 
to his mind-warfare 
battlefield, 
which is how the relationship between intelligence and 
the psychic world was born. But it was General Stubble- 
bine who, inspired by the First Earth Battalion, pro- 
claimed a generation later that anyone could be a great 
psychic, and so opened the doors wide, and Major Ed 
Dames joined the programme, and subsequently revealed 
the secrets of the unit on the Art Bell show, and then all 
hell broke loose and, through no fault of any of the 
military personnel involved, thirty-nine people in San 
244

--- PAGE BREAK ---ealed 
the secrets of the unit on the Art Bell show, and then all 
hell broke loose and, through no fault of any of the 
military personnel involved, thirty-nine people in San 
244

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
Diego killed themselves in an attempt to hitch a ride on 
Prudence and Courtney’s Hale-Bopp companion. 
Allen Dulles put Sidney Gottlieb in charge of the 
fledgling psychic programme, and also of MK-ULTRA, 
and then a third covert mind-warfare project known as 
Artichoke. 
Artichoke is the programme that is not fun. 
Recently declassified documents reveal that Artichoke 
was all about inventing insane, brutal, violent, frequently 
fatal new ways of interrogating people. 
Frank Olson was not just a civilian scientist working 
with chemicals at Fort Detrick. He was a CIA man too. 
He was working for Artichoke. This is why he was in 
Europe in the months before he died, sitting in pavement 
cafes with the men wearing long coats and trilbies. They 
were there on Artichoke business. Eric’s father was — and 
there is no pleasant way of putting this — a pioneering 
torturer, or at the very least a pioneering torturer’s 
assistant. Artichoke was the First Earth Battalion of 
torture — a like-minded group of ground-breaking out- 
of-the-box thinkers, coming up with all manner of clever 
new ways of getting information out of people. 
An example: according to a CIA document dated 26 
April 1952, the Artichoke men ‘used heroin on a routine 
basis’, because they determined that heroin (and other 
substances) ‘can be useful in reverse because of the 
stresses produced when they are withdrawn from those 
who are addicted to their use’. 
This is why, Eric has learnt, his father was recruited 
245

--- PAGE BREAK ---useful in reverse because of the 
stresses produced when they are withdrawn from those 
who are addicted to their use’. 
This is why, Eric has learnt, his father was recruited 
245

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
to Artichoke. He, alone among the interrogators, had a 
scientific knowledge of how to administer drugs and 
chemicals. 
And now, in 2004, this Artichoke-created cold-turkey 
method of interrogation is back in business. Mark Bow- 
den, the author of Black Hawk Down, interviewed a 
number of CIA interrogators for the October 2003 edi- 
tion of Atlantic Monthly, and this is the scenario he 
constructed: 
On what may or may not have been March r [2003] 
the notorious terrorist Khalid Sheikh Mohammed was 
roughly awakened by a raiding party of Pakistani and 
American commandos 
. 
. 
. Here was the biggest catch 
yet in the war on terror. Sheikh Mohammed is con- 
sidered the architect of two attempts on the World 
Trade Center: the one that failed, in 1993, and the 
one that succeeded so catastrophically, eight years 
later 
.. 
. He was flown to an ‘undisclosed location’ (a 
place the CIA calls ‘Hotel California’)— presumably 
a facility in another cooperative nation, or perhaps a 
specially designed prison aboard an aircraft carrier. 
It doesn’t much matter where, because the place 
would not have been familiar or identifiable to him. 
Place and time, the anchors of sanity, were about to 
come unmoored. He might as well have been entering 
a new dimension, a strange new world where his every 
word, move, and sensation would be monitored and 
measured; where things might be as they seemed but 
might not; where there would be no such thing as day 
246

--- PAGE BREAK ---rld where his every 
word, move, and sensation would be monitored and 
measured; where things might be as they seemed but 
might not; where there would be no such thing as day 
246

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
or night, or normal patterns of eating and drinking, 
wakefulness and sleep; where hot and cold, wet and 
dry, clean and dirty, truth and lies, would all be 
tangled and distorted. 
The space would be filled night and day with harsh 
light and noise. Questioning would be intense—some- 
times loud and rough, sometimes quiet and friendly, 
with no apparent reason for either. The session might 
last for days, with interrogators taking turns, or it 
might last only a few minutes. On occasion he might 
be given a drug to elevate his mood prior to interrog- 
ation; marijuana, heroin, and sodium pentothal have 
been shown to overcome a reluctance to speak. These 
drugs could be administered surreptitiously with food 
or drink, and given the bleakness of his existence, they 
might even offer a brief period of relief and pleasure, 
thereby creating a whole new category of longing— 
and new leverage for his interrogators. 
See how in this scenario a slice of Jim Channon’s First 
Earth Battalion (‘harsh light and noise’) and a slice of 
Frank Olson’s Artichoke 
(‘a whole new category of 
longing’) come together like two pieces of a jigsaw. 
On the day before Eric’s press conference, Eric and I 
watched old 8mm home movies of his father playing in 
the garden with his children. On the screen, Frank was 
riding a wobbly old bicycle and Eric, then a toddler, was 
resting on the handlebars. Eric gazed, smiling, at the 
screen. 
He said, ‘There’s my father. Right there! That’s him! 
247

--- PAGE BREAK ---ding a wobbly old bicycle and Eric, then a toddler, was 
resting on the handlebars. Eric gazed, smiling, at the 
screen. 
He said, ‘There’s my father. Right there! That’s him! 
247

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
In comparison with the other guys from the CIA, he has- 
an open face. Um...’ Eric paused. ‘Basically,’ he said, 
‘this is a story about a guy who had a simple moral code 
and a naive view of the world. He wasn’t fundamentally 
a military guy. And he certainly wasn’t someone who 
would be involved in “terminal interrogations”. He went 
though a moral crisis, but he was in too deep and they 
couldn’t let him out.’ 
We continued watching the home video. Then Eric 
said, ‘Think of how much could have been different if 
he was alive to tell any of this. Ha! The whole history 
of a lot of things would be different. And you can see a 
lot of that just in his face. A lot of the other men have 
very tight, closed faces. He doesn’t .. .’ And Eric trailed 
off. 
At some point during his investigation, Eric hooked 
up with the British journalist Gordon Thomas, who has 
written numerous books on intelligence matters. Through 
Thomas, Eric learned that during a trip to London in the 
summer of 1953 his father had apparently confided in 
William Sargant, a consultant psychiatrist who advised 
British intelligence on brainwashing techniques. 
According to Thomas, Frank Olson told Sargant that 
he had visited secret joint American-British research 
installations near Frankfurt, where the CIA was test- 
ing truth serums on ‘expendables’, captured Russian 
agents and ex-Nazis. Olson confessed to Sargant that 
he had witnessed something terrible, possibly ‘a terminal 
experiment’ on one or more of the expendables. Sargant 
heard Olson out and then reported to British intelligence 
248

--- PAGE BREAK ---t 
he had witnessed something terrible, possibly ‘a terminal 
experiment’ on one or more of the expendables. Sargant 
heard Olson out and then reported to British intelligence 
248

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
_ that the young American 
scientist’s misgivings were 
making him a security risk. He recommended that Olson 
be denied further access to Porton Down, the British 
chemical-weapons research establishment. 
After Eric learnt this, he told his friend, the writer 
Michael Ignatieff, who published an article about Eric in 
the New York Times. A week later, Eric received the 
telephone call he’d been waiting for his whole life. It was 
a real Harold junior, one of his father’s best friends from 
Detrick, a man who knew everything, and was willing to 
tell Eric the whole story. 
His name was Norman Cournoyer. 
Eric spent a weekend at Norman’s house in Connecti- 
cut. Revealing to Eric the secrets he’d been harbouring 
all these years was so stressful for Norman that he 
repeatedly excused himself so he could go to the toilet 
and vomit. 
Norman told Eric that the Artichoke story was true. 
Frank had told Norman that ‘they didn’t mind if people 
came out of this or not. They might survive, they might 
not. They might be put to death’. 
Eric said, ‘Norman declined to go into detail about 
what this meant but he said it wasn’t nice. Extreme 
torture, extreme use of drugs, extreme stress.’ 
Norman told Eric that his father was in deep and 
horrified at the way his life had turned. He watched 
people die in Europe, perhaps he even helped them die, 
and by the time he returned to America he was deter- 
mined to reveal what he had seen. There was a twenty- 
four-hour contingent of Quakers down 
at the Fort 
249

--- PAGE BREAK ---elped them die, 
and by the time he returned to America he was deter- 
mined to reveal what he had seen. There was a twenty- 
four-hour contingent of Quakers down 
at the Fort 
249

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
Detrick gates, peace protesters, and Frank would wander 
over to chat to them, much to the dismay of his col- 
leagues. Frank asked Norman one day, ‘Do you know a 
good journalist I can talk to?’ 
And so, Eric said, slipping LSD into his father’s Coin- 
treau at the Deep Creek Lodge was not an experiment 
that went wrong: it was designed to get him to talk while 
hallucinating. And Frank failed the test. He revealed his 
intentions to Gottlieb and the other MK-ULTRA men 
present. This was the ‘terrible mistake’ he had made. 
Seeing Martin Luther on the Sunday night had made him 
all the more determined to quit his job. Here I stand. 
I can do no other. 
And on the Monday morning Frank did, indeed, 
tender his resignation, but his colleagues persuaded him 
to seek psychological counselling in New York. 
Documents reveal that Frank never saw a psychiatrist 
in New York. He was taken instead, by Gottlieb’s dep- 
uty, to the office of the former Broadway magician John 
Mulholland, who probably hypnotized him, and Frank 
probably failed that test too. 
Housing a possibly deranged and desperate man in a 
hotel room high above Seventh Avenue no longer seemed 
like a regrettable error of judgment. It seemed like the 
prelude to murder. 
When Eric had his father’s body exhumed in 1994, 
the pathologist, Dr James Starrs, found a hole in Frank’s 
head that — he concluded — came from the butt of a gun 
and not a fall from a tenth-floor window. 
250

--- PAGE BREAK ---exhumed in 1994, 
the pathologist, Dr James Starrs, found a hole in Frank’s 
head that — he concluded — came from the butt of a gun 
and not a fall from a tenth-floor window. 
250

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
‘Well, he’s gone,’ said the voice of Sidney Gottlieb’s 
deputy, Robert Lashbrook. 
‘That’s too bad,’ came the reply. 
And they both hung up. 
There were around forty journalists at Eric’s press con- 
ference — crews from all the networks and many of the 
big newspapers. Eric had decided — for the purposes of 
clarity — to tell the story primarily through the narrative 
of his weekend with Norman Cournoyer. He repeatedly 
stressed that this was no longer a family story. This was 
now a story about what happened to America in the 
1950s and how that informs what is happening today. 
‘Where’s the proof?’ asked Julia Robb, the reporter 
from Eric’s local paper, the Frederick News Post, when 
he had finished. ‘Does all this rest on the word of one 
man, your father’s friend?’ 
Julia looked around her to make the point that this 
Norman Cournoyer wasn’t even in attendance. 
‘No,’ said Eric. He looked exasperated. ‘As I’ve tried 
to tell you it conceptually rests on the idea that there are 
two vectors in this story and they only intersect in one 
place.’ 
There was a baffled silence. 
‘Are you in any way motivated by ideology over this?’ 
the man from Fox News asked. 
‘Just a desire to know the truth.’ Eric sighed. 
Later, as the journalists milled around, eating from 
pe

--- PAGE BREAK ---n any way motivated by ideology over this?’ 
the man from Fox News asked. 
‘Just a desire to know the truth.’ Eric sighed. 
Later, as the journalists milled around, eating from 
pe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
the buffet laid out on picnic tables, the conversation 
among the Olsons and their friends turned to Julia Robb, 
the reporter from the Frederick News Post. Someone 
said he thought it was a shame that the most hostile 
journalist present represented Eric and Nils’s local paper. 
‘Yeah, it is,’ said Nils. 
‘It’s painful to me. I’m a 
professional here in town. I have connections with local 
people as a dentist, and I see people on a daily basis who 
come in and read the local paper, and that affects me.’ 
Nils looked over across the garden at Eric, who was 
saying something to Julia, but we couldn’t hear what. 
Nils said, ‘At times you go through a phase of believ- 
ing that maybe the story is a bunch of hooey, and that it 
was just a simple LSD suicide and that’ — Nils glanced at 
Julia — ‘can trigger a kind of shame spiral. Its like the 
feelings you’ve had in the middle of the night, at three 
2.01. when you’re trying to get to sleep and you start 
having some thought and the thought spins you into 
another negative thought and it kind of spins out of 
control and you have to shake yourself and maybe turn 
the light on and get grounded in reality again.’ 
Eric and Julia were arguing now. Julia said something 
to Eric and then she walked away, back to her car. (Later 
Eric said to me that Julia seemed ‘incensed, as if the 
entire story made her furious in some deep way that she 
was completely at a loss to articulate’.) 
‘I mean,’ said Nils, ‘America fundamentally wants to 
think of itself as being good, and that we’re fundamen- 
tally right in what we’re doing, and we have a very 
compelling responsibility for the free world. And looking 
252

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts to 
think of itself as being good, and that we’re fundamen- 
tally right in what we’re doing, and we have a very 
compelling responsibility for the free world. And looking 
252

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
at some of these issues is troubling, because if America 
does have a darker side it threatens your hold on your 
view of America and it’s kind of like, “Gee, if I pull out 
this one underpinning of the American consciousness, is 
this a house of cards? Does it really threaten the funda- 
mental nature of America?”’ 
We drifted back down to the swimming pool, and an 
hour passed, and then Eric joined us. He’d been in the 
house on the telephone. He was laughing. 
“You hear the latest?’ he said. 
‘Bring me up to date,’ said Nils. ‘I’m dying to hear.’ 
‘Julia,’ said Eric, ‘called Norman. I just called her and 
she said, “Eric, ’m glad you phoned. I just called Nor- 
man. He says he has no reason to believe that the CIA 
would murder Frank Olson.” I said, “Julia, thanks for 
respecting my wishes about not calling Norman.” She 
said, “Eric, I’m a reporter. I have to do what’s necessary 
to get the story.”’ 
Eric laughed, although nobody else did. 
And so I drove to Connecticut, to Norman Cournoyer’s 
house. I was slightly shaken by the news of the telephone 
call between Julia Robb and Norman. Had I got Eric 
wrong? Was he some kind of fantasist? 
Norman lives in a large white bungalow in an upmar- 
ket suburban street. His wife answered the door and she 
led me into the living room where Norman was waiting 
for me. He pointed to the table and said, ‘I dug out some 
old photographs for you.’ 
253

--- PAGE BREAK ---His wife answered the door and she 
led me into the living room where Norman was waiting 
for me. He pointed to the table and said, ‘I dug out some 
old photographs for you.’ 
253

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
They were of Norman and Frank Olson, arm in arm, 
‘somewhere in the middle of Fort Detrick, circa 1953. 
‘Did you tell the reporter from the Frederick News 
Post that you had no evidence to suggest that Frank was 
murdered by the CIA?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah,’ said Norman. 
‘Why did you do that?’ I asked. 
‘Over the phone?’ said Norman. ‘I think a journalist 
is making a big mistake in trying to get somebody to talk 
over the phone.’ 
‘So you do think Frank was murdered?’ I said. 
‘T’m sure of it,’ said Norman. 
And then he told me something he hadn’t told Eric. 
‘I saw Frank after he’d been given the LSD,’ he said. 
‘We joked about it.’ 
‘What did he say?’ I asked. 
‘He said, “They’re trying to find out what kind of guy 
I am. Whether I’m giving secrets away.”’ 
‘You were joking about it?’ I said. 
‘We joked about it because he didn’t react to LSD.’ 
‘He wasn’t tripping at all?’ I said. 
‘Nah,’ said Norman. ‘He was laughing about it. He 
said, “They’re getting very, very uptight now because of 
what they believe I am capable of.” He really thought 
they were picking on him because he was the man who 
might give away the secrets.’ 
‘Was he going to talk to a journalist?’ I asked. 
‘He came so close it wasn’t even funny,’ said Norman. 
‘Did he come back from Europe looking very upset?’ I 
asked. 
254

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecrets.’ 
‘Was he going to talk to a journalist?’ I asked. 
‘He came so close it wasn’t even funny,’ said Norman. 
‘Did he come back from Europe looking very upset?’ I 
asked. 
254

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold’s Club or Bust! 
“Yeah,” said Norman. ‘We talked about a week, ten 
days, after he came back. I said “What happened to you, 
Frank? You seem awfully upset.” He said, “Oh, you 
know...” I must admit, in all honesty, it’s just coming 
back to me now. He said...’ 
Suddenly, Norman fell silent. 
‘I don’t want to go on further than that,’ he said. 
‘There are certain things I don’t want to talk about.’ 
Norman looked out of the window. 
‘It speaks for itself,’ he said. 
Eric hoped his press conference would, at least, change 
the language of the reporting of the story. At best it 
would motivate some energetic journalist to take up 
the challenge and find an unequivocal smoking gun that 
proved Frank Olson was pushed out of the window. 
But in the days that followed the press conference it 
became clear that every journalist had decided to report 
the story in much the same way. 
Eric had finally found ‘closure’. 
He was on the way to being ‘healed’. 
He had ‘laid his mystery to rest’. 
He could ‘move on’ now. 
Perhaps we will ‘never know’ what really happened to 
Frank Olson, but the important thing was that Eric had 
achieved ‘closure’. 
The story was fun again. 
#5)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tagaeriie Sa Be “Ti age ra 
Fates, ne Soot ~saralie. Bak 6 
ii joke 
ba 
eS 
per Sad Shas 
pests oerewniner 
srry rid pte ink Sik 
oe 
Pie aac 
a! ihe sah iN, 
; oa : 
Mw > ele 
Pe 
oo? SI meee 
H,18 
Padi cones 
5 
oes bie 
wenn 
rh 
mee AER eth lp a 
<i

--- PAGE BREAK ---per Sad Shas 
pests oerewniner 
srry rid pte ink Sik 
oe 
Pie aac 
a! ihe sah iN, 
; oa : 
Mw > ele 
Pe 
oo? SI meee 
H,18 
Padi cones 
5 
oes bie 
wenn 
rh 
mee AER eth lp a 
<i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16. THE EXIT 
27 JUNE 2004 
Jim Channon faxes me his Iraq exit strategy. This is the 
same document he sent to the army’s chief of staff 
General Pete Schoomaker after Donald Rumsfeld had 
asked the general to bring ‘creative’ thinkers into the 
fold. 
Jim’s strategy begins: 
When we left Vietnam, we did so with our tails 
between our legs. We were leaving at an undignified 
pace. In the eyes of the world that watches, the last 
moments are as telling as the first. 
THE FIRST EARTH BATTALION SOLUTION 
1. A touching and heartfelt ceremony [consisting of ] 
mothers, children, teachers, soldiers, nurses and 
doctors from both sides. Where possible children 
will carry the actual awards (i.e., medals, trophies, 
small statues) of appreciation and recognition to 
those [American and Iraqi soldiers] honoured. 
257

--- PAGE BREAK ---here possible children 
will carry the actual awards (i.e., medals, trophies, 
small statues) of appreciation and recognition to 
those [American and Iraqi soldiers] honoured. 
257

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
2. The ceremonial surroundings we design are them- 
selves a gift to the future of Iraq. We recommend 
that a beautiful global village be built as a setting. 
It can showcase the kinds of alternative energy, 
sanitation and agricultural technology appropriate 
for this part of the world. 
3. [The ceremony will include the giving of] gifts from 
other parts of the world. United Nations translators 
will be available to interpret those gifts. An elder 
might speak and a teen might speak about the 
promise of cooperation. 
29 JUNE 2004 
Today, sovereignty 
is transferred from the coalition 
forces to the new Iraqi government. Whoever organized 
the ceremony obviously chose not to implement Jim’s 
ideas: 
Behind silver miles of new razor wire, behind high 
concrete barriers stronger than most medieval fortifi- 
cations, behind sandbags, five security checks, US 
armoured 
vehicles, US armoured 
soldiers, special 
forces of various countries and private security guards, 
an American bureaucrat handed a piece of paper to 
an Iraqi judge, jumped on a helicopter and left the 
country. 
The first thing reporters saw as they came into the 
sunshine from the banal auditorium where the newly 
258

--- PAGE BREAK ---aper to 
an Iraqi judge, jumped on a helicopter and left the 
country. 
The first thing reporters saw as they came into the 
sunshine from the banal auditorium where the newly 
258

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
sworn-in Iraqi government hailed the new era was two 
US Apache helicopter gunships, pirouetting low in the 
furnace sky. 
Fear of the bombers gave the occasion all the pomp 
of an office leaving do. It lasted only 20 minutes. 
James Meek, Guardian. 
I suppose this has been a book about the changing 
relationship between Jim Channon’s ideas and the army 
at large. Sometimes the army seems like a nation, and 
Jim a village somewhere in the middle, like Glastonbury, 
looked on fondly but basically ignored. At other times, 
Jim seems right in the heart of things. 
Perhaps the story is this: in the late 1970s Jim, trau- 
matized from Vietnam, sought solace in the emerging 
human potential movement of California. He took his 
ideas back into the army and they struck a chord with 
the top brass who had never before seen themselves as 
New Age, but in their post-Vietnam funk it all made 
sense to them. 
But then, over the decades that followed, the army, 
being what it is, recovered its strength and saw that some 
of the ideas contained within Jim’s manual could be used 
to shatter people rather than heal them. Those are the 
ideas that live on in the War on Terror. 
The ‘bureaucrat’ referred to in the Guardian article, 
Paul Bremer, may have left the country today, but he has 
left behind him in Iraq 160,000 troops, the vast majority 
of them American. According to the Institute for Policy 
Studies and Foreign Policy in Focus, 52 per cent of those 
259

--- PAGE BREAK ---left behind him in Iraq 160,000 troops, the vast majority 
of them American. According to the Institute for Policy 
Studies and Foreign Policy in Focus, 52 per cent of those 
259

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
American soldiers are experiencing low morale, 15 per 
cent have screened positive for traumatic stress, 7.3 per 
cent for anxiety, and 6.9 per cent for depression. The 
suicide rate among American soldiers has increased from 
an eight-year average of I1.9 per 100,000 to 15.6 per 
100,000. 
A total of 952 coalition soldiers have been killed since 
the war began, including 836 Americans. Some 5,134 
more 
have 
been wounded. 
Military 
hospitals have 
reported a sharp increase in the number of amputations 
— the result of an ‘improved’ design of body armour that 
protects vital organs but not limbs. 
Between 9,436 and 11,317 Iraqi civilians are now 
dead as a result of the US invasion and the ensuing 
occupation, with 40,000 more injured. These figures are 
less exact because nobody has really been keeping count. 
Eighty per cent of Iraqis say they have ‘no confidence’ 
in either the US civilian authorities or in the coalition 
troops, in part, ’ve no doubt, because of the photo- 
graphs 
that 
detailed 
the methods 
of interrogation 
employed by military intelligence at Abu Ghraib. 
I have had the strangest telephone call. It was from 
somebody [ve written about in this book, 
a man who 
continues to work within the US military. I almost didn’t 
include what he told me because it is utterly outlandish 
and impossible to substantiate. But it also rings true. He 
said he’d tell me the secret on the condition that I didn’t 
reveal his name. 
260

--- PAGE BREAK ---me because it is utterly outlandish 
and impossible to substantiate. But it also rings true. He 
said he’d tell me the secret on the condition that I didn’t 
reveal his name. 
260

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
Before I repeat what he said, I should explain why I 
believe it rings true. 
First, outlandish hasn’t stopped them before. 
I once asked Colonel Alexander if there had been 
some sort of post-9/11 renaissance of MK-ULTRA. 
‘Not necessarily LSD,’ I added, ‘but a non-lethal 
weapon type of MK-ULTRA. Take the Guantanamo Bay 
ghetto-blaster story. Surely the most likely explanation is 
that they were playing him some kind of mind-altering 
noise, buried somewhere below Fleetwood Mac.’ 
“You’re sounding ridiculous,’ he replied. 
He was right. I was sounding just as ridiculous as I 
sounded when I asked friends of Michael Echanis if they 
knew whether Michael had ever been involved in ‘influ- 
encing livestock from afar’. But those were the cards this 
story had dealt me. 
(Remember that the crazy people are not always to be 
found on the outside. Sometimes the crazy people are 
deeply embedded on the inside. Not even the most 
imaginative conspiracy theorist has ever thought to 
invent a scenario in which a crack team of Special Forces 
soldiers and major generals secretly try to walk through 
their walls and stare goats to death.) 
‘Listen,’ said Colonel Alexander, crossly. ‘Nobody 
who lived through the trauma of MK-ULTRA’ (he was 
talking about the trauma on the intelligence side, the 
trauma of being found out, not the trauma on the 
Olsons’ side) ‘would ever involve themselves in some- 
thing like that again. Nobody who lived through all 
those congressional hearings, that media reaction . 
. .’ He 
261

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the 
Olsons’ side) ‘would ever involve themselves in some- 
thing like that again. Nobody who lived through all 
those congressional hearings, that media reaction . 
. .’ He 
261

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
paused. Then he said, ‘Sure, you’ve got kids in intelli- 
gence who’ve read all about MK-ULTRA and think, 
“Gee. That’s sounds cool. Why don’t we try that out?” 
But you’d never get a reactivation at command level.’ 
Of course a bunch of young enthusiasts in military 
intelligence thinking ‘that sounds cool’ is exactly how 
these things can spring to life, and have done before. 
The other reason why I think the secret rings true 
revolves around the mystery of why Major Ed Dames 
decided one day to reveal on the Art Bell show the 
existence of the psychic spying unit. When I asked Major 
Dames 
in Maui what his motive 
for this was, he 
shrugged and a faraway look crossed his face and he 
said, ‘I didn’t have any motive. I didn’t have any motive 
atvall? 
But he said it in such a way as to lead me to think 
that he actually had a very shrewd, secret motive. At the 
time I put Ed’s pointedly enigmatic half-smile down to his 
well-deserved reputation as a somewhat self-aggrandizing 
mystery-monger. 
Many people blamed Ed for the closure of the unit, 
and some smelt a conspiracy. Ed’s former psychic col- 
league Lyn Buchanan once told me he’d come to believe 
there was another psychic unit, even more deeply hid- 
den, and presumably with more glamorous offices than 
theirs, and that the reason why their unit was revealed 
to the world was to divert attention from this mysterious 
other psychic team. Lyn’s implication was that Ed was 
instructed to reveal the secrets by some high-up cabal. 
At the time, I didn’t give this theory much credence. I 
262

--- PAGE BREAK ---erious 
other psychic team. Lyn’s implication was that Ed was 
instructed to reveal the secrets by some high-up cabal. 
At the time, I didn’t give this theory much credence. I 
262

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
have often found that people at the heart of perceived 
conspiracies are often conspiracy theorists themselves. (I 
remember once speaking with a high-ranking Freemason 
from their Washington DC headquarters. He said to me, 
‘Of course it is simply absurd to think that the Free- 
masons secretly rule the world, but I’ll tell you who does 
secretly rule the world: the Trilateral Commission.’) I 
put Lyn’s assertion down to that peculiar facet of the 
conspiracy world. 
But now I’m not so sure. 
After Lyn Buchanan had presented his theory to me 
I emailed 
Skip Atwater, 
the extremely level-headed 
former psychic headhunter from Fort Meade. Skip had 
been deeply involved in the unit, in an administrational 
capacity, between 1977 and 1987. Was there, I asked 
him, any truth to what Lyn had said? 
He emailed me back: 
It is true that if asked about the use of remote viewing, 
psychics, or whatever, the CIA can now say something 
like, There was a program, but it has since been 
closed.’ And that is a true statement, but it’s not the 
whole truth. For security reasons, | cannot detail 
further information about non [Fort Meade] programs. 
| would suppose however, that since the years that | 
was privy to such information, these efforts have 
changed direction a bit and are now highly focused on 
counterterrorism. For reasons of security 
management, it would be customary to... well, 
perhaps | shouldn't go on at this point. 
263

--- PAGE BREAK ---rection a bit and are now highly focused on 
counterterrorism. For reasons of security 
management, it would be customary to... well, 
perhaps | shouldn't go on at this point. 
263

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
And that was the end of Skip’s email. 
I know that almost every former psychic spy from the 
old Fort Meade unit received a telephoned from the 
intelligence services in the weeks that followed 9/11. 
They were told that if they had any psychic visions of 
future terrorist attacks they shouldn’t hesitate to inform 
the authorities. 
And they did, in their droves. Ed Dames had a terrible 
vision of al-Qaeda sailing a boat full of explosives into a 
nuclear submarine in San Diego harbour. 
‘I knew bin Laden’s people were clever,’ Ed said to me 
of his vision, ‘but I hadn’t realized they were that clever.’ 
Ed reported his findings to the California Coastguard’s 
office. 
Uri Geller had his telephone call from Ron, but that is 
all I know about Uri and Ron. 
A number of second-generation remote viewers (psy- 
chic spies who learnt the trade from members of the 
Fort Meade unit and subsequently set up their own 
training schools) were also contacted by the intelligence 
communities post-9/11. One — a woman called Angela 
Thompson — had a vision of mushroom clouds over 
Denver, Seattle and Florida. I was present at a re- 
union convention of the former military psychics at a 
Doubletree Hotel in Austin, Texas, in the spring of 2002 
when Angela presented her mushroom-cloud findings. 
The conference room was full of retired psychic spies 
and intelligence officers. When Angela said ‘mushroom 
clouds over Denver, Seattle and Florida’, everybody in 
the room gasped. 
264

--- PAGE BREAK ---ference room was full of retired psychic spies 
and intelligence officers. When Angela said ‘mushroom 
clouds over Denver, Seattle and Florida’, everybody in 
the room gasped. 
264

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
Prudence Calabrese was in the room. All seemed to 
have been forgiven regarding the Heavens Gate mass 
suicides, because the FBI telephoned Prudence in late 
September 2001 and asked her to let them know as soon 
as she had any visions of future terrorist attacks. 
Prudence did indeed have a vision, she told me, a truly 
awful vision. She fedexed the details of her vision to the 
FBI. They thanked her and have been requesting more 
psychic information ever since, she said. 
‘What was the vision?’ I asked her. 
There was a short silence. 
‘Put it this way,’ she said. ‘London is an area of high 
concern. It’s certainly an area we’ve looked at and there’s 
reason to be concerned if you live in London.’ 
‘I live in London,’ I said. 
Prudence tried to change the subject, but I wouldn’t 
let her. 
‘When?’ I asked. 
‘2.30 in the morning!’ she snapped. Then she laughed 
and turned serious. ‘Really, we’re not at liberty to give 
any more information on this.’ 
‘Is there anything else you can tell me?’ I asked. 
‘We know enough to be certain that something is going 
to happen,’ she said, ‘and we know enough to know the 
general vicinity in which something will happen.’ 
‘A landmark?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah,’ said Prudence. 
‘A Houses of Parliament-type landmark?’ I asked. 
‘I’m not going to tell you,’ she said. 
‘Surely not Buckingham Palace,’ I said, shocked. 
265

--- PAGE BREAK ---?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah,’ said Prudence. 
‘A Houses of Parliament-type landmark?’ I asked. 
‘I’m not going to tell you,’ she said. 
‘Surely not Buckingham Palace,’ I said, shocked. 
265

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
It was at this point that my interrogation of Prudence 
finally cracked her. 
‘It’s London Zoo,’ she said. 
London Zoo was about to be hit by a dirty bomb, she 
said, one so powerful it would knock over the nearby 
BT Tower. 
‘How do you know this?’ I asked, visibly upset. 
‘The elephants,’ she said. 
The elephants were screaming in agony in her psychic 
vision, Prudence explained. The pain of the London Zoo 
elephants was the most intense and powerful image she 
had received. Prudence had gathered a team of fourteen 
psychic employees, based in Carlsbad, San Diego. All 
fourteen of them, she said, had felt the pain of the 
elephants. 
When I returned home to the UK I discovered to my 
relief that the London Zoo elephants had, some months 
prior to Prudence’s psychic vision, all been moved to the 
Whipsnade Wild Animal Park, in rural Bedfordshire, 
about thirty miles north of London. How could the 
elephants be collateral damage in a London Zoo dirty 
bomb if there weren’t any elephants left at London Zoo? 
I have wondered whether John Ashcroft’s Office of 
Homeland Security has ever issued a non-specific warn- 
ing of a future terrorist attack based on intelligence 
provided by a psychic. I spent a few weeks trying to find 
out whether they had, but my calls got me nowhere and 
I gave up and the psychics drifted from my mind. 
266

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntelligence 
provided by a psychic. I spent a few weeks trying to find 
out whether they had, but my calls got me nowhere and 
I gave up and the psychics drifted from my mind. 
266

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
I hadn’t spent much time thinking about the psychics 
until I received the telephone call out of the blue and the 
man on the other end said he had a secret to reveal as 
long as I promised to protect his identity. 
‘Okay,’ I said. 
‘Do you know about remote viewing?” he said. 
‘The psychic spies?’ I asked. 
‘Yeah,’ he said. ‘There’s a Jot of interest in it again.’ 
‘I know that,’ I said. 
I told him about Ed and Angela and Prudence and Uri 
and the mysterious Ron. 
‘I don’t suppose you know who Ron is?’ I asked him. 
Tm not talking about those remote viewers,’ he said. 
‘They’ve got some new guys in, and they’re using remote 
viewing in a very different way.’ 
‘Mmm?’ I said. 
‘They’re taking remote viewing out of the office,’ he 
said. 
‘T’m sorry?’ I said. 
‘They’re taking remote viewing out — of — the - office.’ 
‘Okay, thanks,’ I said. 
I had no idea what he was telling me but it didn’t 
sound like a particularly good secret. 
‘Do you understand?’ he said, exasperated. ‘Remote 
viewing is no longer office based.’ 
‘Uh,’ I said. 
I think he was beginning to suspect he had picked the 
wrong journalist to reveal his secret to. 
‘’m sorry that I’m not savvy enough to understand 
what you are cryptically telling me,’ I said. 
267

--- PAGE BREAK ---nning to suspect he had picked the 
wrong journalist to reveal his secret to. 
‘’m sorry that I’m not savvy enough to understand 
what you are cryptically telling me,’ I said. 
267

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘What do you know about the history of remote 
viewing?’ he asked, slowly. 
‘I know it was office based,’ I said. 
‘That’s right,’ he said. 
‘And it is no longer so?’ I said, my eyes narrowing. 
‘Oh, for fuck’s sake,’ he said. ‘If it’s no longer office 
based then...’ 
He paused. He had two choices. He could either 
continue to reveal the secret enigmatically — which was a 
method that was clearly annoying both of us a little — or 
he could just come right out and tell me. And so he did. 
‘Psychic assassins,’ he announced. ‘Cool, eh? They’re 
teaching the Special Op assassins, the Fort Bragg guys 
who go out into the field to track down and assassinate 
terrorists, how to be psychic. They used to rely on hard 
intelligence, but things are changing. Intelligence is so 
often flawed. So instead they’re going back to the power 
of the mind.’ 
‘How does it work?’ I asked. 
‘We drop a Special Op guy in a jungle or a desert or 
at a border,’ he said. ‘We know the target is a few miles 
away but we don’t know exactly where. What do we 
do? Wait for the spy planes? Wait for an interrogator to 
crack a prisoner? Sure, we do these things, but now we 
can augment all that with the power of the mind.’ 
‘So the assassins,’ I said, ‘while waiting for hard 
intelligence, psychically envisage the location of their 
targets and start tracking straight away?’ 
‘Sure,’ he said. “The mind is making a very big come- 
back down at Fort Bragg.’ 
268

--- PAGE BREAK ---gence, psychically envisage the location of their 
targets and start tracking straight away?’ 
‘Sure,’ he said. “The mind is making a very big come- 
back down at Fort Bragg.’ 
268

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
15 JULY 2004 
I hear from Guy Savelli. He sounds excited and I assume 
there has finally been some movement on his looming al- 
Qaeda paranormal sting operation. The last time I spoke 
to Guy he was being deluged with calls from young 
martial arts enthusiasts based in axis of evil countries 
who wanted to learn how to kill goats just by staring at 
them. Ever since then Guy has been waiting for the go- 
ahead to start teaching the terrorists the stare while 
acting as a spy on behalf of the intelligence services, but 
it is yet to come. 
I assume he is calling to tell me the latest news on this, 
but, he says, something else, something incredible, has 
happened. He has received a telephone call from Fort 
Bragg. Can he get down there ‘right away’ to demon- 
strate his powers to a new commanding general who 
‘sees the spiritual side’? 
‘I’m going this weekend,’ he says. 
‘Are you taking an animal with you?’ I ask. 
‘Yeah,’ he says. ‘They want me to bring an animal.’ 
‘A goat?’ I ask. 
‘My resources are limited,’ says Guy. 
‘A hamster?’ I ask. 
‘All I can tell you,’ said Guy, ‘is that there will be 
some kind of animal involvement.’ 
‘Are we talking about a small animal, cheap to pur- 
chase?’ I ask. 
‘Correct,’ confirms Guy. 
269

--- PAGE BREAK ---n tell you,’ said Guy, ‘is that there will be 
some kind of animal involvement.’ 
‘Are we talking about a small animal, cheap to pur- 
chase?’ I ask. 
‘Correct,’ confirms Guy. 
269

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘A hamster,’ I say. 
A silence. 
‘Yes,’ says Guy. ‘I am taking a hamster out there and 
I’m going to blow their minds with it.’ 
I hear Guy’s wife say something to him on the other 
end of the phone. 
‘That’s them on the other line now,’ says Guy, 
urgently. ‘Pll call you back.’ 
‘Guy!’ I shout after him. ‘Ask them if I can come 
too!’ 
19 JULY 2004 
I haven’t heard from Guy in four days. I email him to 
ask if there has been any movement and he finally calls 
back. 
‘Everything seems to be coming together,’ he says. 
‘Have you been to Fort Bragg with a hamster yet?’ 
‘It’s more than that,’ says Guy. ‘They’re trying to get 
— 
what I’m doing classified. They’re trying to get me into a 
deeper military position.’ 
‘What do you mean?’ I ask. 
‘They want me to actually go with them some places. 
Some Middle-Eastern places.’ 
I ask Guy to tell me more, and he does. 
After Jim Channon produced his First Earth Battalion 
Operations Manual his commanders invited him to create 
a real-life Warrior Monk unit, travelling the world with 
their supernatural powers. As I have explained earlier, 
270

--- PAGE BREAK ---lion 
Operations Manual his commanders invited him to create 
a real-life Warrior Monk unit, travelling the world with 
their supernatural powers. As I have explained earlier, 
270

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
Jim turned the offer down because he was rational 
enough to realize that walking through walls, and so 
on, were good ideas on paper, but weren’t, necessarily, 
achievable skills in real life. 
But now, Guy says, this is exactly what they want him 
to do. They want him to lead a Warrior Monk unit into 
Iraq. 
. 
‘What sort of powers will you be equipped with?’ I 
ask. 
‘Hopefully quite a few,’ says Guy, ‘because we’ll have 
to go in without weapons.’ 
‘Why?’ I ask. 
‘Because it’s the peaceful and gentle way,’ says Guy. 
‘These are good, kind men. They know they’ve been 
doing it all wrong in Irag. Remember: the guys in the 
Abu Ghraib photographs trained at Fort Bragg. And they 
screwed up big. They know this crap can’t go on any 
more. So now they’ve asked me to come down.’ 
‘And teach them how to stare people to death?’ I ask. 
‘No,’ says Guy. ‘This is different now. This is such a 
revolutionary idea, it’ll change the way they treat those 
prisoners. Think of what you can do just by staring. You 
can confuse people to the point where they don’t know 
what the hell they’re looking at, and they’ll give you all 
sorts of information.’ 
Guy says he hasn’t yet told Special Forces that he’s 
keeping me informed of all developments. 
‘Won’t they be furious?’ I ask him. 
‘Nah,’ says Guy. ‘This is the kind and the gentle way. 
They’ll want people to know about this.’ 
27%

--- PAGE BREAK ---keeping me informed of all developments. 
‘Won’t they be furious?’ I ask him. 
‘Nah,’ says Guy. ‘This is the kind and the gentle way. 
They’ll want people to know about this.’ 
27%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MEN WHO STARE AT GOATS 
‘Next time you go to Fort Bragg with a hamster,’ I 
say, ‘can I come?’ 
Tl ask them,’ says Guy, ‘when the time is right.’ 
23 JULY 2004 
Guy calls. He has been to Fort Bragg with a hamster. 
Tl tell you, Jon,’ he says. “The Special Forces guys 
came into the meeting in a pretty hostile frame of mind 
and they left like little kids. They’re frustrated. They’re 
afraid. They know they’re senselessly screwing up in 
Iraq. And they know that their only alternative is me. 
Thought projection is really sinking in with these guys. 
They definitely, one hundred per cent, want to go back 
to the old ways.’ 
‘So you’re going to Iraq?’ I ask. 
‘Looks that way,’ says Guy. 
‘When?’ I ask. 
. 
‘We have a limited time before we leave,’ says Guy. 
‘Have you told them yet that you’re telling me every- 
thing?’ I ask. 
‘Nah,’ says Guy. ‘But they’ll be fine with it. ’'m sure 
you'll be able to come with me next time. It'll be great 
PR for them. And there’s another reason why I know 
they'll want you on board. If the enemy knows we have 
this power it'll scare the shit out of them.’ 
Guy pauses. 
‘T’m going to tell them all about you tomorrow,’ he 
says. 
272:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Exit 
28 JULY 2004 
I phone Guy Savelli repeatedly today, as I have done all 
week, but still to no avail. He doesn’t call me back. 
29 JULY 2004 
I leave more messages on Guy’s answerphone. Can he 
just let me know if he has told them about me, and if so, 
what was their reaction? 
I don’t hear from Guy. 
I presume the news went down badly. 
273

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~*~ 
a 
© 
- 
a 
¢ 
D 
7 
1s 
4 
1% 
~~ 
7 
° 
S-=>5 
a> 
© 
ine wie. 
win dodanie 
ata 
fin 
s 
~ 
@ 
Li 
= 
a 
* 
> 
. 
a 
- 
- 
¥

--- PAGE BREAK ---news went down badly. 
273

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~*~ 
a 
© 
- 
a 
¢ 
D 
7 
1s 
4 
1% 
~~ 
7 
° 
S-=>5 
a> 
© 
ine wie. 
win dodanie 
ata 
fin 
s 
~ 
@ 
Li 
= 
a 
* 
> 
. 
a 
- 
- 
¥

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
I would like to thank everyone who allowed me to 
interview them for this story, especially Jim Channon, 
General Stubblebine, Guy Savelli and Eric Olson. I 
harassed Jim so frequently over the past two years — for 
facts, dates, copies of his manual, reminiscences, verifi- 
cations of names and places, and so on — that at one 
point he emailed me to say, exhaustedly: ‘Why do I feel 
like the copy boy on my own show?’ But he always 
provided the information I asked for. 
Jim allowed me to reproduce a drawing from the First 
Earth Battalion Operations Manual, and | thank him for 
that too. 
Although nothing much has been written before about 
the First Earth Battalion, Mind Wars by Ron McRae (St 
Martins’ Press, 1984) has a few useful pages on Jim, a 
paragraph or two of which I have appropriated. 
Thanks to Tony Frewin (of Lobster magazine and the 
Kubrick estate) for giving me his copy of Remote View- 
ers: The Secret History of America’s Psychic Spies by Jim 
Schnabel (Dell, 1997). This book gave me invaluable 
27.5

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd the 
Kubrick estate) for giving me his copy of Remote View- 
ers: The Secret History of America’s Psychic Spies by Jim 
Schnabel (Dell, 1997). This book gave me invaluable 
27.5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Acknowledgments and Bibliography 
background information for chapters 5 and 6, as did 
Francis Wheen’s How Mumbo-Jumbo Conquered the 
World (Fourth Estate, 2004), and my conversations with 
Skip Atwater and Joe McMoneagle, the two leading 
players in the Fort Meade psychic spying unit. 
Thanks to John Le Carré, who told me to read In The 
Time Of Tyrants: Panama: 1968-1990 by Richard M. 
Koster and Guillermo Sanchez (W. W. Norton & Com- 
pany, 1991). All anyone needs to know about Panama 
and military intelligence is contained within that book. 
Prudence 
Calabrese’s 
moving and funny memoir 
Intentions: The Intergalactic Bathroom Enlightenment 
- Guide (Imprint, 2002) helped me to re-tell the story of 
her roller-coaster adult life, and I recommend it. Well, 
the memoir parts I recommend unreservedly, the alien in 
the bathroom parts I recommend reservedly. 
Thanks to Kathryn Fitzgerald Shramek for allowing 
me to reproduce her late husband’s photograph of the 
Hale-Bopp comet and the ‘companion’ object. 
It was a pleasure to watch the brilliant documentaries 
Waco: Rules of Engagement and Waco: A New Revel- 
ation again. Thanks to the producer, Mike McNulty, for 
sending them to me. The excerpts from the FBI nego- 
tiation tapes I quote in chapter 12 are lifted from these 
superb films. 
I pieced together the story of Frank and Eric Olson 
primarily through my many conversations with Eric, but 
some 
paragraphs have been taken from his friend 
Michael Ignatieff’s New York Times article, ‘What Did 
276:

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd Eric Olson 
primarily through my many conversations with Eric, but 
some 
paragraphs have been taken from his friend 
Michael Ignatieff’s New York Times article, ‘What Did 
276:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Acknowledgments and Bibliography 
the C.LA. Do To Eric Olson’s Father?’ (x April 2001), 
‘The Sphinx and the Spy: The Clandestine World of John 
Mulholland’, by Michael Edwards (Genii, April 2001), 
and from Eric’s own painstakingly researched website, 
www.frankolsonproject.org. Ignatieff’s piece was par- 
ticularly helpful. 
Eric allowed me to reproduce two of his photographs, 
and I thank him for that. I have been unable to locate 
Ed Streeky, the copyright holder of the third photograph, 
the one that appeared in People magazine in 1975 and 
shows the family back at home after meeting President 
Ford. 
My information about Artichoke came from Martin 
A. Lee and Bruce Shlain’s Acid Dreams: The Complete 
Social History of LSD, the CIA, the Sixties and Beyond 
(Pan, 1985). 
Thanks also, as always, to Fenton Bailey, Rebecca 
Cotton, Lindy Taylor, Tanya Cohen and Moira Nobel 
at World of Wonder and the extremely patient Peter 
Dale at Channel 4. I couldn’t have asked for kinder 
supporters within the channel than Peter and Tim Gar- 
dam, the now retired director of programmes, and his 
successor, Kevin Lygo. 
Ursula Doyle, my editor at Picador in rea and 
Geoff Kloske, my editor at Simon & Schuster in New 
York were typically brilliant, as were Adam Humphries, 
Andrew Kidd, Camilla Elworthy, Stephanie Sweeney, 
Sarah Castleton and Richard Evans at Picador, and 
Derek Johns at A.P. Watt. 
277

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Acknowledgments and Bibliography 
Most of all I'd like to thank Andy Willsmore, David 
Barker and especially John Sergeant, to whom this book 
is dedicated. John’s research and guidance can be found 
in every page of this book.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

picador.com 
S 
blog 
videos 
Interviews 
extracts

--- PAGE BREAK ---ant, to whom this book 
is dedicated. John’s research and guidance can be found 
in every page of this book.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

picador.com 
S 
blog 
videos 
Interviews 
extracts

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EO 
aE 
—~—t 
THE SUNDAY TIMES NUMBER ONE BESTSELLER 
‘Not only a narcotic road trip through the wackier reaches of 
Bush’s war effort, but also an unmissable account of the 
insanity that has lately been done in our names’ 
OBSERVER 
In 1979 a secret unit was established by the most gifted minds 
within the US Army. Defying all known military practice - and 
indeed the laws of physics —- they believed that a soldier could 
adopt a cloak of invisibility, pass cleanly through walls, and, 
perhaps most chillingly, kill goats just by staring at them. 
They were the First Earth Battalion. And they really weren’t 
joking. What’s more, they’re back, and fighting George 
Bush’s War on Terror. Often funny, sometimes chilling and 
always thought-provoking, The Men Who Stare at Goats is 
a story so unbelievable it has to be true. 
‘Funny and gravely serious, what emerges is a world 
shrouded in secrecy, mystery and wackiness, where 
Warrior Monks and psychic spies battle it out for 
military thinking. Mind-blowing stuff 
METRO 
re 
PICADOR 
_ 
NON-FICTION 
_ Cover design © crushed.co.uk 
_ Author photo: Barney Poole 
' 
| 
| 
|