4/28/79
Dear "r.senk,
It surprisesme and takes me back what aoams like more than adecade when you aak me
ahout the John Joerg manuscript.I've never soen ft.I spent a few days with hin abcut
the cnd of June and baforo 7/1/68 when he was st ulane and had a hideauay on Robertson
Street in Hew Orlesns.I'vo not.eon hin since that general period of time.I do not
renenbar the address and I suppose the phone number (861-9648) is moaninglass now。
I balieve his home was at 4128 Perrier, 899-3096.
ha wao on the Bnylish or iterature faculty at Pulano, &s I recall.
I never saw hhe manuscript, only a few pagos he took up wath no whon he asked cy
permision to uoe ne aa a raal character in it.My recollection of the content is limited
to thia and that it involved the so-cakled training campo in tho l.0.area.
Ifyou've tried the college and the known addresses porhaps ouis Ivon might know
how to reach hin.Ivon kmew him,was Garrison's chief investigators,and hon 1 last hard
about hin was a Lioutonant on tho No PD,
If he is still in the NO area he'a have a phono.
fouoxA praBa z, oms us1 4ng 4T 2uzoo uy 4satoqur 4eats cu oatl 1 Aaco v qu nof J1
History Departnent,Univ.Wisconsin,Stevens oint,Wisco,54481,would like a copy for
his JFK aaueooination arohive
If he is not still in the No area try the Anor.Ason Vniv.Profs.
By the way, whon the FBi Atbe uses symbois like No T-1 that is a tenporary designation,
to hide tho ifentity of a source for a short p riod of time.Thero wero many,nany No T-1o
and it is like that each agent who had toaporary sources used this means cf hiding the
Sinceroly,
Barold Weiuberg
DW-asI rcmember itI was the hero of that novel!
Sok kmew nothing would come ot if!。
Before + moved in I knew Joerg had been an FBT intormant.
from his cench wife,woman he met as soldier。His lady friend was the fife of another
man。She threw me one helluva a fancy dinner one night,I recall that。
 1           S
wound up staying with arge Kirkpatrick who had a wonderful slave quartors 1,modernized,
on ackson Ave。 two blocks away from the snaking river and from St. Charles.Her son
killing Garrison, which made hin and Zton ry to talk me out of staying is those great and
seoarate quartersmarge offered me。
Whole period quite a story.Lost 15 lbs in two week,s too.
Jeff Meek at 2 337Deerfield Dr.,Bolingbrook,Ill。60439