Tao te Ching


Ay S


1


Translated with Commentary by
Julius Evola


BERSERKER


BOOKS


Index


I
The Book of the Way and Virtue
Introduction 27
First I ihro
According to I .ihro 55.
Appendix 69
11
The Book of Principle and its Action
—_Introduction tts)
Tao-té-ching 101
Bibliographic guide 201
203


Index of names and anonymous texts


I
THE BOOK OF THE WAY AND VIRTUE


Introduction


Lao-tze was born in the late 7th century B.C. in the village of Kio-gin of the kingdom of
Tzu to a peasant family. What is known for sure about his life boils down to very little:
namely, that he was a chronicler and archivist to the princely rulers of the Ceu dynasty; after a
time he gave up his post and retired to a lonely hut, which he left in his eighties to leave for the
West and never to be seen again. His real name was Li-pe-jang; he was called Lao-tze - or old
child - as a result of a legend that has him being born with white hair and eyelashes and with
the wisdom of an old man, after a pregnancy of eighty-one years; a legend that is significant in
relation to his doctrine in which all profound wisdom - as befits a mature thought of multiple
evolutions - is transfigured into the originality of the present consciousness, eternally young
and simple. Instead, the anecdote portraying Confucius' reencounter with Lao-tze (reported in
Co-hong's Si-sien-ciuen) is historical: Those tried to essay the philosopher of the Dao in the
manner of those insipid maxims of traditional morality-denying all personality, expressions of
the prudent and mediocre ethics of an already old-fashioned society automatically handing
down its own equilibrium-that constituted his sluggish doctrine; but he got such answers that,
referring to the conversation, he found no better way than to say: "Nets and hooks seize even
the nimblest fish of the dark waters, in snares fall the animals of the forest, even free birds are
reached by the arrow of the skilful hunter: but with what could we ever catch the dragon that
hovers in the ether, above the clouds?".

The only work left to us by Lao-tze is the Tao-teh-king (= Book of the Way and Virtue).
This small volume of aphorisms leaves us doubtful of any ideal finality of history: for through
it we must see the clear presence in a mind of 700 B.C. of the highest thoughts that speculation
has hitherto conquered. It is only to be deplored that little and inadequate consideration has
been given to this work by us moderns; perhaps this can be clarified by the fact that the
translations that have so far been made of it - beginning with the first, French, by S. Julien
(1842) - are exceedingly defective. E


27


This is not so much because of the radical difference between European (alphabetic) and
Chinese (hieroglyphic) languages, and because of the error only recently revealed by A. Ular
of giving the ancient signs of Lao-tze the meanings of present-day linguistic usage (1), as much
as due to the fact that orientalists in the main son mere scholars and grammarians, incapable of
thinking according to the philosophical concept, completely alien to that sense of the historicity
of the spirit which, by revealing the concrete essentials of even a distant personality, makes it
possible to obviate the inevitable difficulties inherent and accidental gaps and aporias of the
texts, and the categories that are imposed for a presentation in our language and present-day
European culture. This negative factor has a particular efficiency in the case of Lao- tze: whose
profound thought is expounded in his book only according to the most general and essential
conclusions in dry and bare formulas, with little trace of the process that generated them, not
always systematically connected, and moreover with a certain I would say almost deliberate
paradoxicality of form. Hence to the lazy spirit, accustomed to indulging without friction on
the rails of well-connected exposition, Tao-teh-king may well appear as a collection of oddities
and inconsistencies. This is also true of the Chinese; and if we consider that one of the main
foundations of all natural religion is a superstitious and mythical transmutation of that which
the intellect does not comprehend, we may understand how from Lao-tze's philosophy-so
intimately human and devoid of any nebulous transcendence-could come forth the Taoist
mythology that makes Lao-tze a God with the accompanying regulation of entities, devils and
wonders. Except that Daoism itself has accomplished its own dissolution, and beyond the ruin
of the religion-now the object only of irony by the Chinese educated classes-it has returned
Lao-tze's little book intact.

I precede the text with a systematic exposition in terms of modern thought of the
content of Tao-teh-king, developed with interpretation and rendered into action where it is
necessitated by the over-ellipticity of the form. This outline and the few notes, I believe, can
clearly highlight the speculative value of Lao-tze's doctrine.


The beginning (I) is metaphysical: it is the definition of the Dao or Way, which is the
essential mode of reality. Now metaphysics itself-as Kant will show-needs a demonstration
of its validity. "What is the foundation of principles?" asks Lao-tze (LIV): it is the I am
(XX): in the absolute knowing the human and the cosmic are one (XXL XXV) and the
basis of the thought-form is this form itself (LIV). By deepening my reality, abandoning the
ray and holding to the origin (XX XVIII) I am given to know (‘absolutely certain. He says,
"Without going out one can see, the Perfect comes without walking" (XLV1]); and to inner
knowing he contrasts the procedure of intellectual science (LXXI, LXXX1. LX1V) that
leads from conditioned to conditioned farther and farther (XLVIII) toward schlechte
Unendlichkeit


(1) A. Ular, Die liahn and del Rechte Weg des Lao-ize, Leipzig. 1921. p. 100 ff.


28


unveiled by Hegel, where the Way leads further and further back, until it leads all of reality
back to the center, in a circular recourse in which the gnoseological and the cosmic merge. In
fact, the starting point for everyone is the empirical man, which is not grounded in himself, but
rests on a series of conditions; if we turn to this and want to exhaust it, we see that it puts down
to that which is grounded in itself, that is, to the Way (XXV), to the I = I. to the inner man:
starting from man, in man toma therefore to converge the eternal circle of things. And so, in
this 7th century B.C. Chinese we find anticipated the cornerstones of German idealism. It is
therefore a matter of seeking our true humanity. Where? Lao-tze rejects the lazy pretense of a
sufficiency realizable in the categories of the merely human: perfection, fullness, the
knowledge of men - he says - remain irremediably imperfection, emptiness, stupidity (XLV);
art itself remains a motionless pawing (XLV), expresses man's aspiration to realize himself as
original and creative, but in fact does not move him forward one step: the Way that is the Way
is not the ordinary way (I).

However, the Perfect Earthly remains the ultimate goal of the universe (XLV). How then?
The fact is that we live in the prejudice that humanity is only that which is limited and common
in man, whereas it is precisely by denying that which is immediately human that humanity is
truly affirmed. Lao-tze states that to live outside life is to live more intimately than to live in
life (LXXV). Applying this principle to the understanding, it follows that it must be denied in
order for it to be truly understood (LXIV, XIV). For if we turn to the Tao, we see that our
habitual categories are incapable of grasping it: yet there is something in us that makes it
present to us in everything; a dialectic of meaning ensues whereby this is denied, extends to
nonmeaning, and adapts the undifferentiation of nonmeaning to the Tao (XIV). which therefore
can be understood as non-distinct, imperceptible and uncreated: essentially, as the form of
formlessness, the phenomenon of non-phenomenon.

Therefore, man must surpass himself, he must make himself Perfect, that is, "Absolute
Individual," for then he will find in himself the elements by which real knowledge can be
established; knowledge that will no longer be something extrinsic, as in the science of human
discursiveness, but will be life of Gnosis, for it will express nothing but the very consciousness
of the Perfect that is one with the root of all real.

Perfect, accomplished individual and Titus are terms that recur in Lao-tze with the same
attributes. For he says that mere knowledge of the Dao and its utilization is the proper of
inferior wisdom, that extrinsically adhering to the Way-that is, morality in accordance with
law-is the proper of unaccomplished wisdom; while it is only perfect wisdom to implement the
Way in itself (XLI).

That being the case, what is the metaphysics that the Perfect One discovers and justifies
with its own completeness? The central vision Lao-tze gives us of the world is a
phenomenalization of the One in an opposition of the nominable and the unnamable; the
universal-unnamable is contrasted with the particular and determi-


29


na with this as nominable becoming (I). Such opposition is only phenomenal, and its truth is
the Tao. unfathomable, real-irreal basis, which, as the principle of the possibility of the real
(IV), that is, of the opposition that develops the dialectic. becoming, as the principle and
antecedent of all determination remains in itself as the unconceivable (VI), the unconcrete, the
void (passim).

11 transcendental process unfolds thus: the Way specializes in the One which,
determining itself, creates the opposition, the dyad: from which, as its determination, proceeds
the synthesis, the triad: with which the law is fulfilled, and from the triad can proceed, by
successive determinations, the becoming, the multiple hovering around the center (XL1D.
Here, in the ellipticity of a few sentences, there is the whole outline of Hegel's Logic, and even
more; for in Hegel the idea, if it is in its immanent rationality, the light of each of its moments
is, however, conceived so connected with the various determinations that it leaves little
intelligible the internal possibility of itself if identified with its development. For - here I am
compelled only to hint - one cannot conceive how from position one passes to negation and
then how from the dissolution in itself of the antithesis a new term arises, unless one admits
that at every moment of the process there is a principle of general positivity by virtue of which
a new production flourishes together with and at the dissolution. This principle evidently
cannot resolve itself into absolute immanence in the individual terms, but must stand in
opposition to the principle of becoming in general: hence the immanent dialectic of becoming
cannot be conceived of as productive unless, at becoming itself, a principle is posited which
realizes with it a transcendental opposition on which rests the possibility of all the particular
oppositions which unfold the very course of becoming. And since all the real is summarized
and born only in becoming nor is it distinguished from it, the transcendental opposition will be
that between the unreal and the real, between the unnameable and the nameable as well as in
Lao-tze: and as in Lao-tze only in the unreal, in the emptiness that exists behind everything,
will stand the true foundation of everything (XXXVI), as in the emptiness of the hub stands the
essentiality of the wheel (XI). In short, in Lao-tze the mystical need is very clear to admit an
absolute spirit, irreducibly indeterminate per the infinity of its possibilities, at the spirit that.
determining itself, creates the world; a need this has not yet been felt in its logical and vital
necessity by modern thought, all concerned as it is to resolve the world in the empty
insufficiency of the merely speculative spirit.

Except that here a difficulty arises: is not this second term something transcendent, and is
it not then shown to be ignorant of the fact that all European speculation, from the Greeks
down to Hegel and Gentile, has had no other purpose than to bring truth, which for the ancients
fell outside things, into things themselves? But this difficulty is overcome in Lao-tze:
emptiness is not detached from fullness, the Tao is not outside of becoming, but in becoming
itself emptiness, the Tao itself does not exist without the full, the concrete. The climax of Taoi-
stic speculation is precisely this thought, that non-being, that is, the Tao. is nothing


30


without the being, the becoming; in the sense that the Tao is absolute act, so it is not if it does
not posit itself, but by posing itself it creates, that is, it passes into the concrete things, into the
other term that is so necessary for the reality of the first. But the fact is the opposite of the act;
the Tao therefore by posing itself denies itself, but also, since only the fact enacts, demonstrates
the act, by denying itself poses itself; from death life and from life death - Heraclitus will later
say in a formula that condenses the profound meaning of all mystical life. There is thus an
unconscionable, concrete duality, sufficient in itself. The beyond, says Lao-tze (XXXII),
imbues the terrestrial though man in this does not comprehend it; the infinitely distant is the
returning (XXV). Lao-tze thus remains as free from transcendence as any other ever was; but,
in fact, in this denial of transcendence lies the reversal of transcendence, for the transcendent is
falsehood if relegated to a fantastic background, it is truth instead if it lives in us as the intimate
principle of all certainty and development. Lao-tze has intuited this reciprocity of creation
whereby the finite is externalized, inasmuch as in itself it contains the very principle whereby
the divine, the Tao, is true; he says (LI1): knowing oneself as son (finite) means recognizing
the infinite (the mother), and this expresses denying oneself as finite, knowing oneself as life,
the continuation of the mother, that is, infinite. The belonging of finiteness only to the
phenomenon (I) and Tesser the reality the profound unity actualized through the duality of the
infinite act and the finite product, results in the Tao-teh-king also a posteriori, from the
analysis of the nameable; in fact, about becoming it is understood that its essence, its profound
truth is precisely the opposite, the eternally stable, and that beyond the dialectical movements
of ascent and descent it resolves itself into a circular recourse (XVI). The metaphysical
deduction of this truth is latent in various passages of Lao-tze and may sound, in short, as
follows: becoming is opposite to Dao, yet being produced by the latter, in this in a certain way
it must reconvert. However, one cannot speak of an absolute conversion, in which becoming is
identified with Dao, for then, as the opposition ceases, both terms would vanish into
nothingness. Therefore, becoming does not reconnect with the Dao and remains in itself
opposed to it; but at the same time it reconnects with it, inasmuch as becoming is realized
through a law that is like the moving image of the Dao. This law will be common to the two
opposites, just as the image is common to the projecting body and to the thing on which it is
projected: as belonging to the Dao is the immovable, the unnamable, as belonging also to
becoming is the shifting immovable, that is, the cyclic course. Thus it is made explicit how the
unnameable is contained in the nameable through the cyclic law that is called in the text (XXI)
the phenomenal form, the way of the Way: the Dao of the Dao (XL). This same theory,
developed yes but in nothing altered in its essence, we will find in the Neo-Platonists (in
Proclus especially), Scotus Eriugena, in Eckhart, in the Christian doctrine of the eternal origin
of time of which there is a trace as early as Augustine and on to Schelling and Hegel.

A further determination of Dao is fundamental in Lao-tze, and that is the character of non-
acting. This may seem a paradox: and indeed to the naive and unphilosophical consciousness it
cannot appear but strange that at the principle of everything, which here moreover is
immanentistically understood as an act, should


31


agree with the predicate of non-acting, - accustomed as she is. to the purely anthropomorphic
conception of the theistic God as infinite power. In fact among the ancients non-being and
absolute passivity were rather ascribed to matter, to iAr): but if we consider that for Platonic
consciousness God is something external to thought, thus itself a thing, it is already to be
supposed that more than in the noetic empyrean the determination of the divine in-self was to
fall into the intuition of pure matter. Later with the Neo-Platonists up to Christian mysticism
(Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, Scotus, etc.) a reversal was accomplished, and non-being
was adapted to the to Ev. to the inaccessible and tenebrous principle of emanationism and
theophanies: but in an entirely extrinsic manner, that is, only in relation to the intellectual
faculties which not even in their highest category - that of being - could comprehend the divine.
Senonché for a theory of immanence that absolute not for us (KaT'aviipcoTtov), but in itself
(KaT'E*oxqv) must result as non-being.

Lao-tze's concept is thus that the first principle in itself is non-being, non-acting, non-
wanting, since all that is being, acting and wanting already belongs to the sphere of creation, in
which the creator is in fact dead, overcome in things; it belongs to the creating activity that has
already immersed itself in becoming - indeed it is itself becoming - not to the creator, which in
itself remains null, incoherent, non-acting: like a bellows that though creating inexhaustibly in
itself remains empty (IV. V, XXXIV, XXXVI etc.). Hence, he calls the Tao eternal matrix of
everything and yet eternally without essence, mother and not mistress and therefore great and
omnipotent (XXXIV), whose mode of action is not doing or willing, but abandoning (XL);
finally, the Tao directs and does not possess, acts without remaining agent, has and is not lord
(LI); he does not know love (V), since its product is his own essence which he detaches from
himself in order to realize himself infinitely; only by disappearing does he reveal himself; it is
by exhausting himself that he attains absolute being (VII), since one cannot possess by
retaining (IX) - in fact, by retaining, one fixes the self in the thing retained, one is but does not
have oneself in the absolute originality of freedom (and in this regard it is said that avarice,
understood in the metaphysical sense of empty permanence in oneself, of being rather than
creating since creating is surrendering oneself into something else, that is, negation of avarice -
is guilt). Similarly, neither can it be sharpened if one touches (IX), i.e., if one partakes with
passion in the thing, because - likewise - passion, complacency for the thing, binds the creator
to its product and thus prevents him from being self; instead, one must live by keeping oneself
in the nothingness of the act, pure from the action and doing that proceeds from it (IX).

I believe that this is one of the highest peaks that human thought has conquered. Here the
profound meaning of the doctrine of divine sacrifice, called the folly of the cross, is also
revealed to us. There is no more universal myth in the history of religions than this one: from
the Mexican Quetzalcaatl to the Egyptian Osiris quartered by Typhon-Set, from the Indians
Parusha and Crishna to the Babylonian Bel- Merodac of whose blood men were made, from the
Greek god immediately devoured (rtproioTOVOC) of Oxirincus mythology to the mystical
figure resolved on Golgotha into ineffable light, we see transmuted in time and space


32


the same theme, of alienation, of the death of the L'no in the birth of the world. And the
consensus gentium - whose importance Cicero elevated to the point of proof of the truth of the
God - on that occasion so strongly realized, should well have drawn the philosopher's attention,
and incited him to elevate to clear logical consciousness what was poetically thought of in that
myth; which, on the other hand - if we exclude the Hegelian attempt in regard to Christian
dogma - is still taken in its naivete, so that it is either relegated among the fantasies of primitive
peoples, or is misunderstood according to the mere letter. Now, the deep meaning of sacrifice is
that by it the divine essence is realized and, on the other hand, the world itself. God would not
be if he did not sacrifice himself, if he did not produce and in himself remain nothing, if he did
not depart with creation from himself. It is one and the same act therefore that gives reality and
to the world and to God: since, as Lao-tze puts it (XX XIX). the other rests on the low, the Tao
that is absolute only in itself is pure act, that is, non-being, is conditioned by being, that is, by
the placing of things, in which it annihilates itself and by annihilating itself is, as Tao. The
Gospel will later configure this wisdom in the symbolic episode of Christ washing the feet of
his disciples.

But then sacrifice is but the mediator of supreme egoism, alienating oneself in others is
but realizing oneself as an individual. The spirit of the myth thus contradicts the letter, and in
Tao-teh-king it will be possible to say that only by being inegoist one is an individual, that is,
selfish (VII, XIX). From which it also follows that vulgar egoism marks only a naive and
contradictory stage of individuality; as a selfish, I shall say so, empirical self, the self in fact
excludes the possibility of being truly, profoundly selfish; whereas only if he sacrifices himself.
if he yields (LXXXIII), if he abandons himself - if he denies, in short, egoism - can he be
selfish in the most to the power and realize himself as absolute individuality. Consequently, in
Lao-tze the inegoism of the Dao - creator and yet eternally empty, giver of reality and yet not
lord - is contrasted with the human who proceeds only outwardly, never affects the essence -
the real self - remains in self and thus has no self. The inexhaustible creation in words (V)
masks the evil egoism, which has immanent its own critique and dissolution: for since one has
sacrificed oneself only outwardly, what is correlatively realized is a superficial, discursive self,
and beyond it remains the inner darkness of the real self which, locked in its avarice, deludes
itself into being but in fact is not. While the absence of the inner self, non-egoism, resolves
itself into perfection, it is only thus that one is truly an individual and lord of the self (XV).
Five centuries later the Gospel will say, "He who loves his life will lose it, and he who loses it
will have eternal life in the kingdom of heaven." But how different in the presentation of the
two doctrines! In the Chinese everything is placed sharply, logically in its truth, in the calmness
and transparency of a thought that knows no contamination of sentiment: in that clarity the
maxim appears directly- minded in its inner sense, cold, shining, not invoking faith but
expressing the inexorable logic that conditions divine selfishness, the original model of every
individuality, the purpose of the universe (XLV). In orthodox morality, on the other hand, the
profound wisdom of the law is depotentiated, reduced to a merely human precept, a true
exoteric caput mortuum in itself, not only incomprehens-


33


sible, but
attesting to the
sense of
individuality
that is in us as
our best
nobility, and to
which that
maxim-if
properly
understood-
points instead
to
development
to the point of
deification.


These are the cornerstones of Taoist metaphysics. But-we have said-in this system
speculation has value only if it is justified by a real process of modification whereby man
achieves perfection, and he himself experiences-as his own life-the divine rhythm of the Tao.
Thus, closely connected to the doctrine of the Way, we have a doctrine of virtue, of Teli,
outlining the methodology of perfection (2). In principle, the doctrine of Teli tends to move
man from phenomenal consciousness, from life in the fact-from the state, in short, of being a
creature in which he lives in perpetual forgetfulness of himself, in a true living death-to present
consciousness, to the original source of the real, which is not outside him, but is his own
intimacy. A caveat must be made here. The act, it has been said, is the Dao, which in itself is
non-esse- re: one might therefore think that Daoist morality has for its end the total erasure in
consciousness of all concrete determination: and there has been no lack of well-meaning
Orientalists who have tried to make a poorly understood Buddha digest Lao-tze's morality.
Now, this is called equivocating in the most deplorable way the Chinese philosopher, and
mainly making abstraction of the metaphysical presuppositions of Lao-tze's ethics, whereby the
latter speculatively indeed rises to a far greater height than Sakia Muni; so much so that the
Buddhist teaching, at least in its ordinary exoteric-Western presentation, could be taken as a
mere moment of the morality of the Dao. Indeed, I hope I have highlighted that the culmination
of Daoist theodicy is the conception of a logic of the Divine, whereby the Divine realizes its
absoluteness only by denying itself-that is, by creating, by positing the world as real. To deny
the concrete world would therefore be to deny God, and this is absurd and contradictory. Nor is
the compromise of Vedanta and neo-Platonic philosophy worthwhile, which, while retaining
creation, wants to transmute it along the increasingly abstract scale of essences of
emanationism: for the world in so far as it is concrete and rotttXoxnq will be able to volatilize
it into a KOapoq voqr6q but not make it be what in essence it is not, that is, something outside
of creation. Lao-tze's morality, consistent with its metaphysical premises, does not at all tend
toward a "negation" of the world, much less a sublimation of it: the world, he says, is to be left
as it is, in its full normalcy; the work is to be centered on another plane, interpenetrated yes, but
yet essentially distinct from the first (LXV).

Here Lao-tze unfolds another profound doctrine: man ordinarily lives only in the product,


34


to be the center, so the life force is not closed in itself, but dispersed, prostituted in a purely
human consciousness and utilization. This dispersion realizes the excess of our life, with its
empty splendors, an excess that is deeply desired by Lao-tze (HIM) as a theft on the one hand, as
an ambitious conceit on the other: theft, because in this way we remove our power from the
center and with it realize ourselves instead as a personality made up of will, of practical actions,
of passions; conceit, because we think to enforce this obscure product in which our nobility as
individuality, as lo, as the true self, has been used and made to decay. Instead, we need to detach
ourselves from the world by letting it subsist indifferently (LIX), to concentrate, to enclose
instead within ourselves -- within it, I would say almost in depth -- all that there is of originality
in the human being, in order to realize ourselves as avtfptottoq'appqTogq, as absolute actuality, as
the nothingness imbibing the world and thus establish in us the duality of the divine formula.

Outwardly, therefore, it is necessary to identify oneself with the ordinary, such is the depth
(LXX): even better, to be adequate to everything (Vili), to all assent, no effort, for to strive to
stand on tiptoe is an illusion of rising, and he who possesses the Way is far from such decadence
(XXIV); he who stands in the light remains in the dark (XXIV), blunt instead the sharp, soften
the dazzling (IV). All faculties proceed according to the earthly demands of the various domains
(Vili): full automatism (LV, X), being of mourning in the ordinary, this is required to depart
from the ordinary. Grief and death are the profound warning to those who delude themselves
that they can overcome themselves by standing out, by opposing fact as fact (i.e., to overcome
humanity as man) and not as act, but adaptation resolves it (Vili). Letting go: letting go testifies
deep root, strong trunk, path to immortal power (LIX). Greatness is nothing but letting go (LX1).
And, at the deepest possession, wanting without wanting to want, acting without wanting to act,
feeling without wanting to feel (LXIII, LX XVID); thus one is above all influence and struggle
(passim), like water, the Perfect One is indomitable and invulnerable because he adapts himself
to everything (VII, LXXVI, LXXV1ID); he, in order to place himself at the apex, veils, eclipses,
his lo (LXV1, LXXVID; outside mediocre, inside great (LXX): acquiring without conquering,
possessing without taking, progressing without advancing (LXIX), to be understood as
progressing in depth and not in extension. Indeed, all acting according to the Dao is acting
without force or domination (XXX); in fact good imprisoner has no need to enclose. good ruler
has no need to rule (XXV11). Naiveté will be the veil of perfection (XVIII), the Perfect One
knows himself to be enlightened, strong and great and yet shows himself to be dark, weak and
small (XVIII): but he, retracting himself into the impenetrable depths, reaches the essential
element and makes himself elusive, inexhaustible, never reducible to powerlessness; while he
appears flexible, never recurring to rejection and opposition (XVIII). Thus he is sweet and
strong lord (XXV1I1).

11 Perfect is far from connecting any desire or complacency to power: it is not attracted by
it, it avoids its splendor, it does not there


35


aspires (XXIX); he, simply, is, without his being being based on the action or needs of force
(XXX), will or those other forms of self-persuasion on which the false and empty human
personality feeds.

Such a norm is profound: the empirical individual ordinarily places himself in the same
plane as the fact; but since the fact is himself, if the powers of the act are applied to that plane,
nothing but hysteria can come forth, and the "I" which here attempts to overcome the fact,
insofar as in the sphere of the fact it carries the conflict, is in this irretrievably chained. Only
when the individual adapts itself to the given, to the worlds, does the sterile opposition in
extension cease, the force that is now free can instead move in depth, and the ego is liberated
because it goes to possess itself in the act. It is necessary, therefore," says Lao-tze, "to move
from fullness to emptiness where the essentiality of fullness consists and converges; it is also
said that the passion of life leads to death, for the love of living enchains, thus kills, prevents that
possession of the origin whereby the Perfect One, while living, stands so far above life that
neither rhinoceros horn nor enemy's sword would know where to strike it (L). The hysteria
shown above is enacted as an enhancement of the given or ungiven, which, however, engenders
in it nothing but decadence and corruption (L, III, XII). While the Perfect One does not lose the
self in the non-self, he subtracts himself from it, can thus consist in the self and thus truly gain
the non-self (XID); consequently he instead of gathering, abandons his riches, and thus is realized
in the center (LXXX1). Spontaneity and selflessness are thus the phenomenon of the Perfect
One, who realizes his absence from the "I," and thus veils absolute immovable individuality
(XIX). Hence arises the sense of the grandmother of adequacy, which also sounds: to be all in
the fragment, straight in the curved, full in the void (XXID; for by abandoning through non-act
the fact and instead shifting the I to the act - which is in itself one and absolute - the whole
individuality remains intangible in its straightness behind every thing, however transient and
finite it may be.

And at such conceptions Lao-tze thus draws his Perfect: he appears, impenetrable in his
loftiness (XX), a beguiler of sound human reason (LX1V), at society beyond glory and shame,
beyond honor and contempt (LVI), for he who conceives the Dao has no pious duties (XXXV)
and the esteem of men has no place at his freedom. He appears obscure (XV). idiot, clumsy,
without purpose or desire (XIX. XX), wandering stranger who assists (XXXV), in himself
devoid of all love (V), locked up in his lonely summit (XX): sufficient to himself (LXXI1).
straight but flexible, clear but without splendor (LVIII). In its height it does not even know of
itself (111), yet it confounds those who know (III). The turbid river of passion passes over him
without moving him, for that river is himself according to his wandering and rolling humanity
without ceasing (XX). Beyond letting go, contracted in himself, he becomes center (XXII);
concentrated, he achieves himself, (XXII); different from all, alone among all he is a lo (XX).

At these general maxims, we find in Tao-teh-king important methodological details: it is,
for example, acknowledged the absolute power of faith in the phrase: "believe not, and that shall
not be" (LXXII); but on the other hand


36


knowledge is understood as capable of a real modification of consciousness; whence it is said
that he who penetrates the immutable to which the disrupted becoming is veiled, recognizes the
Tao and such knowledge is worth drawing him into solitude or oneness, making him Master,
placing him in the omnipresent way, in the motionless center of the act (XVI).

Lao-tze also preempts that false interpretation of his doctrine, whereby it
should be believed that by surrendering oneself, by not wanting in one's empiricity.
one should expect to see perfection fall from heaven, without any effort or merit
(LXX, LXXXIII); and he distinguishes a propaedeutic stage of approximation to
Virtue in which action must well be willed, and one is indeed aimed at acquiring
power, however without purpose, taking care not to use it, watching over the
threshold (XXXVI11, LXXX), from Virtue proper in which non-willing action and
non-willfulness of action dominates (XX XVIII). Concerning propaedeutics, since it is
a self-evident absurdity to will the Way (XXXV11D) - in fact, by doing so one would
only exclude oneself from the Way, in the Way being only when all willing ceases
and one avoids all that becomes concrete only through willing - all our willed work
must be aimed only at detaching oneself from the human center of consciousness.
Which is achieved through internal indifference (LXXIX), leveling everything,
however without struggle (LXXXIJ); for all struggle, as we have seen, only
demonstrates the importance, the reality of the thing being fought and subordinates to
it indeed the energy we steal from ourselves under the illusion that we can bring it
down. Instead, a subtle, effortless action is pointed out - for this measuring with our
own humanity: it is, again, the action of water: there is in the world - he notes
(LXXVIII) - nothing weaker and more docile than water, and yet, at the same time,
there is also nothing more powerful and infallible than it in vanquishing the rigid and
the strong. 11 value of such an attitude is found in our day recognized by the
psychology of the subconscious, which shows how the "law of converted effort"
renders sterile, indeed negative, all direct and voluntary action in the life of
consciousness. - A particular maxim is that of the soul's dominion over the senses (X)
aimed at establishing a constant parallelism, a full adequacy between the two.
whereby, since it is no longer possible to be interested in the senses as a what outside
oneself. to which one goes to chain oneself neck exploiting them, or even seconding
them, indifference, automatism, is also psychologically realized.

The secret of initiation into the Dao lies, therefore, in realizing such an attitude
that we can act on things without things being able to act on us (3), placing ourselves
beyond that reciprocity inevitable in all human acting-mentioned in the Hermetic
Books (4)-whereby the agent, precisely because of his acting, is as passive as the
acted upon.


(3) It is the theoretical premise of what 40 years later will be more precisely formulated in Riding the
Tiger (1961), as a method for suppressing an "age of dissolution," a contemporary version of the Kali-yttga. of
which Evola will speak in The Man as Power (1926) and The Rouse of Power (1949) (Ed.)

(4) Trad. Ménard, p. 80.


37


It is a difficult thing to exaggerate the value of Lao-tze's doctrines, in which
the divine is resolved into the human in a purity and simplicity of which we are
rarely given to observe the equal. Having ripped open the mass of the opaque
clouds of anguish. of doubt and passion of our outer humanity, he fixes in a cold
and calm atmosphere with a few strokes the anatomy, the inner logic of the divine,
reveals it as the very rationality of the real, and thus makes it true in spirit by
identifying it with the very nature of man as an Absolute Individual, as Perfect,
every following religion or philosophy far from surpassing his positions, has seldom
been able to possess them in that clear and pure nakedness in which they lived in
the mind of the great Chinese. On the contrary, most religions and morals have
succeeded only in insulting man, for they have treated him as what he is not, as a
creature, and have endeavored to humiliate his nobility in an ever-increasing
ingrandizement in the sphere of the human, of the effect. Beyond them there remain
in history only the scattered and uncertain fires of various mysticisms. However, all
this is now inadequate for the modern consciousness, which has begun to realize the
sense of the absolute reality and solitude of the person. Senonché price of such a
conquest has been everything that previously formed his life and faith: his illusion.
Hence man appears today a castaway clinging to that "I" which he does not yet
know how to comprehend without tainting, but which he nevertheless intuits as his
only certainty; without religion nor faith nor enthusiasm, between a science that in
itself breaks down and a philosophy exasperated in a formal and empty sufficiency;
thirsting for freedom and yet stiffened in the contrast with a nature, a society and a
culture in which he now no longer recognizes himself.

At such a state of affairs, I feel the absolute relevance of Lao-tze's theories (5).
Modern man has yet to learn that "I" which still knows only to babble in those
deformed images that are Stirner's V Unico or the Man of Marx and Lenin's social
ideologies, the absolute ITo of idealism or the lyrical subject of avant-garde
aesthetics. Now it can be said that all of Lao-tze's work converges in a single
interest: the Absolute Individual, the Perfect. It is for it that he - sensing the truth of
the Tiibingen school, that in God man projects that absolute which he does not yet
dare to attribute to himself - has cleansed the divine from the mists of transcendence
and the lees of sentiment, analyzed its rhythm and drawn from it a morality by
which the individual can possess creation in its deepest root and realize the
grandeur of his nature. Of course, Taoist ethics is very dangerous: but there are
parts-


(5) It can be noted in passing here how of Lao-tze's theories are revealed as the metaphysical
presuppositions-sometimes even conscious-of the strangest and most significant fruit of today's European
culture, Dadaism.

[References to Lao-tze in the context of Dadaism can be found in Evola in one of his letters to Tzara
in 1923 (see Julius Evola's Letters to Tristan Tzara. J. Evola Foundation, Rome. 1991. pp. 53-54) c in the
essays On Dadaism of 1923 and On the Meaning of Very Modern Art of 1925 (see both in: Julius Evola.
Writings on avant-garde art, edited by Elisabetta Valente, J. Evola Foundation. Rome. 1994. pp. 45-51 and
57-73) (Ed.)I


38


te in which one must play all one's cards, in which man must know how to lead his
will on a razor's edge: and it is in those alone that we can understand whether we
are or whether we are not, whether there is a light or whether a gloomy atteiptov is


the essence of creation.


In this version of Tao-teh-king of mine, I have kept in mind the earlier German
version by Planckner and Uiar, the French by Julien, the English by Legge, and the
Italian by Evans. Let my gratitude then be expressed here to Mr. He-sing for the
discussion of the Chinese original.

The informing principle of the translation has been the constant elevation to
the form of the concept-at the working hypothesis of the coherence of Tao-teh-king
thought-that content which in Lao-tze. because of the structure of Chinese writing
where every idea can only be expressed in direct or indirect reference to a sensible
image, is found in symbolic and metaphorical species. The goodness of such a
criterion seems to me to be proved even in retrospect by this, that by it the great part
of those indeterminacies and absurdities which, if they could appear as a merit to the
empty reverie of poetic consciousness, were, however, worth excluding Tao-teh-king
from the serious consideration of the scholar of philosophy; to which we here intend
to address ourselves.

J. EVOLA


Assisi, September 1922


39


FIRST BOOK


The Way of Ways (1 )is not the ordinary way; the Name of Names is not the ordinary
name.

Undetermined, unnameable, it appears as the universal essence; nameable,
concrete, it appears as the becoming of the individual.

However: those who detach themselves, those who contemplate from afar can see
where it is murky mist for those who with their passion participate in things (2).

Now the Way is one beyond the opposition (3) that implements its phenomenon:
fundamental essentiality, it is the unfathomable, the unfathomable basis that
appears beyond the pan of the ultimate mystery.


Human consciousness, positing the beautiful, necessarily created along with it the ugly: defining
the good, it gave in one necessarily reality to evil as well (4).

Being and non-being thus arise from each other from the differentiation of essence; possible and
impossible from the differentiation of sensory experience; large and small from the
differentiation of space; high and low from the differentiation in direction; articulate sound
and


(1) ) That which implements and grounds the laws of man and the world. Way (= Tao) will henceforth be valid to mean
the essential law of reality.

(2) That is to say, the possibility is preached in man, of disentangling himself from the phenomenal opposition in
which he is determinalo as a becoming individual, when with indifference he distances things from himself.

(3) Of nameable and unnameable = individual and universal.

(4) This is the same theme stated by St. Paul in saying that with the law comes sin.


a1


Noise from the differentiation of sound; antecedent and consequent from the
differentiation of continuity.
Thus:
The Perfect One lives without purpose, directs without ordering, acts without
impulse, creates without giving form, conceives unselfishly, accomplishes
without acting (5). Essentially:
It is outside the differentiation of human consciousness the source of the original
force.


Thi


Over-enhancement breeds strife (6); over-valuing the rare breeds guilty craving;
superb display of that which transcends one's own being breeds envy.

Hence the Perfect One goes without preference or prejudice: he is wavering and
weak in his passion, but strong in his inner being (7).

Without knowing it or desiring it he leads the people (8); he confuses those who
know, he avoids action: and society lives freely for him in its organization.


IV


He Via is not (has) essence, he is inexhaustible act.

Unfathomable, it gives the essential norm to things.

It blunts the sharp, clears the murky softens the dazzling, orders the elementary of matter.
Unquenchable clarity! Could there ever be a creator - a father for this Supreme?


Vv


The universal does not know love: he transcends the individual who is worth to him
only as a means; the Perfect does not know love: he passes over individuals as
a means.


About human consciousness as a principle of differentiation and polarity. Lao-tze anticipates here the fundamental
principle of the philosophies of Fichte and Schelling.

(5) This is made clear by the maxim that follows; to stand in the originality of the Dao the Perfect One must
absorb and dissolve within himself the duality inherent in every determination of normal consciousness.

(6) In fact, the greater intensity given to bread upsets the balance and. in the reaction of the whole, generates
struggle.

(7) Lett.: in his bones.

(8) The lesto also allows, "He leads the people by making them unconscious and without desire." Thus the Julien
and the Evans. The Ular leaves the alternative: "Erftihrt das Volk Wissens - und Wunsch-los."


42


The whole (9) resembles a bellows that, while creating inexhaustibly in its movement, in itself
remains empty.
Man, on the other hand, beyond the inexhaustibility of his speech, remains in his not at all full


self (to self) (10).


VI


The life force of becoming is eternal: it is the inconceivable Mother, the inconceivable Mother
root of Heaven and Earth.
Eternally turning in on itself, it needs no push.


Vil


The universal is eternal. It is eternal because it is not individual: such is the condition for
eternity.

Hence the Perfect is by disappearing that it reveals itself, it is by exhausting itself that it
acquires infinite being, it is by losing itself that it becomes Individual (11).


Vili


Virtue, similar to water, taking without struggle the form of everything, to everything is
adequate. The further it leads away from the ordinary, the more it leads near the Way.
Hence the Perfect is earthliness in the domain of immediate being, depth in the domain of the
soul; love in the domain of feeling; truth in the domain of thought; development in the
domain of purpose; strength in the domain of Pagi re; opportunity in the domain of
practice.

Basically: adequacy toward everything dissolves pain (12).


IX


One cannot at one time preserve and fill; one cannot at one time sharpen and touch (13); one
cannot at one time possess and maintain ( 14).


(9) In the context with the usual attributes of the Dao. here should be taken to mean not the universal or the whole
(graphically and mythically in the text: "heaven and earth") which is instead only one term of the phenomenal opposition
(cf. 1), but the Way itself. | think the aporia-recurring in several other places and of no small moment for the unity of the
Lao-tze system-can be explained by the graphic expression: the sign of heaven could be taken here for the concept of
totality, to express with it the Dao as the basis of all real.

(10) See Introduction. Cf. the guilt of avarice ch. IX.

(11) The individual, denying itself in its empirical and immediate form, is affirmed in the uni- versal. whence it is
realized as an absolute, or Perfect, individual.

(12) This theme will be developed by the doctrines of Christian gnosis: thus for Basilides in the "Final
Consummation" each element will be restored to its own plane and nature, with which the pain of the spirit will cease.

(13) Gaining the extreme essentiality is while participating in things.

(14) By maintaining, one becomes fixed in the thing, one becomes so, and one can then no longer possess it or
possess oneself, having thereby lost the absolute centrality of the act, of the Way.


43


Inner avarice means guilt.
Acting, implementing while remaining in nothingness, such is the Way.


XxX


The dominance of the spirit over the senses-establishing the parallelism of the senses to that-
leads to indifference.

Self-education, through the maxim of adaptation, leads to simplicity.

Extending judgment is purification and leads to excellence.

The feeling of reciprocity (15) at the basis of society brings its self-ordination.

The instability of fate forms the receptivity of the spirit.

The vision that penetrates things leads to the futility of knowledge/discourse!

To implement development: to create without maintaining, to act without profiting, to rise
without dominating.

This is the Way.


XI


Thirty spokes converge in the hub: and it is in the emptiness of the hub that the
essentiality of the wheel rests. Jars are made of clay: but it is the inner void
that realizes the essentiality of the jar. Walls and roof constitute the house: but
the inner void realizes the essentiality of the house.

In general: from being proceeds/usability. from non-being essentiality.


XI


Excessive application to visual impressions dulls the ability to see.

Excessive application to auditory impressions dulls the ability to intend.

Excessive application to tastes obtunds the possibility of tasting. Too great passion for play
obtunds the possibility of knowing. Excessive lust destroys the possibility (16).


(15) Recall, for the understanding of this element, the Kantian "Operate in such a way, that the
maxim of your will may stand as the principle of a universal legislation."

(16) Desire, immediately realizing according to necessity only one direction, already in itself
excludes other possibilities, thus kills in the spirit arbitrariness, freedom. Likewise, in the preceding
sentences it is meant that in full adherence to things, one loses oneself in that principle of freedom, of self-
possession, in which alone a pure dominated cognition of things is likewise possible. Cf. ch. I.

[The concept would later be developed by Julius Evola in The Man as Power of 1926, The Doctrine of
Awakening of 1943, The Vogue of Power of 1949. in part also in Orientations of 1950. Men and Ruins of
1953 and in a very special way in Riding the Tiger of 1961 (Ed.)]


44


Hence, the Perfect - in order to gain the Not-I to the I - does not lose the I in the Not-I, subtracts
itself from the outer, consists in the inner (17).


XU


// forgiveness brings the humiliation of shame. Honors weigh down The spirit] like the body.

What does it mean, "Forgiveness brings the humiliation of shame "?

Forgiveness /others'] presupposes one's own subordination to the other], one
therefore obtains it through the subordination of oneself to the other]: it
brings, when one has undergone it, shame.

What does it mean, "Weighing down like the body"?

The proper of the body is to offer grip to every weight [= affection], the body is thus
the bearer of all heaviness.

It follows: those who take away themselves from both body and society will be able
to rule them both freely; those who stifle their passion aimed at the body or
society will be able to lead them loyally.


XIV


The sense (18) seeks it but does not see it: whence it appears to it as the
undifferentiated; the sense hears it but does not understand it, whence it
appears to it as the unperceivable; the sense touches it but cannot grasp it,
whence it appears to it as the uncreated. These three determinations insofar as
they transcend sense are indistinguishable, and sense thus gathers them into a
‘unity beyond itself: negation of the higher light and the lower darkness,
eternally indeterminate, folding into the incoherent, form of the formless,
phenomenon of the non-phenomenon, unmediated by anything else, not coming
from synthesis of anything else, without beginning or end.

Beyond such analysis, synthetic knowledge of its eternal nature is possible: an act
that draws itself from itself absolutely in development (20).


(17) Note the antithesis of such a method with that of Indian mysticism, in which the individual must
resolve himself in the understanding and love of the Universal, until in the so-called samadhi he disappears
"like a grain of salt dissolving in a sea of water" (Hathayogapradipika, \V, 5-7)); where in Lao-tze there is
precisely the opposite direction, of centralization and egoization, and its result is the life of the individual in
the absolute act. The same opposition occurs in Christianity between St. Francis and Meistcr Eckhart.

(18) To be understood as the ordinary categories of the intellect = man.

(19) The Way, the Tao.

(20) Sentence translated somewhat loosely: in the text are the ideas of development and
spontaneity, also referring to human evolution. Analysis refers to the apprehension of the Way from outside,
as a function of and in opposition to the categories of sense; in synthesis one is transported to the Way, so
that the negative determination resulting from analysis is transmuted neH experimentation, that the Way is
auloctysis.

[Self-consciousness is a "technical" term in Gentile idealism: the act of self-consciousness as an
inner, free process by which the self posits itself, thus determining its own being (Ed.))


45


XV


The Masters of ancient times were free, clairvoyant, intuitive: in the vastness of the
forces of their spirit the self was still unconscious: and this unconsciousness of
the inner force gave greatness to their appearance.

They were as cautious as one who wards a winter torrent, as vigilant as one who
knows around him the enemy, as cold as the stranger, as vain as melting ice, as
rough as unruffled wood, as vast as great valleys, as impenetrable as murky
water.

Who, today, could with the greatness of his light lighten the inner darkness? Who,
today, could with the greatness of his life animate inner death?

In those was the Way: they were individuals and lords of the self: and in perfection
their absence was resolved (21 ).


XVI


He who has penetrated the apex, beyond the particular finds the eternally identical;
for the life of the particular, beyond the interplay of the moments of ascent and
dissolution, resolves itself into the cyclic course, and the circle is the
immovable, the eternally identical. The immutable is the eternal norm of
becoming, and the norm of becoming is the essence of all life.

Consciousness of the unchanging essence of life leads to calm vision; ignorance of the essence
of life generates the dark chaos of the soul.

Awareness of the essence of life leads to loneliness (22).

To be alone is to be superior.

To be superior means to be lord.

To be lord means to be sublime.

In sublimity flows the Way: the omnipresent, the invariably identical.


XVII


The early organizers of the society were barely known to the people.
1 following were loved and praised.

! following were feared.

The following were scorned.

Only the feeling of reciprocity can ground society.


(21) The absence of the ego of the empirical, "outer" center of consciousness. Always keep in mind the dialectic,
whereby the consciousness of the absolute individual excludes the peripheral coagulation of the empirical self.
(22) For that essence is the absolute self, which by it nature is unique and solitary.


46


/ first, grave and reserved in their speech, accomplished their work: and the people lived in
the illusion of an order born of their own nature.


XVII


The Way was lost: and then judgment arose.

At the lordship of judgment the primitive spontaneity of actions disappeared.
Broken the consanguineous bond by which man lived in communion with the
original, the family was born; estimated the primitive social unity arose the
deployment in nations.


XIX


Devalue the usefulness of knowing, despise the obligation -- and the welfare of society will
be increased a hundredfold.

Devalue the usefulness of the law, despise the duty-and the feeling of reciprocity will reign
again in society.

Devalue the usefulness of purpose, despise the interested will - and guilt will die in society.

Conforming to the appearance of these three maxims would not conform to their truth.

It is necessary essentially: to be Individual and to appear natural: to be without lo and to
appear disinterested (23).


XX


Reason (24) is a source of pain.

Contradiction in decision (25) is regrettable, but contradiction in action (26) testifies to
power.

"Act like everyone," duty born of reason...

No! guilty folly!


(23) The maxims preach anlintellectualism, simplicity and disinterestedness not in themselves, but only as
effects in the discursive self of that inner process in which the individual realizes his own absoluteness by denying
himself as an empirical egoist. Effect of such an effect would be for Lao-tze a natural state of harmony and justice in
society. To "conform to the appearance of these maxims" is to assume and actualize them as valid in themselves, and in
themselves having meaning and purpose; to conform to their truth is to assume and practice them with the
understanding that they have no truth and rationality other than as a moment (or effects) of the transcendental process
of the absolute individual; so that for example Tesser natural and disinterested (= moral) is but Vappearance. the
phenomenon of individual being-which in one is (see note to ch. XV) being without self.

(24) Reason, to be understood in a pejorative sense, as inherent in merely phenomenal or human
consciousness.

(25) That is, the choice, the oscillation between opposites of human judgment, as opposed to the absolute
spontaneity of the present.

(26) It is the one inherent in the consistency of human consciousness with inner consciousness, of the
emptiness of that with the fullness of it, which will be colored in the following lines: it is in the action-


47


Everyone is easily ravished by superficial joy: all they need is a party, a spring
evening, I, on the other hand, strongly anchored at the bottom of the river of
feeling, remain serious and quiet beyond joy like the child who does not yet
know affection. I let myself live ... like this ...; detached from everything, I don't
know where to go.

All desire excess, while I am devoid of all craving: I am clumsy in life, I have no
practical sense. All live in light, while I am deep in darkness. All need
companionship (27), while I love nothing but solitary height: I am as unstable
as the wave, I wander restlessly. Everyone has an experience: whereas I
behave like a mere, like an idiot!

Lam different from all: but, possessing the original essentiality, only I am a lo!


XXI


Law (28) is the phenomenal (nameable) form of the Way: but the in-self of the Way
is inexplicable and incomprehensible.

Inexplicable, incomprehensible it contains the rational. Inexplicable,
incomprehensible it contains the real. Inexplicable, incomprehensible it
contains the spiritual essentiality: as such it is TAssolute; as such it is Human.

Never will it wane: being has its original principle from her.

What is the foundation of this knowledge ? - "I am "


XXII


Being whole in the fragment, straight in the curved, full in the empty. Concentrated,
one achieves; dispersed, one fails.

Hence the Perfect maintains its unity and becomes the model of the world.

He does not put himself in the light, and he shines; he is dissatisfied with himself,
and he excels; contracted in himself; he becomes center; he has no
complacency for himself; and he becomes great: devoid of desires, he is
invulnerable.

Would the old saying, "Whole in the fragment " be meaningless?

No: the original will (29) realizes the truth of it.


ne. because the Dao is act, and it is in the movement of its dialectic that the opposition of the two consciousnesses is
created and held firm.

(27) Grazio's appetitus societatis.

(28) That is, the circular course; see ch. XVI.

(29) That is, the transparency of various human limitations or determinations in the consciousness of the absolute
individual.


48


XXIII


The truth lies in transmuting ideas: a cyclone does not rage for an entire day; a
heavy rain does not last all day. What symbolizes such instability? The way of
nature. Nature is changeable and even more than it is man.
Therefore (30): to imitate the Way's way of acting in order to make oneself similar to
it; to represent the Virtue of the Way in order to be able to resolve oneself into
it: to surrender oneself to disruption in order to realize it in oneself.
Adapt to the Way in order - by virtue of it - to resolve into it; adapt to Virtue in
order - by virtue of it - to resolve into it; adapt to disintegration in order - by
virtue of it - to resolve into it.
The imitant and the idea that informs it are mutually realized to the point of homogeneity (31).


XXIV


The exertion of one who holds himself on the tip of his toes is not elevating himself, the
exaggerated beating forward of his legs is not walking (32).

He who sets himself in the light (33), remains in the dark; he who believes himself to have
arrived, finds himself pushed back; to put forth (exhibit) oneself is to depend (34); to esteem
oneself (35) is to decay.

All this in relation to the Way is corruption of the spirit, and in relation to the purpose is the
useless: it is far from that who possesses the Way.


XXV


There is an indistinct principle cause of all becoming; eternally stable, occult; having in itself
basis, in everything eternally equal to itself; impulse of all development, original form of
life.

Unnameable, Tuomo calls it Via.

Strength passes into greatness, greatness passes into the immeasurable, the
immeasurable passes into the infinitely distant, the infinitely distant is the
return.


(30) The inference is: since the idea is true only in its adequacy to the mode of nature (mutability), the adaptation
(imitation) of the self to the mode of the Way will realize the truth of the Way in the self.

(31) The idea realizes the action (fonnaliter), the action realizes the idea Onaterialiter): the two terms are
homogenized in concreteness in the activity that realizes its ideal or purpose.

(32) To be understood: it is not by an empowerment of man-the sphere of fact-that the overcoming of man is
achieved.

(33) = One who places self in the sphere of the fact which is (34) a bit out of self. a performing: the fact as such has
lapsed from present independence, thus implies subordination, relation to other: obscurity.

(35) In the ego thus exteriorized, phenomenalized.


49


Now the Way, Heaven [the universal], Earth and the Ordinator are the four extreme
quantities: the Ordinator is one of them. But man is founded on Earth, Earth is founded on
Heaven, Heaven is founded on the Way. the Way is founded on itself (36).


XXVI


Gravity is deeper than joy; stillness is the lord of motion.

Hence the Perfect One, ever wandering, never in fact departs from his grave stillness; even in
earthly apogees he stands alone with himself, beyond the exterior.

Cursed, then, be the superficial life of the great of the world, who, by his example of joy,
weakens the social bond: for easy indulgence in pleasure dazzles the people and destroys
order (37).


XXVII


Good walker leaves no trail, good speaker does not hitch, good calculator does not
need to count, good keeper does not close, good imprisoner does not need
ropes.

Hence the Perfect One always knows what he has to do, he is never forced into
refusal, he always finds means, he is never reduced to helplessness. Such is his
double glory (38).

It follows that the Perfect One is master of the inferior man (39), the latter is but
his instrument. Veneration of the master, love for the instrument are - in spite
of everything - the basis for a social constitution.

This is subtle and essential.


XXVIII


To know oneself strong and appear weak, such is the basis (40) (of social life); he who
possesses it never derives from Virtue and will return to the simplicity of childhood.

Knowing how to be enlightened and seeming obscure, such is the basis (of social life); one
who possesses it never lapses from Virtue and will return to the pinnacle.


(36) It is a kind of phenomenology of spirit in which the human proceeds through the various planes of nature,
overcomes the relation to other in the Way and there recognizes itself, the infinitely distant being the return. Cf. ch. XXI.

(37) In the sense that the desire to enjoy a life similar to that of the grown-ups causes revolt c destroys the state.

(38) On the one hand, to remain invulnerable in himself; on the other hand, to second, to be adequate, by this
shirking, to every instance of his lower life.

(39) As those who contain within themselves the action of the inferior without being in any way affected by it.

(40) _ It is still the antithesis of phenomenon and essence, inherent in the displacement in the act of the center of
consciousness and the related depowering of the self as humanity.


50


Knowing oneself large and showing oneself small, such is the basis (of social life);
he who possesses it always progresses in Virtue to the state of naiveté; naiveté
is the veil of perfection.

The Perfect One, conforming to this, becomes chief, becomes strong and sweet lord.


XXIX


Wanting to distinguish society according to a norm drawn from experience is
impossible; as a complex system of contingent factors, society on the other
hand cannot conform to a rational ordering determined by an individual.

To order it is to disorder it, to fix it is to destroy it, for the action of the individual
varies: now it is a going forth, now it is a yielding; now it is heat, now it is
frost; now it is strength, now it is weakness; now it is motion, now it is
stillness.

Hence the Perfect avoids the pleasure of power, is not attracted by it, avoids its
splendor.


XXX


Dominion according to Life is not dominion by force: for there is no action on which a
reaction does not reconvene (41 ).
And where armies passed, brambles spring up, where war raged, famine rages.
The Good is, and you don't have to of force.
Is. and is stripped of the splendor [of his being],
Is, and does not adorn itself with fame.
is, without its being based on action.
Is, and has no need to oppress.
Is, and does not aspire to power.
The point that is the highest is likewise that of decadence. Outside the Way, everything is
destined for corruption.


XXXI


Through empire, not good is realized but rather decadence.

True strength is not empire: without tending to it the wise man proceeds in greatness.

The empire is the bearer of neither good nor wisdom, it does not improve; even by pacifying it
oppresses; it is not hello, that beauty is joy, and it instead generates contentment only in
the spirit of destruction; and the destroying spirit in man is not a sign of strength.

Happiness is on the left, misfortune on the right: the commanded are on the left, the leaders on
the right.


(41) Action as such has the passion of its object, so it would not know how to achieve absolute dominance.


51


Announcement of war, announcement of doom: death of men, source of weeping. Victory by
force is sorrow (42).


XXXII


The Way is eternal and beyond the particular: simple as the extreme part of matter, it
encompasses the whole in itself. It is the ordinator in itself (43).

The beyond. penetrating the terrestrial, brings down the sweet fertilizing dew, which though
men do not understand. For the individual is a product of differentiation and as such
implies an end: the possibility of suffering an end demonstrates limitation of
consciousness, and such a consciousness is the essence of the individual (44).

The Way is scattered throughout the universe, but it is also as a valley in which the rivers and
streams of the mountains converge.


XXXII


To know the human is prudence; to know oneself /1'interior! is enlightenment. To dominate
others is strength; to dominate oneself is power.

Sufficiency in itself is superiority: possibility to accomplish is energy.

He who does not disintegrate himself (45) is eternal; he who lives after death (46) is immortal.


XXXIV


The Way is infinite and omnipresent: it is by it that every being is born, develops
and persists: it is the original creator of everything and yet it is not
dominating. As eternally without essence, it seems infinitely small I humble].

In Her the eternal circle of things is closed. As non-signor she reveals herself to be
infinitely great.

And the Perfect is not the instrument of greatness [of the Way], but the purpose of
greatness.


XXXV


He who understands His great image [of the Way], goes through the world without duties,
wandering stranger attending.


(42) See, for the meaning of pain, which clarifies this phase. the introduction.

(43) | That is, the organization in it is latent, not yet deployed in becoming as law.

(44) _Leti.: it is that which maintains the individual as such. It is understood by itself, that here individual is taken
naturalistically, as an individual.

(45) He who does not apply himself to the external, but always keeps himself in the collected unity of the act.

(46) After the realization of indifference. after detachment. Cf. Valentinus: "Inasmuch as you dissolve the world
and are not yourselves dissolved, you are lords of all destruction and of all creation" (Clement of Alexandria, Straniata, IV,
20).


52


Freedom, tranquility, height, joy, sovereignty are its foods: and yet the Way-described-appears
dry and dull.

It was toward Her that the eyes of many were directed, but they did not see Her; it was for Her
that many listened, but they did not hear Her. But yet they invariably lived in Her life.


XXXVI


The small implies the great, weakness implies strength; descent implies elevation, emptiness
implies fullness (47). Such is the basis of transcendental wisdom.

The soft triumphs over the hard, the weak triumphs over the strong. But as the fish would not
know how to live by abandoning the dark depths, so let man [volga* re] not be unfamiliar
with the weapon of this wisdom of the Lord.


XXXVII


The Way. in its invariable non-action, contains the principle of all action. By imitating it, the
organizer holds all beings to himself:

Everything is moved by passion: I, on the other hand, am unshakable in my transcendental
simplicity; for simplicity, whose unity transmutes into the whole (48), is imperturbable.

When this imperturbability (at the passions) is realized in society, it will become free.


(47) To refer to Virtue, where in fact negation is realized by the supreme affirmation. where non-being, emptiness, is
the expression of the actual nature and fullness of Dao.
(48) Lett: the unity-less simplicity that subsumes everything into itself.


53


SECOND BOOK.


XXXVIII


To be truly in Virtue is not to want to be in Viriti: and the Virtue thus possessed is that of the
Way (1).

An imperfect possession of Virtue is shown by the concern (2) not to deviate from Virtue: thus
one deviates from the Virtue of the Way.

Higher Virtue is unwilling action and unwillingness to act (3).

Approximation [preparation] to Virtue is intentional action and will to action.

Morality is willed action and non-willed action (4); law is willed action and
fulfillment of action; custom is willed action and exchangeably limited action.

Hence: having lost the Way, Virtue remains; having lost Virtue, morality remains;
having lost morality, law remains; having lost law, custom remains. Custom is
only the exteriority of morality and marks the beginning of decadence:
likewise, culture, though it is the image of the Way, is a means of decadence.

Therefore the Perfect One holds to the essential and abandons the phenomenon,
holds to the origin and abandons the ray: it avoids this, it holds to that.


(1 ) The way of the Way is the absence of the way.

(2) Leu; from the will.

(3) Non-willing action as absolute act, non-willing action as indifference and non-power of the fact, of the
periphery.

(4) = Acting Distinterested

[On the concept of "selfless action" as it will be developed by Julius Evola, see in sequence the works
already cited: Man as Power. The Doctrine of Awakening. The Yoga of Power. Riding the Tiger (Ed.)].


55


XXXIX


The foundation of being is its being a participant in unity.

Heaven is pure because it has unity in itself, the earth is solid because it has unity in itself, the
soul is conscious because it has unity in itself, emptiness (5) him contained because it has
unity in itself, beings are living because they have unity in themselves, the prince (the
organizer) can inform society with order because he has unity in himself. All that is. is as
it is in grace of ‘unity. heaven without purity would dissolve, earth without solidity would
collapse. emptiness without content would be a non-being, beings without life, would
disappear, the prince if he did not realize order would be a destroyer.

The superior rises from the inferior, the high rests on the low. And the ordainer keeps itself
null, neither expressing nor signifying anything, born of that which is to be organized (6).
[However:]

The sum of the parts does not give the whole [in its organic unity]: if the original force is
absent, in place of the regular clarity of the diamond there will be nothing but formless
gangue.


XL


The eternal return to nonbeing is the way of the Way (7).

Abandonment is the Way's mode of action.

Particular beings from non-being proceed into life; but their life is only a reconversion into
non-being (8).


XLI


The perfect savant understands the Way and implements it [in himself]; the incomplete savant
understands the Way and abides by it; the inferior savant understands the Way and-
unable to follow it-uses it.


(5) To be understood as the spiritual. In the following lines saying, "emptiness without a content would be a non-
being" refers to the now well-known dialectic, whereby the spirit is only insofar as, by sacrificing itself in a content, it is
conquered as actuality.

(6) In the sense that the Way. actual being becomes real only in the position of the fact, of things. But these are
existent only by means of law: the Way therefore must be ordering in order to realize itself; as such, it turns out to be born
of that which is to be organized, but yet already having in itself the primordial Svvaptq, without which the two terms would
dissolve back into a murky chaos, instead of realizing the individual: as is said in the following sentences

(7) For the Way lets itself escape in creation (= abandonment), by this it denies itself, but through such denial it
affirms itself as an act and reconverts to itself, to non-being. Cf. Hegel. Aencycl. d. philos. |V'iss .,§ 244.

(8) Cf. Proclus. Inst. Theol. 35. The life of the individual is a progressive consummation of bad individuality into
absolute individuality, a progressive conquest of non-being. i.e., of being, until death. Cf. for this a posteriori deduction.
Feuerbach. Gedan. u. Tod u. Unslerblich. chapters 2 and 3.


56


Hence it was said, He who penetrates the Way is in the solitude of upper darkness,
he who goes the Way is isolated he who is conscious of the Way is human.

The Virtue /= way] of greatness is universal surrender, perfect purity is simplicity.

The Virtue of the Far is non-willingness of action, the Virtue of Strength is absolute
spontaneity. It magnifies indefinitely those who have knowledge of it.

The infinite square has no more corners, the infinitely large vessel has no more
capacity, the infinitely high sound is no more audible, the infinitely large image
has no more shape.

The Way transcends sense and the particular: yet it lends itself to beings and
carries out their development.


XLII


The Way is determined in the one; the one is determined in the opposition (in the
dyad): the opposition is determined in the triad, and this is finally determined
in the multiple.

The multiple hovers around (central) abandonment and valve in becoming: an
immaterial principle informs it with harmony.

The individual possessed by impulses to action-not letting go-has no place in
society. The ordainer is [instead] a propitiator of balance, and therefore great.

"Gain becomes loss, loss becomes gain" (9). so speaks the vulgar wisdom. But I
teach, "The Perfect One will never come to his death."

Such is my Wisdom.


XLUI


The more flexible elements direct the more rigid elements into the world: the spiritual
penetrates Timpenetrability of matter. This is why it recognizes the superiority of the
unwilling.

But very few can instruct without speaking, accomplish without doing.


XLIV


What is closer to me, the self or fame? What is more precious to me, the self or riches? Is gain
or loss harder for me? (1)

Excess (11) brings decadence, wealth brings loss.

He who is sufficient to himself suffices does not suffer ruin: he has the condition of eternity.


(9) = "To conquer the Way you must give up the joys of humanity, which you would gain in loss instead." Lao-tze
op|X>ne that. by overcoming such "gain," man achieves immortality.

(10) Gain is the pure self, loss | the discursive realized by fame c wealth.

(11) Recall that for Lao-tze, the empowerment of "fact," the excess from which human splendor, wealth and fame
arise, marks a form of decay of the absolute self into the Non-Ego.


By


XLV


She human perfection remains irremediable imperfection; human fullness remains an
irreempihile emptiness; human straightness remains obliquity; human knowledge
remains foolishness; human art remains a motionless pawing (12).

// motion wins the cold, rest wins the heat (13).

However, the Perfect Earthly remains the ultimate goal of the universe.


XLV1


When society lives by the Way, warhorses can be employed for the culture of the fields;
when it moves away from it, warhorses are taken to guard the borders.

There is no greater fault than adherence to passion; greater evil than excess; greater
deficiency than desire to acquire.

He knows satisfaction only who knows how to be sufficient for himself.


XLVI1


Without going outside, one can penetrate the universe; without looking outside, one can
see.

The farther one goes [in outer knowledge], the less one knows.

The Perfect One comes without walking: he penetrates the concept (14) of things without
observing; he accomplishes without willing.


XLVUI


Study leads farther and farther (15); the Way-followed, on the other hand, leads farther
and farther back, all the way to the [original] non-wanting.

The not-willing and not-acting make every door yield; for them one becomes lord of the
‘Empire.


XL1X


The Perfect One has no special affections: his affections are those of the community.

He is good to the good as well as to the non-good; this is Virtue in goodness.

He is loyal to the loyal as well as to the non-loyal; this is Virtue in loyalty.

The Perfect One-in society-remains unflappable and ensures that no disturbance occurs in
the common consciousness.


(12) | Ted. Stammelin; frane, piétiner sur place.

(13) | could not grasp the connection of this sentence with the rest.

(14) — Leu.: the name.

(15) | To be understood, naturalistic science always unfinished, leading indefinitely from conditioned to
conditioned.


58


The members of society are his eyes and ears: he is the center, and the universal name.


L


Entering life is a turning toward death.

On man act thirteen causes of life and thirteen causes of death: now the thirteen causes of life
precipitate him into death. Why? Because of the excessive enhancement of life (16).

Those, however, who have penetrated the essence of life, live and do not fear tigers or rhinos,
fight and do not need armor: the rhino would not know where to strike him with his horn,
the tiger where to sneer at him with his claws, the enemy where to pierce him with his
sword.

Why? He, in life, is above life [= death].


LI


The Way is the principle, Virtue the preserver. Determination is the formative process in
which the occult force unfolds ( 17).

So beings venerate the Way. honor Virtue: such veneration and honor is a duty they perform
without knowing it, for it is the hidden foundation (conatus) of their nature.

The Way produces everything, nurtures everything, develops everything; everything is
nurtured, accomplished, matured by her: she protects everything, keeps everything in
circular motion; she creates and does not possess, acts without being an agent, has, and
does not dominate.

Such is its occult Virtue.


Li


The original principle appears as the Mother of man: to recognize Mother means to know
oneself as her child; to know oneself as a child means to recognize oneself as a
continuation of Mother's life, and this means to overcome all corruption of human life.

Let the life force be shut in, let the dispersion (18) be ended, and the well (19) will never be
exhausted. Dispersion of the life force, abandonment


(16) It is still the translation of the pure ego into the empirical or human ego that brings the empowerment of the
latter, and yet its own decay. The ego by placing itself outside leaves room for passion and motte. This theory is found in
Baadcr and Schelling, for whom evil and illness would be explained by the translation of the individual's deep power into
his peripheral consciousness. Cf. Schelling. trini. Uni. ii.d. \Vessen d. in. Freiheitecc. (transl. il.: Carabba. Lanciano, 1910.
pp. 65-68).

(17) Virtue is the mode, the logical rhythm of the Way; and therefore the principle of the Way is through the Vinti
that accomplishes and maintains its own nature. Remember then that Virtue comes to expression in the realizing process
by determination the becoming.

(18) Cf. the "scattering of the members of the ineffable" in the Apocryphal Huns of John (M. R. James, Apocr.
Anecdota, Il).

(19) The ego, which enclosed within itself is eternal and inexhaustible, is the Tao; but that applied to its
phenomenon and lost to itself, participates in the corruption of it.


59


to the pulses of action and the well will soon be exhausted. He who can penetrate its
bottom [of the well I (20) will be enlightened.

Mastering in weakness is true strength; living in that greatness, entering that
enlightenment; then the dissolution of the body will no longer be a loss. This is
the eternal life.


HIM


Knowledge has for its fruit life in the Way. Will is evil.

The Way is vast, but men love the paths (21 ).

Splendor of fantastic palaces on one side, on the other uncultivated fields and
barns
empty(22).

Depltivmdlt tfigidahefstitienintd tiousoco baeiguBesideguhgitame teagures.
(23).


LIV


Those who can lay firm foundations will not fear decay; those who can strongly preserve
will not fear loss: and what proceeds from him will testify to its eternity.

Now Virtue in the domain of lo is straightness, in the domain of commonality
duration, in the domain of the people turmoil, in the domain of social life
order.

For the knowledge of the self one must ground oneself in the [concept of] self: for
that of humanity in the [concept of] human: for that of the community in the
[concept of] community: for that of the people in the [concept of] people; for
that of society in the [concept of] society. [For] the foundation of the thought-
form is the thought-form itself (24).


LV


He who possesses Virtue resembles the infant, who fears neither sting of venomous animals
nor claws of fierce beasts nor rostrum of birds of prey; who, though he has weak bones
and delicate sinews, knows how to grasp at once; who is oblivious to sensuality, yet his
member is aroused. Perfect order! He can shout the whole day without his voice
becoming altered. Perfect automatism!


(20) The actual essence of life, the Dao.

(21) Human greatnesses.

(22) The glitz of man's illusory grandeur masks the inculcation and abandonment of the essential, the true
self.

(23) _ If one takes away the theft and presumption in which-through wanting-the possibility of all external life is
resolved, what original essence and purity of the human appears to be the Way.

(24) Aristotle, Met. XII, 9'11 voqou; tffi voupévot pfa.


60


To know the automatism of life means to be immortal (25); to know the essence of
‘immortality means clarity.

Contemplation (26) of one's life means decadence, will of one’s life means struggle, and
struggle equally leads to decadence (27).

Everything like this is outside the Way: and outside the Way everything is decadence.


LVI


Those who know (the Dao] do not speak: those who speak do not (know) it.

Keeping life concentrated, excluding dispersion; dulling the sharp (28), brightening the
confused, softening the dazzling, outwardly identifying with the common. this is depth.

Beyond glory and shame, honor and disrepute; this is Virtue in social life.


LVII


Loyalty presides over empire, cunning (artifice)presides over the means of accomplishment.

Non-will produces the order of society. Why? In that prohibition implies constraint of
energies, authority produces disorder [riots], cunning produces fraud, law produces
crime.

In accordance with this the Perfect One says: - Observe non-will, and the people will
develop according to their nature: observe non-will. and the people by themselves will
realize the deep will of their destination: observe non-will, and the people will prosper
because left to themselves: observe the exclusion of desires, and the people through
themselves will become what they are meant to be.-


LVUI


When the government (seems) inactive, the people are happy; when the government is
informed by excessive zeal, the people are unhappy.

Unhappiness has happiness around it: happiness has in itself latent Tinfelicita (29). Who
can see the solution?


(25) | Knowledge of the automatism-i.e., the possibility of self-regulation-of life, supposes that the self without
its denial can detach itself from it to realize absolute self-nothing (which leads toH immortality).

(26) Thatis, the empty and dull vision - mere aestheticism - not enlivened by current consciousness.

(27) The ego in order to want life must terrestrialize itself, with which it is engrossed in the laws of human
decadence.

(28) Energy that sharpens into will to action.

(29) It is the absolute relationship of pleasure and pain: in activity the moment of pain arises


61


Going straight? But the straight passes into the bent, the good into evil. Eternal blindness,
defile men!

Waves the Perfect is a square without corners, an angle without a vertex (30), straight but
flexible, clear but not glaring.


LIX


The highest means for the mastery of the human and the development of the spiritual is
letting go; through letting go one enters Virtue; entry into Virtue becomes progress in
Virtue: the progress of Virtue becomes that absolute adjustment whereby all limits
disappear; from the absolute adjustment proceeds the fulfillment of the absolute
individual (31): in the absolute individual rests the condition for possessing the
Kingdom: and in the possession of the mother of the Kingdom rests immutability.

To apply such principles is to /realize] a deep root, a strong trunk, a path to immortal
power.


LX


Social governance resembles letting it simmer.

When society is in the Way, no spirit stiffens in the individual will anymore; not because
the individual will is suppressed, but because it no longer turns against others.

The Perfect One never turns his will against others, for he knows that he may well do so.
But Perfect and "others" never meet: their paths are constantly parallel.


LxI


The great state is the depth at which rivers come together in a sea: it fulfills the function
of the femina. The feminine always enchains the masculine through passivity:
passivity is condescension.

Therefore, the large state through condescension absorbs the small states; the small state
through condescension absorbs the large state. In both cases condescension realizes
supremacy.

The end of the large state is the society and maintenance of men, the end of the small state
is the sustenance and welfare of men. And yet [with condescension absorbi rice] they
both accomplish their end.

In general: greatness is nothing more than releasing ( = condescension).


from that of pleasure, and the moment of pleasure from that of pain: the one takes reality and meaning from the
other. Cf. the well-known place in Plato's Phaedo (transl. Acre, p. 60).

(30) It is the synthesis of contraries-the straightness that is realized in the curve and the curve that is
realized in the straightness-in which the Dao is pinned.

(31) The avtipmKog'dppqrog of the Gnostics, the individual who through self-denial reaffirms himself in the
Way.


62


LXII


The Way is the condition of all men, it is the treasure of the good, the refuge of the misled.

It fruits honors to those who speak of it, it fruits reputations to those who act in accordance
with it; but, above all, it does not abandon the lost.

The power of the emperor, the splendor of the palace do not equal the value of those who
return to the Way.

Why did the ancients place their ideal in the Way? Because it can really be found, because the
fallen obtain life and freedom in it: that is why it is the supreme thing in the world.


Lxill


To will without wanting to will, to act without wanting to act, to feel without wanting to feel;
that the little is as good as the great, that the little is as good as the much; to see the good
in the bad.

It is the development of the easy that brings the difficult to fruition; it is the development of the
small that implements the great. The most arduous things in the world necessarily began
from the easy: the greatest things in the world, from the small.

Hence the Perfect One is not troubled by the character of greatness that the thing has once
accomplished; and because of this he accomplishes great things.

Those who promise much deliver little; those who deem everything easy will find everything
difficult.

But the Perfect One thinks everything difficult, and everything he finds easy.


LXIV


It is easy to preserve what is kept quiet; it is easy to prevent what has not yet manifested; it is
easy to destroy what is still weak.

Prevent the fact before eh ‘it becomes, calm the crisis before it erupts.

The giant tree had a root as fine as a hair; the nine-story tower began with a fistful of earth; a
Journey of a thousand miles had for its beginning a step.

Failure is made possible by wanting.

Loss is made possible by attachment. But the Perfect One, devoid of will and passion, leaves no
ground in himself for disillusionment and loss. On the other hand, the gain of most is but
loss.

Most fall at the moment of succeeding: being present at the end as at the beginning, this is
required in order not to lose.

The Perfect One has for desire the absence of desires; makes the absence of study the purpose
of his study; sickens "sound" human reason; observes non-wanting; makes no obstacle to
the development of absolute spontaneity.


63


LXV


Those, among the ancients, who possessed the Way, did not enlighten the people, but kept
them in unsuspecting simplicity: it is difficult to govern an educated people.

To rule with prudence is misfortune for the kingdom; to rule with loyalty (simplicity) is
happiness for the kingdom. Those who behave according to these principles are
models /among rulers]; and those who are models are partakers of Virtue.

Deep and occult virtue, how different you are from the way of creatures! Thou

understandest all things, and universal harmony subsists for thee.


LXVI


Rivers and lakes are the lords of the dispersed waters, because-in the valleys-states lower
than those. Such is the condition for lordship.

So the Perfect One, to place himself above the many, lowers himself with words of humility;
to place himself at the summit he veils his lo. Wherefore he is above without compelling,
he is at the summit without humiliating. Society under him will live in prosperity and
believe itself free.

The ordinator observes the non-will and society can do nothing about him.


LXVII


Iam called great, yet I appear altogether like others. It is because I am great that I appear
like the others: those who are [empirically] great are those who really resemble the
common altogether and are, in fact, quite small (32).

I have three precious things that I cherish and revere: the first is the feeling of reciprocity:
the second is the dignity of origin (33); the third is modesty in social relations. The
feeling of reciprocity (solidarity) infuses me with courage; the dignity of origin gives me
pride; by modesty I avoid being the first in the empire, and by this I have a chance to
become the leader of all men.

Nowadays, on the other hand, the feeling of reciprocity is abandoned for arrogance,
intimate dignity is abandoned for the empty sound of praise, modesty is abandoned for
the greed of honorific offices: this is the way of decadence.

The feeling of solidarity in war means victory, in peace strength.

It is through the feeling of solidarity that Heaven saves man (34).


(32) |The meaning of the passage is doubtful and | have interpreted it freely: the various translations diverge. |
believe that Lao-tze wanted to show how those who are like others in their empirical lo can be altogether different from
others because of being realized on the other plane of consciousness, while those who diverge empirically from others
because of their greatness, are qualitatively-in relation to inner poverty-entirely like others.

(33) _ It is probably to be understood in a mystical sense.

(34) Cf. Schopenhauer, D. Welt a. Vii. u. Vors. 11. § 25.


64


LXVI11


Good knower does not argue, good fighter is not violent, good victor does not fight, good
director does not direct. This is the power of Virtue in non-acting; this is the means to
make use of the forces of the human, this is the way of Heaven, this is the original
perfection.


LXIx


Here is the maxim of the good fighter; be the guest, not the visitor (35); step back a foot rather
than advance an inch (36).

Therefore: progressing without advancing, absorbing without conquering, having without
taking.

There is no greater evil than to resist Isecondo the human form]: that is to lose one's treasure
(37). Between two combatants the one who yields (who does not fight) wins. The rational
principle grounds the victory.


LXX


My doctrine is easy to understand, easy to practice: but most cannot understand it, cannot
practice it.

My doctrine has but one principle (38), my practice has but one rule (39). Those who do not
know them cannot understand my wisdom (40).

Few understand me: this is my title of glory: the Perfect One appears mediocre, but he is great.


LXxXI


Knowing and not-knowing is greatness (41 ).
Not-knowing and knowing is sickness. Whoever feels this disease, ceases to have it (42).
The Perfect One feels it, so he does not have it and is free from it.


(35) In Chinese conveniences, it is up to the host to set the example first, which the visitors follow. The meaning is:
to prevent, to ensure that one is never faced with the action already determined by the opponent's initiative.

(36) That is, never to commit. preserve one's freedom, not to bind oneself, not to exhaust oneself in action. Such
sense also belongs to the last sentence of the chapter. All this is to be understood more in a metaphysical and mystical
sense than as mere tactical wisdom.

(37) Indeed, by this is transmuted | the absolute into a form, in which it can be vulnerable by the action of the lower
element opposed.

(38) The absolute nature of the self.

(39) |The non-action.

(40) = Those who do not have an inner experience of the supreme reality will not be able to recognize it in my
doctrine, and it will therefore not be understood by them.

(41) The first term refers to transcendental wisdom, the other to human or discursive wisdom, in this sentence as
well as in the one that follows.

(42) That is, one who knows that one's inferior knowledge is nonknowledge is taken out of delusion and initiated
into higher knowledge.


65


LXxII


Those who do not take into account the unexpected succumb to it.

Believe not little, believe not small, believe not unworthy; believe not and that will not be.

Now the Perfect One knows Himself without performing (43); He is sufficient to Himself
without overestimating Himself; He avoids this, He holds to that.


LXXIH


Those who are brave dare to push to death; those who are not dare to leave in life.

Both are sometimes good, sometimes bad: for who knows the ends of Heaven? On this the
Perfect One meditates deeply.

[Now] the Way of Heaven is this: to win without struggling, to be obeyed without
commanding, to draw to oneself without calling, to act without doing.

Heaven's net has wide meshes, but nothing escapes her (44)...


LXXIV


If the mass no longer fears death, how to direct it with the fear of death? And if it fears
death, can one dare to inflict death?

But there is in eternity a superior arbiter of life and mone; he who wants to replace it with
himself resembles the man who wants to cut down a tree instead of the lumbering one:
he will certainly injure his hands...


LXXV


The people are hungry while the princes dissipate the proceeds of crude taxes: here is the
cause of their hunger. The people are agitated because the princes do abuse: here is the
cause of their agitation.

The people fear mone for love [because they are slaves] of life; here is the meaning of their
fear of death.

But to live outside of life is to live more intimately than to live in life.


LXXVI1


Man is born weak and delicate, dies hard and stiff: Plant is born flexible and tender, dies
inflexible and strong.
Waves rigid and strong are the modes of death, weak and flexible are the modes of life (45).


(43) That is, without externalizing self to self: the Perfect is known-or rather, possessed-outside the
objectifying category of discursive knowing.

(44) Lao-tze's morality may seem to be the glorification of sloth and cowardice: in fact, there is no other that
requires for its implementation a will so terribly subtle and indomitable, a presence of self to self so inexorable as for
this to be current and yet distant at any moment of our lives.

(45) Keep in mind, especially in this chapter, the spiritual reference that erases the one-sidedness and
paradox with which such statements may appear to the common intellect.


66


The victorious army is the one that has never fought (46). The strong tree is felled...
Big and strong are at the bottom, sweet and flexible are at the top.


LXXVII


The action of the universal resembles stretching a bow: lowering what is above, raising
what is below; taking away from the excessive to give to the deficient.

The way of the Way is to remove the excess, to supplement the deficient. Instead, man still
thins what is already deficient, supersaturates what is already excessive.

He who resolves his excess in society is in the Way. [It is] thus [that] the Perfect One acts
without doing, operates without being operating, disappears (47).


LXXVHI


There is nothing in the world weaker and more yielding than water, but at the same time
there is nothing that surpasses it in overcoming the strong and the rigid. It is
indomitable because it is adapted to everything.

Thus the weak triumphs over the strong, the flexible triumphs over the rigid: this truth is
clear, but no one acts in accordance with it.

Therefore the Perfect One says: - He that receiveth in himself the obeisances of the world is
the providence thereof: he that receiveth in himself the misfortunes of the world (48) is
the Lord thereof.-

This is the hidden truth.


LXXIX


After great hatred, a residue of hatred always remains; nothing is erased.

Now the Perfect fulfills his part and expects nothing from others. He who is in Virtue thinks
only of giving, he who is outside Virtue thinks only of taking (coveting): those
concentrate his power, these disperse it.

The Way of Heaven is indifference (49): in it the good fly.


(46) Another lesson: "The invincible army is the one that does not bring back victory." Leaving point or
possibility (and this is implied in entering combat) of taking, already brings with it subjugation.

(47) | This passage is important: it shows that the Perfect One, in so far as he possesses his absolute present
nature, insofar as that which lives in the human (through self-denial and automatism) is not himself according to this
absolute nature, but its excess, the "second virtue," not the act, but the "a "o of the fact," of emanation. Therefore,
when he operates, he, as Perfect, is not the operant: his lo is vanished from the human center of consciousness.

(48) — Leti.: of the kingdom. Note how the transcendental logicality of Christ's soteriological mission is revealed
here (as a function of individual value).

(49) | The giving of the Perfect is indifferent, it is pure of the stain of feeling; it is the


67


LXXX (50)


Small state, large people (51). - Arming ten or a hundred men, but not using them.

Fear Death, watch over the threshold.

Having ships and chariots, but not using them.

Arming for defense and offense, however, without purpose.

Return to the knotted cords (52).

Then foods would be enjoyed (53), clothing (54) would please, habitation (55) would
satisfy, simple customs would be loved (56).

And even if the kingdoms come so close that the cries of the dogs and roosters are
distinctly heard from one to the other, live, grow old and die without passing into the
neighboring kingdom (57).


LXXxI


True words are not beautiful; beautiful words are not true.

The man who has Virtue does not argue; the man who argues does not have Virtue.

Knowing is not knowing, knowing is not knowing (58).

The Perfect One does not gather his riches: by lavishing to the human he gains: by giving
to the human he becomes rich.

The Way of Heaven: leveling without struggle (59).

Ixi Way of Man: acting effortlessly (60).


cold transcendental function, not the "gute Leidenschaft der Menschen" (the "good-passion of men").

(50) It is to be believed that the entire chapter has metaphorical value.

(51) Fullness in recollection.

(52) It alludes to the time when writing did not yet exist in China, and they used variously knotted and
intertwined ropes as writing. It means: to return to the original simplicity, to the Tao.

(53) | One would understand the meaning of the human.

(54) | The phenomenon of humanity proper.

(55) | The category of the human in relation to the human.

(56) | Any enhancement of the human would be avoided.

(57) Even when the rhythm of the sphere of the fact was so in harmony with that of the sphere of
the act that it tended almost to merge with them, always keeping to itself and incommunicable the absolute
center of consciousness.

(58) It is the opposition of gnosis to discursive philosophy: see ch. LXXI.

(59) It is the subtle action of water that realizes internal indifference, whence proceed, in man, effortless
acting, an expression of non-acting.

(60) ‘It may be noted here that Daoist theory has its characteristic and concise expression in the
well-known passage from the Egyptian initiation, which one tradition has it was marked by Hermes in the so-
called Tabula stnaragdina: "The Father of everything, of everything in the universe-the Telesma-is here. Its
force or power is whole if it is converted into earth: thus you will gently and with great art separate the earth
from the fire, the crude from the subtle. It rises from the earth and reabsorbs the power of higher and lower
things. Thou shalt have by this means the glory of the whole world, and all darkness shall depart from thee
forever." (| emphasize to highlight the immanentist instance).


68


Appendix


Having brought to completion in the long years of solitude the process of his inner
development, Lao-tze silently eclipsed himself from his land and people, leaving behind him-in
the synthetic ideograms of Tao-teh-king-the trace of his wisdom now elevated to life.

Lao-tze seems to have had two disciples, who in turn initiated ten others; and it has been
claimed that elements of the related oral teachings are contained in the main text of early Taoism,
the Thai-Scian-Kan-ing-pien (or Thai-Scian's Book of Concurrent Action and Reaction). In fact
such a work is evidently informed by the central principle of Lao-tze ethics, v. d. that, outside of
transcendental action in the Dao, there is no agent which, as such, does not already imply Tesser
acted in itself. However, the Kan-ing. in place of understanding this principle in its entire absolute
truth - that is, as an a priori value - assumed it rather according to the mythicity of the naturistic
form; whence - by expounding how to every action (Kan) of man in the world reconverts a
congruent cosmic reaction (big) by which the initial energy bounces back almost to the center that
emitted it, and how nothing escapes such a movement whereby every action in itself
automatically receives sanction and judgment and every being has its own form - it almost comes
to nothing but a paraphrase of the Karma of Brahmanism, and by losing the point of view of the
absolute individual, it often teeters on the brink of naturistic spiritualism.

On the other hand-as mentioned above-the intense and profound wisdom of Tao- teh-king
was soon completely depotentiated in the interpretations and commentaries of the mythicizing
and poetic fantasy, sentimentality and moralism from which Taoism drew life. Nevertheless,
beyond this decadence - out of all ritual, all worship and all superstition, centralizing solely in the
cold and concrete teaching and realization of Science - an initiatory tradition of the Tao was and
is maintained.

Taoist initiation-as little as the West has been able to learn about it (1)-consists of three
moments, which are likewise hierarchical grades (or colleges)


(1) For the following nolizie | have largely relied on Matgioi. La vote raion- nelle, Paris, 1907, ch. VII.


69


of the relevant community. The first degree is that of Tong-sang, and in it the metaphysical
content of the Taoist texts is penetrated rationally and then integrated with the fundamental
principles of esotericism. The following degree, of Phii- tiiy, is characterized by the full
isolation of the individual, and yet by the fact that the degree of Science to be achieved there
must absolutely be conquered by means of oneself (one does not acquire it by means of
another unless one contravenes the law), through the concentration of all individual powers
pushed to the point of bringing to life according to an entirely new reading and in a mystical
experience the wisdom of those texts, which are nevertheless those same ones that are used
by the Tong-sang. The Phii-tiiy, after a long period of intense study, isolation and silence
(enwrtq), can succeed Phap. Phap is the one who has fully realized in himself the dialectic
of the Dao; he is a dark and powerful being, revered and ignored, wandering, detached from
everything; he is lord of the secrets and forces of nature, so that he can absolutely command
his own body as well as other things in the outer world.

Here it is perhaps worth drawing the reader's attention again to the fact that the
preceding pages contain instances that go far beyond merely philosophical
consciousness. The actualism of the Dao. as concrete has nothing to do with the
schlecht und biilig (2) actualism that can be professed in words fromH the heights
of a Western university chair. In reality, the Tao is not known unless one realizes it,
and not in words, thoughts or beautiful sentiments, but by a concrete process in
which the whole individual engages and with his or her most real powers. To know
the Tao in truth is to be the Tao: but the realization of the Tao has immanent in
itself real dominion over the world; power is therefore the rite through which
knowledge proves itself to itself. Not power, means not knowing and therefore not
being. And by this is evidently not to say that the Perfect must go in search of
potency, but that potency, and only it, testifies to real perfection and proceeds
naturally from it like light from the sun. Not in beautiful books of philosophy, but in
the quiet indifference with which the seldom-revealing Phap lets the "prodigies"
slip by - almost out of the wonder and confusion of the sufficiency of Western
civilization - rests the sign of the accomplished, concrete actuality.

Reserved for the Phap is the knowledge and practice of the Phankhoatu (or
Book of Returning Things), an extremely secret text in which is set forth the
initiatory High Science proceeding from the positions of Lao-tze (and yet also the
method for bringing things back to alflo, that is, for "returning" things). It is with
the translation of Ch. 3 of Part I' of that book (a chapter that Matgioi [3] has
managed to get to know) that I believe I can close the present work. In this passage
from the Phankhoatu is expressed the formula of theia reduction of duality (the
esoteric androgynous theory) and yet the celebration of the advent of the


(2) Bad and Right (Ed.).
(3) La vote rationnelle, cit. p. 215.


70


Tao (4); we refrain from commentary given the nature of the present book, leaving each reader to
take whatever he or she is capable of.


PHANKHOATU
(p. I. ch. 3)


You will worship your right hand where your heart is and detest your left hand where your liver
and courage [your strength] is.

But you shall worship your right hand, where your brother's left hand is. Thou shalt worship thy
brother's left, where his soul is.

You will forsake your brother's soul for the spirit of his left.

It will be so that the Dragon will bite your left breast. And by his bite, the God will enter.

The voice, without the word; Tudito, without the sound; the sight, without the object; the
possession, without the contact: these are the blood strands of the bite.

Praying with mute lips, believing with closed ears, commanding with submissive eyes, taking with
motionless hands: this is the bite of the Dragon.

Sleep is lord of the senses and souls: so sleepeth thy head upon thy brother's heart.

The right of his body responds to the left of your spirit. The right of your spirit responds to the
left of his body.

Let your right hand penetrate his left; let your left hand be penetrated by his right hand. Thus
your spirit will be his thought and his blood will be your blood.

The Dragon's bite will heal: he will take flight; you will be invisible in his wings.

You will be united with heaven.

Thus, you are two-and one-and the original God.


(4) The Dragon, conceptually and perhaps also philologically (cf. Matgioi, La vaie métaphysique,
Paris. 1905. p. 51) identical with Logos, and the Dao. the original, transcendental truth of the self.


71


II
THE BOOK OF PRINCIPLE AND ITS ACTION


Introduction


to MARIO MORETTI
To whom | owe the inducement for this new
work.


Under the title LJ Libro della Via e della Virtu (The Book of the Way and
Virtue) in 1922 our presentation of Lao-tze's Tao-té-ching came out for Carabba
Editions (1). The present version of the same Far Eastern text differs considerably
from that early work of ours-so much so as to constitute almost a new thing-for two
reasons.

First of all, in that edition Lao-tze's work had been taken in isolation, and to its
content we had given an interpretive framework following a line of thought
resentful of transcendental idealism (though supplemented with some original
instances of a not merely intellectualistic order) according to the kind of studies we
were then concerned with. But the new presentation deliberately sets aside any
philosophical superstructure and follows a traditional point of view. Thus" Lao-tze's
work here is no longer considered in isolation, but in the framework of the Far
Eastern tradition to which it belongs. In it was then seen not as an original
speculation or "mysticism" of personal inspiration, but rather as one of the
formulations of an identical knowledge, found at the basis of other great currents of
metaphysical orientation in other cultures and, in its proper form, more in the
sapiential and esoteric domain than in that of conceptual formulations and
translations. This domain is, indeed, the "proper place" of Tao-té-ching doctrines. It
is in their "orthodoxy," in the broadest sense of the term, that therefore these
doctrines will now be considered.

Secondly, since we drafted that first presentation having come out, or having
become accessible to us, numerous other translations of the Tao-té-ching, it seemed
to us appropriate to proceed, on the basis of them, to revi-


(1) As noted above, the Evolian introduction bears the date "Assisi, September 1922," while the
small volume published by Carabba has "April 1923" (Ed.) as its printing indication.


75


sion of the basis on which our version rested. Thus various lessons of passages
found to be insufficiently justifiable were rectified and fine-tuned. Every effort has
been made, therefore, to make the new version as satisfactory as possible, even
from the point of view that one his! to call "scientific," but always within the limits
permitted by that higher instance which, from the point of view now assumed, that
is, from the traditional point of view, must be constantly enforced.

Indeed, it must remain firm that Tao-te-ching cannot be interpreted linguistically alone.
This is, first of all, because the essential content of no traditional, sapiential text can be
grasped in those terms, even when dealing with texts in Western languages, such as Greek,
for example. Then, in the case of an ancient Chinese text, there is a specific circumstance
that reduces to a physique any claim to fix its content definitively and "critically" on the
basis of linguistic competence alone, and that is the peculiar character of the Far Eastern
language, which is ideographic. An ideographic language: that is as much as to say a
language for images and symbols. But when images are used to express not concrete things
but abstract ideas, polysemy is inevitable, many interpretations are possible. Add to this the
fact, that most Chinese ideograms consist of several elementary signs, that the overall
signification does not automatically result from the simple sum of these components, and,
finally, that the overall meaning attributed to each character of the genres in ancient times-
that is, when the text was composed-may correspond very little to that of the most recent
linguistic usage. There is also the fact that the style of Lao-tze is particularly elliptical,
deliberately obscure and ambiguous, like the oracular style of many sapiential texts. All this
makes the Tao-té-ching present a wide margin of indeterminacy, a margin that will subsist,
however hard even sinologists want to give themselves, and which, moreover, from the
orthodox point of view has not been regarded as a flaw at all. It is attested that in some
Taoist schools the sign of a disciple's being mature, or not, in order to pass from one degree
to another had been seen in his ability to discover different, deeper and deeper meanings in
the same text of the master. The latitude of terms is synonymous with richness, with
multidimensionality; it is defined only by a free act of the spirit, starting from a meditation
and not from a discursive analysis of ideas. M. Granet (La pensée chinoise, Paris, 1950, p.
503) honestly acknowledges, "The short sentences composing it (the Tao-té-ching) were
visibly intended to serve as themes of meditation. It would be vain to try to lend them a
unique sense, or even a sufficiently defined sense. Those formulas were valid because of the
multiple suggestions that could be found in them. They had one or more esoteric meanings,
indiscernible today" (2). Of "a kind of magical elasticity" of language, speaks A. Waley
(The Why and its Power, London, 1934, p. 12). This will suffice to dismiss the claims of
definiti-


(2) Tr. il: Chinese thought. Adelphi. Milan, 1971 (ed.).


76


vity, of "critical reestablishment" of the text, and so on, pitched by every new Western specialist
translator, despite what had been recognized even by us, until a Dante, namely that every
scripture (a title, this one, which also suits the Tao-té-ching already for the fact, that the
designation ching in China has been reserved for traditional texts and is not used for individual
secular works) admits precisely various interpretations, which are ordered, ranging from the
literal and moral to what Dante called "anagogical," referring to the potential essential and
spiritual content of it (3).
We have held firm to this point and, as mentioned above, if on the basis of the

new material we have been concerned that the new version be as "in order" as

possible even from the secular point of view, we have also made use of the intrinsic

latitude of the text to make the interpretation of spiritual and traditional order,

among all other possible ones, count. This has brought a definite difference from the

greater number of existing translations oriented in the opposite direction, especially

in the many places where the literal sense of the text would seem to vértere on the

merely social and moral level, while a different interpretation in inner and spiritual

terms remains equally possible (cf. Chuang-tze, XX VIL, i: "I have used allegories

taken from the external world to express abstract ideas."). In various linguistically

controversial complexes, we have left to decide, as to a sword of Alexander, a

general methodological criterion, which is this: a text from a tradition that has

countenanced minds of the highest stature cannot fail to have its own internal unity

and meaningfulness. Now. when the application of the spiritual and traditional

interpretation resulted, both for the controversial passages and for many others, in a

greater intelligibility and coherence of the whole-which will not fail to strike the

reader-while the other interpretations, especially the heavily linguistic ones, led to

trivial, incongruent and sometimes even childish things, in this we seemed to see a

precise counter-evidence of the legitimacy of the first interpretation and of a greater

adherence of the version to the actual content of the text. Subject to such a criterion,

not even the Chinese commentaries in the public domain have been given much

consideration here: they are generally of a very low standard, to say nothing of what

has been perpetrated by modern Chinese who have set out to zealously follow the

"scientific method" of the Europeans. Otherwise things would stand to refer to what

has existed as a tradition of secret schools beyond the degeneration of Taoism into

popular religion. But these are particularly closed circles, the written records of

which are almost nonexistent. Of some use are, at best, references to parallel

teachings of the two other masters of ancient Taoism. Lieh-tze and Chuang-tze.

Having thus indicated the orientation of this presentation of ours on Tao-té-

ching and what makes it different from the previous presentation of 1922. for the

sake of enlivening the reader we will premise the text with a nod to the general

historical and doctrinal background of Taoism.


(3) Cf. Convivio, | (ed.).


77


According to tradition, Lao-tze and Confucius would have been contemporaries: the
former would have lived between 570 and 490 BCE and the latter between 552 and 479
BCE. The doctrine of both the former and the latter does not represent something new, benst
a reformulation or adaptation of the primordial Far Eastern tradition, based on sM'I-ching
and its commentaries, a reformulation necessitated by a partial obscuration of that tradition
and undertaken by Lao-tze and Confucius on two distinct planes. Because of the diversity of
those planes, it has often been desired to see, between the Confucian and Daoist teachings,
an antithesis that, in reality, is relative. It is that the doctrine of Lao-tze is essentially
metaphysical and initiatory in order, although it also comes to ethical and social
applications: that of Confucius, on the other hand, is centered in the moral and political
realm. The one has for its ideal the adept who is and acts beyond all condition- lity,
beginning with those of his own ego; the other - Confucius' - is limited to an ideal of human
culture, targets the "noble," the man who in political society gives himself a style and
uprightness by the exercise of certain positive virtues and by conforming to given forms.
And while Confucius favors a line of rationality, Lao-tze's own is paradox, he holds to
nonconformist summit lines, professing a subtle wisdom expressed in terms that are often
enigmatic, elusive and puzzling. These two types only come into conflict at the point where
one or the other becomes absolutized. Only Confucianism degenerated into Mandarin
formalism and outward preceptism is in antithesis with the essentially metaphysical doctrine
of Lao-tze. Hence the words that the historian Sse Ma Ts'ien put into Confucius's mouth,
after a meeting the latter is said to have had with Lao-tze: "To animals you can tend strings,
you can catch fish with nets, birds with arrows. But how to grasp the dragon that hovers in
the ether above the clouds? Today I saw Lao-tze. He resembles the dragon." On the other
hand, in the Taoist writings, beginning with those of Lieh-tze, Confucius is not infrequently
presented as a disciple of Lao-tze or as a master of Taoist doctrine: which means that, in
spite of everything, an intimate relationship between the two teachings was well perceived,
a relationship that is real and due to the two masters' drawing back to the common source of
the primordial tradition and the extreme-oriental orthodoxy.

This aside, it is noteworthy that while Confucius' historical existence as a well-defined
person is established and there is fairly precise information about his life, the same cannot
be said for Lao-tze, to such an extent that one may wonder whether this name corresponded
to a single person, or is not primarily a symbolic designation. Already the exact name of
him is not known, "Lao-tze" being a title: literally it means the "old child," with which is
associated the popular legend that he was born already looking like an old man and with
white hair. Except that old age in Chinese tradition has tinche had a translational meaning,
becoming synonymous with perenniality and even immortality (so, for example, the correct
translation of the name of a great deity, Huang-lao kiun, is not "Old Yellow Lord" but the
"Immortal Lord of the Center"-yellow is the color of the center). So "Lao-tze" - "old child" -
properly stands for the quality of


78


perennial actuality, durability and youthfulness proper to those who keep in touch with
origins, according to what is attributed to the "men of the Dao."

For the rest, "Lao-tze" is said to have been a "historiographer" in charge of the
archives of Lo, capital of the Chou. In this regard, it must be remembered that, as in ancient
Rome, in the ancient Chinese empire "officials" had at the same time a sacred character,
that the "historical archives" contained the documents of tradition and were sometimes kept
so secret that there are reports of cases in which those who had them in their possession
preferred to go to their deaths rather than make them accessible to people-even princes-to
whom they were not reserved. So, in any case, it is not in the capacity of a kind of archival
bureaucrat that "Lao-tze" was imagined. Later such a person would leave office, spend part
of his life in solitude, and finally leave for the West after fixing the essence of his doctrine
in a book at the invitation of the guardian of the Han-ku crossing on the northwestern
border. Since then, nothing has been heard of him: "he left, and no one knows where he
went," says historian Sse Ma Ts'ien. He adds, "Of him, it can only be said that he loved
darkness above all, and that he deliberately erased all traces of his life": it is, this, the
precipitous style attributed by his book to the so-called "Royal Men." Referring then to
legends, Lao-tze. left the empire, allegedly retreated to the K'un Lun. mountain on the
border of Tibet, which, however, vested a symbolic character, of "center," and to the
"Mysterious Capital," a designation that was later (but partly abusively) to apply to the seat
of the "Yellow Church" of Taoism turned religion. Others want him to have died at the age
of 81, which is again a symbolic reference, because 1'81 is a sacred number in Taoism,
corresponding to Heaven and the perfect fulfillment of the yang quality (in connection with
this, the book of Lao-tze itself is divided, generally, into 81 chapters): fulfillment which,
involving the overcoming of transience, leads to yet another legend, to that according to
which "Lao-tze" continued to live for a very long age, as one of the so-called "earthly
immortals."

According to another group of legends, "Lao-tze" would have changed his name
several times, or there would have been more than one person called "Lao-tze" (which
would explain the divergent reports about the period in which he would have lived). Putting
aside the deification he was to undergo in popular Taoism (like the Buddha in Buddhism-
religion), there was also conceived of a supertemporal "Lao-tze" ("born before Heaven and
Earth," as is said in a late second-century BCE inscription.C.), who would precisely appear
under various names in thirteen successive existences after Fo-hi and Chen-nong as the
initiator of the "Royal Men" and the occult inspirer of the founding sacral rulers of
dynasties, up to the Chang and Chou. It was also intended that "Lao-tze" was the progenitor
of the Tang Dynasty. All of these traditions should not be held as pure fantasies. From
them can be gathered, as a content in its own positive way, the idea of the relation of Lao-
tze's doctrine to a non-human influence and initiatory current closely connected with the
royal function. The part of "Lao-tze" would be played by piti people, among whom was the
Lao-


79


tze historian, if he really existed. These would have continued a chain and would have
been exponents of a corresponding organization; the same name, after him, may have been
transferred to other exponents of the same chain, in all this the mere individualities
remaining in the background.

About the Tao-té-ching, if it certainly contains original formulations and if even
personal traits of the person who composed it are reflected in it (see, for example, ch.15),
even the relation of the doctrine expounded in it to the Far Eastern primordial tradition has
always been recognized. Apart from the fact that it often refers in it to the origins and
masters of ancient times, at the beginning of the Han period, that is, in the second century
B.C.E., Taoism was thought to have begun with the first emperor of China, Huang-Ti (2697-
2598 B.C.E.)-the so-called "Ruler of the Center" or "Yellow Emperor"-when the imperial
patriarchal civilization asserted itself over an archaic society of the opposite, matriarchal
orientation. And the sense of the ideal relationship between "Lao-tze" and HuangTi was so
vivid, that for a time one of the designations of Daoist doctrine was the "Huang-lao," a term
composed of parts of each other's names. Similarly, Tao-té-ching was associated withWI-
ching, so another name for the doctrine, similarly formed by combination, was "Lao-i."

Character as a creation less of a single person than of a current also had the work of the
second father of) Taoism, Lieh-tzc, who like Lao-tze is not clear whether he existed
historically or was primarily a symbolic figure. Certain, however, is the historical existence
as an individual of the third patriarch of Daoism. Chuang-tze, whose work also has a much
more personal imprint, however, with a teaching in various respects already quite flaky and
diluted, with a wide margin given to poetry and episodics, as opposed to the essential, bare
and lucid style of "Lao-tze" (4).

Turning now to the text, it should be noted that the Tao-té-ching designation is not the
original one; the book was so called only under the later Han, or Hou Han (25-220 CE), thus
several centuries after it was written. Ching-it has already been noted-is the designation
reserved for traditional texts. The most current translation of the title, followed in our earlier
version, is IJ Book (ching) of the Way (Tao) and Virtue (tea). We thought it appropriate to
change it to // Book of Principle and its Action. It already indicates the fundamental ideas of
the text, which includes a metaphysics, an ethics, a political doctrine and, finally, elements
of an esoteric doctrine of immortality, in the interweavings of sentences with multiple senses
and in the summaries of short chapters.

As for pure metaphysics, the concept of Tao was known even before Lao- tze, it recurs
in all orthodox Chinese currents or schools derived from the de\Y J-ching tradition. Literally
(and ideographically) Tao means "Way." It is the Way, in which the All moves. In its
origins, however, the term did not have a


(4) In the random quotations we will make of passages from the other Masters of Taoism we will refer, in
principle, to the versions of P. L. Wieger and J. J. M. De Groot.


80


unambiguous meaning, for it designated on the one hand the Great Principle (although the
prevailing designation of this has been the "Great One" or "Great Summit," T’ai Chi), on the
other hand the sense of the course of the world, the productive force and immanent law of
manifestation. Already in the title of Lao-tze's work these two aspects of the Dao are
distinguished: the Dao is the Great Principle, its action, "virtue" or law, is the ¢é. This
distinction, however, is that of the terms of a dynamic unity; by this means the characteristic
of the Far Eastern worldview is maintained in Tao-té-ching.

To make this point clear, it must be remembered, on the one hand, that from the very
beginning the Far Eastern tradition was not religious but metaphysical in character. It ignored
anthropomorphism, the humanization of the divine; it considered abstract and impersonal
principles that remained essentially so even when material images taken from the world of
nature were used for them. Thus there spoke not of a "God" but of Heaven, Tien, in the sense
of a symbol of transcendence, a figurative expression of the infinite height above the human of
the Great Principle. Even when this in state religion became enchanted in the "Lord from on
high," Shang-ti, it did not cease to have an impersonal character and was understood as a
function of the aforementioned Principle, through the title Huang-t'ien Shang-ti ("the Heavenly
Supreme God"). This is the first characteristic of the Far Eastern conception: it has a trans-
human purity and essentially metaphysical characters. At the same time, it was proper to it to
forfeit the dualism of a superworld opposed to the world. A fundamental unity was recognized,
despite the feeling of the infinitely distant and the non-human, in the terms of what may be
called an "immanent transcendence." The Tao of Heaven is elusive and, at the same time, truly
present and acting among the webs of phenomenal reality.

This metaphysics is taken up, specified and developed in an original way in the Tao-té-
ching. Here the "transcendence" aspect of the Principle is emphasized again with the specific
use of the concepts of "emptiness," "non-being," "non-acting," and "formless" and "nameless"
to indicate the supreme, detached essentiality of the Great One and the Great Beginning,
superior to and prior to the "being" of theistic and religious theologies.

Instead, Virtue, té, is given as the immanent and acting aspect of the Principle; it is the
power that develops the eternal manifestation of Perfection, a manifestation that does not have
a "creationist" character in the theistic sense, that is, it is not tied to a will and intention but is
part of the eternal, immutable and impersonal logic of the divine.

Beyond this, in Lao-tze the use of the term "Way" refers precisely to the conception of the
One not in static terms but in those of an eternal process in which immanence and
transcendence not only coexist but intercondition themselves, are generated by a single act.
Herein lies the most characteristic side of the doctrine of Tao-té-ching. which, if it could be
brought back to terms of simple intellectual speculation, would recall some of the ideas of the
so-called European transcendental philosophy (hence, the interpretation proper to our previous
presentation of the text). Such a metaphysical situation is expressed by Lao-


81


tze saying that it is by "emptying itself" that the Principle is and produces. The image of the
bellows (chap. 5:45) is used to indicate the eternal act that on the one hand produces the
"emptiness" and on the other gives being to the current of forms, to the "ten thousand
beings." Especially in the many passages in which the Principle in such a way is presented
as a model, this idea is given as a denying itself, or non-being, in order to be - it can be said:
as a transcendence that in the same act on the one hand realizes the Principle as "emptiness,"
as absolute and center, on the other hand externalizes and distances its substance in an
inexhaustible, impersonal giving, emanating. flowing and vivifying. Thus it could not
wrongly be said that in Lao-tze's Taoism "virtue is the mode which the Principle itself needs
in order to realize itself" (A. Castellani, Lao-tze's Celestial Rule, Sansoni, Florence, 1927, p.
LIV). For our part, in addition we had also mentioned that, in a metaphysical transparency,
here is given what can be gathered from various confusing myths relating to "sacrifices" of
divine entities which give rise to creation.

So: interconditionality and co-presence of transcendence and immanence, of
hypersubstantial non-being and being as the ultimate meaning of the Way of Heaven, but
also of the eternal process of the world. From such a view derives, in a particular way, that
of non-being as an omnipresent substratum or internal and essential dimension of being.
From a different point of view, another inference is that all things, all being and all life are
found in the Way and Perfection, and have never ceased to be there. As another Taoist
master will express it, "If anything were or lived outside the Tao, the Tao would not be
Tao." From which, as will be seen, also proceeds the theory of "natural" spontaneity and
perfection and the ethics of being in the Way with just being what one is. In this regard there
is a certain convergence between Taoism and Mahayanic Buddhism, where the latter affirms
the transcendent identity of .ramsora (contingent world) and nirvana (the unconditioned) as
two aspects of the one reality. Because of this, and other convergences-for example,
concerning the metaphysical notion of the Void, common to both schools-in China there was
an interesting symbiosis between Buddhism (imported there, precisely in its Mahayanic
form, during the period of a revival of Taoism) and Taoism itself, a symbiosis that appears
in various schools, from the ancient Chinese Ch'an school to its promanations as Japanese
Zen. The mentioned view about immanent transcendence and natural perfection is expressed
here by saying that every being has Buddha nature and that every being, even if he does not
know it, from the beginning is a "liberated one."

Let us now bring attention to the virtue - tea - of Principle, taken in its aspect of
ordering power. It should be noted that in the ancient Chinese language the term tea did not
have a moral sense (such a sense did not acquire it until later, after Confucianism), but that
of power of action (as in the Middle Ages people spoke of the "virtues" of a substance or
element) and, above all, of magical power. Magical power was designated as both Jing and
tea. It is in this sense that. for example, there was talk of the five powers - wu tea - by which
the Chinese dynasties ruled. Such a character also does not exempt tea as a virtue or action
of Heaven. The teaching of Tao-té-ching is that, for the pre


82


without real of transcendence in immanence, a higher order is realized in the world in an
invisible and spontaneous way, a way in a certain magical sense called in Taoism "non-
acting." By this expression is meant that it is not a direct regulatory or moralizing
intervention in the course of the world, as in the theistic theology of Providence, but a
superordinate influence not tied to particular ends or intentions, without regard for
individuals (it is "inhuman," says Lao-tze. ch. 5), which, while leaving things c to beings
their freedom, causes the whole to be composed into a totality reflecting the Great One and
Perfection. The Taoist image is that of the net of Heaven that has great meshes but from
which nothing ever escapes (ch. 73), or that of the great valley that does not act but toward
which they gravitate irresistibly, into which all the waters of the slopes descend and flow.
This character has the Virtue, fé, of the Principle. We can also refer to these sayings of
Chuang-tze (XII. 3; XXII, 2): "The action of the Principle through Heaven is infinite in its
expansion, elusive in its subtlety... Of the Principle one can only say that it is the origin of
everything, that it influences everything by remaining indifferent." More generally, that is,
outside of pure metaphysics, té is also conceived as a "power of presence." Beings and
things can be centers of #é, as we shall see, especially "Real Men" and "Transcendent Men."
Then they "act without acting," ad imagine of the Dao: that is, they exert an effective and
irresistible influence by their mere beingness, impersonally, outside all "doing" and
particular intention. Hence the shift from the metaphysics of the Dao to ethics and politics
according to the Dao. Adding to the ideas fixed above this particular conception of tia té, the
overall cosmic picture is thus that of an inexhaustible flowing and producing permeated by
the "Void," and of an eternal and unchanging law that through the magic of Virtue operates
in all change by directing without touching, dominating without compelling, bringing about
without "doing": in this-in this imponderable action-having a large part the principle called
the principle of concordant actions and reactions, a principle already contained in the
metaphysics of Z-c/rriig. Cf. Chuang-tze (XXV, 10): "11 Principle, acting as the pole, as the
axis of the universality of beings, of him, we say only that he is the pole, the axis, without
seeking either to understand or to explain him.... Modifications, the effect of a unique norm,
do not alter the unchanging whole. All opposites find their place in this totality, without
bumping into each other."

In terms of Taoist metaphysics we will mention two final points.

The first concerns the traditional theory of the metaphysical Dyad, which already
figured in the 7-dung teaching as that of yin and yang. The manifestation of Dao is
developed through the alternate play of yang and yin. opposing and, at the same time,
complementary and inseparable principles, which have multiple valences: they are Peterno
masculine and the eternal feminine, the active and the passive, Heaven (in a narrow sense)
and Earth, the bright and the dark, the creative and the receptive, and so on. Ul-ching had
traced the structure of every process, being and phenomenon back to various dynamic
combinations of these two powers or qualities, fixing them in the image system of trigrams


83


mi and hexagrams, signs composed precisely of yin and yang. It is thus through yin and
yang that the Way of Heaven operates. A particular idea that recurs in Tao-té-ching is that of
the conversion of opposites: there is no indefinite accretion or development of a given
quality, whether yin or yang: having reached the apex, there is also the limit beyond which
the reversal, the passing into the opposite quality, takes place. For example, a peace
protracted beyond the mark blossoms into disorder and war, extreme disorder produces
order, ascent is followed by descent and descent all the way up (cf. the Chinese folk proverb,
"When the moon is full, it begins to wane"), and so on, in a whole in which the invisible
regulating, rectifying and compcensing action of the Virtue of the Great Principle is
manifested, as in an immense circulation.

The second point concerns the concept of mutation, i, in which in both ? /-ching and
Taoism are summarized those of production, creation, development or becoming. Beings
and things appear, become, disappear by "mutation of state." In everything that happens,
rises, sets, in birth, life, death, there are but changes of state: this is a fundamental view of
Far Eastern metaphysics. In the Principia the potentialities of being are contained in the
preformal state; through the eternal power of the One. in this respect likened to the
feminine function (vin) of emitting generating, nurturing and nourishing, they pass into the
formal state (as will be seen, "corporeality" is synonymous with this) and enter the current
of transformations. In that current they can remain, in an indeterminate affair analogous to
that of the Hindu samsora and the Hellenic "circle of generation" (not to be interpreted,
however, as reincarnation, that is, as a necessary repeated reappearance in the human
condition, but as "transmigration"-"being a man is but an episode in the chain of
transformations"), if attachment to form subsists in them. They then undergo the crises of
discontinuity due to the various changes of state, "going out" (being born) and "coming
back in" (dying). That is, they can overcome them when they break away from the formal
state and become integrated into the transcendence present and ongoing in immanence: and
then they become the "men of the Dao," or "men of the Way." "Transformation," in
technical language, in accordance, moreover, with the etymological meaning of our term
("the going beyond form"), corresponds properly to the second case; the transformations in
the, shall we say, horizontal sense, in succession, or circle, of the first case are mere "state
modifications" and metaphysically irrelevant. Apart from what is proper to the operative
domain of esoteric Taoism, to which we shall refer later, from the absolute point of view in
this doctrine, not unlike in the Vedanta and Mahayana (wanting to add Western references:
that in Scotus Eriugena and Meister Eckhart), the difference between the two conditions,
however, is constituted by a pure fact of consciousness. In fact, it has already been said that
from that point of view there is no being who is ever outside the Way and the Great
Perfection. In the Tao-té-ching this is also expressed by saying that 1" extremely far away is
the return" (ch. 25; cf. ch. 32); in the current of forms the end and the beginning become
confused


84


and-as we read in another text-"are illumined by a great light." Thus from metaphysics
directly derives what for the men of the Tao must be the way: to exclude all that is extrovert
action proceeding from! peripheral center or aimed at empowering and stiffening the
peripheral center, that of externalized formal existence-the common individual ego-to
instead be and act by keeping oneself in transcendence, in the metaphysical, "empty"
dimension, ever present beyond all changes of state, where the true root and the unchanging
and untainted essential center is to be found.

Let us turn, then, to the domain of personal realization as it is considered in Tao-té-
ching. At the center of the text is the figure of the one who is called the sheng-jén. Again and
again Lao-tze describes to us its type, behavior, mode of action, and sovereignty. The
dependence of ethics on metaphysics is explicit. As the reader will see, in Tao-té-ching
metaphysical utterances almost always come first, then with the particle "so," or other
analogous one, we indicate what is proper to sheng-jén. This being is thus modeled on the
Way, and not on a human moral ideal. While in Lao-tze the prevailing term is sheng-jén, in
Taoism, however, we also encounter those of chen-jén and shen-jén to designate a being often
identified with the former. It is on the basis of this that we have made the choice of the most
suitable term to translate sheng-jén. Those almost always used by translators-the Sage or the
Saint-are to be excluded. While "Sage" is linguistically correct, as well, such a designation has
a primarily noetic-philosophical coloring, and for Westerners, by bringing to mind, for
example, a Socrates, a Plato or a Boethius, it refers to a very different type from the Taoist
one. Moreover, sheng- jén as Sage is precisely an ideal of Confucian exotericism, whose
distance from the plane of Taoism has been said. Even less suitable is the term "Holy,"
because of its background of a moral and religious character in the strict sense, a background
that sheng-jén lacks altogether: as it also lacks the emotional, yearning and ecstatic
background proper to the mystic. Finally, for a similar reason, namely a possible reference to
a merely moral fulfillment within the domain of the human, we discarded a third term, "the
Perfect," although we had used it in our earlier version. Based on the relationship just
mentioned above between the various Daoist designations. we have instead adopted, for
sheng-jén, the translation "Real Man," or "Realized Man" A higher dimension, that of
"Transcendent Man," shen-jén, must be equally referred to "Real Man," despite the difference
which, strictly speaking, exists between "Real Man" and "Transcendent Man," and which
Guénon has well illuminated (La Grande Triade, Paris, 1946, ch. XVIII) (5). If the term were
not too technical, one could also speak of adept in the initiatory sense, rather than of saint,
philosopher, mystic or sage, because, as to ontological status. that is precisely what we are
dealing with; among other things, this would not make one lose sight also of a certain magical
quality equally present in the type in question. In


(5) Tr. il. The Great Triad, Adelphi. Milan. 1980 (Ed.).


85


Indeed, "men of the Tao"-tao-shih-even at the beginning of our era were called fang-shih, a
term that certainly alludes to that quality. It is a general idea that possession of the Dao
confers magical power, and masters are referred to as té-jén, that is, "men from the #é" (from
power). But the term "adept" or "initiate" is too specific, so we preferred to render sheng-jén
as "Real Man."

"Real Man" is thus the one who reproduces in himself the metaphysical law of the Tao:
who, in order to be, is not, who by denying himself affirms himself, who by disappearing
preserves himself at the center, who is full with empty Tesser, who by obscuring himself
shines, who by lowering himself towers above. All this, in an impersonal and asentimental
sense. thus with a definite difference from the spirit that informs similar ethics outside the
Taoist East, for example in the Christian religion. The fundamental theme is also expressed
by the technical term "preserving the One" - chen-i - or "preserving the Essence" - ching.
Man loses himself because he displaces the original force outwardly, creating the concretion
of the self, supersaturating that concretion, immersing himself in "life" or energizing it,
nurturing attachment to that portion of life he "stole" and convulsively grasped at. Opposite
is the path of perfection or integration: desaturating, letting go, denuding, simplifying, not
acting, letting go of the ray, going back to the origin. That, as in the Tao, there is also in man
the continuous, free flow of life that allows essential detachment, transcendence, the
consistence in the immaterial and the elusive, and that dissolves into a higher spontaneity
and calm dominion the existential tangle. In the human world, this is the "higher virtue" as
opposed to the "lower virtue" which has in view instead acting and tending starting from the
limited human strength and illusory center of the individual self, being ultimately cut off
from the Way.

It thus seems quite clear how absurd it is to conceive of the doctrine of Lao-tze as
"quietism" in this regard. And when, apart from many Europeans, one hears from a modern
Chinese that the "non-acting" indicated for attaining "conformity to the Tao" is "the
weakness that is manifested by not desiring. not knowing, contentment, humility, etc." (P.
Siao Sci-Yi, in his translation of Tao-té-ching, Laterza, Bari', 1947, p. 20), one is really
faced with the height of incomprehension. If anything, not a "quietism" of the most subtle
and purified doctrine of "superman" can be spoken of. Such misunderstandings are then
exercised deplorably in the terms in which. in general, many passages of the Tao-té-ching
have been rendered by referring them to maxims of a most mediocre wisdom in social and
political life. While everyone, because of the virtual polysemy of an ideographic language,
may also find in such passages a meaning reflecting his own flatness, nevertheless it must be
held firm that the essential meaning is almost always that in inner, spiritual terms: these are
norms of the deepest inner life, almost we would say transcendental, not of external social
conduct. Lao-tze ethics is essentially an initiatory ethics.

About Daoist "non-acting," wu-wei, its positive counterpart is "acting without acting,"
wei-wu-wei. As noted above, wu-wei only means not to


86


peripheralTo intervention, exclusion of "doing" in the direct and material sense, of the use of
externalized power-as a condition for the manifestation of a higher form of action, which is
precisely the "acting without acting," wei-wu-wei. Wei-wu-wei takes over as the very "action
of Heaven" in its characters of tea, of invisible spiritual power that brings everything to
fruition, irresistibly but also "naturally." With paradoxical fonnules. Lao-tze returns again
and again to this concept: detachment, abandonment, not-wanting, not-acting in order to
liberate true acting, in identity with the Way itself. "To be man is to be Heaven," adds
Chuang-tze (XX, 7), "what prevents man from being Heaven is his own activity. And Chung
Yung himself (26): "He who so is can remain imperceptible or manifest his influence;
without moving he can cause upheaval, and without striving he can perform works."

In this context one encounters another patently absurdity in many translators or
commentators, that of seeing in Taoist precepts relating to both the individual and society
those of a "return to nature" with the premise of natural goodness or spontaneity, almost as
if one were dealing with a Rousseau anticipated by twenty-three centuries, with the
apologetics of the "good savage" and the corresponding trial of "corrupting culture" proper
to eighteenth-century Europe. To be sure, in Taoism the denial of "culture"-external
knowledge, rationalism, the contrived social system, petty political facetious wisdom, the
zeal to "enlighten the people," and all the rest, including the very study of books on the Tao
(which, says Chuang-tze, are but "the excrement of the Ancients")-is even more radical
than in those Rousseau-like ideologies. Here, however, the counterpart is something, which
with nature and naturalness such as we in the West have been able to conceive them, has
nothing to do. Just as in Far Eastern texts "natural" appears very often as a synonym for
"celestial," likewise as "nature" was conceived the Way itself in its sensible form, the
elusive, incorporeal celestial order in action (cf. Chung Yung, 1: "Celestial development is
called nature"). Thus the spontaneity spoken of and that everything operates only that "no
action is taken," i.e., only that the individual does not meddle, is the transcendental
spontaneity of the Way of Heaven; the "original simplicity," p ‘u, taoi- sta is not a trivial
idealized almost animalistic primitivistic innocence, but the state that in other traditions was
adumbrated with the myth of the Golden Age or other myths of origins, a state to which
was proper, if one may so express it, the naturalness of the supernatural and the
supernaturality of the natural. Moreover, it is noteworthy that both in Lao-tze and in older
orthodox texts, up to that attributed to the legendary Fo-hi (who is said to have reigned
from 3468 B.C.), we refer to an even more remote antiquity, the way of which is meant to
be restored (of Lao- tze, Confucius is said to have said, "This man claims to practice what
was the wisdom of the primeval age."). Making the heavenly element a synonym for the
natural element, and contrasting it with the human element, it is a Taoist saying that "it is
necessary for the heavenly element to predominate in order for action to conform to the
original perfection." The Westerner must therefore keep in mind that where he is led to see
a "naturalism" it is instead the vision of the


87


world proper to a humanity that, in a certain way, was still connected to the origins or
"super-nature"; directly and existentially, not through theories, revelations or religions in
the strict sense (religio, from religare, i.e., to reconnect what is already split) as in later
stages or cycles of civilization. This is the key to understanding the true face of Far Eastern
spirituality in general, up to expressions, such as artistic ones (think, for example, of
painting, with a subtilized "nature" that has as its constant background theme, or "canvas,"
the plane and the metaphysical "void"); it is the key, likewise’, to explain, in that ancient
spirituality and in what has subsequently been preserved of it, the absence of the ascetic
moment in a narrow sense, that is, as effort, mortification and violent overcoming, and,
finally, to understand the suaccused-and thus misrepresented-aspects of the Tao-te-ching
teachings on non-acting.

Referring to "Real Man," non-acting, on another hand, concerns those who shun the
play of concordant interactions, actions and reactions to act, instead, on the invisible and
preformal plane of causes and processes in their nascent state. In this is to be found, in Tao-
té-ching. the fundamental idea of /-ching itself considered in its aspect as an "oracular"
book; that of preventing the coercion of events and situations, of bringing action to bear on
that which is still in the process of becoming on the basis of knowledge of the "images" of
what happens in heaven and on earth. And already in the deH7-c/">ig tradition, the type of
one who, using such knowledge, is able to foresee, control and direct the play of actions and
reactions (of yin and yang in the world of forms and beings), beyond the motionless and
impersonal principle whose nature he reproduces, was defined. Thus one can define this
aspect of Taoist "non-acting" as not putting oneself on the same plane as the forces or things
one wants to come to terms with. Rightly has been recalled, by analogy, the principle of
Japanese wrestling, which is "never to oppose force to force but to bring down the opponent
by the strength of him alone" (C. Puini). The "Real Man" "does not act" - yields, retreats,
bends - in order to act in such a way, that is, to secure the initiative of true action, referring
to which Lao-tze speaks of a winning without fighting, of tying without using knots, of
drawing to oneself without calling and moving. In a more special venue, reference can also
be made to what is proper to magic, when wu-wei is brought back to the imperceptible
action on what is still "weak" or "soft" (in germ) to prevent subsequent developments, to
arrest them or to lead them in a desired direction, which to the layman will seem natural. In
this context in Tao-té-ching it is said that the weak triumphs over the strong, the minute over
the great, the soft over the rigid, and the image of water is used, which takes the form of
everything but has no equal in corroding the hard and rigid.

Apart from the doctrine of wu-wei, two possible ways of appearance are indicated
(though not without interference) for sheng-jén. The first is what may be called that of the
unknown initiate. Sse Ma Ts'ien reports; "For his (Lao-tze's) school, the main care was to
keep oneself hidden and to have no name or fame." Another said, "One is not a Sage if one
leaves a trace." The sheng-jén can outwardly identify himself to the common man, even to
the man


88


despicable, seeming devoid of knowledge, skill, practical spirit, culture, ambition, like one
who lets himself be carried along by the current of the world, avoiding standing out, putting
himself as it were in the light: as if by a kind of reflection, in his own empirical humanity
and conduct, of his keeping himself in the depths, nothing externalizing. This impenetrable
type of the initiate may seem-and to a certain extent indeed is-very extreme-oriental; but
after all it recurs in other traditions as well, in Mahayana and Islam for example, then in
Western Hermeticism and Rosicrucianism. And where in Lao-tze the description of the
"Real Man" in such a cryptic form includes some colorings of antinomianism, that is, of
disdain for current values and grandmothers, for "small virtue" and what is attached to it in
regulated social living, one may refer back, for a parallel, to the stfico, Islamic type of the
so-called "blameworthy" (maldmatiyah), such insofar as they may have a high,
unacknowledged dignity, or to the Tibetan legend of Naropa, who cannot find the master
Tilopa because, although he meets him again and again, he cannot recognize him in the
person of those who perform actions that are reprehensible to him, or, finally, to another
Islamic type, that of the majadhth, initiates who have made a split whereby transcendental
development has no reflection in the lower, human part, which is left to itself.

One finds, in the Tao-té-ching, suggestive characterizations, given in the well-known
paradoxical style, of this kind. To him one is not near, to him one is not far. he is above
honor and above shame (ch. 56). Without duty in the world, he is a wandering stranger
attending (ch. 35). Indeterminate as the ocean wave, he loves nothing but solitary height (ch.
20). He is straight in the curved, full in the void, untouched in corruption (ch. 22). He wears
common garments and conceals precious matter (ch. 70). According to the symbol already
mentioned, like water he is elusive and untamable, because he is adaptable to everything (ch.
8, 76, 78). He progresses without advancing, possesses without taking, arrives without
walking, wins by abandoning (ch. 69). To keep himself at the top he veils his ego (ch. 66). It
is a being that offers no hold, while, if it wants to act, its action, because it is from another
plane-from behind the scenes, one might say-achieves the goal without resistance being
possible. The magical trait of even physical invulnerability is not absent, almost as a chrism,
a tangible symbolic sign, of its transcendent detachment creating a different ontological
status (ch. 50). Chuang-tze (v. 5) speaks of it thus, "In the body of a man, he is no longer a
man. He lives among men, but is absolutely indifferent to their approval or disapproval, for
he no longer has their feelings. Infinitely small in that for which he is still a man; infinitely
great in that for which he is one with Heaven." And Lieh-tze (II. 5), "He carries his gaze to
the heights of the heavens, or to the depths of the earth, and to the farthest horizons without
his spirit being moved."

In contrast, the second type of Daoist sheng-jén corresponds to situations in which a
given structure of society and civilization makes it possible to match the intema and secret
quality with an authority and dignity


89


exterior, in the exercise of the visible functions proper to a chief, an ordainer and a ruler. In
that case the figure of sheng-jén is confused with that of the Wang and Ti. of the "Son of
Heaven" of the Far Eastern dynasties. This is the second possibility. 1 references to the
"Real Man" in such a capacity are, in Tao-té-ching, no less numerous than those to his other
eventual mode of appearance. This leads to consideration of the third aspect of the teaching,
namely, the application of the metaphysics of the Tao to politics.

While intrinsically Lao-tze's doctrine has nothing "mystical" about it, this character is
confirmed here in one special respect: precisely because of the constant reference of the
Way to the one who is to order society and act as the center or pole for the forces of the
world, to whom the exponent of an abstract evasive spirituality is not at all contrasted. In
this, too, Lao-tze keeps strictly in the line of the primordial Chinese tradition, which was a
tradition of unity not only on the purely metaphysical but also on the political level. For it
ignored the division of the two powers (spiritual authority and political authority), associated
the teachings of transcendent wisdom, beginning with theVI-ching and commentaries to it,
with figures of emperors and princes-Fo-hi, the "Yellow Emperor," Wen-Wang and so on-
and not with a distinct priestly or "philosophical" line. As repositories of doctrine, they were
regarded as the rulers: just as it seemed natural that eminently those who possess knowledge
and are in the Way as "Real Man" or "Transcendent Man" should be entrusted with the
command and function of ruling according to the "mandate of Heaven." Of fundamental
significance in this context is the Far Eastern conception of the so-called Great Triad,
consisting of Heaven, Earth and Man: Man, as the mediator between Heaven and Earth, is
essentially man as ruler and the ruler as "Real Man." This teaching, which is also Confucian
(cf. Chitng Yung, 22), is exactly found in Tao- té-ching (ch. 25). The eminent function of the
ruler is to maintain contact between Heaven and Earth.

As of ethics, so also of Taoist politics the essence is the imitation of the Principle, thus
also non-acting, according to the mentioned valence. And until 1912 (6), that is, as long as
the ancient regime lasted, wu-wei, non-acting, was the formula that. written on cinnabar,
stood on the Chinese imperial throne. It hardly needs to be said that in this regard the
incomprehension of most of Lao-tze's translators and commentators has been no less than
that shown in speaking of Daoist "quietism" and "passivity" as an individual ideal. The
precept to exclude, in government, force and coercion, not to intervene heavily in the
delicate and complex mechanism of social forces, the idea that overdoing and super-
organizing, rationalism, bridling, legislating and banishing precepts of "sociality" and virtue
lead to effects opposite to those aimed at, the principle that everything must order itself and
that one must only


(6) The year in which the Manchu dynasty fell, after the secession of the southern part of the country by Sun
Yal-sen (Ed.).


90


propitiating natural developments and the accrual of effects from certain causes, so much so
that V political optimum is to be recognized where the "ten thousand beings" and "everything
under heaven" hardly know they are governed and directed-all of which in Tao-té-ching
cannot help but suggest a political absenteeism, a societal utopia that, again, leads back to
Rousseau, the denial of any superelevated authority or power and thus, at bottom, of the
very idea of the state. This misrepresentation is almost inevitable on the part of modern
Europeans, since they no longer have any sense of the environment and core values proper
to the traditionally based regimes of their origins. But to have understood the true meaning
of Taoist metaphysics and the way of being of the "Royal Men" is also to realize that this is
about something else entirely. The idea of the state, first of all, is recognized, indeed in an
eminent degree, since, as mentioned above, the state, the empire, is even conceived as the
earthly image of the Way and almost as a promanation of it. As for the regime conforming to
the Dao, it is well suited to the attribute of "Olympism" (L. Wieger) when taken in a positive
sense, and the ruler's norm is that of personal ethics itself: detachment, non-acting as an
individual in order to exert an action which, for being subtle, invisible and immaterial, is no
less real but rather - given certain conditions of environment - is more effective than that of
any heavy and obtuse use of force, any "activist" intervention, any coercion. The ruler must
constitute the "invariable means" (this is the same idea as Confucius). Like the Great
Principle, he is absent, but precisely with that supremely, impersonally present. He exercises
the "action of! Heaven" by acting by his mere presence, by his mere being as "Real Man,"
by his transcendence. It is in this sense that Kuan-tze (1:5) says, "Sovereign is he who is
without movement."

It is, this, the direct application of the aforementioned extreme-oriental doctrine of the
Great Triad, of man conceived as the third power between Heaven and Earth, in a
framework that may appear unusual only if one overlooks the aforementioned combination,
in that tradition, of the political function with the sacral one: for if not, limited to the sacral
realm, a similar idea was not unknown to the West itself, it finding itself precisely in the
function of the "pontiff" according to the archaic etymological meaning of the term (=
"bridge-maker"): beings conceived as mediators, as avenues for the radiating of an influence
from above into the human world or even as impersonal centers of such influence - in Taoist
terms: of the té. The idea ofH "agent immobility" was also known to Aristotelianism, as well
as to other Eastern traditions (it is reflected, for example, in Hindu deities of the "purushic"
type). Taoism merely specifically refers this same order of ideas to sheng-jén as ruler.

Thus the essential thing, for the ru/er, is not specific material actions, not a "doing" or
even a human care, but -- by union with the Principle, by the destruction in oneself of all
particularity and irrational motion, by the adaptation of one's nature to that of the "center" --
is to possess and nurture tea, Virtue. Then the ruler will radiate an influence that resolves
tensions, moderates, invisibly and imperceptibly composes the play of forces


91


in total balance, which wins without fighting, which bends without using violence, which
rectifies and propitiates a climate where everything can develop in a "natural" way, in
accordance with the Way, so much so as to "bring us closer to the primordial state." To this,
two conditions are necessary.

The first is precisely, at the top, the non-acting, impersonal impassibility of the leader,
detached from all human feeling, from all mania for greatness, neutral in the face of both
good and evil as is. metaphysically, the Principle itself, because any declination in one sense
or the other from such neutrality or centrality would paralyze Virtue and have for immediate
repercussion disorder around him. Second, in the environment and on the periphery, the
condition is that the "ten thousand beings," that is, the people, hold in principle to "original
simplicity," that is, that one does not want to be what one is not, that one remains true to
one's nature and realizes to a certain degree, on one's own plane, the Taoist ethic that
condemns extraversion, individualism, agitation for unnatural ends, greed, imbalance and
excess. Then Heaven's Inaction" will be felt, both positively, through the aforementioned
climate in which positive dispositions will be brought to develop freely and naturally, and
negatively, by gradually bringing back into the right order the discarding forces, through the
play of concordant actions and reactions, the compounding of ways and destinies and the
law of the conversion of opposites when they reach their limit. Acting without acting within
this framework, at an Olympian and supernaturalistic concept of sovereignty, such is the
function of the Taoist ruler. as it is variously highlighted in the Tao-té-ching and, later.
emphasized by the other two early masters, Lieh-tze and Chuang-tze.

We recognize that of the two conditions the second is utopian only in referring to the
orientation of the most recent humanity. In fact, the European world itself knew, until after
the Middle Ages, the loyalty of large strata of the people to their state and nature, and this
was the basis of the stability of the ancient regime. As for the first point, Olympian
sovereignty, traces of it had been preserved in Europe at least where temporal power did not
dissociate itself from spiritual authority, and monarchies of divine right had an intrinsic
prestige, symbolic character and their own mystique. Already, however, China itself in the
early centuries of Taoism was far from presenting without fail the social environment
presupposed by the political principle of non-action reaffirmed by the doctrine of Lao-tze. In
view of this, Confucianism beat the other path, that of a social and human orthopedics based
more on normative principles than on original spontaneity. Han Fei-tze's so-called School of
Law gave proof of sound realism by combining the two demands, interpreting Daoist ideas
to mean that in the first instance drastic steps should be taken to restore individuals and the
masses to their natural state by striking down all transgressions and excesses, and only in the
second instance would the political principle of non-action be applied within the framework
of free and natural developments favored by superordinate influence. Instead, in Lao-tze, the
principles of a metaphysically based politics, Olympian sovereignty and invisible, top-down
action are presented without compromise or mitigation, in adherence to the pure doctrine of
origins. This, even though the stages of the


92


descent, of the involution of the political principle (ch. 17), leading all the way to the leader
who is only feared and, in the end, hated and despised. Chuang-tze, having recognized that
"under the rulers of antiquity the condition of men was altogether different: the people only
followed their own nature," had to push his pessimism to the point of saying, "Those who
have known the Principle have become the emperors and kings of the heroic age, those who
have not known it have remained earthly and carnal beings... Now the Principle is so
forgotten, that all beings, having left the earth to the earth return" (IX, 2; XI, 3). From this
we are led to say something about the fourth and final aspect of the Dao doctrine,
concerning the initiatory notion ofH immortality.

The current view among sinologists is that after the period of Lao-tze, Lieh-tze and
Chuang-tze, Taoism would have become corrupt and degenerated; ceasing to be
"philosophical and mystical," it would, on the one hand, have turned into a religion that
absorbed the most spurious and primitive folk beliefs, and on the other hand would have
given rise to a complex of superstitious doctrines and practices, associated with magic and
alchemy, at the center of which lay the quest for "bodily immortality" and thaumaturgic
powers.

This is accurate only in one respect. Acknowledging that the essential core of the
doctrine in its origins had a character that was not "philosophical and mystical" but, what is
very different, metaphysical, in the history of Taoism we certainly see the same process of
degradation undergone by Buddhism, which in its beginnings, as a doctrine of awakening
and enlightenment, had had an almost exclusively initiatory character (7). For Luna and the
other doctrine this was the fatal consequence of their spread and popularization. Already in
the first centuries after Christ Taoism had developed into a religion that attracted the popular
masses, reaching its apogee between the fourth and sixth centuries under the six dynasties. It
even gave rise to a political movement with the revolt of the so-called "Yellow Turban" that
overthrew the Han empire in the mid-2nd century. In that religion, what in the original
doctrine had the character of abstract metaphysical principles and moments of inner
experience, became transformed into a set of deities, spirits and entities that in ever-
increasing numbers populated an imaginative and baroque pantheon analogous to that of the
Buddhist religious Mahayana. Like the Buddha, Lao-tze was deified. The constant forms of
what is simple religion were reaffirmed: deferring to the gods to obtain salvation, the need
for external spiritual help, faith, devotion, worship with even collective rites and ceremonies.
Well, in regard to all this one can certainly speak of a regression that departed completely
from the spirit of early Taoism. However, Taoism which became a popular religion and exo-
terism, after partly mingling with Buddhism, was to rapidly decline in turn and survived
only as a cult of monks or as the practice of sorcerers, becoming the object of scorn by the
intellectualizing Chinese educated classes.


(7) Cf. Julius Evola. The doctrine of awakening (1943). Edizioni Mediterranee, Rome’ 1995 (ed.).


93


Things are different in regard to what, through misunderstanding, has been conceived
as a set of superstitious and magical techniques for the attainment of "bodily immortality."
In fact, here we are not dealing with a degradation but. on the contrary, with the esoteric
and operative side of Taoism, where a doctrine assumed a particularly precise form, a
doctrine which in essence is not peculiar only to the tradition in question but is found at the
basis of all that is initiation, even outside the East. The misunderstanding arose from the
fact that of these aspects of Taoism the most came to know something only when they were
degraded into circles and sects that no longer understood their true meaning: then it was
natural to attribute to the doctrines themselves as they had already previously been
transmitted the problematic or distorted characters proper only to what had appeared later.
Even of sinologists, however, they have had to recognize that already in the Fathers of
Taoism the presence of elements of the initiatory doctrine of immortality is attested, that
this therefore is not, as many others want, something more recent and spurious resting on
strained and fanciful interpretations of the Tao-té-ching and other scriptures. It is indeed
true that in such ancient texts one finds only hints that are often involuted; but, as we have
noted, in Lao-tze and the others one should not see isolated individuals given to personal
speculations, but the exponents of schools and chains that guarded certainly ab antiquo the
integral doctrine. To the latter one must refer when in certain Taoist traditions one speaks
of the "royal immortals who have realized the Tao" and who pass on only among
themselves, orally, the secret teaching about initiatory procedures, swearing by blood not to
reveal them to others.

That being said, although in this regard more than Tao-té-ching there is therefore to be
referred to the tradition in general into which it falls and which in such aspects became
known only later at various distortions, we shall give a brief outline of what it is about.

In order to bring out well the meaning of the doctrine of immortality mentioned above
and which, as we noted, is common to both Taoism and other Eastern and Western
initiatory schools, a comparison with religious views - to simplify, with those of
Christianity - will be needed. For Christianity, every soul is immortal; immortality is
consubstantial to it and is guaranteed. Not the soul's survival to death, but only how it will
survive-whether it will attain the bliss of heaven or whether it will have to suffer the eternal
torments of hell-is the issue here. So all the believer's concerns are not to escape death, but
to spare the immortal soul from the tormenting afterlife and to assure it of the beatific one:
that for him means "health" or "salvation."

According to initiatory doctrine, things are very different: the issue is not how one
survives but whether one survives. The alternative is between actual survival and non-
survival, survival and immortality being conceived not as a given but as a simple, non-
ordinary possibility. According to Taoism, almost all humans are indeed inscribed in the
Book of Death; only in exceptional cases does the Regent of Destiny erase them from that
book and place them in the Book of Life, that is, of immortals.


94


It would, moreover, be easy to point to correspondences of such an anti-democratic idea of
immortality, especially as the content of myths, in other traditions - it would suffice to recall
the notion of double destiny, that of "heroes" destined for the quasi-Olympic seats of
immortals, and that of "the most" in ancient Eliade. But in esoteric Taoism apart from doctrine
it is a complex of techniques put in place to secure the privilege of immortality by causing a
change of state, that is, the "transformation" mentioned above.

A second point of differentiation from religious exotericism is that, while for this the soul
is made immortal by detaching itself from the body, in Taoism there is instead the apparently
bizarre idea of an immortality to be elaborated already in life in the body and by transformation
of the body. Such an idea, which, pari- mens, is also characteristic of other initiatory and
mystical teachings, finds a very suitable framework in Far Eastern metaphysics. In fact, this
metaphysics, starting from the earliest dctt'l-ching commentaries, ignored the dualism between
soul and body, between "spirit" and matter. As has been dello, here birth was conceived as a
passage of being from the invisible and aformal state into the visible and formal one, and as
corporeality was conceived simply resisting with form, or externalized existence. This has also
been explained as a coagulation or binding of the spiritual, and for such a change of state
symbolic bodily images have also been given, those of a fixation of spirits and breaths or the
coagulation of the subtle ethereal substance (ch'i). In its deepest sense, however, fixation is the
identification or identification of being in existence with form. Externalized formal existence is
taken up in the current of transformations, is thus subject to the crises inherent in every change
of state, the leaving of one state (dying) and the passing of another. It seems natural that for
those fixed in form, that is, in the bodily state, this crisis can be destructive. Not having
retained, having "dissipated" the One, or Essence, he in the proper sense may not survive, will
recurrently "enter" and "exit" without anything substantial persisting. According to Taoism, his
being as an individual disintegrates; the metaphysical principle being obnubilated, having come
to an end the manifold forces (depicted as various entities residing in the body) provisionally
held together in the bodily frame and, in general, in the human personality, are released,
ceasing to provide the basis for the consciousness and continuity of the individual self.

Against this backdrop, in its own way not rambling but realistic, is also defined the
esoteric doctrine of an immortality to be worked out in the body and in life (as a deplorable
circumstance is thus considered to die before one's time) on the basis of an ontological and
existential transformation of the condition of formal existence: immortality, which does not
mean escaping death materially but rather escaping the crisis bound, for the common man, to
the transformation or change of state, Jma. Thus of the legendary ruler Jan- siang it was said,
"He alone remained untransformed in the universal transformation." And Chuang-tze (1, 2),
about ("Real Man": "Neither life nor death can cause any change in his Ego: apart from the
hearths of harmful influences."


95


It is not the case here to dwell on the details. We will only say that the techniques
contemplated are aimed at curbing the extroverted tendency of identification with life and
dissipation of essence in life (in Tao-té-ching there are many maxims susceptible to be
taken up operationally in this sense), at generating and nurturing what is called ("immortal
embryo" or "mysterious embryo," dissolving the coagulation of formal existence. Which
could be expressed in Western dualistic language by saying that the "body" is transformed
into "spirit," or that "body" and "spirit" become one by reintegration into Principle. One
may quote the following passage from a text, from the Yun-chi ch'i-ch'ien, referred to by
Maspéro (Le Taoisme. Paris. 1950, p. 39): "The body is penetrated by the Tao and becomes
one with the spirit: he in whom body and spirit are united and make no more than one is
called a divine man (shen-jén). Then the nature of the spirilo is empty and sublimated, its
"substance not destroyed in the transformation. The body being wholly like life, there is no
longer either life or death...enduring or ending depend only on itself; one goes out and
comes back in without intermission." Then, "The transformed material body is identical
with the spirit; the fused spirit becomes subtle, is one with the Tao" (Le Taoisme. p. 40).
"Molten," "to melt," is a technical term in operative Taoism, synonymous with
"decoagulate" (in the same sense as a metal passing from a solid state to a fluid state by the
effect of fire, that is, precisely by fusion). And that is, overcome the stiffening in form, only
because of which death can mean something other than a mere change of state, not held to
affect the essence. The whole being becomes alive in the current of the primordial vital
fluid, ch'i, with which contact has been reestablished.

It remains to be added that all this is not thought of in abstractly spiritualistic terms. In
the fusion, the many powers of the psycho-physical composite, which would otherwise be
dissociated and released, are integrated and taken up into the essential One. Hence the
specifically Taoist notion, recurring in various "biographies of the Royal Men who
enchanted the Tao," of the fusion or solution of the corpse, shi chieh: the Taoist adept dying
leaves no body; in his grave is nothing but a sword or rod-sceptre as a symbol. This is the
sign of the "men of the Dao" of higher degree, delti the "Immortals." They are thus such-let
us repeat-not in the sense that they will live perpetually as men, but in the sense that they
die only in appearance, because they are integrated without residue into the higher central
principle both in life and death. Thus the true meaning of Taoist "bodily immortality" is that
the form integrated into the preformal is transferred into the primordial nonexternalized
condition, and yet removed from the flow of modifications and changes so much so that one
can think of an "immortal body" by analogy. If one wishes, one can also speak here of "pure
forms," in a sense analogous to that given by scholasticism to that term. Only by laymen or
semi-initiates, who could not understand the teaching in these metaphysical and esoteric
terms, was the whole taken up in a crude and superstitious way, and thus thought of
procedures that promised to eliminate old age and ill


96


tia and to indefinitely prolong physical endurance. The misunderstanding, with the
inevitable shift to superstitious forms, is thus self-evident, although it is not to be
ruled out that from spiritual realization certain extranormal possibilities in human
existence may possibly proceed by way of effect, and that these have been much
cultivated by some schools (8).

For Westerners, the same terminology then lends itself to misunderstanding,
for the expression almost always used is ch'ang-sheng, which, while literally
meaning "long life," actually alludes to a life that has no end, to a continuous life,
therefore also to immortality (we mentioned earlier that a not different meaning in
China was had by "old age" itself, hence the attribute of "old" applied to deities and
to Lao-tze himself); it is easy, on that basis, to believe that the Masters had
longevity and a kind of composition of the elixir of long life exclusively in view.
Finally, an even more serious misrepresentation took place, in China, in the Taoism-
religion, where the mentioned esoteric doctrine gave rise to the myth of the believer
who, after death, takes up the body and leaves the tomb to go to the paradise of the
immortals. And the exact correspondence of the coarse esoteric Christian
conception of the "resurrection of the flesh," which arose by the same route, that is,
by an obtuse interpretation of certain mystic teachings gathered from early
Christianity and echoed in the Pauline notion of the "glorious body" or "resurrection
body." The "resurrection of the flesh" is not the fantastic event at the end of time,
but the hinted initiatory "decoagulation" of the bodily condition. or with form.

A striking Taoist image for the one who passes through, free and invulnerable.
any change of state is that of the "flying immortal," fei-hsien. One finally
encounters the initiatory hierarchical distinction between the "terrestrial immortal"
and the "celestial immortal," a distinction that is likely to be traced back to two
degrees of immunization from changes of state, with respect to those on the plane of
the human condition alone in the one case, with respect to those proper to other,
higher conditions of being, in the other case. See also Chuang-tze (XXII, 2):
"Among beings, some seem to disappear, yet they continue to exist; others with
having lost their (physical) bodies only become even more transcendent."

It is not the case here to deal with the procedures used by operative Taoism.
Apart from the discipline of thought and contemplation, yogic, breath-based and
even sex-based techniques, possibly with a dietary regimen, drugs, forms of an
applied alchemy and even a kind of gymnastics (so-called tao-yin) have been
considered as adjuvants (9). On the inner side, the premise is detachment, thus not
"desiring the desi-


(8) See also Julius Evola. The Hermetic Tradition (1931), Edizioni Mediterranee, Rome*. 1996. Part
Two. Introduction, §§ 24 and 26 (ed.).

(9) Cf. Huang Ti, Nei-Ching, Edizioni .Mediterranee, Rome. 1977; and Lu K'uan YU, The Yoga of
the Daos. Edizioni Mediterranee. Rome. 1976. On Chinese alchemy, see also: Julius Evola, Metaphysics of
Sex (1958), Edizioni Mediterranee. Rome’. 1996, § 56 (ed.).


97


derio," as Lao-tze already says, to decoagulate the flow of life energy; it is the re-
establishment on its throne of the One, ruler that usurpers or rebellious generals had
banished-the technical term "nurturing the spirit" is synonymous with strengthening the
One, which is also sometimes called the Great Yang. At the opposite of mystical
exaltation, it is the cold impersonal magical quality that must be acquired; at the opposite
of moralism, it is the balanced neutrality with respect to both good and evil that is needed.
"Cooling the heart," "emptying the heart," hsii-hsin.

In a Taoist text it is said, "The heart, like dull ashes, without emotion or tendency,"
expressions, these, which are already found in Chuang-tze. Then one will perceive the Tao
and realize that one is in the way. The rest is a consequence, a consolidation. In Chuang-
tze (VI, 5 - cf. XXVII, 4), referring to master Pu Leang Yi, seven stages are distinguished:
1 ) to detach oneself from the outer world; 2) to detach oneself from neighboring things; 3)
to detach oneself from one's own existence; 4) a clear intuition then intervenes, like
"morning light"; 5) having reached this point, one perceives the One; 6) having perceived
the One, the distinction between past and present falls away; 7) after that "the mystery is
fulfilled," there arises the state "in which one is neither alive nor dead," i.e. the superiority
to life and death proper to being "transformed," united with the fixed Principle "from
which all mutations derive." After that, we read, "He had therefore killed life, and yet was
not dead; he lived life, and yet did not live; he was a bodily being who did everything and
was in relationship with everyone, and yet for him all this was destroyed, although he was
able to bring everything to completion. This state is called "being embraced by calmness,"
embrace which is followed by perfection."

It is this realization that gradually, proceeding from the subtle to the thick, will
decoagulate or produce the "fusion" of the form, until the dissolution of the body, the shih-
chieh. Finally, for the initiatory amalgamation of soul and body into the "mysterious
embryo," there is an explicit reference in the Tao-té-ching as an outcropping of the secret
teaching (ch. 10). In terms of written documents, on all this the best accessible information
is found collected in a study by Maspéro (Les procédés de "nourrir l'esprit vital" dans la
religion taoi'ste ancienne, in Journal Asiatique, voi. CCXXIX, April-June, July-September
1937). But if these techniques are attested as early as the fourth and third centuries B.C.,
likewise it is difficult to separate the genuine core of ideas from what comes from
misunderstanding and misrepresentation, from deviations or degradations of doctrine.
After all, in the Masters the warning is explicit, that the real key to operative Taoism is not
given in writing, but is only transmitted orally.

As early as the Han period the esoteric Taoism of the "men of the Tao," tao-shih,
separated from Taoism-religion, continuing as a secret tradition almost to the present day.
One of the few Europeans who came into direct contact with representatives of it, the
Matjoi (pseudonym of Commander A. de Poupourville). at the beginning of this century
reported on the existence in Taoist initiatory groups of a hierarchy of three grades. The
first is that of tong-sang. in which one is introduced to the teaching formulated in the texts.
The second degree is that of phu-tuy, and includes a special in-depth


98


ments not merely intellectual doctrine; by oneself one must be able to discover the higher
and secret meanings contained in the texts, here science not being able to be acquired
through any other person than by contravening the law. To the third and final degree one is
admitted after a period of seclusion and the discipline of silence; after which one obtains
full initiation, with the degree of phap. The phap generally corresponds to the first of the
two types of the adept previously described; he is a dark and powerful being, revered and
ignored, wandering, detached from everything. He is attributed with the power to
absolutely command his body and the knowledge of the secrets and hidden forces of
nature. He corresponds to the "Immortal" of ancient Piti Taoism (see Matjoi, La vaie
rationnelle, Paris, 1907. ch. VII). It can be referred to by the saying, "They neither act nor
rest, neither live nor die, neither rise nor fall."

This, so far as the area of Chinese civilization is concerned, where, as it was said, the
other, outward and degraded forms of Taoism-religion or semi-Buddhism-had long ago
fallen into disrepute and lost more and more ground to the second orthodox orientation, to
the Confucian one. Much of the spirit of "Lao-tze" Taoism, even as a general conduct of life
and internal discipline, has, on the other hand, been preserved, mixed with Buddhism, in
other schools, such as in Zen, which still subsists in Japan and on which the attention and
interest of various Western circles have also recently been brought there. There recurs
especially the theme of the elimination of the ego and its tensions (the "emptiness") and
antin- tellectualism as the way to a higher spontaneity and perfection (acting without acting)
not confined to an ascetic or "mystical" world, but embedded in all domains of existence. In
the Zen way an enlightenment, usually conceived as a sudden, abrupt break in level,
produces the change of polarity and brings the self back to the true center, unites it with the
Great Principle (10).

To this brief briefing on! Taoism according to its various aspects, metaphysical, ethical,
political and esoteric, we therefore follow up the new presentation of Tao-té-ching. As we
said, within the framework of the maximum that can be afforded to what we use to call the
"scientific," linguistic treatment of it, we have consistently attended to an interpretation in
the manner of the higher meaning to which most of the maxims are susceptible, so that we
can make the text count as what it really is: as one of the fundamental expressions of the
traditional spirit in general. A few comments added to the individual chapters will serve to
reconnect their content to the basic ideas illustrated as a whole in this introduction.


JULIUS EVOLA


(10) Cf. Julius Evola, The Doctrine of Awakening cit. Il. ch. 11 (ed.).


99


Tao-te-ching


The Tao that can be named Is not the eternal Tao

The Name that can be pronounced is not the eternal Name.

(As the) Namelessness it is the principle of Heaven-and-Earth.

With the Name lossia: determined as Heaven-and-Earth] is the origin of the infinity of
particular beings

Thus: those who are detached

He perceives the Mysterious Essence.

Of those who are clouded by desire

The gaze is arrested by the limit f sees only the phenomenal appearances of the Principle].

Now of the two IH Nominable and the Non-Nominable, the being and the non-being] One the

essence, different only the denomination

Mystery is their identity

It is the unfathomable bottom

Beyond the threshold of the last arcane.


Indicated here are the two aspects of the Principle, transcendent the one (unnamable,
without form-equivalences: the non-being, the Void, the motionless), immanent the other
(nameable, with form-equivalences: the being, the full, the mobile). Other Daoist designations:
the "Before Heaven" (hsien t'ieri) and the "After Heaven (hou t'ien). The first determination of
the Dao (also called "the Great Mutation") is Heaven-and-Earth as cosmic symbols of Yang
and Yin. This Diad produces all the modifications, thus the infinity of particular beings, their
paths and destinies ("The Great Flow," the "current of forms").


101


The unmanifest and the manifest, the aformal and the formal, the "before" and the "after
Heaven" are not to be distinguished temporally (as if at a given moment something like a
"creation" intervenes), but in logical-metaphysical terms. Transcendence is immanent,
"fullness" coexists with "emptiness," non-being is the bottom of being: identity, which
constitutes the ultimate mystery of Daoist realization.

Cf. Lieh-tze (I, 1. 3): "The chain of productions and transformations is unbroken, the
producer and transformer producing and transforming without it.... The producer is immobile,
the transformer comes and goes. And the motionless and the motionless will always last."
"Analyzing the production of the universe, the unfolding of the sensible from the non-sensible,
the germ of the calm generating action of Heaven and Earth, the ancient Sages distinguished
therein these stages: the Great Mutation, the Great Origin, the Great Beginning, the Great
Flow."


102


For everyone under this sky, conceived the beautiful

The ugly is born (as a correlative)

Fixed the good

The non-good takes shape.

Likewise: being and non-being intercondition themselves

Possible and impossible are complementary differentiations

Large and small characterize each other

The high flips into the low

Articulate sound and noise complement each other

"First" and "then"/or: "ahead" and "behind"/run in a circle.

So the Real Man

Lingers in the non-acting

He teaches without speaking

He directs without touching /without commanding/.

Shape (makes become, leads to development/ without appropriating

Accomplishes without doing /without calling attention to what he does/

Essentially: not residing (in the domain of correlatives, where it takes place
the play of opposites)

It always participates (of the original force).


In the first lines, reference on the one hand to the law of correlation of all human notions;
then, on the other hand, to its ontological counterpart, to what may be called the "dialectic of
the real." Taoistically: the solidarity and alternating action of opposites, of yin and yang, gives
rise to modifications of the phenomenal world that now complement each other, now transcend
each other.

This dynamism, already ne\VI-ching given by the circle of "Heavenly Figures," i.e.,
trigrams and csagrams. does not touch the calm, undifferentiated essence of the Principle.
Chuang-tze (II. 3): "Still center of a circle on the circumference of which all contingencies,
distinctions and individuals run." Hence, the transition ("thus") to the non-acting behavior of
the Real Man, the sheng-jen. as it reflects within itself the Principle in its nameless aspect (cf.
Ch. I).


103


On the gnoseological level, from the principle of correlation of opposites is deduced the
relativity and irrelevance of human distinctions, thus of all current values, to which in reality
nothing corresponds: which, however, "only great spirits are capable of understanding"
(Chuang-tze, II, 4).


104


Empowering beyond the mark

You provoke (by reaction) the fight

By emphasizing what is rare to have

A guilty desire for appropriation is aroused.

Veil that which, in things, attracts

And the soul will remain calm.

Thus: the Real Man as leader.

It goes without preferences and appetites

Weakens the impulses [the man of desire, the physique self], hardens the inner being [lit: the
bones]

Without (outward) knowledge and without desires guides the ten thousand beings Confuses

those who know

Avoid action (self-centered)

And society will always live free in its own order.


Some translators have rendered the line "(the sheng-jén) without knowledge and without
desire guides the people" with "(the sheng-jén) makes the people have neither knowledge nor
desire." To ignore the symbolic significance of the respective characters, in a modern Chinese
translator the "devoid of preferences and appetites" later became, "(the royal tiomo) empties his
heart and fills his belly" (!!!). Along the same lines, there are, among sinologists, those who
have interpreted the grandmotherly contained in these lines even as "numbing the people" (the
"ten thousand beings") on the one hand and, on the other, as "repressing the most nobly human
part in heart and will (hsin and chih) and blandening instead the most vulgarly bestial part -
belly and bones (fu and ku)."”

Instead, the internal logic of the entire chapter corroborates the lesson adopted here. Not
knowing and not desiring (in the sense of the individual's discursive knowing and desiring) are
the traits repeatedly attributed to the Real Man by the Tao-té-ching, which in him are virtues,
how much they would be the opposite in the layman and the people, that is, how much they
would be unrealizable in this one (if taken in the positive sense, as virtues).

Elsewhere in the chapter there is mention, yes, of the usefulness of keeping the people in
an ignorance that will safeguard their original simplicity (which is different from "stupefying"
them). But for now, it rather alludes to a propitiatory desaturation of measure and away from
tensions and disordered appetites (first lines of the chapter). As noted above, it is thought that
by his presence alone the Real Man acts in this sense .on the environment, fostering an orderly
spontaneity in social life.


105


Dao is not substance, it is inexhaustible activity

Acting that does not increase it How unfathomable it is!

It is like the primordial source of everything.

Blunts the sharp

It clears up the confused

Temper the dazzling

It orders the elemental parts ["the dust"] (of matter) It is elusive yet omnipresent
How could it have been generated?

And prior (and superior) to the Lord of Heaven.


The insubstantiality (the "emptiness"), the pure actuality of the Principle is
emphasized, an actuality that neither increases nor diminishes it (thus opposition to
both the theory of the "becoming" or "becomingness" of Spirit and that of its
degradation by emanation). The Taoist image is also that of a vase that by
continually pouring out what it contains remains full and that while always filling
up again remains empty. "Primordial scaturigine" is the abstract sense of the text's
tsung = avo, original father. If one retains the image, given the ordering part proper
to the Chinese head-family, the idea of an ordering power may also be included in
the fourth line, following some translators. Then a natural connection would be
established with the next four lines, which deal with the action of the Dao.

Important for Taoist metaphysics are the last two lines, where the principle is
said to be "without origin"-wu yuan-, superior and prior to the Sovereign of Heaven
(the Shang Ti), that is, the god-person. In this passage a certain cautious manner of
expression has been noted linguistically, due to the part that the Shang Ti played in
the state cult under the Chou dynasty when the Tao-té-ching was composed. It is as
if out of a regard for that conception of exotericism. But in the introduction we have
already noted the foreignness of personal, theistic and anthropomorphic conceptions
of the divine to the Far Eastern primordial tradition, taken up in its abstract,
metaphysical orientation by Lao-tze. Chuang-tze (II, 3) makes it clear that one can
admit the principle of a universal regulator (from which by participation is derived
the principle of every unity, family, people, etc.) but on condition that one does not
make it a distinct personal being, that one understands it "as an influence without a
graspable form."


106


The Universal [Heaven-and-Earth] is not human [compassionate] All things (produced)
uses them as means

Real Men are not human (jen) Beings they have them as means.

(As) the void between Heaven and Earth / = in its Virtue] The Principle is similar to a
bellows

It empties itself and is inexhaustible

While inexhaustibly creating with his motion.

(So) it is vain to multiply words and plans (in caring for individuals) Keeping in the middle
is best.


The term in the text rendered as "means" (second and fourth lines) is literally
"straw dogs" (ch'u kou), simulacra manufactured in ancient China for certain rituals
and then abandoned, thrown away. It is meant to express that the Absolute
considers individuals only in universal function, that is, in function of what
transcends them, for every other way, that is, for what they are mere ephemeral
appearances in the current of forms, not caring about them (non-"humanization" of
the Principle, as opposed to the religious conception of Providence and God-love).

Because it reproduces in itself the detached quality of Principle, the Real Man
equally ignores human solicitude, even as the Confucian jén (solidarity,
sociability), by some Taoist commentaries called the "little virtue" or "lower
virtue." In the last two lines, words and measures in view of the particular as such
are contrasted with action from the "center," that is, from a neutrality free of
preference and sentimentality, in view not of the part, but of the whole, of the
universal. It models the virtue of the Dao, which while producing inexhaustibly
remains "empty" (image of the bellows), that is, pure, simple, "free from the self."
Cf. Chuang-tze (V, 1) who, referring to Wang-t'ai, whose influence "derives from
his transcendence," says: Having attained perfect impassibility "he lets beings
evolve according to their destinies, and he maintains himself as the immovable
center of all destinies" (as in another passage, II, 3, is said, of the Principle:
"motionless center of a circle on the circumference of which run all contingencies,
distinctions, individuals"): for "there are two ways of considering beings, as distinct
individuals or as all in a great whole." It is the imperturbability of a spirit that,
"superior to heaven, earth


107


And to all beings, he dwells in a body.... Absolutely independent, he is lord of men.'

In the above ideas there are those who have wanted to see the reflection of a
cold, unscrupulous Machiavellianism. Even if one wanted to go all the way down to
the political level, this could only be right if the point of reference was a powerful
individual's will to dominate, i.e., that exasperation of a particular ego that. by
contrast, is the first thing that the Royal Men destroy in them (cf. already ch. 6).

About the last line, even in the Chung Yung we read, "Keeping the right middle
is perfection, but very few in the world can last there" (4). 11 metaphysical sense is
the opposite - it is hardly worth saying - of that of moderation, of practical "golden
mediocrity." About the aforementioned relativity of the divergence of views in Lao-
tze and Confucius, the following passage from the latter can be quoted, again in the
same context: "He who reigns according to the virtue of Heaven resembles the polar
star; he is motionless, but everything turns orderly around him" (Lun yii, I, 1).


108


Eternal is the energy of the middle space [of the valley/ It is the Mysterious Femina
The door of the Mysterious Femina It is the root of Heaven and Earth

Continuous and invariable

It acts and does not run out.


Possible interference, in this chapter, of the doctrine of the Dao with remnants
of the archaic conception of the primal maternal Feminine (Magna Mater Genitrix).
"Power of the median space" - literally, in imagini: "life force (or spirit) of the
valley." The valley, understood as the space between two rows of mountains, brings
back to the idea of both the Void and the median space where the virtue of the
principle is manifested, in eternal promanation and transformation (unlike the
meaning of the valley - and the feminine - referred to in chapters 61 and 66). The
two-leaf door in some commentaries has been referred to the Principle acting
through the Dyad, the yin and yang. The whole is unclear, because here the idea of
Principle is overlaid to some extent with that of Virtue. Finally, it may be the
"ethereal fluid" (ch'i). This is one of the most involuted chapters, variously
explained. It is also of those that have been made the subject of esoteric
interpretations in operative Taoism, with reference to the occultly considered
human being. Characters with technical meaning are used, the meaning of which is
difficult to trace. As a hint to such interpretations, the Mysterious Femina is the yin
(p'o) soul principle or energy from which those seeking bodily immortality must
extract and coagulate the subtle essence; the two-leaf door alludes to the nose; from
the last two lines we get the allusion to the technique of breathing: "in long, long
strokes (one breathes) as if one wished to hold the breath, remaining motionless"
(cf. J. J. M. De Groot, Universismus, Berlin, 1918, pp. HO-111). The Mysterious


mom


Femina is the "intema woman": "she is continually in us," says Kuan-tze.
.


109


The Universal is hermitage

It is eternal

Because he does not live for himself.
Therefore: the Real Man

Backing away advances

Staying outside is always present
With not making oneself the center
It achieves perfection.


Although the characters used in the first line are "Heaven and Earth," here they
express the idea of totality, and it is not to the qualified, "nameable" Principle that
we refer but to the action that makes it eternal: it "is" in a transcendent sense insofar
as it denies itself.

"Stepping back" = not putting forth self. By reproducing in himself the way of
the Dao, the Real Man advances, grows transcendentally as an absolute individual
to the extent that he does not make his human individuality the center (it can also be
translated: by not having person-person inclinations, he becomes a person,
personhood ensues). Taoist technical expression: "letting the person fall like a
garment."


HO


The transcendent quality resembles water Without resisting it takes the form of everything It
takes the lowest position, which men despise (because they seek heights).

The further you are from (acting) communal, the closer you are to the Way.

(Thus: the Real Man) in the material domain holds for good the staying in the place he has

In the domain of feeling holds for good the depth of the ‘abyss If he gives, he holds for good the
generosity (impersonal) Speaking, he holds for good the truth

Governing keeps orderly development for good

Acting holds for good the shrewd attainment of the end In the practical domain holds for good
the intervening in the right place. Indeed, precisely through adjusting without struggle Nothing
alters its being.


Classic Taoist comparison of water for subtle action and "higher virtue" (shang shan).
Adapting outwardly to things and situations, not extolling but descending below (which also
means: beyond the surface) to exert the desired influence. According to another aspect: in this
context, the "I break but do not bend" related to the ego mania could be contrasted with the "by
bending (= water) I break." The set of behavior illustrated in this chapter being designated as 7
hsing (which is as good as saying: "ease of nature"), the positive counterpart is also indicated:
spontaneous and essential way of operating, beyond antitheses.


Keep when filled to the brim Not possible

Keep an extremely sharp blade Not possible.

One cannot, at one and the same time, Possess and preserve, possessions and power united
with pride Prepare by themselves for ruin Acting and retreating / = passing into the
shadows/ Is the Way of Heaven.


References, by imagery, to the law of converting into the opposite of all that has
reached the extreme. In the apex one begins decadence. For essential possession and control
of transformation, one must know how to abandon at the right point what one has brought to
completion; to bind oneself to it, and especially to associate with it the pride of the ego, is to
expose oneself to being thrown off balance. The inner meaning of these maxims must be put
before the social and political meaning, to which one has usually arrested oneself, in
mundane terms (for example: do not accumulate riches and possessions because they cannot
be secured -- or: retire to a dark life after accomplishing or collecting honors).


112


10


Preserving the One to that spirit and body join And piti do not separate
Circulating (in the body) the fresh and subtle breath Generating the embryo.

Clean the secret mirror excluding all complicated thoughts A that the mind does not wear
you out.

In dealing with others and holding up the state Follow the non-action.

The instability [mutability] of fate [the opening and closing of the Gate of Heaven]
Worth developing the receptivity of the soul [ = the virtue of the feminine]

With the essential vision embracing every aspect ["the four dimensions"]
Eliminate knowledge (discursive) [ = look ignorant]

To achieve development:

Creating without owning

Act without appropriating Elevate without forcing. This is the Way.


The first part of the chapter reflects the ideas of operative Taoism about the elaboration
of immortality (see Introduction, p. 97 ff.). It hints at practices with the breath, the vehicle of
life energy, which, subtilized, was used as a means for the occult unification of spirit and
body in the original. "Spirit and body," Aun and p’o (first line)-strictly speaking, technically:
yang soul and yin soul, spiritual soul and physical soul. The former is the non-terrestrial
light principle, the latter the life entity. One could also say: "being" principle and "life"
principle. The privileged condition of immortality is achieved through the union of the two
principles, in the sense of a perfect interpenetration of the p’o by the /iun, of "life" by
"being," overwhelmed and obnubilated upon entering the current of forms. The integration
of the two principles into the One is compared to the forming of an embryo - the embryo of
an existence removed from transformation. On these practices, in addition to the already
cited study by H. Maspéro, see the text, also translated into Italian, // Mystery of the Flower
of Oro (Edizioni Mediterranee, Rome, 1971).


113


The starting point of such practices is also mentioned: detachment from the
environment, simplification and calming of the mind, to keep one's nature
completely pure and whole. Cf., in Chuang-tze (IV, 1), The "abstinence of the
heart": "Do not listen with the ears nor with the heart, but only with the spirit.
Preclude the way of the senses, keep the mirror of the heart pure. Keep empty...
From the outside, let only things penetrate into the inside that have no more name
(impressions freed from mental translations)."; VII, 6: "The Transcendent Man
exercises his intelligence only in the manner of a mirror: he knows and knows
without any attraction or repulsion following, without any impression subsisting. In
this way he is superior to all things and neutral before them"; XIII, 1: "11 heart of
the Real Man, completely calm, is like a mirror reflecting Heaven, Earth and all
beings." All this, to be reconnected with Lao-tze's "cleaning the secret mirror."

Subsequent operational developments, as a "decoagulant" conjunction of body
and spirit, are also attested in Lieh-tze (li, 3; IV, 6) in these terms: "The spirit
condenses as the body dissolves" (becomes "etherized," "rarefied"). One noli the
correspondence with the solve et coagula formula of the Western hermetic-
alchemical tradition, which likewise knew the formula: "corporize the spirit,
spiritualize the body, make fixed the volatile and volatile the fixed" (on this, see our
work The Hermetic Tradition cit., Part Two. § 16).

The second part of the chapter returns to sketch the "nonagent" behavior of the
Royal Men.


114


11


Thirty spokes converge in the hub

But it is the emptiness of the hub that is the essence of the wheel.

The pots are made of clay

But it is the internal vacuum that makes the essence of the vessel

Walls with windows and doors form a house

But it is the emptiness of them that makes their essence.

Generally: being serves as a useful means Net non-being [in the void]lies the essence.


Various imagery used to express the idea, that the essence of the material and the sensible
lies in the immaterial and the invisible, that the "full" is ordered to the "empty": reference to the
metaphysical plane ("emptiness" = transcendence) and concordant reference to the nature of
non-acting. The wheel with thirty spokes was that of an ancient sacral chariot.

In the esoteric interpretation proper to operative Daoism this chapter has also been related
to the distillation of the subtle from the dense, the latter being ordered to the former and having
to be resolved in the former (in the yang soul) in the "solution of form."

For the ambivalence of the Dao, cf. the expression, "It is heavy as a stone, light as a
feather."


115


12


The sight of colors blinds the eyes of man The perception of sounds deafens the hearing
The taste of flavors dulls the mouth The identification with action obscures the mind The
craving desire [passion} destroys the possibility of movement (binding to the
corresponding object)

Therefore: the Real Man

Doesn't lose the self in the not-it

It excludes the outer; it consists of the inner.


Maxims with possible initiatory value as well, in relation to the discipline of removing
oneself from the violence of the impressions of the external world (see, further on, the
"closing the door") in order to develop a subtle sensitivity (that, which in the first lines is
said to be stifled or impeded) and consolidate inner freedom, which amounts to a gradual
shifting of the center from the p’o to the hun soul plane. It is Taoist teaching that already
the natural use of the senses can be harmful, when it comes to defending and preserving
intact the "original simplicity" (p’u): this, because of the irruption of the multiplicity of
sensible appearances into the mind.

An example of the distance in the Chinese text between the literal sense of the
characters and their abstract meaning: literally the penultimate line would sound something
like this, "(Real Man) is for the belly and not for the eye." It is that the eye is taken as the
door through which the external world penetrates into the self, altering and transporting it,
suffocating the internal senses, while the belly is taken as the "empty" part of the body,
thus, transposing (according to the ideas set forth in the previous chapter), as symbolizing
the essential and transcendent part of the human being. The pre-eminence of the belly over
the eye therefore stands to signify that the Real Man is not lost in the world that is revealed
to the eye, that is, in the external world, in the non-lo. A thing generally ignored in the
West, the obesity, the "big belly" with which "Immortals" and Taoist sages, but also certain
Chinese and Japanese Buddhas, have often been depicted, has a symbolic character based
on the idea now explained: it alludes to the development that in such beings has precisely
the "emptiness" principle or dimension of "emptiness"-the immaterial or transcendent
element. Belly, lower belly - in Japanese: hara. On its meaning as a center in still existing
Japanese esoteric schools.


116


cf. K. Diirckheim, Hara, Vital Center of Man According to Zen (Edizioni Mediterranee,
Rome, 1969), and on the problems related to it our essay, The Japanese Hara-theorv in its
Relation lo East and West (in East and West, No. 2, 1958).


117


13


Grace received wounds as much as misfortune Greatness weighs down as does the body.
What does it mean, "Grace received wounds as much as misfortune"? Grace received
implies one's own lowering W is anxiety in waiting for it

There is anxiety in losing it.

What does it mean, "Greatness weighs down like the body"?

Having a personal moon body means offering grip

The body is the principle of heaviness

If one did not have it

There would be no passibility.

Therefore: those who break away from greatness

Can freely rule the empire

Those who are attached to the body so little count to the empire May rely on the empire.


The text of this chapter is very corrupt. Thus divergent translations have been
given. Instead of "grace received," it can also be read: favors, honors received; we
refer, then, to being dependent because of it, with the implied lowering of one's
own, innermost dignity, which is "disgrace." The ideogram for "body" can also be
rendered as "person"; then the passibilities, given as a term of comparison for that
to which external, profane greatness exposes, are those inherent in being a person,
in a limiting sense: a variant, this, to which by making slight modifications the
whole can be equally accorded, preserving the overall interpretation given to the
chapter.


118


14


You look at it and do not see it, whence it is called invisible You hear it and do not understand
it, whence it is called soundless You touch it and do not grasp it, whence it is called
incorporeal. These three characteristics of the transcendent

They mix and say one ‘thing.

It is denial of the higher brightness

And of the lower darkness

It is immense and insusceptible of name

Refers to what is before (and above) being

Its form is the absence of form Its figure is the absence of figure Indiscernible depth
If you bring your gaze forward you don't see the end of it

If you take your gaze back you don't see its origin Primordial principle

In place now [as in all time - perpetually current].

Follow the way of the Ancients

And the eternal essence of the Principle will be known.


The ninth line can be understood either metaphysically: the Dao stands before and above
being-or in these terms, referring to individual beings: the Dao brings them back from the
current of transformations to that which stands before and above being (the preformal state).

In the first lines: the Principle, tangible but elusive. Its non-being, which is the non-
existent. You may be interested in this passage from Kuan-tze (XIII, 36), to reencounter the
attributes of the principle with the technique of realization: "The Tao is not far away, though
reaching it is difficult... Emptiness and nonbeing, incorporeality and immateriality, this is
called Dao. Heaven is empty, Earth is calm, neither one nor the other strives. Cast away the self
and be silent: then divine clarity will abide in you. He who deeply understands silence (p'u jen)
and stillness will understand the essential tow of the Dao... If (man) renounces cravings,
emptiness (/isti) will interpenetrate him entirely; by it interpenetrated, he will remain calm and
non-acting; calm and still, he will regain contact with the vital ether; he who possesses the vital
ether is detached (from the earthly form); detached, he will radiate light like a god (ming
shen)."


119


The Masters of Ancient Times

They were free, clairvoyant, mysterious, intuitive

In the vastness of the forces of their spirit they did not know of a lo

This unawareness of inner strength gave greatness to their appearance.

To characterize them with imagery:

They were cautious

As one who crosses a (frozen) stream in winter

Firefighters

As one who knows around him the enemy

Cold

As a stranger

Vanenti lelusivi]

Like melting ice

Rudi

As undirozed wood

Vast

Like the great valleys

Impenetrable

Like murky water.

Who, today, with the greatness of his light could lighten the inner darkness?
Who, today, with the greatness of his life could revive the death [inertia] within?
In those was the Way

They were individuals and lords of the self

And their non-being [their vacation = the not grasping, taking or filling, in a translational

sense]
In them was perfection.


The characterization of the Masters of Ancient Times, models of Taoism,
appears to be associated with the traditional idea of the regressive course of
historical iimanity, vividly felt even in the Far Eastern world (a Chinese proverb
says, "Antiquity was like full rice, we are like empty shells"-see also Lao-tze's
reference to the "way of the Ancients" in the previous chapter). This is a teaching of
general significance, and what in Tao-té-ching lo


120


reflects should not be referred to mere local Chinese political conditions, to the decadence of
the Chou dynasty, under which Lao-tze would have lived, as according to the banal
interpretation of several commentators or translators. "A living light illuminated high antiquity,
but scarcely a few rays of it have come down to us. To us it seems as if the Ancients lived in
darkness because we see them through the thick fog from which we emerge. Man is a child
born at midnight: when he sees the sun rise he believes that yesterday never existed" (Taoist
text quoted by R. Rémusat). Cf. Chuang-tze (XXXIIL, 1): "The ancients coliaborated with the
transcendent celestial and terrestrial influences, with the action of Heaven and Earth" (this is
the concept, already mentioned, of the Great Triad)

Because of their structure in the original, the last lines of the chapter are controversial.
We have essentially followed the lesson of Ular (1) as the one that organically connects these
lines with the rest and keeps them at the level of the whole.


(1) See Introduction to 117 Book of the Way c of Virili, supra note 1


121


16


Those who realize extreme emptiness

Find that (which beyond the changeable and the particular) subsists motionless and calm In
the flow of countless beings

He sees their going out [going to formal state] and swarming And how they all return to the
root.

Returning to the root means a state of rest

From such rest ( succeed to) a new destiny

This is the immutable law (of transformation)

Knowledge of the immutable law leads to the clear vision

Non-knowledge of immutable law leads to blind and harmful action Knowledge of
immutable law leads to detached equanimity Being detached means being superior

To be superior is to be regal

To be regal means to be like Heaven

To be like Heaven is to be similar to the Principle To the eternal and identical

And one will be forever out of harm's way.


The chapter usually goes under the designation kuet kén - "return to the root."
It briefly outlines the two ways we mentioned in the introduction. On the one hand,
the eternal law of the flow of transformations, deir "entering" and "exiting" of
beings, an affair for which the imagery of being exhaled (exiting, being born, in the
sign of yang) and re-inhaled (returning, dying, in the sign of yin) is also used in the
commentaries. or that of the back-and-forth motion of a weaver's loom (Lieh-tze).
On the other hand, the contemplation of this law, contemplation that initiates
detachment, and the perception of the motionless substratum of transformations,
which "brings one back to the root," makes Real Man similar to Heaven and puts
him out of harm (only in the exoteric interpretation, out of the harm and risks
inherent in this one life - esoterically: immunity with respect to what may proceed
of the crises bound up with ontological changes of state).

It should be emphasized that Taoism knows this dual possibility, that therefore
its horizon is by no means exhausted-as more than one has argued-in the eternal
monotonous affair of appearing and disappearing, of leaving and


122


re-entry of beings, resulting in a fatalistic indifference as the norm of wisdom. Lieh-tze (I,
9) calls this "the lower knowledge." The higher knowledge, on the other hand, concerns the
knowledge of the Principle and reintegration into the root (from Lieh-tze, IV, 2, indicated in
these terms: first, deep union of body and spirit, then integration of that unity into the forces
of the world, brought by "non-being," i.e., transcendence). For those who come to such a
point, says Lieh-tze (VI, 2), endurance in the current of forms appears as a long sleep, and
death as the great awakening from a dream (Chuang-tze, IL 8 - cf. VI, 8: "You and I who are
speaking at this moment are like two unawakened dreamers").

Chuang-tze himself (XIX, 1, 2) says that he who, having his body and spirit intact and
united with nature, "having gathered all his powers," "has reached the starting point of
transformations and remains there," upon the occurrence of the dissolution of form "is
capable of transmigration." It does not dissolve, but, "quintessentially, becomes a cooperator
with Heaven."


123


17


The people in the origins hardly knew that there were (rulers)
1 successive (rulers) were loved and exalted

/ subsequent were feared

1 following were despised

Their disloyalty [incomplete loyalty] destroyed all trust

The first, serious, reserved in speaking

They fulfilled their function perfectly

And the ten thousand beings said:

" We live according to our nature."


Until recent times in China the "invisibility of the emperor" (because, according to
ritual, he only very rarely showed himself) was an outward symbol of the invisible "non-
agent" government. The text indicates the later, increasingly degraded forms taken by the
type of the leader. First of all, "distance" is lost (the principle, before, was, "one exerts
influence, only by keeping oneself distant"). The ruler is visible and "popular": he loves
popularity or needs it. His prestige is not based on the feeling of distance, but on the feeling
of closeness to him of the ruled mass; for this he is loved. In a third time takes over the type
of the prince who rules only because he is feared. Finally we come to the leader who, at one
and the same time, is feared and despised, with which all relations of loyalism and mutual
loyalty are broken, and the structure of a state reaches the limit of instability.

The ruler of origins, "whose power is derived from that of the Principle," was called
"the Mysterious One"-says Chuang-tze. He transmits the influence of the Principle to all
beings, causing natural capacities to develop in them; originally his "policy" was "to bring
the individual nature of individuals back into conformity with the universal acting virtue"
(XII, 1-10). The general idea is summarized quite well by Granet (La pensée chinoise, cit.,
p. 547) in the following terms: "For the profit of all things, but without charity or pride, he
limits himself to concentrating in himself an intact Majesty... this sovereign Majesty is not
distinguished from a pure Power nor from an integral knowledge (/ she)... Unknown
autocrat, it does its work without anyone being aware of it, and this work is accomplished
without affecting in any way the one from whom it emanates."


124


18


Lost the Way

They put forward "humanity and justice "

(Lost original simplicity) from skill and cunning

The great hypocrisy was born

Broken the blood bond that bound the original

They made up for it with family feelings When kingdoms fell into disorder "good ministers"
stepped forward,


19


Take away (small) wisdom, put away prudence And far greater will be the benefit of the people
Let not humanitarianism and morality be banished And a spontaneous [=family-like] solidarity
will reign in society Let utilitarian purposes be devalued, self-interested action be despised
And in society guilty actions will disappear.

(But also) about these three maxims

One should not stick to the letter

It is essentially necessary:

Being (themselves) in rough, natural directness

Detached from particular ambitions free from vain desires.


Visible continuity of this chapter with the previous one. Banning "virtues" is, for Taoism,
only a sign of a corrupt society. See ch. 38: "Higher virtue does not give itself as virtue." It also
speaks of the "non-virtue of virtues," in the latter meaning those artificial ones corresponding to
an outward precept that, rather than restoring a life of integrity, will only increase harm by
propitiating hypocrisy and cunning. Taoist polemic in this regard, not without reference to a
deterrent or misunderstood Confucianism, has often gone overboard. "Humanity and justice" -
Jjén and i - are precisely cardinal Confucian virtues. Family sentiments reduced to conventional
and obligatory behavior also belong to decadence (ch. 18). Cf.


125


Chuang-tze (XIII, 5): "This scurrying after humanity and justice reminds one of a fellow
who beat a drum in chasing a runaway son, with the sole effect of making him flee piti far
away.... Unite your influence with that of the Principle instead of imposing artificial virtues,
and you may come to something."

From the last lines of ch. 19, the positive point of reference becomes clear: the conduct
that comes from being oneself, instead of reflecting a grandmother of society. The
elimination of desires, as vain desires, is not to be understood here in an ascetic, striving or
renunciatory sense. It is a fundamental idea of Taoism that in man a complex of desires,
tendencies and interests is not "natural" at all, it is an error, it is something artificial and
parasitic. One is truly oneself-and is in the Way-when one frees oneself from it. Then true
virtues also manifest themselves. "Morality," far from restoring this state of natural balance,
moves one even further away from it, adding to one stratification another stratification.
Effective image: "The beginning is what I call the thaw (the dissolution of the concretion of
the outer self), after which the river begins to take its course" (Chuang-tze, XXIII. 3).

In a way, in the following chapter the same double instance is reaffirmed. Among the
outgrowths with respect to the natural state, of which one must prune oneself, the world of
intellectualism and social distinctions between "good" and "evil" is also brought within its
ambit. However, in contrast, a being oneself is described that already leads quite far along
the line of Transcendent Man in his closed and impenetrable form. The reference, as will be
seen, is in the first person-it is almost the only passage in the Tao-té-ching where the author
speaks of himself: however, with the visible intent of sketching a model.


126


20


Intellect (discursive, reasoning) is a source of pain
Dialectical distinctions, what consistency do they have?
Between "good" and "evil" what is the difference?
"Acting like everyone else" - fear-based norm.

No! (filo ri da) this squalor.


Everyone is carried away by an easy joy

All they need is a party

A spring landscape such as is offered to us from a terrace lo, instead, anchored in the
depths of the current of feeling I remain serious and calm [beyond joy] like a child who has
not yet smiled.

I live like this and go as if I don't belong anywhere.

Everyone desires excess

While I am like one who possesses nothing

(I look) unaware, simple, without practical spirit

Everyone lives in the light

While I am dark

Everyone needs company

While I love nothing but the lonely height

Indeterminable as the waters of the ocean

Like the wave I turn without ceasing

Everyone is aiming for something

While I look simple and incapable

lam different from everyone

But combined with the 'original producing essence, only Iam a lo.


127


21


The great Virtue as manifested

And only the exteriorization of the Principle

But the substance of the Principle

It is undifferentiated and elusive

Indifferent and elusive

It contains the seeds The archetypes, the seminal possibilities of beings, constituting their
indestructible element, their "heaven."]

Mysterious and incomprehensible

It contains the existences 1= beings passed to the formal stage] Deep and hidden

It contains the essences/transformed beings - the "spirits"]

As such is the great Reality (Of all beings) the secure seat. From the origin until the present

It does not change its Name

From him proceeds the animating principle (of all things) What is the foundation of such

knowledge?

This.


Beings do not cease to live in the Principle and to have their "secure seat" in
him in the threefold condition: 1) in the preformal state "being part of Heaven-and-
Earth" as archetypes or seeds (kéyot OTtppaTixoi ) ; 2) in formal existence or
existence in the proper and limiting sense; 3) as pure forms. Coexistence of the
issue, of the eternal movement where such stages succeed each other, and of the
mysterious, elusive, motionless Oneness.

The unknowability and elusiveness that would be the predicates of the
Principle in this respect is contrasted in the last lines with the form proper to a
possible knowledge of its mystery: "this," a term to refer to direct, metaphysical and
superrational intuition (it recurs in ch. 54). Compare the expression tathata which,
used with a similar meaning, in Mahayanic Buddhism designated the content of the
supreme, unutterable experience.


128


22


Being whole in the fragment

Straight into the curve

Full in the void

Intact in corruption.

Collected is achieved

Missing you fail

Therefore: the Real Man preserves the original One.

He thus becomes a model for the world He does not stand out and shine By not asserting
himself he imposes himself Devoid of complacency for himself he becomes great Because he
does not fight

No one can attack him.

"Being Whole in the Fragment"

This ancient maxim

Would it be meaningless? No: in the Way it is the truth.


The saying in the first line, repeated in the third last - chil tsé ch'iian - can be
interpreted as much in the sense of a norm ("to be whole in the fragment") as in an
ontological sense (wholeness of the fragment). Ontologically it is meant that in the
Way the fragment (the part) is the whole (as well as the curved is straight, the
empty is full, etc.). It is the idea of "partial perfections" reflecting in their own way
the Principle. It should not be understood (as various translators have done) that the
fragment will become the whole, etc. materially, by transformation or development,
but rather that it already is when seen in the Way. Instead, in the nonnative sense
that maxim ("to be whole in the fragment") refers to a specific extreme-Eastern
concept of perfection: to accomplish exactly and perfectly everything, with natural
and effortless concentration. Then, whatever activity one is engaged in, one is in the
Way. Cf. in Chuang-tze (XIX. 3): "To unify intentions; to have only one. which is
confused with vital energy" (cf. XIX, IO. 12). There is a relationship between this
idea and that, already explained, of "original simplicity," even in its "magical"
aspect.


129


23


Speak little and act like nature

A rushing wind does not blow a 'whole morning

A downpour does not last a whole day

This impersistence is proper to nature itself [~ to Heaven-and-Earth] If

not even nature has the power to persist (in extreme actions) Man even

less can

Therefore: in life imitate (not act) the Principle.

To become one with the Principle

Imitating (acting) the (its) Virtue (tea) perfecting one with it Abandoning oneself to the

transformations to realize) in oneself the power Adapting oneself to the Principle enjoying

it

Adapting to Virtue enjoy it

Adapting to the transformations enjoy them

(However, in most) so much inner confidence is lacking, whence the incomplete
confidence...


Real Man conforms to the Principle and reproduces it in its dual nature: non-
agent (the Dao proper) and agent (the Virtue of the Dao). The latter, as is known,
acts in perpetual transformation. So in all that is external the Real Man does not
stiffen and resist against the instability that Heaven-and-Earth itself, especially in its
extreme manifestations, shows him; he follows the course of the transformations of
forms, the immutable not being to be grasped and realized on this plane. So much,
however, requires an inner confidence, something like an intrepidity or
"metaphysical trust" (in the Way): the art of an active letting go, as one who
surrenders to the play of the waves without being submerged. Which, is from a few
(last line).

In the tenth and thirteenth lines, the character shih, rendered as
"transformation," has the more current sense of "defect" ("transformation" would
properly be t). The literal translation would therefore be, "to join the defect (shih) in
order to enjoy (or enjoy) it." With "transformation" (referring to the instability and
changes spoken of in the beginning and which are the way of the Way) in place of
"defect," the meaning of the two lines fits well with the rest. Wanting instead to
keep the literal meaning, the phrase could bring one back again to the norm of being
whole in the fragment and of one's own nature: joining the defect is equivalent to
wanting what one is in the limiting conditions of the formal state; with this
adaptation, excluding the arbitrariness and mania of the self, one is in the Way.


130


24


The effort of those who keep themselves on tiptoe is not to rise Exaggeratedly discarding their
legs is not walking Those who put themselves in the light remain in the dark

He who thinks he has arrived finds himself brought back To put himself ahead is to lose value
To estimate oneself is to decay

Compared to the Way all this

It is but excrescence and detritus [waste].

Respect at last, it is a thing to disdain

He is far from this who is in the Way.


The line of one who, united with the Principle, manifests a natural, impersonal
spontaneity is opposed to all behavior based on displacing and externalizing the center of the
self in the concretion of the small ego, a simple outgrowth (the text adds: "refusal") with
respect to being. Any accentuation of that automatically converts into an impairment of this: a
Taoist theme already familiar to us. On the same order of ideas an even more drastic Taoist
expression is: the ego is an abscess that bursts with death.


131


25


There is an indefinable and perfect Principle [being and non-being].

Anterior to Heaven-and-Earth

Calm and hidden

Lonely and changeless

Present in everything that moves (and yet) unchanging (because it does not participate in
movement)

It nourishes all that is.

Unmentionable

Man calls it the Way (Tao)

Greatness he strives to conceive.

Greatness means process

To proceed is to turn toward the infinitely distant

The infinitely distant is the return.

Thus: great is the Principle, great is the Heavens

Great is the earth, great is the royal man (wang)

(As) in the universe four are the greatnesses [the four elements] Who rules is one of them.

Of man the foundation is the Earth

Of the Earth the foundation is Heaven

Of Heaven the foundation is the Way

The Way is foundation to itself [is the unconditioned].


In the first line the opposition of the characters wft and yu can also express a
simultaneity of being and non-being (Wilhelm). The parenthesis has been added so that the
reader, if he or she wishes, also has in view this second possible interpretation, which is


adherent to the metaphysics of the Dao.


The fifth line expresses the idea that although the Principle is present in every
movement (lit.: "goes around everywhere"), it does not participate in it, thus does not
remain modified by it (opposition to pantheism and absolute immanentism). Cf. Chuang-tze
(XXII, 6): "The Principle produces the succession (of opposites), but it is not this


succession. It is the author of causes and effects, but it is not the cause and effects."


The tenth, eleventh, and twelfth lines deal with the cyclical course whereby the


extremely distant brings back the origin and the apex of existence for-


132


evil transpires in leaving the form and returning to the root (metaphysical coincidence of
beginning and ending).

In lines 13-16 if one abstracts from the Principle there remains the Great Triad-a
classical concept throughout Chinese tradition-which consists of Heaven, Earth and Man.
The wang character for "man" can also have the meaning of ruler, for these are man in the
eminent sense: to such a mark, that in China one of the expressions designating him is "the
One Man." So in those lines we have associated the two concepts by using the term "royal
man." As mentioned in the introduction, the third term in the Great Chinese Triad is in fact
Man above all in the function of sovereign-pupil. As Guénon noted (The Great Triad, cit.,
ch. XVII), the "pontifical" function, that is, mediating and linking Heaven and Earth (as
metaphysical principles and not as elements of visible nature), is indicated by the very
structure of the wang character.

Instead, in the seventeenth line it is the case to interpret wang simply as "man," because
only of man in the current sense can the foundation be said to be the Earth.


133


26


// grave lies at the root of mild

Calm is lord of disorderly movement

Therefore: the Real Man while acting

Never abandons its calm gravity

Even in the glory and among the splendors of the world He remains alone with Himself,
detached from the external.

But what will it be if the great ones make a show of levity ?

With being light you lose the root

By letting go we lose all authority, we lose imperium.


Parts of this chapter have been given esoteric interpretations, with reference to
the theory of "cinnabar fields," tan tien, considered by the hyperphysical
physiology of human beings. The lower field, which lies at the root, is called "the
force field" and plays an important part in the processing procedures of "bodily
immortality." See also the aforementioned Diirckheim's book for the Japanese
notion of the /iara.


134


27


Good walker leaves no footprints

Good talker does not attack

Good calculator does not need to count

Good imprisoned man closes without bars

Good binder ties without using rope or knots.

Thus: the Real Man always knows what to do.
Nothing rejects

Always has adequate means for the purpose

He never finds himself reduced to helplessness

This is veiling (his) light.

CosThe Real Man

He is the lord of the ‘lower man

The inferior man

It is not that his matter

To this quality of his (the Real Man) he does not value
He does not cease to cure (impersonally) that which is his matter His wisdom does not appear.
This is subtle and essential.


New references to modes of acting without acting. Some translators have seen in this
chapter an antithesis between those who exercise such modes of action and those who use
direct action to assert their power over men or, as Wieger puts it, "to make the professional
savior of men and things." Rather, the sense is that even to wish to achieve such aims the best
means is precisely the invisible "trackless" influence that Real Man exerts by concealing his
true nature from the profane. The title generally given to such a chapter, ch'iao yung,
underscores precisely this substantive meaning, for it means the technique or art of indirect
action (in the pejorative vernacular sense, ch‘iao even means "skill as shrewdness").


135


28


Knowing about one's own strength

And look willfully weak w

It means possessing the quality of the valley.
Who is like the valley

Preserve Virtue

Regain the primordial staro.

Knowing about one's own light

And look dark

This is the basis.

Of those who own this base

Virtue does not waver

He returns to the perfect state.

Knowing about one's height

And look small

It means possessing the quality of the valley.
To whom the valley is counted

Constant Virtue will suffice

In the state of original simplicity

The simplicity of the elemental not yet dispersed in forms.
Man realized by using it

Becomes chief

And it governs from the One, not by particular actions.


Sticking to the literal rather than the abstract sense, the first two lines can also
be rendered as: "knowing of one's own strength as a male and having the virtue of
the femina" (male = strong, femina = weak). Then it is not only a question of the
duplicity of the Real Man insofar as outwardly he presents himself as the opposite
of what he is, and in the specific case he knows a virility quite different from that
based on a crude outward assertion; the simile with the valley rather imports a
reference to the subtle virtue of the receptive or feminine, which is also spoken of
more explicitly in ch. 61, combined with the already well-known image, used for
the tea of the Principle, of the valley as the lowest place that attracts and captures
the waters of every higher place.


136


The fourth last line is referable to theiPrinciple: "a simplicity that specifying itself by
modification produces the essences." As can be seen, the fundamental Taoist idea of
"primordial simplicity" according to its metaphysical value recurs in the chapter. Its application
(last lines) is "Olympian government" (Wieger): influencing the whole by holding oneself at the
center, rather than by direct particular actions. Because of the homonymy of "sculpting" and
"governing," ideas both expressed by the ideogram chih, the meaning can also be derived: "the
great sculptor little cuts"(Waley).


137


29


To maintain the empire having to resort to direct action Means being forced into the
opposite of what should be done. The empire is a delicate and complex organism

It does not conform to regulations decreed by an individual To order it (mechanically) is
to disorganize it To want to fix it is to let it slip away

Because changeable is the behavior of beings

Now it is an advancing, now a yielding

Now there is ardor, now there is apathy

Now there is impetuosity, now there is weakness

Now he is agitated, now he is calm.

Therefore:/'Real Man (regarding the whole of beings).

Avoid forcing

Eliminates pompous opulence

Reject the excess.


Sense of the last lines: apart from his "presence" action, the function of the
Real Man as leader must only be that of "moderator": he lets each being follow its
own nature not by trying to regiment it in a mechanical and artificial order (cf. ch.
18 and 19), however, by repressing every excess (cf. ch. 74), every point of tension
or saturation that would go to disturb the mutual connection and compensation of
the forces at play in society (cf. ch. 77). The model is always the Dao. The
expression tiao ho indicates "the concerting, harmonizing or coinspiring action that
lies beneath all contrasts" (Granet).


138


30


Dominate according to the Way

It is dominating without resorting to force

(Because) there is no action that does not attract a reaction.
There where armies passed

Weeds and thorns grow

Where there was war

One will certainly have bad vintages.

The good leader wins and stops

Asserting himself does not abuse the power

It is. and does not seek its own glory

It is, and it does not seek its own advantage

And, and he doesn't get superfluous

Acts only when necessary He is resolute without being violent.
At the highest point the decline also begins.

This is out of the Way

Out of the Way, swift is the end.


As the specific content of the chapter, eventual application to warrior actions
of the detached and enlightened way of being in accordance with the Way. They
must be dictated by necessity and be carried out having a clear view of the
consequences; then everything that may have, reference to the human personal
element and ambition of the military leader must be eliminated. The latter must not
be carried away by his action, even in winning he must know the limit. By ignoring
the limit, he will be exposed to the consequences of the law of actions and
reactions, of the subito converting into its opposite of what is achieved by violence
and by an excess that alters right relations. The following chapter partly develops
the same ideas.

As an example of a leader who followed the style of the Dao, and fired after
his victories, Fan-li (5th cent. B.C.) is often cited, who, though he was offered half
the kingdom where he returned in triumph with the victorious armies of Yiieh, "got
on a small boat instead, and nothing more was heard of him" (Kuo Yii, 21, apud A.
Waley. The Wayand its Power, cit., p. 144).


139


31


Even in the best forms domination IS a nefarious thing

True strength is not dominance

This is not cared for by those who follow the Way.

The Real Man in peace honors the left In war honors the right

Nefarious is the force even when it is peaceful It is not the instrument of Real Man When I
‘adopts it being compelled He keeps himself impassive He takes no joy in destruction The
spirit of destruction in man is not a sign of strength It is not the way of (true) dominion
[The auspicious stands to the left The inauspicious stands to the right The subordinate
stands to the left

The leader stands to the right

According to the order of funeral rites J

Announcement of destruction, announcement of doom

Death of men, source of weeping Victory with strength Is sorrow.


There seems to be interpolations or a mixing of the text with a commentary in
this chapter. Certainly interpolated are the five lines put in square brackets.
Literally, in the last two lines it is said that the victor in war, or one who is such by
the use of mere force, should feel as one who attends a funeral rite; to grieve, rather
than to rejoice. Only in the outward sense, to grieve for the deaths or destruction
caused; according to the inner sense, to grieve, instead, for himself, for having to
leave the Way. However, Taoist anti-belligerence is not to be given greater
prominence than the principle of impassibility: cf. Chuang-tze (VI, 2), where it is
said that "Royal Men make war without hating, and good without loving," in this
having likewise an imitation of the) Principle, to which Chuang-tze himself thus
appeals, "You destroy without being evil, you build without being good" (XIII, 1).
Only the power of the Dao "cuts without wounding."


140


32


In its essentiality, the Principle is nameless

It is as simple as the extreme particle of matter

Yet the whole would not know how to contain it.

If sovereigns and princes were to reproduce its nature.

To them the ten thousand beings would spontaneously obey

Heaven and earth would harmonize

By descending the subtle fertilizing dew And the people would order themselves even without

being commanded. The particularization of the Principle produces individuation [beings with a

name].

Identification means limit

Limit that leaves the Principle intact

Compared to the beings all in the universe

The Principle is like the ocean and the great river where the waters of streams and valleys
converge.


Return to the metaphysics of Principle: its transcendence (its not being able to be
contained by the world, i.e., by manifestation) when considered in its eternal, aformal
simplicity (lines I -3); simultaneously, its presence in all beings, its not being affected by the
limit (by name) that defines them.

The "fertilizing dew": the invisible, propitiatory influence of the natural order, when the
ruler as the "Third Power" imitating the Principle "helps Heaven," harmonizes Heaven and
Earth.


141


33


To know others is wisdom

To know oneself is enlightenment

Dominating others is strength

To dominate oneself is superiority

Rich is he who is sufficient to himself

Energy in applying to the purpose means character
Those who do not leave the place they have will last
Not ceasing to be after death is immortality.


In the penultimate line one tomes to the norm deli'essere se se, in fidelity to
the part assumed upon entering the human condition. 11 forcing, changing place,
refining oneself without contact with one's original nature creates only a kind of
fictitious being outside being, destined to dissolve, not to last; instead, that fidelity
brings one back to that which subsists beyond transformation. The last line is not a
trivial truth in that the survival involved is by no means guaranteed for everyone
(see the introduction). In fact, another possible interpretation of that line is, "after
death, do not forget"-that is, maintain the continuity of consciousness. This is why
the present is one of the chapters referred to in Operational Taoism.


142


34


Great is the Principle! It flows endlessly

Indifferent in every direction

All beings have life from him without being annulled in him

Of them he carries out the unfolding (in the course of transformations) Without imposing
himself as a master /without binding them, without asking anything of them/. For this his
eternal giving without taking

Seems devoid of being /seems infinitely small]

In him the eternal circle of things is closed.

With not dominating

It turns out to be infinitely large.

Therefore:/ 'Real Man not seeking greatness.

Greatness follows.


It tomes on the dialectic of the Principle, which in its eternal giving and
emanating realizes its own simplicity or superessential infinity (the "Void"), the
center, beginning and end of the circulation of forms. Contrast this with the
conception of a jealous and domineering personal God in the face of his
"creatures." The Taoist Principle is with the "emptiness" itself created by its
impersonal flowing and giving. it is with the pure dissolving from itself of beings,
which generates the occult virtue that will cause their return (cf. the image of the
"valley").


143


35


He who has in himself his great image (of the Principle)

It goes into the inundation without duties

Wandering foreigner attending.

Freedom, calmness, height

They are his foods

There is no stopping him, who goes.

Yet the Way, to speak of it

It looks dry and drab

Toward her the gaze of many peeped, but they did not see her To perceive her many stood
listening, but they did not Puddle Yet never had they ceased to live in her.


Chapter, which in translations by Sinologists has almost always been rendered with
platitudes. The exception is the Ular version, which has been substantially followed here.


144


36


To retain [to close

It is quicker to extend

To weaken

It's quicker to strengthen

At the apice following the descent

It makes what you want to tear down ascend

To take

You must first give

This is the subtle wisdom

The yielding and the weak overcome the hard and the strong
But how the fish cannot live outside the deep water
So the weapon of this wisdom

Do not show it to the man in the crowd.


The most obvious sense of the first part of the chapter concerns that aspect of
non-acting, or subtle acting, which, based on the law of inversion, precisely by
letting a situation or a power develop, by giving it free rein, even by favoring it,
knows how to come to terms with it. However, it is also possible to hold to the
metaphysical plane and interpret by referring to ! Principle, according to what was
said in ch. 34 (the original power developing in letting go c in giving).


145


37


Principle is always non-agent

Yet there is no thing he does not do (with his unseen influence) If rulers would imitate him
All beings would proceed in their natural development

Cravings are aroused in their movement (unnatural)

But I stand firm

In transcendental simplicity [unnamed]

In the simplicity that has no name

It is imperturbability [immunity from cravings].

In the peace created by this imperturbability

In freedom everything will go to order.


Known pair: non-acting and original simplicity. Keep in mind the Taoist
theory about the artificiality and parasitic nature of cravings compared to the
"natural state."


146


38


Higher virtue (shang tea) does not give itself as virtue AND such without wanting to be

The lower virtue (hsia té) is concern not to deviate from virtue And so it is far from virtue
Higher virtue in acting does not will and does not set ends Lower virtue is the effect of will and
sets ends Justice in acting wills and sets ends

Social custom acts and if it does not find consensus

He operates aggressively.

Thus: lost the Way comes virtue Lost virtue comes morality Lost morality comes justice Lost
justice comes social custom [conformity] Custom, mere semblance of the blunt form

And principle of disorder (as opposed to natural order)

Tao traditionalism based on culture alone [on ancient literature] also.

And principle of forfeiture.

Therefore: the superior man

Holds to the substance, rejects the rind [the outward, the artificial] Holds to the kernel [the
fruit], not the flashy [alfiore] Rejects this, chooses that.


Downward succession of the forms assumed by acting as it progressively moves away
from the Principle: the higher virtue, shang té, which, based on being, does not proclaim itself
as such and is "non-acting," is contrasted with the lower virtue. hsia té. preoccupied with self,
ordered to precepts and ends. Having failed essential virtue, higher morality (shang jén)
appears, which, while not natural and impersonal, while "acting," is not extroverted, follows an
autonomous principle; having failed this, the forms of law, shang i (of legal equity), appear;
finally social custom, shang li, intervenes. The text seems to refer properly to Confucianism in
its aspect of scrupulous observance of stereotypical forms of behavior in social life (almost as
in a "social ritualism ": /i = (also] the rites, the etiquette). Along this


147


regression "acting" in the intentional, "willed" sense has more and more prominence, flax to
even coercive and aggressive forms, and ends up leading more to disorder than order (a
well-known Taoist theme) because it has for its premise the lack of an inner form, a "being."
Not even what was called "the flower of Dao," tao chin (the cultural heritage of the
classics), can be the way and make up for higher virtue; the traditionalism of scholars and
literati is not the living tradition, nor can it restore it.

Of past, it can be noted that within the framework of this morphology of varieties of
behavior, in the face of the "higher virtue" conforming to the Way the same morality
understood in an autonomous, disinterested, but "acting" sense falls under ethical by-
products and surrogates. Thus, opposition of the doctrine of naturalness (= transcendental
integrity) to Kantian ethical rationalism itself.


148


39


The original One is the principle

Heaven owes the One its luminous purity

Earth owes its stability to the One

The spirit owes its strength to the One

The void [the median space, the valley - that is: the vital fluid, the ether/ owes the One its
fullness

By participating in it beings are living

Through the One the rulers rectify what is in the empire

All this proceeds from the original One

The bright sky without it

It would collapse

The stable earth without it

It would falter

The spirit without it

It would dissolve

The valley without it

It would dry up [its subtle virtue of drawing waters to itself would be lost].

Beings without it, which makes them living,

They would vanish

I sovereigns without it

They would not emanate the calm, decisive ordering influence

The noble rests on the humble

I Sublime rests on the simple.

Therefore: the (true) rulers are devoid of ostentation [they cancel themselves, give themselves
humble titles I

Humility and simplicity (impersonal) of one who has root (in the Principle).

The whole of the parts does not make the whole.

It is.

If the original One disappeared instead of the precious stone.

You would have nothing but formless gangue.


For line 23: it was customary for Far Eastern rulers to give themselves humble titles, to


veil their person. On Taoist humility, which is devoid of moral coloring and expresses
spontaneous depersonalization and adherence


149


to the "original simplicity," noted above. Fourth to last line: without the simple, immaterial
One there would be a mere sum of parts (in the text: the many parts of a chariot), not the
organic unity of a whole (the chariot as such). Placing them in another context, of the last
two lines a different lesson is possible, given by the some in these terms: "not wanting to be
as precious as jade but having the roughness of stone" (Castellani), by the others:
"considering beings with serene impartiality, not esteeming some as precious as jade, others
as vile as stone" (Wieger). However, these lessons connect less logically (especially the
second one) with the rest of the chapter.

About the One and the technical formula "grasping the One" or "preserving the One"
(see Ch. 10) in the operative doctrine of immortality, it was mentioned in the introduction.


150


40


The eternal motion of return is the essence of the Way
Abandonment is the way of the Way

All things come to life from being

Being comes to life from non-being.


This short chapter admits of a double interpretation: metaphysically, it is the well-known
idea of manifestation as "abandonment" (emanation) and return. But the second line can also be
referred to the individual, in whom conformity to the Principle ( = return) entails abandonment
(bad individuality, being). Instead of "abandoning" one can read "weakening," possibly
"subtilizing." Hence yet another, operative meaning of the same line: "subtilization is the
process of the Way" (in those who return = reintegrate into the ethereal aformal state).


151


Al


The perfect sage understands the Way

And in it firmly is established

The imperfect knower understands the Way

And now he follows her, now he loses her

The knower of the lowest rank hearing of the Way
Laughing about it

If he did not laugh at it the Way would not be the Way
Therefore it applied as an ancient saying:

Those who are enlightened through the Principle seem obscure
Those who progress in the Principle seem to retrograde
He who has been made great by the Principle seems a simple man
The higher virtue resembles the valley

Absolute white looks black

The virtue of the far seems non-action linefficiency/
Virtue at work is secret

Curve may opinion the straight (of the Real Man)

The infinitely large square has no more corners

The infinitely large vessel has no more capacity

The infinitely high-pitched sound is no longer audible
The infinitely large image no longer has form

The Principle is mysterious and nameless

But his giving is perfect and leads to fulfillment.


Very expressive imagery, in the last lines, for transcendence and inaf-
ferrability proceeding from conformity to Principle.


152


42


The Dao produced the One

The One produced the Two[/<> yin and yang].

The Two produced the Three

The Three gave birth to the multitude of particular beings [to the ten thousand things! Coming

out of the power [yin = from "darkness"]

They move to the act [yang = to "light"/.

The primordial unity (ch'i) (to which the varied play of yin and yang is ordered) composes the
ways.

The vulgar man does not let go [no/; abandon] He wants to be worth, to be from much

By their being the opposite sovereigns are propitiators of balance Loss becomes accretion

Accretion becomes loss.

Conforming to what has always been taught is what I teach The strong do not die a natural

death

This is the basis of my doctrine.


Much-discussed chapter that first contains a concise metaphysical summary in accordance
with the concordant teaching of other traditions. The determination or crystallization of the
nameless universal possibility in the One (i) is the "Great Beginning," the first stage of
manifestation ("first," in the sense of ontological precedence, not temporal). Then the
metaphysical Dyad (that of yang and yin = of positive and negative, of form and matter, of
bright and dark, of masculine and feminine, of celestial and terrestrial, etc.) is manifested. The
varied juggling of these opposing principles, constrained and regulated by unity (by the One
being added to the Two. thus manifesting itself in the Three, in the Ternary) gives
physiognomy and life to the particular beings that transform themselves and follow their ways
in an overall order that derives from the invisible and uniform influence of the non-acting
primordial unity. About the latter, the term used in the seventh line, chi, is generally translated
as "primordial ether." The sense is not substantially different, for in the Far Eastern system,
ether has often been given as the first determination ("production") of the Principle. In a way,
of the metaphysical process, semi-corporeal imageries have been given when speaking of the
ether freezing or coagulating into forms by the action of yin-yang-almost colluding with an
exposition of the


153


ne "physicow-cosmological with a purely metaphysical exposition, or interference of two
distinct but, in a sense, complementary points of view.

The logical connection of the first part of the chapter (of the metaphysical one) with the
second is somewhat tenuous, so much so that additions or spurious parts have been
assumed. In the version followed here, the opposition between the one who does not let go
and maintains the tensions peculiar toH asserting himself and wanting to assert himself as a
mere individual, and the ruler who. following the opposite path, reproduces the function of
the One, is presented again; then it is a logical sequel what the two lines say about the
mutual conversion of (outer) accretion and (inner) loss. It is unclear what the ch'iang liang,
the subject of the penultimate line, refers to: the "strong," to interpret it-as has often been
done-with "violent," gives a rather trivial sense, which is almost a jarring to refer it to what
would be the basis of the doctrine hinted at in this chapter, rich in metaphysical elements.
Thus a different, esoteric interpretation would not be ruled out: "strong" taken in a positive,
spiritual sense-allusion, then, to overcoming the natural fate of death (rather than the violent
death that awaits those who affirm external strength).


154


43


//more yielding in the inundation [cf. the image of water].
Toughest wins

There is nothing that non-being (wu yu) does not penetrate
Therefore, I recognize the superiority of non-acting (wu wei)
But teaching without words

Accomplishing without doing

Very few can


"Teaching without words" - pu yen chili chiao - is a theme that often recurs in Taoist
texts. Cf. in the Ch’an and Zen ("teaching by keeping silent." It is a variety of the "acting
without acting" proper to the Masters. As "language of silence," moreover, has often been
designated, not only in the East, that by means of symbols and signs. Finally, the term
"mystery" is known to be derived from the term pu©, which means to keep silent, to keep one's
lips closed. Cf. Lieh-tze (Vili, 8), "The most effective word is that which is not heard."


155


44


Which is closer to me, the name [fame/ or the self?

What is more precious to me, the self or wealth?

Which is worse, the gain or the loss?

Because he who hoards dissipates

He who possesses much loses much

Those who recognize their place suffer no shame

He who knows how to arrest himself is in no danger He will not cease to be safe and secure.


Same idea as ch. 42: displacing value in the outer domain is tantamount to loss. The
real man curbs any impulse that would lead him outside himself, because of the interest
accorded to splendor, wealth and fame. Usual trivial and outward interpretation, that of the
last maxims, as advice of prudence to prevent risks in social or political life: whereas it is
about the danger of internal impairment. In the first and second lines we read properly
"body," not "it"; but the sense is the one we give, because "body" is an image used for what
is real and most intimate to us, as opposed to what is unreal and extrinsic.


156


45


The ultimate (human) perfection is imperfection

The highest human fullness is vacuity

The highest human straightness is obliquity

The highest human knowledge is nonsense The highest human art is babbling.
Motion overcomes cold (producing heat)

Rest overcomes the heat

In its calm purity (the Real Man) rectifies the world.


The first lines of this small chapter also admit of a different interpretation,
leading back to the theme of "non-acting," according to the title sometimes given to
it, hung tea (the great or overwhelming virtue): the higher perfection that may have
the appearance of imperfection, the true fullness that may have the appearance of
emptiness, the true straightness that may appear to be incapacity: beyond these
appearances an influence of a higher order is manifested instead. Such ideas being
known to us and being repeated in the other chapters, here we thought it good to
follow the other interpretation, equally possible if we refer the first lines not to the
Real Man, but to common humanity, whose apparent values are non-values.

The third-to-last and penultimate lines concern the compensatory juggling of
opposites, on which the perfect balance of the Real Man is based, who by his calm
"agent inactivity" (or "his action disguised as inaction," as Wieger puts it) rectifies
his environment.


157


46


When (in the empire) the Principle is followed.
War horses are used for field cultivation

When (the empire) moves away from the Principle.
They even breed war horses in sacred places.
There is no greater fault

Of giving in to greed

There is no greater evil

Of the excess [of the lack of limit]

There is no thing more nefarious

Of always wanting more

Therefore: (only) those who know what is enough.
They are always satisfied.


By using the comparison of wars waged out of unnatural expansionist greed, it
actually stigmatizes the demonia of limitless action, the lust for ever greater grasp that
is counterpart to ever greater internal inconsistency and a turning away from the
Principle. It tomes to reaffirm the creative virtue of the limit. Thus an allegorical
interpretation has also been given to the reference to war, seeing the war horses as a
symbol of human impulses, so much so as to give greater emphasis to the overall


internal meaning of the chapter.


158


47


Without leaving home

Getting to know the universe

Without looking out the window
Penetrating the Ways of Heaven

The farther one goes the less one knows.

Thus: the Real Man arrives without walking

Without seeing grasps the name Accomplishes without acting.


Antithesis between inward, essential and synthetic knowledge and outward,
particularistic knowledge. The latter the farther it goes, developing indefinitely in analytical
research closed in the sensible and phenomenal world, exchanged with the world of true
reality, the farther it moves away from actual knowledge, which is indivisible knowledge
according to principles. Imagine for outward-oriented, profane knowing: "walking out of the
house," "looking out of the window." The "coming without walking" is also referable to
intuitive knowledge, which has a direct character (wu wei character, "non-agent"). The
"name" here applies as the essence of the thing, which is precisely the object of such
intuition, as opposed to the object of "seeing," that is, of external perception.

Cf. this passage from Chuang-tze (XI, | ): "Without putting his organs to work, without
using his physical senses, (the Real Man) sitting motionless would see everything with his
transcendent eye; absorbed in contemplation, he would shake everything, like thunder: the
sky would adapt to the movements of his spirit; all beings would follow his non-acting
influence as dust follows the wind."


159


48


Study always leads further

The Way. followed, leads further and further back

Falling further and further behind

Up to the original non-action

Not-acting and not-wanting make every door give way

It is by constantly sticking to non-acting that one secures sovereignty. You don't get it as
soon as you give yourself to acting.


In the first four lines, the concept expressed in the previous chapter is
developed: while outward knowledge is always unfinished, always leading further
away, from phenomenon to phenomenon, from conditioned to conditioned,
metaphysical knowledge goes backward, leading further and further back, that is,
toward causes and principles having as its limit the supreme non-acting Principle.
Thus this chapter was also given the title of wang chili, that is, "forgetting
knowledge," with reference to external and profane knowledge by orienting oneself
toward which or having interest for which one forms a forma mentis antithetical to
that necessary for true knowledge.

In the remaining lines of the chapter we return to the practical field and to
ideas already known (imitation of Principle, virtue of non-acting).


160


49


The Real Man has no special affections

His soul is universal

He is good to the good guys

It is good with non-goods

This is the perfection of goodness

And loyal to the loyal

He is loyal to the disloyal

This is the perfection of loyalty

Equanimous in the face of beings

He embraces them all in his impersonal soul.
They are like his eyes and ears

He has them as his limbs

(He is at the center; He is the universal Name).


Depersonalization of the Real Man, for the influence or virtue of which in the
texts is also given the image of sunlight pouring equally and impassively on the
good and the bad, the noble and the vulgar. The absence of an affective background
in the proper sense, of any intentional motion going toward others, in this aspect of
the Taoist adept is to be highlighted: something that marks a difference, for
example, from the attitude of the Christian saint.

The last line is missing in most texts but, after all, it gives the key to the whole.
The penultimate line is usually translated in trivial terms: "The Real Man
bambinizes - hai chih - beings," that is, he makes children of them, treats them as
children. Instead, the deeper meaning is that in universalized consciousness the
various beings become like so many limbs or parts of the transcendent man, almost
his emanations ( = tigli, children), he, however, retaining qualities of the center, of
the "universal Name" (the rea/ man, in the eminent, indivisible sense. archétypical,
or "one man").


161


50


To be born is to go out, to die is to re-enter

Thirteen are the causes of life

Thirteen causes of death

What are the principles of life Are the principles of death Why ?

For Morbid attachment to life.

But the truth of those who know is: He who is detached in life When he goes to wild
places He need not avoid rhinos or tigers He can go into battle Without armor or sword
The rhinoceros would not know how to strike him with his horn The tiger would not
know how to gherm him with his claws The enemy, he must pierce him with his weapons.
Why?

Because in him nothing pili is vulnerable [ = there are no death grip points in him].


"Life," in the common sense, corresponds to one of the intervals between "going
out" and "coming in."

It makes one vulnerable to attach oneself to it, to transfer one's center to it. About
the thirteen principles of life and death, and generally about the corresponding lines in
the text, interpretation is controversial. They have also been related to the senses and the
"openings" of the body by which contact with the external world is established. It is easy
then to come to the idea, that the principles of life -- that which nourishes life through
contacts with the external inworld -- are also the principles of "death" (in the
translational sense) when the process of externalization and the immersion of being in
life so conditioned occurs. Cf. in this same context the Taoist saying, "Man fears death
instead of fearing life" (because this, in those who lean into it entirely, creates a hold for
death, creates the vulnerability of being). The theme of invulnerability understood in a
magical sense as well (almost a "magic circle") recurs in Taoist traditions and texts, as
already discussed in this


162


chapter, in regard to those in life who are actually detached-we mean, detached in terms
not simply moral but because of a change in their ontological status.

About Daoist invulnerability cf. Chuang-tze: "Nothing reaches Transcendent Man.
A flood would not submerge him, a universal conflagration would not consume him"
(1:4); "Neither water bathes him, nor fire burns him" (VI, 2); "Only one being is not
dominated by anything, the Real Man" (XVII, 1). Lieh-tze says. of the Real Man,
"Although his bones and joints are like those of other men, one and the same trauma does
not have the same effect on him, for his spirit, being intact, protects the body" (IL 4).
These are consequences of the "initiatory fusion of form."


163


51


Tao is the principle (of beings)
And his Virtue brings them forth
Until the development of their nature
To the fullness of their faculties.

So all beings

They venerate the Principle

And they appreciate its virtue

The Greatness of the Principle

The power of virtue

They unintentionally worship them
By the impulse of their very nature.
The Way produces everything
(His) Virtue nourishes everything
Develops and nurtures

Complete and mature

Preserves and sustains

Driving without owning

Acts without binding to itself


It leads without dominating Such is the mysterious Virtue.


11 chapter deals essentially with the feminine-maternal aspect of Heaven (in
Hindu terms: Shakti or Prakrti). It is the energy that brings into being the
potentialities included in the Principle, which makes beings "become" in the proper
sense when they "come forth," yet leaves them free in their development. In similar
terms Plato spoke of the power that is the "nurturer" of beings, the eternal feminine
as the maternal element, and Plotinus of the Life, Zoe force-life or Psyche of the
One which "chronizes" (i.e., brings to development in time - Chronos) that which is


included in it.


164


52


That which is before the existing

She became (by transformation) the universal Mother
He who (going back to the Principle) finds the Mother
He can also get to know his son

Who knows the son

Starting with Mother,

To the end he is out of danger.

Closed mouth

Closed the door [excluding dispersion)

The well will never be exhausted

With his mouth open

Giving himself to the impulse to act and accomplish
The well will soon be exhausted.

To glimpse what is minute is illumination

Keeping in the weak is strength

In the own-light

Preserve (that) clear vision

It means to no longer let the being be worn out It means to clothe oneself with eternal
durability.


Unlike in the previous chapter, here, not without matriarchal reminiscences,
the symbolism of the mother is used for the Principle itself, which at the point of
being productive comes to stand with respect to what it has produced in a
relationship similar to that of the mother giving birth to the child: Imagine thus
deals from the purely physical order, not considering which the image of the
procreating father is instead the one predominantly encountered in traditions of a
higher type: unless here the mother stands to emphasize the idea of the "issuance"
of beings in their own right-rather than the exoteric one of their creation or
generation. In any case, as a title often given to the chapter puts it (huei yuan =
return to the origin), and as is clear from the context of the subsequent lines, the
central idea is, once again, the going back to the Principle and the natural
connection with it, which drives away existential dangers. According to the well-
known method of antitheses, the Principle is given the predicate of littleness or
minuteness (as opposed to that which has material extension) and weakness (as
opposed to externalized material energy).


165


The second part of the chapter, in initiatory Taoism has had operational
interpretations, in relation to the already mentioned practices for the generation of the
"immortal embryo": curbing the extroverted and dispersive movement (closing mouth
and door) first and foremost on the mental level. Mention has already been made of the
Taoist idea that the wear and tear, the wear and tear of being is largely due to the mind
itself, the artificial use of thought and indulging in emotional life. It then enters into
consideration the deep life energy (reference to the "Wells" and the so-called "breath of
the Mysterious Femina"), then the practices (which also use the breath) to unite with it.
The vision of the Principle, or enlightenment, then initiates the transformation, the
"decoagulation."


166


53


Even the smallest wisdom

It comes from going in the great Way

Bad is ( however) to put it forward.

The Way is vast, but men love the narrow paths

Splendors of palaces on one side

Fallow fields and empty barns on the other

Lavish display of garments

Sharp swords at the belt

Feasts with every food and every drink All this is theft, in empty jattance Far from this is
the Way.


The references to a vain exterior sumptuous and princely life are not to be
taken in the immediate, social sense alone: rather, this life, in its illusory grandeur,
is identical with what, compared to the Way, appears as a "narrow path." Its
counterpart is the abandonment and uncultivation of the essential (fallow fields,
empty barns). The idea of "stealing" is to be understood metaphysically: one steals
by asserting oneself as an empirical individual, ordering to the "I" - in order to
empower it - the force that, in itself, would be eternal and inexhaustible, while fixed
by the "I" it becomes finalized, corporatized and consumed: hence a relation to the
order of ideas mentioned in the previous chapter, but also the first lines of what will
follow. Confining itself to the ethical plane, it is the norm of simplicity and
collected sobriety that is defended here.

As a curiosity: in Communist China of the 1950s, holding to social
interpretation, and referring the idea of "theft" to private property and the charge
against luxury and wealth toH anti-capitalism, propaganda presented Lao-tze as a
national precursor of Marxism...


167


54


He who has firm root [root in the Dao, in the 'One] is not taken away
Those who make right hold need not fear being undermined
And the line that proceeds from him will be eternal

Virtue [conformity to Principle] in the domain of the person
It is true straightness

In the domain of the family

It will expand

In the domain of society

It will be the good

It will be greatness

In the domain of the Empire

In regards to the world

It will be universal principle of order.

To get to know the person

You need to know (about the principle) of the person

To get to know the family

You need to know (about the principle) of family

To learn about the society

You need to know (about the principle) of society

To learn about the empire

You need to know (of theprinciple) of empire

To learn about the world


One must know (of the principle) of the world What is the foundation of such


knowledge?
This.


The last line in this paragraph is identical to the last line in ch. 21 (see ch. 57): i
iz'ii. It refers to the direct experience of the Principle in oneself. Hence, almost as its
key, the whole chapter was also appropriately given the title Asiu kuan = "developing
vision" (inner). We refer, then, to the idea mentioned in the commentary to ch. 4,
namely, that the essence of the various organic units named here is to be sought in their
participation in the great ordering One: this is what one must know in order to really


know them. Then one will penetrate the Way.


168


55


He who fully possesses Virtue

He resembles the child

Who is not afraid of poisonous insects

Nor claws of beasts

Nor roosts of birds of prey

That while having weak bones and delicate tendons

Can grasp firmly

Who while not knowing of the ‘sex act has the erect member Retaining whole the
essential power of semen Can cry out all day long

Without his voice becoming hoarse

Perfect neat spontaneity!

(Restoring) this rhythm of life is to be immortal

To know the immortal is to obtain the light

Exhaustive is congesting life

Strong life obtained by immersing oneself in life [energizing vital spirits with the mind I
It is stiffening that leads to decadence

This is out of the Way

And everything outside the Way has a swift end.


In Taoism there is frequent reference to "childishness" taken as a comparison. As
when texts speak of "naturalness," to mean more or less the same thing, here it is easy to
misunderstand: for the child is merely expressing the condition in which there is
complete adherence with the primordial essence and the absence of "I," whereby a
tension-free, secure and inexhaustible spontaneity manifests and operates in it. When, on
the other hand, the "I" intervenes, and it believes that it enhances and increases life by
unnaturally exciting it, it produces a halting of the flow and stiffening, one is cut off
from an immortal continuity, transparent with the light of the Principle.

In Operant Taoism the interpretation introduces notions of occult physiology:
returning as a child (indeed, one even speaks of an embryonic state) is understood as
preserving whole and pure mind and "ethereal fluid," to the exclusion of the corrosive
forces of thought and ego. This is aimed at re-establishing contact with what in ch. 6 is
called "the spirit of space


169


median," for the "etherification" and vivification of the body, for the thawing of form.
Cf. Lieh-tze (IV, 6 - cf. II, 3): having abandoned all distinctions between yes and no,
advantageous and disadvantageous, all notions of right and wrong, of good and evil, of
for himself and for others, "there settled down for him the perfect communication
between the outer world and his inwardness. He ceased to make use of the senses. The
spirit solidified as the body dissolved; his bones and flesh liquefied." "Keeping the
original vital spirit intact" is indicated as the key to powers of even magical order: it is
the way to attain the absolute simplicity "which bends all beings," for acting together
with universal motion, by "impulse of complete and undivided being," and yet so that no
external resistance is possible (II, 6, 8, 9; XIX, 2, 9). Lieh-tze. IV, 12: "Only the spirit
restored to the state of perfect natural simplicity" can perceive the Principle. Cf. Chuang-
tze (XXIII, 4): "In time, the artificial will disappear entirely; only the natural will remain
in him. Men who have attained this state are called heavenly children, heavenly people,
that is, men who have returned to their natural state." Appropriately, it has been noted
(Granet) that the Masters affirm the identity of the "state of nature" with a "magical state
of grace."

Also in operative Taoism, the mention of sexuality found in this chapter connects to
practices that use sex in addition to breath. The basic teaching is that the procreative
sexual act involves lethal dissipation, to be understood not in a salutary or moralistic
sense but as dissipation of the One, of Essence. But following an order of lines analogous
to that of the Tantric principle of "converting the toxic into a drug," operative Taoism
considered a special regime of intercourse, such as not to dissipate but rather to galvanize
the "essential power of the sperm," ching chih chih. discussed in this chapter, by
nurturing the "mysterious embryo" through the joining of yin and yang in the act of
possessing a woman. This has been understood as a path to immortality. The reference to
what would happen in the child (state of erection without loss of the essential power of
sperm) is used precisely pel regime to be given to intercourse (on this, see our
Metaphysics of Sex, cit. §§ 55-56).


170


56


Those who know do not speak

Those who speak do not know

Close your mouth

Close the door

Bevel the cutting edge

Clearing up the confused

Softening the dazzling

Blending outwardly with the common man
This is the depth.

(To the Real Man) you are not close

You are not far away

For him, there is no gain

For him, there is no loss

It is beyond honor/ praise/

It is beyond contempt.

That is why it is what is highest in the world.


About the first two lines, cf. Chuang-tze: "Knowing and keeping silent, that is
perfection. Knowing and speaking is imperfection. The ancients tended to
perfection" (XXXIL 3); "The man of the Principle remains silent; the perfect man
seeks nothing; the great man no longer has an ego" (XVL, I).


171


57


It is governed by straightness

It wages war with stratagems

But it is with non-action that one has empire

The foundation of such knowledge?

It is this.

The more numerous are the prohibitions and bans
The more the beings sadden

The more the people arm themselves (against the authority that intervenes and
prohibits)

So much greater is the disorder in the kingdom
Resorting to the ‘ability

Cunning is brought to life

The more ordinances and laws are enacted

The more the crime spreads

So the Real Man says:

Follow the non-action

And the people will develop according to their nature
Do not fret

And the people will find the right way

Don't get busy

And the people will prosper by themselves

Want nothing [exclude rationalizing plans and programs/
And the people will return high natural spontaneity.


We are already familiar with the Taoist theme, that every external measure,
every extrinsic interdiction and regulation produce, in government, the opposite
effect, they only increase evil. In the Introduction, the assumptions have been
pointed out because of which the opposite direction, that of non-action, to which we
return again in the following chapter, is quite different from the miracleism of a


laissez faire, laissez aller liberalism.


172


58


When government is simple

The people abound in virtue

When the government shows excessive zeal

The people lack virtue.

Evil may be followed by good

Good may be followed by evil

How to fix [stabilize] the limit I the east oar, the apex] reached
In this continuous motion of conversion?

Going straight: but the straight pierces into the curved
The good in the bad

Eternal blindness of men!

Therefore: the Real Man is a square without corners.
It is a corner without vertice

Straight but not rigid

Clear but not glaring.


The ideas about the "Olympian" non-agent government (that, whereby of some rulers
it is said, "They make everything go unmixed, so imperceptibly, so impersonally, that the
people do not even know their names"- Lieh-tze, IV, 3), are now supplemented with a
reference to the circular alternation of yin and yang whereby each quality or situation,
having reached the limit, reverses into the opposite one: movement, which is disregarded
by those who exercise direct and material actions, rigidly, on the complex web of reality by
forcing and framing everything in one direction. The quality of one who exercises a very
different action is given in the last lines, with suggestive imagery, which in part anticipates
the surrealistic and paradoxical ones peculiar to the Taoist-Buddhist Ch'an school (1).


(1) Cf. Lu K'uan Yii. Ch ‘an and Zen, Editions .Medilerranee. Rome. 1978 (Ed.).


173


59


To govern men by cooperating with Heaven.

Nothing is better than following the pattern [the Principle].

By following the model early you participate in Virtue

Virtue is developed

Development in Virtue

It leads to the irresistible force

Possessing the irresistible force

The absolute individual is realized [boundaries or borders fall = conditions-who].

Realized the absolute individual

One possesses the principle of empire [read: the Mother, i.e., the generating principle,
of empire].

The beginning of an empire

Which is not transient.

This means having firm hinge, strong trunk

It is the path of a 'non-perishing existence and vision.


The idea, that to rule is to "cooperate with Heaven," was so current in the Far
East that to say that a people has no sovereign, it was said, "that people is without
Heaven," and to ask whether a given being is qualified for the function of
sovereign, it was said, "does he have what it takes to cooperate with Heaven?"

Commentary on this chapter, "The essential task of the Real Man is to preserve
and increase magical tea (virtue); then everything will go in order through natural
development."


174


60


To rule a great kingdom

Do as one who carefully simmers.

When a State is ruled by following the Principle Spirits will not be the cause of evil Not
that spirits lack power But they will not be able to harm men. As they cannot harm men So
also the Real Man (though he may) does not harm men There remains (between the Real
Man and other men) the distance (of two parallels, which never meet)

In the ‘harmony of their ways.


The comparison, in the second line, is literally that of frying small fish, which
requires care and a slow fire so that the fish do not brazen out and burn: it is still a
reference to the subtle art of governing.

In the next four lines the concept detraction by the presence of the Royal Man
as ruler is extended to the suprasensible and cosmic realm. The ancient
cosmocentric conception of kingship, attested particularly in China but also present
in other cultural areas, ascribed to the behavior of the sovereign an influence on the
natural, as well as the social, environment itself ( 1 ) so that of disturbances or
calamities occurring in the order of things, the cause was sought, in a certain way,
in some alteration or deviation occurring at the center: any moral imbalance at the
center was thought to bring with it a cosmic imbalance as well. Thus it was
customary that, at the foretelling of unrest, danger or calamity, the ruler would
isolate himself, impose on himself a period of absolute silence, and practice
asceticism by purifying himself in body and soul. As a positive counterpart, here
we have the idea, that the impassive presence of the Real Man exorcises, in the
environment, the invisible influences that can act in an evil or nefarious sense on
men: it paralyzes them or changes, so to speak, their direction of effectiveness. The
idea of a function that is not only political


(1) For the physical c spiritual relationship between ruler and kingdom in Arthurian legend see Julius Evola, The
Mystery of the Grail (1937), Edizioni Mediterranee, Rome‘ . 1994 (ed.).


175


and human but also metaphysical nature of the empire is confirmed by the expression often


used for the latter in Tao-té-ching itself: t'ien hsia = "all-under-heaven." So this very
expression has been used by some translators (J. J. L. Duyvendak: all-under-heaven).


176


61


The great Srato is like the deep

Where the waters of the rivers converge and flow It is the universal fernina.
In its passivity the fern always wins the male.

Passivity is condescension

Therefore, the great state condescendingly

Absorbs smaller states

Zz> Minor state by condescending


Participates in the great state

Liabilities to attract and to receive Liabilities to be received.

The purpose of the great state is to order and govern

The purpose of the small state is to integrate zi that dual purpose is realized It is
necessary for the piti grande to maintain the position at the bottom (to which the
attractive and absorbing virtue is proper).


Application of Taoist non-acting to the plane of great politics, in situations where a
large state becomes a natural center of gravitation for smaller states, which allow
themselves to be taken up and integrated into it. Just as in the domestic order acting in
accordance with the Principle is the opposite of centralism and direct intervention, so it
in the international order is the opposite of "imperialism." Moreover, in general, the
principle of any true empire has always been of a similar kind: a superordinate authority
that unites and orders particular and partial units without constraining them with external,
merely political power (thus, also, coexisting with national and feudal autonomies) (1).
In the conception set forth in this chapter, however, the idea of central authority is veiled
in favor of that of a more subtle power of attraction, of the (specifically Far Eastern)
virtue of apparent passivity or impassibility.

For a particular aspect of magical nonaction, the comparison with the subtle power
of the woman who, with her apparent passivity, like a magnet attracts and binds the male
is effective. Analogous is the image of the valley (cf. chapters 8 and 28) that with its
lower position irresistibly attracts the waters of the nearby slopes.


(1) On the meaning to be given to the concept of Empire, see Julius Evola. Revolt against the Modern
World (1934), Edizioni Mediterranee. Rome' 1969; and. in a current version, Men and Ruins (1953), Ed. Settimo
Sigillo. Rome’, 1990 (ed.).


177


62


In the Way all beings have their sacred and secret principle

It is the wealth of the good It is the support of the perverse.

With fine words (about it) one can obtain honors from men But it is by right action [by

acting in accordance with it] that one rises. Even the non-good

It is not abandoned by it

Therefore [for the preservation and development of that principle in every being] rulers
are installed, magistrates are established.

Better than the exercise of any force

Of all ostentatious dignity

It is the being established and proceeding in the Way

Therefore, the ancients honored the Principle.

For even unsought his Virtue is manifested

Redeem the same culprit

That is why it is the highest thing in the world.


The essential concept of this chapter is that in every being, whether good or evil,
there is an ontological fund, its sacred and secret principle, in which he is always in the
Way. In this sense it is said that even the perverse is not forsaken, that in the Way he is
redeemed (in the metaphysical, not by the initiatives of a theistic deity). Propitiating the
surfacing of this metaphysical bottom of every being (its "nature" = its "Heaven") should
be the goal. Maintaining the same transcendent neutrality in the face of both the good
and the non-good proper to the Principle by allowing the operant virtue of the Way (wei
tao. chapter title) to act impersonally and automatically ("unsought"): this, as already
known, should be the task of the true state.

The ontological background mentioned in the text is given through the image of the
hidden southwestern corner where a shrine was located in ancient Chinese dwellings. As
an illustration of this doctrine, one can go back to Chuang-tze, who speaks of that part of
Heaven, or celestial law, which constitutes the being of a given person and which does
not cease when that person ends because "it was before her, it is after her, unalterable,
indestructible," the rest being only illusory (IL, 2). He returns to it as the part that subsists
in the current of transformations "when the physical self ceases" (XXI, 3).


178


63


To will without wanting to will To do without wanting to do To taste without wanting to
taste To see the great in the small The much in the little To hate oppose Virtue (tea)
Through the easy accomplish the difficult Through the small accomplish the great. The
hardest things in the world Begin with the easy The greatest things in the world Begin with
the small That is why the Real Man

He never acts on things that have become great That's how he accomplishes great things
He who promises easily difficilmente keeps. Therefore the Real Man properly considers
the difficult And never encounters difficulty.


"To taste without wanting to taste" (third line) = to taste without identification,
without the greedy grasp of the ego. By extension, "taste" can designate feeling,
sensation in general. "To hatred oppose Virtue" (sixth line): this is not the
evangelical loving the enemy, at least if the precept is taken in a moralizing sense,
because Virtue, té, here is to be understood in its magical aspect, as the power
emanating from non-acting impassibility, a power capable of paralyzing the
opponent. Similar conception of an extranormal, magical power of love in
Buddhism (see the texts adduced in our Doctrine of Awakening) (1).

The second half of the chapter, generally misinterpreted, has its natural
development in the chapter that follows and connects with the de\V I-ching oracular
tradition: effective action is preventive action exercised over beginnings.


(1) Cf. Julius Evola. The Doctrine of Awakening (1943), Edizioni Mediterranee, Rome’ . 1995 (ed.).


179


on germane causes (the easy, the small from which the great and the strong derive).
Action then will be easy, how difficult it would be, on the other hand, when faced with
situations already developed, processes already in place, forms already manifested. On
these, rUmo Real never acts; it does not encounter difficulties because it recognizes and
excludes the scope of "difficult" action. It has already been said in the introduction about


this aspect of subtle acting. See also further on, ch. 76.


180


64


It is easy to direct what is still calm

It is easy to prevent what has not yet manifested itself

There is no difficulty in breaking what is still tender

There is no difficulty in dispersing what is still weak

Discerning the fact when there are no signs yet

Dissolving the crisis before it erupts

The giant tree

It took its beginning from a threadlike root

A nine-story tower

He began with a fistful of soil

A journey of a thousand miles

Begin with your own step (in the direction of the goal) He who acts (directly) fails, he who
grasps loses. That is why the Real Man

Refraining from doing does not fail

Not grasping does not leak.

Instead in heavily pursuing the end

Many fall just as they are about to reach it

Being present (with detachment) at the beginning as well as at the end
This is the condition for success.

Thus: the Real Man

It has for desire not to desire

He doesn't care about the things that are hard to have

As the purpose of his study he does non-study

Return there where all others have passed over

Helps the development of things according to their nature By not disturbing it with
(individual) action.


As can be seen, this chapter largely continues the previous one; so already in ancient
times, in China and Japan, there were those who made one chapter of the two by ordering
the individual lines differently. However, this does not bring an appreciable difference in
the order of ideas, which is the one clarified in the previous commentary.

"Wanting without intending"; in practical applications, the maxim of some Taoist-
derived schools corresponds to it: "By intention attain the intentionless state." Cf. Chuang-
tze (XXIII, 7): "Always keep yourself


181


In the natural balance. One must be neutral before making an effort, before acting:
so that the effort, the action, coming from non-effort, from non-action, are natural."

By the third-to-last line-"ritoma there where all others have passed over"-is to be
understood that the Real Man detaches himself from what men have already fixed and
evaluated with their petty wisdom, makes a clean slate of agreed ideas, and regains
contact with reality and nature. Back in the last line is the maxim of propitiating the
natural ripening of things in the Way, without intervening with direct, external actions.


182


65


Among the Ancients those who followed the Way did not enlighten the masses
They cared that the people remained simple It is difficult to direct the masses When they
become too intelligent.

An enlightenment-based government

It only brings ruin to the country

But those who govern with non-knowledge

It will make him happy

He who observes these two principles also knows the measure

The constant application of the measure

It is the formula of mysterious and profound virtue.

Occult and distant virtue!

It is the opposite of the way of ordinary beings

But it eventually leads to the Great Equilibrium.


Those who retain a sound faculty of judgment, especially today can easily
recognize what was already seen by Taoism: the political and social calamities that
have been and continue to be the effect of the education and enlightenment of the
masses. It hardly needs to be said that this is not a matter of keeping the people in
ignorance in order to better exploit them in the interests of a parasitic upper class.
Rather, it is a matter of avoiding a pseudo-culture which, first of all, is detrimental
to the masses themselves, because it destroys natural simplicity in everyone, creates
displaced people and is the principle of continuous social imbalances. The
knowledge to be condemned is not that which is necessary for the exercise of useful
and healthy activities in accordance with one's vocation, but that which serves only
to "politicize the masses" and awaken in them artificial and materialistic aspirations.
On this basis no natural order is any longer possible, and in order to contain
disorder and a latent anarchy one will have to move to centralized mechanical
"agent" forms of government, in antithesis to the imperceptible and non-agent forms
of reigning according to Principle.


183


66


/ great rivers and lakes are the kings (of waters) of the thousand valleys Because they
stand lower than those

Such is the reason for their being the kings of the (waters of the) thousand valleys.
CosThe Real Man

To rise above the many

In his expressions he lowers

To stay on top

Sail his lo.

So he stands above the many

Without forcing

It stands at the top of the many

Without humiliating.

The people will always be ready to obey him.

Since (the Real Man) never fights

No one can anything against him.


184


67


Iam called great

And they say they are not like the other big

Precisely because I am big I am not like others If I were like others I would be small.
Ihave three precious things

That I cherish and cultivate

The first is openness of mind

The second is the balanced dignity

The third is the lack of ambition

Openness of mind infuses me with courage Balanced dignity makes me generous Lack of
ambition puts itself at the head of men Instead, today, openness of mind gives way to
arrogance Balanced dignity is abandoned for the empty sound of praise Lack of ambition
yields to the pursuit of honors

This is the path of decline.

Free soul gives victory in war

And safety in peace

Such a spirit Heaven grants To those who want to save.


Maxims, such as those appearing in the present and previous chapters, recall
the Christian virtue of humility, the evangelical idea of the last who will be first,
etc.: it will be worth recalling the difference in spirit existing between the two
attitudes. In Christianity, the reversal of values and the reward of humility are
referred to an existence in the afterlife and guaranteed by divine will;
psychologically, there is no lack of a certain resentment toward the great ones of the
world on the part of those who are humble and small not by virtue but by necessity,
and who hope for revenge on the plane of the spirit. In Taoism, on the other hand, it
is a matter of maxims of an immanent perfection based on imitation of the
Principle, at the recognition of the dialectic, whereby every external affirmation is
eo ipso transformed into an internal loss, at the knowledge that the very act of
wanting to emerge puts one on the same level as others, makes one similar to
others, takes away the


185


possibility of truly overpowering based on an ontologically different, transcendent
quality.

In connection with all this, the term ¢s‘u (ninth line), designation of the first of the
three virtues of the Real Man, has not been translated as "love," "compassion," or
"charity," as most interpreters have done, but as "openness of mind," the jarringness that
those terms would represent being visible where one keeps in mind the explicit
references to a detached, impersonal, not at all humanitarian and Christian-like attitude of
the Real Man (and Principle) given in so many other chapters. The second virtue is not
rendered by the lesson "modesty," "temperance," or "moderation"; the reference is to
one's actual worth, so the actual meaning is "balanced dignity." The term designating the
third virtue of the Real Man in the text has the literal sense of "not daring to put oneself
before others"; similarly, it is not the case to translate with "humility" in the Christian
manner, but, if at all, with absence of pride. That is, only the ego-centered assertion of
those who put themselves in value against others is excluded: for, as for not putting
oneself but being in fact above others, without ambition, pride and conceit, by one's very
nature, this is explicitly stated as an automatic effect of following the Way. Cf. Chuang-
tze (XXIL, 5) about Royal Men: "They act spontaneously, naturally, as the sky is elevated
by nature, the earth is extended by nature, the sun and moon are bright by nature."


186


68


Good ruler does not fight

Good warrior does not turn on

Good winner does not fight

Good manager does not direct

This is the power of the Virtue of non-combat
This is the strength in employing men

This is the way of Heaven (to be reproduced)
Summit of Virtue in Origins.


Already known characterizations of non-acting. Its metaphysical foundation is


highlighted by one of the titles given to this chapter: p’ei t'ien = reconnecting with
Heaven, realizing or reproducing in oneself the way of Heaven.


187


69


The maxim of the good fighter is:

Indulge to maintain the initiative

Retreating one foot rather than advancing one inch

Therefore: progress without advancing

Defending without moving arms Attacking without having an opponent Possessing
without taking

Nothing is worse than engaging lightly

This almost means losing what is most precious.

Between two fighters

The one who leaves wins.


Development of the ideas of the previous chapter, in a paradox style. The sixth
line says, literally: be the guest, not the host. It is that according to Chinese etiquette
what the host does is subito imitated by the guest and others (for example, if he
stands up). In context with the next few lines, the meaning is precisely: indulge in
order to retain the initiative. One should not limit the sense of the last lines to subtle
tactics in the clash of forces; one should also keep in mind the possible extension of
the maxims to the domain of inner life in general. The most precious thing (or
"treasure," or "what one possesses" = pao) that can be lost is the essential principle,
not to be engaged lightly where it might be vulnerable. "Let go" (last line) is
equivalent to detachment in action, so as not to be subjected to the initiative of
others. He wins who, "empty of ego," lets act for him an almost impersonal power
which can more than the greatest tension of individual will and the most heated
identification.


188


70


My teaching is easy to understand

And easy to follow

But the pili can't understand it

They don't know how to follow him.

My doctrine is derived from one principle [the Tao].

My practice is fixed on a single force Ila té/

Who doesn't know them

He cannot comprehend my wisdom.

Few understand me

This is my title of glory.

Therefore: the Real Man wears common clothes [eliminates everything that is appearance,
that is flashy!

He keeps the precious matter concealed within himself.


The ease mentioned in the first lines is relative, so much so that the title the
chapter generally has alludes to the opposite: chili nan = the difficult knowledge. It
is in the assumption that one perceives the Great Principle and its Virtue that the
Taoist teaching appears self-evident: which practically amounts to saying that it is
the thing of few, that it is secret knowledge. "Ease" can also be referred to the "non-
agent" character that intuitive knowing has, as opposed to the speculative efforts
and constructions of discursive thinking. The last lines could be matched by the
Roman saying: esse non haberi.


189


71


Knowing and not knowing is greatness

Not knowing and knowing is disease

Those who experience (as such) the disease

He will know how to defend himself against it.

Real Man is free from evil

Because he feels the evil of evil That is why evil does not touch him.


Resumption of the theme of value inversion, applied to the plane of knowing:
essential knowledge, correlative to an exclusion of profane and only human
knowledge. Believing to know in order to possess this second knowledge, is
sickness, ping. The most difficult thing for those who cultivate such knowledge
(which could refer to much of what is boasted of as "culture," to what some have
called "intelligent stupidity" (1), others "the knowledge of what is not worthy of
being known," Luther the works of reason, "prostitute gone mad") is to realize that
such is its nature. To be from so much is already to be on the way to overcoming
evil or making oneself immune from it. A drastic imperative of Chuang-tze is,
"Puke up your intelligence."


(1) A definition by Fritjof Schuon often quoted by Evola (Ed.).


190


72


Those who do not fear what they should fear.

It will succumb to that which is most to be feared.

Don't think yourself small

Do not consider one's condition unworthy

Indeed, it is not unworthy

If one does not imagine it to be such.

That is why the Real Man

He knows himself without showing off

He holds to what is without attributing false value to himself He avoids this, he holds to
that.


One chapter title is ai chi = read "loving oneself," but the sense is: fidelity to one's
own nature, to what one naturally is: Taoist doctrine already encountered repeatedly.
Cf. the Hindu notion of svadharma, with the idea of the danger inherent in following
another's dharma, even if it seems superior (dharma = law of one's own nature).


191


73


V? is an active courage that leads to death

There is a non-active courage that preserves life Both are sometimes good, sometimes
bad The judgment of Heaven, who can know it?

The way to Heaven is:

Don't fight and win

Getting obeyed without commanding

Attracting without calling

Calmly, it brings everything to fruition.

Heaven's net has wide meshes

But nothing escapes it.


The first two lines Moon refers to the courage of those who do not care to go to their
deaths in action, the other to the courage of those who know how to impose on
themselves instead the principle of non-action, non-affirmation. Depending on the case,
that is, depending on their ultimate meaning, both behaviors can be good or bad. Non-
action. sparing oneself, non-exposure, supposed by some to be the essence of Taoism,
may simply be sloth and sluggishness; then it is certainly not a value. It is a different line,
whereby Confucius himself condemned useless daring, urging to preserve life for what is
truly worth pursuing (it is the other courage).

Very well known and incisive is the saying of the last two lines, "The net of Heaven
has wide meshes but nothing escapes it." Cf. the Western saying, "TI mill of the Lord
grinds slow but grinds fine," and also the image in De Maistre, of a clock that always
strikes the right time even though the motion of each of the wheels is disordered-image,
which in turn leads back to another Far Eastern saying, "Order is the sum of all disorder."
This is what Lao-tze also expresses by saying that the way of Heaven, calm and
indifferent, brings everything to completion: it allows individual beings freedom, even
the freedom to deviate, but with elusive influences and reactions it causes the
disturbances to balance out and they themselves bring about the unmanifest final plan,
always making the cosmic clock mark the right time.


192


74


When the masses no longer fear death

What is the use of trying to restrain it with the fear of death?

Let it be made to always fear death

But only the few who act perversely

Let them be taken and put to death

(Otherwise) how dare you kill?

W is a superior arbiter of life and death [the Way] Whoever replaces him

He resembles someone who sets out to cut down a tree instead of a log splitter He will
easily injure his hands.


Chapter with an essentially political background: it warns against provoking
those conditions, in which the masses, exasperated, no longer fear death. If not, it
will only be fitting to strike, by way of warning, the few who truly break the
natural order. In this same regard, the justice of men must not be heavy-handed and
presume too much. The idea of immanent justice is already contained in the saying
of the previous chapter, namely, that no one escapes the net of Heaven. The
Principle is the true arbiter of life and death, in a neutral, impersonal framework.
Replacing it obtusely can also create causes that will react against the
administrators of a harsh, unenlightened law. the case-limit being the rise of the
masses who no longer fear death.


193


75


The people are hungry

Why princes dissipate the proceeds of serious taxes

This is the cause of his destitution

If the people are difficult to guide themselves

It is because the ruler exceeds in action

This is the cause of the resistance

The people [vulgarel man exposes himself slightly to death

Because he is greedily attached to life

This is the cause why he does not fear death. Only he who by acting holds himself above
life Rightly values life.


Note, in the last four lines, the shift from the social domain to the inner domain as
well, albeit at a parallelism. There is to be referred back to the order of ideas, the
dialectical reversal, already considered in ch. 67: the inner negation (death), of which
there is no sense, hence not even fear, which is the counterpart of greedily grasping life.
Again, one of the chapter's titles provides the key to its internal sense: t’an sun, which is
as much as to say: the covetousness (of life) that is tantamount to loss. Cf. Chuang-tze:
"Of all the instruments of death, desire is the deadliest" (XXIII, 4). Let it not be
forgotten, however, that the Taoist ethic is foreign to the denial of desire per se: it is
servitude to desires that is condemned, it is it that is considered execrable and must be
escaped (1).


(1) This is a fundamental aspect of the Evolian theory ofphagire," that of action in itself perfect insofar as it is
not moved by "craving," "mania," or "passion," through which one is conversely "acted upon." Cf. what is explained
in the aforementioned The Hermetic Tradition and The Doctrine of Awakening. but also in The Yoga of Power
(1949), Edizioni Mediterranee. Rome*. 1994; and in Riding the Tiger (1961). Edizioni Mediterranee. Rome’. 1996
(ed.).


194


76


Man is born weak and delicate
Dies stiff and hard

The tree is born flexible and tender
He dies unyielding and strong

So: stiff and sturdy

These are the ways of death

Weak and flexible

These are the ways of life.

The victorious army

He is the one who never fought The strong tree is felled.... Big and strong are at the bottom
Sweet and flexible are at the top.


Various comparisons, to express the well-known idea that true strength binds
to the original subtle stage, opposed to developed and fixed forms. We then move
on to the other, equally well-known theme of action imposing itself as one does not
exert it on the plane where it can offer grip and can be reached by the direct action
of the opponent (true victor is the one who does not fight). The same order of ideas
is still taken up in ch.78.


195


77


The action of Heaven

Resembles stretching an arc It is a smoothing out what is convex A stretching out what
is concave A reducing the excessive

To increase the lacking.

The way of Heaven

It is taking away from the overabundant

Add to the shortfall.

Different is the way of man

He takes away from the already lacking

To strengthen what is already in excess.

He who of his own excess makes a gift to the world

Those are in the Way.

For this: the Real Man

Acts without binding to the result Operates without appearing operable Disappears
[does not show]


About the similarity of the first lines it should be remembered that the ancient
Chinese bow, on the opposite side of ours, was curved outward; thus it was ready for
arrow throwing when pulling the string made it, from curved (concave and convex),
straight. Generally, the chapter refers to the subtle balancing action of the Way. Instead,
men exacerbate the polarizations thus binding themselves to the external and the
particular.

"He is in the Way who of his own excess gives the world a gift." The deeper
meaning of this maxim brings one back to the imitation of] Principle: keeping the
center in the deep dimension, the adept gives the world 1'excess," that is, what
spontaneously emanates from it, an influence and not an externalization of its essence.
Therefore, when it operates, it is not operating; its being is not visible. In the last line:
the opposite of Asien (a term containing the idea of visibility), usually interpreted
trivially as voluntarily keeping oneself in the shadows, as not performing in social life.


196


78


There is nothing in the world more yielding and weak than water

But at the same time.

There is nothing that surpasses it in overcoming the stiff and the strong
It has no equal (in such virtue).

Thus: the weak triumph over the strong

Flexible triumphs over rigid

This truth should be clear to everyone But there is no one who acts in accordance with it.
Therefore the perfect man says:

Only he who takes upon himself the burdens of the kingdom

He is its priestly leader

Only he who takes upon himself the misfortunes of the kingdom

He is the ruler of it

This is the mysterious truth.


The connection between the first part of the chapter and the last six lines is
tenuous, so much so that some have transferred its principle to another chapter. The
last lines visibly connect to the already mentioned cosmocentric conception of
kingship. In his function as the center and third power between Heaven and Earth,
the ruler takes upon himself the weight of the realm (= of "all-below-heaven"), thus
also of the negative and inauspicious. The literal translation of the fourth last line
is: he becomes the leader who celebrates the Shé Chi sacrifice, which in China was
the highest state sacrifice officiated annually by the ruler for all the people,
precisely in his also priestly or pontifical capacity.


197


79


After a great hatred

There always remains a little hatred

No return to the initial state

That is why the Real Man

Fulfills his part and does not press on others

He who has virtue thinks only of what he has to do

Those who do not have virtue think (instead) about what others should do
The Way of Heaven does not look at people [is neutral, has no preferences].


But those who adhere to it are always carried forward [without the tensions mentioned
in the first lines].


198


80


In small kingdom of not dense population To have some good men [ten to a hundred]
But without using them

Let the people attach importance to death Do not go far there.

While having means to travel by sea and land

Don't use it

While having means of defense and offense

Don't show it off

Let there be a return

To knot the ropes

Then for one's food one will have taste, one will find one's garments beautiful Quiet will
become one's dwelling, one will take pleasure in one's way.

When even two states were so close together.

Let the cries of the animals be heard from each other Let it come to death

Without passing into the neighboring realm.


The chapter also admits of an interpretation in terms of inner life-not simply a
description of a small political and social house foot-which everyone will be able to
draw from by giving the concrete references an imagery value: for this, we have
left those references in as much latitude as possible. From such an interpretation we
will pick up themes already known: gathered strengths and possibilities, neither
externalized nor artificially saturated; simplicity that gives calmness, that makes
one love one's way and does not leave one's condition (passing into the other realm,
even if close); while knowing that one can go far, "by land and sea," into multiple
external experiences, not having the taste for it and seeking the Way (cf. the
"without going out, one can know" of ch. 47); loving to be alone (hence one of the
chapter titles: you them). The ritome to the use of braided cords means renunciation
of useless culture-it seems that variously knotted and braided cords were used in
China before writing was employed. This has no reference to a primitive ignorance;
after all, among other things, a ritual and sacral character was also attached to the
means of fixing ideas or transmitting them using knots and braiding.


199


81


True words are not beautiful Beautiful words are not true The man who has Virtue does
not argue The man who argues does not have Virtue Knowing is not knowing Knowing is
not knowing The Real Man does not hoard By giving to others He gains The more he
gives to others The more he possesses for himself: The Way of Heaven: Ordering without


Struggle
The way of the realized man: Acting without effort.


For the opposition between true knowledge and mere knowing (culture, erudition)
see also ch. 71; here the indifference to all tinsel is added: true, bare speech, aimed
exclusively at the essential, hsien chili. The other motif of this last chapter is also
familiar to us: the realized man who, in the image of the Principle, by not keeping for
himself has, by giving acquires; whereby there is no need to remind us that this is not
"altruism," but an impersonal motion proceeding from one who is free from the
constraint of the "I" (thus also from that of the "you," the other). The text concludes with
a reference to what has been called "transcendental spontaneity." Joined to the Way, the
Real Man acts effortlessly, is "Heaven," cooperates with Heaven.


200


Bibliography


Italian translations of Tao-té-ching, in chronological order:

William Evans, Lao-tse. The book of the way and virtue. Mouth. Turin. 1905.

Alberto Castellani, The Heavenly Rule of Lao-Tse (Tao té ching). Sansoni, Florence, 1927

Adriano Carbone, Taoist Texts, Carabba, Lanciano, 1938.

Paul Siao Sci-Yi, The Tao-te -king, Laterza, Bari, 1941.

Chin-hsing Wu and Rosanna Pilone, Lao-tse: Tao-te-king, Italy-China Institute , Milan. 1956.

Rosanna Pilone, Lao-tzu: The book of the norm and its action, Rizzoli, Milan 1962.

J.J.L. Duyvendak. Tao Tea Ching. The book of the Way and Virtue. Adclphi, Milan, 1973.

Virgil Gracci, Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching. The Book of the Way and Virtue, The Red Sagittarius,
Monza, 1976.

Fausto Tomassini, Taoist Texts, UTET. Turin, 1977.


Lionello Lanciotti, The Lao-tzu of Ma-wang-tui or the Te-tao-ching, in China, 14 (1978), pp. 7-
26.


Lionello Lanciotti, Lao Tzu: The Book of Virtue and the Way. Editoriale Nuova, Milan, 1981; 2nd
ed.: SE, Milan, 1993; 3rd ed.: Oscar Mondadori, Milan, 1996.


Angelo Giorgio Teardo, Laozi: Tao. The Book of the Way and Virtue, Stampa Alternativa, Rome.
1994.


Domenico Sebastianelli, Lao-Tse: The Book of the Standard. Tao-té ching, La Spiga, Milan,
1995.


Girolamo Mancuso, Lao-tzu: The Book of the Tao. Tao-teh-ching, Newton Compton. Rome,
1995.


Luciano Parinctto, Laozi: the way forward. La Vita Felice, Milan. 1996.


Essential bibliography of studies on Daoism in Western languages:

Marina Miranda, Studies on Taoism in Italy, in \sabelle Robinet, History of Taoism from
its origins to the fourteenth century, Ubaldini, Rome. 1993. pp. 227- 230.

Michel Soymié, Bibliographie du Taoi'sme: études dans le langues occidentales, in
Dokyo kenkyu, 3 (1968), pp. 1-72, and 4 ( 1968), pp. 1-66.


201


Julian Pas. A Select Bibliography on Taoism, Stony Brook. The Institute for Advanced
Studies of World Religions. New York, 1988.

Anna Scidel. Chronicle of Taoist Studies in thé West, in Cahiers d'Extréme-Asie, 5
(1989-90), pp. 223-247.

Kristofer Schipper, The History of Taoist Studies in Europe, in Europe Studies China,
Papers from an International Conferente on thé History of European Sinologi-,
Han-Shan Tang Books and The Chiang Ching-Kuo Foundation for International Exchange.


London. 1995. pp. 467-491.
SV.


202


Index of names


Augustine (St.), the
Alleton, 19n

Ames, 20n
Aristotle, 60n


Bachofcn, 9
Baillet, 8
Basilides, 43n
Beckmann, 15n
Bel-Mcrodac, 32
Berkeley, 2
Bemachot, 8
Bertuccioli, 15n
Bhagavad-Jiya, 12
Boethius, 85
Boltz, 14n


Cadonna, 22n

Castellani, 22n, 87, 150

Chan, I3n

Chang (dynasty), 79

Chen-nong (v. Lao-tze), 22

Chou(dynasty), 11, 17, 121

Chuang-tze, 77, 78, 80, 83, 87, 89, 92- 98, 103-
104, 106, 114, 121-124, 126- 129, 132. 140.
159, 163, 170, 178, 182, 186, 190, 194

Chu Ch'ien-chih, 12n

Chung Yung, 87, 108

Cicero, 32

Clement Alexandria, 52n

Confucius, 8, 13-14, 16, 21
108, 122

Crishna, 32


27, 78, 87; 91,


Christ 7:33
Cross, 2


D'Alessio, 19n

Dante, 81

De Groot, 23n, 80n, 102

De Poupourvillc (v. Matgioi), 8
D'Elia, 15n

Dehergne, 16n

De Maistre, 122

Demariaux, 15n

Diirckheim, 112

Duyvendak, 17, 23n, 126


Eckhart (Meister), 31,45n, 84

Eliade, 25

Heraclitus, 31

Erkes, 13n

Hermes, 68n

Evans, 19, 39,42n

Evola, 7-9, 11, 18-23, 44n, 55n, 93n, 97n, 99n,
170, 175n, 177n, 179n, 190n


Fan-li, 139

Feuerbach, 56n

Fichte, 41 n

Fingacene, 21

Fo-hi (v. Lao-tze), 79.20
Formichi, 22

Francis (St.), 45n


Kind, 30

Graham, 12-13n

Granet, 23n, 76, 124, 138,120
Grazio, 48n

Guénon, 9:21-23, 85, 133


203


Hall, 20n Meyrink, 2


Han (dynasty). 11-15. 98 Moretti, 8. 25
Han Fei-tze, 22
Hathayogapradipika, 45n Naropa, 82
Hegel, 29-31,.56n Nicholson, 2
Henricks, 14n, 17n
He-sing. 8 ne
Huang-lao kiun, 79 Osiris, 32
HuangTi, 14.80.97n
Papini, 7, 20
I-Ching, 90, 103 Paul (St.), 4In
Parusha, 32
Pauthier, 17n
papouay Pelliot, 22n
Julien, 19n.27.39.42n Phankhoatu, 21
Junger, 2 Plato. 62n, 85, 164
Plotinus, 164
Pound, 8
Kalgren, 12n Proclus. 31. 56n
Kant.28.44n, 148 Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite,
Kohn, |2n 32
Kuan-tze, 91. 109. 119 Puini, 88


Pu Leang Yi. 28


Lackner. 19n

Lafargue. I2n

Lao Tan (v. Lao-tze), 13

Lanciotti, l4n

Lao-tze, 11-16, 18-19, 20n, 21, 23. 28. 45n,
47n. 57n, 64n, 66n, 69. 75-83, 87- 90,92-


Quetzalcaatl, 32


Rémusat, 121


94. 97, 106, 108, 167, |92 Ricci, 16
Lau, 14n, 17, 18n Robinet, I2n, 15n, 23n
Law, 16. 32 Rossi, 18-2 In
Lenin, 22,38 poe Ge
Lieh-tze, 78-80, 87, 92-93, 102, 114. 122- Rurnp. I3n
123.155, 163,170; 173
Loewe, 14n Sakia Muni, 34
Lu K'uan Yii, 97n, 173n Schelling. 42n, 59n
Lun yii, 108 Schipper, I6n
Luther, 190 Schopenhauer, 64n
Schuon, 190n
Scotus Eriugena, 31-32, 84
Matgioi (or Matjoi), 69n, 70, 7In. 98. 22 ate i l4n
: akti,
Mair, 12n, LZ Shang Ti, 106
Marx, 22, 38 Siao Sci-Yi, 22n, 86
Masini, 19n Socrates, 85
Maspéro, 23n, 96, 98, 113 Spengler, 2
Mead, 2 Si mel, 78-79, 88
f incr, 22,
Ménard, 37n Putty,8
Mencio, LZ Sun Yat-sen, 90n


204


Typhoon-Seth, 32

Tang (dynasty), 72

Tilgher, 12

Tabula smaragdina, 68n
Tilopa, 82

Tucci, 18n, 22

Tzara, 7, 38n


Ular, 20, 28, 34n, 39.42n, 121, 144


Yiich, 132


Valentine, 52n
Valento, 38n
Life, 2

Von Baader, 59n


Von Planckner, 19n, 34n, 32
Von Strauss, 20n


Wade-Giles (system), 1 In.
Waite, 9

Waley, 17, 23n, 76, 137, J39
Wallis-Budge, 2

Wang-t'ai, 102

Weininger2

Welch, 16n

Wen-Wang, 20


Wieger, 23n, 80n, 97, 135. 137, 150, 157


Wilhelm, 132


Zoe, 164
Ziircher, 15n, 17-18n


205


BERSERKER


BOOKS
