Taiwan’s Quest for the Bomb

Published: Jan 10, 2019 | Briefing Book # 656 | Edited by William Burr

Warning in 1971 of “Adequate Fissionable Material”
U.S. Embassy Concluded in 1978 That Taiwan was Keeping the Weapons “Option Open”
CIA Exfiltration of Key Figure in Nuclear Program Forced Taiwan to Move Research Away from Weapons

[According to INR analysts, the "shock" of the 1964 Chinese nuclear test convinced President Chiang kai-Shek to order the creation of the Chung Shang Institute of Science to "investigate the feasibility and advisability of research and development leading to the manufacture of nuclear weapons." The Taiwanese government recognized the difficulty of carrying out a weapons program but wanted to be ready to execute one in the event of "profound changes in the international scene." Therefore, "studies of the feasibility of manufacturing nuclear weapons appear to be long-range directed ten years or more into the future."]

The U.S. government team that visited Taiwanese nuclear facilities in early 1977. At 2nd from left is Burton Levin, Department of State China expert; to his left is Joerg Menzel, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, who was the liaison between the U.S. government and the IAEA on the Taiwan issue. Others in the photo, but not yet identified, are Gerard Helfrich, Energy Research and Development Administration (now Energy Department); Raymond Wymer, ORNL; Murray Kavanagh, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory; Allen Locke and Dean Cooper, both State Department (Photo courtesy of Institute for Science and International Security, published in Taiwan’s Former Nuclear Weapons Program)

President of Republic of China Chiang Ching-kuo presided over the secret nuclear weapons effort from 1976 to his death in early 1988 (photo from Wikipedia ).

Nuclear physicist Wu Ta-you, science adviser to Chiang Kai-Shek, who played a key role in slowing down the Taiwanese nuclear effort by preventing the acquisition of a nuclear reactor from West Germany (photo from Wikipedia ).

Washington, D.C., January 10, 2019 – From the late 1960s until the late 1980s, U.S. government officials worried that Taiwanese leaders might make a “fundamental decision” to develop nuclear weapons. Documents published today for the first time by the National Security Archive illustrate Washington’s efforts to keep tabs on military and scientific research and to intervene when they believed that Taiwan’s nuclear R&D had gone too far.

Today’s posting builds on and adds documentary detail to an important recent publication by the Institute for Science and International Security (ISIS), David Albright and Andrea Stricker’s Taiwan’s Former Nuclear Weapons Program: Nuclear Weapons on Demand . Their book provides a comprehensive account of the nuclear program, in part by drawing on documents from the National Security Archive. [1]

A key moment in the Albright-Stricker history is the January 1988 exfiltration by the CIA of a senior official Chang Hsien-yi who was embedded in Taiwan’s nuclear establishment and wanted to stop activities that he believed could endanger his country. Albright and Stricker provide the first detailed account in English of Chang’s whistle-blowing. While Chang’s relationship with the CIA remains deeply classified in government files, today’s posting includes declassified documents on the consequences of his actions.

Taiwan’s Nuclear Weapons Research and Development, 1966-1988

By William Burr

From the late 1960s into the late 1980s, U.S.Albright and Stricker provide the first detailed account in English of Chang’s whistle-blowing. While Chang’s relationship with the CIA remains deeply classified in government files, today’s posting includes declassified documents on the consequences of his actions.

From the late 1960s into the late 1980s, U.S. government officials worried about the possibility that the Taiwanese government, officially known as the Republic of China [ROC], was secretly committed to acquiring a capability to produce a small number of nuclear weapons. According to a recently declassified telegram from September 1978, published today by the National Security Archive for the first time, the U.S. ambassador to the ROC supported a proposal to station a few U.S. scientists at nuclear installations in Taiwan. While it was not known for sure if President Chiang Ching-kuo had made a “fundamental decision” to develop a weapons capability, “if the ROC were to move in this direction they would have to conceal their effort from us at all costs.” Although U.S. scientists “could not absolutely preclude a clandestine ROC effort …. their presence would make such an effort much more difficult, by forcing still greater clandestinity.”

The proposal to station a few U.S. nuclear scientists in Taiwan never came to pass, but for years before and after 1978 U.S. government officials were watching for signs of a clandestine program to develop a nuclear weapons capability. U.S. diplomats and intelligence officers became aware of Taiwan’s nuclear interests not long after China first tested a nuclear device at Lop Nur in October 1964. Seeking a deterrent against a Chinese attack, the Taiwanese military, with the support of President Chiang Kai-shek, played a leading role in the nuclear program.diplomats and intelligence officers became aware of Taiwan’s nuclear interests not long after China first tested a nuclear device at Lop Nur in October 1964. Seeking a deterrent against a Chinese attack, the Taiwanese military, with the support of President Chiang Kai-shek, played a leading role in the nuclear program. Military interest in a nuclear deterrent continued when Washington began to normalize relations with Beijing in 1971 and then broke formal diplomatic relations with Taipei altogether in 1978.

U.S. government officials believed that even a few nuclear weapons would worsen Taiwan’s security situation and complicate U.S. efforts to normalize relations with Beijing while maintaining economic and security ties with Taipei. The latter’s dependence on Washington for security support gave the U.S. an influential role in Taiwan’s nuclear decisions whenever CIA and State Department officials became aware of problematic activities.

The military-controlled Chung Shan Institute of Science and Technology (CSIST) directed nuclear weapons research since its founding in 1966. CSIST played a controlling role in the Institute for Nuclear Energy Research (INER), which conducted weapons research and development. According to one of the declassified records published today, a Taiwanese official explained that INER was a “daughter” of the Atomic Energy Council that had been “married” to the Chung Shan Institute.CSIST played a controlling role in the Institute for Nuclear Energy Research (INER), which conducted weapons research and development. According to one of the declassified records published today, a Taiwanese official explained that INER was a “daughter” of the Atomic Energy Council that had been “married” to the Chung Shan Institute. That relationship enabled CSIST secret payments of salary supplements to INER staffers without any civilian oversight.

Inspiring today’s posting is a recent publication by the Institute for Science and International Security (ISIS), David Albright and Andrea Stricker’s Taiwan’s Former Nuclear Weapons Program: Nuclear Weapons on Demand , which provides a comprehensive account of the nuclear program, in part by drawing on documents from the National Security Archive. A key moment in this history was in January 1988, when the Central Intelligence Agency exfiltrated a senior Taiwanese official, Chang Sen-i, deputy director of the Institute for Nuclear Energy Research (INER). Chang had warned the CIA that Taiwan had a major clandestine nuclear program in the works but the Agency did not believe he would be safe when the U.S. started demanding that the ROC stop work at suspect sites that only a few people, such as Chang, could identify. Albright and Stricker provide the first detailed account in English of Chang’s whistle-blowing.

U.S. government documents about Chang Sen-i’s work as a CIA source remain classified; so do documents about the secret installations and activities that Taiwan closed in early 1988 in response to U.S. pressure. Nevertheless, some records about the consequences of Chang’s revelations have been declassified and are published today.pressure. Nevertheless, some records about the consequences of Chang’s revelations have been declassified and are published today. They include documents about the shipment of heavy water from the Taiwan Research Reactor (TRR) and the withdrawal of Taiwan’s military from nuclear research and the separation of INER from the Chung Shan Institute.

Today’s posting includes significant material on the U.S. and Taiwanese nuclear activities that the National Security Archive has collected since the last major posting on the issue in 2007. Many were declassified in collections at the National Archives in response to requests by the National Security Archive. Some have even been declassified in the weeks since the publication of the Abright-Stricker book. They include:

State Department intelligence reports from the 1960s on prospects for Taiwanese nuclear weapons capabilities and plans to purchase nuclear technology

A report from 1971 by a U.S. scientist, Bruce Billings, who declared that once the Canadian-supplied Taiwan Research Reactor went critical, “in 1973--the earliest possible date--the GRC [Government of the Republic of China] could, by dumping the core of the reactor, have adequate fissionable material for a nuclear weapon.”

A fully declassified telegram from March 1977 identifying the names of the IAEA officials, inspector Herbert Frittum and supervisor Leslie Thorne, who detected and reported on a secret port at the Taiwan Research Reactor that could be used to remove spent fuel from the reactor fuel cooling pond so that it could be reprocessed into plutonium. National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 221

A White House report from the summer of 1978 that a secret source had told the U.S. government that Taiwan had concealed heavy water production equipment. 221

A White House report from the summer of 1978 that a secret source had told the U.S. government that Taiwan had concealed heavy water production equipment. At the same time a U.S. team of nuclear experts was in Taiwan and while the “team had been occupied with ‘useless’ briefings and tours of various facilities in northern Taiwan … the equipment they were looking for” was hidden in southern Taiwan.

The secrecy of CIA operational files makes it unlikely that documents about the Chang Sen-I affair will be declassified any time soon. Nevertheless, the Archive’s nuclear project has pending declassification requests for documents concerning the Taiwan nuclear story during the 1970s and 1980s. Moreover, if successful, the resolution of pending appeals at the Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel may shed more light on this secret history.

I. Initial Moves: Trying to Buy A Reactor, 1966-1971

II. Early Reprocessing Controversies, 1972-1973

The title of this telegram tells the story. During a meeting with embassy officials, Victor Cheng explained why Taiwan needed "in-country reprocessing capability" as the "most reasonable and economic method for TAIPOWER to ensure its continued supply of fuel" for power reactors. According to the embassy, "this appears ... to be a well-orchestrated ROC attempt to acquire a ... capability of the type needed in nuclear weapons programs." In light of the earlier "abortive" attempt to acquire a plant from Western Europe, Taiwan "is now attempting to conceal the same objective behind the face of a plan ostensibly designed to serve TAIPOWER's mid-eighties fuel requirements."

III. The Taiwan Research Reactor Incident and Follow-Up, 1977-1978

In response to a letter from Secretary of State Vance on nuclear research (still classified), Premier Chiang Ching-kuo responded that "my government is not engaged in any research work in the sensitive fields of nuclear enrichment, reprocessing, or heavy water production." One of the suspect Taiwanese nuclear research activities that U.S. officials detected was a laser isotope program to separate uranium isotopes. Chiang specifically denied that Taiwan's interest in laser research extended into isotope separation and more broadly denied any "intention whatsoever to develop nuclear weapons or a nuclear device." Chiang might not have known that the U.S. had already discovered the technology to produce heavy water (see Document 18 above).

IV. The TRR Reconversion, Spent Fuel, and Colonel Chang’s Exfiltration

Note

[1] See also Alan Paterson, David Ho, Crossing the Red Line: Consequences of Taiwan's Emergence as a Nuclear Proliferant

Documents

Thomas L. Hughes, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to the Secretary, "Republic of China Interest in Nuclear Energy and Weapons," RFE-25, 25 January 1966, Secret
Jan 25, 1966 | Source RG 59, INR/RCRC, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Reports Coordination and review Staff, Intelligence Reports, 1961 and 1963-67, box 5, Chron/ Jan 66 Research Memos

U.S. Embassy Republic of China telegram 1088 to State Department, "German Nuclear Reactor for Taiwan," 6 April 1966, Secret, excised copy
Apr 6, 1966 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, FSE 13 CHINAT
As the INR report suggested, the Taiwanese had been considering purchasing a nuclear reactor from West Germany. By early 1966, a deal was in the works with the Siemens Corporation for the installation of a heavy water nuclear reactor. Arguing that the ROC military had a nuclear weapons program in mind "under the guise of power generation," Ambassador Arthur Hummel recommended that the State Department "dissuade" the West Germans from going ahead with the deal.

U.S. Embassy West Germany telegram 3292 to State Department, "German Nuclear Reactor for Taiwan," 15 April 1966, Confidential
Apr 15, 1966 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, AE 6 CHINAT
According to a confidential source in Bonn, the West German government had been divided over the reactor sale, but the Science Ministry had supported it as the country's "first major nuclear export." The Science Ministry would support the deal only as long as Taiwan accepted IAEA safeguards, which it was willing to do, but if Washington had non-commercial objections than Bonn would not move the transaction forward. The U.S. must have endorsed the deal because, as the following message indicates, the IAEA approved it in September 1967. Nevertheless, internal opposition in Taiwan would later sink the deal.

State Department telegram 127764 to U.S. Embassy Republic of China, 9 March 1968, Confidential
Mar 9, 1968 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, DEF 12-4 CHINAT
Boston Globe staffer Min Yee provided the Department with background on a forthcoming story on nuclear research in Taiwan. Yee characterized the Chung Shan Institute as a "center of weapons research." The State Department would decline to comment and state that it "was not aware of any weapons research being conducted" at the Chung Shan Institute. The Taiwanese had plans to purchase a reactor from the Siemens Corporation in West Germany but the company would agree to the sale only if the GRC sought IAEA approval, which it did in September 1967. The Department had "no reason believe GRC has changed [its] position" in favor of nonproliferation.

Ray Cline, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to the Secretary, "REPUBLIC OF CHINA: GRC Nuclear Weapons Program," Intelligence Note 802, 12 November 1969, Secret, excised copy
Nov 12, 1969 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969, DEF 12-1 CHINAT
Updating its earlier intelligence report, INR projected that "Over the next five years we can expect the GRC nuclear program to continue to stress those components that could be turned to nuclear weapons production, thereby keeping open a nuclear option." According to the report, the Chung Shan Science Institute had recently acquired a 40-megawatt heavy water reactor from Canada and was still considering the purchase of a nuclear reactor from Siemens as well as a chemical reprocessing plant. Whether Taipei was going to make the "political decision" to undertake a weapons program would depend on its assessment of financial costs and political risks. While there are elements in the government that supported a weapons project, "there are also elements who strongly oppose such a program because of its 'political and economic costs."

William W. Thomas to Thomas P. Shoesmith, 11 March 1971, enclosing report on "GRC's Atomic Weapons Program," Secret
Mar 11, 1971 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1970-73, AE 11-2 CHINAT
William Thomas, a political counselor at the embassy in Taiwan, sent the gist of physicist Bruce Billings' assessment of the nuclear program. Consistent with earlier intelligence estimates, Billings saw no active intent to construct a nuclear weapon but an intent "to attain the capability to manufacture such a device." Reviewing the work of the Chung Shan Research Institute, which sought the nuclear reactor from Siemens, Billings provided the backstory of the deal, which was scuttled by internal opposition led by Chiang's science adviser, Wu Ta-yu. It saw the reactor as "unnecessary and inefficient." A deal with Canada for an NRX reactor, however, was going forward and when it "goes critical in 1973--the earliest possible date--the GRC could, by dumping the core of the reactor, have adequate fissionable material for a nuclear weapon." According to Billings, Taiwan had the "the capability, staff and equipment for producing such a weapon."

Charles Van Doren, ACDA, to Dwight Porter [Deputy Representative to IAEA], "Background Materials on US Policy Toward a ROC Reprocessing Plant," 1 December 1972, Secret
Dec 1, 1972 | Source RG 84, Records of U.S. Mission to IAEA, Classified and Unclassified Subject Files, 1959-1976, box 15, China, Republic of AE-13
This recently declassified report provides perspective on the U.S. government's objections to chemical reprocessing in Taiwan and the problems in assuring IAEA safeguards in Taiwan. For Van Doren, the best outcome would be that a reprocessing plant not be "built in ROC at this time." Not only did it make no "economic sense," it would help prevent a nuclear weapons capability and should China take over Taiwan "it would acquire a valuable, free chemical reprocessing plant." A thorny problem was the role of IAEA safeguards. The future of the trilateral U.S.-Taiwan-IAEA trilateral agreement was in doubt because Taiwan had been expelled from the IAEA, to be eventually replaced by the PRC as part of the process of normalizing Beijing's international relations. The agreement would permit continuing IAEA inspection of the Canadian-supplied Taiwan Research Reactor, then under construction, but the question was whether Beijing would compel the Agency to withdraw from the agreement with Taiwan.

U.S. Mission to the European Economic Community telegram 5045 to State Department, "Proposed Reprocessing Plant for Republic of China," 21 December 1972, Limited Official Use
Dec 21, 1972 | Source RG 59, Subject-Numeric Files, 1967-1969. FSE 13 Chinat
Reports and rumors that Taiwan was trying to purchase a reprocessing plant were widespread in European nuclear energy circles during 1972. This message mentions Taiwanese discussions with potential British, Belgian, French, and West German suppliers. Bonn had a leg up in the negotiations because it could provide a "guarantee of delivery" while the other governments were wary of objections from Beijing. The U.S. position was that Taiwan "must be content" with a non-reprocessing "status quo" unless it built a capability with "indigenous technical expertise and industrial capability." The problem was that if Taiwan was determined to have a reprocessing capability was it better for suppliers to work out a safeguarded arrangement than to "run [the] risk" of Taiwan "finding other ways of realizing [its] objective with uncertainty about controls." Within weeks, the State Department authorized the embassy in Taiwan to convey its objections to Taiwanese interest in building a reprocessing plant

State Department telegram 051747 to U.S. Embassy in Taiwan, "ROC Nuclear Research," 21 March 1973, Secret
Mar 21, 1973 | Source RG 59, previously withdrawn telegram from Access to Archival Databases [AAD]
During a meeting with Victor Cheng, the Secretary-General for Taiwan's Atomic Energy Council, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Richard Sneider expressed the U.S. government's "appreciation" for Taiwan's "decision not to proceed with purchase and construction of nuclear fuel reprocessing plant." Cheng said he had only heard about the proposed plant in December and that the ROC "does not have [sic] any nuclear secrets from its friends." The next day, when meeting with Atomic Energy Commission officials, Cheng mentioned a project in the works at the Nuclear Science Institute, presumably the Institute for Nuclear Energy (INER), for a "laboratory-scale fuel reprocessing facility" whose capacity would be "miniscule": "two fuel elements per year (from the Tsing-Hua reactor)" that would yield "only 300 grams PU [plutonium] per year." This lab-scale project would become controversial in the future.

U.S. Embassy Taiwan telegram 4872 to State Department, "ROC Declares Need for Nuclear Reprocessing Capability: Probable Second Try at Acquiring Weapons Grade Material Capability," 11 August 1973, Secret
Aug 11, 1973 | Source RG 84, Records of U.S. Mission to IAEA, Classified and Unclassified Subject Files, 1959-1976, box 27, AE 13 ROC 1973

State Department telegram 167237 to U.S. Embassy Taiwan, "ROC Nuclear Reprocessing Plant," 22 August 1973, Secret
Aug 22, 1973 | Source RG 84, Records of U.S. Mission to IAEA, Classified and Unclassified Subject Files, 1959-1976, box 27, AE 13 ROC 1973
Responding to the embassy's message about Taiwan's renewed interest in a reprocessing plant, the State Department agreed that a "prompt, firm and negative reaction is in order."

U.S. Embassy Taiwan telegram 7052 to State Department, 'Atomic Energy Study Group Team Visit to Taiwan," 23 November 1973, Secret
Nov 23, 1973 | Source AAD, previously withdrawn telegram
This cable reports on the first of a series of U.S. "study" team visits to Taiwan. One of the group's takeaways was that "despite [Taiwanese] affirmations to the contrary we had impression that some individuals and segments of government might view full fuel cycle and chemical reprocessing plant as way to keep open military option." While members of the U.S. team made clear their concerns about the "direction" of the Taiwanese nuclear research program to officials in charge of R&D and nuclear energy policy generally, a "striking exception was General Tang [Chun-po], director of the Chung Shan Science Institute (CSSI) and key officials, who failed to attend dinner at the [Ambassador's] residence and was absent when team visited CSSI."

U.S. Embassy Taiwan telegram 5351 to State Department, "Current Status of Nuclear R and D in the Republic of China," 6 August 1976, Secret, excised copy, under appeal
Aug 6, 1976 | Source AAD, previously withdrawn telegram
Three years later U.S. diplomats remained concerned about Taiwan's interest in reprocessing and a full fuel cycle. This detailed embassy report acknowledged the difficulty in evaluating the "evidence to date of GROC interest in developing a nuclear device capability." Nevertheless, the Embassy believed that "a decision has been made at the highest executive level to keep this option open." Taiwan's determination to acquire a reprocessing capability, U.S. objections notwithstanding, leads to the conclusion that the "rationale is based on more than the economic-need argument." Noting that the U.S. has already objected to Taiwanese attempts to acquire a reprocessing plant from a Dutch firm, COMPRIMO, "we feel that ROC activities in this area should be monitored as closely as possible." If Taiwan made another attempt to acquire a reprocessing plant, the embassy recommended a "demarche in the strongest possible terms."

U.S. Embassy Taiwan telegram 8253 to State Department, "IAEA Inspection of ROC Nuclear Facilities," 15 December 1976, Confidential
Dec 15, 1976 | Source AAD, previously withdrawn telegram
The U.S. embassy received a copy of the IAEA's July 1976 inspection report of Taiwan's nuclear facilities, a report that became a matter of controversy in early 1977 because of an apparent oversight during the visit. Nevertheless, the inspectors did visit the TRR, assess the surveillance cameras (which were found wanting), the fuel element fabrication plant, and two reprocessing facilities. One consisted of a one-cell reprocessing laboratory of the same design used in a Norwegian installation : according to the report, "the very small size of the equipment inside ... preclude[s] the possibility that it could be used for serious production scale reprocessing." According to Albright and Stricker, that underestimated the risk. The other reprocessing facility was a "Plutonium Fuel Chemistry Laboratory" located at the Institute for Nuclear Energy Research (INER). The report found that the "characteristic coloring of plutonium was evident in the visible filters," which indicated that the facility had been used for reprocessing.

State Department telegram 053088 to U.S. Embassy Taiwan Repeating U.S. Embassy Japan telegram 3212 to State Department, "ROC/IAEA Safeguards," 10 March 1977, Secret
Mar 10, 1977 | Source AAD, previously withdrawn telegram
This recently declassified telegram was originally released to the National Security Archive in excised form, with the names of an IAEA official and an inspector withheld. Mentioned in the document were Leslie Thorne, chief of the Far East division of the Agency's Safeguards Department, and inspector Herbert Frittum. Meeting in Tokyo with ACDA official Joerg Menzel, a member of the U.S. team that had visited Taiwan a few weeks earlier, Thorne told Menzel about his visit to the Taiwan Research Reactor (TRR) and inspector Frittum's discovery of an unsafeguarded exit port at the fuel pond. The discovery brought up questions about the effectiveness of IAEA safeguards, but Agency inspectors believed that the problem reflected "lack of ROC cooperation" more than any problems with the safeguards themselves. An issue that was unexplained in the telegram was the presence of "special fuel rods," which according to the Albright-Strickner account, the U.S. team also noticed. They were segmented so that they could be cut more easily in the cooling pond for eventual chemical reprocessing. The discovery of the exit port raised questions about the possible diversion of spent fuel for secret reprocessing because the "irradiation and discharge of nine fuel rods had not been declared to the IAEA." The discoveries and discrepancies quickly led the U.S. to press Taiwan to shut down the TRR temporarily and to agree to restrictions on fuel cycle research and development work that could facilitate a weapons option.

State Department telegram 030046 to U.S. Delegation repeating U.S. Mission IAEA telegram 2395 to State Department, "IAEA Safeguards in the ROC," 28 March 1977, Secret
Mar 28, 1977 | Source AAD, previously withdrawn telegram
Galen Stone, the chief of the U.S. mission to the IAEA, reported on his discussion of the TRR problem with IAEA Director General Sigvard Eklund. Stone mainly wanted Eklund's assurance that if the Agency took any action against Taiwan "he would inform me in advance." Stone mentioned that the IAEA inspector and the U.S. team visiting Taiwan in early January had more or less simultaneously discovered the problem of the unsafeguarded exit port. So that a full analysis could be prepared "of what had transpired," the U.S. sent a representative to Vienna to work with IAEA safeguards officials.

State Department telegram 030080 to U.S. Delegation repeating U.S. Mission IAEA telegram 2402 to State Department, "IAEA Safeguards in the ROC," 29 March 1977, Secret
Mar 29, 1977 | Source AAD, previously withdrawn telegram
After Galen Stone's private meeting with Eklund (see previous document), Deputy Director General for Safeguards Rudolph Rometsch met privately with Joerg Menzel to discuss the Agency's safeguards at the TRR. Rometsch confirmed that Taiwan had not included the exit port in the design information that it had submitted to the Agency but "gave no explanation as to why the IAEA had not known about the port" (implying that it should have been noticed during the 1976 inspection). Rometsch "did not comment on previous IAEA safeguards effectiveness at all during 90-minute conversation." He did, however, observe that the special fuel rods "put safeguards at TRR and the significance of [the] now defunct reprocessing laboratory in new perspective." The implication was that the fuel rods could have been cut up into small enough pieces to be processed at the one-cell reprocessing laboratory which had apparently been closed under U.S. pressure. Stone reported that Rometsch did not seem to be aware of the discrepancies in the fuel rod count that the IAEA's Leslie Thorne had noticed. Moreover, Rometsch did not confirm Thorne's statement that the Agency had approved the transfer of spent fuel to dry storage, but in fact that would happen in the coming months.

Global Issues [National Security Council Staff] to Zbigniew Brzezinski, "Evening Report," 21 August 1978, Secret
Aug 21, 1978 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, RAC Project, Folder 10-14-4-12-8
According to a State Department INR report, during mid-1978 when a U.S. team was conducting a follow-up trip to nuclear sites a secret source told the U.S. government that Taiwan had concealed heavy water production equipment. According to the source, the "team had been occupied with 'useless' briefings and tours of various facilities in northern Taiwan while the equipment they were looking for" was hidden in southern Taiwan. According to the NSC's Global Issues staff, which prepared this report to national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski, the INR report "fails to mention that such heavy water production is explicitly prohibited under the recent US-ROC nuclear agreement." Although the actual agreement remains classified, the substance of it can be found in various records, including the prohibitions discussed in this telegram from December 1977.

U.S. Embassy Taiwan telegram 06279 to State Department, "President Chiang's Reply to Secretary Vance's Letter on Nuclear Matters," 14 September 1978, Secret
Sep 14, 1978 | Source RG 59, Files of Deputy Under Secretaries of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology Lucy W. Benson and Matthew Nimitz, box 9, Taiwan 1978

U.S. Embassy Taiwan telegram 06351 to State Department, "Proposed Assignment of U.S. Nuclear Scientists to ROC," 18 September 1978, Secret
Sep 18, 1979 | Source RG 59, Files of Deputy Under Secretaries of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology Lucy W. Benson and Matthew Nimitz, box 9, Taiwan 1978
Following up Chiang's suggestion that the U.S. assign American scientists to participate in Taiwan's nuclear R&D, Ambassador Unger observed that an important point was to "allay U.S. concerns" about the direction of the research activity. It could not be known for sure if Chiang had made a "fundamental decision" to develop a weapons capability, notwithstanding his assurances not to do so, but "if the ROC were to move in this direction they would have to conceal their effort from us at all costs." While the presence of U.S. scientists would not "absolutely preclude a clandestine ROC effort to achieve a nuclear weapons capability," if a few of them had access to key nuclear institutions, that "would make such work more difficult, by forcing still greater clandestinity."

State Department telegram 249943 to U.S. Embassy Taiwan, "Proposed Assignment of U.S. Nuclear Scientists to ROC," 2 October 1978, Secret
Oct 2, 1978 | Source RG 59, Files of Deputy Under Secretaries of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology Lucy W. Benson and Matthew Nimitz, box 9, Taiwan 1978
Receptive to Ambassador Unger's thinking, the State Department prepared a "non-paper' on the subject of visits by U.S. scientists for presentation to the ROC leadership. State did not envision any permanent stationing of scientists, but believed that their presence would help clarify "any misunderstandings" about the Taiwanese nuclear R&D, and "afford us some advantage [in making] more difficult any ROC efforts to engage in weapons-related nuclear activities and would also contribute to our overall efforts to keep closely informed of ROC activities in the nuclear field." On 5 October, an Embassy officer presented the non-paper, but any follow-up action by Taiwanese authorities remains unknown. They may have concluded that the disadvantages outweighed any benefits.

Department of State, "Chronology of TRR Conversion/Spent Fuel Return Program," n.d., Secret, excised copy, under appeal
Jan 1, 1982 | Source State Department declassification release
After TRR operations resumed in 1981, the U.S. and Taiwan held protracted negotiations over its reopening, using low-enriched uranium fuel, and the return of spent fuel rods (SFR). Included in the discussions was a representative of Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), possibly the late Richard Lewis, who proposed using reactor fuel enriched to 20 percent.

Assistant Secretary of State for International Oceanic, Environmental, and Scientific Policy John Negroponte to Ambassador Richard Kennedy, "Taiwan Research Reactor (TRR) Spent Fuel," 13 March 1986, Secret, excised copy, under appeal
Mar 13, 1986 | Source State Department declassification release
Unspecified arrangements had been made for the disposition of TRR spent fuel but with reactor operations continuing "unabated," spent fuel was accumulating at the rate of 180 rods per year, and some 2,000 rods in storage. While arrangements to cover costs were being discussed, they were not completed, for example, provisions to cover follow-on costs, such as cask rental, remained to be settled.

State Department telegram 173988 to AIT [American Institute in Taiwan], Taipei, "U.S./Taiwan Nuclear Discussions Taiwan Research Reactor Spent Fuel Shipment," 3 June 1986, Secret, excised copy
Jun 3, 1986 | Source State Department declassification release
This telegram enclosed the text of a "non-paper" to be given to senior Taiwanese officials on the need to expedite spent fuel shipments partly because of "safety concerns and public sensitivity to all things nuclear in the aftermath of the Soviet Chernobyl reactor disaster." With the downgrading of U.S. official ties with Taiwan in 1978, as part of the deal to recognize Beijing, the U.S. and Taiwan no longer had embassies but non-official "institutes" to maintain relations

State Department telegram 357483 to AIT, Taipei, "Taiwan Research Reactor [TRR] Conversion," 15 November 1986, Secret, excised copy, under appeal
Nov 15, 1986 | Source State Department declassification release
With shipments of spent fuel rods underway, the State Department reported that by mid-1989, when about 1,600 fuel rods "should" have been removed, an "equilibrium state" would be reached "where the numbers of spent fuel rods remaining on Taiwan will have been minimized at one and a half-year's discharge" (circa 270 fuel roads). Moreover, the reactor core of the TRR "would be 'converted' to a different fuel mixture from a core of only natural uranium metal fuel to a mixture of uranium metal and low enriched uranium oxide." The excised portion of this document may refer to the implications of those developments; for example, low enriched uranium fuel had a lower proliferation risk because substantially less plutonium could be separated from it.

AIT telegram 06561 to State Department, "Visit to Taiwan's Institute of Nuclear Energy Research," 10 October 1987, Secret
Oct 10, 1987 | Source State Department declassification release
For discussions of the TRR conversion and spent fuel transfer, officers from the AIT met with Institute for Nuclear Energy Research (INER) officials, including Deputy Director Chang Sen-I [Hsien-yi], who was then a CIA asset in Taiwan. For Chang, safety "outweighed all other considerations," and he worried about a possible conflict between safety and the profit motive of the firm, Nuclear Assurance Corporation (NAC), that transported spent fuel. It is improbable that the U.S. officials present at this discussion had any idea of Chang's connections with the CIA.

State Department telegram 365028 to AIT, "Meeting at Brookhaven on TRR Improvement," 23 November 1987, Secret, excised copy
Nov 23, 1987 | Source State Department declassification release
Deputy Director Chang and other INER officials met at Brookhaven National Laboratory with David Diamond, who was the U.S. project director, to review their plans for the TRR conversion. Within two months, the CIA would exfiltrate Chang from the ROC.

State Department telegram 395061 to excised recipient, "Assistance to TRR Conversion," 22 December 1987, Secret, excised copy
Dec 22, 1987 | Source State Department declassification release
Only weeks before Chang's exfiltration from Taiwan by the CIA, U.S. project director David Diamond wrote him about the plans for the TRR conversion.

State Department telegram 989853 to AIT, "Press Guidance on N.Y. Times Article on Secret Nuclear Power Plant," 24 March 1988, Unclassified
Mar 24, 1988 | Source State Department declassification release
A front-page New York Times article by Tim Weiner reported that the U.S. had pressed Taiwan to "stop work on a secret installation that "could have been used to obtain plutonium." The State Department provided guidance that indicated its satisfaction that Taiwan "is not engaged in activities" that were inconsistent with its nuclear nonproliferation commitment. The guidance confirmed that the TRR had been "shut down for economic reasons."

AIT Telegram 09194 to State Department, "New York Times Article Returns Chang Hsien-yi Case to Headlines," 24 March [1988], Confidential, excised copy
Developments at the TRR, including the removal of heavy water from the facility, and INER Deputy Director Chang's disappearance had already been the subject of media coverage in Taiwan and the New York Times story renewed interest in the story.

State Department telegram 137129 to AIT, "Taiwan, Nuclear Weapons, and Nonproliferation," 29 April 1988, Confidential
Apr 29, 1988 | Source State Department declassification release
David G. Brown, the State Department's desk officer for Taiwan affairs, prepared for the AIT a set of talking points that Institute staffers could use to argue that it was in Taiwan's own interest to abide by its commitments to the NPT and nonproliferation arrangements generally. For example, with respect to Taiwan-PRC relations, "Taiwan's pursuit of a nuclear weapons option could expose Taiwan to risks it does not now face." Nuclear weapons could provoke a "conventional build-up across the straits, thus increasing the conventional threat, and create a nuclear threat, by raising the prospect of massive nuclear retaliation against Taiwan."

Department of State telegram 149719 to U.S. Mission to the IAEA, "Transfer of Heavy Water," 3 May 1988, Confidential
May 3, 1988 | Source Release by Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel
Confirming the earlier Taiwanese media reports, U.S. government agencies and Taiwan made arrangements to transfer the TRR's heavy water supply, all 20 metric tonnes of it, to the United States. This was an important initial step in the U.S. effort to compel Taiwan to climb down from its program for a weapons capability. The illegibility of some of the text in this telegram makes it difficult to determine whether the amount was 20,390 or 20,490 kilograms.

Draft AIT, Washington telegram to AIT, "Conversations in the Margins on Meeting of AIT-CCNAA Joint Standing Committee on Civil Nuclear Cooperation," 31 May 1988, Secret
May 31, 1988 | Source State Department declassification release
To move Taiwan away from weapons R&D, the United States wanted INER to be freed from the Chung Shan Institute. At a meeting of the Coordination Council for North American Affairs (later renamed the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States), AEC Secretary-General Liu Guang-ji, and the former director of INER, reviewed options for restructuring INER, ranging from disbandment to privatization to organizational autonomy as a "parastatal." In passing, Liu noted that some of INER's engineers or nuclear scientists could work at the Chung Shan Institute of Science and Technology (CSIST) because the latter "does some computational work in the nuclear area," a statement that the drafter found "intriguing" but lacked time to pursue. As Albright and Stricker demonstrate, U.S. intelligence had been interested in weapons-related computer work at CSIST for years.

State Department telegram 323241 to AIT, Taipei, "Visit to Taiwan Research Facilities," 4 October 1988, Secret
Oct 4, 1988 | Source State Department declassification release
The State Department requested the AIT to assist with plans for a State/DOE/ACDA team to Taipei, including the unfaltering Joerg Menzel, to visit CSIST's nuclear research sites. One of the purposes was to permit the U.S. to "continue exporting the many commodities ordered by CSIST that are subject to control because of their potential significance to nuclear weapons activities." The U.S. experts also wanted to discuss with Taiwanese officials their plans for the relationship between INER and CSIST and the AEC, respectively. The detailed itinerary included a visit to the Lungtan area, the suspected site for explosives research related to nuclear weapons.

AIT, Taipei telegram 06229 to AIT Washington, "Visit to Taiwan/CSIST Facilities," 17 October 1988, Secret, excised copy
Oct 17, 1988 | Source State Department declassification release
AIT director David Dean sent back an itinerary that he had developed with senior CSIST officials. The schedule is excised including the destination for a helicopter trip which may have had something to do with the explosive research site at Lungtan.

AIT Taipei telegram 96635 to AIT Washington, "Reorganization of Taiwan's Atomic Energy Council," 17 October 1988, Confidential, excised copy
To take the military out of Taiwan's nuclear affairs, the government made major organizational changes. The AEC severed all connections with the military, including its budget which was to become part of the Ministry of Education instead of the Defense Ministry. Moreover, as of 1 October, INER became part of the AEC and was "instructed to open its doors to the universities and the public."

AIT, Taipei telegram 06507 to AIT Washington, "Visit to Taiwan/CSIST Facilities," 28 October 1988, Secret, excised copy
Oct 28, 1988 | Source State Department declassification release
During the first day of the visit to CSIST, the U.S. team was briefed about the new arrangements for INER, with State Department representative James Shipley telling Admiral Hsia, Vice Chief of the General Staff, that the "team is encouraged by .... the actions and plans toward INER/CSIST separation." Shipley took note of President Lee Teng-hui's "commitment against acquiring nuclear weapons," while observing that "those who control exports and worry about nonproliferation matters must be convinced that this continues to be the case." Hsia assured the team that "there is currently and in the future no nuclear or nuclear related research at CSIST" or "classified military research" at INER. To expedite nuclear-related exports, ACDA's Joerg Menzel suggested better end-use statements and more communication with U.S. contacts on export requests.

AIT, Taipei telegram 06505 to AIT Washington, "Visit to Taiwan/CSIST Facilities," 28 October 1988, Secret, excised copy
Oct 29, 1988 | Source State Department declassification release
Whatever the U.S. team saw or heard during the second day of their tour of CSIST facilities, they found a "general tenor of openness and candor." CSIST director Vice Admiral Liu Shi-hi said that he "he believed our concerns about CSIST had been alleviated." State Department representative James Shipley agreed that it was a "positive step" but follow-up would be needed
