Paul RASSINIER

Debunking the Genocide Myth

A Study of the Nazi Concentration Camps and the Alleged 
Extermination of European Jewry

Introduction by Pierre Hofstetter

Translated from the French by Adam Robbins

© The Noontide Press Los Angeles, California

AAARGH

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
This text is the "Introduction" to Debunking the Genocide Myth, a Study of the Nazi 
Concentration Camps and the Alleged Extermination of European Jewry, by Paul 
RASSINIER, Introduction by Pierre Hofstetter, Translated from the French by Adam 
Robbins, published in 1978 in Los Angeles by The Noontide Press, PO Box 2719, 
Newport beach, CA 92659. 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 78-53090. ISBN 0-911038-24-8. 
Copyright © 1978 by the Noontide Press.ed in 1978 in Los Angeles by The Noontide Press, PO Box 2719, 
Newport beach, CA 92659. 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 78-53090. ISBN 0-911038-24-8. 
Copyright © 1978 by the Noontide Press.

This text has been displayed on the Net, and forwarded to you as a tool for educational purpose, further 
research, on a non commercial and fair use basis, by the International Secretariat of the Association des 
Anciens Amateurs de Récits de Guerres et d'Holocaustes (AAARGH). The E-mail of the Secretariat is 
<aaarghinternational@hotmail.com. Mail can be sent at PO Box 81475, Chicago, IL 60681-0475, 
USA. 
We see the act of displaying a written document on Internet as the equivalent to displaying it on the 
shelves of a public library. It costs us a modicum of labor and money. The only benefit accrues to the 
reader who, we surmise, thinks by himself. A reader looks for a document on the Web at his or her own 
risks. As for the author, there is no reason to suppose that he or she shares any responsibility for other 
writings displayed on this Site. Because laws enforcing a specific censorship on some historical 
question apply in various countries (Germany, France, Israel, Switzerland, Canada, and others) we do 
not ask their permission from authors living in thoses places: they wouldn't have the freedom to 
consent. 
We believe we are protected by the Human Rights Charter:  
ARTICLE 19. <Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes 
freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas 
through any media and regardless of frontiers.>The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted 
by the United Nations General Assembly on December 10, 1948, in Paris.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3

Table of Contentsmedia and regardless of frontiers.>The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted 
by the United Nations General Assembly on December 10, 1948, in Paris.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3

Table of Contents

About The Author......................................................................................................4 
Introduction by PIERRE HOFSTETTER ...................................................................5 
Part I The Author's Experience.................................................................................10 
Chapter One Prologue ..........................................................................................10 
Chapter Two Swarms of Humanity at the Gates of Hell........................................23 
Chapter Three The Circles of Hell........................................................................37 
Chapter Four Charon's Bark .................................................................................49 
Chapter Five Port of Grace; Anteroom of Death...................................................65 
Chapter Six Shipwreck.........................................................................................76 
PART II The Experience of Others...........................................................................80 
Chapter Seven Concentration Camp Literature.....................................................80 
Chapter Eight The Minor Witnesses.....................................................................90 
Chapter Nine Louis Martin-Chauffier...................................................................99 
Part III The Drama of European Jews.....................................................................156 
Chapter Twelve Raul Hilberg: His Doctrine and His Methods............................156 
Chapter Thirteen Witnesses, Testimonies, and Documents .................................167 
Chapter Fourteen Statistics: Six Million or... ......................................................210 
Chapter Fifteen Conclusion: Six Million Exterminated Jews -- Fact or Fiction ...277 
Annexes.................................................................................................................288 
Appendix A: Four Descriptions of Prison Life in French Penal Institutions ........288 
Appendix B: The Two French Versions of the Gerstein Document.....................293 
Appendix C: The Wolfgang Grosch Statement and a Report of a Second Lieutenant 
to a Lieutenant....................................................................................................302 
Afterword by Mark Weber of the Institute for Historical Review ...........................306nt....................................................................................................302 
Afterword by Mark Weber of the Institute for Historical Review ...........................306

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4

About The Author.............................................................302 
Afterword by Mark Weber of the Institute for Historical Review ...........................306

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4

About The Author

Paul Rassinier was born on March 18, 1906, in Beaumont, a small village near 
Montbéliard, the son of a farmer. He received his formal education in the schools of 
the area and passed the necessary examinations which allowed him to teach history 
and geography at the secondary school level and to use the title of "professor." He 
taught in the secondary school at Faubourg de Montbéliard where students were 
prepared to take the "brevet," an examination that is somewhat inferior to that 
examination which is taken by students in the lycées who desire to matriculate at the 
university. It was at this school that he was arrested by the Gestapo in October 1943. 
Having joined the Socialist Party, SFIO, in 1934, Paul Rassinier became the head of 
that party in the Belfort area when the war broke out in 1939. Following the German 
occupation of France, he participated in the founding of the "Libre-Nord" 
organization which became involved in various forms of "passive resistance," 
including the smuggling of Jewish refugees over the Franco-Swiss border into 
Switzerland in cooperation with the Swiss Jewish Committee. Rassinier's activities 
eventually came to the attention of the German authorities who caused him to be 
arrested and to be deported to the concentration camp at Buchenwald. Later he was 
sent to the camp at Dora where he was incarcerated until the end of the war. 
Upon his liberation in 1945, he returned to France where he was elected to the 
Assemblée Nationale as a Socialist deputy. He served for one year and then retired He 
was awarded the highest decoration which the French government bestowed for 
service in the wartime resistance movement. Due to his frail health, a consequence of 
his two years of imprisonment at Buchenwald and Dora, he retired from teaching and 
received a small pension from the French government. He died on July 29, 1967, at 
his home in Asnières, near Paris. He is survived by his wife, Jeanette, and his only 
son, Jean-Paul, who is a practicing physicianll pension from the French government. He died on July 29, 1967, at 
his home in Asnières, near Paris. He is survived by his wife, Jeanette, and his only 
son, Jean-Paul, who is a practicing physician

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5

Introduction

by PIERRE HOFSTETTER1967, at 
his home in Asnières, near Paris. He is survived by his wife, Jeanette, and his only 
son, Jean-Paul, who is a practicing physician

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5

Introduction

by PIERRE HOFSTETTER

In every respect, Paul Rassinier was a remarkable man of his time -- out of the 
ordinary, we are tempted to write -- a man to whom can be immediately attributed 
these three essential qualities, all of which are rather rare today in a single person: 
courage, honesty and ability. 
As a professor of history and geography, he could have had a brilliant and lucrative 
career in these disciplines if he had confined himself to the "official history" -- i.e. the 
"official false history that is taught ad usum Delphini" and of which Balzac spoke -- 
and if he had not opted for historical revisionism by beginning to study carefully the 
"hidden history" wherein lies the true causes of events, in short, of the "shameful 
history". He devoted the last twenty years of his life to the debunking of the historical 
orthodoxy that surrounds World War II produced a shelf full of books which 
culminated in the remarkable work, insufficiently known, entitled Les Responsables 
de la Seconde Guerre mondiale (1) which was published shortly before his death in 
July 1967. 
Paul Rassinier also could have made a name for himself in politics if, when he was a 
socialist representative in 1946, he had submitted to the oppressive climate of that 
period in France and had accepted open collaboration with the Communist Party. But, 
he refused such collaboration, and that party did all that it could to defeat him in his 
bid for re-election. As a matter of fact, the Communists always did want Paul 
Rassinier's "hide" in both the literal as well as the figurative sense. A confirmed, total 
pacifist, Rassinier, in 1922 at the age of 16, under the influence of the anarchist Victor 
Serge, had been drawn into the Communist Party from which, having later gone to the 
opposition, he was quickly excluded. He joined the Socialist party in 1936, where he 
made himself known particularly in the pacifist wing that was opposed to the French 
policies that led to the 1939 war. Then, after France was occupied by the German 
army, he was one of the earliest resistants to this occupation and helped to found the 
"Libre-Nord" movement, but, unlike the murderous guerrilla bands and the "shadow 
assassins," he tried to inculcate into these Resistance movements "the idea of 
nonviolence and the principles of total pacifism." Such an attitude succeeded in 
getting him "condemned to death" by the Communist resistance (which had arrived on 
the scene late following the German attack on the U.S.S.R. in June 1941) and in 
putting him on the receiving end of the ritual "little warning coffin" effigy. It is bitter 
irony that this man -- deported to Buchenwald and to Dora, where he endured 
frightful suffering for nearly two years -- should later concede that he only escaped 
from the rain of Communist machine gun fire thanks to his arrest by the Gestapo on 
October 30, 1943, and his subsequent deportation to Germany.two years -- should later concede that he only escaped 
from the rain of Communist machine gun fire thanks to his arrest by the Gestapo on 
October 30, 1943, and his subsequent deportation to Germany.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6
Liberated in 1945, returned to France on a stretcher, and declared to be a severe 
invalid, Paul Rassinier could have, once again, had a lucrative and successful career in 
what was called "résistantialisme," that is to say, the shameless, continuous and 
highly advantageous exploitation -- "make room for us!" -- of the events of the 
"resistance," real or imaginary.

However in Belfort, his native city, he began with a 
nearly naive honesty to proclaim vociferously that he had never met in the Resistance 
most of the men who were speaking in its name, which was in itself, already a bold 
step But, he went even further and with the exceptional courage of an honest man who 
was sickened by the flood of lies that flowed before his eyes, he began to denounce 
exaggerations of every kind concerning German war crimes, while maintaining that 
there had been as many war crimes committed on the Allied side as on that of the 
Axis and that they were all of a similar horrible nature.

Indignant.

Paul Rassinier was thoroughly indignant, this former deportee, about the 
whole avalanche of questionable and often fanciful literature about the German 
concentration camps that passed before him.

In the preface of Rassinier's Le 
Parlement aux mains des banques (2), the dramatist and screenwriter Henri Jeanson 
described Paul Rassinier's indignation as follows: 
I like Rassinier very much.

I like him very much because, without losing his 
composure, without grandiloquence, quite simply Rassinier lived, in the word 
of Zola, "indignant." Indignant, but calm because he was sure of his facts.

Indignant, but imperturbable.

Indignant since the age of sixteen.

The indignation of Rassinier does not make itself known through spectacular 
temper tantrums.

He does not at all become carried away and avoids all 
invective.

From these traits stem his strength and perfect aim.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He does not at all become carried away and avoids all 
invective. From these traits stem his strength and perfect aim. He does not 
belong to that race of congestive polemists who rid themselves in one article -- 
whew -- of their scrupulosity or their bad temper and who write like someone 
purging himself. Once the article has been published, he does not consider 
himself released from duty as concerns himself and does not move to another 
sort of exercise. No, he carries on with a good faith that no one dreams of 
reproaching him for, with the exception, of course, of these national 
organizations in which authentic resistance fighters and deportees innocently 
allow themselves to be duped by the profiteers of the crematoriums. And these 
profiteers do exist. They have always existed. No one is unaware that the 
ossuary of Verdun, for example, has become a circus attraction and an 
excellent business whose profits are all the greater since the merchandise is 
never replenished. It is always the same skeletons which are used. The remains 
are not a loss for everyone. Indignant; Paul Rassinier began, then, almost immediately upon his return from 
Buchenwald, to do battle against the numerous concentration camp legends, as a free 
spirit and a scrupulous historian. There were then published in succession Le Passage 
de la ligne (3), an impartial and lucid account of his life as a deportee, Le Mensonge 
d'Ulysse (4), a critical look at the orthodox concentration camp "literature," and 
Ulysse trahi par les siens (5), a companion work to Le Mensonge d 'Ulysse. The bulk 
of these three works makes up the first eleven chapters of this present edition; some 
redundant material i.e., overlapping material which appears more than once in the 
original French editions -- has been removed from the present English language

--- PAGE BREAK ---7
editions which combines the three books, in an effort to retain the readability of the 
original works and to reduce the production costs of this edition.

Naturally, the scope 
and the meaning of the original editions have not been altered by this editing.

On the subject of atrocity propaganda, Paul Rassinier, as the reader will discover 
when he reads the chapters which follow minces no words: 
The atrocities and those responsible for them are clearly inseparable.

Moreover, I shall perhaps astonish you.

I forego, as a matter of fact, either 
giving you a list of these atrocities or decrying them to you.

You have already 
heard far too much on the subject.

The atrocity proves nothing, moreover, in 
history, either against he who commits it or in favor of he who is subjected to 
it.

We have all too many examples of a world where today's victim is 
tomorrow's executioner and vice versa.

It will be enough then for me to tell 
you that the concentration camps were a world of horrors.

And if anything 
ought to be added, it would be this: in spite of this, just about all those who 
have spoken of them have overdone it and particularly their explanations have 
little in common with the truth ....

Concerning figures, the "witnesses" have 
said and written the most improbable things.

Concerning the implementation 
of the means of` killing, also.

Concentration camp literature on the whole has 
the appearance of a collection of contradictory pieces of ill-natured gossip.

With such a view on the worth of concentration camp literature, it is no surprise that 
Paul Rassinier began to question the central tenet of the concentration camp 
orthodoxy, to wit: the claim of Jewish genocide.Concentration camp literature on the whole has 
the appearance of a collection of contradictory pieces of ill-natured gossip.

With such a view on the worth of concentration camp literature, it is no surprise that 
Paul Rassinier began to question the central tenet of the concentration camp 
orthodoxy, to wit: the claim of Jewish genocide.

On this subject, the authoritative 
work of Paul Rassinier clearly remains his Le Drame des Juifs européens (6) in which 
he examined, with the care of the scrupulous historian that we know him to be, the 
documents, the statistics, and the census figures that are related to the alleged 
holocaust.

The translation of this study is found in the final four chapters of this 
volume.

Without question, it is an authoritative work in its genre.

And, as such, it has 
been circulated widely through Europe during the past decade.

Moreover, Le Drame -
- as well as Rassinier's numerous other works -- has inspired an ever-growing library 
of other "revisionist" works on the subject, including the excellent study by Arthur R.

Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moreover, Le Drame -
- as well as Rassinier's numerous other works -- has inspired an ever-growing library 
of other "revisionist" works on the subject, including the excellent study by Arthur R. Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century. (7) 
Paul Rassinier's contentions that there was no Nazi policy of Jewish genocide, that 
there were no officially sanctioned "exterminations by gas" and that there were no six 
million Jewish deaths at the hands of the Nazis have, naturally, bothered greatly the 
"court historians," caught with their hands in the cookie jar, so to speak, with their 
dishonest scholarship, as well as the entire Zionist establishment which has built the 
State of Israel on the "myth of the six million." In fact, the post-war politics of the 
Soviet Union, of the Bonn government in West Germany, and of the United States 
with regard to its "Cold War" policies have been justified, to a large extent, by the 
pointing to the alleged Nazi wartime atrocities, with the expressed hope that the given 
policy under consideration will prevent what the Nazis "did" from ever occurring 
again, et caetera, ad nauseam. Thus, it should be no secret why historical revisionism 
in this area of study has been greeted with such hostility from "official quarters" on 
both sides of the "Iron Curtain."

--- PAGE BREAK ---8
Notwithstanding his iconoclastic contentions, Paul Rassinier kept things in balance.

In 
the chapter concerning the "Jewish question" in his Les Responsables de la seconde 
guerre mondiale, he argued that "...

even stripped of all the exaggerations that have 
falsified its meaning" Hitler's policy against the Jews was an unquestionable attack on 
human rights and was, according to the sanctioned expression 'more than a crime, a 
transgression'".

But, he hastens to add that to a certain extent the misfortunes of the 
Jews during that period were a consequence of their own doing: 
Let us recognize that [the Jewish] claim to wanting to be in Germany -- as in 
every other country that they regard as a "land of welcome" -- a national 
minority was scarcely tenable either.

It was up to themselves to admit that they 
were foreigners in Germany and to surrender any right to protest if, in his turn, 
Hitler treated them like foreigners.

The other governments of the world were 
free to accept this claim of the Jews, it was a problem of domestic policy 
which was none of Hitler's affair.

Let the Jews of Germany go settle 
elsewhere, he said.

The Third Reich was a totalitarian state, and, in its bosom, 
there was no room for a national minority.

The only problem with Hitler's plan was that the other sovereign states wanted 
nothing to do with these Jews, at least in appreciable numbers.

"Even had they wanted 
to deal with them, Hitler's policy would have remained, without any doubt a blow to 
human rights," Rassinier remarked further, "but it would have remained such only 
from the point of view of principles and, on the practical level, it would have not 
taken on [the subsequent] inhuman turn of events.

The matter could have been 
resolved by the expedient of a transfer of the population accompanied by a transfer of 
personal property, the likes of which history offers us many an example."Even had they wanted 
to deal with them, Hitler's policy would have remained, without any doubt a blow to 
human rights," Rassinier remarked further, "but it would have remained such only 
from the point of view of principles and, on the practical level, it would have not 
taken on [the subsequent] inhuman turn of events.

The matter could have been 
resolved by the expedient of a transfer of the population accompanied by a transfer of 
personal property, the likes of which history offers us many an example.

That is what 
Hitler was proposing." 
In spite of the outbreak of hostilities in September 1939, this policy of population 
transfer remained the ultimate goal of the Hitler government, and, as the study that is 
printed in the final four chapters of this book demonstrates, such a population transfer 
actually did take place for the vast majority of European Jewry, although admittedly it 
occurred under inhumane and brutal conditions which caused numerous casualties.

But, as the study also shows, such deaths were an unfortunate coincidence and were 
not the result of a deliberate policy of "genocide." 
As an important revisionist historian in the tradition of the late American historian 
Harry Elmer Barnes -- through whose efforts, incidentally, this translation was 
commissioned -- Paul Rassinier left an impressive body of work, without doubt 
indispensable to a complete understanding of the events of the Twentieth Century.

Among his works which have not been mentioned previously, is a large volume, rich 
in documentary material of prime importance and analyzed with his customary 
lucidity, concerning that gross example of "kangaroo justice" known as the Jerusalem 
Tribunal which passed judgment on Adolf Eichmann; it is entitled Le véritable procès 
Eichmann ou Les Vainqueurs incorrigibles (8).--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, as the study also shows, such deaths were an unfortunate coincidence and were 
not the result of a deliberate policy of "genocide." 
As an important revisionist historian in the tradition of the late American historian 
Harry Elmer Barnes -- through whose efforts, incidentally, this translation was 
commissioned -- Paul Rassinier left an impressive body of work, without doubt 
indispensable to a complete understanding of the events of the Twentieth Century. Among his works which have not been mentioned previously, is a large volume, rich 
in documentary material of prime importance and analyzed with his customary 
lucidity, concerning that gross example of "kangaroo justice" known as the Jerusalem 
Tribunal which passed judgment on Adolf Eichmann; it is entitled Le véritable procès 
Eichmann ou Les Vainqueurs incorrigibles (8). Other works that should be noted include his Candasse ou Le Huitième péché capital 
(9), a "story beyond time" that is told a bit in the manner of Anatole France, and, 
above all, his L'Opération Vicaire (10) in which he admirably exposes the political 
operation which consisted, in conjunction with the play "The Deputy," in charging

--- PAGE BREAK ---France, and, 
above all, his L'Opération Vicaire (10) in which he admirably exposes the political 
operation which consisted, in conjunction with the play "The Deputy," in charging

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
Pope Pius XII with the crime of "having favored Nazism," and, in doing so, having 
favored the anti-Jewish persecutions conducted by the Nazis, whereas, to the contrary, 
the Pope condemned those policies. Interestingly, as if by chance, there were found in 
rather great numbers in the gaggle of the Pope's accusers people who had helped 
Hitler to come to power. 
To the everlasting credit of Paul Rassinier is the fact that with his L'Opération 
"Vicaire" he undertook the defense of the "highest moral authority on earth" in spite 
of the fact that he was a professed atheist. It was likewise honorable for this former 
deportee, the poor victim of the hell of the concentration camps, to refrain from 
capitalizing on his experiences as a camp inmate and, instead, to put himself at the 
service of historical truth concerning the German camps and the "Jewish holocaust." 
Clearly, Paul Rassinier belonged, as his friends and admirers were always able to 
appreciate, to this elite of men whose sole ambition is never to repudiate themselves 
and to conserve an unswerving allegiance to the principles they have chosen to serve. 
July, 1977

FOOTNOTESto 
appreciate, to this elite of men whose sole ambition is never to repudiate themselves 
and to conserve an unswerving allegiance to the principles they have chosen to serve. 
July, 1977

FOOTNOTES

1 Those Responsible for the Second World War (Paris: Nouvelles Editions Latines, 
1967). 
2 The Parliament in the Hands of the Banks (Paris: Contre-Courant, 1955). 
3 The Crossing of the Line (Paris: Editions Bressanes, 1950). 
4 The Lie of Ulysses (Paris: La Librairie Française, 5th ed., 1961). 
5 Ulysses Betrayed by his Own (Paris: La Librairie Française, 1961). 
6 The Drama of the European Jews (Paris: Les Sept Couleurs, 1964). 
7 (Richmond, Surrey: Historical Review Press, [1976]). See pages 9-13 for a 
bibliographical essay concerning other "revisionist" titles as well as other source 
material. 
8 The Real Eichmann Trial or the Incorrigible Victors (Paris: Les Sept Couleurs, 
1963). 
9 Candasse or the Eight Capital Sin (Paris: L'Amitié par le Livre, 1955). 
10 Operation "The Deputy, " (Paris: La Table Ronde, 1965).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10

Part I The Author's Experience

*** 
Chapter One 
PrologueEight Capital Sin (Paris: L'Amitié par le Livre, 1955). 
10 Operation "The Deputy, " (Paris: La Table Ronde, 1965).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10

Part I The Author's Experience

*** 
Chapter One 
Prologue

It rained a fine, cold, icy April rain; steady, relentless, and inexorable. It had rained 
for two days and the third night was beginning. 
The train, a long line of cars grinding along the rails slowly disappeared into the 
blackness. The engine, a locomotive of another era, sweated, blew and strained, 
coughed and spat, slipped and back-fired. A hundred times it hesitated, and a hundred 
times it seemed to refuse to make the effort expected of it. 
It rained unceasingly. In the gondola car open to the sky were eighty huddled cringing 
bodies, intertangled, on top of each other. Were they living? Were they dead? No one 
could say. In the morning they woke once more, frozen in their miserable rags; they 
were emaciated and hollow with their eyes staring out, feverish and dazed. With a 
superhuman effort they shook themselves. They were aware of the daylight. They felt 
the rain - the stinging slashes of the rain - go through their ragged clothing, to their 
thin and hardened flesh, reaching to the very bone. They arched their backs with an 
imperceptible shudder. Perhaps, they were just beginning to make those thousands of 
instinctive, waking up movements, when they saw themselves reflected in each other's 
eyes. Through the fog of fever and the sheet of water falling from the skies, they 
noticed the men in uniform, armed to the teeth, planted in the four corners of the car, 
impassive but vigilant. Then they remembered. They realized their destiny, and with a 
start, dejected and overwhelmed, they fell back into that half sleep, that half life, that 
half death. 
It rained, and rained, on and on. A heavy fetid air rose from the mass of bodies, and 
disappeared into the cold wetness of the night. 
When they had left there were a hundred of them. They had been collected together in 
a hurry, with dogs at their heels and thrown pell-mell in groups into the train, under 
blows and shouted commands. They were horror stricken when they found themselves 
about to leave from the small platform, without provisions for the journey. Suddenly 
they understood that a great ordeal was beginning. 
"Achtung, Achtung!" they were warned. "On your feet during the day; sit down during 
the night!... Nicht Verschwinden Any breaking of the rule, sofort erschossen! 
understand?" 
The open car, the cold, and the rain, that was one thing- that had been seen before. 
But, nothing to eat, nothing to eat!icht Verschwinden Any breaking of the rule, sofort erschossen! 
understand?" 
The open car, the cold, and the rain, that was one thing- that had been seen before. 
But, nothing to eat, nothing to eat!

--- PAGE BREAK ---11
To cap their misery, for weeks there had not been an ounce of bread in the camp, and 
they had had to make do with supplies from the storage pits: plain soup of rutabaga, a 
quart sometimes half a quart, and small potatoes, in the evening, after a long, hard day 
of work.

Nothing to eat.

Everything else vanished before this menace.

The sound of 
the Americans seven and a half miles away barely reached them.

Standing during the day, sitting down at night...!

Before the end of the first night, 
three or four of them who had shown too precipitately a desire to satisfy a pressing 
need, were seized by the collar, smacked brutally against the high wall of the car and 
executed point blank: Craa-ack!

against the wood, craa-ack!

They did it in their pants, 
cautiously at first, holding themselves so as to soil themselves as little as possible; 
then, progressively they gave up.

Three or four others who had fallen down with exhaustion during the following day, 
were coldly finished off with a bullet in the head.

Craa-ack!

against the floor, craa-
ack!

The bodies were tossed out, as the train rolled along, after the registration 
numbers were removed.

At the beginning of the third night, the ranks were 
considerably thinned, and fear gave way to terror, and terror to complete resignation.

Abandoned was any urge to escape this hell, any urge to live; they let themselves die 
in their own excrement.

And still it rained, on and on and on.

A little breeze riffled across the convoy, and the 
bit of canvas, that make-shift shelter under which in each corner the guard passed his 
long hours of watch, was lifted.

It was as if the miasma were blown away, and the 
S.S.

man, nervous at first, fussing about although in a determined way, suddenly 
became concerned.

For some time, fewer rifle shots were heard, and there was less 
machine gun chattering.

The dogs themselves-oh those dogs!-barked and yelped less 
at the numerous stops.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For some time, fewer rifle shots were heard, and there was less 
machine gun chattering. The dogs themselves-oh those dogs!-barked and yelped less 
at the numerous stops. In 48 hours, due to the constant changing of direction from 
side-track to side-track, the train was less than twelve and a half miles from where it 
started. Late in the afternoon it set off toward the southwest, after having tried the 
north, the south, and east in vain. If this track was cut like the others, it would mean 
that we were trapped and that we would be taken. The S.S. guards frowned, and then 
passed the news on from car to car, throughout the length of the train. "We are 
trapped, we will be captured!" They were completely bowled over. They were going 
to be captured, and all of these half conscious prostrate bodies were going to come 
back to life, rise up to accuse them; they would be caught red-handed. Still, during the morning we heard them frequently calling out questions to each other 
with guttural voices, cracking jokes, and laughing coarsely at the sad and disabused 
girls who all along the right of way gave them back only occasional and melancholy 
encouragement. Now they were silent, only the click of a lighter, or the red end of a 
cigarette, from time to time broke this death-like silence, or disturbed the thick and 
humid obscurity of the night. It rained endlessly, on and on. On top of this, the wind had become stronger. It began 
to whistle sharply between the boards, and the water came down in torrents. The 
canvas cover over one S.S. guard ballooned up, and its props gave way. Suddenly, the 
tent cloth began to flutter like a flag and to flap against the wall of the car. The S.S. swore. Then, grumbling and swearing, he tried in vain to repair the damage. If he got 
it attached on one side, the wind tore it off on the other! "Gott Verdammt!"

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
After two futile attempts he gave up.

Suddenly, he turned toward the nearest of the 
miserable creatures, and gave a few shoves with his knee.

"Du," he cried.

"du...

Du.

blöder Hund!" Blöder Hund?

The man heard, understood where the cry came from, 
automatically collected all the strength left in him, and got up frightened.

When he 
saw what he was expected to do, he felt a little reassured.

He raised himself onto the 
top of the wooden side of the car where he balanced on his hands and knees.

Then, 
very carefully so as not to fall over the other side onto the road bed, he brought in the 
canvas, and helped the guard to fix the corners onto the supports.

"Fertig?" (Finished?

) "Ja, Herr S.

S.

" 
And, then an extraordinary thing happened.

He came to his senses all of a sudden.

All 
of a sudden the thought came to him that he was on his knees on the top edge of the 
wall, that his two legs were turned toward the outside, that the train was not moving 
very fast, that it was raining, that the night was black, and that the Americans were 
perhaps seven or so miles away, that freedom...

Freedom, oh liberty!

With that 
evocation, a sudden madness filled him who just a little while before was afraid of 
falling-oh irony-a light filled his brain, flooded his whole being: "Ja..." he repeated; 
then cried, "Ja!

Ja!

Ja!...a...a.

.

.

ah!" 
Before the S.S.

guard even had time to register surprise, the man, the half-dead 
skeleton, tightened his muscles in one supreme effort, propped his poor thin arms on 
the edge of the board, and threw himself backward.

He heard the crackling of gunfire 
ringing in his head, and he still found the strength, the astonishing lucidity, to realize 
that he had fallen into a spot, that was out of the line of fire.

He felt himself caught 
there, body and soul, and he collapsed into the nothingness of unconsciousness.

A 
machine gun continued to fire: Tch!.

.

.

Tch!...

Clac!

Tcheretchstche!...

Clac !...

Tch!...

Clac!

Taratatata!...

Tche!...--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taratatata!... Tche!... Tche!... Tche!... Tche!... The locomotive sweated 
and blew, hesitated, slid and back-fired, and the train moved on. The guns stopped 
spitting death. Little by little the great indifferent silence of nature asleep closed over 
the drama going on, disturbed only by the hissing of the rain that now became steady 
with the dying of the wind. It rained on and on and on. ***** 
It was no longer raining. Hours had gone by, two, three, four, perhaps. The heavens 
had finally given up. In the thick and spongey night something next to the iron rail 
moved. First, two eyes tried to open, but the heavy eyelids sank down in a sudden reflex, as 
though the head were under water. His dry throat contracted to salivate and brought up the taste of earth on his tongue. An arm sketched a movement which was paralyzed in mid air by a sharp pain in the 
elbow, dull at the shoulder. Then, nothing more; the man lost himself again in a 
strange sense of well-being, and actually thought that he was falling asleep. Suddenly, a shiver came over him and enveloped him. His chest was bared of its wet 
covering, brrr!... He wanted to curl himself up to get warm. Then, he tried to wake up.

--- PAGE BREAK ---13
His eyelids fluttered nervously, and he forced them to stay open.

He stared into the 
opaque blackness.

A desire to cough rose up from his lungs and shattered him.

He had the feeling that 
his body was acting in sections, independently and aching, in the dripping grass, and 
on the muddy ground.

He tried to think.

Like a knock in his head came the thought "The dogs." This time he 
did wake up.

He reviewed everything.

A flood of experiences assailed him, one after 
the other: the loading, the train, the hell of the railroad car, the cold, the hunger, the 
canvas, the wind, the jump into the night.

The train; what if it should come back over 
the same way once again?

The dogs!

Oh!

Any death but that.

He wanted to flee; there was nothing else to do, but the pieces of his body were 
riveted there.

He wanted to gather himself together, he heard his bones grating against 
each other.

But, he had to get away from there, at any cost.

His reasoning took another turn: a railway line was a military objective for the 
attackers and a defensible breastwork for those attacked The Germans would return to 
make use of it as a defensive line, and they would find him.

To flee!

To get a few hundred yards from the railway right of way and wait there 
would be a little safer.

The Americans would eventually come.

"But, first, stand up!

First, stand up." He was thinking out loud and the murmur from his lips brought forth 
from his mouth gritty bits of earth.

He sputtered.

With infinite carefulness he moved his arms one after the other; the left seemed all 
right, but from the right came that pain in the elbow and shoulder.

"Well, well, it 
seems to be going away." He repeated the motion, and it was true; the pain grew less 
as he moved his muscles and joints.

Nothing was broken.

He breathed easier.

Now the 
legs.

Gently he moved his muscles.

He felt no pain; nothing was broken there either-at 
least it did not seem so.

He became calmer.

He managed to sit up.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He became calmer. He managed to sit up. His bruises became more painful, and his wet sticking clothes 
became more icy. He shivered. In the pit of his stomach he felt a round ache. He was 
hungry, and that was a good sign. He was surprised that he had not felt this hunger 
before. He put his hand to his head, his prison beret was still in place. This fact made 
him laugh. He thought of his clogs which he had lost during his jump; never mind. He 
felt all over himself: he was covered with mud and was rolled up in a tangle of wire 
from which he at once tried to extricate himself. He turned and got on all fours; one 
more effort and he would be standing up .... On his feet; he was standing; he would get away; the Germans could double back, 
cling to the railway... not so fast; his head was spinning. He felt like vomiting. He felt 
himself tottering, about to fall. He stiffened, held himself upright as long as he could, 
and saw that he was going to collapse and that he might hurt himself in the fall. So, 
gently and very carefully, he crouched down. If he could not walk, he would drag 
himself, but he would not stay there; no, he would not stay there. He thought of the 
train, the dogs, and the Germans who would be coming back. And, he thought of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---14
Americans...

"To think that they are there seven miles away.

No, it would be too 
stupid." 
On his hands and knees, crawling like a huge tormented worm, he managed to go 
down a slope, to cross what seemed to be a ditch, full of gluey water, and to slither 
along a newly ploughed section of an adjacent field where the earth came up in hunks 
and stuck to his knees, his legs and his elbows.

He stopped and got his breath back.

Meanwhile the night had become less black and the sky was higher.

Already the 
shapes of the hedges and the single trees around him could be made out in the 
thinning fog.

Day was about to break and that was another danger.

A few hundred 
yards away on a little rise of ground he made out a dark mass: woods, no doubt.

He made it his first objective to reach them before dawn.

He started to move again.

The struggle had warmed his body, had loosened his muscles and his joints, and had 
localized the pain down the whole length of his right side.

He succeeded in standing 
up, in staying up, in putting one foot before the other, and in walking.

He walked 
slowly because his right leg pulled and his shoulder was very painful.

But, he was 
walking, and he made progress.

Bent over, dead beat, broken, twisted, he pulled 
himself toward the woods.

He straightened up, forced himself, and kept hold of 
himself.

He would be there before dawn, and would take cover there; the Americans 
would come, and he would be saved.

The rest took place in a dream a long, dead tired, 
slow-motion dream.

* * * * 
When he arrived at the edge of the woods, he gave up the idea of hiding deep inside, 
which could prove treacherous, and decided it was wiser to sit down there, partially 
concealed in the low brush from which he could observe all sides.

Day broke.--- PAGE BREAK ---

* * * * 
When he arrived at the edge of the woods, he gave up the idea of hiding deep inside, 
which could prove treacherous, and decided it was wiser to sit down there, partially 
concealed in the low brush from which he could observe all sides. Day broke. The ground which sloped down from his feet gradually appeared out of 
the darkness; the indistinct checkerboard pattern of fields and meadows became more 
outlined: the railroad tracks down below stood out like a long ribbon. In between two 
distant hills, a church spire rose among little wisps of smoke rising straight up from 
invisible chimneys. Very quickly the radiant spot in the still grey sky, which 
announced the sun piercing the clouds, was high in the sky. The country-side was 
animated here and there with yokes of oxen peacefully going and coming. A man, a 
civilian too, but whose brassard could be distinguished, had nonchalantly begun to do 
his stint along the tracks. The sight evoked in him the image of a similar corner of the earth in similar weather, 
under the same sky, and with the same checkerboard of fields and meadows, the same 
woods, the same isolated trees, the same church steeple, and the same railroad 
somewhere in the vicinity of Alsace and Franche-Comté. It occurred to him that if his mother could see this scene at this very hour, she would 
certainly have commented that the sky was "washing itself" or that the weather was 
"drying itself off." For a long time he watched two horses about five hundred yards 
away who were pulling a sort of harrow, over a square of meadow, to "scatter" the 
mole hills; the old man guiding them, surely that was father Tourdot, and that good

--- PAGE BREAK ---15
little girl pulling on a rope attached to the back of the harrow that was his 
granddaughter, whose father, Tony, was a prisoner in Germany!

In an association of 
ideas he saw the worried face of his wife bending over a little bit of a fellow two years 
old...

Then, the reality of his present situation came to him with a start of anxiety.

No, no, it was a trap!

The Americans couldn't be seven miles away because 
everything was too quiet.

Nothing in these fields and meadows and these woods gave 
a sign of war, much less of a complete collapse.

He was crushed; what was going to 
become of him?

He could not approach those people in his prisoner's clothing!

He 
was hungry, very hungry, and thirsty, and he picked up a twig which he put into his 
mouth that was another remedy of his mother's, when he had cried into her skirts with 
thirst in the hot afternoons during the harvest.

It took his mind off it.

The hours went by; the sun managed to pierce the greyness and to clear up the sky.

A 
church bell rang; noon it was.

The afternoon went by in the same way.

The teams of 
animals became more numerous under a hotter sun which completely dried his 
garments.

A man went by near him, a hoe over his shoulder, and almost brushed 
against him.

He didn't move a muscle, but he realized that he couldn't stay there much 
longer without being discovered.

The next day was Sunday, he had no trouble 
deciding that since they had left the camp on a Wednesday evening.

So, in the 
morning he would be all right, but in the afternoon he would have a lot to worry 
about, since the Germans, large and small, liked to walk in the woods 
Evening came, then the night.

The moon, a huge moon, the color of embers, shed its 
strange light over the country.

The guard on the tracks was still going back and forth.

There had been no alert; in fact, there had not been the least little noise of an airplane 
motor in the sky during all day long.

But, now he heard heavy thuds sounding in the 
distance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There had been no alert; in fact, there had not been the least little noise of an airplane 
motor in the sky during all day long. But, now he heard heavy thuds sounding in the 
distance. He thought, "They are still twenty-five or thirty miles away. The dogs, if 
they are set after me, will find me before the Americans get here. I must go, go toward 
them, but which way first?" 
He was about to despair of everything when the sound of aircraft gave him back his 
courage. Airplanes wheeled above him and dropped their bombs in the immediate 
vicinity, without in the least being disturbed by anti-aircraft fire. Then they went 
away, and others came; a continual coming and going until dawn. Daylight came, and the fog quickly broke up under a bright sun. All at once the day 
became clear. It was a beautiful springtime Sunday morning that gave no hint of what 
was to come. It might have been ten o'clock when the great upheaval finally came. Tac! .... Tac! .... Tacatacatacatac!.... Tac! He estimated the distance: two to three 
miles at the most. It came from the direction of the church and a little beyond. Tac ! Tac!.... tac tac tac!.... Tac! The machine gun persisted, and another replied. Toc! Toc! .... toc toc! Toc toc! Then a great uproar: Boom! boom! Boom!. . . Boom! The projectiles did not fall far 
away, but still on the other side of the village. Boom! Boom! ... boom, boom .... A 
pause, Boom!

--- PAGE BREAK ---16
.

.

boom!...

Another pause.

Boom!

Boom!

Boom!

Boom!

Boom!...

Boom!

They came 
right at him; the discharge was regular, sharp, ringing.

It would soon be time to do 
something, but what?

A formidable explosion tore the air behind him; a shell had 
almost fallen on top of him.

Brr.

.

.

oom!

Then another.

Brr.

.

.

oom!

His ear drums 
were bursting with it!

Brr.

.

.

oom!

Br.

.

.

oom!

It didn't stop, and was echoed from 
behind.

Boom!...

Boom!...

Boom!...

Boom!...

The countryside was deserted, and the 
man with the brassard had disappeared.

He was alone.

Brr...

oom!...

Boom, boom, 
boom, Brou...

Brr...

oom!

He was on the axis of a trajectory that was cut almost at right angles by the rail tracks, 
along which the Germans were doubling back.

They would try to defend it, but they 
could not hold out for long in the face of the artillery fire; they would then retreat into 
the woods, where they would find him.

"No, he must not stay there!" 
He got up.

He went down the slope, veering toward the left to get out of the line of the 
trajectory.

His leg hardly dragged any more, the earth was dry, the ground was hard, 
and he was in possession of all his faculties.

The last act of the tragedy was about to 
be played, and no false step must be made.

"Not too near the tracks, not too near the 
forest," he decided.

The artillery duel continued: Boom!

.

.

.

Boom!

.

.

.

Boom!

.

.

.

Boom!.

.

.

The shells 
came down again; the were hitting the tracks.

He saw the earth explode in a long line 
which cut obliquely across the tracks.

He could smell the burning explosives.

"The 
Devil!

Get Down!" He would have liked to go farther on, but ....

He saw a single bush 
that was near by: a poor shelter.

He preferred a deep trough which separated two farm 
plots; he threw himself down in it.

ZZ.

.

.

.

Boom!

.

.

.

.

ZZ.

.

.

.

Boom!

Just in time!

The shell whistled over his head and 
fell near him.

The thunder behind him, which had ceased, began again, the sounds 
were heavier and farther away.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The shell whistled over his head and 
fell near him. The thunder behind him, which had ceased, began again, the sounds 
were heavier and farther away. They were drawing back! While the American lengthened their fire, the Germans shortened theirs, following 
their withdrawal step by step. Suddenly, he found himself in the very center of a 
terrifying earthquake, a cloud of smoke, iron, earth. He was almost buried in earth and 
wondered what miracle had saved him from being pulverized. As the dust settled, he risked taking a look around him. He could see forms in field 
grey who were crossing the tracks, one after the other, in rapid spurts between bursts 
of machine gun fire. They flattened themselves against the embankment; a burst of 
fire! They were up and moving again. Down again, another burst of fire! They 
retreated toward him, trying to get out of the open, to make it to the woods. Down . . . a burst of fire; fifteen steps backs, a burst of fire . . . . down again. "Let's hope that one 
of them doesn't throw himself down next to me!" he thought. A shot rang less than 
fifteen feet on his left, another less than five on his right. He could not see anyone. "What are they shooting at, Good Lord?" 
The exploding artillery shells, little by little, reached the woods, and the chattering of 
machine gun fire raked it. More grey forms climbed up over the tracks and withdrew 
into the woods from which they directed their fire: Clac! . . . . Clac! . . . . Clac! . . . .

--- PAGE BREAK ---17
Clac .

.

.

.

Clac!

But in the face of the brisk artillery fire, the reports from the forest 
grew weaker, and finally stopped altogether.

Suddenly there was a great clamor.

It came from all corners of the horizon and echoed 
nearer and nearer, never ending.

Suddenly, a host of men began to appear with rifles 
and machine guns in hand.

While those who, a short while ago, had crossed the tracks 
amounted to a few dozen men, a hundred at the most, there were at least a thousand of 
these.

They all seemed to be converging on the same point.

Soon they were 
everywhere, walking and running.

Not one of them saw him, which was just as well 
since one never knew what might happen at moments like these.

He was careful not to 
make his presence known too soon.

He waited for the excitement to subside.

Finally 
he dared to move.

He sat up.

About three hundred yards away some fifteen very nervous men, with their 
hands above their heads, were slowly emerging from the woods under the watchful 
eyes of guards, with their machine guns on the alert.

In front of them, their backs to 
the woods, other men were already lined up, their hands resting on their heads, rigid.

Finally others with their arms raised high appeared one by one; they threw their guns 
to the ground, took off their equipment, and took their places in the lineup.

"Jump to it!" One of them, too slow, was reminded of his new status with a well 
placed kick.

Another received a blow with a gun-butt.

A third tried to argue; Cra-a-ac!

A machine gun was fired point blank at his chest.

A few more blows, kicks, and slugs 
with the gun-butt, and the column was ready.

"Get marching, toward the church!" 
The group passed him at a distance of about seventy-five yards.

The prisoners, in 
rows of five, completely stripped of equipment, jackets unbuttoned, and hands behind 
their heads shuffled by, awkward, silent and docile.

On both sides an armed cordon of 
seven or eight men showered them with insults and warnings.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The prisoners, in 
rows of five, completely stripped of equipment, jackets unbuttoned, and hands behind 
their heads shuffled by, awkward, silent and docile. On both sides an armed cordon of 
seven or eight men showered them with insults and warnings. He decided that it was 
time to show himself, and he rose up with a leap. "Hey! . . . Hey! . . . " he shouted, 
and he raised one arm in a gesture of appeal. Without delay, the group halted, four men detached themselves on the run, and before 
he had time to realize what was happening to him, the barrels of four machine guns 
were pressed against his chest and back. "Like this, at least, I know they won't shoot!" 
he thought. The questions all came at once, menacing and in a language that he did 
not understand. '`French man," he said. It was all the English that he knew and he wasn't sure that was 
right. They looked at him round-eyed, astonished and mistrustful. He was obviously 
not understood. Then, he said, "Française!" This was not understood either. He tried 
his last resource: "Französische Häftling! Franzous!" This time it worked; one of the 
machine guns was lowered. "Was?" He briefly explained, in broken phrases, and he saw that he was in the 
presence of a German, two Spaniards and a Yugoslav, whose lingua franca was 
Italian. They had understood, all the machine guns were lowered, and a canteen was 
offered to him. He drank a bitter cold drink, which he wanted to spit out. He 
grimaced. "Koffé," said the German, "gut Koffe." They got out dry biscuits, hard, hard, 
oh how hard, chocolate, tins, cigarettes .... Cigarettes! First a cigarette .... But, they

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
must not waste time.

"Schnell," said the German, "Wir müssen...

"(Hurry ....

we have 
to ....) They saw what condition he was in.

Two of them hoisted him onto their 
shoulders, and like a living trophy took him, laughing, to the group which was 
waiting.

"Sin-Sin?" asked one of the fellows of the escort.

"Yes," he answered.

But, 
the others said nothing.

There was only one Englishman-or an American-in the 
company...

which was a kind of international brigade, and he thought of the Spanish 
War.

As evening fell, the little column resumed its march toward the church, with the 
emaciated figure keeping his balance with difficulty on the shoulders of the two men, 
while nibbling slowly, his mouth watering copiously, on the biscuits and the 
chocolate.

The sarcastic comments, the warnings, and the oaths, continued to rain on 
the prisoners, who, always docile, moved along, awkwardly in the unlaced shoes, 
their heads hung down their two hands crossed at the nape of their necks.

"Porco Dio.

.

.

Gott Verdammt!" From time to time the German spoke up: "Du!

Blöder Hund!...

Du!!" And, he pointed to a prisoner.

Then, taking his revolver out of its holster, he 
asked him, "Muss ich erschiessen?" (Shall I shoot?) The prisoner rolled his frightened 
and pleading eyes, waiting for the answer a neutral, resigned smile.

"Du hast Glück!

Mensch!

Blöder Hund!" (You're lucky ...

stupid dog ....) he said and spat 
contemptuously, "tt!...

Lumpe." The roles were reversed.

From insult to insult, gibe to gibe, and threat to threat, the column of triumphant 
conquerors and disappointed losers made their entrance into the village just before 
midnight.

They were past a station, very small, just like others that he knew, in 
Franche-Comté and Alsace.

On the front he read "Munschof' in Gothic lettering.

They 
set him down on the ground and the column rested.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the front he read "Munschof' in Gothic lettering. They 
set him down on the ground and the column rested. Then, slowly they started up 
again, amidst the deafening noise of the imposing war machines which at full speed 
went through the deserted but intact village on to new positions. Sometime later, the 
column reached the headquarters encampment. **** 
An odd little fellow was the Commanding Officer: English, German, Italian, French; 
he seemed to be familiar with all languages. And, then there was that tone, that 
manner: 
"First, find a place to stay, my friend, eat, get your strength back, rest, a good bed. Then, we will see .... Knock at the first door that strikes you as a good place .... No, 
no, not with my men, they haven't the time, the hell with them now. Knock; if they 
open the door to you, ask for something to eat, hot, you need something hot. You will 
get a little something extra, from us, cold of course .... If they don't open, go in just 
the same, whether there is someone there or not; make yourself at home; all these 
people are our servants, it is their turn .... All they have to do is behave properly. No, 
no, don't be afraid, at the slightest lack of respect .... Come back to see me tomorrow. Until then .... Not wounded? Not sick? ... Yes, of course, weak, just weak. Until 
tomorrow then. And try to find another pair of shoes there... and another dinner 
jacket!" 
The next day he went back. The Commanding Officer was sitting in an armchair on 
the porch, playing around with two very pretty persons, laughing out loud, who

--- PAGE BREAK ---19
seemed to be quite ready "to behave properly" in the military sense of the phrase as 
applied to civilians of the opposite sex.

"The female always submits to the conqueror 
with smiles," he thought.

In France, in 1940 ....

All of them, girls from Colas 
Breugnon.

But, the Commanding Officer said at once: "Ah, there you are!

You know, since last 
evening I have been handed quite a lot of people like you.

Since dawn my men 
haven't stopped bringing them to the Arbeitsdienst camp.

What am I going to do with 
them, Good Lord?

There is a train load of them, a train!

And me, I haven't any way to 
transport them to the rear!

They are all going to die; they'll all die!

What sort of a 
place was it that you were in.

Ah!

the skunks!

Well, don't worry about it, old boy, 
these two girls ...." 
"Good," he began again, "You can walk?...

Then, don't go to the Arbeitsdienst camp 
Go West, my friend, toward the West.

Escapee, get there on your own, on friendly 
ground Hague Convention, deportee, priority ....

Signal the first ambulance you run 
into.

In eight days you'll be in Paris.

All the laws, I'm telling you we'll see that you 
have something to eat to take with you.

Really, is that all you have found since last 
evening?

You'll give a fright to the girls all the way, old boy.

Wasn't there anything 
where you spent the night?

We won the war, in God's name!...

She's pretty good that 
one!

Ah, these French, you can't ever teach them anything Frantz!" 
Then he added in a few words in Anglo-German lingo: 
"Also, bye, bye!

Follow the guide, he's going to give you something to take along.

Good luck, but...

try to do better the next time!" 
Well weighed down with canned food, sugar, chocolate, biscuits and cigarettes, 
among other things...

which he didn't know where to put, he found himself outside.

He wanted to see the train from which he had escaped, and he turned toward the 
station.

People, civilians and soldiers, were busily going back and forth along the platforms.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He wanted to see the train from which he had escaped, and he turned toward the 
station. People, civilians and soldiers, were busily going back and forth along the platforms. They made room for him as he came along: the clothes that he wore gave him a sort 
of respect. Gangs of men were pulling from the cars, the half clothed bodies, in rags, 
lank, dirty, bearded, and muddy! Some civilians were helping and watching them, full 
of pity, horrified. The dead bodies were lined up along the edge of the tracks, after 
their numbers, if there were any on their rags, were taken down. He looked to see if he 
could find anyone he knew among the dead .... Two men, two German civilians, 
arrived carrying a big thin body. "Kaput?!" one of them said. "Nein," answered the 
other, "atmet noch...." (Finished .... No, he's still breathing.) He recognized Barray; 
Barray! Barray was an engineer from St. Etienne. In camp they had slept together on the same 
straw mat for three weeks and had become friends. They had promised to write to 
each other if they got out. He learned from one of the survivors that the poor man had 
gone down under the blows of some German prisoners for having, in the delirium of 
hunger, cold and fever, begun to sing the Marseillaise. The S.S. guards had stood by 
unconcerned during the show. "Barray!" .... "It's all over," he said to himself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---20
And, he went away thinking that there was a fatality in things that some premonitions 
did come about in life: for fifteen days, at least, Barray had been swearing by all the 
Gods that they would be freed on Quasimodo (Low) Monday He promised himself to 
write to his widow and two children about whom they had so often talked before they 
went to sleep.

A survivor told him what had happened to the convoy.

A mile and a quarter beyond 
the station, it had been brought to a halt, very early Saturday morning.

The S.S.

guards had hurriedly made all of the able-bodied men get down from the cars and had 
formed them into a long endless line, which trailed away into the landscape, 
accompanied by the howling of the dogs and the sound of gun shots.

The S.S.

had left 
- on the train - the dead, the dying, and all of those who, taking advantage of the 
general confusion, were lucky enough to pass for dead.

Obviously, there were too 
many of them, and there wasn't time to kill them one by one-nor was there the desire 
to do so.

(Since this was written, it has been determined that there was no order to kill 
the prisoners, either.) 
He continued his inspection.

In one wide open car that no one was paying any 
attention to, the surviving prisoners shivered in spite of the full sun; they crawled out 
from under the pile of dead bodies; they huddled together to protect themselves from 
a cold that they alone felt.

"What are you waiting for?" "Well...

waiting to die, can't 
you see?" "What?" "There are still fourteen of us living; all the rest are dead; we are 
waiting our turn...." He could not understand how they could be so little concerned 
with the saving of their lives.

"They have given up," he thought; "It is not worthwhile 
to bother with them.

They are already 'dead' and are satisfied.

To force them back to 
life would be to inflict a kind of punishment on them ...." 
And, he went on, with a feeling of indifference.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They are already 'dead' and are satisfied. To force them back to 
life would be to inflict a kind of punishment on them ...." 
And, he went on, with a feeling of indifference. He had known many prisoners in the 
camp who had been burdened with a sort of "death wish" and whom one could never 
meet without thinking that they were already dead, but that their bodies, in some 
manner, had survived them .... They were the ones who never missed a chance to 
announce, to drum it into one, that the war would be over in two months, that the 
Americans were here, that the Russians were there, that Germany was in revolution, 
and so forth. They were irritating, and they exhausted one's patience. Then, one fine 
day they were seen no more. The two months-or whatever-had gone by, and, since 
nothing had happened, they had just "let go of the railing," as it was said, and had let 
themselves die on the appointed date. These prisoners had let go of the railing right at 
the winning post; the two months had ended there, and the day of liberation had 
arrived! He knew from experience that there was nothing to do. But, two steps farther 
on a feeling of remorse overcame him. "Don't stay like that; get out of there; the 
Americans are here; they are emptying the next car, and they will get to you soon. They will give you something to eat; there is a hospital in the village." They did not 
believe him, but he had made peace with himself. At the end of the train was a boxcar that was filled with supplies; sacks of peas, flour, 
canned goods, packages of every sort of ersatz goods imaginable, liquor, beer, 
liqueurs, suits of clothes, shoes, accessories, and equipment. He took a soldier's nap 
sack and a pair of Italian shoes, with cloth sides and low-heels, which fitted his feet 
wonderfully. Then he left, eager to leave behind all that misery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---21
But, he still wanted to see the Arbeitsdienst camp where the Commanding Officer had 
told him that the Americans were taking those inmates who were still living.

On the 
mustering grounds, surrounded by wooden buildings, living skeletons were coming 
and going, and corpses lay crumpled here and there...

There were some five or six 
hundred men milling about.

Well-wishing nurses - attached to the American army - 
busied themselves among them, running from one to another.

The nurses did their 
utmost in vain to try to get the inmates to understand that they should stay inside the 
barracks and rest on the straw mattresses.

Few among them had in their hearts any 
desire to live.

Those who might have been saved began to die of dysentery because 
they had, disregarding all warnings, stuffed themselves too greedily with all of the 
food that was so profusely distributed among them.

They ate, then felt a great need for 
air, and then went outside to die in the yard.

No, no, this was no place for him.

In the 
first place, he was too near the front lines; one could still hear the cannon fire all too 
sharply.

He thought of Ulysses' return.

He made his way toward the villa where he had slept the night before and where 
another tug at his heart awaited him.

On the way, he found an American soldier who 
wanted to shave him, amused.

To tell the truth, it was not a villa but the modest house of an engineer or a retired 
person just like so many in France- with an iron fence and a garden all around.

The 
evening before he had found it empty with all the doors open.

In the kitchen, the table 
had not even been cleared; a white cheese was on one plate, and jam was on another.

In the dining room, the doors of a cupboard were swung open, and the linen and 
various other things were piled up on the sofa, on the table, and on the chairs, without 
thought.

A trunk with its top gaping open sat waiting.

The bedroom was in perfect 
order.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A trunk with its top gaping open sat waiting. The bedroom was in perfect 
order. He felt there the pressing distress of a comfortably well-off family who had 
hoped to the end and had waited until the last minute before leaving. "They aren't far 
away," he had thought, "They will come back any minute." 
He had slept in the big bed in the bedroom; he had laid there lazily in the morning 
smoking a cigarette. He had stretched himself out under the warmth of the covers, 
under a wide beam of sunshine which shone on the polished furniture. Leaving this 
house, to go to the Commanding Officer's about ten o'clock in the morning, he had 
thought of what had happened to him in 1940 when, turning back into Alsace, he had 
wanted to go home one last time. He had caught himself holding a pencil to write a 
note which he would have stuck on the door if at the last moment a sort of pride, 
which he had always felt was misplaced, had not restrained him: "Make use of 
everything, steal nothing, break nothing. Do not take vengeance on things for what 
you reproach people for. Do not make individuals pay for what you believe is the 
error of the whole community." And so he had taken out of the linen cupboard only 
what was indispensable: a shirt a pair of under shorts, a handkerchief, and from under 
the kitchen sideboard the pair of imitation leather sandals that had made the 
Commanding Officer laugh so much... He had even resisted the very strong 
temptation, when passing in front of the garage, to borrow the magnificent Opel that 
was parked there. Now everything had disappeared, the magnificent Opel was gone, the cupboards were 
emptied, the linen was stolen, and the dishes were broken. "And I who was so 
conscientious," he thought "The war, ah the war!" On the night table, an alarm clock

--- PAGE BREAK ---e cupboards were 
emptied, the linen was stolen, and the dishes were broken. "And I who was so 
conscientious," he thought "The war, ah the war!" On the night table, an alarm clock

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
that he had noticed the night before was still there by some miracle It pointed to 6:30. 
He threw himself, still all dressed, onto the bed and went to sleep. 
***** 
Early the next morning, when the sun was already high, he set off. The thunder of 
cannon was still rumbling in the distance, and behind him the mighty war machines 
rolled toward the front. At the edge of the village, in front of a house a little apart, 
some civilians were cooking something in a kettle balanced on two stones; there were 
about half a dozen of them, badly clothed, unwashed, unshaved, dirty, and he noticed 
that one of them kept the fire going with books which he picked up in bundles. He 
approached, curious. They were Belgian and Dutch laborers - volunteers who had 
worked in the factories in the area. The books were those from the Hitler-Jugend-
Bucherei of the village. 
He glanced at the titles: Kritik über Feuerbach; Die Räuber of Schiller; Kant und der 
Moral. Goethe, Hölderlin, Fichte, Nietzsche, and others, were all there as if at a tragic 
rendez-vous, and they were waiting for their fate to be decided by less noble lords, the 
Goebbels and the Streichers. The paper was fine, the bindings were unpretentious, and 
the workmanship was good. He had always had a weakness for books of any kind. He 
spotted one, Du und die Kunst by one of National Socialism's leaders. He opened it 
mechanically, and he saw a colored reproduction of "La Liberté guidant le peuple," by 
Delacroix. He leafed through it more attentively: Monet's flowers, a detail from 
Renoir, la Joconde, Mme Récamier, le Martyr de Saint Sébastien. This sharp contrast 
with the hell out of which he had just come made him ill. He asked if he could take 
this book away with him, as a souvenir of that civilization that had been so cruel to 
him, and which would astonish and shock the world for years to come. Permission to 
take the book was given with a smirk and a sneer. Of course it was difficult for them 
to understand. 
He turned west again, with the feeling that he would never come upon an ambulance 
and that he would continue to the end on foot All of a sudden, he felt that he was on 
the threshold of a new adventure, and that he would have liked to have it resemble, 
although in other times and under a different sky, that of Ulysses of whom he had 
thought the day before. 
Before him he saw roads, the peasants in the fields, the hedges in bloom, the trees 
budding, the farms, the people who asked about him and to whom he gladly told his 
story, and the never ending roads. And, there at the end of this mirage-like horizon a 
small house with arbor vitae, on the outskirts of a small village. In the little yard, a 
little boy always two years old playing in the sand, who raised astonished eyes at 
seeing him arrive in his prison clothes... On the tip of his tongue he was about to ask, 
"What's your name? Little fellow? Where is your mama?" He wept.ng in the sand, who raised astonished eyes at 
seeing him arrive in his prison clothes... On the tip of his tongue he was about to ask, 
"What's your name? Little fellow? Where is your mama?" He wept.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23

Chapter Two 
Swarms of Humanity at the Gates of HellThe time was about six o'clock in the morning, but I could only guess.

There were 
about twenty of us of all ages and backgrounds, all French, all dressed in the most 
unlikely rags, and all quietly sitting around a large table set on trestles.

We did not 
know each other, and we made no attempt to become acquainted.

Silent, or just about, 
we tried to read each other's expressions, and, although without much interest, to size 
each other up.

We had the feeling that, united in a common fate, we were destined to 
live through some painful experience together and that we must therefore resign 
ourselves to the idea of depending on each other.

But we acted as though we wanted 
to put that idea off until the last possible minute; it was not easy to break the ice.

Each man was absorbed in his own thoughts; we were trying to buck ourselves up and 
to understand what had happened to us: for three days and three nights, one hundred 
of us per car, hunger, thirst, madness, death, the unloading at night, in the snow, with 
the howling of men and the barking of dogs, with blows from some and swipes from 
others; the shower, the disinfection, the "gasoline tank," and so forth.

We were all 
stupefied by what had happened.

We had the feeling that we had just crossed a no-
man's-land and that we had been in a more or less mortal obstacle course which had 
been carefully graduated and organized in every detail.

After the trip, and without any transition, we encountered a long string of halls, 
offices and underground corridors, each filled with strange and menacing people, who 
had their no less strange and humiliating specialties.

Here, your wallet, wedding ring, 
watch, fountain pen; there your jacket, trousers, shorts, socks, shirt; in the last place, 
your name.

They had stolen everything from us.

Then came the barber who shaved us 
bald, the cresylic bath, and the shower.Chapter Two 
Swarms of Humanity at the Gates of Hell

They had stolen everything from us. Then came the barber who shaved us 
bald, the cresylic bath, and the shower. Finally the whole process was repeated in 
reverse: at one window a shirt that was falling to pieces; at another shorts with holes; 
at another pants with patches; and so on to the wooden clogs and the strip of cloth 
with the registration number. A frock coat thrown away, a military blouse no longer 
used, a Russian cap, a Bersagliers hat made up our clothing. We were not given back 
our wallets, wedding rings, fountain pens or watches. "Just like Chicago," someone said, showing his number and joking, "there they go 
into the factory as pigs and come out as cans. Here we go in as men and come out as 
numbers." Nobody laughed; between the pig and the can in Chicago there is surely 
not much difference than between what we were and what we had become. When we arrived in that large, light and clean hall, well aired and comfortable at first 
glance, we felt a sort of relief; the same feeling, doubtless that Orpheus felt coming 
out of Hades. Then we withdrew into our own preoccupations, to the one which 
dominated and checked any desire for inner speculations and which could be seen in 
the eyes of all: "Will we get anything to eat today?" When will we be able to sleep?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---24
We were at Buchenwald, Block 48, Wing A.

It was six o'clock in the morning at a 
guess.

And it was Sunday -- Sunday, January 30, 1944.

A dark Sunday.

* * * * 
The building which housed Block 48 was made of stone and had a roof that was 
covered with tiles; and, unlike almost all of the other buildings which were made of 
lumber, it had a ground floor and one story.

There were toilets and washrooms on 
both floors; the washrooms had two large circular basins with places for ten or fifteen, 
and a stream of water coming down like a shower: the W.C.'s had six places for sitting 
and six for standing.

On each side, with a space between, was a Esszimmer (refectory) 
with three large trestle tables and a Schlafsaal (dormitory) with thirty or forty bunk 
beds.

One Esszimmer and one Schlafsaal in pairs, made up a wing, or Flügel the four 
Flügel, consisted of "A" and "B" on the ground floor and "C" and "D" on the first 
floor.

The building covered about one hundred and twenty to one hundred and fifty 
square yards; twenty to twenty five yards long and five to six yards wide; the design 
was intended to provide a maximum of comfort in a minimum of space.

In preparing for our arrival the day before, the camp authorities had emptied Block 48 
of its prior occupants.

Only the administrative personnel who were attached to it 
remained: the Blockältester or the Block Chief; his Schreiber or bookkeeper; the 
barber, and the Stubendienst or barracks men.

There were two Stubendienst per wing.

In all, eleven persons ran the block.

Our group, which was the first to arrive, was housed in the Block Chief's Flügel.

Little by little others came in.

And, little by little the atmosphere livened, too, as 
tongues became loosened.

Fellow countrymen who had been arrested at the same 
time, or in the same operation, met each other again.

As for me, I had found Fernand 
again, who came to sit next to me.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fellow countrymen who had been arrested at the same 
time, or in the same operation, met each other again. As for me, I had found Fernand 
again, who came to sit next to me. Fernand was a former student of mine, a solid and conscientious worker, who was 
twenty years old. During the occupation he had just naturally turned to me. We made 
the trip to Compiègne chained together, and already at Compiègne we made a nice 
little island among the seventeen who were arrested in the same operation that had 
netted us. To tell the truth, we had decided to ignore them. First, there was the one 
who had set himself down at the interrogation table, then the inevitable career non-
com who had become an insurance agent, and who, upon decorating himself with the 
Legion of Honor, had felt that it was indispensable to his dignity to promote himself 
to the rank of Captain. Then there were the others, steady and serious, whose silence 
and whose every look betrayed their awareness of the seriousness of their plight. The 
insurance agent, especially, annoyed us with his megalomania, his grandiloquent 
manners, his air of being in on God's secrets, and the stupidly optimistic 
exaggerations which he incessantly imposed on us. "Come on," Fernand had said to 
me, "they're not our kind of people." 
At Buchenwald, where we had arrived in the same railroad car, we once again stuck 
together, and took advantage of a moment of inattention on the part of the group to 
slip away and to present ourselves one behind the other, for what can only be called 
prison registration formalities. Separated for an instant, we again found ourselves 
together with the group.

--- PAGE BREAK ---25
At eight o'clock in the morning, there wasn't room left to break an egg around the 
tables, and the chattering that went on was so noisy that it disturbed the Block Chief 
and the Stubendienst.

Introductions, occupations and positions that had been held in 
the Resistance were shouted back and forth over the heads; bankers, big industrialists, 
twenty year old commanding officers, colonels hardly any older, the big chiefs in the 
Resistance, all having the confidence of London and in possession of military secrets, 
especially the landing date.

In addition, there were a few professors, a few priests who 
timidly kept apart, and a few who said that they were simply job holders or workmen.

Aside from these few, everyone wanted to have a social position more enviable than 
that of his neighbors: above all, one that included having been entrusted by London 
with a mission of the greatest importance.

You could not count the number of brilliant 
feats.

We two unpretentious people found ourselves crushed.

"Upper crust, upper ten .

.

.

Crud," Fernand whispered into my ear in a very, very low voice.

After a quarter of an hour, really tormented, we felt an irresistible urge to urinate.

In 
the hallway which led to the WC an animated conversation among five or six persons 
was in progress.

As we went by, we heard talk about millions of dollars.

"God, what 
sort of a crowd have we fallen into?" 
All the places were occupied in the WC; there was a line-up and we had to wait.

On 
the way back, a good ten minutes later, the conversation was still going, and it still 
concerned millions.

It was a matter then of some fourteen million.

We wanted to find 
out what it was all about and stopped.

It was a poor old fellow who was lamenting 
over the fabulous sums that the time he would spend in camp would cost him.

"But 
then, sir," I ventured, what do you do in civilian life that would cause you to handle 
such large sums of money?--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was a poor old fellow who was lamenting 
over the fabulous sums that the time he would spend in camp would cost him. "But 
then, sir," I ventured, what do you do in civilian life that would cause you to handle 
such large sums of money? You must have quite a position." And, I assumed an air of 
admiring commiseration when I said that. "Ah, don't talk about it." And, he showed 
me the wooden clogs he had on. I couldn't keep from laughing out loud. He did not 
understand and started to tell his story again for my benefit. "You understand, first the Germans ordered a thousand pairs of them from me, which 
they came to get without checking either the number or the invoices. Then another 
thousand pairs, then two thousand, then five thousand, then . . . Lately the orders were 
pouring in. And, they never checked them. So I began to cheat a little on the quantity, 
then on the prices. What else can you do? The more money you take from them the 
weaker they get, and the job gets easier for the English. Sales boches, just the same! Then, one fine day they compared the invoices with the reports of their receiving 
clerks; you can expect anything from people like that. They found they had been 
robbed of about 10 million. And, so they sent me here. Directly. And, without any 
trial, Sir. But, can you see me, a thief? Ruined, I am going to be ruined Sir! And 
without any trial . . ." 
He was truly shocked. Quite sincerely, he was under the impression that he had 
indisputably performed a patriotic service, and that he had been, although with so 
many others, the victim of an injustice. Another fellow nearby, without batting an eye 
began to explain, "That's just like me, Sir, I was a business manager in . . ." "O.K. Come on," Fernand said to me "You see!" 
* * * * *

--- PAGE BREAK ---26
The days went by, and we familiarized ourselves, insofar as we could, with our new 
life.

First, we learned that we were there to work, that we would soon be assigned to a 
Kommando, probably outside the camp, and that we would then go out "in transport." 
Meanwhile, we would remain in quarantine for three to six weeks, depending on 
whether or not an epidemic sickness broke out among us.

Then, the camp administration let us know something about the provisory regime that 
we would be required to follow.

During the quarantine, we were absolutely forbidden 
to leave thee Block or its small yard; in any case, it was surrounded with barbed wire.

Every morning, we were roused at half past four, "with bugle," by the Stubendienst, 
with a rubber truncheon in hand for those tempted to lag behind; we washed on the 
run, and then received our food distribution for the day: 250 grams of bread; 20 grams 
of margarine; 50 grams of sausage or white cheese or jam, and a pint of ersatz coffee 
without sugar.

Roll-call was held at half past five and lasted until half past six or 
seven.

From seven to eight, we cleaned the block.

At about eleven we got a quart of 
rutabaga soup and at about four o'clock the cafe-trink.

At six o'clock there was 
another roll-call which could last until nine o'clock, rarely longer, but usually ended at 
eight.

Then to bed.

In between times, we were left to ourselves, sitting around the 
tables, and if we weren't too noisy about it, we could tell our little stories, our 
discouragements, our fears, our apprehensions, and our hopes.

In fact, from morning 
to night, the talk centered around the date of the eventual end of hostilities and how 
they would end; the general opinion was that the war would be over in two months 
with one of us having gravely announced that he had received a secret message from 
London giving the beginning of March as the sure date for the landing.In between times, we were left to ourselves, sitting around the 
tables, and if we weren't too noisy about it, we could tell our little stories, our 
discouragements, our fears, our apprehensions, and our hopes.

In fact, from morning 
to night, the talk centered around the date of the eventual end of hostilities and how 
they would end; the general opinion was that the war would be over in two months 
with one of us having gravely announced that he had received a secret message from 
London giving the beginning of March as the sure date for the landing.

Gradually Fernand and I became acquainted with the others in our group, while 
keeping our distance and remaining on our guard.

In two days, we were sure that at 
least half of our companions in misery were not there for the reasons that they gave, 
and, in any case, they had had practically no connection with the Resistance.

Most of 
these internees seemed to have been arrested for black market activities.

It was more difficult to adjust to the rhythm of things.

Through the intermediary of a 
Luxemburger who knew hardly any French, the Block Chief made speeches to us 
explaining things every evening during roll-call; but, needless to say, it was hard to 
understand.

The Block Chief was the son of a former Communist delegate to the 
Reichstag, who had been assassinated by the Nazis.

He was a Communist and didn't 
conceal it, a fact which surprised me.

The main gist of all of his palaver was that the 
French were dirty, that they talked like magpies, and were lazy, that they didn't know 
how to wash themselves, and that those listening to him had the double good luck of 
having arrived at a moment when the camp had become a sanitarium and of having 
been assigned to a Block whose Chief was a political and not a common criminal.

One could not say that he was a bad fellow: he had been in prison for eleven years and 
had acquired the ways of the establishment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The main gist of all of his palaver was that the 
French were dirty, that they talked like magpies, and were lazy, that they didn't know 
how to wash themselves, and that those listening to him had the double good luck of 
having arrived at a moment when the camp had become a sanitarium and of having 
been assigned to a Block whose Chief was a political and not a common criminal. One could not say that he was a bad fellow: he had been in prison for eleven years and 
had acquired the ways of the establishment. Rarely did he strike one; his displays of 
violence generally consisted of vigorous "Ruhe!" cutting across our talk, which were 
followed by imprecations in which there was always something about a crematorium. We were afraid of him, but we were much more afraid of the Russian and Polish 
Stubendienst. We knew nothing, or almost nothing about the rest of the camp because of our 
confinement to the four Flügel of the Block. We sensed that there was work going on

--- PAGE BREAK ---27
around us and that the work was hard but we had only scuttlebutt to give us any idea 
of the nature of it.

On the other hand, we knew very quickly about every nook and 
cranny of our Block, as well as the life stories of the occupants who lived there.

There 
was a little of everything there: adventurers, people whose social origin and standing 
were very ill-defined; genuine Resistants; serious minded people; Crémieux, the 
attorney to the Belgian King, among others.

It is hardly necessary to say that neither 
Fernand nor I felt any desire to attach ourselves to any one of the groups that formed.

* * * * * 
The first week was especially distressing.

Among us were the cripples the maimed 
with only one leg or with both legs gone, and the congenitally disabled, who had to 
leave their canes or their crutches or their artificial limbs at the entrance along with 
their wallets and jewelry.

They dragged around miserably and we helped them or 
carried them.

There were also the very seriously ill from whom had been taken away 
the indispensable medicines which they always carried on their persons; these persons 
died slowly.

Then, there was the shock that is produced in all organisms by a brutal 
change in diet, both as to its quality and quantity.

Then, all of our bodies began to 
suppurate; and the Block soon became a vast carbuncle which ex tempore doctors, or 
doctors without any supplies, tried to treat.Then, there was the shock that is produced in all organisms by a brutal 
change in diet, both as to its quality and quantity.

Then, all of our bodies began to 
suppurate; and the Block soon became a vast carbuncle which ex tempore doctors, or 
doctors without any supplies, tried to treat.

Finally, on the moral level, various 
unexpected incidents made even more insupportable the promiscuity that had been 
imposed on us: the business manager, who had claimed the rank of Colonel, was 
caught stealing bread from one of the sick men whose nurse he had volunteered to be; 
a violent quarrel pitted the attorney to the King of the Belgians against a doctor over 
the division of a piece of bread a fellow, who went around from group to group 
claiming that he was going to be a magistrate after the Liberation, was surprised in the 
act of stealing for himself some extra food from the general rations, etc.

.

.

.

We were 
in the Court of Miracles.

All this stirred up the philanthropists.

There is no Court of Miracles without 
philanthropists, and France, copiously endowed with them, perforce exported some to 
this place, who asked only to have their devotion noted and, if possible, to be 
remunerated.

One fine day they cast a haughty glance of commiseration on this mass 
of men in rags and tatters abandoned to all of the machinations of the mind and 
possible victims of all of the perversions.

The level of our morale seemed in danger to 
them, and they flew to its assistance, because in a situation like this the factor of 
morale was essential.

So it is in life; there are those who grudge you your bread, 
others your freedom, and others your morale.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The level of our morale seemed in danger to 
them, and they flew to its assistance, because in a situation like this the factor of 
morale was essential. So it is in life; there are those who grudge you your bread, 
others your freedom, and others your morale. A man from Lyon, who said he was editor-in-chief of l'Effort, a Colonel, if my 
memory is good; a big supply official; and a lame man who called himself a 
Communist, but whom the people of Toulouse accused of having betrayed them to the 
Gestapo during his interrogation, got underway a program of regular singing and a 
series of lectures on various subjects. During the week, we heard a discourse on 
syphilis among dogs, another on the world petroleum production and the role of 
petroleum after the war, and a third on comparative labor organizations in Russia and 
America. On Sunday afternoon, there was a continuous program from three to six, with a stage-
manager. A dozen volunteers gave impromptu performances. The most mixed

--- PAGE BREAK ---28
feelings arose from the depths of their souls, and the most varied personalities 
displayed themselves: from the Violon brisé to the Soldat alsacien, and through 
G.D.V., Margot reste au village and Coeur de Lilas.

In addition the most daring broad 
jokes were told along with the most comical monologues.

These clownish actions 
clashed with the place, the audience, the spot we were in, and with the preoccupations 
which should have occupied our minds.

Definitely, the French well deserve the 
reputation for levity that the world has attributed to them.

Finally, an intelligent, handsome young man, twenty years old, with a warm voice, 
sang La petite Eglise by Jean Lumière and made everyone homesick.

"Je sais une 
église au fond du hameau ..

.

." Everyone had tears in his eyes, faces resumed a 
human look, and the unbalanced became men again.

I understood what "le lent 
Galoubet de Bertrandou, le Fifre ancien berger" meant to the Cadets of Gascogne de 
Cyrano de Bergerac.

I forgave the philanthropists and, then and there, vowed eternal 
gratitude to Jean Lumière.

* * * * 
A change of scene the second week revealed still more formalities that had to be 
carried out.

On Monday morning medical orderlies burst into the block with 
hypodermic syringes in hand to administer vaccinations.

On the way to the 
Esszimmer, everyone was caught in the corridor and was given one hypo after 
another.

This operation was repeated three or four times with a few days in between.

In the afternoon it was the politische Abteilung that descended on us and proceeded to 
conduct a detailed interrogation of one's civilian standing, profession, political 
convictions, reasons for having been arrested and deported.

These interrogations took 
up three or four days and were conducted in between the vaccinations.

And, then there 
was the "m .

.

.

duty".

The "m .

.

.

duty": ah!

my friends!--- PAGE BREAK ---

duty": ah! my friends! All the defecations of some 30 to 40 thousand 
inhabitants of the camp converged into a cone of excrement on a lower level. Since 
nothing was to be wasted, every day a special Kommando spread this precious 
commodity on the gardens attached to the camp which produced the vegetables for 
the S.S. and the foreign civilian workers who worked in and around the camp. Ever 
since the convoys of foreign prisoners began to provide a continuous supply of new 
manpower, the German prisoners, who were in charge of the administration of the 
camp decided that they would have this work done by the new arrivals; it took the 
place for them of the traditional farce played on the recruits in the casernes in France, 
and it amused them enormously. This duty was the most painful one. The prisoners 
were harnessed in pairs to a Trague (a wooden basket in the shape of a pyramid with a 
rectangular base) which contained the stuff; they then went back and forth from the 
reservoir to the gardens, like horses in a circus, for twelve consecutive hours, in the 
cold and in the snow. In the evening they returned to the Block dog-tired and stinking. One day we were told, without even being detailed to a Kommando that our Block 
was to quarry rock each morning and each afternoon during the rest of the quarantine 
period. The Block Chief had decided that instead of sending out groups of a hundred 
men who would work in relays for a period of twelve hours, it would be easier on us 
for all of us to go at once, that is, all four hundred, and to stay out only two hours for 
each shift. Everybody agreed. From that day on, every morning and every evening we

--- PAGE BREAK ---29
filed across the camp to get to the Steinbruch where we picked up a stone whose 
weight was what our strength could manage.

We dragged it back to the camp where 
gangs broke it up for street pavement.

Then we went back to the Block.

This work 
was light, particularly in comparison with that of the quarry workers who excavated 
the stone under the insults and the blows of the Kapos, the abbreviation for 
Konzentrationslager Arbeitpolizei, or police in control of labor.

Four times a day we passed close to villas where rumor had it that Léon Blum, 
Daladier, Reynaud, Gamelin and Princess Mafalda, daughter of the King of Italy, 
were imprisoned.

We all envied the lot of those privileged people.

Every time we 
passed, I heard comments: "Wolves don't eat each other!" "All depends on whether 
we are powerful or miserable .

.

." "The big shots, old boy, you break your neck for 
them and they bow to each other." "Hitler's race laws apply to all Jews but one." And, 
the like.

In our ranks there was a former prime minister of Belgium, a former French minister, 
and other personages, more or less important.

They were more mortified than we at 
the treatment enjoyed by the inhabitants of the villas.

It was said that each of them 
had two rooms, a radio, German and foreign newspapers, and three meals a day.

Moreover, we were sure that they didn't have to work.

Leon Blum (1) was especially 
envied.

Chance had it that during one trip, Fernand and I, who never left each other, 
found ourselves next to the French minister.

"Why Léon Blum and not me?" he said 
to us.

Judging by the tone of his voice, we gathered that he did not find it at all strange 
that we should be detailed to those low jobs fit for slaves, but for him, really, a former 
minister!

Fernand shrugged his shoulders.

I was puzzled.

Another day, instead of taking us to the Steinbruch, we were taken to the criminal 
anthropometry department where our photographs, face and profile, and our finger 
prints were taken.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I was puzzled. Another day, instead of taking us to the Steinbruch, we were taken to the criminal 
anthropometry department where our photographs, face and profile, and our finger 
prints were taken. Coarse, fat, well-fed individuals, but prisoners just like ourselves, 
each with a brassard on the arm of some authority or other, and each with a rubber 
truncheon in the hand to back it up, yelled at our heels. In front of me were Dr. "X" 
and the little Communist cripple who was in the good graces of the Block Chief and 
who was considered by the French to be his confidential agent. I listened to their 
conversation. Doctor "X," whom everyone knew had been several times a candidate 
for the U.M.R. in various elections, was explaining to the cripple that he was not a 
communist, but not an anti-Communist either, far from it. The war had opened his 
eyes, and, perhaps, when he had time to assimilate the doctrine . . . For two days a 
possible move to Dora had been talked about, and Doctor "X" was beginning to lay 
the ground work so that he could stay at Buchenwald. Misery! Suddenly I felt a terrible blow. Absorbed in reflections that had been stimulated by 
this conversation, I must have strayed a little from the ranks. I turned around and got 
an avalanche of insults in German of which I made out "Hier ist Buchenwald, lumpe 
schau mal, dort ist Krematorium!" (This is Buchenwald, take a look you, there is the 
Crematorium.) That was all I was to know about the reason for the assault. By the 
way of explanation, and to justify it, the little cripple turned to me and said, "You 
could have been more careful; that's Thaelmann!" 
We arrived at the entrance to the anthropometry department where somebody else 
with brassard and truncheon pushed us brutally in line against the wall. This time it

--- PAGE BREAK ---30
was the little cripple who got a blow and who was soundly imprecated.

The storm 
passed, and he turned to me, and said, "That doesn't surprise me coming from that 
S.O.B.; that's Breitscheid." I did not in the least care who in the world these two fine 
fellows were.

But, I smiled at the thought that the Communists had finally realized 
that unity of action that they had talked about so much before the war, and I admired 
that acute sense of difference which the little cripple felt even in his reflexes.

* * * * 
I was a pessimist; at least, that was my reputation.

First, I refused to take seriously the 
optimistic news that Johnny reported each evening to the Block.

Johnny was a Negro.

The first time that I saw him was at Compiègne where I heard him say, with a strong 
American accent, that he was a Captain of a Flying Fortress and that during a raid on 
Weimar, when his aircraft was hit, he had had to parachute.

When he got to 
Buchenwald he began to talk French fluently and called himself a doctor of medicine.

He spoke two other languages almost as well as French: German and English.

Thanks 
to this advantage, to his imagination, and to the fact that he was undeniably cultivated, 
he managed to get assigned as a doctor in the Revier (sick ward) even before 
quarantine was ended.

The French prisoners were sure that he was no more a doctor 
than he was a captain of a Flying Fortress, but they acknowledged the skill with which 
he took care of himself.

Every evening he was mobbed by news hungry inmates: the 
Revier was supposed to be the only place from which reliable news came.

Besides, in 
spite of his reputation for talking big, Johnny was listened to seriously when he spoke 
about events in the war.Every evening he was mobbed by news hungry inmates: the 
Revier was supposed to be the only place from which reliable news came.

Besides, in 
spite of his reputation for talking big, Johnny was listened to seriously when he spoke 
about events in the war.

One evening he came back with the story of revolution in 
Berlin; another evening with the revolt of the troops on the Eastern front; a third time 
with the landing of the Allies at Ostende; a fourth with the 
International Red Cross taking all of the concentration camps over.

Johnny was never 
short of good news, with the result that every evening, in February 1944, the war was 
going to be over in two months.

He exhausted my patience, and that of others, too.

To 
those who came up to me with the assurance that had been fed to them by Johnny, I 
was in the habit of answering that as far as I was concerned, I did not think that the 
war would be over for another two years.

Moreover, since I was one of the very few 
who did not believe in the fall of Stalingrad, just on the face of things as it were, and I 
admitted it after it happened, I was immediately pigeonholed as a pessimist.

In fact, I 
listened to everything with unshakable skepticism: the most refined horrors that were 
told about the history of the camps; the optimistic assumptions about the future 
conduct of the S.S.

who felt, it was said, the wind of defeat blowing over Germany 
and who wanted to redeem themselves in the eyes of the coming conquerors; and the 
reassuring rumors about our ultimate assignment.

I did not even fly in the face of 
facts.

For example, the famous inscription which was on the wrought iron gate which 
closed the entry to the camp read: Jedem das Seine.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I did not even fly in the face of 
facts. For example, the famous inscription which was on the wrought iron gate which 
closed the entry to the camp read: Jedem das Seine. With my little knowledge of the 
German language, I translated it as A chacun sa destinée (To each his destiny.) All of 
the French prisoners were convinced that it was a translation of the celebrated phrase 
which Dante had put on the gate to Hell: Vous qui entrez ici abondonnez tout espoir 
(2). That was the limit, and I the nonbeliever. * * * *

--- PAGE BREAK ---31
The Block was divided into two antagonistic groups: on one side were the newly 
arrived prisoners, and on the other side were the eleven individuals - Block Chief, 
Secretary, Barber, and Stubendienst, German or Slav -who constituted its 
administrative backbone.

There was a sort of solidarity which eliminated all of the 
differences of background or ideology, and yet bound together the first in reprobation 
against the second.

The latter, prisoners like ourselves, but for a much longer time, 
knew all of the dodges of prison life, acted as though they were our actual masters, 
and controlled us with abuse, threats, and beatings.

It was impossible for us not to 
consider them to be agents provocateurs or sycophants of the S.S.

I saw at last what 
the Chaouchs - the prisoner trustees who are referred to in French literature about 
penitentiaries of all kinds-really were.

From morning to night, our Chaouchs, 
throwing out their chests, plumed themselves on the power that they said that they had 
to send us to the Krematorium for the least indiscretion and with a single word.

Also 
from morning to night, they ate what they stole, to our certain knowledge, from our 
rations: quarts of soup, bread and margarine, and potatoes fricasseed with onion or 
paprika.

Moreover, they did not work.

They were fat.

They revolted us.

Among these 
fellows I met Jircszah.

Jircszah was a Czech and a lawyer.

Before the war he had been the assistant Mayor of 
Prague.

The first thing that the Germans did when they occupied Czechoslovakia, was 
to arrest and deport him.

He had been moved from camp to camp for four years.

He 
knew them all: Auschwitz, Mauthausen, Dachau, Oranienburg.

A commonplace 
accident had brought him to Buchenwald, among a transport of the sick.

When he 
arrived, one of his compatriots got him the job of general interpreter for the Slavs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A commonplace 
accident had brought him to Buchenwald, among a transport of the sick. When he 
arrived, one of his compatriots got him the job of general interpreter for the Slavs. He 
hoped to be able to hold that position until the end of the war which he did not think 
was very near, but which he felt would come finally. He lived with the Chaouchs of 
Block 48, who considered him to be one of themselves, but his attitude immediately 
set him apart from the others and made us consider him to be one of us; among other 
things, he was more generous with the rations that he distributed, and he got hold of 
and lent us books. With our arrival in the camp, Jircszah came into contact for the first time with 
Frenchmen. He looked at us with curiosity and with pity, too. So that's what the 
French are? So that's the culture they told him so much about when he was a student? He was disappointed; he couldn't get over it. My skepticism and the way I kept myself apart from the noisy life of the Block drew 
him to me. "Is that what it is, the Resistance?" he asked. I did not answer. To 
reconcile him to France I introduced him to Crémieux. He certainly did not approve of the conduct of the Chaouchs, but he was no longer 
shocked, and he did not even despise them. "I have seen worse," he said. "You mustn't 
expect men to have too much imagination along lines of what is right; when a slave 
gets power without changing his station, he becomes more tyrannical than the 
tyrants." 
He told me the story of Buchenwald and the other camps. "There is a lot that is true in 
all that is said about the horrors for which they are the setting, but there is a lot of 
exaggeration, too. You have to reckon with the complex of Ulysses' lie, which is 
everyone's, and so it is with all of the internees. Human beings need to exaggerate the

--- PAGE BREAK ---32
bad as well as the good and the ugly as well as the beautiful.

Everyone hopes and 
wants to come out of this business with the halo of a saint, a hero, or a martyr, and 
each one embroiders his own Odyssey without realizing that the reality is quite 
enough in itself." 
He did not hate the Germans.

To his mind, concentration camps were not specifically 
German and did not reveal propensities that were unique to the German people.

"The 
camps -- Les Lager," as he said, "are an historical and social phenomenon through 
which all peoples go as they reach the idea of Nation and State.

They were known in 
Antiquity, the Middle Ages, and in modern times.

Why should the contemporary 
epoch be different?

Long before the birth of Jesus Christ, the Egyptians could find no 
other way than this to neutralize the commercial threat that was presented by the 
Jews, and Babylon reached its marvelous apogee thanks to persons in concentration 
camps.

The English, themselves, resorted to them with the unfortunate Boers, after 
Napoleon who invented Lambessa.

As a matter of fact there are some in Russia which 
are nothing to be envied when they are compared to the German ones.

Moreover, they 
exist in Spain, in Italy, and even in France (3); you will come across Spaniards here 
and you will see what they have to say about camp Gurs, in France, for example, 
where they were stuck right after Franco's triumph." 
I ventured a remark.

"In France, all the same, it is done out of humanity." In response, 
Jircszah, countered: "The Germans, when they speak of the institution, use the word 
Schutzhaftlager, which means 'camp for protected prisoners.' When the Nationalist 
Socialists came to power, they decided, in a gesture of compassion, to put all of their 
adversaries in a place where they could not hurt the new regime and where they could 
be protected from the public anger.Moreover, they 
exist in Spain, in Italy, and even in France (3); you will come across Spaniards here 
and you will see what they have to say about camp Gurs, in France, for example, 
where they were stuck right after Franco's triumph." 
I ventured a remark.

"In France, all the same, it is done out of humanity." In response, 
Jircszah, countered: "The Germans, when they speak of the institution, use the word 
Schutzhaftlager, which means 'camp for protected prisoners.' When the Nationalist 
Socialists came to power, they decided, in a gesture of compassion, to put all of their 
adversaries in a place where they could not hurt the new regime and where they could 
be protected from the public anger.

In other words, the National Socialists wanted to 
put an end to assassinations and to beatings on street corners and, at the same time, 
wanted to rehabilitate the strayed sheep and to bring them back to a healthier concept 
of the German community, of its destiny, and of the role that the individual was to 
play within it.

But, National Socialism was overtaken by events and, particularly, by 
its agents.

It is something like the story of the eclipse of the moon that is told in the 
barracks.

The Colonel says one day to his Adjutant that there will be an eclipse of the 
moon and that the officers and noncoms should see to it that the soldiers see the 
phenomenon and that they have it explained to them.

The adjutant then passed the 
word on to the Captain, who, in turn, passed it on down the ranks, and the news got to 
the soldiers via the Corporal in this form: 'By order of the Colonel, there will be an 
eclipse of the moon this evening at 23:00; all those not present will get four days 
guard duty.' And, so it is in the concentration camps: the ruling powers within the 
National Socialist regime thought them up and, then, set up regulations by which 
former unemployed illiterates run them through the assistance of Chaouchs who are 
selected from among us.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Colonel says one day to his Adjutant that there will be an eclipse of the 
moon and that the officers and noncoms should see to it that the soldiers see the 
phenomenon and that they have it explained to them. The adjutant then passed the 
word on to the Captain, who, in turn, passed it on down the ranks, and the news got to 
the soldiers via the Corporal in this form: 'By order of the Colonel, there will be an 
eclipse of the moon this evening at 23:00; all those not present will get four days 
guard duty.' And, so it is in the concentration camps: the ruling powers within the 
National Socialist regime thought them up and, then, set up regulations by which 
former unemployed illiterates run them through the assistance of Chaouchs who are 
selected from among us. In France, the democratic government of Daladier had 
established the camp at Gurs and had fixed the regulations for its operation, with the 
result being much the same as that that is found in the German camps. The 
implementation of those regulations was delegated to gendarmes and to militia whose 
power to interpret them was very limited. "It is Christianity which introduced into Roman law the humanitarian nature that is 
given to punishment in the West and which assigned to it, as its first objective, the 
rehabilitation of the delinquent. But, Christianity failed to account for human nature, 
which cannot come to terms with itself, except on a basis of perversity. Believe me,

--- PAGE BREAK ---33
there are three kinds of people who have remained the same throughout all of 
recorded history: policemen, priests, and soldiers.

Here, we have to deal with 
policemen." 
Obviously, here it was a matter of policemen.

I never had had any trouble with any 
other than the German police, but I had often read and heard it said that the French 
policemen do not distinguish themselves for any special consideration.

I remember 
that at this moment in my conversation with Jircszah, I brought up the Almazian 
affair.

But, Almazian was involved in a crime of common law, and we were political 
prisoners.

The Germans did not seem to distinguish between common prisoners and 
political prisoners, and this fact accounted for the commingling of the two groups in 
the camps....

"Come, come," Jircszah said, "You seem to forget that it was a Frenchman, an 
intellectual of whom France is proud, a fine scholar, a great philosopher, Anatole 
France, who wrote: 'I am a supporter of the suppression of the death penalty in a 
matter of common law and of its reinstitution in political law.'" 
By the end of the quarantine - since the S.S.

never meddled with the camp life itself, 
which thus seemed to be left the master of its own laws and rules - I believed that 
Jircszah was more or less right; the National Socialists had resorted to this classic 
method of coercion, and it was the prisoners themselves who had made it still worse.

We hashed over other problems together, especially the war and the postwar period.

Jircszah was middle class, a democrat, and a pacifist.

"The last war left the world 
divided into three rival blocks," he said.

"The Anglo-Americans, the traditional 
capitalists, the Soviets, and the Germans, the latter supported by Italy and Japan.

There is one too many.

The postwar period will find a world divided in two, and the 
democracies will make no headway and the peace will be no less precarious.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There is one too many. The postwar period will find a world divided in two, and the 
democracies will make no headway and the peace will be no less precarious. The 
Allies think that they are fighting for liberty and that the Golden Age will rise from 
the ashes of Hitler. It will be terrible afterwards; the same problems will lie before 
two powers instead of three in a world that will be ruined materially and morally. Bertrand Russell was right when he said during his courageous youth, 'No ill that war 
claims to do away with is as bad as war itself.'" I shared that view, and even cherished 
it. As time went on, I thought often of Jircszah. * * * * 
It was March 10th, at about three o'clock. An officer of the S.S. entered the Block and 
shouted, "Raus, los! Raus, raus!!" (Everybody out. Out!) We began to assemble in the 
yard. We were going to leave, and the formalities were about to begin. For about a 
week, a rumor about this move had been going around, and guesses ran riot: to Dora, 
some said; to Cologne to clear up the rubble from the bombings and to salvage what 
could still be used, said the others. The latter guess carried the day. Those well-
informed persons felt that the National Socialists -seeing that the war was lost - were 
abandoning the Kommando at Dora, considered to be the hell of Buchenwald, and 
were not sending anyone there any more. They added that, even though given the 
dangerous work of clearing ruins, we would be well treated at Cologne. Maybe we 
would run the risk of setting off an unexploded bomb at any moment, but we would 
get all that we wanted to eat; first, we would receive the camp ration; then, we could

--- PAGE BREAK ---34
have whatever we might find in the cellars, some of which would certainly be full of 
food supplies.

We did not know what Dora was.

Not one of those prisoners who had been sent there 
had ever returned as far as we knew.

It was said to be an underground factory, 
constantly being enlarged, in which secret weapons were being manufactured.

One 
lived there, ate there, slept there, and worked there without ever seeing the light of 
day.

Every day trucks brought full loads of dead bodies from Dora to be cremated at 
Buchenwald, and it was from the presence of these corpses that the horrors of the 
camp were deduced.

Fortunately, we were not going there.

Four o'clock: we were still standing in front of the Block at attention (Stillgestanden) 
under the eyes of the S.S.

guards.

The Block Chief went down the ranks and the old 
men, the cripples, and the Jews were taken out.

Crémieux who filled all three of these 
categories by himself, was one of them.

The little cripple as well as a few others who 
did not seem to be either old men cripples, or Jews but whom we knew were in the 
good graces of the Block Chief since they passed for or actually were Communists-
was also removed.

Half past four: we were marched to the infirmary for a medical checkup -- "checkup" 
was just a figure of speech.

An S.S.

doctor who was smoking a huge cigar and who 
was flopped in an armchair conducted the examination, so to speak.

We passed in 
front of him in a single file and, generally, he did not even bother to look up.

Five thirty: next we went to the Effectenkammer, where we were given clothing -
striped trousers, jacket and coat -- and shoes (leather with wooden soles) to replace 
the wooden clogs which were not fit for labor.

Six thirty: we had to stand for a roll call which lasted until nine o' clock.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Five thirty: next we went to the Effectenkammer, where we were given clothing -
striped trousers, jacket and coat -- and shoes (leather with wooden soles) to replace 
the wooden clogs which were not fit for labor. Six thirty: we had to stand for a roll call which lasted until nine o' clock. Alter that, 
before we could go to bed we still had to sew our numbers on to the clothing that we 
had just been issued: the strips of cloth on which numbers had been stenciled had to 
be sewn on the left side chest on the jacket and coat, and on the right pocket of the 
trousers. On March 11th reveille came at half past four and the roll-call lasted from five-thirty 
until six. Ah! those roll-calls! In March, in the cold whether, it rained or the wind 
blew, we had to stand for hours and hours being counted and re-counted! This last one 
was a general roll-call of all of those prisoners - regardless of the Block that they 
belonged to - who were destined for the transport, and it took place on the mustering 
ground in front of the guard tower. At eleven o 'clock we were given our ration of soup. Then at four o 'clock there was 
another roll-call which lasted until six or seven; we lost track of how long it lasted. On March 12th, we got up at the usual reveille, and the roll-call lasted from half past 
five until ten. Roll-call and again the roll-call. They wanted to drive us crazy. At three 
o' clock we left Block 48 for good, and, after a wait for some time on the grounds, we 
were sent to the Block where the movie theater was, where we spent the night, with 
the lucky ones sitting down and with the rest of us standing up.

--- PAGE BREAK ---35
The next morning, reveille was sounded at half past three, an hour earlier than usual.

The guards led us under the tower where we waited, in the dark and in the cold, with 
nothing in our stomachs since the day before at eleven, to be loaded onto a train.

It 
was sometime between seven and eight o'clock when we got into the cars.

The trip was uneventful.

We had elbow room, and we talked mainly about where we 
were going.

The train was going in a westerly direction.

To Cologne, that was it.

We 
were right!

At about four o'clock, the train stopped in the middle of nowhere, at a sort 
of railroad switchyard, where, floundering in the mud and the snow, miserable men 
who were haggard and dirty, and who wore striped rags of the same kind as our new 
clothes, unloaded the cars, dug ditches and cleared away rubble.

Men with brassards 
and numbers - who were well clothed and full of health -- pushed them on with 
threats, insults or the blows of truncheons.

We were forbidden to speak to them.

Passing next to them, if by chance they were out of eye and ear shot of the guards, we 
questioned them in as low a voice as possible: "Say, where are we?'' "At Dora, old 
boy, haven't you finished .

.

.

yet?" Fernand and I looked at each other.

We had only 
with difficulty just come to believe the optimistic rumors about Cologne.

Now, we 
felt terribly discouraged, our shoulders sagged, and we felt the shadow of death pass 
over us.

Footnotes 
1 [Leon Blum was imprisoned at Buchenwald at about the same time that Professor 
Rassinier was there.

Several interesting references to Blum's stay at Buchenwald are 
found in his biography by Louise Dalby.

One of them confirms the camp rumors 
which Professor Rassinier mentions: 
Occasionally visits to Blum were restricted and letters censored, but he 
suffered very little while in France.

His quarters at Buchenwald were 
reasonably comfortable, but his diet was poor and contributed greatly to his ill 
health.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of them confirms the camp rumors 
which Professor Rassinier mentions: 
Occasionally visits to Blum were restricted and letters censored, but he 
suffered very little while in France. His quarters at Buchenwald were 
reasonably comfortable, but his diet was poor and contributed greatly to his ill 
health. He resented most of the restrictions on his privacy, and the annoyance 
of being disturbed every two hours as guards thoroughly inspected his 
quarters. He was allowed to take a servant to care for him, he was permitted a 
radio by which he could occasionally get the B.B.C. although this was 
forbidden, and he received most of the food parcels sent him. (Louise Elliott Dalby, Leon Blum. New York: Yoseloff, 1963 pp. 418-419.)] 
2 This phrase translates: "Abandon all hope ye who enter here." Immediately after my 
liberation, in May 1945, when I was still in Germany on my way home, I heard a talk 
over the radio by a deportee - Gandrey Retty, if my memory holds -who gave this 
translation. This is how tall stories are born. 3 [The fact should be noted that the United States also had its concentration camps 
during this period. Best known, in spite of the repeated efforts of the liberal 
establishment to sweep all memory of the matter under the rug, are the so-called 
"relocation camps" where Americans of Japanese ancestry were interned during 
World War Two. This sordid episode, although officially justified as being necessary 
in the interest of national security, seems to have had as its real impetus certain racial

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng 
World War Two. This sordid episode, although officially justified as being necessary 
in the interest of national security, seems to have had as its real impetus certain racial

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
and economic motives. Clearly, the relocation of the prosperous Japanese-American 
community away from the West Coast afforded numerous bargain conscious 
Californians, among others, the opportunity of purchasing Nisei and Issei businesses 
and properties at "fire sale" prices, a fact which, without doubt, was on the minds of 
many of those persons who applauded the prompt action of General John DeWitt. For 
a general discussion of these "relocation camps," see, Allan R. Bosworth America's 
Concentration Camps (New York: W.W. Norton, 1967). Not so well known are the 
numerous concentration camps that were spread across the United States from the 
Carolinas to the Dakotas where German and Italian nationals many of whom had been 
long time residents of the U.S. were incarcerated. Following the outbreak of formal 
hostilities in December 1941, these German and Italian nationals were declared to be 
"enemy aliens", were rounded-up by the American version of the Gestapo, i.e., the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, and were confined behind barbed wire for the 
duration of the war.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37

Chapter Three 
The Circles of HellOn June 30, 1937, Buchenwald was only what its name means, a forest of beech trees, 
a place perched on a foot hill of the Harz mountains, five and a half miles from 
Weimar.

One reached it by a stony, winding path.

One day some men came by car to 
the foot of the hill.

They climbed to the top on foot, as though it were an excursion.

They carefully inspected the area.

One of them pointed out a clearing; then they 
returned after having had a good luncheon at Weimar.

"Unser Führer wird zufrieden 
werden," they said.

(Our Führer will be pleased).

Sometime later others came.

They were chained together by fives, one to the other 
and constituted a detachment of a hundred men, surrounded by about twenty S.S., 
guns in hand.

There was no more room in the German prisons.

They climbed up the 
path as best they could, sworn at and kicked.

When they reached the top exhausted, 
they were put to work without any delay.

A group of fifty put up tents for the S.S., 
while the other group put in place a circle of barbed wire, three Strands high and 
about a hundred circle of barbed wire, three strands high and about a hundred yards in 
diameter.

The first day that was all that could be done.

They ate a meagre meal in a 
hurry and almost without stopping work and, very late in the evening, they went to 
sleep right on the ground, wrapped in thin coverings.

The next day, the first group of 
fifty unloaded all day long construction materials and sections of wooden barracks 
which heavy tractors managed to bring about half way up the hill; they carried this 
material the rest of the way up on their back s and placed it inside the barbed wire.

The second group cut down trees to clear the area.

They did not eat that day because 
they had started off in the first place with food for one day only.

But, they slept better 
that night in the shelter of the branches and among the piles of boards.Chapter Three 
The Circles of Hell

They did not eat that day because 
they had started off in the first place with food for one day only. But, they slept better 
that night in the shelter of the branches and among the piles of boards. Beginning with the third day, sections of barracks began to arrive at a faster rate and 
began to pile up half way up the hill. There were also a kitchen outfit, quantities of 
striped clothing, some tools, and some supplies. The S.S stated in their daily report 
that with one hundred men they could not keep up with material delivered. Others 
were sent them. The rations then were insufficient. At the end of the week, some fifty 
S.S. struggled with about a thousand prisoners who they did not know where to put at 
night, who they could barely feed and who overwhelmed their ability to supervise. The prisoners were made up into several groups or Kommandos, each detailed to a 
particular job: the kitchen for the S.S., the orderlies for their camp, the kitchen of the 
prisoners, the construction of the barracks, the transport of material, the 
administration accounting. All of these operations were called .SS Küche, 
Häftlingsküche, Barrakenkommando Bauleitung, Arbeitsstatstik, etc., and on paper, in 
reports, it looked like a simple and methodical organization. But it was in fact, a 
complete mess, a horrible swarming of men, who went through the motion of eating,

--- PAGE BREAK ---38
who worked haphazardly, and who barely slept covered in a jumble of branches and 
boards.

Since it was easier to keep them under surveillance when they were working 
than when they were sleeping, the days were twelve, fourteen or sixteen hours long.

Since there were not enough guards, they were forced to select a complement of 
trustees out of the whole lot of the prisoners on appearances alone, who, since they 
had uneasy consciences, created a reign of terror by way of excusing and justifying 
themselves.

Blows rained, not just insults and threats.

The bad treatment, the poor and insufficient food, superhuman work, the lack of 
medicines, and the pneumonia created conditions that caused this gang of men to die 
at an alarming rate, endangering the general health.

The S.S.

had to think of another 
way to get rid of the bodies other than by burial which took too much time and which 
was too often repeated: so they had turned to cremation, a procedure that was much 
faster and in conformity with Germanic traditions.

Another Kommando, in its turn, 
became indispensable, the Totenkommando, and the construction of a crematorium 
was put on the list of "urgent" work to be done.

Thus it happened that a place was 
built for men to die in, before the place was built for them to live in.

Everything is 
linked together: evil attracts evil, and when one is caught in the mesh of evil forces ....

Moreover, the camp was not conceived in the minds of the National-Socialist 
authorities to be just a camp, but a community working under supervision for the 
building of the Third Reich, just like the other individuals of the German community 
who remained in relative liberty.

As a consequence, after the crematorium came the 
factory, the Guzlow.Moreover, the camp was not conceived in the minds of the National-Socialist 
authorities to be just a camp, but a community working under supervision for the 
building of the Third Reich, just like the other individuals of the German community 
who remained in relative liberty.

As a consequence, after the crematorium came the 
factory, the Guzlow.

So it is seen that the order of precedence for all the installations 
was determined first by the need to keep everything well under guard, second by 
hygienic requirements, and third by the demands of work that constituted the raison 
d'etre for the camp.

Everything was subordinate to the collective interest which 
trampled down and crushed the individual.

Buchenwald was thus, during the period of the first installations, a Straflager 
(punishment camp) where only those considered incorrigible in other prisons were 
sent.

Then, from the moment that the factory, the Guzlow, was ready to go, an 
Arbeitslager (labor camp) with Strafkommandos.

Finally, it was transformed into a 
Konzentrationslager (concentration camp) which is what it was when we knew it, a 
camp equipped with all the amenities of a small city, where everyone was sent 
without discrimination.

Around the central camp there were satellite camps, which it 
kept supplied with human material.

All the camps went through these three stages 
successively.

Unfortunately, with the war breaking out, prisoners from all places, of 
all kinds, in for all kinds of reasons, and under all kinds of disciplinary punishment, 
were haphazardly, because of the disorder of the circumstances, and indiscriminately 
sent to a Straflager, an Arbeitslager, or a [?].--- PAGE BREAK ---

All the camps went through these three stages 
successively. Unfortunately, with the war breaking out, prisoners from all places, of 
all kinds, in for all kinds of reasons, and under all kinds of disciplinary punishment, 
were haphazardly, because of the disorder of the circumstances, and indiscriminately 
sent to a Straflager, an Arbeitslager, or a [?]. The result was a frightening mixture of 
all kinds of humanity which resembled, under the sign of the truncheon, a gigantic 
basket of crabs, over which National-Socialism, so sure of itself and so methodical in 
its operations, but overwhelmed on all sides by events which were beginning to 
master it, threw an immense Noah's mantel. Dora was born under the sponsorship of Buchenwald and in the same way. It grew 
and prospered following the same process.

--- PAGE BREAK ---39
In 1903, German engineers and chemists had discovered that the stone of the Harz 
mountains in that area was rich in ammonia.

Since no private company was willing to 
risk capital in its extraction, the Government undertook it.

Germany did not possess as 
did her neighbors, colonies that were able to put at her disposal men from Cayenne or 
Nouméa.

Because of this fact together with the fact that she was obliged to keep her 
convicts inside the country, they were imprisoned in certain places where they were 
used for especially disagreeable labor.

As a consequence, a convict prison, like all 
convict prisons in the world except for a few minor differences, was created at Dora.

In 1910, for reasons unknown, but most likely because the yield of ammonia was 
much smaller than was anticipated, quarrying the stone was stopped.

It was resumed 
during the war of 1914-1918 as a sort of punitive camp for prisoners of war at a time 
when Germany was already beginning to think of going underground to escape some 
of the devastation of bombing.

Again the operation was interrupted by the Armistice.

Between the two wars, Dora was completely forgotten: wild tangled growth masked 
the entrance to the excavations and, all around, vast fields of sugar-beets were 
cultivated to supply the sugar refinery at Nordhausen three and a half miles away.

It was into these beet fields that on September 1, 1943, Buchenwald disgorged a first 
well escorted Kommando of two hundred men.

Germany, again feeling the need to go 
underground or at least to put her war industries underground, had taken up the 
project of 1915 again.

Construction of the S.S.

camp and of the crematorium was 
begun, underground the factory was set up, and the kitchens, showers, the 
Arbeitsstatistik, the Revier, or infirmary, were built, last of all.

So long as the 
underground work existed, the S.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

camp and of the crematorium was 
begun, underground the factory was set up, and the kitchens, showers, the 
Arbeitsstatistik, the Revier, or infirmary, were built, last of all. So long as the 
underground work existed, the S.S. delayed as long as possible, putting off always a 
little longer, the unprofitable work of constructing Blocks for the prisoners, preferring 
instead to dig the gallery of the tunnel farther in, and to make it possible to get as 
many factories as possible under protection from the ever increasing threats from the 
open sky. When we arrived at Dora, the camp was still in the Straflager stage. We made an 
Arbeitslager out of it. When we left it with its 170 Blocks, its infirmary, its theater, its 
brothel, and with all its installations in place and its tunnel completed, it was on the 
point of becoming a Konzentrationslager. Already, at the other end of the double 
tunnel, there was another camp, Ellrich, its offspring, and which was itself in the 
Straflager stage. There could be no break in the descending curve of human misery. But, the English and Americans and the Russians had decided otherwise, and, on 
April 11, 1945, they came to free us. Since then, the penitentiary system of East 
Germany has been in the hands of the Russians who haven't changed things a fraction. Tomorrow, it will be in the hands of ... who knows? Since there must be no gap in 
history.

* * * * 
A concentration camp, when it is completely set up, is a regular city which is isolated 
from the outside world which conceived it, which is surrounded by fences of 
electrified barbed wire, and which is guarded with special guards every fifty yards on 
platforms, armed to the teeth. To make the screen between the two even more dense,

--- PAGE BREAK ---40
an S.S.

garrison bordered the camp and at a distance of three or four miles all around 
sentinels were encamped.

Thus, anyone trying to escape would have a certain number 
of obstacles to overcome, or perhaps it would be better to say that any attempt would 
be doomed to failure.

This isolated city had its own laws and its own particular social 
phenomena.

Any ideas born there, individually or collectively, were stopped at the 
barbed wire and remained unsuspected by the rest of the world.

By the same token, 
almost everything that took place in the outer world, was unknown on the inside, any 
penetration being made almost impossible by that screen (1).

Newspapers came in; 
but, they were carefully selected and said nothing but those things that had been 
especially printed for the inmates in the concentration camp.

It did happen in wartime 
that the "news" for the concentration camp inmates was the same as that which the 
Germans were supposed to take as gospel, and that is why the but those things that 
had been especially printed for the inmates in the concentration camp.

It did happen in 
wartime that the "news" for the concentration camp inmates was the same as that 
which the Germans were supposed to take as gospel, and that is why the newspapers 
were the same for both, but it was pure chance.

Use of the radio was punishable.

It 
follows that camp life, organized on other moral and sociological principles, had quite 
a different orientation from that of normal life.

As a consequence, it revealed aspects 
that could not be judged by standards common to mankind in general.

But, it was a 
city, and a human city.

Inside -- or on the outside, but near by -- a factory was the reason for its existence and 
its means of existence: at Buchenwald, the Guzlow; at Dora, the Tunnel.

The factory 
was the keystone of the entire edifice, and its needs, which had to be satisfied, were 
the iron laws.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inside -- or on the outside, but near by -- a factory was the reason for its existence and 
its means of existence: at Buchenwald, the Guzlow; at Dora, the Tunnel. The factory 
was the keystone of the entire edifice, and its needs, which had to be satisfied, were 
the iron laws. The camp was made for the factory, and not the factory to keep the 
camp busy. The most important department of the camp was the Arbeitsstatistik, which kept a 
strict accounting of the entire population, and kept track of each man day after day in 
his work. At the Arbeitsstatistik the personnel could tell you at any moment 
whatsoever of the day what each prisoner was doing and where he could be found. This department, like all the others, too, was entrusted to prisoner trustees and kept 
busy a considerable and privileged number of them. Then came the Politische-Abteilung, which kept track of the political aspects of the 
camp and which was able to give for any prisoner any information wanted about his 
previous life, his moral conduct, the reasons for his arrest... It was the department of 
anthropometry of the camp, its Sicherheitsdienst (security police), and employed only 
those prisoners in whom the S.S. had confidence. Once again the privileged. Then the Verwaltung, or the general administration, which kept track of everything 
that came into the camp: food, material, clothing, etc.... It was the quartermaster of the 
camp. Those prisoners employed in office work always occupied a privileged 
position. These three big departments ran the camp. They had at their head a Kapo who ran 
them under the supervision of a noncommissioned officer of the S.S., or 
Rapportführer. There was a Rapportführer for all the key services, and each one of 
them reported every evening to the Rapportführer-general of the camp. who was an 
officer, generally an Oberleutnant. This Rapportführer-general communicated with

--- PAGE BREAK ---41
the prison camp through the intermediary of his subordinates and of the Lagerältester, 
or the doyen of the prisoners, who was responsible in general for the camp and who 
answered for its smooth running even with his life.

Similarly, the departments of the second level: the Sanitätsdienst, or health service, 
which included doctors, male nurses disinfection, infirmary and crematorium 
services; the Lagerschutzpolizei, or camp police; the Feuerwerk, or fire protection; the 
Bunker, or jail for those prisoners caught breaking the rules of the camp; the Kino-
Theater, or movie, and the brothel, or Pouf.

There were also the Küche, or kitchen; the Effektenkammer, or clothing store, which 
was attached to the Verwaltung; the Häftlingskantine, or canteen, which supplied the 
prisoners with extra food and drinks in exchange for the coin of the realm, the Bank, 
where the special money good only in the camp was issued .

And, now to describe the mass of workers...

They were divided up into Blocks 
constructed on the same plan as that of Buchenwald 48, but of wood, and with only 
one floor.

They lived there only at night.

They returned there at night after roll call at 
about nine o'clock, and they left every morning before dawn, at half past four.

They 
were supervised by the Block Chiefs who were surrounded by their Schreiber, 
Friseur, Stubendienst, who were veritable satraps.

The Block Chief governed life in 
the Block through the supervision of an S.S.

soldier, or Blockführer, who reported to 
the Rapportführer-general.

The Blockführer were only rarely seen; generally they 
confined themselves to one friendly visit with the Block Chief during the day, that is, 
when the prisoners were away, so that it was the latter who was in effect the only 
authority, and practically all of his exactions were without appeal.

During the day, that is, during the period of actual work, the prisoners were caught in 
the meshes of another group of prisoner trustees and camp officials.The Blockführer were only rarely seen; generally they 
confined themselves to one friendly visit with the Block Chief during the day, that is, 
when the prisoners were away, so that it was the latter who was in effect the only 
authority, and practically all of his exactions were without appeal.

During the day, that is, during the period of actual work, the prisoners were caught in 
the meshes of another group of prisoner trustees and camp officials.

Every morning 
those who worked only during the day were divided up among Kommandos, each 
with a Kapo for chief, assisted by one, two or several foremen or Vorarbeiter.

Each 
day, beginning at four thirty, the Kapos and the Vorarbeiter were at the mustering 
grounds, in a designated place -- always the same, and formed their respective 
Kommandos which they conducted in marching time to the place where they were to 
work.

There a Meister or a civilian supervisor informed them of the job that they were 
to have their men get done during the day.

The Kommandos which were used by the 
factory did two twelve hour shifts rather than the usual three eight hour shifts.

They 
were divided into two teams or Schicht: There was the Tageschicht which came 
before the Kapos and Vorarbeiter at nine o'clock in the morning, and the Nachtschicht 
at nine o'clock in the evening.

The two Schicht alternated one week of day labor and 
one week of night labor.

That was the Buchenwald which we knew.

Life was bearable there for the prisoners 
who definitely were assigned to the camp; it was a little harder for those who were 
destined to stay there only for the quarantine period.

It must have been the same in all 
of the camps.

Unhappily, when mass deportations of foreigners into Germany were 
taking place, few camps were ready, aside from Buchenwald, Dachau, and Auschwitz.

Consequently, almost all of the deportees knew the camps only during their 
construction, as Straflager, and Arbeitslager.

but not Konzentrationslager.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Consequently, almost all of the deportees knew the camps only during their 
construction, as Straflager, and Arbeitslager. but not Konzentrationslager. Unhappily, 
too, even in camps that were ready, all responsibilities were given to German

--- PAGE BREAK ---42
prisoners at first, to facilitate relations between the Häftling people and those of the 
Führung, and to the survivors of the Straflagers and the Arbeitslagers afterward, who 
could not imagine the Konzett, as they called it, without the horrors that they had 
themselves suffered there.

This latter group constituted a much greater obstacle to any 
humanizing of the camps than did the S.S.

The "Do not do unto others what you do 
not want others to do unto you" is a concept of another world, which had no meaning 
in the concentration camp.

"Do unto others what has been done to you" was the motto 
of all the Kapos, who had spent years and years in Straflagers and Arbeitslagers, and 
in whose minds the horrors that they had lived through had created a tradition, which, 
by an understandable distortion, they felt obliged to perpetuate.

If by chance the S.S.

forgot to mistreat us, these prisoners took care to make up for the slip.

* * * * *-- 
The population of the camp, its social composition, and its origins were also elements 
that were de-humanizing.

I have already remarked that National-Socialism drew no 
distinctions between political crime and common crime, and that consequently, there 
was in Germany no distinction between the civil and the political regime.

As in the 
prisons of most civilized nations, there was something of everything in the camps -- 
of everything and something else besides.

All of the prisoners, whatever social or 
criminal element they came from, lived together, under the same regulations.

The 
only thing that distinguished them was the colored triangle on their prison clothing 
which was the insignia of their classification -- i.e., their reason for being there.

Red was reserved for political crimes.

For common crimes, there was a green triangle; 
it was plain for Verbrecher, or petty crimes; it was embellished with an "S" for 
Schwerverbrecher, or serious crimes, and a "K" for Kriegsverbrecher, or war crimes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Red was reserved for political crimes. For common crimes, there was a green triangle; 
it was plain for Verbrecher, or petty crimes; it was embellished with an "S" for 
Schwerverbrecher, or serious crimes, and a "K" for Kriegsverbrecher, or war crimes. Thus, a gradation was made from common crimes, such as a simple theft, to murder 
and to the theft of supplies or armaments . Between these two extremes, there was a whole series of intermediary crimes: the 
black triangle (professionally unemployed); the pink triangle (pederasts and 
homosexuals); the yellow triangle reversed over a red one so as to form a star (Jews); 
purple triangle (conscientious objectors) (2). In addition, those who had done a certain 
term in prison, and then, following their release, were incarcerated again for 
committing new crimes wore instead of the triangle a black circle on white 
background with a large "Z" in the center, which stood for those freed from the 
Zuchthaus or prison. And, finally, those who wore a red triangle with the point up had 
committed minor crimes in the army and had been sentenced by a court-martial. To these were added a few special ones: the red triangle with a transverse bar for 
those sent to the Konzett for the second or third time; three black dots on a yellow and 
white brassard for the blind; the Wifo, the same circle as for the Zuchthaus people 
with the "Z" replaced by a "W." These latter had originally been volunteer workers. They had been employed by the Wifo firm which had been the first to try to achieve 
the Vergeltungsfeurer the famous V1 and V2 rockets. One fine day, and for no 
apparent reason, they got the striped clothes and were put into concentration camps. The secret of the V1 and V2 having gone through the trial period and into the 
intensive production stage was not to be freely circulated, even among the German 
people. In other words, they were interned for reasons of State security. The Wifo

--- PAGE BREAK ---43
were the most unfortunate ; people in the camp: they continued to be paid their salary, 
half of which was paid them in the camp itself, the rest being sent to their families.

They had the right to keep their hair and to write whenever they wanted to, on 
condition that they said nothing about what had happened to them; and since they 
were the best off, they introduced the black market into the camp and raised the 
exchange (3).

As far as the population was concerned, the concentration camps were regular towers 
of Babel in which personalities clashed because of differences of origin, of their 
sentences, and previous social standing.

The common law offenders hated the 
political criminals whom they didn't understand, and the latter returned the feeling.

The intellectuals looked down on the manual laborers, and the latter rejoiced to see 
the former "working at last." The Russians wrapped the whole of the West in the same 
icy contempt.

The Poles and the Czechs couldn't stand the French, because of Munich, 
etc...

On the nationality level, there were enmities between Slavs and Germanic 
people, between the Germans and the Italians, between the Dutch and the Belgians, or 
between the Dutch and the Germans.

The French, who came last and began to receive 
the most magnificent parcels of food, were looked down on by everybody except the 
Belgians, who were pleasant, frank, and good.

France was regarded as a land of milk 
and honey, and her inhabitants as sybaritic degenerates, who were incapable of work, 
who ate well, and who were occupied only with making love.

To these sentiments the 
Spaniards added the concentration camps of Daladier.

I remember having been 
accosted in Block 24 at Dora by a vigorous: "Ah!

The French; now you know what a 
Lager means.

No harm, it'll teach you!" 
It was one of the three Spaniards (there were 26 in all at Dora) who had been interned 
at Gurs in 1938, enrolled in labor companies in 1939, and sent to Buchenwald after 
Rethel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The French; now you know what a 
Lager means. No harm, it'll teach you!" 
It was one of the three Spaniards (there were 26 in all at Dora) who had been interned 
at Gurs in 1938, enrolled in labor companies in 1939, and sent to Buchenwald after 
Rethel. The three maintained that the only difference between the French and the 
German camps was the work; all other things, treatment, food, being just about the 
same. In fact they added that the French camps were dirtier. Oh, Jircszah ! * * * * * 
The S.S. guards lived in a parallel camp. In general, they were a company. At first, 
this company was a training unit for young recruits, and only Germans were in it. Later on, the S.S. became more international in composition: Italians, Poles. Czechs. Bulgarians, Rumanians, Greeks, among others filled the ranks (4). The necessities of 
war had compelled the Germans to send the young recruits to the front, often with 
limited military instruction, or even without any special preparation, and the young 
were replaced by the old, those who had already served in the war of 1914-1918, on 
whom National Socialism had made scarcely any imprint. They were less hard. In the 
last two years of the war, when there were not enough S.S., the rejects from the 
Wehrmacht and the Luftwaffe, who couldn't be used for anything else, were assigned 
as guards to the camps. All the services of the camp had their parallel in the S.S. camp where everything was 
centralized, and from which daily or weekly reports were sent directly to Himmler's 
offices in Berlin. The S.S. camp was, therefore, the administrator of the other. When

--- PAGE BREAK ---44
the camps were just beginning during the Straflager period, they were administered 
directly: afterwards, and as soon as possible, the S.S.

carried on the camp 
administration only through the prisoners themselves as intermediaries.

One would 
think that this arrangement was used out of sadism and, after the war was over, that is 
what was said.

But, it was really out of the necessity to economize personnel that the 
system was used, and for that reason, in all prisons in all countries, the same situation 
holds.

The S.S.

itself only administrated the camp when it was impossible for them to 
do otherwise.

We knew what self-government by the prisoners in the camps was.

All 
of the old hands who have experienced both systems are unanimous in recognizing 
that the former was in principle the better and the more humane, and that if it was not 
in tact, it was because wartime circumstances and the pressure of events did not 
permit it.

I believe it; it is better to deal with God than with the saints.

So the S.S.

guarded the perimeter of the camp, and it can be said that we hardly ever 
saw them inside the camp, except when they simply went through to take the salute of 
the prisoners, the famous "Mützen ab".

They were helped in their guard duty by a 
company of marvelously trained dogs, always ready to bite and capable of hunting out 
an escaped prisoner tens of miles away.

Every morning, the Kommandos that were to 
work outside the camp, often they traveled three or four miles on foot -- when they 
had to go farther, they used trucks or trains -- were accompanied, according to their 
importance, by two or four S.S., guns in hand, each with a muzzled dog on a leash.

This special guard, which complemented the surveillance of the Kapos, just kept 
watch from afar, and did not intervene in supervision of the prisoners unless a show of 
force was called for.Every morning, the Kommandos that were to 
work outside the camp, often they traveled three or four miles on foot -- when they 
had to go farther, they used trucks or trains -- were accompanied, according to their 
importance, by two or four S.S., guns in hand, each with a muzzled dog on a leash.

This special guard, which complemented the surveillance of the Kapos, just kept 
watch from afar, and did not intervene in supervision of the prisoners unless a show of 
force was called for.

In the evening, at the roll-call by Block, when everyone was there, at a whistle, all the 
Blockführer turned toward the Block for which they were responsible, counted those 
present, and then went back to report.

During this operation non-coms went around 
the Blocks to enforce silence and attention.

The Kapos, Block Chiefs, and 
Lagerschutz (5) greatly helped them in making this task easy.

From time to time an 
S.S.

man stood out from the others for his brutality, but it was rare; and in no case was 
he ever more inhuman than the prisoner trustees who filled the positions that are 
mentioned in the preceding sentence .

* * * * * 
The problem of the Häftlingsführung dominated the life of the concentration camps, 
and the way it was handled determined their evolution in so far as the welfare of the 
common prisoners was concerned.

At the inception of every camp there was no Häftlingsführung (6) ; there just the 
convoy of prisoners which arrived out in the open, guarded by the S.S.

who 
themselves assumed all responsibility, directly and in detail.

And that's the way it 
remained until the second, third, or fourth convoy arrived.

The direct supervision of 
the S.S.

could last six weeks, two months, six months, a year.

But, as soon as a camp 
grew to a certain size, since the number of S.S.

personnel could not be indefinitely 
expanded, they were obliged to take from among the prisoners the additional 
manpower necessary to keep watch over the mass of prisoners.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, as soon as a camp 
grew to a certain size, since the number of S.S. personnel could not be indefinitely 
expanded, they were obliged to take from among the prisoners the additional 
manpower necessary to keep watch over the mass of prisoners. One has to have 
experienced concentration camp life and have assimilated their history really to 
understand this phenomenon and the form it took in practice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---45
When the camps were originated in 1933, the German state of mind was such that 
opponents of National Socialism were considered the worst of brigands.

With this 
attitude in the popular mind, the new masters easily succeeded in indoctrinating the 
masses to accept the idea that there were no crimes or offenses against common rights 
or political rights but only and simply crimes and offenses.

As a result, the distinction 
between the two became unclear and in many instances it took very little to make the 
second, to all appearances more odious than the first in the eyes of a youthful fanatic, 
enrolled in the S.S.

and entrusted with carrying out the project!

Now put yourself in 
the place of the fifty S.S.

soldiers at Buchenwald, on the day when, deluged by a 
thousand prisoners and a huge mass of materiel they had to select the first trustees 
from among their prisoners, and appoint the first Lagerältester.

Between a Thaelmann 
or a Breitscheid, whose recalcitrance was especially brought to their attention, and the 
first criminal they came across who had murdered his mother-in-law or raped his 
sister, but who was just as dull and docile as you please, they did not hesitate; they 
chose the second.

He, in his turn, appointed the Kapos and the Blockältester, and 
naturally he picked them from his kind of people, that is, from the common criminal, 
the "greens." 
It was only after the camps had developed up to a certain point that they became real 
ethnographic and industrial centers, and that men of some moral and intellectual 
caliber were really needed to give efficacious assistance to the S.S.-Führung.

The 
latter perceived that the common criminals were the dregs of the population, in the 
camp as elsewhere, and that they were quite beneath what was required of them.

Then 
the S.S.

turned for help to the political criminals.Then 
the S.S.

turned for help to the political criminals.

One day a "green" Lagerältester had 
to be replaced by a "red," who at once began to get rid of the "greens" in all positions, 
in favor of the "reds." And so arose the struggle which rapidly became a permanent 
one between the "greens" and the "reds.

'' And, that explains why old camps like 
Buchenwald and Dachau were in the hands of the Politicals when we were there (7) 
while the newer ones, still at the Straflager or Arbeitslager stage except for 
miraculous variations, were always in the hands of the "greens." 
An attempt has been made to claim that the struggle between the "greens" and the 
"reds", which only very late in the day extended beyond the German contingent in the 
camps, was the result of a coordinated effort on the part of the second against the first: 
this assertion is incorrect.

The politicals, distrusting each other, not knowing where to 
turn, had only very vague and tenuous solidarity among themselves.

But.

on the side 
of the "greens." it was quite different: they formed a compact block, firmly held 
together by that instinctive confidence which always exists among criminals 
recidivists and convicts.

The triumph of the "reds" was due only to chance, to the 
incompetence of the "greens." and to the discernment of the S.S.

It was also said that the political -- and especially the German political -- had 
organized revolutionary committees, had held meetings in the camps, had stocked 
arms, and had secret correspondents on the outside.

This is pure legend.

It is possible 
that some happy concurrence of circumstances made it possible, on occasion, for an 
individual to write to the outside, or to another prisoner in another camp, under the 
nose of the S.S.-Führung.

Or, someone who was released from a camp might carry, 
with great precaution, news from a prisoner to his family or a political friend; maybe 
someone who had just arrived might do the same thing in reverse.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is possible 
that some happy concurrence of circumstances made it possible, on occasion, for an 
individual to write to the outside, or to another prisoner in another camp, under the 
nose of the S.S.-Führung. Or, someone who was released from a camp might carry, 
with great precaution, news from a prisoner to his family or a political friend; maybe 
someone who had just arrived might do the same thing in reverse. In fact, a transport 
of prisoners sometimes became a means of communication from one camp to another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---46
But it was extremely rare, at least during the war, for a prisoner to be discharged from 
a camp and, as for the transports, no one in the camp, not even most of the S.S., knew 
what their destination was to be before they got there.

Generally one only learned that 
a transport had taken place several weeks or months after its departure, and that it had 
arrived at Dora or Ellrich, through the sick, who sometimes came back from them.

More often, this information was learned through the dead, who were returned to the 
camp to be cremated, and on whose chests their numbers and places of origin could be 
seen.

But to say that these communications were premeditated, organized, and carried 
through, is pure fantasy.

As for the stocking of arms: in the final days of Buchenwald, 
thanks to the chaos, some of the prisoners were able to filch pieces of guns, and even 
whole weapons from the manufacturing that was going on, but to state that such 
activity was a systematic practice is ridiculous.

And, as for the revolutionary 
committees, and the meetings held: I had a good laugh, when, after the liberation, I 
heard of a committee for French interests at Buchenwald being talked about.

Three or 
four vociferous Communists, including Marcel Paul (8) and the famous Colonel 
Manhes who had managed to escape from the evacuation transports, evoked this 
committee in the vacuum between the departure of the S.S.

and the arrival of the 
Americans.

They succeeded in making others believe that this committee had long 
been organized (9), but the existence of this committee is a pure invention and the 
Americans did not take it seriously.

Their first action.

when they came into the camp, 
was to ask the trouble-makers to be quiet and the crowd that was getting ready to 
listen to them to go back quietly to the Blocks.

In short, everybody was required to 
submit from the start to a discipline of which they alone intended to remain the 
masters.--- PAGE BREAK ---

when they came into the camp, 
was to ask the trouble-makers to be quiet and the crowd that was getting ready to 
listen to them to go back quietly to the Blocks. In short, everybody was required to 
submit from the start to a discipline of which they alone intended to remain the 
masters. After order was restored, they took care of the sick, the feeding of the 
prisoners, and the organization of the repatriation efforts. without taking any notice of 
the advice and suggestions which the several last minute VIP's tried in vain to impress 
upon them. And, that was all to the good: it cost Marcel Paul a lesson in humility, and 
a certain number of lives were saved. Finally, it was said that the politicals, when they had the upper hand in the H-Führung 
were more human than the common criminals. And this claim was said to be 
supported by the experience at Buchenwald (l0). It is true that Buchenwald was, when 
we arrived there, a relatively comfortable camp for those prisoners who were 
definitely free of any threat of being transported to any of the satellite camps. But, the 
bearable situation at Buchenwald was due more to the fact that it had completed its 
evolution and had become a Kozentrationslager, than because it had a political H-
Führung. In the other camps which were behind it in development, the distinctions 
between the "greens" and the "reds" were hardly discernible. It could have been that 
contact with the politicals might have improved the moral standards of the criminals; 
but, the opposite took place, and it was the criminals who corrupted the politicals.le. It could have been that 
contact with the politicals might have improved the moral standards of the criminals; 
but, the opposite took place, and it was the criminals who corrupted the politicals.

Footnotes 
(1) It is said that the German population was almost totally ignorant of what went on 
in the camps during the war, and I believe it. In fact, the SS personnel who lived near 
the camps and who guarded their perimeters were, for the most part, ignorant of -- or, 
at least, did not learn of -- certain happenings until long after they were past.. If the 
reader finds this contention hard to believe, permit me to ask the following question:

--- PAGE BREAK ---47
who in France knows any of the details about the life of the prisoners at French penal 
institutions at Carrere, La Noe, and other places?

[And, for the American reader: how 
many Americans really know what goes on in the thousands of jails, penitentiaries, 
and prison farms that exist throughout the United States?] 
(2) [For a scathing description by an English prisoner of the Jews -- as well as others -
- who were interned at Buchenwald, see Christopher Burney, The Dungeon 
Democracy (New York: Duell, Sloan, & Pearce, 1946).] 
(3) ["Black markets" seem to have been a common feature throughout the German 
concentration camp system.

For a detailed discussion of how this kind of sub rosa 
economic activity worked in a German P.O.W.

camp, see R.

A.

Radford, "The 
Economic organization of a P.O.W.

Camp," Economica, (November 1945), pp.

189-
201.] 
(4) [By the end of the war, nationals of virtually every country in Europe -- including, 
even, Turkey -- were fighting along side the Germans.

A kind of "pan-Europeanism" 
in the face of the possible annihilation of European culture at the hands of the 
Russians seems to have been a primary motivational factor for some of these 
volunteers.

For a general discussion on the foreign volunteers from German occupied 
Europe who fought on the German side -- generally in units of the Waffen-SS -- see 
David Littlejohn, The Patriotic Traitors (Garden City: Doubleday, 1972).

As a 
general rule, most of the foreign volunteers fought in combat units on the Eastern 
Front against the Russians.

Some, however, were assigned to other duties such as the 
guarding of concentration camps.

Littlejohn mentions, for example, that while the 
bulk of the Dutch and Flemish SS volunteers were transferred to the Waffen-SS 
following June 22, 1941, some of them were retained in Holland where, among other 
things, they guarded the concentration camps at Westerbork, Vught, and Amersfoort 
(p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some, however, were assigned to other duties such as the 
guarding of concentration camps. Littlejohn mentions, for example, that while the 
bulk of the Dutch and Flemish SS volunteers were transferred to the Waffen-SS 
following June 22, 1941, some of them were retained in Holland where, among other 
things, they guarded the concentration camps at Westerbork, Vught, and Amersfoort 
(p. 99).] 
(5) All of these administrative positions within the camp were filled by prisoners who 
had been selected for the jobs by the SS guards. (6) "Häftlingsführung" means the "self-government" or the direction of the day to day 
operation of the camp by the prisoners themselves. (7) [Following the liberation of Buchenwald by American troops, a U.S. Army report 
was prepared in which it was stated that "... the prisoners themselves organized a 
deadly terror within the Nazi terror..." with German communist inmates running 
things. This report formed the basis of an article by a former U.S. Army officer who 
was present at Buchenwald following the capture of the camp and who interviewed 
many of the prisoners. In his article, he presents a story of how the communists ran 
the camp which corroborates many of the details which Professor Rassinier mentions 
in the text. Among other things, he says that "... on the day Buchenwald was liberated, 
the Army intelligence men were astounded to note that the 300 surviving German 
communities [who were running the camp from the inside] were dressed like 
'prosperous business men.'" See, Donald B. Robinson, "The Communist Atrocities at 
Buchenwald," American Mercury (October, 1946), pp. 397-404. See, also, R.H.S. Crossman, "Buchenwald," Nation (July 30, 1945), pp. 123-125, in which the author

--- PAGE BREAK ---munist Atrocities at 
Buchenwald," American Mercury (October, 1946), pp. 397-404. See, also, R.H.S. Crossman, "Buchenwald," Nation (July 30, 1945), pp. 123-125, in which the author

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
reports on an interview with an Austrian inmate who describes at length how the 
communists ran Buchenwald from the inside.] 
(8) Marcel Paul was a Stubendienst in Block 56, and later he was assigned to Block 
24 where the parcels that were sent to prisoners by their relatives were received. 
(9) There was only one "committee" of long standing in the camps, and this 
"committee" was the loose association of thieves and pillagers, composed of either 
"reds" or "greens," who had been given the levers of command by the SS. At the 
liberation -- in order to save their own necks - they tried to put everyone off the track 
by claiming that they had represented organized prisoner resistance to the Germans, 
and to a large measure they have succeeded in this objective. 
(10) Although to this camp was due all the notoriety about the "human skin lamp-
shades" for which Ilse Koch, called the "Bitch of Buchenwald," today remains solely 
responsible, the question still remains: did the wife of the Lagerkommandant walk 
around the camp looking for handsome tattooing, and herself pointing out their 
unfortunate owners for death? I can neither confirm nor disprove it. Nevertheless, I 
can point out that from February through March 1944, rumors in the concentration 
camp accused the two Kapos of the Steinbruch and the Gartnerei, of that crime, 
already carried out by them, with the complicity of almost all their "colleagues." The 
two buddies had made a business of the death of tattooed prisoners, whose skins they 
sold to Ilse Koch in exchange for a variety of favors, and to others, through the 
intermediation of the Kapo and the SS of the Crematorium service. So, the contention 
of the accusation, if it has any basis in fact, is very fragile. [For a further discussion of 
the Ilse Koch matter, see Arthur R. Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century 
(Richmond, Surrey: Historical Review Press [1976]), pp. 42-43.]sis in fact, is very fragile. [For a further discussion of 
the Ilse Koch matter, see Arthur R. Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century 
(Richmond, Surrey: Historical Review Press [1976]), pp. 42-43.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49

Chapter Four 
Charon's Barkon of 
the Ilse Koch matter, see Arthur R. Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century 
(Richmond, Surrey: Historical Review Press [1976]), pp. 42-43.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49

Chapter Four 
Charon's Bark

We were received at Dora according to the customary routine: Out of the rail cars, a 
frantic race across the rubble, in the mud up to the ankles, under melting snow, 
insults, shouted threats, barking, blows. 
Across the S.S.-Lager, about fifty buildings were spread around, with no paved walks 
going from one to the other; just muddy paths through fields. 
Entrance to the H-Lager: two blocks of wooden buildings, one on each side of a wire 
tangle that opened in front of us. We were counted. "Zu funf ! Zu funf ! Mensch 
Blöder Hund!" Wham, a blow trom [?] a fist. Wham, a kick. 
On the other side of the wire fence was the camp itself. Ten or so square blocks of 
wooden buildings, a dozen at the most, were laid out haphazardly with no visible 
coordination. On the way we could read from a distance the numbers on the Blocks: 
4, 35, 104, 17. Where are the other Blocks? 
A muddy track, marked out by many tramping feet, led away from the entrance and 
climbed the hill, with nothing to indicate that it led anywhere. The guards had us take 
it and we came to the gemeinde Abort (public toilet) where we were penned in, 
waiting for orders. The gemeinde Abort was a Block in which there were only toilets, 
urinals, and wash basins. It was impossible to sit down or to stretch out, and going 
outside was forbidden. We were tired and famished, too. Toward six o'clock, a bowl 
of soup, 300 grams of bread, a piece of margarine and a slice of sausage were served 
to us. We noticed that the rations were ampler than at Buchenwald. A breath of 
optimism blew over us. "We shall be working, but at least we shall eat" was 
whispered among the group. 
Men with brassards appeared at eight o'clock: a table was set up; a clerk sat down. 
One by one we passed in front of the table where we stated our registration number, 
name, and profession. The men with brassards were Czechs and Poles who had been 
interned for a variety of offenses. They were heavy handed and made generous use of 
the rubber truncheons with which they were armed. "Hier ist Dora! Mensch! Blöder 
Hund!" and wham, wham. 
At midnight, the business was finished. Everyone was ordered outside. We retraced 
our path, in the dark this time, always surrounded by Kapos and S.S. Suddenly we 
found ourselves in front of an immense excavation which opened on the hill side: the 
Tunnel. Two enormous iron folding doors opened: this was it, we were going to be 
buried; nobody had any idea that these iron doors would ever open again to liberate 
us. The horrors that we had heard about this "underground" installation while we were 
at Buchenwald worried us.e 
buried; nobody had any idea that these iron doors would ever open again to liberate 
us. The horrors that we had heard about this "underground" installation while we were 
at Buchenwald worried us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---50
We entered the Tunnel and were confronted with a Dantesque scene: outside, all was 
darkness; inside we were in full light.

Two parallel railroad tracks were set a yard 
apart; so trains shuttled back and forth in the belly of the monster?

A string of cars 
loaded and covered with tarpaulin shrouded torpedo shapes, immense shells longer 
than the cars which carried them, was sitting on one of the tracks.

They were the 
famous V1 and V2 rockets.

By their looks, their diameter was greater than a man's 
height, and they appeared to be more than 40 feet long.

"That must have quite an 
effect where it falls!" 
Talk started to turn to the mechanical details and the launching method of the V1 and 
V2 which we had heard about and which we saw now for the first time.

To my great 
amazement, I found that there were some persons among us who seemed to be very 
well informed, and who with the greatest seriousness provided the most precise 
details, but who later turned out to be the most fanciful story-tellers.

We kept going farther inside.

On each side of the main tunnel were offices and 
caverns that had been fixed up as work shops.

We came to a portion of the Tunnel 
which was still being worked on: gaunt, thin, diaphanous shadows of men perched on 
scaffolding all over, against the walls like bats, were boring into the rock.

On the 
ground, the S.S.

guards walked around, guns in hand; the Kapos, in all the coming and 
going, bawled out the poor men who were carrying tools or were pushing wheel 
barrows full of the excavated material.

The noise of machinery was deafening, and 
dead bodies were sprawled along the passageways.

One cavern was fixed up as a living Block; we were ordered to stop.

At the entrance were two garbage cans and fifteen or so corpses.

Inside, men were 
running around like madmen between the tiers of bunks, three, four and five layers.

Brawls erupted between two orin [?] a group now and then.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inside, men were 
running around like madmen between the tiers of bunks, three, four and five layers. Brawls erupted between two orin [?] a group now and then. Among them, serious and 
imposing, were the Stubendienst who tried in vain to restore order. That was where 
we were to spend the night. The Stubendienst interrupted their police work to take 
care of us. "Los! Los! Mensch! Hier ist Dora!" The rubber truncheons began to dance 
on their new targets. The Block Chief, a big German, looked on, amused, mocking, 
and threatening at the same time. We quickly saw that this Block was occupied by 
Russians whose day gang was off work. Still dressed we threw ourselves down on the 
straw pallets assigned to us. At last! Hours later, we woke up: all our shoes and what 
was left from the food distribution the evening before had disappeared. Even our 
pockets had been emptied. We admired the dexterity of the Russians who had 
accomplished this general pillage without waking us up. Only two or three were 
caught in the act. The victims took them to the Block Chief and were themselves 
brought back to their straw mattresses, with blows of the rubber truncheon, by their 
Stubendienst accomplices "Hier ist Dora, mein Lieber!" We had fallen for sure into 
the lair of brigands whose only law is that of the jungle. As soon as we were awake, we were brought back up to the daylight. We breathed 
easier; so we were not to be buried indefinitely. The morning was spent standing in 
front of the Arbeitsstatistik, stamping around in the mud and the snow; we were 
freezing cold and hungry again. In the afternoon, we were divided up into 
Kommandos: Fernand and I were landed in the Strassenbauer 52 (road builders).

--- PAGE BREAK ---51
Right away they put us to work, and until the evening roll-call we carried fir trees on 
the run, from the camp to the railway station.

At six o'clock, the roll-call: it lasted until half past eight.

At nine o'clock we were 
ordered to Block 35.

This time we were sure that we were not going to be put 
underground in the Tunnel.

But, we learned that quite a few among us had claimed to 
be skilled in all kinds of specialized technical professions so that they would be 
employed in the factory and so that they would not have to come up again in all 
probability until the liberation.

The Chief of Block 35 was a Czech; the Stubendienst, too, naturally.

The Block itself 
was still bare of furnishings.

We slept piled together, right on the floor, without 
covers, in our clothes.

But first, in an indescribable scuffle, they gave us a quart of 
rutabaga soup which we ate while standing; that was all we had to eat that day.

At ten 
we went to sleep, certain now that we were an integral part of Dora.

Dora!

* * * * * 
The first day of work...

Half past four: a gong sounded four times in that shell of a camp.

The Block lights 
went on, the Stubendienst, rubber club in hand, burst in to the Schlafsaal.

"Aufstehen!

Aufstehen!

Los Waschen!" Then, with pause, "Los, Mensch!

Los, Waschen !

" 
The two hundred men got up as one, crowded through the Esszimmer, bare to the 
waist, and in the passage between came to the door of the wash room at the same time 
as the two hundred from the other Flügel.

The wash room could hold twenty persons.

At the entrance two Stubendienst, hose nozzle in hand, held back the invasions.

"Langsam!

Langsam!...

Langsam, Lumme!" At the same time the hose went into 
action.

The poor fellows fell back...

Meanwhile, two other Stubendienst having 
anticipated the water spray, forced them on: 
"Los.' Los.' Schnell, Mensch!

Ich sage: waschen!" And, the truncheons rained down 
pitilessly on the thin bare shoulders.

Every morning it was the same tragi-comedy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ich sage: waschen!" And, the truncheons rained down 
pitilessly on the thin bare shoulders. Every morning it was the same tragi-comedy. It didn't stop there, however. After 
washing came the distribution of food for the day. We went single file holding in hand 
the chit that had been handed out in the wash room (you could not get your food until 
you had shown that you had washed) and which had to be given to a Stubendienst. Another solid crush of humanity. The hour allowed by the rules to accomplish this 
double formality was soon over. Half past five: the Kapos, warmly clothed, were there on the mustering ground 
waiting for the arrival of the human tide. It came pouring out toward them from all the 
Blocks; men running in the icy morning while still dressing and swallowing the last 
mouthful of the meager portion of the daily ration that had been handed out for 
breakfast. The Kapos proceeded with the assembling of the Kommandos and called 
the roll of their men blows and insults rained down. With the roll-call over, the 
Kommandos started out at a predetermined pace according to the distance they had to 
go; some had to go as far as three and a half to five miles, and they left first. Then

--- PAGE BREAK ---52
came those who had only an hour's march, and finally those with only half an hour's 
walk.

Kommando 52 was twenty minutes away.

It left at six thirty.

At exactly seven 
o'clock everyone was where he was to work.

The Tunnel Kommandos were run on 
another schedule: reveille at seven in the morning for the day shift, seven in the 
evening for the night shift, and all of the preliminaries for the work took place in the 
Tunnel itself.

At seven o'clock Kommando 52 was at the embankments, having arrived there after 
having completed the washing and the feeding operations, after having waited 
shivering in ten inches of mud at attention for an hour and ten minutes, and after 
having marched the mile and a quarter or so from camp to work.

The men were 
already exhausted long before the work began.

The purpose of the work was to construct a road bed from the station to the camp.

An 
ellipse of narrow-gauge railway track, whose greatest diameter was perhaps 800 
yards, was used in the construction.

Two trains of eight dump cars each pulled by 
gasoline-powered engines, made a perpetual circuit over the tracks.

While 32 men -- 
four per car loaded the train up at one end, 32 others unloaded the other one at the far 
end, being careful to spread the rock level.

When the empty train arrived, the other 
had to leave filled; this was supposed to happen every twenty minutes.

Generally, the 
first train left in the time prescribed.

However, with the second, there were delays 
which provoked growls from the Meister, the Kapo, and the Vorarbeiter.

On the third 
circuit, the empty train had already been waiting for five minutes and another five 
were needed before it was ready to leave.

The Meister smiled ironically and shrugged 
his shoulders, the Kapo shouted, and the Vorarbeiter lashed at us; no one escaped 
being hit.On the third 
circuit, the empty train had already been waiting for five minutes and another five 
were needed before it was ready to leave.

The Meister smiled ironically and shrugged 
his shoulders, the Kapo shouted, and the Vorarbeiter lashed at us; no one escaped 
being hit.

The delay was increased by the amount of time that it took three men to 
beat thirty-two, and from then on the time lost was never made up, and the work was 
off schedule for the rest of the day.

On the fourth trip, there was a further delay; more 
blows rained down.

On the fifth the Kapo -- and Vorarbeiter -- grasped the fact that 
nothing could be done, and they gave up beating us.

In the evening, instead of the 
thirty-six trips planned at the rate of three per hour, only fifteen or twenty had with 
difficulty been achieved.

Noon: a pint of hot coffee was distributed right where we worked.

We drank it 
standing up while eating the remains of the bread, margarine and sausage given out in 
the morning.

Twelve thirty: we began work again.

During the afternoon the work dragged.

The 
men, hungry and frozen, had just enough strength to keep standing.

The Kapo 
disappeared, the Vorarbeiter calmed down, the Meister himself seemed to recognize 
that there was nothing more to be got from such rags as we were, and he gave up.

We 
kept up an appearance of working, but that was hard, too.

We had to rub our hands 
and stamp our feet for the cold.

From time to time, an S.S.

guard went by.

The 
Vorarbeiter, on the lookout, saw him coming from way off and gave the signal.

When 
he reached the Kommando, everybody was busy at his job.

He tossed out a word to 
the Meister, "Wie geht's?" (How's it going?) A discouraged shrug of the shoulders 
answered, "Langsam, langsam, Sehr langsam!

Schauen Sie mal diese lumpen: Was 
machen mit?" (Slow, slow, very slow.

Just look at these no-goods.

What can you do 
with them?) The S.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just look at these no-goods. What can you do 
with them?) The S.S. guard shrugged his shoulders, too, grunted and went on, or else, 
depending on his humor, gave vent to insults, handed out a few blows of his fist,

--- PAGE BREAK ---can you do 
with them?) The S.S. guard shrugged his shoulders, too, grunted and went on, or else, 
depending on his humor, gave vent to insults, handed out a few blows of his fist,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

53
threatened with his revolver, and left the area. Once he was outside of earshot the 
Kommando relaxed again. "Aufpassen! Aufpassen!" said the Meister almost 
paternally. 
Six o'clock came, and everybody slackened off. "Feierabend," (Knock off) said the 
Meister. The Kapo who had returned a few minutes before, had his men stack the 
tools, shouted a few insults which stimulated the Vorarbeiter, and distributed a few 
cuffs; a return to discipline through the use of terror. 
Six forty: the Kommando started the march back to the camp in fives. At seven 
o'clock, organized by Block, and not by Kommando, we once again waited shivering, 
feet in the mud, for these gentlemen to finish counting us; that job took two or three 
hours. 
Between eight and nine o'clock we got to the Block. A Stubendienst, rubber truncheon 
in hand, was stationed at the entrance. We had to take our shoes off, wash the wooden 
soles and enter with them in our hands; and then only if they passed as really cleaned 
were we allowed to go in. On the way to the Esszimmer we put them down in rows; 
then we held out tin bowls into which theoretically a quart of soup was poured, which 
we ate standing up in an indescribable jostling. When these various formalities were 
over, a third Stubendienst gave us permission to make for the Schlafsaal, where we 
simply fell in a heap on a little straw that had been brought in during the day. Half 
past ten. We were dead tired, hungry, and cold. We felt that the work forced on us 
counted for very little in contributing to our fatigue. 
The next morning, it all began again at four-thirty. During the night the Russians stole 
the Holzschuhe which we had so carefully lined up in the Esszimmer at the command 
of the Stubendienst. Thus, in addition to the washing and the distribution of food, we 
had to locate another pair before running outside, while still dressing and swallowing 
the last mouthful of the meager breakfast, into the cold night to reach the mustering 
grounds where the Kapos were waiting. By the end of the week we had become 
shadows of our former selves.lowing 
the last mouthful of the meager breakfast, into the cold night to reach the mustering 
grounds where the Kapos were waiting. By the end of the week we had become 
shadows of our former selves.

* * * * * 
There were worse Kommandos than ours: the Ellrich Kommando, the Transport Eins 
and all the transport Kommandos, Steinbruch, Gartnerei ..., etc. 
At the other end of the Tunnel, camp Ellrich was being built. A very important 
Kommando of about a thousand men went there every morning on a ballast train 
which left the station at Dora at half past four. There were three miles to go. On foot it 
would only have been necessary to leave at half past five to get there by seven 
o'clock, but that would have been too simple. The S.S. authorities decided to show 
that they had some human feelings and, to spare the Kommando the fatigue of the 
march, they ordered the prisoners to be transported to work by the train. As a 
consequence, the Ellrich Kommando was awakened at three; the men washed, got 
rations and were at the mustering grounds at four. Then came the departure from the 
station. The train which was due at four-thirty was never less than an hour late, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---54
the Kommando had to wait.

At six at the earliest, half past six at the latest, it arrived at 
Ellrich.

The work consisted of digging all day.

The work stopped at six.

Theoretically, 
the prisoners should have gotten on the train at half past six, but like the morning 
train, it was never less than an hour late.

They had to wait again.

At about half past 
eight, at the best, but often nine or even ten, they returned to Dora where they had to 
observe all of the formalities of going into the Block, the shoe washing, and the 
distribution of soup.

At about eleven they could lie down and sleep; five hours of 
sleep and up again, assembly, departure, waiting.

The grind of the days was merciless; 
the steps that the S.S.

took, or pretended to take, to improve things turned into an 
additional torment.

The very travel back and forth was more killing than the work 
itself.

Added to that fact was the fact that the Kapos of the Ellrich Kommando were 
the worst of brutes, whose blows rained down upon the prisoners without pity.

Then, 
too, the work was rigorously supervised; in short, it was the Kommando of death, and 
every night corpses were brought back.

In the camp itself there was Transport Eins.

The men of Transport Eins began their 
day in the same way and at the same time as all the others: they unloaded cars and 
carried on their backs heavy loads from the station to the tunnel, or from the station to 
the camp.

We saw them from morning to evening working like circus horses in fours 
with large boards, by twos with railroad ties, by lines of eight or ten with rails, and 
singly with bags of cement.

They moved slowly under the weight of their burden.

Their Kapo was a Pole with the red triangle who went from one group to the next 
swearing, menacing, striking.

The Gartnerei, or garden Kommando also worked in teams like Transport Eins, but 
they carried human excrement instead of building material.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Their Kapo was a Pole with the red triangle who went from one group to the next 
swearing, menacing, striking. The Gartnerei, or garden Kommando also worked in teams like Transport Eins, but 
they carried human excrement instead of building material. The Kapo was a "green" 
who used the same methods as the Pole of Transport Eins with the same results. The Steinbruch, the famous quarry for all of the camps, supplied rock building 
material. Stone was excavated and loaded on wagons which were pulled or pushed to 
the places where the stone was broken up to be used as surfacing for the camp roads. The people at the Steinbruch had the additional bad luck of having to work on the 
slope of the hill at the opening of the quarry where the beatings by the Kapos often 
caused them to lose their footings and to fall to the bottom of the quarry where they 
were killed. Every day the dead were brought back to the mustering grounds. Four 
men carried each body by the arms and legs. "Ein, zwei, drei, vier," the Kapo at the 
head of the column called out to set the pace; ploc, ploc, ploc, the heads of the dead 
men knocked against the ground. From time to time we heard that some poor devil at 
the Steinbruch, having been hit with a truncheon tottered and fell into the stone-
crusher, or the concrete-mixer, without anyone trying to stop him. There were also Kommandos that were better. Among them were all those that made 
up the camp administration: the Lager Kommando, the Holzhof, the Bauleitung, the 
Schwung. At the Effektenkammer, an account was kept of the clothing that had been taken away 
from the prisoners when they came into the camp; that was an easy job. It was 
lucrative, too. From time to time a pair of pants could be stolen, or a watch, or a 
fountain pen, all of which were valuable exchange goods for food. At the Wascherei, 
the underwear which the prisoners were supposed to change every two weeks was

--- PAGE BREAK ---55
washed.

There it was sheltered and warm.

Also quite a few opportunities presented 
themselves to obtain food.

At the Schusterei, the shoes were repaired, at the 
Schneiderei, clothing was repaired and underclothing mended, and at the Küche...

The best Kommando was without question the kitchen or Küche Kommando.

The food 
was not rationed to those who prepared it, and the work was not difficult.

First they 
got the ration that was given to everyone at the Block before starting for work.

When 
they got to the kitchen or place where they worked, they received a supplementary 
ration officially.

Then, whenever they were hungry they could help themselves from 
the provisions that they were preparing.

In addition, they stole food in order to 
provide themselves with exchange for tobacco, socks, clothes, and favors.

On top of 
that, they were exempt from the roll-call.

They lived the life of regimental cooks.

A 
certain amount of influence was necessary to get into the Küche Kommando; the 
French did not have it; and, as a result, the positions were reserved for Germans, 
Czechs and Poles.

On a par with the Küche were the Arbeitsstatistik and the Revier.

There was no roll-
call either.

Blows were not the usual practice.

At the Arbeitsstatistik, the work was 
office work, and one could obtain as much food as one wanted because those who 
were assigned to the better Kommandos by the personnel there paid in kind: clothing, 
food, tobacco, etc.

I know two Frenchmen who had managed to get themselves into 
the Arbeitsstatistik; all the rest were Germans, Czechs, and Poles, as in the kitchen 
service.

In the Revier, there were doctors, Pflegers, and Kalifaktors.

The Pflegers, or nurses of 
sorts, took care of the patients, and the Kalifaktors were responsible for the 
cleanliness of the hospital.

In addition, there were a lot of clerks, who ate their fill; 
you could hardly say that they worked, and they were not beaten.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Pflegers, or nurses of 
sorts, took care of the patients, and the Kalifaktors were responsible for the 
cleanliness of the hospital. In addition, there were a lot of clerks, who ate their fill; 
you could hardly say that they worked, and they were not beaten. Then came the Lagerkommando, or the Kommando responsible for the maintenance 
of the camp. All those prisoners in delicate health were assigned there, in principle. Actually only those prisoners with pull, with friends among the Kapos and 
Lagerschutz, with influential friends in the Revier or the Küche, or with relatives who 
sent good parcels were assigned to the Lagerkommando. The Lagerkommando 
supplied crews for light janitorial work, cook-house work for the S.S., the Häftling, -- 
and the volunteer foreign workers who worked in the factories at the camp, and for 
the care of the Altverwertung, the place where things were repaired. At the beginning, 
when the camp was still small, it was a very much sought after spot. Later on, when 
the Kommando had grown to include hundreds and hundreds of individuals, the 
personnel were periodically screened for manpower to fill out other Kommandos 
without enough men, a fate which was escaped only by those with pull. Two other Kommandos were also sought after: the Tabakfabrik and the Zuckerfabrik. They both went to Nordhausen to work, and they were transported in trucks. Each 
evening, the first group came back with pockets full of tobacco which they exchanged 
for bread and soup, and the others did the same with sugar. Afterwards, a third 
Kommando was assigned to the slaughter houses at Nordhausen, and they introduced 
meat barter into the camp.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and soup, and the others did the same with sugar. Afterwards, a third 
Kommando was assigned to the slaughter houses at Nordhausen, and they introduced 
meat barter into the camp.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
To get a good or a bad Kommando was a matter of chance, which connections with 
someone in the Arbeitsstatistik could decisively influence. The constant preoccupation 
of all the prisoners was to get into a good Kommando, and this overriding objective 
was pursued by any means regardless of how incompatible it might be with human 
dignity. 
* * * * *The Tunnel Kommandos were considered both the best and the worst.

They were 
formed into a single Kommando, called Zavatsky, after the name of the supervisor 
who ran the Tunnel operations.

They had at their head a Kapo general -- the great Georges -- who had under his 
orders a whole team of Kapos in charge of prisoners according to their specialties.

To 
be assigned to a Kommando working in one of the ten or twelve factories sheltered in 
the Tunnel was to be guaranteed light labor and to be protected from the wind, the 
rain, and the cold.

All this was a very great advantage.

Such an assignment also 
guaranteed being free of the roll-calls, since there were no roll-calls for the Tunnel 
people.

But, it was also a certainty that the tunnel workers never came up into the 
daylight, and had to breathe in galleries that were badly ventilated.

Consequently, 
they were afflicted with miasmas of all sorts and dust for months on end, and they 
risked dying before they were liberated.

But on the road building, for example, one 
worked in all kinds of weather: rain, snow, wind, or hot sunshine.

In other words, the 
work never stopped.

Nor were the roll-calls cancelled or shortened.

During the rainy 
season it happened that for weeks on end we could never get the rags that served us 
for clothing dry.

In the evening, coming back to the Block, we put our clothes under 
the straw mattresses in the hope that the heat of our bodies would evaporate the 
dampness.

The next morning we put them on warmed, but wet, and we went out once 
again into the rain.

Simple or double pneumonia was endemic among the road 
workers, and many ended up in the crematorium, but at least we were living out in the 
open.

And, during the good weather...

Opinion was divided between wanting to work 
in the Tunnel or on the roads.

"One should be able to get in the Tunnel during the 
winter, and come out during the summer," Fernand said to me.56
To get a good or a bad Kommando was a matter of chance, which connections with 
someone in the Arbeitsstatistik could decisively influence. The constant preoccupation 
of all the prisoners was to get into a good Kommando, and this overriding objective 
was pursued by any means regardless of how incompatible it might be with human 
dignity. 
* * * * *

Opinion was divided between wanting to work 
in the Tunnel or on the roads. "One should be able to get in the Tunnel during the 
winter, and come out during the summer," Fernand said to me. That solution was 
obviously impossible, and I was not sure that in the end that it would be a good 
solution. What was called the Tunnel was a system of two parallel galleries going through a 
mountain from one side to the other. At one end was Dora, and at the other was the 
hell of Ellrich. These two main galleries, each about three miles long, were connected 
by about 50 transverse galleries or halls each about 200 yards long, 8 yards wide, and 
8 yards high. Each one of these halls contained a work shop. In April 1945 the Tunnel 
was all finished and if it had not been for the sabotage would have produced at 
maximum capacity. It was estimated that at that time there was a total of eight to ten 
miles of galleries, excavated and fitted out, as against the five to six in existence in 
August 1943, when Dora was just started. These figures give an idea of how hard the 
prisoners were made to work. It should also be noted that the two camps, Dora and 
Ellrich, together, could never handle more than 15,000 men, who had, in addition, to 
build barracks, as well as to produce a certain number of V1 and V2 rockets, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---57
airframes and secondary weapons.

And, that if one wants to calculate the cost of this 
work, one must add to the francs or marks, the 20,000 to 25,000 human lives it cost in 
less than two years.

Twice every day, at seven in the morning and at seven in the evening, the 
Kommandos of the Tunnel who slept in the galleries, or in those parts of the galleries 
fixed up as Blocks, were awakened by shifts.

They had less water; consequently the 
hygiene was deficient, and fleas and lice abounded.

At nine in the morning and at nine 
in the evening depending on the Schicht to which they belonged, they were at work.

There were also bad Kommandos in the Tunnel.

Those digging the galleries, and those 
who were assigned to the transportation of drilling tools and the excavated material 
had a bad time.

Those Kommandos were veritable chain gangs whose members died 
like flies, their lungs poisoned by the ammonia laden dust.

But, most of the Tunnel 
Kommandos were good.

In the factories, scientific management was carried to an extreme: one Kommando 
spent its time sitting in front of drills punching out holes one after the other; another 
inspected gyroscopes; a third assembled electrical switches; a fourth polished sheet 
metal; a fifth was made of turners or fitters.

And, there were some jobs that were 
neither good nor bad like those involved in the assembly of the V1 and V2 rockets.

Generally speaking, the productivity was not very good: ten men were employed at a 
job, against their will, which one or two could have done if they had had the 
incentive.

The most difficult things were always to pretend to be working, to be 
standing up all the time, to seem to be very busy, and.Generally speaking, the productivity was not very good: ten men were employed at a 
job, against their will, which one or two could have done if they had had the 
incentive.

The most difficult things were always to pretend to be working, to be 
standing up all the time, to seem to be very busy, and.

above all, to live in that noise 
and miasma, getting hardly any air from the outside through the few and inefficient 
air ducts 
Toward the middle of March, at the request of Zavatzky; who wanted to eliminate one 
of the main causes which he thought was responsible for the poor output, they began 
to take the Tunnel Kommandos up into the open air to have their camp soup, instead 
of taking the soup down to them.

By the end of April, the construction gangs had 
finished just about all of the Blocks that had been planned: 132 of them.

It was 
decided that no one would sleep in the Tunnel any more.

So, all the Kommandos after 
that date only went underground to work, that is, for twelve hours a day.

To give the whole picture, it must be said that civilians, too were used in the various 
factories in the Tunnel.

In April 1945, there were six to seven thousand of them.

They 
included the Germans who were Meister, and the S.T.O.

or volunteers from all over 
Europe They too were grouped in Commando, but they lived in a camp about a mile 
from Dora worked ten hours a day got good wages and ate fairly monotonous food, 
but which was healthful and plentiful Besides they were free to move about within an 
18 mile radius; in order to go beyond that, they needed special papers.

Among them 
were many Frenchmen who kept themselves at a distance from us and in whose eyes 
one always saw the fear that they had that they might some day have to share our lot.

The date was March 31, 1944.

For the past week the Kapos, the Lagerschutz, and the 
Block Chiefs had been particularly on edge.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The date was March 31, 1944. For the past week the Kapos, the Lagerschutz, and the 
Block Chiefs had been particularly on edge. Quite a number of prisoners had died 
from blows; lice were found not only in the Tunnel, but even among the Kommandos 
outside; and the S. S.-Führung laid the responsibility for this state of affairs on the H-

--- PAGE BREAK ---58
Führung.

On top of that, the weather the whole day long was terrible: it was colder 
than usual, and an icy rain mixed with hail came down without any let-up.

In the 
evening, we got to the muster grounds, frozen, soaked, and hungry beyond belief.

How we hoped the roll would not last too long!

But, there was no such luck.

At ten 
o'clock we were still standing at attention under the rain of hail, waiting for the order 
Abtreten (break ranks!) which would liberate us.

Finally it came, and we could go and 
eat the hot soup in a hurry and fall onto the straw.

We got to the Block and began the 
shoe cleaning.

But, then, gesturing that we should stay outside, the Block Chief, 
standing framed in the entrance, announced that since lice had been found, the whole 
camp was going to be disinfected.

It was to begin that night.

Five of the 35 Blocks 
were picked for Entläusung -- (delousing) that night.

Consequently, that night there 
was no soup until that was over.

The delousing process then began: "Alles da drin!" 
(Everybody in there!) We went into the Esszimmer with our shoes in our hands.

"Auszieben!" (Undress!) We took our clothes off, wrapped them in a bundle with the 
number on top.

"Zu fünf!" (By fives!) That frightened us.

"Zu fünf."' We form into 
lines.

With the Stubendienst carrying our clothes on blankets, surrounding us, all 
naked, in the cold, in the rain and the snow, we went in the direction of the building 
where we were to be deloused.

There were about 800 yards to cross.

When we got there, the four other Blocks, naked like us, were already pushing against 
the entrance.

We felt Death in our presence.

How long would it last?

There were 
about a thousand of us, all naked and shaking in the wet and the cold which 
penetrated to our very bones, pushing at the doors.

There was no way to get in.

Only 
forty at a time could go in.

The scene was hideous.

At first we tried to force our way 
in, but the delousing men kept us back with water hoses.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The scene was hideous. At first we tried to force our way 
in, but the delousing men kept us back with water hoses. Then we wanted to go back 
to the Block to wait our turns; but that was impossible since the Lagerschutz, 
truncheons in hand, surrounded us. So we had to stay there, crowded together, 
between the water and the truncheons, soaked and beaten. We pressed together. Every 
ten minutes, forty of us were allowed to enter the delousing chamber in a crush that 
was a life and death struggle. Elbows went into play; there were fights, and the 
weaker were mercilessly trampled underfoot, and their bodies were found at dawn. At 
about two in the morning, I succeeded in getting inside, Fernand behind me, where we 
received a haircut, cresyl, and shower. At the exit we were given a shirt and a pair of 
shorts which we wore when we went out into the night to return to the Block. I felt as 
though I had accomplished some act of heroism. When we came to the Block, we 
went into the Esszimmer where a Stubendienst handed us our clothes which had been 
disinfected. Next came soup and bed. At reveille, the sinister comedy was just barely finishing. At least half of the Block 
got back only just in time to get dressed, get soup, get the daily ration, and hurry to 
the grounds to go to work. And, there were a number missing: those who had died 
during the execution of this sorry business. Others survived it only for a few hours or 
for two or three days and were carried away with the inevitable double pneumonia. The job itself probably killed as many men as it did lice. How did it happen? The S.S.-Führung -- was responsible only for the decision to 
disinfect five Blocks per day, and the H-Führung was left in complete control of how 
it was to be carried out. A schedule could have been set up: at eleven, Block 35, at 
midnight, 24, at one, number 32, etc... The Block Chiefs could have, within this

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntrol of how 
it was to be carried out. A schedule could have been set up: at eleven, Block 35, at 
midnight, 24, at one, number 32, etc... The Block Chiefs could have, within this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
frame-work, sent us in groups of one hundred at twenty minute intervals, for example, 
and in our clothes. But no, that would have been too simple. 
When what took place on the night of March 31st reached the ears of the S.S.-
Führung, the latter itself set up an exact schedule the next morning for the Blocks that 
remained to be disinfected. 
* * * * *hat took place on the night of March 31st reached the ears of the S.S.-
Führung, the latter itself set up an exact schedule the next morning for the Blocks that 
remained to be disinfected. 
* * * * *

April 2. 1944: Easter. The S.S.-Führung decided on a twenty-four hour rest period 
which was not to be disturbed except by a general roll-call, that is, the Tunnel people 
as well as the quarry workers would be present. The weather was magnificent, a 
radiant sun in a pure calm sky. Joy; the Gods were with us! We got up at six instead 
of four-thirty: washing and food distribution was done at a slower pace. 
Nine o'clock. All the Kommandos were on the grounds at attention. The Lagerschutz 
went in and out among the groups: Block Chiefs were at their stations. The 
Lagerältester -- chatted familiarly with the Rapportführer. He had a paper in his hand: 
a detailed list of the camp personnel drawn up by the Arbeitsstatistik. About thirty 
S.S. in helmets, their pistols in holsters, were assembled at the entrance to the camp: 
the Blockführer. It looked as though all were going to go well. 
A whistle blew, and the Blockführer spread out fan-wise, each toward the Block 
which it was his responsibility to oversee. Each one made his count and compared his 
figure with that which the Block Chief handed him. "Richtig" (Correct.) One by one 
the Blockführer came to report to the Rapportführer who waited, pencil in hand, and 
who wrote down the figures as they were given him. 
There was not one discordant note: the roll-call would not last long. The S.S. wanted 
to take advantage of this Sunday and were moving fast. We were exultant: one day to 
rest with nothing to do but to eat our soup and to stretch out in the sun. 
Just a minute! The total number of prisoners which the Rapportführer had, did not 
tally with the figure given to him by the Arbeitsstatistik: there were twenty-seven 
fewer men on the grounds than on the paper. Question: what had become of them? 
The Kapo of the Arbeitsstatistik was sent for in a hurry. He was asked to go over his 
figures right away. One hour later he came back with the same figure. Perhaps, then, 
the S.S. had made a mistake. The count was made again, and the Rapportführer came 
up with the same figure. They searched through the Blocks, they searched through the 
Tunnel: they found none of the missing prisoners. 
It was noon. The ten thousand or so prisoners were still on the grounds waiting for the 
figures of the Arbeitsstatistik and of the S.S.-Führung to agree. Time dragged: some 
men fainted: those whose turn it was to die fell down never to get up again: those with 
dysentery relieved themselves as they stood: the Lagerschutz felt that things were 
getting slack and began to lay about. The S.S. guards whose Sunday was threatened 
were furious. They went off to eat, but we stayed there. At two o'clock they came 
back.chutz felt that things were 
getting slack and began to lay about. The S.S. guards whose Sunday was threatened 
were furious. They went off to eat, but we stayed there. At two o'clock they came 
back.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
Suddenly the Kapo of the Arbeitsstatistik came running: he had come up with another 
figure. A murmur of hope rose from the crowd. The Rapportführer looked over the 
new figure and became violently angry: there were still eight men missing. The Kapo 
of the Arbeitsstatistik went away again. He came back at four. Now no more than five 
men were missing. At eight only one was still missing, and we were still there, pale, 
drawn, and exhausted, after having stood for eleven hours, with empty stomachs. The 
S.S. decided to send us to eat. We left. Behind us the Totenkommando picked up some 
thirty dead. 
At nine, it all began again, in an attempt to find the missing man. At eleven forty-five, 
after various comings and goings, this missing man was found, too: the S.S.-Führung 
and the Arbeitsstatistik were in agreement. We went back to our Blocks and were able 
to go to bed, again leaving behind us ten or more dead. 
There you have the explanation of why the roll-calls took so long. Those employed in 
the Arbeitsstatistik, illiterate or nearly so, had been made bookkeepers only as a favor, 
and they were incapable of adding up at the first count the number of men present. 
The concentration camp was a world where every man's place was determined by his 
connections and his cunning and not by his abilities Accountants were made masons, 
carpenters became accountants, wheelwrights became doctors and doctors became 
fitters, electricians or road graders 
* * * * *and his cunning and not by his abilities Accountants were made masons, 
carpenters became accountants, wheelwrights became doctors and doctors became 
fitters, electricians or road graders 
* * * * *

Every day a railway car, full of packages from every western European country, 
except Spain and Portugal arrived at the Dora station. With a few exceptions, these 
packages were intact. However, by the time that a package was given to the one to 
whom it was addressed, it had been three quarters pilfered. In many cases, one got 
nothing but the sticker listing the contents: shaving soap, or shaving brush, or a comb, 
etc... 
A Kommando of Czechs and Russians were detailed to unload this car. From there, 
the package was taken to the Poststelle where the Schreiber and Stubendienst -- of 
each Block went to take delivery. Then the Block Chief himself gave it to the 
addressee. It was during this chain of distribution that the packages were plundered. 
The way the pillage was worked was simple. First, it was the French parcels, known 
for the wealth of their contents, which got all the attention. Right where the parcels 
were unloaded, under the eyes of an S.S. guard in charge of the operation, they were 
passed through three hands: at the car a Czech passed it to a Russian standing outside, 
who had to catch it in air and toss it to another Russian or Czech, whose job it was to 
stack it onto a wagon. From time to time, the Czech at the car said "Franzous," and 
the Russian spread wide his hands; the parcel fell to the ground where it broke open, 
the contents spilling all over. The Russians and Czechs filled their pockets or musette 
bags. If something from the parcel pleased the S.S. guard, he held out his hand and 
thus was his complicity bought. When the wagon was full, pulled by six men it 
rumbled off toward the Poststelle; during this brief trip, a number of parcels 
disappeared or also broke open.

--- PAGE BREAK ---61
Regulations required that at the Poststelle the parcels were to be carefully examined, 
and that medicines, wine, any alcohol and weapons or various things that could be 
used as weapons, be removed.

This official search was made by a team of prisoners 
(Germans or Slavs, under the surveillance of two or three S.S.

and provided another 
opportunity for more filching.

The S.S.

guards themselves were tempted occasionally 
by a piece of bacon, a bar of chocolate which a girlfriend liked, a package of 
cigarettes, or a lighter.

They made sure that the prisoners would not talk by closing 
their eyes to the thievery that was committed by the latter.

From the Poststelle to the 
Block, the Schreiber and Stubendienst arranged things between them so that a third 
pilfering took place, and at the end of the distribution chain, there was the Block 
Chief who did the fourth and last and who gave what was left to the addressee.

There was something grotesque about the ceremony of handing over the remains to 
the party concerned.

The prisoner was summoned by his number and invited to 
present himself to the Block Chief.

On the latter's desk lay his parcel, open and 
contents listed.

By the desk was a large basket surmounted by a placard labeled 
"Solidaritat." Each prisoner was morally obliged to drop in a little something of what 
he had received for those who never received anything in particular the Russians, the 
Spaniards, the young and the disinherited of all nationalities who had no relatives or 
whose relatives did not know where they were.

This is what was supposed to happen in theory; in practice, the Block Chief, after 
each distribution, simply appropriated what was in the basket and divided it with his 
Schreiber and the Stubendienst.By the desk was a large basket surmounted by a placard labeled 
"Solidaritat." Each prisoner was morally obliged to drop in a little something of what 
he had received for those who never received anything in particular the Russians, the 
Spaniards, the young and the disinherited of all nationalities who had no relatives or 
whose relatives did not know where they were.

This is what was supposed to happen in theory; in practice, the Block Chief, after 
each distribution, simply appropriated what was in the basket and divided it with his 
Schreiber and the Stubendienst.

After every load was received, the Kapos, the 
Lagerschutz, the Blockältester, and all those with any rank at all in the S.S.-Führung 
were amply supplied with French provisions, a fact which convinced me that the 
pillaging was done by an organized gang.

I received my first parcel on April 5, 1944: all the underclothing, a bar of chocolate, I 
think, and a tin of jam were missing, but there were still three packs of cigarettes, a 
good two pounds of bacon, a tin of butter and various other eatables.

We had changed 
Blocks two days before, and we were now in 11.

Our Block Chief was a German with 
a black patch.

I asked him what he would like.

"Nichts, geh mal." (Nothing, get 
going.) Resolutely I held out a package of cigarettes to him, then pointing to the 
"Solidaritat" basket, I questioned with my eyes."Brauchst nicht!

Geh mal, Blöde 
Kerl!" -- (Don't bother, get going, you dumb ass!).

I had guessed correctly.

The day after the next, I was called up again.

I had three 
parcels this time.

Of one nothing was left but the label; but the two others were more 
or less intact and in one there was a huge hunk of bacon.

"Dein Messer, " (Your knife) 
I said to the Block Chief.

I cut off a good half which I handed him and then I went off 
without asking whether I should leave something in the "Solidaritat" basket.

He 
watched me go with gaping eyes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I cut off a good half which I handed him and then I went off 
without asking whether I should leave something in the "Solidaritat" basket. He 
watched me go with gaping eyes. The French had a reputation, which was deserved, 
of being very tight with their parcels and not very generous. Suddenly he called me 
back. "Dein Nummer?" (Your number?) 
He wrote it down, and then, said to me, "Höre, mal, Kamerad, deine Paketten werden 
nie mehr gestollen werden. Das sage ich. Geh mal jetzt!" (Listen, your parcels won't 
be pilfered any more. That I can tell you. Now get going!")

--- PAGE BREAK ---62
Indeed, from that day on my parcels were given to me just about intact.

The Block 
Chief had passed my number on to the various stations in the chain of distribution, 
implying an order "do not touch".

And, it was to that fact that I owe my life since the 
parcels which came from France, aside from the fact that they contained food 
supplements to the camp diet, were a precious exchange currency with which 
exemptions from work, extra clothing, and light jobs could be bought.

They made it 
possible for me to spend eight months in the infirmary, when others, just as sick, spent 
the same time working until they died.

Concerning the parcels, another tragic phenomenon took place.

Most of the French, 
even those from very comfortable families, received one parcel three quarters 
plundered; then they received nothing more.

It was only after the liberation that I got 
an explanation.

On arrival at the camp the prisoners wrote to their families, saying 
that they had the right to write twice a month.

The family sent a parcel, and, since it 
was the first, before sending another they waited for an acknowledgment of receipt 
which never came, because except for the first, only one out of ten letters that we 
wrote arrived at its destination.

In the camp, the prisoner who wrote regularly 
wondered what was the matter.

And, while he was dying of starvation, his family in 
France was convinced that it was not worth while to send a second package because, 
since he had not acknowledged reception of the first, he must surely be dead.

My 
wife, who regularly sent me a parcel every day, told me that she did it for her 
conscience's sake and against all hope; my mother herself was of the opinion that she 
was sending them to a dead man and that, in addition to the mourning, she was 
throwing her money away.

* * * * * 
On June 1, 1944, the camp was unrecognizable.

Since March 15, convoys of 800, of 
1,000, of 1,500 prisoners kept coming and coming once or twice a week.--- PAGE BREAK ---

* * * * * 
On June 1, 1944, the camp was unrecognizable. Since March 15, convoys of 800, of 
1,000, of 1,500 prisoners kept coming and coming once or twice a week. And, the 
population grew to about 15.000 individuals. If the population did not climb beyond 
this figure, it was because the death rate came very close to the arrival rate. Every day 
fifty to eighty bodies were carried out in the direction of the crematorium. The H-
Führung itself made up one tenth of the total number in the camp. Fourteen to 
eighteen hundred men with soft jobs, all powerful and full of their importance, ruled 
over the vulgum pecus. With cigarettes in their mouths, plenty of soup in their 
stomachs, and with beer to quench their thirsts, they almost lived in another world. Block 141, destined to be the movie theater, was under construction and the brothel 
was ready to receive the women. All of the Blocks, geometrically and agreeably set 
out on the hill were connected with concrete streets. Cement staircases with railings, 
led up to the higher Blocks. In front of each of them were pergolas with climbing 
plants and little gardens with carpets of flowers; here and there were cross roads with 
a fountain or statue. The mustering yard, which covered about half a square mile, was 
entirely paved, and was so clean you could not lose a pin on it. With a swimming pool 
that was fitted with a diving board in the center, a sports field, and shaded areas 
nearby, Dora was a regular resort camp for anyone who might happen in, when the 
prisoners were not there. In fact, such visitors would go away under the impression 
that a pleasant life was led there, not to be compared to the war risks which free men 
were running. The S.S. authorized the establishment of a music Kommando. After 
that, every morning and evening, a band of wind instruments, supported by a bass

--- PAGE BREAK ---63
drum and cymbals, gave rhythm to the march of the Kommandos going to and from 
work.

During the day they practiced and deafened the immediate area with the most 
extraordinary sounds.

On Sunday afternoon they gave concerts in the midst of general 
apathy while members of the prisoner elite played football or did acrobatics on the 
diving board.

Although the appearances had changed, the realities were the same.

The H-Führung 
was still what it had always been, except that the politicals had worked their way in 
appreciable numbers and the prisoners, instead of being brutally treated by the 
"greens" got the same from the Communists or so-called Communists.

Every person 
regularly received a wage, of two to five Marks per week.

These wages were collected 
by the H-Führung who distributed them usually on Saturday evening in 
Arbeitsstatistik square.

But, the distribution was done in such a way that chaotic mobs 
were created which made any attempt to get them tantamount to offering yourself for 
the crematorium.

Very few prisoners were bold enough to claim their share.

The 
Kapos, the Block Chiefs, and the Lagerschutz, divided up among themselves what 
they were relieved of having to pay out.

Cigarettes too, were distributed -- twelve 
cigarettes every ten days -- for about 80 Pfennig on the average.

We had no money to 
pay for them, and the Block Chiefs in charge of dividing them up exacted from those 
who did have some money such standards of cleanliness and order that it was just 
about impossible to get possession of one's ration.

Finally, beer was distributed, in 
principle, to everyone.

But, there again one had to be able to pay.

The families of the 
prisoners were allowed to send them 30 Marks a month, which they no more received 
than their weekly wage or their cigarettes, and for the same reason.But, there again one had to be able to pay.

The families of the 
prisoners were allowed to send them 30 Marks a month, which they no more received 
than their weekly wage or their cigarettes, and for the same reason.

And, all in 
keeping with this, one day the H-Führung people decided to divide up the clothing 
and the various other things that had been taken away from us when we arrived at 
Buchenwald.

It can be added that for things to have reached that stage, thousands and thousands of 
prisoners had died as a result of natural causes, as a result of the life they were forced 
to lead, or as a result of their summary execution for various other reasons, especially 
for sabotage and were no longer around to claim their property that was stored in the 
Effektenkammer.

From March 1944 to April 1945, not a week passed when I did not 
see three or four men hanged for sabotage.

Toward the end, they were being hanged 
by tens and twenties, right in front of each others eyes.

These executions took place 
on the muster grounds in front of everyone.

A gallows was set up, the condemned 
men arrived, a gag in the shape of a bridle-bit was placed in their mouths, and their 
hands were tied behind their backs.

They climbed onto a stool, and their heads were 
put into the hanging noose.

With a kick, the Lagerschutz knocked the stool over.

No 
sudden jerk; it took the poor people four, five or six minutes to die.

One or two S.S.

guards supervised.

When the job was done, the whole camp filed past the bodies 
strung up on their ropes.

On February 28, 1945, thirty men were hanged in groups of ten.

The heads of the first 
ten were placed into the nooses.

The next ten were waiting their turn, at attention, near 
the stools: the following ten were standing five steps away, waiting for their turn.

The 
following March 8th, nineteen men were hanged.

This time the job took place in the 
Tunnel, and only the Kommandos of the Tunnel were witnesses.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 
following March 8th, nineteen men were hanged. This time the job took place in the 
Tunnel, and only the Kommandos of the Tunnel were witnesses. The nineteen 
condemned men were lined up in front of Hall 32. A huge pulley, to which nineteen 
ropes were attached, was slowly lowered above their heads. The Lagerschutz handed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
out the nineteen nooses: then the pulley raised up slowly, slowly. Oh! How the eyes 
of the poor fellows grew large, and how their poor feet searched to keep some contact 
with the ground! On Palm Sunday, fifty-seven were hanged, just eight days before the 
liberation, when we had already heard Allied cannon fire very close and when the 
issue of the war could no longer be in any doubt for the S.S. But this was the way it 
was: the S.S. themselves discovered a certain number of cases of sabotage (in 1945, 
and since the middle of 1944, it had become impossible for anyone in the camp, or 
even on the outside to live without sabotaging); however, the H-Führung, without any 
mercy, pointed out to them an even greater number. 
It is almost impossible to grasp the cost of this undertaking in human lives. On June 1, 
1944, the population of the camp was almost exclusively made up of people who had 
arrived in March of that year or later. There were still seven prisoners whose numbers 
ranged between 13,500 and 15,000; at least 800 of them had arrived on July 18, 1943. 
There were about a dozen left in the 20,000 to 22,000 range, they had arrived in a 
group of about 1,500 in October, 1943. Of the 800 included in the 30,000 to 31,000 
group, who arrived in December-January, there remained about fifty; of the 1,200 
taken from the 38,000 to 44,000 group, who came in February-March, three or four 
hundred survived. Those prisoners who wore numbers 45,000 to 50,000 and who 
arrived during May 1944, were still more or less all there; but not for long.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65March, three or four 
hundred survived. Those prisoners who wore numbers 45,000 to 50,000 and who 
arrived during May 1944, were still more or less all there; but not for long.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65

Chapter Five 
Port of Grace; Anteroom of DeathOn July 28, 1943, when the first convoy arrived in the beet fields in front of the 
Tunnel, there was no question of any Revier.

They had sent only those prisoners from 
Buchenwald who were supposed to be in good health, and it was not anticipated that 
they might fall sick right away: but, should this happen, the S.S.

had orders to pay 
attention only to serious cases, to report them by mail, and to wait for instructions.

Naturally, the S.S.

never discovered anyone seriously sick; anyone who has been a 
soldier will easily understand that.

The weather was beastly that year.

It rained and rained.

Pneumonia and pleurisy ran 
rampant, and made great inroads among those who were weak and badly treated, who 
were wet all day long, and who had to sleep at night in damp caves in the rock.

In 
eight days, those unfortunates were doubled up with what the S.S.

called a little fever, 
which seemed to worsen, but they didn't know why.

The regulations were that one 
was not sick unless one had a temperature of more than 39.5°C.

(103°F.), in which 
case one could get a Schonung, or work exemption.

Until you had such a fever you 
had to keep on working, and when you did have such a temperature it meant death.

Then there was what we called dysentery, but which was in reality uncontrollable 
diarrhea.

One fine day, for no clear reason, one was overcome with digestive troubles 
which rapidly developed into an inability to tolerate anything.

There was no remedy: 
one had simply to wait for it to stop, without eating anything.

It lasted eight, ten, 
fifteen days, depending on the resistance of the sick man, who got weaker, who 
finally began to fall down, without any strength left to move, even to take care of his 
needs, and who then succumbed to the fever that accompanied it.

This sickness, 
fortunately easier to detect than pneumonia or pleurisy, led the S.S.

to take steps, with 
what means they had available, to check it.Chapter Five 
Port of Grace; Anteroom of Death

This sickness, 
fortunately easier to detect than pneumonia or pleurisy, led the S.S. to take steps, with 
what means they had available, to check it. They ordered the construction of a Bud, 
where, without regard for their temperatures, those with diarrhea were admitted on 
showing the proper paper and so long as there was space available. The Bud could hold thirty people. Very soon there were fifty, a hundred, and more, 
their number ever growing as new convoys arrived from Buchenwald and as the camp 
grew larger. Generally, the diarrhetics were sent there only in the last stages of the 
illness, and then only to die there. They were piled together right on the ground, 
packed like sardines, unmindful of what was under them; it was an epidemic. It got to 
such a point that for health reasons the S.S. had the first H-Führung pick out a 
Pfleger, or nurse, to keep order among the sick and help them to keep themselves 
clean. The job was given to a "green" (naturally!), a carpenter by trade, who had been 
sentenced for murder. A fine job was done...! All the day long people were lined up at the entrance to the Bud. The Pfleger, 
truncheon in hand, calmed down the impatient ones. From time to time a corpse was

--- PAGE BREAK ---66
brought out of the stench, and a space was made which was jumped at.

The number of 
diarrhetics only increased.

When the S.S.

saw that the Pfleger was not up to the task, 
the latter pointed out that he had a lot of work to do all alone, and he was given an 
assistant of whom the S.

S.

required that he know his business.

The job fell to a Dutch 
doctor who had been employed, until then, in the work of transporting goods from the 
station to the Tunnel.

From that moment on the Bud became humanized, the Pfleger 
became Kapo, and the Dutchman worked under his orders, exercising prodigious 
diplomacy.

He managed to save one diarrhetic, whose cure he was careful to conceal 
in order to keep him by his side as a nurse.

With the help of a big supply of charcoal, 
the diarrhea was checked, the S.S.

declared themselves satisfied, and the Bud could be 
used for something else.

The first Revier was born.

In fact, the Dutchman was able to fix it so that as places were left available by the 
diarrhetics, those with pneumonia and pleurisy with temperatures of 38°C (109°F) 
and up could be admitted.

But, this practice aroused the resentment of his Kapo!

He 
even began to claim that with a little charcoal it would be possible to care effectively 
for the diarrhetics without hospitalizing them, if they were caught soon enough, and 
that, therefore, there would be more room for those with pneumonia and pleurisy.

The 
duel was Homeric.

An S.S.

doctor, who had been assigned to the camp and who had 
arrived in November along with the officers of a convoy, after having remained 
indifferent to this conflict for a long time, ended by backing up the Dutchman.

And, 
the building of a Block was begun, the Bud having rapidly become too small.

Then it was the turn of those with nephritis.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, 
the building of a Block was begun, the Bud having rapidly become too small. Then it was the turn of those with nephritis. Nephritis was inherent in the life of the 
camp: under-nourishment, too many hours standing up, the effects of bad weather, 
pneumonia, pleurisy, the rock salt -- the only kind there was in Germany -- which the 
cooks used immoderately, and which, it seems, was harmful because it contained no 
iodine. Cases of edema were legion; everybody had legs more or less swollen. It goes away, they said, it's the salt that does it. And no more attention than that was 
paid to it. When it was an innocuous edema, it did sometimes disappear! When the 
edema was the outcome of nephritis, one was carried away, one fine day, with an 
attack of uremia. The Dutchman succeeded in getting those with nephritis 
hospitalized, too. Another Block had to be built. Then it was the turn of those with 
tuberculosis, and so on. The expansion continued to such an extent that on June 1, 
1944, the Revier was composed of Blocks 16, 17, 38, 39, 126, 127, and 128, grouped 
around the top of the hill. Fifteen hundred patients could be put there, at one person 
per bed, or a tenth of the camp's population. Each Block was divided into wards, 
where related sicknesses were assigned. Block 16 was the administrative center of the whole structure. The Dutchman was 
promoted to the rank of Head Doctor. Meanwhile, the S.S. replaced the "green" 
Lagerältester with a "red" and there was a great commotion in the H-Führung. The 
Kapo of the Revier was the first victim of the new Lagerältester. A plan was set up to 
catch him in the act of stealing the food destined for the sick. He was sent to the 
Ellrich camp by way of punishment, and he was replaced by Proell. * * * * *

--- PAGE BREAK ---67
Proell was a young German, about 27 or 28 years old.

In 1934, he had intended to 
take up medicine.

But as the son of a Communist and as a Communist himself, he was 
arrested when he was still only a child.

He spent the next ten years in various camps.

First he was sent to Dachau where it was due only to his youth that he survived the 
rigors of that budding camp.

Neither the S.S.

nor the adult prisoners had their knives 
out for the youngsters: the first because of a kind of respect for real innocence; the 
second because of a special tenderness which nourished in them the hope of seeing 
the youngsters become affectionate later.

Thanks to these two circumstances.

Proell 
managed to get into the Revier as a Pfleger and to stay there for several years.

Then, 
he was sent to Mauthausen in that capacity.

The "green" Häftlingsführung of 
Mauthausen got rid of him by sending him to Auschwitz, where he was included in 
the first convoy that was sent to Natzweiler.

It was at Natzweiler that he spent his 
longest time.

There he was promoted to Kapo of the Lagerkommando and was 
attached to the Lagerältester.

The few prisoners who knew him in that camp were 
unanimous in saying that they never had seen such a brute.

A palace revolution in the 
H-Führung of Natzweiler caused his removal to Buchenwald from whence he was 
sent to Dora as a confidant of the Communists and Kapo of the Revier.

At Dora, Proell behaved like all the other Kapos -- neither better nor worse.

He was 
intelligent and organized the Revier along the lines laid down by the Dutchman, 
whom he considered, in spite of everything a valuable assistant because he was 
competent.

To be sure, he did not always follow the moral commandments of 
medicine.

He was brutal, and in making up the army of Pfleger that he needed to carry 
out the job, he gave preference to the politicals before the professionals.To be sure, he did not always follow the moral commandments of 
medicine.

He was brutal, and in making up the army of Pfleger that he needed to carry 
out the job, he gave preference to the politicals before the professionals.

That is how 
the blacksmith Heinz, who was a Communist and who had managed to get himself 
into the Revier under the regime of the "green" Kapo as Oberpfleger (head nurse), 
was completely trusted by him against the advice of all the other medical people.

That 
is also why, to a medical student whose political opinions he knew did not agree with 
his, he always preferred any lout, German, Czech, Russian or Polish.

He had a great 
admiration for the Russians, and a weakness for the Czechs, who in his eyes had been 
abandoned to Hitler by the English and the French of whom he was contemptuous.

But, he was an organizer of the first order.

In less than a month, the Revier was organized on the lines of the big hospitals: in 
Block 16, the administration, admissions and emergencies; in 17 and 39, general 
treatment, the kidney cases and those with neuritis; in 38, surgery; in 126, pneumonia 
and pleurisy; in 127 and 198 the tubercular.

In each Block there was a doctor in 
charge, assisted by an Oberpfleger; in each ward, a Pfleger for nursing and a 
Kalifaktor for other duties.

For the sick two-bunk beds only, one above the other, with 
a mattress stuffed with wood shavings, sheets and blankets.

There were three diets: 
the Hauskost, or food in every way like that given out in the camp, for those whose 
digestive tracts were not affected; the Schleimkost, or thin semolina soup (no bread, 
no margarine, no sausage), for those who required a low diet; the Diatkost, which 
every day consisted of two soups, one sweetened, and white bread, margarine and 
jam, for those who needed building up.

It cannot be said that one was very well taken care of in the Revier.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were three diets: 
the Hauskost, or food in every way like that given out in the camp, for those whose 
digestive tracts were not affected; the Schleimkost, or thin semolina soup (no bread, 
no margarine, no sausage), for those who required a low diet; the Diatkost, which 
every day consisted of two soups, one sweetened, and white bread, margarine and 
jam, for those who needed building up. It cannot be said that one was very well taken care of in the Revier. The S.S.-Führung 
dispensed very little medicines and drugs, and Proell filched from the lot all that was 
necessary for the H-Führung letting only that which they didn't need filter through to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
the sick themselves. But, the beds were clean; one rested; and the food ration, 
although not of better quality than for the rest of the camp, was still more abundant. 
Proell himself limited his activities as Kapo to one visit which each day was 
accompanied with shouts and some generously bestowed blows on the personnel and 
the sick who had been caught disobeying Revier regulations. Life there could have 
been a contrast to the prevailing conditions in the rest of the camp, if the Pfleger and 
Kalifaktor, as much out to zeal and loyalty to tradition as out of fear of the Kapo, had 
not been bent on trying to make it intolerable. 
* * * * *itions in the rest of the camp, if the Pfleger and 
Kalifaktor, as much out to zeal and loyalty to tradition as out of fear of the Kapo, had 
not been bent on trying to make it intolerable. 
* * * * *

Every night after roll-call, a mob collected at the entrance to Block 16. Block 16 
included, aside from the administration office for the Revier, an Aussere-Ambulanz 
and an Innere-Ambulanz. The first took care of the immediate needs of all those who, 
sick or having met with an accident, did not meet the requirements for being 
hospitalized; the second determined, after examination, those who should or should 
not be hospitalized. 
Aside from the H-Führung, everyone in the camp was sick, and, under conditions 
which prevail in the normal world, everyone would have been hospitalized without 
exception and without delay, even if only on account of their extreme debility. In the 
camp, the situation was quite the opposite. There, general debility did not count; only 
those conditions which exceeded such debility were taken care of, and then only 
under certain extra-therapeutic circumstances or when nothing else could be done. 
Every prisoner was, therefore, more or less a candidate for the Revier. They had to 
make a rule that one could apply for admission every four days, on an average. 
First of all there were the boils. The whole camp had suppurative furunculosis, the 
result of the lack of meat and roughage in the food. It was endemic just like the 
benign edema and the nephritis. There were the sores on the hands or feet or both. 
Finally there were cut fingers, arms or legs broken, and the like. They made up the 
patients of the Aussere-Ambulanz and from June 1, 1944, were in the hands of the 
Negro, Johnny, whose incompetence as a doctor had finally been recognized at the 
Buchenwald Revier. In spite of the political pledges that he had given, he was sent to 
us in a transport, as a doctor, naturally, but with a note stating that it would be more 
prudent to use him as a nurse. Proell thought that he was just right for the Aussere-
Ambulanz, and put him in charge. I learned afterwards that he had been astute enough 
to get the protection of Katzenellenbogen, that prisoner who called himself an 
American by origin, who was the general physician of the Camp, and who committed 
so many extortions that he was considered a war criminal after liberation. 
Johnny had under him a whole company of Pfleger, Germans, Poles, Czechs or 
Russians, who knew nothing whatever of the job they were charged with; they put on 
dressings, took them off and put them on again when it struck their fancy. For boils or 
wounds, there was only one remedy: ointment. Those gentlemen had before them pots 
of ointments of all colors. On the same sore, they one day put the black salve and 
another day put the red or the yellow, and there was no guessing what determined 
their choice. Luckily, all of the ointments were antiseptic!. On the same sore, they one day put the black salve and 
another day put the red or the yellow, and there was no guessing what determined 
their choice. Luckily, all of the ointments were antiseptic!

--- PAGE BREAK ---they one day put the black salve and 
another day put the red or the yellow, and there was no guessing what determined 
their choice. Luckily, all of the ointments were antiseptic!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
To the Innere-Ambulanz went everybody who hoped to get hospitalized. Every night 
there were five or six hundred, each one just as sick as the other. Sometimes there 
were ten or fifteen beds available. Put yourself in the place of the doctor who had to 
choose which ten or fifteen... The others were sent back with or without Schonung. 
They appeared the next day and every day until they had the luck to be admitted. 
Uncounted were those who died before they made it. 
I knew prisoners who never went to take a shower because they were afraid that gas 
would come out of the pipes instead of water (1). And, then, during the weekly 
inspection by the nurses of the Block, lice were found on them. Then they had to go 
through a disinfection treatment that killed them. 
I also knew prisoners who never went to the infirmary. They were afraid of being 
used as guinea pigs of some kind in the medical experiments that rumor had said were 
being conducted by the S.S. or of being given poison injections. Consequently, they 
held out and held out against all advice, and one evening a Kommando brought their 
corpses back to the camp. 
At Dora, no medical experiments were performed on the prisoners, and poison 
injections were not administered, at least not to the common prisoners. Generally, in 
all of the camps, injections of poison were not used against the general run of the 
prisoners, but they were used on occasion by one of the two H-Führung cliques 
against the other; the "greens" used this method as an elegant means of getting rid of a 
"red" whose star they saw was rising in the eyes of the S.S. staff, or the other way 
around. 
* * * * * 
A fortunate circumstance allowed me to get into the Revier on April 8, 1944. For 
fifteen days I had been dragging around the camp with a feverish body that was 
visibly swelling. 
The swelling had begun in the ankles. "Ich auch, Bloder Hund!" my Kapo said, "du 
bist verrueckt! Geh mal zu Revier!" (You you're crazy! Get on to the Revier!) And, he 
punctuated this order with several fist blows. It was April 3rd. 
At the Revier I was caught in the mob. After waiting for an hour my turn came to go 
before the doctor. 
"You have only 37.8° (99°F), impossible to hospitalize you; three days of Schonung. 
Rest stretched out in the Block with your legs up, it will go away. If it doesn't go 
away, come back again." 
As for the rest, for three days I was put at Block cleaning by the merciless 
Stubendienst. At the end of the period I presented myself again in a noticeably worse 
state. 
Of course you will have to be hospitalized, the doctor said to me, but there are only 
three vacant places and there are at least three hundred of you, some of them worse 
off than you are. Another three days of Schonung, then come back...zed, the doctor said to me, but there are only 
three vacant places and there are at least three hundred of you, some of them worse 
off than you are. Another three days of Schonung, then come back...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
I began to have a presentiment of the crematory. With resignation, I went back to the 
Block where my first parcel was waiting for me, thanks to which I got the 
Stubendienst to allow me to stretch out on my bed instead of making me work. 
On April 8, when my turn came, a package of Gauloise cigarettes got me among the 
three or four chosen ones. And what was bad about it was that I saw nothing irregular 
in the bribe. 
Before getting to the bed assigned me, I still had to leave at the entrance my clothes 
and my shoes, which were naturally stolen while I was there, and to go under an 
individual shower which a Polish Kalifaktor kept just as cold as he could. 
The shower was the last thing that had to be done. It was supposed to be hot, but when 
it was not a Czech or a Pole, or a German, the Kalifaktor swore to heaven that the 
thing was out of order. The number of those hospitalized for pneumonia or pleurisy 
who died of that treatment is incalculable. 
I was in the Revier six times: from April 8th to the 27th; from May 5th to August 
30th; from September 7th to October 2nd; from October 10th to November 3rd; from 
November 6th to December 23rd; and from March 10, 1945 to the liberation. At the 
first, I lost track of Fernand, who was sent in transport to Ellrich were he died. I was 
sick that fact was quite plain. In fact, I was gravely ill because I still have not fully 
recovered, but... 
* * * * *lost track of Fernand, who was sent in transport to Ellrich were he died. I was 
sick that fact was quite plain. In fact, I was gravely ill because I still have not fully 
recovered, but... 
* * * * *

Life in the Revier was regulated in detail. We were up at half past five every day, one 
hour later than the reveille of the rest of the camp. Then came the washing: no matter 
what the reason was for one's hospitalization, with a fever of 40°C (104°F.) or 37°C 
(98.5°F), one had to get up, go to the sink, wash, and, on returning, one had to make 
one's bed. In principle, the Pfleger and the Kalifaktor were supposed to help those 
who could not do it themselves, but, with rare exceptions, they simply got the patients 
to do the chores themselves, with the help of blows. With these chores done, the 
Pfleger took temperatures, while the Kalifaktor washed down the ward with a hose. 
At about seven o'clock, the Block doctor went among the beds, looked at the 
temperature charts, heard the comments of the Pfleger, the complaints of the sick, said 
a word to each one, and gave orders for particular treatment or medicines that were to 
be administered during the day. If he was not Polish, German or Czech, the doctor 
was usually a good and understanding man. Perhaps, he trusted the Pfleger a little too 
much, with the latter treating the sick according to their political views, their 
nationality their profession or trade, or their generosity with the parcels that they 
received. Nevertheless, the doctor very rarely allowed himself to be influenced in a 
bad sense. Rather, his decisions were almost always well intended. 
Once in a while someone who was very sick would dare to ask him, "Krematorium?" 
The doctor might answer: "Ja, sicher... Drei, vier Tage". ("Yes, that's certain... in 
three or four days.") There was a laugh. He then went on without any consideration of

--- PAGE BREAK ---rium?" 
The doctor might answer: "Ja, sicher... Drei, vier Tage". ("Yes, that's certain... in 
three or four days.") There was a laugh. He then went on without any consideration of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
the effect that his reply had on the one concerned. After he finished with the last bed, 
he left the ward; it was all over. He would not be seen again until the next day. 
At nine o'clock, the distribution of medicine. It went very fast since the medicine was 
generally either rest or diet. From time to time, an aspirin or pyramidon was given out 
very parsimoniously. 
At eleven, soup. The Pfleger and the Kalifaktor ate heartily, served themselves at each 
issuance and gave the remainder to the sick. It wasn't too bad; there was enough left 
over to give an honest regulation helping to everyone, with even a little supplement 
for one's friends. 
In the afternoon, a nap until four o'clock, after which lots of talk until the 
temperatures were taken and the lights put out. The conversations were only 
interrupted when our attention was drawn to a long line of cadavers which, right 
under our windows, the Totenkommando people were carrying to the crematorium. 
Some favored ones, of which I was one, received parcels: they were a little more 
pilfered than in the camp because they had to go through another pair of hands before 
they reached the addressee. The tobacco they contained was not replaced; that was 
deposited at the entrance, but the Pfleger were obliging, and with a good hand-out, a 
fair share, one could also get one's tobacco and permission to smoke secretly. In the 
same way, by sharing the rest, the Pfleger could be gotten to hike-up the temperature 
readings, and one's stay in the Revier was prolonged. 
In summer, the afternoon siesta took place in the open air under the beech trees. The 
Kommandos working inside the camp looked at us with envy, and we grew 
apprehensive of the time when we would be cured and back among them. 
* * * * *place in the open air under the beech trees. The 
Kommandos working inside the camp looked at us with envy, and we grew 
apprehensive of the time when we would be cured and back among them. 
* * * * *

In October 1944, only very rarely were diarrhetics admitted to the Revier. Every night 
they came to Block 16, and they were stuffed with charcoal and sent back. Sometimes 
the trouble disappeared, but it also persisted beyond the calculated eight days and was 
complicated by some kind of a fever, and then they were hospitalized with all sorts of 
conjectures as to what it was. 
They were collected in Block 17, Ward 8, whose Pfleger was the Russian, Ivan, who 
said that he was a "Docent" on the medical faculty at Karkhov, and whose Kalifaktor 
was the Pole, Stadjeck. Ward 8 was the hell of the Revier. Every day it supplied two, 
three or four corpses to the crematorium. 
For every diarrhetic admitted, the doctor prescribed, in addition to the charcoal, a 
supervised diet: very little to eat, if possible nothing at all, and nothing to drink. He 
advised Ivan to give nothing the first day, to divide a quart of soup among two or 
three the next, and so on; a return to a normal diet being determined by the 
disappearance of the sickness. But Ivan considered that he was there as Pfleger to take 
care of himself and not the sick men: to look after them was work too hard for him,

--- PAGE BREAK ---72
and, in any case, out of place in a concentration camp.

He found it simpler to 
administer the absolute diet, to divide with Stadjeck the rations of the patients, to feed 
themselves amply, and to do some bartering with the rest.

The poor men had nothing 
to eat, absolutely nothing.

On the third day with very rare exceptions, they were in 
such a state that they could no longer get up, and they had to take care of their needs 
right where they were, since Stadjeck had other things to do than to bring them the 
bedpan when they asked for it.

From that moment on they were doomed...

Stadjeck started to inspect very carefully the bed of the unfortunate man to whom he 
had just refused to bring a basin.

All of a sudden he got the smell and went into a 
rage.

He began by giving the offender a good beating, pulled him out of bed, pushed 
him to the adjoining lavatory, and there gave him a good cold shower since the Revier 
must always be a clean place and patients who didn't want to wash themselves, well, 
they had to be washed ....

Then shouting out curses, Stadjeck took off the sheet and 
cover from the bed and changed the straw mattress.

Hardly stretched out again the 
patient would be seized with grips, would ask for the bedpan again which was again 
refused, would discharge in the bed, and would be taken once more to the cold 
shower, and so on and on.

Usually, twenty-four hours later, the patient was dead.

From morning to night the cries and pleadings of the poor men who were put under 
the cold shower by the Pole, Stadjeck, could be heard.

Two or three times the Kapo or 
a doctor happened to pass near during this operation.

They opened the door; Stadjeck 
explained, "Er hat sein Bett ganz beschiessen...

Dieser Bloder Hund ist so faul...

Keine Warme Wasser." (He completely dirtied his bed the stupid dog is so lazy...

and 
there is no warm water.) The Kapo or the doctor would close the door again and go 
away without saying a word.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Keine Warme Wasser." (He completely dirtied his bed the stupid dog is so lazy... and 
there is no warm water.) The Kapo or the doctor would close the door again and go 
away without saying a word. The explanation was, of course, unassailable: those 
patients unable to wash themselves had to be washed, and when there was no hot 
water... In the Revier one was kept pretty well informed about the way the war was going. German newspapers, in particular the Völkischer Beobachter, were delivered, and 
everyone regularly listened to the radio. Of course there was only official news, but 
that came rapidly, and that was something. We also knew what was going on in the other camps; the poor men who had already 
been through two or three camps before ending up at Dora, recounted the whole day 
long the experiences they had lived through. That was how we learned about the 
horrors of Sachsenhausen, Auschwitz, Mauthausen, Oranienburg, etc. And, that was 
also how we learned that there were very decent camps. In August, for ten days, the German, Helmuth, was my bed neighbor. He had come 
straight from Lichtenfeld near Berlin. There were 900 in that camp, and under 
Wehrmacht guard they carried on the work of clearing the bombed suburbs: twelve 
hours of work, as everywhere, but three meals a day, and three good meals (soup, 
meat, vegetables, often wine), no Kapos, and no H-Führung, consequently no 
beatings. A hard life, but bearable. One day they asked for specialists: since Helmuth 
was a fitter, he stood up; he was sent to the Dora Tunnel, where they put rock drilling 
equipment in his hands. Eight days later he was spitting blood.

--- PAGE BREAK ---73
Before that, I had next to me a prisoner who had spent a month at Wieda, and who 
had told me that the 1,500 occupants were not too badly off.

Naturally, they worked 
and had little to eat, but they led a kind of family life: on Sunday afternoons, the 
villagers came to dance at the outskirts of the camp to the music of the prisoners 
accordions, exchanged friendly small talk with them, and even brought them things to 
eat.

It seems that that did not last; when the S.

S.

noticed it, Wieda became as hard 
and as inhuman as Dora.

But, most of those who came from other camps had only hair-raising things to tell, 
and the accounts of Ellrich were the most horrifying.

They were in an incredible state 
when they arrived among us, and just one look at them was enough to prove that they 
were inventing nothing...

In speaking of bad concentration camps, Buchenwald, 
Dachau, and Auschwitz are cited, and that is an injustice: in 1944-1945, it was Ellrich 
that was the worst of all.

There, one was without a billet, not given clothing, not fed, 
without a Revier, and all the work consisted of digging under the supervision of the 
scum of the "greens", the "reds", and the S.S.

It was in the Revier that I got acquainted with Jacques Gallier, called Jacky, clown at 
Medrano.

He was as tough as they came.

When anyone complained of the hardships 
of camp life, he invariably answered, "Me, you know, I've done two and a half years 
at Calvi: I m used to it." And he went on, "Listen, at Calvi, it was just the same, same 
work, never enough food, only we didn't get hit so much, but there were irons and 
solitary, so..." (2) 
Champale, the sailor from the Black Sea who had done five years at Clairvaux, didn't 
contradict him, and as for me, who had earlier witnessed the life of the Joyeux in 
Africa, I wondered if they weren't right.(3) 
* * * * * 
On December 23rd I left the Revier with the firm intention never to set foot there 
again.

Several things had happened.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When anyone complained of the hardships 
of camp life, he invariably answered, "Me, you know, I've done two and a half years 
at Calvi: I m used to it." And he went on, "Listen, at Calvi, it was just the same, same 
work, never enough food, only we didn't get hit so much, but there were irons and 
solitary, so..." (2) 
Champale, the sailor from the Black Sea who had done five years at Clairvaux, didn't 
contradict him, and as for me, who had earlier witnessed the life of the Joyeux in 
Africa, I wondered if they weren't right.(3) 
* * * * * 
On December 23rd I left the Revier with the firm intention never to set foot there 
again. Several things had happened. In July, Proell gave himself a shot in the arm of potassium cyanide. No one ever 
found out why, but rumor had it that he had been just about to be arrested and was in 
danger of being hanged for conspiracy. He was replaced by Heinz, the Communist 
blacksmith. Heinz was a brute. One day he caught a fever-case, who had been forbidden any 
water, in the act of moistening his lips, and he beat him up so hard that he died as a 
result. He was said to be capable of everything: in the surgery Block, he undertook an 
appendicitis operation -- without the surgeon in charge, the Czech Cespiva, knowing 
about it. The story was told that in the first days of the Revier, under the rule of the 
"green" Kapo, he had given his attentions to an Algerian whose arm had been crushed 
between two carts in the Tunnel: he disjoined the shoulder, just as a butcher does with 
a ham, and instead of anesthetizing the victim, he first beat him up with his fists... A 
year later, the whole Revier still resounded with the wails of the unfortunate fellow. Lots of other things were told, too. The patients never felt safe with him. As far as I 
was concerned, one day at the end of September, he came near my bed with Cespiva,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e fellow. Lots of other things were told, too. The patients never felt safe with him. As far as I 
was concerned, one day at the end of September, he came near my bed with Cespiva,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
and he decided that to cure me, the right kidney would have to be removed. I at once 
begged one of my comrades, who had another disease, to give a urine specimen for 
me, and thus got a negative analysis, which allowed me, as I had wanted, to be sent 
back to the Kommando. Being incapable of doing the work, I presented myself at the 
Revier a few days later -- just time enough for the storm to have passed -- and I got in 
easily. 
Everything went well until December, at which date Heinz was arrested, in his turn, 
for conspiracy, like his predecessor, and he was replaced by a Pole. Caught in the 
same net by the S.S. were Cespiva, a certain number of Pfleger, among them the 
lawyer Boyer from Marseille, and some others from the camp. We never learned why 
about this either, but it is probable that it was for having circulated news about the 
war which they said they got from foreign broadcasts, listed to in secret, and which 
the S.S. considered subversive. 
With the new Kapo, the Revier was overrun with Poles, and new doctors were put at 
the head of the Blocks, ours was an illiterate Pole. When he arrived, he decided that 
nephritis was caused by bad teeth, and gave an order to have all the teeth of all the 
nephritis cases pulled. The dentist was sent for at once and began to carry out the 
order without knowing what it was about, but showing his astonishment and 
protesting. In order to save my teeth, I arranged once more to get out of the Revier 
with a paper which certified me for leichte Arbeit (light labor). An exceptionally 
favorable set of circumstances occurred which made it possible for me to serve as the 
Schwung (batman) to the S.S. Oberscharführer who was in charge of the company of 
guard dogs which patrolled the perimeter of the camp. I found that the camp had 
changed considerably when I got back.Schwung (batman) to the S.S. Oberscharführer who was in charge of the company of 
guard dogs which patrolled the perimeter of the camp. I found that the camp had 
changed considerably when I got back.

FOOTNOTES 
(1) The gas chambers which some of the S.S. denied existed and which others attested 
to with the logic of Mme Simone de Beauvoir did not exist at Dora. Nor did they exist 
at Buchenwald. I note in passing that of all those who so minutely described the 
horrors of this form of execution (which, incidentally, is a perfectly legitimate form of 
execution in the United States) not one was an eyewitness, as far as I know. The only 
possible exceptions are Rudolf Höss, Miklos Nyiszli, and Kurt Gerstein. The former 
was Lagerkommandant at Auschwitz; his testimony is unreliable both on the grounds 
of the atrocious conditions under which it was written down and of the fantastic 
circumstances under which it was published, as will be discussed further on in this 
book The testimony of the latter two is obviously false, a fact which will be discussed 
in the following chapters. 
(2) For a comparison of prison life in French prisons -- during about the same period -
- I have included four descriptions which are found in Appendix A at the end of this 
book. 
(3) In La Lie de la Terre, Arthur Koestler gives a picture of the life in a French 
concentration camp which confirms my point of view. (The first book in English by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
Koestler : Scum of the Earth, London, Jonathan Cape, 1941) Another account which 
also confirms my view is that of Julien Blanc under the title Joyeux, fais ton fourbi.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76

Chapter Six 
Shipwreckof the Earth, London, Jonathan Cape, 1941) Another account which 
also confirms my view is that of Julien Blanc under the title Joyeux, fais ton fourbi.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76

Chapter Six 
Shipwreck

What happened next is of not great interest. 
In December 1944 Dora was a large camp. It was no longer a satellite of Buchenwald, 
but, rather Ellrich, Osterrod, Harzungen, and Illfed, all in the construction stage, were 
dependents of it (1). Convoys of prisoners arrived there directly, just as they had 
earlier at Buchenwald, where they were disinfected, numbered, and divided up among 
the satellite camps. The numbers that the new prisoners wore now were beyond the 
100,000's... 
Every night, trucks brought back corpses from the satellite camps to be burned in the 
crematorium. 
Block 172 was finished; there was a movie theater, as well as a library, functioning 
for the people of the H-Führung and their protégés; the women who had been 
installed for several months in the brothel also served their needs. The Blocks were 
comfortable; there was running water; and there were even radios! The beds were set 
up, without sheets but with straw mattresses and with blankets. The period of great 
hurry was over; the S.S. were less exacting; their object, which was to get the camp 
set up, had been accomplished. But, on the other hand, they paid more attention to the 
political life, got excited about all sorts of imaginary conspiracies, and hunted out acts 
of sabotage, which, indeed, were real and numerous. 
All of these material betterments, nevertheless, did not bring the general mass of 
prisoners the welfare that might have been expected. The mentality of the H-Führung 
had not changed. It was as though the prisoner bureaucracy tried to make us live the 
life of savages, but in buildings instead of caves, so hard did they try to retain the 
atmosphere of the Straflager along with its hardships and cruelties. 
During the night of December 23-24, some Kommando, motivated by cudgels, set up 
on the grounds a gigantic Christmas fir tree, the erection of which was completed by 
five thirty the next morning in time for the roll-call before leaving for work and which 
was resplendent with multi-colored lights. From that day on and until Epiphany we 
had to listen every night at roll-call to O Tannenbaum, played by the 
Musikkommando, before breaking ranks . . . One was obliged to listen with evident 
enjoyment or one risked getting hit. 
Concerning the matter of prisoner welfare, two unexpected elements had to be 
considered: the joint advance of the Russians and of the English and Americans 
forced the evacuation of the camps in the East and the West and the transfer of 
prisoners to Dora and the more and more intensive bombing from the air that 
interrupted the normal flow of supplies into the camp.vacuation of the camps in the East and the West and the transfer of 
prisoners to Dora and the more and more intensive bombing from the air that 
interrupted the normal flow of supplies into the camp.

--- PAGE BREAK ---77
After January 1945 there was no end to the convoys that arrived; often the prisoners 
were in an indescribable state.

The camp which was planned to hold about 15,000 
persons sometimes had 50,000 and more.

They were bunked two or three to a bed.

There was no more bread since flour was no longer delivered.

Instead, one got two or 
three tiny potatoes.

The ration of margarine and sausage was cut in half.

As the 
storehouses were emptied as a consequence of the increased population and of the 
bombings, only a pint of soup instead of a quart, was distributed.

There was no more 
clothing to replace what could no longer be used; Berlin was unable to send more.

No 
more shoes; one made the best of the old ones.

And, the same shortages existed with 
everything else.

On the work level, the whole camp became riddled with sabotage.

Raw materials no 
longer arrived at the Tunnel, and the work was slowed.

It was winter.

It was useless to 
ask for window glass to replace what was broken because there was not any to be had: 
but any prisoner could secretly steal a pane at the Tunnel.

There wasn't any paint, 
either.

The Block Chief who needed some had it stolen from a Zawatsky warehouse 
by one of his protégés.

One day there was no electric wire for the V1 and V2 rockets; 
all of the prisoners who were working in the Tunnel had stolen a yard each to use for 
shoelaces.

Another time, a supplementary stretch of railroad track was to be laid 
down.

For at least a year, the necessary wooden ties had been there, piled up around 
the station.

The S.S.-Führung supposed they were still there and gave the order to 
build the line since they had no choice.

It was noticed then that the ties had 
disappeared, and an investigation revealed that at the beginning of winter the civilian 
workers had had them sawed up one by one by the prisoners and had taken them away 
little by little in their Rucksacks to supplement the shortage in their fuel rations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The S.S.-Führung supposed they were still there and gave the order to 
build the line since they had no choice. It was noticed then that the ties had 
disappeared, and an investigation revealed that at the beginning of winter the civilian 
workers had had them sawed up one by one by the prisoners and had taken them away 
little by little in their Rucksacks to supplement the shortage in their fuel rations. A few 
persons were punished, more ties were requested, and a few days later some 
gyroscopes were received. In the Tunnel the acts of sabotage were beyond counting. It took the S.S. months to 
catch on to the fact that the Russians were making a large number of V1 and V2 
rockets perfectly useless by urinating over the wireless equipment. The Russians were 
master pillagers, and master saboteurs, and they were stubborn; nothing stopped them. They also made up the largest contingent of those hanged. But this was for another 
reason: they thought they had worked out a plan of escape ... Very few prisoners had any idea of escaping from Dora, and those who tried it were 
all recovered by the dogs. Once back in camp they were usually hanged, not for the 
attempted escape, but for a war crime, since it was rare indeed that they could not be 
charged with some theft or other crime in one of the places that they had gone 
through... Sabotage seems to have extended into even very high circles: the V1 and V2 rockets, 
before being used, had to be tested, and those that were not right were sent to 
Harzungen to be dismantled and checked. At Harzungen, they were dismantled, and 
the various defective parts were put into special packing cases which were then sent 
back again to Dora where they were assembled again in the same improper way. As a 
consequence, there were always about thirty V1 and V2 rockets that were being 
shuttled back and forth between Harzungen, Dora and the testing place.

--- PAGE BREAK ---78
Even the administration at Dora was snowed under in confusion.

At the entrance to 
the Tunnel, there was a sort of stockroom where all the parts that could not be used 
were collected: nuts, bolts, pieces of sheet-metal, screws of all kinds!

etc.

A special 
Kommando, detailed for light work, was in charge of sorting all these pieces: into one 
box went the bolts, into another the screws, in a third the odds and ends of sheet-
metal.

When all of the boxes were full, the Kapo would give the order to empty them 
all together into a rail car.

When the car was full, it was attached to a train which went 
off to an unknown destination; then, two days later it ended up at the entrance at 
Ellrich where it had been sent to be unloaded and sorted.

The Kommando in charge of 
this work at Ellrich sent to the storeroom at Dora all of the pieces that they had sorted 
out and had dumped in a heap.

Thus was a whole lot of scraps being endlessly sorted 
at the opposite ends of the Tunnel.

And so, from incident to incident, from bombings 
to diminishing food supplies, from virtual conspiracies to sabotage and hangings, we 
reached the liberation.

During all this period I lived as batman to the Oberscharführer in command of the 
company of dogs; it was easy work which included the polishing of his boots, the 
brushing of his uniforms, the making of his bed, the keeping of his room and his 
office meticulously clean, and the fetching of his meals from the S.S.

canteen.

Every 
morning at about eight my stint was done.

I spent the rest of the time talking here and 
there, warming myself near the fire, reading newspapers, and listening to the T.S.F.

When the S.S.

cook gave me food for my Oberscharführer at each meal, he 
surreptitiously gave me just as much for myself.

In addition, the thirty S.S.

men who 
lived in the Block gave me various jobs from time to time; they had me wash their 
mess kits, wax their boots, sweep out their rooms, etc...In addition, the thirty S.S.

men who 
lived in the Block gave me various jobs from time to time; they had me wash their 
mess kits, wax their boots, sweep out their rooms, etc...

In return, they gave me their 
leftovers, which every night I took to friends.

It was the good life.

This direct contact with the S.S.

personnel made me see them in quite a different light 
than that in which they were universally seen in the camp.

There was no possible 
comparison: in public they were brutes; taken individually, they were lambs.

They 
looked at me with curiosity, they asked questions; then spoke on familiar terms with 
me; they wanted to know how I thought the war would turn out and took my opinion 
seriously.

They were all men -- former miners, factory workers, plasterers -- who had 
been unemployed in 1933 and who the regime had taken out of their misery by giving 
them what they thought of as a bridge of gold.

They were simple, and their 
intellectual level was extremely low.

In exchange for the well-being that the regime 
had brought them, they carried out its more ignoble deeds and were at peace with their 
consciences, with morality, with the German fatherland, and with humanity.

Although 
they were very sensitive to the bad luck that had befallen me when I was sent to Dora, 
they nevertheless, went among the prisoners in their charge with their heads high, 
haughty, unbending and without pity.

Not once did the idea occur to them that the 
other prisoners were people like themselves, or even ...

like me!

The anomalies in the administration were not generally obvious to them, and when by 
chance they did notice them, they quite sincerely attributed them to the H-Führung (2) 
or to the general prisoner population.

They did not understand how we could be so 
thin, so weak, so dirty, and so badly clothed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The anomalies in the administration were not generally obvious to them, and when by 
chance they did notice them, they quite sincerely attributed them to the H-Führung (2) 
or to the general prisoner population. They did not understand how we could be so 
thin, so weak, so dirty, and so badly clothed. The Third Reich, after all, had furnished 
us with everything we needed: food, everything necessary to keep us perfectly clean, 
comfortable lodging in a camp as modern as possible, health recreations, music, 
lectures, sports, a Christmas tree, and so forth. And we did not know how to take

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
advantage of it. That was proof that Hitler was right and that, with very rare 
exceptions, we belonged to a physically and morally inferior part of humanity! The 
idea never occurred to them that they might be responsible as individuals for the 
wrongs that were done under their eyes, or with their cooperation, unconscious or 
active. They were victims of the environment -- of that special environment -- in 
which, while breaking collectively with the restraints of tradition, all peoples, without 
distinction as to regime or nationality, founder periodically. 
On March 10th, a group of female Bibelforscher (Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses, and 
conscientious objectors) arrived at Dora, followed by an order from Berlin stipulating 
that these women -- there were twenty-four of them -- were to be put to light work. 
Henceforth, the Schwung work was turned over to them. I was removed and sent back 
to camp. To escape a bad H-Führung Kommando, I thought it wiser to take advantage 
of my state of health and to get hospitalized in the Revier; from the hospital windows 
I watched the bombardment of Nordhausen on April 3 and 5, 1945, two days before 
being taken in the evacuation transport, the account of which is included in the 
Prologue.from the hospital windows 
I watched the bombardment of Nordhausen on April 3 and 5, 1945, two days before 
being taken in the evacuation transport, the account of which is included in the 
Prologue.

FOOTNOTES 
(1) The Häftlingsführung of these satellite camps was in the hands of the "greens" 
which the " red" H-Führung of Dora sent there to get rid of them and to prevent their 
return to power. 
(2) The majority of the prisoners also felt that the H-Führung was much more to 
blame than was the S.S. for the kind of life that they were forced to lead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80

PART II The Experience of Others

Chapter Seven 
Concentration Camp Literatureng was much more to 
blame than was the S.S. for the kind of life that they were forced to lead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80

PART II The Experience of Others

Chapter Seven 
Concentration Camp Literature

When the time came for me to draw a parallel between my own experience and that of 
others, as they described it, I found myself in a state of mind which the reader will 
easily understand. 
While we were in the camp, all of our conversations during rare moments of respite, 
were centered around three things: when the war was likely to end and our individual 
or collective chances of surviving to see that end, the food that we were going to eat 
after we were freed, and what might be called camp "gossip," although the word 
"gossip" seems inappropriate in view of the tragic reality of camp life. None of these 
topics offered much possibility for escaping from the actual situation of the moment. 
All three, on the other hand, separately or collectively, depending on the amount of 
time that we had to discuss them, brought us right back to the present with the use of a 
phrase like, "When we tell them about that..." said with such a tone and such a sinister 
look that it frightened me. Recognizing that I was powerless to do anything about 
these pangs of conscience, given the atmosphere of the place, I retired within myself 
and became an obstinately silent witness. 
Instinctively I recalled the aftermath of the First World War: the veterans, their stories 
and all of their writings. There was no doubt in my mind that the coming post-war 
period would have, in addition, veteran prisoners and deportees who would go back to 
their homes with even more horrible memories than those of veteran soldiers. But, 
instead of merely telling their stories, the way seemed to be open for these veterans to 
vent their feelings in a spirit of hatred and vengeance. To the extent that I was able to 
distinguish my personal lot in the great drama that was being played, all the 
Montagues, all the Capulets, all the Armagnacs, and all the Burgundians of history, 
taking up all their quarrels from the beginning, began to dance, before my eyes in a 
frenzied saraband, on a stage enlarged to the size of Europe. I could not convince 
myself that the spirit of hatred, being kindled before my eyes, would be harnessed no 
matter how the conflict came out. 
When I tried to envision the consequences of this smoldering hatred and when I 
remembered that I had a son, I had to ask myself whether it would not be better if no 
one returned. And, I even hoped that the higher authorities of the Third Reich would 
realize in time that they could only be pardoned by offering, in a gigantic and frightful 
holocaust, all that remained of the inmates in the camps, as a redemption for so much 
evil. In that state of mind, I had decided that if I ever got back from the camps, that Igigantic and frightful 
holocaust, all that remained of the inmates in the camps, as a redemption for so much 
evil. In that state of mind, I had decided that if I ever got back from the camps, that I

--- PAGE BREAK ---81
would practice what I preached, and I swore never to make the slightest reference to 
my experience in the camps.

For what seemed to me to be a very long time after my return to France, I stuck to my 
decision; but it was not easy to do.

First, I had to struggle against a natural inclination to want to tell my story.

For 
example, I shall never forget a demonstration that in the very first days, the deportees 
had arranged at Belfort to mark their return.

The whole town had gathered itself 
together to listen to their message.

The great hall of the Maison du Peuple was full to 
bursting.

Outside the square was thronged with people.

Loud-speakers even had to be 
set up out in the street.

My health did not permit me to be present at this 
demonstration, either as a speaker or listener, and I was very disappointed.

But, my 
disappointment was even greater the next day when the local papers reported all that 
had been said; it was impossible to discern any statement of objectivity.

My 
apprehensions about the hate-filled and distorted stories of the camp veterans had 
been confirmed.

The crowd, however, was not fooled; never again could the same 
mass of people be gathered together for such a purpose.

I had also to struggle against others.

Wherever I went, over a glass of wine or a cup of 
tea, there was always a distinguished parrot in the grip of emotion, who was 
discussing the deportation, or a well-wishing friend who thought he was doing me a 
favor by drawing attention to me by turning the conversation to the subject: "Is it true 
that?" "Do you think ...?" "What do you think of the book by ...?" All these questions 
irritated me.

When they were not inspired by a perverse curiosity, they betrayed an 
uncertainty and a need to be reassured.

Systematically I cut the talk short, a practice 
which sometimes provoked severe criticism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When they were not inspired by a perverse curiosity, they betrayed an 
uncertainty and a need to be reassured. Systematically I cut the talk short, a practice 
which sometimes provoked severe criticism. I resented such criticism, and I blamed it upon my fellow deportees and their never 
ending publication of their stories, often imaginary, in which they gave themselves the 
airs of saints, heroes, or martyrs. As their writings collected on my desk like so many 
entreaties, I was sure that the time was coming when I would be forced to abandon 
my reserve and to relate my memories of my experiences as a deportee. Hence, I was 
not surprised when more than once I thought that the saying, attributed to Riera, that 
after every war all of the veterans should be killed without pity, was more than just a 
clever remark. Then one day I realized that a false picture of the German camps had been created and 
that the problem of the concentration camps was a universal one, not just one that 
could be disposed of by placing it on the doorstep of the National Socialists. The 
deportees -- many of whom were Communists -- had been largely responsible for 
leading international political thinking to such an erroneous conclusion. I suddenly 
felt that by remaining silent I was an accomplice to a dangerous influence. And, at 
one sitting, without paying attention to literary style and in as simple as possible a 
form, I wrote my Le Passage de la ligne in an attempt to put things into proper 
perspective and in an attempt to bring people back to a sense of objectivity and, at the 
same time, to a better conception of intellectual honesty. Next, the idea occurred to me that future discussions about the problem of 
concentration camps would benefit by starting with a general reconsideration of those

--- PAGE BREAK ---ellectual honesty. Next, the idea occurred to me that future discussions about the problem of 
concentration camps would benefit by starting with a general reconsideration of those

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
things that were attributed to the German camps, drawn from the mass of testimonies 
that former prisoners have brought forth. As a consequence, I have gathered together 
the first elements of this reconsideration. This is the explanation and the justification 
for the Regard sur la Littérature concentrationnaire (Survey of concentration camp 
literature) which is found in Chapters Eight through Eleven. 
* * * *This is the explanation and the justification 
for the Regard sur la Littérature concentrationnaire (Survey of concentration camp 
literature) which is found in Chapters Eight through Eleven. 
* * * *

The experience of the ex-service men, still so fresh from the 1914 war, offers another 
parallel which I believe to be pertinent. They came back with a great desire for peace, 
swearing by all the saints that they would do everything possible to achieve it: that 
this was the "war to end all wars." They were shown gratitude, appreciation and a 
certain admiration. With joy, hope, and enthusiasm, the whole French nation received 
them with affection and confidence. 
On the eve of the 1939 war, however, their opinions were very much questioned. 
Their experiences and the lessons from them were fully commented on in various 
ways, and the best that one can say is that public opinion was not kind to them. It 
sneered at their public statements, saying that they were in their dotage -- that was the 
word used -- and that their memories crowded into every conversation. The leaders of 
the national veteran associations, whose mission seemed to be limited to demands for 
fatter pensions were also criticized. Concerning the writings of the veterans, public 
opinion was just as categorical, and there was only one testimonial that it would 
acknowledge: Le Feu by Barbusse. When, in rare moments of good will, public 
opinion made an exception, it was for Galtier-Boissiere and for Dorgelès, but on other 
grounds: for the mocking obdurate pacifism of the one, and what it thought was the 
realism of the other. 
Who can say what the real reasons were for this reversal of opinion? As I see it, the 
reasons all belong within the framework of this general truth: men are much more 
preoccupied with the future that they face than they are with the past from which there 
is nothing more to be gained. Consequently it is impossible to center people's lives 
around any event, no matter how extraordinary, especially a war, a phenomenon 
which tends to become commonplace and whose particular characteristics very 
rapidly become obsolete. 
On the eve of 1914, my grandfather, who had not yet digested the war of 1870, used 
to talk about it interminably to my father, who yawned with boredom. On the eve of 
1939, my father had not yet finished telling about his war, and, every time that he 
brought it up, I could not help thinking that Du Guesclin, rising up among us, full of 
pride in his deeds with his cross-bow, could hardly have been more ridiculous. 
Thus are generations opposed to each other in their ideas. They are also opposed in 
their interests. Between the two wars, the rising generations had the feeling that it was 
impossible for them to make any attempt to realize their own destiny without coming 
up against the ex-service men, their pretensions, and their preferential rights. They 
had been given "rights over us." And they took advantage of it and kept pressing for 
more. But, there are rights which even the fact of having suffered through a long warr preferential rights. They 
had been given "rights over us." And they took advantage of it and kept pressing for 
more. But, there are rights which even the fact of having suffered through a long war

--- PAGE BREAK ---83
and having won it, do not confer, particularly that of being the only ones fit to 
construct a peace, or, more modestly, the right to positions regardless of merit, 
whether they be in a tobacconist's shop, in a rural police station, or in a teaching post.

The divorce between the public and the veterans took place during the economic crisis 
of the Thirties.

The rift was aggravated, about 1935, when the veterans forgot about 
the vows that they had made on their return from the battlefield and so easily accepted 
the possibility of another war, and when, at the same time, the public sentiment was 
for peace.

It is another law of historical evolution that the young generations are 
pacifist, that through them, over the centuries, humanity progressively becomes firmer 
in its search for universal peace, and that war is always, in a certain measure, the 
rancor of old age.

In any case, there is one thing due the ex-service men of that war as well as of the last 
one: they told about their wars as they were.

Almost every word, to read them or to 
listen to them, rings profoundly true, or, at least convincing.

But this cannot be said of 
the deportees.

The deportees came back with hatred and resentment on their tongues and in their 
pens.

They were not tired of war; rather they had an axe to grind and they demanded 
vengeance.

Moreover, since they suffered from an inferiority complex -- there were 
only some 30.000 of them out of a population of 40 million inhabitants -- they 
wantonly created a story of horror for a public that always clamored for something 
more sensational in order the more surely to inspire pity and recognition.

The inflammatory fabrications of one deportee soon inspired similar stories by others, 
and they progressively were caught on a treadmill of lies.

Although some deportees 
were duped by others in this process, most of them managed quite consciously to 
blacken the picture even more in their zeal to hold the limelight.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The inflammatory fabrications of one deportee soon inspired similar stories by others, 
and they progressively were caught on a treadmill of lies. Although some deportees 
were duped by others in this process, most of them managed quite consciously to 
blacken the picture even more in their zeal to hold the limelight. So it was with 
Ulysses who, during the course of his voyage, each day added a new adventure to his 
Odyssey, as much to please the public taste of the times as to justify his long absence 
in the eyes of his family. But, if Ulysses succeeded in creating his own legend and in 
fixing the attention of twenty-five centuries of history on it, it is no exaggeration to 
say that the deportees failed to do so. Everything was fine for the deportees during the very first days of the Liberation. One 
could not, without risk of being branded a "collaborator" question what they had to 
say, even if one would have felt like it. But slowly, the truth took its revenge. With 
the passage of time, with a return to freedom of speech, and with conditions more and 
more normal, it burst forth into the light. For example, one could write, sure of 
expressing the common uneasiness and of not being incorrect, that "Travelers from 
afar can lie with impunity... I have read many accounts by the deportees and always I 
felt the reserve, or the pressure. Even David Rousset, at moments, misleads us; he 
explains too much." (From a letter by Abbé Marius Perrin published in Le Pays 
Roannais, 27 October 1949), or that "La dernière étape is an imbecilic film that 
amounts to nothing." (From a letter by Robert Pernot published in Paroles françaises. 27 November 1949.) 
It was fifteen years before the military veteran of World War Two lost prestige in the 
eyes of the public; it took less than four years for the deportees. Except for that

--- PAGE BREAK ---1949.) 
It was fifteen years before the military veteran of World War Two lost prestige in the 
eyes of the public; it took less than four years for the deportees. Except for that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
difference, their political destiny was the same. Such is the importance of truth in 
history. 
* * * * 
I would like to cite a personal story which is typical in that it shows the relative worth 
which one must accord to all accounts in general. 
The scene takes place in a law court, in the fall of 1945. A woman is seated on the 
defendant's bench. The Resistance, which suspected her of collaboration, had not 
succeeded in killing her before the arrival of the Americans. Her husband, however, 
fell in a burst of machine gun fire, at the corner of a dark street one night in the winter 
of 1945. I never learned what the couple actually did, although I had heard, before my 
own arrest, the most improbable tales. In order to get to the bottom of it, I went to the 
hearing. 
There is not much in her record. The witnesses are the more numerous and the more 
merciless. The principal one among them is a deportee, a former group leader of the 
local Resistance -- so he says! The judges are plainly embarrassed by the accusations 
whose substance seems to them to be very questionable. 
The principal witness arrives. He explains that members of his group had been 
informed against to the Germans and that it could only have been by the accused and 
her husband who lived in their circle and knew their activities. He adds that he 
himself has seen the accused in friendly, possibly amatory, conversation with an 
officer of the Kommandantur, who lived over a court behind his parents' shop; that 
they exchanged papers, etc. The defense attorney then begins his cross-examination: 
Attorney: "You used to go to this shop then?" 
Witness: "Yes, just to keep track of this business." 
Attorney: "Can you describe the shop?" 
(The witness describes the counter, the shelves, the window at the back, gives the 
approximate dimensions, etc ...) 
Attorney: "It was through the window at the back which looks out on the court that 
you saw the accused and the officer exchange papers?" 
Witness: "Yes." 
Attorney: "Then, you can describe just where they were when you saw them, and 
where you were in the shop?" 
Witness: "The two of them were at the foot of a stairway which led to the officer's 
room, the accused with her elbows on the railing, and the other one very near her ..."here you were in the shop?" 
Witness: "The two of them were at the foot of a stairway which led to the officer's 
room, the accused with her elbows on the railing, and the other one very near her ..."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
Attorney: "That's enough. (Turning to the court and holding a paper) Your Honor, 
there is no spot from which the stairway in question can be seen: here is a floor plan 
of the place drawn up by a draftsman." 
(The Chief Judge examines the document, passes it to his colleagues, and admits the 
evidence.) 
Chief Judge: "Do you adhere to your statement?" 
Witness: "Well, that is ... It wasn't I who saw ... It was one of my agents who gave me 
the report at my request ..." 
Chief Judge: "You may step down."ief Judge: "Do you adhere to your statement?" 
Witness: "Well, that is ... It wasn't I who saw ... It was one of my agents who gave me 
the report at my request ..." 
Chief Judge: "You may step down."

The rest of the affair has no importance at all, since the witness was not arrested on 
the spot for perjury and since the accused, having admitted that she had attended some 
courses at the Franco-German Institute, which, as she said, brought about a certain 
number of friendly relationships between herself and certain officers of the 
Kommandantur, was in the end sentenced to a term in prison for a number of things in 
which she was only implicated. 
Even if the witness had been cross-examined further, such questioning would 
probably have revealed that the agent he claimed to have sent to make a report was 
non-existent and that his statement consisted of nothing but those "they says" which 
poison the atmosphere in those small towns where everybody knows everyone else. 
It is not my intention to compare all of the writings that have appeared on the German 
concentration camps to this experience. My only object is to show that some were no 
better, even among those which were most popular. And that, aside from good or bad 
faith, there are so many imponderables which influence the witness that, one must 
always distrust History as it is told, especially when it is still warm. 
Les jours de notre Mort, which established the prodigious talent of David Rousset, 
and which is discussed further in Chapter Ten, is, for example, a collection of the 
"they says" which ran through all of the camps and which could never be verified. It is 
upon this kind of questionable testimony that the author has culled the facts upon 
which he bases his particular interpretation. In this present work, which is concerned 
with truth and not with virtuosity, no extracts from it will be found.

****e author has culled the facts upon 
which he bases his particular interpretation. In this present work, which is concerned 
with truth and not with virtuosity, no extracts from it will be found.

****

In 1950, I put the witnesses who had testified as to their experiences in the 
concentration camps into three categories: first, those who were not intellectually able 
to be careful witnesses, or accurate observers, and whom I called, without any

--- PAGE BREAK ---86
pejorative intention, minor witnesses, second, the psychologists, victims of a bias, to 
my mind a little too subjective; and, third, the sociologists, or those claiming to be.

I 
had found no historians, at least none worthy of the name.

On guard, so as not to fall into the error for which I was blaming others of talking 
about things a little too removed from my own experience, I deliberately gave up 
presenting a complete list of concentration camp literature of the time.

Moreover, the 
number of witnesses was necessarily limited in each of the above-mentioned 
categories so as to keep this study in a manageable form: three minor witnesses (Abbé 
Robert Ploton; Frère Birin of the Ecoles chrétiennes d'Epernay; and Abbé Jean-Paul 
Renard); a psychologist (David Rousset); and a sociologist (Eugen Kogon).

In 
addition, there is a witness who defies classification: Louis Martin-Chauffier.

With 
the exception of one of them, their experiences had to do with the same camps where 
I had been imprisoned.

Since 1950, sustained and encouraged by the political policies which underpin the so-
called "cold-war," concentration literature, which in turn supports those policies, has 
only grown and blossomed.

For example it is no secret that there are certain features 
of the foreign policy of the United States which are expressly designed to prevent any 
serious breakdown of relations with the Soviet Union; the contrived danger of a re-
birth of Naziism and Fascism in Europe is one of them.

Both Stalin and Truman fully 
exploited this myth, the former to keep Europe from achieving economic and political 
unity and from integrating Germany into such a European community, and the latter 
to justify in part the huge cost of maintaining an army of occupation in Germany.

And, Khrushchev continues to play the same game that Stalin played with Truman, 
with Kennedy ...

but, with a little less luck?And, Khrushchev continues to play the same game that Stalin played with Truman, 
with Kennedy ...

but, with a little less luck?

About 1950, the idea was revived among many Europeans that Europe as -- a political 
entity--did exist.

Formerly brought about by the haunting memory of the Franco-
German wars, this pan-Europeanism was this time provoked by another obsession 
with two complementary aspects: on the one hand, the near certainty that, divided 
against itself, Europe was an easy prey for Communism; on the other hand, that no 
United Europe was possible without the integration of Germany.

In Moscow and in 
Tel-Aviv, it was felt, from the first breath of this revival of pan-Europeanism that if it 
grew into a tempest, it could not fail to end in a united Europe, which would mean the 
political isolation of Russia and the end of the so-called reparation payments paid out 
by Germany to Israel.

The counter-attack was not long in coming: two attacks, as 
remarkably synchronized as if they had been planned together ahead of time, were 
spear-headed by two propaganda organizations, the one with the title Comité pour la 
recherche des crimes et des criminels de guerre, located at Warsaw, and the other 
called the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, whose two most 
important branches are in Tel-Aviv and in Paris.

The target was Germany.

The theme 
was that the horrors and atrocities that had been committed during the Second World 
War by the Nazis were a natural vocation of Germany.

Therefore, in order to prevent 
a re-emergence of this horrible propensity, the Germans had to be kept under severe 
control and very carefully segregated.

The first result of this policy of defamation 
was, so far as I know, the publication of Documentation sur l'extermination par les 
gaz (1950) by Helmut Krausnik; the second, was Médecin à Auschwitz (1951) by a 
certain Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, in order to prevent 
a re-emergence of this horrible propensity, the Germans had to be kept under severe 
control and very carefully segregated. The first result of this policy of defamation 
was, so far as I know, the publication of Documentation sur l'extermination par les 
gaz (1950) by Helmut Krausnik; the second, was Médecin à Auschwitz (1951) by a 
certain Dr. Miklos Nyiszli, a Hungarian Jew who was deported to that camp in May 
1944, and the third was Le Bréviaire de la Haine (1951) by Leon Poliakov. Since then

--- PAGE BREAK ---87
the deluge has not stopped: every time that the least sign of rapprochement between 
Germany and the other European countries is seen (e.g., CECA., Common Market, 
Franco-German Treaty, etc ...) we get with the stamp of the Warsaw Committee or of 
an important member of the World Center for Jewish Documentation, or again, of the 
Munich Institut fur Zeitgeschichte, which is associated with the two, a study that each 
time amounts to an accusation more terrible than the last one.

And, each time the 
world press supports the defamation with a spectacular publicity campaign.

Thus have 
three publications appeared one after the other: Le Troisième Reich et les Juifs (1953) 
by Leon Poliakov and Josef Wulf, L'Histoire de Joel Brand, un échange de 10,000 
camions contre un million de Juifs (1955); and Le Lagerkommandant d'Auschwitz 
parle, Mémoires de Rudolf Höss (1958).

These volumes are among the best known; to 
cite them all, just a list without commentary would require an entire book.

Recently, 
an anthology of this literature was compiled by a Comité d'étude de la seconde guerre 
mondiale, whose head office is in Paris and among whose directors are a woman by 
the name of Olga Wormser of the World Center of Jewish Documentation, and a 
renowned unknown, who can put his hand to anything, by the name of Henri Michel.

It contains excerpts from 208 author-witnesses, and I can add that it cites only those 
authors who strictly followed the Zionist and Communist lines because on the shelves 
of my library there are almost as many books which are not cited, although they are 
often just as accusatory, often more intelligently, and although they often have the 
same lack of respect for historical truth.

Naturally, I was not included in this 
anthology which is entitled La Tragédie de la Déportation (1962).It contains excerpts from 208 author-witnesses, and I can add that it cites only those 
authors who strictly followed the Zionist and Communist lines because on the shelves 
of my library there are almost as many books which are not cited, although they are 
often just as accusatory, often more intelligently, and although they often have the 
same lack of respect for historical truth.

Naturally, I was not included in this 
anthology which is entitled La Tragédie de la Déportation (1962).

What makes one 
despair is that there are historians who are intellectually dishonest enough to support 
these works with their authority: Labrousse and Renouvin in France, and Rothfels in 
Germany among others ...

From the United States has come Raul Hilberg, whose 
book, The Destruction of the European Jews (1961), is surely the most important of 
all the works that have been published on the question and the one that has best 
succeeded in giving the appearance--the appearance only -- of being a serious and 
objective study.

Because of its importance, I have devoted the third section of this 
work to an examination of The Destruction of the European Jews, as well as other 
historical studies.

Finally, to be thorough one should also cite the films, whose 
purpose is to condition public opinion, that have been taken from this literature: La 
Dernière Étape, Kapo, the Nuremberg Documents, etc....

The reader may be tempted to place this survey of the concentration camp drama, 
with regard to its over-all tragic consequences alone, on the human plane, and perhaps 
to find that I included too much detail.

If I point out that the deportation trains from 
France to Germany carried a hundred persons per car in cars that were intended to 
hold forty at a maximum, and not a hundred and twenty-five as some have claimed, it 
will be observed that the fact scarcely mitigates the conditions of the trip.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The reader may be tempted to place this survey of the concentration camp drama, 
with regard to its over-all tragic consequences alone, on the human plane, and perhaps 
to find that I included too much detail. If I point out that the deportation trains from 
France to Germany carried a hundred persons per car in cars that were intended to 
hold forty at a maximum, and not a hundred and twenty-five as some have claimed, it 
will be observed that the fact scarcely mitigates the conditions of the trip. If I point 
out that a camp bore the name Belsen-Bergen and not Bergen-Belsen, that fact 
certainly does not alter the lot of those who were interned there. If I claim that the 
word Kapo is derived from the first letters of the German phrase Konzentrationslager 
Arbeitpolizei, instead of coming from the Italian Il Capo, that fact does not excuse the 
brutalities that were committed by the prisoner police. And, the bad working 
conditions, the hunger, the tortures, etc., whether they took place in one camp or in 
another, whether the one reporting them saw them or not, whether they were the acts 
of the S.S. themselves or carried out by the prisoner trustees whom they chose at 
random from among the inmates, were still inhuman and brutal treatment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ether they were the acts 
of the S.S. themselves or carried out by the prisoner trustees whom they chose at 
random from among the inmates, were still inhuman and brutal treatment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
I would like to make the observation, in my turn, that a whole is composed of details, 
and that an error of detail, whether made in good or bad faith, regardless of whether it 
is of a kind that is intended to mislead the observer, must logically make the observer 
doubt the reliability of the whole; and if there are many errors in detail ...? And if they 
are almost all shown to be made in bad faith ...? 
I shall make myself better understood by referring to a news item that filled all of the 
papers a few years ago. Just before the outbreak of the 1939 war, a foreign student, 
taking advantage of a momentary distraction on the part of the guards, stole a painting 
by Watteau called l'Indifférent from the Louvre. A few days later the painting was 
recovered, but the student, in the meantime, had made a slight modification to it: 
disturbed by that hand raised in a gesture which all of the experts said was something 
that had been left unfinished by the artist, the student had rested it on a cane that he 
had added. This cane did nothing to change the figure. On the contrary it harmonized 
marvelously with the pose. But, it emphasized the figure's indifference, and noticeably 
changed the interpretation one could place on his reasons for it and his purposes. 
Moreover, one could argue that quite another interpretation could have been made if, 
instead of the cane, a pair of gloves had been put into the figure's hand, or if a bouquet 
of flowers had negligently been dropped from it. In spite of the fact that no one could 
swear that Watteau had not intended that the cane be included in the picture, the cane 
was effaced and the painting was put back in its place. If the curators had let the cane 
remain no one would have noticed anything amiss either in the painting itself or in the 
general appearance of the painting galleries of the Louvre. But, if, instead of 
confining himself to correcting l'Indifférent, our student had taken it into his head to 
eliminate all of the enigmas of all of the other paintings, if he had put a velvet mask 
over the smile of the Joconde, rattles in all the outstretched hands of the little Jesuses 
lying astonished on the knees and in the arms of spell-bound Virgins, spectacles on 
Erasmus; and if all that had been allowed to remain, one can imagine how all of those 
little changes would have changed the general appearance of the entire Louvre 
collection! 
The errors that can be found in the testimonies of the deportees are of the same kind 
as the cane of l 'Indifferent, without modifying noticeably the picture of the camps, 
they have falsified the sense of History. Moreover, by taking these errors collectively, 
the viewer is confronted with a distorted picture of a similar magnitude as if he had 
gone through the Louvre's collection of paintings, after they had been thoroughly 
corrected.rors collectively, 
the viewer is confronted with a distorted picture of a similar magnitude as if he had 
gone through the Louvre's collection of paintings, after they had been thoroughly 
corrected.

The same will hold true for the reader if he will reserve his judgment, both on the 
secondary works and the documents which I indict and on the conclusions which 
certain historians who are obviously in the service of a cause, have drawn from them, 
and if he will ask himself apart from all other considerations whether these documents 
and interpretations could be upheld in their entirety before a properly constituted court 
of law, that is, one that is not a kangaroo court like the Nuremberg Tribunal!(1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
FOOTNOTE 
(1). [This view is not unique to Paul Rassinier. For example, William O. Douglas, 
former Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, observed that he "... thought at 
the time and still think[s] that the Nuremberg trials were unprincipled. Law was 
created ex post facto to suit the passion and clamor of the time .... " For additional 
strong "anti-Nuremberg" views by numerous notables who were in the highest 
echelons of the Allied governments during World War Two, see, H.K. Thompson, Jr. 
and Henry Strutz, eds., Doenitz at Nuremberg: A Re-appraisal (New York: Amber 
Publishing, 1976).]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90

Chapter Eight 
The Minor Witnesses

These witnesses recount only what they saw or what they claim to have seen, without 
much comment. Criticism here pertains only to details, which are often small. While 
the great enigmas of the concentration camp problem can only he approached through 
the major witnesses, the others cannot be overlooked.m here pertains only to details, which are often small. While 
the great enigmas of the concentration camp problem can only he approached through 
the major witnesses, the others cannot be overlooked.

l. Frère Birin 
Frère Birin, whose real name is Alfred Untereiner, published a chronological account 
of his experiences at Buchenwald and Dora entitled 16 mois de bagne (Reims: Matot-
Braine 1946). In the prologue, he relates the circumstances that led to his arrest and 
deportation. He was arrested in December 1943, was deported to Buchenwald on 
January 17, 1944, and was transferred to Dora the following March 13th. We were in 
the same deportation convoy and in the same transport from Buchenwald to Dora. Our 
registration numbers were also close together: 43,649 for him, and 44,364 for me. 
We were liberated together. But, inside the camp we fared differently. Thanks to the 
perfect knowledge that he had of the German language, because of his Alsatian origin, 
he managed to get himself assigned as secretary of the Arbeitsstatistik (work statistics 
office) a particularly privileged position, while I shared the common lot until sickness 
interrupted. As secretary of the Arbeitsstatistik, he rendered innumerable services to a 
large number of prisoners! Especially to the French. His devotion was without limits. 
Implicated in a plot which I have always believed was without substance, he was 
incarcerated in the camp's prison for the last four or five months of his deportation. He 
is presently teaching, if I am not mistaken, in the Ecoles chrétiennes, at Epernay. 
Frère Birin claims that 16 mois de bagne is a faithful account. "I wish nevertheless 
only to give an account of what I have seen," writes the author (page 38). Perhaps 
indeed he believes this quite sincerely. But we shall see how faithful it really is. He 
writes that in the deportation train from the Compiègne station "They made us get into 
an '8 chevaux 40 hommes' car... but 125 of us." (page 28) 
What really happened when we left the Royallieu camp was this: the guards lined us 
up in columns of fives and in groups of 100, each group destined for one rail car. 
Fifteen or twenty sick men had been brought to the station by automobile, and they 
had a rail car all to themselves. The last group in the long line which that morning was 
strung out along the streets of Compiègne between heavily armed German soldiers, 
was short of men. It consisted of some forty persons who were disbursed among all 
the cars, after all of the complete groups had boarded. We got three in our car which 
brought our number to one hundred and three. I doubt that there were any special 
reasons why the car in which Frère Birin found himself should have taken on twenty-ed. We got three in our car which 
brought our number to one hundred and three. I doubt that there were any special 
reasons why the car in which Frère Birin found himself should have taken on twenty-

--- PAGE BREAK ---our car which 
brought our number to one hundred and three. I doubt that there were any special 
reasons why the car in which Frère Birin found himself should have taken on twenty-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
five. At any rate even if that were the case he should in all honesty have shown it to 
be an exception. 
He describes our arrival at Buchenwald as follows: 
Everyone arriving had to be disinfected. First of all, the shearings where ex 
tempore barbers, amused at our confusion and at the gashes which in haste or 
carelessness they gave us, mocked us. Like a flock of sheep shorn of their 
fleece, the prisoners rushed pell-mell into a big tank of water strongly dosed 
with Cresyl. Streaked with blood, dirty with filth, this bath served the entire 
detachment. Harried with clubs, heads had to be plunged under the water. At 
the end of each session, drowned bodies were dragged out of that despicable 
basin (Page 35, emphasis added) 
The reader, not forewarned, will not fail to think that these ex tempore barbers who 
mocked and gashed us were the S.S., and that the clubs that beat the heads were held 
by the same. Not at all, they were prisoners. And, since the S.S. were absent from this 
operation, which they only supervised from a distance, no one made the prisoner 
barbers behave the way they should, have. But, because this detail is omitted, the 
entire responsibility seems to fall on the S.S. This confusion, which I shall not point 
out again, is maintained all through the book, an in the same way. 
Concerning the camp schedule, Frère Birin writes: 
Very early rising, food clearly insufficient for twelve hours of work: one liter 
of soup, two to two hundred and fifty grams of bread, twenty grams of 
margarine. (Page 40) 
Why did he forget, or neglect to mention, the half-liter of coffee each morning and 
night, and the round of sausage or the spoon of cheese or jam which regularly came 
with the margarine? The fact that the food was insufficient would not have been 
lessened and the honesty of the information given would have suffered less. He then 
goes on to say: 
Since March, twelve hundred French, I among them were designated for an 
unknown designation. Before our departure we were issued convict's clothes, 
striped blue and white: Jacket and trousers only which could not protect us 
from the cold. (Page 41, emphasis added.) 
I was in that convoy. Everyone was issued, in addition an overcoat. If this clothing 
could not protect us from the cold, it was not because there were not enough pieces 
but because the pieces were badly worn. 
He describes the Dora camp as follows: 
The installation of the camp at Dora began in November 1943 (Page 40) 
Actually, the first convoy arrived there on August 28, 1943, exactly. Concerning our 
reception at Dora, he writes:as follows: 
The installation of the camp at Dora began in November 1943 (Page 40) 
Actually, the first convoy arrived there on August 28, 1943, exactly. Concerning our 
reception at Dora, he writes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---92
There, as at Buchenwald, the S.S.

were waiting for us at the unloading of the 
cars.

A road furrowed with ruts full of water led to the camp.

We ran along it 
at race speed.

The Nazis with big boots on, chased us and let their dogs loose 
on us...

This new style of "corrida" was punctuated with many gun shots and 
inhuman yells...

(Pages 43-44, emphasis added.) 
I have no recollection that dogs were set on us or that any guns were fired.

On the 
contrary, I remember very well that the Kapos and Lagerschutz (camp police 
composed of prisoners) who came to take charge of us were much more aggressive 
and brutal than the S.S.

who had convoyed us.

Before going on to the serious errors, I would like still to point out two more which 
are not so serious but which expose the lack of accuracy of Birin's testimony, all the 
more so when one recalls that the author was, through his duties in the camp, in 
control of job placement which eliminates any excuse: 
I will only mention that good old doctor Mathon, nicknamed Papa Girard ...

(Page 81) 
For ten months I always carried on my person the Holy Reservation.

Priests, 
constantly risking death, kept me always replenished.

I should mention here 
Abbé Bourgeois, the R.P.

Renard, Trappist, and that dear Abbé Amyot 
d'Inville.

(Page 87) 
For one thing, there was at Dora a doctor Mathon and a doctor Girard.

The latter was 
very old and it was he who we had nicknamed "good Papa Girard." For another, Abbé 
Bourgeois died in the second month after he came to Dora, between the 10th and the 
30th of April, 1944 before the departure of a transport of the sick, among whom he 
was supposed to have been included.

He, therefore, could not have kept Frère Birin 
supplied for ten months.

One might also add that if the priests were maltreated for the 
same reasons as the other deportees, and even more because of their religious calling, 
they still were not risking death by keeping in their possession the Holy Reservation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He, therefore, could not have kept Frère Birin 
supplied for ten months. One might also add that if the priests were maltreated for the 
same reasons as the other deportees, and even more because of their religious calling, 
they still were not risking death by keeping in their possession the Holy Reservation. Now to turn to the serious errors that Frère Birin includes in his account. He writes 
that: 
The wives of the S.S. also picked out their victims, and with even more 
cynicism than their husbands. What they wanted were fine human skins, 
artistically tattooed to humor them, an assembly was ordered on the parade 
grounds, Adam naked was the rule. Then, these women went up and down the 
ranks, as if at a style show, and made their choices. (Pages 73-74) 
It is not correct to say that these things took place at Dora. There was one case of a 
lamp shade made of tattooed human skin at Buchenwald. It figures in the case of Ilse 
Koch, who was called "the Bitch of Buchenwald." And, even at Buchenwald, Frère 
Birin could not have been present at the selection of the victims, as is claimed in his 
statement that is already cited from page 38, since these incriminating activities took 
place before we arrived at Buchenwald, if, in fact, they ever did take place at all. He 
gives to this selection of victims the feeling that it was something that happened 
regularly and as a matter of course and that his description is quite precise. If the

--- PAGE BREAK ---93
person who had placed the event at Buchenwald, in the first place, from having seen 
evidence of the crime (the lamp shades in question), did so in the same fashion, how 
can one avoid thinking that the accusation against Ilse Koch rests on very fragile 
grounds?

(1) 
To conclude the matter, I shall point out that from February through March 1944, a 
camp rumor at Buchenwald maintained that two Kapos, one from the Steinbruch 
(quarry) and the other from the Gartnererei (garden) were responsible for that crime, 
which earlier had been perpetrated by them with the complicity of almost all of their 
colleagues.

The two comrades had, it was said, made a business of the killing of 
tattooed prisoners, whose skins they sold for various favors to Ilse Koch and others, 
through the intermediary of the Kapo of the crematorium service and of some S.S.

personnel who looked the other way.

But did the wife of the commandant of the 
camp, and the other wives of officers walk around the camp looking for fine tattoo 
specimens, whose owners they themselves designated to be killed for their skins?

Did 
they organize roll-calls in the nude to facilitate this search?

These allegations I can 
neither confirm nor deny.

All that I can say is that, contrary to what Frère Birin 
attests, these things never took place at Dora, nor at Buchenwald, during our common 
internment there.

Where there was a sure case of sabotage, the hanging was carried out in a 
more cruel fashion.

Those about to be executed were lifted up from the ground 
very slowly by an electric winch.

Not getting the fatal jerk that kills the victim 
and often breaks his neck, the poor men went through all the stages of agony 
...

Other times a butcher's hook was placed under the jaw of the condemned man 
who was thus hung in that barbarous manner.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not getting the fatal jerk that kills the victim 
and often breaks his neck, the poor men went through all the stages of agony 
... Other times a butcher's hook was placed under the jaw of the condemned man 
who was thus hung in that barbarous manner. (Page 76) 
It is true that at the end of the war -- i.e., between the end of 1944 and the end of the 
spring of 1945 -- acts of sabotage became so numerous that groups of guilty men were 
hanged at a time The S. S. took to holding executions in the Tunnel itself with the use 
of a pulley worked by a winch, and not just on the parade grounds with gallows that 
looked like the goal posts on the ends of football fields. On March 8, 1945, nineteen 
condemned men were hanged in this way, and on Palm Sunday fifty-seven were 
executed. Palm Sunday, incidentally, was eight days before the Liberation, when we 
could even hear the Allied cannon very near and when the outcome of the war could 
not have been in any doubt in the minds of the S. S.! But, the story of the butcher's 
hook, which was told about Buchenwald, where the instrument was found in the 
crematory oven, was unlikely to have been true of Dora. In any case, I never heard 
anything about it in the camp itself and it did not fit in with the way things were done 
at Dora. On the instigation of the notorious Oberscharführer Sanders, S. S., with whom 
I had something to do, other methods of execution were used for the saboteurs. The unfortunates were made to dig narrow ditches, in which their comrades 
were forced to bury them up to the neck. They were left for a certain length of 
time. After that an S. S. with a long handled axe cut off their heads.

--- PAGE BREAK ---94
But the sadism of some of the S.

S.

led them to discover an even more cruel 
death.

They ordered other prisoners to pour barrow loads of sand over their 
poor heads.

I am still haunted by the looks, etc ...

(Page 77) 
This, too, was never done at Dora.

But the story was told to me in almost the same 
words, in that camp, by prisoners who had been transferred there from other camps 
and who all claimed to have been present at the scene: Mauthausen, Birkenau, 
Flossenburg, Neuengamme, etc...

Back in France I came across references to it by 
various writers; but none concerned Buchenwald or Dora because it was not desirable 
to place the story, in a written testimony, at a camp where it did not take place.

French 
public opinion, catching an author in a deliberate error, would have become 
suspicious about all the accounts concerning all of the camps, and German public 
opinion also would have made an issue of this lie.

Concerning the fate of the deportees, Frère Birin reports as follows: 
As Geheimnisträger (those who knew the secret of the VI and V2) we knew 
we were condemned to death and destined to be massacred as soon as the 
Allies approached (Page 97) 
Here it is not a question of a fact but of speculation.

Such speculation was engaged in 
by all the writers of memoirs about the camps up to and including Leon Blum in Le 
Dernier Mois.

Blum found some semblance of justification for his speculation in the 
drownings in the Baltic of some deportees who a short time before Liberation were 
loaded onto boats which were set adrift and which were allegedly sunk from the shore 
by gunfire.

In addition, he pointed to the statement of an S.

S.

doctor at Dora who 
confirmed the existence of secret orders to that effect, and who, in so doing, saved his 
own life.

In any case, the Geheimnisträger at Dora were not massacred; nor was anyone in the 
evacuation convoy in which Leon Blum was included.--- PAGE BREAK ---

doctor at Dora who 
confirmed the existence of secret orders to that effect, and who, in so doing, saved his 
own life. In any case, the Geheimnisträger at Dora were not massacred; nor was anyone in the 
evacuation convoy in which Leon Blum was included. For a long time it was 
maintained that the absence of massacres, which was the case in all the camps, 
resulted solely because, in the turmoil of the German collapse, the S.S. had neither the 
time nor the means to carry out their sinister execution plans. Then one day, January 
6, 1951, light was thrown suddenly on the worth of that assumption On that day, in Le 
Figaro littéraire, Mr. Jacques Sabille, of the Center of Jewish Documentation at Paris 
wrote under the title "Un Juif négocie avec Himmler" that: 
It was thanks to pressure from Gunther, put on Himmler through the 
intermediary of Kersten (his personal physician), that the fratricidal order to 
sack the camps at the approach of the Allies --without sparing the guards -- 
remained a dead letter. This means that this order, supposedly received by everyone, and brandished with 
such forceful indignation against the accused at Nuremberg, although not one of the 
prosecutors could produce a copy of it, was never given by anyone who had the 
authority to issue it. In 1960, in the Les Mains du Miracle, a study by Dr. Kersten, 
Joseph Kessel confirmed this account unreservedly.

--- PAGE BREAK ---95
For having testified that the order actually did exist, Dr.

Piazza, the S.S.

physician at 
Dora, saved his life, and a number of good marks were awarded him, among them the 
following statement, made on the 25th day of June, 1954, at the Struthof Trial, by Dr.

Bogaerts, Major-Doctor at Etterbeek (Belgium): 
I had managed to get myself detailed to the infirmary of the camp, and there I 
was under S.S.

Doctor Piazza's orders, the only man at Struthof with any 
humane feelings.

Now at Dora, where this Dr.

Piazza assumed the position of head doctor of the camp, 
opinion was unanimous in putting the responsibility on him for all that was inhuman 
in the diagnosis and treatment of illness in the camp.

The reports from the Revier 
(infirmary) were crammed with his misdeeds, which, it was said, his assistant Dr.

Kuntz was only able to mitigate with great difficulty.

Those who knew him at 
Struthof spoke of him in horrifying terms.

I personally had contact with him and agree 
with all those in the same position: he was a brute among brutes.

Back in France, I 
was surprised to see so many certificates of good behavior given--by privileged 
prisoners, true--to a man whom everyone at the camp, even the better disposed, 
wanted to see hanged.

I could only understand it after I had learned that he had been 
the first, and for a long time the only one, to attest to the authenticity of the order to 
destroy all of the camps on the approach of the Allies, and to murder all of their 
occupants, guards included.

It was his reward for false testimony; the worth of which 
at the time could not be known, but which was indispensable for the fabrication of a 
theory itself indispensable to a policy!I could only understand it after I had learned that he had been 
the first, and for a long time the only one, to attest to the authenticity of the order to 
destroy all of the camps on the approach of the Allies, and to murder all of their 
occupants, guards included.

It was his reward for false testimony; the worth of which 
at the time could not be known, but which was indispensable for the fabrication of a 
theory itself indispensable to a policy!

As for the drownings in the Baltic, it has long been a question as to whether they were 
an isolated instance, due to the excessive zeal of underlings, or whether they were part 
of a general plan drawn up in various departments on the initiative of Himmler, head 
of the German Police, and later Minister of the Interior.

In reality this is what took 
place: On the 3rd of May, 1945, in the roads at Neustadt near Lubeck, three ships that 
were loaded with deportees, who, by an agreement between Himmler and Count 
Folke Bernadotte, were to be transported to Sweden and from there repatriated to their 
various countries, were waiting for the order to sail; they were the Cap Arcona, the 
Deutschland, and the Thielbeck.

On that same day, the three ships were attacked by 
British aircraft, which persisted for hours in the attack, even though the people on the 
ships hoisted up, from the moment of the first bomb, white flags, and spread out on 
the decks all the linen, towels, sheets, etc.

that they had.

But, nothing worked, and the 
attack was not ended until the pilots decided that no one was left alive on board.

There were 7,000 dead, buried in a cemetery especially made for them.

Most of the 
victims were of foreign nationalities and came from thirty different countries.

However, prior to the burial, the mass of bodies that had been taken out of the 
smoldering ships was piled up on the shore.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Most of the 
victims were of foreign nationalities and came from thirty different countries. However, prior to the burial, the mass of bodies that had been taken out of the 
smoldering ships was piled up on the shore. Photographs and films made of the 
corpses -- piled like so much cordwood --were circulated all over the world, and the 
commentaries of many journalists made them appear as a new atrocity to add to 
Germany's charge. This was all the easier since the shore batteries of the German 
D.C.A. had opened fire on the British warplanes, and that fact provided a perfect 
occasion for spreading the word that the Germans had fired on the three ships, under 
orders.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
The mystery has been cleared up for almost ten years now. It is known that the three 
ships were destroyed by an attack of British warplanes. This fact is admitted by 
historians all over the world, even those of the World Center of Jewish 
Documentation and the Institut fur Zeitgeschichte at Munich. But in La Tragédie de la 
Déportation (1962) Madame Olga Wormser and Mr. Henri Michel still maintain that 
the drownings in the Baltic were the work of German artillery which had fired on the 
three ships from the shore. And, no one contests their error -- not even the Center of 
Jewish Documentation or the Institut fur Zeitgeschichte of Munich, which not only let 
it stand but which continue to give praise to that "remarkable work."

II. Abbé Jean-Paul Renardn the Center of 
Jewish Documentation or the Institut fur Zeitgeschichte of Munich, which not only let 
it stand but which continue to give praise to that "remarkable work."

II. Abbé Jean-Paul Renard

Deported with registration number 39,727, Abbé Jean-Paul Renard preceded Frère 
Birin and myself by several weeks to Buchenwald; it was Dora where we met him 
again. He published a collection of poems inspired by a sometimes moving mysticism 
with the title Chaines et Lumières. These poems consist of a series of spiritual 
reactions rather than any attempt at objective testimony. One of them, nevertheless, 
enumerates some facts: J'ai vu, j'ai vu, et j'ai vécu... Frère Birin published it in an 
appendix to his own work, which has been discussed in the first section of this 
chapter. One of the poems reads: 
"I saw going into the showers thousands and thousands of persons over whom 
poured out, instead of liquid, asphyxiating gases. I saw those who were unfit 
for work injected in the heart." 
Actually, Abbé Jean-Paul Renard saw nothing of the kind because gas chambers did 
not exist either at Buchenwald or at Dora. As for the injections, it was not done at 
Buchenwald at the time he went through there. When I pointed that fact out to him at 
the beginning of 1947, he answered, "Right, but that's only a figure of speech... and 
since those things existed somewhere, it is of no importance." 
I found his reasoning delightful. At the moment I did not dare to retort that the Battle 
of Fontenoy was also an historical reality, but that was no reason for saying, even as a 
figure of speech, that he had been present. Nor did I say that, if twenty eight thousand 
survivors of the Nazi camps had claimed that they had been present at all of the 
horrors set forth by all of the testimonies, the camps would assume, in the eyes of 
history, quite a different image than if each survivor had confined himself to telling 
only what he had actually seen. Nor did I mention that it was in our interest that not 
one of us should be guilty of lying or exaggeration. 
When, in July 1947, J'ai vu, j'ai vu et j'ai vécu appeared in Chaines et Lumieres, I had 
the satisfaction of noting that, although the author had allowed his testimony on the 
injections to remain in its entirety, he had nevertheless honestly attributed his 
statement on them as well as on the gas chambers to another prisoner, who, in turn, 
had laid the responsibility on still another deportee.n its entirety, he had nevertheless honestly attributed his 
statement on them as well as on the gas chambers to another prisoner, who, in turn, 
had laid the responsibility on still another deportee.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

97evertheless honestly attributed his 
statement on them as well as on the gas chambers to another prisoner, who, in turn, 
had laid the responsibility on still another deportee.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

97

III. Abbé Robert Ploton 
Abbé Robert Ploton was curé at the Nativité at St. Etienne and presently is curé at 
Firminy. He was deported to Buchenwald with the number 44,015, in January, 1944, 
in the same convoy with me. We ended up together in Block 48, which we left, also 
together, for Dora. His account of his deportation, entitled Montluc à Dora, was 
published by Dumas in March, 1946 at St. Etienne. 
Montluc à Dora is an unpretentious testimony of 90 pages. Abbé Ploton states the 
facts simply, as he saw them, without going into much detail and often without 
checking himself. Manifestly he is quite sincere, and if he sins, it is out of a natural 
predisposition for the superficial heightened by the eagerness with which he recounts 
his memories. 
For example, when the German collapse came, he was sent to Bergen-Belsen. But, he 
writes "Belsen-Bergen" throughout the chapter in which he tells about this, so that one 
cannot think that it was a mere typographical error. And he misses other facts: In 
Block 48, at Buchenwald, he heard someone say, "We are under the orders of a 
German prisoner, Communist ex-deputy of the Reichstag," (Page 26), and he accepted 
that statement as being fact. Actually, the particular Block Chief in question, Erich, 
was only the son of a Communist deputy. 
As concerns the camp food, it is doubtless in the same manner that he writes: 
On principle, the daily menu consisted of a liter of soup, 400 grams of a very 
heavy bread, 20 grams of margarine extracted from coal, and a dessert which 
varied: sometimes a spoon of jam, sometimes white cheese, or again some 
ersatz sausage. (Page 63-64) 
So many people have said that the margarine was made from coal, and without being 
questioned, that the exact origin of that product is no longer brought up. After all, 
Louis Martin-Chauffier did even better in writing that: 
It seems that nothing pleases them [the S.S.] unless it is artificial; and the 
margarine that they stingily distributed to us derived all its flavor from having 
been a product made from coal. [The cardboard box was labeled "Guaranteed 
to contain no fat."] (L'Homme et la bete, Page 95) 
When Abbé Ploton undertakes to speak of the categories of prisoners he finds eight 
classifications, without realizing that there were in reality thirty and when he talks 
about the camp regime, he writes: 
One of the most effective and ignoble ways to moral degradation, inspired by 
the instructions in "Mein Kampf" is to charge a few prisoners, chosen almost 
exclusively from the Germans, with the policing of the camp. (Page 28, 
emphasis added.)o moral degradation, inspired by 
the instructions in "Mein Kampf" is to charge a few prisoners, chosen almost 
exclusively from the Germans, with the policing of the camp. (Page 28, 
emphasis added.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---inspired by 
the instructions in "Mein Kampf" is to charge a few prisoners, chosen almost 
exclusively from the Germans, with the policing of the camp. (Page 28, 
emphasis added.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
He does not know that this ignoble procedure is used, precisely because it is effective, 
in all the prisons of the world, and that that was the case long before Hitler wrote 
Mein Kampf (2). Shall we recall that Dante n 'avait rien vu, by Albert Londres, 
establishes France in the application of this system in her prisons and jails? 
On the duration of the roll-calls, which plagued all of the prisoners, here is the 
explanation that he gives: 
We wait for the count to be verified, a laborious job the length of which 
depends on the humor of the S.S. Rapport-Fuhrer. (Page 59, emphasis added.) 
The length of the roll-calls, if it depended on the humor of the Rapport-Fuhrer, also 
depended upon the competence of those persons who were in charge of establishing 
every day the number of the men present. Among them there were S.S. personnel who 
generally knew how to count, but there were also illiterate, or almost so, prisoners 
who had become clerks in the Arbeitsstatistik only as a favor. It must not be forgotten 
that the employment of each prisoner in a concentration camp was determined by his 
ability to get around and not by his ability to do the job. At Dora, as everywhere else, 
it happened that masons became accountants, accountants became masons or 
carpenters, wheelwrights became doctors or surgeons, and it could even happen that a 
doctor or a surgeon became a fitter, an electrician or an earth-works laborer. 
Concerning the injections, Abbé Ploton sides with the general view: 
Meanwhile the infirmary had to be expanded and an increasing number of its 
barracks were built on the hillside. Those with incurable tuberculosis ended 
their poor existence there as a result of an euthanasia injection. 
This practice, as I have explained in earlier pages, is not true. 
With the exception of these remarks, this witness is not tainted by a mania for 
exaggeration. He is simply crushed by an experience which was too much for him. 
And the inaccuracies of which he is guilty are only minor when compared with those 
of Frère Birin; they also carry much less influence. But, a concern for objectivity, 
nevertheless, requires that they be noted.curacies of which he is guilty are only minor when compared with those 
of Frère Birin; they also carry much less influence. But, a concern for objectivity, 
nevertheless, requires that they be noted.

FOOTNOTES 
(1). So fragile was the case against Ilse Koch that the Augsburg Court of Assizes, 
dealing with the case, refused to hold her for trial due to the lack of evidence. 
(2).See Appendix A to this volume: La discipline à la Maison centrale de Riom, in 
1939, by Pierre Bernard, who was interned there, and Dans les prisons de la 
"Liberation" a testimony given by A. Paraz.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99

Chapter Nine 
Louis Martin-Chauffierrale de Riom, in 
1939, by Pierre Bernard, who was interned there, and Dans les prisons de la 
"Liberation" a testimony given by A. Paraz.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99

Chapter Nine 
Louis Martin-Chauffier

He falls between the lesser witnesses, whom he surpasses due to his effort to explain 
in a learned way the experiences which he lived through, and the great tenors like 
David Rousset, whose power of analysis he lacks, or like Eugen Kogon, whose 
exactness and attention to detail he lacks. Given that, and taking into account the 
place that he occupies in post-war literature and journalism, he cannot be classified 
with either the first or with the second. 
Martin-Chauffier is a writer by profession. He belongs to that class of writers called 
"committed." He is committed, but he frees himself often enough -- in order to 
recommit himself, since commitment is second nature to him. He has been known as a 
fellow-traveler, and he is now an anti-Communist. Probably, moreover, for the same 
reasons and under the same circumstances -- i.e., it is the thing to do. He could not fail 
to give his testimony on the concentration camps for a couple of reasons: First, 
because his profession is writing. Second, because he had to get straight for himself 
what had happened to him. The others profited by him. Doubtless, he did not realize 
that he was saying just what everybody else said, although he expressed it differently. 
The title of his testimony is L'Homme et la Bete (1948, Gallimard). As far as 
originality is concerned, he saw the cardboard boxes, which contained the margarine -
- made of coal, of course -- which were given to us with the label "Guaranteed to 
contain no fat." Other than that, his testimony is a long chain of reasoning based on 
facts which the author has isolated from all moral or other reflections.ven to us with the label "Guaranteed to 
contain no fat." Other than that, his testimony is a long chain of reasoning based on 
facts which the author has isolated from all moral or other reflections.

I. The Line of Argument 
Before he was deported to Neuengamme, Louis Martin-Chauffier was for a while at 
Compiègne-Royallieu. He knew Captain Douce there, who was then camp elder. Here 
is his opinion of him: 
Captain Douce, "doyen" of the camp and zealous servant of those who had put 
him in that position, perched on a table, doing his figures out loud, chain-
smoking the cigarettes which had been refused to us, against regulations. (p. 
51). 
At Neuengamme, he knew Andre who was one of the important inmates in the camp, 
an official with authority, chosen from the prisoners by the S.S. This is the portrait he 
gives of him: 
Narrowly watched by the S.S. a most suspicious sort, he was forced, in order 
to keep the role he had chosen and gotten with difficulty, to speak roughly to

--- PAGE BREAK ---100
the prisoners, to make a show of being without feeling, unbending and brutal 
in his language.

He knew that the least sign of weakness would inexorably 
bring denunciation down on him, and his immediate dismissal.

Nearly 
everyone was taken in by his manner, believed him to be working with the SS, 
their creature, our enemy.

Since he was responsible for the sorting out and 
allocation of posts, he was blamed for all those he sent to the Kommandos, 
with apparent indifference, deaf to prayers, pleas, recriminations...

When a 
thousand deportees were to go to the Kommandos, and only about 990 were 
piling into the cattle cars, no one realized how many ruses Andre had used, all 
the risks he had run, to preserve ten men from probable death...

He knew that 
he was universally detested or suspect.

He had chosen it that way, preferring 
the service he could render to esteem...

As I saw Andre, he accepted in the same spirit the menacing cordiality of the 
SS, the corresponding servility of the Kapos and the Block chiefs, the hostility 
of the mass.

I think that he had risen above humiliation, substituted a glacial 
purity for his own inner courage, a stranger even to himself.

He had renounced 
his being, in favor of a duty which in his eyes was deserving of this 
submission.

(Pages 167-168-169.) 
Thus of the two men fulfilling the same function, one gets the laconic severity and 
contempt of the author, while the other enjoys not only his approving indulgence, but 
even his admiration.

When one examines this inconsistency further, one learns, during 
the course of reading the work, that Andre rendered considerable service to Martin-
Chauffier in circumstances when his life was in danger.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Pages 167-168-169.) 
Thus of the two men fulfilling the same function, one gets the laconic severity and 
contempt of the author, while the other enjoys not only his approving indulgence, but 
even his admiration. When one examines this inconsistency further, one learns, during 
the course of reading the work, that Andre rendered considerable service to Martin-
Chauffier in circumstances when his life was in danger. I did not know Captain Douce 
at Compiègne, but it is very likely that, compared with Andre, his only mistake was in 
not knowing how to choose the people for whom he did favors -- since he, too, 
certainly had his favorites -- and in having too limited a familiarity with literature to 
know that there was in his realm a certain number of Martin-Chauffiers, and even 
Martin-Chauffier himself. And it is not beside the point to add that this kind of reasoning leads to: 
I have always admired, with some fear and some repulsion THOSE who, in 
order to serve their country or a cause they consider just, are willing to face all 
the consequences of duplicity: the contemptuous defiance of the enemy 
employing them, and his confidence when HE deceives THEM; and the 
disgust of his comrades in battle who see in HIM a traitor; and the abject 
comraderie of the real traitors or those who have simply sold themselves, who 
seeing HIM doing the same thing, consider HIM as ONE of them. It requires a 
self-renunciation that is beyond me, a guile which confounds me and goes 
against my grain. (1) (Page 168) 
One wonders whether Pétain's attorneys might not make use of this kind of argument, 
whose pungency comes from having issued from the pen of one of crypto-
Communism's finest ornaments. If Petainism becomes fashionable again, Martin-
Chauffier, in any case, will have reason to be proud of it, and perhaps to profit from 
it...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
II. Another Line of Argumentnts. If Petainism becomes fashionable again, Martin-
Chauffier, in any case, will have reason to be proud of it, and perhaps to profit from 
it...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
II. Another Line of Argument

In the camp the author was talking with a doctor who said to him: 
There are at present in the camp three times as many sick people as I can take 
care of. The war will be over in five or six months, at the latest. It is up to me 
to see to it that the greatest possible number hold out. I have decided. You and 
others, you will get better slowly. If I send you back to the, camp in this state 
and at this season (we were at the end of December) you will be dead in three 
weeks. I am going to keep you here. And -- listen carefully --I am going to 
bring in those who are not so seriously afflicted, those that a stay in the Revier 
can save. Those who are lost, I am going to reject. (2) I cannot afford the 
luxury of letting them in just to give them a peaceful death. What I can assure 
is the care of the living. The others will die eight days sooner: in any case, 
they would die too soon. It can't be helped, I am not here to be sentimental, but 
to be effective. That's my job. All my colleagues are in agreement, that's the 
right thing to do ... Everytime that I refuse to let in a dying man, and he looks 
at me with stupor, fear, with reproach, I would like to explain to him that I am 
exchanging his lost life for a life that can be saved. He would not understand, 
etc... (Page 160) 
As far as admittance into the infirmary is concerned, I had the experience that one 
could get into the Revier and be cared for (in a loose manner of speaking) for reasons 
among which sickness or infirmity were sometimes only secondary; know-how, pull, 
politics and bribery were the common reasons for getting a hospital bed. I attributed 
this fact to the general conditions of concentration camp life. Further, if some prisoner 
doctors behaved the way Martin-Chaufier says this one did, that conduct should be 
recorded as both a philosophical argument and as a causal element, side by side with 
the "sadism" of the SS, in explaining the large number of deaths. For it takes a great 
deal of knowledge, confidence, and also presumption, for a doctor to determine in a 
few minutes who can be saved and who cannot. And, I am very much afraid that if 
such were the case generally among doctors, then once having taken this first step 
toward a new code of professional conduct, they might progressively arrive at another 
by asking themselves no longer who could be saved but who ought to be saved and 
who ought not and by resolving this problem of conscience on grounds that have 
nothing to do with therapeutics.other 
by asking themselves no longer who could be saved but who ought to be saved and 
who ought not and by resolving this problem of conscience on grounds that have 
nothing to do with therapeutics.

III. The Regime of the Camps 
The treatment inflicted on us by the S.S. was the execution of a plan worked 
out in high places. It could have refinements, embellishments, flourishes, due 
to the initiative, the imagination, the tastes of the head of the camp; sadism has 
nuances. The overall plan was fixed. Before killing us or making us die, we 
had to be debased. (Page 85)

--- PAGE BREAK ---itiative, the imagination, the tastes of the head of the camp; sadism has 
nuances. The overall plan was fixed. Before killing us or making us die, we 
had to be debased. (Page 85)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
During the occupation, there existed in France an Association of the Families of 
Deportees and Political Internees. If a family sent an inquiry to the Association for 
information about what had become of its deportee, it received, in the return mail, a 
report coming from those German "high places." 
Here is this report. (3) 
Weimar camp. -The camp is situated 9 k m. from Weimar and is connected to 
it with a railroad. It lies at an altitude of 800 m. It consists of three enclosures 
of concentrically strung barbed wire. In the first enclosure, the prisoners 
barracks, between the first and the second, the factories and the workshops 
where T.S.F. accessories are manufactured, pieces of machinery, etc... 
Between the second and the third lies an area not yet built upon, which has just 
been cleared of trees, and where they are laying out camp streets and a small 
railroad. 
The first enclosure of barbed wire is electrified and is marked out with a great 
many watch towers, on top of which there are three armed men. No sentinels 
in the second and third enclosures, but within the area of the factories there is 
an SS caserne; during the night they patrol with dogs, likewise in the third 
enclosure. 
The camp spreads over 8 k m. and contains about 30,000 internees. At the 
beginning of the Nazi regime, its enemies were interned there. The population 
is partly French, partly foreign, anti-Nazi Germans, but who remain Germans, 
and who make up most of the Block chiefs. There are also Russians, among 
them officers of the Red Army, Hungarians, Poles, Belgians, Dutch, etc. ... 
The camp regulations are as follows: 
4:30 -- Rise, wash, under surveillance, stripped to the waist; washing the body 
is obligatory. 
5:30 -- a half liter of soup or coffee, with 450 gr. of bread (at times they have 
less bread, but they have an abundant ration of potatoes of good quality), 30 
gr. margarine, a slice of sausage or a piece of cheese. 
12:00 -- noon - coffee. 
18:30 -- a liter of good thick soup. 
In the morning at six, leave for work. Assembly is by job, factory, quarry, 
woodcutters, etc... In each detachment the men line up in rows of five, holding 
each other by the arm so that the ranks are well aligned and separated. Then 
they leave, with music at the head (70 or 80 musicians from among the 
prisoners, in uniform: red pants, blue jackets with black trimming.) 
Sanitation in the camp is very good. At the head of this is Professor Richet, 
deportee. Medical checkup every day. There are numerous doctors, an 
infirmary and a hospital, just as for a regiment. The internees wear themp is very good. At the head of this is Professor Richet, 
deportee. Medical checkup every day. There are numerous doctors, an 
infirmary and a hospital, just as for a regiment. The internees wear the

--- PAGE BREAK ---103
costume of German convicts made of artificial cloth, relatively warm.

Their 
underclothing has been disinfected on arrival.

There is one blanket for two 
men.

There is no chapel in the camp.

There are, however, a number of priests 
among the internees, but they generally have concealed their calling.

These 
priests gather together the faithful for talks, recitation of the rosary, etc.

...

Free time -- Complete liberty in the camp on Sunday afternoon.

This afternoon 
is enlivened by a theatrical group organized by the prisoners.

Cinema, once or 
twice per week (German films), radio in each barrack (German news).

Fine 
concerts are given by the orchestra made up of internees.

All the prisoners agree that they are better off at Weimar than they were at 
Fresnes or in the other French prisons.

We call attention to the families of the deportees that the Allied bombardment 
of the factories at Weimar toward the end of August did not find a single 
victim among the deportees of the camp.

Jean Puissant, who quoted the above, followed it with this appraisal: "a monument of 
deceit and lies." 
Self-evidently, it is written in a benevolent style.

It does not say that in the workshops 
of Buchenwald the pieces of machinery being made were weapons.

It does not speak 
of the hangings for sabotage, the numerous roll-calls, the conditions of work, or the 
physical punishments.

It does not point out that the Sunday afternoon liberty was 
subject to limitations which depended upon what went on in the place; nor does it say 
that if the priests gathered together their faithful for talks and prayers, that such 
gatherings were clandestine and, were held at the risk that they might be taken for a 
meeting of conspirators.

It even lies when it says that the deportees thought they were 
better off than in French prisons, that the August 1944 bombardment had no victims 
among the internees, and that most of the trains leaving Compiègne or Fresnes at that 
date were headed for Weimar.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It does not point out that the Sunday afternoon liberty was 
subject to limitations which depended upon what went on in the place; nor does it say 
that if the priests gathered together their faithful for talks and prayers, that such 
gatherings were clandestine and, were held at the risk that they might be taken for a 
meeting of conspirators. It even lies when it says that the deportees thought they were 
better off than in French prisons, that the August 1944 bombardment had no victims 
among the internees, and that most of the trains leaving Compiègne or Fresnes at that 
date were headed for Weimar. But, such as it is this text is closer to the truth than the testimony of Frère Birin, 
particularly with regard to the food. And, it still is a resume of the regulations of the 
camps as they were established by the higher levels of the Nazi government. That 
these regulations were not applied often at the local level is certain. History will tell 
why. Probably, it will consider the war as the major cause as well as the principle of 
camp administration by the prisoners themselves. The deterioration which, in a 
hierarchical administration, all orders undergo as they are handed down from the top 
to the bottom will be listed also. This deterioration can be seen, for example, in a 
regiment where the orders of the colonel are delivered by the lieutenant to the 
sergeant who has the responsibility for their execution. Everyone knows that in a 
caserne it is the sergeant who is dangerous, not the colonel. For my part, I am convinced that, within the constraints imposed by the condition of 
total war, there was nothing to prevent the prisoners who administered over us, who 
commanded us, who supervised us, and who cadred us, from making life in a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
concentration camp something resembling closely the picture that the Germans 
presented to the families of prisoners.o supervised us, and who cadred us, from making life in a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
concentration camp something resembling closely the picture that the Germans 
presented to the families of prisoners.

IV. Maltreatment 
I saw my unfortunate comrades, guilty only of not having strong enough arms, 
die under blows lavished on them by German political prisoners promoted to 
overseer, who had become the accomplices of their former enemies. (Page 92) 
Those brutes, while striking, did not at first intend to kill; nevertheless they 
did kill in an access of joyous fury, eyes bloodshot, face scarlet and foam on 
their lips, because they could not stop themselves, they had to go to the very 
end of their pleasure. 
Here we have a deed which, for change, is imputed to the prisoners without any 
qualifications. One never knows: it is possible that there are people who kill "in an 
access of joyous fury" and whose only purpose is "to go to the very end of their 
pleasure." In the normal world, there are abnormal people; likewise, there can also be 
some in a world where everything is abnormal, such as a concentration camp. But, I 
am rather led to think that if a Kapo, a Block Chief, or a camp elder let himself go to 
that extent, it was for motives arising from more likely reasons: the need for revenge; 
the desire to please the masters who had given him his choice post; the desire to hold 
onto it at any price, etc. I believe that even if they had resorted to the brutality which 
is described above, they usually stopped short of killing a man, since his death might 
have gotten them in trouble with the SS, at least at Buchenwald and Dora. 
In spite of this explanation, Martin-Chauffier must be forgiven for having cited two 
more actions whose criminal nature can in no way be considered the result of the 
execution of a plan "worked out in high places": 
Each week the Kapo of the Revier made his rounds (he was completely 
ignorant about it), examined the temperature charts whose margins were 
covered with remarks about a disturbing diagnosis, looked at the sick: if he 
didn't like their looks, he stated that they were to leave, whatever condition 
they were in. The doctor tried to forestall or influence his decision, which was 
difficult to foresee, since the Kapo whose impressions took the place of 
knowledge was a lunatic, besides. (Page 185). The frigid draft, the obligatory 
washing stripped to the waist, were hygienic provisions. Each killing process 
was thus cloaked in the guise of sanitation. This proved to be most efficacious. 
All those who suffered from some chest ailment were carried out in a few 
days. (Page 192). 
Nothing obliged the Kapo, the Stubendienst, or the Pfleger of the Revier, to let a draft 
of ice cold air through, to make the unfortunate patients in their care wash bare-
chested in cold water, or to render medical decisions without the concurrence of the 
treating physicians. Nevertheless, they did do it, with the aim of pleasing the SS, who 
most of the time knew nothing about it, and of holding on to the positions which 
saved their lives. One would like to have seen Martin-Chauffier direct his accusationshe aim of pleasing the SS, who 
most of the time knew nothing about it, and of holding on to the positions which 
saved their lives. One would like to have seen Martin-Chauffier direct his accusations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
against them with as much vigor as he has done against the SS, or -- at least -- divide 
the responsibility between them.to have seen Martin-Chauffier direct his accusations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
against them with as much vigor as he has done against the SS, or -- at least -- divide 
the responsibility between them.

V. A Qualified Witness? 
The following is an account of Martin-Chauffier which was written by Dominique 
Canavaggio (former editor-in-chief of Temps de Paris and son-in-law of Pastor 
Boegner): 
Louis Martin-Chauffier -- who later was to be arrested by the Gestapo and 
sent to Auschwitz -- was a contributor to Sept jours, a weekly newspaper of 
Jean Prouvost. One morning when I was in Lyon he visited me. His face was 
distorted with anxiety. He said, "My daughter has tuberculosis; her condition 
is very serious. I have tried to have her treated in France. It is impossible: 
nowhere here does one find combined the necessary altitude, comfortable 
accommodations and board: only a sojourn in Switzerland could save her. Do 
you think that she could obtain a travel pass from Laval?" 
I promised him even to attempt the impossible, and upon my return I went 
immediately to see the head of the government in Vichy. Impossible was truly 
the right word, for since November 1942 the Germans tightly controlled all 
travel in and out of France at the Swiss frontier; they allowed, practically, no 
one to cross the border except some official persons. Besides, the name of 
Martin-Chauffier was already at that time suspected by Laval and was not 
likely, for that reason, to make things easier. Laval listened to my request 
without interrupting me, then when I had finished, he said, "Martin-
Chauffier?... He is, I suppose, the fellow who at the time of Munich wrote an 
article in which he demanded that I should be sent to the gallows?" 
"Yes," Mr. President, "that is he." 
There was a moment of silence. I looked at him firmly. Finally he spoke, "Tell 
him that his daughter will go to Switzerland... Arrange the formalities with 
Bousquet." "Thank you, Mr. President; I was sure that you would do it. And I 
am not sure that Martin-Chauffier will be grateful ..." 
He motioned me back and said, "I want no thanks. I do it from a sense of duty 
to mankind." 
As we have seen, Martin-Chauffier, was especially suited to become one of the 
leaders of the Resistance Movement in France. He furthermore "honored" with his 
(episodic) collaboration Le Figaro, Paris-Press, and Paris Match. The biographical 
reference work, Pharos, writes of him that before the war he made his political 
opinions clearly recognizable, and his sympathy for Communism during the Civil 
War in Spain confirmed them. In 1939 he traveled in the U.S.S.R. The year 1945 
found him, naturally, again on the side of the Communists in the famous National 
Committee of Authors and among the most furious of persecutors.em. In 1939 he traveled in the U.S.S.R. The year 1945 
found him, naturally, again on the side of the Communists in the famous National 
Committee of Authors and among the most furious of persecutors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---led in the U.S.S.R. The year 1945 
found him, naturally, again on the side of the Communists in the famous National 
Committee of Authors and among the most furious of persecutors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
Without doubt, he had to try to be forgiven for what had happened between these two 
dates. For today, Martin-Chauffier, like Eugen Kogon and David Rousset, holds 
himself aloof (or acts as if he held himself aloof) from the Communists, whose game 
he has played and continues to play. But, for how long? I pose this question for a very 
good reason. 
On March 18, 1953, when I had just been sentenced by the Court of Appeals at Lyon, 
Jean Paulhan, since elected to the membership of the French Academy, wanted to 
express his sympathy; a 100,000 franc fine, together with an assessment of damages, 
in the sum of 800,000 francs, and a sentence of eight days in jail (which was 
suspended) had seemed alarming to him, and being less familiar than I was with such 
things, he did not know, as I did, that this judgment would surely be reversed by the 
Supreme Court. This is what he wrote: 
I have followed (from a distance) your trial and the iniquitous judgment that 
ended it. Your book was splendid, and I wish I had written it. Perhaps it is due 
to it, and to the obvious absurdity of the quarrels they have tried to pick with 
you, that I am indebted for not having been prosecuted. (4) As for Martin-
Chauffier, who indeed understands grammar but poorly, he was busy in 43 
getting for the Germans (specifically from Maison Beraud, metallurgy, 315 
rue Grimaldi, Lyon, for Captain Schwenn) ferrous and non-ferrous ores. That 
is what gives him the right to speak. Yours, with all sympathy. 
The witness for the prosecution at my trial, Martin-Chauffier had not dared confront 
me at the bar, and that is easy to understand, but he all the same sent the President of 
the Court a telegram in which he demanded "a merciless condemnation." 
Moral: Ah! These witnesses -- excuse me: Ah! These Resistants! That is all.nderstand, but he all the same sent the President of 
the Court a telegram in which he demanded "a merciless condemnation." 
Moral: Ah! These witnesses -- excuse me: Ah! These Resistants! That is all.

FOOTNOTES 
(1) This quotation has not been faked, in spite of the error in syntax that might make 
one think so, which is emphasized by the words in capital letters. In Le Droit de vivre 
of December 15, 1950, Martin-Chauffier claimed, in these words, that the text was 
correctly written: "It is useless to add that there is no error of syntax -- another lie -- 
but that a comma, inserted by M. Rassinier in place of the colon that I had put there, 
could deceive those not very sure of their grammar." For Martin-Chauffier is 
convinced that one nail drives out another. And he is too sure of his grammar" for one 
to be able easily to count on him for the relations that exist between the verb and its 
subject or the pronoun and its antecedent. The moral: a gentleman who comes out of 
the Ecole des Chartes is evidently not obliged to know what is expected of a child of 
ten to get into the 6th grade. Not wanting to haggle over a penny we re-inserted the 
colon claimed by Mr. Martin-Chauffier which an unfortunate slip had indeed replaced 
with a semi-colon in the first edition: the reader who can see that this changes 
anything is kindly requested to write to us. 
(2) Emphasized in the text.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
(3) As far as I know this has only been cited by Jean Puissant in his book, La Colline 
sans oiseaux (Editions du Rond-Point, 1945). A generally honest and detailed 
monograph, one of the best testimonies on the camps. 
(4) On February 20, 1952, Jean Paulhan had written an "Open Letter to the Directors 
of the Resistance" (Gallimard-Paris) in which he had questioned the prevailing 
orthodoxy, and which had produced as much emotion as Le Mensonge d'Ulysse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108er to the Directors 
of the Resistance" (Gallimard-Paris) in which he had questioned the prevailing 
orthodoxy, and which had produced as much emotion as Le Mensonge d'Ulysse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108

Chapter Ten 
The Psychologists: David Rousset and the Universe of 
the Concentration Campevailing 
orthodoxy, and which had produced as much emotion as Le Mensonge d'Ulysse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108

Chapter Ten 
The Psychologists: David Rousset and the Universe of 
the Concentration Camp

Of all of the witnesses, none has matched David Rousset's ability, power of evocation, 
and exactness in reconstructing the general atmosphere of the camps, of which he is 
the acknowledged great spokesman, worldwide. Neither, has any other witness 
fictionalized his account more or in a better fashion. 
I am afraid that history will remember his name; but mostly for his literary quality. At 
this level of history, properly so called, the wrapping outdoes the contents. He was, 
moreover, aware of this fact and attempted to forestall objections: 
I have reported certain things as they took place at Buchenwald, and not as 
they are described in documents published subsequently... 
...Especially are there contradictions in details, not only in the testimonies, but 
in the documents. Most of the texts published up to the present are concerned 
only with aspects quite outside life in the camps, or are apologies in the form 
of allusions which affirm principles rather than assemble facts. Such 
documents are valuable, but only if one is intimately acquainted with what is 
being said; in that case they often provide another hitherto unperceived link. I 
have made a special effort to bring forth the relations between the groups in 
their actual complexity and in their dynamics. (Les Jours de notre mort, 
Appendix, page 764.) 
This sort of reasoning allows him totally, or nearly so, to ignore the documents, and, 
in view of the fact that those pertaining to the camps in the East are both very few and 
very poor, to state that, "Recourse to direct testimony is the only proper way to 
proceed." He then selects from these direct testimonies those that best illustrate his 
way of looking at things at the moment. "Given these conditions," he acknowledges, 
"it was a bold -- perhaps one should say, rash -- venture to want to present a panorama 
of the whole of the concentration camp world." (Ibid.) 
One could not put it better than he does himself. But then, why describe the camps 
using this method in which all is based on categorical assertion? 
L'Univers concentrationnaire (Pavois, 1946) had a deserved success. In the midst of 
the minor witnesses who howled for vengeance and death on the heels of the defeated 
Germans, it tried to lay the responsibilities on Nazism and, by so doing, marked a new 
direction. 
By way of illustration of the atmosphere at the time, take Frère Birin, who penned the 
following warning:s, it tried to lay the responsibilities on Nazism and, by so doing, marked a new 
direction. 
By way of illustration of the atmosphere at the time, take Frère Birin, who penned the 
following warning:

--- PAGE BREAK ---109
The French should know and remember that the same errors will bring back 
the same horrors.

They should be informed of the character and shortcomings 
of their neighbors across the Rhine, a race of dominators, and that is why No.

43,652 wrote these lines.

Frenchmen, be vigilant and never forget.

(16 mois de 
bagne, p.

117.) 
And, that was the tone in all the French press, too.

"Le boche" was on everybody's 
lips, with the snarl that goes with the word when it is pronounced correctly.

In this 
atmosphere of hatred, pacifist France was grateful to David Rousset for having 
concluded with these words: 
The existence of the camps is a warning.

German society, both because of the 
strength of its economic structure, and the ruthlessness of the crisis which 
crushed it, has experienced a decomposition exceptional in the present 
situation of the world.

But it would be easy to show that the traits most 
characteristic of S.S.

mentality and the social substructures, can be found in 
many other areas in world society.

Less pronounced, however, and certainly 
not to be compared with the developments we have seen in the Great Reich.

But it is only a question of circumstances.

One would be guilty of deception if 
one pretended that it is impossible for other peoples to have the same 
experience because it is against their nature.

Germany has interpreted, with the 
originality peculiar to her history, the crisis which led her to the universe of 
concentration camps.

But the existence and mechanism of this crisis derive 
from the economic and social bases of capitalism and imperialism.

Under a 
new guise, analogous results could appear again tomorrow.

Consequently 
there is a very definite battle to be conducted.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Under a 
new guise, analogous results could appear again tomorrow. Consequently 
there is a very definite battle to be conducted. (Page 187) 
With the passage of time, what has happened in Algeria and in Indochina and what is 
today taking place between Blacks and Whites in the United States and between Jews 
and Arabs in the Middle East, has demonstrated, more than could be expected, how 
justified Rousset's theory was. Moreover, what was then still going on in Russia 
demonstrated it no less, but at that time David Rousset was careful not to make use of 
that argument. On a more mundane level one could find still more justifications; take 
this one for example: 
When several hundreds of thousands of adult "displaced persons" succeeded in 
getting out of the camps and in leaving for the two Americas, thousands of 
children remained behind, together with the old people, in the care of the 
I.R.O.... in the sinister barracks of Germany, Austria and Italy. But the 
International Refugee Organization is scheduled definitely to cease its 
activities in a few months, and one wonders what will be the fate of these 
orphans twice abandoned. Their situation is tragic right now, because in some 
camps they have not received more food in all than three to four hundred 
calories a day, and no one can say if even that inadequate ration can be kept 
up. The death rate under such conditions is terrible. (La Bataille, May 9, 
1950.) 
The paper said that there were thirteen million living like that, in a Europe that had 
got rid of Hitler and Mussolini. If an investigation had been made into the treatment

--- PAGE BREAK ---950.) 
The paper said that there were thirteen million living like that, in a Europe that had 
got rid of Hitler and Mussolini. If an investigation had been made into the treatment

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
that they were subjected to by their guardians, it would be interesting to see upon 
whom the responsibility would be placed. 
Les Jours de notre mort (1947), which takes up the facts as given in L'Univers 
concentrationnaire and carries them to the limits of speculation, strays far from that 
profession of faith while Le Pitre ne rit pas (1948) ignores it entirely. From which it 
must be concluded that David Rousset's thinking went through such evolutions, under 
cover of going into details, that his books ended up on a note much more anti-German 
than anti-Nazi in the eyes of the public. This evolution was all the more noticeable in 
that being shaded with certain weaknesses for Communism at the start, it developed, 
in the end, into an anti-Communism, which one would not want to say could never 
turn into Russophobia pure and simple, if the cold war should reach such a point as to 
turn into a shooting war. 
The originality, therefore, of L'Univers concentrationnaire lay in drawing a 
distinction between Germany and Nazism in the determination of responsibilities. 
But, this originality was more than matched by the sensational theory that justified the 
conduct of the prisoners who were in charge of running the affairs of the camps, on 
the basis that it was necessary to preserve, for the post-war period, the elite of the 
revolutionaries at the expense of all of the others. David Rousset embraced this theory 
by justifying the policy of saving a certain kind of prisoner, that he defined in terms of 
certain extra-humanitarian imperatives. As evidence of that policy, the malicious 
could point out that David Rousset was probably saved from death by the German 
Communist Kapo, Emile Kunder, who considered that he belonged to that 
revolutionary elite, who showed him great friendship for that reason, and who, today, 
disowns him.ved from death by the German 
Communist Kapo, Emile Kunder, who considered that he belonged to that 
revolutionary elite, who showed him great friendship for that reason, and who, today, 
disowns him.

I. The Postulate of the Theory 
It is normal, when all the active forces of one class are the stake of the greatest 
totalitarian battle yet invented, that the enemies be put where they can do no 
harm, and, if necessary, be exterminated. (Page 107) 
This statement is unassailable. His conclusion, set forth without transition, is much 
less so: "The purpose of the camps is indeed physical destruction." (Ibid.) One cannot 
but notice that, in the postulate itself, physical destruction is subordinate to necessity, 
and is envisaged only in cases where the extent of internment is not enough to prevent 
the individual from doing harm. 
After a leap, or an off-hand deduction, of this kind, there was no reason to stop, and 
he could write: 
The order bears the mark of the master. The commanding officer of the camp 
knows nothing. The Block-Fuhrer (S.S. responsible for the livelihood of a 
Block) knows nothing. The Lagerältester (camp elder, prisoner selected by the 
S.S.) knows nothing. Those who carry out the order know nothing. But the 
order prescribes death and the kind of death and how much time it shall take

--- PAGE BREAK ---er, prisoner selected by the 
S.S.) knows nothing. Those who carry out the order know nothing. But the 
order prescribes death and the kind of death and how much time it shall take

--- PAGE BREAK ---

111
to cause death. And in this desert of knowing nothing, that is enough. (Page 
100, emphasis added.) 
With this assertion he found a way both of placing the responsibility of the camps on 
those "high-places" of Louis Martin-Chauffier, and of allowing him to conclude in 
favor of a pre-established plan for the systematizing of terror, justified by a 
philosophy. 
The enemy, in the philosophy of the S.S., is the force of evil, intellectually and 
physically expressed. The Communist, the socialist, the German liberal, the 
revolutionaries, the foreign Resistants are the active representations of evil. 
But the objective existence of certain races: the Jews, the Poles, the Russians, 
is a static expression of evil. It is not necessary for a Jew, a Pole, or a Russian 
to act against National Socialism; they are by birth, by predestination un-
assimilable heretics, dedicated to the apocalyptic fire. Death therefore has no 
complete meaning. Only expiation can satisfy and appease the lords. The 
concentration camps are the astonishing and complex machinery of expiation. 
Those who are to die go to their deaths with a slowness calculated so that 
their physical and moral downfall, by degrees, shall finally make them 
conscious of the fact that they are accursed, the expressions of evil, and not 
men. And that priest-administrator of justice feels a sort of secret pleasure, a 
deep-seated sensation of delight, in ruining bodies. (Pages 108-109, emphasis 
added.) 
From this excerpt it can be seen that, starting from concentration camps as places to 
put enemies where they can do no harm, one can easily make of them institutions of 
extermination and one can elaborate to infinity on the purpose of that extermination. 
From the moment that one reaches that stage, it becomes no more than an intellectual 
exercise where one can demonstrate his aptitude for mental constructions and his 
talent for writing. But, the literary effort which produces such a fine description of 
sadism is perfectly useless, and one need not have lived through the experience to 
describe it like that; one need only consult Tomas de Torquemada and copy down the 
arguments of the Spanish Inquisition. 
I shall not waste time with a discussion of the first part of the explanation which ties 
the Russians and the Poles together with the Jews in the minds of the Nazi leaders; it 
is obvious fantasy.. 
I shall not waste time with a discussion of the first part of the explanation which ties 
the Russians and the Poles together with the Jews in the minds of the Nazi leaders; it 
is obvious fantasy.

II. The Labor 
By labor is meant a means of punishment. Concentration camp manpower is 
of secondary interest, a preoccupation foreign to the nature of the 
concentration camp universe. Psychologically, it was connected by that sadism 
that forced the prisoners to strengthen the instruments of their bondage. 
"It was because of the accidents of history that the camps also became public 
works enterprises. On the extension of the war to a world scale, calling for the 
total employment of everybody and everything, the lame, the deaf, the blind,

--- PAGE BREAK ---112
and the PGs, the S.S., with lashes of the whip, enrolled the blind mob of the 
concentration camps for the most destructive tasks .

.

.

The work of the 
concentration inmates did not have as its ultimate object the carrying out of 
specific tasks, but the keeping of the "protected prisoners" [1] in the strictest 
most debasing confinement.

(Pages 110-112.) 
Since it has been decided that the purpose of the camps was to exterminate, it is quite 
obvious that the work that was performed there is hardly more than an element, 
negligible in itself, in the theory of the extermination mystique.

Eugen Kogon, who 
will be considered in the following chapter, starting from the same idea but with much 
less refinement in form, writes regarding this issue in his L'Enfer organisé.

...It was decided that the camps should have a secondary purpose, a little more 
realistic, a little more practical and more immediate; thanks to them, they were 
going to collect and make use of a manpower composed of slaves, belonging 
to the S.S., who, for as long as they were permitted to live, should live only to 
serve their masters ...

But, what were called the secondary aims (keeping the 
population in fear, the use of slave manpower, keeping the camps up as 
training and experimental stations for the S.S.) these aims little by little rose to 
the first level, insofar as they were the true reasons for consignment to the 
camps, until the day when, the war, unleashed by Hitler, envisaged and 
prepared by him and the S.S., in an ever more systematic way, brought about 
the enormous expansion of the camps.

(Pages 27-28, emphasis added.) 
By setting these two passages side by side it appears that for the first it was the 
historic accident of the war, and then only at the moment that it became world wide, 
which made the use of the prisoners as manpower the important purpose of the camps, 
while for the second, this result had been achieved before the war, and the war only 
emphasized it.But, what were called the secondary aims (keeping the 
population in fear, the use of slave manpower, keeping the camps up as 
training and experimental stations for the S.S.) these aims little by little rose to 
the first level, insofar as they were the true reasons for consignment to the 
camps, until the day when, the war, unleashed by Hitler, envisaged and 
prepared by him and the S.S., in an ever more systematic way, brought about 
the enormous expansion of the camps.

(Pages 27-28, emphasis added.) 
By setting these two passages side by side it appears that for the first it was the 
historic accident of the war, and then only at the moment that it became world wide, 
which made the use of the prisoners as manpower the important purpose of the camps, 
while for the second, this result had been achieved before the war, and the war only 
emphasized it.

I choose the second interpretation for the following reason: the division of the camps 
into these categories -- i.e., Konzentrationslager (concentration camp), Arbeitslager 
(work camp), and Straflager (punishment camp, where the labor and living conditions 
were harder) -- was an accomplished fact when the war broke out in 1939.

The 
operation of internment, before and during the war, was accomplished in two stages: 
the prisoners were concentrated in a central camp that was planned for or already was 
organized for labor, and which served, in addition, as a sorting station; from there the 
prisoners were sent on to other camps, according to the demands for manpower.

There 
was a third stage for those who had committed offenses during the process of being 
interned; assignment as punishment to a camp generally still in construction, which 
was considered a punitive camp (Straflager), but which, from the moment that 
construction was completed, became in its turn an ordinary camp 
(Konzentrationslager).

I shall add that, in my opinion, the use of prisoner labor had always been anticipated.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There 
was a third stage for those who had committed offenses during the process of being 
interned; assignment as punishment to a camp generally still in construction, which 
was considered a punitive camp (Straflager), but which, from the moment that 
construction was completed, became in its turn an ordinary camp 
(Konzentrationslager). I shall add that, in my opinion, the use of prisoner labor had always been anticipated. This is part of the universal code of repression: in almost all countries of the world, 
the State makes those that it imprisons sweat for their livelihood by laboring for the 
State; there are a few exceptions -- e.g., fallen government officials in the democratic 
nations and distinguished deportees in dictatorships. The contrary practice is 
inconceivable. It would be nonsense for a State to support those who break its laws

--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
and undermine its foundations. It is only the conditions of labor that vary, depending 
upon whether one is free or interned, and the margin of benefits to be earned. 
For Germany, there was an added factor which needs to be noted: the camps had to be 
built under the imperatives of a total war. During the war, one could only think that 
the sole purpose of the camps was to kill people off and one was quite inclined to 
think so even afterwards. The erroneousness of this impression was all the less 
obvious since, as the war made necessary an even greater number of camps, the 
construction period never came to an end, and the two circumstances, superimposed 
in their effects, led to a generalized continuation of the Straflager stage, seemingly 
deliberate.er of camps, the 
construction period never came to an end, and the two circumstances, superimposed 
in their effects, led to a generalized continuation of the Straflager stage, seemingly 
deliberate.

III. The Häftlingsführung 
We know that the S.S. delegated to the prisoners the direction and administration of 
the camps and that this practice of self-administration was called Häftlingsführung. 
There were, for example, Kapos (who headed Kommandos), Blockältester (Block 
supervisors), Lagerschutz (prisoner police), Lagerältester (camp supervisors) along 
with other prisoners who composed a whole concentration camp bureaucracy which 
in fact wielded all of the authority in the camp. This practice also follows a pattern 
that is part of the code of regression all over the world. If the prisoners to whom fell 
all of those administrative posts had the slightest notion of solidarity with the 
common prison population, they would have worked everywhere to alleviate the 
hardships for everyone. Unhappily that is never the case. Everywhere, on taking over 
the post that is placed in his command, the designated prisoner (often called a 
"trusty") changes his outlook. It is a phenomenon too well known to dwell on and too 
universal to impute solely to the Germans or the Nazis. David Rousset's error was to 
believe that it could be any other way in a concentration camp and that, in fact, it had 
been otherwise -- i.e., that the political prisoners were beings superior to the common 
mass of prisoners and that the laws they obeyed were nobler than the laws of the 
individual struggle for life. 
This error led him to lay down as a principle that the prisoner bureaucracy of the 
concentration camps, not being able to save large numbers of men, deserved credit for 
saving the "best" of the prisoners: "With the close collaboration of a Kapo one could 
make life much easier, even in the Hell." (Page 166.) But he does not tell how one 
could get the close collaboration of a Kapo. Nor that this collaboration, except when 
the Kapo was a political prisoner, ever went beyond the kind of relationship that one 
would expect to exist between a patrician and his dependent. In any case, he fails to 
mention that only a tiny number of prisoners could hope to achieve this relationship, 
regardless of its precise nature. 
Obviously, the positions within the Häftlingsführung were eagerly sought after, since 
to hold one improved the relative conditions that one faced in the camp. David 
Rousset writes that: 
The holding of those posts was therefore a prime interest, and the life and 
death of many men depended on it. (Page 134)e relative conditions that one faced in the camp. David 
Rousset writes that: 
The holding of those posts was therefore a prime interest, and the life and 
death of many men depended on it. (Page 134)

--- PAGE BREAK ---114
Then trying to link everything together, Rousset asserts that those who held those 
posts organized, and most of those who organized were Communists: then they 
worked out regular political plots against the S.S.: then they drew up programs for 
action after the war: 
At Buchenwald the secret central committee of the Communist faction was 
composed of Germans, Czechs, a Russian and a Frenchman.

(Page 166) 
From 1944 on they were preoccupied with the conditions that would be 
created by the end of the war.

They were greatly afraid that the S.S.

would kill 
them all before that.

And it was not an imaginary fear.

(Page 170) 
At Buchenwald, besides the Communist organization that without doubt 
achieved there a degree of perfection and efficiency unique in the annals of the 
camps, meetings took place more or less regularly among the political 
elements, from the socialists to the extreme right, which ended in setting up a 
program of joint activity for when they returned to France.

(Page 81 ) 
All of this activity is a possibility, but it is factually questionable that such 
organization ever occurred.

Certainly, in all of the camps, the prisoners gathered 
together in numerous and unobtrusive and informal group alignments for various 
reasons: to better endure their common fate; to promote their self-interest; to get 
appointed to the Häftlingsführung and, once appointed, to hold that position.

But, 
these prisoner alliances were a far cry from the picture that Rousset paints.

After the liberation, as David Rousset corroborates, the Communists were able to 
make people believe that the bond of their association was their doctrine, to which 
their acts conformed.

In reality, the bond was the material advantages that were to be 
gained by those in the association.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After the liberation, as David Rousset corroborates, the Communists were able to 
make people believe that the bond of their association was their doctrine, to which 
their acts conformed. In reality, the bond was the material advantages that were to be 
gained by those in the association. In the two camps which I knew, the general view 
was that, political or not, Communist or not, all of the so-called "Committees" were 
first of all associations of food thieves regardless of whatever form they took. Nothing 
has been uncovered to change this view. On the contrary everything has confirmed it: 
the small groups of Communists affronting each other over the various spoils of the 
system e.g., the composition of the clique which held power; the manner in which the 
spoils of pillage were to be divided up; the distribution of camp assignments, etc., 
etc... For example, during the few weeks that I spent at Buchenwald in Block 48, at 
the suggestion of the Blockältester, or with his authorization, a group of prisoners, 
new arrivals, had decided to bolster the group morale. Little by little they acquired a 
certain degree of authority. In particular, contact between the Blockältester and 
ourselves in the end could only be made through them. The group regulated life in the 
Block, organized discussions, assigned the duties, and divided up the food, among 
other things. It was pitiful to see the toadyism toward the omnipotent Blockältester 
that developed among them. One day, the principal mover in this group was caught in 
the act of dividing up with another the potatoes that he had stolen from the common 
ration... Eugen Kogon relates that the French at Buchenwald, who were about the only ones to 
receive parcels from the Red Cross, had decided to share them equally with the whole 
camp:

--- PAGE BREAK ---115
When our French comrades said they were going to share a large part of them 
with the entire camp, this act of fellowship was received with gratitude.

But 
the distribution was organized in a scandalous manner for weeks; there was in 
effect only one parcel for every ten Frenchmen...

while their compatriots in 
charge of the distribution, having at their head the chief of the French 
communist group in the camp [2], reserved for themselves piles of parcels, or 
used them for the benefit of their friends of the same stamp.

(L'Enfer organisé, 
Page 120.) 
David Rousset sees a harmful aspect in this state of things, if not a principal cause of 
the horror, when he writes: 
The bureaucracy does not serve only in the management of the camps; it is, at 
the top, all involved in the deals of the S.S.

Berlin sends cases of cigarettes 
and tobacco to pay the men.

Truckloads of food arrive at the camps.

Every 
week the men are to be paid; they get paid every two weeks or every month; 
the number of cigarettes is reduced and lists are made of bad workers who get 
nothing.

The men are dying for want of a smoke.

What does that matter: The 
cigarettes go into the black market.

Meat?

Butter?

Sugar?

Honey?

Jam?

A 
bigger portion of red cabbage, beets, rutabagas, touched up with a little carrot, 
that will do well enough.

It is even pure kindness...

Milk.

Lots of whitened 
water, that will do perfectly.

And all the rest: meat, butter, sugar, honey, jam, 
milk, potatoes, on the market for the German civilians who pay and are proper 
citizens.

The people in Berlin will be satisfied to learn that everything arrived 
all right.

It is enough that the records are in order and the bookkeeping 
verifiable ...

Flour?

Of course, the bread ration will be reduced.

Without even 
covering it up.

The portions will be a little less carefully cut.

The records are 
not concerned with such things.

And the S.S.

masters will be on excellent 
terms with the tradesmen of the area.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And the S.S. masters will be on excellent 
terms with the tradesmen of the area. (Pages 145-146-147) 
Here, support is given, at least as far as the food is concerned, to the legend that a plan 
was drawn up "in high places" to starve the prisoners. Berlin supplied everything that 
was needed to provide the prisoners with adequate rations, in conformity with the 
reports that were written to the families, but, without the knowledge of the officials, it 
was not distributed to the mass of prisoners. And, why not? Who does the stealing? The prisoners who were in charge of the distribution. David Rousset tells us that such 
theft was done under the orders of the S.S. to whom was turned over the proceeds. No, the prisoner trustees stole for themselves first, and took all that they required. Then, they paid some of it to the S.S. to purchase their complicity. Incidentally, the same phenomenon was brought to light in May 1950 during the trial 
instituted against the "Oeuvre des mères et des enfants" at Versailles, whose ring 
leader was headmistress Pallu. Preliminary investigation revealed that: 
The children were badly clothed, left in a repulsive state of filth, in a room 
crawling with vermin. The straw mattresses were foul with excrement and 
urine, crawling sometimes with maggots. There was but one sheet, one 
blanket. All the toilets were stopped up. The children relieved themselves just 
where they were. They were covered with impetigo and lice. That was the 
setting. There 13 children died of hunger. And yet they were supposed to have

--- PAGE BREAK ---116
received, in addition to their normal rations, supplementary allocations.

The 
children saw nothing of this: the milk was half watered.

"The children were getting too much," said a sister.

"The headmistress had a 
liter and a half of milk delivered to her every day, chocolate, rice, meat -- and 
of the best quality." 
"The headmistress, a little brunette, sent twenty-kilo packages to her family, 
out of her personal reserves.

All those people were well nourished, and did not 
wonder at that choice food during times when the daily rutabaga was the rule.

And the children?

Oh!

that was so easy, they didn't ask for anything..." (Le 
Populaire, May 16, 1950.) 
This account is in a class with the best accounts covering the German concentration 
camps.

The drama took place in France, and neither the public nor even those in the 
administration of "L'oeuvre des mères et des enfants" knew anything about it.

The 
children died there like inmates of a concentration camp, under the same conditions 
and for the same reasons...

and in a democratic country, to boot!

So, to return to the subject at hand, these famous "revolutionary committees" never 
defended the interests of the common prisoners or prepared political plans for use 
after the war, the Communists were able to delude the public on these points.

Rather, 
they existed merely to promote the well-being of their members.

I shall add that those 
persons who succeeded in forming them, kept alive a spirit of subservience vis-à-vis 
the S.S., a kind of collaboration, without which the camps could not have operated.

Regarding the discussions organized in Block 48, and to which reference has been 
made, David Rousset has this to say: 
So I organized a first discussion; a Russian Stubendienst twenty-two or 
twenty-three years old, worker in the Marty Factory at Leningrad, gave us a 
long exposition of the condition of labor in the U.S.S.R.

The discussion which 
followed lasted for two afternoons.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Regarding the discussions organized in Block 48, and to which reference has been 
made, David Rousset has this to say: 
So I organized a first discussion; a Russian Stubendienst twenty-two or 
twenty-three years old, worker in the Marty Factory at Leningrad, gave us a 
long exposition of the condition of labor in the U.S.S.R. The discussion which 
followed lasted for two afternoons. The second talk was given by a 
Kolkhosian on Soviet agricultural organization. I myself, gave a little later a 
talk on "The Soviet Union, from Revolution to War"... (Page 77) 
I was present at that talk; it was a masterpiece of Bolshephilism, rather unexpected for 
one familiar with David Rousset's earlier Trotskyite activities. But Erich, our 
Blockältester, was a Communist and was in very good standing with the "cell" which 
exercised the preponderant influence in the Häftlingsführung at the moment. It was 
artful to get his attention and to predispose him for the day when he would have 
favors to dispense. "Three months later," continues Rousset, "I would certainly not 
have begun this endeavor again. The game was played out. But at the time we were all 
still very ignorant. Erich, our Block chief, grumbled, but didn't oppose the business..." 
(Page 77) To be sure. Furthermore, three months later, it was Kapo Emil Kunder on 
whom siege had to be laid. The time of the talks was over, and the emphasis was on 
the Red Cross packages from France. If I have correctly understood Les Jours de 
notre mort, Rousset used these packages to his advantage, and I do not reproach him 
for it; I myself owe my return to France to them, and I never made any secret of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Jours de 
notre mort, Rousset used these packages to his advantage, and I do not reproach him 
for it; I myself owe my return to France to them, and I never made any secret of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
It could be, and perhaps it will be, maintained that it was not important to establish the 
fact that the Häftlingsführung made the common prisoners suffer a treatment that was 
substantially more horrible than that which had been planned for them by the higher 
circles of Nazism and that nothing forced the Häftlingsführung to do it. If such a 
contention were made, I would then observe that it has seemed to me to be 
indispensable to determine exactly the causes of the concentration camp hell in all 
their aspects, if only to place the contentions of the Häftlingsführung apologists in the 
proper context, and to orient a little more toward the true nature of things the inquiry 
of the reader in whose mind this problem remains unresolved.ntions of the Häftlingsführung apologists in the 
proper context, and to orient a little more toward the true nature of things the inquiry 
of the reader in whose mind this problem remains unresolved.

IV. Objectivity 
Birkenau, the largest city of death. The selections on arrival; the trappings of 
civilization set out like caricatures to deceive and subdue. Regular selections 
in the camp, every Sunday. The inevitable destructions in Block 7 long drawn 
out. The Sonderkommando (special Kommando assigned to the Crematory) 
totally isolated from the world, condemned to live every second of its eternity 
with tortured and burned bodies. Terror breaks the nerves so decisively that 
the death agonies know all the humiliations, all the betrayals. And when, 
ineluctably, the strong odors of the gas chamber close, everyone rushes 
forward, crushing each other in a frenzy to keep alive, so that, when they are 
opened the bodies inextricably tangled fall forward in cascades onto the rails. 
(Page 51) 
In such a fictionalized panorama as Les Jours de notre mort, this passage will cause 
no shock. But, in L'Univers concentrationnaire, which has in so many aspects the 
character of a true story, it would be out of place. David Rousset was not, actually, 
ever present at this scene of torture of which he gives so exact and so gripping a 
description. 
In 1950, it was still too soon to pronounce a definite judgment on the existence of gas 
chambers in the camps; documents were wanting and those that existed were 
incomplete, inexact, and obviously apocryphal or falsified. But, the historian has no 
right to bring forth gratuitous hypotheses. Therefore, I limited myself to pointing out 
obvious anomalies. For example, Eugen Kogon, who in his L'Enfer organisé, said that 
"a very small number of camps had their own gas chambers," (Page 154), was careful 
not to say which ones. Or again, concerning those which allegedly were installed at 
Auschwitz-Birkenau, Kogon told how the Germans effected the extermination by this 
method, according to the testimony: 
...of a young Jew from Brno, Janda Weiss, who belonged in 1944 with the 
Sonderkommando (crematory and gas chambers) from whom come the 
following details, confirmed, moreover, by others. (Page 155) 
To my knowledge, this Janda Weiss was the only person in the whole of the 
concentration camp literature who was said to have been present at such 
exterminations and whose exact address was given. Unfortunately, by an unhappy 
chance, he was in the Russian zone and only Eugen Kogon has profited by hise who was said to have been present at such 
exterminations and whose exact address was given. Unfortunately, by an unhappy 
chance, he was in the Russian zone and only Eugen Kogon has profited by his

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve been present at such 
exterminations and whose exact address was given. Unfortunately, by an unhappy 
chance, he was in the Russian zone and only Eugen Kogon has profited by his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
statements. Given the historical and moral significance of the use of gas chambers as 
a method of repression, further steps could possibly have been taken to acquaint the 
public with his precise testimony, other than through a third party, and at the same 
time to extend its length to a little more than that of a paragraph that appeared to have 
been incidentally included in Kogon's comprehensive study. 
There was another doubtful element in Eugen Kogon's thesis regarding the gas 
chambers, and it lay in this: 
In 1941, Berlin sent to the camps the first orders for the formation of special 
transports for gas extermination. The first ones chosen were prisoners in for 
breaches of the common law, prisoners sentenced for immoral behavior, and 
certain political figures in bad odor with the S.S. 
These transports left for an unknown destination. In the case of Buchenwald 
one could see being returned the next day, clothing, including the contents of 
the pockets, dentures, etc... Through an under-officer of the escort it was 
learned that these transports had arrived at Pirna and at Hohenstein and that 
the men who made up the transports had been subjected to tests of a new gas 
and had perished. 
During the winter of 1942-1943, all the Jews had been examined with regard 
to their capacity for work. Instead of the above-mentioned transports, it was 
then those Jews, who, in groups of 90 men, took the same road, but ended up 
at Bernburg near Kothen. The doctor-in-chief of the nursing home of the 
district, a certain Doctor Eberl, was the docile tool of the S.S. In the files of 
the S.S. this operation bore the reference "14F. 13." It seems to have been 
carried out simultaneously with the annihilation of all the sick in the nursing 
homes, which little by little became the general practice in Germany under 
National-Socialism. (Pages 225-226) 
Now, I had already studied the matter enough to know that the extermination orders to 
which he alludes stem from a program of euthanasia, not of extermination. The two 
documents that he quoted in support of his contention -- and he was careful not to 
reproduce the orders themselves -- amply proved the point. They consisted of a couple 
of pieces of correspondence between the camp officials at Buchenwald and the 
directors of a nursing home at Bernburg. In his letter dated February 2, 1942, Dr. 
Hoven, the camp physician states, with regard to Jewish prisoners who are unfit for 
work in the camp: 
Referring to our personal conversation, I send you, attached, in copy, and to be 
used for all purposes, a list of those Jews sick and unable to work, now in the 
camp at Buchenwald. 
At this point, it must be noted that the list which is mentioned is not published. The 
second document is a letter from the nursing home at Bernburg, dated March 5, 1942, 
in which the writer refers to a letter of March 3, 1942. The text of this letter is as 
follows: 
Subject 36 prisoners, list no. 12 of February 2, 1942.nursing home at Bernburg, dated March 5, 1942, 
in which the writer refers to a letter of March 3, 1942. The text of this letter is as 
follows: 
Subject 36 prisoners, list no. 12 of February 2, 1942.

--- PAGE BREAK ---burg, dated March 5, 1942, 
in which the writer refers to a letter of March 3, 1942. The text of this letter is as 
follows: 
Subject 36 prisoners, list no. 12 of February 2, 1942.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
In our letter of the 3rd current, we asked you to make available to us the last 
36 prisoners of the last transport, March 18, 1942. 
Because of the absence of our physician-in-chief who is to examine medically 
these prisoners, we request you not to send them to us on March 18, 1942, but 
to add them to the March 11, 1942, transport, together with their papers which 
will be returned to you March 11, 1942. 
One must agree that the meaning of the text has to be strangely distorted to deduce 
from this exchange of correspondence that extermination by means of gas chambers 
was involved. 
These two documents, moreover, call for comment, since they apparently refer to the 
practice of euthanasia, and since they bear the dates of February 2 and March 5, 1942. 
Here is the story of operation Gnadentod: 
On September 1, 1939, Hitler signed the Gnadentod order, the text of which is given 
as follows: 
Reichleiter Bouhler and Doctor Brandt are instructed, on their own 
responsibility, to extend the authority of physicians to designate by name, after 
a critical examination of their condition, those sick persons who can humanely 
be called incurable, so that a merciful death may be assured. 
When this decree -- which was not restrictive -- was signed, the installation of 
crematoriums was begun in six sanitariums: that of Hadamar near Limbourg, that of 
Grafeneck in Wurttemberg, that of Hartheim near Linz, and the homes for the aged at 
Pirna, Bernberg and Brandenburg. After January, 1940, the transfer of the terminally 
ill to these establishments began. 
During July, 1941, the rumor began to spread in German Catholic circles that some 
30,000 ill persons had been subjected to euthanasia contrary to Church doctrine. The 
priests were aroused, and on July 6, 1941, a pastoral letter of the bishops was read 
aloud in all of the Catholic churches of Germany, dated June 26, 1941, of which the 
essential passages are the following: 
Most certainly there are commands which do not call for action on our parts if 
their execution would involve too many difficulties or dangers. But there are 
also duties of conscience from which no one can free us and which we must 
carry out, even at the cost of our lives. Never, in any circumstances outside of 
war and legitimate self defense may an innocent man be killed! 
When this pastoral letter which he had energetically promoted had no effect, and the 
removal of the terminally ill was renewed in his diocese, Monseigneur von Galen, 
Bishop of Munster, lodged a complaint on July 28, 1941, with the public prosecutor 
of the Munster Court, invoking articles 139 and 211 of the code which put an 
obligation on everyone to denounce murder and to oppose it. When this complaint had 
no effect, Monseigneur von Galen ascended the pulpit on August 3, 1941, in his 
church Saint-Lambert of Munster, and delivered a ringing sermon.ounce murder and to oppose it. When this complaint had 
no effect, Monseigneur von Galen ascended the pulpit on August 3, 1941, in his 
church Saint-Lambert of Munster, and delivered a ringing sermon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---120
After recalling earlier protestations of the bishops, and also of his own, and after 
denouncing a recent removal of one thousand six hundred sick persons from the 
homes for the aged at Marienthal and Warstein, the Bishop of Munster stated: 
Why should these poor defenseless sick people die?

Simply because according 
to the verdict of some doctor or commission they belong in the category of the 
"unfit to live." It is stated that they can no longer be productive.

They are like 
an old machine that no longer works, an old paralyzed horse, a cow that no 
longer gives milk!

What becomes of an old machine: it is put on the scrap 
heap.

What is done with a paralyzed horse?

Unproductive cattle?

.

.

.

But it is 
not a question of old machines, horses or cows.

It is a question of men like us, 
our brothers and our sisters.

Woe to man!

Woe to our German people if the 
sacred Commandment: 'Thou shalt not kill' which our Creator engraved from 
the beginning in the minds of men, is transgressed, and if this transgression is 
tolerated and goes unpunished...

This sermon had a profound echo all over Germany and started a movement before 
which Hitler retreated.

Less than a month afterwards, August 20, 1941, Hitler gave the order to suspend 
operation "Gnadentod." All the historians, even the most anti-Nazi, are today agreed 
on this version of the affair.

Even Mr.

Gerhard Jaeckel, a specialist on Nazi atrocities 
and war crimes, in the illustrated Munich weekly Quick (June 25, 1961), has 
confirmed it in every detail as it is reproduced above.

And, in Paris, the newspaper Le 
Monde (May 3, 1963) has also accepted the story as it is set forth in the preceding 
paragraphs.

Now, the two documents that are produced by Eugen Kogon bear the dates of 
February 2 and of March 5, 1942, when operation "Gnadentod" had been terminated 
for more than six months.

A third document that was published by Eugen Kogon in 
support of these two letters, which is a report from Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now, the two documents that are produced by Eugen Kogon bear the dates of 
February 2 and of March 5, 1942, when operation "Gnadentod" had been terminated 
for more than six months. A third document that was published by Eugen Kogon in 
support of these two letters, which is a report from Dr. Hoven, but which has no date, 
has this to say, according to Kogon: 
The obligations of the contracting physicians and the negotiations with the 
burial services have often led to insurmountable difficulties ... This is why I 
am at once getting in touch with Doctor Infried-Eberl, head physician of the 
nursing home of Bernburg-sur-Saale, Post Box 252, telephone 3.169. This is 
the same physician who carried out operation "14 F 13." Doctor Eberl has 
shown the greatest kindness. AU the bodies of the prisoners deceased at 
Schoneberg-Wernigerode will be transported to Doctor Eberl at Bernburg and 
will be cremated, even without a death certificate. (Page 227) 
The least one can say is that this report does not excuse one from the obligation of 
verifying the authenticity of the three documents . . . if only to find out if, in the 
Germany of 1942, it was possible to contravene the orders of the Fuehrer to this 
extent. A procedure called the "Selektion", which was periodically performed in all the 
camps, contributed in no small measure to the dissemination of the notion that 
executions were common occurrences in the camps. What actually happened was this:

--- PAGE BREAK ---121
Periodically, the health services of the camps received the order to make up a list of 
all sick persons who were considered to be unfit for fairly sustained work or for any 
work at all, and to gather them in a special Block.

Then, trucks arrived -- or a line of 
railway cars -- and they were put in, and they departed for an unknown destination.

The rumor in the concentration camps had it that they were taken directly to the gas 
chambers; as a consequence, with a sort of cruel sense of humor, these assemblings 
were called Himmelskommandos, meaning that they were composed of persons bound 
for heaven.

Naturally all of those who were sick tried to escape the 
Himmelskommando.

I saw two or three "Selektions" carried out at Dora; I even escaped being included in 
one of them.

Dora was a small camp.

Although the numbers of unfit sick were always 
greater than the means available to care for them, those numbers only very rarely 
reached proportions so large as to interfere with the operation or the administration of 
the camp.

Auschwitz-Birkenau, which David Rousset speaks about in the quotation in 
question, was different.

That camp was very large, a human ant-heap, so to speak.

The 
number of unfit was considerable.

The "Selektions", instead of being made through 
the health services, often were made on the spot whenever the trucks or rail cars 
arrived.

They took place at a rate of about one a week, and decisions as to who was to 
be included were made just on appearances.

Between the S.S.

guards and the 
concentration camp bureaucracy on the one hand and the mass of prisoners trying to 
escape selection on the other, one can imagine the confusion of what amounted to 
manhunts in an atmosphere of universal panic.

After each "Selektion" ' those who 
were left behind felt that they had for the time being escaped the gas chamber.guards and the 
concentration camp bureaucracy on the one hand and the mass of prisoners trying to 
escape selection on the other, one can imagine the confusion of what amounted to 
manhunts in an atmosphere of universal panic.

After each "Selektion" ' those who 
were left behind felt that they had for the time being escaped the gas chamber.

But, there is nothing to prove conclusively that any of the unfit, or those so designated 
as unfit, who were selected in this way, either at Dora or at Birkenau, were sent to gas 
chambers.

In support of this statement I want to record a personal experience.

In the 
"Selektion" which I escaped at Dora was included one of my comrades who did not 
have the same luck.

I saw him depart, and I was sorry for him.

In 1946 I still believed 
that he was dead and that he had been asphyxiated together with the entire convoy of 
which he was a part.

In September of the same year, to my astonishment, he showed 
up at my house to invite me to attend some official demonstration.

When I told him 
what my fears for him had been all this time, he told me that the convoy in question 
had been sent to Bergen-Belsen, a convalescent center for the sick deportees from all 
the camps.

This story is verified by a former deportee, a fellow named Mullin who is 
now an employee at the Besançon railway station.

After a trip that was made under 
appalling conditions, he arrived at Bergen-Belsen, to which had converged convoys of 
the unfit from all over Germany.

There were so many Prisoners that the camp 
administration didn't know where to put them or how to feed them.

He spent many 
horrible days there and was finally sent back to work.

At Buchenwald, moreover, I 
had already encountered in Block 48 a Czech who had returned to Birkenau from 
Bergen-Belsen in the same way.

My view on the gas chambers?

Some probably did exist; but not as many as is 
believed.

Moreover, there probably were exterminations by gas, but not as many as 
has been claimed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some probably did exist; but not as many as is 
believed. Moreover, there probably were exterminations by gas, but not as many as 
has been claimed. The number, of course, does not in the least diminish the nature of 
the horror, but the fact that the practice might have been a measure that was decreed 
by a State order in the name of a political doctrine would singularly add to the 
horrible nature of it. Was that the case? The statement of Dr. Aryeh Kubovy, Director

--- PAGE BREAK ---122
of the Center of Jewish Documentation at Tel-Aviv, which is discussed in Chapter 13, 
Note 8, concerning the nonexistence of orders for the extermination of the Jews has 
definitely settled the question in the negative.

Nevertheless, in spite of the fact that there appears to have been no official Nazi 
policy of gas exterminations, the factor that has played the greatest role in promoting 
the contrary belief, seems to have been the "Selektion" practice about which there is 
not a deportee who cannot speak as a witness in one way or another, and who does so, 
mainly, in terms of all that he feared at the moment.

Two other documents that are quoted by David Rousset in Le Pitre ne rit pas (1949) 
in support of the existence of mass exterminations by gas do not strike me as any 
more convincing than those of Eugen Kogon.

The first is a deposition of a certain 
Wolfgang Grosch at Nuremberg and is about the construction of gas chambers, but 
not their use.

The second, concerning trucks that had been fitted with asphyxiating 
mechanisms which were to have been used in Russia, bears the signature of a second-
Lieutenant and is addressed to a Lieutenant.

Neither one of them allows one to accuse 
the leaders of the Nazi regime of having given orders for the extermination by gas.

The text of both documents will be found in Appendix C at the end of this book.

Speaking of Auschwitz-Birkenau, Eugen Kogon had said that toward the end of 1942 
the Third Reich was contemplating the installation of a branch of I.G.

Farben 
Industries at the camp, in which the use of chemical gasses would be indispensable, 
and I suggest that from this fact might have sprung the accusation that the Reich had 
decided to exterminate Jews in this way.

[3] Of course, it is only a supposition.

But in 
history as in the sciences, have not most discoveries stemmed, if not from supposition, 
at least from doubt?--- PAGE BREAK ---

[3] Of course, it is only a supposition. But in 
history as in the sciences, have not most discoveries stemmed, if not from supposition, 
at least from doubt? It may be objected that there is nothing to be gained in exonerating National-
Socialism in this way, whose misdeeds in other respects are definitely established. In 
response, I believe that there is nothing more to be gained in supporting a doctrine or 
an interpretation, perhaps correct, but which rests on falsities. All of the great 
principles of democracy die, not because of their substance, but from being too 
exposed in details considered as insignificant in their scope as in their substance, and 
dictatorships generally only triumph to the extent that insufficiently studied arguments 
are brandished against them. In this connection, David Rousset gives an example 
which in a masterly manner illustrates this way of looking at things: 
I was talking with a German physician ... He was obviously not a Nazi. He 
was fed up with the war and did not know where his wife and four children 
were. Dresden, which had been his home, had been cruelly bombed, "Look 
here," he said to me, "did we go to war for Danzig?" I answered no. "All right 
then, Hitler's policy in the concentration camps was frightful (I bowed); but, 
for the rest, he was right." (Page 170) 
So, by this little detail, because it was felt to be wrong to be told that they were going 
to war for Danzig, and that that turned out to be false, this doctor pronounced 
judgment on Hitler's entire policy and approved of it. I wonder in fear what he thinks 
of that policy now, now that he has had a chance to read David Rousset and Eugen 
Kogon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

123

V. Traduttore, Traditorepolicy and approved of it. I wonder in fear what he thinks 
of that policy now, now that he has had a chance to read David Rousset and Eugen 
Kogon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

123

V. Traduttore, Traditore

This small detail is without great significance; David Rousset sets forth his opinion as 
to the etymology of the word "Kapo" as follows: 
The expression Kapo is probably of Italian origin and means the head: there 
are two other possible explanations: Kapo, abbreviation of Kaporal, or a 
contraction of the phrase Kamerad Polizei, used during the first months of 
Buchenwald. (Page 131) 
Eugen Kogon on the other hand is more positive: 
Kapo: Il capo, the head, the chief... (L'Enfer organisé, page 59) 
I suggest another explanation: the word is derived from the phrase 
Konzentrationslager Arbeit Polizei, using the initials of each word, just as Schupo 
comes from Schutz Polizei and Gestapo from Geheim Staat Polizei. The haste of 
David Rousset and Eugen Kogon to interpret, rather than analyze, prevented them 
from thinking of it.

FOOTNOTES 
1. In German, the camps were called Schutzhalflager, camps for prisoners being 
protected (against the people's fury.) 
2. He was given this title by the Ruling Clique; his name was Marcel Paul. 
3. [Auschwitz and its satellite camps became, by the end of the war, a huge industrial 
complex where both prisoner and free labor worked in a variety of industrial 
enterprises, among which were extensive chemical works which manufactured from 
the coal of the region synthetic gasoline and "Buna" (synthetic rubber.) For a detailed 
discussion, see Arthur R. Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century (Richmond, 
Surrey: Historical Review Press, [1976]), pages 47-52.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124

Chapter Eleven 
Eugen Kogon and L'Enfer organiséon, see Arthur R. Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century (Richmond, 
Surrey: Historical Review Press, [1976]), pages 47-52.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124

Chapter Eleven 
Eugen Kogon and L'Enfer organisé

I am not acquainted with Eugen Kogon. I learned all that I know about him from what 
he says about himself in his book and from what I have read in the book reviews. 
Unless I am mistaken, Kogon is an Austrian journalist of the Christian social or 
Christian progressive variety who was arrested following the Anschluss and who was 
deported to Buchenwald. He is known to the French public as a sociologist. 
L'Enfer organisé has had more success than any other concentration camp memoir. It 
covers a considerable number of facts and events, most of which were experienced by 
the author himself. Although Kogon is to some extent naive and is somewhat prone to 
exaggerate, his main weakness lies in his explanations and interpretations. These 
weaknesses are the result, on the one hand, of Kogon's insistence at looking at things 
"in their political light" (Preface, page 14) and, on the other hand, of his desire to 
justify the conduct of the Häftlingsführung. His vindication of the concentration camp 
bureaucracy is done in an even more categorical and explicit manner than the 
"whitewash" that was done by David Rousset. 
Otherwise, Eugen Kogon writes his report, so he says, "without any regard for the 
consequences... as a man and a Christian" (Preface, page 14), and without any 
intention of writing a comprehensive "history of the German concentration camps" or 
"a compilation of all of the horrors that were found in them; but rather a work 
essentially sociological in character, whose human content, both political and moral, 
established in its authenticity, has the value of an example." (Introduction, page 20). 
The intention was good. He believed himself to be qualified for that mission, and, 
perhaps, he was. He describes himself as, " ...having spent at least five years in 
captivity... having climbed up under the most painful circumstances, little by little 
reaching a position where he could see things clearly and exercise influence... as 
never having belonged to the camp police stooges... as never having dishonored 
himself in his conduct as a prisoner." (Page 20) 
After having been detailed for one year to the Effecktenkammer Kommando (the 
workshop where clothing was made), a privileged job, he became secretary to the S.S. 
camp physician, Doctor Ding-Schuller, an even more privileged job. In this job he 
was in a position to become acquainted in detail with all of the intrigues of the camp 
which occurred during the last two years of his internment. 
After reading it, I closed the book. Then I opened it again, and under the heading of 
the title page I wrote, as a subtitle: Plaidoyer pro domo (plea in self-defense).t two years of his internment. 
After reading it, I closed the book. Then I opened it again, and under the heading of 
the title page I wrote, as a subtitle: Plaidoyer pro domo (plea in self-defense).

--- PAGE BREAK ---125
I.

The Prisoner Eugen Kogon 
At Buchenwald there was a "Section for the study of typhus and viruses." It occupied 
Blocks 46 and 50.

In charge of this laboratory was the S.S.

camp physician, Doctor 
Ding-Schuller.

This is the way it operated: 
In Block 46 at Buchenwald camp which was a model of cleanliness, and very 
well managed experiments were not only carried out on the men, but all the 
typhus cases were isolated, those who had contracted it in the camp as a matter 
of course, and those who had been brought to the camp when they were 
already affected.

They were cured there, insofar as they could weather this 
terrible sickness.

The running of the Block had been put in the hands of Arthur 
Dietzch...

one of the prisoners...who had gotten his medical knowledge only 
through this experience.

[2] Dietzch was a Communist who had been a 
political prisoner for nearly twenty years.

[3] He was a very hardened person, 
naturally one of the most hated and feared at Buchenwald.

[4] 
Since the S.S.

and the under-officers of the camp had an unconquerable fear of 
contagion, and since they thought typhus could be picked up simply by 
contact, in the air, from the cough of someone sick, etc...

they never went into 
Block 46...

The prisoners took advantage of that, in collaboration with Kapo 
Dietzch: the illegal management of the camp made use of this, on the one 
hand, to get rid of those who were collaborating with the S.S.

against the 
prisoners (or who seemed to be collaborating, or who were just plain 
unpopular),[5] on the other hand, to conceal in Block 46 certain important 
political prisoners whose lives were threatened, which was sometimes very 
difficult and very dangerous for Dietzch, since his servants and nurses were all 
"greens." (Page 162, emphasis added.) 
In Block 50, a vaccine was made up for exanthematous typhus, from the lungs 
of mice and rabbits, in line with the procedure of Professor Giroud (of Paris).

This was begun in August 1943.--- PAGE BREAK ---

against the 
prisoners (or who seemed to be collaborating, or who were just plain 
unpopular),[5] on the other hand, to conceal in Block 46 certain important 
political prisoners whose lives were threatened, which was sometimes very 
difficult and very dangerous for Dietzch, since his servants and nurses were all 
"greens." (Page 162, emphasis added.) 
In Block 50, a vaccine was made up for exanthematous typhus, from the lungs 
of mice and rabbits, in line with the procedure of Professor Giroud (of Paris). This was begun in August 1943. The camp's best specialists, doctors, 
bacteriologists, serum specialists, chemists, were chosen for this work, etc... (Page 163) 
And this is how Eugen Kogon got assigned to his position. One of the crafty political aims of the prisoners, from the beginning, was to 
bring into this Kommando comrades of every nationality, whose lives were 
threatened, since the S.S. had as respectful a fear of this Block as of Block 46. This fetishist fear on the part of the S.S. was sustained as much by S.S. Dr. Ding-Schuller, as by the prisoners, but for different reasons (for example, by 
posting bulletins on the barbed wire that isolated the Block). Candidates for 
death, such as the Dutch physician Van Lingen, the architect Harry Pieck and 
other Netherlanders, the Polish doctor, Dr. Marian Ciepielowski (production 
chief in this service), Professor Dr. Balachowsky, of the Pasteur Institute at 
Paris, the author of this work, in his capacity as an Austrian publicist, and 
seven Jewish comrades, found refuge in this Block, with Dr. Ding-Schuller's 
approval (Page 163, emphasis added.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---uthor of this work, in his capacity as an Austrian publicist, and 
seven Jewish comrades, found refuge in this Block, with Dr. Ding-Schuller's 
approval (Page 163, emphasis added.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
It must be admitted that Eugen Kogon had put himself in serious pawn to the 
"Communist" nucleus that was preponderant in the camp -- in the face of other 
"green" groups, politicals and even Communists! -- in order to get assigned by them to 
this position of confidence. And, that assignment was made "with the approval of 
Doctor Ding-Schuller" it must be remembered. Now this is what he could do in this 
position: 
As a result of the requests which, every time, I suggested, drew up, and 
presented for signature, they were protected from sudden roundups, 
extermination transports, etc...(Page 183) 
During the last two years which I spent as secretary to the doctor, I wrote out, 
with the help of the specialist of Block 50, at least half a dozen medical 
communications on exanthematous typhus ...which were signed by Dr. 
Schuller. I will mention only in passing that I was also assigned to take care of 
a part of his private correspondence, including love and condolence letters. 
Often, he did not even read the answers; he threw me the letters after having 
opened them, and said to me, "Fix that up, Kogon. You know what to reply. 
It's some widow looking for consolation..." (Page 270) 
And, he could state, "I had Dr. Ding-Schuller in the palm of my hand," (Page 218), 
and to such an extent that the fact that he was "on bad terms with the Kapo of Block 
46" did not disturb him at all. 
Clearly, on the basis of the preceding quotations, Kogon knew how to get into the 
graces of the influential clique in the Häftlingsführung, while, at the same time, 
staying in the graces of one of the highest S.S. authorities of the camp. All of those 
persons who have lived in a concentration camp will agree that such a position could 
not be engineered without infringing upon the rules of morality which are customarily 
observed outside the camps.persons who have lived in a concentration camp will agree that such a position could 
not be engineered without infringing upon the rules of morality which are customarily 
observed outside the camps.

II. The Method 
In order to dispel certain fears, and to show that this report [that is what he calls his 
Enfer organisé] cannot be construed as an accusation against certain prisoners who 
held dominant positions, I read it aloud, at the beginning of the month of May 1945, 
as soon as it was down on paper, lacking only the last two chapters out of a total of 
twelve, to a group of fifteen people, who had been members of the clandestine 
government of the camp,[6] or who represented certain political alignments among 
the prisoners. These persons approved its accuracy and its objectivity. Present at the 
reading were: 
1. Walter Bartel, Communist from Berlin, president of the international committee in 
the camp. 
2. Heinz Baumeister, Social, from Dortmund, who for years had been a member of the 
Buchenwald Secretariat; second secretary of Block 50.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the international committee in 
the camp. 
2. Heinz Baumeister, Social, from Dortmund, who for years had been a member of the 
Buchenwald Secretariat; second secretary of Block 50.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
3. Ernst Busse, Communist, from Solingen, Kapo of the prisoners' infirmary. 
4. Boria Banilenko, head of Communist youth groups in the Ukraine, member of the 
Russian committee. 
5. Hans Eiden, Communist, from Trier, first camp elder. 
6. Baptiste Feflen, Communist, from Aix-la-Chapelle, washhouse Kapo. 
7. Franz Hackel, Left independent, from Prague. One of our friends, without position 
in the camp. 
8. Stephan Heymann, Communist, from Mannheim, member of camp information 
office. 
9. Werner Hilpert, Centrist, from Leipzig, member of the international committee in 
the camp. 
10. Otto Horn, Communist, from Vienna, member of the Austrian committee. 
11. A. Kaltschin, Russian prisoner of war, member of the Russian committee. 
12. Otto Kipp, Communist, from Dresden, assistant Kapo of the prisoners' infirmary. 
13. Ferdinand Romhild, Communist, from Frankfurt am Main, first secretary of the 
prisoners' infirmary. 
14. Ernst Thappe, Social, head of the German committee. 
15. Walter Wolff, Communist, head of the camp information office. (Page 20-21)rankfurt am Main, first secretary of the 
prisoners' infirmary. 
14. Ernst Thappe, Social, head of the German committee. 
15. Walter Wolff, Communist, head of the camp information office. (Page 20-21)

This perfunctory statement, in itself, is enough to render suspect the entire testimony: 
"In order to dispel certain fears, and to show that this report cannot be construed as an 
accusation against certain prisoners who held dominant positions in the -- camp... " 
Thus has Eugen Kogon avoided reporting anything accusatory against the 
Häftlingsführung; rather, he harbored grievances only against the S.S. No historian 
could ever accept that. On the contrary, one is justified in thinking that in this way he 
has paid a debt of gratitude to those who got him his privileged positions in the camp 
and that he has chosen to defend those with whom he had common interests, as well 
as himself, before the public. 
And, besides, the fifteen persons listed who passed judgment on his "accuracy and 
objectivity" are suspect. They are all Communists or fellow-travelers, and if, by 
chance, there was an exception, he could only be under obligation to the others. 
Lastly, the list is made up of the highest functionaries of the Häftlingsführung of 
Buchenwald who, naturally, are likely to share Kogon's point of view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128
I consider such titles as "president" or "member" of this or that "committee" with 
which they are tricked out to be meaningless. They awarded such titles to themselves 
at the time of the liberation of the camp by the Americans, or even afterwards. And, I 
pay little attention to the notion of "committees", for reasons which I have dealt with 
elsewhere. As I see it, these fifteen persons were only too happy to find in Eugen 
Kogon an artful pen with which to free them from all the responsibility for their 
actions in the camp in the eyes of posterity.s I see it, these fifteen persons were only too happy to find in Eugen 
Kogon an artful pen with which to free them from all the responsibility for their 
actions in the camp in the eyes of posterity.

III. The Häftlingsführung. 
It had the following duties: to maintain order in the camp; to maintain 
discipline in order to avoid the intervention of the S.S., etc...this made it 
possible to do away with the S.S. patrols in the camp; their task was to receive 
the new arrivals, this little by little eliminated the brutal wrangling of the S.S. 
It was a difficult and thankless job. The guards of Buchenwald camp very 
rarely struck blows, although there were often savage rows. The new arrivals, 
who came from other camps, were terrified at first when they were met by 
those who were guards at camp Buchenwald, but later they always came to 
appreciate how much better their reception had been than in other places...To 
be sure there was always this or that member of the camp guard who, judging 
by his way of expressing himself, aught to have been an S.S. But that didn't 
matter much. The aim alone counted: To keep a nucleus of prisoners against 
the S.S. If the camp guard had not seen to an impeccable appearance of order 
in front of the S.S., what might not have become of the entire camp, and its 
thousands of prisoners, in the line of punitive labors and, last but not least, 
during the last days before liberation? (Page 62, emphasis added) 
Looking back on my personal experience and on the reception that my convoy 
received at the two different camps, it is not possible for me to concede that it was any 
better at Buchenwald than it was at Dora. But, I must also acknowledge that 
conditions in general at Buchenwald and at Dora were not to be compared: the first 
was a sanatorium when compared to the second. But, to conclude that the relatively 
better conditions of Buchenwald were due to a difference in the make-up, the nature, 
and the political and philosophical convictions between the two Häftlingsführung 
would be an error. If they had been transposed en bloc, the result would have been the 
same. In both cases, their behavior was governed by the overall conditions of 
existence in each camp, and over these factors they had no control. 
At the time of which Eugen Kogon is speaking, Buchenwald was at the end of its 
evolution. Almost everything had been completed: the various services were installed 
and things were in order. The S.S. guards themselves, having to face fewer of the 
worries that always accompany disorder, settled into a routine that was almost without 
mishaps; in short, their nerves were much less on edge. At Dora, on the other hand, 
the camp was in full construction; everything had to be built and put into place with 
the limited resources of a country at war. Disorder was the natural state of things. 
Everything was in a jumble. The S.S. were unapproachable, and the Häftlingsführung, 
not knowing what to do to please them, often exceeded their desires. But, at 
Buchenwald, the exactions of a Kapo or a camp elder, identical in their motives andproachable, and the Häftlingsführung, 
not knowing what to do to please them, often exceeded their desires. But, at 
Buchenwald, the exactions of a Kapo or a camp elder, identical in their motives and

--- PAGE BREAK ---129
aims, were less comprehensive, because, with conditions in every way better, the 
consequences were not so serious for the mass of the prisoners.

As additional support for this contention, is the fact that in the fall of 1944, when 
Dora was, in its turn, almost completed, and with the Häftlingsführung having in no 
way modified its conduct, the material and moral conditions there could stand 
comparison with Buchenwald.

Unfortunately, at that moment the end of the war was 
imminent, the bombings had interfered -- with the getting of supplies, and the advance 
of the Allies on two fronts had caused the overpopulation of Dora with prisoners who 
had been evacuated from camps in the East and the West.

As a consequence, 
everything in the camp was in turmoil again.

There remains to be discussed the line of reasoning according to which it was 
important, in order to maintain a nucleus against the S.S., to substitute a prisoner 
bureaucracy for them.

But, since the whole camp was naturally against the S.S., I do 
not understand this reasoning.

It could be argued that it would have been better to 
keep everyone alive to oppose the S.S.

guards, and not just a nucleus of prisoners who 
were under their orders, if only to create extra difficulties for them...

Instead of that, a 
method was used which, while it saved that precious nucleus, it killed the mass.

As 
Eugen Kogon recognizes, after David Rousset, urbanity was not the only thing that 
came into the discussion: 
In fact, the prisoners never received the scant rations which were in principle 
meant for them.

First, the S.S.

took what they pleased.

Then the prisoners who 
worked in the food storehouses and in the kitchens worked it so they could set 
apart an ample share.

Then the heads of the barracks diverted a good lot for 
themselves and for their friends.

The rest went to the miserable ordinary 
prisoners.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then the heads of the barracks diverted a good lot for 
themselves and for their friends. The rest went to the miserable ordinary 
prisoners. (Page 107) 
There is room here to point out that everyone who had a shred of authority in the 
camp was by that very fact in a position to "set apart": the camp elder who delivered 
the rations in bulk; the Kapo and the Block chief who helped themselves copiously in 
the first place; the foreman and the ward keeper who cut the bread or put soup into the 
bowls; the police; the secretary, etc... It is strange that Kogon does not mention this 
fact. All of these people literally gorged themselves on what they stole, and walked 
around the camp with prosperous appearances. Not the slightest scruple stopped them: 
In the prisoners' infirmary in the camps there was special food for the sick, 
which was called "the diet." It was very much sought after as a supplement, 
and most of it was diverted to the profit of the camp personages: Block elders, 
Kapos, etc... In every camp could be found communists or criminals who for 
years received in addition to their other advantages, the extras for the sick. It 
was above all a matter of good relations with the kitchen for the sick, 
composed exclusively of people belonging to that category of prisoners who 
dominated the camp, or of an exchange of services rendered: the Kapos of the 
sewing shop, cobbler, clothing storehouse, tool house, etc..., turned over, in 
exchange for this food, what was asked of them. In Buchenwald, from 1939 to 
1941, nearly forty thousand eggs were made away with in this way, right 
inside the camp. (Pages 110-112, emphasis added.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ood, what was asked of them. In Buchenwald, from 1939 to 
1941, nearly forty thousand eggs were made away with in this way, right 
inside the camp. (Pages 110-112, emphasis added.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130
Meanwhile, the sick in the infirmary were dying from the lack of this special food 
which the S.S. had intended for them. In explaining the mechanics of the thievery, 
Kogon just calls it an aspect of "system D", indiscriminately used by all of the 
prisoners who were involved with the distribution of the food. Such a characterization 
is both inaccurate and charitable, with regard to the Häftlingsführung. 
The worker, in whatever Kommando, could not steal, because the Kapo and the 
foreman, all set to denounce him, watched him very closely. At the most when the 
distribution of rations was made, he could risk taking something from one of his 
fellow sufferers. But, the Kapo and the foreman, working together, could set aside 
something from the supply of rations, before distribution, and this they cynically did. 
And this "setting aside" was done with impunity, too, because they could not be 
denounced except through the chain of command, that is, through themselves. They 
stole for themselves, for their friends, for those in authority to whom they were 
indebted for their positions, and, in the higher ranks of the hierarchy, for the S.S., 
from whom they hoped to keep or get protection. 
As for the diet of the sick, the Kapo of the infirmary -- the very one who attested to 
the accuracy and the objectivity of Kogon's testimony -- expropriated a considerable 
quantity for the benefit of his colleagues and the accredited Communists. [7] During 
my stay at Buchenwald, every morning he set aside some milk, about a liter, and some 
other delicacies, for Erich, chief of Block 48. Multiply this example of plunder by the 
number of persons in the whole camp, who also had the opportunity to steal, and one 
can see the amount of milk which the sick in the infirmary never received. Compared 
to this kind of theft, the petty scroungings along the food distribution circuit were 
insignificant. 
Thus, whether it is a question of the normal rations or the "diet" for the sick, the 
common mass of prisoners had two reasons for dying of hunger: the food that was 
taken by the S.S. and the food that was taken by the Häftlingsführung. The rank and 
file prisoners also had two reasons for being beaten and for being maltreated in 
general: the Kapo who stole extra, also hit harder to please the S.S. and it was rare 
when a simple reprimand from a S.S. guard did not bring on, in addition, a whole rain 
of blows from the Kapo. Given these conditions, there were few prisoners who did not 
prefer to deal directly with the S.S.ple reprimand from a S.S. guard did not bring on, in addition, a whole rain 
of blows from the Kapo. Given these conditions, there were few prisoners who did not 
prefer to deal directly with the S.S.

IV. The Arguments 
The arguments that are used to justify the protection of a nucleus of "elite" prisoners 
at the expense of the common masses of prisoners are in no way more convincing 
than the facts. Without this prisoner elite, "what would have become of the entire 
camp, especially at the moment of liberation?" Kogon asks himself fearfully. From 
what has been said, it is already clear that the common prisoners would have had one 
less reason to die ("crever") at the rate they were dying. It is not enough of an answer 
for him to add, "It was thus that the first American tanks, coming from the Northwest, 
found Buchenwald liberated," (Page 304) and to give the credit for that liberation to 
the Häftlingsführung. To make such an assertion does not make it true. With such an 
argument, one could also say that the American Army entered a liberated France, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---131
that, too, would be ridiculous.

The truth of the matter is that the S.S.

withdrew before 
the American advance, and, trying to take with them as many prisoners as possible, 
they set the Häftlingsführung personnel, bludgeons in hand, to round up as many 
prisoners as possible throughout the camp.

Thanks to the willing cooperation of the Häftlingsführung, the manhunt took place 
with a minimum of disorder.

And, if by some miraculous chance the American 
offensive had been stopped before the camp, and a vigorous German counteroffensive 
had reversed the outcome of the war, this reasoning would offer a sure advantage as 
revealed in these lines: 
The S.S.

staffs of the camps were not capable of enforcing on tens of 
thousands of prisoners more than an outward and sporadic control.

(Page 275) 
In other words, with a victorious Germany each member of the Häftlingsführung of 
the camp could have pleaded his personal contribution to the maintenance of order 
and his loyalty, in an effort to obtain his liberation.

And, the lines that we have just 
read could have appeared without the changing of a comma.

Through ceaseless struggle, the system of the S.S., to mix together the various 
categories of prisoners, to encourage natural antagonisms and to provoke 
artificial ones, had to be broken and made inoperable.

The reasons for that 
were clear to the reds.

With the greens it was not at all political reasons; they 
wanted to be able to have a free course for their customary practices: 
corruption, extortion, the seeking of material advantages.

Any control was 
insupportable to them, especially that from within the camp itself.

(Page 278) 
It is obvious that no matter what system the S.S.

used it had to become inoperable 
from the moment when, used by others for the same purposes, it was applied to the 
same object and in the same way.

Even more: it was useless.

The S.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Even more: it was useless. The S.S. no longer had 
any need to hit men, since those to whom they had delegated their power did the 
hitting better; nor to steal, since their minions stole better and the benefits were the 
same, if not more substantial; nor to kill slowly to make order respected, because 
others did that for them, and order in the camp was all the more perfect for it. In spite of what Kogon says, I never observed that the intervention of the camp 
bureaucracy had any effect on the "natural antagonisms" between prisoners or that the 
various categories of prisoners were less "mixed together" than had been intended by 
the S.S. Moreover, the integration of the whole prisoner population was not the objective of 
the Häftlingsführung, rather, to divide and rule, a principle that holds for any power 
wanting to maintain itself, was just as valid for the camp bureaucracy as for the S.S. In practice, while the latter vaguely set the mass of prisoners against those they had 
chosen to rule them, the former played with political nuances, with the nature of the 
crime, and with the selection of a nucleus of men of a certain mentality. What is amusing -- from a distance -- in Kogon's thesis, is the distinction he drew 
between the "reds" and the "greens" concerning the manner in which each group 
exercised its power, accusing the latter of corruption, bribery, and self-seeking. What

--- PAGE BREAK ---132
did the "reds" do that was not all of that?

And, for the ordinary prisoner, what 
difference did it make to him who was in power, when it was impossible for him to 
see any resulting difference.

What happened in the concentration camps was that in the struggle to keep alive, 
appetites more or less understandable took precedence over all moral principles.

At 
the bottom of everything was the basic desire to survive.

Along with this desire, 
among, the less scrupulous, went the need to steal food, and then the need to clan 
together in order to steal food better.

Those who were the most skillful at organizing 
in order to get better nourishment -- i.e., the politicals, since under the circumstances 
the task of organizing called more for cleverness than strength -- were then the most 
able to obtain power, because they were better fed.

And once in power, they were also 
better able to hold onto it, because they were intellectually more adept.

But, no moral 
principle, in the sense that it is understood in the world outside of the concentration 
camps, played any part in this evolution, except by its absence.

And, then to write: 
In every camp the political prisoners tried to take in hand the internal 
administrative machinery or, as the case might be, struggled to hold onto it.

This in order to defend itself by every means against the S.S., not just to fight 
the hard battle for life, but also to further, insofar as possible, the 
disintegration and crushing of the system.

In more than one camp, the leaders 
of the political prisoners, for years, worked at this end, with admirable 
perseverance, and complete contempt for death.

(Page 275, emphasis added.) 
This statement is only pap, whose laudatory tone fails to hide the fact that it puts all of 
the political prisoners -- even those who never wanted to exercise any authority over 
their fellow sufferers -- in a class with the least scrupulous of them.In more than one camp, the leaders 
of the political prisoners, for years, worked at this end, with admirable 
perseverance, and complete contempt for death.

(Page 275, emphasis added.) 
This statement is only pap, whose laudatory tone fails to hide the fact that it puts all of 
the political prisoners -- even those who never wanted to exercise any authority over 
their fellow sufferers -- in a class with the least scrupulous of them.

Nor, does the 
admission "defend itself by every means..." help either.

"By every means:" this is what 
that could mean: 
When the S.S.

asked the politicals to make a selection of those prisoners "unfit 
to live," [9] in order to kill them, and that a refusal might have meant the end 
of the control of the reds and a return of the greens, then they had to be 
prepared to take the burden of that transgression.

Their only choice lay 
between taking an active participation in that selection, or a possible 
withdrawal of their responsibilities in the camp, which, after all that had 
already been experienced, could have had even worse consequences.

The more 
tender the conscience, the harder it was to make this decision.

But since it had 
to be made, and without delay, it was better for it to lie in the hands of those of 
strong constitution, so that we would not all be made martyrs.

(Page 327) 
I have already remarked that it was not a question of selecting the unfit to live, but, 
rather, the unfit for work.

The difference is considerable.

If one wants to overlook it at 
any cost, I submit that it would have been better to "risk a possible (10) withdrawal of 
their responsibilities in the camp" than to have burdened their collective conscience 
with this "active participation" that was always so zealously carried out.

Maybe, the 
"greens" would have come back to power?

But, so what?

In the first place, they were 
not likely to have retained it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, so what? In the first place, they were 
not likely to have retained it. And, in the second place, the "greens" would not have 
behaved any worse than the "reds" with regard to the mass of the prisoners. They 
would not have selected any greater number of prisoners as unfit; nor would they have

--- PAGE BREAK ---133
taken any less account of the background of the designated prisoners, because, in 
these selections, the "reds" were no less concerned than the "greens" over political 
caste.

The fact was that the Häftlingsführung, whether "green" or "red," used the 
selection procedure as a method of getting rid of potential rivals.

Consequently, and, if it meant assuming the same moral burden, why take power 
away from the "greens," or seek to prevent them from holding it?

It is possible that 
with the "greens" in power, the selection of the unfit, with a few exceptions, might not 
have been the same.

But, nothing would have been changed as far as the number of 
unfit was concerned, since that figure was determined by the general work statistics 
and the amount of provisions available in the camp for the support of non-working 
prisoners.

Under such circumstances, Eugen Kogon himself might perhaps not have 
been in a position to become, or to remain, the secretary and aide-de-camp to the S.S.

camp physician Dr.

Ding-Schuller, and, once returned to the mass of common 
prisoners, and once beaten and starved, perhaps he, too, might have been included 
among the number of those found to be "unfit." Probably the same thing could have 
happened to the fifteen others who sanctioned his testimony.

Then, had this most 
unthinkable of catastrophes actually occurred, only this could have happened: these 
fifteen would have been "made martyrs," while others would have continued to live as 
witnesses.

As if it mattered to History whether Kogon and his associates or some others were 
witnesses, like Michelin de Clermont, Fernand, Francois de Tessan, Doctor Seguin, 
Crémieux, Desnos, among others...

When Kogon said "so that we would not all be 
made martyrs," he was referring, of course, only to the privileged prisoners among the 
Häftlingsführung, and not to all of the politicals who, in spite of what has been said, 
made up the majority of the prison population.As if it mattered to History whether Kogon and his associates or some others were 
witnesses, like Michelin de Clermont, Fernand, Francois de Tessan, Doctor Seguin, 
Crémieux, Desnos, among others...

When Kogon said "so that we would not all be 
made martyrs," he was referring, of course, only to the privileged prisoners among the 
Häftlingsführung, and not to all of the politicals who, in spite of what has been said, 
made up the majority of the prison population.

Not for an instant did Kogon think that 
by being satisfied with eating less and with beating less, the concentration camp 
bureaucracy could have saved almost all of the prisoners; if that had happened, today 
we would reap only benefits in that they too would be witnesses.

How could a man as informed as Kogon, and affecting a degree of culture, have 
arrived at such garbled conclusions?

The reason may be seen in the fact that he tried 
to judge the prisoners and guards, and the events that took place in the world of the 
concentration camp, by the standards of the outside world.

We do the same thing 
when we form an opinion about what is taking place in the Soviet Union or in Red 
China, based on the moral codes of the western world, and the Russians and the 
Chinese do the same to us.

On both sides of the "Iron Curtain," an Order has been 
created, and making it function has given rise to a type of men whose conceptions of 
social life and of individual conduct are different and, indeed, even opposite in nature.

The same is true of the concentration camps: ten years of existence were enough to 
create an Order within the camps, and all must be judged on its terms.

In particular, 
this Order gave rise to a new type of man, who can be classed somewhere between the 
common prisoner and the political prisoner.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The same is true of the concentration camps: ten years of existence were enough to 
create an Order within the camps, and all must be judged on its terms. In particular, 
this Order gave rise to a new type of man, who can be classed somewhere between the 
common prisoner and the political prisoner. The characteristic feature of this new type 
of man resulted from the fact that the common prisoner corrupted the political 
prisoner, made him almost like the former, without troubling his conscience very 
much. It was to this level that the camp was reduced by those who had conceived of 
it. The camp gave direction to the reactions of all of the prisoners, "green" or "red," 
and not the reverse. With this fact established -- and to the extent that one is willing to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

134
admit that it is not a mental fabrication -- the moral code of the world outside the 
concentration camps can pardon what happened in the camps, but it can in no case 
justify what happened there.V.

The Conduct of the S.S.

I put side by side two statements: 
Those prisoners who maltreated their comrades, or even beat them to death, 
were certainly never punished by the S.S.

but were turned over to the justice of 
the prisoners.

(Page 98) 
One morning a prisoner was found hanged in a Block.

An investigation was 
started and it was seen that the "hanged" man had died after having been 
horribly beaten and trampled on, and that the barracks man, under the 
direction of the Block elder Osterloh, [11] had then hanged him to make it 
look like a suicide.

The victim had protested against a misappropriation of 
bread by the barracks man.

The S.S.

staff succeeded [12] in hushing the matter 
up and put the murderer back in his post so that nothing was changed.

(Page 
50) 
It is true that the S.S.

personnel did not usually intervene in the disputes among the 
prisoners and that one waited in vain for any pronouncement of justice from them.

It 
could not be otherwise, since "they did not know what was actually happening behind 
the barbed wire." (Page 275) The reason for this ignorance on the part of the S.S.

was 
that the Häftlingsführung made every effort to see to it that they were kept in the dark 
concerning the day to day happenings in the camp.

By setting itself up as a veritable 
"court of prisoners," and by profiting from the fact that no appeal could be made 
against its decisions, the Häftlingsführung never had need for recourse to the S.S.

except to strengthen its own authority if it felt that it was weakening.

In any case, the 
camp bureaucrats did not like to see the intervention of the S.S.

for fear that the S.S.

would be less severe, a situation which would have brought their authority into 
question with the mass of prisoners.

In addition, such intervention might have caused 
the S.S.

to question their ability to govern, which, in turn, might have caused them to 
be relieved from their duties and to be returned to the rank and file.134
admit that it is not a mental fabrication -- the moral code of the world outside the 
concentration camps can pardon what happened in the camps, but it can in no case 
justify what happened there.

In addition, such intervention might have caused 
the S.S. to question their ability to govern, which, in turn, might have caused them to 
be relieved from their duties and to be returned to the rank and file. As a practical 
matter, there existed an implicit operating procedure between the Häftlingsführung 
and the S.S.: the Häftlingsführung "avoided trouble" by preventing the various camp 
happenings from seeping through the screen of its own edifice, and the S.S. made no 
attempt to know what was going on in the camp as long as order was maintained. In the specific case which Kogon mentions, if Block Chief Osterloh had been a "red," 
nothing concerning the matter would have reached the ears of the S.S. other than the 
fact that the victim had been a suicide, a fact which would not have resulted in any 
difficulties. But, he was a "green", and he represented one of the last elements of 
power which his category still held in the camp. The "reds" denounced him in the 
hope of getting rid of him. However, the S.S. did not settle the matter in the way that 
they had hoped. This is the way of the Order: a Block Chief, even guilty, could not be 
questioned or punished except by some higher authority, and, in no case, could he be

--- PAGE BREAK ---135
punished from the prisoner masses.

Whether a "green" or a "red," that is the way that 
it was.

One can reverse the facts of the preceding example and make Osterloh the victim, and 
his victim the murderer.

In such a case, the Häftlingsführung itself would have reacted 
this way: without worrying about Osterloh's color, it would have felt itself attacked or 
threatened in its prerogatives and would have sent for the S.S.

-- demanding an 
exemplary punishment unless, which is more likely, it had first given the punishment 
-- in which case it would only have asked the S.S.

to approve it.

In the first situation, 
the S.S.

would forward the matter to a higher echelon and would wait for a decision.

In the meantime, blows would rain down from everywhere on the murderer as he 
would be taken to the Bunker (13) where he would be subjected to further corporal 
punishment.

In the second situation, the S.S.

would endorse the action of the 
Häftlingsführung, precisely to avoid the demands for explanations, and the sundry 
other difficulties, that would be forthcoming from that higher echelon.

In both cases, 
nothing would happen that was not compatible with the Order.

The authorities in Berlin had to intervene in the Osterloh affair, to which the "reds" 
had imprudently given the character of a matter of conscience in which honesty 
attacked the Order; this intervention stirred up so many difficulties that the S.S.

staff 
at Buchenwald had no choice but to succeed in hushing the matter up.

Besides, 
generally speaking, the S.S.

staff personnel did not like to refer matters to Berlin.

They feared the delays, the unaccustomed attention, indeed the scruples, which could 
cause troubles, the chief one being the transfer to another unit, which in war time 
could be most consequential.

In order to hush things up, Berlin was kept in almost 
complete ignorance of what was happening and was informed only of what could not 
be concealed.

The S.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In order to hush things up, Berlin was kept in almost 
complete ignorance of what was happening and was informed only of what could not 
be concealed. The S.S. staff of Buchenwald exercised maximum control on the spot. To the reader who might think that I have exaggerated with regard to the state of 
ignorance of the authorities in Berlin, permit me to point to the present situation in 
France. There, the Ministers of Justice and of National Education do not know what 
really takes place in the prisons, and the so-called houses of correction. For example, 
the disciplinary practices of the minor prison authorities are generally in constant and 
flagrant violation of the official regulations, and no one -- either in the Ministries or 
among the general public -- knows anything about it, except when there is an 
occasional scandal. And so it is in every country in the world that there is a "universe" 
of delinquents living on the fringe of the other, lifers, of whom the chaouch is king. Within the limits of that "universe" are also the colonial peoples; and the Colonial 
Ministers and the Ministers of War, to whom they are subject, are also generally 
ignorant of the conduct of their adjutants, unless, and until, some particularly 
abhorrent behavior on the part of their subordinates comes to light which, because of 
political considerations, cannot be ignored. And, here is another citation from Kogon which is just as significant: 
Visits of the S.S. frequently took place in the camps. When this happened, the 
S.S. staff went through an astonishing procedure: on the one hand they 
concealed all side structures; On the other they organized regular displays. Anything that might have led anyone to suspect that the prisoners were 
tortured was passed over in silence by the guides, and they were concealed. It

--- PAGE BREAK ---136
was in this manner that the famous torture rack which was on the mustering 
grounds was hidden in one of the barracks until the visitors left.

It seems that 
once they overlooked these prudent measures: when a visitor asked what the 
thing was, one of the camp chiefs answered that it was a carpentry model for 
making special forms.

The gallows and the stakes on which the prisoners were 
hanged were also put out of sight each time.

The visitors were conducted 
through "model - installations:" infirmary, cinema, kitchen, library, stores, 
laundry, and the agriculture section.

If they actually went into a block, it was 
where the barbers and the servants of the S.S.

and a few privileged prisoners 
lived "detached," blocks which for that reason were never over crowded and 
were always clean.

In the kitchen garden as well as in the sculpture workshop, 
the S.S.

visitors sometimes received presents as souvenirs.

(Page 258) 
This description is of Buchenwald.

If one wants to know who these visitors were, we 
have this: 
There were group visits, and visits of individuals.

The latter were especially 
frequent during the vacations, when the S.S.

showed the camp to their friends 
or relatives.

These were also for the most part S.S.

personnel or heads of the 
S.A., sometimes also officers of the Wehrmacht or the police.

The group visits 
were of different kinds.

We frequently saw batches of police or gendarme 
promotions from a near-by station, or batches of S.S.

aspirants.

After the war 
began, visits from officers of the Luftwaffe.

From time to time, we also had 
visits from civilians.

Once to Buchenwald there came youth delegations from 
the Fascist countries, who had come together at Weimar for some "cultural 
congress." Groups of the Hitler youth also came to the camp.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From time to time, we also had 
visits from civilians. Once to Buchenwald there came youth delegations from 
the Fascist countries, who had come together at Weimar for some "cultural 
congress." Groups of the Hitler youth also came to the camp. Distinguished 
visitors, such as Gauleiter Sauckel, police commissioner Hennicke of Weimar, 
Prince Waldeck Pyrmont, Count Ciano, Italian minister of foreign affairs, 
commanding officers of military divisions, Doctor Conti, and other visitors in 
that class, more often than not stayed until the evening roll-call. (Page 257) 
Thus were carefully hidden all traces of brutality not only from the general run of 
visitors, but also from those visitors who held the highest positions in the S.S. and in 
the Third Reich. I imagine that when these personages inspected Dachau and 
Birkenau, as well as other camps, explanations as pertinent as that which was given 
for the alleged torture rack at Buchenwald would have been given them for the 
alleged gas chambers at Birkenau. And, I ask this question: how can it be maintained 
after all this, that all of the horrors of which the camps were the stage were part of a 
plan that had been conceived "in high places?" 
When, in spite of all that was kept hidden, the authorities in Berlin discovered 
something awry in the administration of the camps, the S.S. staffs were called to 
account. An example is provided by a directive coming from the Chief of Section D, 
dated April 4. 1942: 
The Reichsführer of the S.S. and Chief of the German police, has directed that 
concerning his orders for the bastonade (this applies to men as well as to 
women in preventive detention) it will be proper in cases where the word 
"aggravated" is attached, to apply the punishment on the naked posterior. In all

--- PAGE BREAK ---137
other cases, the method customary up to the present will be used in conformity 
with previous instructions from the S.S.

Reichsführer.

Eugen Kogon, who cites this circular, adds: 
In principle, before applying the bastonade, the camp staff had to ask approval 
from Berlin, and the camp physician had to certify to the S.S.

W.V.H.

that the 
prisoner was in good health.

But it had been the custom for a long time in all 
the camps, right to the end in a great many of them, to send the prisoner first 
to the "rack" and to give him as many blows as was judged good.

Then, after 
getting approval from Berlin, they began again, but this time officially.

(Page 
99) 
It goes without saying that the bastonade was almost always applied to the naked 
posterior, and that it was to combat this abuse, and not to aggravate the punishment, 
that the directive in question was sent to all of the camps.

One can certainly be astonished and find it barbarous that the bastonade played any 
part in the punishment of the prisoners in the camps.

But, the reason for its use is 
another story: in a country like Germany where until the end of the First World War it 
was prescribed as the most lenient of punishments, under the name of "Schlag," it is 
not so surprising that its use was retained by the National Socialists for the 
punishment of major criminals, especially when we remember that the government of 
the Weimar Republic was not disturbed by its use.

On the other hand, it is more 
astonishing -- in view of the reams of French governmental circulars that have denied 
the use of the bastonade for almost a century -- that thousands of Negroes in the 
French colonies continue to suffer such punishment, and in actual fact suffer it "with 
naked posterior," since they have the misfortune, in addition, to live in those regions 
of the earth where they would have no reason to clothe themselves except for 
protection from the bastonade.But, the reason for its use is 
another story: in a country like Germany where until the end of the First World War it 
was prescribed as the most lenient of punishments, under the name of "Schlag," it is 
not so surprising that its use was retained by the National Socialists for the 
punishment of major criminals, especially when we remember that the government of 
the Weimar Republic was not disturbed by its use.

On the other hand, it is more 
astonishing -- in view of the reams of French governmental circulars that have denied 
the use of the bastonade for almost a century -- that thousands of Negroes in the 
French colonies continue to suffer such punishment, and in actual fact suffer it "with 
naked posterior," since they have the misfortune, in addition, to live in those regions 
of the earth where they would have no reason to clothe themselves except for 
protection from the bastonade.

Another directive, dated December 28, 1942, emanating from the central S.S.

office 
concerned with economic administration and bearing the signature of General Kludre 
of the S.S.

and the Waffen S.S., says: 
...

The camp doctors should supervise the food of the prisoners more than they 
have up to the present, and in agreement with the administration, they should 
submit to the commanding officer of the camp their suggestions for 
improvement.

The latter should not just remain on paper, but be regularly 
checked by the camp physicians.

It is necessary that the mortality rate be 
appreciably lowered in each camp, since the number of the prisoners must be 
brought back to the level required by the Reichsführer S.S.

The head doctors 
of the camp shall do everything possible to achieve this.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is necessary that the mortality rate be 
appreciably lowered in each camp, since the number of the prisoners must be 
brought back to the level required by the Reichsführer S.S. The head doctors 
of the camp shall do everything possible to achieve this. The best doctor in a 
concentration camp is not the one who thinks it helpful to call attention to 
himself through uncalled for harshness, but the one who maintains to the 
highest possible degree the capacity for work in every shop, by keeping an eye 
on the health of the workers, and in making adjustments. (Pages 111, 141) 
As was mentioned in the previous chapter, David Rousset published a collection of 
documents relating to alleged German atrocities of all sorts under the title Le Pitre ne

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138
rit pas; however, Rousset does not discuss the second of the two documents that are 
cited above because it destroys much of his argument. He does cite the first document, 
but he does so in a completely twisted sense. In this respect, although there are 
reasons for distrusting Kogon's interpretations, we must rejoice in the fact that he was 
objective enough to include the second. Perhaps, there may exist more documents 
which support my thesis and which lie still in German archives, or in those of the 
Allied victors, and which have not been brought to light yet...

VI. Health Personnelhere may exist more documents 
which support my thesis and which lie still in German archives, or in those of the 
Allied victors, and which have not been brought to light yet...

VI. Health Personnel

In the first years the hospital staff was incompetent. But little by little it 
acquired a great deal of practical experience. The head Kapo of the infirmary 
at Buchenwald was a printer by trade; his successor, Walter Kramer, was a 
strong and courageous person, a hard worker, and with a sense of 
organization. With time he became a remarkable specialist in wounds and 
operations. Through his position, the Kapo of the infirmary exercised, in all 
the camps, a considerable influence on overall living conditions. So the 
prisoners [14] never put a specialist into that position, although it might have 
been possible in numerous camps, but rather a person who was completely 
devoted to the ruling clique in the camp. When, for example, in November 
1941, the Kapo Kramer and his closest collaborator Peix were shot by the S.S., 
the post of head of the infirmary did not go to a doctor, but was given, on the 
contrary, to a former Communist deputy to the Reichstag, Ernst Busse, who, 
with his assistant Otto Kipp from Dresden, concerned himself with the purely 
administrative side [15] of that service, whose activity never ceased growing, 
and played a large part in the greater stabilization of living conditions. A 
specialist put at the head of that service would, without any doubt, have 
brought catastrophe on the camp, because he never would have been able to 
dominate all the complicated and far-reaching intrigues, the outcome of which 
was very often fatal. (Page 135, emphasis added.) 
One trembles at the thought that such a line of reasoning could have been advanced 
by Kogon, without batting an eye, and broadcast to the public, without rousing waves 
of indignant protest. To understand the full horror, it is important to know that in his 
turn the Kapo chose his assistants for reasons that had nothing to do with their 
competence as medical practitioners. And, to think that these so-called "leaders of the 
Prisoners," who exposed thousands of miserable men to various brutalities and who 
stole their food, had them treated, without being forced to do it by the S.S., by people 
who were absolutely incompetent. 
The drama began at the entrance to the infirmary: 
When the sick man finally got there, he first had to stand in line outside, no 
matter what the weather, and with his shoes cleaned. Since it was not possible 
to examine all the sick, and since there were always among them prisoners 
who only had the understandable desire to escape work, a sturdy doorman, awith his shoes cleaned. Since it was not possible 
to examine all the sick, and since there were always among them prisoners 
who only had the understandable desire to escape work, a sturdy doorman, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed. Since it was not possible 
to examine all the sick, and since there were always among them prisoners 
who only had the understandable desire to escape work, a sturdy doorman, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

139
prisoner, proceeded to make the first basic selection of the sick. (Page 130, 
emphasis added.) 
The Kapo, chosen because he was a Communist, picked out a doorman, not because 
he was capable of telling the sick from the malingerers, or of distinguishing those who 
were more sick from those who were less, but because he was husky, and was able to 
give a good thrashing to anyone who tried to get past him without permission. It goes 
without saying that he was kept in good shape with extra food rations. The reasons for 
the choice of the nurses and the doctors, if not quite the same, were just as nobly 
inspired. When, finally, there were prisoners who were medical doctors in the camp 
infirmaries, it was because the S.S. insisted on it. I pass over the humiliations, even 
the retaliatory measures, which these doctors were made to suffer every time that the 
demands of their consciences came into conflict with the demands of politics and 
intrigue. 
Eugen Kogon saw benefits in the procedure: Kapo Kramer had become "a remarkable 
specialist in wounds and operations," and he adds: 
A good friend of mine, Willi Jellineck, was a pastry cook in Vienna ..... At 
Buchenwald he was undertaker, a zero in the camp hierarchy. As a Jew, 
young, tall, and uncommonly strong, he had small chance of surviving during 
Koch's time. And yet, what did he become? Our best tuberculosis expert, a 
remarkable practitioner who helped many a comrade, and, in addition, was the 
bacteriologist of Block 50 ... (Page 324) 
I am willing to disregard the use made of, and the fate of, the professional doctors 
whom the Häftlingsführung considered, individually and collectively, less useful than 
comrades Kramer and Jellineck. I am also willing to disregard the number of the dead 
who paid for the training and the remarkable expertise of the latter. But, if it can be 
conceded that these considerations are of negligible significance, then there is no 
reason for not extending this practice into the non-concentration camp world. In 
pursuit of this goal, one could issue two decrees at once: the first would disband all of 
the schools of medicine and replace them with training centers for pastry cooks and 
machinists, the second would dispatch to the kitchen or factory all of the doctors who 
are practicing, and would replace them with pastry cooks and machinists who are 
Communists or fellow-travelers. I do not doubt that the latter would emerge from such 
a reversal of roles in an honorable fashion; instead of blaming them for the deaths that 
they would cause, they would be credited for their adroitness in surviving all of the 
intrigues of political life. That is one way of looking at it.hion; instead of blaming them for the deaths that 
they would cause, they would be credited for their adroitness in surviving all of the 
intrigues of political life. That is one way of looking at it.

VII. Devotion 
From the beginning, the prisoners attached to the dental staff tried to help their 
comrades as much as possible. In all the dental centers they worked 
clandestinely, running great risks, and in a way hard to imagine. They made 
dentures, artificial parts, bridges, for those prisoners whose teeth had been 
broken by the S.S., or who had lost them because of the general conditions of 
life. (Page 131)

--- PAGE BREAK ---140
This statement is correct.

But the "comrades" who were helped were always the same: 
a Kapo, a Block chief, a camp elder, a secretary, etc ...Those among the mass of 
prisoners who had lost their teeth for the reasons given above died without having 
recovered their loss with artificial teeth, or, if they survived, they had to wait for the 
liberation to be cared for.

But, the clandestine nature of this work was very peculiar in 
view of the fact that it had the previous consent of the S.S.: 
During the war, 1939-1940, they managed to set up a clandestine operation 
ward, thanks to the close collaboration of a series of Kommandos, and with the 
secret consent of the S.S.

Doctor Blies...

(Page 132) 
The scope and the impact of this revelation can be appreciated when one realizes that 
the dental and medical installations in the camps were intended for the benefit of all 
of the prisoners in all of the camps and, that, thanks to the complicity of certain well 
placed S.S.

personnel, these facilities were diverted to the sole benefit of the 
Häftlingsführung.

In my opinion, if those who proceeded to misuse those facilities 
"ran great risks," that was only very just ...

as seen from below.

Eugen Kogon himself feels the weakness of this reasoning: 
In the last year, the internal administration of Buchenwald was so closely 
organized that the S.S.

no longer had any say over certain very important 
internal matters.

Tired, the S.S.

was now accustomed to "let things go," and on 
the whole the politicals had a free hand...

Most certainly it was always the 
directing clique, which identified itself more or less with the active anti-fascist 
forces, that most profited from the state of affairs: the mass of prisoners 
benefited only at times, and indirectly, mostly in that they no longer had to 
fear the intervention of the S.S., since those running the prisoners had taken 
steps on their own authority in the interests of all.was now accustomed to "let things go," and on 
the whole the politicals had a free hand...

Most certainly it was always the 
directing clique, which identified itself more or less with the active anti-fascist 
forces, that most profited from the state of affairs: the mass of prisoners 
benefited only at times, and indirectly, mostly in that they no longer had to 
fear the intervention of the S.S., since those running the prisoners had taken 
steps on their own authority in the interests of all.

(Page 284) 
Obviously, it can be explained that if the S.S.

"...

let things go, and on the whole the 
politicals had a free hand," it was because the S.S.

were "tired" or "accustomed to 
doing so." This is a way of looking at things.

But, I am more persuaded to believe that 
this delegation of authority by the S.S.

was due to the fact that the politicals had 
proven their devotion to the maintenance of order, on numerous occasions, and thus 
had established a "track record" from which the S.S.

deduced that they could be 
trusted to assume a great deal of responsibility.

As for the "steps [taken] ...in the interest of all," they might have prevented the 
intervention of the S.S., but it was precisely this lack of intervention by the S.S.

which 
gave a free hand to the Häftlingsführung a fact which, in turn, had a catastrophic 
effect on the mass of prisoners.

It is better to be dealt with by God than by his saints.

Furthermore if power becomes consolidated to the degree that it succeeds in 
neutralizing the possible opposition, reciprocally, it grows weaker from dissensions 
among those who share it.

Looked at in this way, the S.S., by exercising a constant 
and meticulous control over everything that took place in the camp, would have 
substituted mistrust for an attitude of connivance in all of its relations with the 
Häftlingsführung.

That the S.S.

did not want that is easily understood.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That the S.S. did not want that is easily understood. But, the 
Häftlingsführung did not want it either; this prisoner bureaucracy had deliberately 
crossed the Rubicon, and, although it might have shared the common lot with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
mass of the prisoners of the concentration camps, it preferred, whatever the rancor of 
the mass, to collaborate with the S.S. and to enjoy the benefits derived from such 
collaboration.REAK ---

141
mass of the prisoners of the concentration camps, it preferred, whatever the rancor of 
the mass, to collaborate with the S.S. and to enjoy the benefits derived from such 
collaboration.

VIII. Cinema, sports 
Once or twice per week, sometimes after quite long intervals, the cinema 
offered entertaining and documentary films. Given the frightful condition of 
life which prevailed in the camps, more than one comrade could not make up 
his mind to go to the cinema. (Page 128) 
A strange thing, there was in the camps something that resembled sports. Yet 
the conditions of life did not lend themselves very well. There were, 
nevertheless, young men who thought they still had energy to expend, and 
they managed to get the authorization of the S.S. to play soccer. And, the weak 
who could just barely walk, those emaciated, exhausted men, half dead on 
their trembling legs, the starved, went with pleasure to this spectacle! (Page 
124-125) 
These weak, starved, half dead men who Eugen Kogon reports watched a game of 
soccer with pleasure, although standing, are the same who he thought, given the 
frightful conditions of existence, did not have the heart to go to a movie where one 
could sit down. 
The truth is that the common prisoners did not go to the movies because every time 
that there was one, all of the seats were reserved by the Häftlingsführung people. It 
was different for soccer: the field was out in the open where everyone could see, and 
the surrounding grounds were big. Everyone could go. And, even so, some Kapo 
might take it into his head to break up the crowd of spectators and, with bludgeon in 
hand, chase all of those miserable men back toward the Blocks, on the pretext that 
they would profit more from their Sunday afternoon by resting! 
As for the "young men who thought they still had energy to expend" and who made 
up the soccer teams, they were men of the Häftlingsführung or their protégés, who 
were stuffed with food that had been stolen from those who were watching them play; 
moreover, they did not have to work and were in good shape.ere men of the Häftlingsführung or their protégés, who 
were stuffed with food that had been stolen from those who were watching them play; 
moreover, they did not have to work and were in good shape.

IX. The Brothel 
The bordello was known by the modest title, Sonderbau [special house] .... For 
those who did not have connections high up, the length of visiting time was set 
at 20 minutes... The aim of the S.S. in this enterprise was to corrupt the 
politicals... The illegal management of the camp had given the order not to go 
there. On the whole, the politicals obeyed the order, so much so that the 
intentions of the S.S. were thwarted. (Pages 170-171)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142
Like the movie theater, the brothel was accessible only to the members of the 
Häftlingsführung, the only ones, in any case, who were in any state to find any use for 
it. No one complained about it, and there is not much point in any lengthy discussion 
about it. Nevertheless, I would like to point out that, according to Kogon "Some of the 
prisoners without morals, and among them a fairly large number of politicals, get 
themselves involved in frightful relations, after the arrival of the boys." (Page 236.) 
My view is that the politicals would have done better by using the brothel, since they 
were given the opportunity to do so. Kogon's praise for their refusal to use the brothel 
in order to avoid its "corrupting" influence becomes hollow when it appears that -- 
instead of normal sexual relations -- numerous politicals preferred the corruption of 
the young boys in the camp. I shall add that it was precisely to eliminate any excuse 
or any justification for this pederasty that the S.S. established brothels in all of the 
camps in the first place ...oung boys in the camp. I shall add that it was precisely to eliminate any excuse 
or any justification for this pederasty that the S.S. established brothels in all of the 
camps in the first place ...

X. Informing 
The S.S. staff put spies in the camps in order to be informed about what was 
going on inside... The S.S. only got results with spies selected within the camp 
itself: common criminals, the asocial, and sometimes the political also .. (Page 
276) 
It was very rare for the Gestapo to pick out prisoners in the camps to be spies 
and informers... The Gestapo probably had such bad experiences with this sort 
of thing that fortunately it only resorted to it in very rare cases. (Page 255) 
It seems quite surprising that a procedure which brought about results when it was 
used by the S.S. should come to nothing when used by the Gestapo. It is, nevertheless, 
a matter of fact that the Gestapo very rarely resorted to the use of informers in the 
camps; it did not need to. Everyone in the concentration camps who occupied any 
position of power was more or less an informer who reported directly, or through an 
intermediary, to the S.S. When the Gestapo wanted some information about someone 
in the camps, it only had to ask the S.S... 
Looked at closely, the camps were all caught in the web of a gigantic network of 
informers. Among the mass of prisoners were the little men, the professional cheats, 
who kept the Häftlingsführung informed, out of congenital servility, for a bit of soup, 
a piece of bread, a stick of margarine, etc... or even unwittingly. Above these petty 
informers was the entire Häftlingsführung which spied on the mass for the S.S. when 
there was the need. Finally, the Häftlingsführung people informed on each other. 
Under these circumstances, denounciation often assumed strange aspects: 
Wolf (former S.S. officer, homosexual, camp elder in 1942) began denouncing 
other comrades for the benefit of his Polish friends (he was the lover of a 
Pole). On one occasion he was crazy enough to make threats. He knew that a 
German Communist from Magdeburg was to be freed. When he told him that 
he knew how to keep him from being freed, by telling on him for political 
activity in the camp, he was answered that the S.S. would be informed of his 
pederasty. The quarrel grew so bitter that the illegal direction of the campbeing freed, by telling on him for political 
activity in the camp, he was answered that the S.S. would be informed of his 
pederasty. The quarrel grew so bitter that the illegal direction of the camp

--- PAGE BREAK ---143
forestalled action by the Fascist Poles by turning them over to the S.S.

(Page 
280, emphasis added.) 
In other words, denunciation which was ignominious when it was done by the 
"greens," became a virtue, even a preventive measure, when it was done by the "reds." 
Happily, the "reds" could justify it by putting the label "Fascist" on the foreheads of 
their victims!

And, this is a better example: 
At Buchenwald in 1941, the most famous and most sinister case of 
voluntary[16] denunciation was that of the white Russian émigré, Grogorij 
Kushnir-Kushnarev who claimed to be a former Czarist general, and who, for 
months, won the confidence of various groups, then proceeded to deliver into 
the hands of the S.S.

comrades of all kinds, especially the Russian prisoners.

This agent of the Gestapo, responsible for the death of hundreds of prisoners, 
also dared to denounce, in the most infamous way, [17] all those with whom 
he had any conflict, even for minor reasons...

For a long time it was not 
possible to catch him alone, to kill him, because the S.S.

watched over him 
very carefully.

Finally they made him the director, in fact, of the secretariat of 
the prisoners.

Once in that position he was not satisfied just to bring about the 
downfall of all those who failed to please him, he clogged the wheels of the 
prisoners' autonomous organization.

Finally, at the beginning of 1942, he felt 
sick and was stupid enough to go to the infirmary.

Thus, he put himself in the 
hands of his enemies.

With the authorization of S.S.

Doctor Hoven, who had 
long been mixed-up in this affair, and was on the side of the politicals, 
Kushnir was at once declared to be contagious, he was isolated, and a few 
hours later he was killed with an injection of poison.--- PAGE BREAK ---

With the authorization of S.S. Doctor Hoven, who had 
long been mixed-up in this affair, and was on the side of the politicals, 
Kushnir was at once declared to be contagious, he was isolated, and a few 
hours later he was killed with an injection of poison. (Page 276, emphasis 
added.) 
This Grogorij Kushnir-Kushnarev was probably guilty of all that he was accused of, 
but everyone who climbed the ladder in the hierarchy of power in the concentration 
camps and who occupied the same position, before or after him, behaved in the same 
way, and their consciences are charged with the same crimes. The only difference in 
the case of Mr. Kushnir-Kushnarev was the fact that he did not have Eugen Kogon's 
approval... In any case, it is difficult to believe that the S.S., in the person of the S.S. Doctor Hoven, gratuitously took so active a part in his elimination. Eugen Kogon adds: "I still remember the sigh of relief that went through the camp, 
when like lightning the news went around that Kushnir had died in the infirmary." 
(Page 276, emphasis added.) The members of the clique that Kogon belonged to 
doubtless sighed with relief, and that fact is understandable since Kushnir's death 
meant the assumption of more power. But, the sigh was only one of hope in the rest of 
the camp, since a death by execution of no matter what influential member of the 
Häftlingsführung was always greeted with some hope of finally seeing the common 
lot improved. After a short time, it was evident that nothing had changed, and, until 
the next execution, it was a matter of indifference to everyone whether they were 
sacrificed on the altar of truth or of lies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---it was evident that nothing had changed, and, until 
the next execution, it was a matter of indifference to everyone whether they were 
sacrificed on the altar of truth or of lies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144
XI. Transports 
It is known that in the camps the office of labor statistics, composed of 
prisoners, directed the use of manpower, subject to the instruction of the head 
of the labor force, and the labor office. As the years went on, the S.S. was 
overwhelmed with enormous demands. At Buchenwald, S.S. 
Hauptsturmführer Schwartz tried only once himself to make up a transport of 
a thousand prisoners. After having kept almost the entire camp on the grounds 
for half a day, to review the men, he managed to collect 600 men. But those 
who had been examined and selected out, slipped away in all directions, and 
not one remained in Schwartz's hands... (Page 286) 
In my opinion, there was no drawback in having Schwartz's experience repeated every 
time that the organization of a transport to some work area was attempted; if the S.S. 
had never succeeded, all the better. But, unfortunately, "from that moment, the head 
of the labor force turned over to the prisoners in the labor statistic bureau all questions 
of the distribution of labor." (Ibid.) And, once that happened, it was no longer 
possible "to slip away in all directions" after the work force had been assembled on 
the mustering grounds, as had been the case with Schwartz. With rubber truncheons in 
hand, all of the Kapos, all of the Block Chiefs, all of the Lagerschutz (prisoner 
police), as well as others, set up a menacing barrier to any attempted flight. Compared 
with them, Hauptsturmführer Schwartz seemed innocuous. The Häftlingsführung 
people were Communists, anti-Fascist, and anti-Hitler, among other things, but, they 
could not bear to have anyone disturb the Hitlerian order of things or to weaken the 
war effort of the Third Reich by trying to escape from it. As compensation for their 
service to the Fuhrer, they were given power to designate those prisoners who would 
make up a transport, and they exercised their power with a zeal beyond all praise.m it. As compensation for their 
service to the Fuhrer, they were given power to designate those prisoners who would 
make up a transport, and they exercised their power with a zeal beyond all praise.

XII. Tableau 
One result of "power gained through corruption" was the enrichment of one or several 
men at the expense of the others. Sometimes this reached shameful proportions in the 
camps, even in those where the politicals were in power. More than one who took 
advantage of his position lived the life of a prince, while his comrades died by the 
hundreds. When the cartons of food for the camp, containing fats, sausages, jams, 
flour, and sugar, were smuggled outside the camp by S.S. accomplices, to be sent to 
the families of the prisoners in question, one can hardly say it was justified. But most 
exasperating was when, at a time when the local S.S. were no longer wearing high 
boots but only regular army shoes, the members of the small clique of "caids" walked 
proudly around in stylish clothes, custom tailored, like dandies, some of them even 
with a little dog on a leash! That is a chaos of misery, filth, disease, famine and death! 
In this case, the "instinct for self-preservation" was carried beyond all reasonable 
limits and ended in a phariseeism, ridiculous to be sure, but hard as rock, badly out of 
tune with the social and political ideals proclaimed at the same time by these persons. 
(Page 287)

--- PAGE BREAK ---145
It was like that in all of the camps.

And, with certain reservations, the reason for the 
horror could hardly be better described, or in fewer words: the instinct for self-
preservation.

If one can end the commentary on this tableau, with the preceding observation, 
therein also lies the basis for pointing out that the instinct for self-preservation, an 
ancient conception, is quite another thing altogether from that taught by a puerile 
moral.

From the fierce Guitton, besieged at La Rochelle by Richelieu, who had 
himself bled in order to feed his son on his cooked blood, to Saturn who devoured his 
children at birth to escape the death which the Titan threatened, self-preservation is 
susceptible to the most varied human reactions.

In a culture which promotes the value 
of human life, one might think that there are more Guittons than Saturns.

And, under 
normal conditions, the conduct of the majority of individuals would not allow one to 
affirm the contrary.

But, this behavior is only part of the veneer of civilization, and 
one has only to scrape it a little -- i.e., to change brutally the social conditions -- in 
order to show what price human nature attaches to human life.

In the voices of all of the children of France, the good sense of the people cries out 
and echoes Il était un petit navire...

(There was a little ship...) and consoles itself, 
insofar as it believes, that it lessens the horror of the situation, by affirming that in 
order to find out who will be eaten, On tira à la courte paille (we will draw straws), 
rather than to leave the decision to a democratic majority.

But, public opinion was not 
less indignant when it learned that that little ship had become the airplane of the 
Italian General Nobile, which had crash landed on the polar ice, and that the General 
could be said to have survived, until the arrival of the rescue expedition, only because 
he had eaten one or more of his comrades.(There was a little ship...) and consoles itself, 
insofar as it believes, that it lessens the horror of the situation, by affirming that in 
order to find out who will be eaten, On tira à la courte paille (we will draw straws), 
rather than to leave the decision to a democratic majority.

But, public opinion was not 
less indignant when it learned that that little ship had become the airplane of the 
Italian General Nobile, which had crash landed on the polar ice, and that the General 
could be said to have survived, until the arrival of the rescue expedition, only because 
he had eaten one or more of his comrades.

If public opinion does not react violently 
against the self-serving accounts of the concentration camps by former 
Häftlingsführung people, it is because the fact is not clearly made that the 
concentration camp bureaucracy -- using every method of corruption, keeping for 
itself all of the straws, and having the drawing done by the S.S.

-- did "eat" the mass 
of the prisoners.

Before the 1939 war, I myself knew many people who "preferred to die on their feet 
than to live on their knees." Without doubt, they were sincere, but in the camps they 
lived prostrated in order to insure their survival.

After returning to civilian life -- or 
simply to life -- they are still just as uncompromising about this precept, unaware of 
the defeat that they suffered.

They keep making the same speeches, and now they are 
ready to collaborate with the Communists like they did with the Nazis.

In reality, one sees very clearly that except for the instinct for self-preservation which 
played a role at all levels (e.g., the ordinary prisoner in the face of the 
Häftlingsführung, the Häftlingsführung in the face of the S.S., and even the S.S.

staff 
in the face of its superiors), there is no valid explanation for what went on in the 
concentration camp world.

The instinct for self-preservation is very obvious, but one 
does not want to admit it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

staff 
in the face of its superiors), there is no valid explanation for what went on in the 
concentration camp world. The instinct for self-preservation is very obvious, but one 
does not want to admit it. So one turns to psychoanalysis: Molière's doctors talked to 
their patients in Latin, which they knew no more about than they did about their 
profession, and the public meekly approved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---turns to psychoanalysis: Molière's doctors talked to 
their patients in Latin, which they knew no more about than they did about their 
profession, and the public meekly approved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146
XIII. Evaluations 
The happenings in the concentration camps were psychologically very 
singular, as much for the S.S. as for the inmates. In general, the reactions of 
the prisoners seemed more comprehensible than those of their oppressors. 
Actually the first were of a more human kind, while the others were markedly 
inhuman. (Page 305) 
In my view, it would be more correct to say that the reactions of both groups were all 
of the human kind, in the psychological sense of the word, and that with regard to the 
Häftlingsführung, especially, and to the S.S., they were all markedly inhuman in the 
moral sense. 
Further on, Eugen Kogon points out: 
Those who were the least affected in the camps were the asocial and the 
professional criminals. The reason is to be found in the parallel between their 
psychic and social makeup and that of the S.S. (Page 320) 
Perhaps, this may be a correct analysis. But, it must also be agreed that the 
concentration camps were not the place to cultivate a political consciousness in the 
common criminals. On the other hand, the camps did provide the appropriate 
atmosphere for turning the political prisoners into rogues. This phenomenon is hardly 
unique to the concentration camps. It can be observed constantly in all of the 
reformatories and in all of the prisons in every nation of the world, where men are 
perverted on the pretext that they are being rehabilitated. 
Dr. Sigmund Freud's theory of repression explains all of this very well, and it would 
be childish to dwell on the point. In all of the penal institutions, the mentality of the 
whole group, as a result of systematic restraint, shapes itself at the lowest level, 
usually typified by the guard, the link between all of the prisoners. This fact should 
not be surprising. The social environment in which we live, in which the idea of the 
concentration camp is rejected with so much righteous indignation, but in which, at 
the same time, it is carried out to various degrees, has given the political, turned 
scoundrel, the right -- momentarily, I hope -- to play the hero! 
It is, without doubt, because he anticipated some reproach for this kind of thinking 
that Eugen Kogon wrote in his Foreword: 
It was a world in itself, a State in itself, a lawless condition into which was 
thrown a human being, who from that moment on, turning to his advantage the 
virtues and vices -- more vices than virtues! -- ceased struggling except to save 
his miserable existence. Did he struggle against the S.S.? Certainly not! He 
had to struggle as much, if not more, against his companions in captivity... 
[18] 
Tens of thousands of survivors made to suffer more, perhaps, by the reign of 
terror of arrogant companions in captivity than by the infamies of the S.S., will 
thank me for having also shed light on this other aspect of the camps, for not 
having feared to unveil the role played in the various camps by certainaptivity than by the infamies of the S.S., will 
thank me for having also shed light on this other aspect of the camps, for not 
having feared to unveil the role played in the various camps by certain

--- PAGE BREAK ---infamies of the S.S., will 
thank me for having also shed light on this other aspect of the camps, for not 
having feared to unveil the role played in the various camps by certain

--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
political types, who, today, make a big noise over their uncompromising anti-
Fascism. I know that some of my comrades have despaired at seeing the 
injustice and brutality dressed up with an aureole of heroism by good people 
who suspected nothing. Such profiteers of the camps will not emerge 
enhanced in my study: it provides grounds to dim these usurped glories. What 
camp were you in? What Kommando? What job did you do? What color did 
you wear? What party did you belong to? etc... (Page 17) 
One can only say that the witness has not kept his promise: one looks in vain, 
throughout the whole "report" for the condemnation of anyone who was distinctly a 
political. On the other hand, from the beginning to the end, he pleads for the 
Communist group, either indirectly or expressly: 
That elastic wall erected against the S.S..... It was the German Communists 
who furnished the best means to realize that task... The anti-Fascist elements, 
that is, first and foremost the Communists... (Page 286) 
There are almost countless other examples where he defends the Communists or the 
Häftlingsführung. Actually by defending the Communists, he was also defending the 
bureaucracy of the concentration camps, because only those who called themselves 
Communists could claim to get into it and, once in it, stay there. To a certain extent 
Kogon is making a plea for himself, and I very much fear that, after even the least 
informed reader has finished reading the book, he will feel an irresistible urge to ask 
Kogon the very question that he suggests: what positions did you hold? 
The conclusion of all this? Here is what Kogon gives us: "Accounts about the 
concentration camps usually evoke, at the most, astonishment or a shaking of the 
head; they hardly ever touch the comprehension, and in no case, do they wring 
hearts." (Page 347) Clearly, this is true, but whose fault is it? In the intoxication of the 
liberation, and in giving vent to a resentment pent-up during the long years of the 
occupation, the French public opinion believed everything. However, as social 
relations became progressively more normal, it became more and more difficult to 
influence it. Today, accounts of the concentration camps seem to everyone more like 
justifications than testimonies. The public now wonders how it got itself caught in the 
trap, and for two cents it would put everyone on the defendants' bench.ation camps seem to everyone more like 
justifications than testimonies. The public now wonders how it got itself caught in the 
trap, and for two cents it would put everyone on the defendants' bench.

XIV. Statistics 
In 1945, when Kogon's book was published in Germany, there was still not enough 
data at hand to allow one to say with accuracy how many persons of all nationalities 
had been imprisoned by the Germans in the concentration camps. Eugen Kogon 
acknowledges this and warns that the figures he was able to get are only approximate: 
Without the slightest doubt, thousands of persons went through the camps 
during the twelve years of the National-Socialist regime. If we take as a basis 
for an estimate the number of dead at Auschwitz, which alone seems to come 
to between three and a half million, as well as the number of dead in the other

--- PAGE BREAK ---148
camps of that kind, it is easy to see that the total number of interned came to at 
least eight or ten million.

(Page 34) 
Then, going into detail (Page 147), he produces precise statistics for this period; the 
total for all the camps and for the sum of the deportees, racial or not, is the following: 
Total number of prisoners: 8,000,000 
Survivors: 500,000 
Total number of dead: 7,500,000 
This figure of 7,500,000 means that about 94 percent of the total number of prisoners 
died in the camps.

But, if the rest of his statistics are studied carefully, we see: (1) that 
the number of non-racial deportees comes to 606,000, up to 1939 (Germans only), and 
to 3,538,000 from 1939 to 1945, for a total of 4,144,000; and (2) that Kogon does not 
give the total number of racial deportees, but only that of those deportees who died, or 
the sum of 5,620,000.

These two sums add up to 9,764,000 deportees.

The margin of 
approximation is therefore quite broad: about 2,000,000.

But, Kogon warned us of 
that fact.

(Page 34) 
On the other hand, if we take into consideration the non-racial deportees, the figures 
show that out of a total of 4,144,000 deportees, about 1,827,000 are estimated to have 
died, leaving 2,317,000 survivors, about 56 percent of the overall total.

Conversely, 
the number of dead amounted to about 44 percent.

Naturally, in the press, it was the 
manifestly false figure of 94 percent that served to illustrate the horror, or some very 
similar percentage that had been pulled out of thin air; in France, it was usually 82 
percent, and I have never learned just how the statisticians arrived at that figure.

What puzzled me most of all at the time was the total number of deportees: 
9,764,000-or even only 8,000,000.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Naturally, in the press, it was the 
manifestly false figure of 94 percent that served to illustrate the horror, or some very 
similar percentage that had been pulled out of thin air; in France, it was usually 82 
percent, and I have never learned just how the statisticians arrived at that figure. What puzzled me most of all at the time was the total number of deportees: 
9,764,000-or even only 8,000,000. For the Germans to have deported that number of 
persons during a twenty-seven month period (March 1942 to August 1944) (19), it 
would have called for transportation facilities which, from the facts, the Germans in 
the midst of war did not have at their disposal. The magnitude of such an operation 
can be seen upon reflection: three to four hundred thousand persons per month, or ten 
to thirteen thousand per day, needed to be transported without fail. To do this would 
have required a minimum of six to nine trains a day, assuming that each train could 
transport about fifteen hundred persons (plus the accompanying guards and their 
equipment), as was the case for those trains that left from France. If Kogon is correct, 
that was quite a lot of rolling stock to divert from the German war effort. Although I 
am not a railway expert, I made some calculations that were based upon the duration 
of these trips by train. The deportees from the West, like those from the East, all said 
that their trips had lasted from four to six days, which would mean, taking five days as 
the average, that for the entire period of the deportation, there were between sixty to 
ninety trains, constantly, day and night, going back and forth at this job. When spare 
equipment is added into the picture, the amount of necessary rolling stock would 
include between eighty to a hundred locomotives and between three to four thousand 
railway cars. And, I did not estimate the huge number of personnel, both railway 
workers and guards, that would have been required.eighty to a hundred locomotives and between three to four thousand 
railway cars. And, I did not estimate the huge number of personnel, both railway 
workers and guards, that would have been required.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
After the appearance of Kogon's book, other means of estimating the number of 
deportees appeared. For example, at Nuremberg, the Attorney General Charles 
Dubost, representing France, stated on January 29, 1946: 
The census taking which we have carried out in France allows it to be affirmed 
that there were more than 250,000 deportees from France: only 35,000 have 
returned. Document F. 497, filed under the number R.F. 339. indicates that, 
out of the 600,000 arrests made by the Germans in France, 350,000 were made 
with internment in France or in Germany in mind. Total number of deportees: 
250,000. Number of deportees returned: 35,000. (IMT, VI. p. 338) 
The percentage of survivors, was, therefore, 14 percent and the percentage of the dead 
was 86 percent. But, to a question put to him by the Minister for Veterans and War 
Victims of the French Government, Dubost answered, through the official journal, 
Débats parlementaires, on February 24, 1962, in this way: 
According to statistical information released on the first of December 1961 in 
the multi-copy card file of the deportees and internees of the 1939-1945 war, 
kept by the National

Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies, the number of cards given out to 
deportees and internees, or to their beneficiaries, is as follows: 
Living Deceased

Deportees (Resistants) 16,702 9,783 
Deportees (Politicals) 13,415 9,235 
Internees (Resistants) 9,911 5,759 
Internees (Politicals) 10,117 2,130 
TOTALS 50,145 26,907is as follows: 
Living Deceased

Deportees (Resistants) 16,702 9,783 
Deportees (Politicals) 13,415 9,235 
Internees (Resistants) 9,911 5,759 
Internees (Politicals) 10,117 2,130 
TOTALS 50,145 26,907

From Dubost's figures, it can be seen that the total number of deportees was 49,135 
and that the total number of dead was 19,018. This means that about 38 percent of the 
deportees died while 62 percent (or 30,117) survived. Obviously, it is difficult to 
determine from these figures the exact number of survivors and of dead that existed 
during the month of May 1945. Returning from the camps, even after having spent 
only short periods of time there, the survivors were a very frail lot whose annual 
mortality rate was understandably way above normal. Consequently, I would not be 
surprised to be told that out of the 19,108 who were dead on February 24, 1962, 35 to 
45 percent died after their return to France. In that case, one would have to concede

--- PAGE BREAK ---150
that on May 8, 1945, the proportions of living to dead were the following: 75 to 80 
percent were survivors and 20 to 25 percent were dead.

While tragic enough, this 
latter estimate is quite a different thing from 86 percent dead and 14 percent living as 
deduced from the figures that were brought forth at Nuremberg by the Attorney 
General Dubost; in fact, this estimate is so different that it almost represents inverse 
proportions!

What supports my opinion that these proportions, which I have noted for France, are 
valid for all of the camps, is my detailed study of the statistics of the Buchenwald 
camp, where I was deported myself.

As a result of my study, I came to the following 
conclusions: to Buchenwald and its satellite camps there seem to have beep deported, 
from 1939 to 1945, a total of 238,980 persons, of whom statistics show that 56,545 
died or 23 percent.

But, I cannot vouch for this rate of 23 percent, for the following 
reasons: the incoming prisoners were registered just once, while the outgoing, being 
dead, were often subject to double registration, the first time in the satellite camp in 
which they died (Dora, for example) and a second time at Buchenwald, where, until 
the time that each of the satellite camps was equipped with a crematorium, they were 
cremated.

In the statistics that were produced, those who died in the camps like 
Halberstadt, Ellrich, Beuchow, and Dora, among others, were, in fact, added to the 
number of persons who were cremated at Buchenwald.

The mortality rate might, then, 
have been a little less, but not much; even 20 percent for example, would still be 
enormous, The Assistant Bishop of Munich, Mgr.

Neuhaussler, did the same sort of 
research that I did, but concerning the Dachau camp where he was interned.The mortality rate might, then, 
have been a little less, but not much; even 20 percent for example, would still be 
enormous, The Assistant Bishop of Munich, Mgr.

Neuhaussler, did the same sort of 
research that I did, but concerning the Dachau camp where he was interned.

For 
Dachau he came to the same conclusions as I did for Buchenwald: there were between 
199,519 and 206,206 internees (the uncertainty arises from the fact that there were 
two numbering systems on the camp register) of whom 67,665 died, or 28 percent.

The same observation applies for Dachau as for Buchenwald with regard to the 
adding of the dead in the satellite camps to those of the central camp.

Still, it must be 
noted here that the card index of the S.S.

camp staff showed only about 26,000 dead, 
according to Mgr.

Neuhaussler, in his book So war es in Dachau.

But, Pastor 
Niemoller claimed, in a speech given on July 3, 1946, and published with the title Der 
Weg ins Freie by Franz M.

Helbach at Stuttgart, that "238,756 were cremated at 
Dachau," or a greater number than there were internees.

On a visit to Dachau in 1945, 
I was able to take a photograph of a sign that had been put up between two trees at the 
entrance of the camp; the inscription on the sign read as follows: "This area is being 
retained as a shrine to the 238,000 individuals who were cremated here." Without a 
doubt, this sign which had been prepared for the benefit of the tourists was based on 
the conclusions of Pastor Niemöller who was interned in that camp, and who then 
became its authority.

I must add that since he published So war es in Dachau in 1969, Mgr.

Neuhaussler 
has made new discoveries which have caused him to modify his first conclusions and 
that he had the honesty to make them public, on March 16, 1962, in a speech that he 
gave at Dachau to the representatives of some 15 nations that had gathered there to 
commemorate the liberation of the camp.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I must add that since he published So war es in Dachau in 1969, Mgr. Neuhaussler 
has made new discoveries which have caused him to modify his first conclusions and 
that he had the honesty to make them public, on March 16, 1962, in a speech that he 
gave at Dachau to the representatives of some 15 nations that had gathered there to 
commemorate the liberation of the camp. Le Figaro of March 17, 1962, reported the 
statistical data that was contained in that talk as follows: 
This afternoon in bitter cold and in spite of a snow storm, pilgrims gathered 
together at Dachau camp where thirty thousand men were exterminated, out of

--- PAGE BREAK ---in that talk as follows: 
This afternoon in bitter cold and in spite of a snow storm, pilgrims gathered 
together at Dachau camp where thirty thousand men were exterminated, out of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

151
the two hundred thousand from thirty-eight countries who were interned there 
from 1933 to 1945. 
Moreover, all of the other newspapers of the day printed the same figures. So it was 
30,000 deportees who were cremated at Dachau (or 13 percent, which is still enough), 
and not 67,665, which was the number that Mgr. Neuhaussler had calculated initially. 
In other words, the card index that had been maintained by the S.S. staff reflected the 
truth, but very good care has been taken not to take it into consideration. It is possible 
that some day similar figures will be determined for Buchenwald. 
Such is the extent of the exaggerations which no one doubted in 1950, which Mr. 
Eugen Kogon did not hesitate to authenticate and to disseminate, and which the world 
press still echoes on a daily basis in spite of all of the new information that has come 
to light. Moreover, in France, no commemoration of war events takes place that does 
not loudly reaffirm that 250,000 French nationals were deported to Germany, that 
only 35,000 came back, and that six million Jews were exterminated in the gas 
chambers. 
Concerning the Jews, Kogon gives the number of dead as 5,620,000, as we have seen. 
In the camps where the Jews were interned, the mortality rate -- while far from the 
percentages that have been published by tile press for propaganda purposes -- was 
certainly as high as that suffered by other prisoners. Although we do not yet have 
reliable documents concerning these camps, we shall see in the following chapters 
what one may think, both of the means that were used allegedly to exterminate the 
Jews and the number of alleged Jewish victims.uments concerning these camps, we shall see in the following chapters 
what one may think, both of the means that were used allegedly to exterminate the 
Jews and the number of alleged Jewish victims.

XV. Nota bene... 
There are a number of the most unlikely tales, as well as certain examples of 
journalistic sensationalism, that I must point out before I finish with Mr. Kogon. 
Among the unlikely tales must be included most of Kogon's statements concerning the 
listening to foreign broadcasts. I sincerely doubt that it was possible for anyone to set 
up and to use a secret radio receiver inside any of the concentration camps. If the 
Voice of America, the B.B.C. or Radio Free France were occasionally heard in the 
camp, it was with the consent of the S.S.; moreover, only a very small number of 
privileged prisoners could have been among the listeners, and, then, mainly by 
chance. Thus it happened to me personally at Dora during the short period that I 
served as the Schwung (orderly) for the Oberscharführer who commanded the 
Hundesstafel (the company of guard dogs). 
My work consisted in cleaning a whole barrack which housed the more or less 
ranking members of the S.S. staff; among other things, I waxed their boots, made their 
beds, cleaned their mess kits, etc....all things that I did most humbly and 
conscientiously. In everyone of the rooms in this barrack was a radio. For all of the 
gold in the world, I would not have taken the risk of listening to one, even when I was 
absolutely certain of being alone. However, at about eight o'clock in the morning, 
when all of his subordinates had left for work, it happened two or three times that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---152
Oberscharführer called me into his room, where he had tuned to the B.B.C.

that was 
broadcasting in French, and asked me to translate for him, which I did under my 
breath.

In the evening, back in my Block, I passed on the news in a whisper to my friends 
Delarbre (from Belfort) and Gourguet (from the Creusot) urging them either to keep it 
to themselves or to repeat it only to comrades of whom they were very sure, and even 
then to do so in such a way so that it could not be traced to its source.

We did not constitute a "committee," and not one of us claimed that we were in touch 
with the Allies.

Moreover, nothing happened to us.

But during that same time, there 
was a stir that centered around the listening to foreign broadcasts in which, I believe, 
Debeaumarche was mixed up.

I never knew exactly what it was all about.

One of the 
members of that group approached me one day saying that there was a secret listening 
post in the camp, that a political movement was getting orders from the English, etc....

He backed up what he was saying by telling me the news that I had listened to that 
very morning, or the evening, before, with the Oberscharführer.

I expressed my 
skepticism in such terms that thereafter he considered me someone to be avoided.

It 
was just as well for me.

A few days later, there were massive arrests in the camp, and 
among those arrested were the fellow who I just mentioned and Debeaumarche 
himself.

The to-do ended with a few hangings.

In all likelihood, it began with a 
prisoner in my situation who had talked too much, and what he had said was 
imprudently bruited about, until it reached the Sicherheitsdienst (S.S.

secret police) 
through an informer in the Häftlingsführung.

When Eugen Kogon writes: 
I spent many a night, with a very few who were in on it, before a 5-tube 
receiver which I had taken from the S.S.

Doctor Ding-Schuller to have it 
repaired in the camp.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Eugen Kogon writes: 
I spent many a night, with a very few who were in on it, before a 5-tube 
receiver which I had taken from the S.S. Doctor Ding-Schuller to have it 
repaired in the camp. I listened to the Voice of America in Europe as well as 
to the Soldatsender, and I copied down the important news. (Page 283) 
I am willing to believe that he may have listened to foreign broadcasts; but I am 
inclined to think that he listened to the broadcasts in question in the company of 
Doctor Ding-Schuller. As for all of the rest, it is only an embellishment which is 
intended both to make believable the revolutionary activity on the part of those in the 
Häftlingsführung, and to better excuse their monstrous exactions. I believe that Kogon listened to these broadcasts in the company of his S.S. patron 
Doctor Ding-Schuller, or at least with his connivance and consent, because Dr. Francois Bayle reports in his Croix Gammée contre Caducée this curious testimony 
that was given by Kogon at Nuremberg: Doctor Ding-Schuller asked him to take care 
of his wife and children in case Germany was defeated! From this testimony, I gather 
that their relations were surely more cordial than Kogon has admitted. And. I shall 
add that if this request implies a quid pro quo which Kogon would not admit in any 
case! -- the privileged position of this singular prisoner would be explained by a 
mutual collaborative understanding whose inspiration and aims would appear to be 
much less noble than it has so far been convenient to concede.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r prisoner would be explained by a 
mutual collaborative understanding whose inspiration and aims would appear to be 
much less noble than it has so far been convenient to concede.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

153
Further speculation along these lines is not likely to be productive, nevertheless, the 
record may reflect that the collaboration between Kogon and the S.S. was. by his own 
admission, profitable, friendly, and often intimate. There was also the collaboration 
between Kogon and the Communists, as has been mentioned in earlier sections of this 
chapter. 
As for Kogon's journalistic sensationalism, I quote the following example which 
should provide the reader with an idea of what I mean: 
Let us recall the taking of oath of those aspiring to the S.S., at midnight, in the 
cathedral at Braunschweig. There, before the bones of Henry the First, the 
only German emperor on whom he set any value, Himmler was fond of 
expatiating on the mystique of the "Communauté de conjurés." Then, after 
that, in the gay sunshine he would go to some concentration camp in order to 
watch the political prisoners being whipped [20] one after the other. (Page 24, 
emphasis added.) 
Mme Koch who previously had been stenographer in a cigarette factory 
sometimes took baths in a tub filled with madeira. (Page 266, emphasis 
added.) 
Statements of this sort abound concerning all of the important personages of the Nazi 
regime, and they produce pleasant sadistic reactions. They also exhibit some of that 
same state of mind that made Le Rire publish, in September 1914, a photograph of the 
child with his hands cut off or Le Matin describe, on the 15th of April 1916, the 
Emperor William II as being a paranoiac with cancer, with at the most just a few more 
months to live, when, in fact, he had neither of those afflictions. Furthermore, the 
state of mind seems to have caused Henri Desgranges in L'Auto, in September 1939, 
to "thumb his nose" at a Göring and say that the Reichsmarschall was without soft 
soap with which to wash himself. The banality of the method is equaled only by the 
credulity of the public and by the imperturbability of those who make use of it and 
keep repeating it about all enemies in all wars.o wash himself. The banality of the method is equaled only by the 
credulity of the public and by the imperturbability of those who make use of it and 
keep repeating it about all enemies in all wars.

FOOTNOTES 
1. La Jeune Parque, November 1947. It was published in Germany in 1945 under the 
title: Der S.S. Staat. 
2. During this time, for example, a Doctor Seguin never succeeded in getting himself 
recognized in his professional capacity by the Häftlingsführung. Having never been 
acknowledged as a medical doctor by the Communists, they sent him to work in the 
quarry where he died. 
3. It seems that the National Socialists took him over from the Weimar Republic. This 
fact is not without its humor because it shows that the jailing of Communist 
troublemakers was a policy which was common to both regimes. 
4. He does not seem to have encountered a Martin-Chauffier.

--- PAGE BREAK ---its humor because it shows that the jailing of Communist 
troublemakers was a policy which was common to both regimes. 
4. He does not seem to have encountered a Martin-Chauffier.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
5. The "disposal" of "troublesome" prisoners by the Häftlingsführung was often done 
for reasons much more base than those that are mentioned by Kogon. For example, 
those prisoners who got in the way of the ruling clique or those who might possibly 
get in the way by being placed in influential positions by the S.S. were often marked 
for death. The argument of collaboration is, moreover, worthless; this "illegal 
management" -- i.e., the Häftlingsführung -- collaborated openly with the S.S., as is 
shown elsewhere in this book. 
6. Eugen Kogon sometimes uses the word "illegal" and sometimes the word 
"clandestine" to describe the operation of the Häftlingsführung. Actually, there was 
nothing the least illegal or clandestine about it inasmuch as it had been set up by the 
S.S. 
7. There were many Communists who were not "accredited", and they were, above 
all, decent people. They were lost in the mass and shared the common lot. 
8. It is well to note that the S.S. generally did not steal from the prisoners. First of all, 
they enjoyed better rations to begin with and, thus, had no pressing need to obtain 
more. Secondly, when they did desire to supplement their rations, they let other 
prisoners do the stealing for them and were thus better served. 
9. These quotation marks appear in the original text. 
10. I want to emphasize the word "possible." 
11. Osterloh was a "green," and that is why the incident is described as having been a 
"good example." 
12. Emphasis added. 
13. The Bunker was the prison within the camp. If Kogon is to be believed, "it was 
not the S.S. but the first elder of the camp, Richter, who invented it," (p. 174) when 
the S.S. had not even thought of it. 
14. This is an improper generalization. It was a question only of those who had made 
themselves their leaders, thanks to the authority that they derived from the S.S. 
15. All of the Buchenwald prisoners can testify that his main concern was for the 
actual delivery of health and medical services to the prisoners. 
16. Since this way of thinking doubtless admits a denunciation ... involuntary! As we 
see, ways to get out of things are not lacking! 
17. It seems that there are other ways of denouncing which are less infamous or which 
are not infamous at all, evidently! 
18. This statement is an improper generalization. As a common prisoner, one had to 
struggle against those who exercised power on behalf of the S.S., while distrusting his 
fellow prisoners among the common lot.atement is an improper generalization. As a common prisoner, one had to 
struggle against those who exercised power on behalf of the S.S., while distrusting his 
fellow prisoners among the common lot.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
19. This twenty-seven month period is generally recognized as being the time period 
during which the vast majority of the foreign internees who were incarcerated in the 
German concentration camp system were deported by the Germans from whatever 
locale in which they had been arrested. 
20. If the rack at Buchenwald (if, indeed, there was one) was hidden from the Chief of 
Police of Weimar during his inspection of the camp, it is hardly likely that it would be 
shown to his superior Reichsführer-S.S. Himmler.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156

Part III The Drama of European Jews

Chapter Twelve 
Raul Hilberg: 
His Doctrine and His Methodsdly likely that it would be 
shown to his superior Reichsführer-S.S. Himmler.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156

Part III The Drama of European Jews

Chapter Twelve 
Raul Hilberg: 
His Doctrine and His Methods

Between the Commentaries on the Holy Scriptures of Saint Thomas Aquinas (1225-
1274) and The Destruction of the European Jews, (Chicago, Quadrangle, 1961) an 
exhaustive commentary on the Nuremberg documents by Mr. Raul Hilberg, there is 
plainly no common measure. Indeed, one can feel assured that in seven centuries the 
latter will not be spoken of at all, or, if it is still mentioned, it will only be mentioned 
in reference to something unworthy of notice except as an example of the most 
scandalous aberrations of our times. Now, after seven centuries, when Saint Thomas 
Aquinas is spoken of it is to point him out as having been the originator of a 
philosophy also aberrant, which from the 17th century on was called ancilla 
theologiae, by the Humanists and the Free-thinkers. Nevertheless, this philosophy was 
that of centuries of faith. It was substantial; it opened windows onto a world which 
was the dream of the epoch; and, thus, it deserved to become that Thomism to which 
reference must be made today, if the broad currents of contemporary philosophy are 
to be correctly explained. To construct his system, the man had, of course, to mutilate 
Aristotle; but in the 13th century printing had not yet been discovered, manuscripts 
were scarce, and the means of research at the disposal of intellectuals were so 
rudimentary that he was the only one who knew it. Then, three centuries later, having 
discovered the trickery, the Humanists and the Free-thinkers spoke of ancilla 
theologiae. But there was no scandal. The fraud was attributed to an imperfect 
acquaintance with the writings of Aristotle. Today, more light has been shed on the 
matter, and Thomism has a place. But, there will never be any Hilbergism. And if the 
790 large size pages, based on almost 1,400 documentary references, of The 
Destruction of the European Jews, some day are found to be the ancilla of something, 
it will only be of a not very nobly inspired purpose. Therein lies the difference, and it 
is not a small one. 
Having admitted that neither in their persons nor in the value and influence of their 
respective works are the two men comparable, if thought of, Saint Thomas Aquinas 
nevertheless came to mind after having read Mr. Raul Hilberg, there were good 
reasons. The most important reason of all is this one, which is the central theme of 
this chapter: the Nuremberg documents that Mr. Raul Hilberg used to prove to us that 
5,100,000 (p. 767) or 5, 407,500 (p. 670) Jews were exterminated by the Germans 
during the Second World War -- 1,000,000 in the gas chambers at Auschwitz, 
950,000 in five other camps much less well equipped, 1,400,000 (if I have understood 
correctly his complicated and often contradictory calculations) by Einsatzgruppen, 
and the rest, either 1,750,000 on page 767, or 2,069,500 on page 670, in camps and in400,000 (if I have understood 
correctly his complicated and often contradictory calculations) by Einsatzgruppen, 
and the rest, either 1,750,000 on page 767, or 2,069,500 on page 670, in camps and in

--- PAGE BREAK ---157
ways which could be called pottering compared to the others -- are of the same kind 
and the same worth as those in which Saint Thomas Aquinas, like all the Church 
Fathers before him, found the proof that the first act in the creation of the world, the 
separation of light from darkness, took place exactly 4,001 years before the birth of 
Christ, that Joshua had stopped the sun in its course, that Jonas sojourned in the belly 
of a whale, etc.

And, then there is the problem of misuse.

Mr.

Raul Hilberg in making the documents 
say what they do not say, except after having been removed from their context and 
rewritten, is an example on a small scale of what Saint Thomas Aquinas did on a large 
scale in giving to the writings of Aristotle that interpretation which oriented the entire 
intellectual work of the Middle Ages in Europe to the celebrated formula, Aristoteles 
dixit, when Aristotle had, in fact, not said it.

In this respect, they both, each at about 
the same distance in time, illustrate that moral which was quite well defined by Saint 
Ignatius Loyola, according to which, since the end justifies the means, all means are 
good to justify the end.

But here again, to permit a fair appreciation of both, the 
coordinates of the point which they have in common must be given.

Saint Thomas 
Aquinas found himself in the presence of the writings of Aristotle, which at that time 
were spread about Europe with so much success by Jewish rabbis and Arab clerks that 
they were threatening to unsettle Christian thought, and for him it was a purely 
philosophic problem.

But, in the case of Mr.Saint Thomas 
Aquinas found himself in the presence of the writings of Aristotle, which at that time 
were spread about Europe with so much success by Jewish rabbis and Arab clerks that 
they were threatening to unsettle Christian thought, and for him it was a purely 
philosophic problem.

But, in the case of Mr.

Raul Hilberg, it is a question of 
justifying by a proportional number of cadavers the enormous subsidies which 
Germany has paid annually since the end of the war, and which she continues to pay, 
to the State of Israel as reparations for a wrong which she did not do to Israel, either 
morally or legally, since at the time these wrongs for which she is charged were 
taking place, the State of Israel did not exist.

In short, it is only, purely and very 
basely, a material problem.

Here I would like to point out -- in order to underline the extent of this swindle, which 
has no other name in any language -- that the State of Israel was not founded until 
May 1948 and that the Jewish victims of the Nazis were the nationals of various states 
but not of Israel.

Nevertheless, Germany pays to Israel sums calculated on the basis of 
about 6,000,000 dead.

In addition, since at least four-fifths of these 6,000,000 were 
very much alive at the end of the war and countable, she pays to those still living in 
the other countries of the world, aside from Israel, and to the beneficiaries of those 
who have since died, substantial reparations as victims of Nazism.

This means that for 
the enormous majority, she is paying twice.

All of these indemnities that are so generously granted to the Jews seem, moreover, to 
have made the gypsies desire to cash in on this "bonanza" in a manner similar to that 
of the State of Israel and Zionism.

If Le Monde of December 29, 1961, is to be 
believed, the gypsies have now given themselves a king with the name of H.

M.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If Le Monde of December 29, 1961, is to be 
believed, the gypsies have now given themselves a king with the name of H. M. Vaida 
Voievod III, who claims to be the "Supreme and spiritual head of the gypsy people" 
and who expects to obtain from the United Nations a corner in the world, where the 
great wandering of their caravans will come to an end, just as, theoretically, the State 
of Israel was to end the Diaspora. When he is asked what corner of the world he lays 
claim to and where it is, he answers that it is Romanestan, and he places it, now on a 
Pacific Island, now in a country near Israel. Furthermore, he specified that the number 
of his subjects strolling along all the roads of Europe add up to 12 million, and that 
the reason there are not more is that between 1939 and 1945 the Nazis exterminated

--- PAGE BREAK ---158
three and a half million.

Unfortunately, for him, in this case, there are statistics to put 
the number of gypsy victims of Nazism between 300 and 350,000 only, which is, of 
course, quite atrocious enough.

Things have not come to a point where one can be 
accused of anti-Romanestanism as easily as one can be accused of anti-Semitism, 
every time the fantastic statistics of the Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation are mentioned, and one does not run the risk of being accused of the 
same low intent if one speaks of the 3,500,000 Nazi victims of H.

M.

Vaida Voievod 
III in a humorous tone.

If, then, the U.

N., let us say, should grant the gypsies the right 
to regroup in this Romanestan, which only needs to have its geographical location 
determined, Germany will have no choice but to subsidize them.

Having granted the 
State of Israel an appreciable and substantial indemnity for the victims of Nazism 
among the Jewish people, it would be difficult to refuse the same to Romanestan, 
whose claims the U.

N.

could not fail to support as they did those of the State of 
Israel.

Then the 3,500,000 gypsies exterminated by the Nazis would dispute the 
6,000,000 Jews for the limelight in the world press.

But, the Reverend Father Fleury, 
Chaplain of the gypsies of France, already warns that H.M.

Vaida Voievod III is only 
an impostor, and many agree with him.

It must be acknowledged that the number of 
people is much smaller who have the same opinion of the leaders of the State of Israel 
and their supporters, whose policy, while in every point similar, and just as poorly 
grounded, has nevertheless succeeded.

To the extent that it has shown post-war 
Zionism to be very closely related to what can be called Romanestanism, the 
burlesque story of the hero of this adventure deserved to be cited here, if only to give 
the reader as exact an idea as possible of the worth of the work to which Mr.

Raul 
Hilberg has devoted himself.To the extent that it has shown post-war 
Zionism to be very closely related to what can be called Romanestanism, the 
burlesque story of the hero of this adventure deserved to be cited here, if only to give 
the reader as exact an idea as possible of the worth of the work to which Mr.

Raul 
Hilberg has devoted himself.

But I would like to return to the problem of misuse, and on this subject to be well 
understood.

Having spent an appreciable number of months in the horrible physical 
and moral conditions of a concentration camp, I know what I am talking about.

What 
I am discussing is only the degree of the horror, since the truth -- without further 
exaggeration -- is quite enough.

The fact that some poor uneducated devil of a fellow 
like the cure and the other witness to whom I have referred elsewhere tell us that they 
have seen, the one, thousands enter the gas chambers in the camp where we were 
interned together and where there were none, and the other, the heads of human 
beings buried up to their necks, crushed by the wheels of barrows pushed by the 
prisoners on order of the SS, is understandable.

They are victims who are fired by a 
resentment in proportion to what they suffered, and the guilty one is the judge who 
believed them.

That a general of an Einsatzgruppe, testifying under threat of death, 
tells what he thinks will be most likely to save his life, and that Höss, a former 
commandant of Auschwitz, does the same, like many others, is easily understood and 
calls for no explanation.

The fact that in order to get into the good graces of his 
captors, some poor SS private, attached to an Einsatzgruppe, reports that his unit 
exterminated "thousands" or "tens of thousands of Jews," as is seen in the documents 
cited by Mr.

Raul Hilberg, is not at all astonishing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The fact that in order to get into the good graces of his 
captors, some poor SS private, attached to an Einsatzgruppe, reports that his unit 
exterminated "thousands" or "tens of thousands of Jews," as is seen in the documents 
cited by Mr. Raul Hilberg, is not at all astonishing. Nor, is it strange that a Martin-
Chauffier, guilty of many things, tries to have them forgiven by howling with the 
wolves and that a David Rousset, whose main concern in the camp was to obtain the 
protection of the communists, and a Eugen Kogon, who had no other concern than to 
establish as comfortable a balance as possible between the SS and the communists, 
have recounted what they did. The background and motivation of the witness is an 
important factor when considering the amount of weight that should be given to his 
testimony. And, it is the business of the judge and of the specialists in the human

--- PAGE BREAK ---159
sciences to establish this credibility as a step toward distinguishing whether the 
testimony is likely to be true or false.

If I am struck by the fact that the judges at 
Nuremberg did not pay much attention to the credibility of the prosecution witnesses -
- especially since they had already decided upon a verdict prior to the trials and only 
required the testimony to support it -- I am much less impressed when a journalist 
believes all of these people right from the start.

It is well known that journalists are 
generally supposed to be more skeptical and questioning than most people.

I shall go even further.

A man like Dr.

Francois Bayle, the author of Croix Gammée 
contre Caducée, to whom I have referred, when faced with the documents and 
testimonies of Nuremberg, is only half responsible for the conclusions he drew from 
them.

Dr.

Francois Bayle is a doctor in the Navy and is, therefore, a military man.

On 
reading his work one perceives that he has a passionate interest in psycho-somatology 
and psychoanalysis.

The defendants at Nuremberg strike him, above all, as being sick 
men, or at least, tainted, which amounts to the same thing.

How he would have liked 
to have had the chance to write up their cases!

He is a brilliant fellow, and 
circumstances assisted him.

On October 19, 1946, he was appointed to the scientific 
commission on war crimes, and soon he was at work with the original documents and 
transcripts of the Nuremberg Trial, at which he was present, and where he had free 
behind-the-scenes access.

As a military man, he did not question the authenticity of 
the documents that were made accessible to him by the authorities on whom he 
depended.

In the military more than anywhere else the fundamental principle on 
which the system of hierarchy rests is that "every subordinate owes complete 
obedience to his superior and submission at all time," and he himself relies on the 
postulate that a superior may not misuse his subordinate.As a military man, he did not question the authenticity of 
the documents that were made accessible to him by the authorities on whom he 
depended.

In the military more than anywhere else the fundamental principle on 
which the system of hierarchy rests is that "every subordinate owes complete 
obedience to his superior and submission at all time," and he himself relies on the 
postulate that a superior may not misuse his subordinate.

In this state of mind, Dr.

Francois Bayle could not ask questions.

And if any questions had occurred to him, not 
having been prepared for the work in which he was left to orient himself, he would 
not have been able to answer them correctly.

Anyway, he can, therefore, be excused.

Those who cannot be excused are his superiors, the ones who allowed him and 
encouraged him to direct his efforts along the line that is mentioned above.

In the 
main, everything happened as it does in the Figaro of Beaumarchais, where the role 
of mathematician was assigned to a dancer.

A historian was needed for the job, and it 
was given to a medical doctor.

Was a doctor also needed because it was a matter of 
medical analysis?

Perhaps, but what I maintain is that the doctor, if he had not been 
present during the medical experiments and if he was not at the same time a historian, 
absolutely could not study the documents correctly unless assisted by a historian who 
would have, previously, verified all of the testimonies and documents which attested 
to the facts and which described, not the scientific environment -- since for this a 
historian would not have been qualified -- but the social environment, the historic 
moment in which they had been performed, particularly, in times as emotional as 
those in question, and the criminal nature -- if any -- which could be imputed fairly to 
such conduct.

Who was responsible for all this?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Perhaps, but what I maintain is that the doctor, if he had not been 
present during the medical experiments and if he was not at the same time a historian, 
absolutely could not study the documents correctly unless assisted by a historian who 
would have, previously, verified all of the testimonies and documents which attested 
to the facts and which described, not the scientific environment -- since for this a 
historian would not have been qualified -- but the social environment, the historic 
moment in which they had been performed, particularly, in times as emotional as 
those in question, and the criminal nature -- if any -- which could be imputed fairly to 
such conduct. Who was responsible for all this? No one, unless it is whoever is 
responsible for the distribution of knowledge and the forming of the elites of our 
times and whoever -- while pushing specialization greatly to the detriment of culture 
in general on the pretext that an industrial civilization needs more than anything good 
technicians in well defined and narrowly limited fields -- lets it be believed and, when 
necessary, sees to it that it is believed that any specialist at all is qualified to speak ex 
cathedra on all specialties.

--- PAGE BREAK ---160
Mr.

Raul Hilberg's case is quite different from that of all these people.

He was not 
deported, he was not a victim of Nazism, and he has no apparent reasons for having a 
guilty conscience such as Martin-Chauffier, David Rousset, and Eugen Kogon.

In 
addition, he is neither uncultivated, as was that poor cure mentioned above - who 
invented gas chambers at Buchenwald and Dora, nor a stumbler of hit or miss 
education like adventurers in the search for subsistence, rather ill-defined before the 
war, as were David Rousset and Eugen Kogon, who, besides their need to clear their 
conscience, probably recounted all that they did in order to assure themselves of the 
best and most lasting post-war livelihood, a goal which they both achieved 
remarkably well.

He is not even like Dr.

Francois Bayle, a medical doctor led astray 
in the study of historical documents.

He is a "political scientist," who is properly 
sheep-skinned, as his biographical note says, who specialized in international 
relations, and who worked in the "War Documentation Project" of the American 
government.

It is unfortunate that his education in the field of "public law and 
government," which prepared him to work in a profession in which the science of 
statistics plays such an important part, did not better equip him for the study of 
documents and testimonies on which his profession is based and for the study of 
history in which the social phenomena, which are the subject matter of statistics, have 
their roots.

If, therefore, Mr.

Raul Hilberg acts as though he had no idea as to whether 
a witness and his testimony can be regarded as creditable, or under what conditions a 
document should be admitted as evidence, he has only one excuse, and that excuse is 
dishonesty.

I say "excuse" because, as I continue to read his biographical note, I find 
that he is a collaborator in the Jewish Encyclopedia Handbooks and, in my judgment, 
that fact explains everything.Raul Hilberg acts as though he had no idea as to whether 
a witness and his testimony can be regarded as creditable, or under what conditions a 
document should be admitted as evidence, he has only one excuse, and that excuse is 
dishonesty.

I say "excuse" because, as I continue to read his biographical note, I find 
that he is a collaborator in the Jewish Encyclopedia Handbooks and, in my judgment, 
that fact explains everything.

And, this particular interest, of course, applies not only 
to Mr.

Raul Hilberg, but to many others.

It applies to Mme.

Hannah Arendt, for 
example, who has the same intellectual outlook, who often refers to Mr.

Hilberg in 
her reports of the Eichmann Trial which the New Yorker published in five issues 
(February-March 1963), who was -- or still is -- Forschungsleiterin (Research 
directress) of the Conference on Jewish Relations, Verwaltungsleiterin (Directress of 
administration) of the Jewish Cultural Reconstruction, Stipendiatin (Fellow) of the 
Guggenheim Foundation, and who coolly informs us (New Yorker, February 23, 
1963) that "3 million Polish Jews were massacred during the first day of the war," the 
one explaining the other.

Mme.

Hanna Arendt would do well, in my opinion, to ask 
Mr.

Raul Hilberg where he found the "about 2,000,000 Polish Jews, who were 
transported to their deaths in 1942 and 1943" of whom he speaks on Page 311 of his 
book.

(Emphasis added.) It would be a good thing to come to an understanding: were 
there in Poland 3 to 3.3 million Jews before the war, as all statisticians unanimously 
claim, including those who are Jewish, or were there 5,700,000 as Mme.

Hannah 
Arendt is obliged to claim, since here are 5,000,000 exterminated, and, since Mr.

Shalom Baron, brandishing his title of Professor of Jewish History at Columbia 
University, claimed on April 4, 1961, before the Jerusalem Tribunal, that 700,000 of 
them were still living in 1945 when the country was liberated by Russian troops?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hannah 
Arendt is obliged to claim, since here are 5,000,000 exterminated, and, since Mr. Shalom Baron, brandishing his title of Professor of Jewish History at Columbia 
University, claimed on April 4, 1961, before the Jerusalem Tribunal, that 700,000 of 
them were still living in 1945 when the country was liberated by Russian troops? Really, one would like to invite all of these people -- these three and the multitude of 
others in the same boat -- to please get together and agree on their figures, before 
undertaking to explain us to ourselves. But, Particularly to Mr. Raul Hilberg, one 
could advise him to agree with himself. On page 670 of his book, he in fact points out 
to us that of the 9,190,000 Jews, who he says were living in territories occupied by 
German armies during the war, only 3,782,500 survived, which makes 5,407,500 
dead; but on page 767, by some mathematical mystery, these 5,407,500 dead become 
5,100,00; It must also be pointed out that for Poland, which together with Russia and

--- PAGE BREAK ---161
the Danubian countries is the Crux of the problem, he finds only 50,000 survivors, 
where his colleague Mr.

Shalom Baron found 700,000.

However, a journal, in French, 
published in Switzerland (Europe Réelle, Lausanne, No.

44, December 196 1) claims 
that the Israeli periodical Jedoth Hazem, issued in Tel Aviv (No.

143 of 1961) states, 
without turning a hair, that "the number of Polish Jews at present living outside of 
Poland approaches 2 million." By way of compensation, for that part of Russia 
occupied by German troops, the Paris and Tel Aviv Centers of Jewish Documentation 
both agree in placing the number of Jews exterminated at 1,500,000 (Figaro 
Littéraire, June 4, 1960), while the Institute of Jewish Affairs and the World Jewish 
Congress (Eichmann's Confederates and the Third Reich Hierarchy, already cited) 
give the figure of 1,000,000; Mr.

Raul Hilberg finds only 420,000.

This inconsistency 
is all a little irresponsible, and it is embarrassing that the supporting documents, 
which are the same for all, speak so different a language to each of these specialists.

Having said this, let us render unto Caesar what is Caesar's.

As far as I know, of all of 
this kind of writing, (which has been published until now) in which the Nuremberg 
documents and the appended testimonies have been endlessly hashed and rehashed 
and in which they have been perverted more and more in order to support the 
contention that about 6,000,000 Jews were exterminated by the Germans in the 
Second World War, The Destruction of the European Jews is without any doubt the 
most precise and the most complete in the number of references it contains.

For that 
very reason, without being more convincing than all that has been published in this 
line, it is the more vulnerable.

Moreover, an analysis of Mr.

Hilberg's book has one 
advantage: in displaying all of its weaknesses, those of all the others show up, too.Moreover, an analysis of Mr.

Hilberg's book has one 
advantage: in displaying all of its weaknesses, those of all the others show up, too.

I 
have, therefore, decided to take The Destruction of the European Jews as the point of 
reference for much of the following discussion.

It will, of course, be understood that I 
will not examine each of the 790 pages one by one, although there is hardly a page 
that could not be used for illustration.

To put each one to the test in detail would 
require as many pages as Mr.

Raul Hilberg needed to present his thesis, and it would 
be tedious.

I have already said that Mr.

Raul Hilberg has succeeded in making his 
documents reveal what he wants them to reveal simply because he accepted them just 
as they were -- that is, rewritten, picked over, and taken out of their context.

It is this 
context that I shall try to reconstruct by comparing the documents with others and by 
dwelling only incidentally on the grossest manipulations.

To make myself clearly understood I must make a brief digression, the theme of 
which is the following: History is a sequence of historical moments.

Self-evident?

In 
form, yes.

But in implications, quite something else.

Some historians think that each 
moment in history posits to man only those problems which allow a single solution, a 
Hobson's choice.

It then follows that since the beginning of time, all the moments of 
history, each an exact prolongation of the other, are arranged in a sort of straight line, 
which is the meaning of history, and that by correctly analyzing each one of them, one 
arrives at historical determinism.

Pursuant to the concept of historical determination, 
the only question man can possibly ask is, not where he wants to go nor what he 
should do to get there, but simply, where he is going.

For an answer to that question 
he has only to look behind him and to project the historical line, and then turning 
forward he sees before him Socialism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pursuant to the concept of historical determination, 
the only question man can possibly ask is, not where he wants to go nor what he 
should do to get there, but simply, where he is going. For an answer to that question 
he has only to look behind him and to project the historical line, and then turning 
forward he sees before him Socialism. At the most, he might hesitate (as before the 
picture of the turn which Socialism has taken in Russia, for example) and slow his 
step. In no case can he stop or change directions. The ground burns under his feet, and 
on each side of his road are deadly precipices. And, so he goes toward Socialism, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---162
not very fast.

Such historians are Marxists, and they were in favor in the nineteenth 
century.

But, by reducing to nothing or almost nothing the role of the individual in 
history, this theory was so over simplified that it has lost favor in the twentieth 
century: consequently, Marxian historiography is disappearing today.

On the whole, most historians believe, in fact, that each moment of history presents 
man with an infinity of problems; that for man each moment holds an infinity of 
solutions -- even though, without any doubt, only one is rational and good: and that 
between the good solution and the more or less bad ones, man's choice depends upon 
a more or less correct conscientious appraisal of the aspects of the problem.

Modern 
historians also think that in this infinity of problems there are some that man can skirt 
all his life without even suspecting their existence; that among those which he 
perceives there are some that are more or less important, more or less momentous, and 
more or less urgent; that, not being able to resolve them all at once, man is obliged to 
take them one by one in fixed order; and that the very determination of this order 
already presupposes a correct and conscientious appraisal of the choices among the 
possible solutions.

Depending on the quality of his appraisals -- and, here, we must 
note that it is a question of collective problems and that the mental age of the group is 
in inverse proportion to the number of individuals who compose it -- the man in each 
historic moment sees a more or less large number of problems presented to him.

Those that he does not see, however, are not necessarily the most negligible ones.

Returning to Mr.

Raul Hilberg, he begins his study several historical moments behind 
and announces Luther dixit, in 1963 no less!

I am inventing nothing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Raul Hilberg, he begins his study several historical moments behind 
and announces Luther dixit, in 1963 no less! I am inventing nothing. In the 
introduction to The Destruction of the European Jews, he seriously explains to us, in 
substance, that National Socialism descends in a straight line from the anti-Semitism 
of the Germans in the Middle Ages, from their Catholicism, and from Martin Luther. This assertion calls for a few remarks: 
1. Luther was not anti-Semitic, but was anti-Jewish, which is quite a different thing. Historians are of the opinion that there have been eight Semitic peoples (Assyrians, 
Chaldeans, Phoenicians, Hebrews, Samaritans, Syrians, Arabs, and Ethiopians) of 
which three are in existence today (Arabs, Hebrews or Jews, and Ethiopians). Catholicism in the Middle Ages and Luther were only against the Jews. 2. This anti-Judaism was of a religious nature only. Equally universalist, both the 
Roman church of the time and Luther thought that all of the people of the earth except 
the Jews were pervious to the seductions of their system of propagating the Faith. It 
went no further. 3. During the Middle Ages all of Europe was religiously anti-Jewish, and to the same 
degree everywhere. In countries like Holland, where Lutheranism has remained the 
same as it was in Luther's time, and in other countries like Spain and Hungary, where 
the Roman church has remained what it was in the Middle Ages, anti-Jewish feeling 
has been considerably attenuated during the past six centuries. Nevertheless, neither 
Holland, Spain, nor Hungary was the theater of a phenomenon similar to that of 
National Socialism. Indeed, in our days it is in Germany that the Church, Lutheran as 
well as Roman, is the most open to the problems of science!

--- PAGE BREAK ---163
4.

National Socialism itself was anti-Semitic, but only because it was racist.

It 
maintained, for example, the best relations with the Arabs.

It would also have 
maintained good relations with the Jews if they had not, claimed to be a distinct 
people -- chosen besides!

-- in Germany itself.

(Its relations with the Arabs would not 
have been much better had they made the same claim.) The attitude of the Nazis on 
this point was clearly defined, doctrinally, on the one hand, through its conception of 
the idea of a people (in one specific area, one race protected against crossbreeding), 
and, on the other hand, through the international Zionist movement, to which National 
Socialism attributed a determinant role in the unleashing of the First World War (to 
get Palestine, it claimed) and in the formulation of the Versailles Treaty (which would 
permit, it claimed again, the Jewish people, after having gotten Palestine, to take over 
the Middle East with the help of Bolshevism).

Thus, it was from its very beginning that National Socialism held the Jews responsible 
for all of Germany's troubles after the Treaty of Versailles.

Once in power, the Nazis 
unceasingly accused them of wanting to provoke a Second World War, in permanent 
collusion with Bolshevism, in the hope of destroying Germany and, at the same time, 
of gaining the help of Bolshevism in the Middle East.

These were the two main, fundamental reasons for the policy of National Socialism 
with regard to the Jews.

Anti-Semitism?

That is saying both too much and too little; 
racism is the right word.

These reasons, in any case, bear no relation, either by 
association or affiliation, to the anti-Judaism of the Roman Church in the Middle 
Ages or to that of Martin Luther, and it is a little embarrassing to have to recall this, if 
not to teach this, to an American professor of political science, with his university 
degrees and his apparently solid credentials.

But, since 1933 (when Mr.These reasons, in any case, bear no relation, either by 
association or affiliation, to the anti-Judaism of the Roman Church in the Middle 
Ages or to that of Martin Luther, and it is a little embarrassing to have to recall this, if 
not to teach this, to an American professor of political science, with his university 
degrees and his apparently solid credentials.

But, since 1933 (when Mr.

Raul Hilberg 
was a youngster) and, especially, since 1945 (when he was just leaving adolescence) 
so many papers and journals have explained, for the benefit of public opinion, that 
National Socialism traced its roots to Roman Catholicism in the Middle Ages and to 
Martin Luther, and that, therefore, anti-Semitism and racism were a fundamentally 
German tradition, that Mr.

Raul Hilberg, preeminently a man of preconceived ideas 
and dogmas, accepted the idea without feeling the need to verify it.

In Hilberg's case, 
it is not even Luther dixit, but rather Vox populi dixit.

To have been correctly 
informed on this issue, it would have sufficed for him to have read Das Weltbild des 
Judentums: Grundlagen des Antisemitismus by the Austrian Bruno Amman (Vienna, 
1939) or Warum-Woher-Aber Wohin by the German Hans Grimm (Lippoldsberg, 
1954).

Although the first was written by a partisan of National Socialism and the 
second by an independent, they are two of the most serious studies on the origins of 
National Socialist racism and the answer it expected to find for the Jewish problem 
because they are the best documented.

But, Mr.

Raul Hilberg does not seem to find it 
necessary to read anything more than what comes from the prophets and the political 
friends.

Once having been caught in this mesh, the only thing that has to be done is to prove 
that the prophets and the political friends are right.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Raul Hilberg does not seem to find it 
necessary to read anything more than what comes from the prophets and the political 
friends. Once having been caught in this mesh, the only thing that has to be done is to prove 
that the prophets and the political friends are right. However, since the position of 
these prophets and political friends is grounded upon various historical inaccuracies, 
an attempt to justify it historically results in error upon error, because everything is 
linked together. For example, having a false idea of the origins of National Socialist 
racism, Mr. Raul Hilberg could not possibly have a correct idea of its historical form. Thus, he states theoretically that Hitler had decided to exterminate the Jews; Chaim

--- PAGE BREAK ---164
Weizmann and Ben Gurion dixit.

To support this contention he cites (p.

257) a 
passage from a famous speech that Hitler made before the Reichstag on January 30, 
1939: 
Today I want to be a prophet once more: if international finance Jewry inside 
and outside of Europe should succeed once more in plunging nations into 
another world war, the consequence will not be the Bolshevisation of the earth 
and thereby the victory of Jewry, but the annihilation of the Jewry race in 
Europe.

I have already had occasion to remark (with regard to the Hossbach document) that 
threatening observations of this kind abound in the writings of statesmen the whole 
world over.

Historians usually consider them as representing the kind of defiance that 
was hurled by the ancient heroes and, as a consequence, attribute little significance to 
them.

Between the two wars Russian statesmen addressed such threats in profusion 
toward capitalism, and, at the United Nations General Assembly of 1960, Mr.

Khrushchev once more bellowed, word for word, the same threat to the Americans 
while hitting his desk with his shoe.

At Nuremberg only once was this passage from 
the speech cited (T.

III, p.

527), but without attaching importance to it.

It does not 
figure in the prosecutor's charge.

Mr.

Raul Hilberg, doubtless, thinks that was by 
mistake and heavily insists on citing (p.

266), by way of confirmation of the decision 
for extermination, another passage from another speech, given in the Sport Palace on 
September 30, 1942: 
At one time, the Jews of Germany laughed about my prophecies.

I do not 
know whether they are still laughing or whether they have already lost all 
desire to laugh.

But right now I can only repeat: they will stop laughing 
everywhere, and I shall be right also in that prophecy.

But, not only was this passage not sustained at Nuremberg, it was not even cited: in 
short, it was not serious evidence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But right now I can only repeat: they will stop laughing 
everywhere, and I shall be right also in that prophecy. But, not only was this passage not sustained at Nuremberg, it was not even cited: in 
short, it was not serious evidence. On January 30, 1939, the concentration of Jews in 
camps had not yet begun (according to the Jewish historian Til Jarman, there were 
only six concentration camps in Germany at the beginning of the Second World War, 
and they contained, all together, 21,300 internees, of which 3,000 were Jews; The Rise 
and Fall of Nazi Germany, New York, 1956), and, on September 30, 1942, the 
concentration of Jews which until then had taken place only in Poland (1940-41) was 
just beginning (March 1942), on a scale similar to that of Poland in other parts of 
Europe that were occupied by German troops. Without doubt, Mr. Raul Hilberg had foreseen this objection, since, in nearly 700 
pages, he sets before us a methodical plan in four stages: Definition of the Jew; 
Expropriarion; Concentration; and, finally, Extermination. Mr. Raul Hilberg could 
then reply that to carry out an enterprise of such a scope took time, and that in 1942 
they could not have gotten very far with the work, but that that does not mean it was 
not planned. What the basis for that conviction is we do not know. Mr. Raul Hilberg 
does not offer a single document corroborating this plan, which allows us to presume, 
in any case, that during peacetime much more time was necessary (1933-1939) to 
define and expropriate the nearly 600,000 Jews (the total for Germany in 1933. Austria from 1938 on, and Czechoslovakia in 1939) on hand in Germany during that 
period, than to transport and exterminate 6,000,000 during total wartime conditions

--- PAGE BREAK ---rmany in 1933. Austria from 1938 on, and Czechoslovakia in 1939) on hand in Germany during that 
period, than to transport and exterminate 6,000,000 during total wartime conditions

--- PAGE BREAK ---

165
(1941-1944). Not less surprising is this contradiction: after having told us (p. 177) that 
the intentions of National Socialism were to exterminate the Jews along this 
methodical plan, Mr. Raul Hilberg then tells us (pp. 2572-58) that "Hitler hesitated in 
his policy of extermination, until he was convinced that there was no other alternative. 
From 1938 to 1940 he made the most extraordinary efforts to work out a vast plan of 
emigration." In another place in his book (p. 256) he wants to prove to us that 1.4 
million Jews were exterminated by the Einsatzgruppen, but after having used all 
means to prove it (reports of unit leaders, testimonies of victims who survived, etc.) 
he is still lacking 500,000 bodies, to come up to his total, so, coolly he adds, on his 
own authority, 250,000 for "omissions" and 250,000 more for "gaps in our sources." I 
do not think a better example of this kind of harebrained thinking could be found. 
Moreover, light has today been shed on these extermination orders which were 
allegedly given by Hitler, which show up every fifty or hundred pages in The 
Destruction of the European Jews and which bear all sorts of dates. As I have already 
stated, in La Terre Retrouvée (Paris) of December 15, 1960, Dr. Kubovy, Director of 
the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation at Tel Aviv, has agreed 
that no extermination order by Hitler, Himmler, Heydrich, Göring, or any other 
member of the ruling circle of the Third Reich, exists.er of Contemporary Jewish Documentation at Tel Aviv, has agreed 
that no extermination order by Hitler, Himmler, Heydrich, Göring, or any other 
member of the ruling circle of the Third Reich, exists.

If we were to go into further detail, we would find that there is no end to the factual 
distortions of which Mr. Raul Hilberg is guilty. The following list is a sample of some 
of them: his presentation of the so-called "Crystal Night" (November 9 and 10, 1938) 
as having been planned by the high authorities of the Third Reich through the citation 
of telegrams (all dated November 10, 1938) from minor officials within the ranks of 
the police and the N.S.D.A.P. (pp. 19 and 655); the Einsatzgruppen which he shows 
as having been in action in Poland in 1939 when such units were not created until 
May 1941 (see, the testimony of Ohlendorf, N.M.T. IV, p. 322); his interpretation of 
the German expression "Judenfrei" to mean to be "free of Jews" by means of 
"extermination" when, in reality, the term was applied to a given territory to mean that 
it was to be "free of Jews" by their transfer into concentration camps or other areas; 
his distortions of such documents as the "Wannsee Protocol" in which he translates 
the expression "weitere Losungsmoglichkeit" (meaning, "new solution possibility") as 
further solution possibility (p. 264); his statistical errors where he has some Jews die 
twice, like the ones at Simferopol, where the city was "freed of the 10,000 Jews who 
were living there in December 1941, so that the army could have a quiet Christmas" 
(p.192) and who then were "exterminated in February 1942" (p. 245); his failure to 
deduct from the total of the exterminated all of those Jews of whom he says (p. 192) 
that "on the road from Smolensk to Moscow [and] ... in many towns, the Soviets had 
evacuated the entire Jewish population" (to behind the Urals from which on their own 
they proceeded on their way to Hong Kong, or southward to Turkey and the Middle 
East); the 10,000 Jews of Chemigov who numbered only 300 when the Germans 
arrived (ibid.), the 100,000 of Dniepropetrovsk who were only 30,000 (ibid.), those of 
Mariupol and Taganrog who were evacuated to a man by the Soviets (ibid.); there 
appear to be 1,500,000 Jews in all (p. 190) who seem not to have been deducted from 
the general statistics of total Jewish losses, because otherwise it would not be possible 
to arrive at a total of 5,407,500 (P. 670) or even of 5,100,000 (P. 767); his crudehave been deducted from 
the general statistics of total Jewish losses, because otherwise it would not be possible 
to arrive at a total of 5,407,500 (P. 670) or even of 5,100,000 (P. 767); his crude

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166
errors in figuring such as: 3,350,000 Jews given as living in Poland in 1939 (p. 670), 
3,000,000 dead in 1945 (p. 767) but only 50,000 survivors (p. 670), etc. 
Of what use is it to continue? I think that I have given a good enough idea of the 
doctrine and of the method of Mr. Raul Hilberg to convince the reader that he cannot 
regard The Destruction of the European Jews to be an objective piece of scholarship. 
Now, the time has come to examine Mr. Hilberg's source materials: his witnesses, his 
testimonies, and his documents.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167

Chapter Thirteen 
Witnesses, Testimonies, and DocumentsNow, the time has come to examine Mr. Hilberg's source materials: his witnesses, his 
testimonies, and his documents.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167

Chapter Thirteen 
Witnesses, Testimonies, and Documents

I. Generalities 
Unfolding my usual newspaper on May 17, 1963, my eye was caught by the 
following: "Legal error uncovered in Austria: innocent persons have been in prison 
for fifteen years." Then followed the explanation, in the form of a press dispatch from 
Vienna, dated the day before: 
Sentenced sixteen years ago to hard labor for life, two Austrians, Hubert 
Ranneth, 43, and Joseph Auer, 30, were yesterday set free.  
Following a new investigation ordered last November by the Austrian Minister 
of Justice, light was thrown on one of the worst legal errors of the century.  
In 1947 Ranneth and Auer were sentenced for having murdered with iron bars 
three workmen in a steel works. But it was only last November that an 
important fact became known. The "complete confession" of Auer, on which 
the accusation had been based, had been extorted by means of a shot of 
scopolamine, a euphoric medicine, paralyzing in big doses. Finally the 
medical experts have established that the iron bar, at the time, the item that led 
to conviction, could not have been used to murder the victims.  
Many good people think that this information offers an explanation for the sensational 
confessions in the celebrated Moscow trials. It does not seem that this method of 
Austrian justice was used at Nuremberg, at least not during the thirteen big trials. That 
drugs might have been used in the multitude of minor trials which have taken place 
since, against former S.S. or petty bureaucrats of the Third Reich, is quite possible. 
Most of these cases never came to a hearing except after a long period of 
imprisonment of the defendants, after having been many times postponed, and that 
fact raises all sorts of suspicions. The drugging of the defendants seems to have been 
the case, for example, in the trial of the "Death busses," March 1963, where the 
accused gave technical details of the operation which experts cannot accept. This 
could be the case again in the trial of the second commandant of the camp at 
Auschwitz, where the matter has been under preliminary investigation for three years 
and where the trial has been postponed four times already. As of the date of this 
writing, the Prosecutor has still not succeeded in proving that 437,000 Hungarian 
Jews were gassed at Auschwitz between the 16th of May and the middle of October 
1944. Perhaps, that is why the defendant, instead of committing suicide like Gerstein 
(whose case will be discussed farther on), decided to die of a "heart attack"; in 1963 it 
has become very difficult to have suicides. This could be the case with Eichmann. 
Once the first injection is admitted, one is permitted to think that others may have 
come later, a fact which would explain a lot of things.t to have suicides. This could be the case with Eichmann. 
Once the first injection is admitted, one is permitted to think that others may have 
come later, a fact which would explain a lot of things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---168
Additional means at the disposal of justice include compulsion through bad treatment 
and physical torture (Streicher, Pohl, Ohlendorf), intimidation (Sauckel, whose wife 
and nine children in the hands of the Russians were, according to his statement at the 
Trial of the Major War Criminals, used to exert pressure on him, by the Soviet 
examiners), psychological torture or "brainwashing," and, finally, the situation that 
the defendant found himself in with regard to the charges (Höss, Kurt Becher, Höttl, 
Wisliceny, von dem Bach-Zelewski).

Next followed the witnesses who were not brought to the bar by any charges and who 
gave evidence without any pressure being exerted on them: the partisans of guilty 
conscience.

One easily understands why the Czech communist, Doctor Blaha, saw a 
gas chamber in action at Dachau where none existed.

It was communist doctrine to 
say so.

Furthermore, as a prisoner belonging to the Häftlingsführung of the Dachau 
camp, this individual could not have had a clear conscience.

One can just as easily 
understand an analogous declaration of the S.S.

Hoellriegel concerning other 
imaginary gas chambers at Mauthausen.

It is an example of a guilty conscience in its 
pure form on the part of a man who had to get himself pardoned for his participation 
in the drama, and who, furthermore, might have to jump, from one day to the next, 
from the role of witness to that of defendant.

I have explained this factor in 
connection with the cases of Louis Martin-Chauffier.

David Rousset and Eugen 
Kogon.

I could have added to their names the names of others such as the Reverend 
Father Riquet of the Society of Jesus.

Professor Pierre Bertaux and many others who, 
having given during the German occupation certificates of good conduct to 
collaborators or Gestapo agents, later became fierce upholders of the Resistance 
orthodoxy in order to excuse their former actions.I could have added to their names the names of others such as the Reverend 
Father Riquet of the Society of Jesus.

Professor Pierre Bertaux and many others who, 
having given during the German occupation certificates of good conduct to 
collaborators or Gestapo agents, later became fierce upholders of the Resistance 
orthodoxy in order to excuse their former actions.

The most typical case of this kind of guilty conscience seems to me to be that of the 
German Pastor Martin Niemöller.

In short, he is a man who could have been at the defendants' bench at Nuremberg 
under the charge of "Crimes against peace," for having participated in the Nazi "Plot," 
which the indictment included, from 1920 until 1936.

Such a conclusion is 
inescapable when one reads his own book.

Vom U-Boot zur Kanzel which came out in 
Germany in 1935, when Hitler had been in power for two years, and which was 
written on the theme "Damals versank mir eine Welt." It is the harshest of any 
indictment of Bolshevism that I have yet read it is also a narrow and chauvinistic 
profession of faith in nationalism, and it shows the most complete adherence to the 
general policies of the N.S.D.A.P.

To get pardoned for all that, Pastor Niemöller, President of the Council of the German 
Protestant Church, in a speech which he gave on July 3, 1946, and which was 
published under the title Der Weg ins Freie (F.M.

Hellbach, Stuttgart, 1946), testified 
that 238,756 persons had been exterminated at Dachau, although we know today that 
in reality there were only about 30,000 deaths there; he confirmed the existence of a 
gas chamber, and we know today there was not one there; and since 1945, every time 
he has opened his mouth to speak, he has preached the unilateral responsibility of 
Germany, and the collective responsibility of the German people, in the war of 1939-
1945.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To get pardoned for all that, Pastor Niemöller, President of the Council of the German 
Protestant Church, in a speech which he gave on July 3, 1946, and which was 
published under the title Der Weg ins Freie (F.M. Hellbach, Stuttgart, 1946), testified 
that 238,756 persons had been exterminated at Dachau, although we know today that 
in reality there were only about 30,000 deaths there; he confirmed the existence of a 
gas chamber, and we know today there was not one there; and since 1945, every time 
he has opened his mouth to speak, he has preached the unilateral responsibility of 
Germany, and the collective responsibility of the German people, in the war of 1939-
1945. He is today at the head of a pacifist movement, and he defends without 
exception all of the contentions which are the basis of Soviet Russia's foreign policy. There is no doubt that if he had not conducted himself in the way that he has, he

--- PAGE BREAK ---s without 
exception all of the contentions which are the basis of Soviet Russia's foreign policy. There is no doubt that if he had not conducted himself in the way that he has, he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
would have been one of the chief objects of the accusations that the Soviets 
incessantly make against the Germans. Pastor Niemöller, in short, has the same 
attitude as all of those people of the Parisian gentry, or of the world of arts and letters, 
who led a Dolce Vita in the company of the highest German personages of occupied 
Paris, rejoicing in the champagne of Hitler's victories, and who, as soon as the wind 
turned, gave their allegiance to the communist party and became the most severe 
denouncers of the collaborators, in postwar France, solely with an eye to escaping the 
defendants' bench. 
It was people like that who gave the prosecutors and the judges at Nuremberg their 
most striking evidence and who continue to enrich the archives of Rehovot (Israel) 
and of Warsaw with all those documents, as fanciful as they are new, which are 
discovered from time to time and which are published to the sound of trumpets in 
order to keep alive in the world those anti-German feelings on which the world policy 
of Bolshevism and Zionism depend. 
At Nuremberg, the Prosecution and the Judges got sensational results by this method. 
Notice this curious document P.S. 3319 (N.M.T. XXXII, pp. 159-92) which Mr. Raul 
Hilberg cites and comments upon (pp. 502-709). In question is the organization, by 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Third Reich, of an anti-Jewish congress at 
Krummhuelbel on April 3 and 4, 1944, with all the representatives at foreign posts 
participating. In 27 Pages a certain Ludwig Kohlhammer, Landesgruppenleiter, 
reports very exactly on the number of participants -- 31 persons -- and their names 
and what each one said. 
Now, this congress never took place. This is how the matter was presented to the 
Nuremberg Tribunal: 
March 27, 1946, von Steengracht (Secretary of State, Foreign Affairs, Third 
Reich) is interrogated by Colonel Philimore, deputy prosecutor-general for the 
English, who asks him:  
"I would now like to bring up the question of the Jews. You told us yesterday 
that you yourself and Mr. Ribbentrop had prevented the anti-Jewish Congress 
of 1944 from taking place. Is that true?  
"Yes," answered von Steengracht. (TX., p. 137.)  
And this is what he stated the day before in reply to a question put by Dr. Horn, von 
Ribbentrop's counsel: 
"Our liaison with Hitler informed us that the latter, informed by Bormann, had 
ordered Rosenberg's office to organize an anti-Semitic congress. Ribbentrop 
did not want to believe it, but after having had a conversation with the liaison 
agent, he had to believe it. Since this decision made it impossible for us to 
prevent the congress through official channels, we tried to prevent it with a 
policy of hesitation, delay and obstruction. And, although the order had been 
issued in the spring of 1944, and the war was still not over in April 1945, the 
congress never took place." (T.X., p. 125.)icy of hesitation, delay and obstruction. And, although the order had been 
issued in the spring of 1944, and the war was still not over in April 1945, the 
congress never took place." (T.X., p. 125.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---elay and obstruction. And, although the order had been 
issued in the spring of 1944, and the war was still not over in April 1945, the 
congress never took place." (T.X., p. 125.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170
On April 2, 1946, von Ribbentrop is interrogated by Mr. Edgar Faure, who at the time 
was deputy prosecutor-general for France, and who later was to become President of 
Council in France: 
Mr. Edgar Faure (to Ribbentrop): "During the examination of your witness 
Steengracht, the English prosecutor brought forth document P.S. 3319, which 
has the English No. G.B. 287. I would like to refer to this document just for 
one question: In this document appear the minutes of a congress, of a 
gathering at which were present all the reporters on Jewish matters in the 
various diplomatic missions in Europe. This congress was held at 
Krummhuebel on April 3 and 4, 1944. It had been organized by Schleier. That 
was read the other day. You knew about this congress, I suppose?"  
von Ribbentrop: "No, I am hearing about it for the first time. What was that 
congress? I have not even heard that such a congress took place. What sort of 
a congress was it?"  
Mr. Faure: "The document has been filed with the Tribunal, and I simply 
want to ask you one question. You have testified that you did not know about 
this gathering at which were present thirty one persons, almost all of them 
diplomatic personnel. I point out to you that during this reunion Counsellor of 
Embassy von Thadden made a declaration which was reported in the 
following terms:  
'The orator is showing why the Zionist solution of Palestine and other 
similar solutions should be rejected, and why there are grounds for the 
deportation of the Jews to the eastern territories.'  
I suggest that this declaration made by a Counsellor of Embassy before thirty 
one persons in your department represented your own thesis on the subject."  
von Ribbentrop: "Yes, but I do not know at all what you are trying to say. 
Will you please put the document at my disposal so that I may answer?"  
Mr. Faure: "I have no intention of showing you this document .... (T.X., p. 
420)."  
That was the proof of forgery. It was also a typical breach of the Rule of Procedure 
No. 2 of the Tribunal itself which provided that "all the documents appended to the 
Indictment shall be put at the disposition of the defendants not less than 30 days 
before the trials" (T.I., p. 2 1 ). This matter was never spoken of again. If one looks in 
the Index of Names (T., 24) for information on Landesgruppenleiter Ludwig 
Kohlhammer, he is not listed. But, Document P.S. 3319 was admitted into evidence. 
One can hardly understand why. If Mr. Edgar Faure wanted to prove that the Zionist 
and other similar solutions, according to the thesis of the Reich Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, were rejected in April, 1944, there was no need to invent a document. It was 
common knowledge that the main obstacles to these solutions derived from the 
strategic operational situation, and that, as the affair of Joel Brand proved the 
following month, the Allies turned them down, through neutrals. One understandsto these solutions derived from the 
strategic operational situation, and that, as the affair of Joel Brand proved the 
following month, the Allies turned them down, through neutrals. One understands

--- PAGE BREAK ---171
even less how it is that seventeen years later, Mr.

Raul Hilberg still does not know 
that this document was a common forgery.

Shall I speak to Mr.

Raul Hilberg about his principal witness on the missions of the 
Einsatzgruppen, Gruppenführer Ohlendorf?

On January 3, 1946, in the morning 
session, he said, "On the subject of Jews and communist commissars, the heads of the 
Einsatzgruppen received verbal [sic] orders before each mission," and that "on 
Russian territory [we admire the precision] that meant that they were to be 
assassinated" (T.

IV, p.

322), and in the afternoon session, to the question as to 
whether this had been arranged in the agreement between the O.K.W.

and the 
R.S.H.A., he replied that "he did not remember, but that in any case that job of 
liquidation was not mentioned" (T.

IV, p.

319).

Every two hours he was asked if 
"most of the heads of the Einsatzgruppen came from the R.S.H.A.," to which he 
replied that "they came from all over the Reich," (op.

cit.

p.

325); then, again to the 
same questions, he stated that "they were furnished by the State police, the Kripo, and 
to a lesser extent by the S.D." (op.

cit.

p.

332).

The poor fellow, with the threat of a 
death sentence hanging over him, had completely lost his head and did not know what 
Saint to turn to for help to escape his destiny.

He was hanged in 1951 in spite of his 
willingness to please, and after having suffered such treatment!

At his trial in 1948, 
when all that he had said at Nuremberg was brought up against him, he said that all 
previous declarations had been extorted from him under pressure and were worthless.

The preceding paragraphs are concerned only with the witnesses, testimonies and 
earlier documents on which Mr.

Raul Hilberg bases his work.The preceding paragraphs are concerned only with the witnesses, testimonies and 
earlier documents on which Mr.

Raul Hilberg bases his work.

At Rehovot (Israel) and 
Warsaw (Poland) the Zionists and Communists have for fifteen years been 
concentrating on a search for new documents to back up the earlier ones so as not to 
halt the wave of hatred against Germany, which is playing both Zionism's and 
Bolshevism's game.

The most famous of all these testimonies which have their place 
on the shelves of the libraries of these two centers is surely the Diary of Anne Frank 
(Paris, Ger.

tr.

1958, Calmann-Lévy).

This document did not capture the attention of 
Mr.

Raul Hilberg, but some day he might be drawn to consider it.

Far from me to 
claim that it is a forgery.

A teacher who lives near Hamburg did this, and he received 
a heavy sentence.

Furthermore, I must admit that this matter did not engross me very 
much, although I followed it closely enough.

What immediately struck me as being 
most peculiar was the handwriting itself of the unfortunate child.

Aside from the fact 
that if the text is read in the different languages in which it has been printed in none of 
them are the same things found, the two specimens of the child's handwriting, one is 
presented by her father in the German edition and the other as shown by Life 
(September 15, 1958), appear to be quite different -- i.e., written by different persons.

I want to be clearly understood.

I do not say that the Diary of Anne Frank is a forgery 
.

I do not want to make any trouble!

I only ask if these two writings are by the same 
person of the same age, since I am not a graphology expert.

After that, I shall decide 
about the authenticity of the document.

Perhaps, Mr.

Raul Hilberg will take this 
problem up ....

And now, moving from the general to the particular, let us speak a little about the late 
Messrs.

Rudolf Höss, Kurt Gerstein, and Miklos Nyiszli, who, in varying degrees are 
the stock witnesses of Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And now, moving from the general to the particular, let us speak a little about the late 
Messrs. Rudolf Höss, Kurt Gerstein, and Miklos Nyiszli, who, in varying degrees are 
the stock witnesses of Mr. Raul Hilberg.

--- PAGE BREAK ---172
II.

The Witness Rudolf Hoess 
Der Lagerkommandant von Auschwitz spricht 
Born in Baden-Baden on November 15, 1900, Rudolf Höss was a soldier in the First 
World War.

As a member of the N.S.D.A.P.

from 1922 on, in May 1923, he and two 
accomplices killed Walter Kadow who had turned over to French occupation troops in 
the Ruhr Leo Schlageter, a sabotage organizer in the occupation area.

Höss was 
sentenced to ten years but was paroled after serving six.

Höss was a member of the S.S.

from 1934 on; while in the S.S., he became a block 
chief (Blockführer) at Dachau at the end of 1934; later he was promoted to manager 
of the prisoners' belongings and, then, deputy to the commandant of the 
Sachsenhausen Camp.

He served as Commandant at the Auschwitz camp from May 
1940 (the camp was not ready for prisoners until June 14) until the end of November 
1943.

He was arrested for the first time at Heide (Schleswig) in May 1945 by the 
English, who released him almost immediately, and was arrested again in May 1946 
at Flensburg (Holstein), where he was interrogated with "whip and alcohol," as he 
says in his book, Le Commandant d'Auschwitz parle, (p.

211, French ed.).

He was 
then transferred after a few days "to Minden on the Weser, an interrogation center in 
the British zone," where he suffered "the most brutal treatment from the military 
prosecutor, an English commander." (ibid.) He came to Nuremberg at the beginning 
of April as a defense witness for Kaltenbrunner.

He testified at Nuremberg on May 
15, under threat of being turned over to the Soviets.

Knowing what treatment they had 
in store for him, it was quite natural that he said what he thought was best calculated 
to keep the Americans from doing that.

Professor Gustav Gilbert, a psychologist 
attached to the prosecution staff, was at the Trial and, encouraging this hope, adroitly 
suggested what he should say.Knowing what treatment they had 
in store for him, it was quite natural that he said what he thought was best calculated 
to keep the Americans from doing that.

Professor Gustav Gilbert, a psychologist 
attached to the prosecution staff, was at the Trial and, encouraging this hope, adroitly 
suggested what he should say.

He did not complain about his treatment at Nuremberg: 
on the contrary, he said it was a "health cure" (p.

21 1) when compared with what he 
had undergone at Heide and Minden.

Unfortunately for him, he was claimed as a war 
criminal by Poland, and was transferred there on May 25 where, on July 30, he was 
incarcerated in the Krakow prison.

At Krakow he experienced a change of scene that 
was much worse than Heide and Minden, and "without the intervention of the 
Prosecutor they would have finished me off," he said (p.

214).

His case was heard 
from the 11th to the 29th of March, 1947.

He was condemned to death on April 2 by 
the Warsaw Supreme Court and was hanged on the 4th at Auschwitz.

In prison, while waiting his trial, he wrote his memoirs.

For this purpose, he was 
given not a pen and ink but "a pencil." The advantage, for those who wish to exploit 
it, is that facsimiles -- and surely the originals, too -- from pencil writings are almost 
illegible.

It follows that authenticity can only be attested by experienced specialists, 
the kind who work on Egyptian palimpsests, and so far the original manuscript has 
not been submitted to one, if my information is correct.

The original document is in 
the Auschwitz Museum where the International Committee of the camp has custody 
of it, and where its inspection by scholars has been carefully restricted.

Just try to 
examine it there!

To my knowledge, one part of it has been published in German 
entitled Autobiography (1951), but it does not seem to have been translated into any 
other language except Polish.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just try to 
examine it there! To my knowledge, one part of it has been published in German 
entitled Autobiography (1951), but it does not seem to have been translated into any 
other language except Polish. As far as I know only a few fragments, cited by authors 
more fortunate than I (for example, Michel Borwicz, Revue d'histoire de la seconds 
guerre mondiale, October 1956, pp. 56-87) have appeared until now. Another part 
was published with the title, Le Commandant d'Auschwitz parle (1959) in French,

--- PAGE BREAK ---oire de la seconds 
guerre mondiale, October 1956, pp. 56-87) have appeared until now. Another part 
was published with the title, Le Commandant d'Auschwitz parle (1959) in French,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

173
English, German and Polish. It seems that the whole manuscript has not yet been 
published and that, at the present time, specialists are studying and preparing the rest 
for publication, doubtless in "pencil" too. It looks like there are many fine days ahead 
for the historians. In short, together with the testimony of the author at Nuremberg, on 
the same subject, we have at hand three texts from the same person. What do these 
texts say? 
The judgment of the Supreme Court at Warsaw which sentenced Höss to death and 
which served as the introduction to Le Commandant d'Auschwitz parle (pp. 9-13, 
French ed.) charges him with taking part in the killing of: 
-- about 300,000 persons confined in the camp as prisoners, and listed in the 
camp register.  
-- a number of people, whose exact number is difficult to determine, but at 
least 2,500,000 mostly Jews brought to the camp by wagons from all over 
Europe for immediate extermination, and not in the camp register for that 
reason.  
-- at least 12,000 Soviet prisoners of war held in the concentration camp 
contrary to the law of nations with regard t o the treatment of prisoners.  
Therefore, the Polish court claimed that 2,912.000 persons in all for the period from 
May 1940 to the end of November 1943 died at Auschwitz. By assuming that this 
figure was correct, and by adding those who were exterminated from the end of 
November 1943 to January 1945, witnesses at Nuremberg spoke of 4,500,000 dead. In 
October 1956, Mr. Henri Michel, a former French deportee and the editor-in-chief of 
the Revue d' histoire de la seconds guerre mondiale, put the total number of dead at 
Auschwitz at 4,000,000, in this way: "This camp was the most international and the 
most western of the death factories, and its soil is enriched with the ashes of four 
million corpses." (p. 3.) 
In reply to the question put by Dr. Kaufmann, Kaltenbrunner's legal counsel at 
Nuremberg, "Did Eichmann tell you in fact that more than 2,000,000 Jews were 
destroyed at Auschwitz camp?", Höss answered, "Yes, that is right." (T. XI, p. 409.) 
Behind the scenes he is supposed to have told the American psychologist, Gustave 
Gilbert that "Every day two trains brought in 3,000 persons, for 27 months" 
(therefore, for the whole length of the period of deportation, from March 1942 to July 
1944). "So that makes a total of about 2,500,000 people." (Statement of Professor 
Gilbert before the Jerusalem Tribunal in judgment on Eichmann, May 30, 1961.) But, 
when it came to giving details about these 2,500,000 people he wrote in the Le 
Commandant d'Auschwitz parle (p. 239, French ed.): 
As for me, I never knew the total number, and had no way of determining it. I 
can only remember the number in the most important cases, often pointed out 
to me by Eichmann or one of his deputies:  
-- From Upper Silesia, or Poland in general: 250,000  
-- From Germany, or Theresienstadt: 100,000he number in the most important cases, often pointed out 
to me by Eichmann or one of his deputies:  
-- From Upper Silesia, or Poland in general: 250,000  
-- From Germany, or Theresienstadt: 100,000

--- PAGE BREAK ---t important cases, often pointed out 
to me by Eichmann or one of his deputies:  
-- From Upper Silesia, or Poland in general: 250,000  
-- From Germany, or Theresienstadt: 100,000

--- PAGE BREAK ---

174
-- Holland: 95,000  
-- Belgium: 20,000  
--France[2]: 10,000  
--Greece: 65,000  
--Hungary: 400,000  
-- Slovakia 90,000  
TOTAL: 1,130,000  
The figures concerning cases of less importance are not graven in my memory, 
but they were insignificant compared with the above. I think the figure 
2,500,000 much too high.  
These figures, too, have to do with the whole period of deportation and Höss got them 
from Eichmann. And, Eichmann definitely did have things to say about the matter, but 
when Höss' statement at Nuremberg is compared with his book, we see that these 
things do not always agree. 
It is my opinion that very few Jewish deportees came to Auschwitz from countries 
other than those which appear on Höss' list. It is possible that this total corresponds to 
the reality, although it is still very high. Apparently, this realization was admitted by 
the Institute of Jewish Affairs in Eichmann's Confederates and the Third Reich 
Hierarchy when it concluded that " at Auschwitz, [together with its satellite camps, 
best known of which was Birkenau, located to the south not far from Krakow]... about 
90,000 Jews perished." Probably, Mr. Raul Hilberg referred to this estimate, too, in 
order to figure at a million (p.572) the number of Jews who died there. What is the 
basis for the estimation of the number of survivors, one of 230,000, and the other of 
130,000? Neither in Eichmann's Confederates and the Third Reich Hierarchy nor in 
The Destruction of the European Jews is there an explanation of how these figures 
were determined. Therefore, they are probably conjectural. In Mr. Raul Hilberg's case, 
it is a little troublesome because (p. 670) he finds only 50,000 survivors for the whole 
of Poland, which is astonishing considering that there were already 130,000 at 
Auschwitz. 
But, we shall not anticipate the discussion of the general statistics which will follow 
in another chapter; we are concerned here with the witness Höss, not the general 
statistics. And, about those two trains that for 27 months brought 3,000 people to 
Auschwitz every day, witness Höss does not seem very certain. On this subject I 
invite the reader to think about these three propositions: 
1. "As far as I can remember the convoys arriving at Auschwitz never carried 
more than 1,000 prisoners." (p. 220.)  
2. "Following some delays in communications, five convoys a day, instead of 
the expected three, arrived." (p. 236.)onvoys arriving at Auschwitz never carried 
more than 1,000 prisoners." (p. 220.)  
2. "Following some delays in communications, five convoys a day, instead of 
the expected three, arrived." (p. 236.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---175
3.

"In the extermination of Hungarian Jews, convoys were arriving at the rate 
of 15,000 persons a day." (p.

239.)  
From which it appears that under certain circumstances five trains per day of 1,000 
persons each delivered a total of 15,000 persons.

To the Tribunal on April 15, 1946, Höss had stated that these trains carried 2,000 
persons each (T.

Xi, p.

412).

To Professor Gustave Gilbert he said that they contained 
1,500 each, and in his book, he comes down to 1,000.

What is certain is that for the 
period given none of these estimates on the capacity of the trains corresponds to a 
total of 1,130,000.

The last one is the closest to the truth with an exaggeration of only 
300,000.

Since Mr.

Raul Hilberg takes under consideration six "killing centers," an 
exaggeration of 300.000 for each one would yield a total exaggeration of nearly 
2,000.000 persons and, out of six million a total exaggeration of that magnitude is 
quite important.

The same observation holds for the soundness of this testimony: "In the middle of 
spring, 1942, hundreds of human beings perished in the gas chambers." (p.

178.) But, 
as we have seen, Document No.

4401 establishes beyond any doubt that the so-called 
"gas chambers" were not ordered for Auschwitz until August 8, 1942, and Document 
No.

4463 establishes that they were not actually installed until February 20, 1943.

At 
Nuremberg, Höss had already stated in his deposition that "in 1942, Himmler came to 
visit the camp and was present at an execution from beginning to end," (T.XI, p.

413), 
no one called his attention to the fact that even if it were possible that Himmler had 
gone to Auschwitz in 1942, it was not possible for him to have been present at an 
execution, since the gas chambers had not been constructed yet.

And, furthermore, we 
know that it would have been unlikely for Himmler to have been present at an 
execution because as we learned after the war from his physician, Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

413), 
no one called his attention to the fact that even if it were possible that Himmler had 
gone to Auschwitz in 1942, it was not possible for him to have been present at an 
execution, since the gas chambers had not been constructed yet. And, furthermore, we 
know that it would have been unlikely for Himmler to have been present at an 
execution because as we learned after the war from his physician, Dr. Kersten, he 
could not bear the sight of an execution. Höss' comments concerning the capacity of the gas chambers and the crematories also 
are grossly contradictory. For example, he says on one page that: 
The maximum figure for the number of people gassed or incinerated every 24 
hours was a little more than 9,000 for all the installations. (p. 236, emphasis 
added.)  
But, then, he says a few pages later: 
As I have already said, Crematories I and II could incinerate about 2,000 
bodies in 24 hours; it was not possible to exceed this if one wanted to avoid 
damage. Installations III and IV were supposed to incinerate 1,500 corpses in 
24 hours. But, as far as I know, these figures were never reached. (p. 245, 
emphasis added.)  
How can one fail to deduce from these flagrant contradictions that here is a document 
which was fabricated hastily after the event by illiterates? Moreover, this fabrication, after the event, can be detected just from the kind of book 
it is, written in pencil and carefully preserved in the archives of the Auschwitz

--- PAGE BREAK ---176
Atuseum, where, unless one is a well-known communist, one cannot examine it.

Although it bears the date of February-March 1947, it became known and published 
only in 1958; this fact further clouds the reliability of the document.

In addition, it is 
attributed to a dead man who, in any case, cannot protest what is said over his 
signature; this fact, in itself, tells all too much.

Finally, a careful analysis of the following language reveals a pearl: 
Toward the end of 1942, all the mass graves were cleaned [crematory ovens 
had not been built yet, and incineration was done in mass graves].

The number 
of cadavers buried there exceeded 107,000.

This figure [as Rudolph Höss 
explains farther on] includes not only convoys of Jews gassed from the 
beginning, until the moment when they went on to incineration, but also the 
cadavers of all the prisoners who died in Auschwitz-Birkenau camp.

(p.

231)  
From this statement one infers that in nearly three years 107,000 persons died.

I say 
"in nearly three years" because the two phrases, "toward the end of 1942" and "until 
the moment when they went on to incineration," are paradoxical, since the cremations 
could not have been begun, according to the official thesis, before February 20, 1943.

Therefore, for the two to be concomitant, which is called for here, it is absolutely 
necessary that both should have occurred on this last date.

Since the camp was opened 
on June 14, 1940, one has to speak of almost three years.

Hence: the cremation of 
107,000 cadavers before February 1943 must mean that all of the rest were cremated 
at a later date.Since the camp was opened 
on June 14, 1940, one has to speak of almost three years.

Hence: the cremation of 
107,000 cadavers before February 1943 must mean that all of the rest were cremated 
at a later date.

Taking into account that between February 1943 and October 1944 (the 
official end of the exterminations) there are 17 months and that, as the Kasztner 
Report tells us, for 8 or 9 months (the autumn of 1943 to May 1944) the gas chambers 
at Auschwitz were out of order and not working, it remains to be established how 
many persons more than 107,000 could have been "incinerated," from February 1943 
to October 1944, when the camp was equipped with four crematory ovens of 15 
burners each.

I would be very astonished if a cremation expert, given these facts, 
should reply that it was possible to cremate the million bodies that are claimed by Mr.

Raul Hilberg, or even the 900,000 of the Institute of Jewish Affairs.

And, here we 
must also remember that Eichmann gave May 15, 1944, as the date when Himmler 
ordered that cremation be stopped and that, therefore, the period during which the 
killings and the cremations took place -- if they took place -- could not have been 
longer than 5 or 6 months (March-Fall 1943).

But, there it is a question of how much credence can be given to Höss' different 
versions, and after what we have seen I should imagine that his credibility is very 
limited.

What follows is, unhappily for Mr.

Hilberg, not much more convincing.

Witness what 
Höss says about the development or the final solution in the direction of 
extermination.

We have seen that when he visited the camp in March 1941, Himmler told Höss about 
his intention to transform the camp into "a great armament plant, which would keep 
100,000 war Prisoners occupied." Therefore, at that date, Auschwitz was not destined 
for the extermination of Jews, and so Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Witness what 
Höss says about the development or the final solution in the direction of 
extermination. We have seen that when he visited the camp in March 1941, Himmler told Höss about 
his intention to transform the camp into "a great armament plant, which would keep 
100,000 war Prisoners occupied." Therefore, at that date, Auschwitz was not destined 
for the extermination of Jews, and so Mr. Raul Hilberg's contention -- based upon a 
speech of Hitler's on January 30, 1939, that after such extermination was decided

--- PAGE BREAK ---177
upon, it was carried out according to a mathematically progressive plan that already 
had been worked out -- is destroyed.

On the contrary, there seems to have been no planned extermination.

In fact, it seems 
that gas was used for the first time to kill prisoners without any order whatsoever, 
with gassing apparatus that was makeshift, and without anyone in a responsible 
position in the camp, from top to bottom, expecting it: 
During one of my business trips (1942) my substitute, Schutzhaftlager Fritsch, 
made use of gasses with a group of political officers of the Red Army.

For this 
he used cyanide (Zyklon B) which he had at hand, because it was used all the 
time as an insecticide.

He informed me as soon as I returned.

(Page 172)  
Thus, from the fortuitous initiative of a subaltern is supposed to have arisen the 
method which was supposed to have been used on a massive scale against the Jews.

Many times, in his work.

Rudolf Höss says (or he is made to say) that verbal orders 
from the highest government offices, particularly that of Himmler, told him to 
exterminate the Jews with gas, but, he then adds, "We never got a clear-cut decision 
on this matter from Himmler" (p.

233).

Moreover, when Höss was all for gassing on a 
large scale, he states that, "I often brought this up in reports, but I could do nothing 
against pressure from Himmler who always wanted more prisoners for armaments 
factories" (p.

189).

So now, Himmler was against the gassings?

In any case, it is not 
clear how Himmler could have had more and more prisoners for munitions work if he 
was exterminating more and more with gas.

In addition, we must note that when Himmler verbally asked Höss to construct gas 
chambers at Auschwitz (in the summer of 1941), Höss "submitted a detailed plan of 
the proposed installations." About these plans, he stated, "I never had an answer or a 
decision on this matter" (p.

227).

Nevertheless, gas chambers were constructed, 
because, says Höss, "...--- PAGE BREAK ---

227). Nevertheless, gas chambers were constructed, 
because, says Höss, "... later Eichmann casually told me [-- verbally, therefore; 
everything is verbal in this business! --] that the Reichsführer approved" (p. 227). Himmler, then, could never have given the order to construct the gas chambers -- the 
admission is tremendous! It seems that Himmler wanted at one and the same time to 
destroy as many and as few as possible of the same people. Höss adds that: 
The Jewish prisoners under his [Himmler's] jurisdiction were to be treated 
with every consideration .... They could not do without the great supply of 
manpower, especially in the armament industries. (Page 191)  
It does not clarify matters to look into the method used for extermination. We have 
seen above that the gas used was an insecticide, Zyklon B, which was used, Höss tells 
us, for all asphyxiations after the gassing of the political officers of the Red Army. It 
is strange, to say the least, that to carry out such an order, even given verbally, that 
some gas other than an insecticide was not provided (3). Be that as it may, this is what Zyklon B is: "Zyklon B exists in the form of blue 
pellets, delivered in boxes, out of which gas is formed under jets of water vapor." (p. 228.) But, as we shall see further on, Dr. Miklos Nyiszli claimed that the gas was 
formed on contact with air. It was so dangerous to handle that after it had been used in

--- PAGE BREAK ---r." (p. 228.) But, as we shall see further on, Dr. Miklos Nyiszli claimed that the gas was 
formed on contact with air. It was so dangerous to handle that after it had been used in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

178
a room, the room "had to be aired for two days" before it was safe to go in that room 
again (p. 229), but the gassing of the Jews "lasted on an average of half an hour" (P. 
173), after which "the doors were opened and the Sonderkommando immediately 
began the work of clearing out the cadavers" (p. 230, emphasis added). In fact, 
sometimes they dragged "... the corpses out while eating and smoking" (p. 180) and 
without incurring the least harm. Equally incredible is the account of the first 
extermination which took place in a morgue. In order to get the gas in there, "while 
they were unloading [the future victims from] the trucks, several holes were rapidly 
made in the stone and concrete walls of the morgue" (P. 172). We are not told how the 
necessary water vapor was let in, nor how the holes were stopped up after the blue 
pellets were put in; no doubt, that was done rapidly too, with old rags. 
I would like to add that in addition to the contradictions that can be uncovered from 
one page to another in Le Commandant d'Auschwitz parle and in addition to those 
which appear when it is compared with what its author said at Nuremberg, the 
testimony on Auschwitz-Birkenau is written in a style that is strangely similar to the 
public confessions of the defendants in the famous Moscow trials, which no one in 
Western Europe took seriously. Perhaps, this strange style is further corroboration of 
my contention that Höss' memoir is a fraud. Arthur Koestler told the whole story in 
his Le Zéro et l'Infini -- I must not fail to refer to that!

III. The Witness Miklos Nyiszliher corroboration of 
my contention that Höss' memoir is a fraud. Arthur Koestler told the whole story in 
his Le Zéro et l'Infini -- I must not fail to refer to that!

III. The Witness Miklos Nyiszli

Doctor at Auschwitz 
In March 1951, in Les Temps Modernes, a monthly review run by Jean-Paul Sartre, a 
certain Tibere Kremer presented, with the title S.S. Obersturmführer Docteur 
Mengele, and subtitle, Journal d'un médecin déporté au crématorium d'Auschwitz, a 
piece of false evidence concerning that camp which will remain one of the most 
abominable pieces of trickery of all time. The author was, he said, a Hungarian Jew 
named Miklos Nyiszli, a medical doctor by profession, as is indicated in the sub-title. 
The article contained 27 pages of selected extracts from the doctor's memoir (pp. 
1655-1672). The April issue of the review devoted 31 more pages (pp. 1655-1886). 
This false evidence had just been presented to American public opinion by Mr. 
Richard Seaver, with a preface by Professor Bruno Bettelheim. It was only in 1961 
that it was published as a whole, in German, by the Munich illustrated weekly Quick 
in five issues (January to February) under the title Auschwitz, and, in French, by 
Julliard Publishers in a volume of 256 pages with the title Médecin à Auschwitz, and 
the sub-title Souvenirs d'un médecin déporté. 
It made a sensation in France in 1951. The trial over Le Mensonge d'Ulysse was in 
full swing, and in the eyes of the public I had the blackest of souls. In 1961 it made a 
sensation again, but the world over this time -- the Eichmann trial was in full swing. 
The things he had to say, this Doctor Miklos Nyiszli! And, in addition, he gave the 
first detailed account of all the horrors that took place at Auschwitz, including the 
exterminations in the gas chambers in particular. Among other things, he claimed that 
in this camp was a gas chamber, 200 meters long (width was not given), together with

--- PAGE BREAK ---179
three others of similar dimensions.

They were used to asphyxiate 20,000 persons a 
day, and four crematory ovens, each with 1 5 burners, incinerated the victims as the 
operation proceeded.

He added, in another connection, that 5,000 other persons were, 
every day, done away with by less modern means in two immense open air hearths.

And, he added again that for eight months he had been personally present at these 
systematic massacres.

Finally (this is on page 50 Of the Julliard edition), he stated 
specifically that when lie arrived at the camp (about the end of May 1944 at the 
earliest) the exterminations by gas, at the rate cited above had been "going on for four 
years." 
From the aforementioned testimony, the following contradictions can be gleaned.

First, this fellow did not know that if there were gas chambers at Auschwitz they had 
not been installed or made ready to work until February 20, 1943 (Document No.

4463, already cited).

Second: He did not know that the area of the gas chambers, officially and 
respectively, was 210 square meters for the first (the very one he mentioned), 400 
square meters for the second, and 580 square meters for the last two.

In other words, 
the gas chambers which he saw, and whose operation he describes so minutely, must 
have been only 1.05 meters wide.

In fact, it must have resembled a long hall.

Since he 
states precisely that down the middle of the chamber there was a row of columns With 
holes from which the gas came out (these columns came up through the roof, and into 
these openings hospital attendants wearing Red Cross arm bands threw the tablets of 
Zyklon B), that there were along the walls on both sides benches for sitting (surely not 
very wide, those benches!) and that 3,000 persons (they were gassing batches of 
3,000!) could move about easily in the room, I claim that one of two things is true: 
either this Dr.In fact, it must have resembled a long hall.

Since he 
states precisely that down the middle of the chamber there was a row of columns With 
holes from which the gas came out (these columns came up through the roof, and into 
these openings hospital attendants wearing Red Cross arm bands threw the tablets of 
Zyklon B), that there were along the walls on both sides benches for sitting (surely not 
very wide, those benches!) and that 3,000 persons (they were gassing batches of 
3,000!) could move about easily in the room, I claim that one of two things is true: 
either this Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli never existed, or, if he did exist, he never set foot in the 
places that he describes.

Third: If the gas chambers at Auschwitz, together with the open hearths, exterminated 
25,000 people a day for four and a half years (since according to this "witness" they 
continued to exterminate for six months after his arrival) that makes a total of 1,642 
days.

And at the rate of 25,000 persons per day for 1,642 days, there would have been 
41 million cadavers, a little more than 32 million in gas chambers and a little less than 
9 million in the open hearths.

I shall add that even if it had been possible for the four gas chambers to asphyxiate 
20,000 persons a day (at the rate of 3,000 per batch, as the witness says), it was 
absolutely not possible to cremate that many at the same time, even if there were 15 
burners and even if the job took only 20 minutes, as Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli also falsely 
claims.

Taking these figures for a basis, the capacity of the ovens, all working 
together, could not have consumed more than 540 corpses per hour, or 12,960 for the 
24-hour day.

At this rate the ovens could not have been put out until several years 
after the liberation.

And only then on the condition that not a minute was lost for 
nearly ten years.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At this rate the ovens could not have been put out until several years 
after the liberation. And only then on the condition that not a minute was lost for 
nearly ten years. Now, from information from Père-Lachaise on how long it takes to 
incinerate three bodies where there is one burner, we see that the ovens at Auschwitz 
are still burning, and that they are not anywhere near ready to be put out! Since, I have made my point regarding the ovens, I shall pass over the two open air 
hearths (which were, our witness says, 50 meters long, 6 wide, and 3 deep and in

--- PAGE BREAK ---180
which were burned 9 million cadavers during their four and a half years of operation) 
without further comment.

Fourth: There is another impossibility, at least as far as extermination by gas is 
concerned, since, if there were gas chambers at Auschwitz, they were not officially 
operating except from February 20, 1943 to November 17, 1944, or for 17 or 18 
months.

The number of deaths by this means, based on Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli's facts, 
would then be about 11 million, and with the 9 million of the open hearts, about 20 
million, which -- by some unknown mathematical process -- are reduced to 6 million 
by Tibere Kremer in his presentation of this "testimony." 
Fifth: That is not all.

This Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli is as much in contradiction with himself 
as he is with all those who testified before or after him about Auschwitz.

The 
following is a comparison of his testimony with that of the others: it is he who says (p.

56) that the gas was produced from pellets of Zyklon B "on contact with air!" Höss 
told us that it was "in contact with water vapor." It is he who tells us (p.

56) that "in 
five minutes" everyone was dead, according to Höss the Zyklon B took "half an 
hour." Again, it is Dr.

Nyiszli who tells us (p.36) that the Hungarian Jews were 
transported to Auschwitz at the rate of "four or five trains a day," each of which 
contained forty cars, which, in turn, contained 80 persons (p.

15), or 3,200 persons 
altogether, but a few pages later, he says that they, each carried "about five thousand 
people...

" (p.

18).

This last statement must cause surprise, since we know that the deportation of 
Hungarian Jews lasted for 52 days (May 16 to July 7, 1944) according to the Kasztner 
Report, and that the Histoire de Joel Brand agrees on this point, Höss said at 
Nuremberg that the deportation took "a period of four to six weeks." (T.Xl, p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

18). This last statement must cause surprise, since we know that the deportation of 
Hungarian Jews lasted for 52 days (May 16 to July 7, 1944) according to the Kasztner 
Report, and that the Histoire de Joel Brand agrees on this point, Höss said at 
Nuremberg that the deportation took "a period of four to six weeks." (T.Xl, p. 412.) 
Let us make some calculations concerning the four possibilities: 
1st: 4 trains of 3,600 persons equal 14,000 persons per day, and for 52 days 
yield 748,000 persons  
2nd: 4 trains of 5,000 persons equal 20,000 persons per day, and for 52 days 
yield 1,040,000 persons  
3rd: 5 trains of 3,600 persons equal 18,000 persons per day, and for 52 days 
yield 936,000 persons  
4th: 5 trains of 5,000 persons equal 25,000 persons per day, and for 52 days 
yield 1,300,000 persons  
But, in statistics from Jewish sources, the highest figure given for Hungarian Jews is 
437,000 (4). I leave it up to the reader to figure out this odd item. I shall add that the 
Kasztner Report tells us that on March 19, 1944, Eichmann arrived in Budapest with a 
company of 150 men and that 1,000 rail cars were at his disposal to carry out the 
transportation of the Jews. If, as Dr. Miklos Nyiszli, says, the trip lasted four days -- 
which is plausible; it took that long to go from Compiègne to Buchenwald in the 
convoy I was in -- then after six days there were no more cars in the railway station at 
Budapest! Consequently, the work of deportation was halted until the 9th day when 
empty cars began returning. And, this estimation is made without taking into

--- PAGE BREAK ---181
consideration the number of railway carriages that were necessary to bring to the 
assembly points all of the Jews who had been rounded up all over Hungary.

The court 
of the Jerusalem Tribunal that condemned Eichmann to death moreover completely 
destroyed this testimony in stating (in Exhibit No.

12) that "in less than two months 
434,351 persons were deported in 147 sealed freight trains, with 3,000 persons in each 
train, men, women and children, two or three trains a day on the average," and so, as 
we shall see farther on, this new version is not any better.

The passages in the testimony of Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli where he contradicts himself are 
numberless: the crematory in action, his nose and throat assailed "by the smell of flesh 
burning and hair scorching," (p.

19); "the hair of the dead is clipped off" (p.

60), after 
removal from the gas chamber and before incineration; then, "coarse hands cut off the 
tresses of their well-kept hair" (p.

168), before they were sent to the bathing place and 
then to the gas chamber.

And, so it goes.

But, what is more significant than the contradictions in the texts themselves is what 
one finds by comparing the French version of this so-called testimony with the 
German version which appeared in the Munich illustrated weekly Quick in successive 
issues after January 15, 1961.

In the latter version, the crematories all together are not 
incinerating more than 10,000 persons a day instead of 20,000.

A pistol shot which 
hits the target at 40 to 50 meters in French, does so only at 20 to 30 meters in German.

An institute which was "the most celebrated in the Third Reich" in the one case 
becomes "the most celebrated in the world" in the second.A pistol shot which 
hits the target at 40 to 50 meters in French, does so only at 20 to 30 meters in German.

An institute which was "the most celebrated in the Third Reich" in the one case 
becomes "the most celebrated in the world" in the second.

"Pretty rugs" become 
"Persian carpets." Auschwitz camp which could hold "up to 500,000 persons" in the 
French version is no more than "gigantic" in the German version, all precision, having 
disappeared, without doubt, because between 1951 and 1961 the author -- long since 
dead, as we shall see -- discovered through an intermediary that at Nuremberg Höss 
had stated that "it held up to 140,000 persons." (T.

XI, p.

416.) A distance of three 
kilometers is reduced to 500 meters, or vise versa, etc.

One of two things can be concluded from the preceding discussion: either it is an 
authentic document, in which case it should be the same in 1951 as in 1961, in its 
French and in its German versions, or, if it is not the same, then it is apocryphal.

The 
fact that the two versions do not agree with each other in almost any respect and that 
neither one agrees with the descriptions, for example, that were derived from the 
documents produced at Nuremberg permits one to maintain, at least, that this Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli never set foot in Auschwitz.

That fact I suspected after having read the 
very first page of his testimony.

Did he not say of the convoy of which he was a part 
that after "leaving behind us the Tatra mountains, we went past the stations of Lublin 
and Krakow" (in order to get to Auschwitz from the Hungaro-Rumanian frontier).

This statement proves that in addition to not knowing the camp at Auschwitz he did 
not know the route to get to it either.

And, to think that a publishing house was found 
in Paris that would place such utter nonsense as this testimony before the public!

In April, 1951, when the extracts from his testimony were published by Les Temps 
Modernes, I wrote to him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, to think that a publishing house was found 
in Paris that would place such utter nonsense as this testimony before the public! In April, 1951, when the extracts from his testimony were published by Les Temps 
Modernes, I wrote to him. In October of the same year he answered, through the 
agency of Mr. Tibere Kremer, that actually "2,500,000 persons had been exterminated 
in the gas chambers at Auschwitz . . . " In February 1961, after having read the entire 
text in Quick, I decided to write to Mr. Tibere Kremer. The letter was returned to me 
with the notation "no longer at this address" stamped on it. I next wrote to Dr. Nyiszli

--- PAGE BREAK ---ire 
text in Quick, I decided to write to Mr. Tibere Kremer. The letter was returned to me 
with the notation "no longer at this address" stamped on it. I next wrote to Dr. Nyiszli

--- PAGE BREAK ---

182
in care of Quick, and I was told that my letter could not be forwarded to Dr. Nyiszli 
because he was dead. 
In November 1961, after having read the entire text in the French version, I wrote to 
Julliard Publishers, asking them kindly to forward the enclosed observations to Mr. 
Tibere Kremer, whose address they surely must have since they had just published his 
translation. I added: 
Historic documents are rightly respected and versions of them should not be 
published unless their authenticity is guaranteed. It happens that for ten years, 
in connection with my research, I have been seeking the original of this one, 
and no one has ever been able to tell me where it can be consulted. The best 
qualified historians in the world know nothing about it. The versions which 
have been published are divergent and contradict each other on every page. 
The author speaks of places which he has obviously not been to, etc. 
Therefore, if you could give me sufficient assurance to allow me to state 
"authentic document" in the case of Dr. Nyiszli, in the references in my work, 
I would be very much obliged.  
On the 8th of December, in the name of Julliard Publishers, of which he is one of the 
literary directors, Mr. Pierre Javet answered: 
Thank you very much for having sent me a typewritten copy of your letter of 
November 16th.  
I am forwarding it today to Mr. Tibere Kremer, translator of Dr. Miklos 
Nyiszli's "Médecin a Auschwitz," so that he may reply to you.  
Meanwhile, I may tell you that it is true that Doctor Nyiszli is dead, but his 
wife is still alive. Moreover, I have showed his book to several deportees who 
have confirmed its authenticity.  
I am still waiting for an answer from Mr. Tibere Kremer. However, it is quite 
probable that I shall never receive it. First, as we have said, on October 24, 1951, Mr. 
Tibere Kremer sent on to me a reply from Dr. Nyiszli to my letter of April, l 9 51. 
Then as a result of my continued research concerning this singular witness, I learned 
from New York, where the book was published in 1951, that Dr. Nyiszli had died 
long before his testimony was first published. If this fact is true, this dead witness -- 
another one -- was thoughtful enough to write to me after his death. And, so Mr. 
Tibere Kremer's silence is understandable. No further comment is necessary.f this fact is true, this dead witness -- 
another one -- was thoughtful enough to write to me after his death. And, so Mr. 
Tibere Kremer's silence is understandable. No further comment is necessary.

IV. The Witness Kurt Gerstein

June 6, 1961: The Jerusalem Tribunal in judgment on Eichmann is overwhelmed with 
testimonies on the subject of the extermination of Jews that was said to have taken

--- PAGE BREAK ---183
place at the camp at Belzec.

All of the journalists reporting the hearings say just about 
what this one from Le Figaro (Paris, June 7, 1961) says: 
The third extermination camp in question [at the hearing of June 6 during the 
Eichmann trial], that of Belzec located between Lublin and Lemberg, had only 
one survivor at the war's end, and he has since died.

The prosecutor bases his case on a series of depositions made before Allied 
officers by Kurt Gerstein, lieutenant in the Health Service of the Waffen S.S., 
who afterwards hanged himself in a military prison in Paris.

Gerstein had been 
ordered by Eichmann to look into quicker poisons.

And, here again in the limelight is Kurt Gerstein, as he was in January 1946 at the 
Nuremberg trial and as he was recently in Germany in the drama Der Stellvertreter 
(Hamburg, 1963) by a certain Rolf Hochhuth.

It is a story as gruesomely 
phantasmagorical as that of Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli.

In the very first days of May 1945 (the 5th, it seems) French troops on going into 
Rottweil (Wurttemberg) found and took prisoner in a hotel a certain Kurt Gerstein.

He 
was wearing the uniform of the S.S.

with the epaulettes of a Obersturmführer.

He was 
taken to Paris where he was interned in a military prison, according to some, in the 
Cherche-Midi, according to others, or in the prison at Fresnes, still others said, where 
he is said to have committed suicide.

In short, no one knows exactly where he was 
imprisoned.

As for when he died, a morning in July -- the 25th almost all the 
annotators say, in particular, Professor H.

Rothfels (Vierteljahrshefte für 
Zeitgeschichte, No.

2, April 1953, p.

185) -- is given, but nothing could be less 
certain.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2, April 1953, p. 185) -- is given, but nothing could be less 
certain. On March 10, 1949, the widow Gerstein is said to have announced that she 
received from the Ecumenical Commission for the Spiritual Aid of War Prisoners, 
headquartered at Geneva, only the following terse communication on the death of her 
husband: 
Unfortunately, in spite of repeated attempts, it has not been possible to learn 
more about the death of your husband, nor can the whereabouts of the grave 
be determined. At the present moment neither the arrest, nor the death of the man, seem to have been 
made public. At least, there has been no publication to my knowledge. In any case, it 
was only on January 30, 1946, that this fact became sensational news through the 
attention drawn to it by some first class blunderers. Without doubt, the first and best known of these blunderers was Mr. Dubost, the 
French prosecutor at the trial of the Major War Criminals at Nuremberg. In the 
archives of the American delegation he had found a number of invoices for Zyklon B 
that had been furnished to the Auschwitz and Oranienburg concentration camps by 
DEGESCH Gesellschaft, of Frankfurt/M; they were dated April 30, 1944, and were 
appended to an account in French, signed by Kurt Gerstein, Obersturmführer of the 
S.S., which pertained to the extermination of Jews in the gas chambers at Belzec, 
Chelmno, Sobibor, Majdanek and Treblinka; the account does not give the date of 
these exterminations. (T. VI, pp. 345-347.) Subsequently, Mr. Hans Rothfels tells us 
(Vierteljahrshefte f. Z., op. cit. p. 177) that this document was made use of by the

--- PAGE BREAK ---184
prosecution in the German language, in its principal passages, as evidence at the so-
called "trial of the doctors," which was conducted at Nuremberg on January 16, 1947.

And, then, the part about Zyklon B and the appended invoices were used at the trial of 
the DEGESCH Gesellschaft at Frankfurt in January 1949.

The date of this document, April 26, 1945, was made public for the first time at the 
"trial of the doctors." And, until the article of Mr.

Hans Rothfels, mentioned above, 
only the French version was used, which for various legal purposes was translated 
into German.

In Le Bréviaire de la Haine (Paris, 195 1, pp.

220 ff.), Mr.

Poliakov 
gives this French version, but without the date.

In 1959, Heydecker and Leeb in Le 
Procès de Nuremberg do the same.

In Der Gelbe Stern (Hamburg, 1961) Mr.

Schoenberner gives the date as May 4, 1945.

But in 1961, Exhibit No.

124 of the 
Jerusalem Tribunal which condemned Eichmann gives no date, and, furthermore, the 
French version therein is in no way similar to the version that was published by Mr.

Poliakov in 1951.

What is remarkable is the fact that it is thanks to Mr.

Poliakov that 
we know about this second version (Le Procès de Jerusalem, Paris, 1962, p.

224 ff.) 
and that he gives it, apparently without remembering that it was he who gave us the 
first.

We had to wait for the "trial of the doctors," in January 1947, for that of the 
DEGESCH Gesellschaft, in January 1949, and -- above all -- for the article, cited 
above, by Mr.

Rothfels, in order to learn how this document got into the archives of 
the American delegation, where Prosecutor Dubost had found it, together with not 
only the two invoices from DEGESCH Gesellschaft that are mentioned above, but 12 
of them, bearing dates between February 14 and May 31, 1944.We had to wait for the "trial of the doctors," in January 1947, for that of the 
DEGESCH Gesellschaft, in January 1949, and -- above all -- for the article, cited 
above, by Mr.

Rothfels, in order to learn how this document got into the archives of 
the American delegation, where Prosecutor Dubost had found it, together with not 
only the two invoices from DEGESCH Gesellschaft that are mentioned above, but 12 
of them, bearing dates between February 14 and May 31, 1944.

At the same time, we 
learned that the French version, composed of six typewritten pages ending with a 
handwritten statement attesting to the authenticity of the contents, followed by the 
signature of the author (Vierteljahrshefte f.

Z.., op.

cit.

p.

178), had two more attached 
pages, also handwritten and signed, but in English, bearing the same date, in which 
Gerstein said that not more than four or five people had been able to see what he had 
seen.

There was one more page in which he asked that his statement not be made 
public before finding out whether Pastor Niemöller had died at Dachau or had 
survived, plus 24 typewritten pages in German with a handwritten note, dated May 4, 
1945, but not signed (Vierteljahrshefte f Z., op.

cit.

p.

179).

It seems -- at least that is 
what Mr.

Rothfels tells us -- that this German version in 24 pages, and the French 
version, are "on the whole identical on all points." Since there are two different 
French versions, the one published by Mr.

Poliakov and the one that was Exhibit No.

124 at Jerusalem, nothing is lost in asking him which of the two he takes as his basis 
for comparison.

Now, let us return to these two French versions.

In January 1946 the Americans had 
not yet realized the importance of this document -- which existed in two versions, 
even three versions if one believes Mr.

Rothfels -- and they did not think it was worth 
being produced in evidence against the defendants at the Tribunal.

Fortunately, Mr.

Dubost was there.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fortunately, Mr. Dubost was there. On January 30, 1946, he brought it out of his brief case, and 
submitted it as reference P.S. 1553-RF. However, before we discuss what happened, 
we should first learn a little more about its author Kurt Gerstein. Who was Kurt Gerstein? To this question, no answer is to be found anywhere in the 
forty-two volume report of the proceedings of the Nuremberg Trial. For reasons

--- PAGE BREAK ---185
which the reader will not fail to understand, the Tribunal, in fact, did not want to hear 
anything about either Kurt Gerstein or his testament; out of the bundle of documents 
that were produced by Mr.

Dubost, it accepted only two invoices of April 30, 1944, 
each for 555 kilos of Zyklon B, one for Auschwitz and the other for Oranienburg.

The next day, January 31, 1946, in such a form that no one could doubt its 
authenticity and its admission into evidence by the Tribunal, newspapers all over the 
world reproduced this document which was not allowed to be read at the hearing the 
day before.

It was this "press offensive" that started the exploitation of this document, 
which has continued for fifteen years by those eminent historians from the Ecole 
Normale Supérieure, de la Rue de la Liberation (sic), founded by Father Loriquet, 
such as Mr.

Poliakov (Le Bréviaire de la Haine -- what a nice title!) and a few others 
like the Germans H.

Krausnick (Documentation sur l'extermination par les gaz), J.J.

Heydecker and J.

Leeb (Les Procès de Nuremberg), and Gerhardt Schoenberner 
(L'Etoile Jaune), among others.

As much as one can gather from the writings of these brilliant historians, Kurt 
Gerstein was a chemical engineer.

In 1938 he was arrested by the Gestapo and was 
interned in the concentration camp at Welzheim.

How he managed to get out we do 
not know.

In any case, we find him again in 1941 in the political S.S.

and in 1942 in 
the Waffen S.S., with the rank of Obersturmführer in the "hygiene division" 
(Abteilung der Entwesung und der Entseuchung) of the Central Sanitation Service 
(Hauptamt des Sanitätsdienst).

In this capacity it was his business to receive the 
orders for Zyklon B, a chemical that was used as an insecticide by the Reichswehr, 
since 1924, and then by the Wehrmacht, which was not fortunate enough to know 
about DDT.and in 1942 in 
the Waffen S.S., with the rank of Obersturmführer in the "hygiene division" 
(Abteilung der Entwesung und der Entseuchung) of the Central Sanitation Service 
(Hauptamt des Sanitätsdienst).

In this capacity it was his business to receive the 
orders for Zyklon B, a chemical that was used as an insecticide by the Reichswehr, 
since 1924, and then by the Wehrmacht, which was not fortunate enough to know 
about DDT.

These purchase orders he passed on along with a request for delivery, to 
the chemical works of DEGESCH Gesellschaft of Frankfurt/M.

or to its subsidiary, 
Testa of Hamburg.

And, naturally, when he received the disinfectant he got invoices.

The facts that he tells about -- or to be more correct -- which are found in the account 
that is attributed to him -- belong in 1942.

So, on the 8th of June he met in his office 
with S.S.

Sturmführer Gunther who said he urgently needed 100 kilos of Zyklon B to 
be delivered to a place which was known only to the driver of the truck.

A few weeks later, the driver of the truck in question presented himself; he was 
accompanied by Gunther.

They loaded the 100 kilos of Zyklon B in the truck, 
Gerstein got in, and they drove off for Prague and then for Lublin where they arrived 
on the 17th of August.

On the same day, they met Gruppenführer Globocnik, who is 
charged with the extermination of Jews in Warthegau and who has not found any 
better way to carry out his task than by using the exhaust gas from Diesel motors, 
which he has arranged to have piped into rooms especially fixed up for the purpose.

Naturally, the Gruppenführer, who has a sense of logic, starts by talking to Gerstein 
and detailing the scope of his entire operation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the same day, they met Gruppenführer Globocnik, who is 
charged with the extermination of Jews in Warthegau and who has not found any 
better way to carry out his task than by using the exhaust gas from Diesel motors, 
which he has arranged to have piped into rooms especially fixed up for the purpose. Naturally, the Gruppenführer, who has a sense of logic, starts by talking to Gerstein 
and detailing the scope of his entire operation. In his region there are three 
installations for exterminating Jews with diesel fumes: Belzec (on the route from 
Lublin to Lwow) with a capacity of 15,000 persons a day; Sobibor (he is not sure just 
where that is!), with a capacity of 20,000 per day; Treblinka (120 kilometers NNE of 
Warsaw), with no indication as to capacity according to Mr. Poliakov, but Heydecker 
and Leeb are more precise and give the figure of 20,000 per day. (This remarkable 
document does not speak the same language to one and the other!) A fourth

--- PAGE BREAK ---186
installation, Majdanek, is in preparation, but nothing is said by anyone about where it 
is or what its capacity was anticipated to be.

To be thorough about this, we must add 
that in L'Etoile Jaune (German ed.), by Mr.

Gerhardt Schoenberner, this part of the 
document not given; doubtless, it is an example of another sort of historical method.

In citing the four locations, nevertheless, Mr.

Gerhardt Schoenberner attributes to 
Gerstein's pen a total capacity of 9,000 persons per day for the four installations.

From Le Bréviaire de la Haine of Mr.

Poliakov and the Documentation sur 
l'extermination par les gaz by Mr.

Krausnick, we deduce in addition that the Fuehrer 
was at Lublin two days before (apparently, they do not shrink at anything in these 
factories where historical forgeries are fabricated!) with Himmler, and that they gave 
the order to "speed everything up." But this part of the document is not reproduced in 
either L'Etoile Jaune by Schoenberner, or the Procès de Nuremberg by Heydecker 
and Leeb.

Finally, Globocnik -- but only according to these two authors -- informs Kurt Gerstein 
of his mission to improve the gas chambers, particularly with the use of a more 
poisonous gas and less complicated mechanisms.

Then, the men part company, after 
deciding to go to Belzec the next day.

And, after having repeated all that he was told, Gerstein recounts what he saw.

Upon 
arriving at Belzec on August 18th, Mr.

Kurt Gerstein began by visiting the camp 
under the guidance of a person that Globocnik put at his disposal.

Mr.

Poliakov was 
not able to read the name of this person.

But after working at it, he thought he could 
make out "Wirth." More fortunate than he, Mr.

Schoenberner was able to read clearly 
"S.S.-Hauptsturmführer Obermeyer von Pirmasens." Unfortunately, when the latter 
speaks of S.S.

Wirth, who is quite another person than the one mentioned by Mr.

Poliakov, he gives him the rank of "Hauptmann," a grade that never existed in the 
S.S!--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wirth, who is quite another person than the one mentioned by Mr. Poliakov, he gives him the rank of "Hauptmann," a grade that never existed in the 
S.S! In any case, during this visit Gerstein saw gas chambers in action using Diesel 
exhaust, and he measured the places: 5x5 or 25 square meters in area; 1.90 meters in 
height or 45 cubic meters, he calculated. We will say nothing about his 2.5 cubic 
meter error. Messrs. Krausnick, Heydecker, Leeb, and Schoenberner did not say 
anything about it either. More concerned about what was probable, Mr. Poliakov 
corrected the document (as we have had the honor to tell you!). He calculated that the 
chambers were 93 square meters in area (Bréviaire de la Haine, p. 223, 2nd ed.), 
without any further details, and that figure was more prudent. But, in the Procès de 
Jerusalem (Paris, 1962) when the Tribunal admits into evidence the 25 square meter 
version, Mr. Poliakov is not at all put out, and agrees with that figure, too. How right 
he was to correct the document! Later on, Kurt Gerstein recounts, as factual, that the 
next day, August 19th, he saw the gas chambers -- four according to some; ten, protest 
the others -- in action. At the crack of dawn, a trainload of Jews arrived from Lemberg at the Belzec station, 
on the very edge of the camp, composed of 6,700 -- Mr. Poliakov gives 6,000 -- men, 
women and children, who were crammed into 45 cars (therefore, between 148-150 
people per car, and, for those who know the size of Polish freight cars, quite a figure). It is certain that with its 6,000 to 6,700 people, this train of 45 cars was the most 
nightmarish of all deportee trains. Please recall that Dr. Miklos Nyiszli did not dare to

--- PAGE BREAK ---187
give more than "about 5,000 persons per train." This Kurt Gerstein certainly has no 
eye for estimating or measuring, and for an engineer that is not very good.

Two hundred Ukrainians, with whips in hand, hurl themselves at the train doors, tear 
them open (i.e., actually rip them off of the cars!) and make everyone get out, under 
the surveillance of other Ukrainians, with loaded guns in hand.

"Captain of the S.S.

" 
Wirth directs the operation, assisted by a few of his fellow S.S.: the prisoners are 
forced to undress completely, to turn in their valuables, to have their hair cut off; then, 
they are taken to the gas chambers.

"The rooms are filling.

Everyone squeeze closer, ordered Captain Wirth.

Many people 
were standing on the tips of their toes, 700 to 800 in an area 25 meters square, and 45 
cubic meters.

The S.S.

pack the room as full as they can.

The doors are closed." 
relates Mr.

Schoenberner in L'Etoile Jaune, and, except in style, the others say the 
same thing, except for Poliakov, who sticks to his 93 square meter area.

The point on which everyone agrees, on the other hand, is the duration of the 
operation, measured by Gerstein, chronometer in hand.

First the 700 to 800 persons 
who are jammed into the gas chambers had to wait two hours and forty-nine minutes 
before the diesel motor would run; then, it took thirty-two minutes for everyone to 
die.

These times come from Gerstein who clocked them with his chronometer in hand, 
I repeat.

It was this fantastically gruesome account that Mr.

Dubost -- not just anyone, but a 
prosecutor, and, doubtless, a well known one too, since he was chosen from among 
his peers to represent France at Nuremberg -- wanted to have accepted by the 
International Tribunal on January 30, 1946.

The Tribunal did not go along.Dubost -- not just anyone, but a 
prosecutor, and, doubtless, a well known one too, since he was chosen from among 
his peers to represent France at Nuremberg -- wanted to have accepted by the 
International Tribunal on January 30, 1946.

The Tribunal did not go along.

But, one 
must say that for the Tribunal not to go along it had to be really a little thick, because 
in other circumstances it swallowed, apparently without the flick of an eyelash, lots of 
other tricky things of this kind.

This refusal of the Tribunal to consider the evidence 
did not keep the world press from issuing, the next day, January 31, 1946, ad 
nauseam and to cry yourself to sleep, the Kurt Gerstein story as an unquestionably 
authentic document.

And, even today -- fifteen years later -- men who lay claim to the 
title of historian still dare to present it as unquestionably authentic in their books.

Nor, 
by doing so, do they lose prestige or the favor of the world press.

This reality was 
demonstrated at the Eichmann Trial.

And, as we have mentioned above, the story has 
recently been staged in Germany by an actor of sorts, on a text written by Rolf 
Hochhuth, who obviously is seeking literary publicity by the presentation of a 
shocking subject matter.

In the Eichmann Trial, the Kurt Gerstein account was presented by the public 
prosecutor as being one of a "series of depositions given by Gerstein before various 
Allied officers." The judgment at Jerusalem did not refer to that series of depositions, 
and they were never made public.

It seems that we do not know all that there is to 
know about the Gerstein dossier.

Why?

I am afraid that the answer to that question 
lies in this one little fact: in the article by Hans Rothfels (op.

cit.) we find him writing 
that "so fehlt insbesondere die im franzoesischen Text eingefuegte verallgemeinernde 
und sehr uebertreibende Schaetzung der Gesamtzahl an Opfern" (p.

179), and in a 
note (p.

180) "G.--- PAGE BREAK ---

179), and in a 
note (p. 180) "G. schaetzt hier auf 25 millionen (Nicht nur Juden, sondern 
vorzugsweise Polen und Tschechen)." The preceding sentences translate as follows:

--- PAGE BREAK ---188
"Thus is lacking in particular the generalized and very exaggerated estimation of the 
total number of victims inserted in the French text.

G.

estimates here 25 million (not 
only Jews, but especially Poles and Czechs)." It really was a little unbelievable.

What 
is astonishing is the fact that those who made use of this singular document did not 
discover that gas chambers 25 meters square with a capacity of 700 to 800 persons 
was an even more shocking exaggeration.

This oversight reveals quite a lot about their 
intellectual faculties as distinguished "Professors." Only those statements of Kurt 
Gerstein that were considered "objective" (sachlich, Mr.

Rothfels says, p.

179) and, 
therefore, true, were made public and used at the tribunals.

Another case of testimony 
that has been tampered with.

In the case of the Hochhuth play, we have only to point out the sources which he leans 
on for the authenticity of all the assertions in the Gerstein document as it was made 
known to the public, especially the assertion that "700 to 800 persons [were] 
asphyxiated" in gas chambers whose "floor area [was] 25 square meters." Among 
these sources there figures, naturally, Pastor Martin Niemöller (and, we have seen 
what his testimony concerning Dachau was worth), a certain Professor Golo Mann 
(who attests to gas chamber exterminations at Mauthausen from 1942 on), and various 
other persons of about the same including even Bishop Otto Dibelius, who I held in 
esteem until then as having much greater discernment; various newspaper articles by 
unqualified people and numerous rumors round out Hochhuth's source material.

All this passes understanding.In the case of the Hochhuth play, we have only to point out the sources which he leans 
on for the authenticity of all the assertions in the Gerstein document as it was made 
known to the public, especially the assertion that "700 to 800 persons [were] 
asphyxiated" in gas chambers whose "floor area [was] 25 square meters." Among 
these sources there figures, naturally, Pastor Martin Niemöller (and, we have seen 
what his testimony concerning Dachau was worth), a certain Professor Golo Mann 
(who attests to gas chamber exterminations at Mauthausen from 1942 on), and various 
other persons of about the same including even Bishop Otto Dibelius, who I held in 
esteem until then as having much greater discernment; various newspaper articles by 
unqualified people and numerous rumors round out Hochhuth's source material.

All this passes understanding.

It is true that one should be astonished at nothing: at 
that Eichmann trial the judges accepted as truth, for days on end, the statements of 
people who saw -- with their own eyes -- the gas chambers at Bergen-Belsen working, 
which even the Institut fur Zeitgeschichte at Munich, that model of world 
resistantialism, admitted as having never existed.

Without doubt as a worthy counterpart to the Stellvertreter of the aforesaid Rolf 
Hochhuth there has just been brought out in France the Tragédie de la déportation in 
which, endorsed by Mrs.

Olga Wormser and Mr.

Henri Michel, even people like 
Mademoiselle Genevieve de Gaulle and the gentle Germaine Tillion come forward to 
reaffirm the existence of gas chambers and the systematic extermination by that 
means in one or the other of those camps where the Institut fur Zeitgeschichte says 
that they did not exist.

Every day, with pen quivering with indignation, the press wonders at the resurgence 
of Nazism, racism, and anti-Semitism -- among which, however, they draw no 
distinctions.

What makes me wonder is why the text tamperings of Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Every day, with pen quivering with indignation, the press wonders at the resurgence 
of Nazism, racism, and anti-Semitism -- among which, however, they draw no 
distinctions. What makes me wonder is why the text tamperings of Mr. Poliakov and 
the others have so far not injected even more poison into the racism and the anti-
Semitism which are aimed against the Jews. Nothing has been overlooked that would 
lead to that effect . We know that Kurt Gerstein was an engineer, and, as such, he probably had a logical 
mind and probably was trained to make careful and accurate observations. Consequently, if it is true that he made the statement of which we have just read the 
resume (4), this man was obviously not, or was no longer, in possession of all his 
faculties when he did so. It is of interest to find out why. On this point, the clues we 
have about the circumstances of his death are to me very revealing. If we are to 
believe Hans Rothfels (op. cit. p. 185, note 25), the widow Gerstein was informed that

--- PAGE BREAK ---189
he had hanged himself, with the following notice: "...Death was due to hanging.

This 
manner of killing oneself can absolutely not be prevented in a prison." That may by 
true.

but it is no reason for not telling her when the event took place or what was done 
with the body; and, the fact that the authorities professed ignorance on both scores 
seems to me to explain a lot of things.

Suppose, for instance, that the two military inquisitors -- a Major D.C.

Evans and a 
J.W.

Haught -- who were said to have started the interrogation of Kurt Gerstein, found 
themselves in the presence of a man who, at the time they confronted him, had not yet 
written anything, or, between the date of his arrest and his first interrogation, had 
written only what he had actually seen, which would have been horrible enough, 
knowing the savage character of the war in the East on both sides.

To read the 
memoirs of all those who were arrested in Germany at this time, and under these 
conditions, that is generally what happened to them.

They were invited by those who 
had arrested them to write their confessions; so, this is not an entirely gratuitous 
supposition.

Whether Kurt Gerstein wrote his confession in French or in German is 
not important.

It is possible that he wrote them in both languages -- at least, so they 
say.

Let us suppose again, and this is not entirely gratuitous, either, given the ways of 
the military and the police, that after the French version was written they attempted to 
force him to say what is in the document which bears his name, but which represented 
their view at the moment of the events in question; on the Allies' side, concentration 
Camps, gas chambers and "genocide" were in general the central theme of the anti-
German propaganda, and being familiar with the intellectual level of the military and 
the police in all countries of the world, it would not be astonishing if that view 
represented their profession of faith.It is possible that he wrote them in both languages -- at least, so they 
say.

Let us suppose again, and this is not entirely gratuitous, either, given the ways of 
the military and the police, that after the French version was written they attempted to 
force him to say what is in the document which bears his name, but which represented 
their view at the moment of the events in question; on the Allies' side, concentration 
Camps, gas chambers and "genocide" were in general the central theme of the anti-
German propaganda, and being familiar with the intellectual level of the military and 
the police in all countries of the world, it would not be astonishing if that view 
represented their profession of faith.

They might, themselves, have gone on to the 
editing of the French text, which was then presented to Kurt Gerstein for his 
signature; at the same time they could have asked him to write a few lines at the end 
of the last page to make its authenticity positive.

One can imagine the scene -- Kurt 
Gerstein -- an engineer, and a man who was a precise thinker refusing to countersign 
and to authenticate all of those technical impossibilities which do not stand 
examination, and the two inquisitors giving him the beating that was usual in such 
cases.

They were pretty brutal with him, no doubt, since Kurt Gerstein was usually 
described as a man who could not be pushed without resisting into saying what he did 
not want to say.

Later, we can imagine the same scene for the German text, which 
lasts much longer but takes place in the same manner.

The German text was written 
on a typewriter with a handwritten endorsement, but was not signed.

Another detail 
must be noted: the handwritten endorsement is shorter, and the formula of 
certification under oath which occurs in the French text is missing.

So, my conclusion 
is that Kurt Gerstein was beaten unconscious, and then he died before getting to the 
oath and the signature ....

Everything now becomes very clear.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So, my conclusion 
is that Kurt Gerstein was beaten unconscious, and then he died before getting to the 
oath and the signature .... Everything now becomes very clear. Since he died during the interrogation at 
Rottweil (in Germany) as a result of the torture inflicted on him to obtain his 
confession, Kurt Gerstein could never have been transferred to Paris to be put at the 
disposal of the Sécurité Militaire. This imaginary transfer would not have been 
thought up in the first place, unless a simple examination would have shown to the 
naked eye the real causes of his death. By spiriting away his corpse, an autopsy was 
avoided and, thus, the inevitable subsequent scandal was also avoided. This 
hypothesis would explain, furthermore, how the Americans came to let the document 
that bears his signature lie undisturbed in the archives of their delegation at

--- PAGE BREAK ---190
Nuremberg where Prosecutor Dubost found it.

It is easy to understand, under such 
circumstances, why they had no desire to bring this body up to the surface by 
producing his so-called confession before the Nuremberg court.

By rejecting it as not 
probative and by preventing Mr.

Dubost from even reading it, the President of the 
hearing of January 30, 1946, knew very well what he was doing.

But, Mr.

Dubost, 
who had come so close to making a blunder, had given it out to the press.

From then 
on, it could not be retracted, and its authenticity had to be sustained in order not to 
lose face before public opinion, which was thus already alerted.

There are only three other possible hypotheses: 
First, at Rottweil, interrogated as Kurt Gerstein must have been to get a confession 
from him so manifestly out of line with the technical truths, he could have thought 
that the Americans would have him confirm the confession at the bar of some 
tribunal, at which time he could retract it and tell how it had been forced from him; 
however, foreseeing how he would be handled most likely by the ones thus exposed, 
in a moment of depression, he wanted to end his life quicker, suffer less, and, thus, 
committed suicide.From then 
on, it could not be retracted, and its authenticity had to be sustained in order not to 
lose face before public opinion, which was thus already alerted.

There are only three other possible hypotheses: 
First, at Rottweil, interrogated as Kurt Gerstein must have been to get a confession 
from him so manifestly out of line with the technical truths, he could have thought 
that the Americans would have him confirm the confession at the bar of some 
tribunal, at which time he could retract it and tell how it had been forced from him; 
however, foreseeing how he would be handled most likely by the ones thus exposed, 
in a moment of depression, he wanted to end his life quicker, suffer less, and, thus, 
committed suicide.

Then, the body had to disappear so as not to reveal the marks it 
carried; 
Second, he was actually transferred to Paris, where, to make him confess more, he 
was tortured again as he had been at Rottweil, and, for the same reason, he committed 
suicide; and, again, for the same reason the body had to disappear; 
Third, either at Rottweil or at Paris, thinking that they could not get any more out of 
him than what he had said, or to avoid having him retract it in court, those who 
interrogated him murdered him in cold blood so that his supposed testimony could be 
presented by the prosecution without any risk of being contradicted by its author; in 
this latter case, it was still necessary to get rid of the body in view of the state that it 
was in, a condition which would have controverted the contention of suicide.

I maintain that the most plausible of these four hypotheses is the first.

And, I maintain 
this opinion for the following reason: In July 1945, all of the French administrative 
services were in operation again, if not yet perfectly at least normally, and in all of the 
military or civil prisons, the prison registers were kept up to date.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I maintain that the most plausible of these four hypotheses is the first. And, I maintain 
this opinion for the following reason: In July 1945, all of the French administrative 
services were in operation again, if not yet perfectly at least normally, and in all of the 
military or civil prisons, the prison registers were kept up to date. Therefore, one of 
two things must have happened: either the name of Kurt Gerstein occurs on the 
register of one of the prisons in the column " entered on... ;" the column "released 
on..." is blank, and the "observations" column records his death, the person or group 
to which his body was turned over, and the place where he was buried. Or else, which 
is the case, there is no notation for Kurt Gerstein, which means that he was never 
imprisoned in any military or civil prison in Paris. That fact would indicate that, if he 
left Rottweil for Paris, he never arrived. Was he assassinated en route? It is possible. In any case, the most precise of all those who have told us where he committed 
suicide is the always incredible Rothfels who writes: 
Gerstein was then [after his arrest] put on his honor for the time being by the 
French occupation forces, with permission to go back and forth between 
Tubingen [where his family lived] and Rottweil. Then he was brought to a 
prison in Paris [at what date he does not tell us]. There on July 25, 1945, in the 
"military prison of Paris" he committed suicide. (op. cit. p. 185)

--- PAGE BREAK ---191
Aside from the freedom of movement that was allowed this prisoner while he was still 
at Rottweil, and which in itself should not cause the slightest surprise, the most 
curious thing in this statement is that he killed himself in "the military prison of 
Paris." In Paris there is not one, but several military prisons, each one being 
administratively designated by its own name, the most famous of which is the "Prison 
militaire du Cherche Midi." In 1945, given the extraordinary number of people, both 
military and civil, who were incarcerated, there were "military divisions," in addition, 
at la Santé, Fresnes, and other places.

The official paper which mentions the death of 
Gerstein could only have as its letterhead: "Military Subdivision of Paris -- Military 
Prison of Cherche-Midi," or of Fort Montrouge, or of Caserne Neuilly, etc., or 
"Penitentiary Administration -- Prison de la Santé, (or Fresnes) Military Division." 
Depending on the administration which issued the communication, it could also, of 
course, have had other headings.

For instance, the heading could have been "Sécurité 
militaire" or "Sureté Générale;" but in no case could it have been "military prison of 
Paris." And if, in spite of this, it has this heading and if an official statement with 
another stamp gave notice of the death of Gerstein only in these terms and in 
quotation marks, then it is just a forgery that was prepared for the occasion by 
someone who knew nothing about the French police services, or about the French 
safety, intelligence, military and civil administrations.

In short, it is a clumsy forgery -
- another one!For instance, the heading could have been "Sécurité 
militaire" or "Sureté Générale;" but in no case could it have been "military prison of 
Paris." And if, in spite of this, it has this heading and if an official statement with 
another stamp gave notice of the death of Gerstein only in these terms and in 
quotation marks, then it is just a forgery that was prepared for the occasion by 
someone who knew nothing about the French police services, or about the French 
safety, intelligence, military and civil administrations.

In short, it is a clumsy forgery -
- another one!

Finally, the preceding discussion which has led us to the discovery of a forgery until 
now unnoticed, explains why the statements that are imputed to Kurt Gerstein seem to 
be those of a man who was not in possession of all his faculties: at the moment when 
they were given to him for his signature he was already on the point of death because 
of the methods that had been used to extract them from him, and he only had time to 
sign the French version before dying.

The very form of the French version, as 
reproduced in Exhibit No.

124 at the Jerusalem trial, militates in favor of this 
contention.

To my French eyes, which claim to know the maternal language fairly 
well, it looks much more like French written by an American (or an Englishman) 
rather than French written by a German.

I would not be surprised if, when the day 
comes when this document can be examined, specialists discover that it was typed on 
an English or American machine, since, judging by its tenor, the intellectual level of 
those who wanted to make Kurt Gerstein endorse it seems to have been so low that 
they probably did not think it indispensable to type it out on a German or French 
machine.

As it is, it would not be very bold to ask oneself if the handwritten notes on 
the French version are really in Kurt Gerstein's writing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I would not be surprised if, when the day 
comes when this document can be examined, specialists discover that it was typed on 
an English or American machine, since, judging by its tenor, the intellectual level of 
those who wanted to make Kurt Gerstein endorse it seems to have been so low that 
they probably did not think it indispensable to type it out on a German or French 
machine. As it is, it would not be very bold to ask oneself if the handwritten notes on 
the French version are really in Kurt Gerstein's writing. The value that can be placed on the Gerstein document having been assessed, what 
now must be done is to consider the value that Mr. Raul Hilberg placed on the 
document. I shall say right now that for once Mr. Raul Hilberg is very prudent. He 
devotes only three pages to the subject (pp. 570-572), and those pages mention, in 
passing, that Gerstein was present at "a gassing which took an especially long time" 
and that "to Wirth's great embarrassment and mortification [he] timed the operation 
with a stop watch." However, nothing is said about the size of the gas chambers or 
about the figures concerning the extent of the exterminations by gas. The invoices for 
Zyklon B, which are appended to the document, are mentioned too. Here, I must point 
out that, basing himself on these invoices (12 of them according to Rothfels op. cit. p. 179; two, claimed by Prosecutor Dubost at the Trial of the Major War Criminals, with 
one for Oranienburg and the other for Auschwitz) and those invoices which were

--- PAGE BREAK ---192
produced in the court of the Tribunal which in 1949 judged the DEGESCH 
Gesellschaft, producer of Zyklon B, Mr.

Raul Hilberg calculates (P.

570) that the 
amounts of this product which were delivered in 1943 and 1944 by this company to 
the German Army, were 160 tons, and to the sanitation services of the SS were 125 
tons (12 for Auschwitz in 1943, none in 1944, but 7.5 tons in 1942).

In the aggregate 
these figures seem plausible to me; in any case, they seem Proportionate -- but in the 
aggregate only.

If from 1942 to the end of the war, the German Army ordered and had 
delivered 160 tons of Zyklon B, it is quite possible, judging by their needs in the face 
of the exigencies of the first Russian campaign during 1941, that the sanitary services 
of the SS would later have required 125 tons.

But, in detail I am much more cautious, 
and the shipments to Auschwitz particularly distress me.

In the 12 invoices that were 
appended to the Gerstein document, bearing dates between the 14th of February and 
the 31st of May 1944, there were indeed some that pertained to Auschwitz, as Messrs.

Dubost and Rothfels have told us.

However, of these dates none are given in Mr.

Raul 
Hilberg's calculation.

And, the absence of dates make the exactness of his calculations 
awkward to follow.

Since I am not a specialist in the use of Zyklon B for hygienic purposes, I am not in a 
position to give a definitive analysis of the significance of an all-inclusive delivery to 
Auschwitz of 19.5 tons of Zyklon B, allowing for the fact that a greater amount was 
delivered, since Mr.

Raul Hilberg forgot to include the deliveries of 1944 in his 
calculations.

However, even if I were such an expert, quite a number of factors that 
would be needed to shape an estimate would be lacking.

Therefore, this is all that I 
can say: 
1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, even if I were such an expert, quite a number of factors that 
would be needed to shape an estimate would be lacking. Therefore, this is all that I 
can say: 
1. Just the fact that the Zyklon B was delivered to a concentration camp does not 
permit one to conclude that it was used to asphyxiate the prisoners; otherwise, one 
must conclude that it was similarly used in other camps where it was delivered but 
where no extermination of that kind has been shown; 
2. Auschwitz was a Stammlager (central camp) which means that there were more 
Kommandos stationed around there than, I suspect but cannot however confirm, were 
located, at Chelmno, Belzec, Majdanek, Sobibor and Treblinka. This figure for total 
delivery is then not just for the Auschwitz camp, but all those Kommandos around the 
camp, a list of which, as far as I know, has never been made known; 
3. In order to estimate the consumption of Zyklon B correctly, we would have to 
know how many tons of this overall total were used and how many were not, how 
many persons went through the camp, and how many kilos of Zyklon B were required 
to disinfect their clothing on their arrival at the rate of 1,500 to 2,000 persons per 
convoy. Then, we would have to know how much Zyklon B was used for the 
minimum disinfection of underclothing necessary for the total population of the camp, 
and for the Kommandos, every fifteen days. Even if we find out someday about how 
many persons were involved and about how many tons of Zyklon B were required, we 
still shall not know how many tons were effectively used, because we shall never 
know, there having been no inventory, how many were not used. And, so we shall 
never be able to make a comparison which would allow us to say whether much more 
Zyklon B was used than was required for disinfection --in which case one might speak 
of exterminations using this material. And, this means that we have to keep searching 
until we find other methods of assessment;ed than was required for disinfection --in which case one might speak 
of exterminations using this material. And, this means that we have to keep searching 
until we find other methods of assessment;

--- PAGE BREAK ---193
4.

Was all of the Zyklon B that was delivered to Auschwitz used?

If so, then we 
would have proof that more was used than was reasonable, and we would have to 
concede the point, but that possibility is excluded.

All the camps were abundantly 
supplied with this product, and I shall give but one example of it: the train in which I 
was evacuated from Dora, which left the camp at the last minute, and which I left and 
then got on again under circumstances which I have described in an earlier chapter, 
included a car three-quarters full of iron bound boxes with labels all over them: some 
of the labels bore "Blausäure" (Prussic acid) on a red background while the others had 
"Vorsicht " (danger) on a white background.

Below the "Vorsicht" there were some 
lines which I did not read.

I had more things to worry about than stuff that was labeled 
dangerous.

I was looking for a bag and shoes which obviously were not to be found 
there, and I was not interested.

Moreover, I was far from being able to surmise what 
the Blausäure was to be used for.

It was much, much later, after I read Kogon, that I 
put two and two together.

But, I only wanted to say that there is no reason for not 
thinking that the other camps, and especially Auschwitz, were just as abundantly 
supplied as Dora and that the total amount of Zyklon B delivered to Auschwitz was 
no more used up than was that which had been delivered to Dora.

And here we are 
once again faced with the unanswerable question: how much of it was used?

If this question cannot be answered, one might as well say that no significance can be 
attributed to the deliveries of Zyklon B that were made to Auschwitz which are laid 
out so complacently -- and, alas, so incompletely -- by Mr.

Raul Hilberg, except that 
this product was, by definition, not a man-killer, but an insecticide and a disinfectant 
and was used as such since 1924 by all the German Military and civil health services 
(5).--- PAGE BREAK ---

If this question cannot be answered, one might as well say that no significance can be 
attributed to the deliveries of Zyklon B that were made to Auschwitz which are laid 
out so complacently -- and, alas, so incompletely -- by Mr. Raul Hilberg, except that 
this product was, by definition, not a man-killer, but an insecticide and a disinfectant 
and was used as such since 1924 by all the German Military and civil health services 
(5). The invoices produced, in any case, are not grounds for going beyond this 
statement itself without foundering in suppositions and conjectures, all of which are 
absolutely, indisputably, and shockingly gratuitous. What we have just seen on this 
point provides it only too well. Mr. Raul Hilberg was well inspired not to retain either the description of 
extermination by gas, as the Gerstein document says its author witnessed (Remember: 
700 to 800 persons in a room 25 meters square in area!), or the statistics concerning 
the Belzec, Treblinka and Sobibor camps. At least he avoided the misadventure of 
that poor Mr. Rothfels. Let us recall, too, the statistics as they occur in the German text (in the French text 
given by Mr. Poliakov in the Bréviaire de la Haine they are not the same, and, 
doubtless, for the same reasons that Mr. Raul Hilberg, and the Jerusalem court, did 
not use them) which were made public following the article by Mr. Rothfels (op. cit. pp. 187-194), and according to which the extermination capacity of the camps was the 
following: 
Belzec:.................15,000 persons a day; 
Treblinka:............25,000 persons a day; 
Sobibor:...............20,000 persons a day. About that, Mr. Rothfels wrote (op. cit. p. 181) that "600,000 having perished at 
Belzec, Gerstein's estimate of 15,000 per day is not plausible" (von 15, 000 pro Tag 
nichts unwahrscheinliches). This camp officially began exterminating in March 1942, 
and stopped in December of the same year (Poliakov, op. cit. p. 224), which makesplausible" (von 15, 000 pro Tag 
nichts unwahrscheinliches). This camp officially began exterminating in March 1942, 
and stopped in December of the same year (Poliakov, op. cit. p. 224), which makes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194
the duration of its operation some nine months or 270 days; 15,000 times 270 equals 
4,050,000 persons and not 600,000. 
Let us continue with this kind of reasoning: Treblinka and Sobibor were officially 
exterminating from March 1942 to "the autumn of 1943," about 18 months or 540 
days. At the daily rate which is given in the preceding paragraph, we get an 
extermination total for the first of 13,500,000 persons and for the second of 
10,800,000 persons. In all, for these three camps alone there must have been 
28,350,000 persons exterminated. And, if we are to believe Mr. Gerstein, they were 
all Jews! Incidentally, this total does not count those exterminated by the same 
process at Chelmno, which the Gerstein document does not cite, and at Majdanek, 
which it cites as being "in preparation" at the time of his visit in August 1942, so he 
could not estimate its capacity. 
And that is the sort of testimony that they have the audacity to present to us as being 
"reliable!" To complete the picture let us point out that, when they come to summing 
up and to giving the totals of Jewish losses in each of these camps, those who 
seriously offer this nonsense arrive at figures like the one Rothfels found for Belzec. 
Below is a table giving these losses as estimated by the Polish Commission on War 
Crimes (from Poliakov, op cit. p. 224), and Mr. Raul Hilberg (op. cit. p. 572): 
 Camps. 
 Estimate of Losses 
 Estimate of Lossesble giving these losses as estimated by the Polish Commission on War 
Crimes (from Poliakov, op cit. p. 224), and Mr. Raul Hilberg (op. cit. p. 572): 
 Camps. 
 Estimate of Losses 
 Estimate of Losses

Polish Commission 
 Raul Hilberg 
 Chelmno. 
 300,000... 
 "over a hundred 
thousand" 
 Belzec 
 600,000 
 "hundreds of 
thousands" 
 Sobibor 
 250,000 
 "hundreds of 
thousands" 
 Treblinka 
 700,000 
 "hundreds of 
thousands" 
 Majdanek 
 200,000 
 "tens of thousands" 
 TOTAL 
2,050,000 
 950,000 (6) 
One wonders just how the Warsaw Commission and Mr. Raul Hilberg came to these 
conclusions; there is no evidence that they referred to the Gerstein document, and 
neither one cites any other documentary references worthy of the name. 
For Auschwitz, in the same table, Mr. Raul Hilberg gives one million dead, whereas 
to my knowledge no one else ever gave less than two million, (7) with most of the 
witnesses mentioning four. I do not think that I go too far in saying that if people who 
examine the same occurrence and who claim to be as qualified as the Polish 
Commission on War Crimes and as Mr. Raul Hilberg, Professor at the University of 
Vermont, can arrive at such disparate results as we have seen, it must be that their 
units of measure, or their bases of reference, are purely conjectural, do not rest on 
anything positive, and derive from different and extremely doubtful sources. The 
proof which supports my observation is furnished by the Polish Commission and Mr. 
Raul Hilberg themselves. I have before me at least one hundred of the references

--- PAGE BREAK ---195
which the Polish Commission turned to in order to arrive at figures for which it is 
responsible in the preceding table.

Among these references, one finds such things as: 
German Crimes in Poland (Warsaw, 1948), which is a pack of contradictions by 
people of whom it cannot even be said that they existed and who are given as 
"survivors;" or, "Testimony of Dr.

Rothbalsam (dead!), gathered by Mme.

Novitch;" 
or Belzec, (Cracow, 1946) which is a book of recollections on the camp, by someone 
named Reder, given as "sole survivor," about whom it was said at the Jerusalem trial 
(hearing of June 6, 1961) that he had been "dead since..." 
As for Mr.

Raul Hilberg, on almost every page of his book, one finds references, in 
footnotes, such as these: "Affidavit by Rudolf Schonberg, survivor" (p.

311, nt.

14), or 
"Borkomorowski, The Secret Army" (p.

315, nt.

32), or the testimony of an unnamed 
survivor taken by Cohen in "Human Behaviour in the Concentration Camp" (p.

625, 
nt.

22), or, again, another testimony, of another survivor, named this time but just as 
hypothetical, taken by a certain Friedman in his book, Osviecim (p.

622, nt.

8), 
etc...etc.

And, in addition to personal testimony, there abound extracts from papers 
and documents which were written during the war or since its end.

In the first case, 
they are papers published under German control.

Bits of statistics are found in them 
that are not always in agreement; often these documents are annotated or evaluated by 
journalists who are not specialists; these documents and papers may discuss the steps 
that were taken to plunder, to ghettoize, or to concentrate; they may outline the bad 
treatment of which the Jews were victims, but never do they say anything whatsoever 
that could justify an interpretation in the sense of murder or extermination by gas or 
otherwise.In the first case, 
they are papers published under German control.

Bits of statistics are found in them 
that are not always in agreement; often these documents are annotated or evaluated by 
journalists who are not specialists; these documents and papers may discuss the steps 
that were taken to plunder, to ghettoize, or to concentrate; they may outline the bad 
treatment of which the Jews were victims, but never do they say anything whatsoever 
that could justify an interpretation in the sense of murder or extermination by gas or 
otherwise.

The word "Judenfrei" often recurs, applied to a territory, a country or a 
region, but it means "freed of Jews," not their extermination as Mr.

Raul Hilberg 
insinuates.

In the second case, they are papers that were published after the war 
ended.

One finds that these documents and papers, annotated by non-witnesses, 
contain accounts which were given by witnesses, who, for the most part are not 
named.

If they are named, they generally are given as "dead since," thereby 
precluding the possibility of being cross-examined, in a controlled manner, by 
qualified persons.

How, indeed, could one possibly think that these witnesses are objective observers, 
people who, if they are still alive, will admit that since their release from the 
concentration camps, every move that they have made, and still make, in their lives is 
dictated by the hatred that they have forever sworn for the Germans?

Quite a number 
of witnesses of this kind appeared before the Jerusalem court to testify that they had 
seen gas chambers in camps where, as is acknowledged by everyone including Jewish 
sources, none existed.

The basic shortcoming of this kind of testimony -- if one wants to obtain the truth -- is 
found in the fact that it was given by people who were not witnesses, in the sense of 
relating honestly what they actually saw, but who were demanding reparations -- as 
well as retribution -- for what they have suffered.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Quite a number 
of witnesses of this kind appeared before the Jerusalem court to testify that they had 
seen gas chambers in camps where, as is acknowledged by everyone including Jewish 
sources, none existed. The basic shortcoming of this kind of testimony -- if one wants to obtain the truth -- is 
found in the fact that it was given by people who were not witnesses, in the sense of 
relating honestly what they actually saw, but who were demanding reparations -- as 
well as retribution -- for what they have suffered. Consequently, they had an interest 
in saying those things which were calculated by them to support their objective. In all 
of this extermination business there are mostly accusers, who back each other up, and 
forgeries, crudely fabricated, whose authenticity is verified only by false witnesses. And, like Mr. Rothfels when faced with the Gerstein document, Mr. Raul Hilberg, 
with a frightening lack of conscience and an unimaginable contempt for the most 
elementary rules of his profession, pretends not to have seen the existence of bias and

--- PAGE BREAK ---196
interest which undermines the credibility of his source material.

And, here we are 
again back to the fundamental problem of our times: the extraordinary intellectual and 
moral prostration of the elites.

This latter observation is not addressed to the Commission for War Crimes of 
Warsaw, or, for example, to Madame Hannah Arendt; these two, from all evidence, 
do not belong to the elites.

The first was created on the other side of the Iron Curtain, 
not to verify historical facts, but to produce evidence that can be used for certain kinds 
of propaganda.

To take part in the Warsaw Commission it is not at all necessary to be 
a historian, but just a communist.

As for the second, Mme.

Arendt is obviously a Zionist propagandist.

Much of the data 
which she uses in her report of the Eichmann Trial (The New Yorker, op.

cit.) derive 
from what she has read in the book by Mr.

Raul Hilberg, which she assimilated badly, 
which she dishes back to us even more clumsily than the manner in which it was 
given in the first place, and which she cites with the clearest and most positive 
avowals.

Mr.

Robert Kempner, that former Prussian Police commissioner who is a 
much higher ranking agent of Zionism, is, moreover, not at all pleased with the 
manner in which she carried out her task.

In Aufbau (Vol.

XXIX, No.

15, April 12, 
1963) he administered one of those blistering attacks which I recommend the reader 
to read.

Asinus asinam castiget, the Romans of today would say of this shabby 
controversy.15, April 12, 
1963) he administered one of those blistering attacks which I recommend the reader 
to read.

Asinus asinam castiget, the Romans of today would say of this shabby 
controversy.

To return to the Gerstein document and to finish with it, I now ask the following 
question: If it is not true that the gas chambers at Belzec, Treblinka, and Sobibor 
could asphyxiate between 15,000 and 25,000 persons a day; if it is not true that a gas 
chamber 25 meters square could hold 700 to 800 persons; if it is not true that a train 
with 45 cars could transport 6,700 persons; and if it is not true that Hitler was at 
Belzec on August 15, 1942, I ask what does it contain that is true, since it contains 
nothing else?

Are the Zyklon B invoices that are appended to the document genuine?

Perhaps, but they prove nothing.

Of all those who have endorsed the authenticity of this document, only one grieves 
me, Otto Dibelius, Bishop of Berlin, whose fine independent spirit and sureness of 
judgment I have drawn attention to, particularly with regard to the Nuremberg Trial.

According to Mr.

Rothfels, (op.

cit.

pp.

181-182) he wrote a letter to the Institut fur 
Zeitgeschichte at Munich, dated November 22, 1949, in which, after a series of 
praises addressed to Gerstein, we find the following sentence: "Through it I was in a 
position to establish that Gerstein's communication to me, insofar as his Swedish 
acquaintance came into the question, had been absolutely according to the truth.

So 
had also been his original report." Of Eugen Kogon, David Rousset, Golo Mann, Hans 
Rothfels, Hannah Arendt, Raul Hilberg, among others, I have made a special and 
individual study of each of them, and it does not seem that anything else could have 
been expected of them.

V.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So 
had also been his original report." Of Eugen Kogon, David Rousset, Golo Mann, Hans 
Rothfels, Hannah Arendt, Raul Hilberg, among others, I have made a special and 
individual study of each of them, and it does not seem that anything else could have 
been expected of them. V. Conclusion 
With regard to gas chambers, the almost endless procession of false witnesses and of 
falsified documents to which I have invited the reader's attention during this long 
study, proves, nevertheless, only one thing: never at any moment did the responsible

--- PAGE BREAK ---197
authorities of the Third Reich intend to order or in fact, order -- the extermination of 
the Jews in this or any other manner (8).

Did such exterminations take place without 
orders?

This question has haunted me for fifteen years, and it is the Gerstein 
document, the worst and most immoral forgery of all, that indirectly put me in a 
position finally to answer it in a positive way.

It was June 1963.

The first and the second part of my Le veritable procès Eichmann 
ou Les Vainqueurs incorrigibles had just come out in German with the title Zum Fall 
Eichmann and the subtitle Was ist Wahrheit?

...

oder die unbelehrbaren Sieger.

(**) 
For fifteen years, every time that I heard of a witness anywhere, no matter where in 
the portion of Europe that was not occupied by the Soviets, who claimed to have 
himself been present at gas exterminations, I immediately went to him to get his 
testimony.

And, each time the experience ended in the same way.

With 
documentation in hand, I would ask him so many precise and detailed questions that 
soon it became apparent that he could not answer except by lying.

Often his lies 
became so transparent, even to himself, that he ended his testimony by declaring that 
he had not seen it himself, but that one of his good friends, who had died in the camps 
and whose good faith he could not doubt, had told him about it.

I covered thousands 
and thousands of kilometers throughout Europe in this way.

One day in the month of June 1963, I had a strange visitor, a German, who was large 
and of good carriage, who looked about sixty (but during our conversation I learned 
that he was actually much older) who had a little something military in his bearing, 
who was very distinguished in appearance, and who was exquisitely polite.

In his 
hands was my first book on the subject, the German edition of Mensonge d'Ulysse, in 
which a book marker was sticking out.One day in the month of June 1963, I had a strange visitor, a German, who was large 
and of good carriage, who looked about sixty (but during our conversation I learned 
that he was actually much older) who had a little something military in his bearing, 
who was very distinguished in appearance, and who was exquisitely polite.

In his 
hands was my first book on the subject, the German edition of Mensonge d'Ulysse, in 
which a book marker was sticking out.

He introduced himself and told me about the purpose of his visit, which he wanted 
kept absolutely confidential.

I Promised to preserve that confidentiality, and that is 
why I have presented what was said in our conversation in such a way that he cannot 
be identified; the account of what he told me alone being authentic.

He did not want to have his name given because during the war he had been a high 
ranking civilian in an important government service.

He had not been a military man, 
but was a professional within the civil service.

He did not conceal from me, that, 
although he had not been an active National Socialist, he had, nevertheless, given his 
support to the Party in 1933.

When the war was over, he had narrowly escaped being 
a defendant at Nuremberg.

Although he had been "denazified" like everyone else, he 
had lost his former governmental position.

He had suffered a great many difficulties, 
and he had had enough.

He did not want to begin all that again.

The story that he had 
been carrying around inside him for twenty years burdened him, but he was to be 
excused for the cowardice which had made him keep it to himself until the present.

When the war ended, he had four children, all very young, and, at more than fifty, a 
whole new career to carve out.

I willingly and very sincerely conceded this.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When the war ended, he had four children, all very young, and, at more than fifty, a 
whole new career to carve out. I willingly and very sincerely conceded this. I understood the moral -- and often 
physical -- misery that millions and millions of Germans have lived through and still 
live with, and which reduced them to a silence that they only break when they vote 
periodically for Chancellor Adenauer, although his politics do not please them, but 
whom they consider the only German capable of protecting them a little against the

--- PAGE BREAK ---198
punitive measures of the German counterparts of Tomas de Torquemada, like 
Prosecutor-General Bauer.

These things said, and his conditions having been accepted by me, my interlocutor 
opened his copy of Le Mensonge d'Ulysse to the marked page, set it down in front of 
him, and without further preamble started right in.

"You say, and I believe you," he said in substance, "that not one of the witnesses who 
have claimed to have been present at exterminations by gas have, until now, been able 
to prove it to you.

I have just read your last writings on the matter, and I feel that you 
are on the point of concluding that there were none.

Seeing the interest that your 
works have aroused, I thought that it would be very dangerous, both for you and for 
Germany, if you do, since you could not fail to be discredited, a fate which you do not 
deserve.

Moreover, if you were discredited, Germany, at the same time, would have 
lost her only defender who has some hearing.

And, so I have come to tell you myself 
that I have been present at an extermination by gas..." 
"Then I do not understand you," I answered.

"It does not seem to me that if you told 
your story publicly that you would risk, as you claim, being imprisoned again.

Witnesses of this kind are being sought by Prosecutor Bauer, who has so far not found 
anyone who is trustworthy, and if you are sure of yourself, go to him; he will lay 
down the red carpet..." 
"Be patient," he interrupted, "In Germany in order not to be thrown into prison, it is 
not enough to state that one has witnessed an extermination by gas.

It has to be told 
exactly as it was described in a document or by a witness officially recognized as 
reliable, and that is not my case.

You will see.

I was on an official trip to Lublin, and I 
had just gone in to see Globocnik when Gerstein was announced.

Chance had it that I 
found myself again with him the next day at Belzec.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I was on an official trip to Lublin, and I 
had just gone in to see Globocnik when Gerstein was announced. Chance had it that I 
found myself again with him the next day at Belzec. And, if I say that I also was 
present at the extermination that is referred to in the document which is attributed to 
him, I must also add that everything said in it concerning the gassing operation, as 
well as the circumstances under which he was present and his conversation with 
Globocnik, is, from one end to the other, utterly false. Without any doubt, such 
testimony on my part would be enough to have me thrown automatically and 
immediately into prison." 
I understood less and less. "If everything is false from beginning to end," I ventured, 
"there was, therefore, no extermination . . ." "There was one all right," he said. "But 
let us begin at the beginning." And, then, he told the story ... From his long recital, 
which I have abridged in order to stick to the essentials, it turned out that: 
1. In the conversation that he had at Lublin with Gerstein, in the presence of my 
visitor and two or three military men whose names my visitor only remembered 
because they are given in the Gerstein document, Globocnik had spoken only of 
Belzec and absolutely had not mentioned any other camps. Concerning the number of 
persons that could be exterminated at the Belzec installation, not one figure was 
given. Furthermore, he did not begin the conversation by talking of extermination; he 
talked only of the disinfecting of clothing. It was only further into the conversation 
that, while deploring the limited means for disinfection available at Belzec, he said, in 
passing that he had found a very efficient method which would permanently resolve

--- PAGE BREAK ---199
the Jewish question.

When inquiry was made by my visitor as to what he meant, he 
described his Diesel engine at Belzec...

"But," declared Globocnik, "it is only a 
makeshift installation; what I need is a more deadly gas, which is easier to use.

That is 
why I have sent Gunther to get from Gerstein those things that are better adapted to do 
this job." 
"I was horrified," my visitor said to me.

"Because of my civilian position, I was the 
only one listening to Globocnik who could say anything.

'But after all,' I said to him, 
'it is a crime, and are you sure that that is the solution that the Fuehrer has in mind for 
the Jewish problem?' 'Certainly I am sure,' was all that Globocnik answered, 
shrugging his shoulders.

And, with a knowing look, but without saying it precisely, he 
suggested that the authority for his project came from the Fuehrer himself.

Moreover, 
he insisted that it must be kept secret.

Unlike what is said in the Gerstein document, 
he did not state that Himmler and Hitler had been to Lublin two days before -- that is 
pure invention." 
2.

During the conversation, my visitor remarked that Globocnik had said that he had 
sent Gunther to Gerstein to get a more poisonous gas and less complicated apparatus.

My visitor had noted that this was not the normal operating procedure, and he had 
wondered why Globocnik had not addressed himself directly to the supply office by 
letter.

This fact made my visitor suspicious about the entire operation.

My visitor said 
that Globocnik's assignment at Warthegau was a punitive measure that had been 
imposed for a number of misdeeds which he had committed during his tenure as 
Gauleiter in the Vienna area.

At Berlin he also had a very bad reputation, at least, so 
my visitor claimed.My visitor said 
that Globocnik's assignment at Warthegau was a punitive measure that had been 
imposed for a number of misdeeds which he had committed during his tenure as 
Gauleiter in the Vienna area.

At Berlin he also had a very bad reputation, at least, so 
my visitor claimed.

Thus, with the intention of speaking about this business as soon as 
he got back to Berlin, my visitor decided to go to Belzec -- even though his business 
did not require him to go -- so as to be in a position to speak about the matter with 
some first hand knowledge.

At Belzec he saw a very small camp, with enough barracks to have housed four or 
five hundred people.

He saw the inmates walking around the camp and they appeared 
to be well fed and in good shape.

Moreover, upon inquiry he learned that they were all 
Jews.

He was told by a Jewish inmate that there was a small railway station with a 
single track that served the camp.

From time to time, a short train would arrive full of 
his coreligionists.

The people in the camp were to greet the arrivals and were to assist 
in their extermination by herding them into a little house, which was shown him, 
where they were asphyxiated.

On the house was a sign which read "Fondation 
Heckenholt, " the name of the Jew who was in charge of starting and keeping the 
motor running.

The inmate told all this while eating a jam tart, which clouds of flies 
tried to settle on and which he kept brushing away.

A disgusting smell similar to that 
of a freshly opened grave pervaded the camp.

The flies and the stench came from the 
massive pits where the victims were buried after each gassing.

Hauptsturmführer 
Wirth, formerly an officer with the Stuttgart criminal police and commandant of this 
camp, received my interlocutor on his arrival.

He and another S.S.

officer, his deputy, 
who accompanied them during his visit, both complained incessantly about the 
Kommando to which they had been assigned.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He and another S.S. officer, his deputy, 
who accompanied them during his visit, both complained incessantly about the 
Kommando to which they had been assigned. They begged him to use his influence to 
get them transferred to another unit as soon as he returned to Berlin. Neither one of 
them could understand how they could be required to do such work, and they were 
sure that at Berlin nothing was known about what was going on here. "Why do you 
not ask for a transfer yourselves?" asked my visitor. "Then, after getting it you could

--- PAGE BREAK ---200
expose this disgraceful business..." "This is just what Globocnik is afraid of," he was 
told.

"And another thing, we could not apply for a transfer without going through 
channels, and that means going through him, and for fear of being exposed, either he 
would not grant it, or he would have us shot at once on some pretext or other.

We 
know of cases...

Fortunately you have come here and you can, at the same time that 
you get us out of here through your connections in Berlin, stop this shameful 
business...

Fortunately, too, it is only a small train with few cars that arrives from time 
to time, two or three up to now (9).

Otherwise, with the limited means we have at 
hand for burying the bodies, we would be living in a regular center of infection, 
breeding every imaginable disease...

Tomorrow a train is scheduled to arrive at about 
seven in the morning..." 
3.

My interlocutor told me that, upon being informed of the expected train, he decided 
to stay.

Accompanied by Wirth and his S.S.

aide, he again visited the little house that 
had been fixed up for exterminations, and he described it to me.

It had a raised ground 
floor, and a hallway with three small rooms on each side, which he did not measure, 
but which he thought had an area of surely less than 5 x 5 meters, perhaps 4 x 5 
maximum, and all of them were rectangular, not square.

At the end of the hall was the 
room where the Diesel motor was located in the center on a cement base and a little 
below floor level.

I asked about this motor and how it was connected up to exhaust 
outlets in each of the six rooms.

It was a truck motor, about 1.50 meters long, a little 
less than 1 meter wide, and a good meter in height, including the concrete base.

Its 
power he did not know; perhaps it had 200 horsepower, he said.

I pointed out to him 
that it was said to have been a marine engine, and, therefore, it must have been much 
bigger if it had been built for a ship.

"Surely not," he said.I pointed out to him 
that it was said to have been a marine engine, and, therefore, it must have been much 
bigger if it had been built for a ship.

"Surely not," he said.

"it was a truck motor, at 
least its dimensions led me to visualize it on a truck." He remembered the number of 
cylinders, six in one row.

As for the connection with the exhaust pipes, in order to 
proceed faster, he made a drawing for me, which showed that the motor exhaust was 
introduced into each room by means of a pipe that was connected to an outlet in the 
floor.

"I do not wonder," I said, "that Globocnik wanted to find a more efficient 
method.

It must have been horribly long..." " A quarter of an hour," he interrupted.

If until now this account had seemed plausible to me, after this remark, this "quarter 
of an hour" weighed heavily on the rest of our conversation.

We talked about it at 
length, and we kept returning to it, with me maintaining that it was absolutely 
impossible and with him insisting that it was nevertheless true.

I had already studied 
the Gerstein document together with automotive engineers and toxicologists and I 
knew what I was talking about.

In response to my technical objections, he said that he 
had seen it and that "nevertheless it was true." In vain I tried to explain to him that, 
with 200 horsepower or even more, a Diesel engine could not produce, in a quarter of 
an hour, the necessary toxic concentration in 250 to 300 cubic meters of air to cause 
death.

That faced with the impossibility of getting 700 to 800 persons -- 40 to 50 at a 
maximum, my interlocutor corrected -- into rooms of 40 to 45 cubic meters, and 
knowing the limitations of a Diesel engine, the writer of the document had to reduce 
to almost nothing the quantity of air to be made toxic.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In response to my technical objections, he said that he 
had seen it and that "nevertheless it was true." In vain I tried to explain to him that, 
with 200 horsepower or even more, a Diesel engine could not produce, in a quarter of 
an hour, the necessary toxic concentration in 250 to 300 cubic meters of air to cause 
death. That faced with the impossibility of getting 700 to 800 persons -- 40 to 50 at a 
maximum, my interlocutor corrected -- into rooms of 40 to 45 cubic meters, and 
knowing the limitations of a Diesel engine, the writer of the document had to reduce 
to almost nothing the quantity of air to be made toxic. I added that the atmosphere in 
the house in question would not be sufficiently toxic to kill everyone until after 32 
minutes and that if the day before Globocnik had said himself that the method was not 
very efficient, it was just another proof that the operation must have lasted a long 
time. Finally, I pointed out that after twenty years his memory could not be so exact, 
etc. Nothing budged him. He would not change his mind about the quarter of an hour,

--- PAGE BREAK ---201
except to say that he had not timed it with his watch and that without doubt his 
estimate was within a minute or two of being exact.

Moreover, his demeanor reflected 
only good faith.

Since then I have, with his sketch in hand, questioned many experts 
on combustion engines, fluid combustion, and toxicology, no one has been willing to 
give less than one and a half to two hours ....

During the rest of the conversation, nothing else came up that I took exception to, but 
this objection is an important one and is very disturbing.

There was one other thing 
that was strange about the asphyxiating apparatus.

I did not understand why the 
designer had divided the space into six rooms instead of leaving it in one, which 
would have been less costly and less complicated; but, I did not press the point.

4.

Meanwhile, Gerstein arrived with three or four people; my visitor was no longer 
quite sure how many.

Globocnik, who had come with them, turned right around and 
went back.

During his conversation the day before with Globocnik, my visitor 
reported that Gerstein had related that his trip from Berlin to Lublin had not been 
uneventful.

What he had with him was not Zyklon B in crystals, as one might think, 
but liquid prussic acid in bottles, and with the incessant jolting on a road in bad repair, 
one or two of these bottles had broken in the truck.

He and his driver had been very 
frightened.

My visitor then asked him how his trip from Lublin to Belzec had been.

"Very good," he replied.

"We left the goods at Lublin..." 
They inspected the camp together, and in the evening, still together, they were served 
at dinner by a couple of Jewish prisoners.

The atmosphere was heavy; the most 
talkative one was Gerstein.

He seemed keyed up, and everything he said seemed to be 
aimed at belittling Globocnik.

He inspired confidence in no one, at least my 
interlocutor had that impression.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He seemed keyed up, and everything he said seemed to be 
aimed at belittling Globocnik. He inspired confidence in no one, at least my 
interlocutor had that impression. And, when he heard several years later, from one of 
his friends who had had Gerstein as a student, that the latter was a psychopath, he was 
not surprised. The next morning, between 7 and 8 o'clock, the expected transport of Jews arrived; it 
was a train of four or five cars, with some 250 to 300 men, women, and children, and 
not with 6,000 or 6,700 persons, piled into 45 cars, as the Gerstein Document claims. Likewise, the 200 Ukrainians that are mentioned in the Document were in reality 
about two dozen Jewish inmates from the camp. There was no brutality; no doors 
were wrenched from the cars; no one was struck with rubber truncheons. Rather, there 
was a brotherly reception from their coreligionists, plainly intent on creating a feeling 
of confidence in the arrivals. In preparing the victims for the gassing, they were required to deposit their valuables 
and jewels at the Effecktenkammer in return for a receipt; then they proceeded to the 
barber. Finally, they were made to undress. The undressing was the longest process 
and took almost all morning. These unfortunates asked their coreligionists, who had 
received them under the armed guard of a few listless and inattentive S.S., what was 
to become of them. They were told that they were to be disinfected and that, after that, 
they would be assigned to labor Kommandos according to their abilities. They were 
told to take a deep breath during the disinfection process -- a hideous spectacle for 
those who knew.

--- PAGE BREAK ---202
Then, they were herded into the building where the gassing was to take place.

Haphazardly they were divided up among the six rooms -- 40 to 50 per room, my 
visitor repeated.

The doors were closed, and the lights were put out.

At this moment, 
the only things to be heard were the prayers of these unfortunates, and the cries of 
fright from the women and the children.

The engine was started and, a quarter of an 
hour later, the bodies were removed by the Totenkommando, which was composed of 
Jewish prisoners.

The corpses were carried to a waiting grave.

"But that grave," I interrupted, "they must have seen it, since, really, for 250 to 300 
people it must have been quite sizeable." My visitor replied, "No.

It had been dug 
some distance behind the gassing house, and they could not see it.

The bodies were 
taken out through side doors in each room, directly to the outside, sort of garage 
doors.

The dimensions of the grave?

I have an idea that it must have been about 20 
meters long, 5 wide, and barely 2 deep..." 
And, he explained the dangers of that kind of burial.

Wirth had told him that into that 
huge grave lots of gasoline had been poured over the heap of corpses.

But, the attempt 
to cremate the corpses in that manner had been only partially successful.

Earth was 
thrown on top of the corpses, but after two or three days this earth raised up from the 
pressure of gas rising from below.

And, it infected the air.

Also, the rotting flesh 
attracted the clouds of those flies which one saw everywhere.

Deciding that he now 
had seen enough, my visitor left the camp without delay and returned to Lublin.Also, the rotting flesh 
attracted the clouds of those flies which one saw everywhere.

Deciding that he now 
had seen enough, my visitor left the camp without delay and returned to Lublin.

I tried to return the conversation to a discussion of the "quarter of an hour" that the 
gassing was supposed to have lasted, by expressing the opinion that the length of the 
breakdown of the diesel engine, which lasted two hours and forty nine minutes, 
according to the Gerstein Document, could actually have been not a breakdown, but 
the added time that this engine required to poison the air sufficiently to cause death.

I 
had no success with this suggestion.

My visitor was sure that there had been not the 
least engine trouble and that the gassing took only a quarter of an hour.

My visitor's business in the region around Lublin took longer than he had anticipated.

He was detained in Lodz for a good two weeks, and he could not get back to Berlin 
until about September 15.

Immediately upon his return he went straight to Dr.

Grawitz who was a friend of his and a close associate of Reichsführer-S.S.

Heinrich 
Himmler.

After hearing his tale, Dr.

Grawitz jumped up, horrified, and rushed without 
delay to Himmler.

"I cannot now be specific about the dates," he added, "but about ten days later, Dr.

Grawitz came himself to tell me, while at the same time congratulating me for my 
intervention, that an inquiry was underway about what I had reported, and, a few 
weeks later -- I remember that it was just a few days after All Saints Day -- that the 
camp had been closed and Globocnik once again had been transferred (10).

That is all 
I know." 
I told my visitor about Dr.

Konrad Morgen's testimony at Nuremberg on the 7th and 
8th of August 1945 (I.M.T., Volume XX, pp.

520-553).

He knew about it and gave it 
no credit.

The portrait that Morgen drew of Wirth, making him an unscrupulous 
criminal, corresponded in no way with what was the actual fact.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He knew about it and gave it 
no credit. The portrait that Morgen drew of Wirth, making him an unscrupulous 
criminal, corresponded in no way with what was the actual fact. Morgen had 
described him as being the commandant of four camps and the Deus ex-machina of

--- PAGE BREAK ---203
the whole business (op.

cit.

pp.

528-29), while, in reality, he was the despairing 
commandant of the Belzec camp only, and, furthermore, he was bullied and terrorized 
by Globocnik.

Then again, Morgen had testified that he had met Wirth, and if he had 
met Wirth, it could only have been at Belzec.

But, he gave the date of this meeting as 
"the end of 1943" (op.

cit.

p.

527), when the camp had been closed at the latest in 
December 1942.

This Dr.

Konrad Morgen was a man who had held the rank of 
Obersturmbannführer in the S.S., who had headed the criminal police office of the 
Reich, with special powers that had been conferred by Himmler himself, and who 
probably had many things on his conscience, my visitor concluded.

I had no difficulty sharing that view with him.

Morgen had said that the had met Höss, 
as Commandant of the Auschwitz camp, "...towards the end of 1943, beginning of 
1944" (op.

cit., p.

540), when Höss had not been in that post after the end of 
November 1943; Morgen placed all of the exterminations by gas at Monowitz (op.

cit., p.

540), when all witnesses have subsequently placed them at Birkenau; Morgen 
claimed that Wirth received his orders directly from Hitler's Chancellery (op.

cit.

p.

531), when, etc....

5.

It was at this moment in our conversation that the eyes of my interlocutor fell on Le 
Mensonge d'Ulysse open before him, and to which until then he had not made any 
reference.

"I have read your books," he continued; "In my opinion your critique of the 
testimonies and documents produced at Nuremberg is impeccable and will one day 
bear fruit.

Thanks are due you.

But what interests me (he took the open book in both 
hands) is the problem of gas exterminations, the only issue that truly touches upon the 
honor of Germany.

So this is what I have come to tell you.But what interests me (he took the open book in both 
hands) is the problem of gas exterminations, the only issue that truly touches upon the 
honor of Germany.

So this is what I have come to tell you.

Here (he showed me the 
book) you have given, in 1950, a most correct interpretation, when, in formulating 
your judgment, you came to the conclusion that there had been very few such 
exterminations and those few were the work of, I quote, 'only one or two insane 
persons in the S.S.' I would have said 'one or two criminal sadists.' Believe me, I knew 
this crowd well.

As a whole it was a decent group, but it was not free -- like all social 
groups -- of a few sadists who were capable of the most unimaginable crimes.

Globocnik was surely one of them.

I know Höss only from what I had heard of him in 
Berlin from the people in my branch of service who knew him.

He did not have a 
good reputation either.

And, it is possible that at Auschwitz he behaved the way 
Globocnik did around Lublin.

I do not know that for certain; I only say that it is 
possible.

And, judging from what you yourself have written about that camp, it would 
have been easy for him since everything which was needed to make such activity 
possible was obtainable at Auschwitz." 
I agreed, although I had not directed my supposition to any one particular camp -- for 
the very reason that one could give so little credit to that mass of false testimony and 
false documents on the subject that had been gathered by the various military 
tribunals.

It was one of the hypotheses that I had advanced for the camps in general 
with the old adage, "where there is smoke, there is fire," in mind.

Actually, all of my 
efforts tended to show that if there had been exterminations by gas they could only 
have been conducted on a very limited basis since there was no positive evidence to 
support the existence of the widespread practice.

"There were exterminations by gas," he concluded.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Actually, all of my 
efforts tended to show that if there had been exterminations by gas they could only 
have been conducted on a very limited basis since there was no positive evidence to 
support the existence of the widespread practice. "There were exterminations by gas," he concluded. "I have brought you an example." 
Then he added: "However, they were neither massive nor deliberately ordered by the

--- PAGE BREAK ---204
hierarchy of the Third Reich, in spite of what the evidence that was created out of thin 
air at Nuremberg, and that was verified by unscrupulous people, seemed to indicate; 
rather, such activities were the deeds of a few isolated criminals.

What is certain is 
that each time that the authorities of the Third Reich were informed about things of 
this kind, they put an end to it, and I brought you proof of that.

At Nuremberg, the 
prosecution simply made use of these isolated instances of criminal activity in order 
to establish the existence of an officially sanctioned practice for the purpose of 
dishonoring Germany.

It is a little like claiming that the French systematically killed 
all of the German prisoners that they took during the war, basing the claim on the one 
case at Annecy on August 19, 1944.

There are potential criminals among all peoples, 
and war -- which unleashes their instincts -- nurtures their depravity to incredible 
dimensions.

Take the example of the French Resistance in whose name and Protection 
those criminals, of which unhappily France has the same kind and as many as 
Germany or any other country, committed their crimes (11).

Consider the behavior of 
your troops during their occupation of Germany after May 1945..."(12) 
He paused for a moment and then said, "Let it go at that, Sir.

The honor of Germany 
will only be saved when it is definitely established that the exterminations by gas 
were the exception, and then only the act of a few criminals who were disowned as 
soon as they were uncovered.Consider the behavior of 
your troops during their occupation of Germany after May 1945..."(12) 
He paused for a moment and then said, "Let it go at that, Sir.

The honor of Germany 
will only be saved when it is definitely established that the exterminations by gas 
were the exception, and then only the act of a few criminals who were disowned as 
soon as they were uncovered.

As for the rest, Heavens, it was war, and we are no 
better than Germany's enemies."(13) 
I reassured him by telling him that if I stubbornly questioned every line of every 
document and deposition upon which was based this monstrous indictment of which 
Germany was the victim and that if my examination of this evidence caused me to 
conclude that it was nothing but the crudest of fabrications, it would not allow me to 
claim that there never had been an extermination by gas.

Moreover, I had never 
claimed that, but only had stated that I had never found any reliable evidence to 
support that contention.

"I am happy that I was fearful over nothing," he said.

"Excuse 
me.

Germany's honor owes much to you, and you richly deserve it." 
And, that was the end.

The discussion lost itself in generalities, but later we returned 
to the subject of Globocnik.

I maintained that if he had only been transferred, which 
did not seem to me to have actually happened, the punishment had indeed been very 
light.

"That," answered by interlocutor, "is characteristic of totalitarian systems.

Those 
people sent so far from Berlin had been sent with the power given to Roman 
proconsuls.

Moreover, the Nazi state was racist, and it did not consider crimes against 
the Jews in the same light as it viewed crimes against others; it was more indulgent 
towards those guilty of the former.

The case of Koch, commandant at Buchenwald, 
who was shot for lesser crimes that had been committed against prisoners considered 
Aryan, is the proof.

But, see what the State of Israel does.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The case of Koch, commandant at Buchenwald, 
who was shot for lesser crimes that had been committed against prisoners considered 
Aryan, is the proof. But, see what the State of Israel does. If they are gentiles, it 
demands the death sentence for all the Kapos guilty of crimes in the exercise of their 
duties as guards of gangs of prisoners in the concentration camps, and if they are 
Jewish, it finds many excuses for them and dismisses the charges or, at the most, 
imposes jail sentences of a few months, which are then suspended." 
I shall spare the reader the details of the other subjects that we touched upon during 
the balance of our rambling conversation: the Versailles Treaty and its responsibility 
for the rise of German National Socialism, and, consequently, the outbreak of the 
Second World War; the war; wars, etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---conversation: the Versailles Treaty and its responsibility 
for the rise of German National Socialism, and, consequently, the outbreak of the 
Second World War; the war; wars, etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

205
If I have made a point of ending this chapter with this testimony, it is because, on the 
one hand, a historian worthy of the name should not suppress anything that he knows 
which is relevant to the subject under discussion, and on the other, because I was not 
seriously able to impeach it except on one point. Moreover, whether right or wrong, 
the good faith of its author and his sincerity seemed obvious. It is one of the canons of 
historiography that a testimony cannot be impugned if it seems inconsistent on one 
point only. After all, history does not, so to speak, offer examples of testimonies that 
are perfectly consistent. This one, in fact, summed up the opinion which I had formed 
after a study of all of the documents and the testimony that was produced at 
Nuremberg on the subject of the extermination of the Jews by gas. 
All this, however, does not at all mean that I endorse this testimony. Testis unus, testis 
nullus, that is also one of the laws of history, and I know only too well the ancient 
truth that nothing resembles perfect good faith more than perfect bad faith. Without 
going so far as to claim that this aphorism applied to my interlocutor, and I am far 
from wanting to conceal the pleasure and interest that I took in his conversation, I still 
must say that in spite of all that argues in his favor, and although his entry on the 
scene, regrettably late, can be excused by circumstances, his testimony can only be 
accepted with the most distinct reservations. All that one can say is that it is more 
acceptable than what we have so far been accustomed to, and in which we have been 
completely submerged. We shall not know what it is really worth unless those, who so 
zealously suppress impartial inquiry into the subject in an attempt to throttle the 
historical truth that they know, renounce the drastic measures that are resorted to keep 
it from coming to light, and, instead, assist it to return to an atmosphere of free 
discussion. Then, all of those persons who know or who think that they know 
something about any event whatsoever concerning the war can come forward and can 
publicize it, without fear of being thrown into prison. Incidentally, I can add that if 
some day I could be sure that my interlocutor could be questioned without running 
this risk, I am authorized to make known his name. He will not run away, he told me, 
and this is another good point for him and his testimony, and for everyone it might be 
the beginning of a return to free discussion. Check! Your turn to play, Mister 
Inquisitors.away, he told me, 
and this is another good point for him and his testimony, and for everyone it might be 
the beginning of a return to free discussion. Check! Your turn to play, Mister 
Inquisitors.

FOOTNOTES 
1. [The fact that the "Diary of Anne Frank" is a fabrication has been established pretty 
well since 1962 when Professor Rassinier was writing this book. It seems that the 
American Jewish writer Meyer Levin was hired by Otto Frank, the father of Anne, to 
write the Anne Frank Diary. The existence of this "literary collaboration" came to 
light when Mr. Levin sued Mr. Frank in the New York State courts for breach of 
contract. The dispute seems to have been settled out of court with Mr. Levin receiving 
the sum of $50,000. For a further discussion of this matter, see the following: Richard 
Harwood, Did Six Million Really Die? (Richmond, Surrey: Historical Review Press, 
n.d.), pp. 19-20; Teressa Hendry, "Was Anne Frank's Diary a Hoax?" The American 
Mercury, Summer, 1967, pp. 26-28.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---206
2.

Exhibit No.

100 of the Jerusalem judgment (Eichmann Trial) mentions that for 
France only 52,000, mostly non-French, had been deported by July 21, 1943, and that 
no deportation after that date was noted.

3.

[It is strange, indeed, that the Germans -- who were far more advanced than the 
Allies in the development of chemical weapons -- should rely upon Zyklon B, an 
insecticide and disinfectant, as their primary killing agent in these alleged 
exterminations by gas when they had much more efficient gases, which had been 
designed specifically as "man-killing" agents, to choose from.

For example, as early 
as 1936, I.G.

Farbenindustrie was producing Tabun, the first of a family of nerve 
gases which the Germans were to develop by the end of the Second World War.

(By 
contrast, the best gas in the Allies' arsenal was an improved version of the World War 
I "mustard gas.") Tabun -- which was regarded as a "quick kill" agent of tremendous 
potency -- was followed by the development of Sarin (1938) and Soman (1944).

Only 
about 140 mg/meter3/minute of Tabun is needed to induce severe convulsions which 
are almost immediately followed by collapse, paralysis, and death.

Sarin is twice as 
deadly as Tabun and Soman is many times more potent than Sarin.

(See, Steven Rose, 
ed., CBW.

Chemical & Biological Warfare, Boston: Beacon Press, 1968, pp.

23-24) 
By the end of the war, the Germans had stockpiled nearly twelve tons of Tabun and 
more than 250,000 tons of the more conventional chemical warfare agents like 
phosgene gas.

(See, Seymour M.

Hersch, Chemical and Biological Warfare: 
America's Hidden Arsenal, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1968, pp.

7-12)] 
4.

Not taking into account the fantastic figures of Mme.

Hannah Arendt, who does not 
seem to be very certain of herself in this area.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not taking into account the fantastic figures of Mme. Hannah Arendt, who does not 
seem to be very certain of herself in this area. Does she not in fact say (New Yorker, 
February 2, 1963) that "in less than two months 147 trains transported 434,351 
Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz," and, (New Yorker, February 16, 1963) that among the 
Hungarian Jews there were 476,000 victims; "Que souvent femme varie, " as the 
French song says, "Comme la plume au vent," from one page to another with this one! 5. ["The most typical use of the Zyklon was in disinfecting rooms and barracks. Everything was sealed and then the necessary amount of Zyklon which came in green 
cans . . . was emptied in. After the proper time interval it was assumed that all the lice 
and other insects and pests were dead and then the enclosure was aired out. The 
Zyklon could be used for disinfecting clothing by employing an 'extermination 
chamber'..." Arthur R. Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century (Richmond, Surrey: 
Historical Review Press, [1976]), p. 105. However, Zyklon B also was lethal to 
human beings in as much as its crystals, "when exposed to air, sublimated into 
"Prussic Acid' (hydrogen cyanide gas)." (op. cit. p. 104.)] 
6. To reach that total I took the general total of Jewish losses given by Mr. Raul 
Hilberg (p. 767) for the five camps and for Auschwitz, that is 1,950,000, and I 
deducted his estimate of Jewish losses at Auschwitz (p. 670), that is 1,000,000, which 
leaves 950,000. So as not to overlook anything, we must state that in his own table (p. 570) Majdanek is listed under "Lublin district." 
7. Except the Institute of Jewish Affairs of the World Jewish Congress, in Eichmann's 
Confederates and the Third Reich Hierarchy, which gives 900,000 (p. 18).

--- PAGE BREAK ---207
8.

We have seen that Dr.

Aryeh L.

Kubovy, Director of the Center of Contemporary 
Jewish Documentation at Tel-Aviv, admitted in 1960 that "there exists no document 
signed by Hitler, Himmler, or Heydrich speaking of exterminating of the Jews and ....

the word 'extermination' does not appear in the letter from Göring to Heydrich 
concerning the final solution to the Jewish question." In regard to this issue, Mme.

Hannah Arendt, who makes the Führer's order to exterminate the Jews the central 
theme of her report on the Eichmann Trial at Jerusalem, labors in vain.

This 
divergence of opinion is a problem which needs to be worked out between herself and 
Dr.

Kubovy, and we can only advise her to come to an understanding with him, who 
for once -- by chance, mischance, or good faith -- is himself in agreement with the 
historical truth.

9.

This incident took place on August 18, 1942.

The construction of this camp -- 
which had been authorized at the Wannsee conference -- had been begun at the end of 
March of that year, and it had taken a very long time to build, mainly because of the 
fact that a single track rail line had to be constructed as a branch line in order to 
connect the camp to the nearest existing mainline tracks.

That mainline track had to 
be either the one that went from Budapest to Warsaw, via Przmysl and Lublin, or the 
one from Budapest to Wilna, via Lvov.

My interlocutor could not tell me whether the 
branch line had been attached near Przmysl or Lvov.

In either case, it would have 
required the building of at least 50 km.

of track, and this track was not ready for use 
until the end of July.

10.

According to Jewish sources, which are unanimous in agreement, this camp was 
not closed until the beginning of December 1942.

It does not appear that Globocnik 
was demoted or punished.According to Jewish sources, which are unanimous in agreement, this camp was 
not closed until the beginning of December 1942.

It does not appear that Globocnik 
was demoted or punished.

In any case, if he was, the punishment was light, especially 
when that punishment is compared with the punishment that was given to Karl Koch, 
the celebrated commandant of Buchenwald, who was executed for doing much less.

11.

[For a good account of that bloody period which followed the so-called 
"Liberation of France," see France: The Tragic Years 1939-1947 (New York: Devin-
Adair, 1955) by Sisley Huddleston, especially Chapter Twenty-three.

Contrary to the 
impression that has been created by the scores of Hollywood war movies which have 
dealt with the period, French "resistance" to the German occupation of France during 
World War II was not a "mass movement" by any means.

Rather, the number of 
Frenchmen who collaborated with the Germans -- to one extent or another -- far 
exceeded the number of "resistants" who, it seems (based upon the number of 
membership cards that were issued by the French government after the war to 
veterans of the resistance) totaled somewhat more than 250,000.

In any case, the 
combined number of "resistants" and collaborators was small when compared to the 
vast majority of the French population which remained apathetic and outwardly 
indifferent to the German occupation.

After all, it made little practical difference to 
the average "man on the street" whether it was the Germans or his own countrymen 
who were actually guiding governmental policy once the French civil service had 
resumed operation and once life had returned to its normal pace following the signing 
of the Armistice with Germany on June 22, 1940.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In any case, the 
combined number of "resistants" and collaborators was small when compared to the 
vast majority of the French population which remained apathetic and outwardly 
indifferent to the German occupation. After all, it made little practical difference to 
the average "man on the street" whether it was the Germans or his own countrymen 
who were actually guiding governmental policy once the French civil service had 
resumed operation and once life had returned to its normal pace following the signing 
of the Armistice with Germany on June 22, 1940. This uncomfortable reality was the 
subject of the four and one-half hour television film Le Chagrin et la Pitié which was 
produced by Marcel Ophuls in 1969 and which, incidentally, was not aired over the 
state-controlled French television network until after the death of Charles de Gaulle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---208
A portion of the filmscript has been published in an English translation under the title 
The Sorrow and the Pity (New York: Outerbridge and Lazard, 1972).

The French make a distinction when they speak of "resistants": there are those few 
persons -- like Paul Rassinier -- who engaged in organized resistance against the 
Germans almost immediately following the defeat of the French army in the spring of 
1940; and, then, there are those numerous individuals who joined the "resistance" 
after the German fortunes of war began to wane -- i.e., generally after June, 1944.

Many of these so-called "late" resistants joined the "underground" in an eleventh hour 
attempt to redeem themselves for their earlier collaboration with the Germans.

Many 
others were Communists.

In fact, the cadres of the resistance movement at that late 
date were almost exclusively made up of Communists who were financed by the 
Americans, who were armed by the British, and who followed the Stalinist line.

It was the Communists who were primarily responsible for escalating the ineffectual 
guerilla war against the Germans and who, indirectly, caused so much suffering 
among the innocent French populace in the form of German reprisals.

The 
Communists, moreover, did not confine themselves to the assassination of Germans.

They took advantage of the general disorder following the "Liberation" to murder as 
many of their domestic political opponents -- whom they prudently had branded as 
"fascists" and "collaborators" -- as they could get their hands on.

The precise number 
of victims has never been determined.

However, a former French minister of the 
interior has estimated that about 105,000 "summary executions" occurred between 
August 1944 and March 1945.

(Huddleston, op.

cit., pages 299-300.) Others have 
placed the number at about 50,000.

(See, e.g., Donald B.--- PAGE BREAK ---

cit., pages 299-300.) Others have 
placed the number at about 50,000. (See, e.g., Donald B. Robinson, "Blood Bath in 
France," The American Mercury, April 1946.) Regardless of what the true figure may 
be, there can be little doubt that, as Huddleston put it, "there has never been, in the 
history of France, a bloodier period than that which followed the Liberation of 1944-
1945. The massacres of 1944 were no less savage than the massacres of the Jacquerie, 
of St. Bartholomew, of the Revolutionary Terror, of the Commune; and they were 
certainly more numerous and on a wider scale." (Huddleston, op. cit., page 296.)] 
12. [The behavior of the Allies during their occupation of Germany was so generally 
atrocious that it has been a subject that most liberal apologists for the American 
participation in World War II would like to forget, especially when moralizing about 
the crimes and the shortcomings of the Germans. For a more objective view of the 
military occupation of Germany, the following titles offer an adequate, but by no 
means an exhaustive, treatment of the subject: Andy Rooney & Bud Hutton, 
Conqueror's Peace (Garden City: Doubleday & Co., 1947); Victor Gollancz, Our 
Threatened Values (Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1946) and In Darkest Germany 
(Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1947); Marshall Knappen, And Call It Peace (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1949); Freda Utley, The High Cost of Vengeance 
(Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1949); W.K. Turnwald, ed., Documents on the Expulsion 
of the Sudeten Germans (Munich: University Press, 1953); Ernst von Salomon, 
Fragebogen (Garden City: Doubleday & Co., 1955); Juergen Thorwald, Flight in 
Winter (New York: Pantheon Books, 1953); Nicholas Balabkins, Germany Under 
Direct Controls (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1961); Harold Zink, 
American Military Government in Germany (New York: Macmillan, 1947).]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Balabkins, Germany Under 
Direct Controls (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1961); Harold Zink, 
American Military Government in Germany (New York: Macmillan, 1947).]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
13. [For the reader who desires to obtain a better understanding of the "atrocities" that 
were committed by the Allies during World War Two, the following titles provide a 
good introduction to the subject: Hans Grimm, Answer of a German: An Open Letter 
to the Archbishop of Canterbury (London: Euphenon Books, 1952); F.J.P. Veale, 
Advance to Barbarism (Appleton, Wis.: C.C. Nelson, 1953) and War Crimes 
Discreetly Veiled (New York: Devin-Adair, 1959); Hans Rumpf, The Bombing of 
Germany (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1963); Louis Fitzgibbon, Katyn, A 
Crime Without Parallel (New York: Scribners & Sons, 1971); Julius Epstein, 
Operation Keelhaul (Old Greenwich, Conn.: Devin-Adair, 1973); Peter H. Nicoll, 
Britain's Blunder (East Orange, NJ.: Communications Archives, 1973), especially 
pages 117-125.] 
(**) AAARGH additional note: The 7th edition, by Druffel-Verlag (1981) has a 
somewhat different title: Was ist Wahrheit ? and the subtitle is: Die Juden und das 
Dritte Reich. (What is Truth? The Jews and the Third Reich.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210

Chapter Fourteen 
Statistics: Six Million or...After some fifteen years of historical research, I have come to the following 
conclusion: it was in 1943 that National Socialist Germany was accused for the first 
time of the systematic mass extermination of the Jews in the gas chambers.

The 
author of this first, horrible and infamous accusation was a Polish Jew, a refugee in 
England and a jurist by profession, by the name of Rafael Lemkin.

And, he made that 
accusation in a book published in London, and in English, in that year, entitled Axis 
Rule in Occupied Europe (Am.

ed., New York: Columbia Univ.

Press, 1944).

At the 
time the book did not receive much attention; in October, 1943, when I was arrested 
by the Gestapo, it was still completely unknown in the best informed circles of the 
French Resistance, and I only heard of gas chambers for the first time at Dora, toward 
the middle of 1944.

But in 1945-1946, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe was the topic of 
all conversation behind the scenes at the Trial of the Major War Criminals at 
Nuremberg, where it was cited by the prosecution in the case of Seyss-Inquart (T.

XIX, pp.

70 and 92).

And, the view maintained in the book was supported by the 
Kasztner Report on the tragedy of the Hungarian Jews, a report which was also talked 
about in the corridors during the trial.

But, we must be precise and say that it was only 
after January 30, 1946, the date when French Prosecutor Dubost made public his 
discovery of the Gerstein document, that these two pieces of writing took on 
importance.

In fact, it was on that day that, in the world press, the gas chambers 
mythology began its dance to every tune and diabolical rhythm; that unrestrained 
saraband full of missteps has not stopped since.

Let us try to reconstruct the facts.Chapter Fourteen 
Statistics: Six Million or...

In fact, it was on that day that, in the world press, the gas chambers 
mythology began its dance to every tune and diabolical rhythm; that unrestrained 
saraband full of missteps has not stopped since. Let us try to reconstruct the facts. Until January 30, 1946, aside from the Axis Rule in 
Occupied Europe and the Kasztner Report, which were only secondhand testimonies, 
the prosecution and the judges at Nuremberg had only direct testimonies which, 
juridically, were not much more authentic, given the way in which they were adduced 
by their authors. All of these witnesses had been interned at Auschwitz, and, as for 
gas chambers, either they knew nothing about them, or they only knew about them 
through their prison comrades who were "trustworthy" and who they generally did not 
name, or who were already dead, if they did name them. Second hand testimony 
again. An example of this kind of testimony is provided by Dr. Benedikt Kautski who 
did not appear at court, but, as we have seen, who wrote a book and had his short hour 
of fame. Another is that of Madame Vaillant-Couturier who arrived at the Auschwitz 
camp in January 1943, who was a communist, who, for that reason, was hidden away 
in the hospital where she was an important personage in the Häftlingsführung, and 
who, in answer to the question as to whether the hospital had been open to Jews when 
they were sick, coldly replied to French Prosecutor Dubost, "No, when we got there 
the Jews did not have the right to go there; they were taken directly to the gas 
chamber if they were sick." (T. VI, p. 219.) Now, never was a false witness brought 
before the bar of a Tribunal with such calm assurance, since in January 1943 there 
existed -- if indeed, there ever existed -- no gas chamber at Auschwitz, the official

--- PAGE BREAK ---211
word being that they were not installed until the end of February 1943.

There is no 
end to the number of false witnesses of this kind that could be cited.

But, for the first 
time, with the Gerstein document, the prosecution had a first-hand witness.

But wasn't 
Gerstein dead?

Yes, but he had written, or, at least, he had signed, a statement -- at 
least that is what was claimed.

Was not this statement about Auschwitz?

No, not in so 
far as it concerned what he had seen; but invoices for Zyklon B that was delivered to 
that camp were appended.

His description of extermination by gas in other camps 
portrayed the operation in such a degree of horror that the journalists assigned to the 
trial decided that their emphasis of that theme would be sure to sell newspapers at 
home.

The judges themselves accorded much less importance to the Gerstein 
allegations, but they allowed the journalists a free hand; even though they did not 
actually encourage them, they never gave them their true impressions of the Gerstein 
document, which was presented to public opinion as though it had been admitted into 
evidence when actually it had been rejected (as was discussed in the preceding 
chapter).

Dr.

Benedikt Kautski's book did not come out until the end of 1946.

Therefore, it did 
not play a part in the trial of the Major War Criminals.

As a secondhand testimony on 
gas chambers it would not have been any great help.

To have a description of the gas 
exterminations at Auschwitz as precise as that of the Gerstein document on Belzec, 
the prosecution had to wait until 1951 and Médecin à Auschwitz by Miklos Nyiszli, 
about whom we have also learned what to think in the preceding chapters.

Since then, 
nothing.

No other de visu witnesses.Since then, 
nothing.

No other de visu witnesses.

The literature of the concentration camps -- the 
historians like Hans Rothfels, Golo Mann, or Raul Hilberg, the War Crimes 
Commission of Warsaw, and the Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, 
their propagandists like Leon Poliakov or Hannah Arendt, the Institut für 
Zeitgeschichte at Munich, or showmen and film directors like Piscator (producer of 
Der Stellvertreter by Hochhuth) -- has never been able to bring forth, as far as I know, 
any more than those two testimonies, both of which I believe I have proved were 
obviously apocryphal.

I shall not belabor the point.

Not having been able to establish the existence of gas extermination any better than 
that, those championing the genocide indictment did not have much better luck when 
they wanted to number the losses in human lives.

In 1945-1946, during the trial of the 
Major War Criminals, they found themselves in the following situation: Mr.

Rafael 
Lemkin said simply, "millions;" Dr.

Rudolf Kasztner spoke only of Hungarian Jews 
whose number he estimated to be about 800,000 (page 1 of his Report), and he 
calculated (page 8) that "500,000 had been deported on the Karchau-Odenberg route 
between May 15, 1944, and the beginning of July," that is, the 7th, as he makes clear 
a little farther on; the figures given in the Gerstein document led to results so 
astronomical that they were useless (it is, perhaps, not useless to recall that all the rest 
of the material in the document was, at the time, used only by the press because the 
President of the Tribunal refused even to have it read by the French Prosecutor 
Dubost); Höttl and Wisliceny, who, under the circumstances we already know about, 
spoke in terms of six and five million respectively, estimates that both said came from 
Eichmann.

Finally, Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rudolf Kasztner spoke only of Hungarian Jews 
whose number he estimated to be about 800,000 (page 1 of his Report), and he 
calculated (page 8) that "500,000 had been deported on the Karchau-Odenberg route 
between May 15, 1944, and the beginning of July," that is, the 7th, as he makes clear 
a little farther on; the figures given in the Gerstein document led to results so 
astronomical that they were useless (it is, perhaps, not useless to recall that all the rest 
of the material in the document was, at the time, used only by the press because the 
President of the Tribunal refused even to have it read by the French Prosecutor 
Dubost); Höttl and Wisliceny, who, under the circumstances we already know about, 
spoke in terms of six and five million respectively, estimates that both said came from 
Eichmann. Finally, Mr. Justice Jackson, as we have seen, added to this confusing state 
of affairs when he stated in his speech of November 21, 1945, that: 
Of the 9,600,000 Jews who were living in Nazi dominated Europe, it is 
estimated, with full knowledge of the facts, that sixty per cent perished;

--- PAGE BREAK ---212
5,700,000 Jews are missing from countries where they lived before, and more 
than 4,000,000 cannot be accounted for, either by a natural death rate, or 
immigration into other lands.

(I.M.T.

II, p.

128).

The figure of 4,500,000 exterminated was the claim of the prosecution, and it was, 
just the beginning.

But, it is not easy to see how, between May 8, 1945, and the 21 st 
of November, Mr.

Justice Jackson was able to obtain full knowledge of the facts.

Since no official census took place during that period of time -- in any case, how 
could it have taken place in such a chaos of populations displaced and moving about 
in every direction?

-- it is plainly only a purely conjectural estimate.

Be that as it may, 
it was not sustained in the judgment against the Major War Criminals, and the press 
sustained Höttl's estimate.

Since then, except for Mr.

Gerald Reitlinger, who alone 
came to a conclusion more or less in accord with Mr.

Justice Jackson -- i.e., of 
4,200,000 to 4,600,000 exterminated, everything has happened as if, once having laid 
down the principle that Höttl's estimate was well founded, all of the other statisticians 
who have worked on the figures in the same spirit as the Warsaw Commission, the 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, or the Institut für Zeitgeschichte of 
Munich had never had any other purpose except to prove that the estimates of Höttl 
and Wisliceny corresponded with reality.

What is noticeable from the very first is that 
while they have all come to an overall result in the neighborhood of six million, they 
do not come to it by the same routes, since the allocation in detail by countries of 
these six million presents considerable disparities.

The clearest example of these 
differences, it seems to me, is Poland, where Mr.What is noticeable from the very first is that 
while they have all come to an overall result in the neighborhood of six million, they 
do not come to it by the same routes, since the allocation in detail by countries of 
these six million presents considerable disparities.

The clearest example of these 
differences, it seems to me, is Poland, where Mr.

Salo Baron, holder of the chair of 
Jewish History at Columbia University, found that on the arrival of Russian troops in 
the country 700,000 Jews were still there (according to his statement of April 24, 
1961, at the Eichmann Trial); the World Center of Jewish Documentation at Paris 
gave the figure of 500,000 (communiqué to the Figaro littéraire of June 4, 1960), the 
Institute of Jewish Affairs claimed some 400,000 (Eichmann's Confederates and the 
Third Reich Hierarchy, p.

59), and Mr.

Raul Hilberg found only 50,000 (The 
Destruction of the European Jews, p.

670).

The distribution by camp, or sector of 
destruction, is not the same either, and offers disparities just as glaring, depending 
upon which one of these statisticians is referred to.

For example: about 4,000,000 
Jews met their fate at Auschwitz, the rest in other extermination camps, or in the open 
at the hands of the Einsatzgruppen, we are told by Leon Poliakov, Olga Wormer, and 
Henri Michel, among others.

This distribution manifestly takes into account the 
Warsaw judgment that condemned Höss to be hanged on the charge of having caused 
the death at Auschwitz of 2,812,000 persons, 2,500,000 of them Jews, from May 1940 
to December 1943; therefore, it is argued that this figure is not so far from the four 
million figure that is claimed for the whole term of the camp; to round things out, 
1,950,000 is claimed for all the other camps, another million at Auschwitz (900,000 
as corrected by the Institute of Jewish Affairs), 1,400,000 by the Einsatzgruppen, and 
the remainder in "Mobile operations" as Mr.

Raul Hilberg tells us.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This distribution manifestly takes into account the 
Warsaw judgment that condemned Höss to be hanged on the charge of having caused 
the death at Auschwitz of 2,812,000 persons, 2,500,000 of them Jews, from May 1940 
to December 1943; therefore, it is argued that this figure is not so far from the four 
million figure that is claimed for the whole term of the camp; to round things out, 
1,950,000 is claimed for all the other camps, another million at Auschwitz (900,000 
as corrected by the Institute of Jewish Affairs), 1,400,000 by the Einsatzgruppen, and 
the remainder in "Mobile operations" as Mr. Raul Hilberg tells us. We must also point 
out that the latter does not seem to be very sure of the figures himself since he comes 
to a total of 5,100,000 on page 767 of The Destruction of the European Jews, while he 
gets 5,407,500 on page 670. For all extermination camps other than Auschwitz Mr. Raul Hilberg gives us 950,000, but the Warsaw Commission and the Judgment of the 
Jerusalem Tribunal found "850,000 for only four out of five of them" (Chelmno, 
Belzec, Sobibor and Treblinka, cp. chap. XXIII, p. 80).

--- PAGE BREAK ---213
All this shows how serious they are and how much to credit their documentary 
sources, which, although the same for all the statisticians, speak to each of them in so 
different a language that the only point of agreement is the total number of Jewish 
losses between 5 and 6 million human lives, when they all make their additions -- 
except for the more modest Reitlinger and for Poliakov who says "between 5 and 7 
million" (Le Troisième Reich et les Juifs).

However, with regard to Reitlinger and 
Poliakov, they settle on 6 million, which is the mathematical mean.

The reader will readily understand that, faced with this jumble of contradictory 
calculations, rather than to take up each of the references one by one and to go over 
each of the additions, I have preferred, by using statistics all from Jewish sources, to 
try to reconstitute in detail, country by country, the world Jewish population of 1946, 
and compare it with what it was when National Socialism came to power in Germany 
in 1933.

Rightly or wrongly, this procedure seems to me to be the best method, as we 
go along, to show up the shameless falsifications of the Warsaw Commission, the 
World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, the Institut für Zeitgeschichte 
of Munich, and all of their supporters, authors, propagandists, journalists, historians, 
and others.

I imagine that the reader will also readily understand that the statistics 
which follow cannot be considered correct down to a unit.

In the matter of population 
statistics it is never possible to arrive at more than approximate conclusions, since the 
figures are based purely on interrogations of interested persons whose answers, when 
they can be gotten, are always unreliable, or they are not to be had at all because of 
the faultiness, or even the lack, of a civil service in a very great number of countries.I imagine that the reader will also readily understand that the statistics 
which follow cannot be considered correct down to a unit.

In the matter of population 
statistics it is never possible to arrive at more than approximate conclusions, since the 
figures are based purely on interrogations of interested persons whose answers, when 
they can be gotten, are always unreliable, or they are not to be had at all because of 
the faultiness, or even the lack, of a civil service in a very great number of countries.

In the matter of the Jewish population, the vague sort of aversion which all Jews, 
since the days of Herod, have shown toward census taking is another source of errors.

It is these two constant reservations which make approximations of all statistics.

Nevertheless, as all statisticians concede, the errors will be so slight as to be 
negligible in the conclusions drawn from a comparison of two or more sets of figures, 
if they are of the same origin.

With that granted, where do we stand in this month of 
July 1963?

II.

Postwar Statistics 
In 1951 the World Almanac published statistics from which it was concluded that 
there were then only 11,303,350 Jews in the world as against 16,643,120 in 1939.

This conclusion was given as the result of research on the part of the American Jewish 
Committee Year Book and the Jewish Statistic Bureau of the Synagogue Council 
which had spent the years 1949 and 1950 at it.

Presented as they were, there are many reasons for thinking that the World Almanac 
statistics of 1951 were primarily an answer to a study which appeared on February 22, 
1948, in the New York Times on the statistical data given by Hanson W.

Baldwin, the 
Times expert on Jewish population matters.

He claimed that in 1947, based on a secret 
census undertaken by the Jews themselves, there were living in the world between a 
minimum of 15,000,000 and a maximum of 18,000,000 Jews.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Baldwin, the 
Times expert on Jewish population matters. He claimed that in 1947, based on a secret 
census undertaken by the Jews themselves, there were living in the world between a 
minimum of 15,000,000 and a maximum of 18,000,000 Jews. He also claimed that 
between 650,000 and 750,000 of these Jews were living in Palestine and that 500,000 
were living in the other countries of the Middle East. In October 1959, the American 
Mercury (pp. 14 to 17) reviewed all of these figures and brought the controversy up to 
date. In reply to the American Mercury, the 1960 edition of the World Almanac gave,

--- PAGE BREAK ---214
for the year 1959, a world Jewish population of 12,299,780.

Then, another bit of 
information from a Jewish source, which was widely circulated by the world press, 
appeared in 1963.

The Hamburg daily, Die Welt, of April 1, 1963, for example, 
reported that: 
There are only about 13 million Jews still in the world.

In 1939 there were 
16,673,000.

This information was given out over the weekend by the London 
Institute of Jewish Affairs.

Most of the Jews, about 5,500,000, are today living 
in the U.S.A.

In Israel there are 2,045,000 in the Soviet Union 2,300,000, and 
in Great Britain 450,000 Jews.

(1)  
But, in the Israel Almanach (5719 in the Jewish calendar, 1958-1959 in the common 
calendar, P.

282) a Mr.

Eric Peretz tells us that "the Jewish population of the state of 
Israel represents one eighth of the world Jewish population," and he fixed it at "one 
million eight hundred thousand." Meanwhile, a Mr.

Marc Cohen puts that eighth at 
"two million." So, in that year, the thirteen million Jews of whom a world census was 
taken again in 1962 by the Institute of Jewish Affairs of London was either 14,00,000, 
if one prefers the first estimate, or 16 million, if one chooses the second.

Incidentally, 
the Israel Almanach is published in Jerusalem by the "Youth and Hehabouts 
Department" of the world Zionist movement.

Only out of concern for accuracy and completeness do I give the puerile statement 
which Mr.

Salo Baron, waving his title of Professor of Jewish History at Columbia 
University, made before the bar of the Jerusalem Tribunal on April 24, 1961; it is 
herewith summarized from a report that appeared in the Figaro of the next day: 
1.

"Since 1945 the world Jewish population has increased at the rate of 20%."  
2.

"In 1939, there were about 16 million of us in the world.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Since 1945 the world Jewish population has increased at the rate of 20%."  
2. "In 1939, there were about 16 million of us in the world. We should, 
therefore, be about 19,000,000 today, and we are only 12 million."  
He makes up for his lack of historical knowledge with a very good knowledge of 
mathematics: 16 million minus 6 million equals 10 million, which, in turn, plus 
twenty per cent equals 12 million. His conclusion is mathematically indisputable! Now, it only remains for the Professor to establish, first, that the rate of increase of 
the world Jewish population was indeed 20% in 16 years and, second, that 6 million 
Jews were indeed exterminated. Well, let us proceed . . . Let us proceed with the consideration of one particular element of world Jewry: the 
Jewish population in the United States. In 1959, the American Jewish Committee Year 
Book and the Jewish Statistical Bureau of the Synagogue Council estimated the 
American Jewish population at 5,185,000 for the year of 1949, and in 1959, at 
5,260,000 for the year of 1958. From which we can conclude that if the world Jewish 
population increased by twenty per cent from 1945 to 1961, or 1.25% per year, as Mr. Salo Baron proclaimed at the Jerusalem Tribunal, America, at least, was an exception 
to the rule where the population was decreasing. And, for Russia, the information 
from the Institute of Jewish Affairs, which puts the population at 2,300,000 in 1962, 
hardly seems any more serious, if Mr. Nahum Goldmann is to be believed, who, in a 
report to the World Jewish Congress on September 12, 1963, said: "From 1948 to 
1963 Jews in the USSR increased to about three million, according to five writers

--- PAGE BREAK ---215
since dead, and one almanac and two periodicals." (Le Figaro, Paris, September 13, 
1963).

In 1961 Mr.

Nahum Goldmann had already produced these figures before the 
World Jewish Congress.

Just the same, there is a difference of 700,000 between 
2,300,000 and 3 million ...

During the whole of 1959, the Jewish population of the United States was the object, 
in the United States itself, of very strained discussion, after the publication in 1951 of 
The Iron Curtain Over America, (Dallas: Wilkinson, 1951) in which the author, Mr.

John Beaty, complained that the 1924 immigration law was constantly broken and 
that "since the end of the Second World War the problem of illegal entry has 
increased tremendously." (p.

45).

And, he cited the Jewish immigration from eastern 
Europe as an example of such illegal immigration.

(pp.

36-43).

Here again it is the 
American Mercury which gave emphasis to the discussion.

It underlined two things in 
particular concerning the Jewish immigration: 
1.

"The principal world Zionist organizations proudly proclaim that two-thirds of the 
Jews of the world are now living in the United States." And it concluded that if the 
figures which Hanson W.

Baldwin published in the New York Times of February 22, 
1948, correspond to reality, it was not of 5,185,000 or 5,260,000 that one should 
speak, as the statistics from Jewish sources claimed, but of 10,766,666 or 12,800,000 
(in 1947!).

In any case, Jewish statistics for 1959 claimed that the world Jewish 
population had risen that year to 12,299,780 persons.

If it is true that two-thirds of 
them were living in the United States, that makes, after all, 8,200,000, or, according to 
the information of Die Welt (also from a Jewish source) 8,667,000 for the year 1962, 
and not 5,500,000 as that information claims.

2.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If it is true that two-thirds of 
them were living in the United States, that makes, after all, 8,200,000, or, according to 
the information of Die Welt (also from a Jewish source) 8,667,000 for the year 1962, 
and not 5,500,000 as that information claims. 2. The other aspect of the problem was that during the year 1959 the Census Bureau 
of the United States government decided to conduct a census in 1960 to determine the 
extent of illegal immigration into the United States. All of the world Zionist 
organizations immediately protested -- and successfully, the American Mercury 
pointed out -- when the Census Bureau turned to the churches and to the synagogues 
with the object of finding out the number of persons who claimed membership within 
their congregations. The Zionist leaders stated, still according to the American 
Mercury, that it was "a violation of the principle of the separation of Church and 
State" -- as set forth in the Constitution of the United States -- for such a census to be 
taken and even that the proposed action of the census officials would draw down the 
wrath of God." The true reasons for this opposition can be seen easily; such a census, 
conducted in that manner, would have brought to light the vast extent of the Jewish 
immigration into the United States since 1933 and would have forever destroyed the 
myth of the six million Jewish victims of Nazi "genocide." That none of them at once 
calculated the Jewish population of the United States at 12 million is not astonishing, 
particularly if they had read the New York Times article! Since then, the figure of 12 million has become accepted, more or less, by American 
public opinion makers, as shown by this excerpt from the National Observer of July 
2, 1962: 
The nation's major religious groups, representing more than 40 Protestant, 
Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Jewish denominations have joined

--- PAGE BREAK ---ional Observer of July 
2, 1962: 
The nation's major religious groups, representing more than 40 Protestant, 
Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Jewish denominations have joined

--- PAGE BREAK ---

216
forces to tackle one of the country's thorniest domestic problems: race 
relations.  
They have called the first National Conference on Religion and Race to be 
held next January in Chicago. About 600 clerical and lay leaders, representing 
nearly 100,000,000 Americans, are expected to participate. One stated 
objective of the conference is to demonstrate the concern of religious leaders 
over racial segregation by a "statement of conscience."  
Participating will be the National Council of Churches, an organization of 33 
Protestant and Eastern Orthodox denominations with nearly 40,000,000 
members; the National Catholic Welfare Conference, the administrative 
agency of Catholic Bishops (there are 43,000,000 Catholics in the nation); and 
the Synagogue Council of America, which is representative of Jewish bodies 
at the national level. (Rabbinic bodies of Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform 
Judaism are represented. There are about 12,000,000 Jews in the United 
States.)  
Such are the points of view that confront each other concerning the Jewish population 
of the United States. We shall see farther on that for Poland, Russia, and, in a general 
way, for all of Central and Balkan Europe, statistics of Jewish origin pose in no less a 
brutal fashion the problem of their obvious falsification. 
III. Prewar Statistics 
In 1932, a Jewish journal that was published in New York, the Menorah Journal, (No. 
2, February) printed an analysis of the world Jewish population, the facts for which 
had been taken from the most noted Jewish statistician of the times, Mr. Arthur 
Ruppin. (2) The latter, said the Menorah Journal, had classified the Jews of the whole 
world, by occupation and by country. By occupation, it gave the conclusions just as 
they had been formulated by the statistician. By countries, it gave, in diminishing 
order, only those where there were more than 100,000 Jews, being content, for the 
others, to classify them in three categories, between 50,000 and 100,000, between 
10,000 and 50,000, and less than 10,000. The following is how the figures appeared: 
A. By occupationstent, for the 
others, to classify them in three categories, between 50,000 and 100,000, between 
10,000 and 50,000, and less than 10,000. The following is how the figures appeared: 
A. By occupations

Commerce..........................................6,1 00,000 or 38.6% 
Crafts and industries..........................5,730,000 or 36.4% 
Rentiers..............................................2,000,000 or 2.7% 
Professions.........................................1,000,000 or 6.3% 
Agriculture...........................................625,000 or 4% 
In service, laborers...............................325,000 or 2% 
Totals..................................................15,780,000 100%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

217
B. By countries.......625,000 or 4% 
In service, laborers...............................325,000 or 2% 
Totals..................................................15,780,000 100%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

217
B. By countries

United States...........................................4,500,000 
Poland..................................................3,100,000 
Russia...................................................3,000,000 
Rumania.................................................. 900,000 
Germany................................................. 500,000 
England................................................... 330,000 
France.................................................... 250,000 
Palestine ................................................. 250,000 
Argentina ................................................. 240,000 
Austria.................................................... 230,000 
Canada.................................................... 170,000 
Lithuania.................................................. 160,000 
Low countries............................................ 120,000 
French Morocco.......................................... 120,000 
Iraq......................................................... 100,000 
Other..................................................... 1,810,000 
Total...................................................15,780,000 
The other countries showed up this way: 
1. Countries with between 50,000 and 100,000 Jews: 
Latvia, Greece, Yugoslavia, Belgium, Italy, Turkey, Bulgaria, Algeria, South Africa, 
Tunisia, Egypt. 
2. Countries with between 10,000 and 50,000 Jews: 
Switzerland, Brazil, Mexico, Uruguay, Persia, Syria, Yemen, India, Afghanistan, 
China, Spanish Morocco, Tripoli, Australia. 
3. Countries with fewer than 10,000 Jews: 
Danzig, Sweden, Denmark, Esthonia, Ireland, Spain, Rhodes, Memel, Portugal, 
Norway, Finland, Cuba, Chile, Japan, Singapore, New Zealand. 
All of the preceding figures are dated from 1926 to 1928 and represent 0.8% of the 
population of the world, then calculated at two billion inhabitants. 
In 1932, population movements only interested me professionally, that is, in their 
major lines of force, and, as far as the Jewish population was concerned, at that time 
these statistics seemed to me to give a good enough picture so that I felt informed on 
the matter. I remember having noted that from 1877 to 1932 the Jewish population of 
the United States had risen from 230,000 to 4,500,000, while that of France had 
increased from 150,000 to 250,000 between 1850 and the same date, and I concluded 
that the migration of European Jews was in the direction of the United States via 
Western Europe. From the lands of pogroms to the land of liberty. For me that was the 
main point. So, in 1934, when Arthur Ruppin's Les Juifs dans le Monde moderne 
came out in France, I did not read it. But, that was a mistake. Had I read Ruppin'sland of liberty. For me that was the 
main point. So, in 1934, when Arthur Ruppin's Les Juifs dans le Monde moderne 
came out in France, I did not read it. But, that was a mistake. Had I read Ruppin's

--- PAGE BREAK ---me that was the 
main point. So, in 1934, when Arthur Ruppin's Les Juifs dans le Monde moderne 
came out in France, I did not read it. But, that was a mistake. Had I read Ruppin's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218
original work, I would surely have noticed that the Menorah Journal had, for 
instance, failed to mention Hungary and Czechoslavakia. I was wrong again in not 
foreseeing that later on I would need figures more exact than those that that 
publication gave for Belgium, Yugoslavia, Greece, and the like. After the war, when I 
needed all that information, I was not able to put my hands on a copy of Arthur 
Ruppin's work, which had so mysteriously disappeared from circulation, except after 
exercising the wiles of a Sioux Indian. In 1960, when I published Ulysse trahi par les 
siens, I had not yet succeeded, and for Hungary and Czechoslovakia I had to be 
satisfied with working out, as a note to the figures quoted, the figures of the World 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, leaving it up to the reader to add 
them to the total which I found for the population of European Jews in countries 
occupied by Germany, and which came to 8,700,000, but at the same time cautioning 
the reader that the figures were clearly exaggerated by some 404,000 for Hungary and 
some 315,000 for Czechoslovakia. 
Here now are Mr. Arthur Ruppin's statistics for those countries of Europe occupied by 
the Germans during World War Two: 
Poland........................3,100,000 
Russia.........................3,000,000 
Rumania....................... 900,000 
Germany....................... 500,000 
Hungary........................ 320,000 
Czechoslovakia............. 260,000 
France........................... 250,000 
Austria........................... 230,000 
Lithuania........................160,000 
Low countries................ 120,000 
Latvia...............................80,000 
Greece..............................75,000 
Yugoslavia........................70,000 
Belgium............................60,000 
Italy..................................50,000 
Bulgaria............................50,000 
Denmark............................7,000 
Esthonia.............................5,000 
Norway..............................2,000 
Finland...............................2,000 
Luxemburg..........................2,000 
Total.............................9,243,000 
From 1932 to 1939, philo-Semites or anti-Semites, everyone who talked about the 
European or the world Jewish population referred to Arthur Ruppin. In Europe, the 
first drew attention to the fact that about 9 million European Jews were menaced by 
National Socialism; the second made use of his classification by occupations to 
conclude that according to the Jews themselves, few among them really worked, and, 
in Germany, that was one of the grounds of National Socialism for the accusation of 
Jewish social parasitism.s to 
conclude that according to the Jews themselves, few among them really worked, and, 
in Germany, that was one of the grounds of National Socialism for the accusation of 
Jewish social parasitism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---219
I should say that in his study Arthur Ruppin warned that because of the difficulties 
inherent in all population studies, in particular that of Jewish populations, the figures 
he gave did not have an indisputable and absolute value.

With that consideration in 
mind, I shall concede that the 9,243,000 Jews in Europe occupied by the Germans 
could just as well be 9 million.

In addition, I shall concede that in figuring 9.6 million, 
Mr.

Justice Jackson had not exaggerated so badly; at least, his overestimation was 
very much less than the postwar statisticians of the World Almanac (cp.

on p.

103, the 
estimate of the Jewish population in 1938, as published in the 1948 edition).

In fact, 
one can hardly say that he exaggerated at all.

He had not left anyone out, that's all.

His 
great mistake was in not having thought that in 1939 the Jewish population of those 
countries was not the same as in 1931; in other words, he erred by not taking into 
account Jewish emigration during the period when they were directly threatened by 
National Socialism.

He should be censured, therefore, for having stated positively, 
without any proof -- not having and not being able to have "full knowledge of the 
facts," as he boldly claimed -- that sixty per cent of that population, certainly 
overestimated by him, were absent from the roll call at the time he pronounced his 
indictment.

Finally, in parallel columns, on page 302, are the estimates of Jewish losses published 
by the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation at Paris (Le Figaro 
Littéraire, June 4, 1960) and by Mr.

Raul Hilberg in 1961 (The Destruction of the 
European Jews, p.

670).

My first idea had been to put into parallel columns three sets of statistics, the third 
being those published also in 1961 by the Institute of Jewish Affairs in Eichmann's 
Confederates and the Third Reich Hierarchy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

670). My first idea had been to put into parallel columns three sets of statistics, the third 
being those published also in 1961 by the Institute of Jewish Affairs in Eichmann's 
Confederates and the Third Reich Hierarchy. But that compilation was limited to a 
list of Jewish losses by country without further reference to their numbers in 1939 
other than by percentages. By stretching Mr. Raul Hilberg's figures for Poland, Czechoslovakia and Russia a 
little, the Institute of Jewish Affairs gives a total of 5,717,000 exterminated, 
representing, it points out, 68 percent of the Jewish population of those countries in 
1939. From which one can conclude that the prewar Jewish population of those 
countries came to 8,400,000. The discrepancy is significant only with regard to 
Poland, for which the Institute gives 400,000 survivors, where Mr. Raul Hilberg came 
up with only 50,000; Mr. Salo Baron got 700,000; and the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation of Paris, found 500,000. Where it found two 
million survivors in Russia, Mr. Raul Hilberg found 2,600,000. 360,000 Jews are 
claimed by the Institute to have been living in Czechoslovakia in 1939, while Mr. Raul Hilberg is content with 315,000, and Mr. Arthur Ruppin with 260,000. In 
addition, there are a few other misuses. Upon reflection, the dose of phantasy which is 
provided by the statistics which are set forth on page 302 struck me as quiet enough 
for the time being, and I finally decided to refrain from citing the third set of figures 
in addition.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
Table p. 302which are set forth on page 302 struck me as quiet enough 
for the time being, and I finally decided to refrain from citing the third set of figures 
in addition.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
Table p. 302

WCJD 
Hilberg 
Country 
1939 
1946 
Losses 
1939 
1946 
Losses 
France 
300,000 
180,000 
120,000 
270,000 
200,000 
70,000 
Belgium 
90,000 
50,000 
40,000 
140,000 
20,000 
120,000 
Holland 
150,000 
60,000 
90,000 
140,000 
20,000 
120,000 
Denmark 
7,000 
6,500 
500 
6,500 
5,500 
1,000 
Norway 
1,500 
600 
900 
2,000 
1,000 
1,000 
Esthonia 
5,000 
1,000 
4,000 
4,500 
--- 
4,500 
Latvia 
95,000 
10,000 
85,000 
95,000 
--- 
95,000 
Lithuania 
150,000 
15,000 
135,000 
145,000 
--- 
145,000 
Poland 
3,300,000 500,000 
2,800,000
3,350,000
50,000 
3,300,000 
Germany 
210,000 
40,000 
170,000 
240,000 
80,000 
160,000 
Czechoslov. 315,000 
55,000 
260,000 
315,000 
44,000 
271,000 
Austria  
60,000 
20,000 
40,000 
60,000 
7,000 
53,000 
Hungray 
404,000 
204,000 
200,000 
400,000 
200,000 
200,000 
Yugoslavia 
75,000 
20,000 
55,000 
75,000 
12,000 
63,000 
Rumania 
850,000 
425,000 
425,000 
800,000 
430,000 
370,000 
Italy 
57,000 
42,000 
15,000 
50,000 
33,000 
17,000 
USSR 
2,100,000 600,000 
1,500,000
3,020,000
2,600,000 420,000 
Bulgaria 
50,000 
43,000 
7,000 
50,000 
47,000 
3,000 
Greece 
75,000 
15,000 
60,000 
74,000 
12,000 
62,000 
Luxemburg 
3,000 
1,000 
2,000 
3,000 
1,000 
2,000 
TOTALS 
8,297,500 2,288,100
6,009,400
9,190,000
3,782,500 5,407,500 
Now, let us have a look at our two sets of statistics. They have the following in 
common: 
1. In comparison with the statistics of Mr. Arthur Ruppin they both take into account 
the Jewish migration between 1933 and 1939, but for Germany and Austria only. 
With regard to this emigration everyone, including the statistics of Richard Korherr, 
head of the Population Bureau of the Third Reich, dated April 17, 1943, is in 
agreement, a most rare occurrence, in estimating the Jewish emigration at 300,000 
from Germany, and 180,000 from Austria. The exaggeration of Mr. Raul Hilberg is 
unimportant because, being of the same magnitude and kind in the two columns, it 
does not involve the number of exterminated obtained by comparison. It calls for only 
one comment: one piece of the record with which he was not acquainted. 
2. The victims are largely accounted for by overestimating the prewar Jewish 
population and minimizing the postwar Jewish population, a little everywhere, but 
mainly in Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia. We notice that these prewar 
overestimations lie between 50,000 and 100,000 per country, sometimes more 
(200,000 for Poland!). If they have minimized proportionately the number of 
survivors, and on the supposition that ten out of the twenty countries concerned in 
these statistics are affected by an exaggeration of this kind (it was obviously not 
possible everywhere, in Norway or Denmark, for instance), an exaggeration of at least 
50,000 per country would account for a million of the total number of those who 
claimed to have been exterminated, obtained by the difference, and an exaggeration ofce), an exaggeration of at least 
50,000 per country would account for a million of the total number of those who 
claimed to have been exterminated, obtained by the difference, and an exaggeration of

--- PAGE BREAK ---221
100,000 per country, would yield a total of 2 million.

But, that is only a gratuitous 
supposition, and I only make it here to show how a little stream can easily become a 
great river.

Later on we shall see what the actual worth of these two statistics is.

Each 
thing in its own time.

Next, let us examine the divergences that are presented by comparing the 
aforementioned statistics: 
1.

The total number of survivors varies by about 1.5 million from one to the other, and 
of those exterminated by a little more than 600,000.

In both cases such a variation is a 
significant margin; 
2.

Looking at it closely, this divergence derives from the evaluations, respectively, for 
Russia and Poland.

For the first, the figure of 2,100,000 given by the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation at Paris does not include the whole of Russia, 
but only that part which was occupied by German troops.

The only persons who know 
this are those who have read Le Troisième Reich et les Juifs by Leon Poliakov, from 
which these statistics are extracted and in which this particular detail is mentioned.

If 
one reintegrates into the two columns the million Jews that Mr.

Poliakov very 
arbitrarily subtracted, the estimate of survivors differs by exactly one million from 
one to the other for that country, the total number of the exterminated for all countries 
still differs by a little less than 600,000.

Who can say how Mr.

Poliakov managed to 
get the figure, 2,100,000 for the number of Jews living in that part of Russia occupied 
by German troops; he does not tell us.

But, we can be sure that there is no question 
here of a census evaluation; such a procedure is absolutely impossible on the local 
level unless that level corresponds to the existing civil administrative districts.

Thus, 
no census could have been made in Russia, because the O.K.W.But, we can be sure that there is no question 
here of a census evaluation; such a procedure is absolutely impossible on the local 
level unless that level corresponds to the existing civil administrative districts.

Thus, 
no census could have been made in Russia, because the O.K.W.

decided to conquer 
Russia in accordance with the geographical imperatives of strategy instead of by one 
administrative district after another.

Mr.

Poliakov's figure is a purely conjectural 
evaluation, therefore, and one which seems to assume that the Jews of this region, 
instead of fleeing before an invasion which they knew was fatal for them, waited 
nicely in place for the coming of their executioners.

Nor can it be said how Mr.

Poliakov managed to estimate at 600,000 the number of survivors in 1946, when we 
can be sure that, with the war over for only a year, order had not been sufficiently 
reestablished to permit census-taking; obviously, that figure is still another rough 
estimate!

That it showed a loss of 1.5 million was doubtless all that mattered to Mr.

Poliakov, and, without doubt, he also worked out ahead of time the result that he was 
to come to, so that it would harmonize with the legend of the six million.

He did not 
realize that Mr.

Raul Hilberg was right behind him!

3.

On reading Mr.

Raul Hilberg's monograph, we see that he has taken into account 
the flight of the Jews before the advance of the German armies in Russia.

But to what 
extent does his estimate correspond with reality?

That is what we shall see farther on.

One must concede, in any case, that when he gives 3,020,000 as the number of Jews 
living in Russia in 1939, he is in agreement with Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That is what we shall see farther on. One must concede, in any case, that when he gives 3,020,000 as the number of Jews 
living in Russia in 1939, he is in agreement with Mr. Arthur Ruppin; and, when he 
calculates at 2,600,000 those among them who survived, which gives 420,000 lost, he 
is also in agreement with the Jewish journalist, David Bergelson, who wrote in Die 
Einheit, on December 5, 1942, that "Thanks to the evacuation, the majority (80%) of 
the Jews of the Ukraine, White Russia, and Lithuania and Latvia, were saved" (cited 
from Der Weg, Buenos Aires, January 1953). Where Mr. Raul Hilberg is no longer in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ity (80%) of 
the Jews of the Ukraine, White Russia, and Lithuania and Latvia, were saved" (cited 
from Der Weg, Buenos Aires, January 1953). Where Mr. Raul Hilberg is no longer in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
agreement is with himself. If, as he says, 2,600,000 Russian Jews were saved, how 
can he maintain (p. 190) that for Latvia, Lithuania, and Russia only 1.5 million 
"escaped behind the Russian lines" at the time of the advance of the German troops? 
And, how can he also maintain, as he does in his own statistics, that not one Latvian 
Jew survived? 
4. Poland: Here the statistics are more or less in agreement on the Jewish population 
in 1939, but not at all on the number of survivors; 500,000 for one, 50,000 for the 
other, a ratio of 1 to 10 -- compared to the 1 to 14 of Mr. Salo Baron. We do not know 
how the World Center for Contemporary Jewish Documentation came to this 
conclusion; there is no reference. As for Mr. Raul Hilberg, he is irretrievably lost in 
the fog of figures that he builds up around himself. Indeed, we have seen that on page 
767 of his book he gives 3,000,000 Polish Jews exterminated, and on page 670, he 
gives just 50,000 survivors out of 3,350,000; any explanation is superfluous. From 
what we have seen thus far, we can detect the playing of a little game. These statistics 
are indiscriminately, and even sometimes simultaneously, supported by the World 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation and various other Zionist 
organizations and spokesmen. The reader is free to choose between the two and to put 
himself in the place of one who might find the Jewish population of 1939 as given by 
the World Center at Paris and the number of Jewish survivors in 1945 as given by Mr. 
Raul Hilberg closer to reality. Or the other way around. In this saraband of figures, 
anything goes. In the first case we get: 8,297,500 minus 3,782,500 or 4,515,000 
victims; and in the second case 9,190,000 minus 2,288,100 or 6,901,900 victims. The 
result yields quite an impressive difference. By pursuing further this comparison of 
the two statistics we could doubtless find even more striking anomalies, but to what 
purpose? 
I think that the moment has come to talk of more serious matters, namely, of that 
migration of the European Jews between 1933 and 1945, to which I have only alluded 
so far. Because this movement has not been studied in any detail by any of the authors 
who we have been discussing, it is full of question marks and is susceptible to all 
kinds of manipulation. If it is true, as the American Mercury claims, that the Zionists 
will not permit a census of world Jewry -- what an admission! -- and that that refusal 
makes an accurate head count impossible, then they have little ground for complaint if 
any of my conclusions, which are based upon their own statistics, are wrong; after all, 
the following study would not have been necessary if there were such a census, since 
the entire truth would be revealed by it.sions, which are based upon their own statistics, are wrong; after all, 
the following study would not have been necessary if there were such a census, since 
the entire truth would be revealed by it.

IV. The Jewish Migration, or "The Wandering Jew" 
In order really to understand the movements of the European Jews from 1933 to 1945, 
it seems to me that a brief historical survey of Jewish migration is indispensable; in 
short, a history of the "wandering Jew." 
Successively or simultaneously popularized as Cartaphilus, Ahasverus, or Laquedem, 
depending upon the place and the time, the "wandering Jew" seems to have come into 
the European tradition in about the thirteenth century. Image and song had 
characterized him definitely in the eighteenth century in a naive ballad in twenty-four 
couplets, a "Portrait drawn from nature by the citizens of Brussels, at the time of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---223
last appearance of the Jew, the 22nd of April, 1774," which in its own way gives an 
account of one of the oldest and earliest of historical realities: the Jewish migration.

One of the oldest, the peregrinations of that branch, considered legitimate, of the 
descendants of Noah by Sem and Abraham (5), it is, in its legendary and mythical 
form, the substance of the Old Testament, which dates their first steps back to the no 
less legendary and mythical Flood.

The earliest: coming into history at a very 
uncertain date but very probably contemporary with the invasion of Egypt by the 
Hyksos (18th c.

B.C.), in any case, between the 20th and the 12th centuries before 
Christ, when all the other human migrations had long since come to an end.

Not only 
is the Jewish migration not ended, but twenty centuries after Christ it is still being 
described in the same legendary terms, and still has the same motive power.

"The 
commercial bent of the Jewish people," Otto Heller said (La Fin du Judaisme.

Paris: 
Guilde, 1933), "is of long tradition." In fact, from Sumer, which, if one is to believe 
the Old Testament, was its first objective, to New York, which seems to be its present 
objective, the Jewish migration has followed, as have all human migrations, the great 
natural arteries, but not in the same haphazard way.

Rather, the Jews have constantly 
turned toward those points or regions on the globe which have achieved the highest 
economic development.

That is why, instead of going directly from the East toward 
the West, like all the other human migrations, this one went in a zig-zag fashion in all 
directions.

That it encountered various misadventures, particularly the hostility it 
attracted in certain areas it had chosen for expansion, is certain.

But these accidents 
scarcely modified the movement with regard to the ever constant aims.That it encountered various misadventures, particularly the hostility it 
attracted in certain areas it had chosen for expansion, is certain.

But these accidents 
scarcely modified the movement with regard to the ever constant aims.

Incidentally, 
this hostility was never, historically speaking, either systematic or permanent, 
doubtless because, unlike all the other human migrations, it was itself never massive 
or aggressive; instead, it was characterized by the suppleness of the professional 
tradesman.

However, there are two exceptions to this historical generalization.

In its 
Biblical phase, during the time when first Saul, then David, and then Solomon tried to 
settle permanently and by force at the place where the two great commercial arterial 
routes of their times intersected -- routes that connected Europe and Asia to Africa, 
that is to say in Palestine --with the hope of living there by extracting a tithe of all the 
trade obliged to make use of this passage.

And today, still in Palestine where 
international Zionism plans to reconstitute, in the form of a State Bank, the Kingdom 
of Solomon, since Israel finds itself once again on the most important commercial 
arterial of the modern world, the one going from New York to New York, around the 
world via London, Paris, Tel-Aviv, Calcutta, Singapore, Hong-Kong, Shanghai, and 
Tokyo.

In any case, that is what one gets out of a small book, by a certain Kadmi 
Cohen, a spokesman for international Zionism, which had some fame between the two 
world wars: L'Etat d'Israel (Paris: Kra, 1930).--- PAGE BREAK ---

And today, still in Palestine where 
international Zionism plans to reconstitute, in the form of a State Bank, the Kingdom 
of Solomon, since Israel finds itself once again on the most important commercial 
arterial of the modern world, the one going from New York to New York, around the 
world via London, Paris, Tel-Aviv, Calcutta, Singapore, Hong-Kong, Shanghai, and 
Tokyo. In any case, that is what one gets out of a small book, by a certain Kadmi 
Cohen, a spokesman for international Zionism, which had some fame between the two 
world wars: L'Etat d'Israel (Paris: Kra, 1930). The theme of this book seems to be, 
although presented in vague terminology so as not to reveal the cloven hoof, that the 
international Zionist movement should not aim at assembling all of the Jews of the 
world in a country the size of the Kingdom of Solomon and at organizing them into a 
modern nation, but only its outer flank, whose task it would be to make it a home-port 
for a Diaspora which would rationally apportion the riches of the world at the point 
where they converge, after, naturally, siphoning off a portion for themselves. But, on 
the scale of the modern world, that would in a way be a repetition of the operation 
which was realized in the first century B.C., on the scale of the Roman world, which 
was described by Cicero in his celebrated speech Pro Flacco, and which was seen in 
the periodic shipment, on galleys headed for Judea, of all the gold of that world, 
which had until then, converted on Rome. If, twice, Rome commissioned Titus (70 
A.D.) and then Hadrian (135 A.D.) to destroy the Kingdom of Judea and to disperse

--- PAGE BREAK ---224
its people throughout the Empire, among other reasons, it had this one: to get back 
what she considered to be her gold.

Until Titus she had been very benevolent toward 
the Jews, as shown by the Bernice story.

Today, speaking metaphorically, the aim is the gold of Fort Knox.

If the plan should 
succeed -- and all that is needed is for the American branch of international Zionism 
to get its hand on Wall Street -- the Israeli home-port of the Diaspora would become 
not only the commercial home of the Atlantic world, but, since oil is the primary 
source of energy for its development, and control of that would be totally assured 
from the Middle East to Texas, it would also become the command post of all of the 
world's industry.

"You will earn your bread by the sweat of your brow," the Eternal 
One said to Adam; and to Eve, "You will give birth in pain," as he chased the couple 
from the earthly Paradise he had created for them and for their descendants.

The 
women of Israel would, to be sure, continue to bear their children in pain, but their 
men would earn their bread and that of their children by the sweat of other's brows.

Then, at the very least, it could be said that the designation "Chosen People," which 
the Jews claim for themselves, would assume it full significance.

The chances for this to succeed?

In 1932, Mr.

Arthur Ruppin (Les Juifs dans le 
Monde Moderne, op.

cit.) told us that in 1927 in the United States, the 4,500,000 Jews 
controlled a substantial number of periodical publications; they can be broken down 
in this way: 9 dailies, 68 weeklies, 18 monthlies, 16 others.

Furthermore, he specified 
that 65 of these publications came out in English, 41 in Yiddish, 3 in Hebrew, 2 in 
German, and that the most widely read of the dailies, the New York Vorwärts, had a 
circulation of 250,000.

Here it is a question only of the internal press of Judaism, 
whose aim was solely to maintain homogeneity.Furthermore, he specified 
that 65 of these publications came out in English, 41 in Yiddish, 3 in Hebrew, 2 in 
German, and that the most widely read of the dailies, the New York Vorwärts, had a 
circulation of 250,000.

Here it is a question only of the internal press of Judaism, 
whose aim was solely to maintain homogeneity.

No account was taken of Jewish 
financial participation in the press at large, which Mr.

Arthur Ruppin describes as 
being very significant.

And what of this Jewish control of the "mass media" today?

We shall see its effect farther on when we take up the significance of the Jewish 
population in the United States.

As for the importance of the internal press of the 
Zionist movement, I have not one fact which would allow me to estimate it.

But it 
cannot be less than it was in 1927.

And, as for the significance of Jewish financial 
participation in the public press -- as well as in cinema, radio, television, and book 
publishing -- it will suffice for me to remark that that press publicizes, with 
remarkable consistency, and assumes responsibility for all the theses of the American 
Jewish Committee.

That these theses are not always in accord with those of the World 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, and of its subsidiaries, whose 
propaganda is inspired by Mr.

Ben Gurion, is to be accounted for in the political 
dissension between him and Mr.

Nahum Goldmann, who is the inspiration for the 
American Jewish Committee.

The discord between these two men and the two 
organizations lies only in details and is only barely perceptible in shades of meaning.

When it comes to essentials they are always in agreement on the general theme.

And 
their respective adherents follow their example; Mr.

Raul Hilberg and Madame 
Hannah Arendt offer us the best illustration.

At the service of Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Raul Hilberg and Madame 
Hannah Arendt offer us the best illustration. At the service of Mr. Nahum Goldmann, 
they credit Auschwitz with one million Jews exterminated (nearly three million less 
than Leon Poliakov, or Olga Wormser, or Henri Michel of the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation and its subsidiaries!) and give 950,000 for the 
five other alleged gas extermination centers (more than one million less than the 
figure given by the World Center group; in all, a margin of error of nearly four million 
out of a total of six!) But, when they come to make their additions for the balance

--- PAGE BREAK ---225
sheet of Jewish losses, they still manage to come to a figure near, or at least on the 
same sort of scale (this is the shade of meaning in the general theme) as the six million 
of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation and its subsidiaries at 
the service of Mr.

Ben Gurion.

The same holds true for the analysis of the Jewish 
losses by countries, where, depending upon whether you follow the contentions of the 
American Jewish Committee, as expressed by Mr.

Raul Hilberg or by Mr.

Salo Baron, 
or those of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, as expressed 
by the Poliakov group, you get a total for survivors which varies from 50,000 to 
700,000 for Poland, from 500,000 to 2,600,000 for Russia, from zero to 85,000 for 
Latvia, and from zero to several millions for each one of a dozen other countries, 
without the overall figure for losses for all the countries being noticeably affected.

All 
this means that in the general contention, shared by both, that six million Jews more 
or less were exterminated, these two theses nullify each other when it comes to the 
details.

But, let us return to our examination of Jewish migration.

Of the accidental historical circumstances which had an influence on the general 
direction which the Jewish migration took, the most important seem to have been the 
Babylonian Captivity (588-536 B.C.), the intervention of Titus (70 A.D.) and of 
Hadrian (135 A.D.), the reactions of Christianity in the Middle Ages (especially from 
the 13th to the 16th century), the policy of the Russian Czars in the second half of the 
19th century, Bolshevism, the, so to speak, atavistic hostility of the Polish people 
since the end of the First World War, and finally Hitler from 1933 to 1945.But, let us return to our examination of Jewish migration.

Of the accidental historical circumstances which had an influence on the general 
direction which the Jewish migration took, the most important seem to have been the 
Babylonian Captivity (588-536 B.C.), the intervention of Titus (70 A.D.) and of 
Hadrian (135 A.D.), the reactions of Christianity in the Middle Ages (especially from 
the 13th to the 16th century), the policy of the Russian Czars in the second half of the 
19th century, Bolshevism, the, so to speak, atavistic hostility of the Polish people 
since the end of the First World War, and finally Hitler from 1933 to 1945.

However, 
there were other significant circumstances which were not hostile: since 1850, the 
progressive assumption of industrial and commercial world leadership by the United 
States has been a positive factor which has been decisive in orienting the actual 
migration of the Jews, and in accelerating the orientation.

'The figures are revealing: 
230,000 Jews in the United States in 1877; 475,000 in 1890; 1,775,000 in 1906; 
3,300,000 in 1916; 4,081,000 in 1926; 4,461,184 in 1936, according to Mr.

John 
Beaty (The Iron Curtain over America, p.

41), who claims to be citing from various 
official censuses of the American populations (6).

And, that means that during these 
sixty years the Jewish population of the United States has multiplied more than 
twenty-fold, a veritable invasion.

However, it is true that during these sixty years, it is 
not only Jews who have been drawn to the United States.

In 1936, the date of the last 
official statistics which are referred to by Mr.

John Beaty, out of a total population of 
128 million, there were about 115 million whites.

Among these 115 million, 
approximately 33 million were either foreign-born or of the first generation of 
foreign-born.--- PAGE BREAK ---

John Beaty, out of a total population of 
128 million, there were about 115 million whites. Among these 115 million, 
approximately 33 million were either foreign-born or of the first generation of 
foreign-born. These sixty years corresponded to what we in Europe call the Gold 
Rush, which was first set in motion in 1848 by the discovery of gold in California and 
which laid the foundation for the extraordinary development of San Francisco. It was 
really an "Industrial Rush" in the United States after 1877. In 1926 the Germans, or descendants of Germans, made up the largest ethnic or 
national group in the United States with 7,250,000; the English were next with 5 
million; then came the Irish with 4 million; and the Italians with 3,500,000. However, 
with its 4,081,000 individuals, the Jewish group was the one which was, with regard 
to its world-wide importance, by far the strongest contingent. It must also be noted 
that while the other groups settled in the United States between 1850 and 1900, the 
Jews only began to arrive in large numbers about 1900, particularly after 1906, and,

--- PAGE BREAK ---226
as the statistics show, they were mostly Russian and Polish in origin; those who were 
not were almost all German.

It seems that one can associate the beginnings of the 
massive migration of the Jews to the United States with two events, contemporary 
with it: (1) the setback of Theodore Herzl (who died in 1904) in his attempt to found a 
Jewish state in Palestine, which was especially of concern to the Russian and Polish 
Jews who were victims of periodic pogroms, and (2) the first steps taken by the 
United States to establish immigration quotas (1917-1924) which, according to the 
figures cited above, make it clear that the immigration of the Jews was largely 
clandestine after 1917.

One quickly gets an idea of what it has been since that date.

No error is risked in saying that the Russian, Polish, and German Jews have lost no 
ground since the beginning of the century, and that, especially between 1933 and 
1945, their immigration was not any the less clandestine in spite of the existence of 
the National Origins Law of 1924 which, observing how Jews in Europe were being 
persecuted, was never brought -- to the honor of America -- into effect against them 
during this period, although in theory this law was never officially repealed.

If every time the Jewish problem has arisen in the world it has been stirred up by 
Russian, Polish, and German Jews -- at least -- it is due to the shattering intervention 
of Titus and Hadrian in Palestine, an intervention which displaced what one might call 
the center of gravity, or nutrient reservoir, of the Jewish migration in the European 
triangle lying between the mouths of the Volga, the Danube, and the Vistula.No error is risked in saying that the Russian, Polish, and German Jews have lost no 
ground since the beginning of the century, and that, especially between 1933 and 
1945, their immigration was not any the less clandestine in spite of the existence of 
the National Origins Law of 1924 which, observing how Jews in Europe were being 
persecuted, was never brought -- to the honor of America -- into effect against them 
during this period, although in theory this law was never officially repealed.

If every time the Jewish problem has arisen in the world it has been stirred up by 
Russian, Polish, and German Jews -- at least -- it is due to the shattering intervention 
of Titus and Hadrian in Palestine, an intervention which displaced what one might call 
the center of gravity, or nutrient reservoir, of the Jewish migration in the European 
triangle lying between the mouths of the Volga, the Danube, and the Vistula.

Mistreated as they were by Rome, the refugees from the massacres were scarcely 
drawn to Egypt, also Roman, as their fathers had been in the time of Herod; they 
preferred to work their way beyond the limes, most of them by way of the Caucasus, 
with the rest going to settle in Babylon, which had earlier been assigned to their 
ancestors by Nebuchadnezzar during the time of the Captivity (6th c.

B.C.).

In the 
tolerant reign of the Arsacides, the latter formed a sort of vassal state which, from the 
third to the fifth century, intellectually illuminated the entire Jewish world through its 
theological academies of Sora, Poumbadita and Hahardea.

There, and during that 
epoch, the so-called Babylonian Talmud was codified.

But that branch progressively 
joined with the larger migration and was incorporated within it.

Had their Palestine experience taught them a lesson?

Very likely.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Had their Palestine experience taught them a lesson? Very likely. The fact remains 
that all the writers who have described or commented upon these events are agreed on 
this point: the Jews were very well received on the other side of the Caucasus by the 
autochthonous peoples among whom they appeared as the bearers of a new religion to 
whose proselytism they yielded. As they made converts among these people so did 
they mingle with them, and they rapidly swarmed into the area between the mouth of 
the Danube and that of the Volga; then, clever merchants as they had remained, they 
were drawn to the Baltic Sea, and they soon occupied a triangle formed with the 
mouth of the Vistula, through which necessarily passed all the land routes, highways 
and rivers, which contributed to the trade between continental Europe and Asia, via 
the Black Sea and the Caspian. Caracalla did away with the measures taken against them by Titus and Hadrian. Consequently, during the whole of the third century and until Constantine, who 
persecuted them again (beginning of the fourth century), their commercial progress 
was favored by the normalization of their relations with their co-religionists who were 
still in the Empire, and they too appeared as the bearers of a standard of living, until 
then unknown to the barbarian peoples of those regions, which attracted the native

--- PAGE BREAK ---227
population as much as, if not more then, their religion did.

With conversion and 
intermarriage contributing, the two or three tens of thousands of Jews, who fleeing 
before the soldiers of Titus and Hadrian had crossed the Caucasus, had become by the 
Middle Ages hundreds of thousands, living in trading communities closed to the 
uninitiated, whose synagogues were at the same time the cement and the keystone, but 
whose ethnic formation was quite different from the original group.

On the eve of the 
war of 1939, there were several million of the Ashkenazim in world Jewry, as 
compared to the Sephardim, descendants of those who had gone into western Europe 
along the shores of the Mediterranean, without mingling with the autochthonous 
populations of the countries they went through and who had kept their original ethnic 
type.

I shall take advantage of the opportunity here presented to say that from the 
Ashkenazim to the Sephardim, world Jewry of the twentieth century is composed of 
men and women of an infinity of types, very clearly distinguishable in their somatic 
characteristics -- there are even yellow and black Jews!

-- who are united only by a 
religion, customs, a way of life, or, to sum it up, a tradition which is the binding 
element made up of a singleness of viewpoint and a solidarity that survives all strains, 
but which is not of the kind that defines a race in the biological sense that we give to 
the word.

By giving a racial character to their struggles, both Hitler and Ben Gurion 
committed the same error: that of the latter in wanting, in the creation of the State of 
Israel, not only to save men, but to save a type of man who no longer exists, if he ever 
did; that of the former in wanting to protect from intermarriage by that imaginary man 
a German society which he labeled the Germanic type, but which racially was no 
more that than the Israeli society is Jewish.

With regard to its population, this is what 
Mr.By giving a racial character to their struggles, both Hitler and Ben Gurion 
committed the same error: that of the latter in wanting, in the creation of the State of 
Israel, not only to save men, but to save a type of man who no longer exists, if he ever 
did; that of the former in wanting to protect from intermarriage by that imaginary man 
a German society which he labeled the Germanic type, but which racially was no 
more that than the Israeli society is Jewish.

With regard to its population, this is what 
Mr.

Ben Gurion's State of Israel is: a conglomeration of human types from the 
Yemenite Jew influenced by the Arab, to the German Jew mixed with the German 
type, and the Russian, Rumanian or Hungarian Jew infiltrated by the Slav; in short, 
Israel is populated with all of these types which have few or no somatic characteristics 
in common.

The only things that the Zionist movement can hope for from so 
anomalous a group are, ethnically or racially speaking, the evolution of a new type of 
Jewish human being, issuing from a long series of mixtures of all these types, insofar 
as they consent to be mixed, and, politically speaking, the development of a 
theological state, a community in its most archaic form, which would correspond with 
the intellectual level of that community, perhaps very high in religious or mystic 
qualities but certainly very low, or backward, from the philosophical point of view.

So, we see that for peoples as primitive as the Yemen Jews -- together with whom it is 
proposed to merge into one single people all the Jews of the world in the land of their 
ancestors, a land much less common to them all than they claim -- international 
Zionism is not held with the same insurmountable aversion which, ever since 
Theodore Herzl held it over the baptismal fountain, it has experienced among the 
peoples of the highest European civilizations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The only things that the Zionist movement can hope for from so 
anomalous a group are, ethnically or racially speaking, the evolution of a new type of 
Jewish human being, issuing from a long series of mixtures of all these types, insofar 
as they consent to be mixed, and, politically speaking, the development of a 
theological state, a community in its most archaic form, which would correspond with 
the intellectual level of that community, perhaps very high in religious or mystic 
qualities but certainly very low, or backward, from the philosophical point of view. So, we see that for peoples as primitive as the Yemen Jews -- together with whom it is 
proposed to merge into one single people all the Jews of the world in the land of their 
ancestors, a land much less common to them all than they claim -- international 
Zionism is not held with the same insurmountable aversion which, ever since 
Theodore Herzl held it over the baptismal fountain, it has experienced among the 
peoples of the highest European civilizations. It is commonly known with what 
stubborn indignation international Zionism has constantly rejected the ideas of the 
greatest Jewish philosopher of all times, Moses Mendelsohn (1729-1786), who, 
wanting to put an end to Jewish Apartheid, preached the assimilation of the Jews with 
the peoples among whom they lived. The reason why his ideas are opposed is that, in 
trying to raise Judaism above the level of religion and racial myths to the level of 
philosophy, the ideas of Moses Mendelsohn would have meant, if they had been 
seriously considered, the end of the Rabbinat, a convenient screen behind which was 
created, and has prospered ever since, the most vast and ambitious commercial

--- PAGE BREAK ---228
enterprise of all time.

Threatened with extinction, or, at the least, with a diminution of 
its profits, by a society greatly enlarged by the assimilation of the Jews with the 
civilized Europeans, this commercial enterprise runs no risk at all by merging with the 
Yemenite Jews on Israeli territory.

But, one shudders to think what this future Jewish 
type would be, with Judaism now proliferating among the blacks and Yellows as it 
has proliferated in Europe.

As seen from the same angle, Hitler's Germany was quite similar: a society of people 
of an infinity of types, in which the German type, characterized by a blend, in one 
person, of considerable height, dolichocephalic head, and deficient pigmentation (pale 
skin, blond hair), represented only a very small minority.

"Between 1874 and 1877," 
Pierre Gaxotte (Histoire de l'Allemagne, Paris, 1963, Vol.

I, p.

21) says, " a study 
made in German schools involving about six million children, showed only 31% were 
blond.

Other studies show that the north Germans, whom tradition calls as the best 
preserved type, are only 18% dolichocephalic." Let the Germans not be disturbed.

A 
comparable study to determine, for example, the Celtic type in the French population 
would give the same sort of results.

In western Europe, where the population is a 
millenary brew of all the migrations meeting there and of the killing of each other off, 
there is no homogeneous people, anthropologically speaking, not even a type of any 
one of the migrations which could be called representative of any majority, or 
perfectly preserved.

Even granting that it is possible to define the original Jewish type 
with as much accuracy as the German or Celtic type, it is very probable that if the 
same sort of studies were made in world-wide Jewish societies, roughly the same 
results would be obtained.

The Sephardim Jews, who are surely the closest to that 
original type, do not, in any case, represent more than a tiny minority.Even granting that it is possible to define the original Jewish type 
with as much accuracy as the German or Celtic type, it is very probable that if the 
same sort of studies were made in world-wide Jewish societies, roughly the same 
results would be obtained.

The Sephardim Jews, who are surely the closest to that 
original type, do not, in any case, represent more than a tiny minority.

And, this shows 
how far both Hitler and Ben Gurion went astray in the battle with a myth, at the racial 
level, at least.

There is no doubt but that twentieth century humanity is faced with a 
racial problem: the relations that can or should exist between the white race and the 
colored races.

It is a problem that exists both on a physical level and on an intellectual 
level and that is a little bit more in harmony with the facts of modem anthropological 
science.

But, concerning the Jews especially, it is not a race that today they represent, 
but a way of life and its aspirations.

And, it is not a racial problem that they pose, as 
the State of Israel proves so well, but aneconomic and social problem, of such 
dimensions that, under the wing of a tradition that is essentially religious, it envisages 
the setting up of a mercantile feudal system, which, as we have said, would take in the 
whole world.

To return to the Jewish migration at its beginning, we must first say that the greatest 
impact on Western Europe was made by the Ashkenazim Jews, by far the most 
numerous, and that is the case today in the United States.

From Constanza via the 
Danubian artery, which was about their only access to the West until about the 
eleventh century, and from Warsaw via countries touched by Hanseatic trade (which 
could not fail to attract them!), which later became a secondary route, they gradually 
worked their way to the major Rhone-Rhine artery, uniting the North Sea and the 
Mediterranean.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To return to the Jewish migration at its beginning, we must first say that the greatest 
impact on Western Europe was made by the Ashkenazim Jews, by far the most 
numerous, and that is the case today in the United States. From Constanza via the 
Danubian artery, which was about their only access to the West until about the 
eleventh century, and from Warsaw via countries touched by Hanseatic trade (which 
could not fail to attract them!), which later became a secondary route, they gradually 
worked their way to the major Rhone-Rhine artery, uniting the North Sea and the 
Mediterranean. Certainly England interested them at the time of the Hanseatic 
League, but more especially after the discovery of America. Mention must be made of 
Spain and the French Midi, regions that attracted their coreligionists who had 
remained within the Roman Empire after the loss of its western provinces (fourth 
century) and after the discriminatory measures against them were reintroduced by 
Constantine, which measures were not imposed in the eastern regions except

--- PAGE BREAK ---229
progressively as those areas were detached from the Empire and, then, definitively 
upon their fall and conquest by the Turks (fifteenth century).

This was the branch of 
the migration that worked its way to western Europe along the shores of the 
Mediterranean.

At the moment when America was discovered, this spearhead of 
Judaism -- or rather, what was left of it, since in the meantime the Inquisition had 
made inroads into it -- found itself on the Madrid-London line where the new 
commercial centers were relocated, since commerce that was once Euro-Asian now 
had become global in scope.

In that part of western Europe that was free of the Roman Emperors, it seems that the 
first violent reactions against the Jews can be dated from the tenth century (7).

But it 
was also in the tenth century that the influence of the Christian church, which was 
sanctioned by Charlemagne and which the Crusades established as the most important 
spiritual force, began to be felt a little everywhere.

Struck by this coincidence, most 
historians have perceived these violent reactions as being attributable to Christianity, 
the word being used in the sense of Christianism.

The Inquisition -- and, there is a 
tendency to forget that it was aimed not only at Jews, but at all heresies, and so it 
absolutely cannot be said to have been inspired with antisemites or racist feelings -- 
which was rampant in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries in Spain and the south of 
France confirmed them in this view.

It is true that the Church did not like Jews: 
against them was held, not their race (because in spite of everything it must be 
recognized that one of the historic invariables of its doctrine is that even in its most 
obscurantist undertakings, it was always universalist and never looked at the heresies 
of men except in relation to dogma), but what it considered the greatest of all crimes, 
the crucifixion of the Christ.The Inquisition -- and, there is a 
tendency to forget that it was aimed not only at Jews, but at all heresies, and so it 
absolutely cannot be said to have been inspired with antisemites or racist feelings -- 
which was rampant in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries in Spain and the south of 
France confirmed them in this view.

It is true that the Church did not like Jews: 
against them was held, not their race (because in spite of everything it must be 
recognized that one of the historic invariables of its doctrine is that even in its most 
obscurantist undertakings, it was always universalist and never looked at the heresies 
of men except in relation to dogma), but what it considered the greatest of all crimes, 
the crucifixion of the Christ.

The hostility of the western European peoples toward the 
Jews was manifested much earlier than the period when the Christian Church exerted 
its influence on them, and it seems that it had its origins in the nature of the 
communities that the Jews formed as they worked their way toward the west and in 
the manner in which, through trade and usury, they drained toward themselves all of 
the cash wealth of the regions where they settled.

Also, for fear of falling into Jewish 
hands and finding themselves dispossessed, the burgeoning system of Feudalism 
forbade them, whom they accused of exploiting the people, to become owners of 
landed wealth.

Even before Christianism was talked about, the Roman Patriciate had 
shown the same defensive reaction against them.

Thus, it seems legitimate to me to 
think that the Christian Church only added religious reasons to those that were 
essentially economic of Feudalism or of the Roman Patriciate, and not the other way 
around.

If this way of looking at the problem were justified, what I call a confusion on 
the Part of the historians would not be important except insofar as it determines the 
original cause of anti-Jewish reactions among Europeans in the Middle Ages.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus, it seems legitimate to me to 
think that the Christian Church only added religious reasons to those that were 
essentially economic of Feudalism or of the Roman Patriciate, and not the other way 
around. If this way of looking at the problem were justified, what I call a confusion on 
the Part of the historians would not be important except insofar as it determines the 
original cause of anti-Jewish reactions among Europeans in the Middle Ages. Indeed, 
it would very well explain things: on the one hand, just when the first of these 
reactions was noted, the European consciousness was that of being, not European, a 
politically unknown idea at that time, but Christian, and Christendom stood against 
paganism, which was synonymous with barbarity; on the other hand, it was the 
Church, Catholic or Reformed, which led the struggle against the Jews and either 
claimed this honor in its fight against heretics, or endowed those who imputed 
"heresy" as a crime with the responsibility of carrying on the struggle. But, that is a 
problem for Mandarins: whatever the hypothesis, the tangible reality for the Jews, 
from the tenth to the sixteenth century, was that in all Christendom they were, in one 
place or another, periodically stripped of their wealth, which they were reputed to 
have acquired in a wrongful way, by the princes, the kings, or the emperors, all with

--- PAGE BREAK ---230
the blessing or at the instigation of the Church, which was in on the division of the 
spoils.

The procedure was simple: confiscation of goods together with prison or exile.

And, the excuse was always the same: usury, or the profaning of a place or object of 
piety, or both.

One can even cite numerous cases of the bourgeoisie -- since they were 
very dangerous competitors for them -- accusing the Jews of some profanation or 
other before the ecclesiastical authorities in order to get them imprisoned, and thus to 
escape their debts to them.

Doubtless, the worst period for the Jews was during the twelfth, fourteenth, and 
fifteenth centuries (8), during which time they surged back to eastern Europe, which 
remained fairly liberal toward them, since conversions to Judaism were constantly 
being registered.

Indeed, it was only later, as the Orthodox religion gained ground in 
these regions and as the idea of the Empire of all the Russias was born, that the 
hostility toward the Jews was born which was to manifest itself in far more terrible 
forms than in the West -- the word pogrom is from the Russian vocabulary.

In the 
West it was the advent of Humanism that brought the first alleviations in the condition 
of the Jews, and it was the Encyclopedists who dealt the decisive blow to the hostility 
against them.

The French Revolution made them citizens like everyone else (1791), 
and this practice spread in Europe: Prussia (1812), the Germanic Confederation 
(1848), England (1858), Italy (1870).

But, the era of "pogroms" had begun in "all the 
Russias".

Migration toward the west swelled again, until in the second half of the 
nineteenth century it brought about the appearance of the word anti-Semitism in all 
the dictionaries, and anti-Semitism itself -- however, wrongly, as has been said -- in 
all national policies.But, the era of "pogroms" had begun in "all the 
Russias".

Migration toward the west swelled again, until in the second half of the 
nineteenth century it brought about the appearance of the word anti-Semitism in all 
the dictionaries, and anti-Semitism itself -- however, wrongly, as has been said -- in 
all national policies.

It was in the second half of the nineteenth century that the first significant numbers of 
Jews crossed the Atlantic, attracted by the Gold Rush and by the dynamic 
industrialization of the American economy -- where, deriving mainly from "all the 
Russias" including Poland, and from Germany, the Jews who had spent more than 
twenty centuries, according to their own Statistics, growing to a little more than ten 
million in the rest of the world, needed only sixty years to approach five million in the 
United States.

In the twentieth century, the Russian Revolution, the general Policy of Poland, 
especially from the time in 1932 when Colonel Beck began to play a role in it, and 
finally Hitler hastened the movement of Jews toward the United States, and only those 
who lacked the means to get there remained behind in Holland, Belgium, England and 
France.

Some of them tried to reach the "Jewish national hearth," created in Palestine 
by the Balfour Commission (on November 2, 1917), and succeeded in doing so, in 
spite of the hostility of England, which had fixed entry quotas.

But the United States 
was the attraction par excellence.

In 1928, the Policy of Stalinist Russia, while hardly 
benevolent towards the Jews, still wanted to keep them within the frontiers.

These 
borders, the gates to the exit to the west, were closed to them, as they were closed to 
all Russians.

The area of Birobidjan, located on the borders of Manchuria, was set up 
and placed at their disposal as an autonomous territory in the heart of the USSR.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These 
borders, the gates to the exit to the west, were closed to them, as they were closed to 
all Russians. The area of Birobidjan, located on the borders of Manchuria, was set up 
and placed at their disposal as an autonomous territory in the heart of the USSR. Stalin very quickly saw that although the number of Jews in the Ukraine and White 
Russia was diminishing, it was not increasing in Birobidjan, where they were 
nevertheless making their way, but only to reach a frontier close to China, where with 
the connivance of the Chinese, who at that time were hostile to the USSR, they were 
able to flee the Soviet regime. From there, via Hong Kong and Shanghai, they went to

--- PAGE BREAK ---231
the United States, which, with the connivance of those who had gone there before 
them and who had become politically quite powerful, they were entering 
clandestinely.

Just before the Second World War began no one in Russia, nor in the 
rest of the world, was talking any more about the Jewish autonomous territory of 
Birobidjan.

During the war the matter was almost brought up again, in circumstances 
which will be described.

For the moment, it is enough to say that in making the Jews 
take the Siberian route again - "Central Asia" as it was called by those fresh from 
Russia -- a significant consistency was given to their migration toward the United 
States by way of the East.

V.

The Movement of the European Jewish Population from 1933 to 1945 
In 1933, the staging area for the Jewish migration, or, if you prefer, its supply area, 
was no longer the triangle marked by the mouths of the Vistula, Danube and Volga.

There had been successively added to those Danubian countries in which political 
instability and trouble following the First World War had stirred them to leave the 
nations of Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia.

And, since 1917 (Balfour 
Convention) besides the United States, there was a second destination point: 
Palestine.

In spite of the confusion that has been systematically created by various leaders of the 
Zionist movement around the period of this migration, a certain number of facts are 
positively known and irrefutably established which mark the routes that were made 
use of by the Jews and which definitely destroy the thesis of the extermination of six 
million Jews.And, since 1917 (Balfour 
Convention) besides the United States, there was a second destination point: 
Palestine.

In spite of the confusion that has been systematically created by various leaders of the 
Zionist movement around the period of this migration, a certain number of facts are 
positively known and irrefutably established which mark the routes that were made 
use of by the Jews and which definitely destroy the thesis of the extermination of six 
million Jews.

Furthermore, it is international Zionism itself -- which by its policy with 
regard to Germany and with regard especially to the numerous trials, that have 
become almost incalculable, which it unceasingly demands against the Germans to 
prove again and again that these six million were really exterminated -- that has 
revealed most of these facts to us (if we did not already know them) or has confirmed 
their actuality (if we only had suspected their existence).

An incalculable number of 
trials calls for an even more incalculable number of witnesses to give weight to the 
accusations and of journalists to report the hearings; and, it was fatal that among them 
should be found blunderers like Mr.

Salo Baron (a professor at Columbia University 
and a witness at the Eichmann trial who, on top of everything else, had actually seen 
nothing!) or like Hannah Arendt (a journalist assigned to cover the same trial by the 
New Yorker who will be discussed elsewhere) to give the game away.

It was no less 
fatal that there arrived at the bar of the Tribunal of History, Mr.

Raul Hilberg and that 
he should make use of all of these in such a way that not only was everything that had 
been said earlier reduced to contradictions, but even that which he said himself.

"He 
who tries too hard to prove .

.

." as the proverb says.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. ." as the proverb says. All of these facts which have set us on the path to historical truth, have been made 
positively known and have been irrefutably established, unfortunately, only by 
specialists, most of whom, out of indifference or political interest, have suppressed 
them or have tried -- as we have seen, and as we shall see again, with regard to the 
facts concerning the international Zionist movement -- to keep them out of sight. I am 
among those who, out of respect for my profession and submission to the moral 
imperatives proper to it, attach great importance to their becoming known to the 
public at large. I am also concerned that this very lack of information might tend to 
lead societies in their evolution toward impasses and catastrophes. It is because

--- PAGE BREAK ---232
governmental policies are based generally on conjectures, more often than not 
elaborated in the personal interests of the politicians who proclaim them and not with 
regard to established truths, that societies are periodically thrown into these impasses 
and precipitated into these catastrophes.

Consequently, there lies the necessity for 
finding out and for establishing, for the benefit of the mass of honest people, those 
truths which will permit them to defend themselves against the interested 
undertakings of the politicians.

Historians tell us that history is learned by tracing its course through time and, then, is 
verified by tracing it back again.

The police, in their jargon, express this idea by 
saying that it is by "tracing every clue to its source," not by following every clue, that 
the truth is discovered.

Since it is a question of verifying a statistic, therefore an 
addition, let us borrow the language of the mathematicians who in accounting teach 
that in order to verify an addition, it must be done from bottom to top, or inversely to 
the way that it was done in the first place.

The top, in this case, is the area where the 
Jewish migration started.

And, Europe, where it took place, is a forest of testimonies 
giving only partial views of events which are all overlapped and, which in addition, 
are falsified by the constituent elements of the psychology of the witnesses.

It was 
from the top that the Zionist historians and statisticians began to total their deaths, 
pretending, because that is the way they wanted it to be, not to see that the sum which 
they obtained could only be infinitely reduced, just as a landscape would be enlarged 
to infinity by placing end to end all of the partial photographs taken of it, without first 
having removed from each all of the overlapping elements figuring in others.And, Europe, where it took place, is a forest of testimonies 
giving only partial views of events which are all overlapped and, which in addition, 
are falsified by the constituent elements of the psychology of the witnesses.

It was 
from the top that the Zionist historians and statisticians began to total their deaths, 
pretending, because that is the way they wanted it to be, not to see that the sum which 
they obtained could only be infinitely reduced, just as a landscape would be enlarged 
to infinity by placing end to end all of the partial photographs taken of it, without first 
having removed from each all of the overlapping elements figuring in others.

The 
views of the witnesses overlap just as do the photographs, and a landscape in nature is 
no more the sum of the latter, retouched by topographers, than a historical landscape 
is the sum of the former uncounted by historians.

Until a general accounting is made, 
everything will remain confused, uncertain, and conjectural, in the very places where 
the events took place.

However, it does not seem as though such an accounting is 
likely to be done in the near future given the absurd "fifty years' rule," or whatever 
else suits the politicians.

Until that period is passed, if historians are nevertheless 
tempted to clarify the circumstances of that drama -- and the urgent need for an 
assault against the historic myth presses them every day -- they will be forced to 
proceed by successive stages from the established facts.

And, it is in that context that 
this study is inscribed.

At the bottom of the addition are the two destination points of the migration, the 
United States and Israel, where, on the other hand, almost everything is known, 
although obscured by what one might call after the title of a recent film, the Night and 
Fog of Zionist propaganda.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, it is in that context that 
this study is inscribed. At the bottom of the addition are the two destination points of the migration, the 
United States and Israel, where, on the other hand, almost everything is known, 
although obscured by what one might call after the title of a recent film, the Night and 
Fog of Zionist propaganda. To take the advice of the historians and trace history back, 
or that of the policemen and trace every clue to its source, or that of the 
mathematician and go over the addition means to take an inventory of the Jewish 
population of the world, starting with what it is today in the United States and Israel. The method offers the signal advantage of obeying the basic rule of all scientific 
investigations: to proceed from the known to the unknown and, thereby, to shed light 
on the unknown by means of the known. I shall begin with a census of Israel first. In 1926. Mr. Arthur Ruppin tells us that there were 250,000 Jews in Palestine. But the 
official statistics of the State of Israel as reproduced by Mr. Andre Chouraqui (L'Etat 
d'Israel, p. 62) tell us that there were only 150,000 in 1927, and 174,610 in 1931, the 
eve of the coming to power of Beck in Poland and of Hitler in Germany. Since this

--- PAGE BREAK ---233
study attempts to show that, aside from the fact that they do not agree with each other, 
all statistics of Jewish origin published after the war do not agree with those published 
by Mr.

Arthur Ruppin before the war, and, taken as a base of reference, one must, if 
one is to make useful comparisons with the latter, first know exactly what the former 
have to say about the evolution of the Jewish population in Israel.

And for the period 
after 1931 this is what Mr.

Andre Chouraqui has to tell them: 1947 -- 629,000; 1952 -- 
1,450,000; 1957 -- 1,763,000.

On the level reached in 1962 we have, on the other hand, two bits of information, 
perhaps contestable but at least in agreement, of which the first is already known to 
the reader: the communiqué of March 31, 1963, of the Institute for Jewish Affairs of 
London, published on April 1 by Die Welt of Hamburg in which it is said that that 
population had reached 2.045 million;(9) and a speech given on July 17, 1963, before 
the Knesseth (the Israeli Parliament) by Mr.

Levi Eshkol (successor of Mr.

Ben 
Gurion) in which it is said that out of a total of 2.27 million inhabitants in the State of 
Israel, 2.05 million were Jews.

We shall assume that Mr.

Levi Eshkol, President of the 
Council of the State of Israel, is very probably better informed than the Institute for 
Jewish Affairs of London, and we shall retain his figure.

In any case with a difference 
of only 5,000 it is without importance.

Here we are presented with four significant dates in the evolution of the Israeli 
population: 1931 (just before the rise to Power of Beck in Poland and Hitler in 
Germany); 1947 and 1952 (the eve and the day after the creation of the State of 
Israel); and finally 1962 (the year in which this study was written).

In order to determine the importance of Jewish immigration into Israel from 1931 to 
1962, a third factor is missing, the normal rate of increase of the world Jewish 
population.

Now, Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In order to determine the importance of Jewish immigration into Israel from 1931 to 
1962, a third factor is missing, the normal rate of increase of the world Jewish 
population. Now, Mr. Salo Baron supplied us with one when on April 23, 1961, he 
came before the bar of the Jerusalem Tribunal to state that in relation to what it had 
been in 1945 this population had increased by twenty per cent. However, "one swallow does not make a summer." I categorically refuse to accept 
such an estimate as being well founded. A normal rate of increase of twenty per cent 
over sixteen years amounts in fact to an annual increase of about 1.25 per cent, that is, 
of the world population, which demographers estimate will double every 80 years at 
its present rate of proliferation. But, this rate is reached only in the eightieth year. What it is in the 16th year does not seem to have been calculated, or if it has, I do not 
know about it. What is certain is that it is much less. The population of France, which, 
it seems, proliferates at the world rate, has, for example, gone from a little less than 42 
million to a little more than 46 million during these sixteen years, or at a global rate of 
increase of 10 per cent, or annually about .62 per cent. During the same period, the 
Italian population, which proliferates at a faster rate than the world rate, still has not 
gone from more than a little more than 43 million to a little less than 50 million, or a 
global rate of 14 per cent, annually about .89 per cent. The United States seem 
similarly to have gone from 141 million to 186 million, that is a global rate of about 
12 per cent, annually about .75 per cent, but there we must reckon with a significant 
immigration which the legislative measures of 1901 to 1924 failed to block.

--- PAGE BREAK ---al rate of about 
12 per cent, annually about .75 per cent, but there we must reckon with a significant 
immigration which the legislative measures of 1901 to 1924 failed to block.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

234
And, what about the world Jewish population? First of all, using the demographers' 
scale of eighty years, and of the century, this is what Professor Salo Baron's estimate 
produces, facts which most surely cannot be admitted: 
16th year...10 million...plus. 20%...equal...12 million (+1.25% per year) 
32nd year...12 million...plus. 20%...equal...14.4 million (+ 1.37% per year) 
48th year...14.4 million...plus. 20%...equal...17.28 million (+1.51% per year) 
64th year...17.28 million...plus. 20%...equal...20.76 million (+1.68% per year) 
80th year...20.76 million...plus. 20%..equal..24.83 million (+1.86% per year) 
96th year..4.83 million…plus. 20%..equal..29.86 million (+2.06% per year) 
Baron's figures show that, more than doubled after the 64th year, the world Jewish 
population would be more than tripled after the 96th year. This projection is like 
saying that the Jews are, if not more, at least as prolific as the Chinese, a fact which is 
not attested to by all their other information on the subject. 
In the absence of any verified information concerning the Jews, I examined the 
normal annual rate of increase, which would be applicable to them, and I arrived at 
the following conclusions: 
a. The world Jewish population is always in a state of migration.  
b. Migrating populations increase proportionately less than sedentary 
populations.  
c. A sedentary population which doubles every 80 years reaches an annual rate 
of about 1 per cent after the 64th year.  
d. But we are concerned with the periods between 1931 and 1962, and the 
calculations cannot include more than 31 years, and should be 16, or 10 or 5 or 
4, which means that the 1 per cent annual rate of increase, if used in the 
calculations, would give the Jews, migrating, a higher rate than sedentary 
Italians, all things being normal. However, let us retain the 1 per cent, on the 
principle of the benefit of the doubt.  
The method of calculation: the natural growth of a population is the difference 
between the number of births and the number of deaths. If we are able to determine 
the natural increase in each of the great waves of the four important dates of Jewish 
immigration into Israel, it should suffice to subtract that from the Jewish population of 
the State of Israel in 1962, to add the number of deaths there to the result obtained, 
and to arrive at the actual number of immigrants for the period 1931 - 1962. In this 
particular case account must be taken of those who, disappointed in the venture, left 
again, and their number should be added. An analysis of these factors -- natural 
growth, immigration, mortality among immigrants, and emigration -- follows:se who, disappointed in the venture, left 
again, and their number should be added. An analysis of these factors -- natural 
growth, immigration, mortality among immigrants, and emigration -- follows:

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the venture, left 
again, and their number should be added. An analysis of these factors -- natural 
growth, immigration, mortality among immigrants, and emigration -- follows:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

235
1. Natural growth: (10) 
a. from 1931 to 1962, the 174,610 counted in Palestine in 1931, have grown 
by 31 % or 54,129 persons.  
b. from 1947 to 1962, the 629,000 counted in 1947 have grown by 15% or 
94,350 persons.  
c. from 1952 to 1962, the 1,450,000 counted in 1952 have grown by 10% or 
145, 000 persons.  
To this must be added the natural increase of:  
a. those 629,000 Jews counted in 1947 who arrived in Israel between 1931 and 
1947;  
b. those 1,450,000 counted in 1952, who arrived between 1947 and 1952;  
c. those 2,050,000 counted in 1962 who arrived between 1952 and 1962.  
Here are the results obtained from the second series of calculations, organized along 
the elementary rules of arithmetic: 
a. from 1931 to 1947, the 174,610 Jews counted in 1931 have increased by 
16% and have become: (174,610 x 116)/100 = 202,547. It follows that, with 
their natural increase included, the new arrivals in this period represent 
629,000 minus 202,547 or 426,453, and, their natural increase itself; (426,453 
x 16)/116 = 58,821.  
b. from 1947 to 1952, the 629,000 Jews counted in 1947, grew by 5% and 
were: ( 629,000 x 105 )/100= 660,450. It follows that, with their natural 
increase included, the new arrivals during that period represent 1,450,000 
minus 660,450 or 789,550, and their natural growth itself (789,550 x 5)/105 = 
37,598.  
c. from 1952 to 1962, the 1,450,000 Jews counted in 1952 increased by 10%, 
thus: (1,450,000 x 110 )/100 = 1,595,000. It follows that, including their 
natural increase, the new arrivals during this period represent 2,050,000 minus 
1,595,000 or 455,000, and their natural growth itself 45 5,000 x 10)/110= 
41,364.  
The preceding figures give a total natural increase of 431,262. 
2. Actual number of immigrants during this period (not adjusted for on the spot 
mortality). To obtain this number one must not only subtract this figure from the 
Jewish population of the State of Israel in 1962, but also the 174,610 persons counted 
in 1931, who are included, which gives 2,050,000 minus (431,262 plus 174,610) 
equal 1,444,128.(11)re from the 
Jewish population of the State of Israel in 1962, but also the 174,610 persons counted 
in 1931, who are included, which gives 2,050,000 minus (431,262 plus 174,610) 
equal 1,444,128.(11)

--- PAGE BREAK ---236
3.

On the spot mortality among the immigrants.

Jewish sources are not very 
exhaustive on the death rate, and not on the birth rate either, at least to my knowledge.

Concerning the latter one finds from time to time data of this sort: "The average 
number of children per family is 3.8" (L'Etat d'Israel, Andre Chouraqui, p.

77) which 
is meaningless.

As for the death rate, also from time to time, some journalists now and 
then will give a figure: 13, 14 and sometimes as low as 10 per 1 000.

Specialists of 
Salo Baron's caliber are fascinated by the natural rate of increase only, and they 
establish it on the level of the world Jewish population, not in terms of the number of 
births and deaths, but in terms of the representation that they wish to present to the 
world for the two dates, 1946 and 1962, after having first subtracted the six million 
exterminated.

It is a rate subject to political pressures, and fluctuations, as we have 
seen.

The Israeli Jewish population is a young population; in all migrations, it is the 
young who leave, and the old who remain.

For example, in Buchenwald, where Jews 
were interned, I do not remember having encountered one who was less than 50 years 
old.

Among the peoples of Western Europe the death rate is about 17 per 1000.

That it 
lies between 13 and 14 in Israel is probable.

But, in 1946, 1947, and 1948, there were 
consequences of the war which raised it a little for the whole period.

So, let us say 
about 14 per thousand, or about 20,504.

In any case, if I miscalculate it cannot be by 
more than a few thousand at most, and I am prepared to make corrections.

Thus, with 
mortality included, the immigration between 1931 and 1962 totaled 1,464,632 
persons.

4.

Emigration.

There were those Jews who were disappointed with the "promised 
land" and there were also those who thought of Palestine, afterward Israel, as a way 
station imposed by circumstances, from which to proceed elsewhere.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Emigration. There were those Jews who were disappointed with the "promised 
land" and there were also those who thought of Palestine, afterward Israel, as a way 
station imposed by circumstances, from which to proceed elsewhere. (12) Until 1939, 
for example, a certain number of Polish, Russian, or German Jews, as well as others, 
did not have the financial means to proceed further. Some, for that reason, even could 
not go beyond North Africa, in view of the limitation that England put on immigration 
to Palestine. Between 1939 and 1945 Palestine became, for those who continued to 
escape secretly either via Istanboul or Constanza, the only accessible refuge. For those 
who were pushed across the Urals and the Volga by the German armies, a 
considerable number who even in 1962 have not all succeeded in getting out of Soviet 
territory, Israel is still the most accessible refuge, unless they are nearer to China; 
those nearer to China go through Hong Kong and Shanghai to reach the United States. Well, Mr. Andre Chouraqui tells us that "95 out of every hundred immigrants manage 
to overcome the difficulties of adapting to the country and found families there, while 
5 give up." (op. cit., p. 75). Very few, but we will not argue the point. Therefore, the 
total immigration between 1931 and 1962 is determined by the following calculation: 
(1,464,63 2 x 100)/95 = 1,541,718 
And now, a last step before finishing with Israel: to take into consideration those 
among these 1,541,718 immigrants who came from Europe. Here we are furnished 
with an estimate by Mr. Andre Chouraqui: 
Asia, since 1948, furnished Israel with 258,181 immigrants, representing 
28.8% of the total immigration. These 258,181 persons came from Turkey 
(34,797), Iraq (122,987), Iran (31,274), Yemen (45,887); Syria, Lebanon, 
Aden, even India and China furnished a contingent of 14,092 souls. Africa is 
third in line (24.8%) after Europe (43.4%), and Asia (28.8%), and supplied aan (31,274), Yemen (45,887); Syria, Lebanon, 
Aden, even India and China furnished a contingent of 14,092 souls. Africa is 
third in line (24.8%) after Europe (43.4%), and Asia (28.8%), and supplied a

--- PAGE BREAK ---237
contingent of 222,806 immigrants representing 24.8% of the recent 
immigration.

North Africa, leading the African contingent, supplied more than 
150,000 immigrants originating mainly from Morocco and Tunisia.

(op.

cit.

p.

65.)  
The data given in the preceding quotation are dated December 31, 1957.

From this 
excerpt the following conclusions can be drawn: 
First, the nonsensical style in which this information is written throws doubt on the 
authenticity of the percentage of the immigrants of African origin, presented in one 
sentence as a proportion of the total immigration, and in the next as a proportion of 
the "recent immigration." And, so it can be assumed that other percentages are no 
more authentic or more significant.

Second, the three per cent of the immigrants who are not accounted for in this 
enumeration, and we don't know whether they are a portion of the total immigration 
or of the "recent immigration," concern the American and Australian continents.

It is, 
however, exact enough to show that very few Jews came from those two continents.

Third, except for those Jews from Yemen, whose well known odyssey could be the 
subject of a novel of dark humor, (13) all the other immigrants taken into account by 
Mr.

Andre Chouraqui could be either Jews who left Europe after 1931, or their 
descendants born in Africa or in Asia.

Please note that I say "could be" and not 
"were." Palestine, for example, is in Asia, and all those who arrived in Israel from the 
non-Israeli parts after 1948 could be considered as having originated from Asia, in 
Mr.

Andre Chouraqui's data.

Such an interpretation is all right for those born there, 
but what about their parents?

Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Syria, Lebanon, are also in Asia, and 
it is precisely those countries which were before and during the war most accessible to 
the European Jews.

Often, those countries were the only ones.Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Syria, Lebanon, are also in Asia, and 
it is precisely those countries which were before and during the war most accessible to 
the European Jews.

Often, those countries were the only ones.

Some got to Africa via 
France, particularly until 1939, and the same argument could be made about them.

Put 
yourself in the place of the Polish Jew who left his country in 1932 or 1939: he could 
not get to Israel before 1948 since a country by that name did not exist, and in most 
cases he got there only after 1948, often very long after, with the children he had 
meanwhile had, that is, after having spent fifteen or sixteen years or more in Palestine, 
Iraq, Syria, Algeria, Tunisia or Morocco, and, if asked whence he came, there is 
nothing astonishing if he named the country he last lived in, since cosmopolitanism is 
one of the characteristics of the Jewish soul.

It is a long time since he was Polish, if he 
even remembers it.

For him, Poland where he was born was never a native land, but 
only a "land of welcome," an expression used by Jews the world over to designate the 
country in which they live, even if they were born there, when they speak among 
themselves.

To his mind, Poland has become the country which treated him badly, 
and his true "land of welcome" is where he took refuge when he was obliged to leave 
Poland.

And, the same holds for all those who, between the years 1939 and 1945, 
succeeded in leaving clandestinely not only Poland but also Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania, and Russia, and who have only arrived in Israel in the 
last few years.

Mr.

Andre Chouraqui takes up only immigration into Israel; that factor 
is all that interests him, and that is his right.

That is the subject he treats and he cannot 
be reproached for limiting himself to his subject.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Andre Chouraqui takes up only immigration into Israel; that factor 
is all that interests him, and that is his right. That is the subject he treats and he cannot 
be reproached for limiting himself to his subject. But, it is a very convenient 
limitation: he can reduce at will the number of European Jews who have immigrated 
to Israel by having them come from their last residence before 1948 -- pardon, from

--- PAGE BREAK ---238
their last "land of welcome" -- which was Africa or Asia.

And, at the same time, he 
can increase the number of those who were allegedly exterminated.

To what extent 
has that subterfuge been used?

The principal element of the answer to that question is 
given in the following paragraphs.

Finally, Mr.

André Chouraqui's book is dated 1959, and the things described therein 
date from 1957, as I said.

Now, he tells us, in 1957 "Asia, since 1948, furnished Israel 
with 258,181 immigrants representing 28.8% of the total immigration" up to 
December 31, 1957.

Hence, a simple calculation yields the following: (258,181 x 
100)/28.8 = 896,462.

This figure of 896,462, then, represents the total immigration 
through the end of 1957 -- according to Mr.

Andre Chouraqui 
But again, the Israeli Jewish population went from 1,763,000 on December 31, 1957 
(Andre Chouraqui, op.

cit., p.

74, and the official statistics for that year) to 2,050,000 
on December 31, 1962, which indicates an increase of 257,000, which, after 
deducting the natural increase, represents 159,381 new immigrants (l4) during that 
period of five years.

Since there was a total of 1,541,718 immigrants on December 31, 
1962, there were 1,382,337 (1,541,718 - 159,381) already there.

And, based on his 
own figures, Mr.

Andre Chouraqui's error, I mean the coefficient of minimization, is 
about 1.54.

Another example of Chouraqui's erroneous analysis is provided by the immigration of 
Moroccan and Tunisian Jews who, he tells us, rallied to Israel to the number of 
150,000.

But, let us have a look.

In Morocco, Mr.

Arthur Ruppin told us, they 
numbered 120,000 in 1926, and in Tunisia 60,000.

Total for both countries is 
180,000.

In 1948 there must have been 219,600, adjusting for a natural increase in 
population.

If 150,000 of them went over to Israel, there remained at that date 69,600.

And, these in 1962 had become 79,344.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If 150,000 of them went over to Israel, there remained at that date 69,600. And, these in 1962 had become 79,344. However, the study by the Jewish 
Communities of the World instructs us that in 1962 there remained 125,000 Jews in 
Morocco and 35,000 in Tunisia, which gives a total of 160,000. The Jewish Post 
Weekly of April 19, 1963, confirms this. Consequently, it appears that 80,656, of the 
Jews listed as Moroccan and Tunisian by Mr. Andre Chouraqui were not such; rather, 
they were the ones who had come from Europe earlier and had not been able to 
proceed farther for personal or other reasons. Therefore, the actual number of 
Moroccans or Tunisians (which is achieved by subtracting 80,656 from 150,000) was 
69,344. Here it is a question of a coefficient of exaggeration (it is the same thing, this 
manipulation of figures in both ways having no other object than to augment the 
number of those exterminated in Europe and to diminish the number of those who 
succeeded in leaving), and it is from 1 to 2.16 exactly. Another example, as is seen from Chouraqui's treatment of the German Jews. "The 
German Jews," says Mr. Andre Chouraqui (op. cit,. p. 66), "were almost totally 
exterminated by the Nazis." Now however, we know, and all the Jewish historians 
and statisticians agree, including Mr. Andre Chouraqui himself, that out of the 
500,000 given by Mr. Arthur Ruppin as living in Germany in 1926, or the 540,000 
given by postwar Jewish statistics for the number living there in 1933, about 300,000 
left the country between 1933 and 1939, and that 40,000, according to Mr. Poliakov 
and the Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, or 80,000 according to Mr. Raul Hilberg were still alive in 1945. Hence, the total number of survivors is 340,000 
or 380,000 depending on whose figures are used. With some 340,000 survivors out of

--- PAGE BREAK ---239
a population of 500,000 or 540,000 a conclusion that German Jewry was "almost 
totally exterminated" is hardly an example of intellectual honesty.

By which it is seen 
that the nonsensical style that allows one to sow confusion also allows one to develop 
a sensational effect.

As the figure for the total, immigration for December 31, 1957, 
he gives the figure of 896,462, according to his data, on page 65, and the figure of 
896,085, according to the data of others, on page 66.

Finally, when he gives it straight 
from the statistics themselves, it becomes 905,655.

The same is true for the total 
population of the State of Israel which on December 31, 1957, is 1,954,954 at page 
64, and which becomes 1,763,600 Jews and 213,000 Christians and Moslems, 
yielding a total of 1,976,000 at page 74.

If it were a question of orders of magnitude 
one would understand it and overlook it, but in every case these are estimates down to 
the unit.

So it is a test.

Mme.

Hannah Arendt and Mr.

Raul Hilberg, I confess, have 
not done much better.

There is no end to the examples that could be cited.

In short, what I want to say here 
is that if these coefficients of exaggeration are of the same order -- and why not, since 
there is no question of error here but of deliberate calculation?

-- as far as the 
percentages are concerned of those European, African, or Asian Jews, who, according 
to him have immigrated into Israel, it is enough to apply the median coefficient of 
exaggeration to reestablish them approximately in their actual relationships.

The 
average coefficient is figured as follows: (1.55+2.16)/2 = 1.85.

For the Jews of Africa 
and Asia: (24.8% + 28.8%)/1.85= 29%.

And, for the European Jews: 43.4% + (53.6% 
- 29%)= 68%.

Still missing is the "three per cent" which I discussed above in my first 
conclusion concerning Mr.

Andre Chouraqui's data.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Still missing is the "three per cent" which I discussed above in my first 
conclusion concerning Mr. Andre Chouraqui's data. Converted into figures, the number of immigrants of European origin then becomes, 
based on the total immigration (mortality and emigration included), (1,541,718 x 
68)/100=1,048,368 and, based on the number who survived and remained, (1,444,128 
x 68)/100 = 982,007. So, there it is in mathematical terms, at least the way I learned 
mathematics. Furthermore, it is reasonable, and for this reason: these figures 
correspond almost perfectly with those published by the New York Times on February 
22, 1948, based on data supplied by its expert, Hanson W. Baldwin. And, to avoid any 
misunderstanding I cite from the text itself: 
There are 650,000 to 700,000 Jews in Palestine. Another 500,000 inhabit other 
countries in the Middle East .... In these countries the Jews are tied by bonds 
of religion to the rest of the fifteen to eighteen million Jews of the world. Among these 1,150,000 to 1,200,000 Jews in Palestine and the other countries of the 
Middle East in 1947, a deduction drawn from the number a Jewish source said were 
living there in 1931, there were a few more or a few less than 750,000 immigrants, 
depending upon whether one bases one's opinion on prewar or postwar Jewish 
statistics. And, almost all of these immigrants came from Europe for the good and 
simple reason, almost without exception, that there was no reason for those from other 
areas to move there en masse. The former had been the first to rejoin Israel, since they 
were more or less already there. Then they were joined later by 200,000 to 250,000 
more European Jews, and to determine the immigration from that origin we get into 
figures of the kind that result from my calculations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---240
If I involve Mr.

Hanson W.

Baldwin in support of my thesis, it is not only because his 
estimates are credible but for a more solid reason: insofar as the figures for the 
Palestinian Jewish population are concerned, they have been confirmed by the official 
Israeli statistics published at the beginning of 1949, for the year 1947, which gave the 
number as 629,000.

They were also given for Palestine by Mr.

Ben Gurion himself, 
who in May 1948 estimated the Jewish population to be 650,000 (Le Peuple et L'Etat 
d'Israel, Paris 1959, p.

102).

Therefore, there is nothing conjectural about them: on 
this point at least it is a verified estimate.

And, it verifies mine.

I shall go further: if Mr.

Hanson W.

Baldwin was so well informed about the Jewish 
population in Palestine in 1947, there is no reason to think he was less informed on 
the world Jewish population, and therefore close to the truth in estimating it between 
15 and 18 million on the same date.

The New York Times said that the data came from 
the Jews themselves (in its own words: "from the secret census made by them in every 
country in the world"), and that explains everything: in one way or another Mr.

Hanson W.

Baldwin was informed about this " secret census." But it makes no 
difference.

If this "secret census" really took place, and if the leaders of the Zionist 
movement know so exactly the actual number of Jewish losses, then we have a case of 
extortion (the payment of indemnity to Israel by West Germany) built up with 
premeditation -- and much better done than the robbery of the Glasgow-London train 
by gangsters that everyone is talking about at the moment.

I used the words "so 
exactly," and I wish to call attention to the nuance, because I do not believe in that 
"secret census." 
But, to return to the European Jews who immigrated to Israel between 1931 and 1962, 
their number is estimated to be 1,048,368, mortality and re-emigration included.If this "secret census" really took place, and if the leaders of the Zionist 
movement know so exactly the actual number of Jewish losses, then we have a case of 
extortion (the payment of indemnity to Israel by West Germany) built up with 
premeditation -- and much better done than the robbery of the Glasgow-London train 
by gangsters that everyone is talking about at the moment.

I used the words "so 
exactly," and I wish to call attention to the nuance, because I do not believe in that 
"secret census." 
But, to return to the European Jews who immigrated to Israel between 1931 and 1962, 
their number is estimated to be 1,048,368, mortality and re-emigration included.

Jewish sources admit to 388,901 for the December 31, 1957 date, and in 1963 this 
figure is still publicized by the world press.

And, we already have 659,467 European 
Jews who were not exterminated by the Nazis, but who all the same figure in the list 
of exterminated in statistics of Jewish sources.

Or, if you prefer, subtract 1,048,368 
from the 9,243,000 given by Mr.

Arthur Ruppin as living in the European areas which 
were controlled by the Nazis, in numbers and for various lengths of time between 
1933 and 1945, or from the 9,600,000 given at Nuremberg by Justice Jackson.

Take 
your choice.

My estimates are given down to units, too, but that is because if one is making 
mathematical calculations one cannot escape that servitude, mathematicians not 
having yet invented any other way of making calculations.

I trust that the reader 
understands that it was a question of rounding off orders of magnitude.

All of the 
elements that have entered into these calculations have been kept at the lowest 
possible figure so that I may not be accused of error greater than that which fits the 
contentions of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation and all the 
rest.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I trust that the reader 
understands that it was a question of rounding off orders of magnitude. All of the 
elements that have entered into these calculations have been kept at the lowest 
possible figure so that I may not be accused of error greater than that which fits the 
contentions of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation and all the 
rest. It is my opinion that in orders of magnitude, these estimates show that 1,100,000 
European Jews are to be subtracted from the figure that is given for the European 
Jewish population prior to the accession to power in Germany of Hitler, and that 
700,000 be subtracted from the announced six million, depending on the method 
preferred. If new data are brought forth to make a revision necessary, there is no 
doubt in my mind that a raising, and not a lowering of the number to be subtracted 
will result. And, precisely because, in keeping the figure down to the lowest level 
within my system, more than once I have found that the level was too low.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

241
------Jewish Immigration 1931-1962----------------Jewish Population 1931-1962 
 Origin 
 European 
 Non-
Europ. Total 
In 1931 ?at.Increase In 1962 
Over-all 
1,048,368 
493,350 1,541,718 ------- 
---------- 
------- 
Settled 
982,007 
462,121 1,444,128+ 174,610+ 431,262(b)= 2,050,000 
Mortality 
13,943 
6,561 
20,504 
----- 
---- 
----- 
Emigration 52,418 
24,668 77,086 
---- 
------ 
---- 
Verification 1,048,368@ 493,350 1,541,718462,121 1,444,128+ 174,610+ 431,262(b)= 2,050,000 
Mortality 
13,943 
6,561 
20,504 
----- 
---- 
----- 
Emigration 52,418 
24,668 77,086 
---- 
------ 
---- 
Verification 1,048,368@ 493,350 1,541,718

(a) 
(a) Levi Eshkol's population estimate (cf supra): 2,050,000 
(b) I warn the reader who is unfamiliar with demographic studies that if he is tempted to think that the 
natural increase should correspond to the number of Jews actually living in Israel, less than 31 years of 
age, he will be committing a grave error; those, for example, who left Germany in 1938 in the arms of 
their parents are today only 24, and figure among the 1,444,128 immigrants. The same for all European 
children born in North Africa or elsewhere. Among them there are those who arrived in their parents' 
arms in 1957 or 1958, only 4 or 5 years old in 1962 and still could be included in the natural increase 
column. They are immigrants just as much as their parents. 
Now let us proceed to a study of the Jewish population of the United States. The study 
of the Jewish Israeli population has so far led us only to the European Jews who 
succeeded in reaching Palestine, later the State of Israel, and who got there either 
from the west or by the Danube route via Constanza or Constantinople or both. There 
is another aspect of the migration of the European Jews between 1933 and 1945, the 
movement toward the East. 
This other aspect is disclosed to us in at least two Jewish sources: Dr. Rudolf 
Kasztner(Bericht des Komittees zur Rettung der ungarischen Juden) and Alex 
Weisberg in collaboration with Joel Brand (L'Histoire de Joel Brand, un échange de 
10,000 camions contre un million de Juifs). (And, incidentally, it is confirmed by both 
Mr. Raul Hilberg and Mme. Hannah Arendt, also.) This is what the former says: 
Up to March 19, 1944, our chief work concerned the rescue and care of Polish, 
Slovakian, Yugoslavian refugees. With the German occupation of Hungary 
our efforts were extended to the defense of the Hungarian Jews... The 
occupation brought the death sentence to Hungarian Jews, numbering almost 
800,000 souls, (op. cit., p. 1, Einleitung) 
Hungary, where the Jews were not persecuted by Admiral Horthy's government (a 
Jew, the banker Stern, was in fact a member of the Council and numerous others were 
deputies), was actually an asylum for Polish, Czechoslovakian and Yugoslavian Jews. 
This text sets the facts down and shows their significance: 800,000 minus 320,000 
(Arthur Ruppin dixit) equal 480,000 Polish, Czechoslovakian and Yugoslavian Jews 
in Hungary on March 19, 1944. 
Dr. Kasztner also tells us how the Committee for the Salvation of the Jews of 
Budapest went about their work, but the Alex Weisberg-Joel Brand team is more 
precise: it was through emigration via Constanza after supplying them with genuine or 
false passports. Once at Constanza they were saved because Rumania did notAlex Weisberg-Joel Brand team is more 
precise: it was through emigration via Constanza after supplying them with genuine or 
false passports. Once at Constanza they were saved because Rumania did not

--- PAGE BREAK ---242
persecute the Jews, except during a very brief period, between 1939 and 1945.

To cut 
the discussion short, let us cite from the two associated authors: 
In their haste to get rid of the Jews the Germans cared very little whether they 
disappeared over the border or into the crematory ovens...

Foreign passports 
were the surest protection...

Within a few weeks (after March 19, 1944) there 
were more nationals of the Republic of San Salvador (in Hungary) than of all 
the other countries combined ...

After a protect from the Pope and President 
Roosevelt, the Swedish and Swiss governments issued thousands of passports, 
and we added thirty to forty thousand.

Possessors of this viaticum were 
immunized against deportation.

(op.

cit., pp.

55-56.)  
To get "thirty to forty" thousand Swedish and Swiss passports circulated with 
impunity in a country as well watched over by the German and Hungarian police as 
Hungary was, Sweden and Switzerland would have had to issue, if not many more, at 
least that number.

And since there were in circulation "more from the Republic of San 
Salvador than all the other countries combined" there must have been about 200,000 
"immunized" against deportation.

But for all that, these "immunized" persons did not have absolute peace of mind about 
their fate just because of their passports, whether genuine or forged.

Most of them got 
the passports only in order to leave Hungary more easily.

There were some who left 
without a passport.

And, that emigration occurred almost with Eichmann's complicity, 
since, as our authors tell us, Eichmann, "who had before the war worked on the mass 
deportation of Jews...

interrupted when Germany went to war with Russia...

had taken 
the idea up again, as soon as he arrived in Budapest." (op.

cit., p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

had taken 
the idea up again, as soon as he arrived in Budapest." (op. cit., p. 93.) Further on, they 
tell us in substance that with or without passports many Jews made it to Constanza, 
and from there they tried to find ships to take them to Haifa, a thing that was not 
always easy to do. If they failed in this, they tried at least to get to Constantinople. Nor was it always easy to disembark at Haifa. Those who succeeded could not all 
remain in Palestine because of the limitation imposed on immigration by England, 
and, in order to avoid arrest, many were obliged to scatter into the other countries of 
the Middle East, from whence they tried to get to Hong Kong, and from there to the 
United States or some other country on the American continent (Argentina, Brazil, 
Canada, etc.). Similarly, it was difficult for them to disembark at Constantinople. But, it is Mr. Raul Hilberg, with the information that he unwittingly supplied so well 
and that he interpreted so poorly -- precisely because he is not aware of it, who makes 
it possible for us to reconstruct in its breadth and in its entirety the movement of the 
European Jews toward the American continent via Hong Kong. Really, it would be 
more accurate to say that his information only confirms the authenticity of the data, 
because we already have the facts and already had used and published most of them. I 
speak here of the Polish and Russian Jews who between 1939 and 1945, during the 
war operations, never found themselves on the German side of the battle line. There 
was a considerable number of them, and the study of the horrors of the Second World 
War to which I have devoted myself for a good fifteen years has convinced me that 
many of them found their way to the American continents, where they are best 
represented in the United States. The few detours that we shall be led to make in 
Europe during the course of this study will enable us to settle on the number who 
were able to get there via the West.presented in the United States. The few detours that we shall be led to make in 
Europe during the course of this study will enable us to settle on the number who 
were able to get there via the West.

--- PAGE BREAK ---243
As far as the United States is concerned, our peripheral point of departure, here the 
obvious lie leaps to the eye right away: it is not true, as the Institute of Jewish Affairs 
of London claims, that 5.5 million Jews were living there in 1962.

In 1926, Mr.

Arthur Ruppin gave us a figure of 4,500,000 Jews, and the official U.S.

census figure 
for that year was 4,081,242 (a total which census officials seem to have regarded as 
being "incomplete").

Curiously, for once almost all of the historians -- and the Jewish 
statisticians as well -- are in agreement that the best estimates lie close to the Ruppin 
figure.

Nevertheless, we shall give the Institute of Jewish Affairs the benefit of the 
doubt and shall use the official 1926 census figure, keeping in mind that it is probably 
too low and that a figure which is closer to that of Mr.

Arthur Ruppin is doubtless 
closer to the truth.

Applying the coefficient of natural growth, one per cent annually, 
to the 1926 census figure, we get an American Jewish population of 5,550,489 
persons in 1962 -- i.e., 36 years later.

And if we had used the coefficient of Mr.

Salo 
Baron of twenty per cent every sixteen years, we would have gotten 4,897,490 in 
1942; 5,876,988 in 1958; and 6,170,837 in 1962.

I Could not have asked for a better 
opportunity than this one to be able to accuse the Institute of Jewish Affairs of London 
of underestimating the American Jewish population by 670,837 persons instead of by 
only some 50,489.

But, that is not my way of doing things, and I am content to show 
to what extent the two Jewish authorities are in disagreement between themselves.

So, 
the American Jewish population in 1963 is 5,550,489 persons -- without taking into 
account the Jewish immigration since 1926, an important consideration.(15) And, also 
without taking into account the Jewish emigration, but that factor is negligible.

In fact, 
Mr.

Andre Chouraqui tells us (op.

cit., p.Andre Chouraqui tells us (op.

cit., p.

67) that only 7,232 immigrants came to 
Israel from the Americas and Oceania between 1933 and 1957.

And, it is not easy to 
imagine what reasons would urge them to go elsewhere.

In any case we are concerned with an examination of the Jewish immigration to the 
United States.

We have already seen how since 1848, but particularly since 1880, 
immigration to the United States was part of the general movement of European 
peoples, known, in part, as the "Gold Rush." Between the two wars, in France, which 
was the best place to observe it since France was an almost obligatory passageway 
toward the West, the stream was fairly slow until the 1930s.

From 1932 on, when 
Colonel Beck took over the post of Minister of Foreign Affairs in Poland, we began to 
see Polish Jews arriving in great numbers.

And, after 1933, we began seeing the 
German Jews.

The first Polish Jews who arrived in France went into business using 
methods so at variance with local custom and so unorthodox that they often aroused 
indignant protests.

Then, one fine day they vanished, but it was soon seen that the 
heads of their businesses had been replaced by other Polish Jews.

The German Jews, 
on the other hand, usually went straight through.

At the end of 1937 the Austrian Jews 
appeared, and this stream was reinforced in 1938 after the Anschluss.

And, at the end 
of 1938 and the beginning of 1939, came the Czechoslovakian Jews.

From the end of 
World War I until 1932, we were aware mainly of the passage or settlement of 
Russian, Rumanian or Bulgarian Jews, among whom only a few Polish Jews had 
mixed, all chased from their respective countries by the Bolshevist storm and the 
instability that followed it.

They came in small numbers, I repeat.

For the over-all 
picture, from Jewish as well as government sources, shows that it was not a matter of 
moving whole populations of them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They came in small numbers, I repeat. For the over-all 
picture, from Jewish as well as government sources, shows that it was not a matter of 
moving whole populations of them. The Jewish population increased only from 
250,000 to 300,000 from 1926 to 1939 (16) (to 270,000, according to Mr. Raul 
Hilberg) or exactly the natural increase rate, barely more.

--- PAGE BREAK ---244
How many then went through France, and where did they go?

It is easy enough to 
give the number of German Jews.

In 1939 there remained in Germany not more than 
210,000, according to the World Center for Contemporary Jewish Documentation, 
and 240,000 according to Mr.

Raul Hilberg.

Official German statistics, in particular 
those of Mr.

Richard Korherr, head of Hitler's population bureau, give a figure within 
the same range: 220,000.

So if it were said that about 300,000 Jews had left Germany 
before 1939 everyone would agree.

But, Mr.

Andre Chouraqui (op.

cit., p.

66) says, 
that "120,000 immigrated to Israel between 1933 and 1939," which seems to indicate 
that at least 180,000 went somewhere else.

Here, may I be permitted to bring forth my 
personal testimony?

At Belfort, a city near the Franco-German frontier, and right on 
the itinerary of the largest number of Jewish refugees, because it is also near the 
Franco-Swiss border, I was, between 1933 and 1939, the leader of the Socialist Party.

Because of that capacity, those German Jews who were Social Democrats and who 
had managed to cross the frontier, generally knew my address, and, in order to 
continue on their way, they preferred to turn to me for help rather than to the Jewish 
community.

Most of them told me that their aim was to get to the United States where 
they had relatives who would make it easy for them to enter the country and to remain 
there in spite of the quota laws on immigration, which they knew were, under the 
circumstances, rarely enforced against them.

A few of them spoke of Canada for the 
same reasons.

Very few mentioned Brazil or Argentina; in these two countries it was 
only after the war that Jewish immigration assumed considerable proportions.A few of them spoke of Canada for the 
same reasons.

Very few mentioned Brazil or Argentina; in these two countries it was 
only after the war that Jewish immigration assumed considerable proportions.

During 
the occupation, still at Belfort, but where I then had the greatest responsibility in the 
most important and judicious Resistance movement (Liberation-Nord), which was the 
only effective channel for them, the same situation existed except that they first had to 
go over the border into Switzerland, where, with the help of the Joint Distribution, 
whose representative was Sally Mayer, they hoped to get a regular passport for the 
American continent, preferably for the United States or Canada.

Not one of them ever, 
either before or during the war, mentioned England, for which they nourished a 
staunch hatred.

In 1937-1938, the same phenomenon occurred with the Austria Jews, and in 1938-
1939 with the Czechoslovak Jews.

We saw no more of the Jews from these countries 
in France during the war; they went by way of the Danube, the first after the 
Anschluss, the latter after the settling of the Sudeten affair.

For Austria, the statistics of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation and of Mr.

Raul Hilberg agree with German sources: before 1939, 
180,000 out of 240,000 had succeeded in leaving Austria.

And, Mr.

Andre Chouraqui 
finds that the number of Austrian Jews who immigrated into Israel is so insignificant 
that he doesn't see any need to mention it.

Where, then did they go?

I can only keep 
repeating: all those who turned to me, before, as well as during the war, gave the 
United States as their preference, or, in any case, a country on the American 
continent.

So, we have a total of 480,000 German and Austrian Jews who managed to leave 
Europe between 1933 and 1939.

In this case, both the World Center for 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation and Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So, we have a total of 480,000 German and Austrian Jews who managed to leave 
Europe between 1933 and 1939. In this case, both the World Center for 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation and Mr. Raul Hilberg had the honesty not to 
include the latter among the number of Jews who they claimed were exterminated. We shall see, in the recapitulation table of the actual number of European emigrants, 
if they have been included in the number of those who augmented the Jewish

--- PAGE BREAK ---245
population of countries other than Israel, where they must have gone, since they are 
no longer in France.

On the number of Polish Jews, or those from the Danubian countries, who reached the 
American continent or Africa via the West, I had no accurate information which 
would permit me to establish it as other than "appreciable." Happily, my excellent 
collaborator, Mme.

Hannah Arendt, came forth most usefully to complete my 
documentation.

Mr.

Raul Hilberg, too, from whom she had taken nearly everything 
she had said, proved to be quite useful.

If I prefer to cite from Madame Hannah 
Arendt, it is because she expresses herself much more clearly than Mr.

Hilberg; she 
borrows nearly everything from him, but her talent for clarity must be recognized.

It is 
with regard to the French, Luxemburg, Belgian and Dutch Jews that she has so 
usefully completed my documentation of the Jews of Poland and the Danubian 
countries who left Europe via the West.

In France, she writes in the New Yorker, March 9, 1963, there were about 300,000 
Jews in 1939 (that I knew), and, in February-March 1940, before the events which 
brought about the occupation of the country, 170,000 foreign Jews had joined them, 
that figure is what I was not sure about.

At the time, all the French papers, as I 
remember, spoke of some 200,000 foreign Jews who had fled their countries in the 
face of Nazism, and that it was our duty to help them.

But, I had kept no clippings.

I 
was much more occupied in aiding the Jews than in counting them.

Among them, 
were 40,000 Belgians and as many Dutch.

What about the others?

I have no precise 
facts.

In any case, the total number probably was 170,000; one can be sure that Mme.

Hannah Arendt, however, did not overestimate it.In any case, the total number probably was 170,000; one can be sure that Mme.

Hannah Arendt, however, did not overestimate it.

Since the government of Marshal 
Pétain refused to turn over the French Jews to the German authorities, and since he 
made so much trouble for them about the foreign Jews, she goes on, that of this mass 
of 470,000 Jews, only 52,000, among them 6,000 of French nationality, had been 
deported at the end of the summer of 1943, that is, in 18 months (massive deportation 
operations did not begin until March 1942).

In April 1944, two months before the 
Allied landing, there were still 250,000 Jews in France, she says, and no further 
measures were taken against them.

Therefore, they were saved.

This fact does not 
keep Mr.

Raul Hilberg from putting only 200,000 in the survivor column in his 
statistics.

And, one must not think that the difference -- 470,000 minus 250,000 equals 
220,000 -- were deported.

On this difference, outside of her indication that there were 
"52,000, among them 6,000 of French nationality," at the end of the summer of 1943, 
Mme.

Hannah Arendt gives us no information at all, But, the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation tells us that 120,000 Jews in all were deported 
from France, without specifying the number of those of French nationality, which 
does not prevent it, when it comes to tallying the survivors, from stating peremptorily 
that there were only some 180,000, as we shall see on the chart for France, Belgium, 
Holland and Luxemburg.

The World Center simply did not figure in this difference 
except among the number of those living in France in 1939, without taking the 
immigration factor into account.

And, here is Mme.

Arendt's conclusion for Belgium: the 40,000 Belgium Jews who 
fled to France before the German invasion, together with 25,000 who were foreign to 
that country, were, she says, nearly all deported and exterminated.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, here is Mme. Arendt's conclusion for Belgium: the 40,000 Belgium Jews who 
fled to France before the German invasion, together with 25,000 who were foreign to 
that country, were, she says, nearly all deported and exterminated. With the 50,000 
which the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation said were living 
there in 1945, we get a figure of 115,000. But, official Jewish statistics give only

--- PAGE BREAK ---

246
90,000 Jews in Belgium in 1939. And, there is another important detail: no Belgian 
Jew was deported, because -- as Mme. Arendt explains -- in Belgium there was no 
Jewish Council (Judenrat) to register them and to designate them for deportation. But 
the foreign Jews, on the other hand, were all deported: they were nearly all Poles or 
Russians, and their very appearance called them to the attention of the German 
authorities, as she says. 
And, for Holland: the 40,000 Jews who fled to France, plus the 118,000 who were 
deported (and exterminated naturally), plus the 60,000 that the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation found still living in 1945 yield 218,000. But, 
according to official Jewish sources, there were only 150,000 Jews living in Holland 
in 1939. 
Finally, for Luxemburg: 3,000 Jews lived there in 1939, minus the 2,000 who were 
deported gives 1,000 survivors in 1945. 
Therefore, if we draw up a recapitulation table for these four countries in 1945, this is 
what it looks like : 
---------------Deportation of Western European Jews-------------Survivors in 1945945. 
Therefore, if we draw up a recapitulation table for these four countries in 1945, this is 
what it looks like : 
---------------Deportation of Western European Jews-------------Survivors in 1945

1939 
1940(a) Deported Actual Difference Official
Off. counted 
as 
exterminated 
 France 
300,000 470,000 120,000(b) 350,000 50,000 
180,000 120,000 
Belgium 90,000 115,000 25,000 
90,000   
50,000 40,000 
Holland 150,000 218,000 118,000 
100,000 (50,000) 
60,000 90,000 
Luxemb. 3,000 
3,000 
2,000 
1,000 
(2,000) 
1,000 
2,000 
TOTALS 543,000 806,000 265,000 
541,000 (2000) 
291,000 252,000 
(a) Actually for the year 1940 there should be two columns in this table; one with the data for before 
the invasion of Holland and Belgium (spring), which is the one, and one with the data for after the 
invasion, which would take into account the 40,000 Belgian Jews and the 40,000 Dutch Jews who fled 
to France. It would look like this : 75,000 in Belgium, 178,000 in Holland, and 550,000 in France in 
July 1940. The general total for the four countries would not have changed, nor the other data, nor the 
circumstances, so it was not thought useful to tangle up the calculations with figures that ended with 
the same results. 
(b) I repeat that Exhibit No 100 of the Jerusalem Court claimed only 52,000 deportees from France, as 
of July 21, 1943. 
Thus, of the Jews who are claimed to have been arrested in France, in Belgium, in 
Holland and in Luxemburg during the war, some 265,000 among them are said to 
have been exterminated in the concentration camps to which they were deported. But, 
when the war was over there were still in the four aforementioned countries, taken as 
a whole, 541,000 Jews or 2,000 less than there were living in them in 1939. This 
conclusion comes from the very figures that Mr. Raul Hilberg, his protégé, Mme. 
Hannah Arendt, and the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation have 
given us. But, without knowing how, or why, the latter, when it comes to drawing 
official conclusions from these figures, concludes that there were only 291,000ontemporary Jewish Documentation have 
given us. But, without knowing how, or why, the latter, when it comes to drawing 
official conclusions from these figures, concludes that there were only 291,000

--- PAGE BREAK ---247
survivors, and, for the number of exterminated, it finds a figure in the same range: 
252,000.

Doubtless to distinguish himself and to demonstrate originality, again without 
knowing how or why, Mr.

Raul Hilberg comes up with 261,000 survivors, and 
242,000 exterminated, drawn from the same figures.

And, naturally, Mme.

Hannah 
Arendt follows in his footsteps.

In Eichmann's Confederates and the Third Reich 
Hierarchy, the Institute of Jewish Affairs of the World Jewish Congress finds 261,000 
survivors and 292,000 exterminated (p.

59).

So, with only shades of difference, the 
Jewish sources seem to be in agreement.

The mechanism of this operation, which is so crude that it stares you in the face and 
which is found in all of the figuring of all of these people, is quite simple: in 1945, 
during the postwar turmoil, the Jewish communities of every country were supposedly 
invited to state very quickly what their losses had been so that Justice Jackson could 
take them into account in his speech for the prosecution at the Nuremberg Trial where 
such figures were prefaced with the expression: "it is estimated in full 
cognizance..."(17) As unscrupulous as we know Justice Jackson to have been, it is 
certain that, although he does not say what, he must have based his opinion on 
something.

And, that something could only have been information of this sort.

This 
information was assessed, not in the terms of all Jews who were survivors in a given 
country, but in terms of those who were nationals of that country and who were, then, 
subtracted from the number of their members who had lived there in 1939.

The 
difference between these two figures was claimed to be the number of Jews who met 
their deaths in Nazi gas chambers.

It was up to the Jewish communities in each 
country to account for Jews of other nationalities among them.

But this was not done.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was up to the Jewish communities in each 
country to account for Jews of other nationalities among them. But this was not done. In each of the European countries the same practice was followed, and, in the present 
instance, it developed that some 250,000 Jews were not counted as survivors 
anywhere, and that this missing 250,000 always turned up in the column of those 
exterminated in the statistics. It is by this process, multiplied by the number of 
countries, that the figure of six million exterminated European Jews was arrived at. Considering only these four countries, the "non-nationals" were not the only ones 
involved. There were also those who possessed the nationality, but who had not yet 
returned -- many never returned -- and, therefore, were not present at the time when 
that fabricated inventory was drawn up. Since they were absent, they were included 
among the exterminated. However, most of them had emigrated. Although that 
emigration could not be proven in 1945, it can be today. We know, for example -- 
even if only through the Arendt-Hilberg team -- that at the moment of the arrival of 
the German troops in Belgium, no more than 5,000 Jews remained who had Belgian 
nationality, and that since no Jewish Council denounced them to the Germans, not one 
of them was arrested (Hannah Arendt, op. cit.). From this fact, the following can be 
concluded: 
a. Since there were 60,000 Jews in the country in 1926 (Arthur Ruppin dixit), 
and therefore not many less than 70,000 in 1939, including the natural rate of 
increase, it was not 40,000 who fled to France as Mme. Arendt says, but 
between 60,000 and 65,000.

--- PAGE BREAK ---248
b.

When the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation puts 
40,000 Belgian Jews in the exterminated column, this is a wretched fraud.

And, the same conclusion holds for France where we know that at the end of the 
summer of 1943 only 6,000 Jews of French nationality had been deported.

Here again, 
the Arendt-Hilberg tandem is in agreement.

For the period from the end of summer 
1943, to the end of the war, no exact information has been made public, as far as I 
know.

But, Mr.

Leon Poliakov (Le Troisième Reich et les Juifs), Mr.

Michel Borwicz 
("Les solutions finales à la lumière d'Auschwitz-Birkenau" in the Revue d'Histoire de 
la seconde guerre mondiale, October 1956), and Mr.

Joseph Billig (Le Dossier 
Eichmann), all say that it was during the course of 1942 that the greatest number of 
French Jews was arrested and deported, in order to arrive at the admirably Jesuitical 
formula that "in all about 120,000 Jews were deported from France." But, if the 
greatest number of French Jews to be deported was 6,000, there is very little chance, 
mathematically speaking, that the number could have exceeded 11,999.

Since the 
largest number was 6,000, arithmetically, the smallest number could not be larger 
than 5,999.

The question remains: what became of the other 110,000 (or, at the least, 
the other 108,000) who are among the 120,000 French exterminated, when it has been 
established that they were not even arrested and deported?

If I answer that question by 
saying that they had left France, I do not think that I can be accused of conjecturing.

Because if they were not deported, if they were not exterminated, and if they were no 
longer there, then they must have gone somewhere else.

It was from Holland that the greatest number of national Jews was deported.

How 
many?It was from Holland that the greatest number of national Jews was deported.

How 
many?

The contradictory data in the recapitulation table permit two equally 
contradictory replies, one of which is necessarily without value: 
On the one hand, if 40,000 Dutch Jews fled to France, where they were not deported 
and where they were found again in 1945, and if in 1945, 60,000 were found still 
surviving in Holland, then, by referring to the statistics for 1939, we subtract 40,000 
plus 60,000 from 150,000 and get 50,000 national Jews actually deported who did not 
return -- at least they had not returned by 1945; 
On the other hand, if out of the 543,000 from the statistics for the countries of France, 
Belgium, Holland and Luxemburg considered as a block, who were living there in 
1939, only 291,000, who had one or the other of the four nationalities, were found 
again in 1945, then 252,000 (figured by subtracting 291,000 from 543,000) of the 
former did not have one or the other nationalities, were strangers there, and had 
replaced, number for number, 252,000 French, Belgian, Dutch or Luxemburg Jews 
who were not arrested there, were not deported, and yet were no longer there.

Among 
them, it is known from an assured source, that there were a minimum of 108,000 
French and 60,000 Belgians.

There were 1,000 Luxemburgers who also were 
officially there.

Therefore, by subtracting 169,000 from 252,000  we have a maximum 
of 83,000 Dutch Jews.

In the column of deportees, who had not returned in 1945 there 
were 67,000, which is determined by taking 83,000 from 105,000.

And, that is the 
only true fact that can be given as being verified by Jewish sources themselves, with 
regard to the details that they give.

What it might be in reality, is another story.

And 
whether these 67,000 Dutch deportees were exterminated is also another story.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What it might be in reality, is another story. And 
whether these 67,000 Dutch deportees were exterminated is also another story. In any 
case, it is far from being established as fact, since to do that it would require that no 
one came back after being deported, and such a contention is untenable. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---249
conclusion holds true not only for Holland but for France and Luxemburg, too.

There 
is no problem with regard to Belgium, since not one Belgian Jew was deported, or at 
least very nearly so.

Considering France, Belgium, Holland and Luxemburg, en bloc, the obvious 
conclusion is the following: a maximum of 12,000 French Jews, 67,000 Dutch Jews, 
and 2,000 Luxemburg Jews yields a total of 81,000 Jews who were deported 
according to the data provided from Jewish sources, and not 252,000 as they claim.

(As has been pointed out in the preceding paragraphs, no Jews were deported from 
Belgium.) Even if not one came back, which is improbable, it would still result in an 
exaggeration of 171,000 Jews, to be subtracted from the column of exterminated.

And, that figure is just for these four countries.

But there are other conclusions to be drawn: With regard to the 252,000 Jews of these 
four countries who were not exterminated since they had not been deported, and yet 
were not in one or the other country in 1945, one or two things can be said: either they 
returned after 1945, in which case they must be included again in the European 
Jewish population, or else they did not return and they must be included in the 
population of the country to which they went and in which they remained.

It is the 
second case that must be looked into since no Jewish source lists them as having 
returned to Europe.

The question remains: where are they then?

Are they in the 
United States, in Canada, in Argentina, in South Africa?

These questions cannot be 
answered until we determine the total number of Jews who succeeded in leaving 
Europe.

One way of making this determination is by conducting an investigation into 
the Jewish population in all the countries where they increased the population, and 
there is only one for which there is no Jewish source: the United States.These questions cannot be 
answered until we determine the total number of Jews who succeeded in leaving 
Europe.

One way of making this determination is by conducting an investigation into 
the Jewish population in all the countries where they increased the population, and 
there is only one for which there is no Jewish source: the United States.

In any case, 
not having officially returned to Europe, these 252,000 -- who could not have left 
Europe until after 1940 -- must be added to the 300,000 German Jews and the 180,000 
Austrian Jews who had left before 1940.

In other words, we have a total of 732,000 
European Jewish emigrants.

With regard to the 252,000 Jews who did not have the nationality of any of the four 
countries in question, who replaced number for number the 252,000 Jews who are 
discussed in the preceding paragraph, and who were found still living in 1945, the 
following is clear: in the statistics of the countries from which the latter came they are 
listed in the exterminated column, and, in order to take mathematical count of the 
living and the dead of those countries, which is the first task to be done, they must be 
reintegrated among the living.

But "to reintegrate them among the living" in the 
statistics does not mean that they returned to those countries.

Officially not one 
returned, since not one was officially reintegrated into the statistics, nor in actuality 
either, since, with the exception of western Germany, these countries are on the other 
side of the Iron Curtain.

For the same reason, the same is true for France, Belgium, 
Holland and Luxemburg.

The second task to be done will be to reintegrate them into 
the population statistics of the countries to which they went after their number has 
been determined.

In any case, it is already possible to say that here we have again 
252,000 more European Jews who have emigrated, and that figure, when added to the 
732,000 figure that is mentioned above, makes a total of 984.000.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The second task to be done will be to reintegrate them into 
the population statistics of the countries to which they went after their number has 
been determined. In any case, it is already possible to say that here we have again 
252,000 more European Jews who have emigrated, and that figure, when added to the 
732,000 figure that is mentioned above, makes a total of 984.000. Finally, with regard to the 265,000 Jews who were arrested in France, Belgium, 
Holland and Luxemburg, we find that among them, as we have seen, 81,000 were

--- PAGE BREAK ---250
nationals of one or the other of these countries.

So it follows that 184,000 were 
without the nationality of any of these countries.

The same logic as above applies 
here, with the exception that those 184,000 Jews should be reintegrated into the 
exterminated (it would be more exact to say, people missing in 1945) columns of the 
countries from which they come.

To correctly reintegrate those 252 000 survivors, who are listed as dead, and those 
184,000 who are listed as exterminated, for a total of 436,000 Jews, into the statistics 
of the countries from which they came, we must know which countries.

But, can we 
determine these exactly?

Mme.

Hannah Arendt -- via Mr.

Raul Hilberg -- says that 
they were "Poles, Russians, Germans, etc...

However, it is not very clear who that 
"etc." covers.

It is not likely that it covers the Yugoslavs who left Europe by way of 
Italy, Greece, or Hungary; the Austrians who took the Danube route or went via 
Switzerland after the Anschluss; or the Czechoslovakians who took the Danube way 
through Hungary, as Dr.

Kasztner specifies.

Moreover, the Russians could only leave 
via Constantinople and the shores of the Caspian or the Birobidjan after the war 
began.

Following the outbreak of hostilities, only the Germans continued to emigrate 
secretly through Holland and Belgium or Luxemburg for the reason that the Rhine 
had to be crossed, and it was easier for them to cross it on German territory than 
where it forms the frontier.

Therefore, there were Germans in appreciable numbers, 
doubtless, but surely not in significant numbers because they were only those who had 
remained in Germany after 1939.

The others, as Mr.

Chouraqui has told us, had 
already left Europe, and 120,000 among them were in Israel.

There remain the Poles 
for whom the truly mass emigration began in the spring of 1939, when the situation 
between England and Germany was disintegrating, and for whom Belgium, Holland, 
and France were their escape routes, too.Chouraqui has told us, had 
already left Europe, and 120,000 among them were in Israel.

There remain the Poles 
for whom the truly mass emigration began in the spring of 1939, when the situation 
between England and Germany was disintegrating, and for whom Belgium, Holland, 
and France were their escape routes, too.

Until the end of August 1939, they could 
even cross Germany with Polish passports.

They constituted almost the whole of 
those 436,000 Jews who were neither French, Belgian, Dutch, nor Luxemburger, and 
who were to be found in one or the other of those countries in May 1940 when their 
emigration route was cut by the German armies during the "Battle of France." 
I have no precise information available that would allow me to divide up these 
436,000 Jews among the nationalities cited, as should be done, because they can no 
longer be counted, and to deduct them separately from the statistics of Jewish sources, 
given for each of them for 1939, or to reintegrate them into the 1945 statistics taking 
the dead and the living into consideration.

Aside from that, any of them who were not 
Polish or German were the exception; that is, they were a negligible number.

The 
Germans, themselves, were only a small contingent, amounting to 20,000, 30,000 or 
40,000 perhaps, but no one knows for certain.

It is about that, in any case.

After that time, two methods are possible: First, one can study the Jewish population 
in the aggregate, for all the above-named countries, by deducting as a whole from the 
start those 436,000 persons from the 1939 statistics, and, in accordance with the 
calculations, by adding for 1945 the 184,000 who were arrested to the corresponding 
column.

Since we are looking at the European Jews, not Jews by nationality, 
mathematically and on that level, no error would have been made.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After that time, two methods are possible: First, one can study the Jewish population 
in the aggregate, for all the above-named countries, by deducting as a whole from the 
start those 436,000 persons from the 1939 statistics, and, in accordance with the 
calculations, by adding for 1945 the 184,000 who were arrested to the corresponding 
column. Since we are looking at the European Jews, not Jews by nationality, 
mathematically and on that level, no error would have been made. But there are two 
things against it: the division of the Polish Jews between the Russian and the German 
zones after the German-Russian invasion, and their migration toward Hungary, which, 
by leaving out so significant a number as 350,000 to 400,000 Polish Jews, could only

--- PAGE BREAK ---251
lead to results whose aberrant character as far as Poland is concerned, would 
inevitably have had repercussions multiplied on a European scale.

Second, since those 436,000 Jews were in the great majority Polish, they can be 
considered -- mathematically -- as being all Polish, and they can be integrated into 
Polish statistics only.

In terms of such a calculation, the results were off by no more 
than 20,000, 30,000 or 40,000 of them who were not Polish, but the error did not 
exceed, on the whole, one or two tens of thousands of persons on the nationality level.

And, on the other hand, mathematically, it could be automatically and exactly 
corrected on the level of the Jewish population of Europe, by an error exactly 
corresponding, inversely, if I decided not to take into account those 20,000, 30,000 or 
40,000 in the study of the German Jewish population.

It is the second method that I 
adopted: the solution of a problem by the well-known process of false supposition.

Having given this explanation, which is indispensable for an understanding of what 
follows, we take Poland first.

In Poland, Mr.

Arthur Ruppin tells us, there were 3,100,000 Jews in 1926.

In 1939 
there were 3,300,000, as the World Center for Contemporary Jewish Documentation 
and the Institute of Jewish Affairs of New York tell us.

Mr.

Raul Hilberg goes even 
further, with a figure of 3,350,000.

But it is nonsense to think that this could be right, 
since they were constantly, and in numbers, migrating since 1932.

Let us say that 
there were 3,100,000 in the spring of 1939, when mass migration began.

We have 
decided that arithmetically 436,000 were on their way through Holland, Belgium and 
France, when the invasion of those countries by German troops took place.

So, there 
should have remained in Poland at the moment of invasion 2,664,000.We have 
decided that arithmetically 436,000 were on their way through Holland, Belgium and 
France, when the invasion of those countries by German troops took place.

So, there 
should have remained in Poland at the moment of invasion 2,664,000.

In reality there 
were less, because the Polish Jews had also tried to leave by the Danube route: the 
Kasztner Report, as we have seen, tells us that a certain number of the latter were still 
in Hungary on March 19, 1944, mixed with Czechs and Hungarians.

And since the 
Nazi invasion of Hungary took place on March 19, 1944, how many Polish Jews fell 
into German hands?

First, we must determine how many there were in the aggregate for the three 
nationalities?

There had been, as Dr.

Kasztner specifies, 800,000 Jews in Hungary, 
more or less permanently since the beginning of the war.

In 1926, Mr.

Arthur Ruppin 
had counted 320,000.

With the natural rate of increase these 320,000 had become 
361,600 in 1939, and not 404,000 as claimed by the World Center of Contemporary 
Jewish Documentation.

Taken together, the Poles, Czechoslovakians and Yugoslavs, 
who were living in Hungary, added up to 438,400 persons.

And by taking each of 
these three nationalities separately in detail, we get the following: 
1.

Czechoslovakians: the statistics drawn up by Mr.

Richard Korherr (already cited) 
for the Wannsee Conference, which was to have taken place on December 9, 1940, 
but which did not take place until January 20, 1942 (Wannsee Protocol in Eichmann 
und Komplizen, Robert Kempner, op.

cit.) -- that is, before deportation of the Jews 
was undertaken -- tell us that in Bohemia-Moravia there were still 74,200 of them, the 
rest having fled to Slovakia, when Czechoslovakia was dismembered (1938-39), and 
88,000 in Slovakia.

Mr.

Arthur Ruppin's statistics for 1926 give 260,000.

With the 
natural increase rate of 1%, which we have used throughout this study, that makes the 
Jewish population 293,800 in 1939 and not 315,000.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Arthur Ruppin's statistics for 1926 give 260,000. With the 
natural increase rate of 1%, which we have used throughout this study, that makes the 
Jewish population 293,800 in 1939 and not 315,000. And, that means that in Hungary, 
continuing along the route by which they were fleeing, there could have been 131,600

--- PAGE BREAK ---252
Czechoslovakian Jews, this figure being determined by subtracting 74,200 plus 
88,000 from 293,800.

2.

Yugoslavs: Mme Hannah Arendt takes from Mr.

Raul Hilberg the fact that when 
Hermann Krumey arrived in Zagreb at the end of 1943 he found a certain number of 
Jews in the country and deported 30,000.

On this point all Jewish sources are in 
agreement.

The Wannsee Protocol mentions 40,000 at the end of 1941.

The rest had 
fled to Italy and Hungary.

In all there were 75,000 Jews in Yugoslavia in 1926, as Mr.

Arthur Ruppin says, and this figure is accepted by the World Center of Contemporary 
Jewish Documentation.

It could be that the Yugoslavian Jewish emigration matched 
the natural increase since that is a country where not only Jews, but all the ethnic 
groups, and in all periods, were numerically very fluctuating.

The difference, or 
35,000 could be equally divided between Italy and Hungary, or 17,500, a little more 
or less for each.

The World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation found 
20,000 Jews there in 1945, and that would indicate that out of Krumey's 40,000 
deportees, 20,000 returned from the concentration camps where they had been sent, 
and the rest died in the camps.

3.

Poles: Without counting those who, with or without genuine or forged passports 
which were given to them by the Committee for Jewish Safety of Budapest (Joel 
Brand dixit), had succeeded in leaving Poland for Hungary after 1939, there were 
approximately 289,300 Poles.

This figure is determined by subtracting the 149,100 
Czechoslovakian and Yugoslavian Jews from 438,400.

On the basis of the preceding discussion, we can conclude that there remained in 
Poland under German-Russian occupation 2,374,700 Jews, figured by subtracting 
289,300 from 2,664,000 and not 3,100,000, 3,300,000 or 3,350,000.

Moreover, that 
number was divided up between the German and the Russian zones.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the basis of the preceding discussion, we can conclude that there remained in 
Poland under German-Russian occupation 2,374,700 Jews, figured by subtracting 
289,300 from 2,664,000 and not 3,100,000, 3,300,000 or 3,350,000. Moreover, that 
number was divided up between the German and the Russian zones. Now, another question arises: in what proportion were these 2,374,700 Jews divided 
between the two zones? With the fine want of realization which seems to keep him 
from making the simplest of accurate calculations, Mr. Raul Hilberg, who found 
3,350,000 Polish Jews in 1939, puts 2,100,000 in the German zone and 1,200,000 in 
the Russian zone. At least, that is the idea one gets. But, it is a worthless estimate; in 
terms of what has been said, which is as historically as demographically irrefutable, it 
does not bear examining. Then, how many were there on each side? In order to answer this question as exactly 
as possible, two elements must be taken into account: the flight of the Jews before 
German troops pushing into Poland, and the steps taken against them from July 1940 
on. Like the Dutch and Belgian Jews, the Polish Jews fled before German troops, either 
toward Hungary, or into that part of Poland destined to be occupied by the Russians. The proportion of the latter cannot be determined, it seems, unless the number of 
those who did not go in that direction can be determined. A very large number, 
without doubt, fell into Russian hands, because there was actually for a certain time a 
German policy of turning over to the Russians Jews encountered in the German area. This is attested to by Zwi Patcher and Yacov Goldfine, two witnesses for the

--- PAGE BREAK ---253
Prosecution at the Nuremberg Trial, who later testified on May 1, 1 961.

The first 
stated: 
All our money and our jewelry were taken from us.

Then, in the columns of 
four, we were conducted toward the East.

It was in December.

It was cold, 
rainy and we were shivering.

When one of us dropped with fatigue, he was 
taken aside and a pistol shot put him out of his sufferings.

But it was forbidden 
to turn one's head, or one was shot, too.

At the end of three days our group had 
been greatly decimated.

We arrived at the frontier of the Soviet occupation 
zone in Poland.

Our executioners had ordered us to put our hands on our heads 
and to shout "Vive Stalin." But just the same the Russian sentinels pushed us 
back into a German area, where we were left to ourselves.

During the night, 
we crossed the frontier to reach a small Jewish village in the Russian zone, 
where our co-religionists gave us shelter.

(Le Figaro, May 2, 1961.)  
The second made an analogous statement.

Helped, even though so brutally, by the 
Germans to get into the Russian zone, quite a number of Polish Jews must have made 
it.

The story of the steps taken against them is more specific.

Mme.

Mary Berg tells us 
(Le Ghetto de Varsovie, Paris, 1947), and Mr.

Leon Poliakov, who seems to have 
taken his information from her, confirms it (Le Bréviaire de la Haine), that in Poland 
the Germans were not seriously concerned with the Jews until war operations in the 
West were over, that is, during July 1940.

Until then, the Jews were under 
surveillance, suffered innumerable persecutions and vexations, but they were not 
confined to their houses; and, they took advantage of that fact to make a run for 
Hungary via Slovakia.

After the construction of the ghetto in Warsaw was completed 
(October 16, 1940), escape was possible, but only at great risk.

They were all under 
house-arrest, and the Jew hunt began that was to round them all up there.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After the construction of the ghetto in Warsaw was completed 
(October 16, 1940), escape was possible, but only at great risk. They were all under 
house-arrest, and the Jew hunt began that was to round them all up there. But, in July 
1941, the Jewish population in Warsaw, counted in 1939, had increased from 359,827 
to only half a million, all within the ghetto. Therefore, in all of the German zone, the German police authorities had been able to 
find only 140,000 to 150,000. To escape the measures to concentrate them, the Jews 
began to flee toward every remote spot, in the mountains and the forests. When they 
were found they often were considered to be partisans; consequently there were 
struggles during which many of them perished. But, even if the Germans who were 
tracking them all over had succeeded in capturing a quarter or a fifth of them during 
that period (and, in view of the efficiency of their police at that time, this is a 
plausible estimation because in France it was about the same when they went after 
those subject to forced labor), that fact still does not put the Jewish Population of the 
German zone, the Warsaw ghetto included, at more than about 1,100,000. Thus, out 
of 2,3 74,700 who made up the total Jewish population of the two zones, 1,274,700, 
were in the Russian zone. And, even if Mr. Raul Hilberg did not know how to 
subtract, this figure is not very far from his. Let us congratulate him all the same. We 
regret at the same time that he did not find so approximate a result for the German 
zone. We know about the Jews who went behind the Russian lines; the Jewish 
journalist, David Bergelson, told us (Die Einheit, December 5, 1942, op. cit.) that 
thanks to evacuation measures 80 per cent of them were saved and were transported to 
Central Asia by the Soviet authorities. So, the following calculations show the fate of

--- PAGE BREAK ---254
the Polish Jews: (1,274,700 x 20)/100 = 254,940 who fell into German hands and 
(1,274,700 x 80)/100 = 1,019,760 who did not.

And in the German zone?

It seems that only by comparisons of the difference can we 
find out.

On the one hand, here are 1,019,760 survivors found in the Russian zone.

On 
the other, in 1945 Mr.

Salo Baron found 700,000 for both zones (according to his 
testimony at the Jerusalem Tribunal).

The total of those not found in 1945 can be 
figured as follows: 2,374,700 - (1,019,760 + 700,000) = 654,940.

And to this 654,940 
for the whole of Poland may be added the 182,000 arrested in Holland, Belgium, 
France and Luxemburg, or 836,940.

All of the preceding data, it must be remembered, 
comes from Jewish sources.

We shall not dispute whether or not they were all 
arrested; but that they were all exterminated we may, just the same, doubt.

So, now we can begin to determine the total number of survivors: first, we must 
reintegrate into the statistics, the 252,000 who in 1945 were found still alive in 
Holland, Belgium, Luxemburg, and France.

We can do this by adding the 1,019,760 
survivors from the Russian zone together with the 700,000 that had been found by 
Professor Salo Baron and these 252,000.

We get a total of 1,971,760, based solely on 
the total number of Jews remaining in Poland after 1939.

Second, we must add in 
those Jews who had tried to flee westward.

Here we shall add 2,374,700 plus 252,000 
plus 182,000 to get 2,812,700.

The number of Jews who, having fled to Hungary 
(289,300) were either deported from there or found alive there in 1945, can only be 
included in the totals made for Hungary itself.

But, we have not finished with Poland yet.

Mr.

Raul Hilberg found 50,000 survivors 
there; the Institute for Jewish Affairs of New York found 400,000; the World Center 
of Contemporary Jewish Documentation found 500,000; and, from the calculations 
based on Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. Raul Hilberg found 50,000 survivors 
there; the Institute for Jewish Affairs of New York found 400,000; the World Center 
of Contemporary Jewish Documentation found 500,000; and, from the calculations 
based on Mr. Salo Baron's data, put into its historical context, there were actually a 
minimum of 1,971,760 survivors out of a population of 2,812,700 Jews (excluding 
those who succeeded in leaving Europe via Hungary and whose number is unknown 
because, as we have seen, it has been possible to count in Hungary, only those who 
remained there). After 1945 it was possible for the World Center of Contemporary 
Jewish Documentation to make its calculations easily by asking all the Jewish 
communities for a report of their numbers by nationality, and it is the latter which 
should have figured in the statistics. It could also have included the Polish Jews 
deported and then found as survivors in Hungary, which would have saved us all this 
figuring, if it had honestly given the results of its investigations. Instead of that, for 
Poland, it gives 500,000 survivors only, or 1,472,760, who are listed as dead in the 
European statistics, but who are alive and who are not listed as such in any statistics 
of any country of the other continents. Of those, at the end of our study of the western 
countries, we had already found 984,000. Here we must add 984,000 to 1,472,760 for 
a total of 2,456,760 survivors. The next stage is an examination of Russia. The situation here is not involved: 
everything is very clear. Mr. Raul Hilberg, who finds 3,020,000 Jews there in 1939, 
concludes that 420,000 were exterminated, and 1,600,000 survived. Mr. Arthur 
Ruppin gave 3,000,000 Jews in 1926. Between 1926 and 1939 Jewish emigration 
probably corresponded to their natural rate of increase because the Russian Jews have 
always been in an endemic state of migration. And, if we accept David Bergelson's 
evidence, we can calculate the number of sure survivors as follows: (3,000,000 xrease because the Russian Jews have 
always been in an endemic state of migration. And, if we accept David Bergelson's 
evidence, we can calculate the number of sure survivors as follows: (3,000,000 x

--- PAGE BREAK ---255
80)/100 = 2,400,000, which leaves 600,000 missing in 1945.

Mr.

Raul Hilberg gives 
only 420,000 as exterminated, which can mean only one thing: if 600,000 Russian 
Jews fell into German hands, 180,000 were not exterminated -- perhaps they were not 
even arrested and deported, or, if they were, they came back from the camps where 
they were interned.

The percentage of those exterminated in the latter case is seventy 
per cent (420,000 out of 600,000) and of survivors, thirty per cent.

That is still a 
fearful number.

The World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation finds that 
1,500,000 were exterminated (in the German zone, none in the Russian zone) which 
means there were 1,500,000 survivors, but to make it sensational, it gives 600,000 for 
the German zone in such a way that the reader thinks it applies to both zones.

On the 
same data, the Institute of Jewish Affairs of New York finds 1,000,000 exterminated 
and 2,000,000 survivors.

But, Mr.

Raul Hilberg charges the Institute of Jewish Affairs with an exaggeration of 
580,000, figured by subtracting 420,000 from 1,000,000 deportees who it lists as 
being exterminated in its statistics, and the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation with having made an exaggeration of 1,080,000 (figured by 
subtracting 420,000 from 1,500,000) in its statistics.

It is in the statistics of the latter 
that we have calculated this exaggeration.

Thus, we come to this conclusion: the 
1,080,000 Jews who were incorrectly listed in the exterminated column, and who 
were quite alive in 1945, if they are no longer in Russia, nor elsewhere in Europe, 
must be living -- with their offspring since 1945 -- in another country on another 
continent.

Our study of the Polish Jewish population brought us to 2,456,760 
survivors.

To this number we can add 1,080,000 for a total of 3,536,760 survivors.

The case of the Jews of the Baltic countries is as clear as that of the Russian Jews.To this number we can add 1,080,000 for a total of 3,536,760 survivors.

The case of the Jews of the Baltic countries is as clear as that of the Russian Jews.

To 
my knowledge no one has ever taken into account the number of Finnish Jews 
exterminated.

For the three other countries, Mr.

Arthur Ruppin gave the following 
figures for 1926: Esthonia, 5,000; Latvia, 80,000; Lithuania, 160,000; total, 245,000.

By moving 10,000 to 15,000 individuals around from one country to another, the 
World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation comes to the same total, and 
Mr.

Raul Hilberg gets 244,500 for 1939.

What about the natural increase from 1926 to 
1939?

He does not consider this.

Perhaps he felt that emigration compensated for it.

But we are within 500, so let us call it 245,000.

According to David Bergelson, the 
survivors can be calculated as follows: (245,000 x 80)/100=196,000.

And, 196,000 
subtracted from 245,000 yields 49,000 missing in 1945.

The World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation finds 219,000 exterminated and 26,000 
survivors.

As for Mr.

Raul Hilberg, he gives us a higher figure: 244,500 exterminated, 
and no survivors.

It is hard to see why, if the Russians evacuated the Jews all along 
the front lines -- and, Mr.

Raul Hilberg subscribes to that fact if not to its significance 
-- they should have deliberately made an exception in the Baltic countries.

Mr.

Raul 
Hilberg claims this, but does not give an explanation.

Here once again, 196,000 minus 
26,000 (from the official statistics) gives 170,000 Jewish survivors, carried over into 
the column of exterminated, who, since they are no longer in the Baltic countries, are 
somewhere else in the world together with their offspring born since 1941-42.

The 
total of survivors at this stage: 3,536,760, plus 170,000 or 3,706,760.

Let us proceed by returning to the West: First, we shall examine Czechoslovakia.

We 
have seen that 260,000 Jews counted in 1926 by Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Let us proceed by returning to the West: First, we shall examine Czechoslovakia. We 
have seen that 260,000 Jews counted in 1926 by Mr. Arthur Ruppin could, at the 
most, have become 293,800 by 1939 and not 315,000 as is claimed by other Jewish

--- PAGE BREAK ---256
sources.

We have also seen that 131,600 among them had surely fled into Hungary 
through Slovakia, and that when the deportations began, I 62,200 remained in the 
country, according to the German statistics of Mr.

Korherr who had a tendency to 
exaggerate what he called the "Jewish danger" rather than to lessen it.

(For example, 
for Europe he gave eleven million Jews in 1941!) The World Center of Contemporary 
Jewish Documentation found 55,000 survivors in 1949.

Logically, then, 107,200 only 
could have been deported from Czechoslovakia.

Even if one insists on taking "Exhibit 
83" of the Eichmann Trial in Jerusalem seriously, which takes account of the 
deportation, very much disputed, of 15,000 Jews of the Protectorate of Lodz on 
October 15, 194 1, that would still give a total or only 122,200 deportees.

After 
October 15, 1941, the Jerusalem court made no further case for any other deportation 
from the Protectorate of Bohemia-Moravia except to give an overall total, without any 
justification whatever of 35,000.

And even if one accepts it, the total is still only 
142,000.

Except for this, all the other Jews of the Protectorate are listed as having 
been victims of the forced emigration that was organized by Eichmann from Prague 
before the war.

(See, "Exhibit 66" which gives no figures.) It is only for Slovakia that 
the Jerusalem Court gives an estimate of Jewish losses: for the whole, "more than 
70,000 out of 90,000" ("Exhibit 104"); 58,000 up to the end of May 1942, and more 
than 12,000 from September 1944 to March 1945.

If we refer to that Court for an 
estimate of Jewish losses for all Czechoslovakia, we find 70,000 in Slovakia plus 
35,000 in Bohemia-Moravia which gives a total of 105,000.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(See, "Exhibit 66" which gives no figures.) It is only for Slovakia that 
the Jerusalem Court gives an estimate of Jewish losses: for the whole, "more than 
70,000 out of 90,000" ("Exhibit 104"); 58,000 up to the end of May 1942, and more 
than 12,000 from September 1944 to March 1945. If we refer to that Court for an 
estimate of Jewish losses for all Czechoslovakia, we find 70,000 in Slovakia plus 
35,000 in Bohemia-Moravia which gives a total of 105,000. And, that means that, 
when it claims to have found only 55,000 Jews still alive there in 1945, the World 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation attempted to promote a truth which 
the judges of the Jerusalem Tribunal did not admit, since it was on documentation 
officially supplied by the Center that they based their conviction. But, the significance 
of this disavowal is seen with regard to the number of Czechoslovakian Jews 
announced in the general statistics given by this group as having been exterminated 
since it fixed the number at 260,000, figured by subtracting 55,000 from 315,000. Actually, the balance should be as follows: 
1. Czechoslovakian Jewish population in 1939: 293,800  
2. Those Jews who crossed into Hungary (where the discount of the deportees 
and those found again alive are included in the totals resulting from 
calculations made for Hungary, since it is impossible to do otherwise. (18) ): 
131,600  
3. Those Jews who remained in Czechoslovakia prior to the deportation 
program: 293,800 - 131,600=162,200  
4. The number of deportees as determined by the Jerusalem Tribunal: 105,000  
5. Those Jews who were not deported from Czechoslovakia: 162,200 - 
105,00= 57,200  
6. The number of those not deported, as determined by the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation: 55,000  
57,200 - 55,000=2,200

--- PAGE BREAK ---257
And, here we have 2,200 European Jews listed among the dead who were quite alive 
in 1945, and who -- since they are no longer in Europe, officially -- must be on the 
lists of those living in another country on another continent.

In the study of the Jewish 
population of the Baltic countries we found 3,706,760 for the whole, in the same 
situation.

Now, we have 3,706,760 plus 2,200 or 3,708,960.

Next, we shall study Hungary.

There, the Jewish situation was as complicated as in 
Poland.

Mr.

Arthur Ruppin had counted 320,000 Jews in 1926, and we have seen that 
they probably increased to 361,600 by 1939.

The World Center of Contemporary 
Jewish Documentation gives 404,000 and Mr.

Raul Hilberg 400,000 (19), Dr.

Kasztner, as we have also seen, gives 800,000 Jews as continuously living there since 
the beginning of the war (20), including -- according to him -- 205,800 
Czechoslovakians, 215,000 Poles, and 17,500 Yugoslavs and, apparently, 361,700 
Hungarians.

The question is, how many of those 800,000 Jews were arrested and 
deported?

And, here we have a hopeless muddle.

It is over the deportation and the fate 
of the Hungarian Jews that the divergences in the accounts of the proZionist witnesses 
and the interpretations given to them by those who, since the end of the war, have 
made it their business to dramatize the Jewish tragedy, are the most numerous, the 
most serious, and the most contradictory.

Of these divergences the reader has already 
had a taste from the analysis made of the Höss testimony, commandant of the 
Auschwitz camp, and of Miklos Nyiszli, the pertinence of which my references to the 
Kasztner Report and the book of Joel Brand have confirmed on all points.

These 
divergences make the contentions of the Zionist movement so vulnerable, on the 
whole, that it was on the deportation of the Hungarian Jews -- in the hope of 
promoting an official truth around which the whole world could be rallied -- that the 
Jerusalem Tribunal was most precise.Of these divergences the reader has already 
had a taste from the analysis made of the Höss testimony, commandant of the 
Auschwitz camp, and of Miklos Nyiszli, the pertinence of which my references to the 
Kasztner Report and the book of Joel Brand have confirmed on all points.

These 
divergences make the contentions of the Zionist movement so vulnerable, on the 
whole, that it was on the deportation of the Hungarian Jews -- in the hope of 
promoting an official truth around which the whole world could be rallied -- that the 
Jerusalem Tribunal was most precise.

It is quite obvious, for example, that the five 
trains a day containing 4,000 or 5,000 persons was a piece of stupidity which 
absolutely had to be eliminated, because during the 52 days while the deportation of 
the Hungarian Jews lasted, that number would yield 260 trains and between 1,040,000 
and 1,300,000 deportees from a country in which, at the maximum, there were only 
800,000 Jews, of whom, moreover, it has been clearly said that 200,000 were not 
deported.

(21) 
The Court of the Jerusalem Tribunal therefore decided that from May 16 to July 7, 
1944, "in less than two months, 434,351 persons were deported in 147 freight trains, 
at about 3,000 persons per train, men, women, and children, or an average of 2 to 3 
trains a day" ("Exhibit 112"); that " 12,000 were killed at Kamenetz-Zodolsk during 
the summer of 1941;" that "45,000 to 50,000 died while working in Galicia and in the 
Ukraine in 1941-42" ("Exhibit 111"); that " 1,500 in the camp at Kistarzca were 
deported on July 20, 1944, (" Exhibit 113"); that "50,000 left Budapest on foot for the 
Austrian frontier (220 km.

away) after November 10th " ("Exhibit 115"); and, finally, 
that "15,000 [were] sent to Austria to the Vienna-Strasshof camp to be kept in the ice-
house," ("Exhibit 116"), on a date given without further detail as "after June 30, 
1944." That total accounted for varies between 557,851 and 562,851.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(21) 
The Court of the Jerusalem Tribunal therefore decided that from May 16 to July 7, 
1944, "in less than two months, 434,351 persons were deported in 147 freight trains, 
at about 3,000 persons per train, men, women, and children, or an average of 2 to 3 
trains a day" ("Exhibit 112"); that " 12,000 were killed at Kamenetz-Zodolsk during 
the summer of 1941;" that "45,000 to 50,000 died while working in Galicia and in the 
Ukraine in 1941-42" ("Exhibit 111"); that " 1,500 in the camp at Kistarzca were 
deported on July 20, 1944, (" Exhibit 113"); that "50,000 left Budapest on foot for the 
Austrian frontier (220 km. away) after November 10th " ("Exhibit 115"); and, finally, 
that "15,000 [were] sent to Austria to the Vienna-Strasshof camp to be kept in the ice-
house," ("Exhibit 116"), on a date given without further detail as "after June 30, 
1944." That total accounted for varies between 557,851 and 562,851. "Exhibit 115," 
which mentions the 50,000 Jews who left Budapest on foot, does not say it, but the 
Report of Dr. Kasztner makes it clear that this march was interrupted on Himmler's 
orders about the 17th or 18th of November, that 7,500 persons were saved and 
brought back to Budapest, and that 38,000 only (22) reached Germany. If account is 
taken of the 200,000 survivors given in the statistics of the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation, there must have been, in Hungary, 757,851 or

--- PAGE BREAK ---258
762,861 Jews in all on March 19, 1944.

And, likewise, Mr.

Raul Hilberg estimated the 
number to be about 750,000.

But, see how our methods and approaches differ: I draw 
the conclusion that out of the "800,000 souls in the Hungarian Jewish community," 
("Exhibit 111"), there were 40,000 to 50,000 that the Jerusalem Court could not 
account for.

As for Mme Hannah Arendt, with her maximum of "476,000 Hungarian 
victims," (and we shall never know how she got the number) we are struck by the 
fidelity with which she reports what she sees and hears when she is sent out to write a 
story.

And, we can understand why it is that Mr.

Robert W.

Kempner has publicly 
expressed his dissatisfaction with her work.

(Die Aufbau, op.

cit.).

Now we shall take up the whole business in detail: 
1.

The number of trains.

We may be richly informed about the arrival of these trains 
at Auschwitz-Birkenau, but we have much less detail about their departure from 
Hungary.

So I shall begin by saying that to gather together 3,000 persons in a station 
and load them into 40 cars is not a minor undertaking, and, to make it clear to those 
who are not specialists in transportation, I know of no better way than to cite from my 
own experience during the departure, from the camp at Compiègne, of the train in 
which I was deported to Buchenwald.

Camp Royallieu where we were first assembled could hold about 10,000 persons.

Every week, at the end of 1943, about 1,500 arrived, and as many left.

The transport 
in which I was included was composed of 1,500 able-bodied persons and about 50 
sick.

Awakened at six in the morning, collected on the parade grounds, grouped in fives, 
and by fives in hundreds, we finally left the camp a little before eight o'clock with the 
15 squads of 100 each in the lead and with a truck following slowly behind that 
carried those who were sick.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The transport 
in which I was included was composed of 1,500 able-bodied persons and about 50 
sick. Awakened at six in the morning, collected on the parade grounds, grouped in fives, 
and by fives in hundreds, we finally left the camp a little before eight o'clock with the 
15 squads of 100 each in the lead and with a truck following slowly behind that 
carried those who were sick. A procession of 15 squads of 100 persons, marching five 
abreast, is long; armed soldiers were stationed at the head and in a single line along 
the sides; a space of 350 to 400 meters was maintained between each squad; and a 
special guard followed at the rear of the column. A little before nine o'clock, we found ourselves lined up along the station platform 
with each group of 100 (23) facing a train car into which it must climb. The train: it 
was a long line -- it seemed immense to us -- of freight cars. How many? I did not 
count. Probably, there was a car for each group (making 15) plus a special car for the 
50 sick persons. I noticed that on the roof of every third car were soldiers armed with 
a machine gun and something else which those of us in my squad decided was a 
floodlight. At the head and at the rear were two passenger cars in which additional 
guards traveled to reinforce, if necessary en route, the other guards who were 
stationed among the cars. In addition, there were freight cars which carried supplies. In all, 25 to 30 cars -- 25 at a minimum. And, a train of 25 to 30 cars is very long. Even so, such a train carried fewer than 1,600 prisoners with 100 per car. A little after 10 o'clock the train seemed to be about ready to depart. No one was left 
on the platform, we were told by those who could see from the skylights at the head 
an end of the car. Nevertheless, the train did not move. A railway man explained: a 
train that is not in the timetables cannot just simply depart; all of the stations along the

--- PAGE BREAK ---259
way have to be notified, and that can only be done at the moment when it is about to 
start.

Another long hour of waiting: a little before noon the train got under way.

In all, our departure took a good half day.

And we heard plenty of "Los!" and 
"Schnell!" On our arrival at Buchenwald, we were unloaded a little faster; but each car 
was brought to the platform separately, since the unloading platform was not as long 
as the train.

It took at least two good hours to empty all the cars, so they could go to 
Weimar.

I do not mean to say that what took place at Budapest was exactly the same as 
Compiègne, but only that, whether here or there, the job was the same in varying 
degrees.

Everywhere, for example, people had to be collected together, the cars 
loaded, and so forth; all these things took about the same amount of time no matter 
where they happened.

From reading the Kasztner Report and Joel Brand's book, one gets the impression that 
there were 200,000 to 250,000 Jews in Budapest, although a more precise estimate, 
which neither gives, cannot be stated.

The organizations of which they were the heads 
seem, indeed, to have tried to avoid too great a concentration of Jews in the capital 
and to have tried to spread out over the whole country the 400,000 odd Poles, 
Czechoslovaks and Yugoslavs who were continually arriving in a steady flow.

Where 
they could not avoid this concentration was in the Hungarian and Rumanian frontier 
regions which they were all trying to reach, and that is why, except for Budapest, one 
or two centers for these areas (east of the Theiss) were chosen as assembly points for 
which trains could leave directly for Auschwitz without going through Budapest.

At 
Budapest itself, the Jews seem to have been first directed to an area fairly far from the 
station, which Dr.Where 
they could not avoid this concentration was in the Hungarian and Rumanian frontier 
regions which they were all trying to reach, and that is why, except for Budapest, one 
or two centers for these areas (east of the Theiss) were chosen as assembly points for 
which trains could leave directly for Auschwitz without going through Budapest.

At 
Budapest itself, the Jews seem to have been first directed to an area fairly far from the 
station, which Dr.

Kasztner and Joel Brand designate with the name "brick-works," 
and where, although we cannot give an exact figure here either since they do not, it 
can be guessed that at a maximum it was possible to gather together about 10,000 
persons.

The official thesis: from there to the station, in columns of 3,000 men, 
women, children and the aged -- and baggage, as mentioned by all the witnesses who 
claim that the Jews took with them everything they could -- they were marched.

In any case, on this or that side of the Theiss, they had to be collected: by trucks or on 
foot to the nearest station and by rail from the nearest station to the assembling area.

Oddly enough, at Budapest it was not the Jews of the city, for the most part 
Hungarian, who were rounded up at the "brick-works," but those from other regions 
who were fetched from 100 to 150 kilometers away.

The "brick-works," moreover, 
could not hold more than 10,000 at a time -- officially deported in batches of 3,000 
who were replaced by a similar number.

In short, whether at the "brick-works" of 
Budapest or elsewhere, railcars had to be assembled, and these cars had to be drawn 
from the lot of 1,000 which, Kasztner tells us, were at the disposal of Eichmann.

The 
two operations took place at the same time, because, at the assembly points, the Jews 
being deported could only be replaced by an equal number, so if they had to go as far 
to collect them as to deport them, each operation would have required an equal 
number of rail cars.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In short, whether at the "brick-works" of 
Budapest or elsewhere, railcars had to be assembled, and these cars had to be drawn 
from the lot of 1,000 which, Kasztner tells us, were at the disposal of Eichmann. The 
two operations took place at the same time, because, at the assembly points, the Jews 
being deported could only be replaced by an equal number, so if they had to go as far 
to collect them as to deport them, each operation would have required an equal 
number of rail cars. But they were deported 500 to 550 kilometers away, at the most 
600, and they went only 100 150 or 200 kilometers away to get them. Therefore, only two-thirds of the cars could have been used for deporting, very few 
more. Let us say 700. And, we reason as follows: it took four days to get to

--- PAGE BREAK ---260
Auschwitz, four days to get back, and at least half a day to load and unload the 3,000; 
consequently, each train could not return empty to its point of departure to be ready to 
take off again, loaded, until the evening of the ninth day after its initial departure.

At 
the rate of three trains of 40 cars each per day, the system must have bogged down 
after the sixth day, following the departure of the second train.

At the rate of two 
trains a day, the operation would not be stopped for want of additional cars until the 
ninth day after the departure of the first train; the evening after the return of the first 
from Auschwitz, the second could leave again.

Moreover, the system was able to 
function only on condition that it worked like a clock.

(24) 
Indeed, in what he recounted to Willem Sassen, and from whom Life (November 28 
and December 12, 1960) drew the abominable stuff that was presented to its readers 
as authentic memoirs, Eichmann said that he only rarely succeeded in getting two 
trains per day out of Hungary.

Is his statement not to be believed because it was to his 
interest to minimize?

Of course, but to judge by the exhibits that were attached to the 
verdict which was handed down by the Jerusalem judges, his testimony is to be 
believed no less than that of the prosecution witnesses who, in the opposite sense, 
plainly did not deprive themselves of dramatizing it beyond all measure.

2.

Number of persons per train.2.

Number of persons per train.

As with almost all facts from Jewish sources, the 
Court of the Jerusalem Tribunal is in flagrant disagreement with itself: it tells us, in 
"Exhibit 112," that the Jews were deported from Hungary at the rate of "about 3,000 
per train" in "Exhibit 127" it states that there were no more than "on an average of 
2,000 Jews per train." And, on this point, more than one oversight shows up this 
contention: it is not clear why -- if Eichmann, who was presented as eager to deport 
the greatest possible number of Jews, was in the habit of crowding together "about 
3,000 persons per train" with "70 to 100 persons and even more per car," as is stated 
in "Exhibits 112 and 154" -- he only put 1,500 as "Exhibit 113" states, in the fully 
laden train to the camp at Kistarzca.

I recall that at Nuremberg Höss told Professor Gustave Gilbert that the convoys 
consisted of 1,500 persons, and, at the bar of the Tribunal, that they averaged 2,000 
persons.

Moreover, in his confession he spoke of "5 trains of 3,000 persons per day" 
but also that they "never carried more than 1,000 persons." But, Eichmann, still in 
what he told Sassen, claimed that he deported in all a maximum of 200,000 Jews from 
Hungary, but he gives no exact details about the numbers for each convoy.

He noted 
the five trains per day that were mentioned by Höss, and on that occasion he said that 
he did not often achieve more than two at the most.

He noted also the 3,000 per 
convoy and protested against that figure no less vehemently.

But the 2,000 that Höss 
spoke about at Nuremberg did not startle him: he only said that it was quite a lot.

My opinion is, on the contrary, that the transportation of 2,000 persons in a single 
train of forty cars was quite possible.

What is not possible was the transportation of 
3,000 persons.

How many less, then?--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is not possible was the transportation of 
3,000 persons. How many less, then? Let us think about it a little: it is about 500 
kilometers from Budapest to Auschwitz, and the trains took at least four days to cover 
this distance, at about 124 km per day. There were two reasons for this slow pace: 
first, they were not scheduled in the timetables -- "off the track" as railroad people say 
-- and they had to make long stops all along the way to let the regular trains through; 
second, the war was on, and during the months of May and June 1944, they were 
frequently halted by air attacks and were threatened also with partisan attacks. They

--- PAGE BREAK ---261
needed to be protected the whole way by both the stationary forces spread out at 
regular intervals from one end of the route to the other, and guards who had to travel 
with them.

We have seen that to transport fewer than 1,600 persons in 16 cars from 
Compiègne to Buchenwald no less than 25 cars were necessary.

Out of the 40 cars in 
a train leaving Hungary, it would very well be that a minimum of 10 were needed to 
carry more than two dozen people each along with their arms and their supplies for 
eight days.

One hundred and fifty armed men for a convoy of 40 cars would be a 
minimum.

In all that I have read about the deportation of the Hungarian Jews, I have 
never seen the slightest mention of this aspect of the problem.

It is, however, well 
known that no convoy of that sort was ever sent off unescorted on any railway line by 
the Germans during the war.

However resigned the Jews may have been to the fate 
that was in store for them and however sealed the cars may have been, at a speed of 
125 kilometers per day, every unguarded train would have arrived at Auschwitz 
practically empty.

Considering all that they were allowed to take along with them, 
they surely had whatever was necessary to saw, cut, and tear up all the boards of all 
the cars.

And, that could be done without any risk, if there were no surveillance.

But, 
147 trains with about 150 guards for surveillance per train means that about 22,050 
Hungarian gendarmes must have been employed since Eichmann's Kommando had 
only 150 men.

Never anywhere has it been mentioned that S.S.

units, the Wehrmacht 
or any other German army or police groups were sent to help him with this job.

I repeat my question: how many Jews?

The answer: a maximum of 30 cars, loaded 
with Jews, per train -- 2,400 persons at 80 per car at the most.

It is thus only the figure 
of 80 per car that is questionable.The answer: a maximum of 30 cars, loaded 
with Jews, per train -- 2,400 persons at 80 per car at the most.

It is thus only the figure 
of 80 per car that is questionable.

Once again, my personal testimony: I refer to a 
group of Hungarian Jews whose convoy, originally bound for Auschwitz, had arrived 
at Dora at the end of May 1944.

Of the 1,500 or so people of this convoy, a certain 
number were sent to satellite camps around Dora as soon as they arrived.

How many 
remained with us, I do not know; maybe they filled an entire block.

Because of the 
racist policies of Nazism, they were to be completely isolated from the other 
prisoners.

That block was surrounded with barbed wire.

And from that protected 
block they went to work like everyone else, but as a separate Kommando.

For them, 
assembly took place within the block, before their leaving for work and on their 
return.

We envied them.

Fifteen days after their arrival, if your clogs had been stolen 
in the night, if you wanted more bread, or if you required some tobacco or something 
else, you had only to make a quick dash to the Jewish block in the morning between 
reveille and roll-call, or in the evening before lights out, and, in exchange for 
something else, you could get just about anything you wanted: it was a regular 
market.

We admired them; at the gate of the camp they had been made to undress 
completely, and had been sent to be disinfected; they went in completely naked, their 
contact with other prisoners was limited, and, all the same, they had succeeded in 
procuring a little of everything that could be gotten in the camp only with the greatest 
difficulties and at a very high price.

After a little while, the special surveillance over them became hardly more than a 
facade: once in a while we could exchange a few words with them, and even have 
short conversations.

Thus it was that we learned about their odyssey.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After a little while, the special surveillance over them became hardly more than a 
facade: once in a while we could exchange a few words with them, and even have 
short conversations. Thus it was that we learned about their odyssey. They told us 
about what they had had to leave behind when they came into the camp (25), and, 
since we were old hands in their eyes, they asked if they would get it back, when, 
how, and so on. They had been transported from Hungary to Dora, 70 to 80 persons in 
a car, with all of their baggage. They had made a long periplus of six to seven days

--- PAGE BREAK ---ck, when, 
how, and so on. They had been transported from Hungary to Dora, 70 to 80 persons in 
a car, with all of their baggage. They had made a long periplus of six to seven days

--- PAGE BREAK ---

262
before arriving. They had been told when leaving that they were being taken to 
Auschwitz, and when they learned that it was at Dora that they would be unloaded, 
they were pleased. They told the most appalling things about Auschwitz. There were 
neither women nor children among them. The latter had been separated out on 
departure, and at the moment it did not surprise us since that is what happened to us. 
From my personal observation, I have come to the following conclusion: the "70 to 
100 persons and even more per car" of which "Exhibit 154" of the Jerusalem Court 
speaks, meant an average of 80 per car, the dividing up of the Jews having taken place 
in the cars or on the platform of the departure station on the basis of what they were 
carrying with them: more in one and fewer in another. With those "3,000 or so 
persons per train" we have, assuming that all the cars were occupied by Jewish 
deportees, an average of 75 per car, a fact to which "Exhibit 112" attests. 
Not all the trains, however, had the same complement of Jews: the one destined for 
Kistarzca, which is mentioned in "Exhibit 113," was officially carrying only 1,500. It 
was probably also a train of 40 cars, with ten or so for surveillance and security, like 
all the others, or about 50 per car on the average... What is probable on the whole is 
that the human cargo, in reality, lay between the minimum of 1,500 indicated by 
Höss, and the possible maximum of 2,400. So that the average of 75 per car of 
"Exhibit 112" could be the general average, about 2,200 per train. In any case, that 
figure is plausible. 
If it is true, as it is claimed, that Eichmann managed to deport about 200,000 
Hungarian Jews in all, then this figure assumes that 32,000 Jews were deported on 
foot, and that the remaining 168,000 were deported by rail. About 77 trains would 
have been required during the 52 days that the deportation of Hungarian Jews lasted. 
This thesis -- in addition to supporting the 200,000 deportee figure -- has the 
advantage of being within the realm of technical possibility -- the very limit of what is 
possible with 1,000 cars. Since Eichmann said that he only rarely succeeded in getting 
two trains off per day, one could think that this is only the impression of a zealous 
employee who did not achieve the objective set him and who exaggerates his failure 
even to himself: 77 trains in 52 days, is still two trains per day, every other day. And, 
under the circumstances it was a fifty per cent success. 
3. General Schedule of the Deportation of the Jews in Hungary: 
March 19, 1944:.....................................800,000 Jews 
End of November 1944, deported:.........200,000 Jews 
Not deported:.......................................600,000 Jews 
"Exhibit 111" of Jerusalem Trial refers to 57,000(26) dead in Hungary, 
and no others are found in the Judgment:. 57,000 Jews 
Survivors among those not deported:....543,000 Jews........600,000 Jews 
"Exhibit 111" of Jerusalem Trial refers to 57,000(26) dead in Hungary, 
and no others are found in the Judgment:. 57,000 Jews 
Survivors among those not deported:....543,000 Jews

--- PAGE BREAK ---263
The official statistics of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation 
mention only 200,000 survivors in 1945; the other 343,000, who were alive and who 
were without any doubt not all Hungarian, are listed in the statistics of those dead 
either in Hungary or in the other countries from whence they came.

For those people 
not listed anywhere in any statistics of the living in Europe, and who are therefore not 
in Europe officially at least -- we had arrived at a total figure of 3,708,960, at the end 
of our study of the Czechoslovakian Jewish population.

Hence, we now add the 
Hungarian Jews: 3,708,960 plus 343,000 gives us 4,051,960 who are living elsewhere 
-- with their offspring since 1945 -- if they are not in Europe.

And of course we 
should add, as everywhere all those who returned alive from deportation, and are 
themselves in the same case.

Closely bound to Hungary is Yugoslavia, because of the stream of Jews who came 
from there, and Rumania, to which they were going.

Yugoslavia herself is bound to 
Italy through the Jews who fled there.

Yugoslavia: we have seen that the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation said there were 75,000 Jews there in 1939, of which only 20,000 were 
found still living in 1945.

In April 1941 Yugoslavia was invaded by German troops 
and was cut into a number of pieces.

Two states were created by the diplomacy of the 
Rome-Berlin Axis: Croatia was declared independent, and Serbia remained under 
German occupation.

Italy received, besides Slovenia which she occupied, a large part 
of Croatia, where she systematically counteracted the anti-Jewish policy of the 
Pavelitch government, which was more Hitlerian than Mussolinian.

Toward the East, 
the region of the upper Vardar, with Skoplje and Monastir, was handed over to 
Bulgaria.

Within this puzzle, this is how the Jerusalem Tribunal ("Exhibits 105 and 
106") divided up the Yugoslavian Jews: 30,000 in Croatia and 47,000 in Serbia, or a 
total of 77,000.Toward the East, 
the region of the upper Vardar, with Skoplje and Monastir, was handed over to 
Bulgaria.

Within this puzzle, this is how the Jerusalem Tribunal ("Exhibits 105 and 
106") divided up the Yugoslavian Jews: 30,000 in Croatia and 47,000 in Serbia, or a 
total of 77,000.

No comment: we are accustomed to discrepancies in the Jewish 
sources.

Another discrepancy: the Court of the Jerusalem Tribunal found that, 
according to "Exhibits 105 and 106," in 1945 there were still living only 1,500 Jews in 
Croatia and 5,000 in Serbia for a total of 6,500.

From the preceding it would appear 
that the entire Jewish population of Slovenia, where -- because of the proximity of 
Trieste -- it has always been dense, must have fled into Croatia and into Serbia in 
order to be either closer to the Germans or right under their fist.

After all, the Tribunal 
apparently found none there in 1945.

In addition, it would seem that -- according to 
the Tribunal -- not one went to Hungary, where Dr.

Kasztner found quite a large 
number of them, enough to note them in his Report.

One might even be tempted to 
believe that 2,000 (the number that the Jerusalem Court found in excess of that 
number that was noted by the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation) 
came from areas where there were no dangers, in order to be more certain of being 
exterminated.

It has often been commented that the European Jews accepted their fate 
with great resignation; from the way the Jerusalem Tribunal told it, the Yugoslavian 
Jews were not only resigned, they were masochists.

Until the Jerusalem trial, Yugoslavia presented an enigma: an official spokesman of 
the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It has often been commented that the European Jews accepted their fate 
with great resignation; from the way the Jerusalem Tribunal told it, the Yugoslavian 
Jews were not only resigned, they were masochists. Until the Jerusalem trial, Yugoslavia presented an enigma: an official spokesman of 
the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, Mr. Poliakov, explained 
to us (in Bréviaire de la Haine and Le Troisième Reich et les Juifs) that in Yugoslavia 
"the Jews took refuge by the thousands;" that in Croatia where Krumey had arrived on 
October 16, 1943, he did not succeed in deporting more Jews than did his colleague 
Alois Brunner, who managed to send 10,000 from Nice to the concentration camps

--- PAGE BREAK ---264
(27); and that after the coup d'etat of Badoglio (September 1943) the Jews had 
followed the Italian troops as they left Croatia.

All this does not sit very well, as we 
see, with "Exhibits 105 and 106" of the Jerusalem judgment.

They are in complete 
contradiction, in any case, both with the way the Jews were divided up among the 
various zones after the dismemberment, and with the number of deportees in Croatia, 
which "Exhibit 105" tells us numbered 28,500, all charged to Krumey except for 
2,800.

Mr.

Poliakov was just about mute on the subject of Serbia as to details: with the stamp 
of approval of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, he 
declared, "No deportations in Serbia, all the Jews exterminated right there." He 
limited himself to stating that there were 20,000 survivors and 55,000 exterminated 
for the whole of Yugoslavia (Bréviaire de la Haine, p.

180).

In order to get more 
precise details, other writers had to be turned to: Michel Borwicz, Joseph Billig, and 
others...

But, unfortunately, in making a total out of all the details picked up, a figure 
of 30,000 was barely reached.

And, hence, I came to the conclusion that the estimates 
of Mr.

Poliakov were without any basis, and therefore pure fantasy.

On the other 
hand, the figure of 30,000 could be supported by plausible proofs.

However, Mr.

Poliakov was surely correct concerning the Jews in Croatia, and so it was the Jews of 
Serbia who had paid the heaviest toll in deportation and death.

Furthermore, it was 
logical: the Germans had been hunting them down since 1941, and even if they did 
not deport them until 1942 they were all set to, the minute the order was given.

By following the events in the order in which they took place, another discovery was 
made: the statistics drawn up at the end of 1941 for the Wannsee Conference by Mr.Furthermore, it was 
logical: the Germans had been hunting them down since 1941, and even if they did 
not deport them until 1942 they were all set to, the minute the order was given.

By following the events in the order in which they took place, another discovery was 
made: the statistics drawn up at the end of 1941 for the Wannsee Conference by Mr.

Richard Korherr -- therefore before deportation steps were taken in Yugoslavia (28) -- 
mentioned 40,000 Jews at that time in the whole of Yugoslavia.

One could only 
conclude that 75,000 minus 40,000 or 35,000 had fled to Hungary and Italy since they 
were no longer there and had not been arrested.

And, if we deduce that it was out of 
those 40,000 that the 30,000 or so mentioned as having been arrested had been taken, 
it is logical.

And, in Serbia -- since, with the exception of about 10,000 -- the Croats 
had followed the retreating Italian troops since September 1943; that is logical, too.

The World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, then, had no factual basis 
for putting more than 30,000 Jews in the column of the exterminated -- assuming that 
they all were, after having been arrested -- in their statistics.

They placed the number 
at 55,000, or 25,000 too many.

Given the fact that the number of Yugoslavian Jews 
who were arrested and who are dead, beyond the justified figure of 30,000, has 
already been included in the results of the calculations on the Hungarian Jews and that 
the remainder will be included in the calculations which will be made for Italy, it can 
be said that here are another 25,000 living European Jews to add to the 4,051,960 
Jews who we found to be living at the end of the study of the Hungarian Jewish 
population: Thus, the total now amounts to 4,076,960.

Italy: Mr.

Arthur Ruppin says there were 50,000 Jews there in 1926, and the World 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation gives 57,000 for 1939.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Italy: Mr. Arthur Ruppin says there were 50,000 Jews there in 1926, and the World 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation gives 57,000 for 1939. The latter 
figure is very possible : figuring a natural rate of increase of thirteen per cent, we get 
56,500. Let us accept 57,000. We have, however, to add the 16,500 Yugoslavian Jews 
who fled there, so we have 73,500. In 1945 the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation found 15,000 deportees exterminated and 42,000 living. Logically the

--- PAGE BREAK ---265
Center should have found 58,500 survivors, and the overstatement on the number of 
deaths should have been 16,500.

Actually, the overstatement of deaths was even more 
significant since even Mr.

Rolf Hochhuth, who recently distinguished himself with 
that fraudulent writing on the theme of the Gerstein Document, Der Stellvertreter, 
found only 8,000 Jews arrested and deported in Italy and since the judges at Jerusalem 
found only "7,500 deportees of whom no more than 600 survived" ("Exhibit 109"), or 
6,900 exterminated.

In this case, the number of survivors should be 73,500 minus 
6,900 or 66,600.

And, the overstatement of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation is 66,000 minus 42,000 or 24,600.

To be added to the total of 
4,076,960, whom we found to be still living after we completed the study of the 
Yugoslavian Jewish population and who are no longer -- at least, officially -- in 
Europe, is this 24,600 which yields 4,101,560.

Rumania: Mr.

Arthur Ruppin counted 900,000 Jews in 1926, and the World Center 
of Contemporary Jewish Documentation found no more than 850,000 in 1939 (a 
figure with which the Institute of Jewish Affairs agrees, but for which Mr.

Raul 
Hilberg gives only 800,000).

There is nothing unusual in that since the Jewish 
population has always emigrated from Rumania in large numbers.

Concerning the 
number of deportees exterminated and the number of survivors, the World Center 
says half and half, the Institute agrees except for 5,000 each, and Hilberg is, naturally, 
in total disagreement; there were 380,000 survivors and 420,000 exterminated, he 
says.

Another thing that points up how conscientious all these people are: the writer of 
the statistics for the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation is, as we 
know, Mr.

Poliakov, and, commenting on the figures of his own statistics (Bréviaire 
de la Haine, p.

186), he tells us that in 1939 there were 700,000 Jews in Rumania, and 
in 1945 only 250,000 (op.

cit.

P.--- PAGE BREAK ---

cit. P. 188). "Exhibit 110" of the Jerusalem Court summing 
up the story of the Rumanian Jews is very prudent: "In this way about half of 
Rumanian Judaism was saved from extermination," it states, basing its decision on the 
written deposition of Dr. Safran, Chief Rabbi of Rumania, but without any reference 
to what that deposition contained. For the rest, if the one who drew up that document was attempting to show that no 
Rumanian Jew had ever been deported by the Germans, he could not have succeeded 
better. In fact, only one deportation project for 200,000 Jews is cited, decided upon 
for the first time on July 26, 1942, to start on the following 16th of September; it was 
discussed a second time on September 17th; then on the 26th and the 28th of 
September, the Germans and the Rumanians finally reached agreement on the details 
of the project. But on the 22nd of October, when the deportations were not yet under 
way, the Rumanian government changed its mind and told the Germans that it would 
take charge of the Jewish problem in Rumania by itself. Until then, the German policy had been precisely that the Rumanians should 
themselves take charge of their own Jews, and the whole of the diplomatic 
correspondence between the two governments attests to the fact that the Rumanians 
had not ceased proposing to the Germans that they turn the Jews over to them, but 
without success; the Germans did not want them. And, when the time came when they 
did want them, the Rumanians no longer were willing to turn them over. The Chief Rabbi of Rumania claims in his deposition -- at least according to the 
writers of the press reports of the Jerusalem Trial -- that until August 1942 the

--- PAGE BREAK ---266
Rumanians, who did not succeed in getting their Jews accepted by the Germans, 
exterminated them.

He cited massacres of Odessa Jews by the Rumanian army 
(60,000 victims), pogroms at Bucharest, Ploesti, Jassy, Constanza, and "victims by the 
tens of thousands," but he gave no other details.

On the whole he estimated that from 
February 1941 to August 1942 ("250,000 to 300,000 Jews were exterminated" by the 
Rumanians and not by the Germans.

This idea is highly contestable.

At Paris during the same period, everyone with whom 
I was associated and who was familiar with the system of escape lines for European 
Jews during the war knew -- from the Jews themselves, with whom they were in 
contact -- that in Rumania, although the government did not show any particular 
sympathy, they were at least given tourist passports for a fee of $1,000 each with 
which they could move on.

The Chief Rabbi affirms that it was only after October 
1942 that this policy was put into practice.

This date corresponds precisely with the 
change of policy of the Antonescu government which, suddenly, after having for so 
long begged the Germans to take the Jews that they wanted to turn over to them, 
refused to do so when the Germans were ready to accept.

Mme.

Hannah Arendt 
echoes this fact (The New Yorker, March 16, 1963).

The information that we in Paris 
had about this was out of line in only one detail: the price for the passport was, it 
seems, not $ 1,000, but $1,300.

This contention that half of Rumanian Judaism (or 425,000 out of 850,000) was 
exterminated due to the deportation by the Germans reveals a difference between 
"250,000 to 300,000" and 425,000 of some 125,000 to 175,000 Rumanian Jews.

It is 
most questionable for another reason too: the territorial changes that were made in 
Rumania between 1939 and 1945.This contention that half of Rumanian Judaism (or 425,000 out of 850,000) was 
exterminated due to the deportation by the Germans reveals a difference between 
"250,000 to 300,000" and 425,000 of some 125,000 to 175,000 Rumanian Jews.

It is 
most questionable for another reason too: the territorial changes that were made in 
Rumania between 1939 and 1945.

In August 1939, the Russo-German Pact forced Rumania to pay a heavy tribute to the 
contractants and to their allies, namely to turn over northern Bukovina and Bessarabia 
to the USSR (June 1940); a significant part of Transylvania to Hungary; and 
Dobroudja to Bulgaria (August 1940).

The movement of the Jewish populations from 
these areas, when the transfers took place, has never been studied, to my knowledge.

The generally held contention is that they stayed where they were or that few moved 
away.

There were, moreover, agreements about moving people which were not all 
settled when the German-Russian conflict began in June 1941.

I refer those readers 
who are interested in these agreements to the excellent work of the National Institute 
of Statistics and Economics of Paris, which came out in 1946, , with the title, Les 
Transferts Internationaux de populations (Presses Universitaires de France).

Naturally, Rumania had been waiting since 1940 for a chance, as the relations 
between Germany and Russia deteriorated, to get back the territories which she had 
lost, particularly Bessarabia which was more likely than others to be obtained.

In 
June, 1941, she went into the war against Russia on the side of the Axis, and as a 
result, she got back not only Bessarabia but was also given an occupation zone which 
was called Transnistria and which extended out from the 1939 frontier and from the 
Dniester to the Bug.

Germany took for herself the zone beyond, from the Bug to the 
Dnieper.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 
June, 1941, she went into the war against Russia on the side of the Axis, and as a 
result, she got back not only Bessarabia but was also given an occupation zone which 
was called Transnistria and which extended out from the 1939 frontier and from the 
Dniester to the Bug. Germany took for herself the zone beyond, from the Bug to the 
Dnieper. Naturally, too, in evacuating Bukovina and Bessarabia, the Russians also evacuated as 
much of the population as possible, which, of course, was fleeing in all directions

--- PAGE BREAK ---267
before the German troops.

At any rate, from the 11th to the 21st of December 1943, 
the International Red Cross sent one of its delegates, Mr.

Charles Kolb, to Rumania.

He stayed there from December 11, 1943, to January 14, 1944.

On his return he drew 
up a report in which he noted that 206,700 Jews were missing in Bessarabia-
Transnistria, and 88,600 in Bukovina.

Otherwise, he observed nothing abnormal.

From this report it is possible to assume that all of these 295,300 Rumanian Jews, 
now Russian, who found themselves on the Russian lines, had fled before the German 
troops just as their Polish co-religionists did in 1939 and were saved from deportation 
at the hands of the Germans.

One can assume it, but it cannot be stated with certainty.

In any case, Mr.

Poliakov, who cites this report (Bréviaire de la Haine, p.

371 ) 
concedes "that just before the German attack, a portion of the Jewish population may 
have been evacuated by the Russians." Anyway, since this report was based on 
investigations made in 1943-1944, at a time when the Jews were no longer in any 
danger in Rumania, and since he does not record one missing elsewhere, it can be 
assumed with certainty that at that date 800,000 minus 295,300 or 504,700, were still 
living, and were neither arrested, deported, nor massacred afterwards.

One can 
assume this with all the more assurance since it is more or less supported by "Exhibit 
119" of the Jerusalem court, which mentions no deportation of Rumanian Jews by the 
Germans; even if it had, such a deportation could only have taken place before 
October 22, 1942, which is to say that it could not have taken place, since until then, 
the Germans had consistently refused to give in to the pleas of the Rumanian 
government to take its Jewish population.

It is an odd coincidence that these 295,300 Jews, which Mr.One can 
assume this with all the more assurance since it is more or less supported by "Exhibit 
119" of the Jerusalem court, which mentions no deportation of Rumanian Jews by the 
Germans; even if it had, such a deportation could only have taken place before 
October 22, 1942, which is to say that it could not have taken place, since until then, 
the Germans had consistently refused to give in to the pleas of the Rumanian 
government to take its Jewish population.

It is an odd coincidence that these 295,300 Jews, which Mr.

Charles Kolb said were 
not in Rumania, are numerically within the limits of the "295,000 to 300,000" claimed 
by the Chief Rabbi to have been exterminated by the Rumanians.

One is led to the 
thought that they are the same, and that in order to hang Antonescu, the Russians who 
saved them claimed he had exterminated them.

As for Mr.

Raul Hilberg, he is even more subtle.

After having examined the misdeeds 
of the Einsatzgruppen in Russia and after having integrated into the statistics on 
Russia the Jews they allegedly exterminated in cities such as Odessa, Chisinau and 
Cernauti, he counts those who were missing in Transnistria, which is where Odessa 
was between 1941 and 1944 and in Bukovina where the other two were, by putting 
them in with the statistics for Rumania (p.

485-509); that is, he counts them twice.

Conclusion on Rumania: in order to know exactly how many Jews should be 
reported as missing in 1945, we should know just as exactly how many of the 
295,300, counted as missing by Mr.

Charles Kolb at the end of December and the 
beginning of January 1944, were evacuated by the Russians, and how many remained 
under the yoke of the Germans or Rumanians.

However, we do not know this.

We 
should also know how many emigrated, and there must have been quite a number 
because of all Jews the Rumanian Jews were in the best position, having the least 
distance to go, with the least effort, to get out of Europe.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, we do not know this. We 
should also know how many emigrated, and there must have been quite a number 
because of all Jews the Rumanian Jews were in the best position, having the least 
distance to go, with the least effort, to get out of Europe. But, if the Russians had 
saved half of those counted as missing by Mr. Charles Kolb, and if the other half 
fallen into the hands of the Rumanians, had been massacred in the pogroms in Odessa, 
Bucharest, Ploesti, Constanza, and other places, the Rumanian Jewish population of 
1939 might be apportioned as follows:

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Rumanians, had been massacred in the pogroms in Odessa, 
Bucharest, Ploesti, Constanza, and other places, the Rumanian Jewish population of 
1939 might be apportioned as follows:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

268
a. massacred:.......................................147,650 
b. saved by the Russians:......................147,650 
c. emigrated, or found living in 1945 
(800,000 - 295,300):................................504,700 
d. total number of survivors:................652,350 
e. officially found still living by the World Center of Contemporary 
Jewish Documentation:........................425,000 
f. overstatement of those exterminated:..227,350 
These 227,350, although still living in 1945, have been improperly added to the 
column of exterminated by the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation. Consequently, we have 227,350 more European Jews to be added to 
the 4,101,560, in the same situation, who were found at the end of our study of the 
Italian Jewish population. At this point of our work, the total should read: 4,328,901. 
Bulgaria: The statistics which appear on page 300 mention that the Jewish population 
of Bulgaria in 1939 was 50,000. And, the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation has accepted this figure as representing the prewar Jewish population. 
The World Center claims that 7,000 Bulgarian Jews were exterminated during the 
war. Mr. Raul Hilberg found only some 3,000 missing, and "Exhibit No. 108" of the 
Jerusalem Tribunal mentions 4,000 deportees from Thrace and 7,000 from 
Macedonia, for a total of 11,000, but nothing is said about losses. This claim of 
11,000 deportees is not supported by any exact facts; it is not known when they were 
deported or where they were sent. As for Mr. Poliakov, commenting upon the World 
Center figures of which he is the author, he cannot even cite them correctly: he 
claimed some 13,000 deportees out of a total Jewish population of 20,000. In 
addition, he says nothing about survivors. Returning to the statistics of the World 
Center, there is no problem in determining the number of survivors: 50,000 Jews in 
1939 less 7,000 of them who were exterminated leaves a total of 43,000. Giving the 
World Center the benefit of the doubt and accepting its estimation of losses, there is 
no exaggeration of casualties to be added to the total that was found at the end of our 
study of Rumania. 
Greece: At one time the official statistics took separate note of Macedonia where 
some 7,000 Jews were supposedly deported, but there was no mention of how many 
were there in 1939. Since then, this particular contention has disappeared from the 
official statistics, and Greece alone remains with 75,000 in 1939, with 60,000 
deportees exterminated in 1945, and, therefore, with 15,000 survivors. Mr. Raul 
Hilberg gives the following figures: 74,000 in 1939, 62,000 exterminated, and 12,000 
survivors. "Exhibit 107" of the Jerusalem Tribunal mentions 80,000 in 1939, 70,000 
exterminated and 10,000 survivors. Finally, Mr. Arthur Ruppin had already taken a 
census of 75,000 Jews in Greece in 1926. Could Jewish emigration equal the natural 
rate of increase? It is possible.exterminated and 10,000 survivors. Finally, Mr. Arthur Ruppin had already taken a 
census of 75,000 Jews in Greece in 1926. Could Jewish emigration equal the natural 
rate of increase? It is possible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---269
Greece was divided into two zones of occupation: to the north were the Germans, who 
had their general headquarters in Salonika; to the south were the Italians who had 
theirs at Athens.

The Jews were proportioned like this: 55,000 to 60,000 persons 
concentrated around Salonika in the German zone and 15,000 to 20,000 in the Italian 
zone concentrated around Athens.

All the Jewish sources are in agreement in saying 
that the Germans did not do anything about the Greek Jews until July 1942 when they 
made them wear the yellow star and this only in the German zone.

In the Italian zone, 
nothing changed.

It was only in February 1943 that the policy of collecting them into 
the ghettos of Salonika and the surrounding areas began.

These steps were taken by 
Dr.

Max Merten -- administrator of the zone, with the help of two men sent from the 
R.S.H.A., Wisliceny and Gunther -- from the 15th of January 1943 on.

Mr.

Poliakov 
claims (op.

cit,.

p.

182) that the first deportation began on March 15, 1943, and ended 
on May 9th; 43,000 Jews in convoys were deported to Auschwitz (with 2,700 persons 
per convoy, one convoy every 3 or 4 days, means that here, where the Jews were 
massed, the work of deportation did not go on as fast as in Hungary where the 
ungrouped Jews were allegedly deported at the rate of 2 to 3 convoys of 3,000 per 
day).

The remainder, or at least about 12,000, were deported from July to August 
1943 in three convoys.

At that rate, there must have been about 4,000 persons per 
convoy at the least.

The trip from Salonika to Auschwitz lasted an average of 10 days, 
and, as Mr.

Poliakov claims, on arrival the Jews were sent directly in a group to the 
gas chamber, without any prior selecting out of the able-bodied since they were in so 
bad a state.

This is, in fact, what Wisliceny, taking the theme from Höss, commandant 
of the camp, claimed at Nuremberg, but Höss did not confirm it!Poliakov claims, on arrival the Jews were sent directly in a group to the 
gas chamber, without any prior selecting out of the able-bodied since they were in so 
bad a state.

This is, in fact, what Wisliceny, taking the theme from Höss, commandant 
of the camp, claimed at Nuremberg, but Höss did not confirm it!

"Exhibit 107" of the 
Jerusalem Tribunal is not in agreement with this aspect of the deportation of Greek 
Jews: "The 56,000 Jews of the Salonika region were all deported from March 15th to 
the end of May 1943," it says; therefore, there were no convoys in July-August, but it 
does not state precisely the number of convoys nor the number of persons per convoy.

The attorney, Max Merten (who was sentenced to 25 years in prison in 1946, but set 
at liberty almost at once, and who was a witness for the defense at the, Jerusalem 
Trial) claimed that thanks to Eichmann, and in spite of Wisliceny's efforts to thwart 
him, about 20,000 Jews escaped deportation.

Furthermore, he claimed that between 
the time that they were forced to wear the yellow star (July 1942), and the beginning 
of their concentration into ghettos (February 1943), many Jews in the German Zone 
went over into the Italian zone.

He added that, since he was not in harmony with the 
deportation measures envisaged because the Jews were giving him no trouble, he not 
only saw no objection but he even helped their flight as much as he could without 
attracting the attention of Wisliceny and Gunther.

That is why, after having been 
sentenced to 25 years in prison, he was freed almost immediately.

In the Italian zone, the Jews were not alarmed until after Badoglio's coup d'etat in 
September 1943.

Then, deportation operations were assigned to Wisliceny and 
Gunther.

Before the Bratislava Tribunal which sentenced him to death, the former 
claimed (June 27, 1947) in a written deposition that 8,000 to 10,000 of the Jews in 
that zone had been deported.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then, deportation operations were assigned to Wisliceny and 
Gunther. Before the Bratislava Tribunal which sentenced him to death, the former 
claimed (June 27, 1947) in a written deposition that 8,000 to 10,000 of the Jews in 
that zone had been deported. For the city of Athens, according to "Exhibit 107" of the 
Jerusalem Court, a large number were nevertheless warned in time to hide themselves 
and to flee, so that no more than 12,000 remained." So all the others had to be looked 
for and gathered together in the first place. In order to deport 8,000 to 10,000 
Wisliceny had to apply himself in earnest, and we see that he did not try to mitigate 
his guilt. Let us accept the figure and reason thusly: we do not know how many Jews 
succeeded in passing from the German into the Italian zone, but we do know that

--- PAGE BREAK ---270
those in the former zone were deported in 19 convoys, and that after that there were 
no more.

At an average of 2,200 per train of 40 cars, an estimation that was 
established and used in our calculations for Hungary, we come to a total of 41,800.

This means that there were 14,200 who had fled into the Italian zone, figured by 
subtracting 41,800 from 56,000 (the figure given by the Jerusalem Court for the 
number deported from the German zone).

Consequently, the Jewish population of that 
zone should have been 33,200 figured by subtracting 56,000 from 75,000 and adding 
14,200 to the remainder.

If Wisliceny did deport 8,000 to 10,000, there must have 
been left over 33,200 minus 8,000 to 10,000, or 23,200 to 25,200 survivors for the 
whole of Greece.

Therefore, the minimum overstatement of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation is 10,200.

(This figure allows for the 15,000 Jews who were already 
in the Italian zone.) And, that only on condition that the 19 trains really did leave 
Salonika, each carrying about 2,200 persons, which is possible, but not likely.

By 
adding this 10,200 to the total at the end of the study of the Rumanian Jewish 
population, we get 4,339,110.

The following countries remain to be looked into: Germany, Austria, Denmark, and 
Norway.

Germany was already mentioned in connection with the Jewish population of 
Holland, Belgium, Luxemburg, and France.

It will be remembered that at the time of 
the invasion of France by German troops, figures from Jewish sources showed that 
there were 252,000 foreign Jews in France whose nationality it was impossible to 
determine, except to say that outside of the thirty or, at the most, forty or so thousand 
who were German, the rest were all Polish.

By looking only at the European 
survivors, there was no objection in stating that they were all Polish (or all German) 
because they could not be allotted.It will be remembered that at the time of 
the invasion of France by German troops, figures from Jewish sources showed that 
there were 252,000 foreign Jews in France whose nationality it was impossible to 
determine, except to say that outside of the thirty or, at the most, forty or so thousand 
who were German, the rest were all Polish.

By looking only at the European 
survivors, there was no objection in stating that they were all Polish (or all German) 
because they could not be allotted.

But now we must take into account the fact that 
40,000 German Jews were already counted, unless we want to count them twice.

So, in 1939, this was the structure of the German Jewish population: 210,000 
remained in Germany because 300,000 out of 510,000 emigrated, according to the 
World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation.

Mr.

Raul Hilberg says: 
240,000 remained in Germany and 300,000 out of 540,000 emigrated.

Taking account 
of the natural rate of increase this aught to be closer to the truth, but there is another 
factor to be considered: from 1926 to 1933, Mr.

Poliakov tells us (Bréviaire de la 
Haine, p.

11) that the demographic curve of Jewish communities, worried about their 
fate in the face of the rise of Hitlerism, was on the decline.

Therefore, let us say that 
there were 210,000 Jews in Germany in 1939.

Officially only 40,000 should have 
been found still living in 1945, which would mean that 170,000 were exterminated.

To the support of the details which he brings forth to justify these 170,000 
exterminated and these 40,000 survivors, Mr.

Poliakov refers to the statistics 
compiled at Himmler's request, on April 17, 1943, for the date of December 31, 1942, 
which he speaks of as having been "prepared with great competence" (Bréviaire de la 
Haine, pp.

383-384).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Poliakov refers to the statistics 
compiled at Himmler's request, on April 17, 1943, for the date of December 31, 1942, 
which he speaks of as having been "prepared with great competence" (Bréviaire de la 
Haine, pp. 383-384). I am of this opinion: the German demographer Korherr seems to 
have been a competent man and that is why I, too, have come to refer to his data; 
however, he has a troublesome tendency to see a few too many Jews everywhere. But, 
except for this, if I accept the picture of German Judaism as he saw it for December

--- PAGE BREAK ---271
31, 1942, I really do not see how Mr.

Poliakov, who also accepts it, has been able to 
draw from it the conclusions he does.

This is what we find in the recapitulative table 
about the German Jews: 
Arrested up to December 31, 1942:...................100,516 
Not yet arrested:..............................................

51,327 
Total:...............................................................151,843 
It is true that this total is shown as concerning the "former Reich and the 
Sudentenland," but that is without significance: on May 17, 1937, there were only 
2,649 Jews in the Sudentenland, the rest having fled to Bohemia-Moravia, then to 
Hungary, or elsewhere.

Except for about a thousand, the figure pertains only to 
Germany.

I repeat: Mr.

Poliakov accepts these figures.

But if there were only 151,843 
in Germany on December 31, 1942, (free or in concentration camps) and if they had 
been able to arrest in all only 100,516, then 210,000 minus 151,843 or 58,157 had 
been able to emigrate after 1939.

That also means that after December 31, 1942, it had 
not been possible to arrest more than 51,327.

The following July 1st, it was finished: 
the law declaring Germany "Juden frei" (free of Jews) was promulgated, and Mr.

Poliakov tells us, "not a single Jew remained at liberty except those married to 
Aryans," (p.

68) and these, Mr.

Richard Korherr tells us in his report, numbered 
16,760.

We know that later they were in their turn arrested and deported -- officially, 
at least.

Now let us correct the error which we deliberately made, when the problem had to be 
solved by the elementary process of the false supposition, in stating that the 40,000 
European Jews who were found living in Holland, France, Belgium, and Luxemburg 
were Polish, although we knew that they were not.

It is among the 58,157 Jews who 
left Germany after 1939 and before December 31, 1943, that they are to be found, and 
they were included in the study of the Polish Jewish population.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now let us correct the error which we deliberately made, when the problem had to be 
solved by the elementary process of the false supposition, in stating that the 40,000 
European Jews who were found living in Holland, France, Belgium, and Luxemburg 
were Polish, although we knew that they were not. It is among the 58,157 Jews who 
left Germany after 1939 and before December 31, 1943, that they are to be found, and 
they were included in the study of the Polish Jewish population. If we do not want to 
have them counted twice, they must be withdrawn from the number of German 
emigrants, and we must only count among the number of the latter: 58,157 minus 
40,000, or 18,157. Next, we can figure the maximum number of German Jews who were arrested and 
who were deported and never came back. If out of the 151,843, the World Center of 
Contemporary Documentation found 40,000 survivors in 1945, then that means that 
151,843 minus 40,000, or, 111,843 never returned, or had not returned by 1945. And, 
since the World Center shows 170,000 Jews in the column of the exterminated, that 
figure is an overstatement of some 58,157. Consequently, the total number of German 
Jews who were considered dead, who are no longer officially in Germany, nor in 
Europe, but who are alive, and who should be included in the column of the living in 
other countries and in other continents is 76,314. The addition of this 76,314 to the 
total at the end of the study of the Greek Jewish population gives us 4,415,424, who 
must be added to the survivor column. I hope that I shall be excused for having considered the German Jews without any 
reference to the Jerusalem Trial: Exhibits 56, 57, 75, 77, 83, 90 and 91, which provide

--- PAGE BREAK ---272
the calculations, barely account for 10 to 15 thousand who were allegedly arrested and 
deported.

It would be ridiculous even to take them into consideration (29).

Austria: for 1939 the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation speaks 
of 60,000 Jews as still being there (with this figure based on an emigration of 180,000 
after Hitler came to power in Germany, out of 240,000) and of 20,000 survivors in 
1945, or 40,000 exterminated.

Mr.

Arthur Ruppin counted 230,000 Austrian Jews in 
1926 -- the same situation as for the German Jews in relation to the demographic 
curve and the natural increase.

The Zionist writing concerning the drama of the Austrian Jews is not very abundant.

The Austrian Jews were also neglected by the Jerusalem Tribunal.

Studied together 
with the Jews of Germany and Bohemia-Moravia, and in the same Exhibits, this 
Tribunal said that there were 5,000 arrests and deportations on October 15, 1941, and 
3,000 more on the 25th and 28th of November and December 2nd of the same year.

In 
1943-1944, the Kasztner Report and Joel Brand take note of a clandestine Jewish 
community, relatively little disturbed.

They do not give the number of individuals in 
this community, but, judging by the way in which it is referred to, it must have been 
significant.

"Exhibit 97" of the Jerusalem Court mentions that, in Austria, arrests and 
deportations were not within the competence of the R.S.H.A.

as everywhere else, but 
of the Jewish Emigration Center, which was set up in Vienna in 1938 by Eichmann 
and which existed throughout the war.

That certainly explains why they were tracked 
and persecuted less zealously and with less brutality.

Dated December 31, 1942, the 
statistics of Mr.

Korherr say that in all 47,655 Jews were arrested and that 8,102 
remained at liberty.

As a total, and all during the war, then, there were 55,757 Jews in 
Austria, which means that there were only 4,243 émigrés after 1939.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Korherr say that in all 47,655 Jews were arrested and that 8,102 
remained at liberty. As a total, and all during the war, then, there were 55,757 Jews in 
Austria, which means that there were only 4,243 émigrés after 1939. That also means 
that if only 20,000 out of these 55,757 Jews were found living in 1945, the 
overstatement of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation would 
only amount to those 4,243 who emigrated after 1939, but who are incorrectly listed 
as dead. I emphasize: if only 20,000 were found still living. However, I have already 
shown that the balance of Jewish losses was determined between May and October 
1945 -- Mr. Poliakov says it is dated August (Le Troisième Reich et les Juifs, p. 196) -
- in order to be available to Justice Jackson in time, and, in the jungle of displaced 
persons which central Europe was then, many Jews who had been deported and who 
were living had not gotten back to their former domiciles in time to be counted. All 
these were accounted for as dead, and since then, if they have been found still living 
in their domiciles or elsewhere (many never went back), no corrections were ever 
made in the statistics. My conclusions for Austria are that 4,243 European Jews surely must be reintegrated 
into the column of living in the statistics for 1945, and must be added to the preceding 
total, giving a new total of 4,419,667. And, to finish up, we shall examine Denmark and Norway: There were 7,000 Jews 
in Denmark and 1,500 in Norway in 1939, according to the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation, or a total of 8,500 for the two countries. The 
same source gives the total number of exterminated as being 500 in Denmark (since in 
the days just before the day fixed for their arrest, the Danish government, which knew 
about it, forwarned the national Jewish community), and 900 in Norway for a total of

--- PAGE BREAK ---nce in 
the days just before the day fixed for their arrest, the Danish government, which knew 
about it, forwarned the national Jewish community), and 900 in Norway for a total of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

273
1,400. The Jerusalem Court gives the losses down to the last person: 737 in Norway 
and 422 in Denmark, or, 1,159. 
The exaggeration of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation is 
241. This exaggeration can be attributed to rounding out the figures, and is not 
intentional. But still it must be added to the preceding total, of which it can be said 
(with the exception of the 480,000 German and Austrian Jews who emigrated before 
1939 and who were accounted for and considered living in 1945) that it is the general 
total of European Jews improperly inscribed in the column of exterminated in the 
statistics of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation: 4,419,667 
plus 241, or, 4,419,908.the general 
total of European Jews improperly inscribed in the column of exterminated in the 
statistics of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation: 4,419,667 
plus 241, or, 4,419,908.

FOOTNOTES 
(1) Die Welt does not say so, but these estimates are taken from a study which was put 
out a few days before by the Jewish Communities of the World, official organ of the 
World Jewish Congress. They were published by the Jerusalem Post Weekly on April 
19, 1963, and after that on various dates by the entire world press. It may be pointed 
out that for the year 1962, the World Almanac of 1963 (p. 259) gives the world Jewish 
population as 12,296,180. In other words, compared to 1959, not only did the world 
Jewish population not increase, it decreased. 
(2) Arthur Ruppin was in charge of the course in Jewish Sociology at the Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem. His major work, Les Juifs dans le Monde moderne, from 
which the Menorah Journal got its figures, was not published in France until 1934. 
(3) Actually in the above statistics, the World Center for Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation had question marks in place of losses for Bulgaria, and had omitted 
Luxemburg. It was only later that exact information concerning these two countries 
were given officially, and I was not able to take them into account in Ulysse trahi par 
les siens. 
(4) They are derived from the statistics on page 670 of his book, but on page 767, they 
are given as 5,100,000, as has already been noted. 
(5) In that version of the genealogy of peoples, the Arabs, who are also descended 
from Noah -- like everyone in the world, to be sure! -- but via the relations of 
Abraham with Agar, servant of his wife Sarah, are considered the illegitimate branch, 
and we who are only descended from Japhet, as well as those descended from 
Chanaan, cursed by the Old Man, are considered only as side branches, the last of the 
line of descendants, degenerated, and in addition forever discredited for having fallen 
into the heresies. That is the basic justification for the qualification "chosen people," 
as Israel claims -- thank you, no for us! -- and this is taught as an historical truth in all 
Hebrew universities on the threshold of the 21st century! 
(6) [The precise figure which is cited in Religious Bodies, Vol. II, Part 1 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1941) for the American Jewish population in 
1926 is 4,081,242 persons.]6) [The precise figure which is cited in Religious Bodies, Vol. II, Part 1 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1941) for the American Jewish population in 
1926 is 4,081,242 persons.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---274
(7) Before this date, the Visigoth King Siebrut had chased them out of Spain (613) 
along with all who were of oriental origin, and King Dagobert of France (629), had 
done the same, but these banishments were of short duration.

(8) They were banished and forced out of England in 1220, from France in 1394, from 
Spain in 1492.

(9) The Jerusalem Post Weekly (April 19, 1963) gives 2.3 million.

On the other hand, 
in his book, Le Peuple et l'Etat d'Israel, Mr.

Ben Gurion gives 2 million for 1958 (p.

66).

If there were only 2.045 or 2.05 million in 1962, it shows that not only was the 
normal population increase of 1 per cent per year not reached in Israel, but also that 
immigration had been halted.

Perhaps one could even speak of emigration.

(l0) [Here, Professor Rassinier takes the rate of natural population increase of one per 
cent per year and computes the entire increase over the given term in a single 
calculation (e.g., the sum of 174,610 is multiplied by 31 per cent to yield the natural 
growth over a period of thirty-one Years).

This method is used throughout the entire 
study.

Although this simplified method produces adequate approximations, the 
estimation of the natural population growth would be more precise if the one per cent 
increase for each year were added to the figure for the preceding year with one per 
cent then taken of the new total, with the procedure being repeated for each year of 
the given term.

For example, the natural growth from 1931 to 1962, as figured in item 
"a" is 63,091 (or an increase of about 36 per cent) when the latter method is used.Although this simplified method produces adequate approximations, the 
estimation of the natural population growth would be more precise if the one per cent 
increase for each year were added to the figure for the preceding year with one per 
cent then taken of the new total, with the procedure being repeated for each year of 
the given term.

For example, the natural growth from 1931 to 1962, as figured in item 
"a" is 63,091 (or an increase of about 36 per cent) when the latter method is used.

Likewise, a natural increase of 101,249 (or 16 per cent) is achieved instead of 94,350 
for item "b." Because it is felt that Professor Rassinier's "shorthand" method of 
calculating population growth resulted in approximations which are of sufficient 
accuracy for the purpose of this study, his calculations have not been changed.] 
(11) If the figuring were done on the basis of the natural increase rate of 1.25% (or 
20% every 16 years) of Professor Salo Baron, the global increase for the period of 
1931-1962 would be carried to 523,308 individuals, or an increase of 92,046, and the 
number of immigrants actually living in the country diminished by as much, or 
1,444,128 minus 92,046 equal 1,352,082.

(12) In a work intended for students of the college for Higher Economic Studies 
(Principes et tendances de la planification rurale en Israel, Paris, (1963) Professor 
Albert Meister claims that "one immigrant out of ten in Israel (or 109%) would return 
into the Diaspora "after a brief sojourn.

(13) When the airplanes in many trips brought them back to the Promised Land, 
which they no longer hoped to see, and whose location most of them no longer knew, 
as Leon Uris just about says in Exodus, they at first thought it was the end of the 
world as proclaimed in the Scriptures, "The day when men shall fly." And they 
arrived in Israel to discover such other unsuspected things as a table, a chair or a fork, 
etc ...--- PAGE BREAK ---

(12) In a work intended for students of the college for Higher Economic Studies 
(Principes et tendances de la planification rurale en Israel, Paris, (1963) Professor 
Albert Meister claims that "one immigrant out of ten in Israel (or 109%) would return 
into the Diaspora "after a brief sojourn. (13) When the airplanes in many trips brought them back to the Promised Land, 
which they no longer hoped to see, and whose location most of them no longer knew, 
as Leon Uris just about says in Exodus, they at first thought it was the end of the 
world as proclaimed in the Scriptures, "The day when men shall fly." And they 
arrived in Israel to discover such other unsuspected things as a table, a chair or a fork, 
etc ... but at the same time they came with the conviction of being "the Chosen 
People," destined in the twentieth century to take the future of the world in charge. (14) In order to spare the reader, the steps in this calculation do not appear. If he feels 
the need of verifying it himself, he can make use of the method which appears earlier 
in this chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---275
(15) [If Arthur Ruppin's figure of 4,500,000 Jews living in the United States in 1926 
had been used instead of the official census figure, a total Jewish population for 1962 
-- exclusive of immigration -- of 6,120,000 persons would be had, using the natural 
growth coefficient of one per cent annually.

If Salo Baron's coefficient had been used, 
the 1962 figure would be 6,804,000 persons, once again exclusive of immigration.] 
(16) However, the World Almanac of 1945 takes note of only 240,000, p.

494.

(17) It was another one of the machiavellianisms of Nuremberg that every time that 
the prosecution brought forth an accusation for which they would not or could not 
give the source they used the expression "in full cognizance" or "from an assured 
source" -- that was generally the case when the source was Jewish -- and it was up to 
the accused to prove their innocence.

At Nuremberg it was not up to the prosecution 
to prove guilt since the Allies recognized early that their adherence to the Anglo-
American jurisprudential presumption of "innocent until proven guilty" would deny 
them the "convictions" which they sought.

(18) The Czechoslovakian Jews who went into Hungary were arrested there together 
with their Polish and Yugoslav coreligionists without any nationality distinctions 
being drawn.

The survivors and the deportees as listed in the calculations concerning 
Hungary cannot be distinguished either, since there are no records.

This could be 
significant with regard to losses by nationality, but is not for losses of a general 
European nature, and that is what we are investigating.

(19) The Jerusalem Tribunal has 480,000 in its "Exhibit No.

111." 
(20) This figure is confirmed by "Exhibit No.

111" of the Jerusalem Tribunal.

(21) Dr.

Kasztner says 300,000 ("800,000 of which 500,000 were deported," page 1 of 
his Report.) 
(22) Figure given by Dr.

Kasztner as coming to him from Eichmann himself.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kasztner says 300,000 ("800,000 of which 500,000 were deported," page 1 of 
his Report.) 
(22) Figure given by Dr. Kasztner as coming to him from Eichmann himself. (23) In France and in Germany, freight cars are larger than in Poland, Czechoslovakia 
and Hungary. I learned this by experience when we were evacuated from Dora in 
April 1945, with 80 per car in a train composed at least half of such cars, we were just 
as crowded with 80 in a Polish car as we were with 100 in a French car. (24) We can see then what would have happened under Joel Brand's system: "Every 
day" he told the Jews in Constantinople, when he met with them towards the 18th of 
June, 1944, "12,000 Jews are thrown into the cars." (Histoire de Joel Brand, p. 125). Conclusion: four trains per day, and the system exhausted the supply of empty 
railroad cars before the evening of the 5th day! (25) At Auschwitz, the "baggage" collected in this manner by the administration of 
the camp was gathered into a corner of the camp which, according to the official plans 
produced at Nuremberg and other trials, was composed of 30 blocks separate from 
each other and heavily guarded: "Canada" they were called by the deportees. The 
official view was that on the approach of the Russian army, the S.S. tried to set fire to 
them but did not succeed. On their arrival, the Russian troops found in the six blocks

--- PAGE BREAK ---e 
official view was that on the approach of the Russian army, the S.S. tried to set fire to 
them but did not succeed. On their arrival, the Russian troops found in the six blocks

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276
set aside for clothing: 348,820 outfits for men, 836,525 outfits for women, but only 
5,255 pairs of shoes for men, and 38,000 pairs of shoes for women. There were also 
13,694 rugs. (Auschwitz, Official Communication of the Museum of the Auschwitz 
Commission -- Panstwowe Museum W. Oswiecimiu -- published in Cracow in 1947). 
That gives an idea of all that the Jews brought with them. Women remained women 
even in the worst circumstances: compare what was found on them with what was 
found on the men. Other barracks contained objects of all sorts of value. The 
commission does not give an enumeration, or an estimate of the market value, but 
trains and trucks were required to transport it all. All these things must have taken up 
a great deal of space in the cars "of 70 to 100 persons and even more" mentioned in 
"Exhibit 154" of the Jerusalem trial. Conclusion: in the cars of the Jews who carried 
with them the most goods, there were fewer persons, and in the others more than 
expected. 
(26) Actually, it said: 57,000 to 62,000. 
(27) In the Bréviaire de la Haine, he even specified "3,000 deportees in all from 
Croatia." (p. 181.) 
(28) Deportation of the Jews from Yugoslavia was decided upon on January 19, 1943, 
for Croatia, but was not seriously begun until after the arrival of Krumey, on October 
16, 1943; deportations were begun in March, 1942 in Serbia. 
(29) Still, the method of the judges at Jerusalem must be emphasized: the case of the 
German Jews is treated in their verdict -- in the aggregate -- together with Austrian 
Jews and those of Bohemia-Moravia. To cover up the ridiculous aspect of the number 
of German Jews which they were taking into consideration, and contrary to the system 
they used for other countries, they did not total them. In order to give the impression 
that there was a great number, they included among the German Jews, the 55,000 
Polish Jews who were in Germany, when on October 7, 1938, the Polish government 
decided to deprive them of Polish nationality by not renewing their passports. By this 
act they were depatriated, and the Germans at that time did not want people without 
passports on their land. Nor, did the Poles, who had depatriated them. Since no other 
country wanted them either, it was a very bad state of affairs. It was the origin of the 
assassination of Counsellor vom Rath in Paris on November 7, 1938, by Grynszpan, a 
son of one of these 55,000 Poles, and of the "Kristallnacht" of November 9th and 10th 
in Germany.he origin of the 
assassination of Counsellor vom Rath in Paris on November 7, 1938, by Grynszpan, a 
son of one of these 55,000 Poles, and of the "Kristallnacht" of November 9th and 10th 
in Germany.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

277

Chapter Fifteen 
Conclusion: Six Million Exterminated 
Jews -- Fact or Fictionof one of these 55,000 Poles, and of the "Kristallnacht" of November 9th and 10th 
in Germany.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

277

Chapter Fifteen 
Conclusion: Six Million Exterminated 
Jews -- Fact or Fiction

Logic demands that this demographic study end with general statistics which include 
the following four items for each of the European nations which I have surveyed: 
1. The number of Jews who were living there just before Beck's accession to power in 
Poland (1932) and Hitler's accession to power in Germany (I 933); 
2. The number of Jews among them who, to escape persecution, emigrated between 
1932 and 1945; 
3. The number of Jews who remained in Europe and who were still alive there in 
1945; 
4. The number of Jews who cannot be accounted for and who, hence, are presumed to 
be dead. 
In order to give the exact truth of this dark story, these statistics should be 
accompanied by others giving the structure of the world Jewish population at the end 
of 1962. And, in four sections also, for each of the nations of the other continents: 
1. The number of Jews living there before the rise to power in Poland of Beck, and in 
Germany of Hitler; 
2. The natural increase in the Jewish population from 1932 to 1962; 
3. The census of the Jewish population at the end of 1962; 
4. The number of Jewish immigrants calculated from the difference between the total 
figures of items 2 and 3. (There is no doubt that this difference comes near the 
4,419,908 figure that is mentioned in the preceding section.) 
This was my intention at the beginning. Now, this double labor turns out to be 
impossible; the second statistics cannot be determined unless and until the leadership 
of international Zionism agrees to undertake a census of the world Jewish population, 
and we have seen that Zionist leaders are not about to accept this idea. As for the first 
statistics, there is a long series of other difficulties that still present obstacles in spite 
of all the specific data that the preceding study has produced. 
The most insurmountable of these difficulties, and which sums them all up, is the 
following: if we now know that a minimum of 4,419,908 Jews succeeded in leavingat the preceding study has produced. 
The most insurmountable of these difficulties, and which sums them all up, is the 
following: if we now know that a minimum of 4,419,908 Jews succeeded in leaving

--- PAGE BREAK ---278
Europe between 1931 and 1945, we are much less well informed on their 
nationalities.

For countries like Denmark, Norway, Germany, Austria, Bulgaria, and 
one or two others - the Baltic countries for example, even Greece - there is no 
problem; they were not on the route of the Jewish migration; the Germans found only 
national Jews in those countries and everything is clear.

But it is not the same in the 
other countries - Holland, Belgium, France, Italy, Hungary, Rumania - which were 
countries into which to escape, or to go through, before they became occupied by 
German troops.

There, the Jews were arrested and deported pell-mell, and it is 
impossible for us to determine accurately the nationalities of those who managed not 
to get arrested as well as those who were.

Hungary is the archetype of this difficulty: 
there, we did succeed in determining that out of the 800,000 Jews who were living 
there on March 19, 1944, 543,000 had not been deported; that about 200,000 had been 
deported; that 57,000 had very probably been massacred in police operations; and that 
343,000 had managed to emigrate.

But, in each of these categories, it was impossible 
to determine who was Hungarian, who was Yugoslavian, who was Czechoslovakian, 
and who was Polish.

The same questions hold for Rumania, where we found 147,650 
massacred, and 652,350 survivors, 227,350 of whom emigrated.

The same questions 
are found again for Holland, for Belgium, for Luxemburg and for France.

In France, 
we found that only 81,000 Jews of one nationality or the other could have been 
arrested and deported; we know also that there were no Belgians among them, that the 
number of French was necessarily between 6,000 and 11,999, and that the number of 
the Luxemburgers was between 0 and 2,000, the others being Dutch.

But these are, all 
the same, figures which are insufficiently exact to be called statistics.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In France, 
we found that only 81,000 Jews of one nationality or the other could have been 
arrested and deported; we know also that there were no Belgians among them, that the 
number of French was necessarily between 6,000 and 11,999, and that the number of 
the Luxemburgers was between 0 and 2,000, the others being Dutch. But these are, all 
the same, figures which are insufficiently exact to be called statistics. In Poland, we 
know that 729,040 Jews were arrested, either on their national land or on the 
emigration route toward the west; but of the 289,300 who tried to emigrate by the 
Danubian route, how many were arrested in Hungary and how many in Rumania? So 
many questions for which there are no answers and which can equally be applied to 
the Czechoslovakians who fled to Hungary and the Yugoslavians who fled to Italy. In the final analysis, rather than to circulate statistics based on nationalities, every 
datum of which might have been open to question, and to add to the confusion created 
by the historians and the statisticians who voice the line of international Zionism, I 
have preferred to draw up these statistics on the only plane where we are sure of 
ourselves, that is in Europe. Here, no serious debate is possible: we have affirmed that 
a minimum of 4,419,908 European Jews managed to emigrate early enough to escape 
arrest and deportation to concentration camps, and we can add them to those that the 
historians and statisticians who support the Zionist "genocide" fiction, found living in 
Europe in 1945. Here then, on information from the World Center of Contemporary Jewish 
Documentation, are our statistics on the European scale in four sections, with the 
integration, for 1931, of the 300,000 German Jews and the 180,000 Austrian Jews 
who are admitted to have left Europe to flee from Hitler together with the million 
Jews who were in the part of the Russia that was never occupied by the German 
troops.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ian Jews 
who are admitted to have left Europe to flee from Hitler together with the million 
Jews who were in the part of the Russia that was never occupied by the German 
troops.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

279
Table page 389 
 Description 
1931 
1945 
Official 
Losses 
Emigrants 
Traced 
Actual (a) 
Losses 
 Statist. totals 
from p. 302 
8,297,500 2,288,100 6,009,400 ---- 
---- 
Known 
German 
Emigrants 
300,000 300,000 ---- 
---- 
---- 
Austrian 
Emigrants 
Acknowledged 
180,000 180,000 ---- 
---- 
---- 
Russian Jews 
saved by 
Soviet 
1,000,000 1,000,000 ---- 
---- 
---- 
Actual totals 
from WCJD 
9,777,500 3,768,100 6,009,400 ---- 
---- 
Ac. totals as 
arrived at in 
this study 
9,777,500 3,768,100 ___ 
4,419,908 1,589,492
(a) The figure in this column actually represents the number of European Jews who were not accounted 
for in the preceding study. Consequently, this figure must be viewed with the following caveats: first 
this figure represents a maximum figure which doubtless would be considerably smaller if a census of 
the world Jewish population were taken today since whenever a question has arisen pertaining to the 
propriety of some statistic, it has been resolved in a manner which has favored the proponents of the 
Zionist line. Second, not every person who is included within this figure can be said to have died at the 
hands of the Germans. The mere fact that a person is not accounted for does not necessarily mean that 
he is deceased. These comments also hold true for Mr. Hilberg's statistics which are outlined on the 
following page 
Here again are the same statistics, but this time based on the information of Mr. Raul 
Hilberg who did not divide Russia into the two zones, but who, too, acknowledged 
that there were 300,000 German and 180,000 Austrian Jewish emigrants.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the information of Mr. Raul 
Hilberg who did not divide Russia into the two zones, but who, too, acknowledged 
that there were 300,000 German and 180,000 Austrian Jewish emigrants.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

280
Table p. 390 
 Description 
1931 
1945 
Official 
Losses 
Emigrants 
Traced 
Actual 
Losses 
Totals from p. 
302 
9,190,000 3,782,500 5,407,000 --- 
---- 
Known 
German 
Emigrants 
 300,000 300,000 
---- 
---- 
---- 
Austrian 
Emigrants 
acknowledged 
 180,000 180,000 
----- 
---- 
---- 
Totals of Mr. 
Hilberg for 
1945 
9,670,000 4,262,500 5,407,500 ---- 
---- 
totals as 
arrived at in 
this study 
9,670,000 4,262,500 ----- 
4,419,908 987,592 
On the basis of the preceding analysis, this is where we stand now: First, out of the 
study of the statistics of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation 
and from its own data, we find 1,589,492 European Jews dead or missing as a 
consequence of Nazi persecutions in concentration camps or in some other way. 
Second, out of the study of Mr. Raul Hilberg's data we find only 987,592 dead or 
missing Jews. 
Twice I took up this problem: first in Ulysse trahi par les siens, published in France in 
1960, and, second, in an article for the German review Deutsche Hochschullehrer-
Zeitung (Tubingen, 12, February 1963). Each time that I reviewed the problems, I did 
it in terms of the data from Jewish sources that had been published at the time. But, 
the first time, neither the judgment of the Jerusalem Tribunal, nor, more significantly, 
the study of The Jewish Communities of the World of February 1963 had been brought 
out. And, in terms of what was already known, my conviction had been that the 
number of Jewish victims of Nazi persecution, in concentration camps or otherwise, 
should be placed at about 1,000,000, more or less. The second time, I had in my hands 
the Judgment of the Jerusalem Tribunal, and I had followed day by day the hearings 
of the Trial, but I still was not acquainted with the study of the Jewish Communities of 
he World, then not yet published. As a conclusion to my writing for the Deutsche 
Hochschullehrer-Zeitung (pp. 61, 62) I had claimed that if the number were greater 
than 1,000,000 it could not by any means exceed 1,655,300 victims. Today, with all 
the documents at hand which were lacking then, it can be said that, based on data 
prior to that of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation, the number 
of victims is 1,589,492. On the other hand, the figure is 987,592, based on Mr. Raul 
Hilberg's data. To achieve greater exactness, we must wait for the new Zionist leaders 
like Salo Baron, Leon Poliakov, and Michel Borwicz, among others, to give new 
avowals, or for another trial like the Jerusalem one, to bring us new light on the 
question. As well as we know these Zionist circles, neither one nor the other of these 
hypothesis is excluded, but, rather, both are more likely than not to occur. In thosebring us new light on the 
question. As well as we know these Zionist circles, neither one nor the other of these 
hypothesis is excluded, but, rather, both are more likely than not to occur. In those

--- PAGE BREAK ---281
circles, indeed, neither talkers without conscience, seeking cheap publicity, nor, alas, 
judges looking for vengeance, are lacking.

I shall bet a good deal on two other things: 
the latent and continuous dissensions which exist between Mr.

Ben Gurion and Mr.

Nahum Goldmann, and the fracas between Khrushchev and Mao Tse-tung.

For a long time now Mr.

Nahum Goldmann has been showing signs of fatigue and 
impatience with the policies of Mr.

Ben Gurion with regard to Germany.

For example, 
he had stated publicly that he was not enthusiastic about the arrest of Eichmann and 
the trial which followed.

Through various indiscretions we learn that he does not 
place much value on all the trials in Germany, aimed at former members of one or 
another of the Nazi organizations of Hitler's time.

In Israel itself, there is a very 
serious divergence between his group and that of Mr.

Ben Gurion, each time the latter 
finds a German minister stupid enough to accept an invitation sent him with the sole 
object of having him publicly insulted in Israel by his partisans, and thus of making an 
issue that attracts the attention of the whole world to the debt which Germany, 
because she rallied to Hitler in 1933, assumed with regard to Israel.

Everything takes 
place as if, not daring publicly to take a position in opposition to Mr.

Ben Gurion with 
regard to his policy toward Germany, Mr.

Nahum Goldmann were trying behind the 
scenes, to silence him on his main theme.

And, the fact that, with regard to the Jews 
who were exterminated, the statistics which we have from the American partisans of 
the Zionist line are generally more moderate than those which come from the 
European branch (as is illustrated by the figures of Mr.

Raul Hilberg compared with 
those of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation) could very well 
reflect the dissentions between the two men.And, the fact that, with regard to the Jews 
who were exterminated, the statistics which we have from the American partisans of 
the Zionist line are generally more moderate than those which come from the 
European branch (as is illustrated by the figures of Mr.

Raul Hilberg compared with 
those of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation) could very well 
reflect the dissentions between the two men.

This would then explain the divergences 
and contradictions revealed in the Jewish sources in their statistics.

As for the quarrel between Khrushchev and Mao Tse-tung, it could be of consequence 
in that, along with that of the United States, the Jewish population of Russia is one of 
the greatest enigmas weighing on the problem.

The Institute of Jewish Affairs of 
London and the Jewish Communities of the World both told us clearly in 1962 that 
there were 2.3 million Jews in Russia.

But Mr.

Raul Hilberg revealed to us that there 
were 2,600,000 in 1946, and that estimate, which can be considered to be confirmed 
by the journalist, David Bergelson (in Die Einheit, December 5, 1942), can also be 
considered closer to the truth.

In that case, it is not 2.3 million Jews that were in 
Russia in 1962, but 3,016,000, adjusted for a natural increase at the rate of sixteen per 
cent.

If we take Professor Salo Baron at his word, that figure would be even greater: 
3,120,000.

But, let us not be tempted.

However, we could justify the use of a larger 
figure, all the less, because in reality there are surely many more than 3,016,000, since 
the Jewish journalist, David Bergelson, also told us, let us not forget, that eighty per 
cent of the Baltic Jews, the Poles, and the Rumanians, who found themselves behind 
the Russian lines as they fled before the German troops in 1941-1942, were saved and 
sent on their way toward Central Asia by the Soviet authorities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, let us not be tempted. However, we could justify the use of a larger 
figure, all the less, because in reality there are surely many more than 3,016,000, since 
the Jewish journalist, David Bergelson, also told us, let us not forget, that eighty per 
cent of the Baltic Jews, the Poles, and the Rumanians, who found themselves behind 
the Russian lines as they fled before the German troops in 1941-1942, were saved and 
sent on their way toward Central Asia by the Soviet authorities. At the end of 1942, 
Bergelson estimated that there were about 5.2 million Jews on Soviet territory, 3 
million of them Russian, and in that he agrees with the statistics of April 17, 1943, of 
Mr. Richard Korherr, which have already been referred to. Question: what happened 
to those 2.2 million non-Russian Jews? Answer: some of them managed to escape and 
reach either the American continent or Israel; the rest of them did not. How many 
were in each group? We cannot tell. But, we can be sure that as long as Khrushchev 
and Mao Tse-tung were getting along together it surely was not easy for Jews who 
had been transported to Central Asia during the war, to make it to the American

--- PAGE BREAK ---282
continent via China; those who have been able to manage the trip in the postwar 
period must have managed it clandestinely.

The subsequent quarrel between these two 
grand men of Bolshevism could result in Mao Tse-tung aiding the Jews to leave 
Soviet territory, just as the China of Chiang Kai-shek aided them before World War 
II, and for the same reasons.

In that case, it could happen that one day a very 
significant number of Jews might turn up suddenly in all of the countries of the 
American continent, and perhaps also in Israel.

And, unless it is kept hidden in the 
dark, a new light will be shed on the statistics of world Jewry.

Neither is this 
hypothesis excluded.

And, if the United States should adopt a rational policy toward 
Russia, the truth would come out very fast.

But to return to the problem as it exists in the data that we actually have: we know 
that the number of European Jews who died as victims of Nazi persecutions is either 
1,589,492 persons, established on the basis of data from the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation compared with the Exhibits of the Tribunal at 
Jerusalem and the study, The Jewish Communities of the World, which came out in 
February 1963, or is 987,952 persons, based on the data of Mr.

Raul Hilberg 
compared in the same manner.

It still remains to be discovered how the 4,419,908 
Jews, who were living in 1945, were divided among the other countries of the world, 
and who, not being listed as living in the European statistics of Jewish sources, are 
necessarily thought to have left Europe between 1931 and 1945.

That is the problem 
for the second statistical analysis, which, in my opinion, should present by country the 
structure of the world Jewish population in 1962.

And, as is pointed out in a preceding 
paragraph, these statistics are impossible to establish at the present time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That is the problem 
for the second statistical analysis, which, in my opinion, should present by country the 
structure of the world Jewish population in 1962. And, as is pointed out in a preceding 
paragraph, these statistics are impossible to establish at the present time. We already know one thing which was revealed to us in the study of the Israeli Jewish 
population, and that is that it includes 1,048,368 European Jews who immigrated to 
Israel between 1931 and 1962. It remains to be seen how the remaining 3,371,540 
European Jews are distributed around the rest of the world. It is in this latter matter that the Jewish sources are the most secretive. Rarely do we 
find, for example, in the study of the Jewish Communities of the World and in the 
World Almanac of 1963, non-European countries where the admitted Jewish 
population is greater than it would have been by natural increase based upon the 
statistics of Mr. Arthur Ruppin for the period of 1926-1928. There are some places 
where even the natural rate of increase has not been reached; that is the case with the 
United States, where, if we can believe the aforementioned publications, the 
population has not risen more than from 4,461,184 in 1936 to 5,500,000 in 1962. However, we have seen that at the natural rate of increase of one per cent there cannot 
be fewer than 5,550,489 Jews in the United States, and that, at the natural rate of 
increase, which Mr. Salo Baron gives, there should be 6,170,837. The few countries 
on continents other than Europe, where the Zionists concede that there is a Jewish 
population greater than what it would have been by natural increase, based on the 
Ruppin statistics, are the following: Argentina, Canada, Brazil, and South Africa. For 
these four countries, these are the statistics that can be drawn up:

--- PAGE BREAK ---283
Table p.

394 
 Country 1926 
population 
Natural 
increase 
36% 
1962 
Populat.

Natural 
1962 
Populat.

conceded 
Immigration 
(b) 
Argentina 240,000 
86,400 
326,000 
450,000 
123,600 
Canada 
170,000 
61,200 
231200 
254,000 
22,800 
Brazil 
40,000 
14,400 
54,400 
140,000 
85,600 
South 
Africa 
60,000 
21,600 
87,600 
110,000 
28,400 
TOTAL 
510,000 
183,600 
693,600 
954,000 
(a) 
260,400 
(a) The total allows one to admire once again the seriousness of the statistics from Jewish sources.

For 
Argentina, Canada and Brazil, the totals is 844,000.

However, there are, in addition, a few Jews in the 
other countries of the American continent, notably in Mexico, 70,000; in Uruguay, 60,000; in Chile, 
15,000, and so on.

The total, therefore, for these six countries is 989,000.

And for the whole Western 
Hemisphere, the same statistics give a total of 6.3 million, which the Jerusalem Post Weekly (April 19, 
1939) brings forward.

If, from this total for the two American continents, we susbstract these 989,000 
persons, there remain for the United States 5,311,000 and not 5.5 million as is claimed by the official 
statement of the Institute of Jewish Affairs of London and the World Almanac of 1963 (p.

159).

That is 
what you come to when you want to conceal the actual total of the Jewish population of the United 
States.

(b) These estimates for immigration include natural increase.

By making an allowance for the natural increase, we get close to 200,000 immigrants 
of European origin for these four countries, assuming that the figures published in the 
aforementioned authorities for 1962 are exact, and it would be astonishing if they 
were.

If they are, we still have 3,171,540 European Jews to locate.

To do that we 
would have to be able to draw up figures for all of the countries of the world in the 
same manner as we did for Argentina, Canada, Brazil, and South Africa.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If they are, we still have 3,171,540 European Jews to locate. To do that we 
would have to be able to draw up figures for all of the countries of the world in the 
same manner as we did for Argentina, Canada, Brazil, and South Africa. But we 
cannot, since the latter are the only ones given by the Zionists which concede any 
immigration. Still, something must be done, since, if they are not in Europe and not in Israel, these 
3,171,540 Jews who were certainly living in 1945 must be somewhere else - together 
with the additional number that they have accumulated at the natural rate of 
population expansion. Where? In order to say that with any real certainty we shall 
have to wait once again for new revelations that the publicity-seeking Zionist 
movement will not fail one day inadvertently to produce. Until then we can only 
conjecture, and that is not my method. I shall, therefore, limit myself to stating my 
basic principles which have defined the direction that my research has taken, and 
which I continue to pursue. 1. It is not probable, but it is possible - that in August 1945, the date when Mr. Poliakov told us (Le Troisième Reich et les Juifs, p. 196) that the European Jewish 
communities had begun to make an inventory of their losses for Justice Jackson and 
had come up with only 3,768,100 survivors according to the World Center of 
Contemporary Jewish Documentation, or 4,262,500 according to Mr. Raul Hilberg -

--- PAGE BREAK ---284
that they gave figures considerably understated for reasons of propaganda.

I say it is 
possible, for two reasons: there was such a chaos of displaced persons in Europe at 
that time that any serious census was out of the question; and the method used in the 
Jewish communities, which everywhere counted only Jews of the nationality of the 
country, might have distorted the results.

2.

Even if the result of this Jewish census of 1945 was not out of line (which is not 
admitted), it is certain that, if all the Jews who had left Europe between 1931 and 
1945 had not returned by 1945, many of them came back later, at least to Western 
Europe, since we can assume that those who returned to the other side of the Iron 
Curtain were the exceptions.

France, in this case, is typical: 300,000 Jews in 1939 and 
between 450,000 and 500,000 at the end of 1962, with about 130,000 Algerian Jews 
and about 20,000 Moroccan and Tunisian Jews who came seeking refuge, after the 
granting of independence to those three countries.

300,000 to 350,000 French Jewish 
nationals is a normal figure in relation to the entire French population in 1962.

But the 
statistics of the World Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation continue to 
claim 180,000 in 1945 plus the natural increase rate of 16 per cent, or 208,000 
(216,000 if we use the natural increase rate of Mr.

Salo Baron).

It is very probable 
that if one went to the trouble, one could make similar statements for Belgium (where, 
in addition, 20,000 to 25,000 Jews returned from the Congo), Holland, Austria, and 
perhaps even Germany.

However, all of the Jews who returned to Europe after the 
month of August 1945, whose number we cannot know exactly as long as the Zionists 
refuse to give it to us, since official census-taking will "bring down the wrath of God," 
surely must amount to several hundreds of thousands and must belong with those 
3,171,540 which no Jewish source allocates to any place.

3.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, all of the Jews who returned to Europe after the 
month of August 1945, whose number we cannot know exactly as long as the Zionists 
refuse to give it to us, since official census-taking will "bring down the wrath of God," 
surely must amount to several hundreds of thousands and must belong with those 
3,171,540 which no Jewish source allocates to any place. 3. The problem of the Polish, Baltic and Rumanian Jews, who in the years 1941-1942 
were evacuated to Central Asia and who, if one can believe the Jewish journalist, 
David Bergelson, should have numbered between 2 and 2.2 million in 1942, since 
there were 3 million Jews in Russian in 1939, and at the end of 1942, there were about 
5.2 million. How many of these Jews are still living in "Central Asia" (read, Siberia) 
with their offspring? How many have succeeded in escaping in the past 16 years? Where have they gone? Everything points to the fact that those who managed to 
escape secretly from the U.S.S.R. reached the American continent, which was for 
them the easiest to get to. Concerning that supposition, a hypothesis, for what it is 
worth, and which I do not offer as a certainty, runs through my mind: in 16 years, it is 
possible that half of them, at a cost of immeasurable difficulties, managed to leave 
Central Asia for the American continent. If that is so, and since the Zionist 
demographers have not located them in Canada, Brazil, or in any other country in the 
Western Hemisphere, they must be in the United States. Thus, the following statistics 
could be drawn up for Russia and the United States: 
A. Russia 
1. Jews found still living by Mr. Raul Hilberg in 1945: 2,600,000 
2. Jews still living in Central Asia, according to Mr. David Bergelson: 2,200,000 
3. Total Jewish population in Russia in 1945: 4,800,000

--- PAGE BREAK ---g by Mr. Raul Hilberg in 1945: 2,600,000 
2. Jews still living in Central Asia, according to Mr. David Bergelson: 2,200,000 
3. Total Jewish population in Russia in 1945: 4,800,000

--- PAGE BREAK ---

285
4. Jews who succeeded in leaving Central Asia for the united States: 1,100,000 
5. Jews who were left in Russia; 3,700,000 
6. Jewish natural increase of 16% since 1947: 592,000 
7. Total Jewish population in Russia in 1962: 4,292,000 
B. United States 
1. Jewish population for 1926 (official figure): 4,081,242 
2. Jewish natural increase of 36% since 1926: 1,469,247 
3. Total Jewish population in 1962: 5,550,489 
4. Jewish immigrants from Central Asia since 1946: 1,100,000 
5. Their natural increase of 16% since 1946: 176,000 
6. Total Jewish population from Asia together with progeny: 1,276,000 
7. Total Jewish population in the United States in 1962: 6,826,489 
But, this total of 6,826,489 includes only immigration from Central Asia, and, 
therefore, it excludes all of those who, like Mme. Hannah Arendt and Mr. Robert W. 
Kempner, came to the United States by some other route from Europe. We can surely 
say that they number more than two, but, how many we do not know, or, at least, not 
yet. All that can be said is that they are there and that surely the Jewish population of 
the United States is greater than 6,826,489 persons. It can also be stated that the claim 
of the National Observer (July 2, 1962) that there were 12,000,000 Jews in the United 
States in 1962 may be an exaggeration toward the other extreme, but, I would not be 
astonished if one day soon a Zionist leader inadvertently reveals that there were about 
8 million Jews in the United States. The estimate of 12,000,000 in the United States 
has been repeated several times with an attempt at numerical documentation by the 
Economic Council Letter published in New York City. 
I repeat that the preceding analysis is only conjectural and is not a fact; it is, however, 
the hypothesis that is necessary to every work as a basis from which to conduct 
further research; it is the hypothesis which orients mine. To my, mind, it is plausible 
and it expresses, all the better, my profound conviction which, until now, has not led 
me to any impasse or error and which has made it possible for me to state some ten 
years ago the conclusions that were to be drawn later from the Jerusalem Trial and the 
study of the Jewish Communities of the World. 
The actual Jewish population of the world in 1962 is very close to being the 
following, at least in the order of magnitude of the figures. By using statistics for each 
country of the world dated for 1926, or 1927, or 1928, as the case was, Mr. Arthur 
Ruppin estimated that world Jewry had reached a total of 15,800,000 persons as of 
that date. We have seen that the World Almanac of 1951 estimated the world Jewish1928, as the case was, Mr. Arthur 
Ruppin estimated that world Jewry had reached a total of 15,800,000 persons as of 
that date. We have seen that the World Almanac of 1951 estimated the world Jewish

--- PAGE BREAK ---

286
population at 16,643,120 for 1939. The natural rate of increase having considerably 
dropped between 1926 and 1939 (Poliakov dixit, cf p. 295), but when it is compared 
with that of Mr. Arthur Ruppin, this estimate is allowable. Here, then is the Jewish 
population of the world in 1962, calculated on the corrected data of the World Center 
of Contemporary Jewish Documentation. 
1. World Jewish population in 1939: 16,643,120 
2. Jewish victims of Nazism: 1,589,492 
3. World Jewish population living in 1945(l): 15,053,628 
4. Jewish natural increase of 16% since 1946: 2,408,580 
5. Total Jewish population on 1962(2): 17,552,208 
And here is the same as calculated on the corrected data of Mr. Raul Hilberg: 
1. World Jewish population in 1939: 16,643,120 
2. Jewish victims of Nazism: 987,592 
3. World Jewish population living in 1946: 15,655,528 
4. Jewish increase of 16% since 1946: 2,504,884 
5. Total Jewish population in 1962: 18,160,412 
And, here we are at the end of this study. It remains for me only to make an apology 
to the reader: this study has clearly been very long, and difficult to follow, like all that 
is technical by nature. But a demographic study can only be of such a technical 
nature. What the reader must recognize is that, until now, the proponents of the 
Zionist line -- whose "official" contentions on the horrors of the war I have been 
following -- have never been faced with arguments other than those from journalists, 
which have been often vague and specious, factors that have been the main reason for 
their lack of success. The only way to shatter their arguments was to set up against 
them the arguments of a specialist. And, that is what I have tried to do.tors that have been the main reason for 
their lack of success. The only way to shatter their arguments was to set up against 
them the arguments of a specialist. And, that is what I have tried to do.

FOOTNOTES 
1. Between 15 and 18 million in 1947," as Hanson W. Baldwin has said (cf p. 294 
above). 
2. It must not be forgotten that this total comes out of the study of Jewish sources, that 
is, those which have been published under the sanction of the Zionist movement or by 
the Rabbinate, after investigation of the synagogues. But, if it is true, as claimed by 
Arthur Koestler (A l'ombre du Dinosaure), that not more than two-thirds of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

287
world's Jews are registered in the synagogues, then there is room to wonder if this 
figure should not be augmented in the same proportion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

288

Annexes

Appendix A: Four Descriptions of Prison 
Life in French Penal Institutionsen there is room to wonder if this 
figure should not be augmented in the same proportion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

288

Annexes

Appendix A: Four Descriptions of Prison 
Life in French Penal Institutions

The following are four descriptions of prison life in penal institutions which were 
operated by the French government at about the same time that Buchenwald and other 
German concentration camps were functioning. 
Discipline in the Maison Centrale in Riom in 1939 
"Three notable elements must be remembered about disciplinary methods. 
"The first is the institution of an internal hierarchy of prisoners who cooperate with 
the wardens in maintaining proper order. I have often heard the French become 
indignant over this institution in the Nazi prisons, over these gratuitous assistants to 
the gang wardens; they are the same persons who cannot admit that the Germans were 
ignorant of what was going on in their country, and yet who do not know what is 
happening in France. For the Kapos, the Schreibers, the Vorabeiters, the Stubendienst, 
etc. . . there are however, precedents. The workshop bookkeepers, the foremen 
(although there were civilians too), the entire administration are made up of prisoners, 
and obviously enjoy certain advantages. Quite apart from this are the provosts 
explicitly in charge of keeping order. That goes for the dormitory provost, who has 
next to his bed an alarm button to alert the wardens in case that something abnormal 
occurs (smoke, reading, conversations, etc.... ) and which, happily, is little used. 
However, its use is up to the official executioner, the provost of the Ward. 
"Now I must say what a Strong-Ward is: the special prison within the prison, and in 
fact a torture chamber (I can attest that the word is not an exaggeration). This second 
element of discipline, like Dante's Hell, includes various circles. It begins in the 
discipline room, where-in principle-the convicts are marched around in a circle with 
very short pauses, at a pace maintained by giving a special ration to the pace-setter. 
while smaller rations are given to the others: the fact is that blows rain down. I was 
lucky enough to escape this myself, but I can attest to having often seen the poor 
beggars coming back from the 'room' with obvious signs of recent blows. Then, there 
was solitary confinement - in principle - up to 90 consecutive days, practically 
equivalent to a death sentence, with a tin of soup every four days. Finally, there were 
some refinements of cruelty which are particularly repugnant. In particular was the 
torture called the 'shirt,' a straight-jacket that tied the arms together behind one's back; 
very often, then, the arms were brought up as far as the neck. I attest, after having 
collected numberless testimonies all in agreement, that some wardens struck the mentogether behind one's back; 
very often, then, the arms were brought up as far as the neck. I attest, after having 
collected numberless testimonies all in agreement, that some wardens struck the men

--- PAGE BREAK ---'s back; 
very often, then, the arms were brought up as far as the neck. I attest, after having 
collected numberless testimonies all in agreement, that some wardens struck the men

--- PAGE BREAK ---

289
with various instruments, including the poker, until death resulted. I attest that the 
Nazis only added some details in perfecting the art of slowly killing men. 
"Now, and this is the third instrument of discipline, these 'accessory' sentences, which 
sometimes meant a death sentence, were not pronounced by tribunals established by 
law, but by a jurisdiction which to my knowledge was ignorant of the law, the 
Pretoire. It is a tribunal within the prison presided over by the director, assisted by a 
sub-director (in penitentiary slang, the 'under-pimp') with the head warden acting as 
clerk. At the Pretoire, there is no pleading, no defense, no intelligible indictment, and 
no reply except for the ritual " Merci, Monsieur le Directeur ," following the sentence. 
I was always able to get off with a simple fine, which meant only cutting down my 
right to buy things in the canteen: income was limited to salary, since help from the 
outside was very much reduced; in those days, no package was allowed to be received 
by a prisoner except for underwear. But heavy sentences were constantly handed 
down even for a simple non-fulfillment of a job." (Pierre Bernard. Revolution 
proletarienne , June 1949.) 
In the Prisons of the "Liberation" 
"All the French wanted this," say our 'patriots.' 
"Edouard Gentez, printer at Courbevoie, sentenced in July 46, not as a criminal, but as 
a printer, was transferred from Fresnes to Fontevrault in September 46. As a result of 
beatings, privations and cold, he contracted pleurisy, which caused him to be struck 
from the list to be transferred to Fontevrault. 
''An hour before the departure, the condemned of the S.P.A.C. who were on this list 
were struck oft on an order; they were still needed. They were replaced, and Gentez 
was among those newly inscribed. 
"He arrived at the Centrale , two and a half hours standing, in the sun, then eight days 
shut up in a hole called the ' mitard '; after this, Gentez was admitted to the infirmary, 
ruled over by a butcher assassin, Ange Soleil, a mulatto who had cut to pieces and 
walled up his mistress, which prepared him for the functions of prison provost-nurse-
doctor, far more powerful than the young civilian doctor, a dandy named Gaultier or 
Gautier 
"Soleil admitted those sick men into the infirmary who shared with him two thirds of 
their parcels, and rejected those whose parcels were too small, by a very clear and 
simple system. 
"Gentez, having neither parcel nor funds, could not pay, and in spite of the 
seriousness of his sickness, was put into the ' inoccupes ,' those forced to three 
quarters of an hour fast march, one quarter of an hour rest, from morning to night, 
every day, Sundays included 
. "Gentez, who was too weak, was let off that torture, but for all that was not 
permitted to lie down n or even to sit down; he had to remain standing, without 
moving, hands behind his back, without coat, during the marching., was let off that torture, but for all that was not 
permitted to lie down n or even to sit down; he had to remain standing, without 
moving, hands behind his back, without coat, during the marching.

--- PAGE BREAK ---orture, but for all that was not 
permitted to lie down n or even to sit down; he had to remain standing, without 
moving, hands behind his back, without coat, during the marching.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

290
"The cold aggravated his pleurisy and Gentez went each week to the medical office 
where he was given aspirin, cod liver oil, and where cupping glasses were applied to 
him, but he was never admitted to the infirmary. 
"He groaned without stopping all night long. The two prisoner doctors, the surgeon 
Perribert and Doctor Lejeune, sounded his chest Saturday morning, and discovered 
double bronchial pneumonia . 
"When Gentez fell down in the yard, the nurse who was called, went to find Ange 
Soleil, who began to shout, called him a faker, and had him thrown in a dungeon, 
along with Doctor Perribert, who was guilty of having made the examination without 
authorization. 
"Gentez was stripped naked and thrown into the cell, where the temperature was five 
degrees above zero (-15° C.) He knocked all night for help, but no one came. The next 
morning, January 14, 1947, he was found dead. 
"Finally. he was carried to the infirmary, where he was pronounced dead there, of a 
heart attack. He was buried simply under a number, 3479. 
"But there was an embarrassing witness, Gentez' son whom I knew in prison and next 
to whom I lived out the vicissitudes of this stark drama. He obtained an investigation. 
This was properly conducted. Ange Soleil was transferred to Fresnes, but was set free 
by a procedure of amnesty [sic]. The Directors Dujour, Vessieres and Guillonet were 
removed. 
"Andre Marie had promised to reduce Gentez' son's sentence to three years, as a result 
of this tragic business. Since then more than three years have gone by, and, if I am 
well informed, he is still in prison." Signed: Benoit C.... 
"This is an extract of a letter sent to me from X prison . . . somewhere in France. (My 
discretion is due to the fact that I do not want to expose the author to the legal process 
mentioned in the above document. ) 
''Benoit C. . . has not read Valsez , saucisses which he is not acquainted with, but 
Vertiges . 
''He informed me about the percentage ( 10% ) of social workers gabbling around -not 
at all to reproach them for it-and describes without too much complaint the curious 
ways of certain ' messieurs de l'oeuvre de Saint-Vincent-de Paul ' [gentlemen of the 
Society of . . . ] with fingers heavy with signet rings. 
"This testimony is all the more conclusive, as it comes from someone obsessed with 
sex and not at all with politics." (Communication from Albert. Paraz.) 
At Poissy 
"In February 1946, head shaved, in clogs and coarse cloth, Henri Beraud found 
himself in Workshop 14 on the second floor of the jail at Poissy. Under the eye of an 
overseer whose duty it was to enforce 'the rule of silence', a rule that weighed on theloth, Henri Beraud found 
himself in Workshop 14 on the second floor of the jail at Poissy. Under the eye of an 
overseer whose duty it was to enforce 'the rule of silence', a rule that weighed on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---291
prison night and day, he made tags with cord or twist wire, averaging .95 francs per 
thousand.

"Typical prison stupidity: the table chief was a burglar who had under him, besides 
Beraud, General Linsard.

a colonel, two Justices, an advocate general, the editor-in-
chief of the Journal de Rouen , a university professor, and some Paris journalists.

"In his book., Je sors du bagne ,one of his prison companions at Poissy, as on Re 
island, brought out how much the convict Beraud earned during the month of April 
1945: labor, 15 Fr.

Deduction for the prison administration, 12 Fr.

left, 3 Fr.

Set aside.

1.50 Fr.

left for the prisoner, 1.50 12 Fr.

"And this was for work for more than seven hours a day.

"(La Bataille, September 21, 
1949.) 
German Prisoners in France 
"La Rochelle, October 18.,1948.

Informed of the scandalous acts of which former 
officer Max-Georges Roux, 36, assistant to the commanding officer of the German 
prison camp at Chattelaillon-Plage was guilty, the examining magistrate of La 
Rochelle referred the matter to the military tribunal at Bordeaux where Roux had been 
transferred.

The ex-officer was then serving an 18 months prison sentence which had 
been given him the preceding August at La Rochelle for breach of trust and for 
swindling various associations(1).

"Infinitely more serious were the crimes committed by Roux in the prisoner-of-war 
camp.

It was a matter of real crimes, and so great that it seems difficult to believe that 
Roux could be the only one found guilty before the judges.

At Chatelaillon this base 
person had, among other things, made several [P.O.W] strip and had beaten them with 
a leaded whip.

Two of the unfortunates had died during these sessions with the knout.

"One overwhelming testimony was that of the German doctor Clauss Steen, who was 
interned at Chatelaillon.

Interrogated at Kiel, where he lives, Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"One overwhelming testimony was that of the German doctor Clauss Steen, who was 
interned at Chatelaillon. Interrogated at Kiel, where he lives, Mr. Steen stated that 
from May to September 1945, he had verified at the [P.O.W.] camp the deaths of fifty 
of his compatriots. Their deaths had been brought about by insufficient food, heavy 
labor, and by the perpetual fear they lived in of being tortured. "The food given out in the camp, which was under the orders of the commanding 
officer Texier, consisted, in actual fact of a plate of clear soup with a little bread. The 
rest of the rations disappeared in the black market. There was one period when the 
number of those with dysentery amounted to 80 per cent. "Texier and Roux, with their subordinates, proceeded, besides that, to loot their 
prisoners, taking away from them everything of value. The thievery of these gangsters 
with military braid, was estimated at one hundred million; they had so well organized 
their business that bank notes and jewelry were sent directly to Belgium by 
automobile. "Let us hope that with Roux the other guilty persons will soon be incarcerated in the 
fortress of Ha, and that an exemplary punishment will be meted out to these real war 
criminals." ( in the newspapers , October 19, 1948.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

292
FOOTNOTES 
(1) At present this Roux holds a high administrative office in the southeast of France. 
As a reward for his fine deeds no doubt!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

293

Appendix B: 
The Two French Versions of the Gerstein 
DocumentThe following is the French version of the Gerstein Document as presented by L.

Poliakov in 1951 (Bréviaire de la Haine, pp.

220-24), with this comment: "This 
account was written down as is, in a halting French; the style has, in essence, been 
respected." And eleven years later in his book the Procès de Jerusalem, Mr.

Poliakov 
presents it again in the form of Exhibit No.

124 of the Judgment, with this comment: 
"This document was written down by Gerstein directly in French.

We present it here 
just as is." These two versions are reproduced on the following pages in parallel 
columns, with the first printed on the left side, and with the second printed on the 
right side, so that the reader may see for himself to what extent Mr.

Poliakov merely 
"in essence, respected the style." What is one to think of a document which, after an 
interval of eleven years, can be presented in two such contradictory versions?

It will 
be noticed that the Jerusalem Tribunal retained neither the daily extermination figures 
of the camps cited, nor the visit of Hitler to Belzec.

And, what is one to think of a man 
like Mr.

Poliakov who, after an interval of eleven years, presents these two versions 
of the same text?

From this same Mr.

Poliakov we have a third version of the Gerstein Documents in Le 
Troisième Reich et les Juifs (1955, pp.

107-119) and a fourth version in La Terre 
Retrouvée (April 1, 1964).

These third and fourth versions include whole paragraphs 
which do not occur in one or the other of the first two.

Moreover, they include 
material which is contradictory on many points, when compared with the former.

And, like the former, they both bear the assurance that they were "reproduced as is," 
but with an additional notation.

"From the German historical review, Viertel-
Jahreshefte fur Zeitgeschichte , no.

2, April 1953." There is no doubt that at this rate 
Mr.Appendix B: 
The Two French Versions of the Gerstein 
Document

"From the German historical review, Viertel-
Jahreshefte fur Zeitgeschichte , no. 2, April 1953." There is no doubt that at this rate 
Mr. Poliakov could soon be the impresario of a multitude of "Gerstein Documents," 
all different and all contradictory, but somehow all authentic. Incidentally, not one of 
these versions mentions the estimates which appear in the original in which the 
number of European Jewish victims "reaches 25 million." 
Lastly, to conclude this discussion of the proliferation of Gerstein documents, I want 
to mention that a small volume has just come out in German with the title Kurt 
Gerstein (E.V.Z. Verlag, Zurich) and with the signature of a certain Helmut Franz, 
who was, he says, an intimate friend of Gerstein. Mr. Franz gives us a second German 
version of the Document that is very different from the one offered by Hans Rothfels 
So that none of these alarming manipulations lose any of their flavor, there might be 
some interest in giving a little free publicity to the latest news which has reached us 
concerning this famous "Document:" in offering his fourth version in the French 
tongue in La Terre Retrouvée, Mr. Poliakov informs us that his original version 
(which of the four?) "has disappeared from the central depository of the archives of

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the French 
tongue in La Terre Retrouvée, Mr. Poliakov informs us that his original version 
(which of the four?) "has disappeared from the central depository of the archives of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294
the French military court," and also that "the dossier of the proceedings begun against 
the man in 1949 by the Spruchkammer of Tubingen" was gone. Since these "two 
essential items" - and how essential! - "were lacking," he says that he was "prevented 
- from undertaking a serious study." It is remarkable that he is aware of this after 
having given three versions already and that this fact does not prevent him from 
giving the fourth. 
We are forced to conclude that no one will ever be able to consult this document 
removed forever in this way from the scrutiny of historians. So I ask this question: in 
whose interest was it that this document should disappear? I propose to make an 
inquiry into this disappearance which is a criminal outrage to historical truth. 
The Gerstein Document 
First French version attributed to Gerstein by Poliakov in 1951, in Bréviaire de la 
Haine. 
A. Poliakov's Introduction: 
The victims are no longer here to give testimony before the world; their executioners, 
too, have disappeared, or gone underground. Among the rare testimonies which have 
come down to us on the functioning of the camps, here is one from the tragic hero of 
the German Resistance, the chemical engineer Kurt Gerstein. His account was written 
down directly in halting French and we have in essence kept his style. 
B. Text of the Document: 
... in January 1942 I was made chief of the technical disinfection services of the 
Waffen-S.S., including also an extremely toxic gas section. 
In this capacity I was visited on June 8, 1942, by S.S Sturmbannführer Gunther of the 
R.S.H.A., in civilian clothes. He was unknown. He ordered me to get for him 
immediately, for an ultra secret mission, 100 Kg of Prussic acid, and to bring them to 
a place known only to the driver of the truck 
A few weeks later, we left for Prague. I could more or less guess what purpose the 
Prussic acid was to serve, and what kind of an order this was, but I accepted because 
it gave me the chance I had long been waiting for to get to the bottom of all these 
things. Moreover, as an expert on Prussic acid, I had such authority and jurisdiction 
that it was easy for me to state under some pretext or other that the Prussic acid was 
not usable, decomposed or something like that, and thus to prevent its being used for 
extermination. We took with us, pretty much by chance, Professor Doctor of 
Medicine Pfannenstiel, S.S-Obersturmbannführer, holder of the chair of Hygiene at 
the University of Marburg-on-the-Lahn.r 
extermination. We took with us, pretty much by chance, Professor Doctor of 
Medicine Pfannenstiel, S.S-Obersturmbannführer, holder of the chair of Hygiene at 
the University of Marburg-on-the-Lahn.

Second French version attributed to Gerstein by the Jerusalem Tribunal in 1961, 
offered to the public by Poliakov in Procès de Jerusalem.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the University of Marburg-on-the-Lahn.

Second French version attributed to Gerstein by the Jerusalem Tribunal in 1961, 
offered to the public by Poliakov in Procès de Jerusalem.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

295
A. Tribunal's Introduction: 
Exhibit 124. Here now we have a description from the pen of a German of the 
extermination method at the camp at Belzec, which very much resembled the one at 
Treblinka. The author is an officer of the S.S. by the name of Gerstein, whose 
conscience gave him no peace, and who, after 1942, tried to unveil to the world what 
was going on in the extermination camps. 
Immediately after the war he drafted the document which we are about to cite, and 
handed it over to allied officers. Later we will return to Gerstein's comments about 
that. For the moment we will only say that the statements of Gerstein are supported on 
all points by the depositions we have heard, so that the proofs are mutually backed up. 
We consider that the description given by Gerstein is a description of what he actually 
saw. Here is what he wrote (T/ 13 09 (1)): 
(N.B. This document was drafted by Gerstein directly into French. We offer it as is.) 
B. Text of the Document: 
[That part of the document that appears on the page at the left is omitted by the 
Jerusalem Tribunal.] (Left page) 
Then we left with the truck for Lublin (Poland). SS-Gruppenführer Globocnik was 
waiting for us there. At the factory at Collin, I purposely let it be understood that the 
acid was to be used to kill human beings. In the afternoon a man showed a great deal 
of interest in our truck. He went off in a great hurry when he saw he was observed. 
Globocnik told us: "This is one of the most secret of all secrets there are, even the 
most secret. Anyone speaking about it will be shot at once. Just yesterday, two 
gabbers were shot." Then he explained to us: 
"Actually (it was the 17th of August 1942) there are three installations in existence: 1) 
Belzec, on the Lublin-Lwow road. Maximum per day, I 5,000 persons. 2) Sobibor, I 
do not know exactly where it is, 20,000 persons a day. 3) Treblinka, 120 Kilometers 
NNE of Warsaw. 4) Majdanek, near Lublin (in preparation)." 
Globocnik said, "You will have to disinfect a very large quantity of clothing coming 
from Jews, Poles, Czechs, etc. Your other duty will be to improve the working of our 
gas chambers, functioning on the exhaust of a Diesel motor. A more toxic gas is 
needed, and one that works faster, such as Prussic acid. The Fuehrer and Himmler - 
they were here the day before yesterday, August 15th - ordered me to go myself with 
all those who are to see the installation." 
Professor Pfannenstiel asked him. "But what does the Fuehrer say?" Globocnik 
answered. "The Fuehrer orders that all operations be accelerated. Dr. Herbert Linden 
who was here yesterday asked me, 'But wouldn't it be more prudent to burn the bodies 
instead of burying them? Another generation might judge these things in a different 
way.' 
"I answered, 'Gentlemen, if ever after us there is a generation so cowardly, so soft that 
it cannot understand our so good and so necessary work, all of National Socialismings in a different 
way.' 
"I answered, 'Gentlemen, if ever after us there is a generation so cowardly, so soft that 
it cannot understand our so good and so necessary work, all of National Socialism

--- PAGE BREAK ---296
will have been in vain.

On the contrary bronze tablets should be buried stating that it 
was us, we, who have the courage to carry out this gigantic work.' Then the Fuehrer 
said, 'Yes, my good Globocnik, you are right." 
(Right page is blank) [That part of the document that appears on the page at the left is 
omitted by the Jerusalem Tribunal] 
(Left page) The next day we left for Belzec.

Globocnik introduced me to SS (1) ...

who showed me the installations.

That day we did not see any dead, but a pestilential 
smell pervaded the whole region.

Next to the station there was a large barracks 
"wardrobe" with an office-window "valuables." Farther on a hall with about a hundred 
chairs, "hair-dresser." Then a corridor 150 meters long in the open air, with barbed 
wire on both sides and with a sign "To the baths and inhalations." In front of us a 
house of the bath establishment type; on the right and on the left large concrete basins 
with geraniums and other flowers.

On the roof the star of David.

And on the building 
the inscription "Heckenholt Foundation." 
The next day, a little before 7 o'clock, they announced to me: "In ten minutes the first 
train will arrive!" Indeed, a few minutes later a train did arrive from Lemberg: 45 cars 
with more than 6,000 persons.

Two hundred Ukrainians detailed for this service, tore 
off the doors and with leather riding whips chased the Jews out of the carriages.

A 
loud-speaker was giving instructions: Take all clothing off, even artificial limbs and 
spectacles.

Turn all valuables and money in to the window marked "Valuables." 
Women and girls are to have their hair cut in the "Hair-dresser" barracks.

(An 
Untersturmführer-S.S.

told me, "It's to make something special for submarines.") 
(Right page) The other day we left for Belzec.

A small special station with two 
platforms sloping up the hill of yellow sand immediately to the north of the road and 
the railway.--- PAGE BREAK ---

told me, "It's to make something special for submarines.") 
(Right page) The other day we left for Belzec. A small special station with two 
platforms sloping up the hill of yellow sand immediately to the north of the road and 
the railway. To the south, near the roadway, with a few service houses with the sign 
"Service area Belzec of the S.S. army." Globocnik introduced me to S.S.-
Hauptsturmführer Obermeyer of Pirmasens, who showed me the installations with 
great retenance. That day no dead were seen, but the smell of the whole region, also 
of the highroad, was pestilential. Next to the little station there was a large barracks 
"Wardrobe" with a window "Valuables." Then a room with 100 chairs "Hair-dresser," 
then a corridor 150 meters long in the open air, barbed wire on both sides and with a 
sign "To the baths and inhalations!" 
In front of us a house like a bathing institution; to the right and left, big concrete tubs 
with geranium or other flowers. After having gone up a small stairway, to the right 
and to the left, three and three rooms, like garages, 4 x 5 meters, 1.90 m. high. Going 
back, but not visible, wooden openings. On the roof, the star of David in copper. In 
front of the building the inscription "Heckenholt Foundation." 
More - that afternoon - I did not see 
. Other morning, a few minutes before 7 o'clock, I was told, "After ten minutes, the 
train will arrive!"

--- PAGE BREAK ---297
Truly after a few minutes the first train arrived from Lemberg, 45 cars with 6,700 
persons, 1,450 already dead on arrival.

Behind the little sky-lights with barbed wire 
over, children, youngsters, full of fear, women, men.

The train arrived: 200 Ukrainians, coerced to this service, tore off the doors and with 
leather riding whips chased the people out of the cars.

Then a big loud speaker gave 
instructions: "In the open, some in the barracks, take off all clothing, also artificial 
limbs and spectacles.

With little piece of string, offered by a little Jewish boy 4 years 
old, tie the shoes together.

Turn in all valuables, all money to window." Valuables 
without voucher or receipt.

Then the women and the young women to the hair-dresser 
- to have cut, one or two cuts, the hair which disappears into large potato sacks "to 
make something special of it for submarines, padding etc.

.

.

.

" the S.S.-
Unterscharführer of the service told me.

(Left page) 
Then the march began.

On the right and left the barracks, behind, two dozen 
Ukrainians, guns in hand.

They approach.

Myself and Wirth, we find ourselves in 
front of the death chambers.

Completely naked, the men and women, babies, the 
mutilated, they go by.

In the corner, a big S.S.

with a loud pastoral voice says to the 
wretched people, "Nothing terrible will happen to you!

Just breathe very deeply, it 
strengthens the lungs, it is a way of preventing the spread of contagious diseases, it's a 
good disinfectant!" They asked him what their fate was to be.

He told them, "The men 
are to work, build houses and lay streets.

The women will not be made to; they will be 
occupied with housekeeping and in the kitchen." It was for some of these poor people 
a last little hope, enough to make them march without resistance toward the death 
chambers.

Most of them know everything, the smell gives it away!The women will not be made to; they will be 
occupied with housekeeping and in the kitchen." It was for some of these poor people 
a last little hope, enough to make them march without resistance toward the death 
chambers.

Most of them know everything, the smell gives it away!

They go up a 
small wooden stairway and go into the death chambers, most not saying anything, 
pushed by the others coming behind them.

A Jewess of about 40 years with eyes like 
torches, curses the murderers; getting a few blows of the whip from Captain Wirth 
himself, she disappeared into the gas chamber.

Many say their prayers, others ask, 
"Who will give us water for death?" (Israelite rite.) Into the chambers the S.S.

shove 
the men, "Fill up" Wirth has ordered, 700-800 in 93 sq.

m.

The doors are closed.

At 
this moment I understand the reason for the sign "Heckenholt." Heckenholt is the 
driver of the Diesel, whose exhaust is to kill the unfortunates.

S.S.

Unterscharführer 
Heckenholt tries to get the motor started.

But it doesn't go!

Captain Wirth arrives.

It is 
noticeable that he is afraid because I am present at this disaster.

Yes, I see everything 
and I wait.

My stop watch clocked everything, 50 minutes, 70 minutes, the Diesel 
doesn't go!

(Right page) Then the march began: to the right and left barbed wire, behind two 
dozen Ukrainians with whips.

Led by a young girl, extraordinarily beautiful they 
came on.

Myself with Captain Wirth, Police, we found ourselves in front of the death 
chambers.

Completely naked, men, women, young girls, children, babies, those with 
only one leg, all naked went by.

In the corner a husky S.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Completely naked, men, women, young girls, children, babies, those with 
only one leg, all naked went by. In the corner a husky S.S. who, in a loud, pastoral 
voice, said to the poor things: "Nothing will happen to you except that you must 
breathe deeply, it makes the lungs strong, this inhalation, it is necessary to counter 
contagious diseases, it is a very good disinfectant!" When he was asked what was to 
become of them, he said to them, "Truly the men are to work making roads and 
houses. But the women do not have to. Only, if they want to, they can help with the 
housekeeping or in the kitchen." For some of those poor people a little hope once 
more, enough to make them march without resistance to the death chambers, most of

--- PAGE BREAK ---298
them know everything, the smell indicates what their lot will be!

Then they go up the 
little stairway and - seeing the truth!

Mothers, nursing, babies at the breast, naked, 
many children of all ages - naked - they hesitate, but they go into the death chambers, 
most of them without saying a word, pushed by those behind them who are hustled by 
the whips of the S.S.

A Jewish woman, about 40 years old, with eyes like torches, calls the blood of their 
children down on their murderers.

Getting five blows of the whip on the face from 
Police Captain Wirth himself she disappeared into the gas chamber.

Many say their 
prayers, others say, "Who will give us the, death water?" (Israelite rite.) Into the 
rooms the S.S.

push the men.

"Fill up good," Captain Wirth has ordered.

The naked 
men are standing on the feet of the others.

700-800 in 25 square meters (2) and 45 
cubic meters!

The doors close.

Meanwhile the rest of the train, naked, are waiting.

I 
am told, "Also in winter naked," "But they might die!" "That's what they are here for," 
was the answer.

Then I understood what "Foundation Heckenholt" meant.

Heckenholt 
is the driver of the Diesel "the exhaust of which is destined to kill the poor people!" 
S.S.

Unterscharführer goes to some trouble to get the Diesel motor running.

But it 
doesn't start.

Captain Wirth arrives.

I can see that he is afraid because I am observing 
this disaster.

Yes, I see everything, and I wait.

My stop watch has fixed everything.

50 
minutes, 70 minutes, the Diesel engine does not go!

(Left page) The men are waiting in the gas chambers.

In vain.

They are heard crying 
"like in the synagogue" says Professor Pfannenstiel, his eye to a window fitted into 
the wooden door.

Captain Wirth, furious, gives a few lashes of the whip to the 
Ukrainian who is Heckenholt's helper.

After two hours and 49 minutes the watch 
recorded everything - the Diesel begins to run.

25 minutes go by.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After two hours and 49 minutes the watch 
recorded everything - the Diesel begins to run. 25 minutes go by. Many are already 
dead, that can be seen through the little window, since an electric lamp lights up the 
interior from time to time. After 32 minutes, finally, all are dead! On the other side, Jewish workers open the 
wooden doors. They have been promised -- for their awful work -- their lives, as well 
as a small per cent of the valuables and money found. Like pillars of basalt, the men 
are still standing, there not being the smallest space for falling or leaning. Even in 
death can be seen families holding hands. It is difficult to separate them, as they 
empty the rooms for the next load. They throw out the bodies, blue, damp with sweat 
and urine, legs covered with fecal matter and menstrual blood. Two dozen workers 
are busy going through the mouths, opening them with iron hooks, "Gold on the left, 
not on the right!" Others examine the anus and genital organs looking for money, 
diamonds, gold, etc. . . Dentists take out with the help of hammers, gold teeth, 
bridges, crowns. In the midst of them stands Captain Wirth. He is in his element, and, 
showing me a large can full of teeth, he says, "Look for yourself at the amount of 
gold! Just from yesterday and day before yesterday! You can't imagine what we find 
every day, dollars, diamonds, gold! You'll see yourself!" He leads me to a jeweler, 
responsible for all these valuables. They show me one of the heads of the great Berlin 
store "Kaufhaus des Westens," and a little man to whom violin music was being 
played, the heads of the gangs of Jewish workers. "He is a Captain of the Imperial 
Austrian Army, Chevalier of the German Iron Cross!" 
Wirth tells me. Then the bodies were thrown into great ditches about 100 x 20 x 10 
meters in size, situated near the gas chambers. After a few days the bodies began to

--- PAGE BREAK ---299
swell up and the whole thing raised up about 2 to 3 meters because of the gas forming 
in the corpses.

After a few days, when the swelling was over, the bodies sank down.

Then, I was told, on the tracks of the railway the bodies were burned with the use of 
Diesel oil, so as to make them disappear ......

(Right page) The men wait in their gas chamber.

In vain.

We listen to them crying 
"like in the synagogue" says S.S.-Sturmbannführer Professor Dr.

Pfannenstiel, 
ordinarius of Hygiene at the University of Marburg-Lahn, with his ear to the wooden 
door.

Captain Wirth, furious, gives 11 to 12 lashes of the whip across the face of the 
Ukrainian, who is assistant to Heckenholt.

After two hours, 49 minutes -- the stop 
watch has recorded everything -- the Diesel starts.

Until this moment the men in the 
four chambers already full are living, living four times 750 persons in four times 45 
cubic meters!

Again 25 minutes go by.

Many, it is true, are dead.

That is what can be 
seen through the little window, through which an electric lamp lights up for a minute 
the inside of the room.

After 28 minutes, still a few alive.

After 32 minutes, finally, all 
are dead!

From the other side, Jewish workers open the wooden doors.

They have 
been promised - for their awful labor - their liberty and a few percentages of whatever 
the value of the valuables and money found.

Like pillars of bassalt the dead are still 
standing, there not being the smallest space to fall or to lean.

Even dead, one 
recognized families with their hands still clasped.

It was difficult to separate them, in 
order to empty the rooms for the next load.

C.

Poliakov's Conclusion: 
There is much to add to this description, valid for Treblinka or Sobibor as well as for 
the camp at Belzec.

The installations were conceived more or less in the same 
manner, and carbon monoxide, produced with a Diesel motor, was the method used 
for administering death.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Poliakov's Conclusion: 
There is much to add to this description, valid for Treblinka or Sobibor as well as for 
the camp at Belzec. The installations were conceived more or less in the same 
manner, and carbon monoxide, produced with a Diesel motor, was the method used 
for administering death. At Majdanek, which was created later and which lasted until 
the last days of the German occupation, the method of asphyxiation with Prussic acid 
(Zyklon B) was introduced, as it was in Auschwitz; we have pointed out, on the other 
hand, that Majdanek was not a camp for immediate extermination. The researchers of the Polish War Crimes Commission have established that the total 
number of victims was close to 600,000 at Belzec, 250,000 at Sobibor, more than 
700,000 at Treblinka, and 300,000 at Chelmno (300). They were more than 90% 
Polish Jews; but there was no European nationality not represented in the remaining 8 
to 10%. In particular, out of the 110,000 Jews deported from the Netherlands, at least 
34,000 were exterminated at Sobibor (301). After nine months of intensive activity, the Belzec camp stopped functioning in 
December 1942. In the fall of 1943, once the "final solution" was for all practical 
purposes achieved in Poland, Sobibor and Treblinka were also closed down, and as 
many traces of them as possible were effaced, buildings torn down or destroyed, and 
the grounds carefully re-wooded. Alone, the camp at Chelmno, the first in place, kept 
on operating without interruption until the month of October 1944, and was not 
completely eliminated until January 1945.

--- PAGE BREAK ---300
C.

Conclusion of the Jerusalem Tribunal 
It is evident from the report of the Polish commission enquiring into Belzec (T.

1316) 
that this camp served above all for the extermination of Jews from southeast Poland; 
but Jews from Czechoslovakia, Austria, Rumania, Hungary and Germany were also 
killed there.

The Commission estimated at 600,000 at least the number of people who 
met death there.

125.

Testimonies given on Sobibor camp have given us a picture similar to that of 
Treblinka and Belzec camps.

The Jews who were exterminated there came from 
Poland and the territories which the Germans occupied in Soviet Russia as well as 
Czechoslovakia, Slovakia, Austria and Germany.

This camp was destroyed following 
a revolt of the Jewish prisoners which broke out there in October 1943.

According to 
the estimates of the Polish Commission, 250,000 persons at least perished there.

126.

Majdanek camp, a large concentration camp near Lublin, likewise served as an 
extermination center for Jews.

They were killed there by shooting and by gas.

Witness 
Joseph Reznik described to us (Session 64) a massacre of Jews by shooting that took 
place in November in "Field No.

5 of Majdanek." In the report of the Polish 
Commission is found the number of victims who were killed in the open in a single 
day, November 3, 1943: 18,000 Jews.

Gas chambers were also installed at Majdanek.

Jews were deported to this camp from Poland, Slovakia, Czechoslovakia, and western 
and southern Europe.

The Commission estimated that 200,000 Jews perished there.

Majdenek camp had branch camps, such as Travniki, which has already been 
mentioned as the destination for Jews from Germany.

Author's Postscript 
The manuscript of this work was being printed when the shocking business of the 
Vicaire hit Paris.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Majdenek camp had branch camps, such as Travniki, which has already been 
mentioned as the destination for Jews from Germany. Author's Postscript 
The manuscript of this work was being printed when the shocking business of the 
Vicaire hit Paris. In the newspaper, Le Monde, which supported the play, I wrote that 
the Gerstein Document was an historical forgery, so false that the Nuremberg 
Tribunal itself had ruled it out as not proof of evidence, on January 30, 1946. Le 
Monde (December 26, 1963) published the information I gave them, with the 
following editorial comment: 
"It is true that during the Nuremberg Trial the President set aside this part of the proof 
brought by the French Prosecution. Taken from the documents of the American 
delegation, it had not yet been authenticated under oath. This took place January 30, 
1946, during the morning session. When the proceedings were resumed in the 
afternoon, the British Attorney General Sir Maxwell-Fyfe, explained that this report 
as well as all those of series PS had been authenticated by American officers. The 
Court then decided to take it in consideration." 
I wrote again to Le Monde to point out to them that "authenticated by American 
officers" and "taken in consideration" did not mean "retained for the prosecution." I 
pointed out: 
1. That during the afternoon session in question what had above all been decided 
(Report of the Hearings, p. 377) by common consent of the President of the Tribunal 
and Mr. DuBost was that Document P.S. 1553 was composed solely of 12 invoices

--- PAGE BREAK ---all been decided 
(Report of the Hearings, p. 377) by common consent of the President of the Tribunal 
and Mr. DuBost was that Document P.S. 1553 was composed solely of 12 invoices

--- PAGE BREAK ---

301
for Zyklon B and that the Gerstein statement was not part of it. The Gerstein 
statement had only been introduced as a foundational reference to the aforementioned 
invoices: "To document P.S. 1553 [sic] attached the deposition of Gerstein and the 
explanations of the American chief of service who obtained this document..." 
2. That all the P.S. documents "authenticated by American officers" had not 
necessarily been authenticated by the Tribunal - far from it! - and had not all been 
retained for the prosecution. All of those documents that had been authenticated and 
retained for use as evidence appeared either in one of the books reporting the hearings 
or in the list (Volume 24) of the documents retained, and in one or the other of the 18 
volumes of documents, which was not the case with the Gerstein statement. In fact, all 
that was retained from P.S. 1553 by the prosecution at the Tribunal appears in volume 
27, pp. 340-42. Two invoices for Zyklon B are found there (out of 12), but of the 
Gerstein statement there is not a word. 
On December 30, 1963, Mr. Jacques Fauvet answered that the statement of Gerstein 
had, indeed, not been "taken in consideration" but that "he hesitated to prolong the 
controversy." In a word, I was right, but the readers of Le Monde were not to know it. 
The controversy remained open in their columns, but only to those who supported the 
merits of the argument of the play. Such are the mechanisms of conditioning public 
opinion. I need not comment further. 
FOOTNOTES 
1. This name is not legible. Wirth?, Poliakov says in a note. 2. In other versions of this 
document, the dimensions of these rooms are given as 4 x 5, or 20 sq. meters, not 25; 
note also that the Poliakov version of 1951 does not give the dimensions of the rooms, 
but only their ground area, or 93 square meters.s of these rooms are given as 4 x 5, or 20 sq. meters, not 25; 
note also that the Poliakov version of 1951 does not give the dimensions of the rooms, 
but only their ground area, or 93 square meters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

302

Appendix C: 
The Wolfgang Grosch Statement and a 
Report of a Second Lieutenant to a 
Lieutenanthe dimensions of the rooms, 
but only their ground area, or 93 square meters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

302

Appendix C: 
The Wolfgang Grosch Statement and a 
Report of a Second Lieutenant to a 
Lieutenant

1. The Wolfgang Grosch Statement 
The following is the statement of Wolfgang Grosch which is quoted from Le Pitre ne 
rit pas by David Rousset: 
The undersigned Wolfgang Grosch attests and declares that the following is true: 
... Concerning the construction of the gas chambers and their crematory ovens, the 
people of office C were responsible for the construction, after office D sent the order. 
The chain of command was this: office D got in touch with office C. The C.I. bureau 
laid down the plans for these installations, in so far as it concerned just the 
construction alone, then sent them to bureau C. III which took care of the mechanical 
aspects of these constructions, such as, for example, getting the air out of the gas 
chambers, or the fittings for the gassing. Then bureau C. III turned over the plans to 
some private company, which was to supply the special machines, or the crematory 
ovens. Always in channels, bureau C. III notified bureau C. IV which sent the order 
on via the Inspection Division of West, North, South and East Constructions, to the 
Board of Directors of Constructions. The Board of Directors of Constructions then 
transmitted the construction order to the respective directive offices of concentration 
camp construction, who then had the construction proper built by the prisoners which 
the D. III office put at their service. Office D gave the orders to office C. and the 
instructions concerning the dimensions of the constructions and their purpose. 
Fundamentally, it was office D which gave the commands for the gas chambers and 
the crematory ovens, signed: Wolfgang Grosch. (Emphasis added.) 
This deposition was given to the Nuremberg Tribunal. If it was not entirely Grosch's 
doing, the gibberish in which it was drafted seems to have been scrupulously 
respected by the translator, obviously to keep up the confusion. The following points, 
however, cannot escape the reader: 
1. It is only a question of the construction of gas chambers, and not of their intended 
purpose or their use; 
2. The witness refers back to facts whose materiality could easily be established, and 
to "instructions" which could be published, but which, nevertheless, seem to have 
been carefully avoided, particularly concerning the purpose of the gas chambers, to 
which an allusion is made.and 
to "instructions" which could be published, but which, nevertheless, seem to have 
been carefully avoided, particularly concerning the purpose of the gas chambers, to 
which an allusion is made.

--- PAGE BREAK ---303
3.

Out of all the construction projects for the camps (living quarters, infirmaries, 
kitchens, workshops, factories, and the like), whose planning and building were 
consigned to office D, the gas chambers and crematory ovens were picked out and, in 
a singular manner, juxtaposed, with the object of better impressing upon public 
opinion the idea that the crematory ovens were designed as instruments of genocide 
for the specific use in the concentration camps; such a conclusion is unwarranted 
since cremation is a common practice -- just as common as burial -- all over Germany.

For all these reasons, no historian can ever accept this deposition as reliable historical 
data.

2.

Report of a Second Lieutenant to a Lieutenant 
David Rousset also cites the following report in his Le Pitre ne rit pas: 
501 P.S Kiev, April 16, 1942 (Reich Secret Business) 
No.

of postal sector: 32,704 B.N.

40/42 To S.S.

Obersturmführer Rauff 
Berlin, Prinz Albrechts, 8.

The overhauling of the vehicles of D groups and group C is completely finished.

Although the vehicles of the first series can be used, even in bad weather 
(nevertheless it must not be too bad) the vehicles of the second series (Saurer) bog 
down completely in rainy weather.

When, for example, it has rained, if only for half 
an hour, the vehicle cannot be used.

It simply slides.

It is not possible to use them 
except in perfectly dry weather.

The only question that arises is one of knowing 
whether the vehicle can be used right at the place of execution when it is stopped.

First of all, the vehicle must be brought to the place in question, which is only 
possible if the weather is fine.

The execution place is usually 10 to 15 km.

away from the main roads, is chosen 
ahead of time, and not very accessible.

It is completely inaccessible if the weather is 
damp or rainy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

away from the main roads, is chosen 
ahead of time, and not very accessible. It is completely inaccessible if the weather is 
damp or rainy. If the persons are brought on foot or by car to the execution place, they 
see right away what is going on, and become restless, which is to be avoided as much 
as possible. The only solution left is to load them in the trucks in the assembly area, 
and then take them to the place of execution. I had the vehicle of group D. disguised as a gypsy wagon, and to do this I had one 
little window put on each side of the small cars, such as are often seen on our 
peasants' houses in the country, and two of these little windows on each side of the 
large cars. These vehicles were caught onto so quickly that they got the name "death 
cars." Not only the authorities, but even the civilian population, called them by this 
name, as soon as they were seen. In my opinion, even the disguise will not long keep 
them from being recognized. The brakes of the Saurer vehicle which I drove from Simfiropol to Taganrog proved 
to be defective en route. The S.K. of Mariupol found that the brake handle worked on 
both oil and compression. Persuasion and bribery on the part of the H.K.P. did the 
trick, so that a form was made from which two handles could be cast... When I arrived 
a few days later at Stalino and Gerlowka the drivers of the cars complained of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---304
same defects.

After an interview with the commanding officers of those Kommandos, 
I went at once to Mariupol to have two other handles made for each of the vehicles.

According to our agreement two handles will be cast for each car and six more will be 
sent to S.S.

Untersturmführer Ernt for the cars of group C.

For groups B.

and A.

handles can be got from Berlin, since their shipment from Mariupol northward is too 
complicated and takes too much time.

Little defects in the vehicles are repaired by the 
technicians of the Kommandos or groups, in their own workshop.

The bumpy ground and the unbelievable condition of the roads and highways, little by 
little wear out the connections and the waterproofing.

They asked me if we then had 
to have the repair work done in Berlin.

But this would cost too much and would 
require too much gasoline.

In order to avoid these expenses I left an order to have 
small soldering jobs done on the spot, and in case this should prove impossible, to 
telegraph at once to Berlin, saying that vehicle P.O.L.

No....

was out of service.

In 
addition, I gave an order that all the men should step away at the moment of the 
gassing so as not to have their health affected by any possible emanations of these 
gasses.

I would like, on this occasion, also to make the following observation: several 
Kommandos have their vehicles unloaded by their own men, after the gassing.

I drew 
the attention of the S.K.

in question to the damages, as much moral as physical, which 
these men were risking, if not immediately, at least a little later.

The men complained 
to me of headaches after each charging.

The regulation, however, cannot be modified 
because it is feared that the prisoners (2) used for this work might be able to seize a 
favorable moment to flee.

To protect the men against this disadvantage, I beg you to 
issue ordinances in accordance.

The gassing is not accomplished as it should be.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To protect the men against this disadvantage, I beg you to 
issue ordinances in accordance. The gassing is not accomplished as it should be. In order to finish the job as soon as 
possible, the drivers always press the accelerators to the bottom. This chokes the 
persons to be executed instead of killing them by putting them to sleep. My directives 
are to open the throttle in such a way that death is more rapid and peaceful for those 
concerned. They do not then have such disfigured faces, do not leave behind them so 
much elimination as we have seen until now. Today I am going to the station of group B. and further news can reach me there. Signed: Dr. Becker S.S. Untersturmführer 
This report comes as support for an affirmation of Eugen Kogon who writes in his 
"Enfer organisé": 
... they (the S.S.) also used traveling gas chambers: they were autos which on the 
outside looked like police vans, and which on the inside had been adequately 
equipped. In these cars, asphyxiation by gas does not seem to have taken place very 
fast, since they usually rolled along for a long time before stopping and unloading the 
dead bodies. (Page 154) 
Eugen Kogon, who does not tell us if any of these death vehicles have been found, 
does not cite this report either 
In any case, the translator is to be congratulated, for although he failed to satisfy one's 
curiosity about certain things, he at least gave the text an extraordinary Latin cast in 
the expression of thoughts. And it must be noted:

--- PAGE BREAK ---for although he failed to satisfy one's 
curiosity about certain things, he at least gave the text an extraordinary Latin cast in 
the expression of thoughts. And it must be noted:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

305
1. That it is easier for the present researchers to uncover documents about what went 
on at Mariupol than about what happened at Dachau; 
2. That, instead of an order that was issued by a ministry, being placed in evidence, 
what we have is the simple letter between a second lieutenant and his lieutenant 
concerning the matter; 
3. That even if this letter is a genuine document, it does not seem that any of the 
vehicles were found; at least, if any were found, very little publicity was made about 
the discovery. 
The matter is still at issue, but, as we have seen from the proceedings of the Chelmno 
trial at Bonn, March 6, 1953, another version has been brought forward: it is no longer 
a question of Saurer vehicles. It was discovered in the meantime that the Saurer firm 
had not been making that type of vehicle since 1912! Rather, now it is claimed that 
the vehicles were American-made trucks that were designed for the disinfecting of 
troops while on campaign. These trucks, it seems, were furnished to Germany by the 
United States at the time of the Spanish Civil War. Further, it is claimed that vehicles 
of a similar nature were built by the Germans. 
Verily, witnesses to anything can always be found!

FOOTNOTES 
1. It is curious that this report of a second lieutenant was found, but not the written 
order with which it is concerned; or at least, it is curious that the one was published 
and not the other. 
2. What prisoners?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

306

Afterword

by Mark Weber 
of the Institute for Historical ReviewIt is difficult to imagine anyone better suited to be the great pioneer of what has 
become known as Holocaust Revisionism than Paul Rassinier.

This French professor 
of history was a non-Communist Socialist who was arrested during the war for 
"passive resistance" activities, which included helping to smuggle Jews into neutral 
Switzerland.

Rassinier was then sent to the Buchenwald and Dora camps in Germany, 
where he remained an inmate until the end of the war.

When he returned to France, he 
was astonished by the stories that were being circulated about the camps, and he felt 
honor-bound to tell the truth as he knew it.

For example, a French priest who had also 
been an inmate at Buchenwald claimed to have seen "thousands and thousands of 
persons" going into gas chambers there.

When Rassinier met with the priest and 
pointed out to him that no one was ever gassed at Buchenwald, he replied: "Right, but 
that's only a figure of speech.

.

.

.

and since those things existed somewhere, it's not 
important." (pages 129-130 of this volume.

See also: M.

Weber, "Buchenwald: 
Legend and Reality," Journal of Historical Review, Winter 1986-87.) Rassinier was a 
man of rare courage and conscientious devotion to historical truth.

In spite of poor 
health he traveled many thousands of kilometers across Europe to meet with persons 
who claimed to have personal knowledge of mass killings.

(p.

271).

As he put it,"...

A 
historian worthy of the name should not suppress anything that he knows which is 
relevant to the subject under discussion." (p.

282).

His obvious intellectual honesty 
contrasts sharply with the deceitful spirit of "Exterminationist" historians such as 
Leon Poliakov, Lucy Dawidowicz and William L.

Shirer.

Rassinier's work has stood 
the test of time remarkably well.by Mark Weber 
of the Institute for Historical Review

Shirer. Rassinier's work has stood 
the test of time remarkably well. His basic thesis -- that there was no German policy 
or program of extermination, and that the incessantly repeated figure of six million 
Jewish wartime dead is a gross exaggeration -- has been abundantly confirmed by a 
tremendous amount of new evidence collected by the scholars who have followed in 
his path. All Revisionists owe a great debt to this man. Some of the more important of 
those who have built upon the foundation he laid are Dr. Arthur Butz of Northwestern 
University, Prof. Robert Faurisson of the University of Lyon (France) and Henri 
Roques, who knew Rassinier personally. (Incidentally, Dr. Butz provides a useful 
summary of Rassinier's work in his book The Hoax of the Twentieth Century, pp. 10-
11.) It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the case for the Revisionist view of the 
Holocaust story is immeasurably stronger today than it was when Rassinier died in 
1967. Because Holocaust Revisionists challenge an official and prevailing view of 
history, they have a tremendous burden of proof. They are held to a much more 
rigorous standard of accuracy than most historians. This was dramatically 
demonstrated, for example, in the essentially political trials of Revisionists Robert 
Faurisson in France and Ernst Zündel in Canada. Rassinier was in frail health when he 
wrote most of the works that have been brought together in this volume. And because 
he was a pioneer who worked virtually alone, a number of errors unfortunately found

--- PAGE BREAK ---307
their way into his writings.

These mostly minor errors are neither malicious nor 
deceitful, which is shown by the fact that they are not crucial to his central thesis.

It 
may even be said that these mistakes underscore Rassinier's basic honesty.

If he were 
alive today, he would be the first to revise his findings in the light of more complete 
and accurate information.

Thus, in the spirit of historical accuracy that Rassinier 
himself vigorously supported, the following corrections and explanatory points are 
offered: 
1.

Rassinier mistakenly maintained (page 288) that the first accusation that the 
Germans were exterminating the Jews was made in 1943 by the Polish Jew Raphael 
Lemkin in his book, Axis Rule In Occupied Europe.

In an effort to discredit Rassinier 
and all Revisionists, the prosecution in the 1988 "Holocaust trial" of Ernst Zündel 
emphasized this point, although it is not at all crucial to the Revisionist thesis.

Actually, the first extermination claims were made, and widely publicized, in the 
summer and fall of 1942 by the World Jewish Congress, and particularly by its 
president, Rabbi Stephen Wise, who was also head of the American Jewish Congress.

The World Jewish Congress mounted a well-organized campaign to pressure the 
Allied governments to endorse its extermination claims.

The result was the joint 
declaration of 17 December 1942 by the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union and 
the other Allied governments, which charged that the Germans were putting into 
effect "Hitler's oft-repeated intention to exterminate the Jewish people," and that Jews 
were being "deliberately massacred in mass executions" in Poland.

A few years after 
the war, the World Jewish Congress boasted in its official history, Unity in 
Dispersion, about its crucial role in bringing about this declaration.The result was the joint 
declaration of 17 December 1942 by the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union and 
the other Allied governments, which charged that the Germans were putting into 
effect "Hitler's oft-repeated intention to exterminate the Jewish people," and that Jews 
were being "deliberately massacred in mass executions" in Poland.

A few years after 
the war, the World Jewish Congress boasted in its official history, Unity in 
Dispersion, about its crucial role in bringing about this declaration.

The declaration, 
which the Allies exploited for propaganda purposes, was issued in spite of warnings 
by the American and British officials responsible for European Jewish affairs, who 
stressed that there was no evidence for the Jewish extermination claims.

(See: D.

Wyman, The Abandonment of the Jews, esp.

pp.

73-75; and the review by M.

Weber, 
Journal of historical Review, Fall 1985, pp.

369-373.) 
2.

Rassinier cannot be faulted for an editor's footnote on page 203, which erroneously 
alleges: 'It seems that the American Jewish writer Meyer Levin was hired by Otto 
Frank, the father of Anne, to write the Anne Frank Diary.

Levin did not write the 
Diary, but rather an adaptation of it for the screen and stage.

The Diary is 
nevertheless suspect for other reasons.

(See: R.

Faurisson, "Is the Diary of Anne 
Frank Genuine?," Journal of Historical Review, Summer 1982, pp.

147-209.) 
3.

It is not true, as Rassinier wrote on pages 219 and 292, that Prof.

Salo Baron of 
Columbia University claimed that there were 700,000 Jews in Poland at the end of the 
war.

Baron actually claimed that there were 73,955.(New York Times, 25 April 1961, 
p.

2 1.) 
4.

The enormous reparation payments by West Germany to Israel and world Jewry are 
not calculated on the basis of six million Jewish dead, as Rassinier asserted.

(p.

214).

5.

Rassinier devoted considerable attention to the ambitious task of estimating the 
number of Jews who perished in Europe during the Second World War.--- PAGE BREAK ---

5. Rassinier devoted considerable attention to the ambitious task of estimating the 
number of Jews who perished in Europe during the Second World War. (pages 288-
399). Unfortunately, reliable and complete data on this point, especially for Poland 
and the occupied Soviet territories, are not available. As a result, it is difficult to 
estimate the number of Jews who perished during the war years with any precision.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r Poland 
and the occupied Soviet territories, are not available. As a result, it is difficult to 
estimate the number of Jews who perished during the war years with any precision.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

308
Regrettably, some of Rassinier's citations of figures from other sources, including 
those of Raul Hilberg, are not entirely accurate. Rassinier concluded that 'the number 
of Jewish victims of Nazi persecution, in concentration camps or otherwise, should be 
placed at about one million, more or less, (p. 390) and he estimated that as many as 
1.59 million Jews may have perished altogether (p.398). Given the lack of complete 
data, these estimates are about as reasonable as any that have been made. 
Interestingly, they closely match the estimate of 1 to 1. 5 million Jewish wartime dead 
reached independently by the respected Swiss daily Baseler Nachrichten (13 June 
1946, p. 2) 
. 6. Readers may be surprised by what Rassinier wrote on pages 164 and 270-283 
about the gassing story. Although he never believed that there was any German 
program or policy to gas Jews, for a time he took the view that gassings were carried 
out on a small scale by a tiny number of sadistic SS men, who acted contrary to 
orders. I have been reliably informed that in the final years of his fife, Rassinier 
became increasingly skeptical that even small numbers of unauthorized gassings ever 
took place. 
7. The abbreviation 'T' appears a number of times in this book (for example, on pages 
232-34, 237, 239, 246, 251). This refers to a volume (Tome) in the French edition of 
the official 42-volume 'blue series' record of the Nuremberg International Military 
Tribunal. Readers should keep in mind that the pagination is different, depending on 
which edition of the series is consulted. 
8. A minor mistake in editing appears on page 239, lines 13 and 15 from the bottom. 
The documents referred to here are actually Nuremberg documents NO-4401 and NO-
4473. Similarly, the "document No. 4463" referred to on page 245, line 7, is actually 
Nuremberg document NO-4473. (See: A. Butz, Hoax, p. 116). These corrections 
should not discourage the reader from digging into this important volume, which is a 
valuable memoir of concentration camp life, as well as an insightful and often brilliant 
critique of the Holocaust extermination story. -- Mark Weberm digging into this important volume, which is a 
valuable memoir of concentration camp life, as well as an insightful and often brilliant 
critique of the Holocaust extermination story. -- Mark Weber

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE REAL
EICHMANN TRIAL
or
THE INCORRIGIBLE VICTORS
by
PAUL RASSINIER
Translated from the original French
INSTITUTE FOR HISTORICAL REVIEW
ÉDITIONS DE L'AAARGH
Internet, 2002

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The original edition of this book was published under the title of Le Véritable Procès
Eichmann ou les Vainqueurs incorrigibles copyright by Les Sept Couleurs, Paris, 1962.
This edition incorporates additions and modifications by the author and is thus not entirely
identical to the
original French edition.
The Real Eichmann Trial or The Incorrigible Victors by Paul Rassinier
Published in the United States by
Institute for Historical Review
Post Office Box 1306
Torrance, California 90505
Manufactured in the United Kingdom
ISBN 0-911038-48-5
Library of Congress Catalog Number 76-19192
First Printing May 1976
Second Printing March 1979
Third Printing October 1983
Internet edition 2002
–    2    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
Foreword 
5
Introduction
7
I.– From Stalingrad to Nuremberg 
30
II.–The Principles of Nuremberg 
40
III.– Conspiracy and Crimes against Peace
50
IV.– War Crimes 
75
V.– Crimes against Humanity 
88
VI.– Conclusion on Nuremberg 
121
VII.– The Eichmann Trial or The New Master Singers of Nuremberg
130
VIII.– The Auschwitz Trial
155
–    3    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---FOREWORD
A confirmed total pacifist, Paul Rassinier was drawn into the Communist Party in 1922 at
the age of 16, by the anarchist Victor Serge.

Having very quickly turned against it, he was
expelled from the Party.

After various attempts at unifying the workers' movement along the
political lines of Souvarine, and the trade union projects of Pierre Monatte, he joined the
Socialist Party on the evening of February 6th, 1934.

As Secretary of the Union of Belfort, he
leaned first towards Marceau Pivert, then towards Paul Faure, and attempted to popularise in
Franche-Comté the pacifist viewpoints of Félicien Challaya, René Gérin, Madeleine Vernet and
Louis Lecoin.

In 1939 he was saved from Daladierist fury by Paul Faure.

As one of the founders of the "Libé-Nord" movement (he was in the Resistance from the
very start) he tried to inculcate into his comrades the idea of non-violence and the principles of
total pacifism.

This attitude caused him to be condemned to death by the Communist resistance;
after receiving the warning coffin effigy, he only escaped pistol shots thanks to being arrested
by the Gestapo (October 30th, 1943).

He was deported to Buchenwald, then to Dora.

On his
return to France, invalided out and decorated with the Médaille de la Résistance, and
Reconnaissance Française, he resumed his place at the head of the S.F.I.O.

union in Belfort.

He
loudly proclaimed that whilst in the Resistance he had never met most of the men now speaking
in its name and, firm in his own personal experience, he attacked their pretentions of having
suppressed "collaboration".

Rassinier was defeated in the first Constituent Assembly elections
by the Communists, who kept him out by giving their votes to the far Left candidate, but he was
elected at the second.

He was again defeated on November 10th, 1946 through the
Communists' using the same method.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rassinier was defeated in the first Constituent Assembly elections
by the Communists, who kept him out by giving their votes to the far Left candidate, but he was
elected at the second. He was again defeated on November 10th, 1946 through the
Communists' using the same method. The state of his health did not permit his resumption of
his post as professor of history and geography so he retired from public and professional life
and published successively:
Le Passage de la Ligne, 1948 [sic]
Le Mensonge d'Ulysse, 1950
Le Discours de la Dernière Chance (introductory essay to a doctrine of Peace on the
theme: "Neither Moscow nor Washington"), 1953
Candasse ou la huitième péché capital, 1955
Le Parlement aux mains des banques, also 1955
Ulysse trahi par les siens, which is complementary to Mensonge d'Ulysse, 1960
L'Équivoque révolutionnaire, 1961
Le Véritable Procès Eichmann ou Les Vainqueurs incorrigibles, 1962
By the same author:
Passage de la ligne, (Editions Bressanes, 1948) out of print. Le mensonge d'Ulysse (Editions Bressanes, 1950) out of print. Le discours de la dernière chance (Editions de la Voix de la Paix, 1953) Introduction to
a doctrine of peace. La Fin du règne de la peur (Editions de la Voix de la Paix, 1963). Une 3ème guerre mondiale pour du pétrole? (Editions de la Voix de la Paix, 1963)
Le Parlement aux mains des banques (Contre-Courant, 1955)
Candasse ou le huitième péché capital (L'Amitié par le Livre, 1955)
Ulysse trahi par les siens (Librairie Française, 1961)
Le mensonge d'Ulysse (Librairie Française, 5th ed., 1961)
L'Equivoque révolutionnaire (Défense de 1'Homme, 1962)
Le véritable procès Eichmann, ou Les Vainqueurs incorrigibles (Sept Couleurs, 1962)
Translated abroad, in German and Spanish
Le mensonge d'Ulysse, 1960
Ulysse trahi par les siens, 1961
–    4    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---cès Eichmann, ou Les Vainqueurs incorrigibles (Sept Couleurs, 1962)
Translated abroad, in German and Spanish
Le mensonge d'Ulysse, 1960
Ulysse trahi par les siens, 1961
–    4    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Le véritable procès Eichmann, ou Les Vainqueurs incorrigibles, 1963
The present volume in English is a revision and completion of these three works.
In preparation:
Partis et politiciens devant la guerre
Le Troisième testament. History of the State of Israel.
–    5    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---INTRODUCTION
1867.

European statesmen are trying to see Europe in terms of nationalities well defined
by natural frontiers.

On the other hand, the socialist movement (the Internationale) is
ideologically committed to breaking down national barriers.

Similarly the merchants value
commercial contacts over and above the frontiers, natural or not.

The merchants are the more practical.

In striving towards their industrial and social
objectives peoples cannot fail to learn to understand and respect each other.

Statesmen
encourage them in order to extend their influence, whilst the intellectuals do it on principle.

Since 1850 the method of contact has been the universal exposition*: in 1851 in London, in
1855 in Paris, in 1862 again in London.

In 1867 the venue reverted to Paris.

In order that the foreign visitors could see something
other than the exhibits assembled in the enclosure set up on the Champs de Mars, with an
annexe on the island of Billancourt, in other words that it might be possible for them to make a
far broader contact with France through the intermediary of Paris, the organisers of the
exposition published a catalogue of all that there was to see, or at least all that they wished to be
seen: Paris-Guide.

The task of writing the preface for that kind of inventory of the riches of
Paris was awarded to Victor Hugo.

Here is the passage of that preface which summarised the
them on which he wrote it:
"In the twentieth century there will be an extraordinary nation.

This nation will be large,
but that will not keep it from being a free nation.

It will be illustrious, rich, thinking, peaceful,
cordial to the rest of humanity.

It will have the gentle seriousness of an elder sister [...].

A battle
between Italians and Germans, between Englishmen and Russians, between Prussians and
Frenchmen will seem to it as a battle between Picards and Burgundians might appear to us.

It
will consider the waste of human blood as useless.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A battle
between Italians and Germans, between Englishmen and Russians, between Prussians and
Frenchmen will seem to it as a battle between Picards and Burgundians might appear to us. It
will consider the waste of human blood as useless. Only with reservations will it approve an
admiration for the war dead. The shrug of the shoulders that we give to the Inquisition it will
give to war. It will look at the battlefield of Sadowa with the air with which we regard the
Quemadero of Seville. It will regard as stupid the oscillation between victories, invariably
ending in a dismal readjustment of the balance - Austerlitz always paid for by Waterloo. It will
have about the same respect for authority that we have for orthodoxy; a court case will seem to it
as a heresy trial seems to us and it will no more understand Béranger in a cell than Galileo in
prison…
[7]
"A common language, common currency, unity of measure, unity of meridian, unity of
law; the highest degree of free enterprise and incalculable profit, resulting in the abolition of
parasitism; no more arms races, the gigantic expense of defence eliminated, the four billions
which the permanent armies cost at the present left in the pockets of the citizens, the four million
young conscripts re-assigned to commerce, agriculture and industry; everywhere the iron of the
sword and chain reforged in the form of the plough; peace, the goddess with eight breasts,
majestically seated in the midst of men…
* In reality the idea came from earlier times; the first manifestation of this kind, although more modest because of its purely
European character, took place in Prague in 1781. But, although it was followed by several others of the same nature organised in Paris
under the First Empire, the Restoration and the reign of Louis-Philippe, the Napoleonic wars and their consequences resulted in a lack of
universal appeal until 1851, in London. –    6    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Instead of war, emulation.

The rise of intelligence towards the dawn.

Impatience for
well-being reproving mistakes and fears.

Every other anger disappeared.

A people prodding the
bowels of the night and extracting an immense clarity for the profit of humankind.

That is what
that nation will be.

"And that nation will be called Europe.

"
The fact that the twentieth century in question, now in its second half, does feel itself
threatened with the prospect of ending up in the middle of a Slavic Europe, or a Sovietised
Europe, says enough of Victor Hugo's posthumous predictions, not to labour the point.

The
only thing necessary to comment upon concerning the great hope thus formulated is its intention
and the manner of its expression.

Especially the manner of its expression: the nationalities, the
natural frontiers, German unity, Italian unity, etc.

If one had pointed out to him that he did not
make mention of these, I imagine that Hugo would have answered with the same shrug of the
shoulders as if he had been asked to pronounce a definitive solution to the problem of the
Guelphs and the Ghibelines, the Armagnacs and the Burgundians (Picards and Burgundians, as
he says), of Richelieu and the House of Austria, of the Hundred Years War, or for all I know,
the crowning of Clovis.

Well!

Nationalities, natural frontiers, etc.

that was again for Europe to try to find herself
on an intellectual level which, compared with today, might seem relatively elevated.

I do not
wish to speak here of either statesmen, who only conceive of Europe as cut in two, or of
merchants whose only concern seems to be a multiplicity of frontiers because by means of
import and export licences a black market in gold is permitted as well as other devices as
profitable as they are numerous.

In modern nations the statesmen and the merchants are not, or
are no longer, the elite.

What of the intellectuals?In modern nations the statesmen and the merchants are not, or
are no longer, the elite.

What of the intellectuals?

If, now that the war of 1939-1945 is ended, the intellectuals have begun to exalt Europe
again, they do so only by systematically citing the reasons for not doing so, specifically: the
German crimes, the German concentration camps, an infinity of Oradours, Prussian militarism
etc.

Recently they have tried to mobilise world opinion concerning the behaviour during the war
of a simple German lieutenant-colonel - Adolf Eichmann: eternal Germany, that black sheep
from which all evil comes, and with which no association is possible except by keeping it on its
knees or stretched out with a knife to its throat.

It is certain that public discussion, if kept on the low level of such archaic ideas and in
such flagrant contradiction of reality, can only prolong the old quarrels, not settle them, and that
Europe has no chance to take stock of itself.

To be otherwise it would be necessary to conceive
of a Europe not only without, but also against Germany.

More important than anything, and this is a serious point, is the fact that the intellectuals of
1962 do not see:
On the one hand, that the Germans could easily reply with Dresden, Leipzig, Hamburg
(tragic counterparts of Oradours); French militarism (or Russian); Algerian concentration camps
(which the International Red Cross established to be no better than their own); or Russian
camps, which have been found to be far worse than the German camps by Margareth Buber-
Neuman, who was in both.

Navareno Scavioli, an Italian Communist refugee in Moscow in
1925, who knew the camps from 1937-1954, has given us (in the Rome magazine Vita,
November 23rd, 1961) a picture which surpasses in horror everything that has been written by
the escapees from German camps - even by those who have embroidered their tale the most.--- PAGE BREAK ---

More important than anything, and this is a serious point, is the fact that the intellectuals of
1962 do not see:
On the one hand, that the Germans could easily reply with Dresden, Leipzig, Hamburg
(tragic counterparts of Oradours); French militarism (or Russian); Algerian concentration camps
(which the International Red Cross established to be no better than their own); or Russian
camps, which have been found to be far worse than the German camps by Margareth Buber-
Neuman, who was in both. Navareno Scavioli, an Italian Communist refugee in Moscow in
1925, who knew the camps from 1937-1954, has given us (in the Rome magazine Vita,
November 23rd, 1961) a picture which surpasses in horror everything that has been written by
the escapees from German camps - even by those who have embroidered their tale the most. On the other hand they do not see that there is not, nor ever can be, a war without
concentration camps, without Oradours and without obedient and zealous lieutenant-colonels of
the Eichmann type -on both sides. Finally, in determining responsibility for the war of 1939-1945, the intellectuals overlook
the consequences of the aberrant Treaty of Versailles which places the first and heaviest
responsibility on those who made that Treaty. Immediately after the first World War these were still indisputable truths for the majority
of intellectuals. Among those who classified themselves on the Left and who made up the
literary or personal associations of my ardent and enthusiastic youth, were: Harry Elmer Barnes,
Sydney B. Fay, Fréderik Bausman, Hermann Hesse, spiritual heir to Bertha von Suttner,
–    7    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Romain Rolland, Alain Mathias Morhardt, Victor-Marguerite, Anatole France, Félicien
Challaye, Jean Giono, Georges Démartial, René Gérin, Barthelemy de Ligt, Lucien Roth, the
Alexandres, Georges Michon etc.

Nobody has succeeded in selling them the idea of any
unilateral character of horrors and responsibilities for the war.

They put everything under the
microscope and were very hard on the men of Versailles, who were supported by a few aged
intellectuals, worn out or fossilised, and belonging to a Right which no longer followed them.

They created a Société d'études documentaires et critiques sur la guerre* of which Mathias
Morhardt was the president, and in France their works were published in the Librairie du Travail
by the militants of anarcho-syndicalism of which the Révolution prolétarienne was and still
[10] is the medium of expression.

In 1945 when hostilites terminated, of the very few people at that moment thinking it
necessary to sift out the horrors and responsibilities for the second World War, it is remarkable
that they were all Right-wing and that their attitude was founded on the very principles in whose
name the intellectuals of the Left had repudiated Versailles twenty-five years earlier.

As for the
intellectuals of the Left, the overwhelming majority approved and exhalted Nuremberg in the
name of principles with whose reactionary character, at the time of Versailles, they had
reproached those on the Right who made them their own, and the phenomenon is no less
remarkable.

There is a curious kind of shifting of position here in the matter of principles, and it
is just in this shifting that my personal drama took place.

Although politically involved, I remained committed to the basic tenets of history.

The
Left was my spiritual family.

I had found intellectual comfort in a socialism which was above all
a humanism, nourished on a hope based on an interpretation of historical facts which attempted
to achieve objectivity through honesty.The
Left was my spiritual family.

I had found intellectual comfort in a socialism which was above all
a humanism, nourished on a hope based on an interpretation of historical facts which attempted
to achieve objectivity through honesty.

At the moment when (I don't know what devil
possessed them) the intellectuals of the Left, confronted by the war and then by the Résistance,
fell back upon the political positions of that Déroulède kind of nationalism which even the most
extreme of those on the Right had long since repudiated, I suffered as much as if my own family
had become guilty of some collective felony.

Was it a panic reaction on the part of the Leftist
intellectuals in the face of danger, or was it deliberate repudiation?

Hope springing eternal, I
opted for the former explanation.

The danger was removed - at the price their attitude had forced
us to pay, that is, the war - and now, after the war, the hour had come for the settlement of
accounts.

I discovered that, far from returning to their traditions and principles, they were
thinking only of how they could justify the untenable political position they had assumed during
the conflict with insupportable theses, and to this end did not hesitate to pervert historical facts
even to the extent of the solicitation, falsification, misinterpretation and invention of documents.

I knew then that I had hoped against hope and that theirs had been a deliberate repudiation.

At
the same time I knew that neither my political and philosophical convictions, nor my concern for
historical truth and my honesty would allow me to ever associate myself with that disavowal,
nor to allow myself to be suspected of it.

Once again this decision presented delicate problems.

The intellectuals' lack of scruples
was as complete in other realms of thought as in that of history.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Once again this decision presented delicate problems. The intellectuals' lack of scruples
was as complete in other realms of thought as in that of history. Through the medium of
propaganda, a general intellectual breakdown had infected all classes of society [11] and now
was threatening everything - a moral prostration, forerunner of the collapse of society (at least of
European society) after an apocalyptic war: the dark prospect of a chaos no less apocalyptic. It
was obvious, therefore, that the pressing job to be undertaken required an immeasurable effort. Everything had to be started again from scratch and since the University could not be counted
on, itself a victim of subversion, it was necessary to address the masses directly, sorely tried as
they were by events that they had not understood (and which were still so fresh in the mind as to
be festering) and saturated with slogans aimed solely at stirring up their lowest instincts,
particularly resentment, hatred and the need for vengeance. Fortunately the zero mark was well defined. Buried under mountains of sophistry was that
need for truth (where the concerns of the historian meet those of the moralist) which, even under
the worst circumstances, all normally constituted men always feel sooner or later. There lay the
* Society for documentary and critical studies on the war. –    8    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---only hope, and that hope directed the first step: attack this mountain at its foot, take the facts one
by one, study their substance in order to replace them correctly in their historical context.

It was an interminable labour.

Disregarding the urgency it finally ended up as a general
study of the Second World War.

But we were only in 1948 and such a study was not possible,
no doubt because of lack of perspective, but especially because of the result of that - the paucity
of documents made public, after having been carefully rewritten.

Even those made public one
could not consult directly without special privilege, that is, knowing the password.

It should be
recognised that the archives of the Third Reich, seized in 1945, amounting to hundreds of tons
of documents, were carefully kept out of sight during the whole term of the thirteen Nuremberg
trials.

And during the trials only those who were willing to become auxiliaries of the prosecution
before public opinion were allowed access to the documents.

In an effort to avoid leaks even
that access was restricted to those documents which the prosecution lawyer decided presented
no threat to his addresses to the Court.

When the trials were over, this enormous mass of papers
was transported to America and put under lock and key in a huge military warehouse in
Alexandria, Virginia, where it lay in dust until 1955.

At that time, before handing the documents
back to Germany, the American government authorised a very small, carefully selected group of
scholars and researchers to make an inventory and select certain documents to be photographed.

Today the mass of documents lies in the dust in Bonn where, under the law of fifty years'
obligatory secrecy, specialists will not have free access to them for another thirty-two years, that
is, about 1995.

Moreover, they will have to be classified before they can be made available,
which task will no doubt take a number of years thus pushing the date even farther along.Today the mass of documents lies in the dust in Bonn where, under the law of fifty years'
obligatory secrecy, specialists will not have free access to them for another thirty-two years, that
is, about 1995.

Moreover, they will have to be classified before they can be made available,
which task will no doubt take a number of years thus pushing the date even farther along.

Until
then, historians will have to content themselves with [12] the 30,000 documents (it might as
well be nothing) which were used by the prosecution at Nuremberg, a few of which the
attorneys for the defence succeeded in procuring through the wiles of an Indian and which are
deposited in an official dossier of 67 large-size volumes of about a thousand pages each.

These 30,000 documents in 67 volumes have been made public - but great heavens!

what
a form and what a state they are in!

- in successive instalments, on the following dates:
1.

Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression (red series): 10 vols.

in English, publ.

in 1947 by
the Gov.

Printing Office at Washington, under the direction of Ch.

Horsky, W.

Jackson and
others.

2.

Report of the discussions and decisions of the trials of the Major War Criminals,
which took place at Nuremberg in 1945-46 (blue series): 42 vols.

in 4 langs.

(French,
English, German and Russian) publ.

at Nuremberg itself in 1948.

3.

Trials of the War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals (green series):
15 vols.

in English, which give a report of the discussions and the verdict of the twelve
succeeding trials at Nuremberg, publ.

1950 by the Gov.

Printing Office in Washington, under
the direction of the Control Council Law No.

10, with the assistance of Drexel A.

Sprecher and
others.--- PAGE BREAK ---

10, with the assistance of Drexel A. Sprecher and
others. Because the ex-Allied governments only publish their own archives in driblets, and then
only to the extent to which they show the Allies in a favourable light; and because, on the other
hand, one cannot pass judgement on the value of the memoirs of the principal actors in the
drama without being able to confront them with all the documents relative to the events of which
they treat - probably not until about the year 2000 - all the general studies published on the
Second World War are bound to be very vulnerable. That is also true of those which were
pretentiously issued in 1948. To provoke a discussion on the actual principle of the Nuremberg trials was unthinkable. I
did attempt to do so in 1946, within the bosom of the Socialist Party of which I was a
representative in Parliament, succeeding only in bringing down upon myself unanimous
indignation. In 1948, therefore, the only thing a historian could do was to turn to partial studies,
limited to the documents and testimonies then made public. In order to be effective he had first
to turn his attention to those documents and testimonies which had reference to events
concerning which public opinion had been conditioned by official propaganda. Without any
–    9    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---doubt the event above all others which best answered that condition was the phenomenon of the
concentration camp, which had taken precedence over all others during the preceding three
years, thanks to the abundance of eyewitness literature and the invariable return of all public
debate on policy with regard to Germany, as defined at Nuremberg, to the subject as though to a
leitmotif and in search of justification.

It so happened that I had the notable advantage of [13]
being able to speak as a witness since I, too, had lived through it.

It was, therefore, impossible
to resist the temptation to set things right and so it was that Le Mensonge d'Ulysse was my first
act of fidelity to the principles of the world of the Left of 1919.

After an interval of ten years, in
an effort to end the bitter controversy which it had stirred in Europe and which had lasted all that
time, Ulysse trahi par les siens was my second act.

It had barely appeared when Eichmann
was kidnapped in Argentina by the Israeli Secret Service in the most complete and brazen
contempt of International Law.

The controversy was resumed more vigorously than ever and it
gave me the long-awaited opportunity to make a collective study of all the horrors of the 1939-
45 war.

I had the opportunity, at the same time, to set them in their historical context, this
context being best defined by a parallel drawn between the thirteen trials of Nuremberg
(without, of course, overlooking the fourteenth which took place in Jerusalem), the Treaty of
Versailles and the uncovering of the basic causes for the first time.

Le Véritable Procès
Eichmann ou les Vainqueurs incorrigibles* was then my third act.

To submit to American opinion all at once and in a definitive form (i.e.Le Véritable Procès
Eichmann ou les Vainqueurs incorrigibles* was then my third act.

To submit to American opinion all at once and in a definitive form (i.e.

documented, since
nothing in history is definitive unless documented) a sum of nonconformist truths of such
importance that European opinion had not been able to grasp them except in steps and
homoeopathic doses - and then only at favourable moments - is an idea for which I am indebted
to one of those rare persons (survivors) faithful to himself and to those who, immediately after
the First World War, did not accept the declaration of Germany's unilateral responsibility.

In
this respect Harry Elmer Bames was a not inconsiderable leader to the student youth of which I
was then a part.

To him I must here give public homage, not only for that fidelity which so
many others have betrayed so brazenly and with so little shame, but also above all for the
counsel of inestimable value which he has given me.

For my own part I confess that this passage from homoeopathic dose to horse medicine,
without transition, is not made without some misgiving.

Rightly or wrongly, from afar I think
of the American reader as being much better protected, by the most modern, powerful and
efficacious media, against assaults on the truth than the European reader, subject as he is to the
old propaganda systems used here.

So I consider the American reader less well prepared to face
an aspect of things which, in my opinion, is almost totally unknown to him and which in any
case is not the sort of thing to be encountered so brutally.Rightly or wrongly, from afar I think
of the American reader as being much better protected, by the most modern, powerful and
efficacious media, against assaults on the truth than the European reader, subject as he is to the
old propaganda systems used here.

So I consider the American reader less well prepared to face
an aspect of things which, in my opinion, is almost totally unknown to him and which in any
case is not the sort of thing to be encountered so brutally.

Even if my concern is misplaced, I
may be excused if, in trying to put him into the picture, I find it necessary to supply
supplementary explanations about the basis of the problem - the reasons which forced the
victors to find the solution they did and to justify a method which [14] can only be described as
such because of the care I have taken to obey the imperative of reality without ever exceeding its
explanations of the atrocious psychological climate in which all my efforts in the direction of
historical truth have until now been pursued.

In the 4th century B.C., legend tells us, the Gallic chieftain Brennus overran Etruria and,
going from victory to victory, he arrived at the gates of Rome, whose population had fled at his
approach.

He entered the city and destroyed it except for the Capitol, in which the youth of the
city had enclosed and barricaded themselves.

After a siege of seven months the young Romans,
reduced by famine, sent to ask him on what conditions he would raise the siege and depart.

"A
thousand pounds' weight of gold," he replied.

While the gold was being weighed, after
adjusting the balance in one of the trays which held the weights several times - doubtless hoping
to move Brennus to granting a remission by making him touch the gold with his own finger -
the chief of the Roman delegation, whose charge it was to hand over the gold, bade him observe
that it was indeed a very great amount.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"A
thousand pounds' weight of gold," he replied. While the gold was being weighed, after
adjusting the balance in one of the trays which held the weights several times - doubtless hoping
to move Brennus to granting a remission by making him touch the gold with his own finger -
the chief of the Roman delegation, whose charge it was to hand over the gold, bade him observe
that it was indeed a very great amount. "Vae victis!" replied the other insolently, throwing his
* The Real Eichmann Trial, or The Incorrigible Victors
–    10    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---sword onto the weight tray of the scales and indicating by a gesture that brooked no reply that,
for having said too much too thoughtlessly, the Romans would have to pay this additional
weight of gold too.

In those times the only law was the unwritten law, creating only very simple
judicial situations.

"Between thine and mine" distinctions, not very fundamental on the
individual level, did not exist at all on the level of groups of people for whom property rights
were guaranteed only insofar as they could be preserved by force.

In consequence the principle
of war, which was a common occurrence, was never the subject of any discussion.

As for the
effects of war, the loser had to pay tribute to the conqueror not because he had become guilty of
some prejudicial misdeed which it would have been just for him to make good, but solely
because he was the loser.

The tribute itself was at the discretion of the victor and could range
from a sum in cash to pure and simple .annexation of the invaded territory, varied only by the
enslavement or extermination of the population.

The law of the jungle this came to be called later
and, because it was moderate in the sense that its terms never irremediably reduced men to the
habits of animals, this evaluation was, on the whole, coarse enough.

However, history seems to show that even given their victory especially the price they
generally made the losers pay for it, the victors have, so to speak, always had a bad conscience.

And not only the conquerors but the disinterested spectators also.

The chronicler who put the
Brennus story into legend and with a single phrase, which has deservedly become part of
history, laid down the martial customs of his times and thus the whole law for all wars for
centuries to come, clearly did not approve of the behaviour of his hero.And not only the conquerors but the disinterested spectators also.

The chronicler who put the
Brennus story into legend and with a single phrase, which has deservedly become part of
history, laid down the martial customs of his times and thus the whole law for all wars for
centuries to come, clearly did not approve of the behaviour of his hero.

Otherwise, legend for
legend, instead of [15] bringing in last minute Roman reinforcements which caused Brennus to
flee and leave his booty behind, he would certainly not have failed to conform to the literary
pattern of his times, and make a conqueror of his hero right to the end of the tale, which would
then have been a song of praise.

Although only an implied condemnation, which brings to mind
either the imminent or providential justice in which man successively or simultaneously believed
for so long, it most certainly bears only on the effects of war and not on its cause.

Nonetheless
it betrays a bad conscience and the need for a justice that is not armed.

And history seems to
show that it is after the event, in the effects of his acts, and not before in his spirit or conscience,
that man found the idea for that justice.

Since Brennus, man has made little progress in the direction of a good conscience: for the
use of victors after wars he has invented the principle of the just war, the basis of which is
historic law.

For before wars he has invented nothing that can prevent them with any certainty.

Historic Law is the title of ownership to a given piece of land for a people.

It is not
inscribed in a notary's archives but only in tradition, essentially religious in nature.

In the
earliest ages of humanity, after the Flood in which everybody except his own family was
drowned, the good father Noah, who had three sons, divided the whole earth between just two
of them at God's command.

Sem, the first, took the East.

Japhet, the second, took the West.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sem, the first, took the East. Japhet, the second, took the West. Chain, the third, was given nothing because, having seen his father drunk and naked, he was
not in a state of grace in the eyes of God and, therefore, belonged to the race of the cursed. The
unhappy man turned towards the South because there was nothing but and mountains in the
North. But that South land, which rapidly became the rich Land of Canaan because of the
industry of his sons, he occupied without right. When the descendants of Shem, to whom the
East had been allotted in the division, were pushed back by armed force, they did not know
where to settle. The God of their fathers suggested to them that, since it had been occupied
without right, the Land of Canaan was at their disposal, especially since the inhabitants were
cursed - doubly so for having taken another god. With His help they exterminated their cousins
in order to take their place. Thus the notion of a just war, the legacy of the Old Testament, was born in Christian
morals, based on the Law of divine jurisprudence, whose justification was the state of grace. "God's will!" or "For God and the King! " became the saying throughout Europe in the Middle
Ages. This law is called historic because the history of Noah is related in the Old Testament and
because, the Old Testament being an historic document, it follows that the events reported
therein are likewise historic. Deduction has never been more advantageous: Noah himself a
witness for history ... –    11    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Everything happens today as if all the people in the earth, [16] considering themselves
descendants of Noah, were continuing to dispose of his legacy by invoking the first division he
made of it, and by taking a stand on a kinship which has transformed from being family-based
to become nation-based.

Unfortunately, even if it were one day possible to agree about the
legitimacy of this categorisation of "nationality" it would never be possible to agree on the
allotment of territory to be made to each nation.

Unfortunately, too, there are peoples who do
not recognise themselves as descended from Noah, and who base historic law on other reasons.

So it is that Historical Law, from the point of view of the first occupant, recognised or not
by a God, is the fundamental reason for modern nationalism and, all things being
interdependent, it has given rise to another idea - patriotism, which throughout the ages has
evolved in the direction of a much more temporal and, at least in appearance, more consistent
judgement than the state of grace of divine jurisprudence.

Nationalism has attached to itself other
laws less rudimentary than Historic Law.

So much so that the idea of a just war can call to its
support a whole arsenal of sophisticated arguments which only broaden the field: country,
national interests, integrity, and independence, democracy, state policy, the right of self-
determination, international justice, civilisation, liberty, revolution, socialism etc., even to
philanthropy in the case of colonial wars.

And all this, integrated in a philosophic system,
pursues its murderous career in the minds and lives of men in the name of humanism.So much so that the idea of a just war can call to its
support a whole arsenal of sophisticated arguments which only broaden the field: country,
national interests, integrity, and independence, democracy, state policy, the right of self-
determination, international justice, civilisation, liberty, revolution, socialism etc., even to
philanthropy in the case of colonial wars.

And all this, integrated in a philosophic system,
pursues its murderous career in the minds and lives of men in the name of humanism.

In the end, in the name of no matter which of these myths, after every war justice always
belongs to the victor, and the guilty one is always the loser: the intellectual and moral
development of humanity has not yet reached the point where it is self-evident that by definition
the victor is not necessarily the one with reason, only the stronger, and that the relations which
should in justice necessarily exist between the judge and the party concerned cannot make an
exception of war.

By virtue of which it is hardly possible to demonstrate, without recourse to
Machiavelli, that manners and customs are essentially any different from those of Brennus, or
that the law of the jungle is definitely ended.

The two world wars having proved that the system was powerless to put right on the side
of the victors, even with all the arsenal of arguments and sophistry, Machiavelli was not just an
additional assistance, but the only recourse.

In 1919 at Versailles, no attempt was made to prove
the unilateral responsibility of Germany in the unleashing of hostilities: it was decreed and to
make the decree acceptable to the people and even the victors, who demanded an accounting,
they undertook to show, after the event, that during the war Germany had committed the most
abominable crimes.

Thus indirectly and all at once came justification for the war waged against
Germany, the victory and the odious clauses of the Treaty of Versailles which practically
condemned her to death.In 1919 at Versailles, no attempt was made to prove
the unilateral responsibility of Germany in the unleashing of hostilities: it was decreed and to
make the decree acceptable to the people and even the victors, who demanded an accounting,
they undertook to show, after the event, that during the war Germany had committed the most
abominable crimes.

Thus indirectly and all at once came justification for the war waged against
Germany, the victory and the odious clauses of the Treaty of Versailles which practically
condemned her to death.

[17]
Such is the origin and explanation of the gigantic campaign to manipulate public opinion
which flooded the world, fed by the celebrated Bryce Report, in which were gathered and, so
to speak, classified like samples, an enormous mass of the most unbelievable horrors and
atrocities (all fictitious, of course) which were brought to Germany's account.

But, less than
five years later, the Bryce Report was pulled to pieces thus destroying forever the reputation of
its author who, until then, had been a statesman, a journalist and a humanist, universally
esteemed for his intellectual integrity.

Homage must be paid here to the Englishman, Arthur
Ponsonby, whose book Falsehood in Wartime created a sensation at the time, and served as a
basis for the counter-campaign immediately undertaken by the Society for Documentary and
Critical Studies on the War to detoxify the evidence and re-establish historical truth, and to all
those scholars and artists courageously associated with this work.

Not for an instant did the victors even pause to acknowledge that this criticism was
validated by the inherent feebleness of their argument.

Without hesitating, they attributed it to
the fact that they had omitted to invest it with the authority of legality.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not for an instant did the victors even pause to acknowledge that this criticism was
validated by the inherent feebleness of their argument. Without hesitating, they attributed it to
the fact that they had omitted to invest it with the authority of legality. In 1945 they were still in
this frame of mind and, certain that there had only been this little error in their method, they
decided this time not to decree that Germany was unilaterally responsible for unleashing the
war, but, in order to lend the argument what it lacked in 1919, to make use of horrors and
–    12    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---atrocities for the legal proof of this guilt - Nuremberg.

As an additional precaution they did not
mince words over the horrors and atrocities, but gave the full dose: concentration camps, gas
chambers, six-million Jews etc., etc.

They took up where the Belgian baby with no hands left
off (which was, I think, the most that was dared in the Bryce Report).

You cannot stop
progress!

Twenty years later, in versions constantly repeated, elaborated upon and, above all,
augmented, all the insanities recorded at Nuremberg as so many incontestable truths are still
disseminated amongst the public, profusely and to order, through a whole literature as ethical as
the judges at Nuremberg, and financed from all over to accomplish this pathetic campaign*
Against this, even if it has already scored points or obtained appreciable results, the counter-
campaign of detoxification has not yet really managed to take shape.

The authority of legality?

Not even that - only control over the mass media.

The Second
World War did not provoke in Europe the considerable upheavals in the structure of society
brought about by the First, which had had a comparable influence on [18] American policy.

It
did not make a break with the past as the First had done.

While the First broke radically with an
evolution of the world in the direction of increasingly more liberal policies, the latter tended
towards regimes of which Stalin, Mussolini, Hitler, Franco and so many others have together
quite well defined the type.

The new element is that in the clan of the victors, the political team
which won the war has remained in power, with very few changes in personnel, is still in
power, and maintains the team of its choice within the clan of the victors, controlling
everywhere the means of subversion.

The dimensions of the crimes of this War being more frightening than those of the war of
1914 - and with good grounds!The new element is that in the clan of the victors, the political team
which won the war has remained in power, with very few changes in personnel, is still in
power, and maintains the team of its choice within the clan of the victors, controlling
everywhere the means of subversion.

The dimensions of the crimes of this War being more frightening than those of the war of
1914 - and with good grounds!

- every effort is made to hold off the hour when the people,
discovering the monstrous subterfuge of which they were and still are the victims, will surely
demand an accounting from them.

As far as the Second World War is concerned such is the drama of historical truth.

Happily, it is only that.

Historical truth no longer being determined by logic, only by the
imperatives of policies, it would take only a trivial incident - even something unconnected with it
- to suddenly modify the mutual interests of the victors, to shatter their solidarity, in order to set
the problem in its true context again and assure its triumph.

It is not impossible.

Suppose for
example - an extreme and probably entirely gratuitous hypothesis - that the United States
reverted to the policy of isolation which is in their tradition, perhaps the sense of objectivity
might be restored to them too, in which case, since they would not lose their position of
leadership in the world for all that, things would surely move very fast.

Now to apply the theory to the facts.Suppose for
example - an extreme and probably entirely gratuitous hypothesis - that the United States
reverted to the policy of isolation which is in their tradition, perhaps the sense of objectivity
might be restored to them too, in which case, since they would not lose their position of
leadership in the world for all that, things would surely move very fast.

Now to apply the theory to the facts.

The evidence was glaring; it was a question of a war
which was, in the beginning, merely a clash of purely national interests (those of Germany and
Russia associated with those of Poland and the litany of little artificial states created haphazardly
by the Treaty of Versailles) degenerating into a European war (with the intervention of Britain
and France and the spectacular shift of Russia) and then into a world war when the United
States entered the lists (Lend-Lease law), and when Japan (Pearl Harbor) refused to submit to a
policy, inherited from the experience of colonialism, which the United States intended to impose
on her.

This evidence was glaringly obvious even to the victors themselves and not just honest
men.

Two intellectual attitudes were possible: 1) either the problem presented itself as a chain of
events associated with a chain of responsibilities; in that case, the good old logic of Aristotle
(which the present infatuation with Hegelian-Marxian dialectic has not yet torn to pieces) pointed
out that only the initial responsibility counted - in this case the Treaty of Versailles; or, 2) the
facts could not be rationally linked together.

Thus it was only a question of a succession of
events related fortuitously by chance and, in this case, each one carried its particular
responsibilities.

So [19] it was legitimate to maintain that Britain's and France's declaration of
* If it was willingly admitted that responsibilities for wars could be determined by their cause, it was only one of the pernicious
effects of the logic of our fathers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus it was only a question of a succession of
events related fortuitously by chance and, in this case, each one carried its particular
responsibilities. So [19] it was legitimate to maintain that Britain's and France's declaration of
* If it was willingly admitted that responsibilities for wars could be determined by their cause, it was only one of the pernicious
effects of the logic of our fathers. In the modern logic of the victors those responsibilities are defined by the consequences invented for
them and laid to the conscience of the losers. –    13    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---War on Germany (rather incoherent since it spared Russia against whom the same complaint
could be made as against Germany) bore, without any reasons other than those relative to the
gratuitous hypothesis, the responsibility for transforming a war of national interests into a war
of European concern and that, in conjunction with the imperialist policy of the United States
towards Japan, the 'Lend-Lease' law carried the responsibility for its transformation into a
world war.

Aggravation - it was also just as legitimate to maintain that not only had Britain,
France and the United States made the Second World War inevitable (rejection of the
compromise peace by Britain and France after the fall of Poland, and by Britain after the fall of
France) but, even more, that all three together had prolonged it by torpedoing, through the
Casablanca Declaration (January, 1943 - demand for Germany's unconditional surrender) the
movement in favour of peace which originated in Germany at the beginning of 1942, on the
basis of the status quo ante (Schellenberg Memoirs, Paris, 1957), and which thereafter had
developed there.

Neither one nor the other of these two attitudes could be adopted by the victors.

It goes
without saying that the latter condemned them outright, from the moment of Britain's and
France's declaration of war on Germany, and for everything that followed.

The former implied
a condemnation of the Treaty of Versailles, the violation of which they brandished as the
greatest of all their grievances against Germany.

Quite a poem, the Treaty of Versailles.

America
had refused to ratify it; Russia, who took no part in its formulation, had until 1934 condemned it
as an act of banditry, and again, from August, 1939 on; Britain had suggested a revision after
1923 and, together with Germany, had even partially achieved it in 1935.

France alone remained
stubborn and it was no small pleasure for her to see manifested, once again, a unanimity.America
had refused to ratify it; Russia, who took no part in its formulation, had until 1934 condemned it
as an act of banditry, and again, from August, 1939 on; Britain had suggested a revision after
1923 and, together with Germany, had even partially achieved it in 1935.

France alone remained
stubborn and it was no small pleasure for her to see manifested, once again, a unanimity.

around her point of view, whose least advantage was that it carried with it implicit and total
absolution for the most serious of all the violations of this treaty: namely, her systematic refusal
to apply the disarmament clause.

At the other end of Europe pleasure became jubilation because,
with the Treaty of Versailles condemned, the right of self-determination of peoples was
recognised and it meant the final blow to Pan-Slavism which Bolshevism, as in the times of the
Tsars but now under the mark of the revolution, had made the keystone of all the foreign policy
of Russia.

At Yalta and other places it was decided that Russia had given proof that she had returned
to the fold of the concert of the Nations, and the attitude adopted, without letting its bastard
character appear, was the following: the world war was envisaged in the first instance as being a
rational chain of events, each evolving from the preceding, the initial responsibility being fixed
[20] not on the origin, that is the Treaty of Versailles, but arbitrarily as the events progressed by
using an argument according to which the one responsible for any war was the one who,
breaking off negotiations aimed at a compromise, set his armies on the march.

For twenty long
years, from 1919 to 1939, endless discussions attempting to define the aggressor were carried
on without success, and there, in a trice, produced on paper without too much effort was just
the right formula.

It was as simple as that.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For twenty long
years, from 1919 to 1939, endless discussions attempting to define the aggressor were carried
on without success, and there, in a trice, produced on paper without too much effort was just
the right formula. It was as simple as that. I must admit that, with both conditions united in one
person - the rupture of negotiations and the marching order to the armies - it made a serious
argument. Unhappily in 1939, the one who had broken of negotiations was not the first to set
his armies on the march. In a remarkable book, Der erzwungene Krieg (The forced war)
(Tübingen, 1962), the American historian David L. Hoggan, supported with documents and
testimonies, has indisputably established that it was Poland, as the docile instrument of Britain,
France and Rooseveltian America, who had broken off negotiations, in order to present
Germany with the Hobson's Choice of putting her armies in the field. In a similar way, Poland
had put her own armies into position, which reveals sufficient about her intentions and those of
her inspirers to be presented as supplementary, though superfluous, justification to David L. Hoggan's argument. To be sure, the victors were not unaware of this aspect of things since they had planned it
themselves. And they had only the less confidence in the solidity of the argument. Then again,
among all the arguments in their philosophical arsenal, there was not one which, even resorting
to sophism and begging the question, could not be turned against one of them, often several of
them, sometimes all of them, and all together against Russia. So, having fallen upon the horrors
–    14    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---and atrocities, they had barely had time to set the mechanism of the operation in motion before
they perceived that, of all those things which could be charged against Germany, there was not
one on which Germany could not hold up a comparable charge against them.

Gas chambers?

Perhaps, but the proof is far, very far, from being established.

With the exception of one, in all
cases the opposite is proved.

In the one remaining case, contrary proof has not been made
because it is a question of a camp (Auschwitz-Birkenau, the very one charged with the greatest
number of the worst crimes) located on the other side of the Iron Curtain where nothing can be
verified, and where the fabrication of false documents is raised to the level of an institution.

Whereas atrocities of a comparable kind - aerial bombardments with the phosphorus bomb of
the civilian populations of Dresden, Leipzig, Hamburg etc., which in a quarter of an hour in the
middle of the night turned 200,000, 300,000 or 500,000 people into human torches - were,
alas, clearly proved, and that even in 1945 (without counting Hiroshima!).

Worse than an impasse - a trap.

The evidence had to be admitted.

No sophist, by no
matter what dialectic trick, could [21] find justice in the victors' conception of it.

Machiavelli
himself would have failed!

There was only one way: the subversion of public opinion.

But the
situation was so delicate that, from the very beginning, it was necessary to mobilise every
instrument controlling information to insure against any possibility of failure.

And so coercive
measures to silence honest people became part of the law.

So infamous were they that, even to
distant posterity, nothing will be able to cleanse the conscience of those who introduced them.

Two new offences, relative to criminal law, were invented: 1) sympathy for Nazism or
Fascism, and 2) anti-Semitism.So infamous were they that, even to
distant posterity, nothing will be able to cleanse the conscience of those who introduced them.

Two new offences, relative to criminal law, were invented: 1) sympathy for Nazism or
Fascism, and 2) anti-Semitism.

After that there was no longer any possibility of saying or
writing anything at all on the War which did not conform to the official line, without falling
under one or the other of these indictments - or more often both - that is to say, not without
being automatically sentenced with very heavy fines or prison, coupled with the loss of civil
rights, which deprived one of the means of subsistence.

Temerity being the ransom of honesty,
some eminent intellectuals took the risk nevertheless, and there were many such cases.

But to prohibit the search for and publication of the truth merely by taking such Draconian
measures would be ineffectual without additional sanctions to prevent, without any chance of a
loop-hole, the action coming to light in the natural play of the traditional mechanisms of the
administration of justice.

Therefore a special law was made.

At any rate one was needed because
international law was without any provisions for even initiating a trial.

Furthermore, even with
the law elaborated, it still could not be applied to the war just ended, the principle of the
nonretroactivity of law forbidding it formally and explicitly.

There was no wavering in the face
of this difficulty.

Coldly it was decided that the 2,000 year old principle of the nonretroactivity
of laws was not applicable to this war.

As for the truth, the law prescribed that the prosecution
could dispense with judicial proof of the materiality of the facts of the accusation, every time
they became a matter of public knowledge.

The number of facts admitted as incontestably of
common knowledge, because they could not be proved, is incalculable.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As for the truth, the law prescribed that the prosecution
could dispense with judicial proof of the materiality of the facts of the accusation, every time
they became a matter of public knowledge. The number of facts admitted as incontestably of
common knowledge, because they could not be proved, is incalculable. And to seal any crack
through which the truth might escape, a whole list of arguments was drawn up which the
Defence, the accused and their witnesses did not have the right to make use of. This precaution
was unnecessary at least in the instance of the witnesses. They were all either themselves
accused and in prison, or likely to be, and it is easy to understand that their testimonies were
inspired, in the first case, by the anxiety not to aggravate their situation and if possible to
alleviate it, and in the second case, by the concern not to put themselves in a worse position. A
psychological service was attached to the Tribunal under the direction of Professor Gustave
Gilbert of Long Island, whose task it was to remind those among the witnesses [22] who did
not seem to be sufficiently inspired of that concern. He obtained remarkable results by every
possible means. With these steps taken and nothing overlooked, everything was set; and with public
opinion needing a scapegoat, as after all collective disasters, the operation could not fail to
succeed. For the moment at least. The psychological atmosphere created was dreadful. It had
not been necessary to protect the Tribunal against the suspicion which its sentence might arouse;
it was already protected by the traditional laws and jurisprudence through contempt of court, a
–    15    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---charge which could be brought against those who might be tempted to summon them before
public opinion.

I have the soul neither of an apostle, nor of a hero, nor of a potential martyr.

I am not
daring by nature.

If I have performed any acts of courage which have attracted attention, it was
only in taking calculated risks of such a kind that I could very easily bear the possible
consequences.

And if once I did expose myself in such a way that for sixteen months every
morning on waking, I was faced with the thought that there was every reason why I should not
be alive in the evening, it was due to a simple miscalculation of the actual possibilities offered in
the combination of circumstances in which I had acted.

Fear of death?

More serious and more
terrible than that.

I was convinced that I had acted like a man totally deprived of intelligence and
good sense.

Taught by experience, at no price did I want to expose myself to an error, to be
sure of lighter consequence, but just as serious in that it would be of the same kind.

Refusal to
do one's duty?

Certainly not, just a rejection of sacrifice.

In this state of mind, if duty demanded
that I object to the operation and speak up, it also commanded me to act more intelligently this
time than I had against Nazism during the German occupation.

My first concern, therefore, was
to evolve a strategy which would save me from finding myself again in the role of Don Quixote
battling against the windmills.

I proceeded by elimination.

To argue over the responsibilities for the war was not only
dangerous, it was hopeless.

On the one hand, the perspective necessary to the historian did not
exist; on the other, public opinion, conditioned by subversion, would not have tolerated it.

Today we are up against the second of these.On the one hand, the perspective necessary to the historian did not
exist; on the other, public opinion, conditioned by subversion, would not have tolerated it.

Today we are up against the second of these.

Until we have indisputably established in the eyes
of public opinion that the flood of calumnies which the victors have laid on the conscience of the
defeated is only the fruit of a deranged imagination, at the service of the most absolute
dishonesty, it will not be possible for us to fix its attention on the true facts of the
responsibilities.

I speak only of public opinion because, in the eyes of all objective people,
proof has now indisputably been made, and it remains only to broaden the field of objectivity.

Having discarded as hopeless the question of the official line on the responsibilities, only
the Ponsonby method remained.

And it was necessary to be very prudent.

I knew that I could
not escape [23] being brought up before some court, but I also knew that to achieve anything
efficacious, I must at all costs avoid being found guilty.

And there were three offences with
which I must never allow the judges to charge me: defence of Nazism or Fascism; anti-
Semitism; and contempt of court, mentioned above, without counting a fourth which has always
existed in ordinary law - injury and defamation of character of those I brought up.

Defence of Nazism or Fascism, that was easy.

A long past proved that I was neither one
nor the other.

I had just come out of a concentration camp into which I had been thrown for that
very reason, and I had just been decorated twice as an official recognition, without myself
having taken the slightest step to obtain these two distinctions.

Anti-Semitism, that was a little more difficult.

Everything that did not tally strictly with the
postulations of the Jewish documentation centres, which had sprung up and were to be found
almost everywhere, was considered relevant to this offence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Anti-Semitism, that was a little more difficult. Everything that did not tally strictly with the
postulations of the Jewish documentation centres, which had sprung up and were to be found
almost everywhere, was considered relevant to this offence. And if I was not actually anti-
Semitic, I was nevertheless in trouble with the international Zionist movement for having always
maintained that to claim the right to settle sixteen to seventeen million people on the twenty to
thirty odd square kilometres of Palestine territory was economic idiocy, apart from the fact that
the law of history which was the basis of reference for the project, as demonstrated by Renan,
was quite another Issue in the legal sense. They were waiting around the corner for me. I
evaded their move by deciding not to bring up explicitly any of the arguments originating in the
Jewish documentation centres. At the time, moreover, the Nuremberg trial was playing the
Zionist game much better than any Israeli writings, or they themselves, could have done. Those
centres and their attachés were very discreet - so discreet that they presented little to take hold of. It was only later, about 1951-52, that they entered the fray and took the lead in counteracting the
emergence of historical truth, and I think I was no stranger to that kind of reaction. As for contempt of court, there was no problem. One simply brought up the Nuremberg
judges without implicating them, that is, without naming them. It was quite easy. One attacked
only those witnesses on whom the judges had based their opinion. And here I was in my own
–    16    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---field, the study of the witness and his testimony being, in a way, part of my profession.

I knew
that if the witness for the defence is almost always a decent sort, he who makes an accusation is
almost always a bad character - only concerned with painting things black in order to get a
condemnation, a shameless liar, and who could be exposed in flagrante dilecto at every point
of his testimony.

In sum, a sadist.

As an -extra precaution, I brought up the former only
indirectly, and then only by making use of that whole body of literature which so embroidered
the testimony that its use will be the shame of our century.

[24]
It was only the offence of injury and defamation against which I was not protected, no
matter what I did.

But since injury and defamation are not in my nature, I could only think of
protecting myself in one way: to write nothing I was not in a position to prove, so that if I were
brought up before any court I could put a stop to those who incriminated me, and the judges.

Naturally, it would never occur to me to tell a falsehood.

But there are two kinds of truth: those
which can be proved, and those which cannot.

The number of the latter was considerable, truths
for which proof did exist, but not in my hands and which could only be found in places
impossible to reach; and, at the same time, it was impossible to reveal where the proof could be
found for fear of exposing it to destruction.

I had to remain silent for both reasons.

May future
historians have no fears; I have left plenty of meat for them!

A final precaution which the moral climate in which we lived seemed to impose on me -
the homoeopathic dose, to which I have referred.

After three years of reflection and research, Le
Mensonge d'Ulysse (Ulysses' Fable) was conceived on the lines of a parallel between the
unanimous testimony of all the other witnesses on their experience in German concentration
camps, and my own experience for sixteen months.A final precaution which the moral climate in which we lived seemed to impose on me -
the homoeopathic dose, to which I have referred.

After three years of reflection and research, Le
Mensonge d'Ulysse (Ulysses' Fable) was conceived on the lines of a parallel between the
unanimous testimony of all the other witnesses on their experience in German concentration
camps, and my own experience for sixteen months.

I had thought that there was no better
method than to reconstruct these camps in their true aspect, in that it permitted me not only to
bring to light everything about which they had maintained a strange silence, but in addition, with
regard to the administration of justice, to catch them in the act of lying.

Before making it public,
I submitted the manuscript to a jurist among my friends, of world repute in matters of freedom
of speech, asking him to point out to me everything that could warrant a judgement of injury and
defamation in case of a lawsuit.

He only had to make a few corrections, on form only, here and
there a word of expression easily replaced by an inoffensive synonym.

Then he had me show
him legal proof of all that I claimed.

I was able to do this impeccably.

Thus the idea of homoeopathic medicine came to me, of publishing the two parts
separately.

The first, which narrated only my personal experience and implicated no one, and
which consequently gave no pretext for any legal involvement whatsoever, could not fail to
provide a favourable climate for the second.

If need arose, I would always be able to bring the
two parts together into a single volume under the title I had chosen.

Thus, I published this first
part with the innocuous title, Passage de la Ligne (1949) (Over the Line of Demarcation).

The idea turned out to be a good one.

On the whole, the reception was favourable and
encouraging.

There was, of course, some gnashing of teeth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the whole, the reception was favourable and
encouraging. There was, of course, some gnashing of teeth. On the part of the Communists, for
example, whom I had handled pretty roughly, but, incredible as it may seem, the crime of anti-
Communism had not (yet) been provided for. [25]
I waited for this first part to produce its effect - two years, during which time I published
the second, with the true title. In court I easily proved my case; I was of course acquitted. But
the adversary did not consider himself beaten. On appeal he managed, thanks to complicity on
the spot, to have me sentenced with a heavy fine and with damages, with a suspended jail
sentence, and an order to destroy the book. In the third and last suit I won the case, as was
foreseen. On the 24th day of May, after four years of proceedings, all the papers published the
final judgement, summed up for Agence France-Presse:
"The criminal division of the Supreme Court of Appeal set aside the judgement of the Court of
Lyon which had sentenced, for injury and defamation, the 2nd of November, 1951, M. Rassinier, author
of the book Le Mensonge d'Ulysse, M. Paraz, author of the preface, and editor of the work, to
imprisonment and fines, and to pay damages to the National Federation of Deportees and Resistants. –    17    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"The Supreme Court objected to the sentence:
"1.

On the penal level for having upheld crimes of injury and defamation, when the criticisms of
patriots in the book are, to be sure, unfair and malevolent, but are of a general character and addressed to
no one in particular.

"2.

On the civil level, for having declared admissible the action of the F.N.D.R., when this
organisation has not been directly referred to in the book, and not one of its members has been attacked
personally."
So I had injured and defamed no one.

In declaring that, the Supreme Court at the same
time declared that all that I had said was recognised to be true, since the crime of injury and
defamation could not be established except by proof to the contrary.

The least to be deduced
from this sentence was that with all the material available to it, the prosecution could not provide
this proof.

It was correctly said that my criticism was "unfair and malevolent" towards the
patriots, but what criticism is not, to the one under attack?

The nature of this appreciation is
indeed so subjective that the law has never made it a crime.

The point was won.

Now at last a bit of historical truth, not negligible although unrelated
to war responsibility, was itself found to be covered, paradoxically, although in irreducible
contradiction to the truths of Nuremberg, by the authority of the Courts, and it could be made
use of without risk in all the public proceedings.

A breach was made in the wall, and through
this breach one could pass to arrive at other truths.

I did not fail to, and since then many others
have followed after me.

Today there is hardly any risk in contesting, even in their smallest
detail, all the arguments of the victors on the unilateral guilt of Germany.

But in France, in the
year in which Le Mensonge d'Ulysse appeared, four or five rash people, who had not felt it
necessary to take as many precautions as I did in entering the fray, were pitilessly and [26]
harshly sentenced.Today there is hardly any risk in contesting, even in their smallest
detail, all the arguments of the victors on the unilateral guilt of Germany.

But in France, in the
year in which Le Mensonge d'Ulysse appeared, four or five rash people, who had not felt it
necessary to take as many precautions as I did in entering the fray, were pitilessly and [26]
harshly sentenced.

Among them, Maurice Bardèche (Nuremberg ou la Terre Promise,
Nuremberg or the promised land) and Henri Fabre (Le 15 août et la Libération de Tulle, The
15th of August, and the Liberation of Tulle).

Such cases are countless within Germany itself.

I will spare the reader the abominable calumnious campaign in the European press of
which I have since been the victim, and which the judgement of the Supreme Court did not cut
short.

It was the Socialist Party which supplied the theme: in 1951, without waiting for the
outcome of the case investigated, and without even considering the facts of the case.

I was
thrust out of the bosom of the party on the pretext, true enough, that what I was saying made
light of what Nazi or Fascist strength remained in Europe.

As if the evolution of modern
societies in the direction of authoritarian forms, for 50 years observable all over the world, did
not stem from the fact that every time they needed to save face the democratic forces have not
drawn back in the face of the shameless lie.

As if Hitler had not been the end result of the great
lie of Versailles, and as if the astonishing progress of Bolshevism since 1945 was not the result
of the great lie of Nuremberg.

The argument of the Socialist Party against me spread like a drop of oil.

Progressively I
became a camouflaged collaborator, then a neo-Nazi, then a member of the governing board of
the neoNazi Internationale.

It was even " taken up by one of the leading contemporary
Philosophers, M.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Progressively I
became a camouflaged collaborator, then a neo-Nazi, then a member of the governing board of
the neoNazi Internationale. It was even " taken up by one of the leading contemporary
Philosophers, M. Merlau-Ponty, Professor at the Collège de France, who wrote to me, the 24th
of May 1951:
"Historians will have to ask themselves these questions. But in reality, this manner of examining
testimonies results in throwing suspicion on them, as if they lacked an accuracy that could justifiably be
expected of them. And since at the present time the tendency is rather to forget the German camps, this
unreasonable demand for historical truth positively encourages the falsification, and massive it is, which
consists in admitting broadly that Nazism is a fable. "
This text gives the measure of the intellectual depths to which we had sunk. I had good reasons for not being too disturbed. Even before he had the proof, after
September 1914, the already non-conformist peasant of the French eastern frontier who was my
worthy father had never believed that German soldiers cut off the hands of Belgian children. And he had made it his business to make the truth known. For years he was called an agent of
–    18    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Kaiser, "Boche", and "Spike Helmet".

In short, I was a chip off the old block.

And I told
myself that time, which had worked for him, would not fail to work for me.

To go into detail on the complete nonsense grafted onto the principal argument, which for
the four years of the proceedings the entire French press echoed every week or two to keep
public opinion on the alert, would be to abuse the English-speaking [27] reader.

It will suffice to
give just an idea of it by citing three particularly significent examples.

Six months after it had
appeared, the title of Le Mensonge d'Ulysse became La Légende des camps de concentration.

And, in summarising the contents, some hard-up journalist wrote, in the Progrès de Lyon, the
following, which was reproduced by almost all of his confrères of the Paris press:
"The brutality, a legend!

the crematoria, a legend!

Electrified wire enclosures, a legend!

Death in
lots of ten, a legend!"
Finally, in a paper of the deportees, M.

Jean Kréher, attorney for the prosecution, came to
the rescue with what seemed to him to come right from the heart of my study, and which was
also abundantly reproduced:
"So, if we were gorged with the sausages and first class margarine, if everything was foreseen to
take care of us, and provide us with the necessary distractions, if the crematorium is an institution required
by hygiene, if the gas chamber is a myth, if, in a word, the SS were full of consideration for us, what is
there to complain of?"
Decidedly, not all the falsifiers in the world met at Nuremberg.

I had, without any
particular merit, the wisdom never to reply to attacks against me.

On the one hand, I had been
taught that silence expresses the deepest contempt, on the other, a sense of dignity kept me from
stooping to such low polemics.

I admit that in this attitude I also took tactics into account.On the one hand, I had been
taught that silence expresses the deepest contempt, on the other, a sense of dignity kept me from
stooping to such low polemics.

I admit that in this attitude I also took tactics into account.

I
wanted to strike only heavy blows, and, to be effective, I had to stick to my method, which,
until then, consisted in striking only under favourable circumstances.

To wait for opportunities?

Yes, but the one quality essential to a historian is never to be in a hurry.

In 1960, a series of
lectures which I gave in Germany, in intellectual circles, so stirred up public opinion that one of
the opportunities was provided - Ulysse trahi par les siens (Ulysses betrayed by his fellow
men, published in Germany with the title, Was nun Odysseus?).

And in 1960 the scandalous
arrest of Eichmann in Argentina, the trial given him in Jerusalem, the intensive propaganda to
support the whole affair, etc., furnished me, finally, with the opportunity I had been so long
waiting for, to present the problem as a whole, Le Véritable Procès Eichmann ou les
Vainqueurs incorrigibles (The real Eichmann trial, or the incorrigible victors) (1962).

Whether the atmosphere in Britain and America is as favourable to the work as it was in
Europe is the question, and to this question, and the reactions it arouses - or does not arouse!

-
this book is the answer.

"The capitalist régime," Jean Jaurès once said, "carries war within itself, as a passing
cloud carries the storm," and this metaphor, of which history offers few so concise, striking and
substantial, has echoed around the world.

Historians of the school to which I belong, who have
made it theirs, will not fail to point out to me that it is the starting point for all studies of the [28]
problems of war and peace.

One of them once said to me, "You are surely right.

Your general
theme is surely indisputable in its whole, if not in all its details.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of them once said to me, "You are surely right. Your general
theme is surely indisputable in its whole, if not in all its details. But with regard to the basic
problem, that of placing the deep-seated causes of the war of 1939-1945 within the framework
of the fundamental principles of the capitalist regime, and the function of the institutions which
led us into it, your theme is only on a minor matter, and you make two errors. The first is, that
in our way of studying the phenomena of war and peace, it is not the Treaty of Versailles which
is the primary cause of that war, but the capitalist system which made the Treaty of Versailles
what it was. The second is that everyone knows that war, which is itself a horror and atrocity -
the greatest and most unspeakable of all - involves in its turn a succession of horrors and
atrocities. So it is not necessary to make an exact count of them, with which to charge each side
of the fighting line. That is not the problem."
–    19    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---No indeed!

that is not the problem, and that is just what I maintain.

Moreover, that is why
the lesson of examples seems to me sounder than that of precepts, that is why all my efforts tend
to draw a parallel between that which should be discussed (the Treaty of Versailles), which
would surely lead to a basic study of the problem, and that which is discussed (horrors and
atrocities), and the methods used in discussing them.

On the other hand, there is no doubt that
as long as this atmosphere, poisoned by the horrors and atrocities, is not cleansed, there will be
no possibility of turning the attention of public opinion toward the basic problem.

For example,
to a book so remarkable as Der erzwungene Krieg by David L.

Hoggan, which incontestably
sheds the most light of all that has until now been published on the war of 1939-1945, for any
student of this problem.

Furthermore, if the air is not cleared, if some day it is ever admitted that
the basic problem cannot ever be dealt with, it is not only their horses the Cossacks will water at
the Rhine, as an old European proverb puts it (which also adds that on that day the stone eyes of
St.

Odile of Hohenbourg (Alsace) will weep), but their tanks which they will fill on the spot in
the Sahara.

For on that day we will have to admit that there is no possibility of integrating
Germany into Europe, since the only obstacle to her integration is precisely the campaign
directed against her on the theme of the horrors and atrocities for which she is supposedly, and
congenitally, forever destined to make herself guilty.

However, a Europe without Germany will
be, within a short time, not only a Slavic Europe, but a Bolshevised Europe, with a promise of
the Bolshevisation of the whole of North Africa, to begin with.

It is the problem of western civilisation which is thus posed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, a Europe without Germany will
be, within a short time, not only a Slavic Europe, but a Bolshevised Europe, with a promise of
the Bolshevisation of the whole of North Africa, to begin with. It is the problem of western civilisation which is thus posed. I ask to be excused by the
Americans if I think that the terms of the problem depend only on them, because, the leadership
of the free world having fallen to them, the intellectual orientation of that world today depends
upon their reactions. [29]
I had thought to present this collective study in the order in which circumstances
compelled me to offer it in successive stages to European opinion. Then, as I advanced with the
work thus conceived, I realised that, although not having to change a word in earlier writings of
10 or 15 years ago, at every step I had to take into account the new discoveries made by
historians during this period, and to integrate them. To avoid the loose and confused tone which
would have been unavoidable if I had pursued this track, I preferred to make a general revision,
and revert to the classic method of the historians: first the theme, then the references. The theme includes the two first parts: the Treaty of Versailles and the Nuremberg Trial. The two other parts are devoted to the references: my personal experience and the experience of
others, or a study of concentration camp literature, together with a complementary study of the
conclusions drawn from them by those fascinated by the subject but totally without experience. Is it long? Yes, it represents fifteen years of work. For the average Briton, will it be tedious or disagreeable? Without any doubt, but I neither
write nor speak for the average Briton: I am not a candidate for the Prime Ministership! P.R. Paris, July 1963
–    20    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[30]
Chapter I
FROM STALINGRAD TO NUREMBERG
Spring 1942.

The focus is on the resumption of the general offensive which has been
stopped just outside Moscow since December.

Everything has been thought out in minute detail.

It does not occur to Hitler and his General Staff that it could be otherwise - this time…
The disposition of the forces for a renewal of the attack, and the overall plan of the
operations were, in fact, well thought out.

A little audacious, if not reckless, indeed ambitious,
in the usual manner of Hitler.

But has not Hitler's way been tested and proved?

But they were stopped in front of Moscow.

Far from holding him accountable, informed
circles put the responsibility on Mussolini's anarchistic and unexpected intervention in Greece.

The disorderly flight of his army, at the last moment, rashly exposed the right flank, in its initial
disposition, and kept the German armies busy for a month repairing the damages, thus delaying
getting the operation underway, which permitted the Russian winter to overtake Guderian's
panzers.

As for uninformed circles, that is, the people, they were not aware of any setback; to
them, at the most, it was just some hitch, not disturbing or serious.

It would take a great deal
more than that to impair Hitler's popularity and the confidence he inspired.

The smarting
misfortune of the Munich putsch of 1923 did not, and he marked out the twenty years since that
time with an uninterrupted series of brilliant and often spectacular victories.

Unconquered, he
was invincible, no matter what he undertook.

In the first instance, the German armies were to take their position along the Murmansk-
Moscow-Stalingrad-Astrakhan line.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unconquered, he
was invincible, no matter what he undertook. In the first instance, the German armies were to take their position along the Murmansk-
Moscow-Stalingrad-Astrakhan line. Once the Russian armies were without provisions, matériel,
foods, medicine, furnished them by the Allies via Murmansk, and especially up the Volga via
Iran and the Caspian Sea,1 at the same time without their oil supply from the Caucasus, their
front driven back, and their defensive system disorganised, they would have no other recourse
than to break up their units, no other hope than to try to reform at the Urals, their last, and the
nearest, strategic line of withdrawal, and also the last vital Centre of Russia. But the General
Staff of the German armed forces (O.K.W. = Oberkommando der Wehrmacht) planned from
the beginning to frustrate that possibility. Guderian's armoured forces were to be at the Urals
before the Russians could get there. Thrown back on Siberia, her army and equipment captured,
with or without capitulation, Russia would be conquered and disabled. [31]
The breakdown was expected to take place at Stalingrad, key to the Caspian, and hinge of
the Russian formations. If the peace proposals, which would be made again to the West, met
1. The British and the Russians had occupied Iran to make sure of a Provisioning route to Russia via the Arabian Gulf, and they
had occupied it in violation of the same legal Principles which they so often blamed Germany for violating. –    21    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---with the same rejection as those of July 1940 to England, Stalingrad would become the base of
operations.

In the second instance, the aim would be to join the armies engaged in Russia with those
operating in Africa under the command of Marshal Rommel, at Basra on the Arabian Gulf.2
However, Hitler hoped it would not be necessary to go as far as Basra to make his victory
decisive and permanent.

With Russia crushed, Britain, in order to avoid the loss of the Middle
East and Egypt (which would mean the collapse of the Commonwealth, and which would
reduce her to the minor role of being a bridge-head for America), would give in, and just as
surely in that case, it would be unthinkable that America would remain determined to continue
the war.

German troops at the Urals and at Basra would mean, of course, removal of the last
hesitations of Spain and France, and then North Africa.

Economically speaking it would mean
an enormous mass of 700 million people, having at their disposal but under German control,
more than half the riches of the world, the surplus finding an outlet in Africa, and especially in
an Asia conquered (and protected from the Americans) by Japan.

Militarily speaking, it would
mean 700 million people, steel clad, solidly entrenched behind an efflorescence of Atlantic Walls
and Siegfried Lines of all kinds, an impregnable fortress, and up to atomic standards, against
which the Anglo-Saxons' most powerful assault waves would only break up or die of
exhaustion.

In other words, world leadership.

But even if Britain did remain stubborn over
everything, America, surely, would not follow her in such folly.

Such was Hitler's calculation.

Audacious, reckless or ambitious, and only conditional.

The crushing of Russia would put an end to the war, and apparently it lay within his power.

Apparently…
There was nothing classical about German tactics.The crushing of Russia would put an end to the war, and apparently it lay within his power.

Apparently…
There was nothing classical about German tactics.

The merit of Hitler, a strategist on
occasion, lay in his having understood that given the excessive length of the fronts, which is
characteristic of modern wars and the plague of general staffs, it was not possible to conceive of
an offensive as a combination of movements harmoniously developed around a Centre and two
flanks, the tradition in classical strategy.

On a 2,000 kilometre front, like the one which served
as a line of departure (assembly position) for the invasion of Russia in 1941, the three segments
of classical strategy were, at 1,000 kilometre intervals, obviously too widely separated [32] to
work together or alternatively.

To divide this front up into three or four independent sections,
with the mission to advance in successive rushes and realignments, in the purest traditions of the
art, was incompatible with those requisites of the Blitzkrieg imposed by the time factor, which
Hitler knew were playing against him, economically speaking.

Therefore, he formed an
unbroken line of bases, firmly anchored, from which to send out sudden sorties of armoured
columns, to drive a wedge into the enemy formation, then to regroup at a depth of 200
kilometres or more behind them.

At the same time, this enemy was to be frontally attacked by
assault infantry, and pounded by Luftwaffe dive bombers.

The results were extraordinary, not only in Poland and France, where the front lines were
relatively short, but also in Russia.

The German armies arrived before Moscow, having
averaged an advance of about 1,000 kilometres in six months along the entire extent of this
immense front, and they had amassed two million Russian prisoners, nine thousand tanks,
seventeen thousand guns.

As for the Russian air force, thanks to the effects of surprise, several
thousands of their machines had been destroyed on the.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The German armies arrived before Moscow, having
averaged an advance of about 1,000 kilometres in six months along the entire extent of this
immense front, and they had amassed two million Russian prisoners, nine thousand tanks,
seventeen thousand guns. As for the Russian air force, thanks to the effects of surprise, several
thousands of their machines had been destroyed on the. ground during the first day in massive
bombardments by the Luftwaffe. Russia's immeasurable resources in men and equipment were known. But that she was
able to recover herself after such a disaster astonished military experts throughout the world. Always she pulled herself together, and always it had to be begun again. From Astrakhan to Murmansk it is 2,700 kilometres as the crow flies. Along the ground it
is nearly 3,500 kilometres. Hitler knew that to determine on that objective meant extending by
about 1,500 kilometres a front which was already 2,000 kilometres long, and that the main
2. In Hitler, Seigneur de la Guerre (Hitler, War Lord) (Paris, chez Payot, pp. 86--87), General Halder, former Chief of Staff of
the German Army, attributes this operation Plan to Goering, and ridicules it. –    22    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---question was one of military strength.

He resolved the problem by deciding to make use of
prisoners of war and civilians in occupied countries, in the war industry, in order to release to
the front as many Germans as possible who were in reserved occupations.

To execute this
decision, Speer was named Minister for Armaments and Munitions in February, and.

at his
suggestion, Sauckel was made General Plenipotentiary for Man Power on March 21st.

Here there was a little difficulty to overcome in the matter of international law.

The
Geneva and Hague Conventions prohibited the use of such labour in war industries and in the
armed forces.

The articles of the Geneva and Hague Conventions, to which the Prosecutors and Judges
at Nuremberg were to refer so often, are, especially those of the Hague, fairly little known.

Perhaps it will be useful to give the reader an outline of what, except for this provision and
those related to guerilla warfare, these covenants embrace, and which I think can be summarised
as follows:
A.

On the initiative of Russia and the United States, who wanted to settle the question of
the limitation of ground and naval [33] armaments, and the question of the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, international conferences took place at The Hague in 1899 (May 18th to
July 29th), and in 1907 (June 15th to October 18th).

B.

At the first conference (on the initiative of Nicholas II) there were represented all the
countries of Europe, a few states of the Americas, and of Asia, twenty-seven in all.

And the
following conventions were adopted:
a) on the laws and practices of war on land, b) on adapting the Geneva principles of
August 22nd, 1864, to maritime warfare; on the peaceful settlement of international disputes.At the first conference (on the initiative of Nicholas II) there were represented all the
countries of Europe, a few states of the Americas, and of Asia, twenty-seven in all.

And the
following conventions were adopted:
a) on the laws and practices of war on land, b) on adapting the Geneva principles of
August 22nd, 1864, to maritime warfare; on the peaceful settlement of international disputes.

Declarations to complete these conventions were also adopted: forbidding the launching of
projectiles from balloons in air; forbidding the use of asphyxiating or harmful gases; forbidding
the use of projectiles exploding within the human body.

Finally, a permanent court of arbitration
was created, as well as a permanent court of international justice.

C.

At the second conference (on the initiative of Theodore Roosevelt, and which was
made up of 44 countries) thirteen other conventions were adopted, with particular reference to:
compulsory arbitration of international disputes over war on land, naval warfare, the opening of
hostilities, maritime seizure, occupation of enemy territory, etc.

A Declaration relative to the
launching of projectiles from balloons confirmed that of 1899.

Finally, a Prize Court was
created, but it was not ratified.

D.

Two other conferences took place, in 1929 and 1930, for the settlement of the financial
debts of the war of 1914-1918.

The Young Plan was adopted, and the evacuation of the
Rhineland was decided upon.3
It was fairly simple to meet the difficulty presented by the Hague Convention concerning
the use of labour.

Russia, which had refused to recognise the conventions and had consequently
not respected them in Poland or in the Baltic countries, could not honestly benefit from them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Young Plan was adopted, and the evacuation of the
Rhineland was decided upon.3
It was fairly simple to meet the difficulty presented by the Hague Convention concerning
the use of labour. Russia, which had refused to recognise the conventions and had consequently
not respected them in Poland or in the Baltic countries, could not honestly benefit from them. And as for the countries which had signed the conventions, the question was resolved
judiciously at a government level, after October 1941, through agreements which ended in the
organisation of voluntary service, and then in laws instituting the administration of compulsory
labour (in France, laws on compulsory labour were not promulgated until October 1942). In
countries like Belgium and Holland, where legal power had resigned constitutionally or
disappeared, only voluntary labour could be sought. To the labour force thus obtained could be added, from all of [34] occupied Europe, an
important number of persons: members of the opposition, resistants, and franc-tireurs,
themselves having infringed the Geneva and Hague Conventions, and no longer protected by
any international statute, and who could be deported and put to work in concentration camps. 3. In 1945, the Permanent Court of International Justice was abolished, and was replaced by the International Court of Justice,
instituted in the Charter of the United Nations. As for the Permanent Court of Arbitration which still exists, it is in reality a roster of
arbitrators , from among whom parties in litigation choose a tribunal; it is supported by an International Bureau and an Administrative
Council, both permanent. Then there was the Prize (maritime) Court of 1907, a court of appeal against the decisions of national (municipal)
courts, which passed judgement on maritime seizure in time of war, and on whether the decisions of those courts conformed to the Prize
Convention. –    23    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Indeed, massive deportations were begun in March 1942, and Eugen Kogon gives 2,791,000 as
the officially accepted figure for deportees of all nationalities, racial deportation not included,
nor the 640,000 or so deportees of the first five months of 1945 (Enfer Organised, pp.

34 and
147).

Four to four and a half million Jews living within the European perimeter held by the
German forces, of whom about half were of labour age, were officially added to this figure.

The
situation of the Jews was judicially and materially tragic.

Since 1933 a whole series of decrees,
in application of the Party programme proclaimed at Munich on 24th February, 1920, and then
racial laws, promulgated in accordance with the decisions acclaimed at the Nuremberg Congress
in September 1935, had progressively taken away their German nationality in the Third Reich.

Since there was no Jewish State with which to make bilateral agreements, or international
agreements in the Geneva tradition, and since, in spite of the repeated proposals of the National
Socialist Government, no country was willing to authorise their immigration or take them under
protection, they lived in Germany, until war was declared, with the status of stateless citizens,
which offered no protection, just as was and is the case with stateless aliens in all countries.

They are subject to the caprice of power.

In November 1938, after the assassination of von
Rath, Counsellor of the Embassy, by the Jew Grynspan, which stirred Germany into a surge of
indignation, albeit somewhat organised, they were thrown to the vindictiveness of the public.

At
the same time, as a reprisal, measures of spoliation were taken against them (which up until then
had not been customary) and all the mechanisms of emigration, non-official, semi-clandestine,
and in every case, forced, were set in motion.In November 1938, after the assassination of von
Rath, Counsellor of the Embassy, by the Jew Grynspan, which stirred Germany into a surge of
indignation, albeit somewhat organised, they were thrown to the vindictiveness of the public.

At
the same time, as a reprisal, measures of spoliation were taken against them (which up until then
had not been customary) and all the mechanisms of emigration, non-official, semi-clandestine,
and in every case, forced, were set in motion.

In September 1939, at the beginning of
hostilities, representative authorities of the Jewish World Congress, in order to reproach
England and France for having delayed so long, reminded them that "the Jews of the whole
world had declared economic and financial war on Germany since 1933," and that they were
"resolved to carry this war of destruction to the end." In making this move, they practically
authorised Hitler to put all the Jews at hand in concentration camps.

In times of war this is the
customary treatment of enemy aliens in all countries.

Progressively, along with military
developments, the other Jews of Europe found themselves in the same boat with the German
Jews, and when there was no longer any hope of arranging for their emigration from Europe
(the last hope, as we shall see, evaporated with the failure of the Madagascar plan, at the end of
1940), it was decided to re-group them all, and to put them to [35] work in a single and
immense ghetto.

After the success of the invasion of Russia, at the end of 1941, this area was
established in the so-called Eastern Territories, near the former Russo-Polish frontier:
Auschwitz, Chelmno, Belsec, Maidanek, Treblinka, etc.

There they were to wait until the end of
the war for international negotiations to determine their fate.

This decision was brought into
application at the celebrated inter-ministerial conference at Berlin-Wannsee on 20th January,
1942, and the transfer began in March.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There they were to wait until the end of
the war for international negotiations to determine their fate. This decision was brought into
application at the celebrated inter-ministerial conference at Berlin-Wannsee on 20th January,
1942, and the transfer began in March. If the fact that in the spring of 1942 there was a
minimum of four million French, Russian, Polish and Yugoslav prisoners in Germany, plus the
human resources of conquered Russia, is taken into consideration, Hitler could very reasonably
expect to have a foreign labour force of about twenty million people. Enough to protect the war
economy and the German army against any manpower shortage. According to Halder, if his journal is to be believed, Hitler defined his political intentions
with regard to Russia to a group of generals on 30th March, 1941. "North Russia to be attached
to Finland. Protectorates: Baltic states, the Ukraine, White Russia." On 17th July, after the
German-Russian war had started, Rosenberg, after he had assumed his post as Minister of
Eastern Occupied Territories, stated the aims more explicitly - "the dismemberment of Russia
into component parts, each to become an independent state, or federations of the Ukraine,
Ruthenia, Russia, Caucasus." Finally, Directive No. 21 (Case Barbarossa: invasion of Russia)
stipulated in the paragraph, - special cases, "Russian territories occupied during the course of
operations, as soon as battle conditions permit, shall be organised into states, in accordance with
special directives."
When these statements and instructions were circulated through Rosenberg's bureau (and
among Canaris' secret agents), they led the Balts, Ruthenians, Ukrainians and Caucasians, all
of whom were traditionally hostile to Moscow and even more to Bolshevism, to hope for
–    24    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---independent statehood on the arrival of the Germans, whom they at first received as liberators.

In application, they would not only provide the German war economy with the manpower Hitler
was counting on, but the army, too, with autonomous legions, fighting at their side - an almost
inexhaustible supply of volunteers.

And that was the case at first.

They were sent to Germany
with nine-month or one-year contracts.

Then there were fewer and fewer.

Then those who went
home did not go back again.

Rosenberg's declarations and Hitler's instructions became dead
letters, as living conditions for the people of the East worsened under the police control of
Himmler, the Gauleiters, and the Protectors.

A change of heart took place, and acceptance was
turned to hostility, all the more because, at the suggestion of the Minister of Economic Affairs
and of the Commissariat, the Bolshevist structures of rural land management (kolkhozes and
sovkhozes), which the people hated, had been retained.

[36]
For all these reasons, and others such as the refusal to provide autonomous military
legions (it took two long years of negotiations before General Vlassov was authorised to raise
two armies in the Ukraine, for example), the recruiting of labour locally, which was the job of
Sauckel's bureau, became a veritable man hunt.

And it was the same in the West, although for
different reasons.

When he was interrogated at Nuremberg on the 31st of May, 1946, by the
Soviet Prosecutor, Alexandrov, General Plenipotentiary of Man Power Sauckel stated that of the
thirty million permanently employed for the German war economy, there were never more than
five million foreign workers, not including prisoners of war and persons in concentration
camps.

The day before, the Prosecutor had tried to get him to admit to ten million, but he would
not accept that figure unless it included prisoners of war.When he was interrogated at Nuremberg on the 31st of May, 1946, by the
Soviet Prosecutor, Alexandrov, General Plenipotentiary of Man Power Sauckel stated that of the
thirty million permanently employed for the German war economy, there were never more than
five million foreign workers, not including prisoners of war and persons in concentration
camps.

The day before, the Prosecutor had tried to get him to admit to ten million, but he would
not accept that figure unless it included prisoners of war.

Lacking positive information, it is
possible to assume that if the accuser intentionally exaggerated, it was to the interest of the
accused to minimise.

If we make a rough estimate, not counting the concentration camps, and
say that at some time there may have been between twelve and thirteen million foreign workers
in Germany, a little more than two fifths, and a little less than half of the total manpower, we
will probably not be very far from the truth.

It was an enormous number, but still nowhere near
Hitler's hopes, and the possibilities.

There was another difficulty.

To the lack of numbers had to be added the lack of quality
because the labour so indiscriminately rounded up was not skilled, and the men in reserved
occupations could not be spared in sufficient numbers to satisfy the demands of the front.

Finally, with regard to production, while the efficiency of the prisoners of war, on the whole,
was almost but not quite at normal level, that of the workers recruited by force and exposed to
the police tactics of Himmler's bureau, was very low, and that of the men from the
concentration camps, living on an atrocious diet, was about zero.

Sabotage did its part too.Finally, with regard to production, while the efficiency of the prisoners of war, on the whole,
was almost but not quite at normal level, that of the workers recruited by force and exposed to
the police tactics of Himmler's bureau, was very low, and that of the men from the
concentration camps, living on an atrocious diet, was about zero.

Sabotage did its part too.

It is clear that, together with the partial failure of the Sauckel mission, the fact that so large
a proportion of the labour force was so unproductive - either unskilled, or living under
conditions that made work impossible, or naturally resorting to sabotage - killed any hope of
furnishing the manpower and war materials in the quantity demanded by the military necessities
of an operation so vast in scope.

Hope was frustrated all the more in view of the unparallelled waste of productive forces
for which the regime, at least in the execution of orders, was cold-bloodedly responsible: the
non-racial camp internees who died at a catastrophic rate, not of compulsory labour, but of bad
treatment, and the four to four and a half million Jews who were never integrated into war
plants, and practically paralysed by the measures used concerning them.

After 1943 it was time for the Allies to think of the organisation of Europe and the world
after the war.

The era of [37] conferences began.

In fact they had tried to open this era of conferences much earlier.

It is hardly an
exaggeration to say that the first reply of the United States to the declaration of war by Japan,
then Germany, was to call a meeting in Washington on 1st January, 1942, of the twenty-five
nations already or about to be at war with the Axis powers, which made up the nations of what
was later called the United Nations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In fact they had tried to open this era of conferences much earlier. It is hardly an
exaggeration to say that the first reply of the United States to the declaration of war by Japan,
then Germany, was to call a meeting in Washington on 1st January, 1942, of the twenty-five
nations already or about to be at war with the Axis powers, which made up the nations of what
was later called the United Nations. But on that date it was not possible to go beyond "a mutual
and solemn pledge jointly to continue to the end the war against the Axis Powers." After that,
nothing more in that line was attempted, the Allies thus pledging showing themselves to be
–    25    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---much less "jointly responsible" than they had stated.

On the British and Americans weighed the
memory of the German-Soviet pact and, correctly, the feeling that Stalin was capable of every
political about-face.

It was duly known after the war, from the direct hints of certain qualified
witnesses and from the revelations of Peter Kleist (Entre Hitler et Staline, 1953), that during
the whole of 1942, and even after Stalingrad, Stalin had multiplied his overtures, through
Finland and Sweden, for a separate peace with Germany and that the British and Americans got
wind of it.

To the Russians it seemed clear that Hitler had declared war on them only to force the
West to a compromise.

Even after the American landing in North Africa they gave him all the
more chance of winning, as the British and Americans plainly delayed opening a second front in
the West.

It was only after 13th January, 1943, that any real steps were taken to meet this
ambiguous situation.

And that was Roosevelt's declaration at Casablanca that no peace with
Germany could be considered before an unconditional surrender.

In As He Saw It (N.Y.

1946,
p.

117) Elliott Roosevelt did not hesitate to say that this initiative was "as good as if Stalin had
invented it himself." In fact it threw consternation into the German opposition to the Hitler
regime, who had been in touch with the Allies through the offices of neutrels since the
beginning of 1942 (Mémoires de Schellenberg, Paris, 1957; and Carl Gördeler und die
deutsche Widerstand Bewegung (Carl Goerdeler and the German Opposition Movement) by
Gerhard Ritter, Stuttgart, 1954).

As for the Hitler regime itself, this declaration inspired it with
the energy of despair and strengthened it in public opinion.

To Roosevelt's credit it must be
acknowledged that in the end (under W.

C.To Roosevelt's credit it must be
acknowledged that in the end (under W.

C.

Bullitt's influence, who pointed out that he was
sometimes able to counteract the influence which his Baruch friends exercised over him) he
recognised that the demand for Germany's unconditional surrender could have no other result
than to prolong the war for the sole benefit of Soviet Russia.

He also sent notes to Churchill and
Stalin, on 23rd May, 1944, suggesting a return to Woodrow Wilson's policy, and a direct
appeal to the German people over the heads of their leaders, the only stipulation of which was
peace on condition of the overthrow of the National Socialist government.

[38] But it was a little
late for that, and neither Churchill nor Stalin was interested.

Furthermore, things had reached a
point where he could no longer exert pressure on them.

Be that as it may, it was still only 1943 and the problem of the further evolution of the
situation among the Allies, with regard to the unconditional surrender formula, did not arise.

What was plain to them was the certainty that the Axis, henceforth unable to resume any military
initiative, was virtually beaten.

Just the same.

they had to wait until the summer for this certainty
to be assured, when the Germans and Italians were pushed out of Africa and the British and
Americans landed in Sicily, and then in Italy, which spelled the imminent fall of Mussolini; and
until October, when they could organise another meeting out of which it was hoped that
constructive solutions for the problems of Europe could be shaped on the ruins of Germany.

This meeting took place in Moscow from the 19th to the 30th of October, 1943, between
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R.

(Molotov), of Britain (Eden) and of the
U.S.A.

(Cordell Hull).--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Molotov), of Britain (Eden) and of the
U.S.A. (Cordell Hull). It was followed by others: from November 22nd to 26th at Cairo
(Roosevelt, Churchill, Chiang Kai-Shek), from November 28th to December 1st at Teheran
(Roosevelt, Churchill, Stalin), which was the first meeting of the Big Three. Then came Yalta,
and finally Potsdam. On the 30th of October, the Moscow mission ended with the following declaration:
"In consideration of the fact that the United Nations have, on several occasions, announced their
intention of bringing the war criminals to justice, the undersigned Ministers of Great Britain, the United
States, and the U.S.S.R. declare that the German officers and soldiers and members of the Nazi party
responsible for atrocities and crimes, or who have taken a consenting part in their execution in occupied
Europe, will be sent back to those countries in which their abominable crimes were committed, there to
be judged and punished according to the laws of the liberated countries and the free governments
established there."
Although impossible in all other post-war problems, unaniimity was achieved in the matter
of vengeance - first and foremost, to have revenge. Since then, the taking of revenge has not
ceased and the prevailing atmosphere of this post-war period is that of the underworld. How
–    26    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---st and foremost, to have revenge. Since then, the taking of revenge has not
ceased and the prevailing atmosphere of this post-war period is that of the underworld. How
–    26    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

could it be otherwise? Marriage between Bolshevism and the western democracies, even if only
a marriage of convenience, was just as contrary to nature, if not more so, than between Nazism
and Bolshevism, and nothing else offered any possibility of harmony. One sees only that,
thinking they have definitely settled Germany's account, the East and the West have finally
begun to settle the one they have discovered between themselves.
In his Memoirs of the Second World War, Churchill related that when the hour for those
toasts which seal agreements had rung at [39] the Teheran Conference, a month later, in the
mists of champagne and vodka, the Moscow Declaration was evoked. Bending to Roosevelt's
ear, Stalin whispered that it would suffice quite simply to shoot 50,000 officers and leaders.
"49,500," the other is said to have answered.
And that illustrates the seriousness of those men on whom the fate of the world depended,
and all that could be expected of them.
–    27    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[40]
Chapter Il
THE PRINCIPLES OF NUREMBERG
This 'war to the finish', although virtually won by the Allies, was carried on for two more
years, precisely because it could not be otherwise after the Declaration of Moscow.

And so on August 8th, 1945, the United States, Britain and Russia, whose company
France had been permitted to join, full of all the bitter resentments that such a prolonged and
merciless struggle had built up, met together in London as conquerors to draw up plans for the
"pursuit and punishment of the major war criminals of the European Axis Powers" - in other
words, to draw the practical conclusions of the Declaration of Moscow.

Notice the shift in the formula.

It was no longer a question of the Germans alone, but of
the nationals of the Axis Powers, and no longer of the "officers, soldiers and members of the
Nazi Party responsible for crimes, or who took a consenting part in their execution," but of
"major war criminals" without further definition which, in the agreement in preparation, so
broadened the field that the prosecution shifted from individual to collective punishment.

This agreement, which bears the signatures of jurists Robert Falco (representative of the
provisional government of the French Republic), Robert H.

Jackson (U.S.A.), Jowitt (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Iou.

Nikitchenko and A.

Trainin (U.S.S.R.),
consists of seven points and says:
a) The establishment of an International Military Tribunal for the trial of war criminals,
whose offences have no particular geographical location, to be charged as individuals, or as
members of a group, or both.

(Art.

1).

b) The return of other war criminals to the countries where their crimes were committed.

(Art.

3).

c) For the latter, "national courts" already established, or to be established, will qualify.

(Art.

6).--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Art. 6). d) To be effective on the date of signature, this agreement "shall remain in force for the
period of one year and shall continue thereafter, subject to the right of any signatory to give,
through the diplomatic channels, one month's notice of intention to terminate it." (Art. 7). Article 2 specifies that the "constitution, jurisdiction, and functions of the International
Military. Tribunal shall be those set out in the Charter annexed to this Agreement" and which
forms the "integral part." Article 3 of the Charter declares that "Neither the Tribunal, its
members, nor their alternates, may be challenged by the Prosecution, the defendants, or their
counsel." Article 3 of the London Agreement initiated a world-wide man-hunt by stipulating:
"The Signatories shall also use their best endeavours to make available for investigation of the
charges against the trial [41] such of the major war criminals as are not in the territories of any
of the Signatories." And Article 5 states: "Any Government of the United Nations may adhere to
this Agreement by notice given through diplomatic channels to the Government of the United
Kingdom, who shall inform the other signatory and adhering Governments of each such
adherence." Only nineteen countries took advantage of this stipulation: "Greece, Denmark,
–    28    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Yugoslavia, the Netherlands, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Belgium, Ethiopia, Australia, Honduras,
Norway, Panama, Luxembourg, Haiti, New Zealand, India, Venezuela, Uruguay, and
Paraguay, a total of twenty-three signatories out of the fifty-odd nations which comprised the
world then.

In Washington, twenty-five nations were represented on January 1st, 1942.

In
August 1945 the protagonists in this affair did not see that a comparison of these figures in itself
constituted a censure in the minds of well-meaning people.

But the practical applications set out in Article 2 of this agreement, and contained in the
annexed Charter, were no less strange.

The strange can produce only the strange, and only more
so.

That the very idea of creating all at once a court, jurisdiction, and procedures, without any
historical, legal or jurisprudence precedents, did not frighten the so-called civilised nations by its
scope and sublteties, can only be explained by the fact that in the chaos of those years they had
retrogressed to the level of inexperienced and uncultured peoples.

It is a phenomenon related to
the psychology of masses whose mental age is lowered in ratio to their numbers.

Suffice it to
say that the mass expressing itself in this instance, through a few of its members, was several
hundred million strong.

What did this annexed Charter contain?

First, here is the definition of the offences as set
out in Article 6 of Part II of the Charter.

(a) CRIMES AGAINST PEACE: namely, planning, preparation, initiation or waging of a war of
aggression, or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements or assurances, or participating in a
common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of the following:
I (b) WAR CRIMES: namely, violations of the laws and customs of war.First, here is the definition of the offences as set
out in Article 6 of Part II of the Charter.

(a) CRIMES AGAINST PEACE: namely, planning, preparation, initiation or waging of a war of
aggression, or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements or assurances, or participating in a
common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of the following:
I (b) WAR CRIMES: namely, violations of the laws and customs of war.

Such violations shall
include, but not be limited to, murder, ill treatment or deportation to slave labour or for any other purpose
of civilian population of or in occupied territory, murder or ill treatment of prisoners of war or persons on
the seas, killing of hostages, plunder of public or private property, wanton destruction of cities, towns or
villages, or devastation not justified by military necessity;
(c) CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY: namely, murder, extermination, enslavement, deportation,
and other inhumane acts committed against any civilian population, before or during the war, or
persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds in [42] execution of or in connection with any crime
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, whether or not in violation of domestic law of the country where
perpetrated.

These three principal charges were in reality four.

In the list of charges, in fact, the first
divides into two: into crimes against the peace, and conspiracy in the intention to commit them -
something like that which French law punishes under the heading of "criminal conspiracy."
Doubtless the writers of this Charter wanted to make sure that the Prosecutors could establish
premeditation, and introduce it under the title "aggravation." Thus, aggravation became in itself
a crime.

The two other main charges were already part of the legislation, although summary
nevertheless real, of the Hague, and later the Geneva Conventions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the list of charges, in fact, the first
divides into two: into crimes against the peace, and conspiracy in the intention to commit them -
something like that which French law punishes under the heading of "criminal conspiracy."
Doubtless the writers of this Charter wanted to make sure that the Prosecutors could establish
premeditation, and introduce it under the title "aggravation." Thus, aggravation became in itself
a crime. The two other main charges were already part of the legislation, although summary
nevertheless real, of the Hague, and later the Geneva Conventions. In case of war, as we have
seen, the belligerents agreed not to act in any way that could be interpreted as unchivalrous, or
as a criminal violation of the laws of humanity. For example, civilian populations were protected
against bombardment, rape, and pillage; prisoners of war could not be used by the enemy either
as soldiers or as workers in armament industries. The wounded were not to be killed or tortured;
but no provision was made for franc-tireurs and spies. All that came under the heading "war
crime." The Nuremberg Charter made a distinction between this and crimes against humanity,
but that was an innovation of form only; the two things were thus distinguished by words, but
not in fact. In the interpretation and treatment of the texts each belligerent was accountable under pain
of fine, to police its own ranks and prevent infractions. In practice, this theory, inherited from
the personal combat of Knighthood, or the line battles of the Fontenoy type, which no one ever
recognised could not be adapted to a confrontation on land, sea and in the air, by masses
provided with modern, murderous armaments, was shaped into a standard scenario, good for all
wars, and offering infinite possibilities to a propaganda machine designed to maintain the morale
of combatants on either side of the firing line. The war, justified by mutual accusations of treaty
–    29    –offering infinite possibilities to a propaganda machine designed to maintain the morale
of combatants on either side of the firing line. The war, justified by mutual accusations of treaty
–    29    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---violation, in spirit or in letter, continued, justifying itself by mutual accusations of crimes - the
Belgian child, the extermination camps, blanket bombing of civilians, Dresden, Leipzig,
Hiroshima, Nagasaki, etc.

When the war was ended, the world could think of nothing but
getting something from the losers: the judgement of God in the modern form of a legal duel
inherited from trial by ordeal.

The war which bred these crimes, on the whole minor, and which inevitably implicated
them, was nevertheless not considered in itself a crime with inherent legal consequences - the
fate of the losers was considered to be within the competence of the political power of the
victors.

At the level of public opinion, they were the object of abusive sarcasm, indeed, of tribal
demands for punishments aimed at their chiefs, but these manifestations revealed [43] more a
need to relieve frustrations in mockery than an interest in vengeance.

Political power was not to
revert to the universally condemned ways of Julius Caesar strangling Vercingetorix in his
prison, or of those feudalists of the Middle Ages who sent each other to rot in dungeons.

And
after that time it did not go beyond the punishment of exile, if, indeed, the losers did not go into
exile of their own accord.

In demanding that Kaiser Wilhelm II be handed over to the Allies to
be judged as the one responsible for a war to which the idea of crime had been attached only
because of its length, scope and unequalled ferocity, the Armistice Convention and the Treaty of
Versailles - which put an end to the First World War - by creating a process for the jurisdiction
of an exceptional court, had taken a step which neither the Treaties of Vienna of 1815 against
Napoleon I, nor that of Frankfurt in 1871 against Napoleon III, had dared to do.

But, in 1919,
the intellectual level of the rulers had not fallen so low that this step could be taken, and it was
renounced.In demanding that Kaiser Wilhelm II be handed over to the Allies to
be judged as the one responsible for a war to which the idea of crime had been attached only
because of its length, scope and unequalled ferocity, the Armistice Convention and the Treaty of
Versailles - which put an end to the First World War - by creating a process for the jurisdiction
of an exceptional court, had taken a step which neither the Treaties of Vienna of 1815 against
Napoleon I, nor that of Frankfurt in 1871 against Napoleon III, had dared to do.

But, in 1919,
the intellectual level of the rulers had not fallen so low that this step could be taken, and it was
renounced.

Moreover, it should be noted that in 1919 a strong current of world opinion tended
to embrace in the same reprobation the rulers of both the victors and the losers, of all the
belligerents, and this came within an ace of triumphing.

Thus, if the Nuremberg Charter made innovations in matters of definition, it is only in
connection with crimes against the peace coupled with the crime of conspiracy, with regard to its
planning and execution (para.

a) of Art.

6).

But, from the moral as well as the legal point of
view, the scandalous thing about this innovation was that it was presented in the form of a law,
written for the first time, designed to punish offences, on various grounds, the most obvious of
which, if not the most important, being that they had been committed before its promulgation.

The non-retroactivity of laws is, in fact, one of the sacred principles of our culture.

And if
our moral system holds that "ignorance of the law is not excusable," it is also claimed that where
no law exists there can be no offence and consequently no punishment.The non-retroactivity of laws is, in fact, one of the sacred principles of our culture.

And if
our moral system holds that "ignorance of the law is not excusable," it is also claimed that where
no law exists there can be no offence and consequently no punishment.

Nulla poena sine lege,
the universal conscience is still pleased with itself for having discovered in our heritage from the
Romans this formula, which was the basis of their law and more than 2,000 years later, remains
the individual's only, and very harrow, protection against arbitrary power.

The answer given to those with mental reservations was "Pure formalism; all of little
import, since these people are criminals they cannot claim so much consideration." But, fifteen
years later, the Eichmarm Trial, which was Nuremberg all over again - but worse - and which
unfolded in an atmosphere of undeniable digapproval, showed more clearly that the problem of
the criminal was far from being settled by the definition in the Charter, after the definition of the
crime.

Everything is linked together.

It was self-evident that any objection would be useless.

One could, in fact, have argued that at any rate the violation of an everyday rule of conduct, to
the detriment of anyone, since it is admitted, [44] would create a precedent to legitimise the
violation of all the others, and since the very essence of law is that it is the same for all, the
criminal too, is entitled to justice, even purely formal.

In this, furthermore, the form was one of
the moral requisites recognised by the law, and itself constituted the basis of the legal problem.

It could certainly be said that five years of massacre, of Apocalyptic proportions, had so
deeply confused men's minds that the best organised among them could not escape the common
fate, and were no longer sensitive to moral requisites and principles.

Doubtless this will be said,
and with reason.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It could certainly be said that five years of massacre, of Apocalyptic proportions, had so
deeply confused men's minds that the best organised among them could not escape the common
fate, and were no longer sensitive to moral requisites and principles. Doubtless this will be said,
and with reason. But did the confusion have to be so deep that nearly everyone, including the
elite, forgot these requisites, even in the realm of experience? For on this point, at least, history
is full to bursting of criminals whom their descendants have refused to recognise and whom
circumstantial jurisdictions disavowed the next day. –    30    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---* * *
In a book which made a certain stir and brought its author his hour of fame, a great French
teacher of his time, the philosopher Jean-Marie Guyau, who met too early a death (1854-1884),
laid the foundation for a moral system which did away with duties and penalties and which,
carried over into law, rendered totally useless, even harmful, "the judges, the rack, the gallows
and the hangmen" mentioned by Molière.

Although J.-M.

Guyau is almost forgotten today, at the turn of the century much was said
and written about his ideas, sometimes stupid and abusive things.

The anarchists, whose star
was rising, immediately adopted him and not only the anarchists, but an important sector of
liberal opinion, although only in principle.

When President of the Republic Fallières, by
systematically exploiting the droit de grâce (right to pardon) during his Septennate, practically
abolished the death penalty, while Anatole France, whose aphorisms were not always happy,
loudly proclaimed his support, as far as common law but not political right was concerned,
many good people justified both in Guyau's name, but wrongly because that was an entirely
different matter.

Be that as it may, it seems to me that the principal idea to be derived from this remarkable
book is this: in not addressing the individual conscience, which is alone of permanent worth
since it only can speak in term of justice, but in addressing the collective conscience, of which it
is the expression, and which is concerned with circumstances and speaks only in terms of self-
interest, the law is nothing more than a precept without fundamental bases, and respect for it,
purely mechanical, can only be gained by force.

However, to speak of coercion is to speak of
revolt, and to speak of revolt is to speak of the relation of forces between society and
individuals.Be that as it may, it seems to me that the principal idea to be derived from this remarkable
book is this: in not addressing the individual conscience, which is alone of permanent worth
since it only can speak in term of justice, but in addressing the collective conscience, of which it
is the expression, and which is concerned with circumstances and speaks only in terms of self-
interest, the law is nothing more than a precept without fundamental bases, and respect for it,
purely mechanical, can only be gained by force.

However, to speak of coercion is to speak of
revolt, and to speak of revolt is to speak of the relation of forces between society and
individuals.

What is grievous is that this relation of forces, which is forever defined and re-
defined according to circumstances, being [45] in the end its only basis and only justification,
the law removes little by little all the strictures of the conscience and leaves to circumstances the
distinction between vice and virtue, the delinquent and the honest man, and the margin between
them becomes morally non-existent.

And now we are back to the Nuremberg trial.

The role of the individual was played by
Germany in the persons of its de facto representatives - since the rule still holds that Brutus
must assassinate or eliminate Caesar, could a people conceivably have de jure representatives?

The role of society was played by the group of associated nations who were indicting her, after
having brought her to her knees.

Therefore, it was entirely an affair of circumstances, and
relations of forces.

Who will deny, for example, that if the military outcome had been the other
way around, the trial would have been conceived and carried on in the same way, but with the
Allies on the bench of the accused and Germany in the judge's seat?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Therefore, it was entirely an affair of circumstances, and
relations of forces. Who will deny, for example, that if the military outcome had been the other
way around, the trial would have been conceived and carried on in the same way, but with the
Allies on the bench of the accused and Germany in the judge's seat? If Hans Frank (writing in
In the face of the gallows, published by his widow at Neuhaus near Chiemsee in 1955) is to be
believed, Hitler had decided, once the war was over, to bring Roosevelt, Churchill, etc. to trial
for "war crimes." There is no doubt that he would not have defined the crime with any more
respect for form, nor punished the criminal any the less. This criminal – Article 6 of the Nuremberg Charter presents him in this way: "Leaders,
organisers, instigators and accomplices participating in the formulation or execution of a
Common Plan or Conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes are responsible…"
The first inescapable observation is that, if in the minds of the authors, this text refers only
to Germans, which would represent so high a proportion of criminals in a people that reason
would refuse to accept it, in its letter it does not refer only to Germans, thereby raising the figure
to a world scale, even less admissible. When, on October 18th, 1945, after the bill of indictment had been issued, the Tribunal
met in Berlin in its first public hearing, to put the finishing touches to the preparations for the
Trial, and those criminals had to be named whose crimes were "without geographical location,"
we find:
–    31    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hermann Wilhelm Goering, Rudolf Hess, Joachim von Ribbentrop, Robert Ley, Wilhelm Keitel,
Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Alfred Rosenberg, Hans Frank, Wilhelm Frick, Julius Streicher, Walter Punk,
Hjalmar Schacht, Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach, Karl Dönitz, Erich Raeder, Baldur von
Schirach, Fritz Sauckel, Alfred Jodl, Martin Bormann, Franz von Papen, Arthur Seyss-Inquart, Albert
Speer, Constantin von Neurath, and Hans Fritzsche, [42] individually or as members of any of the
Following Groups or Organisations to which they respectively Belonged, Namely:
Die 
Reichsregierung 
(Reich 
Cabinet); 
Das 
Korps 
der 
Politischen 
Leiter 
der
Nationalsozialistischen 
Deutschen 
Arbeiterpartei (Leadership Corps of the Nazi Party); Die
Schutzstaffeln der [46] Nationalsozialistischen Deutschen Arbeiterpartei (commonly known as the
"SS") and including Der Sicherheitsdienst (commonly known as the "SD"); Die Geheime Staatspolizei
(Secret State Police, commonly known as the "Gestapo "); Die Sturmabteilungen der NSDAP
(commonly known as the "SA"); and the General Staff and High Command of the German Armed Forces,
all as defined in Appendix B of the Indictment.

If one takes into account that the text also included accomplices, it was enough to have
been a member of the SS, which numbered about 3,000,000 persons (accomplices of
Himmler), or to the Hitler Youth with about 13,000,000 (accomplices of Baldur von Schirach),
or to the Strength Through Joy organisation, which corresponded to our Friends of Nature, and
had about 30,000,000 (accomplices of Ley), etc., you might as well say all of Germany, or
very nearly all.

Thus it was that since the crime had to all appearances become collective,
collective punishment, before which all the moral thinking of the world, except in tribal custom,
has recoiled in horror, was introduced into international law.

And it was only after eight years of
constant effort, in 1953, that M.Thus it was that since the crime had to all appearances become collective,
collective punishment, before which all the moral thinking of the world, except in tribal custom,
has recoiled in horror, was introduced into international law.

And it was only after eight years of
constant effort, in 1953, that M.

Raymond de Geoffre de la Pradelle, world famed French jurist,
succeeded in having it removed.

All of Germany, or nearly, I said.

In fact, even after fifteen years, during which time the
population has considerably renewed itself, there is still only a small minority of Germans who
have not at least a close relative, if it was not they themselves, who has been tried in a de-
Nazification court and sentenced, usually with a heavy fine.

And it is enough to read the reports
of the thirteen Nuremberg trials to realise that all of Germany was the object of the bill of
indictment, and the Prosecutors' addresses to the court, and that it was Germany herself
condemned by the judgements passed.

It did not occur to the Prosecutors or the judges, or to
anyone else, that to decide that 70 million people in a nation of 70 million inhabitants were
guilty, was tantamount to saying that those 70 millions were innocent.

If the concurrence of
world opinion was obtained in such a verdict it would only be by surprise, and in any case,
neither ethics nor history could unreservedly approve such a verdict.

Through which cracks in the wall of closed minds ethics and history opened a triumphal
path will, without fail, be argued some day.

Neither the materiality, nor the fact that they were
produced under the pressure of political necessity, will ever be contested of two of them: Russia
and Israel.

In fact it is Russia who gave the first blow of the pick-axe to the legal edifice so
laboriously constructed at Nuremberg.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Neither the materiality, nor the fact that they were
produced under the pressure of political necessity, will ever be contested of two of them: Russia
and Israel. In fact it is Russia who gave the first blow of the pick-axe to the legal edifice so
laboriously constructed at Nuremberg. In order to better justify her policy of isolating West
Germany, she said that it was a den of Nazi nostalgics, of traditionally impenitent militarists,
and of revenge seekers, at the disposal of the Americans. In order to profit by a show of
contrast, she lifted the burden of guilt from the 18 to 20 millions of East Germans, by saying
that they had [47] simply acted without judgement, that is, that they were innocent. It is clear
that by the same kind of reasoning the West Germans could, in turn, become 50 to 52 million
innocent people, and that by conceding that a sense of conscience is not noticeably more
developed in the leaders of people than in the people themselves – hardly disputable - even those
who were hanged at Nuremberg would be no exception to this general formula for innocence. Let us have no illusions. Those who come after us will surely decide that this is so. Even
now, no one believes any longer that if the Nuremberg Trial were held over again the accused
would be hanged. In his Nuremberg Diary, Dr. Gilbert, who was the "Psychologist" of the trial
and spent a year studying the accused in their prison, and who, in that capacity, testified at the
Eichmann trial in Jerusalem, describes them as in no way differing from the mass of ordinary
people encountered on any street, at all levels of the social hierarchy. And he asserts that what
–    32    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---happened in Germany could happen anywhere, that human nature could, in certain
circumstances, furnish other examples of the acts of which they were accused.

It could not be
better put.

A crime which can be committed by anyone anywhere, for which only human nature
and circumstances are responsible, is not a crime.

Or else we are all assassins and our judge is
not among us.

The case of Israel is hardly different from that of Russia.

Massed at the foot of a world-
sized wailing wall, day and night for fifteen years, Zionists from all over the world - all Israelis
are not, happily, Zionists - have cried unceasingly, every day more gruesomely, every day more
agonisingly.

The purpose is to publicise what they consider the true and apocalyptic proportions
of the horror and the tortures the Jewish world suffered from Nazism, and thereby to increase
the amount of reparations which the State of Israel receives from Germany.

This is a sordid affair of money.

In 1956, when it was clear that the world was refusing to
fall into step with the international Zionist movement in this enterprise, to make Germany an
everlasting milk cow for Israel, a book by a certain Alex Weissberg called L'Histoire de Joël
Brand, with the subtitle, Un troc monstrueux, un million de Juifs pour dix mille camions (The
monstrous barter: 1 million Jews for 10,000 trucks) was published, which, in the light of
paragraph c) of the definition of crime in the Nuremberg Charter, was a veritable bill of
indictment against Britain and the United States, rightly considered by the Zionist movement as
responsible for the failure of the enterprise.

The blackmail was obvious.

It was based,
nonetheless, on solid grounds.

Britain and the United States were untroubled.

Roughly, this was the theme: because she had opposed, even after 1933, the emigration of
European Jews to Israel through application of the Balfour Declaration, more particularly
because she had, in December 1938, politely got rid of Dr.Britain and the United States were untroubled.

Roughly, this was the theme: because she had opposed, even after 1933, the emigration of
European Jews to Israel through application of the Balfour Declaration, more particularly
because she had, in December 1938, politely got rid of Dr.

Schacht who had been sent by Hitler
to London to propose their transportation [48] en masse to Palestine, Britain should be declared
co-responsible for their massacre.

And all the more so because in 1944 she wrecked a proposal
of Himmler's which would have opened the door to safety for a million Jews.

The United States
was responsible because they had in every case supported Britain's actions.

France, too, was
included, although more discreetly - in 1940-41 she had blocked a plan to transport all the
European Jews to Madagascar.

The enterprise which hung fire in 1956 was renewed in 1961 during the Eichmann trial,
and in such terms that many people were led to question whether this was not one of the
principal objects of this trial.

Two things were announced to take place together: 1) Joël Brand,
the principal actor surviving the deal to exchange 10,000 trucks for one million Jews, appeared
on the witness stand, with hitherto unpublished documents of conversations concerning that
deal, which amounted, in fact, to a violent indictment of Britain and the United States, 2) and a
private trip that M.

Ben Gurion was to take incognito "to France and to Canada, a trip he would
take advantage of to pay an official visit to London, from Paris, and to Washington from
Ottawa." (Newspapers, May 24th)
At that time, the pretence in the plan was pointed out.

Rather than Paris and Ottawa, were
not London and Washington the real destination of M.

Ben Gurion's trip, where he wanted to
make a bargain for his silence?

Britain and the United States were no more troubled than they were in 1956.

M.

Ben
Gurion was invited neither to London nor to Washington, nor was the snub overlooked.--- PAGE BREAK ---

M. Ben
Gurion was invited neither to London nor to Washington, nor was the snub overlooked. On the stand before the Jerusalem Tribunal, Joël Brand unwrapped his package on the
29th and 30th of May. The Prosecutor raised the bid, and, so as not to create any jealousy,
brought Russia in too, a propos of a bombardment of the Auschwitz "gas chambers" which the
Jewish leaders in Palestine in 1944 had requested, and which Russia, too, lining up with Britain
and the United States, had said was "impossible for technical reasons." How, indeed, could the
gas chambers be destroyed by aerial bombardment without annihilating at the same time many if
not most of the prisoners in the camp, Jewish for the most part? This sort of argument, moreover, offers no loophole. Had the Allies deferred to the
request of the Jewish leaders in Palestine, they would today be accused of having aided
Germany in the extermination of the Jewish people under the fallacious pretext of destroying the
–    33    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---wish leaders in Palestine, they would today be accused of having aided
Germany in the extermination of the Jewish people under the fallacious pretext of destroying the
–    33    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gas chambers, an operation they would have bungled - intentionally their accusers would say -
just as they failed in so many other of their objectives throughout the war.
Now we are at this point: while Germany is indirectly cleared through a false step on
Russia's part, a wrong move on the part of the international Zionist movement and the State of
Israel puts the Allies, the judges, on the bench of the accused with the Germans. We will return
to the first of these mis-steps. Of the [49] second, one could deplore the fact that it hinged on
blackmail, and that it includes worthless arguments, although on the whole, and with regard to
the Nuremberg Charter, it comes to amply justified conclusions. Of both, it can only be said that
they are complementary in that they together and perhaps unwittingly reopened the door to the
proposition that all the belligerents in aII wars are collectively responsible, a view world opinion
regarded favourably right after the war of 1914-1918.
However comforting this result may be, it must not make us forget that this idea of the
responsibility of the Allies was circulated by Israel and the Zionist movement only in connection
with crimes against humanity (paragraph c. of Art. 6 of the Charter), Germany remaining solely
responsible with regard to paragraphs a. (crimes and plots against the peace) and b. (war
crimes).
If it is also possible to apply these other two paragraphs to the conduct of the Allies during
and before the war, it is on the answer to this question that the historians verdict depends.
An examination of the indictment of crimes and plots against the peace will revive in its
pitiless materiality the whole chain of events from 1919 to 1939.
–    34    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[50]
Chapter III
CONSPIRACY AND CRIMES AGAINST PEACE
As defined in paragraph (a) of Article 6 of the Nuremberg Charter, crimes against the
peace were concerned either with, aggravation or participating in a conspiracy with the intention
of perpetrating such acts of aggravation.

As has been pointed out, premeditation had to be
established.

This is roughly the way the indictment went, on this point: in the course of 1920, a
number of not very respectable individuals, scattered all over Germany, arranged to meet at
various places, principally in Munich, where they formed an association of malefactors whose
purpose was to launch aggressive warfare against neighbouring states.

Hitler became the head
of this association in 1921.

They must have been fairly astute, since they managed to give this
association the baptismal name N.S.D.A.P.

(National Sozialistische Deutsche Arbeiter
Partei), and the appearance of a political party.

They must have been fairly intelligent, too,
since they understood that in order to launch aggressive warfare against neighbouring states, it
had absolutely to be done in the name of Germany, which seemed to indicate that they must first
seize power.

Hence, the conspiracy against peace - which in more modern and more diplomatic
language would be called conspiracy against collective security - was in addition found to be tied
in with conspiracy against the internal security of a state.

As for premeditation, that had been in
the air for nearly twenty years.

It must be conceded that rarely have criminals had so much time
at their disposal, to take stock of their crime, and thus to become more guilty.

Taking things in chronological order, the Tribunal first had to pass judgement on the
conditions under which the accused had seized, consolidated and maintained power, the
methods used, particularly subversion by terrorism, the domestic doctrine that was applied, etc.

I would like to be clearly understood.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taking things in chronological order, the Tribunal first had to pass judgement on the
conditions under which the accused had seized, consolidated and maintained power, the
methods used, particularly subversion by terrorism, the domestic doctrine that was applied, etc. I would like to be clearly understood. I, too, condemn National Socialism, Fascism,
Bolshevism, and in general all doctrines that, on the pretext of arousing a revolutionary spirit,
preach insurrection and the seizure of power, by means of subversion by terrorism, doctrines to
which, after success has been achieved in a blood bath, their followers are held fast by more or
less open, and always ferocious, repression. But my purely philosophical censure is separated
by a gulf from the condemnation of legal authority. I disapprove of their conception of life and
their methods, but I also disapprove of the use of coercion against National Socialism,
Bolshevism, Fascism, etc. to prevent them from expressing themselves, or to send them to the
gallows, if by chance they lose the play-off in a tied match. In the name of that special liberty
which belonged only to those who had won it, St. Just [51] killed the French Revolution. Freedom belongs to everyone, even to those who fight against it. All these disoriented people
are, furthermore, only the product of disoriented societies, whether it is a question of Spartacus
or Hitler, Mussolini or Castro, Lenin or Franco. To call the one lot criminals and the other
benefactors is only a political viewpoint, and will not stand up under examination. It is the same
sociological problem for all, in that all are morally or philosophically culpable; they are all
–    35    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---juridically innocent, which cannot be said of the social structures themselves, which are all
morally, philosophically and juridically culpable.

As long as there are societies which oppress,
there will be rebels to resist with violence, and - alas!

- many more rebels who are taken for
revolutionaries, than there are true revolutionaries.

Therefore, it is societies which must be
attacked, not men.

The guillotine, according to the wisdom of the ancients, can eliminate the
criminal, but not the crime; nothing could be truer.

But these considerations are only subjective.

In all objectivity it can rightly be claimed that
among the judges one at least was not qualified to condemn the origins, ideas and methods of
National Socialism, because his own origins, ideas and methods were in every point similar to
those of National Socialism, and his place should have been on the bench of the accused, not
that of the judges.

And as for the others, they were hardly better qualified, since in their origins,
ideas and methods they did not refuse to deal with that 'association of malefactors'; until 1939
its ambassadors and other emissaries were recognised and respected in all the capitals of the
world and therefore in their own, and it had a place at Geneva in the League of Nations.

It was
even politely regretted when the 'association' departed slamming the door.

And since then, what
were they all busy with?

Since when has International Law been entitled to sanction a
government which a people, in one way or another, makes for itself, or to which it submits,
beyond the right granted to the government of other peoples to recognise it or not, to maintain or
not to maintain relations with it?And since then, what
were they all busy with?

Since when has International Law been entitled to sanction a
government which a people, in one way or another, makes for itself, or to which it submits,
beyond the right granted to the government of other peoples to recognise it or not, to maintain or
not to maintain relations with it?

Strictly speaking, one could understand if this had happened to
the German people, because it is traditional for a victorious insurrection to massacre the
representatives of the power it has overthrown or, the other way round, that the existing power
massacres the leaders of an insurrection that failed.

But for a Tribunal, international besides, not
elected (except by force of arms and by itself), to declare itself qualified passes all
understanding.

So far as I know there never has been and never will be, I hope, any question of
shouldering arms to free the Russians from Kruschev, the Cubans from Castro, or the
Spaniards from Franco.

We are no longer in the era of Metternich and the Congress of Vienna,
and the Holy Alliance.

As for the seizure of power by subversion, the methods by which the accused were
charged could not be compared with those employed by Kruschev in Hungary, Fidel Castro in
Cuba, or [52] Franco in Spain.

If it was actually a question of subversion by insurrectional
violence up to November 8th, 1923 (the date of the Munich putsch that did not come off), from
that date on the N.S.D.A.P.

no longer considered taking over power except by constitutional
and legal means.

There is no question that its propaganda retained a certain violent character,
that all the public meetings were conducted with the protection of its own police force (S.A.

-
Stürmabteilung, security service, then S.S.

- Schutztaffel, elite security service), nor that these
S.A.

and S.S.

were not armed to the teeth and had quick reflexes and a heavy hand.

But it must
also be taken into account that the actions of the N.S.D.A.P.--- PAGE BREAK ---

were not armed to the teeth and had quick reflexes and a heavy hand. But it must
also be taken into account that the actions of the N.S.D.A.P. were in response to the
communists' threat to put a stop to the meetings with violence, and to achieve this by sending in
elements just as heavily armed, just as quick in reflex and just as heavy-handed. On them, in
addition, lay the responsibility for provocation. With this exception, for which its adversaries were responsible, the N.S.D.A.P. pursued
the conquest of power by those methods employed by all parties in all countries where party
activity is free, that is, by means of elections. I do not deny that there was still a question of
subversion. In my opinion, in all the democracies in the world, those who carry the elections are
those who have the money, and are best able to- subvert public opinion through the written and
spoken press, that is, the ones who can buy the greatest number of papers. This was not the
case with the N.S.D.A.P. before 1930, and until then the election results were not brilliant. But,
from 1930 on, once heavy industry had sided with them, everything changed, as can be seen by
the German Reichstag election tables, 1924 to 1933 (compare the votes
0btained by the N.S.D.A.P. with the number of unemployed at the time of voting):
1. From 1924 to 1930
Dates
Votes won
%
Seats
Unemployed
May 4th, 1924
1,918,000
6.6
32
320,711
–    36    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

December 
7th,
1924
908000
3.0
14
282,645
May 20th, 1926
810:006
2.6
12
268,443
–    37    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---II.

From 1939 to 1933
Dates
Votes won
%
Seats
Unemployed
September 14th,
1930
6,407,000
18.3
107
1,061,570
July 31st, 1932
13,779,000
37.3
230
5,392,248
November 
6th,
1932
11,737,000
33.1
196
5,355,428
March 5th, 1933
17,265,800
43.7
288
5,598,855
Heavy industry was just as worried by the mounting unemployment as the working class.

Contemporary economists generally agree that when the percentage of unemployed exceeds 5%
of the active population, there is a danger of social disorders.

Precisely at the beginning of 1930
this margin of tolerance was not only reached but passed.

Furthermore, the consequences of the
Wall Street crash, which were beginning to be felt in Europe, gave a [53] disturbing indication
that this rate was rising.

Finally, after the fall of the German Mark, heavy industry attributed the
collapse to the government parties, and registered their inability to correct the situation.

In a
word, they had no other card to play but National Socialism, and they played it, cautiously at
first, behind the scenes, and then openly.

That explains the reversal of the electoral trend after
the ballot of September 14th, 1930.

In the second half of 1932, when the two dissolutions that brought about the balloting of
July 31st and November 6th had shown that the possibility no longer existed of finding in the
Reichstag a majority of the kind of the earlier parliamentary coalitions, the national parties
(Centre Party and Catholic Bavarian party), whose leaders were respectively Hugenberg and
von Papen, turned to the N.S.D.A.P.

- the first just for a short time and the second for good.

Thus it was that on January 30th., 1933, Hitler was appointed Reich Chancellor by old Marshal
Hindenburg, then President of the Republic.

(In similar circumstances, President Coty
appointed General de Gaulle Prime Minister on June 30th, 1958).Thus it was that on January 30th., 1933, Hitler was appointed Reich Chancellor by old Marshal
Hindenburg, then President of the Republic.

(In similar circumstances, President Coty
appointed General de Gaulle Prime Minister on June 30th, 1958).

In the elections which took
place the following March 5th, the Hitler-Papen tandem was triumphant: 288 seats for the first,
52 for the second, or a total of 340 out of the 648 seats of the Reichstag, thus an assured
majority of 16 in the electoral body, 52% of the vote.

Up to this point everything took place in conformity with pure democratic tradition, as it is
understood by democrats today.

If there was conspiracy the number of accomplices is impressive and it would be a mistake
to think that they were all German.

We know, as I have just said, that the accession to power of
the N.S.D.A.P.

was financially, and very substantially, assisted by German heavy industry.

This aid came from the Central Propaganda Treasury, whose distributors were the banker
Schroeder, and Hugenberg.

Now, when the German Mark began to depreciate during the
Weimar Republic, almost all the industries which contributed to that fund were subsidised by
British or American banks or trust companies.

For example, the American chemical consortium
Dupont de Nemours, and the English trust Imperial Chemical Industry, subsidised I.G.

Farben,
with whom they shared the world explosives market, and the Dillon Bank of New York
subsidised the Vereinigte Stahlwerke, a German steel trust.

Others were subsidised by Morgan
or Rockefeller, etc.

Thus, the Pound and the Dollar were part of the conspiracy which brought
Hitler to power.

But no one has heard that the Dupont de Nemours, the Dillons, Morgans,
Rockefellers, etc.

were summoned to appear as accomplices before the Nuremberg Tribunal.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But no one has heard that the Dupont de Nemours, the Dillons, Morgans,
Rockefellers, etc. were summoned to appear as accomplices before the Nuremberg Tribunal. At the time when this conspiracy was directed against collective security, that 'association
of malefactors' did not lack for political aid and abetment from outside; Britain in the matter of
rearmament (naval agreement of June 18th, 1935), Russia in the matter of aggression (German-
Soviet pact and the partition of  [54] Poland), even France, if you take into consideration, a
propos of Munich, the condemning of pre-war governments by post-war governments. But, for
all that, there was no question of having them leave the judges' bench for that of the defendants. Here we touch on the heart of the problem of crime against peace. This is described in
Article 6, paragraph a. of the Indictment as follows:
–    38    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---The aims and purposes of the Nazi Party and of the defendants and divers other persons from time
to time associated as leaders, members, supporters or adherents of the Nazi Party (hereinafter called
collectively the "Nazi conspirators") were, or came to be, to accomplish the following by any means
deemed opportune, including unlawful means, and contemplating ultimate resort to threat of force, force
and aggressive war:
1.

To abrogate and overthrow the Treaty of Versailles and its restrictions upon the miliary
armament and activity of Germany;
2.

To acquire the territories lost by Germany as the result of the World War of 1914-18 and other
territories in Europe asserted by the Nazi conspirators to be occupied principally by so-called "racial
Germans";
3.

To acquire still further territories in continental Europe and elsewhere claimed by the Nazi
conspirators to be required by the "racial Germans" as "Lebensraum "or living space...

The first point was aimed at Germany's secret rearmament from 1933 to 1935, after that
carried on openly; her departure from the League of Nations on October 14th, 1933; the decision
to build up a military air force, March 10th, 1935; compulsory military service restored on the
16th of the same month, with a peace-time strength fixed at 500,000 men; the re-occupation of
the Rhineland on March 7th, 1936.

The second point was aimed principally at Silesia, divided up among the tiny artificial
states created by the Treaties of Versailles and Saint Germain, the Danzig corridor, Teschen,
Malmédy, etc.

It might have included the Saar, too, if the Saar had not almost unanimously
voted by plebiscite, on January 13th, 1935, to return to Germany.The second point was aimed principally at Silesia, divided up among the tiny artificial
states created by the Treaties of Versailles and Saint Germain, the Danzig corridor, Teschen,
Malmédy, etc.

It might have included the Saar, too, if the Saar had not almost unanimously
voted by plebiscite, on January 13th, 1935, to return to Germany.

As for the third point, which embraced all the territories conquered by the German armies
in operations against Poland, Russia, Norway, Denmark, Luxembourg, Belgium, the
Netherlands, Greece, Yugoslavia, etc., which should have been dealt with in peace treaties,
once the war was over, it stated precisely how the responsibility for everything that had
happened fell solely on Germany:
"(Their) aims and purposes were not fixed or static but evolved and expanded as they acquired
progressively greater power and became able to make more effective application of threats of force and
threats of aggressive war.

When their expanding aims and purposes became finally so great as to provoke
such strength of resistance as could be overthrown by armed force and aggressive [55] war, and not simply
by the opportunistic methods theretofore used, such as fraud, deceit, threats, intimidation, fifth column
activities, and propaganda, the Nazi conspirators deliberately planned, determined upon, and launched their
aggressive wars and wars in violation of international treaties, agreements…"
The Tribunal acceded to these conclusions arrived at by the prosecution, and recorded
them as justified in the judgement rendered (Volume 1, pp.

184 ff).

It appeared clear to them,
from the documents produced from the beginning, that there really had a conspiracy hatched by
the Germans in 1920, with the intention of committing these crimes, of which they were
accused, and that they had committed them deliberately and in full knowledge.

The most
important among these documents were: the programme of the N.S.D.A.P.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It appeared clear to them,
from the documents produced from the beginning, that there really had a conspiracy hatched by
the Germans in 1920, with the intention of committing these crimes, of which they were
accused, and that they had committed them deliberately and in full knowledge. The most
important among these documents were: the programme of the N.S.D.A.P. made public in
Munich on February 25th, 1920 (in 25 points, of which the first three were considered
particularly incriminating); a number of extracts, out of context, from the speeches of Hitler to
the Reichstag, in the Sportspalast, or in other public places; a number of the same person's talks
to the General Staff, in particular that of November 5th, 1937 (Hossbach document, P.S. 386,
original Volume XXXVII, pp. 546 and 556, and in French, Volume II, pp. 281-288), and on
August 22nd, 1939, for which three contradictory documents existed. The two most
contradictory were retained by the Tribunal (P.S. 798, Volume XXVI, pp. 338-344, and P.S. 1014, Volume XXVI, pp. 523-524). And now I would like to call attention to something all these documents had in common:
the distortions made of them which disappeared in the translations and which formed the basis -
the distortions, not the texts themselves! - of the argument maintained by the Prosecution and
upheld by the court. –    39    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---For example, point 1 of the N.S.D.A.P.

programme of February 20th, 1920, reads: "Wir
forden den Zusammenschluss aller Deutschen auf Grund des Selbstbestimmungsrechtes der
Voelker zu einen Gross-Deutschland." (We demand the union of all Germans on the basis of the
right of self-determination of peoples into a Greater Germany.) Used at the trial, we find the
following translation: "Nous demandons la réunion de tous les Allemands dans la 'Plus
Grande Allemagne' en accord avec le principe du droit des peuples à disposer d'eux-
mêmes." (We demand the reunion of all Germans into the "Greater Germany" in accordance
with the principle of the right of self-determination of peoples.) One is obliged to see that by
putting quotation marks around the words "Greater Germany" where none existed in the original
a change which alters the meaning of the text has been made.

The same holds for point 3, where the original reads: "Wir forden Land und Boden
(Kolonien) 
zur 
Ernaehrung 
unseres 
Volkes 
und 
Ansiedlung 
unseres
Bevolkerungsüberschusses," (We demand land and soil (colonies) for the nourishment of our
people and the settlement of our excess population).

[56]
"Nous demandons de la terre et des territoires pour nourrir notre peuple et la
possibilité d'employer à la colonisation l'excédent de notre population." (Volume II, p.

185).

(We demand land and territories for the nourishment of our people, and the possibility to
employ our excess population in colonisation).

Here the suppression of the parentheses and the
word between them shifted the main point of the article to second importance, namely the
colonies.(We demand land and territories for the nourishment of our people, and the possibility to
employ our excess population in colonisation).

Here the suppression of the parentheses and the
word between them shifted the main point of the article to second importance, namely the
colonies.

The same thing again with the Hossbach document, a series of conjectures written in the
hypothetical conditional mood, but translated as a series of statements in the present tense, from
which it was deduced at Nuremberg that Hitler had already decided by November 5th, 1937, as
head of the government, to resort to that war which he (according to the indictment), as head of
the party, had decided on back in 1920, as the only way to resolve the German problem.

The Hossbach document was considered most accusatory because of this sentence: "La
question allemande ne pourrait être résolue que par la force, laquelle ne va jamais sans
risques." (The German problem may not be resolved except by force, which is always attended
by risks) which was translated as "La question allemande ne PEUT être résolue, etc.

" (The
German problem can only be solved by, etc.) At the time all politicians everywhere, with a few
exceptions, formed the same opinion, "the only way to stop Germany from realising her
objectives is with force." This was an application of the famous Roman adage, Si vis pacem
para bellum (If you wish for peace, prepare for war), which was and still is the rule all over the
world, witness General de Gaulle's New Year Message to the French troops on January 1st,
1962.

"Prepare yourselves," he said, "prepare yourselves for great warrior actions which may
be imposed upon the nation, and her European allies.

That the destiny of France is linked with
her military power has never been more true." This is a good deal more specific than the words
the Hossbach paper puts into Hitler's mouth as he addresses his military commanders.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Prepare yourselves," he said, "prepare yourselves for great warrior actions which may
be imposed upon the nation, and her European allies. That the destiny of France is linked with
her military power has never been more true." This is a good deal more specific than the words
the Hossbach paper puts into Hitler's mouth as he addresses his military commanders. Should
we conclude that if this war for which they are to be prepared could not be averted, and should
end in another Nuremberg, the General would be hanged? And if one day war breaks out
between the U.S.A. and Russia (a war which, like the war of 1939-45, could not fail at once to
become a World War) will Kruschev's famous speech to the U.S. in 1961 be remembered
when, striking at his desk with his shoe, he threatened the United States with complete
destruction? It should be further clearly stated that, the following year, when it became a question of
translating into action the first of the eventualities hypothesised in the Hossbach document
(Czechoslovakia), Keitel's directive determining the preparatory steps to be taken, specified on
December 17th, 1938, "Externally it must be very clear that it is only a question of a peaceful
action, and not of a military operation." (Not retained at Nuremberg by [57] the Prosecution or
the court.)
We have an explanation of the interpretation of the text of the Hossbach document, given
by W. L. Shirer - unless it was given by the French translator, since it does not appear in the
–    40    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---German edition - in a footnote to p.

333 (p.

305, American edition) in his book The Rise and
Fall of the Third Reich.

"Almost all the German records of the remarks of Hitler and of others in private talks were written
down in the third person as indirect discourse, though frequently they abruptly slipped into direct, first-
person discourse without any change of punctuation.

This question posed a problem for American
English.

"Because I wanted to preserve the accuracy of the original document and the exact wording used or
recorded, I decided it was best to refrain from tampering with these accounts by rendering them into first-
person direct discourse or by excluding them from within quotation marks.

In the latter case it would have
looked as though I were indulging in liberal paraphrasing when I was not.

"It is largely a matter in the German records of verb tenses being changed by the actual recorders
from present to past and of changing the first-person pronoun to third-person.

If this is borne in mind
there will not be, I believe, any confusion.

"
It was Hossbach, the recorder of the report, who used the wrong tense, as Mr.

Shirer
knows better than anyone else.

The prosecutors and the judges knew it too.

I think falsification
could hardly be more ingenuously confessed.

Thus, at least on this point, the defendants were
condemned on the basis of what Hitler was supposed to have said, not on what he did say.

If
they knew that their report was in addition in no way official, that it was written down on the
10th of November 1937, five days later, from notes hastily taken on the 5th, that it was not read
over by the person concerned, nor brought to anyone's attention (Volume XIV, p.

40) the
historian and judge of the future will certainly be startled.

And the same holds for the Schmundt
document.

One last comment a propos of this document.

On May 16th, 1946, Dr.One last comment a propos of this document.

On May 16th, 1946, Dr.

Siemers, counsel
for Admiral Raeder, cast a doubt on the authenticity of the document because it was not labelled
"State Secret" (Volume XIV, p.

40).

A written deposition was requested of the author, who had
been located, but not his appearance in court; that would have been too dangerous.

On the 18th
of May, 1946, he said that he could not guarantee that the text presented to the Tribunal.was an
exact copy of his notes (Volume XLII, pp.

228-230).

The case of documents P.S.

798 and 1014 is even more typical.

On August 22nd, 1939,
Hitler gave a talk to his military leaders which, it is very likely, no one was asked to type out.

But, on November 26th, 1945, the Prosecution preserved three versions of the talk, all of which
were claimed to be authentic (probably they had not been read) even though they were obviously
in [58] contradiction to each other.

Moreover, not one of them had been communicated to the
Defence beforehand, as required by the Charter, although all three had been released to the
press.

At the end of the reading of the second version the Defence objected, arguing first that
procedure had been violated, second that it was not possible to put in evidence two contradictory
documents concerning the same event.

The objection was overruled.

However, the third version
was dropped.

And until May 16th, 1946, for nearly seven months, the Prosecution maintained
its general thesis, leaning, to the applause of the international press, first on one version and
then on the other.

Each time the Defence naturally wanted to object, and each time it was cut
short.

Finally on May 16th, 1946, Dr.

Siemers, counsel for Raeder, who was implicated in both
documents, became angry.

He was not, however, being difficult since he was quite willing to
have one document accepted, but not both.

Nothing could be more logical.

The President saw that this time he would not desist.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nothing could be more logical. The President saw that this time he would not desist. "What are your reasons?" he finally
asked. Dr. Siemers: "…this document (he was speaking of the more vulnerable, P.S. 1014) is
nothing but two pieces of paper headed "Second Speech by the Führer, on 22 August, 1939."
The original is without a heading, has no file number, no diary number, no stamp 'secret', no
signature, no date… On all the documents which the Prosecutor has submitted, even in the case
of minutes, you will find the date of the meeting, that of the drafting of the minutes, the place
where the minutes were typed, the name of the person who typed them, a stamp 'secret', or
some other. Furthermore, Hitler certainly talked for two and a half hours. I believe it is also
–    41    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---generally known that Hitler spoke very fast.

It is out of the question that the minutes could be
only 1,5 pages long if they are to give the meaning and content of a speech which lasted 2 and
1/4 hours.

Later, I will submit the original of document P.S.

798.

I am not an expert on
handwriting or typewriters, but it is plain to see that this document, which bears no signature
and whose origin we do not know, was written on the same kind of paper and with the same
typewriter." (Volume XIV, p.

51).

A long discussion began.

It will suffice to give the argument of the Prosecution presented
by Thomas J.

Dodd, American Trial Counsel who, after having said that he would make an
effort "to find out where this document came from, that all that he knew was that it had been
captured in the German archives, and, as such, was to be admitted," concluded:
"…whether true or not, it is a question of weight.

On my respectful submission, we cannot go
into intrinsic comparisons in order to decide the admissibility of the document.

We would have a great
deal to do if we compared the documents in detail.

It is a question we do not have to discuss." (Volume
XIV, p.

53).

A last objection by the Defence, then the President: "Yes, very well.

The request to strike
out the minutes of document P.S.

1014 [59] is denied."
One document was as false as the other, and if the Tribunal had admitted it about the
second, given what Dr.

Siemers said, they would have had to admit it about the first.

They did
not fall into the trap.

There was another reason for having the second document admitted, in
spite of the flagrant contradiction, and that was that it contained three important sentences, not
found in the first: "Destruction of Poland, main objective.They did
not fall into the trap.

There was another reason for having the second document admitted, in
spite of the flagrant contradiction, and that was that it contained three important sentences, not
found in the first: "Destruction of Poland, main objective.

Aim: elimination of vital forces, not
an attempt to arrive at a certain line… close your hearts to pity, adopt a brutal attitude I am only
afraid that at the last minute some swine will propose an arbitration plan."
In his anxiety, the falsifier had simply overdone it.

Doubtless he had observed, when it
was done, that he had been too modest in the first document and wanted to make up for it in the
second.

And in his zeal he did not notice that the second contradicted the first.

We would never finish if we tried to cite the distortions and the forgeries.

We will see
further on, in the chapter on "Crimes against Humanity", that M.

Edgar Faure broke all records
with the report, duly dated and signed (by someone dead, of course) of an anti-Jewish congress
which took place at Krumheubel on April 3rd and 4th, 1944, and which was proved, before a
full court on April 2nd, 1946 (Volume X, p.

420), never to have taken place'
I would like to add this concerning warped documents.

One day when he was having a
little vacation from the trial in Paris, a former friend, a journalist representing one of the big
Paris newspapers at Nuremberg, told me how surprised he was at the attitude of the defendants.

"It's funny," he said, "the texts are read to them in their own language, and naturally they
understand them.

Then when the arguments against them in the texts are taken up one by one,
they act as if they no longer understood, and their counsels even more so.

You say they do not
understand… and I say.

'bosh'!"
Just reading these documents, which were not made public at the time, explains
everything.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You say they do not
understand… and I say. 'bosh'!"
Just reading these documents, which were not made public at the time, explains
everything. If one spoke of them in Grande Allemagne and then argued Plus Grande
Allemagne, or of Colonies to argue Silesia or Poland or the Ukraine, or if a text was read to
them in the conditional tense and then arguments were drawn from it in the present, how could
they understand? This process of reading to the German defandants a text written in their mother tongue
asking them to acknowledge it as authentic, then producing English, Russian and French
translations which had nothing in common with the original, then taking from these translations
arguments which were then re-translated into German, was not without, as I have said, a certain
Machiavellianism. Many distortions of texts were corrected by the defendants or their counsel
acting together - in a way in flagrante dilecto - but there were so many that inevitably several
escaped them, and it was their bad luck that they were not the least important. [60]
–    42    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Like war crimes, crimes of peace require that we go into the materiality of the facts.

Naturally, we will not go into detail any more than we need to give the reader a general picture
of the whole, just enough to give him something to think about.

The Lion in the fable of La Fontaine, after he had been hunting with the Heifer, the Nanny
and the Ewe, divided up the spoils into four parts and explained to them, if I recall correctly,
that the first went to him because he was the King, the second because it was his share, the third
because he was the strongest, and as to the fourth, he would at once throttle anyone making a
claim to it.

It did not occur to the writer of the fable to assemble a Court of Justice to condemn
this marked breach of the laws and customs of hunting.

If he had, he would have found some
jurist Fox to claim that there was an infringement, that this infringement constituted one hunting
crime, and surely not four.

For the jurist Fox as for the defendant Lion, the fraudulent division
into four parts of the spoils of the hunt, in this case the Deer, left one, the body of the crime,
and also only one infringement (in this case the right of the strongest) analysed and redivised
under only four explanatory headings.

To claim that this destruction of the Versailles Treaty, the rearmament of Germany, the
acquisition of territories lost as a result of the First World War, and the acquisitions of others for
expansion, coupled with the deliberate intention of making aggressive wars, added up to so
many counts of indictment was perhaps an ingenious idea.For the jurist Fox as for the defendant Lion, the fraudulent division
into four parts of the spoils of the hunt, in this case the Deer, left one, the body of the crime,
and also only one infringement (in this case the right of the strongest) analysed and redivised
under only four explanatory headings.

To claim that this destruction of the Versailles Treaty, the rearmament of Germany, the
acquisition of territories lost as a result of the First World War, and the acquisitions of others for
expansion, coupled with the deliberate intention of making aggressive wars, added up to so
many counts of indictment was perhaps an ingenious idea.

If it had not been for the
overcrowded and overcharged atmosphere in which the trial took place - that extraordinary
proliferation of fish-wives, stocking knitters and the like who invaded that improvised court,
and who fed the interest of the lowest and highest - even the least informed spectator would
quickly have grasped that if crime existed, buried under this mass of headings, there was in
reality only one, the destruction of the Versailles Treaty, or the right of the strongest of the
fable.

To continue the analogy of the fable: imagine that the democratic Heifer, Nanny and Ewe,
having been joined by a Jenny just for the sake of being represented, a Turkey because every
farce has a fool, a Fox for the scenery, and a Wolf for the moral, have managed to catch the
Lion in a snare, firmly tied to the ground, and that they put him to death little by little, taking
care to prolong the spectacle, all of them gathering round every day so as to miss nothing - we
would have a League of Nations of animals, in which a Monkey all bedecked could well play
the part of the mace-bearer, and the press could be represented by an old cackling hen.

Imagine?..

this place in the concert of nations, this Lion in a snare - did not the Treaty of
Versailles want to condemn Germany to just about exactly that?Imagine?..

this place in the concert of nations, this Lion in a snare - did not the Treaty of
Versailles want to condemn Germany to just about exactly that?

One day, maggot-ridden and
half dead, the Lion managed to break his leash, that is all.

As in the world of La Fontaine, an
English Rat, or an American, if not one of their interbreeding, came out of his hole [61] at the
right moment and gnawed through the rope at just the right spot.

To return to the world of men, the question which presents itself is whether the German
Lion had the right to break out of the snare, and this question on another level is that of the
sacredness of treaties, especially peace treaties.

A treaty does not necessarily have to be the written expression of a relation of forces, e.g.

a customs conventions, the European Common Market.

In the case of the European Common
Market it must be admitted that it was imposed on the Six by an outside danger that threatened
all of them and that Germany, although deriving little advantage from this agreement,
nonetheless was forced into it by the new situation in the world in which she found herself as a
result of World War II, and because Britain's non-cooperation would be tantamount to her
exclusion from the most important markets on the Continent.

There are relations of forces that
are purely economic.

In the beginning they are all of this character, which they retain as long as
the problems inherent in commerce and the conquest of markets can be solved peaceably, and
merchants do not request the State to send soldiers to help them to keep what they have, or to
acquire a market prohibited to them, or that they have lost in price competition.

Contingent on
these conditions, treaties which are made or dissolved peaceably are quite imaginable and,
insofar as the interests involved are only of relative importance, they are fairly common.

It is
remarkable that on that score no jurist has thought of invoking the argument of Eternal
Inviolability.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contingent on
these conditions, treaties which are made or dissolved peaceably are quite imaginable and,
insofar as the interests involved are only of relative importance, they are fairly common. It is
remarkable that on that score no jurist has thought of invoking the argument of Eternal
Inviolability. –    43    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---The same does not hold for peace treaties, since they are always the written expression of
relations of military forces, in that there is always a conqueror who imposes his will on the
vanquished, who in turn submits only with the knife at his throat.

Ceaselessly and eternally
denounced in the name of Ethics, the process has never been codified in the name of Law, in the
sense of the limitation of the rights of the conqueror and the protection of the inalienable rights
of the vanquished.

Until the beginning of this century, the tradition of ages has been that the superior interests
of State were reasons enough for declaring war, and no moral or judicial justification was
necessary.

The savagery of the fighting was limited only by the stage of invention in the art of
destruction at the time.

One ransomed oneself or was ransomed at the discretion of the
conqueror, depending on how the battle had turned out.

White flags, truces, treaties… from the
declaration of war to the conclusion of peace, everything unfolded according to a kind of code,
honour handed down from chivalry.

There was always a traitorous knight, who was of course
always the enemy.

After the signing of the peace, which ended the war, the adversaries
separated according to convention, shook each other ceremoniously by the hand, the loser
accepting the conditions of the victor, wrapping himself in [62] his dignity, and both promising
to see each other again some day.

The Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 was declared and
conducted, and peace was concluded in that style.

And even though in the meantime many
attempts had been made, especially at The Hague, to give war a code, drawn up by jurists and
not by men of the sword, so, too, was the war of 1914-1918, at least in its preparation and
declaration.

Germany did nothing at Frankfurt to hinder the policy of revenge openly carried on
by Poincaré - unquestionably a war criminal in the terms of the Nuremberg Charter!And even though in the meantime many
attempts had been made, especially at The Hague, to give war a code, drawn up by jurists and
not by men of the sword, so, too, was the war of 1914-1918, at least in its preparation and
declaration.

Germany did nothing at Frankfurt to hinder the policy of revenge openly carried on
by Poincaré - unquestionably a war criminal in the terms of the Nuremberg Charter!

- but she
took umbrage in an untraditional way, by threatening to reply with more of the same.

And she
declared herself ready, if necessary, to pick up the gauntlet which for many years had been daily
thrown at her.

The intangibility of treaties was not an article of Law, but an established fact
which, in spite of international conventions, it was admitted on both sides could only last until
wars changed it.

Just as Poincaré proclaimed that the Frankfurt treaty was a disgrace for France,
and that it should be destroyed by force of arms, so it was in Germany, where Bethmann-
Hollweg allegedly called all the other treaties that bound them in Central and Balkan Europe, in
Africa and the Near East, "scraps of paper." The phrase went around the world in the press and
even in schools and universities.The intangibility of treaties was not an article of Law, but an established fact
which, in spite of international conventions, it was admitted on both sides could only last until
wars changed it.

Just as Poincaré proclaimed that the Frankfurt treaty was a disgrace for France,
and that it should be destroyed by force of arms, so it was in Germany, where Bethmann-
Hollweg allegedly called all the other treaties that bound them in Central and Balkan Europe, in
Africa and the Near East, "scraps of paper." The phrase went around the world in the press and
even in schools and universities.

In reality, Bethmann-Hollweg had only said "a bit of paper."
(Renouvin)
In order to decide whether these examples are exceptions which permit no generalisations,
or on the contrary are case-types on which rules can be based, the reader can ask himself what
public opinion today would think of jurists who proclaimed as sacrosanct the following: the
treaty of Verdun (843, partition of Charlemagne's empire), the treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis
(1559, end of the Italian wars, and the cleaning up of the unhappy after effects of the Hundred
Years War, which had come to an end in 1453 without any treaty other than the Treaty of
Troyes of 1429, from which the King of England derived the title of King of France, still part of
the realm of England at the end of the past century), the treaty of Westphalia (1648, end of the
Thirty Years War), the treaty of Vienna (1814-15, end of the Napoleonic Wars) etc.

But, in fact,
there is no middle way.

If the inviolability of treaties is a law, all treaties are inviolable without
exception, each treaty being the negation of the inviolability of the preceding one.

It is a fact that
while the jurists at Nuremberg were talking about the sacredness of treaties, they really had in
mind a general rule for which the Treaty of Versailles served as the only basis and only
application.

But why Versailles rather than Frankfurt, or Frankfurt rather than Vienna or
Verdun?--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is a fact that
while the jurists at Nuremberg were talking about the sacredness of treaties, they really had in
mind a general rule for which the Treaty of Versailles served as the only basis and only
application. But why Versailles rather than Frankfurt, or Frankfurt rather than Vienna or
Verdun? It is clear that the argument of the inviolability of the single Versailles Treaty is without
moral, historic or legal grounds, that it rests solely on the chances of war, and that if the war
had been won by the losers, things would be reversed and no fewer or less well qualified jurists
would be upholding the opposite argument. [63]
On the other hand, it is fairly elastic, taking into account the fact that in the matter of
monetary sanctions, the same judges did not consider the Treaty inviolable since, from 1919 to
–    44    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---1930, the considerable indemnities which Germany was sentenced to pay ranged, with their
acquiescence, from 132 billion gold Marks4 to a sum close to zero; and in its territorial clauses it
was only in the case of Germany that it was inviolable, since today all those clauses have been
annulled - with new and appreciable aggravations - to the profit of Russia.

I have already said that Britain, with the backing of the United States, never considered
the military clauses inviolable, not even under Hitler (Naval Agreement of June 1935).

As for
Russia, until September 18th, 1934 when she was admitted to the League at Litvinov's request
and on the recommendation of M.

Yvon Delbos and M.

Barthou, the Versailles Treaty was in
Russian eyes a "dictate of hate and plunder" and the League itself a "League of Bandits." On
April 17th, 1922, acting on this main idea, she even signed the Rapallo Treaty with Germany
(completed by the first German-Soviet non-aggression pact, April 24th, 1926), the first act of
her then foreign policy which was to gather into one bloc all the defeated countries of the war of
1914-1918 who were oppressed by the "dictate of the bandit conquerors." By which it can be
seen that in the view of at least three of the judges at Nuremberg this elastic inviolability of the
Treaty of Versailles was also in eclipse.

So, if I now conclude that no treaty can be considered sacred, I do not think I can be
accused of saying so improperly.

Up until Versailles, treaties were not inviolable because they
were the expression of relations of force, which are not immutable.

Each moment of history has
its own possibility of an outburst of violence which sweeps away the treaty which a preceding
outburst of violence has produced.

It is a vicious circle.

As with all vicious circles you cannot
escape from it without breaking it, and perhaps now is the time to survey the attempts that have
been made in this direction.It is a vicious circle.

As with all vicious circles you cannot
escape from it without breaking it, and perhaps now is the time to survey the attempts that have
been made in this direction.

And it will be seen that the Treaty of Versailles and the Nuremberg
Trial have been placed in a quite curious and original context.

At the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries Intellectual circles were seized
with a fit of conscience over war.

This reached the workers and public opinion generally and
caused the leading persons of nearly all countries to envisage a humanisation of war which
would lead progressively to its being outlawed.

The conventions adopted at the international
conferences at The Hague in 1899 and 1907 should be viewed as materialisations of that fit of
conscience.

A paradox: it was not France that boasted [64] of having originated all the generous
ideas, but Tsarist Russia which took the initiative in this movement in 1899; and in 1907, once
again it was not France but the United States which took it up.

France was busy preparing her
revenge for Frankfurt, and she threw herself into that body and soul, while at the same time she
participated in the conferences and the decisions made there.

Another paradox: during all this
period, as public opinion favoured these conferences more and more (27 participants in 1899,
44 in 1907), and specific measures putting a limitation on recourse to war which tended to
eliminate or restrict its inhumanity were adopted in the texts, at the same time all the dangers
increased, accumulated and ended by making war inevitable in 1914.

Many worthy people
thought at that time that the real aim in the minds of most of the participants of The Hague
conference was to lay a false scent.

In short, there was fighting from August 2nd, 1914 until November 11th, 1918.

The
Peace Conference opened at Paris on January 19th, 1919 and on June 28th the treaty which put
an official end to the war was signed at Versailles.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In short, there was fighting from August 2nd, 1914 until November 11th, 1918. The
Peace Conference opened at Paris on January 19th, 1919 and on June 28th the treaty which put
an official end to the war was signed at Versailles. In the memory of warriors such a humiliation
had never been inflicted on the loser, and in the memory of jurists never was there such an
infringement of the right of self-determination of people - except, of course, in 1945 and after. The military clauses alone were acceptable in that they recognised reciprocity. But for the rest,
one cannot compare without a sense of amazement the 132 billion gold Marks, or the 165 billion
gold francs5 demanded of Germany in reparations, with the 5 billion in the same currency which
Germany exacted from France at Frankfurt (and which brought forth screams from Thiers) nor
the amputations of territory, the justifications for them, and what happened to them. 4. The various publications on the decisions of the Reparations Commission, instituted by the Treaty of Versailles, are not in
agreement on this figure. Benoist-Méchin holds to the devision for 212 billion, in his Histoire de I'Armée allemande. The actual figure is
432 billion. 5. To give an idea of the enormity: Germany's national wealth was then estimated at 260 billion gold Marks, and that of France at
250 billion gold francs. –    45    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Right after the signing of the Versailles Treaty the victors found themselves in this
situation.

Having gone to war for "law and civilisation", in the spirit created by the Hague
conferences, and against the "Might makes Right" formula attributed to Kaiser Wilhelm II and
his Chancellor, Bethmann-Hollweg, they could do no better than themselves to apply the latter
formula to a beaten Germany.

And yet a unique opportunity existed after the war to break the
vicious circle, which could not be done before, by ignoring the results achieved by force of
arms and making a treaty with clauses to show that, in conformity with the war aims of the
Allies, Right made Might.

One has only to read the Fourteen Points to see that that is what
President Wilson would have liked to see, and it was the only possible way to get out of the
vicious circle.

And what a lesson the Allies could have taught the world!

Instead of that… but I
do not wish to say that then the Treaty of Versailles would have been sacrosanct!

The law of
force having been forever excluded from international life, they had only to [65] modify it from
time to time through the instrument of the Permanent Court of Justice instituted at The Hague in
1899, as required by the changing conditions in society, the structures of society being no more
stable than the relationships of force.

The Preamble of the Treaty of Versailles, framed by the Pact of the League of Nations and
inseparable from it, did contain an article - No.

19 - making provision for its revision in case it
ever became decrepit.

The many requests for revision which Germany presented from 1920 to
1939 were based on article 19 – the Treaty was indeed decrepit, from the very hour that it was
signed!19 - making provision for its revision in case it
ever became decrepit.

The many requests for revision which Germany presented from 1920 to
1939 were based on article 19 – the Treaty was indeed decrepit, from the very hour that it was
signed!

It will be easily understood, I think, that no more could a treaty which was acceptable in
feudal times (whether it was the expression of force or of general consent freely given) today
serve to govern relations among the great modern nations, than could a treaty, even though
accepted with universal consent in 1919, claim to control in its propositions what might become
of the world, say, two hundred years later.

No.

If treaties are not 'scraps of paper', neither can they ever be sets of unalterable rules
in a world that is not unalterable.

The only problem is that of their periodic revision and there are
two alternatives.

The periodic revision will be made by relations of force and by war, or by
international conferences of the Hague type.

Once peace was restored it was thought at Geneva that, in the bosom of the League
instituted by the Versailles Treaty, those conversations begun at The Hague could be resumed.

They led to nothing, precisely because they took place in the presence of both relations of forces
and general consent.

On the one side there were the former Allies, victors armed to the teeth and
therefore in a position to force acceptance of their most unrealistic stands; on the other there was
Germany disarmed and without recourse, obliged to bend to the others' wishes like the Lion of
La Fontaine in his snare, if a Rat had not opportunely come on the scene.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They led to nothing, precisely because they took place in the presence of both relations of forces
and general consent. On the one side there were the former Allies, victors armed to the teeth and
therefore in a position to force acceptance of their most unrealistic stands; on the other there was
Germany disarmed and without recourse, obliged to bend to the others' wishes like the Lion of
La Fontaine in his snare, if a Rat had not opportunely come on the scene. The situation was untenable, all the more so because it constituted a marked violation on
the part of the victors of the Treaty of Versailles, of which the Preamble to the five sections of
military articles said: "In view of making possible preparation for a limitation of armaments of
all nations, Germany undertakes to observe strictly the military, naval and air clauses hereinafter
stipulated. "
Germany having kept her promises and disarmed to the limit imposed by the Versailles
Treaty, the victors no longer wished to keep theirs - especially France, followed by the others
not wishing to be disobliging or interfere with her interests. We have seen that Britain, at least
until 1935, saw no objection. The error - not to call it worse - of the prosecution and judges at Nuremberg was to claim
the right to express opinions, as if the Treaty of Versailles had not been the expression of a
relation of forces, as if those who drew up the articles had not been the first [66] to break them,
as if in Germany the decision to destroy it had not been a reply to the violations initially
committed by the victors. This sort of reply is found in fact in all the phases of German rearmament, imputed to
Germany as crimes by the Indictment. 1. October 14th, 1933. Germany leaves the League of Nations. For years Germany
discharged the military clauses of the Treaty of Versailles; the Treaty of Locarno (October 16th,
–    46    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---1925) took legal cognisance of the fact, and Marshal Foch confirmed it in 1927 on his return
from a tour of inspection in Germany.

In spite of that, France refused to fulfil those same
clauses incumbent on her and in spite of the objections of Britain and the United States.

The
League was powerless to bend France, but maintained its hostile attitude to Germany with
regard to equality of rights.

The disarmament conference came to grief on this problem.

The
MacDonald Plan for the limitation of armaments (abolition of all offensive weapons, bombers,
tanks, heavy artillery etc.) was not accepted by France.

On May 18th, 1933, President
Roosevelt addressed the heads of state of 44 nations with a message which took up again the
MacDonald Plan.

On May 17th, Hitler gave a speech to the Reichstag which was an acceptance
of the MacDonald Plan.

France did not budge, the League was helpless to persuade her, did not
even try and insisted on maintaining her stand to refuse equal rights to Germany, whose
doctrine was that either France and the other nations keep to the engagements undertaken at
Versailles and also disarm, or she would re-arm.

When this point of view was not admitted,
Germany slammed the door on the League on October 14th, 1933.

On November 12th this
decision to quit the League was approved by a plebiscite of 95% of the registered voters.

In the House of Commons on October 15th, Lloyd George put the responsibility on
France with these words: "For years France has refused to keep her promise to disarm, and
since Locarno she has not ceased to increase her armaments year after year." This added a
violation of the spirit of Locarno to that of the Treaty of Versailles.

And in his book La France
a sauvé l'Europe, M.

Paul Reynaud admits that this attitude on the part of France made her
"seem responsible, in the eyes of the world, for the arms race, which was clearly leading to
war." (Volume I, p.

294)
2.Paul Reynaud admits that this attitude on the part of France made her
"seem responsible, in the eyes of the world, for the arms race, which was clearly leading to
war." (Volume I, p.

294)
2.

March 10th-16th, 1935, Germany builds a Military Force, restores compulsory Military
Service and brings the Peace-Time strength of the German Army to 500,000.

On the 6th of
February 1934, the Doumergue government came to power in France.

Barthou was the Minister
for Foreign Affairs.

One of his acts was to reverse the Locarno policy and substitute the
encirclement of Germany for it, preparing the way for a rapprochement with Soviet Russia,
which he later got admitted into the League of Nations on September 18th.

In March 1935,
public pronouncements leading to the Franco-Soviet Pact signed the following May 2nd, were
in full flow.

Stalin declared that France "was [67] entitled to bring her arms to the level of her
security needs"; lengthening the term of military service in France, etc., was achieved.

Taking
cognisance of this breach of the Versailles and Locarno Treaties, Hitler officially repudiated all
the military clauses of the Versailles Treaty, decided to create an air fleet and to restore
compulsory military service.

If the security of France called for action, so did that of Germany,
encircled as it was.

It must be observed that while throwing the responsibility on to France - and rightly, that
is indisputable - for a state of affairs that continually worsened, Britain (which at Nuremberg
accused the Germans of violating the Treaty of Versailles) was at the same time not so very
unforgiving, since she had concluded a naval agreement with Germany in June 1935 which
notably increased Germany's naval tonnage, both surface and submarine, in comparison with
that allowed at Versailles.

The creation of an air.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It must be observed that while throwing the responsibility on to France - and rightly, that
is indisputable - for a state of affairs that continually worsened, Britain (which at Nuremberg
accused the Germans of violating the Treaty of Versailles) was at the same time not so very
unforgiving, since she had concluded a naval agreement with Germany in June 1935 which
notably increased Germany's naval tonnage, both surface and submarine, in comparison with
that allowed at Versailles. The creation of an air. fleet, the re-establishment of compulsory
military service, the increase of the standing military strength were imputed to Germany as
crimes, but obviously not the naval re-armament which was, moreover, done without the assent
of France. Britain would have to have been accused of complicity and Britain was one of the
judges. There were State's pardons - even at Nuremberg! 3. March 7th, 1936. Germany re-occupied "symbolically" the Demilitarised Rhineland. It
was a marked infringement of the Treaty of Versailles. It was the logical outcome of what
preceded and Germany's reply to the last act, the signing of the Franco-Soviet Pact on May 2nd,
1935. This pact was not ratified by the French parliament until February 27th, 1936. Hitler had
expected a reversal. Contrary to his hopes, it was ratified by 353 votes to 164. On February
21st, Hitler had said to Bertrand de Jouvenel who had come to interview him for Paris-Midi:
–    47    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"You see before you a Germany nine-tenths of whose people have confidence in their leader, and
this leader says to you: Let us be friends.

Yes, I know what all of you think.

You say: Hitler makes
declarations of peace to us, but is it in good faith?

Is he .sincere?

Consider!

Would it not be ruinous for
both our countries we were to tear each other to pieces again on the battlefield?

My personal efforts towards such a rapprochment will always continue, however.

In fact, this
more than deplorable pact would naturally create a new situation.

You are letting yourselves be dragged
into a diplomatic game with a power whose sole aim is to sow disorder among the great European
nations, a disorder from which she will benefit.

There are in the lives of nations decisive occasions.

Today France can, if she will, forever put an
end to that 'German peril' which generations of your children learn to fear.

You can remove the  heavy
burden which weighs on the history of France - the opportunity is given to all of you.

If you do not seize
it, think of your responsibility to your children.

[68]
For fear that this might compromise the vote on which Hitler had placed so much hope -
there was little danger that it could - the government intervened with the director of Paris-Midi
to the effect that the interview which was to have appeared on the 23rd, only came out on
February 28th, that is, the day after the vote in Parliament.

There was not long to wait for
Hitler's answer to the manoeuvre of the French government and the vote of Parliament.

On the
7th of March he re-occupied the Rhineland with military forces.

And so it was with all the grievances enumerated against the defendants at Nuremberg in
the Indictment, and sustained by the judgement.

It was enough to cite those few examples to
demonstrate that in the infernal arms race which led to the war, Germany - even Hitler's
Germany - was not alone in bearing all responsibility.And so it was with all the grievances enumerated against the defendants at Nuremberg in
the Indictment, and sustained by the judgement.

It was enough to cite those few examples to
demonstrate that in the infernal arms race which led to the war, Germany - even Hitler's
Germany - was not alone in bearing all responsibility.

The judges played as great a part as the
accused and, to be more precise, the initial responsibility was incumbent on France because she
alone had prevented the Disarmament Conference from reaching conclusions, conclusions
which she alone did not want.

It is often asked what was the reason for France's obstinacy in not desiring disarmament.

The answer to this question is given in the Journal officiel de la République française of
March 26th, 1938, which was addressed to the Ministry of National Economy - at the request of
Senator Paul Laffont - concerning the quantities of iron ore exported to Germany from France.

since 1934, and obtained the following information:
"The amounts of iron ore (No.

204, customs' tariff) exported to Germany during 1934,
1935, 1936 and 1937, are recorded in the following table:
Year
Quantity in metric
quintals
1934
17,060,916
1935
58,616,111
1936
77,931,756
1937
71,329,234
One can estimate the loss M.

Francois de Wendel and his associates in iron metallurgy, of
Meurthe-et-Moselle, would have sustained if France had not furnished Germany the
wherewithal for re-arming.

To get an exact picture, compare the export figures for the year
before Germany decided to re-arm (1934) and the year after (1935).

Jean Gautier-Boissière and Michel Alexandre, from whom I have borrowed this account,
conclude: "It will be a consolation to those French soldiers who suffered wounds during the
1939-40 campaign to know that the projectiles that mutilated them were made out of the ore
patriotically exported by M.

Franqois de Wendel and his metallurgical associates of Meurthe-et-
Moselle."
M.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jean Gautier-Boissière and Michel Alexandre, from whom I have borrowed this account,
conclude: "It will be a consolation to those French soldiers who suffered wounds during the
1939-40 campaign to know that the projectiles that mutilated them were made out of the ore
patriotically exported by M. Franqois de Wendel and his metallurgical associates of Meurthe-et-
Moselle."
M. François de Wendel was a person of considerable influence in French politics between
the two wars. On January 11th, 1923, in order to procure for him at a good price the Rhine [69]
Westphalian coke indispensable for Lorraine iron, without forcing him to export, M. Poincaré
had the Ruhr occupied, on the pretext that a delivery of telegraph poles made by Germany as
–    48    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---part of her reparations was incomplete.

When this scheme failed, rather than force him to pay
the asked price for German coke, his friend Barthou, who saw eye to eye with him, did not
hesitate to torpedo the Disarmament Conference in order to get a good customer, in the person
of Germany, for his iron ore.

No one has heard it said that Mr.

François de Wendel was cited by the judges at
Nuremberg to appear as an accomplice.

Nor has that been heard about the Dupont de Nemours, the directors of the English
Imperial Chemical Industry, the Dillon Bank, the Morgans, the Rockefellers etc.

who made
loans to the German industries, whose propaganda funds fed the N.S.D.A.P.

* * *
To complete the picture we must now return to an event in connection with breaches of the
Treaty of Versailles called "Crimes against peace," in Part a.

of Article 6, as interpreted by the
Indictment: the Anglo-German Naval Agreement of June 1935, for which Britain could certainly
have been accused of conspiracy with Nazism, since it was concluded with the Nazi
government.

On July 17th, 1937 this agreement was re-affirmed, in a sense favourable to
Germany.

Through this diplomatic instrument, both Britain and Germany increased their naval
armament in flagrant violation of the preamble to the military articles of the Treaty of Versailles.

France opposed it and the United States did not look favourably upon it, but they both made the
best of it and turned a blind eye.

As for Russia, she howled at the time that it was a preparation
for anti-Soviet aggression.

In 1945, the question of this violation, this 'crime against peace',
was not brought up against Britain, and in order to avoid having to bring it up against Britain,
Germany was granted pardon for the charge… Everything that Germany had done in matters of
rearmament up until then was also deemed allowable, for as long as the honeymoon had lasted -
until March 1939.As for Russia, she howled at the time that it was a preparation
for anti-Soviet aggression.

In 1945, the question of this violation, this 'crime against peace',
was not brought up against Britain, and in order to avoid having to bring it up against Britain,
Germany was granted pardon for the charge… Everything that Germany had done in matters of
rearmament up until then was also deemed allowable, for as long as the honeymoon had lasted -
until March 1939.

In passing, it may be of interest to examine the proposition that the political rupture
between Germany and Britain was produced not in March 1939, but during 1936, and that the
first step was taken not by the British, but by Hitler himself.

Adherents to this proposition, the
most brilliant of whom is the French polemicist, Pierre Fontaine (Les Secrets du pétrole, Paris,
1963) lean on the following:
1.

From the day after the Russian Revolution (1917) which nationalised Caucasus oil,
which was the property of Royal Dutch hell, founded by Deterding, the policy of the Foreign
Office was directed towards its recovery, by diplomatic means at first.

But about 1928, the
Soviets having remained obdurate to all overtures, [70] the Foreign Office, inspired by
Deterding, changed course and no longer envisaged this recovery except through war.

At least
that is what the adherents of this theory maintain.

It was then that Deterding and Royal Dutch
Shell are said to have subvented the National Socialist movement in Germany, whose leader,
Hitler, they considered the only one capable of making a success of the operation.

2.

In Mein Kampf, one reads (p.

705 of the first ed.): "If Germany wanted to reconquer
territories in Europe this could only be done at Russia's expense… it is only with England
covering the rear that a new Germanic migration could be undertaken… In Europe, in the near
future, only two allies will be possible for Germany, England and Italy."
The parallelism of the views is striking to say the least.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Mein Kampf, one reads (p. 705 of the first ed.): "If Germany wanted to reconquer
territories in Europe this could only be done at Russia's expense… it is only with England
covering the rear that a new Germanic migration could be undertaken… In Europe, in the near
future, only two allies will be possible for Germany, England and Italy."
The parallelism of the views is striking to say the least. In 1936 Hitler suddenly felt that
Britain was only making use of him to recover the Caucasus oil and that once this aim was
achieved, she would change course and form new alliances in order to eliminate him. This
feeling was inspired by the attitude of the British government towards the triumph of the
Popular Front, which the communists put over in France in the legislative elections of May
1936. And from then on he rejected all British advances. All Deterding's efforts to get him to
change his attitude were in vain. Royal Dutch Shell, in order to save at least the Rumanian oil,
toyed with the idea of directing the policy of the Foreign Office towards an Anglo-Russian
rapprochement. But Deterding, not in favour of this policy, resigned from his post of President
–    49    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---and Director-General and retired in Germany.

In 1939, on the day of his death, two German
diplomats in full regalia put on his coffin an immense wreath of flowers, in Hitler's colours.

There is much that is true in this interpretation.

The writer of this work thinks,
nevertheless, that for the Foreign Office the period 1936 to 1939 was a period of expection and
not of rupture for Britain, and that a definite rupture did not come until March 1939.

Substantiation for this is to be found in the fact that British policy accommodated itself very well
to all of Hitler's enterprises between 1936 and 1939 in defiance of the Versailles Treaty - that
she even showed herself to be quite understanding.

It is true that this period has not yet been
thoroughly examined by historians and its exploration, as soon as it can be done, may well hold
many surprises.

It is apparently not to be doubted that through Deterding, Caucasus oil played a
major role in British policy between the wars, the successes of Hitler in Germany and the
unleashing of the Second World War.

In March 1939 Lord Halifax - and therefore the British government - discovered Poland
and that was the end of the process of de facto revision of the Treaty of Versailles which had
been, on the whole, fairly peaceful even if concerned with general rearmament.

Hardly anything
remained to be settled at that time except the German-Polish dispute over the Danzig corridor
and [71] Silesia.

Poland wanted the status quo; Germany, stressing the self-determination of
the territories concerned and her right of access to East Prussia, was demanding an adjustment.

Britain sided with Poland, which France had not ceased to defend since 1919, with the Anglo-
Polish Guarantee Pact thereby strengthening the Franco-Polish Pact of the same name.Poland wanted the status quo; Germany, stressing the self-determination of
the territories concerned and her right of access to East Prussia, was demanding an adjustment.

Britain sided with Poland, which France had not ceased to defend since 1919, with the Anglo-
Polish Guarantee Pact thereby strengthening the Franco-Polish Pact of the same name.

Britain's
attitude was later accounted for by the fact that if the German-Polish dispute had been peacefully
settled, in conformity with the right of peoples to self-determination, Rumanian oil-exploited by
British companies would have been considerably closer to Germany's grasp.

In Rumania there
was at the time a strong trend in favour of evicting the British companies.

Germany supported
the movement behind the scenes and the approach of German armies could only strengthen this
movement, especially as Hungary was a friend of Germany.

Taking all things into account, the
argument is valid as an explanation of Britain's brusque counterblow.

It even explains the
Anglo-Russian rapprochement and the British military mission that joined the French military
mission in Moscow… In March 1939 the British and French military missions communicated to
their respective governments information that led them to think they could count on Russia's
support in the event of a general European dispute.

Thus the argument itself provided the
answer that supported it.

The whole matter can be summarised by saying that if until March
1939 Britain had looked with a benevolent and often approving eye on those revisions of the
Treaty of Versailles made by Germany on her own prerogative, it was solely because she did
not concede that the Franco-Russian Pact (1936) carried enough force to become a Franco-
Anglo-Russian pact.

In matters of foreign policy, as Napoleon tragically experienced, Russia
has always been Britain's last resort as a means of ruling the continent.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The whole matter can be summarised by saying that if until March
1939 Britain had looked with a benevolent and often approving eye on those revisions of the
Treaty of Versailles made by Germany on her own prerogative, it was solely because she did
not concede that the Franco-Russian Pact (1936) carried enough force to become a Franco-
Anglo-Russian pact. In matters of foreign policy, as Napoleon tragically experienced, Russia
has always been Britain's last resort as a means of ruling the continent. From the moment
assurance was given by her agents that Russia would play the traditional game, there was no
more reason to hesitate. But, Stalin was not Tsar Alexander and Hitler was not Napoleon. We know the rest: August 23rd, 1939, German-Soviet Pact, partition of Poland and other
gentlemen's agreements between Germany and Russia, which also had disputes to settle with
Poland, the Baltic countries and the regions around the mouth of the Danube - all post Versailles
Treaty. Since Russia acted in connivance with Germany on the partition of Poland she was
obviously just as guilty. But not at all. On April 2nd, 1946, at Nuremberg, a piece of incredible
buffoonery took place when General Rudenko, Russian Prosecutor, personally asked
Ribbentrop this question:
General Rudenko: Do you consider that the attack on Poland was an act of aggression on the part
of Germany? (Volume X, p. 443)
In vain did Dr. Seidl (counsel for Rudolf Hess) and Dr. Horn (Von Ribbentrop's counsel)
attempt to demonsrate that this question could not be put in that form. Each time they were told
[72] that it was not Russia but Germany in the dock. Through sheer persistence they were able,
–    50    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---all the same, to bring out the reasons, which they found in the German-Soviet Pact and the
component secret agreement, why they were asking that the question should not be so stated.

(Testimony of the German Ambassador at Moscow, Dr.

Friedrich Gaus: Volume X, pp.

14, 86,
325; Volume XI, pp.

611--612; Volume XII, p.

4 54; Volume XIV, pp.

299-301; Volume XV,
p.

594, and testimony of von Weizsacker, Volume XIV, pp.

300-302, to cite only two.) But the
German-Soviet Pact and the component secret agreement, whose provisions were only made
public in this manner, were not put to Russia - of course!

For the edification of the reader the provisions contained in the documents cited above
were, roughly (for naturally the Prosecution took every precaution to keep the German-Russian
Pact and the Secret Agreement out of the hands of the Defence): in Poland, the line of
demarcation between the two spheres of influence followed the Rysia, Bug, Narev and San
Rivers; Germany disassociated herself from Latvia, Finland and Estonia, but laid claim to
Lithuania; she further declared she had no other than economic interests in the Balkans, and later
the Russians used this as an authorisation to demand military bases (especially in Bulgaria)
which was, if not the cause, at last one of the reasons for Germany's entering into war with
Russia on June 22nd, 1941.

This shows that Russia held just as low an opinion of the
Versailles Treaty and the right of peoples to self-determination as did Germany.

But the German-Soviet Pact and the secret agreement were not the only documents (and
they were authentic!) which the judges at Nuremberg refused to consider.

There was also the
German White Book which the Defence tried to have admitted in connection with the invasion of
Belgium, Norway and Greece, likewise laid to Germany's charge.

Here the Defence did not dispute Germany's guilt; it asked only that the conditions under
which she had burdened her conscience with this crime be regarded.There was also the
German White Book which the Defence tried to have admitted in connection with the invasion of
Belgium, Norway and Greece, likewise laid to Germany's charge.

Here the Defence did not dispute Germany's guilt; it asked only that the conditions under
which she had burdened her conscience with this crime be regarded.

The German Government,
the Defence claimed, had become convinced that if Germany had not invaded these territories the
Allied Powers were themselves going to do so.

The Government was informed by the agents of
Admiral Canaris, whose information service probably rivalled M.1.5 or the F.B.I.

At this point
in its reasoning, the Defence declared that it was in a position to prove that the belief on
Germany's part was justified.

They reasoned thus: in June 1940, German troops found the
archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at Charité sur Loire (France) and in these archives
documents, in particular a letter from General Gamelin to Daladier, and another from General
Weygand to General Gamelin, and reports of Ministerial Councils or meetings of the French
General Staff which established that the French and British had in readiness a plan for a landing
at Narvik, the invasion of Belgium, the Ruhr, the destruction of [73] Rumania's oil and a
landing at Salonika.

The Defence, in short, wanted to show that Germany had succeeded where
her adversaries had failed and that, for its part, it was a question only of a reaction of defence
against planned aggression6.

Furthermore, in the case of Greece, no decision was to be taken
until invading British troops arrived in Crete.

The reasoning was not without merit.

The
documents selected from the archives of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and on which
the argument rested had been collected into a White Book by the German Government in 1941,
and it was this White Book that the Defence intended to produce.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The reasoning was not without merit. The
documents selected from the archives of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and on which
the argument rested had been collected into a White Book by the German Government in 1941,
and it was this White Book that the Defence intended to produce. The Defence plea was rejected at the insistence of Sir Maxwell-Fyfe (British Prosecutor),
Dodd (American Prosecutor) and Dubost (French Prosecutor) on two grounds: first, that at the
moment Germany made the decision to invade she had no proof that her conviction was
justified; second, that no confidence could be had in a German document such as the White
Book precisely because it was German (session of May 16th, 1946). Of course, a German
document could not be pertinent unless it accused Germany. These are the arguments of the kind of casuists that Loyola would have been proud of,
which were advanced against taking the Treaty of Versailles into consideration and which were
particularly and most pertinently refuted by Dr. Seidl (counsel for Rudolf Hess, who had
probably been sent to Britain by Hitler himself for a last attempt at negotiation with the British)
6. All of this has just been substantiated in France in Volume II of the Memoirs of M. Paul Reynaud, then President of the Council,
recently Published with the title Envers et contre tous (May 1963) in which these documents and reports of the Ministerial Council are cited
and commented upon in the terms and meaning used by the Defence before the Nuremberg Tribunal. –    51    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---and Dr.

Horn (counsel for von Ribbentrop).

After some skirmishing during which they both
marked numerous points, the unanimous argument of the Defence was summarised in this
statement of Dr.

Horn:
"There is no doubt that the Prosecution base their case on infractions of the Versailles Treaty.

To
these treaty infractions it is absolutely necessary, in my opinion, to examine the facts which allowed the
legality of the treaty to be doubted.

It is certain that it was signed under duress.

International Law
recognises that such treaties have grave deficiencies and considers them infamous.

"In my opinion we must be allowed to submit the facts that serve to show the soundness of this
assertion and legal viewpoint.

"I do not wish to make any further statements on this point, but I ask that my first request be
granted, that the documentary facts be allowed which would permit a judgement on the legal value of the
Treaty of Versailles.

" (Volume X, p.

94, 26th March, 1946).

Very solid.

Reply of Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe:
"In spite of all the respect due to Dr.

Horn, I submit that it is  [74] an unsound argument… Once
it is admitted that there is a treaty and that an infraction is made, these are the conceded facts, and it is no
answer to say that a number of admirable people have, in the signatory countries, believed that the terms
of this were wrong.

The treaty is there and the person who knowingly makes an infraction is breaking
the treaty, regardless of the soundness of the arguments on which it is based…"
In saying that, Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe was surely not thinking of France, who violated
the treaty by refusing to disarm, when it was acknowledged in 1927 that Germany had fulfilled
the terms of the clauses relative to disarming, nor of Britain who violated it twice in May 1935
and July 1937, with the Anglo-German Naval Agreement.Horn, I submit that it is  [74] an unsound argument… Once
it is admitted that there is a treaty and that an infraction is made, these are the conceded facts, and it is no
answer to say that a number of admirable people have, in the signatory countries, believed that the terms
of this were wrong.

The treaty is there and the person who knowingly makes an infraction is breaking
the treaty, regardless of the soundness of the arguments on which it is based…"
In saying that, Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe was surely not thinking of France, who violated
the treaty by refusing to disarm, when it was acknowledged in 1927 that Germany had fulfilled
the terms of the clauses relative to disarming, nor of Britain who violated it twice in May 1935
and July 1937, with the Anglo-German Naval Agreement.

He was only the more at ease in
continuing:
"It really does not help to know whether the defendant Hess acted in the belief that the Treaty of
Versailles was bad, or to know what were the opinions of the Editor-in-Chief of the Observer, an
English Sunday paper, or those of some number of the Manchester Guardian, twenty years ago, any
more than it is useful to refer to what distinguished statesmen have written, regardless of the respect due
them, about the event, years after it happened.

" (Volume X, pp.

99).

Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe doubtless did not know that not only journalists and even
statesmen had voiced views unfavourable to the Treaty of Versailles, but that there were
countries which had refused to endorse it for the very reasons invoked by the Defence -
America, for example!

Decision of the Tribunal:
"The Tribunal (after a recess) rules that evidence to establish the injustice of the Treaty of
Versailles, or its imposition by force, is inadmissible, and therefore rejects document Vol.

3 on behalf of
the defendant Hess." (Volume X, p.

99, afternoon session).

It could not be otherwise.--- PAGE BREAK ---

99, afternoon session). It could not be otherwise. To admit in evidence this book of documents would have been
to admit the possibility that France, Britain and Russia at least, had themselves violated the
Treaty of Versailles, which would lead directly to their being challenged as judges, which was
forbidden, as we have seen, in Article 3. In the case of the partition of Poland between Germany and Russia, as of that of the
successive invasions of Belgium, Norway and Greece, it was really basically the same problem
of the competence of the Tribunal that was posed. Evasion was the only argument the Prosecution could put in opposition to the Defence. It was also the only one which it could not openly use. And that is why all the arguments which the Prosecution invoked were at the same time so
constrained, hampered, involved and so mediocre. –    52    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[75]
Chapter IV
WAR CRIMES
Ideas about war crimes have changed considerably since 1945, with regard to the
applications of the Geneva and Hague conventions to them.

Indeed, the corpses of the eleven
men hanged at Nuremberg were hardly cold before the universal conscience was asking itself
the most sober questions about the rights of the Allies to set themselves up as judges and
pronounce sentence.

And since this conscience was from the beginning expressed through the
voices of the most estimable people, it was quite impossible to be unaware of it.

Among them
figured men as universally known as Professor Gilbert Murray, the best known of British
Hellenists, and the Dean of Rhodes House - both men from Oxford; the military writer Lidell
Hart; the anarchist Israeli editor Victor Gollancz; Member of the House of Commons R.

R.

Stokes; Lord Hankey, Secretary of the renowned Committee for the Defence of the Empire from
1912 to 1938 and member of the British Cabinet from 1920-1921; the American Judge
Wennerstrum, from the Supreme Court of the State of Iowa, who had been appointed to the
bench of the Nuremberg Tribunal and who left the post abruptly after a few months; Senator
Taft; Lord Bishop Chichester, who intervened in the House of Lords in strong language on June
23rd, 1948; Dibelius, Bishop of Berlin, etc.

Most of them had protested long before the bodies
of the hanged turned cold, even before the verdict was handed down.

Their opposition was
known to the best informed from the beginning of 1944 when the Allies' determination to hold a
trial became public knowledge, but a conspiracy of silence worked against them and their protest
was not known until long after.

There were few Germans among them.

The abominable press campaign unleashed against
Germany had made defendants of all of them and the Germans gave the impression of bowing
their heads under blows.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were few Germans among them. The abominable press campaign unleashed against
Germany had made defendants of all of them and the Germans gave the impression of bowing
their heads under blows. For any honest person looking back on the press and writings of the
time, there is no possible doubt: the attorneys for the defendants in the Trial of the Major War
Criminals performed acts of real heroism. Limited in their defence procedure, odiously distorted
by the press, their interventions and pleadings often appeared timid, and sometimes
inconsistent. Nonetheless, many of their speeches will one day be considered worthy of being
included in an anthology. I am thinking particularly of the pleading concerning the incompetency
of the Tribunal, presented in the name of all the defence counsels, by Dr. Stahmer, counsel for
Goering, at the beginning of the session of November 19th, 1945, and rejected on the 21st "on
the grounds that it called into question the competence of the Tribunal, it was in contradition of
Article 3 of the Charter." Article 3 stated, in fact, peremptorily that "neither [76] the Tribunal, its
members nor their alternates, may be challenged by the Prosecution or by the defendants or their
counsel."
I am thinking, too, of the intervention of Dr. Sauter, counsel for Ribbentrop, on the
Treaty of Versailles; of Professors Exner and Jahreiss, counsels for Jodl, on breaches of
international law; of Plottenrichter Kranzbuehler, counsel for Admiral Raeder, on maritime law;
of Dr. Robert Servatius, counsel for Saukel, on procedure and forced labour; and of the others
–    53    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---who, although their performance was more modest, nonetheless stood out head and shoulders
above the judges and prosecutors.

In France hardly more than the two admirable books by Maurice Bardèche, Nuremberg ou
la Terre Promise, and Nuremberg II ou les Faux-Monnaveurs (Nuremberg, or the Promised
Land and Nuremberg H, or the Counterfeiters) are worthy of being mentioned.

The French
Left, in power, saw in the contents of these two books only the political opinions of the author,
who openly - and very pluckily - called himself a fascist.

The Left raised a barrage against the
books and the first was actually, and quite scandalously, banned.

The ideas of the books,
presented with rare objectivity, are the same ones that in my youth - taking Bertrand Russell,
Mathias Morhardt, Romain Rolland, Anatole France, Jeanne and Michel Alexandre for guides -
the European socialist parties and the world Left all held, and almost put across at the end of the
war of 1914-1918 and up until 1933.

It would be easy to demonstate that these ideas, of ancient
tradition, are really left-wing.

There is much I could say on the shifting that took place when the
Left, faced with the phenomenon of war, retreated to the traditional positions of the Right, while
the Right resorted to those of the Left; but here the historian should cede the pen to the
sociologist.

So we will confine ourselves to mentioning one thing that offers useful
comparisons.

In 1914, too, the Left adopted the policies of the Right about war, but in 1918 it
turned Left again while the Right, arrogant and impervious, remained stupidly set on dogmas of
another age.

Today it is the Left who are stupidly stuck on these dogmas of another age.

This
historic switch-back is curious to say the least.Today it is the Left who are stupidly stuck on these dogmas of another age.

This
historic switch-back is curious to say the least.

In short, all the protests, whatever their source, and no matter which of the charges
against Germany or the Germans they were concerned with, all the charges could equally well
have been laid against the Allies, and therefore all of the parties concerned should have been
seated in the dock.

And if a trial had to be held, prosecutors and judges should only have been
selected from among neutrals, who doubtless would have seated them all back to back.

Solid arguments were voiced on the subject of war crimes and crimes against humanity.

First the Russians spoke concerning deportation and German concentration camps and
propaganda concerning this was the touchstone of sensitivity in world opinion.

Field Marshal Goering, interrogated on March 21st, 1946 by [77] General Rudenko, the
Russian prosecutor, had answered that "1,680,000 Poles and Ukrainians had been deported
from territories occupied by the Soviet Union, and sent to the Far and Near East" (Report of the
Proceedings, Volume IX, p.

673); he was not permitted to cite his references, nor to continue.

The first Polish government in London had, meanwhile, published a paper according to which
the number of Polish deportees lay between one million and 1,600,000 - 400,000 of whom
perished during the voyage to the interior of Russia and among these, 77,834 children died out
of 144,000 deported.

It seems that this took place in February, April and June 1940, and June
1941.

M.

Montgomery Belgion, referring to the first Polish government in London added that
according to information furnished to Miss Keren by the American Red Cross, and the Polish
book The Dark Side of the Moon (London, 1943), the Russians extended the operation to the
Balts: 60,940 Estonians, 60,000 Latvians, 70,000 Lithuanians.--- PAGE BREAK ---

M. Montgomery Belgion, referring to the first Polish government in London added that
according to information furnished to Miss Keren by the American Red Cross, and the Polish
book The Dark Side of the Moon (London, 1943), the Russians extended the operation to the
Balts: 60,940 Estonians, 60,000 Latvians, 70,000 Lithuanians. May I add that in a small book, Le Problème de la Silésie et le Droit (The Problem of
the Law and Silesia) which came out in 1958, the great French jurist Raymond de Geouffre de
la Pradelle, referring to the 1947 Annual of the Central Statistics Office of Warsaw, published
by the Polish government under Russian control, notes that 7,300,000 Germans were deported
from Silesia to Germany by the Russians between July 1st, 1945 and January Ist; 1947, in
application of an Anglo-American-Soviet convention on the transfer of populations. According
to M. Jean de Pange, who made a study of this problem in the Revue des Deux Mondes of
May 15th, 1952, the number of unfortunates who died during this operation, under inhuman
conditions comparable in every way to those of our deportation to camps by the Germans,
exceeded four million. But evidently the Tribunal at Nuremberg was forbidden by the Charter to be apprised of
that. –    54    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Against the Russians was further cited: the slaughter at Katyn for which a significant part
of the world press still puts the burden of guilt on the Germans, although the Nuremberg
Tribunal did not accept that, and in spite of the fact that it has now been established that they are
to be charged to the Russian conscience; reprisals taken in 1944 against the Ukrainian and
Polish civilian populations who had received the Germans as liberators in 1941; the treatment
inflicted on German prisoners; the entry of Russian troops into all the German cities and the
rape, pillage and massacre to which the civilians were subjected, etc.

In October 1944, in an "Appeal to the Red Army" which was not translated for the
Nuremberg Tribunal, the Russo-chameleon writer Ilya Ehrenburg wrote:
"Kill, Kill!

There are no innocent Germans, among the living, or among those yet to be born!

Carry out Comrade Stalin's instructions to crush the fascist beast in his lair Shatter the pride [78] of the
Germanic women with violence.

Take them as lawful spoils.

Kill, kill, valiant soldiers of the Red Army,
in your irresistible onslaught.

" (Cited by Admiral Doenitz in 10 Years and 20 Days, pp.

343-344)
The war on the Eastern front between Germans and Russians was savagely brutal, defiant
of international conventions and totally dehumanised on both sides.

The clash of the armies was
repeated in the clash of ideologies and doctrines; although illegal in the eyes of international
conventions, partisan warfare was, for example, one of the sacred dogmas of popular or
national emancipation in the eyes of the Russians.

The formula "eye for an eye, tooth for a
tooth" is profoundly immoral.

No one has the right to take justice into his own hands, especially
one who recognises a higher authority which renders justice for all.The formula "eye for an eye, tooth for a
tooth" is profoundly immoral.

No one has the right to take justice into his own hands, especially
one who recognises a higher authority which renders justice for all.

The Einsatzgruppen, the "50 to 100 hostages executed for one German soldier
assassinated" (order of Keitel, September 16th, 1941), the liquidation of Russian political
commissars, viewed as partisans not as soldiers, etc., must also be examined and judged as
German replies to a violation of international conventions by the Russians.

The fact that the
Germans were present and had witnessed the Russian occupation of that part of Poland
conferred to them in the German-Soviet Pact, made them able to appraise their methods of
warfare, and was one of the determinants of the attitude taken in that respect by the
Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (O.K.W.).

The Americans, British and French were no less disqualified as judges than the Russians
and that for breaches of the laws and customs of war no less serious or no less deliberate.

To
the count of the first two figured the extermination of the civilian population of almost all
German cities by applying what the British called "saturation bombing" and which we called
"obliteration bombing" which, as the word indicates, could obliterate entire cities and their
inhabitants, just as much as phosphorus bombings.

At Dresden, Leipzig and Hamburg the
wretches who died crushed under masses of rubble, or burned alive in monstrous conflagrations
which could not be put out and who actually became screaming and inextinguishable human
torches rushing for water - of which there was not enough or which was non-existent - were
counted by the hundreds of thousands in a single night, in each of the three cities.

The case of the Russians was all the more curious since they had been condemned, on
December 14th, 1939, as aggressors against Poland and Finland by the Assembly and Council
of the League of Nations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At Dresden, Leipzig and Hamburg the
wretches who died crushed under masses of rubble, or burned alive in monstrous conflagrations
which could not be put out and who actually became screaming and inextinguishable human
torches rushing for water - of which there was not enough or which was non-existent - were
counted by the hundreds of thousands in a single night, in each of the three cities. The case of the Russians was all the more curious since they had been condemned, on
December 14th, 1939, as aggressors against Poland and Finland by the Assembly and Council
of the League of Nations. The fact that they turned up as judges at Nuremberg shows, to say the
least, an astonishing development in international law between 1939 and 1945. The atomic bombs dropped on Nagasaki and Hiroshima which, at the time, surpassed
anything that could be imagined for horror and cynicism in war crimes, were taken into
consideration. Special [79] mention was also made of the bombing at sea of German submarines
and naval vessels which were proceeding to the rescue of shipwrecked persons, after having
given clear radio notice of their mission on international long wave radio. The most typical case
was that of U-boats 156, 506 and 507 which, on September 13th, 1942, were moving (in
conformity with the laws of the sea) to the rescue of the crew and passengers of the Laconia
(freight ship, armed with 14 guns of which two were 150 min antiaircraft, grenades, etc. which
put the ship in the prize category) which the U.156 had just torpedoed. –    55    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---The record of the French is hardly any better: the Resistance and partisan war, which no
clauses of The Hague protected; innumerable assassinations of German soldiers, stabbed in the
back by invisible enemies; even massacres of prisoners who were protected by the Geneva
Convention, such as the one that took place at Annecy (Savoy) on August 18th, 1944, and
others in French camps after 1945, to such an extent that the International .Red Cross was so
disturbed that it even roused President Eisenhower himself.

All these violations of the Geneva and The Hague Conventions, i.e.

the written law,
certainly do not excuse Germany, who did her share.

I have simply made a summary inventory
to show that the infringements were multilateral and to point out, first of all, that if Germany
was to be judged it should not have been by those judges; second, that once having taken place,
a qualified Tribunal should have used its discretionary power to demand the appearance of
Russia, Britain, America and France next to Germany in the dock.

Declared inadmissible by Article 3 of the Charter because it questioned the competency of
the Tribunal, which was set up on that assumption, the argument which the Nuremberg judges
christened tu quoque (You, too - implying "you did it, too") was also inadmissible by virtue of
Article 18, because it was necessary to proceed rapidly.

"The Tribunal shall," the Article read,
"a) confine the Trial strictly to a rapid (expeditious) hearing of the issues raised by the charges;
b) take strict measures to prevent any action which will cause unreasonable delay, and rule out
irrelevant issues and statements of any kind whatsoever."
Justice however, which requires assumptions, cannot fail to be expeditious, and being
expeditious, it is no longer justice.Declared inadmissible by Article 3 of the Charter because it questioned the competency of
the Tribunal, which was set up on that assumption, the argument which the Nuremberg judges
christened tu quoque (You, too - implying "you did it, too") was also inadmissible by virtue of
Article 18, because it was necessary to proceed rapidly.

"The Tribunal shall," the Article read,
"a) confine the Trial strictly to a rapid (expeditious) hearing of the issues raised by the charges;
b) take strict measures to prevent any action which will cause unreasonable delay, and rule out
irrelevant issues and statements of any kind whatsoever."
Justice however, which requires assumptions, cannot fail to be expeditious, and being
expeditious, it is no longer justice.

* * *
If I selected the Laconia incident above all others and stated that it was typical, it is
because more than any other it reveals a certain Machiavellianism in the Prosecution; in short, it
was typical of that Machiavellianism.

The Laconia was a cargo ship which the Admiralty had turned into a troop transport.

All
other considerations apart, particularly [80] her offensive weapons, the equipment she carried
for the detection of enemy submarines and the order to signal as soon as any had been
detected… that alone put her, by the rules of the international conventions, in the category that
could legitimately be torpedoed by the adversary.

And I do not think that the right of the U.156
to torpedo her was questioned by anyone, at least not officially.

A not too insistent attempt was
made to rouse public opinion because of the 80 women and children on board.

This was not
pressed since it would have been easy to charge that their presence was an infraction of the
international conventions, some- what as if on land a troop of soldiers advancing into battle had
put them in front to keep the enemy from firing.

The Laconia was transporting 1,800 Italian prisoners of war who claimed, according to
Admiral Doenitz (op.cit.

p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Laconia was transporting 1,800 Italian prisoners of war who claimed, according to
Admiral Doenitz (op.cit. p. 203) that "the British closed the hold doors, where they were when
she was struck, and prevented them by force of arms from getting to the life-boats." You can
hardly improve on that for a war crime! What was actually argued at Nuremberg was the order which Admiral Doenitz issued,
having drawn the logical conclusions from the American bombing of the rescuers who were
acting in the great tradition of the sea, and the bombing of those who were shipwrecked,
regardless of age or sex, who had been their allies. "It is henceforth forbidden to attempt the rescue of persons on a torpedoed ship, or to pull men
from the water to take them to small boats, to right-up turned over life boats, to provide food or water. Rescue is contrary to the most elementary principle of war, which commands the destruction of enemy
ships and their crews."
The British prosecutor, Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe, did not fail to seize on this order to claim
that it prescribed "the deliberate killing of ship-wrecked persons." It was all as if the British and
–    56    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Americans, who had driven the Germans to desist from rescue at sea, wanted to establish
grounds for charging them with the consequences of the crime, magnifying it by the use of an
exegesis in line with the rules of pilpoul, and keeping strictly quiet about the crime itself.

Very fortunately a courageous witness, Fleet Admiral Nimitz, Chief of Naval Operations
of the United States, stated:
"On general principles, United States submarines did not rescue enemy survivors, if undue
additional hazard to the submarine resulted, or the submarine would thereby be prevented from
accomplishing its further mission." (Nur.

Volume XVII, p.

389, session of July 2nd, 1946)
In this deposition, Admiral Nimitz furthermore took into account the order given by the
American naval authorities on December 7th, 1941, to attack Japanese merchant vessels without
warning, since they were "usually around."
So the charge was not held against Admiral Doenitz and therefore not against Germany by
the Nuremberg Tribunal, but world [81] opinion was never informed of that by the press which,
reporting the hearings, informed the world a million times over that Admiral Doenitz had
ordered the deliberate massacre of the crew of torpedoed ships.

Even today a considerable part of the press continues to perform its doughty deeds with
the same energy.

This kind of Machiavellianism, given free rein by the Prosecution in the presentation of
the documents and facts pertaining to the Laconia, seems to have beeA the general rule
throughout the trial.

it is seen again in the case of the obliteration bombing, mentioned
elsewhere.

But how did the British and Americans get this idea in the first place?

There are two views on this problem: the one generally held and which William L.

Shirer
adopts in his Rise and Fall of the Third Reich; and the other put forward by J.

M.

Spaight,
British Air Cabinet Minister, in his Bombing Vindicated.M.

Spaight,
British Air Cabinet Minister, in his Bombing Vindicated.

Both are concerned only with the
question of knowing who started it first, which, though morally without importance, is
nonetheless very important with regard to The Hague articles, which maintain that it is not at all
a matter of indifference to know whether it is a question of British and American retaliation or
German retaliation.

This is what William L.

Shirer says, and what he presents as the official view:
"To begin with, there was a minor navigational error by the pilots of a dozen German bombers on
the night of August 23.

Directed to drop their loads in aircraft factories and oil tanks on the outskirts of
London, they missed their mark and dropped bombs on the centre of the capital, blowing up some homes
and killing some civilians.

The British thought it was deliberate and as retaliation bombed Berlin the next
evening… The R.A.F.

came over in greater force on the night of August 28-29, and, as I noted in my
diary, 'for the first time killed Germans in the capital.' The official count was ten killed and twenty-nine
wounded.

"
The fact that this officially recognised navigational error was at that time interpreted as a
deliberate action on the part of the Germans, and that it provoked the immediate reaction of a
British laid on Berlin the following night is understandable and easily pardoned.

That they
returned in force a few days later, when the Germans had offered no further provocation, is less
understandable.

And the fact that (on this the official contention and William L.

Shirer are silent) they kept
it up until they provoked the retaliatory bombardment of Coventry, Birmingham, Sheffield and
Southampton - their justification for Dresden, Leipzig and cannot be understood at all, and
cannot be excused.

The view of the British Cabinet Minister for the Air rings another bell and throw another
light upon the subject.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Shirer are silent) they kept
it up until they provoked the retaliatory bombardment of Coventry, Birmingham, Sheffield and
Southampton - their justification for Dresden, Leipzig and cannot be understood at all, and
cannot be excused. The view of the British Cabinet Minister for the Air rings another bell and throw another
light upon the subject. According to him, this system of bombardment was to have begun well
before [82] August 23rd, 1940 - on May 11th, to be exact. The General Staff of the Admiralty
decided on it on that day, and that very evening 18 Whitley bombers in waves dropped sheets of
–    57    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---bombs on railway installations in the Ruhr, and unavoidably claimed an appreciable number of
civilian victims.

After that they were to continue insofar as they were not hindered by flak.

"Because we were doubtful about the psychological effect of propagandistic distortions of the truth
that it was we who started the strategic bombing offensive, we have shrunk from giving our great
decision of May 11th, 1940, the publicity7 which it deserved.

That, surely, was a mistake.

It was a
splendid decision.

It was as heroic, as self-sacrificing, as Russia's decision to adopt her policy of "scorched
earth." It gave Coventry and Birmingham, Sheffield and Southampton, the right to look Kiev and
Kharkov, Stalingrad and Sebastopol in the face.

Our Soviet Allies would have been less critical of our
inactivity in 1942 if they had understood what we had done." (Bombing Vindicated, cited by Maurice
Bardèche in Nuremberg ou la Terre Promise.

Present translator took the text from J.

F.

P.

Veale,
Advance to Barbarism, p.

121.)
The Germans, however, were not aroused until bombs fell on Berlin.

On August 31st and
September 1st, "after a week of constant English night bombing," William L.

Shirer writes,
"most of the capital's dailies carried the same headline: 'Cowardly British Attack,' then 'British
Air Pirates over Berlin.' "
Finally on September 4th, at the Sportspalast, in his speech at the opening of the
Winterhilfe (Winter Help) campaign, Hitler roused the indignant crowd listening to him to wild
enthusiasm, by declaring:
"For three months I did not answer because I believed that such madness would cease.

Mr.

Churchill took this for a sign of weakness.

Right now we are answering night for night.

When the
British airforce drop two or three or four thousand kilos of bombs, we will drop in a single night 150,
200, 300 or 400,000 kilos."
Indeed, until then, except for the navigational error pointed out by William L.

Shirer, the
German air force had not replied.When the
British airforce drop two or three or four thousand kilos of bombs, we will drop in a single night 150,
200, 300 or 400,000 kilos."
Indeed, until then, except for the navigational error pointed out by William L.

Shirer, the
German air force had not replied.

From then on came Coventry, Birmingham, Sheffield,
Southampton and… London itself.

One bombing led to another and in 1944, the waves of
horror reached Dresden, Leipzig, Hamburg and other places, but in 1944 Germany was unable
to retaliate and the blankets of bombs fell on an enemy whose shoulders were already to the
ground.

Concerning the crime which, according to both William L.

Shirer and J.

M.

Spaight, was
set in motion by the General Staff of the Admiralty, and of which both sides - the judge as well
as the defendant - were guilty, the Nuremberg Tribunal accepted in evidence only the German
reprisals, that is, those steps ordered to [83] be taken against British and American aviators
forced to land on German territory for one reason or another, caught, so to speak, in the act.

The best known of these incidents, the one that raised the greatest outcry because it was
considered inhuman, was the one disclosed in a memorandum found in the papers of the
O.K.W., dated May 21st, 1944, regarding a decision of Hitler to have shot without trial the
crews of the British or American planes responsible for certain specific actions.

(Doc.

P.S.

731,
Volume XXVI, pp.

275-276)
This is what was contained in that memorandum, taken from the document volume cited
above:
"The Führer has decided that in special cases the following measures shall be taken with regard to
British and American crews.

Enemy fliers brought down are to be shot without due process of law, in the
following instances:
1.

When they have fired on German crews coming down in parachute;
2.

When they have attacked with the plane's weapons German aircraft which have been forced to
land, and when their crews are still around;
3.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When they have fired on German crews coming down in parachute;
2. When they have attacked with the plane's weapons German aircraft which have been forced to
land, and when their crews are still around;
3. For attacking public civilian trains;
7. This book was not published in Britain until April 1944. –    58    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---4.

When they have attacked with the plane's weapons isolated civilians, peasants, workers, isolated
vehicles."
As it was presented this memorandum became an order, with nothing to show whether it
was ever executed.

The press reporting the Trial surrounded this note with an air of implication
about "eternally inhuman Germany," tied it in with other similar notes or extracts taken out of
context from other orders termed crimes, and that was all they said when it was presented to the
Tribunal on March 20th, 1946.

(op.

cit.

Volume IX, pp.

604-605) But if we take a look at the
cross-examination of Goering (same date) we find that a mention is made in the margin of
Warlimont, Chief of the General Staff, deputy to the Wehrmacht operations, of Keitel, Jodl, of
General Korten, etc.

…and that what was intended was a poll of the members of the General
Staff of the O.K.W.

on a proposed order that Hitler had in mind.

And if we look at Keitel's
cross-examination (op.

cit.

Volume X, p.

572, and Volume XI, p.

21, April 4th and 8th, 1946)
we learn that it concerned "a continual exchange of ideas expressed here and there about a
measure Hitler wanted, which, thank God, was not put into effect, because the necessary
instructions were not transmitted, and no order from the O.K.W.

was ever set down or given,
to this effect."
The Tribunal was obliged to yield to the evidence.

Not so the press.

Even today, many
after-the-event anti-Nazi propagandists who call themselves historians, continue to publish, in
the news or in books, this memorandum, probably jotted down during some class, which they
take for one of a series of orders effectively executed.

[84]
It is true that British and American fliers were actually lynched or killed on the spot by a
crowd up in arms which rushed on them when they touched the ground.

But that is something
else - a blameworthy group reaction, certainly, but very understandable.[84]
It is true that British and American fliers were actually lynched or killed on the spot by a
crowd up in arms which rushed on them when they touched the ground.

But that is something
else - a blameworthy group reaction, certainly, but very understandable.

The Prosecution wanted to have it that this group reaction had been ordered by remote
control, by the directors of the Third Reich in the midst of war.

And, to prove it, more
documents were produced.

Heading the list were the relevant notes, emanating from Warlimont,
deputy to Keitel, documents P.S.

735 and P.S.

740 (op.

cit.

Volume XXVI, pp.

276 and 279).

These documents implicated Goering and Ribbentrop in connection with a conference which
supposedly took place some time before June 6th, 1944, at Kelssheim Castle, during which,
together with Himmler, they decided on a joint stand in conformity with what was laid down in
the memorandum of May 21st.

Unfortunately this meeting at Klessheim never took place,
except in Warlimont's imagination.

From whom Kaltenbrunner got the information is not
reported.

Moreover, Ribbentrop and Kaltenbrunner were able to prove without difficulty that
they did not share, any more than did Keitel, those views that seemed to have been Hitler's,
concerning the treatment of British and American fliers.

As their evidence crumbled, the Prosecution - determined at all costs to score a point - did
not shrink from reaching back to an order of Hess, dated March 13th, 1940, relative to
instructions to be given to the civilian population on the attitude to be taken in case of enemy
plane or parachute landings on Reich territory (P.S.

062, Volume XXV, p.

119).

In the fourth
paragraph it stated that "enemy parachutists are to be arrested immediately and rendered
harmless." Justice Jackson translated "rendered harmless" as "liquidated," doubtless because it
was more in the fashion at the time, and his translation went around the world and continues in
use in the press.--- PAGE BREAK ---

119). In the fourth
paragraph it stated that "enemy parachutists are to be arrested immediately and rendered
harmless." Justice Jackson translated "rendered harmless" as "liquidated," doubtless because it
was more in the fashion at the time, and his translation went around the world and continues in
use in the press. Then came an order from Himmler dated August 10th, 1943 (Doc. R. 110, Volume
XXXVIII, pp. 313-314). For the benefit of all the superior officers of the operations services of
the S.S. and the police, Himmler said, "It is not the business of the police to intervene in
conflicts between the German civilian population and the British or American terrorist aviators,
who have had to take to the parachute." Translation by the Prosecution: "…the army received
orders not to protect them from lynching by the people. The Nazi government through its
propaganda and police agents, took care to urge the civil population to attack and to kill fliers
crashed to earth." (Session of November 21st, 1945. Volume II, p. 147) But, in his speech, Dr. Gawlik (counsel for the S.D. after March 18th, 1946) claimed, first, that this order was
–    59    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---addressed to the police only, not to the army, which is, after all, evident; second, that actually it
was not the business of the police but of the S.D., whose job it continued to be.

(Volume XXII,
p.

40, session of August 27th, 1946) [85]
Then came Hitler's order, dated October 18th, 1942, re: the destruction of commandos
and parachutists (Doc.

P.S.

498, Volume XXVI, pp.

100-101).

At least, this order was
presented by the Prosecution in those terms.

One has only to read it to see that "commando
parachutists," not parachutists, or simple commandos are meant, those who are sent behind the
lines to wage a kind of warfare rigorously forbidden by the Geneva conventions.

This may be
judged by the three essential points, given in as literal as possible a translation:
"Enemy not acting within Geneva convention, using liberated criminals for brutal commando
work; they kill prisoners, and orders to this effect have been found.

From now on we will do the same
with British sabotage troops.

So, I order, no pardons, even if they seem to be surrendering… "
(Condensed, Tr.)
Three more paragraphs specified further that if certain of those spies or saboteurs fell into
the hands of the army, they should be at once handed over to the S.D.; that this order did not
apply to enemy soldiers taken prisoner in open fighting; that chiefs of units and officers guilty of
negligence in its execution would be liable to court-martial.

Finally, another and complementary order of the Führer, with the same date, gave
explanation to Paragraph I of the original order.

It could be held on many points that this order was in contradiction of the Geneva and
Hague conventions; but if it was judicially accepted, it had also to be admitted that one violation
corresponded to the other, and both should have been judged.

However, by application of
Article 18 of the Charter, the first violation was declared "irrelevant," so only the second was
admitted.It could be held on many points that this order was in contradiction of the Geneva and
Hague conventions; but if it was judicially accepted, it had also to be admitted that one violation
corresponded to the other, and both should have been judged.

However, by application of
Article 18 of the Charter, the first violation was declared "irrelevant," so only the second was
admitted.

And this was given out to the public with stress on such phrases as "soldiers in
uniform or out" … (commandos were issued uniforms for use in case they were captured in
action, and civilian clothes for flight, mission accomplished), "with or without arms" (once in
plain clothes, the arms were discarded), and it was not mentioned that the order did not include
regular troops, as it expressly stated.

If I have said that this order was also in contradiction of
the Geneva and Hague conventions, it is because at least in the case of civilians, captured
without arms, guilt could not be established without an investigation followed by a judgement.

In any case, the business of "commando parachutists" had nothing in common with that of the
fliers, with which it was associated, and therein lies the Machiavellianism.

It should also be
added that the document was read in German to the German defendants, that the actual title
"Geheime Kommandosache" which was given, underlining that they were "durch Flugzeuge
angelandet oder mittels Fallsschirmen," to which the defendants could only nod, was
translated into all the other languages as "commandos and parachutists," to make the
association, and this, too, is not without a certain Machiavellianism.

[86]
One affair of British and American aviators - there was one, and a true one - that of the
escapees from Luft Stalag III at Sagan (Silesia).

On the night of March 24th-25th, 1944, 76
officers of the R.A.F.

escaped from that camp which was allocated to prisoners of the Allied Air
Army.

Except for three, all were recaptured.--- PAGE BREAK ---

escaped from that camp which was allocated to prisoners of the Allied Air
Army. Except for three, all were recaptured. Twenty-three did not get beyond the outskirts of
the camp and were brought back during the day by the Observation Service of the Wehrmacht;
the other 50 who fell into the hands of the police at various places in Germany within 48 hours
were shot. First the International Red Cross, then the Protective Power - in this case
Switzerland - were aroused, and Eden protested in the House of Commons. On June 12th, the
Swiss Minister at Berlin received an official note from the German Minister of Foreign Affairs,
explaining that the 50 escapees had been shot by the police "either when they resisted at the
moment of their recapture, or during an attempt to escape again after their recapture." But the
investigation of the International Red Cross and the Protective Power established without
difficulty that that was not true, and that they had been shot on an order given to Himmler by
Hitler. The order was unknown to all the defendants at the Nuremberg Trial except one -
–    60    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---that was not true, and that they had been shot on an order given to Himmler by
Hitler. The order was unknown to all the defendants at the Nuremberg Trial except one -
–    60    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kaltenbrunner - who had retransmitted it, after receiving it from Hitler via Himmler, to the
executive echelon of the R.S.H.A., of which he was the Head. This was a patent violation of
that Geneva convention which recognises the right to escape. As to whether Hitler actually
issued this order, all the testimony is in agreement. That of Keitel (Volume XI, pp.. 8 ff.) and
of Goering (Volume IX, pp. 380 ff.) (on whom the Prosecution wanted to put the responsibility
for the matter) are particularly honest. Both showed conclusively that not only did they take no
part, but that they were placed in such positions that they could do nothing to prevent it. Hitler
went over Keitel's head, and Goering was informed too late. As for Kaltenbrunner and
Ribbentrop, the first said that he merely transmitted an order which came from his superior, and
that there were no two ways about it; the second offered an explanation which had been given
him after an enquiry.
As far as I know, no exactly similar infractions in the treatment of war prisoners on the
part of the British and Americans.have been brought out. I have shown that others, in no way
less horrible, were noted. Those of the Russians - who signed neither The Hague nor the
Geneva conventions and therefore permitted themselves every licence - were worse. Even the
French are not snow white. We have seen that in one case at least (Annecy) they did not wait for
the prisoners to escape before shooting them en masse.
To sum up: the documents established that in Germany the pattern was for downed fliers
to be sent to prisoner of war camps unless they were categorised as terrorists. The latter were
turned over to the S.D., summarily judged and sentenced to death or sent [87] to concentration
camps. In this category of documents belong those like the memorandum found in the papers of
the O.K.W., dated May 21st, 1944, which established that Hitler wanted, but was unable to
achieve, shooting without any legal procedure. At Nuremberg, Goering maintained that it was
learned from interrogation of these terrorists that their governments had forbidden them to
engage in the very acts they had performed, and that they were war criminals in the fullest sense
of the term. And the Allies did not act any differently. Naval Lieutenant Eyck, commander of the
U.582, was condemned to death together with all the officers on board, by a British war council
after being sunk and taken prisoner following his destruction by gunfire of the flotsam and
shipwrecked persons of a merchant ship which he had just torpedoed. They were executed on
November 30th, 1945.
These are but a few examples to demonstrate that the accusation of war crimes could be
applied to the judges as well as the defendants and therefore, irrefutably, to establish the
incompetency of the Tribunal in the light of International Law as it was then.
–    61    –crimes could be
applied to the judges as well as the defendants and therefore, irrefutably, to establish the
incompetency of the Tribunal in the light of International Law as it was then.
–    61    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[88]
Chapter V
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
What Article 6 of the Charter called, in its strained and highflown style, crimes against
humanity are those conditions to which hundreds of thousands - even millions - of men,
women, old people and children were subjected by deportation to the concentration camps, there
to live and die in numbers, coldly assassinated or killed little by little by the indescribable
maltreatment inflicted on them; and among these assassinations and mistreatments, those more
particularly inflicted on the Jews - the racial laws and gas chambers, about which there has been
so much discussion.

The little interest which the Eichmann Trial stirred up in the world, contrary to the hopes
of its protagonists; the fact that the reaction of their reading public impelled the great newspapers
to recall the star reporters whom they had at first sent to Jerusalem, leaving behind only special
corespondents or third rate police blotter reporters; the reprobation, and even indignation, it
aroused in all circles - even in Israel - were signs that another truth than that of Nuremberg had
already won acceptance.

And this truth was that, until then, in its racist as in its general aspect,
deportation had been represented to world opinion not as an historic fact, a matter of history, but
in terms of the political uses which would be made of it by the international Zionist movement
and the European statesmen put back in the saddle after the defeat of Germany.

The principal
object of the Nuremberg Trial was to make this possible by furnishing the justifications.

Historical truth arrived at by a legal ruling is one more of the tragic innovations of our times.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The principal
object of the Nuremberg Trial was to make this possible by furnishing the justifications. Historical truth arrived at by a legal ruling is one more of the tragic innovations of our times. Dissected and exposed in its every detail by the press, radio, the most improved
propaganda media - not forgetting concentration camp literature - this legal ruling resulted in the
fact that in public opinion, and even in the minds of historians, it was no longer the historical
fact which determined the political uses that could be made of it, which defined the matter of the
fact. This could not fail to be noticed because it is so very true that even if you can fool one
person for a long time, many people for a while, it is not possible to fool all the people all the
time. The mechanics of the way it was worked were quite simple. "The Tribunal," stated Article 19 of the Charter, "shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence…"
And Article 21, "The Tribunal shall not require proof of facts of common knowledge, but
shall take judicial notice thereof."
And in practice this is the way these two propositions worked: when, to cite just one
example, on January 11th, 1946, Dr. Franz Blaha, a Czech communist, stated before the court:
"The gas chamber at Dachau was completed in 1944 and Dr. Rascher instructed me to examine
the first victims. Of the 8 or 9 persons [89] in that chamber 3 were still living, but the others
were dead. Their eyes were red, etc. . . ." (Volume V, p. 175), the Tribunal which was not
bound by technical rules of evidence, did not ask proof of him, and the matter, being declared
common knowledge, was accepted without further formality. –    62    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---However, it is known that the gas chamber at Dachau was not completed and made
workable until after the end of the war by the S.S., who followed after the inmates of the
concentration camp, and no one had ever been gassed there.

Therefore, it can be said that the Czech communist, Dr.

Franz Blaha, was nothing more
than a common false witness.

But it can also be asked, how many Dr.

Franz Blahas were there in the line of witnesses
who appeared before the bar, or whose affidavits produced under oath were read, and who
"witnessed" in the same way, the camps at Bergen-Belsen, Ravensbriick, Mauthausen,
Auschwitz, etc.?

In the case of Mauthausen we have the witness, Alois Höllriegel, S.S.

warder of the
camp, who testified by affidavit on January 2nd, 1946:
"In the fall of 1942, I think it was, Ernst Kaltenbrunner visited Mauthausen.

I was just then on
duty, and I saw him twice.

He went down into (!) the gas chamber with Ziereis, camp commandant, just
when prisoners were being gassed.

I was very familiar with the sounds that accompanied the process.

I
realised that the gas chamber was in operation.

Kaltenbrunner was present.

I saw him come out of the
cellar where the gas chamber was located, when it was all over.

" signed: Höllriegel (Doc.

P.S.

2753,
Volume IV, p.

302)
In August 1960, probably under pressure of the emotions stirred up in Germany by a
series of well-attended talks that I gave in April, in which I had posed the question, the
Institute fürr Zeitgeschichte of Munich gave the following to the press:
"Neither in Dachau nor in Bergen-Belsen, nor in Buchenwald have Jews or other prisoners been
gassed.

The gas oven in Dachau was never quite finished or put into operation… The mass annihilation of
the Jews by gassing began in 1941-142 and took place exclusively in some few establishments selected
for that purpose and provided with technical facilities suitable for that purpose, establishments above all
in the occupied Polish area (but nowhere in Germany proper).302)
In August 1960, probably under pressure of the emotions stirred up in Germany by a
series of well-attended talks that I gave in April, in which I had posed the question, the
Institute fürr Zeitgeschichte of Munich gave the following to the press:
"Neither in Dachau nor in Bergen-Belsen, nor in Buchenwald have Jews or other prisoners been
gassed.

The gas oven in Dachau was never quite finished or put into operation… The mass annihilation of
the Jews by gassing began in 1941-142 and took place exclusively in some few establishments selected
for that purpose and provided with technical facilities suitable for that purpose, establishments above all
in the occupied Polish area (but nowhere in Germany proper).

" (Die Zeit, Hamburg, 19.8.1960)
Even though "witnesses" appeared again in June 1961 before the Tribunal of Jerusalem,
in judgement on Eichmann, to state that they had seen their companions in distress leave for the
gas chambers of Bergen-Belsen, and were not expelled from the court as false witnesses, or
were not arrested in the midst of the hearing for contempt of court, the question of gas chambers
holds good only for Auschwitz and the "camps in occupied Poland."
And strangely, that simplified the problem with regard to 1948, the period when all I had
at my disposal to cast doubts on the [90] existence of gas chambers, was the report of the
Nuremberg Trial, the "Analysis" of one of those responsible at Dachau (published by the
American authorities for the Commission in charge of judging petitions for pardon) and my own
experience at Buchenwald-Dora, that is, a period when "concentration camp literature" had just
swept through public opinion and put gas chambers in almost every concentration camp.

So I
started, with the aid of clearly distorted documents, by proving that the one at Dachau was a
myth, both macabre and odious." (Die Zeit, Hamburg, 19.8.1960)
Even though "witnesses" appeared again in June 1961 before the Tribunal of Jerusalem,
in judgement on Eichmann, to state that they had seen their companions in distress leave for the
gas chambers of Bergen-Belsen, and were not expelled from the court as false witnesses, or
were not arrested in the midst of the hearing for contempt of court, the question of gas chambers
holds good only for Auschwitz and the "camps in occupied Poland."
And strangely, that simplified the problem with regard to 1948, the period when all I had
at my disposal to cast doubts on the [90] existence of gas chambers, was the report of the
Nuremberg Trial, the "Analysis" of one of those responsible at Dachau (published by the
American authorities for the Commission in charge of judging petitions for pardon) and my own
experience at Buchenwald-Dora, that is, a period when "concentration camp literature" had just
swept through public opinion and put gas chambers in almost every concentration camp.

So I
started, with the aid of clearly distorted documents, by proving that the one at Dachau was a
myth, both macabre and odious.

Making reference to my own experience, I did the same for
Buchenwald and Dora, about which a priest, who had been a fellow-prisoner, had just written
that he had seen "thousands and thousands of people" go in (to the gas chambers).

(Abbé Jean-
Paul Renard, Chaînes et Lumières, Paris, 1947).

And so on, as the thirteen Nuremberg
proceedings brought pertinent documents to light.

I was, of course, vilified and even brought to
court, where I was, naturally, acquitted, and from then on the game was won.

It is today
conceded that nowhere on German territory was there a single camp equipped with a gas
chamber.

The Institut für Zeitgeschichte, which is the "paragon of hostility and opposition to
Nazism," finally acknowledged the fact.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is today
conceded that nowhere on German territory was there a single camp equipped with a gas
chamber. The Institut für Zeitgeschichte, which is the "paragon of hostility and opposition to
Nazism," finally acknowledged the fact. It remains only to examine the documents and
testimonies brought forward in support of the existence and criminal use of gas chambers in the
camps in occupied Poland, with as much care as those produced either before a tribunal or
directly to public opinion, whose contents have been considered by a tribunal to be "of common
knowledge," by the application of Articles 19 and 21 of the Nuremberg Charter. –    63    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---To my knowledge those camps in occupied Poland were: Auschwitz-Birkenau, Chelmno,
Belzec, Maidanek, Sobibor and Treblinka.

In the last five of these, the existence and use of gas
chambers to exterminate Jews is attested by a single document, the document labelled
'Gerstein,' produced at Nuremberg on January 30th, 1946, by M.

Dubost, French prosecutor,
P.S.

1533.

An analysis and significant excerpts from the document will be found in the last
chapter of this volume.

Its history was so peculiar and its contents so apocryphal, that the
Tribunal refused to hear it read (Volume VI, p.

377), and it was not admitted in evidence against
the defendants.

Nevertheless, the entire press considered it authentic; it was brought up again
against other defendants in subsequent Nuremberg trials, in particular the one for Nazi
organisations, and people like M.

Poliakov - who call themselves historians - still write about it
in their books (Le Bréviaire de la Haine, p.

228 ff.) (Breviary of Hate) as if it were irrefutable
and had been ad-mitted.

In this document it is a matter of the gas discharged from Diesel engines being piped into
rooms 25 square metres in area and 1.90 metres high, in which were asphyxiated from 20 to
30,000 persons a day (!!..) in batches of 750 to 800 (!).

At Jerusalem, Eichmann stated that he
had been shown at a distance "little houses" in [91] which "they told him…"
Document N.O.

365 is still being cited, which is a letter from a certain Dr.

Wetzel, dated
October 16th, 1941, in which "gas machines" (Gasapparaten) are mentioned.

This Wetzel was arrested in Hanover on August 17th, 1961.

On August 18th, German
newspapers published both that he was living on a government pension of 1,600 DM a month
and that, thanks to the British-Jewish historian Reitlinger, author of a book giving credence to
gas chambers on the basis of information supplied by him, he had up until then never been
disturbed.This Wetzel was arrested in Hanover on August 17th, 1961.

On August 18th, German
newspapers published both that he was living on a government pension of 1,600 DM a month
and that, thanks to the British-Jewish historian Reitlinger, author of a book giving credence to
gas chambers on the basis of information supplied by him, he had up until then never been
disturbed.

I quote from the Allgaüer Anzeigeblatt of August 18th, 1961:
"In the opinion of the authorities Wetzel was indebted for his incognito, which lasted for years, to
the British historian Gerald Reitlinger, who, in his book, which is recognised as a standard work, The
Final Solution, gave Wetzel erroneously the first name of 'Ernst'."
If it was true, this fact would markedly cut across the full significance of Document N.

0.

365, in that it gives historians the right to question whether, as in the case of the Gerstein
document, it was not fabricated after the event, to suit a purpose.

In any case, the man was
arrested and they will not fail to make him talk.

Finally, the testimony of Rudolph Hoess is cited, commandant of Auschwitz camp, who,
incidentally, did know something about the matter (P.S.

3868, Volume XI, p.

425; Volume
XXI, p.

560; Volume XXXIII, p.

275) and his memoirs written up in prison after he was
sentenced to death (published after he was hanged under the title The Commandant of
Auschwitz Speaks).

We will see later what to think of this testimony.

And so to the Auschwitz-Birkenau camp…
The documentation about this camp, which is in the final analysis the crux of the matter, is
both abundant and precise - so abundant and even so precise that that is what kills it.

The
different parts of this immense dossier all confirm the existence and use of gas chambers for the
extermination of Jews, but, on the whole, they are in agreement only on that point.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And so to the Auschwitz-Birkenau camp…
The documentation about this camp, which is in the final analysis the crux of the matter, is
both abundant and precise - so abundant and even so precise that that is what kills it. The
different parts of this immense dossier all confirm the existence and use of gas chambers for the
extermination of Jews, but, on the whole, they are in agreement only on that point. The details
which they offer in description of the places and the mechanics of the operation contradict each
other with such pigheadedness that they can be said to cancel each other out. If, for example, of
two witnesses who claim to have been present, one tells us that Zyklon B (the gas used) came in
the form of pellets which volatised on contact with water vapour (Hoess), and the other tells us
that water vapour prevented the formation of gas (Dr. Miklos Niyszli, author of Doctor at
Auschwitz) it is obvious that one cannot believe the one and still believe the other, and that
prudence cautions that at least one of the two is a false witness. If one witness tells us that he
went into a gas chamber, which an official document says was 400 meters square, that there
were benches on each side for sitting and hollow columns every 20 meters in the middle, that
3,000 persons could easily circulate in it and that it was roughly [92] 200 meters long, it is not
possible to believe, after reading such a catalogue of improbabilities, that he ever set foot inside. And if, as is the case with Dr. Miklos Niyszli, he adds "the dead were stripped at the exit of the
–    64    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---gas chamber" after having been asphyxiated, or that in 1944 this method of extermination had
already existed "for four years", one is forced to think that we have here a common impostor.

At the first Nuremberg Trial of the major war criminals, there was on hand:
1.

Testimonies of survivors who have without exception authenticated the gas chambers,
not only by what they had seen, but by what they had heard.

Their testimonies are like that of
Dr.

Benedict Kautsky who, following his father, was leader of the Austrian Social-Democratic
Party, who spent three years at Auschwitz-Birkenau, who wrote a book about his experiences,
Teufel und Verdammte (Devil and Damned), published in Switzerland in 1946, which stated
clearly: "Here I want to introduce a short description of the gas chambers, which, to be sure, I
have not myself seen, but which have been described to me by so many people worthy of
belief…" (p.

272)
"The naked victims were… crammed together in another room, which was tiled and furnished with
showers in the ceiling… When the space was full, the doors were closed and the showers turned on; from
them streamed no water, but gas… In Auschwitz by mass gassing, at the very least… 3,5 million
persons have been killed." (p.

275)
So, this witness who says on another page that the maximum survival expectancy at
Auschwitz was about three months, but who survived there himself for three years, admits
that he never saw a gas chamber and speaks of them only in accordance with what he was told
by reliable persons.

One notes that he is not the more miserly with his details for all that.

He
knows that 3,5 million people were exterminated in that manner, and also that the gas used was
heavier than air since it fell from the ceiling - still another version, since the other witnesses had
the gas come from pellets thrown on the ground, from which it issued in contact with water
vapour, according to some, or just contact with the air according to others.One notes that he is not the more miserly with his details for all that.

He
knows that 3,5 million people were exterminated in that manner, and also that the gas used was
heavier than air since it fell from the ceiling - still another version, since the other witnesses had
the gas come from pellets thrown on the ground, from which it issued in contact with water
vapour, according to some, or just contact with the air according to others.

At Nuremberg, Colonel Storey, American Attorney-General, was fascinated by that
version in which the asphyxiating gas was discharged from shower installations.

He presented
with the utmost seriousness document P.S.

2285 (Volume IV, p.

270) in which was said,
"When an arrival of 'K' prisoners was too important, instead of wasting time 'measuring' them,
they were exterminated by asphyxiation, by means of gas forced into the shower room through
the water pipes."
2.

Corroborating testimonies for Rudolf Hoess, commandant of the camp already
mentioned, and those of two collaborators of Eichmann, Obersturmführer Hoettl, and
Obersturmführer O.

[93] Wizliceny.

Only the second is still alive, the two others having been
hanged.

Concerning Rudolf Hoess - his testimony was written in pencil on old paper and is
therefore difficult to decipher because it is difficult to read; it was written by a man over whom a
death sentence hung and who would certainly be tempted to say whatever he thought might be
conducive to the acceptance of his petition for pardon; furthermore he contradicts himself on
every page.

From Hoettl we have only the number of Jews exterminated, which was given to him in
confidence by Eichmann: 4 to 5 million which, for good measure, was rounded up to 6.

But at
Jerusalem Eichmann stated during his trial that he never confided any such information to
Hoettl.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From Hoettl we have only the number of Jews exterminated, which was given to him in
confidence by Eichmann: 4 to 5 million which, for good measure, was rounded up to 6. But at
Jerusalem Eichmann stated during his trial that he never confided any such information to
Hoettl. Finally, from Wizliceny we have, in addition to confirmation of the above figure, an
affirmation in which Eichmann is supposed to have shown him a letter from Himmler which
enjoined him to proceed to the "final solution of the Jewish problem," that is, gas chambers. However, there again Eichmann stated that he had never received a written order from anyone,
that he had only told Wizliceny that "Heydrich had summoned him to inform him that the Führer
had ordered the physical destruction of the Jews." (Jerusalem trial, session of April 10th, 1961,
Eichmann confessions, on tape recording, presented to the Tribunal.)
Wizliceny therefore lied, and that can be affirmed without fear of contradiction since the
problem of the extermination orders has been resolved. In La Terre retrouvée, of December
15th, 1960, Dr. Kubovy of the Jewish Documentation Centre of Tel Aviv, admits in effect "that
–    65    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---no document signed by Hitler, Himmler or Heydrich exists, which speaks of exterminating the
Jews, and that the word extermination does not appear in Goering's letter to Heydrich
concerning the final solution of the Jewish question." It is, of course, a little late to acknowledge
that, but better late than never.

So it is settled: all those orders received by so many in 1946
existed only in the imagination of those who claimed to have received them.

Subsequently, during the other Nuremberg Trials, especially that of the Wilhelmstrasse
and Nazi organisations, other documents were brought to light: the Wannsee Protocol (N.G.

2586g), the statement of a certain Wolfgang Grosch (N.O.

2154) concerning orders for the
construction of gas chambers, etc.

The Wannsee Protocol is the report of a meeting which took place on January 20th, 1942,
at which were present the Secretaries of State administratively interested in the solution of the
Jewish Question and the heads of services charged with carrying it out.

It is a question of a text
in which there is no mention of gas chambers or of extermination, but only of the transfer of
Jews to the East of Europe.

This is quite cleverly worded and drawn up so that one can deduce
that even if there is no express mention of it, never[94]theless, it implicitly contains the decision
for extermination.

Apart from that, this report has all the characteristics of an apocryphal document if it is
compared with the photocopy of it which was published in the book of Mr.

Robert N.

W.

Kempner, Eichmann und Komplizen, p.

132 ff.

(Europe Verlag, 1961): no seal, no date, no
signature, ordinary typewriter letters on a paper of reduced format, etc.

In any case, I repeat, there is no question here of gas chambers and if there is any question
of extermination, it is only by distortion of the text.(Europe Verlag, 1961): no seal, no date, no
signature, ordinary typewriter letters on a paper of reduced format, etc.

In any case, I repeat, there is no question here of gas chambers and if there is any question
of extermination, it is only by distortion of the text.

The following is an example of this distortion in a French version made of the text: "die
Zurückdrängung der Juden aus dem Lebensraum des deutschen Volkes" was translated as
"l'élimination des Juifs de l'espace vital du peuple allemand," giving in the commentary the
sense of extermination to the word expulsion, when it is really a question of the "refoulement
des Juifs hors de l'espace vital du peuple allemand." The same was done in English and in
Russian.

For years afterwards the German press has been reproducing these versions,
retranslated into German, commentaries included.

However, to express their decision to drive the Jews out of What they called their living
space, the Germans preferred to use other words with the same meaning, such as Ausschaltung
(exclusion, eviction, elimination), or, especially, Ausrottung (extirpation, uprooting).

It is this
latter word which has been translated by extermination, which in German is Vernichtung.

For
an example, in his talk at Posen to the Obergruppenführer (division of generals of the Waffen
S.S.) on October 4th, 1943, Himmler said, "Ich meine jetzt die Judenevakuirung, die
Ausrottung des judischen Volkes… Das judische Volk wird ausgerottet…" To make his
meaning clear, he used the word Ausschaltung in the next sentence (P.S.

1919, Volume XXIX,
p.

145).

In other words, "Je pense maintenant à I'évacuation des Juifs, à l'extirpation du peuple
juif… But in Dossier Eichmann, M.

Billig has this translation, "J'entends par là l'évacuation
des Juifs, l'extermination du peuple julf," (p.

55) and "l'évacuation des Juifs, c'est-à-dire
extermination." (p.

47)
Another example: In a note of December 16th, 1941, on one of his conversations with
Hitler (P.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

55) and "l'évacuation des Juifs, c'est-à-dire
extermination." (p. 47)
Another example: In a note of December 16th, 1941, on one of his conversations with
Hitler (P.S. 1517, Volume XXVII, p. 270) Rosenberg uses the expression "Ausrottung des
Judentums." In the session of April. 17th, 1946, the American Attorney General Dodd
translated it as "Extermination of the Jews." (Volume XI, p. 562). Rosenberg protested in vain. But in the speeches of the Nazis, the expression "Ausrottung des Christentums" recurs
frequently, and is each time translated as "extirpation of Christianity from German culture." (cf. Revue d'Histoire de la seconde guerre mondiale, October 1st, 1956, p. 62). It is only when it
is a question of Judaism (Judentum), or of the Jewish people (das jüdische Volk) that the word
Ausrottung means [95] extermination, and is applied to individuals, when it is a question of
entities. –    66    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---If, as we have seen elsewhere, Dr.

Kubovy, Director of the Centre of Jewish
Documentation at Tel Aviv, writes that there existed "no document bearing the signature of
Hitler, Himmler or Heydrich referring to exterminating the Jews" it is doubtless because he
himself was drawing the difference between the individual and the entity, and that neither had
he found the word in Himmler's talk at Posen.

Even if one wanted to give that meaning to the
word Ausrottung (it often has in German, for example, when it is used for pulling weeds out of
a garden: in this case Brockhaus says it is a question of "völlige Vernichtung") it means in all
languages that one can destroy an entity without destroying the individuals which it embodies,
and of whose common characteristics it is a summary.

For example, one can destroy
Christianity without destroying Christians, Judaism or the Jewish people without destroying
Jews.

From 1945 until now, the Russians have completely destroyed the German community
without having destroyed the Germans, by cutting it into three parts.

This view is all the less
disputable concerning the Jewish People because the German word "volk" has no exact
corresponding word in any other language (except - oh irony!

- in Hebrew).

In German, a
people is not only the individuals but the earth on which they live and which makes up a whole
with them, das Volk.

In German, "arrachés" (pulled out, ausgerottet) from the soil on which
they lived, the Jews were destroyed (vernichtet) as a People, but nonetheless continued to live
as individuals, in the camps where they were concentrated.

In principle, at least.

Having said
this, in the Wannsee Protocol, there is no question of Ausrottung, nor even of Ausschaltung,
but only of Zurückdrängung (refoulement, expulsion) and the distortion of this meaning is all
the more serious in the matter of this document, if it is truly authentic, which is far from being
proved by the photocopy (cf.

above p.

80).above p.

80).

The last of the documents cited, the statement of Wolfgang Grosch, appears as follows:
"I, the undersigned, Wolfgang Grosch, attest and declare the following:
Concerning the construction of gas chambers and crematory ovens, it was the responsibility of C
group, after receiving orders from D group.

The chain of hierarchy was: D group got together with C
group.

Service CI laid down the plans for these installations, insofar as the construction itself was
concerned, then turned them over to Service CIII, which filled in the mechanical aspects of the
construction, such as the removal of air from the gas chambers, or the apparatus for the gassing.

Service
CIII then turned the plans over to a private concern, which was to deliver the special machines, or the
crematory ovens.

Still within the chain of command, Service CIII notified Service CVI which passed on
the order via the superintendent of works west, south or east, [96] to the central office of works.

The
central office of works then passed the construction order to the respective office for the construction of
concentration camps, which had the structures proper built by the prisoners which the office of Service
DIII put at their disposal.

Service D gave to Service C the orders and instructions about the dimensions
and use of the structures.

Basically, it was group D which gave the orders for the gas chambers and the
crematory ovens.

"
The facts detailed in this gibberish - obviously intended to create confusion - are described
in 
the 
documents 
found 
in 
the 
Construction 
Service 
(Bauleitung) 
of 
the
Reichsicherheithauptamt (R.S.H.A.), dated January 28th, 1942, numbers 932 and 938,
completed by another found in the Economic and Financial Services, with the reference N
11450/42/Bl/H, dated August 3rd, 1942.

The first two are construction plans for four crematory ovens at Auschwitz-Birkenau,
numbered II-III-IV and V, which leads one to suppose that I has not been found, at least to my
knowledge.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"
The facts detailed in this gibberish - obviously intended to create confusion - are described
in 
the 
documents 
found 
in 
the 
Construction 
Service 
(Bauleitung) 
of 
the
Reichsicherheithauptamt (R.S.H.A.), dated January 28th, 1942, numbers 932 and 938,
completed by another found in the Economic and Financial Services, with the reference N
11450/42/Bl/H, dated August 3rd, 1942. The first two are construction plans for four crematory ovens at Auschwitz-Birkenau,
numbered II-III-IV and V, which leads one to suppose that I has not been found, at least to my
knowledge. Each one was to have a large room in the basement, called Leichenkeller for II and
III, and Badeanstatt for IV and V. The dimensions were specified: 210 sq.m. area, height 2.4m
for II, 400 sq.m., height 2.3m. for 111, 580 sq.m. and the same height for IV and V. We will never know how these plans were executed on the spot. The Auschwitz gas
chambers were destroyed as the Russian troops approached, on November 17th according to
some documents, on 25th according to others. Those which can be visited in the camps today,
like those at Dachau, were reconstructed after the war - in conformity with the plans? That is the
question. I point out in passing that the visitor who goes to Buchenwald to see the remains of
–    67    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---the camp is taken in hand by a guard who shows him the gas chamber and explains to him in
detail how it operated in the extermination of Jews.

This happened to Claude-Henri Salerne of
the R.T.F.

who was preparing to put this information on the air for the retrospective survey he
had been asked to make on concentration camps on the occasion of the opening of the Eichmann
Trial (April 1961), when, by chance, a few days before, he fortunately ran into me!

To return to the documents: letter no.

11450/42/BI/H of August 3rd, 1942 (extract from
document N.O.

4401), is the order for those four crematory ovens from Haus Topf und Soehne
of Erfurt.

In the Wilhelmstrasse and Nazi organisations trial it was pointed out, without further
detail, that the order was delivered "at the outset of 1943." In his book Doctor at Auschwitz, Dr.

Miklos Niyszli speaks of the "heart of winter," which usually means the end of January and
beginning of February, and the Revue d'Histoire de la seconde guerre mondiale, published in
Paris under the direction of the Résistant, Henri Michel (the only one, except for the reports of
the hearings, wherein I have found these documents [97] mentioned) uses the phrase, "at the
outset of 1943" (in the October 1946 issue, p.

62), and the document N.O.

4463 gives "le 20-2-
1943." Lastly, Hoess says that at the end of 1942 gas chambers and crematory ovens had not
yet been built.

It was the halls built below ground, beneath the crematory ovens, officially designated as
Leichenkeller or Badeanstatt, that the witness Wolfgang Grosch christened gas chambers.

Since invoices for deliveries of Zyklon B to Auschwitz-Birkenau were found, they were used in
support of his statement if they did not suggest it to him - as we are entitled to wonder after what
hapened in the case of the Gerstein statement!

But Zyklon B was an insecticide-disinfectant,
used in the German Army since 1924.Since invoices for deliveries of Zyklon B to Auschwitz-Birkenau were found, they were used in
support of his statement if they did not suggest it to him - as we are entitled to wonder after what
hapened in the case of the Gerstein statement!

But Zyklon B was an insecticide-disinfectant,
used in the German Army since 1924.

During World War II it was used in all the army camps and in all the concentration camps;
other invoices found prove this for Oranienburg, Bergen-Belsen etc., where there were no gas
chambers.

As for the crematory ovens, I can attest that what we called the "basement" at
Buchenwald was built on exactly the same model as those at Auschwitz-Birkenau and that no
extermination by gas ever took place there.

What is curious is that the orders to build these Badeanstatten and Leichenkeller have
been found, but none as to what was their intended use.

It is not clear how those who had to
make use of these places, whether as shower rooms or as mortuaries, could have divined that
they were actually gas chambers.

On the other hand, it is claimed that orders exist to cease the
extermination of Jews in this manner.

We are told that the reason why no orders to use them as
gas chambers have been found is because the Nazis were not so stupid as to give orders that
could later be found and used as accusations against them.

But then it is hard to see how they
could have been so stupid as to issue an order - just as accusatory, just as easy to find - to cease
making use of them.

Actually, not even this order has been found, only someone who attested
its existence, dated "between the middle of September and the middle of October" (Document
P.S.

3762, Volume XXXIII, pp.

68-70), which is a remarkably precise date.

This someone
was the Standartenführer Kurt Becher, who took part, along with Eichmann, in the deportation
of Hungarian Jews.

Becher was, however, cleverer than Eichmann and knew enough to earn
the gratitude of Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This someone
was the Standartenführer Kurt Becher, who took part, along with Eichmann, in the deportation
of Hungarian Jews. Becher was, however, cleverer than Eichmann and knew enough to earn
the gratitude of Dr. Rudolf Kasztner (responsible for his acquittal at Nuremberg, and who very
probably wrote his "Bericht," cited in this work only for that reason), and of Baroness Weiss
(owner of the Manfried Weiss factories of Budapest) whom he had taken by special plane to
Lisbon with 45 members of her family. The circumstances of his testimony having been thus
given for the edification of the reader, this is what the witness said:
"I, the undersigned Kurt Becher, former S.S. Standartenführer, born on September 12th, 1909, at
Hamburg, declare the following under oath: between the middle of September and the middle of October, I
induced Reichsführer S.S. Himmler to promulgate the [98] following order, of which I received two
copies, one each for S.S. Obergruppenführer Kaltenbrunner and Pohl, and one more for myself:
'I forbid, effective immediately, all extermination of Jews, and I order, on the contrary, that
care be given to sick and weakened persons. I hold you (he meant Kaltenbrunner and Pohl) personally
responsible, even in cases where this order may not be strictly observed by the lower echelons.'
–    68    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"I personally brought Pohl's copy to him to his office in Berlin, and likewise I gave
Kaltenbrunner's copy to his secretary in Berlin."
But he did not produce this order, a copy of which he had received.

Nor was it asked of
him.

And they refused to confront him with Kaltenbrunner, who did not deny the existence of
the order but merely denied any personal responsibility.

for it.

Eichmann, who also did not
repudiate the order, did deny, on the other hand, that it was a written order and cited May 15th,
1944 as the date, which was precisely the date when Himmler ordered the cessation of all
medical experiments in all the camps (text found and cited by François Bayle in Croix Gammée
contre Caducée (Swastika against Caduceus), p.

236), and thought of the plan to exchange a
million Jews for 10,000 trucks.

It is at least probable that Himmler did not simultaneously plan
that exchange and the extermination of Jews in gas chambers at Auschwitz since the two are
contradictory.

But did this order really exist?

It is easy to imagine that it had to exist for the
prosecution, which so far had not found a single written trace of racial exterminations and could
possibly only find it here - yet still did not find it.

But everyone will agree that with this as the
only proof, no historian worthy of the name would ever admit that this order did in fact exist.

After all, everything depends on the trust bestowed on Mr.

Kurt Becher, and Mr.

Kurt
Becher… In short, I think I have made myself clear: testis unus, testis nullus.

Well, there are
counter-testimonies worth as much as Becher's (Eichmann), or better (Himmler's letter on the
experiments in the camps, dated May 15th, 1944 and recovered by François Bayle).

The least one can say is that all this is hardly convincing and, even more, that it tends to
show that there never were any gas chambers, nor any exterminations by that method at-
Auschwitz-Birkenau.Well, there are
counter-testimonies worth as much as Becher's (Eichmann), or better (Himmler's letter on the
experiments in the camps, dated May 15th, 1944 and recovered by François Bayle).

The least one can say is that all this is hardly convincing and, even more, that it tends to
show that there never were any gas chambers, nor any exterminations by that method at-
Auschwitz-Birkenau.

If, however, gas chambers did exist, their existence cannot be said to be
irrefutably established, either by the testimonies and documents which were brought forth
during the various Nuremberg trials, or by the recitations of the survivors, widely disseminated
to the public, who all say, with the exception of two (Hoess and Dr.

Miklos Niyszli, in flagrant
contradition to each other and sometimes to themselves) that they saw nothing, but that they
learned it from "reliable persons," which persons have never been traced.

I will say nothing of the celebrated "death buses" whose existence and utilisation are
attested by Document P.S.

501 [99] (Volume XXVI, p.

1-2-10), which is an account by a
sublieutenant from Marioupol with the date May 15th, 1942.

The whole text will be found in the
fourth part of this work, taken from David Rousset, who reproduced it in Le Pitre ne rit pas
(The Clown does not laugh) (Paris, 1948).

These "buses", which the indictment refers to as "trucks", were supposedly equipped for
asphyxiation by using the motor exhaust.

100,000 Jews are said to have been gassed in this
way.

Even at the rate of 50, or even 100 per "bus" or "truck", take your choice, one can see
what a task it was.

This idea, which poses the problem of whether there was time to asphyxiate
100,000 people in this way, or whether a considerable number of these "vehicles" - of which
not one has been recovered - existed, in itself reveals the imbecility of the contention that this
was part of a vast plan, perfected by the authorities of the Third Reich, to exterminate the Jews.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Even at the rate of 50, or even 100 per "bus" or "truck", take your choice, one can see
what a task it was. This idea, which poses the problem of whether there was time to asphyxiate
100,000 people in this way, or whether a considerable number of these "vehicles" - of which
not one has been recovered - existed, in itself reveals the imbecility of the contention that this
was part of a vast plan, perfected by the authorities of the Third Reich, to exterminate the Jews. If in truth vehicles of this kind did exist, they can only have been produced by private initiative
and only the smallest number could have been produced. The cases reported are considered to
have happened in the region of Chelmno, under the authority of one Globochnik. When one
knows Globochnik (cp. 5th part), one can obviously not swear that he would not be an initiator
of such a scheme. But extermination in numbers of 100,000 is manifestly just as false. If it were
a few hundred, it would be possible to accept the figure; but 100,000, no, absolutely not. Eichmann stated during his trial that he had seen one of these vehicles; that he did not see what
was taking place inside, either when it departed or whilst en route; but that when it arrived, a
whole heap of cadavers was unloaded from it. What is this testimony worth? I do not know. What does bother me, however, is that in order to describe these "buses", "trucks" or
"vehicles", as the press so often did, the document produced at Nuremberg on November 21st,
1945 by the American prosecutor, Justice Jackson (T. II, p. 135), and taken up again by his
alternate, Commander Walsh (T. III, p. 563--65), designates the kind of car with the word
"Wagen", which the Germans never use in that way. It must, in fact, be one of two things:
–    69    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---either they were buses, and P.K.W.

(Personalkraftwagen) were meant, or they were trucks
and L.K.W.

(Lastkraftwagen) were meant, and if the author of the document did not know, I
may be permitted to question his nationality.

On the other hand, the author, a certain S.S.

Untersturmführer Dr.

Becker, whose testimony is unique, like Gerstein and so many others
whose testimony was both exceptional and most devastating, is considered dead.

In the
Nuremberg Trial there were too many witnesses who had died too opportunely, whose so-called
writings were used.

In short, except for Eichmann who "refused" to see, as far as I know not a
single one of these "bustrack-vehicles", not a person who had made use of them, nor even
driven them has ever been found.

In sum, a historical event which has left no traces.

Happily,
the inventor of these infernal machines, [100] a certain Harry Wentritt, a foreman mechanic,
they say, was arrested on January 29th, 1961 in Hanover.

Since then nothing has been heard of
him.

Doubtless his trial is being prepared… or they are waiting for him to pass away, too.

If he
does not die soon he will speak one day.

Unhappily, however, taking into consideration the
conditions under which he would speak if given the chance, even this far in advance it is
impossible to believe that he will tell the Gospel truth.

Long experience teaches that there are
few witnesses who, under threat of severe sentence and after long imprisonment, will not end
up saying just about what is expected of them.

Hoess, Hoettl, Wizliceny etc.

are significant
testimony.

This state of affairs, however, is not without consolation, nor is it hopeless.

We are
no longer in 1946 but in 1963; today we have sufficient documentation to prevent any old
person, as in 1946, from coming along to tell us any old tale.

Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.We are
no longer in 1946 but in 1963; today we have sufficient documentation to prevent any old
person, as in 1946, from coming along to tell us any old tale.

Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.

At first it was said that Saurer trucks were involved; they had to quickly realise then,
that the Saurer firm had not manufactured trucks of that kind since 1912, which was a little bit
thick.

* * *
To finish with the problem of the treatment inflicted on the Jews, I would like to cite one
more document with regard to decisions made concerning the Jews by the authorities of the
Third Reich and the use made of documents relating to gas chambers: the Kasztner report,
Bericht der Jüdischen Rettungskomitees aus Budapest, 1942-1945.

It is quite a story.

Dr.

Kasztner was President of the Comité de Salut des Juifs in Budapest from 1942 to
1945.

In this capacity he was in constant contact with the German authorities in Hungary from
March 19th, 1944 until the end of the war.

He took part in getting the exchange of "a million
Jews for ten thousand trucks" underway, as recounted by Joël Brand and Alex Weisberg in a
book already referred to in this work.

At the end of the war, before returning to Israel, Dr.

Kasztner related what he had witnessed at the instance of the authorities of international Zionism
and those of Nuremberg.

However, only a small number of copies of his report were made and
they were only in duplicated (cyclostyled) form.

The first recipient of this report was
Standartenführer (Colonel) Kurt Becher.

It seems that Becher was Eichmann's superior officer
(the latter was only Lt.

Col.) in the matter of the deportation of Hungarian Jews, and therefore
responsible to Himmler, with whom he was in direct contact (even over the head of
Kaltenbrunner, top man of the R.S.H.A.), for the whole operation.

Thanks to this Kasztner
report, which almost completely whitewashes him, Kurt Becher was favourably denazified.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Col.) in the matter of the deportation of Hungarian Jews, and therefore
responsible to Himmler, with whom he was in direct contact (even over the head of
Kaltenbrunner, top man of the R.S.H.A.), for the whole operation. Thanks to this Kasztner
report, which almost completely whitewashes him, Kurt Becher was favourably denazified. He
is living today at Bremen, where he has built up a fortune in the horse business estimated to be
in the millions. [101]
Briefly, a convinced Zionist, Dr. Kasztner settled in Israel right after the war and soon
became an influential member of the Mapai, Mr. Ben Gurion's party. In 1954 he was charged
that, in his capacity as President of the Budapest Committee during the German occupation, he
had sold himself to the Nazis in order to save his family, thanks to the Bergen-Belsen convoy
(was one then "saved" by being sent to Bergen-Belsen and the "gas chambers"?), and that he
had become a purveyor for the Gestapo, with whom, in addition, he shared the goods pillaged
–    70    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---from the Jews before they were deported, etc.

The charge was raised by another Hungarian Jew
who had also come to settle in Israel where he exercised his profession as a journalist for the
religious-conservative party (which all the other political factions in Israel consider to be fascist,
and accuse of having dealings with the neo-fascist parties).

And, because Kasztner's report on
the activity of the Budapest Committee had been used to exonerate Becher and had effectively
led to his acquittal at Nuremberg, the journalist in question furthermore charged Kasztner with
having contrived the denazification of a "war criminal with whom he had done business."
Kasztner sued his accuser for libel.

The trial unfolded in Jerusalem in 1955 and assumed
unexpected dimensions: 73 sessions, 2,000 pages of reports - the country was stirred up, a
clash between the parties with knives drawn, the very foundations of the state shook.

The court
accepted all the charges made by the journalist as justified, except for one - association with the
Nazis with intent to pillage victims - and acquitted him.

It meant the condemnation of Kasztner
and Mr.

Ben Gurion's party, to which he belonged, was discredited.

In the next legislative
elections it lost an appreciable number of seats, although it still kept an absolute majority.

It therefore became necessary to reverse the situation before the oncoming elections.

Kasztner appealed and the trial was taken up before the Supreme Court of Appeals on January
20th, 1957.

It was a repetition of the earlier trial - but worse.

Influenced or not by Ben Gurion's
government, against which a current of hostile opinion, fed by the proceedings, was growing,
the Supreme Court immediately made its conviction apparent that the journalist had to be found
guilty in order to fend off any danger that Ben Gurion's party might find itself in a minority, and
public opinion reacted favourably to this.It was a repetition of the earlier trial - but worse.

Influenced or not by Ben Gurion's
government, against which a current of hostile opinion, fed by the proceedings, was growing,
the Supreme Court immediately made its conviction apparent that the journalist had to be found
guilty in order to fend off any danger that Ben Gurion's party might find itself in a minority, and
public opinion reacted favourably to this.

On March 5th, 1957, two months after the trial began,
the hearings were threatening to go on for a long time and spread disorder in the state, and
perhaps create a national crisis.

Coincidentally, just as he was leaving the 44th session,
Kasztner was seriously wounded by a terrorist on the very steps of the Law Courts; a terrorist
whose hand had been armed by the violent language - and perhaps in a material way, too - of the
extreme right.

(The extreme right and the extreme left operated a loose coalition against Ben
Gurion.) Kasztner died a few days later.

[102]
The trial thus came to an end to the great relief of everyone, Kasztner's assassin was not
unduly bothered.

In August 1958 Kasztner was rehabilitated in a judgement which did not
censure his denouncer.

The affair was spoken of no more, in an atmosphere, if not of restored
national unity, at least one purged by this "Solomon's judgement" of its poisoning miasma.

Not
wishing to stir up any discord, both sides easily fell into agreement on the necessity not to make
the Kasztner Report public - that is, not to put it in book form - in the interests of the state.

Then came the Eichmann Trial.

In order to clear Becher, Kaltenbrunner had laid all the
responsibility for the deportation and its horrors on Eichmann.

The Kasztner Report therefore
became a principal testimony, with the agreement of the Israeli government.

Kasztner's
beneficiaries then published his report, through Kindler at Munich, with a preface by Professor
Carlo Schmid, socialist deputy to the Bundestag.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Kasztner Report therefore
became a principal testimony, with the agreement of the Israeli government. Kasztner's
beneficiaries then published his report, through Kindler at Munich, with a preface by Professor
Carlo Schmid, socialist deputy to the Bundestag. Nothing was to be neglected to justify the
condemnation of Eichmann in the eyes of world opinion. But, as it stood, the Kasztner Report
could be used by a clever lawyer to clear Eichmann because it distinctly cast a doubt on the
official version of the treatment of the Jews in the concentration camps and, particularly, on the
very existence of gas exterminations, attributed to Auschwitz. So it had to be somewhat
modified. They did not shrink from the task. Here, taken from a photocopy I made myself from one of the copies of the original
edition, which I had in my possession, is what the Kasztner Report has to say about gas
chambers at Auschwitz:
"chen, vielleicht um Tage handeln. Meldungen aus Bratislava bestätigen auch these
Beffürchtungen. Die dortige Vandah leitete uns die Meldungen ihres Nachrichtendienstes weiter. Demgemäss war die S.S. im Begriffe, die Gaskammern und Krematorien in Auschwitz, die seit dem
Herbst 1943 ausser Gebrauch waren auszubessern und zurenovieren. Man erholte die Zahi der
Mannschaft, und einer der Unteroffiziere soll sich die Aeusserung geleistet haben: "Bald essen wir feine
ungarische Salami." (Er dachte hier allerdings an die mitgebrachten Lebensmittal der Juden.) "
–    71    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"perhaps for days negotiate.

Reports from Bratislava also confirm these fears.

The Vandah there
further directs to us the reports of its news service.

According to these reports the S.S.

were about to
renovate and restore the gas chambers and crematoria at Auschwitz, which since autumn 1943 had
been out of use.

They increased the number of troops and one of the subalterns is supposed to have said,
"Soon we eat fine Hungarian Salami." (Here he was thinking, to be sure, of the victuals the Jews brought
with them.)"
Dr.

Kasztner did not say, as we know, that the gas chambers at Auschwitz-Birkenau were
a pure invention, but only that they had not been working "since the autumn of 1943." Since the
[103] event he was reporting took place in May 1944, and since the official version was that
they were not put into service until February 20th, 1943, these 8 or 9 months of interruption
considerably shortened the amount of time the S.S.

had to dispose of 4 to 4,5 million people,
the figure customarily given at the time.

And this is the way the above passage was rendered in the Kindler edition, prefaced by
Carlo Schmid (likewise a photocopy):
"Meldungen aus Pressburg bestätigen these Beffürchtungen.

Das dortige Komitee leitete uns die
Meldungen seines Machrichtendienstes weiter.

Damgemäss war die S.S.

in begriff, die Gaskammern und
Krematorien in Auschwitz auszubessern und zu renovieren.

Die Zahl der Mannschaften wurde erhoht, und
einer der Scharffihrer soll sich die Ausserung geleistet haben: "Bald essen wir feine ungarische Salami." Er
dachte hierbei offenkundig an die mitgebrachien Lebensmittel der Juden."
On the treatment to which the Jews were subjected in the Theresienstadt concentration
camp, the original Report contained a letter sighed by 6 Jews interned in that camp which,
although it was surely not the case in all camps for all Jews, no less surely shows that the
authorities of the Third Reich had decided that that is what is should have been everywhere.in begriff, die Gaskammern und
Krematorien in Auschwitz auszubessern und zu renovieren.

Die Zahl der Mannschaften wurde erhoht, und
einer der Scharffihrer soll sich die Ausserung geleistet haben: "Bald essen wir feine ungarische Salami." Er
dachte hierbei offenkundig an die mitgebrachien Lebensmittel der Juden."
On the treatment to which the Jews were subjected in the Theresienstadt concentration
camp, the original Report contained a letter sighed by 6 Jews interned in that camp which,
although it was surely not the case in all camps for all Jews, no less surely shows that the
authorities of the Third Reich had decided that that is what is should have been everywhere.

"The letter is in answer to one received on 8 May from Chawer.

The senders are pleased to answer
and request Chawer to greet all their friends.

The senders are pleased to learn from Chawer's letter that the
countless parcels from Lisbon and Istanbul are the work of their friends.

Friends from Vienna who live
together with them in Theresienstadt have also received parcels from the above named places.

Although
the welfare situation is thoroughly organised and occasions no worry of any kind, we enjoy always
receiving these parcels because we view them as indications of your friendship.

The letter then describes the life and organisation of the place.

"In Theresienstadt a truly Jewish city has arisen in which all work is taken care of by Jews,
beginning with street cleaning all the way up to a modern health system with hospitals, a staff of doctors,
nurses, helpers, from technical work to caring for the community kitchen, from our own police and fire
department to a special system of courts, post and transport, from a bank with its own settlement money
and from shops selling food, clothing and household utensils, to leisure time installations in which
regular lectures, theatre performances and concerts take place.The letter then describes the life and organisation of the place.

"In Theresienstadt a truly Jewish city has arisen in which all work is taken care of by Jews,
beginning with street cleaning all the way up to a modern health system with hospitals, a staff of doctors,
nurses, helpers, from technical work to caring for the community kitchen, from our own police and fire
department to a special system of courts, post and transport, from a bank with its own settlement money
and from shops selling food, clothing and household utensils, to leisure time installations in which
regular lectures, theatre performances and concerts take place.

The children of whom special care is taken,
are in children's and youth homes, the old people in homes under medical observation and care.

Those
who are able to work are assigned to domestic service.

Excellent specialists have come together from all
areas, not only administrative, technical and sanitary, but also those who in leisure time can contribute to
a rich cultural life, Jewish and general.

A library of 50,000 volumes with several reading rooms, a coffee
house with music serving as a diversion, especially for older people.

A central bath and clothes washing
place furthers the [104] general hygiene upon which naturally special value is put.

So one can feel
thoroughly comfortable here.

The letterhead shows you a view of the city.

The health situation is
throughout favourable, thanks to the unhindered work of our doctors, the extensive provision of food and
medicines, and the climatic conditions of Theresienstadt."
As far as I know this letter has never been made public and, naturally, the Kindler at
Munich edition of the Kasztner Report does not contain it!

Is this the last of the surprises in store for us relative to the Auschwitz camp and the
treatment of Jews in others?

I hardly think so, especially in connection with Auschwitz.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is this the last of the surprises in store for us relative to the Auschwitz camp and the
treatment of Jews in others? I hardly think so, especially in connection with Auschwitz. In
Germany at the moment, the commandant who replaced Hoess as director of the camp, has been
–    72    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---in prison for two years.

His trial is postponed every two or three months because, if the
prosecutor can prove (leaning on Hoess' testimony alone!!) that the gas chambers were in
operation there from February 20th, 1943 to the "autumn of 1943" (say for 6 to 7 months), he is
contradicted by Kasztner for the period "autumn 1943 - May 1944," and cannot prove that they
were put back in use from May to October 1944, which is the date everyone has agreed they
were destroyed (if indeed, they were ever built!).

Will he succeed?

It is not likely.

In 1963 the
mentality of the witnesses is not what it was in 1946.

Among all those witnesses whom
Prosecuting Attorney Bauer (he is the one setting up the trial of the second commandant of
Auschwitz, predestined to the job by his name) has found, the only reliable ones state
unanimously that during the time they were in the camp, between the autumn of 1943 and the
autumn of 1944, they never saw the gas chambers in operation, although - surprise!

surprise!

-
not one of them denies their existence (!).

Prosecutor Bauer must be really out of luck because,
given the progress in techniques, he should be able to find witnesses for the prosecution.

In
Bonn, another attorney, far less endowed with the virtuosity of Bauer, was easily able to find
witnesses to attest to the existence of the "buses" used for the same work.

They contradict each
other, and they contradict all those we have heard up to now, but people are not that difficult!

It will be serious if he does not find any witnesses because, even if the testimony of
Hoess were indisputable, there is at least one piece of evidence that is just as indisputable.

That
is that not one of the "437,000 Hungarian Jews deported to Auschwitz" in the official version
was gassed.

On top of all the other blows, this one could be fatal for Jewish extermination statistics.That
is that not one of the "437,000 Hungarian Jews deported to Auschwitz" in the official version
was gassed.

On top of all the other blows, this one could be fatal for Jewish extermination statistics.

* * *
If the historian now looks over the extent of the damage, that is, the figure used to
determine the dimensions of the crime, he is [105] neither happier nor less perplexed, for this
reason: If it is agreed in political circles in the world that six million Jews were exterminated -
and how can that monstrous slaughter be explained except by the use of such drastic measures
as gas chambers?

- the statistics revealed by the documents are far from corroborating this
evaluation.

On November 21st, 1945, at Nuremberg, Justice Jackson, plaintiff, expressed himself in
this way:
"Of the 9,600,000 Jews who lived in that part of Europe dominated by the Nazis, it is estimated
on good grounds that 60% of their number perished.

5,700,000 Jews are missing in those countries where
they lived before, and more than 4,500,000 cannot be accounted for by the normal death rate, or by
immigration into other countries.

" (Volume 11, p.

128.)
Such, then, was the charge: 4,500,000.

The court did not sustain this figure and, from then on, everyone felt free to estimate the
number of victims as his imagination or fantasy dictated.

Even during the hearings, Sir David
Maxwell-Fyfe, British prosecutor, interrogating Goering on March 21st, 1946, gave the green
light to the most senseless estimations in saying to him: "It has been proved that approximately
10,000,000 Jews and other persons were massacred in cold blood, not counting those killed in
battle."
The press heard, and transmitted "10,000,000 Jews .

That was a little too much.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Even during the hearings, Sir David
Maxwell-Fyfe, British prosecutor, interrogating Goering on March 21st, 1946, gave the green
light to the most senseless estimations in saying to him: "It has been proved that approximately
10,000,000 Jews and other persons were massacred in cold blood, not counting those killed in
battle."
The press heard, and transmitted "10,000,000 Jews . That was a little too much. The
Billigs, the Poliakovs, Alexandrovs, Jacob Lechtinskys, Shalon Barons (holder of the chair of
Jewish History at Columbia University) etc., indulged in speculations of the dizziest kind, to
place the figure somewhere between the lowest, 4,500,000, given by Justice Jackson, and the
highest, 10,000,000, tendentiously taken from Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe's statement, and they
arrived at 6,000,000 for the number of Jews exterminated, which is close enough - remarkably -
to the mathematical average of the two. To give the impression that the question had been
–    73    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---seriously studied, some of them specified that four to four and a half million had been
exterminated at Auschwitz-Birkenau, and the rest in other camps or in other circumstances.

And since then these figures have been served up nearly every morning for breakfast, all
over the world, in the morning papers, it not in so many words at least in close variations.

The
most modest of those who have studied the problem, the British publicist Gerald Reitlinger (The
Final Solution, London, 1956), contented himself with a figure which in its totality lies
"between 4,200,000 and 4,600,000." Dr.

Hans Gunther Seraphim, statistician and librarian at
the University of Göttingen, says "about 4,500,000 Jews." But, to offset that, M.

Léon
Poliakov ends a study he has been making (Revue d'Histoire de la seconde guerre mondiale,
October 1956, p.

90) with the following estimate, the sensational nature of which is inescapable:
"It can be said with virtual certainty that the number of Jews[106] exterminated should lie between
5 to 7 million, 6 million being the most probable, a figure including only deaths by violence,
asphyxiation or execution, and not taking into account at all the demographic deficit added between 1939
and 1945 from the almost total absence of births in Jewish homes… Doubtless professional statisticians,
working with the help of demographic methods, which they will bring in, would conclude in these
conditions that the "actual losses" in the Jewish world between 1933 and 1945 were about 8 million.

"
M.

Léon Poliakov is too modest.

I am sure that in counting as exterminated all the Jews
that were not born between 1933 and 1945 it would not take much effort to arrive at many,
many more than 8 million.

In short, the figure almost unanimously accepted in support of germanophobic publicity is
6 million.I am sure that in counting as exterminated all the Jews
that were not born between 1933 and 1945 it would not take much effort to arrive at many,
many more than 8 million.

In short, the figure almost unanimously accepted in support of germanophobic publicity is
6 million.

For Auschwitz-Birkenau the press sticks to 4 million, although the Krakow tribunal
which sentenced Hoess, the first commandant, to be hanged on April 4th, 1947, gave
2,500,000, and the Institute of Jewish Affairs, World Jewish Congress (Eichmann's
Confederates and the Third Reich Hierarchy, N.Y., 28 E.

84th St., 1961, p.

18) gave only
900,000.

The latest commentator specialising in German horrors and atrocities, M.

Raul Hilberg
(The Destruction of the European Jews, Quadrangle Books, Inc., Chicago, 1961), devoted
himself to learned calculations to arrive at a total of 5,100,000, a million at Auschwitz-Birkenau,
the rest exterminated in other camps (Chelmno, Belzec, Sobibor, Maideneck and Treblinka) by
the Einsatzgruppen during the advance and retreat of German troops in Russia.

M.

Léon Poliakov enumerated six statistical methods which all led, although by different
ways, to the extermination of a number of Jews more or less close to six million.

Each one of
these methods is in itself a veritable puzzle, so that a historian in search of the truth finds himself
faced with a puzzle of puzzles.

The reader will excuse me if I thought that, under such circumstances, the truth could not
be found except through a detailed statistical study, and I have devoted a special chapter to it
later in this work.

I will confine myself here to a summary of the matter.

Even if the Germans
had decided to exterminate the European Jews, the validity of which is disputed in the
documents cited above and by the avowal of Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I will confine myself here to a summary of the matter. Even if the Germans
had decided to exterminate the European Jews, the validity of which is disputed in the
documents cited above and by the avowal of Dr. Kubovy, Director of the Centre of
Contemporary Jewish Documentation at Tel Aviv, they could never have exterminated six
million, or even five, for the simple reason that there never were six million Jews, or even five -
far from that - in that part of Europe occupied by their troops during the war; that those who
were there were by no means all arrested; and that those who were arrested were by no means
all exterminated. If the reader would like to have an idea of the magnitude of the macabre exaggerations
made by all those imaginative writers, [107] one example will suffice. At Nuremberg, the
French Prosecutor general Dubost, claimed in his indictment (the exact text will be found in the
chapter dealing with this matter) pronounced on January 29th, 1946, that 250,000 French had
been deported to Germany. On February 24th, 1962, the French Minister of Veterans and War
Victims, gave the exact figure - 49,135. In other words, the prosecutor had multiplied the actual
number by 5. I will show that in the calculations of Poliakov, Hilberg and Co., there are
innumerable exaggerations of the general total. For example, the 4 millions of Auschwitz-
–    74    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Birkenau (according to the Revue d'Histoire de la seconde guerre mondiale, October 1956, p.

3) were reduced to 900,000 by the Institute of Jewish Affairs (op.

cit.

p.

18).

But everything in its place.

This chapter is addressed to another question.

* * *
The reader might ask himself, if the existence of gas chambers has not been established,
and if the number of deaths could be brought down from 6 million to 1 million, what was the
significance of that concentration of Jews in special camps, and how did the idea of gas
chambers arise?

Here, then:
Hitlerian Germany was a racist state, and that is the answer to the first part of the
question.

The racist state, however, postulates the expulsion of the minority race beyond the
frontiers of the national community.

The State of Israel is another illustration.

"Only a compatriot," stated Article 4 of the programme of the National Socialist Party,
made public on February 24th, 1920 at Munich, "can be a citizen.

Only he who is of German
blood, regardless of his faith, can be a compatriot.

A Jew cannot be a compatriot…"
The word used in the original is Volkgenosse for "kinsman," which has no corresponding
word in French, or in any other language.

"Kinsman" or "compatriot" is only an approximate
translation.

One should say "comrade of the people," or "one belonging to the people." The
difficulty lies in the fact that the word Volk in German does not just mean "people," but includes
"the blood" and "the soil" associated with the idea of a people.

Article 5 concluded: "He who is not a citizen may not live in Germany except as a guest,
and is under the jurisdiction of legislation pertaining to foreigners."
When National Socialism came to power on January 30th, 1933, the German Jews thus
found themselves automatically endowed with the status of aliens which, in all countries,
excludes them from holding top positions in the government or in the economy.

This was the
juridical basis of the race laws in Hitlerian Germany.Article 5 concluded: "He who is not a citizen may not live in Germany except as a guest,
and is under the jurisdiction of legislation pertaining to foreigners."
When National Socialism came to power on January 30th, 1933, the German Jews thus
found themselves automatically endowed with the status of aliens which, in all countries,
excludes them from holding top positions in the government or in the economy.

This was the
juridical basis of the race laws in Hitlerian Germany.

[108]
That there is no moral justification for such a measure is quite evident and there is no need
to prove it.

But then, the fact that in no country in the world is an alien given a post of command
is not the question.

The only difference between Hitlerian Germany and the other countries was
that, in other countries one is an alien by virtue of nationality, while in the eyes of National
Socialism, one was an alien by virtue of race.

But in Israel there are no Arabs who are
schoolmasters, finance administrators or administrators of a Kibbutz, or Ministers.

What takes
place in Israel does not justify what took place in Germany, I repeat - if only because one cannot
justify one wrong with another.

But I am not justifying, I am explaining, and to explain I have
to take apart the mechanism.

If I cite Israel it is only to show that the racist evil, in the sense in
which National Socialism understood racist, is much greater than one thinks, since the
champions of anti-racism there are today racism's protagonists, and only to point out that,
contrary.

to what is generally believed, Hitlerian Germany is not the only example.

As a matter of fact and not of principle, there is still another difference between Germany
and Israel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

to what is generally believed, Hitlerian Germany is not the only example. As a matter of fact and not of principle, there is still another difference between Germany
and Israel. In 1933, the 500,000 Jews who were living in Germany, who de jure were put
outside the national community, could not be put out de facto, by leading them on route
marches to one or another of the frontiers, with or without the legendary 30 kilos of baggage, as
Israel did with the 900,000 Arabs of Palestine, who were pushed into Jordan in 1948. With her
modern well-organised states, with well defined frontiers, all maintaining very formal political
and economic relations with each other, the Europe of 1933 did not offer the same opportunities
to a racist state as did the Middle East of 1948, composed as it was of embryonic states with
poorly defined frontiers and without any mutual relations, except those governed by the laws of
the jungle. The passage of individuals from one country to another was controlled by
–    75    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---immigration laws, and when it was a question of massive immigration, as in the case of the
German Jews, it was called a Population Transfer, and preliminary negotiations were necessary.

The Nazi government wanted to engage in such negotiations first of all, on the basis of the
Balfour Declaration, with Britain, to which the Treaty of Versailles had given a mandate over
Palestine, where the international Zionist movement clamoured for the reestablishment of the
Biblical Jewish State, within its rights.

This is the text of the Balfour Declaration (November 2nd, 1917).

"The government of his Britannic Majesty look favourably on the establishment in Palestine of a
national home for the Jewish people, and will do all in their power to favour the achievement of this
purpose, it being well understood that nothing will be done to prejudice the civil and religious rights of
the non-Jewish communities in Palestine, nor to the rights and status which the Jews enjoy in other
lands."
[109]
To maintain that this declaration was bound to result in the creation of the State of Israel,
in the conditions under which it was created, and to its support in the conditions in which it
actually exists, is meaningless.

That is also the opinion of the celebrated British historian,
Arnold Toynbee, and of many other academics, Jewish and non-Jewish.

In any case, it was a
Utopian dream and the creation of this Jewish state in 1948 proved it.

At the time, Arabs, hostile
- and they still are - to this interpretation of the Balfour Declaration, tried to limit its applications,
indeed, to stop them, and for reasons of oil, Britain did not affront them.

She did not want to
have any direct contact with Germany over the settlement of this problem, and directed her to the
Jewish agency of Mr.

Chaim Weizmann, with which she was involved through the Balfour
Declaration.She did not want to
have any direct contact with Germany over the settlement of this problem, and directed her to the
Jewish agency of Mr.

Chaim Weizmann, with which she was involved through the Balfour
Declaration.

For her part, the Germany of Hitler who, like the Germany of the Weimar Republic
and the Germany of the Kaisers, was determined to cultivate commercial popularity with the
Arab peoples, did not insist.

She put the problem on a much broader plan than the Palestinian
plan with the Jewish agency, but succeeded in reaching only one agreement in 1933 - called the
Chaim Arlossaroff's Transfer-Abkommen by the Germans, the Hawara by the Jews - which
envisaged the immigration into Palestine of all Jews able to arrive there with £1,000 sterling,
but which limited immigration to 1,500 Jews per month for at the others.

(In Le Bréviaire de la
Haine, p.

32, M.

Léon Poliakov notes this agreement, but twists the sense.) Such were the
conditions imposed by Britain on the Jewish agency, and that was the limit of what she could
consent to in order not to offend the Arab peoples of the Middle East.

This 91,000 per Jew stipulation finally constituted the whole problem.

There were about
500,000 Jews in Germany and they represented in the aggregate the export of £500 million, or
approximately 10 billion marks.

This was very close to the evaluation that Dr.

Schacht gave of
the total fortune of the 500,000 German Jews.

No negotiations were undertaken over the sum,
however, because another difficulty had to be surmounted.

Hitlerian Germany declared that it
was impossible to export such a lot of capital all at once because it corresponded to more than
half the amount of the annual budget.

She asked that settlement be future-dated, on the basis of
economic agreements of compensation, not only with Britain - involved because of Palestine -
but also with any other nation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hitlerian Germany declared that it
was impossible to export such a lot of capital all at once because it corresponded to more than
half the amount of the annual budget. She asked that settlement be future-dated, on the basis of
economic agreements of compensation, not only with Britain - involved because of Palestine -
but also with any other nation. These other nations and Britain made it clearly understood that if
they were prepared to receive the German Jews, and even to contemplate a lesser (but not much
less) sum than the fixed average of 11,000 per head, they would not find it possible to enter into
any negotiation whatsoever unless Germany first pledged that the Jews would be allowed to
take with them whatever sum they agreed upon. Everything collapsed. The last attempt of this
kind was made in November 1938. Although already in disfavour, Schacht was commissioned
by [110] Hitler and went personally to London. In vain. It was however correct that in 1933, Germany could not export, without compensation
agreements and time extensions, the sum of 10 billion marks. At that time neither France,
Britain - nor even possibly the United States - could have. So this is what happened. From 1933 the Jewish Agency was authorised to open a central
office in Berlin for Jewish emigration (Zentralstelle für jüdische Auswanderung) to distribute,
–    76    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---under Nazi control, the 1,500 monthly passports for Palestine, as authorised by Britain.

Insofar
as no compensation agreement could be reached, no passport could be issued which allowed the
export of the value in exchange of £1,000.

For the others, however, the Jewish Agency and the
Nazis together agreed to push things a little by distributing more than 1,500 passports (mainly
under the cover of assumed nationalities).

Then again, the Nazis facilitated a steady, clandestine
emigration, to such an extent that when war was declared, about 300,000 - and not just the
108,000 Jews authorised by the Chaim-Arlossaroff's Transfer Abkommen or Hawara - had
succeeded in leaving Germany.

On the declaration of war another complication arose, and the business nearly came to an
abrupt stop.

in March 1939, Britain had decided to grant, flatly, no more than 75,000
emigration authorisations for the next five years.

This little known aspect, carefully kept under cover by the "historians" of the Centre for
Contemporary Jewish Documentation - and a few others too!

- is revealed in a certain number of
documents, especially those carrying the reference N.G.

1889 (Note of the Foreign Affairs
Ministry, dated March 10th, 1938, produced at the Wilhelmstrasse trial) and P.S.

3558 (Report
of the same Ministry, dated January 25th, 1939, produced at the first Nuremberg Trial).

Throughout this period, "the régime inflicted on the German Jews by the government was
that of a minority out of favour and humiliated," M.

Joseph Billig of the Centre for
Contemporary Jewish Documentation tells us.Throughout this period, "the régime inflicted on the German Jews by the government was
that of a minority out of favour and humiliated," M.

Joseph Billig of the Centre for
Contemporary Jewish Documentation tells us.

Further on he adds that "the activity of the Jews
in the German economy was not seriously hampered," and as far as the Austrian Jews who fell
under the power of the Nazis through the Anschluss were concerned, "it was a question again of
a fairly inoffensive action."
Considering that it was precisely during this period that all the racist legislative measures
publicly promulgated at the Nuremberg Congress of the Nazi Party on September 15th, 1935
were taken against the Jews, and in the light of the mountain of indignant and vengeful literature
which these racist measures provoked in the world, this very temperate judgement from an
Israeli pen cannot fail to surprise us.

Inadvertence?

In November 1938 everything changed abruptly.

The assassination in Paris on the 7th of
that month of Counsellor of the Embassy, von Rath, by a young Jew named Grynspan,
provoked [111] that night of horror and nightmare in Germany, November 9-10, 1938 - a
veritable Jew hunt; the pillage and sacking of their stores; the smashing of their windows -
hence the name KristalInacht (Crystal Night) as it was called by the Germans; limitless and
numberless molestations; the pillage and destruction of 815 stores, 171 houses, 276
synagogues, 14 other monuments of the community; 20,000 Jews arrested, 7 Germans, 3
foreigners; 36 killed and 36 wounded.

(Report of Heydrich to Goering, dated November 11th,
1938.

Volume IX, pp.

554.

Document acknowledged as authentic by Goering and all the other
defendants against whom it was produced).

On the conditions under which these manifestations took place we have only one official
and sure document: Document P.S.

3063, dated February 13th, 1939, Volume XXXII, pp.

20-
29.--- PAGE BREAK ---

3063, dated February 13th, 1939, Volume XXXII, pp. 20-
29. This was the report of the highest judge of the National Socialist Party, Walter Buch, in
charge of the inquiry and tribunal to judge the 174 members of the Party arrested after the 11th
of November on orders from Heydrich for having organised it and having participated. These
174 persons were all of the subaltern ranks. The leaders, the government, the defendants and
the Führer only learned about it after it had happened. They all disavowed it, except for
Goebbels who, learning of it afterwards like the others, and not having taken part, was pleased
about it. .It was Goebbels in fact who heard about it first. On the 9th of November, 1938 - as
every year - the heads of the Party met together in Munich to commemorate the putsch of 1923. Late in the evening, Goebbels was informed by telegraph that serious antisemitic demonstrations
were taking place in Hesse, Magdeburg and on a smaller scale all over Germany. After a brief
conversation among the principal dignitaries of the Party and the Führer, a telegram was sent by
Heydrich at 1.20 in the morning to all the police bureaux all over Germany (Document P.S. 3051, Volume XXXI, pp. 515-519). He called upon all the police commissioners to make
contact at once with the district Party staffs, to see to it that Jews were not molested, that their
–    77    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---lives and property were not threatened, that their stores and living quarters were not pillaged etc.

- in short, that things should continue to develop with order and that calm should be restored.

Now this is how this telegram, whose purpose was to put an end to unexpected demonstrations
because they were contrary to the spirit of National Socialism as well as of the government, was
presented to the Tribunal at Nuremberg on November 21st, 1945 by Justice Jackson himself, in
the inaugural session:
"The anti-Semitic campaign became frenzied in Germany after the assassination at Paris of German
counsellor of the legation von Rath.

Heydrich, head of the Gestapo, sent a telegram to all the officers of
the Gestapo and S.D.

ordering them to arrange a "spontaneous" protest for the nights of November 9 and
10, 1938, to hasten the destruction of Jewish goods and to protect [112] German goods alone… 19
(Volume II, p.

130).

One wonders at: a) the plural… "the nights of the 9th and 10th, instead of the night of
November 9-10; b) that this telegram which "orders" (sic) demonstrations for that night is
specifically dated 1.20 a.m.

of the 10th; c) that it "orders" that he wants a stop put to the manner
in which the demonstrations were developing.

Thus are legends born.

But the Crystal Night was not the only consequence of the assassination of von Rath.

Because of the gravity of the troubles it provoked and therefore the need to avoid any repetition
of such, this assassination made the directors of the Third Reich realise that an overall solution
to the Jewish problem had to be found.

It had been dragging on for five years but now, to
describe their new approach, they entitled it die Endlösung der Judenfrage - a phrase to which
for fifteen years the disoriented imaginations of all the drifting journalists and the unusual
historians of the Jewish Centre for Contemporary Documentation have given so many other and
false meanings.Because of the gravity of the troubles it provoked and therefore the need to avoid any repetition
of such, this assassination made the directors of the Third Reich realise that an overall solution
to the Jewish problem had to be found.

It had been dragging on for five years but now, to
describe their new approach, they entitled it die Endlösung der Judenfrage - a phrase to which
for fifteen years the disoriented imaginations of all the drifting journalists and the unusual
historians of the Jewish Centre for Contemporary Documentation have given so many other and
false meanings.

Actually the original phrase was die Gesamtlösung der Judenfrage, or the solution of the
whole, all, so that the question could not be reopened.

But Goering, who used it for the first
time in the first paragraph of a letter to Heydrich dated July 31st, 1941, in which he gave the
order to make preparations for it (P.S.

710, Volume XXVI, p.

266), used the expression die
Endlösung der Judenfrage in the last paragraph, and this is the phrase which prevailed.

It had
the same meaning as the original title and did not mean the iquidation of the problem by the
liquidation of the people concerned.

Picked up by Goering himself, in the act of using a
tendentious translation at Nuremberg on March 20th, 1946, poor Justice Jackson was obliged to
acknowledge it (Volume IX, p.

552).

But the press never breathed a word of this and so a
whole concept was twisted forever.

While Dr.

Schacht was packing his bags to go to London on Hitler's orders to try to
renew negotiations with Britain and a certain number of other countries which had been almost
dead since 1933 and which an international conference convoked at Evian on July 6th, 1938, at
President Roosevelt's initiative had failed to revive, Goering - also armed with a mandate from
Hitler - convened an inter-ministerial conference of representatives from all the ministries of the
Third Reich affected by measures to be taken without delay.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While Dr. Schacht was packing his bags to go to London on Hitler's orders to try to
renew negotiations with Britain and a certain number of other countries which had been almost
dead since 1933 and which an international conference convoked at Evian on July 6th, 1938, at
President Roosevelt's initiative had failed to revive, Goering - also armed with a mandate from
Hitler - convened an inter-ministerial conference of representatives from all the ministries of the
Third Reich affected by measures to be taken without delay. Apart from Goering, who presided,
amongst others at the conference were Goebbels, (Propaganda Minister), Heydrich (head of the
R.S.H.A., representing Himmler), Frick (Minister of the Interior), Funk (Minister of
Economics), Schwerin-Krosigk (Minister of Finance) etc. Opening the session, Goering stated:
"Gentlemen, I have had enough of these demonstrations that do not harm the Jews but do harm
me, the highest authority of the [113] German economy. If today a Jewish shop is destroyed and the
goods are thrown into the street, the insurance company will pay damages to the Jew so that he will
suffer no loss. In addition, consumer goods, goods which belong to the people, are destroyed. If, in the
future, such demonstrations take place, if they are necessary, then I demand that they be controlled in such
a way as not to do us harm. And I want things done in such a way that they do not inflict damage on
themselves; it would be crazy to empty and set fire to a Jewish store because that would be injurious to
the insurance company, since they would have to cover the damages and pay for the merchandise. One
–    78    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---might as well seize and burn the goods at the moment they are delivered." (P.S.

1816, Volume XXVIII,
pp.

499-540, and Volume IX, p.

561).

A certain Herr Hilgard, representative of the insurance companies, was also heard at this
conference.

He estimated the material damages for the windows and jewels alone (goods
imported into Germany with resultant export of capital) at more than 25 million marks.

He
further detailed that the Belgian company which alone could repair the window frames, was
asking for a six months time extension just to manufacture the necessary amount of glass.

He
added that he did not yet have to hand all the other factors of the disaster, at which Heydrich
said that the total could be estimated at 100 million marks.

And the experts in their turn showed
that he had not exaggerated.

A discussion about the organisation of a massive emigration of Jews came to nothing.

Goering did not think that it was practically possible because of the massive export of capital it
would involve, nor did he see any chance of getting any import-export compensation
agreements from other countries.

The reader is doubtless indignant that the Nazis refused to contemplate such a massive
exodus of German Jews, allowing them to take with them the exchange value of all they
possessed.

It was indeed a crying injustice.

But it was also an established practice and
characteristic of all population transfers.

I refer him to two works: European Population
Transfer (Oxford Univ., 1946), and Les Transferts internationaux de populations (Presses
universitaires de France), where he can note at his ease a good twenty such transfers determined
by treaty, which required that the unfortunates involved leave their country with 30 kilos of
baggage, often less, and always without money.

Between July 1st, 1945 and January 1st, 1947
the Russians drove about 7,300,000 persons out of Silesia into Germany.I refer him to two works: European Population
Transfer (Oxford Univ., 1946), and Les Transferts internationaux de populations (Presses
universitaires de France), where he can note at his ease a good twenty such transfers determined
by treaty, which required that the unfortunates involved leave their country with 30 kilos of
baggage, often less, and always without money.

Between July 1st, 1945 and January 1st, 1947
the Russians drove about 7,300,000 persons out of Silesia into Germany.

They used cattle cars,
allowed them far less than 30 kilos of baggage per person and not even any food for a journey
of four to five days.

In the Revue des Deux Mondes of May 15th, 1952, p.

374, M.

Jean de
Pange claims that more than 4 million died during the transfer, which thus amounts to a number
of victims much greater than the Jewish .victims in the concentration camps!

And in full peace-
time!

We are certainly concerned with a human problem here, but it is also an [114] economic
problem and, seen in that light, transfers of national wealth were involved which the very
structure of international exchange does not permit unless coupled with compensations, without
which the economy of the country would be ruined.

Thus inhumanity arises from structures, not
men, and then the chances to rebuild those structures - and the will to do so - alas, are very
limited.

At any rate, the Germans had to wait for the results of Dr.

Schacht's last attempt to renew
international negotiations, and we have already seen that it foundered.

The principle of the three decrees which Goering would support was then laid down:
– The first, which would levy a collective tax of a billion marks on German Jews (P.S.

1412, Reichsgesetzblatt, 1938, pt.

1, p.

1579);
- The second, which would exclude Jews from German economic life (P.S.

2875
Reichsgesetzblatt, 1938, pt.

1, p.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2875
Reichsgesetzblatt, 1938, pt. 1, p. 1580);
– The last, deciding that the insurance companies would pay to the state, not to Jewish
interests, the reimbursement for the damages of the Crystal Night (P.S. 2694 Reichsgesetzblatt,
1938, pt. 1, p. 1581). The assassination thus brought about results analogous to those brought about later,
during the German occupation of France, by those singular Resistants who provoked only the
arrest of hundreds of hostages and a penalty for breaking the occupation ordinance, when they
blew up a chemist shop or a cafe with a plastic bomb - more often than not to satisfy an old
personal grudge - or assassinated a German soldier in a dark and deserted street etc., under the
pretext of combatting Germany or Nazism. After November 7th, 1938, the life of the German
Jews, which international negotiations on reasonable propositions would have saved, was made
even more difficult by their exclusion from the economic life of Germany, and the consequences
of that - the sequestration of Jewish goods and the expropriations in particular. –    79    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---In 1939 another event put an end to any plans: war.

All the more so because on September
5th - two days after the British and French declarations of war on Germany - Mr.

Chaim
Weizmann, President of the Jewish Agency, wrote a letter to Mr.

Chamberlain, Prime Minister
of His Majesty the King of England, in which he informed him, "We Jews are on Great
Britain's side and will fight for Democracy," specifying that "the Jewish representatives were
ready to conclude an agreement to permit the use of all their manpower, their techniques, their
material aid and all their skills."
Perhaps I have not searched hard enough, but I have not found the text of this letter in any
French publication.

Here is the passage in question, according to H.

G.

Adler in his Die Verheimlich
Wahrheit, p.

320 (The Unknown Truth):
"Ich wünsche in nachdrücklichster Form die Erklärung zu[115]bestätigen, dass wir Juden an der
seite Grossbritaniens stehen und für die Demokratie kämpfen werden.

Aus diesen Grunde stellen wir uns
in den kleinsten und grössten Dingen unter die zusammenfassende Leitung der britischen Regierung.

Die
jüdische Vertretung ist bereit, in sofortige Abkommen einzustreten - und alle menschliche Kraft, ihre
Technik, ihre Hilfsmittel und alle Fähigkeiten nutzlich einzusetzen.

" Der englische.

Originaltext dieser
Erklärung wird bei Adler (a.a.O.s.

321) wie folgt wiedergegeben:
"I wish to confirm in the most explicit manner, the declaration which I and my colleagues (sic)
made during the last months and especially in the last week; that the Jews stand by Great Britain and will
fight on the side of the democracies.

Our urgent desire is to give effect to these declarations.

We wish to
do so in a way entirely consonant with the general scheme of British action, and therefore would place
ourselves, in matters big and small, under the co-ordinating direction of His Majesty's Government.Our urgent desire is to give effect to these declarations.

We wish to
do so in a way entirely consonant with the general scheme of British action, and therefore would place
ourselves, in matters big and small, under the co-ordinating direction of His Majesty's Government.

The
Jewis (sic) Agency is ready to ender (sic) into immediate arrangements of utilising Jewish manpower,
technical ability, resources, etc.

"
Reproduced in the Jewish Chronicle of October 8th, 1939, this letter constituted a real
declaration of war on Germany by the Jewish world and created the problem of the internment
of all the German Jews in concentration camps as "nationals of a nation at war with Germany."
That is another step taken by all countries of the world in wartime.

It must, however, be
recognised that even before the publication of this letter, the German government had already
made preparations in this direction.

After all, the declaration of war on Germany, not only by
Chaim Weizmann, but especially by Britain and France, put an end to all projects for the transfer
of Jews on any negotiated basis whatsoever.

After the defeat of France and the failure of peace feelers offered to Britain, the idea grew
in the minds of the Nazi leaders that the Jews could be gathered together, then transferred to a
French colonial territory, for example, Madagascar.

A report dated August 21st, 1942, signed
by Luther, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the Third Reich, concluded on the
possibility of negotiations with France about this and mentioned conversations which took place
from July to December 1940, the failure of which, after the interview at Montoir on October
24th, 1940, was rought about by Pierre-Etienne Flandin, Laval's successor.

During the whole
of 1941, the Germans clung to the hope of taking up these negotiations again and bringing them
to a successful conclusion.

(From Document N.G.--- PAGE BREAK ---

During the whole
of 1941, the Germans clung to the hope of taking up these negotiations again and bringing them
to a successful conclusion. (From Document N.G. 2586 - the same in which the celebrated
Wannsee Protocol appears - produced at the Wilhelmstrasse trial. M. Billig also cites it in the
Eichmann dossier. And V. Alexandrov romances these negotiations in the book that he, too,
wrote on Eichmann.)
'In March 1941," Hoess tells us (Autobiography, p. 153), [116] "Himmler confided to him his
decision to change the camp at Auschwitz-Birkenau into 'a mighty armament works; a camp for 100,000
war prisoners, an enlargement of the former camp for 30,000 prisoners, preparation of 10,000 prisoners
for Buna…' At the time, Hoess comments, "those were figures absolutely unheard of in the history of the
camps. At that date, a camp of 10,000 prisoners was already considered immense." (Cited from Michel
Borwicz, expert before the Tribunal of the Polish High Court, for the trials of war criminals, in "Les
Solutions Finales", published in Revue d'Histoire de la seconde guerre mondiale, October 1956, p. 59.)
–    80    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---If it is true, as claimed, that the Germans really did foster the idea of exterminating the
Jews, the idea had not yet occurred to them at that date and this text proves it, doubtless
inadvertently furnished by the accusers themselves.

And this proof is corroborated by the report
of Luther cited above, wherein it said that at that date the Germans were hoping to arrive at an
agreement with France to gather together all the Jews on Madagascar, on the resumption of the
diplomatic conversations broken off in December 1940.

It was during the second half of 1941 that the solution of the Jewish problem took a
murderous turn.

First there was the declaration of war on Russia.

Goebbels had the rumour
spread that Hitler had been compelled to do it because the Jews were trying to get Stalin into the
war.

Then followed the famous book, Germany Must Perish (Argyle Press, Newark, N.J.,
1941) by a certain Theodore N.

Kaufman, an American Jew of whom it can be said that his
voice was the tocsin of the forthcoming entry of the United States into the war at the side of
Britain, France and Russia.

Theodore N.

Kaufman said bluntly in his book that the Germans, for the very fact that
they were German - be they anti-Nazi Germans, even communists or philosemites - did not
deserve to live, and that after the war 20,000 doctors would be mobilised to sterilise 25 German
men or women a day, so that in three months there would not be a single German capable of
reproducing in Europe, and in 60 years the German race would be totally eliminated from the
continent.

He further said that the German Jews were of this opinion also.

The fact that Theodore N.

Kaufman was not brought before the Nuremberg Trial after
having dared to write such things is not the point I wish to stress.

There is worse.

Hitler ordered the book to be read over all the radio stations and one can imagine the effect
it produced on German opinion.There is worse.

Hitler ordered the book to be read over all the radio stations and one can imagine the effect
it produced on German opinion.

I have myself met Germans who told me that from that day on,
when they learned about this scheme, everyone - people, army, police - everywhere, began to
talk about the necessity to literally exterminate the Jews and expressed the hope that Hitler
would issue an order to that effect.

And the word was passed that such [117] an order had been
given by Hitler to Himmler or Heydrich.

There were people who claimed to be well informed
who said that they heard it from someone high up, and when a Jew fell into the hands of some
dull-witted policeman, who had heard the rumour and firmly believed it, his fate was certainly
not enviable.

At Nuremberg, Minister Lammers, Secretary of the Reich Chancellory, confirmed this,
saying, "My opinion is that these rumours (often passing for orders) came from clandestine
radio listening posts, where foreign broadcasts were heard, and that no one wanted to admit
that." (Volume XI, p.

58)
The reading of Theodore Kaufman's book over the radio unleashed a mass fury against
the Jews, regardless of the influence of the foreign broadcasts.

But all Germany also believed
the foreign broadcasts, which were listened to secretly, and, believing that an order had been
given, many of those sorry S.S.

types surely thought that they were authorised to carry the
order out.

In December 1941, when Germany had to go to war with the United States, it was
the last straw.

Actually, before the war with the United States, there was a general, vague sort of feeling
all round that some solution other than the Madagascar one had to be found for the Jews, and
that they would have to be kept in Europe until the end of the war.

Goering's letter to Heydrich
of July 31st, 1941, already referred to, doubtless reflected this feeling.

The deportation of the
Jews to the East had begun on October 15th, 1941.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Goering's letter to Heydrich
of July 31st, 1941, already referred to, doubtless reflected this feeling. The deportation of the
Jews to the East had begun on October 15th, 1941. Heydrich's summons to the Berlin-Wannsee
meeting, dated November 29th, 1941, originally set the meeting for December 9th, but events
forced its postponement to January 20th, 1942. The purpose of the meeting was precisely to
plan out the concentration of the Jews in the East. The real mass deportation of all European
Jews to Auschwitz-Birkenau and the other Polish camps began in March 1942. From France, M. Joseph Billig tells us ("La Condition des Juifs en France sous
l'Occupation", published in Revue d'Histoire de la seconde guerre mondiale, October 1956,
p. 40), "the first convoy for the East left on March 27th, 1941," but that "deportation in earnest
did not begin until after a plan that was blocked was revised on June 11th, 1942, at the
R.S.H.A. in Berlin" and implemented through a memorandum of the June 11th R.S.H.A. –    81    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---meeting, signed Dannecker, on June 15th, 1942, "which determined the methods of
deportation, not only for France, but for the whole of Europe."
If we consider that the last convoy to Auschwitz-Birkenau arrived on July 7th, 1944
(Hungarian Jews), and taking March 27th, 1942 for the departure of the first, it lasted 27
months, and that is the length of time given by the American psychologist Gustave Gilbert
(Professor at Long Island) attached to the Nuremberg Trial (statement made on May 30th, 1961,
before the Jerusalem Tribunal in judgement on Eichmann).

My investigations reveal the same.

Non-racist mass deportation began on the same [118] date and lasted approximately as long.

The last convoy from France left on August 24th, 1944.

The synchronisation, and in particular the departure date, will be noticed; this coincides
with the arrival of Speer at the Ministry of Armaments (February 1942).

Mass deportations to
relieve the manpower crisis which faced Germany from the second half of 1941 on, were the
consequence.

In Speer's mind there was no reason why Jews should not be put to work like the
others, and many documents signed with his name attest to this.

Another coincidence: we have a
letter from Himmler, dated December 5th, 1941, addressed to Heydrich, to Pohl (head of the
business office of the K.Z.) and to Ghicke (inspector general of the K.Z.) which notes the
tendency to violence he had found among all the K.Z., and which requests of those concerned
that a stop be put to this, without making any special reference to make an exception of Jews,
and which contains these words: "…disagreement with certain specialists of the S.S., I will
improve the diet of the K.Z., and turn all affected into good specialised workers…" (cited by
Billig, Eichmann Dossier, p.

60).

The year 1942 was marked by a quantity of letters emanating
from the central offices of the R.S.H.A.

and pointing to an improvement in the diet at all camps.The year 1942 was marked by a quantity of letters emanating
from the central offices of the R.S.H.A.

and pointing to an improvement in the diet at all camps.

In The Commandant of Auschwitz Speaks, Hoess cites Himmler himself as saying that he
"wanted more and more special prisoners for the arms industry" (op.

cit., p.

225), and therefore
these special prisoners (Jews) were handled accordingly.

We will see further on, in the study devoted to it, how Eugen Kogon cites another
circular, dated December 28th, 1942, from the Central Bureau of Camp Management (Pohl), of
the same nature concerning deportees as a whole.

The orders stated that the Jews had been sent
to special camps (Sonderlagern), which set up the special handling (Sonderbehandlung) which
they were to receive, as compared with the deportation of their opposite numbers who were sent
haphazardly to this camp or that.

The deportation of the Jews to the East became in itself a
special operation (Sonderaktion), that is, especially directed against them.

All this was done in
the atmosphere of hate created by Theodore N.

Kaufman's book and the precipitation towards
"total war" - an expression just then introduced into common vocabulary and which all Germans
thought he had invented, for which he admitted he was preparing fellow members of his race.

Everyone agrees that this deportation was brutal and murderous.

The Jews never spoke of it
among themselves except in terror, even before it happened to them.

And when they had
suffered it, the effects were intensified by apprehension over what was still to come.

Hoess tells
us that at Auschwitz, one entire sector of the camp, Auschwitz III (Monovitz), was given over
to I.G.

Farben; and this industry, which uses colouring matter and dyes, suggests gas
chambers.

Moreover, there were in the camp clothing disinfection rooms, an operation for
which this very Zyklon B was used.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Farben; and this industry, which uses colouring matter and dyes, suggests gas
chambers. Moreover, there were in the camp clothing disinfection rooms, an operation for
which this very Zyklon B was used. It was [119] only one step from that to saying that these
gas chambers were for the asphyxiation of Jews, which the prisoners of the camp itself took up,
even faster than the historians of the Jewish Centre for Contemporary Documentation.- Every
time they found the words Sonderlager, Sonderbehandlung or Sonderaktion in a text, they
decreed on their own authority that it was code talk and referred to gas chambers. As an argument it seems a little weak, to say the least, after considering the following
incident:
On April 12th, 1945, Colonel Amen, American deputy prosecutor, having charged
Kaltenbrunner with having requested the special treatment at Walsertraum in the Walsertal, and
at the Winzerstube at Godesberg, got the following reply:
–    82    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Do you know what Walsertraum in the Walsertal or Winzerstube at Godesberg are, and their
relation to what you call Sonderbehandlung?

Walsertraum is the most elegant and fashionable mountain
hotel in all Germany, and the Winzerstube at Godesberg is a well-known hotel where many international
conferences have been held.

In those hotels such distinguished people as M.

Poncet and M.

Herriot, etc.,
were put.

They received triple the rations allotted to ordinary diplomats, that is, nine times the wartime
ration for a German.

They received a bottle of champagne every day, corresponded freely with their
families, or could receive parcels from them.

These internees had frequent visitors and their wants were
inquired after.

That is what we called Sonderbehandlung.

" (Volume XI, p.

248)
In these terms, the Sonderbehandlung which meant that the racial prisoners were sent to
Sonderlager, and which distinguished them from the common run, also meant that prominent
prisoners were distinguished from the common run in that they were not sent to concentration
camps but to hotels.

And that is quite far from the interpretation given - and still being given!

-
by the "historians" of the Jewish Centre for Contemporary Documentation.

What about witnesses?

So far Hoess, the commandant of Auschwitz, has been produced,
but we must question the value of his oral testimony (given at Nuremberg) as well as his written
testimony (penned in his cell at Cracow) which we have already pointed out was written under
threat of death, in the hope of reprieve or commutation of his sentence, and is full of
contradictions between one page and the next.

Gerstein?

After writing (?) his testimony, he took
the wise precaution of committing suicide.

An analysis of his testimony will be found in my
work The Drama of the European Jews, as well as the most plausible explanation of his
suicide - or his assassination.

There is also an analysis of the testimony given by the strange Dr.An analysis of his testimony will be found in my
work The Drama of the European Jews, as well as the most plausible explanation of his
suicide - or his assassination.

There is also an analysis of the testimony given by the strange Dr.

Miklos Nyiszli, who saw gas chambers 200 meters long and 1.05 to 2.55 meters wide in which
by batches of 3,000, 10,000 persons a day were asphyxiated according to the German language
edition, or 20,000 [120] in the French language edition!

The others?

They put gas chambers which they "saw" themselves in camps where we
know today none ever existed (Dachau), or else they saw their comrades depart for "gas
chambers" which they knew of only by hearsay.

This is generally true of most of these
testimonies.

Until recently, there was Hoess' wretched successor as commandant of Auschwitz,
Obersturmbannführer Richard Baer who took command in December 1943.

Arrested in
Hamburg in December 1960, he was incarcerated at Frankfurt and the preliminary investigation
of his case was begun under the direction of Prosecutor-General Bauer.

He was accused of
having continued the work begun by Hoess at Auschwitz and, between December 1943 and
October 1944, of having had asphyxiated a little more than a million Jews in the famous gas
chambers, especially 437,000 Hungarian Jews.

Announced three times at six monthly intervals,
his trial was put aside three times.

The last announcement made in April 1963 put the trial down
for the spring of 1964 - 2,5 years after his imprisonment during which time the preliminary
investigation was carried out.

This was because he was stubborn and would not admit that
during the time he was commandant of Auschwitz Jews had been asphyxiated in gas chambers.

Furthermore he said that if such gas chambers had existed he would have known about it.

Neither threats, nor persuasion, nor brain-washing - nothing could make him admit it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Furthermore he said that if such gas chambers had existed he would have known about it. Neither threats, nor persuasion, nor brain-washing - nothing could make him admit it. He had
even succeeded in proving that what he said was true and had obliged Prosecutor-General Bauer
to acquit him of that charge and to state publicly that it was incorrect to say that 437,000
Hungarian Jews had been gassed at Auschwitz. A defendant of Baer's stamp had never been
seen before. A veritable catastrophe for the contentions of the Jewish Centre for Contemporary
Documentation! Fortunately Providence came to the aid of Prosecutor-General Bauer. On June
23rd, 1963, the death of Richard Baer was announced, caused by a heart attack. So now he
could be made to say anything that was required. Just as had happened with Gerstein. I will certainly not go so far as to say that Baer was assassinated. No - he just died most
opportunely, and it is only a matter of fortunate coincidence. It will be a little more difficult to extract the truth about the gas chambers at Auschwitz. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. So let us conclude by saying that if some day it were
shown, in the middle of the 20th century, that an historical fact of such importance - involving
–    83    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hangmen and victims together, millions of people, 6 million of them exterminated in gas
chambers, or in some equally horrible way - could only be supported by such a small number of
documents and, in addition, by witnesses of such doubtful character, onecould claim without
risk of the slightest error that it was not a question of a fact, but of an historical lie, the most
tragic and macabre of all time.
–    84    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[121]
Chapter VI
CONCLUSION ON NUREMBERG
The definition of the crime and the criminal, the point of departure and keystone of the
Indictment, Article 6, was the master point in the Nuremberg Charter.

In itself it involved the
historian in the obligation to juxtapose all the parts of the definition with the facts on which they
were lined up, in order to give as exactly as possible a picture, to place these facts both in their
historical context and their judicial context.

The master point of the Charter, it also became that
of this study, which explains its preponderance here.

After investigation, the conclusion is that it is really not even a question of a definition, but
at the most a petitio principii, a fallacy in which that which is to be proved is taken for granted,
namely the sentencing of a single one of the criminals arbitrarily chosen from among all those
who committed the crime.

Since those who picked out this criminal and decided on his trial were
those who, working with him, created in detail all the circumstances of the crime and his co-
authors were therefore in league  against him, it is clear that no other result could come from
their cogitations.

Since at the same time they set themselves up as his judges, condemnation
became automatic, and the other Articles of the Charter add nothing but codification to this
automation.Since those who picked out this criminal and decided on his trial were
those who, working with him, created in detail all the circumstances of the crime and his co-
authors were therefore in league  against him, it is clear that no other result could come from
their cogitations.

Since at the same time they set themselves up as his judges, condemnation
became automatic, and the other Articles of the Charter add nothing but codification to this
automation.

From these Articles, which amount to so many statements nullifying the customary
principles and rules of Law, the most important have already been mentioned: the one which
qualified the judges, who are at the same time party (Article 1), the one which decreed that they
might not be challenged (Article 3); the one which called for expeditious hearing by imposing a
rapid examination of questions raised by the charges, and of those only (Article 18); the one
which freed the Tribunal from technical rules of evidence (Article 19); and the one which
allowed them to accept as established fact what was common knowledge, without requiring
proof (Article 21).

We have seen how these last two Article, in particular, allowed the Tribunal
to accept in the present affirmative tense, documents written in the hypothetical conditional mode
(cp.

Hossbach Doc.) - that there were gas chambers at Dachau, that 6,000,000 were
exterminated and, in general, all that has been said on concentration camps by all the deportees,
although today it has been shown that they expressed their reaction much more as victims eager
for compensation and vengeance than as objective witnesses.

Article 20 could be mentioned too: "The Tribunal may require to be informed of the nature
of any evidence before it is offered, so that it may rule upon the relevance thereof."
All tricky debate in public was to be avoided; thus the defendants found themselves
deprived of the last guarantee of [122] International Law, which is the public nature of justice.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hossbach Doc.) - that there were gas chambers at Dachau, that 6,000,000 were
exterminated and, in general, all that has been said on concentration camps by all the deportees,
although today it has been shown that they expressed their reaction much more as victims eager
for compensation and vengeance than as objective witnesses. Article 20 could be mentioned too: "The Tribunal may require to be informed of the nature
of any evidence before it is offered, so that it may rule upon the relevance thereof."
All tricky debate in public was to be avoided; thus the defendants found themselves
deprived of the last guarantee of [122] International Law, which is the public nature of justice. After citing Article 8, no more can be said; the rest is a morass of legal technicalities of no
importance. "The fact that the defendant acted pursuant to order of his government, or of a
superior, shall not free him from responsibility, but may be considered in mitigation of
punishment if the Tribunal determine that justice so requires."
–    85    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---So the Germans learned in 1945 that since the accession of Hitler to power, they had not
only had the right but the duty to act as conscientious objectors, and were so informed by jurists
(sic) who did not grant this right to their own nationals, and which not one of them has
recognised in those terms since then.

It is enough to make one tremble to think that if the F.L.N.

had been victorious in Algeria and taken all French soldiers who fought against them prisoner,
they could have sentenced them all by applying this Article 8.

The inconsistency - not to say
more - is seen at once when one knows that the masters of these jurists went so far as to cover
with honours certain of their nationals whose participation, under order, in crimes maintained as
such by the Tribunal, was indisputable.

For example, Professor Balachowsky, Russian-born
naturalised French in 1932, head of the laboratory of the Pasteur Institute in Paris, deported to
Buchenwald on January 16th, 1944, assigned to Block 50, told of criminal experiments.

Cross
examined at Nuremberg as a witness on January 29th, 1946, after having admitted that "each
one of these experiments amounted to an assassination" (Volume VI, p.

322), this Balachowsky
justified himself by saying, "one had to carry out to the letter the orders given, or disappear"
(op.

cit.

p.

328).

Not only did the Tribunal not apply Article 8 of the Charter to him for having
"obeyed criminal orders", but, as has been remarked, he now lives very comfortably in Paris,
covered with honours, spreading trepidation and fear amongst those Germans whose orders he
did not disobey.

It depends on who you are.

In that, the judgements of the Nuremberg court
were indistinguishable from those of the court of the fabulist.

And Balachowsky is not the only
one of this kind!

All the attorneys at Nuremberg put in a plea to the effect that this could shake the very
foundations of the state if it were universally accepted.

Dr.All the attorneys at Nuremberg put in a plea to the effect that this could shake the very
foundations of the state if it were universally accepted.

Dr.

Robert Servatius, Eichmann's
counsel revived this plea in similar terms at the hearing of December 13th: 1961 of the Jerusalem
Tribunal:
"Confidence in the rulers is a fundamental principle in all countries.

Action is dumb, obedience
blind.

Such are the qualities on which a country leans.

Are these qualities rewarded?

That depends on
political success.

If the policy collapses, the victor will consider the order a crime.

He who obeyed it will
be out of luck, and will have to answer for his loyalty.

The gallows or honours, that is the question.

When it ends in failure, the order is an infamous crime, if it ends in success, it is hallowed.

" (Le Monde,
[123] December 14th, 1961).

And in his 10 Years and 20 Days, Admiral Doenitz makes the following commentary on
this Article 8:
"…to ask of a soldier anything but obedience is to shake the very basis of the military life and
compromise the security of one's country… Moreover, the nations took good care not to apply it during
the Korean War as well as in the Suez expedition, in November 1956.

On the contrary, the British soldier
who refused to take part in that expedition was brought before a war council and convicted for refusal to
obey, in violation of the Nuremberg Charter." (op.

cit.

p.

41, of the French ed.)
What troubles me is not that the foundations of the state can be shaken, but that an
individual can be put in the position of having to ask himself, before obeying, not whether the
order conforms to justice, but whether the one giving the order is the strongest of all those who,
wherever in the world, have received from Heaven or from chance the mission to command.

Once more this is justice installed in the house of the Might that makes Right.--- PAGE BREAK ---

41, of the French ed.)
What troubles me is not that the foundations of the state can be shaken, but that an
individual can be put in the position of having to ask himself, before obeying, not whether the
order conforms to justice, but whether the one giving the order is the strongest of all those who,
wherever in the world, have received from Heaven or from chance the mission to command. Once more this is justice installed in the house of the Might that makes Right. There have been many other violations of the Nuremberg Charter since 1945: the action of
Great Britain in Egypt (1952-54); of Russia in Hungary (1956); France in Indo-China (1945-
54), then in Algeria (1954 on); Belgium, the United States and the United Nations in the Congo
(1958 on); without counting Mao Tse-Tung in China and Castro in Cuba. They are just so many
crimes with regard to Article 8 and yet there has never been any question of assembling a
Tribunal at Nuremberg to which to submit the cases of the guilty. –    86    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---* * *
Only the proceedings remain.

To give an accurate picture would require a detailed examination into the manner in which
they were conducted, running to as many volumes and pages as are in the Report - 23 volumes,
averaging 600 pages each, in quite a respectable format, for the first trial, another 77 volumes
for all 13 trials.

In spite of the pleasure the polemicist in me would derive from it, that is a work
outside the frame of this study, relating as it would more to the jurist than to the historian.

Besides, I think I have given enough specific examples to give a sufficient idea of the
circumstances in which these articles I have cited were used to impose silence on the defence (on
matters, for example, as important and as abundantly used by the Prosecution as the Versailles
Treaty); or to have accepted as bona fide such obviously false witnesses as Dr.

Blaha or the
Hauptsturmführer Hoettl, and Wizliceny, documents as evidently distorted as the Hossbach
report or as obviously false as the Gerstein report, statistics as fantastic as those drawn from
Auschwitz commandant [124] Hoess' memoirs and disavowed by the author himself.

In this
first trial of the major criminals alone, one finds hundreds of examples of this kind, and their
number or the lack of scruple of the judges were further multiplied in the dozen trials that came
after.

To conclude, I would nonetheless like to point out two more of the eleven rules of
procedure annexed to the Charter, to mitigate its imperfections with regard to the aim pursued:
Rule No.

2 and Rule No.

4.2 and Rule No.

4.

Under the title "Notice to Defendants, and Right to Assistance of Counsel," the first is, in
paragraph (a), Each individual defendant in custody shall receive not less than 30 days before
trial, a copy, translated into a language which he understands, (1) of the Indictment; (2) of the
Charter; (3) of any other documents lodged with the Indictment; (4) of a statement of his right to
the assistance of counsel as set forth in subparagraph (d) of this Rule, together with a list of
counsel.

Nothing to show what paragraph (d) is about.

On the other hand, paragraph (c) of Rule 4
exercises a considerable restriction on the provisions of Rule 2, concerning the right to receive
all the documents referred to in the Indictment, by specifying that they will receive them "only
so far as they may be made available by the Prosecutors."
From this we can see that the writers of the Charter took every precaution.

It is fair to say
that this last provision played a greater role with regard to "witnesses" than with "documents".

The number of "witnesses" who had drafted "documents" either before dying, or still living, but
whom the Prosecutor-General was not able "to make available" is incalculable.

As if on
purpose, the "documents" drawn up by these people were the most devastating.

But it is especially to Rule 2 that I would like to draw attention.

First, the 30 days allowed
for the delivery of documents to the accused was only rarely respected.

Not one of the accused,
in the Trial of the Major War Criminals at least, did not have to face, in at least one or two
sessions, documents brutally produced about which he knew nothing.

The President then
extricated himself by stating that the Rule was not pertinent.

The proceedings ended, one
perceived that these little breaches did not prevent the judge from being very much to the point.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The President then
extricated himself by stating that the Rule was not pertinent. The proceedings ended, one
perceived that these little breaches did not prevent the judge from being very much to the point. And since the judgement of the Tribunal was without appeal, the defence did not even have the
possibility of objecting on grounds of faulty drafting. This might not be so serious except for
the fact that the decisions of this first Nuremberg Tribunal established the jurisprudence of the
twelve that came after. Much more than by the facts brought out against them at Struthof, the
doctors of this camp were declared guilty simply because they had already been declared guilty
at Nuremberg, and in just about that way. In the Struthof trial, Captain Henriet, government commissioner, publicly acknowledged
that he could not prove that the typhus experiments of Dr. Haagen had produced death. But he
added that [125] the Tribunal could base its conviction on presumptions of guilt and these
presumptions of guilt, he said, had sufficed for the reasons adduced at the Nuremberg Trial. At
the time (1954) I observed, in the Introduction to the second edition of Mensonge d'Ulysse:
"This cannot fail to strike the reader if he knows that the Nuremberg Trial, too, based its
–    87    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---convictions only on testimonies of whose value we knew the worth; and on what is called the
lies of Haagen, therefore on more presumptions, and consequently reasoned the same way.

Thus the Nuremberg Trial inaugurated an era of condemnation, based not on facts judicially
established, but on simple presumptions deduced from vague talk."
There is worse.

However, to avoid being taxed with prejudice or exaggeration, I prefer to
let someone speak here who is under no suspicion among the lovers of justice.

This is what
William L.

Shirer says in the Preface to his Rise and Fall of the Third Reich:
"The swift collapse of the Third Reich… resulted in the surrender of documents etc., diaries,
telephone talk, etc.

e.g.

Hitler's diary, a unique source of precise information, Goebbels' diary, OKW,
Naval High Command etc.

60,000 files of the German Naval archives, which were captured at Schloss
Tambach near Coburg, contain practically all the signals, ships' logs, diaries, memoranda, etc., of the
German Navy.

" (Am.

ed.

1960, p.

ix) 485 tons of papers… (This is a condensed translation.)
I ask the reader to think about these statistics.

60,000 files of the Naval Archives, records
of the Foreign Office weighing 485 tons, hundreds and hundreds of thousands of documents in
all.

Who can believe that between August 8th, 1945 - the meeting of the Committee at London -
and November 14th, 1945, the appointed prosecutors were able to examine this mountain of
pieces of evidence seriously enough to make up an indictment historically and judicially
grounded?

Or that 30 days was enough time for the defendants and their counsel to extract
everything from them that could be used in their defence?

Judicial truth, under the circumstances, of which historical truth is the only basis, includes
all of that.

And to seriously examine all of that would require, beyond any doubt, ten, perhaps
hundreds of years, and thousands of historians.

For several years after the war, William L.And to seriously examine all of that would require, beyond any doubt, ten, perhaps
hundreds of years, and thousands of historians.

For several years after the war, William L.

Shirer tells us: "(these) tons of Nazi documents
lay sealed in a large U.S.

Army warehouse" and nobody showed any interest.

In 1955 thanks to
the initiative of AWA etc., papers were opened and a "pitifully small group of scholars" with
inadequate staff sifted through and photocopied them before the "government which was in a
great hurry in the matter, returned them to Germany." (Condensed from p.

ix, Shirer, Am.ed.,
1960.)
These "tons of paper" are now in Germany and it is solely up to the German government
as to who should have access to them, no longer just "a pitifully small group of historians,"
privileged because they support the official view, but all qualified historians.

[126]
Permit me to recall that in 1960, in the course of a series of lectures in Germany and
Austria, I asked the German historians to form an independent committee for such a study.

My appeal fell on deaf ears.

The point I want to make is that one cannot but be
dumbfounded that after just a few months of studying this immense pile of papers, a handful of
prosecutors and judges together felt they could say that they were sufficiently enlightened - the
former to draw up an indictment, and the latter to pronounce sentence.

Fifteen years later the blush of shame has still not crept up their faces.

I warn them, however, that even though he succeeded in having the Duke d'Enghien
assassinated without ever blushing in shame for it, even Napoleon has not escaped the
judgement of history.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fifteen years later the blush of shame has still not crept up their faces. I warn them, however, that even though he succeeded in having the Duke d'Enghien
assassinated without ever blushing in shame for it, even Napoleon has not escaped the
judgement of history. * * *
Having chosen to expose the actual facts in terms of the appraisal given them by the
Nuremberg judges, I had to depend on the classification which the Indictment made of them,
and it is possible that at the same time the chronological order may have been a little upset and
that some facts have escaped me - those which were not involved in a "decision in law," to use
the language of jurists. I hope that I have not overlooked any considered to be important and that
–    88    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---any oversights have not seriously prejudiced the basic argument of this study, nor shaken the
sequence of events too much.

If the medical experiments which played so great a role in the film of German horrors and
atrocities, and which were carried on in a certain number of camps (probably Auschwitz,
Dachau and Buchenwald), have not until now been considered, it is not an oversight, but simply
that they have not figured naturally in the method I have adopted.

I do not intend, moreover, to
treat them in detail; a volume would be needed for that.

Dr.

François Bayle, doctor in the French
Navy, devoted a masterly work of 1,519 pages to them, Croix gammée contre Caducée (1950)
(without a bibliography because he did not have one, and also without an alphabetical index).

Although this work is not without errors (far from it!

- because Dr.

François Bayle, being a
doctor and not a historian, obviously did not tend to weigh the validity of the documents with
which he worked but accepted them all), it is a mine of information.

At least it has the merit of
presenting, without comment, the documents he used.

That the medical conclusions he arrived
at from the documents are without value (because they rest on imaginary actions, that is to say,
on nothing) is another story, and it is surely a sensation for medical science.

However, it is not
the business of the historian to do more than point out the verification or lack of it to those
responsible for the teaching of medicine.

Just the same one may regret that such a [127] work,
of great interest to the medical profession, was undertaken by someone with no historical
qualifications, when the conclusions he came to should have been based on historical facts.

That
is the problem with culture in general; a problem which will have to be stated again, from the
start, when we study The Destruction of the European Jews by the political scientist Raul
Hilberg, which presents the problem in about the same way.Just the same one may regret that such a [127] work,
of great interest to the medical profession, was undertaken by someone with no historical
qualifications, when the conclusions he came to should have been based on historical facts.

That
is the problem with culture in general; a problem which will have to be stated again, from the
start, when we study The Destruction of the European Jews by the political scientist Raul
Hilberg, which presents the problem in about the same way.

With these reservations, Croix gammée contre Caducée is unquestionably a work of
good faith.

If the author happened to work on documents that should have been approached
very cautiously, at least he did not invent any, nor did he twist the meaning.

It must also be
acknowledged that every time he had the chance, he never failed to put the event in question in
its medical context and very objectively, too.

Thus, reproaching the Germans for the medical
experiments they indulged in - and this seems to me to be the normal reaction of a decent person
- he did not neglect, like some Poliakov, Olga Wormer or other, judging from their writings on
other matters in the same line, to compare them with the same sort of experiments indulged in by
the French, British, Americans, Dutch, Japanese… Among the experimenters cited were:
Strong, who vaccinated 900 persons in a British colony with live plague bacteria, without
concern for the consequences; Blanc, who similarly vaccinated "hundreds of thousands of
Moroccan natives with a live virus producing high fever, but who took the risk because of
danger of typhus"; Balthasar, in American prisons (p.

1,240) etc.

It is no secret to anyone that before, as during and after, the Second World War, medical
experiments of the same nature have been a regular practice in all latitudes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1,240) etc. It is no secret to anyone that before, as during and after, the Second World War, medical
experiments of the same nature have been a regular practice in all latitudes. Nor that all the
hospitals - and a few prisons, such as Sing Sing in America - always have plenty of guinea pigs
for the doctors who do not give them much choice in the matter, especially when it is a matter of
colonials or prison inmates. The mistake of Hitlerian Germany was to carry out these medical experiments on subjects
who were not their nationals. But when it came to a study of vaccines, other nations of the
world performed experiments on a large scale on their colonials. In actual fact, we note again
that Himmler prohibited them in all camps in a circular dated May 15th, 1944. Consequently,
unless it would have been possible after that date to continue to send their results to the Institut
für Rassenbiologische und Anthropologische Forschungen, which had made a point of
broadcasting Himmler's prohibition, as the Hungarian communist Dr. Miklos Niyszli claims
they did in his Doctor at Auschwitz, the "evidence" which the "historians" of the Jewish Centre
for Contemporary Documentation present, after that date, can only be fairy tales; and that is
what it is. I would like to give another example of exaggeration in medical experiments: those of the
Struthof (Alsace) concentration camp. [128]
–    89    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Until 1954 we were deafened by the cries of the press: "tens of thousands dead in the gas
chambers of this camp." Even in 1963 it is not unusual to hear or read the same publicity refrain
in the same words.

In the first two weeks of January 1954, at Colmar, sentence was passed on
Professors Haagen and Hirt, who were considered responsible for that dreadful crime.

In the
indictment, reproduced by the newspaper Le Monde (Paris, January 7th, 1954), we find:
1) That one of them is charged with the death, at his order, of the 87 Israelites, men and women,
who came from Auschwitz, put to death in the gas chamber, later to be sent to Strasbourg to add to the
anatomical collection of the German professor:
2) That it is said of the second: "I willingly admit that the first series of experiments did not result
in death";
3) This commentary: "It is now a question of whether the typhus experiments resulted in deaths.

Captain Henriet (he is the government commissioner who is prosecuting) admits that he cannot perhaps
bring proof, but he thinks that the Tribunal can base its conviction on circumstantial evidence when it is
adequate, as in this case.

This presumption he finds in the testimonies, and in the reasons adduced by the
Nuremberg Court, in the lies of Haagen (the doctor on trial) and his dissimulation during the first
examinations.

He thinks that these facts should allow the Tribunal to answer affirmatively the question,
"Was Haagen guilty of poisoning?"
That these experiments mentioned in the charge should result in 87 deaths is of course
horrible, both in principle and in fact.

But, the "tens of thousands of dead" of the horror and
atrocity propagandists amounted, after all, to only 87, and the gas chamber in question was not
a gas chamber at all, but a hall for medical experiments which, although nonetheless to be
condemned, is still something quite different.He thinks that these facts should allow the Tribunal to answer affirmatively the question,
"Was Haagen guilty of poisoning?"
That these experiments mentioned in the charge should result in 87 deaths is of course
horrible, both in principle and in fact.

But, the "tens of thousands of dead" of the horror and
atrocity propagandists amounted, after all, to only 87, and the gas chamber in question was not
a gas chamber at all, but a hall for medical experiments which, although nonetheless to be
condemned, is still something quite different.

I immediately asked the question, "If you continue
to claim that tens of thousands of deportees died in this camp, you must now tell us how they
died, since it was not in the gas chamber." Since no one answered I gave the answer myself,
which was within the frame of my general thesis on the phenomenon of concentration camps.

All the camps had been "Rafts of Medusa"8 in which the Häftlingsführung (self government by
the deportees themselves) selected - without any hesitation to be absolutely sure of not lacking
provisions - not those to be eaten, but those to be thrown overboard.

I call attention again to the fact that in admitting that he could not prove that all the deaths
attributed to the Struthof camp could be summarily attributed to Professor Haagen, Prosecutor
Henriet asked the Tribunal to base its conviction not on the materiality of facts, but on
"assumption." The Nuremberg Tribunal having already pronounced itself in this matter, it was
enough to take up the adduced reasons, for the benefit of the res judicata.All the camps had been "Rafts of Medusa"8 in which the Häftlingsführung (self government by
the deportees themselves) selected - without any hesitation to be absolutely sure of not lacking
provisions - not those to be eaten, but those to be thrown overboard.

I call attention again to the fact that in admitting that he could not prove that all the deaths
attributed to the Struthof camp could be summarily attributed to Professor Haagen, Prosecutor
Henriet asked the Tribunal to base its conviction not on the materiality of facts, but on
"assumption." The Nuremberg Tribunal having already pronounced itself in this matter, it was
enough to take up the adduced reasons, for the benefit of the res judicata.

But the [129]
Nuremberg Tribunal had reasoned in precisely the same way and, in order to condemn, had
based its conviction on "assumption" (presumptive evidence) by referring to Article 19 of the
Charter, concerning "common knowledge." All this was "common knowledge" because one
could read it every day in every paper, so it was not necessary to go to the trouble to find
witnesses to come before the bar and tell the Tribunal what they claimed to have seen, but what
in reality they had only read in the papers.

That, for the time being at least, is all that I wish to say about the medical experiments.

Examples of this kind are legion, and I would need as many pages to refute them as Dr.

Bayle needed to expose them.

If the need arises some day, there will always be time.

The Eichmann trial presented a delicate problem.

From a work which appeared so soon
after the judgement was rendered by the Jerusalem Tribunal, the reader surely expected that
some special mention would be made of it.

But "so soon after" is still "too litle time" for the
historian to present an objective picture.

And I do not think that it is possible yet to add much to
the references that I have made in this book.

Moreover, it does not seem to have enriched the file with many new items.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And I do not think that it is possible yet to add much to
the references that I have made in this book. Moreover, it does not seem to have enriched the file with many new items. Of the
documents produced by the prosecution, every one had already been produced at one or other of
8. Refers to a painting by Géricault. –    90    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the 13 Nuremberg Trials. The witnesses who passed before the bar said nothing more than had
already been said, and in the same words.
Many of them came only to recite not what they had seen, but, like all the witnesses for
the prosecution at this sad time, what they had obviously read in one or another of the
innumerable books published for 15 years on the matter. There were those who came to attest to
the existence of gas chambers at Bergen-Belsen; there was the one who "saw" Eichmann
listening with pleasure, on July 18th, 1942, to the report of the asphyxiations at Auschwitz,
when at that date neither gas chamber nor crematory existed - as proved in official documents,
none of the apparatus was even ordered from Topf and Sons of Erfurt until August 8th, 1942.
Even the judgement could have been prepared a long time in -advance.
In short - the 14th Nuremberg Trial.
If it differed from the others it was only in this way: the conditions in which it could take
place, the procedure of its development only added the abuses of Israeli law to the abuses of the
Nuremberg Charter.
The following chapter will show most of what can now be said on that matter.
–    91    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---s development only added the abuses of Israeli law to the abuses of the
Nuremberg Charter.
The following chapter will show most of what can now be said on that matter.
–    91    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[130]
Chapter VII
THE EICHMANN TRIAL, OR ...
THE NEW MASTER SINGERS OF NUREMBERG
On May 28th, 1960, the name of Adolf Eichmann, unknown until then except to a few
specialists in the history of National Socialism and German concentration camps, suddenly
became notorious in the world press. On that date Ben Gurion, President of the Council of
State, ascended the plinth of the Knesset (Israeli Parliament) and announced to the deputies that
"the person responsible for the death of six million Jews, and their executioner" had been
captured by commandos of the Israeli secret service, and taken the preceding May 11th from
Argentina; that he was in prison in Tel-Aviv; and that he would be judged by an Israeli tribunal.
And from that date on, the "six million Jews" - zealous journalists even spoke of 9 million
- "men, women, old folk and children, exterminated in the gas chambers at Auschwitz" and
other places, were once again served up every morning for breakfast the world over.
On the 11th of April, 1961, after a preliminary investigation that lasted no less than eleven
months, the trial in question began at Jerusalem before an audience of journalists from every
corner of the earth.
And on the 11th of December, the Tribunal rendered its judgement - the death penalty.
On Eichmann's personality, the conditions under which his trial developed, the arguments
brought forward, the political context into which the facts invoked against him must be placed
and the interpretations given them, the jurists, it seems, had much more to say than the
historians, and for the following reasons.
1. Who is Adolf Eichmann?
Adolf Eichmann was born in March 19th, 1906, at Solingen (and not in Palestine in the
German colony of Saron, as Mme Nina Gourfinkel succeeded in making everyone believe. She
wrote the preface to the book of Joël Brand, Un million de Juifs contre dix mille camions
(One million Jews for 10 thousand trucks) which holds an honourable position among the many
historians born of Resistancism).
His father was Prokurist (legal representative) for the tram company of the city. In 1913
the family moved to Linz where, after having held the same job as at Solingen for a while, his
father retired and opened up a business in electric appliances. But in 1913, the Eichmann family
was made up of the father, the mother and only Adolf; of the five children it included (one of
which was [131] from the father's earlier marriage), the eldest was German and the other four
Austrian. In the 1930s, under Chancellor Dolfuss, this had a certain importance because the
eldest, considered a foreigner in Austria, could not find employment. Through his family's
contact with Kaltenbrunner, then leader of Austrian National Socialism at Linz, he became a
salaried member of the Party at Passau, in Germany, because such activities were specifically
forbidden to him in Austria. Thus began the career of Adolf Eichmann.
–    92    –sm at Linz, he became a
salaried member of the Party at Passau, in Germany, because such activities were specifically
forbidden to him in Austria. Thus began the career of Adolf Eichmann.
–    92    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Little by little, he climbed the ladder in the S.S., up to Obersturmbannführer (Lieutenant-
Colonel) of the Reichssicherheitshauptamt (Central Office of the Reich Security Service) in
which, from its inauguration in 1936, he had been attached to Office (or service) IV B 4 (Jewish
affairs).

In order to assess his responsibility in the Jewish drama we have to see him in his rank in
that service, and we must mention that the Reichssicherheitshauptamt was composed of seven
sections, all of an executive character: in the fourth of these offices, in section B (there were two
sections - A and B), Eichmann was head of the fourth sub-office.

Over him in the hierarchy,
there was a colonel Müller, head of all the sub-offices grouped under IV B, about whom
nobody has ever talked (he later became a very high police functionary in East Germany).

Above Müller there was another colonel - Roth - head of the two sections A and B.

Above
Roth was Heydrich, head of all seven offices.

Finally came the supreme head, Heinrich
Himmler.

When Heydrich was killed by the Czech Resistance at the beginning of June 1942,
Kaltenbrunner took his place and, until the end of the war, that was the only important change
that took place in the directorship of the R.S.H.A.

In the Reichssicherheitshauptamt, Lieutenant-Colonel Adolf Eichmann was therefore
sixth in rank, and on the functionary level only of decisions taken at a much higher level than
Himmler himself, since it was only in 1943 that Himmler was raised to the rank of minister.

In the machinery of Nazi power there were thousands and thousands of posts with this
type of responsibility.

From March 1942 on, the date when the massive deportation of the Jews began, Office IV
B 4, of which Eichmann was the head, got orders to devote itself to their transportation to
concentration camps.In the machinery of Nazi power there were thousands and thousands of posts with this
type of responsibility.

From March 1942 on, the date when the massive deportation of the Jews began, Office IV
B 4, of which Eichmann was the head, got orders to devote itself to their transportation to
concentration camps.

In a similar way, the office of which Pohl was the head had the order to
devote itself to the economic organisation of those camps, and another office was ordered to
make investigations among the Jews and re-group them.

But since all the steps to be taken
concerning the Jews were decided at government level, Eichmann's only part was to carry out
the orders and only to the extent that the order concerned him.

It was only in relation to these considerations that Eichmann's responsibility and guilt
could be defined and, in all traditional [132] societies, it is the personal drama of everyone to
whom, under threat of severe condemnation, right of conscientious objection is denied.

On this
point the Jerusalem trial showed that from 1941 on, Eichmann experienced that drama in the
same way that Professor Balachowsky of the Pasteur Institute at Paris did at Buchenwald -
forced by Dr.

Dingschüller to experiment on the deportees with vaccines, knowing perfectly
well, as he has himself testified, that it amounted to assassination.

I said in the same way
because, if there is a difference, it is only one of motives.

While the Lieutenant-Colonel, whose
education was obviously rudimentary, explained his obedience to orders received in terms of
obedience to State policy and love of country, the Professor, whose education could not be
doubted, gave as his reason that he did not want "to disappear." That this difference materialised
in the final analysis in the rope for one and honours for the other is the essence of the problem.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I said in the same way
because, if there is a difference, it is only one of motives. While the Lieutenant-Colonel, whose
education was obviously rudimentary, explained his obedience to orders received in terms of
obedience to State policy and love of country, the Professor, whose education could not be
doubted, gave as his reason that he did not want "to disappear." That this difference materialised
in the final analysis in the rope for one and honours for the other is the essence of the problem. If, as traditional ethics have it, it is true that in all this it was the motive that counted, one could
then say that in this case the roles were badly allotted by justice. 2. The Trial itself
With regard to moral as well as international law, Adolf Eichmann found himself as a
defendant before an Israeli tribunal under conditions which were as wrong to one as to the
other. No one has more clearly established that than M. Raymond de Geouffre de la Pradelle in
an article published in Le Figaro on June 9th, 1960. It is best to let him speak for himself; if my competence in the matter could easily be
questioned, it would be very difficult to dispute his. This is what M. Raymond de Geouffre de la Pradelle says, all other considerations aside,
on the question of guilt:
–    93    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"The proceedings carried on right after the end of the war by the Allies were based on the London
agreement of August 8th, 1945, and the Moscow declaration of October 30th, 1943, to which the London
agreement expressly refers.

The principle laid down is that of the return of war criminals to the country in
which their crimes were committed.

In addition to that, the London statute of August 8th, 1945, created
an international military tribunal to try criminals whose crimes were without definite geographical
localisation…
This London statute was promulgated by the Allies after they had received, May 8th, 1945, from
the head of the Reich government, Grand Admiral Doenitz, through the unconditional surrender, the
mandate of German sovereignty…
There is no international text given that gives the State of Israel the right to judge a foreign
national to whom crimes against humanity are imputed, or war crimes, when these crimes were
committed in a foreign country.

Furthermore, at the time when [138] these crimes were committed, there
could be no question of victims of Israelite nationality because the State of Israel did not exist.

The State of Israel is sovereign.

Within the limits of its territory Israel may, if it wishes, by
special law, give itself whatever jurisdictional right it chooses.

But this right violates the general
principles of law, and of the international rule of competence established for crimes having an essentially
international character, since having been carried out in Germany at a time when German law considered
them licit, they are crimes only with regard to international law."
And M.

Raymond Geouffre de la Pradelle concludes that the only lawful procedure would
have been a demand on Argentina for extradition by Germany, who alone was qualified to make
such a demand.

It could not be better put.Raymond Geouffre de la Pradelle concludes that the only lawful procedure would
have been a demand on Argentina for extradition by Germany, who alone was qualified to make
such a demand.

It could not be better put.

But Argentina had given Eichmann the right of asylum,
probably the reason why, as any other country in similar circumstances would act, Germany did
not demand his extradition.

Is France today asking for the extradition from Spain of many
French citizens considered by her to be criminals and to whom Spain has granted asylum?

Even
Napoleon III did not ask for the extradition of Victor Hugo from Britain.

Still, France did not go on to kidnapping in France or in Argentina.

The only example
historically comparable with Eichmann's kidnapping., is that of the Duke d'Enghien by
Napoleon I, and neither Law nor History has forgiven him for it.

The reader will excuse me if, instead of invoking moral principles which are always
debatable, I have preferred to cite the texts.

Although they are colder, they lend the Eichmann
trial the character of a Moscow trial; and if grounds for guilt could be stated against Eichmann,
they have disappeared in the face of the unpardonable circumstances of his kidnapping and, in
the eyes of posterity, the person who was condemned is more likely to be considered a victim
than an executioner.

Posterity is all the more likely to come to this conclusion because Eichmann's defence was
not able to cite in court all the witnesses for the defence that it would have liked to; for example,
all the Germans living at liberty and in harmony with international law and the laws of their
country, were threatened with arrest for suspicion of guilt of crimes leading to a death sentence,
if they so much as set foot on the soil of Israel.

Under such circumstances, Eichmann was not
judged, he was assassinated.

3.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Under such circumstances, Eichmann was not
judged, he was assassinated. 3. The Accusation and its Political Meaning
The prosecution was considerably weakened by its central motif: the six million European
Jews mass-exterminated in gas chambers. It can never be repeated often enough that this figure
was given only by the press and the witnesses; as we know, the indictment drawn up by M. Gideon Haussner confined itself to [139] saying "millions", and that is the first step of
admission in this obvious imposture. After the war, in an atmosphere of mental confusion and general disorder, it was easy to
have that argument accepted. Today many more documents have been made public which were
not known during the Nuremberg trial, and these documents tend to prove that although Jewish
nationals were odiously attacked and persecuted by the Hitlerian regime, it is not possible that
there were 6 million victims. –    94    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Once it became possible to even discuss the figure and it was agreed by everyone in the
world that the figure was considerably exaggerated, then it was possible to talk about how it
was done.

For example, we know today that there were no gas chambers at Buchenwald, or at
Bergen-Belsen, or Dachau, or Mauthausen.

Caught in the act of lying concerning gas chambers in these camps, witnesses who had
pretended to have seen them functioning were naturally not believed when they talked about the
gas chambers at Auschwitz, which is perfectly natural.

Their credibility declined even further
when they contradicted each other; if one could be believed, the other could not.

Faced with
these contradictions, what is public opinion to do except to dismiss both parties and to charge
them with having fabricated the story?

If, on the other hand, from the number of prosecution witnesses still alive, one turns out
occasionally to be of no more worth than those whom he is accusing - one of their accomplices
or a former member of the Intelligence Service etc.

- public opinion sees only added grounds for
its disapproval.

Such was the case of von dem Bach-Zalewski, Obergruppenführer General of the Waffen
S.S., and head of one of the famous Einsatzgruppen (something like commandos) in pursuit of
partisans and Jews on the Eastern front.

Thanks to him we learned about the activity of these
marginal units, and of a speech given "at the beginning of 1941" at Weselberg (without any
more detail), in which the Reichsführer S.S.

was supposed to have said that "the aim of the
campaign in the East is to reduce the Slav population by 30,000,000." But no one else has ever
heard of this speech and no written text of it has ever been produced (Nuremberg hearing of
January lst, 1946, Volume IV, p.

500).was supposed to have said that "the aim of the
campaign in the East is to reduce the Slav population by 30,000,000." But no one else has ever
heard of this speech and no written text of it has ever been produced (Nuremberg hearing of
January lst, 1946, Volume IV, p.

500).

On January 16th, 1961, this von dem Bach-Zalewski
was arrested for "a political assassination committed in cold blood" on July 2nd, 1934, and for
acts of cruelty in which he was involved "during the crushing of the Warsaw uprising of 1944
and during the struggle against partisans in the Russian campaign, as well as the execution of
Polish hostages at Sosnovitz-Dendzin." (Newspapers, January 17th, 1961, dispatch of the
A.F.P.) And on February 11th of the same year he was condemned to 4,5 years in prison,
which shows that since Nuremberg justice has become singularly indulgent.

And that was the case again when, on January 25th, 1961, the British magazine Weekend
came out with a photograph on its [140] cover of Hoettl, with the following caption:
The SPY STORY that's stranger than fiction
He was a friend of Nazi leaders
His real boss was a British secret service man
That was how it was learned that the principal witness for the establishment of six million
as the number of Jews exterminated by Nazism was an agent of the Intelligence Service (!!).

It is well to make it clear that this figure of 6 million depends on two testimonies only: that
of Hoettl and that of Wizliceny.

This is the statement of the first:
"In August 1944," said Obersturmbannführer Dr.

Wilhelm Hoettl, head of the bureau connected
with section IV of the Reich Central Security Office, "S.S.

Obersturmbannführer Adolf Eichmann, whom
I had known since 1938, had a conversation with me in my apartment in Budapest… He knew that he was
considered a war criminal by the United Nations because he had the lives of thousands of Jews on his
conscience.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wilhelm Hoettl, head of the bureau connected
with section IV of the Reich Central Security Office, "S.S. Obersturmbannführer Adolf Eichmann, whom
I had known since 1938, had a conversation with me in my apartment in Budapest… He knew that he was
considered a war criminal by the United Nations because he had the lives of thousands of Jews on his
conscience. I asked him how many, and he answered that although the number was a great secret he would
tell me because, from the information he had, he had arrived at this conclusion: in the various
extermination camps about 4 million Jews had been gassed and 2 million killed in another way." (Taken
from the Report on the Nuremberg Tribunal, Volume XXXIII, p. 85-87.)
And the second:
–    95    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"He (Eichmann) said that he would jump into his grave laughing because the thought of having 5
million persons on his conscience would be a source of extraordinary satisfaction to him.

" (op.

cit.)
Of these two testimonies, M.

Poliakov himself says, "One could certainly raise the
objection that a figure so imperfectly supported must be considered suspect." (Revue
d'Histoire de la seconde guerre mondiale, October 1956).

Nobody made him say so!

We also know that one of these two witnesses was an
Intelligence Service agent.

And the other, who had seen Himmler's signature on an
extermination order, put himself at the disposition of the law in order to trap Eichmann and seek
mercy for himself, but was hanged, despite his cooperation, for having been Eichmann's
accomplice.

Concerning the political context in which the Trial should be placed, it is well to note that
M.

Raymond de Geouffre de la Pradelle was not the only one to protest against the kidnapping
of Eichmann and to deny competence to the judges of Jerusalem.

Even in Israeli circles there
were eddies of feeling before the opening of the trial, and there still are, after the sentencing of
the accused.

In the Monde of June 21st, 1960, one could, for example, find [141] the attitude of the
American Council for Judaism,9 which represents the point of view of the majority of American
Israelites, namely:
…The American Council for Judaism last Monday sent a letter to Mr.

Christian Herter denying
the right of the Israeli government to speak in the name of all Jews.

"The Council declares that Judaism
is a matter of religion and not of nationality, and asks Mr.

Herter to oppose the pretention of the Israeli
government to judge Eichmann in the name of Judaism."
To this, Mr.

Nahum Goldmann, President of the World Congress of Jews, very
embarrassed, replied:
"As the Israeli authorities have admitted, this action is obviously an infringement of
Argentina laws.

It could furthermore establish a dangerous precedent.Nahum Goldmann, President of the World Congress of Jews, very
embarrassed, replied:
"As the Israeli authorities have admitted, this action is obviously an infringement of
Argentina laws.

It could furthermore establish a dangerous precedent.

But the case is so
exceptional that the illegal aspect of the action should not be considered the only or even the
principal element of the matter… The State of Israel cannot claim to represent world Judaism
(Jewry), but since Israel does exist, and since it has succeeded in capturing Eichmann, I am in
agreement that he be judged in the Hebrew State.

If Mr.

Ben Gurion wishes to turn the
Eichmann trial into another Nuremberg it would be to his advantage to support the Israeli
president with an ad hoc tribunal made up of representatives of all the countries who suffered
under the yoke of the ex-S.S.

colonel."
But even this point of view was not accepted by the Israeli government.

In any case, it was not a legal problem that the State of Israel was claiming to solve by this
trial, but a political problem.

Indeed, we know that the indemnity which Germany has been
constrained to pay Israel, in the name of damages which this state did not suffer, was to come to
an end on January 1st, 1962.

Since the annual payment amounts to 200 million marks, one of
the State's most important sources of revenue was in danger of drying up.

It was all the more
serious because the Israeli budget cannot do without assistance of this proportion.

Israel has
survived for twelve years, thanks only to the German reparations, American aid, French and
British kindnesses and subsidies from Diaspora Jewry.

Naturally, the Israeli government
wanted to get a pure and simple renewal of payments for an indefinite period.

No less naturally,
Germany thought they had had quite enough.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Naturally, the Israeli government
wanted to get a pure and simple renewal of payments for an indefinite period. No less naturally,
Germany thought they had had quite enough. So it was not Eichmann himself committed for
trial but Germany, threatened with having all the leading political figures of her government
charged before the universal conscience during the course of this trial. All the ministers and the
most influential members of Chancellor Adenauer's political circle were liable to be accused of
Connivance with Nazism through this trial. And so it was really a .question of blackmail: either
9. Editor's Note: Unfortunately Rassinier is wrong here. The American Council for Judaism is anti-Zionist but does not represent
the majority of American Jews. He confuses A.C.J. with the more Establishment A.J.C. - American Jewish Committee. –    96    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Germany would accept the proposed [142] deal implicitly, or no German government was
possible.

Such calculations can, at least, be attributed to the leaders of the State of Israel.

And,
by a singular coincidence, it harmonised admirably with the concerns of the Kremlin.

I have found this contention in many publications which cannot be suspected of being
sympathetic to Germany or hostile to the Jews.

In particular, in the Canard Enchaîné of April
2nd, 1961, just after the opening of the Eichmann Trial, we read:
"The Eichmann Trial," said the Canard Enchaîné, "is going to appear as a trial of Hitlerian
Germany on the one hand and of Konrad's Germany on the other.

Certain people, such as some Israelis
not to be named, say that they have no hand in it, and that as far as they are concerned they are interested
only in a trial of National Socialism, do not care a damn for Eichmann and are going to multiply the
proclamations against Adenauer because employed in his government are quite a number of ex-Nazis, such
as his favourite, the Secretary of State Globke, dedicated annotator of the Nuremberg racial laws.

"During the hearings we can expect to hear the names of hundreds and hundreds of persons
presently employed in Federal Germany.

Such heaps of judges, officers, deputies, high officials,
professors etc., are going to get so splattered that it will be a pleasure to watch.

"All to the good of Bonn propaganda.

Some are laughing to split their sides saying that Nikita
will at once certainly, and dryly, bring up the problem of Berlin, right during the trial, just at the moment
when world opinion will be very aroused against Germany."
Two weeks earlier it had already stated:
"A few days after his capture (Eichmann), Ben Gurion, who was giving speeches in the United
States, heard that a certain Konrad turned up in Washington again for a talk with Ike.

B.G...

took the first
available taxi and hurried to where Konrad was staying.B.G...

took the first
available taxi and hurried to where Konrad was staying.

"He went in with a certain smile, he came out with a grin.

if you looked closely, seen in a fold of
his tie (although he never wears one) was something like a cheque for 500 million marks.

Germany was
starting to pay again!

At last!

"The Israelis are not in the least disconcerted when this detail is pointed out to them - after all, the
expenses of the trial have to be paid for, they tell you, with a big laugh."
I do not know whether Adenauer gave out 500 million marks or not; the two suppositions
are equally plausible.

But if he did give 500 million marks, it was hardly more than two annual
payments.

In consideration for that sum, assurances must have been given to the Chancellor that
certain things would not be said.

And in fact they were not.

The German press which reflects
government opinion (Die Welt, Frankfurter Allgemeine, Süddeutsche Zeitung, etc.) was
unanimous in underlining "the relief felt retrospectively [143] at the way the trial was
developing." Before the first hearing, as Le Monde at Paris, December 16th, 1961, explained,
Bonn expected to be in the limelight for weeks, even months, with a resultant stirring up in the
world of anti-German resentment.

Nothing like that happened.

The Eichmann Trial did not turn
into a trial of the Federal Republic.

The subsidies were to continue until April 1st, 1964.

Between now and that date the
Israelis will try to find a way to get a renewal.

There are still quite a number of Eichmanns
around.

By that I mean persons who could be accused of crimes against humanity and against
the Jewish race.

Is Israel already nursing a plan for the kidnapping of the next one, for another
blackmail attempt on the same terms?

One hears a lot about S.S.

Obersturmbannführer Dr.

Mengele, doctor at Auschwitz, accused of the most unimaginable experiments on Jewish
prisoners.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Obersturmbannführer Dr. Mengele, doctor at Auschwitz, accused of the most unimaginable experiments on Jewish
prisoners. In any case, it is a most profitable expedient and one that can be taken up again and
again, almost indefinitely, and which could assure the financial stability of the State of Israel for
a few centuries. When, at so distant a date in the future that it cannot be predicted, the last of the
Nazis has been hanged in Israel, nothing will be left except to write the music for these New
Master Singers of Nuremberg, since under the aegis of the Nuremberg trials the libretto has
already been written for the new Ballad of the Hanged. 4. From Scandal to Scandal
–    97    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---The way in which Eichmann was kidnapped was a scandal with regard to the law of
nations.

We have seen that, in addition to the greatest international jurists, such eminent Jewish
personages as Nahum Goldmann, for example, and even organisations like the American
Council for Judaism were disturbed.

In this line, there is more to come.

In Argentina Eichmann had made the acquaintance of a former S.S.

man, Dutch by birth,
Sassen by name.

He had been a war correspondent attached to S.S.

operational units during the
entire conflict and been sentenced to death in his own country.

He was then living in Buenos
Aires on an import-export business, a little bit of journalism and other writings.

For a very long
time this Sassen did not know just who this man was who called himself a former S.S.

man like
himself; who frequented as assiduously as he did Argentine circles of exiled Germans; who said
his name was Ricardo Klement, which everyone in those circles knew was an assumed name.

But he had noticed that of all the exiled Germans with whom he had met, this Ricardo Klement
was the best informed on what Jewish writings called the extermination of the European Jews,
and he was not long in suspecting that here was surely a person who had played an important
role in the affair.

From then on he cultivated his friendship.

At the time he had not yet set up the
import-export business which is today his main [144] source of income.

Promoting himself in
his capacity as a former S.S.

war correspondent in the theatre of operations, he had succeeded
in making a connection with Life magazine through a relation.

From time to time he was given
a few lines of copy in Life, particularly on Argentine political matters, because he had been
clever enough to make fairly close connections with Peron's entourage.

"Some day," Ricardo Klement often said, "I will write my memoirs."
But he had to earn a living and he had not yet got around to writing his memoirs.From time to time he was given
a few lines of copy in Life, particularly on Argentine political matters, because he had been
clever enough to make fairly close connections with Peron's entourage.

"Some day," Ricardo Klement often said, "I will write my memoirs."
But he had to earn a living and he had not yet got around to writing his memoirs.

"What a shame," Sassen said, "because you seem to be very well informed."
And thus he flattered him.

The talks took place in a little book store in Buenos Aires owned by a former German
schoolmaster in Argentina.

This man was not a former S.S.

man nor a refugee.

But he
published a German paper with nationalist leanings called Der Weg, which all the German exiles
read with great interest because, in their eyes, it was most objective and stated all the
conclusions about the war at which they themselves had arrived.

The talks usually ended in the
nearest cafe with a drink for which Ricardo Klement had quite an inclination.

To get at the secret
of his personality, from which he expected to derive a journalistic benefit, Sassen exploited this
liking as best he could.

And one evening, having drunk a little more than he was accustomed to,
as Sassen was going into raptures about the extraordinary exactness of his information, Ricardo
Klement let drop the words, "Of course, I am Eichmann himself."
It was a windfall for Sassen.

From then on he kept at him about writing his memoirs, but
the other never had the time.

Then he made the great play:
"I am going to help you.

If you want to, instead of dragging these talks on forever in a public
place, which will be lost for everyone, we will go somewhere else to drink and we will talk with a
microphone.

Then after each conversation I will write out what we have said.

I will show it to you and
you can make any corrections you think advisable.

After that I will make a good copy.

"Yes," answered Eichmann, "but on one condition sine qua non.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After that I will make a good copy. "Yes," answered Eichmann, "but on one condition sine qua non. That is that everything which I
have gone over and corrected shall not be published until after my death, and the royalties, less the sum
for your trouble, are to go to my wife and children."
For greater security a contract on these lines was signed between the two men. Eichmann
entrusted it to his best friend - that very bookshop keeper - whom he made his testamentary
executor and the true owner of the copyright. He charged him with dividing up the royalties in
conformity with the stipulations of the contract. This took place at the end of 1955. The conversations before the [145] microphone lasted
for about two years. Put down on paper, they amount to almost two thousand German size
typewritten sheets, Before editing, Sassen gave them to Eichmann who covered them with
numerous corrections. He wrote over the version that Sassen gave him as the definitive one and
even thought that, having gone over it, it was full of imperfections. He considered that it still
–    98    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---contained errors, that he had to verify everything and that he needed lots of time because he had
to think over events which he suddenly saw were much more indistinct in his memory than he
had thought.

"Besides," he thought aloud, "from now until my death we have lots of time…"
So Sassen's work was put aside with Eichmann promising to get on with the verification
and to incorporate the necessary corrections as his memory on the past became more exact.

Eichmann was mistaken.

He had hardly taken this decision when he was arrested.

Meanwhile, Sassen had twice gone to Life to offer sensational revelations on Eichmann's
activities.

Each time he was told that nothing sensational could be revealed on the subject for the
simple reason that it was impossible to centre the attention of the public on a person who had
been merely talked about during the Nuremberg Trial but about whom nothing had since been
heard.

He was surely, therefore, forgotten…
A great many stories were told about the way in which Eichmann had been found and
arrested.

The long hunt by Mosche Pearlmann gives the credit to Simon Wiesenthal, that
incomparable gift to the Israeli Secret Service, with his talent for nosing things out.

In my
opinion things were really much simpler, but I will refrain from advancing any theory.

The fact remains that the incident which allowed Life to speak of Eichmann, with every
chance of grabbing public attention, had happened; that it was able to print in 15,000 words
what it described to its readers as a résumé of the essentials of the Sassen-Eichmann talks, the
text of which was given to Life by Sassen; and that through Sassen a contract had been drawn
up with the beneficiaries and that Sassen had been paid by Life for this work.

For anyone who would like to inspect it, I have a photocopy of the original of these
conversations, gone over and corrected by Eichmann.

To be sure, Eichmann was not a
historian.For anyone who would like to inspect it, I have a photocopy of the original of these
conversations, gone over and corrected by Eichmann.

To be sure, Eichmann was not a
historian.

His knowledge of the events he refers to was very limited, his memory faulty etc.,
and his talks contain many errors of fact, their dates etc.

But I defy anyone at all to find therein
justification for most of the monstrous things to be read in Life (November 28th and December
5th, 1960).

How does it happen that I am at one and the same time able to give such precise
information and yet be in possession of a photocopy of the document which formed the basis of
the Life articles, which I must here add was produced for the prosecution before the tribunal in
judgement on Eichmann?

It is very simple.

The [146] Eichmann family, familiar with my
works, thought that Dr.

Servatius, defence counsel for Eichmann, might need a historian's
advice and begged him to get in touch with me, just in case; and Dr.

Servatius had already
thought of that himself.

All things considered, Dr.

Servatius - on whom rested the responsibility
for Eichmann's life and who had had the experience of Nuremberg - thought that a juridical
rather than a historical plea was called for.

That was one way of looking at it.

But it was, above
all, a matter of conscience in which I had no right to interfere.

The one thing that strikes me as
certain, after the event, is that no matter what plea the defence made - juridical or historical or
both - Eichmann was in any case to be condemned to death.

But who would have dared to
burden his conscience with such an assumption before the event, even if he thought it, as I did?

That was my case.

I could see only one advantage to a historical plea and that was the
impossibility of being able to terminate the trial without a delay of, I estimated, at least fifteen
good years.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That was my case. I could see only one advantage to a historical plea and that was the
impossibility of being able to terminate the trial without a delay of, I estimated, at least fifteen
good years. In short it was just circumstantial that I had occasion to meet Sassen, against whom I was
unshakeably opposed - if only because the report of his talks with Eichmann was riddled with
errors. I had several talks with him, some of which were very long. Anything that concerns him
in what I say is but a translation of what he told me himself. That is how the photocopy of the original of the conversations came into my hands, and I
have been able to study them at leisure. In the same way I have had in my hands the originals of
the minutes of the interrogations of Eichmann during the preparations of his trial, whilst he was
a prisoner. I am therefore in a position to state that he contradicted what he stated before
Sassen's microphone on an infinity of points. –    99    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---Example: On April 18th, 1961, a witness came forward to the bar at the Jerusalem
Tribunal to declare that he had seen "the factory (meaning gas chambers) working at full tilt in
July 1942" and Eichmann visibly interested and very satisfied with a report of the results.

Eichmann denied this but he had no evidence to support him.

It would have sufficed him to say
that in July 1942, in the official version, there was no gas chamber10 at Auschwitz since they
were only ordered, as the official documents reveal, on August 8th and installed on February
20th of 1943.

Perhaps Eichmann did not know this and, if once he had known, he had surely
forgotten.

It was probably the same with his counsel.

So, the false witness was believed…
Examples of this kind are without number throughout this trial which lasted almost a year.

As for Sassen and the document which he turned over to Life, here is a letter written by
Eichmann to his family on February 22nd, 1961, which tells what he thought about it and also
about his whole experience:
[147]
Dear Robert!

First of all, I appreciate it very much that you managed to get a look at the case Dr.

Servatius is
preparing for me.

I would also like to tell you about some of the fundamental principles which need to be
raised, apart from some details which I will mention at the beginning.

For I know that you, as my
brothers and sisters, will be interested in this, especially as already whole libraries have been occupied
with my career and, who knows, will continue to be occupied.

I begin with the current lawsuits which are being brought against me.

The contents of these suits
are so prodigious that even my anger would be useless.

But I must on no account surrender in
consideration of the numerous calumnies and defamations and give up the cause without a fight.

It is
obvious that 15 years of propaganda is against me, which grew like an avalanche and keeps growing and
has been leading the minds here to allegations which are quite incomprehensible.But I must on no account surrender in
consideration of the numerous calumnies and defamations and give up the cause without a fight.

It is
obvious that 15 years of propaganda is against me, which grew like an avalanche and keeps growing and
has been leading the minds here to allegations which are quite incomprehensible.

You will hear from Dr.

Servatius that more than 1,400 documents are here under consideration (I
examined nearly 300 of them during the investigation, the rest was transferred to my defence counsel after
the investigation).

Among the approximately 300 documents alone which were submitted to me appear
approximately 240 different names.

Well, the investigation has caused the collapse of the great sensational build-up that certain groups
of journalists had set up out of pure greed for profit; and I hope - naturally enough - that the coming trial
will reduce my actual position back to the real level which I held at that time, i.e.

recipient of orders; a
bureaucratic occupation, not the slightest trace of killing and atrocity.

To be sure, all this has happened, one cannot deny it.

But I was not in charge of such things and I
kept my hands clean in this matter.

This also includes the officers, non-commissioned officers and men,
who were under my command at that time.

Should the one or the other have overstepped their orders it
was not with my authority in this respect.

Now to look at Sassen.

He is either secretive or stupid.

I do not know myself where I am.

I am
only asking myself, how can someone contrary to all arrangements commit such a breach of confidence
and publish in rough the events which happened in the distant past and throw them to the international
press as a kind of raw material which is undoubtedly full of mistakes and incorrectnesses that need to be
put right and then say: "There you have the stuff, do with it whatever you like to do.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I do not know myself where I am. I am
only asking myself, how can someone contrary to all arrangements commit such a breach of confidence
and publish in rough the events which happened in the distant past and throw them to the international
press as a kind of raw material which is undoubtedly full of mistakes and incorrectnesses that need to be
put right and then say: "There you have the stuff, do with it whatever you like to do. How many dollars
do I get?" Contrary to the arrangement which had been made he published the matter to the public without
having given me the chance of correcting all the mistakes. In this respect I have to praise the mode of procedure of the Israeli police; after the tape recording
interrogation I had the possibility of hearing it all again and reading the transcript at the same time which
had been made in the meantime and could make eventual corrections without being influenced by anyone. Although the transcripts had been made by honest police officers - and there were more than 3,500 typed
pages altogether - there were even so quite a large number of hearing mistakes, which partly distorted the
sense in the first transcription. Well, thanks to the procedure of the Israeli police all these mistakes could
be eliminated by me. Sassen has given me no chance to do the same. I have no guarantee that the person
who then copied it, heard and transcribed it correctly and I have no chance to control what certain
interested parties might have added to it. At that time I got part of it for the first correction - and I
corrected it superficially - but as the transcription was so deficient that there would have been no time left
for other work besides the correction, I gave the whole stuff back to Sassen and told him that this matter
10. umigation Chambers. –    100    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---had to be discussed more thoroughly because of the amount of mistakes.

Some parts of the transcriptions
were never submitted to me.

What is more, this transcription having been controlled by me never should
have been published; due to our arrangement and written contract it should [148] represent only the raw
material which Sassen could use in order to make a book out of it which could be published.

And even
there I put in one more security codicil by ordering a written statement that no page of this eventual
manuscript should come to be printed without my having sort of legalised and released every page by my
full signature.

And even after that I should have got the proofs as a last control whereby I agreed here to
the fact that after the proofs had been finished no large changes in principle should be allowed.

But such procedures which Sassen has followed are unworthy of an honest journalist and I think
this is typical of the fellow.

How does this man dare to publish this article under the title: "Adolf
Eichmann tells his own story - I conveyed them to the butcher - by Adolf Eichmann"?

Sassen is lucky
that I am in close confinement.

It is a consolation for me to know that even a reader who is only partially
attentive to the reading can draw conclusions from the title to the authenticity of the contents of the
article.

But unfortunately such an article will be read by dull-heads of all kinds, of whom one cannot
expect objective, intelligent study.

Now I would like to ask a favour of you.

You are a lawyer, I am sure you will discuss this matter
with my defence; keep a close eye on Sassen and only with the consent of my defence should he be
allowed to publish anything at all.

For all he is going to publish forces him to fall back upon the treasure
of the tape recordings of that time and there are solid arrangements which he has to observe.

Surely, there are legal restraints and possibilities?For all he is going to publish forces him to fall back upon the treasure
of the tape recordings of that time and there are solid arrangements which he has to observe.

Surely, there are legal restraints and possibilities?

Besides this, I leave it completely to my defence
to prepare the next steps which he considers necessary as far as my cause is concerned.

Dear Robert, I do not know what will come out of this trial; in respect to my person I must tell
you that I am only of secondary importance.

With the help of my defence I will naturally take pains to
bring out the truth about the 15 years' calumnies and imputations, up to the very last days, which have
prejudiced public opinion around the world against me to a-degree which is not to be outdone.

Here, too, I
do not think of surrender.

As far as only my own ego is concerned, the danger of resignation is great in
respect to my almost overstrained fatalism.

But I must not leave the matter as it is; not when I think
about my children and you as my brothers and sisters and, last but not least, the memory of our dead
father.

Dear brothers and sisters, I wish you each and all happy Easter, I wish you health and send you my
kindest regards.

Your Adolf.

I have asked lawyer Wechtenbruch to certify the correctness of this statement by
signature, because I, separated by a glass wall, cannot sign it personally.

Given in a prison of the State of Israel on the 22nd February, 1961.

5.

The Last Word
If the reader has been harbouring any doubt about the political significance of the trial, as
described above, and the anti-Semitism it bred on the pretext of combatting it, it will suffice to
say that many good people thought the same way.--- PAGE BREAK ---

5. The Last Word
If the reader has been harbouring any doubt about the political significance of the trial, as
described above, and the anti-Semitism it bred on the pretext of combatting it, it will suffice to
say that many good people thought the same way. Over the French radio itself, the first press
review of the reports of the first day of the trial gave the impression that in the minds of all the
journalists there, without exception, the dominant idea was that the performance was not a
matter of justice but of pure and simple vengeance, and that in any case, it was politically a
mistake. Eight days later, already sure of what to expect from the hearings, all the great newspapers
of the world recalled the best [149] legal reporters they had sent to Jerusalem, in order to
despatch them to more important trials. On April 10th, under the title "This trial is a mistake," and over M. Alain Guinay's
signature, France-Soir did not hesitate to say:
"There are a certain number of people who think that this whole trial has been a mistake. That far
from eradicating anti-Semitism in the world it will only fan the flames, that far from instructing Israeli
youth in the tragic fate of their elders, it will keep that aggressive youth from feeling any solidarity with
those six millions who for the most part died without defending themselves. "They are also afraid that it will have a detrimental effect on Israeli-British, perhaps even United
States-Israeli relations, by revealing, as Ben Gurion has just done, that neither London nor Washington
did a thing to save millions of people whom they could have saved."
–    101    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---We have seen how Ben Gurion failed in his attempt to involve Britain and the United
States in his attempt to blackmail Germany.

With the trial over and Eichmann condemned, "the uneasiness" which everyone talked
about remains.

The anti-Semitic campaigns feared by France-Soir are taking steps and grow.

A boomerang?

Perhaps.

Perhaps Tel-Aviv needs a little wave of anti-Semitism from time to time to realise its
objectives, if only to bring to Israel those millions of Jews who persist in preferring the
comforts of western life to the rigours of kibbutzim.

In any case, if the stirring of anti-Semitic feeling should trouble Israel and international
Zionism, it is not the reasons adduced for the sentence that condemned Eichmann to death which
will prevent them from assuming greater proportion, as they have been revived for us by M.

Poliakov (Le Procès de Jérusalem, Paris, 1963) (The Jerusalem Trial).

Assuredly not.

A strange fellow this M.

Poliakov.

An Israelite, born at St.

Petersburg (Leningrad) in
1910, M.

Léon Poliakov is directly descended from that generation of Russians chased from
their homes by a Revolution which made Russia what we know it to be today and who, since
1920, have given Paris so many picturesque - and sometimes so encumbering - taxi drivers;
people of all social levels.

(But, to hear them talk, all of noble extraction!) Having arrived with
the very first wave of refugees at the age of six, therefore too young to learn to drive, his
parents sent him to a primary school in the 10th Arrondissement.

He developed a taste for
studies, went to the Lycée, then for several years to law school.

His biographers tell us that this
led him, not to the bar, as it does so many others, but… into journalism!

And so one does not
meet this 52-year-old man today at the wheel of a taxi in the streets of Paris, but at the Centre for
Contemporary Jewish Documentation, with the title of historian.His biographers tell us that this
led him, not to the bar, as it does so many others, but… into journalism!

And so one does not
meet this 52-year-old man today at the wheel of a taxi in the streets of Paris, but at the Centre for
Contemporary Jewish Documentation, with the title of historian.

To him we owe already: Le
IIIe Reich et les Juifs, Histoire de l'antisémitisme (The 150 Third Reich and the Jews,
History of Anti-Semitism), and the celebrated Bréviaire de la Haine (Breviary of Hatred).

This
Procès de Jérusalem (Jerusalem Trial) is the fourth feather in his historian's cap.

He is very much at ease in this role, and Mr.

Ben Gurion, President of the Council of
State of Israel, has overlooked nothing in making his task easier.

Indeed, we know that on
December 21st, 1962, Mr.

Ben Gurion decided that the memoirs (2,700 pages) which
Eichmann wrote during his period of detention in Israel between the trial which condemned him
to death and his execution, were to be turned over to the State Archives of Israel instead of being
given to his widow which, if not the rule, is at least customary usage in all the courts of the free
world.

This decision ensures that for a long time to come all the Poliakovs of the world will be
able to say whatever comes into their heads about the Eichmann affair, without risk of being
contradicted by the contrary version of the historical facts of the matter.

It also ensures that the
judgement itself can never be questioned on grounds of any documents other than those very
carefully selected ones used by the prosecution.

The real historians who followed the trial will,
of course, some day be given consideration, but thanks to this procedure, only by a posterity
whose grasp of history becomes less firm as time goes on.

Meanwhile, to public opinion, the
judgement of the Jerusalem Tribunal has all the force of revealed truth.

And what truth!

M.

Poliakov does not, in the first place, give us the whole text of the judgement.--- PAGE BREAK ---

M. Poliakov does not, in the first place, give us the whole text of the judgement. Of the
243 arguments in evidence which it contains, more than half do not figure in his book. He does
not tell us why this is so, but one can be sure that they are the most questionable ones. As for
those which he does give, one or two examples will be enough to give the reader an idea of their
worth. First example: the one based on the function of the Einsatzgruppen (units protecting the
rear of the German armies as they advanced into Russia). These units were created, the
Nuremberg court said, in the middle of May 1941 in anticipation of the Russian campaign. In
the Bréviaire de la Haine, M. Poliakov proves to us with brilliance, with documents and
testimonies to support him, that these units could only have been created at that date. Today, no
less brilliantly and with no fewer documents and testimonies to support him, he proves to us
–    102    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---that they already existed on September 12th, 1939.

M.

Chaim Wiezmann, President of the
Jewish Agency in 1939, who was then living in London and whose personal papers are
collected at Rehowoth (Israel), decided it.11 The Jerusalem Tribunal followed suit, and M.

Poliakov too, of [151] course.

If, some day, Israel decides that Einsatzgruppen were created by
Ramses Il and that Hitler only returned to a very old practice, M.

Poliakov will be ready to
prove that it could not be otherwise, with documents and testimonies to support him; that goes
without saying.

Since 1945, the industry of document and testimony production has been
exceedingly prosperous, and Israel challenges Russia for first place in the world.

Is another example needed?

Take the document called "Gerstein" which has been referred
to.

In the Bréviaire de la Haine, M.

Poliakov gave us a version which he said was authentic
and, moreover, he had corrected it.

The Tribunal of Jerusalem brought forth yet another version
which is different from the two already known.

The latter was written in a kind of pidgin
language and does not agree in any respect with the other two, doubtless so that it could not be
said that it had been rejected at Nuremberg as had been the case with the first one.

The reader is
strongly urged to read the two principle versions of this document, in the last chapter of The
Drama of the European Jews.

There he will see of what prowess a Frenchman born in Russia
is capable, who was driven to become a historian because he failed to become a taxi driver.

There is no end to the list of documents of this kind on which the Jerusalem Tribunal
based its conviction, and M.

Poliakov corrects his own contentions by first correcting the
documents, whose origin is, furthermore, more than dubious.

The court itself is not free from
contradictions of this kind.

Take exhibit No.

63, for example, which declares Eichmann guilty
of having forced the German Jews to emigrate, and No.Take exhibit No.

63, for example, which declares Eichmann guilty
of having forced the German Jews to emigrate, and No.

155, of having prevented them from
emigrating, in terms as scathing and disapproving in one as in the other.

The cynical and cruel
giants who, according to the philosophy professors of my generation, only gave one the choice
between dying on the altar of Truth or the altar of Lies, with sincerity.in the choice the only
chance to escape the trial, were no more cynical and cruel than the Judges of Jerusalem.

We will have no more to say about this book and the judgement after this, which will be
our conclusion:
1) Exhibit No.

79 says, among other things, "We will describe the activities against the
Jews within the Reich and the European countries under German influence, exclusive of what
took place in eastern Europe.

In general, no extermination activity took place in those countries
or in Germany…"
After the Declaration of August 19th, 1960, which was taken up in another connection by
the Institut für Zeitgeschichte at [152] Munich, here is one that authenticates in a masterly
manner the thesis which I have maintained for so long on gas chambers in German
concentration camps.

Carelessness, no doubt.

2) Exhibit No.

161, after stating that the number of victims cannot be designated except by
the term "millions" which is that of the indictment, nevertheless declares that "it is beyond doubt
that the number of victims was about 6 million."
By counting the Jews who died in 1941, in No.

122; in the camps set up in March 1942,
in No.

141; who were taken to camps in convoys of 3,000, No.

112; when No.

127 says
2,000, and No.

154 only 1,000, etc.

doubtless one could arrive at even more surprising results.

Eichmann's Last Speech
11.

In his memoirs, Le Chef du contre-espionage nazi parle (The head of Nazi counterespionage speaks), Paris, March 1957,
Walter Schellenberg, who drafted the agreement between the O.K.W  and the S.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Eichmann's Last Speech
11. In his memoirs, Le Chef du contre-espionage nazi parle (The head of Nazi counterespionage speaks), Paris, March 1957,
Walter Schellenberg, who drafted the agreement between the O.K.W  and the S.D. on the subject of the creation of Einsatzgruppen,
described in detail the. scene when it was signed by Heydrich, head of the S.D., and the administrating officer Wagner, who had been
designated by the O.K.W. for this formality,with the date "end of April 1941," (pp. 229-230). But exhibit No. 69 of the Jerusalem trial
makes mention of misdeeds of the Einsatzgruppen in Poland in 1939, supported by the report of a "conference of heads of bureaux and
Einsatzgruppen" presided over by Heydrich on September 27th, 1939 (attached Document T. 164). It is true that argument No. 120 speaks
of "massacres by Einsatzgruppen, created, it is said, on the eve of Hitler's offensive against Russia." And if I should ask who the rascal is
that manufactured the false document, or the idiot who edited the sentence., what will be the answer?)
–    103    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---In matters of justice, it is a rule: the last word always belongs to the accused.

Here then is
what Eichmann, condemned to death by hanging, declared to the Judges of Jerusalem on
December 13th, 1961:
"I have heard the severe sentence of the Court.

My hope for justice has been disappointed.

I cannot
accept this decision.

I know that punishment is demanded for the crimes committed against the Jews.

The declarations
made by the witnesses here in this Court have astounded me, as I was similarly stupified to see myself
considered responsible for the atrocities.

I was unfortunate enough to have been mixed up in these horrors.

But, these misdeeds were not of
my own doing.

It was not my desire to kill people.

These mass murders are solely the consequence of the
Fuhrer's policy.

I tried to give up my job, to leave for the front so that I could fight honourably, but I was kept at
obscure tasks.

Let me emphasise once again:
My fault lies in my obedience, my submission to my task and to the requirements of my war
office to which I was committed under oath.

Since the start of the war, the law of warfare alone prevailed.

This submission was not easy, and anyone who has commanded and obeyed knows what can be required
of a man.

I pursued the Jews with neither enthusiasm nor pleasure.

The government did that.

As for the
prosecution, only a government could make that decision, never I.

I accuse those governing of having abused my obedience.

At that time, obedience was required,
just as it was later from the subalterns.

Obedience was elevated to a virtue.

On this subject, may I ask you to consider that I obeyed and
not whom I obeyed.

I repeat: the authorities, of which I was not a part, gave the orders; they imposed
atrocious tasks upon me which, on their orders, were to result in victims.

But now, the subalterns are also victims.

I am one of these victims.

This cannot be lost sight of.

It is said that I could have refused to obey and that I should have done so.This cannot be lost sight of.

It is said that I could have refused to obey and that I should have done so.

This is a consideration after the
fact.

Under the circumstances of the moment, this was impossible.

It could not have been any different for
anyone.

I know from experience that the legend must be kept alive, as it was done after the war, that it was
possible to resist orders.

A few men were able to go into hiding, but I was not among those who thought that this was
conceivable.

It is a grave mistake to think that I belonged to the fanatic persecutors of the Jews.

[153]
Since the end of the war, it has outraged me to note that all the responsibility of my superiors and
of the others has fallen on my shoulders.

I have to all appearances done nothing which would allow me to
be accused of fanaticism, and the responsibility for this crime of blood does not fall to me.

This is where
the witnesses have gone against the truth.

The declarations and documents presented to the Court as a
whole at first sight seem convincing, but are untrue.

I shall try, in the next few minutes, to clarify these errors.

No one came to me warning me of my
behaviour.

Not even the witness Probst Gruber could support the opposite.

He visited me and wanted
only to obtain certain alleviations, without criticising my professional activity itself.

He confirmed here,
in the Court, that I did not refuse him, but that I explained to him that I would have to have the opinion
of my superiors since I could not make the decision myself.

On this matter, we have Ministry Director Loesener who reported on Jewish questions to the
Ministry of the Interior (Judenreferent).

He is dead.

In a recently published memoir, he indicates that he
was aware of the atrocities and that he informed his superiors of them.

It must, therefore, be admitted that
everyone at the Ministry of the Interior knew of these methods.

But no one stood in opposition to my
superiors.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It must, therefore, be admitted that
everyone at the Ministry of the Interior knew of these methods. But no one stood in opposition to my
superiors. Ministry Director Loesener closeted himself in silent opposition and served his Führer as a
wise Judge in the Reich's Legal Administration. Herein appears in its true light the civic courage of an
important personality. In a report written in 1950, Loesener gave an appreciation of myself by which I would have been
one of the main perpetrators of Jewish persecution. But nothing is found in these violent sentiments
which would support these suppositions, nor any basis for these allegations. This also holds true for the
other witnesses. –    104    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Judge asked me if I wished to plead guilty, as had Hoess, the Auschwitz commander and the
Governor General of Poland, Frank.

Both had the same reason for acting as they did: Frank, responsible
for the orders he had given, was afraid of being accused by his subordinates, while Hoess was the one who
had actually carried out the mass executions.

My position is different, I never had either the capability or the responsibility of someone who
gave orders.

I never had to deal with murder, as had Hoess.

If I had received the order to perform these
massacres, I would not have taken refuge behind false pretexts; I explained this during my interrogation: if
I had found myself faced with an order which I could not carry out, I would have put a bullet through my
head in order to resolve the conflict between my conscience and my duty.

The Court feels that my present attitude is dictated by the requirements of my case in this trial.

There is a group of points which would seem to confirm this.

The apparent contradictions result from the
fact that I was not able to recall precisely all the details at the very beginning of the police interrogation.

I
lived through too many things that year.

I did not refuse to reply: the preliminary report of 3,500 pages shows this.

It was my duty to
assist in the explanation of the facts.

Mistakes or errors occurred, but I have to rectify them.

I cannot be
reproached for such errors when a 16 to 20 year period is in question, and my spirit of cooperation must
not be taken as trickery and lying.

My rule for living, which I was taught very early, was the will and ambition to attain an ethic of
honour.

After a certain period, Reasons of State prevented me from following this path.

I had to choose
outside this ethic and commit myself to another of the multiple paths of morality.

I had to bend myself to
the requirements of the reversal of all values by virtue of Reasons of State.I had to choose
outside this ethic and commit myself to another of the multiple paths of morality.

I had to bend myself to
the requirements of the reversal of all values by virtue of Reasons of State.

I undertook my own self-criticism, I accused my conscience, an area which is only the province of
my Inner Self.

Considering myself legally not guilty, I neglected totally to take into account this point of
view in this examination.

[154]
I would now like to ask the Jewish people for their forgiveness, to confess the shame which
overcomes me at the idea of the injustices committed with regard to them and the deeds undertaken against
them.

Nevertheless the basis for this judgement appears to me false.

I am not the barbarian I have been
made to seem.

I am the victim of an argumentation: I was seized in Buenos Aires, kept tied up on a bed
for a full week, then given an injection in my arm, and taken to the Buenos Aires airport; from there I left
Argentina by plane.

It is completely obvious taking only this into account, that I was considered
responsible for everything.

It all rests on the fact that a few socialist nations today, and others, spread calumnies about me.

They wanted to place their guilt on me or humiliate me for reasons which escape me.

A certain element
of the press has been, regarding these incredible and false assertions, making suggestive propaganda for
fifteen years.

This is the basis for this unjust condemnation.

This is the reason for my presence here.

I thank my defence lawyer who made himself responsible for my rights.

It is my deep conviction that I am paying for what others have done.

I must accept what fate has placed in store for me."
Obviously there is nothing remarkable about this statement of innocence and one risks
little in saying that it probably will not go down in posterity.

Condemned to death in the last century by mistake, the innocent Lesurques declared: "I
appeal to posterity." Not everyone can be Lesurques.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I must accept what fate has placed in store for me."
Obviously there is nothing remarkable about this statement of innocence and one risks
little in saying that it probably will not go down in posterity. Condemned to death in the last century by mistake, the innocent Lesurques declared: "I
appeal to posterity." Not everyone can be Lesurques. Furthermore, Eichmann was only a little Lieutenant-Colonel, of little culture, just like
thousands of others, and perhaps tens of thousands in the German army, just as there are
hundreds of thousands in the armies of the world. I think it will cause one to smile today to learn that one man, responsible for all that can be
charged to National Socialism in matters of crimes against humanity, was a simple Lieutenant-
Colonel. Nevertheless it is so. In this direction, Mr. W. Kempner, former police commissioner
for Prussia and American prosecutor at one of the Nuremberg trials, went so far as to call his
book on the subject not Hitler and Accomplices, but Eichmann and Accomplices, which tends
to show that it was not Eichmann who was an accomplice of Hitler, but the other way around! –    105    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---ject not Hitler and Accomplices, but Eichmann and Accomplices, which tends
to show that it was not Eichmann who was an accomplice of Hitler, but the other way around! –    105    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is tragic is that if one compares his explanation, or justification, of his attitude with
that given by Prof. Balachowsky of the Pasteur Institute, a cultivated man (or at least he has no
excuse for not being, covered with honours and all), one is obliged to agree that… it is not so
bad after all. Between the Reasons of State to which the troubled conscience of the more or less
untutored Lieutenant-Colonel referred itself, and the single anxiety to save his skin invoked by
the Professor with the clear conscience, men of good sense - and even those who, like me, put
Reason of Man before Reason of State - will not hesitate in their choice.
The reader will not be asked to compare this declaration, nor the charges formally made by
the Israeli prosecutor, nor the legal and moral justifications of the decision rendered by the
Tribunal; the contrast would be even more disheartening.
–    106    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---rmally made by
the Israeli prosecutor, nor the legal and moral justifications of the decision rendered by the
Tribunal; the contrast would be even more disheartening.
–    106    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[155]
Chapter VIII
THE AUSCHWITZ TRIAL
On December 17th, 1960, in the region of Hamburg where he had lived under a false
name for more than fifteen years, the German police arrested a man whom they quickly
discovered was none other than Obersturmnbannführer Richard Baer, who had been, from the
Ist of December 1943 until the 25th of February 1945 - the date of his evacuation as the Russian
troops approached - the second and last commandant of Auschwitz concentration camp. We
know that from the 14th of June 1940, when it was opened, until the Ist of December 1943, the
first commandant of that camp was Obersturmbannführer Rudolf Hoess,12 universally known
today through the subversive publicity campaign (as vast as it is unscrupulous) created around
the publication of his memoirs in five languages, under the title The Commandant of Auschwitz
speaks (published in French by Julliard, 1959).
From April to May 1946, Hoess docilely authenticated before the Nuremberg Tribunal
(although with innumerable contradictions) some of the most improbable accusations brought
against Germany concerning war crimes and crimes against humanity. Despite this, Rudolf
Hoess was condemned to death on the 2nd of April 1947 by the High Polish Tribunal for
having, the judgement states, "participated in the assassination by asphyxiation in gas chambers,
incineration of living persons, shooting, fatal injections, medical experiments, starvation, etc. of
2,812,000 persons, most of them Jews."
"…the next day after, April 4th, he was hanged there at Auschwitz."
Then they examined his successor on whose conscience weighed the charge of having
done his spell in that horrible extermination and who had brought the total number of victims to
an indeterminate figure, but generally estimated in concentration camp literature to be about 4
million Jews. Having finally been found, he was at once put in the prison at Frankfurt and his
preliminary investigation was begun.
This investigation was not easy: it seems that from the very first the ex-
Obersturmbannführer declared that there had never been any gas chamber at Auschwitz while he
was in command, that he had only heard mention of it - an echo of a rumour from the
Nuremberg Trials, where he had hidden himself - and that he had gone into hiding not because
he felt any guilt, but so as not [156] to fall into the hands of some misguided lover of justice.
Fritz Bauer, the prosecuting attorney in charge of the investigation, brought up the statements of
Rudolf Hoess at Nuremberg and in his memoirs; Baer replied that he did not know what had
taken place during the command of Hoess, that he could only answer for what had happened
12. Actually, there was an interval from December 1st, 1943 until May 1st, 1944, when Hoess' adjutant Liebehaenschel was in
command. The latter was hanged at Auschwitz at the same time as Hoess. (Rudolf Hoess is not to be confused with Rudolf Hess, still in
Spandau prison.)
–    107    –ess' adjutant Liebehaenschel was in
command. The latter was hanged at Auschwitz at the same time as Hoess. (Rudolf Hoess is not to be confused with Rudolf Hess, still in
Spandau prison.)
–    107    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---when he was in command, and he mentioned witnesses.

One after another the prosecuting
attorney had them charged with complicity and imprisoned.

Today there are 23 of them who
have been appearing over and over again, since December 20th, 1963, before the Court of
Assizes (Schwergericht) at Frankfurt.

But right to the end Baer stuck to his position and they were never able to budge him from
it.

Nor have they ever succeeded in bringing the slightest proof against him.

One serious
problem followed.

Was prosecuting attorney Bauer to be obliged to agree that the "434,351
Hungarian Jews, deported to Auschwitz in 147 trains, from the 16th of May to the 8th of July
1944" - as exhibit 112 of the Jerusalem trial attests - had not been exterminated by gas?

He was
not to be budged from his charge either.

However, the trial, scheduled for the autumn of 1961,
was first postponed to the spring of 1962, a second time to the autumn of 1962, a third time to
the spring of 1963, and a fourth time to the spring of 1964.

Suddenly, on June 17th 1963,
prosecuting attorney Bauer announced that, although nothing could have led them to suspect it
possible (a few days previously, Baer's wife, who had visited him in prison, had found him
quite healthy and full of confidence that he would soon be released on "no grounds"), Baer had
died of heart failure; less than a week later it was learned from the same source that the
Auschwitz trial could be moved up from the spring of 1964 to the beginning of the winter of
1963.

So, since the 20th of December, 1963, this bewildering trial has been going on with no
end in sight.

With the principal accused person dead, the gain for the prosecution is that the 250
prosecution witnesses (escapees from Auschwitz and most of them former members of the 'self-
government' of the camp) can come before the bar and say just about anything without fear of
being shown up.So, since the 20th of December, 1963, this bewildering trial has been going on with no
end in sight.

With the principal accused person dead, the gain for the prosecution is that the 250
prosecution witnesses (escapees from Auschwitz and most of them former members of the 'self-
government' of the camp) can come before the bar and say just about anything without fear of
being shown up.

What is curious is that during his imprisonment at Frankfurt from the 17th of
December 1960 until the 17th of June 1963, Richard Baer was interrogated without interruption
during the entire period, and yet not a word of what he said has been brought forth at the
Frankfurt trial.

Surely nothing could have been more natural on the part of the public prosecutor
if he was anxious not to furnish the defence with arguments.

But on the part of the defence?

1.

The situation of the Jews after the armistice of 1940
From 1933 to 1939, through diplomatic channels Germany had vainly tried to obtain from
Britain permission for the transfer of [157] all the Jews in Germany to Palestine.

But, on the
claim which the international Zionist movement has been making since 1895, through the voice
and pen of Theodor Herzl, which Hitler thought a little adjustment of the Balfour Declaration of
November 2nd, 1917 could bring about, the British had always categorically refused.

It was
incompatible with her Middle-East policy, over which the Versailles Treaty had given her the
upper hand; it was contrary to the national aspirations of the Arabs; then again, since the date of
the birth of Israel as a State - May 16th, 1948 - there has been daily proof that it was not a
reasonable proposition.

From the collapse of the French military force on July 10th, 1940, and the armistice, the
leaders of the Third Reich nourished the hope of another solution to the Jewish problem.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was
incompatible with her Middle-East policy, over which the Versailles Treaty had given her the
upper hand; it was contrary to the national aspirations of the Arabs; then again, since the date of
the birth of Israel as a State - May 16th, 1948 - there has been daily proof that it was not a
reasonable proposition. From the collapse of the French military force on July 10th, 1940, and the armistice, the
leaders of the Third Reich nourished the hope of another solution to the Jewish problem. The
government of Marshal Pétain reflected an opinion current in France since 1937, complaining
that the under-population of Madagascar suffered to the point that its economic progress was
irreparably threatened. Why should they not, then, allow all the Jews in the area occupied by
German troops at that time to be transported there? So, from July 10th Germany sounded Vichy
out about this. The story of these probings is told in detail in a document dated September 24th, 1942,
under the signature of the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the Third Reich, Martin
Luther, which was produced at the Nuremberg Trial on the 2nd of April, 1946, number P.S. 3688. There we read that Pierre-Etienne Flandin, who had succeeded Pierre Laval to the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs after December 13th, 1940, refused to hear anything about it. Knowing Hitler's views, Otto Abetz informed him of this immediately after the 13th, but Hitler
was not disturbed; his plan was to get Marshal Pétain to get rid of Flandin, known for his
–    108    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Anglophilism," and Hitler had no doubt that he would succeed.

He made no changes to his
policy of the moment with regard to the European Jews because he expected the Vichy
government, sooner or later, to put Madagascar at their disposal.

When Flandin did leave on the 10th of February, 1941, such soundings were resumed.

The area occupied by German troops then included, besides Germany and Austria reconsituted
into the Greater Reich (Gross Deutschland) the following:
- to the East, Bohemia-Moravia, set up as a Protectorate, by dismembering
Czechoslovakia, from which Slovakia had been taken to form an independent state under
German control, and a good half of Poland;
- to the West, Denmark, Holland, Belgium, Luxembourg and France, up to the
demarcation line which cut her in two.

In all, how many Jews?

None, to speak of, in Bohemia-Moravia; they had almost all fled into Slovakia whence,
not feeling safe because of being within reach of National Socialism, they fled gradually toward
Palestine by the route of the Danube, via non-occupied Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria, which
were not hostile to them.

This took place [158] slowly because there was the problem of
currency, which in turn involved the problem of passports.

In April 1939, Britain had decided
to authorise free entry into Palestine only of those Jews who had £1,000 sterling (about
1,500,000 old francs) in their pockets, and to limit to 1,500 persons per year all those who did
not possess such a sum.

Further, Germany was quite willing to let go all the Jews in the area
occupied by her or under her control, but was unalterably opposed to their taking with them the
required £1,000.

Given this, although it was easy for any Jew to get £1,000 (the Jewish
communities were rich), it was much harder to get a passport.Further, Germany was quite willing to let go all the Jews in the area
occupied by her or under her control, but was unalterably opposed to their taking with them the
required £1,000.

Given this, although it was easy for any Jew to get £1,000 (the Jewish
communities were rich), it was much harder to get a passport.

To achieve this it was necessary
to get to Budapest where, as Joël Brand tells us in his book One Million Jews for Ten
Thousand Trucks, the Committee for the Safety of Jews mass-produced passports and
distributed them freely.

If one was willing to arrive in Hungary naked as a worm, there was no
problem; the Germans closed their eyes on the Polish and Slovak-Hungarian frontiers.

But if
one wanted to get there with £1,000 or the equivalent, which was legitimately and generally the
case, the problem arose of having to cross the frontier secretly, which involved long
preparations and slowed the migration down.

After surmounting this difficulty, another presented itself: on actually going into Palestine
there was the problem of the false passport obtained in Budapest.

If the British discovered the
fraud the migrant was turned back even though in possession of the £1,000, and there was
nothing left but to go the way of Central Asia, to reach Birobidjan, the autononous Jewish state
within the framework of the Soviet Union.

The region of Auschwitz was under discussion at the
Wannsee Conference, and Eichmann, when the Madagascar idea fell through, proposed to
create a Jewish state there along the lines laid down by Herzl.

With Himmler's assent, he began
to gather together several tens of thousands of Jews, from the spring of 1941 on.

This project,
called 'nisko', was vehemently held against him in exhibit 72 at the Jerusalem trial.

Preliminary camps were set up, beginning with Auschwitz, and preparatory installations
to receive millions… Crematory ovens were built, showers etc., which were called gas
chambers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This project,
called 'nisko', was vehemently held against him in exhibit 72 at the Jerusalem trial. Preliminary camps were set up, beginning with Auschwitz, and preparatory installations
to receive millions… Crematory ovens were built, showers etc., which were called gas
chambers. This is stretching things a bit far, especially in view of the admission by Kubovy
(Director of the Centre for Contemporary Jewish Documentation at Tel Aviv) that no order for
the extermination of the Jews was ever given by the authorities of the Third Reich. 2. The Number of Victims
A total, we "know, " of six million. At least the international Zionist press claims so, and
the other press, in which the financiers of the Diaspora have sufficient power to determine its
position to suit their theses, does not hinder them. Six million exterminated, in gas chambers, ill
treatment, shot or beaten to death when captured by the Einsatzgruppen. –    109    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[159]
Referring to this point on November 21st, 1945 at Nuremberg, the American prosecutor
Jackson was a little more modest: "Of the nine million Jews who were living in Nazi dominated
Europe, it is estimated that 60% lost their lives: 5,700,000 Jews are missing from the countries
in which they lived before and more than 4,500,000 cannot be accounted for either by the
normal death rate, or the rate of immigration into 'other countries'."
How many at Auschwitz?

The most divergent figures - and the most fantastic, too - have been produced by the
historians and statisticians of the World Centre for Contemporary Jewish Documentation:
"Birkenau," writes one of them named Henri Michel coldly, "was the most international and the
most western of the death factories, and its ground is enriched with the ashes of four million
bodies."
Almost the sum total, then, of the number of European Jews accounted as missing at
Nuremberg by Mr.

Jackson!

But, in his memoirs, Hoess gives the following details on the total number of internees in
that camp:
From Upper Silesia, or Polish Gov.

250,000
From Germany and Theresienstadt
100,000
From Holland
95,000
From Belgium
20,000
From France
110,000
From Greece
65,000
From Hungary
400,000
From Slovakia
90,000
Total
1,130,000
It is certainly obvious that if there was a total of only 1,130,000 Jews deported to
Auschwitz, it was not possible for the Germans to have 'exterminated' more than that number.

It is doubtless for this reason that, in a brochure published in 1961 in New York, the Institute of
Jewish Affairs of the World Jewish Congress says that "900,000 Jews perished in this camp."
(Eichmann Confederates and the Third Hierarchy, p.

13).

At the Frankfurt Trial on the 17th of February, 1964, Dr.

Broszat, Director of the Institut
für Zeitgeschichte at Munich, estimated the number of Jews dead at Auschwitz "at about one
million." (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 18th February, 1964)13.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the Frankfurt Trial on the 17th of February, 1964, Dr. Broszat, Director of the Institut
für Zeitgeschichte at Munich, estimated the number of Jews dead at Auschwitz "at about one
million." (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 18th February, 1964)13. But the press continues imperturbably to write "four million." (Le Figaro littéraire, April
4th, 1964 under the signature of M. Martin-Chauffier, member of the Institut, and Le Figaro,
January 16th, 1965, under that of M. Remy Roure). 3. The Development of the Trial
As far as the Frankfrut Trial is concerned, after a year of proceedings during which almost
all the witnesses for the [160] prosecution have come before the bar, things are just where they
were when they started and truth has not made one step forward. There is no question here of
reporting the trial session by session which would be impossible for me to do in any case. Indeed, it is known that in order to prevent me from getting at the sources directly, the German
government gave me permission to be present at the hearings but forbade me to go into
Germany! When I presented myself at the German frontier with all my papers in order, I was
directly turned back to the French frontier. I was, therefore, only able to follow things from a
13. [Note de l'AAARGH:  Rassinier commet ici une erreur de personne: la déposition en question a été faite par Krausnick et non
par Broszat. –    110    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---distance.

However, thanks to an information service which I succeeded in organising and the
important press service to which I subscribed, I had a fairly accurate picture of things.

This is
what I noted at the end of the fifth week of hearings, on the 16th of January 1964.

On 16th of
January 1965, that is, after a year of hearings, I have practically nothing to add or modify.

It can easily be seen, I said, that at the rate of two proceedings per week, at the most three,
this trial will have a lot of trouble getting under way: at the beginning of the fifth week it
certainly is not under way.

From what little can be read about it in the papers, the special
observers at it are in consternation: from the evening of the first day, it was obvious to them that
they would be around for a while with the 250-odd witnesses for the prosecution which they
were to hear.

The 22 indicted men, on the other hand, posed another problem: on the eve of the
first hearing, when they presented themselves to the secretary of the court to obtain the card
entitling them to be present at the hearings, they were handed a resumé of the indictment which
gave them goose flesh when they read it.

Hundreds of children cold-bloodedly assassinated
with phenol injections into the heart; girls thrown live into the crematory ovens; bullets in the
back of the neck; the see-saw of death, etc.

with a backdrop of gas chambers and millions of
Jews killed.

They were prepared for the sensational; I am sure that on reading all that, Madame
Madeleine Jacob - called the Hyena of the Liberation - must have drooled.

And then there they
were the next day, confronted by 22 people with the comfortable look of ordinary middle class
citizens, and they saw right away that it would take much more imagination than they had to be
original and sensational in their articles.They were prepared for the sensational; I am sure that on reading all that, Madame
Madeleine Jacob - called the Hyena of the Liberation - must have drooled.

And then there they
were the next day, confronted by 22 people with the comfortable look of ordinary middle class
citizens, and they saw right away that it would take much more imagination than they had to be
original and sensational in their articles.

This has been going on for a month now; at yesterday's hearing, the 'corner' - because it
is a corner and not a bench - of the journalists was considerably thinned out, since many of them
gave up trying to find anything interesting in this business.

Let us render unto Caesar: after
having listened to the interrogations of identity and main issues, among those who remain - a
little more than half of the 120 anticipated by the court - who with few exceptions talk of asking
their editors to recall them for other assignments, the dominant feeling is that now, twenty years
after the war, the problem brought up by this trial should have been [161] settled long ago by
amnesty.

And now for the facts:
Whatever there is that is sensational about the examinations of identity and main issues, it
is not provided by the accused but by the President of the Tribunal who directs the hearings and
the methods he uses, more than the charges he lists.

The 200 children whom a single man (on
Christmas Eve 1944) injected with phenol directly to the heart, the girl another threw alive into
the crematory, shots from the revolver into the neck, one after the other, etc., it is clear that
these are not the crux of the hearing.

The main issue which will be the centre of interest is the
gas chambers and the six million Jews allegedly killed in them.

This is the way the President stated the matter at the first meeting:
At Birkenau (one of the three camps of the great complex of Auschwitz, which also
included Auschwitz 3 km.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The main issue which will be the centre of interest is the
gas chambers and the six million Jews allegedly killed in them. This is the way the President stated the matter at the first meeting:
At Birkenau (one of the three camps of the great complex of Auschwitz, which also
included Auschwitz 3 km. away and Monowitz 6 km away) there were gas chambers and,
periodically, in the three camps of the complex, a selection was made of thousands of Jews to
be sent there to be gassed. Toward the end, in 1944, selections were even made right on the
platform where the trains carrying the deportees arrived. Did you order these selections, or
participate in them, he asks of each one of the accused. The question is subtle; he does not ask them if they sent these thousands of Jews to the
gas chambers in question or if they participated in the exterminations, but only if they ordered or
participated in the selections. The inevitable answer is yes. But in each case, as the interrogation continues, it is seen that not one of the accused knew
that there were gas chambers at Birkenau. nor that the purpose of the selections was to send the
Jews there. Now, among them there are two assistants to the two successive heads of the
complex. There is even a Polish prisoner, Bednarec, who was a block chief and who
participated with zeal, so they seem to divine. One wonders why all the prisoner block chiefs of
the camp, who were all in his position - there are thousands all living and with a few exceptions
all Jews - are not, like him, on the bench of the accused. The answer: this one is not a Jew. On
–    111    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---this bench, if he had not died during preliminary investigation, might have sat one of the two
heads of the camp; at the hearing of January 11th it is learned that he, too, had stated that he had
never known there were gas chambers at Birkenau.

Strange, to say the least… And those
selections?

Their purpose seems to have been to separate those fit for work from those unable to
work, the latter to be sent to special camps set up for them.

This came out of the interrogation of
Robert Mulka (today one of the big men in the export-import business in Hamburg) and of
Hoecker, both of them assistants - one to the first commandant of the complex (Hoess, hanged
at Auschwitz by the Poles on [162] April 4th, 1947) and the other of the second (Baer, died
during investigation).

As to the psychology of the accused: they gradually decided that it would be to the interest
to seek the court's indulgence and thus began to mention having 'heard' of unmentionable
goings-on 'inside' camps; to interfere would maybe have cost them their lives, etc.

The press
could not have asked for better; more important than the accused, the big thing is to accuse the
whole of Germany to justify astronomical indemnities… Once started on this track the accused
are ready to state practically anything, fantastic figures of arrivals etc., that no one, not even the
defence, picks up.

But the press repeats these nonsensical figures.

No individual is to blame,
just all of Germany, the government, hence every person.

Every journalist was sitting like the
French Revolutionary knitters.

The prosecutor tried to make Breidweiser confess he had
participated in gassing, but at a date when the camp had not even been set up; he was so
confused that he obviously knew nothing about anything.

On February 6th, this is what I noted in the hearings that had taken place since January
16th.

Are we finally getting at the truth?

The case of Breidweiser came up much sooner than
anticipated.Are we finally getting at the truth?

The case of Breidweiser came up much sooner than
anticipated.

He had been in the S.S., the only one on whom rests the charge of having actually
participated in gas extermination of 850 Soviet prisoners of war.

"Me, sure, I handled Zyklon B, but to disinfect clothing, not to asphyxiate people!

"
And he proceeds to describe Zyklon B and how it works.

Thus we learn that this famous
gas, which until now has been described as "pellets from which gas was freed on contact with
air" (this was said by some at Nuremberg), "on contact with steam" (said by others before the
same Tribunal), was in reality in the form of a "liquid within a capsule," very volatile.

Since this testimony showed up the false testimony given by all the witnesses for the
prosecution in all the trials of this kind which have taken place during the previous twenty years,
President Hoffmaier shifted abruptly.

I looked back at my documentation and learn that Zyklon B was an insecticide used in the
German army since 1924 and that during the Second World War, it had been used not only in
the army, but in all the health programmes of the Third Reich and in all the concentration camps.

On January 30th, 1946 at Nuremberg, evidence was admitted against the accused consisting of
two invoices for this gas, dated 30th May 1944, one for Auschwitz and the other for
Oranienburg.

But at Oranienburg there were no gas chambers.

(Report of Hearings, Volume 27,
p.

740-42).

Question: What did they do with Zyklon B at Oranienburg since they did no asphyxiating
there?

It seem that one cannot find anywhere irrefutable proof that the government of the Third
Reich never thought of using Zyklon B to exterminate the Jews.

[163]
Did they exterminate them in this manner at Auschwitz?

First, this still has to be proved.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[163]
Did they exterminate them in this manner at Auschwitz? First, this still has to be proved. And second, if it is proved, the problem of these exterminations will have to be looked at from
quite another angle than it has been presented up to now - without the knowledge of the
authorities of the Third Reich, as I have already pointed out. At the same time, the role played in
these horrors by the 'self-government' of the camp will have to be brought up, if all the
Breidweisers accused can prove that they were brought to trial for nothing. Now we can understand why President Hoffmaier did not insist. Moreover this was the
second time, the first having occurred during the questioning of the accused Hans Stark, the
preceding Friday. The latter, in fact, did tell that he had executed five or six deportees with a
bullet in the back of the head. "They arrived," he said, "at the camp under a sentence of death
–    112    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---given them by the regularly consituted courts of the Third Reich and I had been assigned to the
squad." And that is how it is with all those assigned to firing squads.

Pushed further, the accused Hans Stark had also admitted "having thrown little pellets of
Zyklon B into the crematory through holes made in the roof." The same operation described by
Breidweiser, who had told us that Zyklon B came in the form of liquid within capsules.

Breidweiser was supported by Dilewsky, who had watched from a distance, But, 'in little
pellets,' says Stark.

The President could only become more and more embarrassed.

But what embarrased him
most was Prosecutor Kugler, who sustained the accusation and who was the same age as the
accused Hans Stark.

In 1943 they were both 17 years old and both were members of the Nazi
Party.

One had been sent to the S.S.

at Auschwitz (Hans Stark), the other (Kugler) to a
regiment of Alpine Chasseurs in Italy.

The first is today a university professor (agronomy) and
indicted.

The other a magistrate, and… judges, face to face, after having been so long side by
side.

The latter had the good luck not to have been assigned to a firing squad, at least as far as
we know.

The next day, he confided to the representative of France-Soir: "Happily I never had
to take part in one of those operations!

" Indeed ...

And happily, too, for Mr.

Eugen Gerstenmaier (today President of the Bundestag) and
Heinrich Luebke (today President of the Federal Republic), who were also important persons
under Hitler and warmly approved his policies.

The first was a member of the Nazi Party (on
mission in a university during the war).

As for the second, his case was much more serious:
head of an industrial outfit working on the manufacture of the V1 and V2, using manpower
detailed from the half starved deportees of the Peenemunde concentration camp (Baltic).The first was a member of the Nazi Party (on
mission in a university during the war).

As for the second, his case was much more serious:
head of an industrial outfit working on the manufacture of the V1 and V2, using manpower
detailed from the half starved deportees of the Peenemunde concentration camp (Baltic).

And he
has never appeared among the accused at any trial of the Frankfurt kind for participation in the
horrors of the Peenemunde concentration camp!

[164]
February 20th:
It is over; all the accused have been interrogated, the first phase of the trial is over.

The
Tribunal relaxed and did not resume until last Monday, the 17th of February, for the good
reason that at Frankfurt, as at Nice, the Carnival is sacred.

At the moment - and this will go on until February 24th - specialists are being heard from
the Institute of Contemporary History at Munich, that world paragon of anti-Nazi resistance.

They have been brought here as experts to authenticate the written testimonies whose authors are
dead or are unable to appear for public reading.

It is not without interest to note that these are the
very same experts whom I forced to admit on August 19th, 1960 that there had "never been any
gas chamber in any concentration camp in the territory of the Grand Reich." And they had, until
then, maintained the opposite.

February 17th, the first witness was heard - and the most important witness for the
prosecution: Mr.

Hermann Langbein, Austrian Israelite, Secretary General of the International
Committee of the Survivors of Auschwitz.

The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on the 27th of
January had published with a trumpet blast an article about him that was, in my view, the
sensation of the week.

First by its title: "Capacity of the crematory ovens at Auschwitz - 4756 bodies a day."
Precise.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on the 27th of
January had published with a trumpet blast an article about him that was, in my view, the
sensation of the week. First by its title: "Capacity of the crematory ovens at Auschwitz - 4756 bodies a day."
Precise. But, in 1951, this capacity was set at 20,000 bodies per day, on oath before the courts
at that time of a dead Hungarian doctor named Miklos Nyiszli, whose detailed testimony was
published in France by Les Temps Modernes (March and April, 1951). But this article was even more surprising. It said that Mr. Hermann Langbein had been
interned for two years at Auschwitz, where he carried on the duties of secretary to S.S. Dr. Wirths, the one directly in charge of gas extermination, and that in that camp there was such an
insufficiency of food (1,800 calories a day provided for by the R.S.H.A.) that one could not
survive for more than four months unless one 'organised' - in the lingo of the camps 'organise'
meant to steal right and left, bread here, margarine there, soup somewhere else, etc. –    113    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---But Mr.

Hermann Langbein survived for two years.

Conclusion: he 'organised' food -
food taken from the rations of the other prisoners.

Not surprising: to be secretary to Dr.

Wirths
meant that he was part of the 'self-government' of the camp, that group of prisoners who
assumed administration and policing - and whose' main occupation consisted in helping itself
first to the 1,800 calorie rations which arrived every day at the camp, to get 3,000 to 4,000 for
themselves, thus condemning the mass of prisoners to exist on 600, 800 or 1,000 calories; in
other words, to die of hunger little by little.

I am not the one who is saying all this, it is Mr.

Langbein who admits it himself; if he
survived for two years in a camp where [165] one could not live more than four months on the
allocated rations, except by stealing food from one's companions in prison, the obvious
conclusion is that he was himself among the thieves, that he caused a certain number of his co-
prisoners to die of hunger, that he contributed to the horror of the camp and therefore his place
was in the dock with the accused, not with the prosecutors.

If one looks at the descriptive list of the 250 witnesses for the prosecution who filed
through the court day after day, it is seen that they are all like Mr.

Hermann Langbein, and that
in that camp where one could not survive more than four months without "stealing" from the
rations of one's co-prisoners, they all survived from two to four -years…
To give some idea of the significance of this thievery we must look at the testimony of Dr.

Hans Winch, S.S.

doctor of Auschwitz.

He came after Langbein to affirm that 25% of the camp
prisoners (the cadres, he said explicitly) were sufficiently nourished, and that 75% never had
enough to eat, so little in fact that at the end of four months they were dying of hunger.

And Dr.

Hans Winch gave figures: in order to live normally at Auschwitz a prisoner needed, he said,
5,000 calories.And Dr.

Hans Winch gave figures: in order to live normally at Auschwitz a prisoner needed, he said,
5,000 calories.

So, if 25% got these 5,000 calories for themselves (and they were able to since
they administered the camp and distributed the food), that is, three rations apiece, or just about,
then the other 75% got about a third of an 1,800 calorie ration, or about 600 calories.

The mass
of prisoners were in reality condemned to death by the 'self-government.' I am very much afraid
that here lie the real figures of the famous 'gas chambers'!

Two of the accused out of 23 partially confessed to what they were accused of, and I must
admit that this is remarkable.

In 1946, at Nuremberg, they would all have admitted everything.

This is proof that we are no longer in 1946… So we must have a look at what these two
admitted.

It is clear about the first - the accused Hans Stark, today professor of agronomy - who
had been assigned to a firing squad to take care of persons condemned to death in the regular
courts of the Third Reich.

No need to come back to that.

As for the second, non-commissioned officer Klaehr, he admitted that he had killed 200 to
300 Jewish prisoners with injections of phenol.

I advise the reader to read carefully a
remarkable book by Maurice Garçon La vie exécrable de Guillemette Babin.

In the Middle
Ages, accused of sorcery, she admitted having met every night at midnight, in orgiastic witches'
revels, incubuses and succubuses, on the promise that if she confessed she would not be burned
as a sorcerer.

Klaehr was accused of having killed these 200 to 300 Jews by injection into the
heart on Christmas Eve of 1942.

He denied having done it that night.

During the trial two things
came out: on Christmas Eve 1942 he was not even at Auschwitz; on the other hand, for one
[166] man to inject 200 to 300 people in one evening was a little too much.

Ask the first medical
student you come across.--- PAGE BREAK ---

During the trial two things
came out: on Christmas Eve 1942 he was not even at Auschwitz; on the other hand, for one
[166] man to inject 200 to 300 people in one evening was a little too much. Ask the first medical
student you come across. So he admitted having reached this figure in two months, at the rate of
ten or fifteen at a time. This is much more plausible. But is it any nearer the truth? That is
another question. What is curious is that during two months of hearings, the problem of gas chambers per
se has not been brought up. Every time the occasion arises, President Hoffmaier (former S.S. Nazi in Italy) limits the answers of the accused to the problem of 'selections' within the camp or
on the arrival platform. Each time the scenario is the same; I never knew there were gas chambers at Auschwitz,
says the accused. And the President says, all the same, men were selected out, therefore . . . The accused remains silent, since it is true that selections were made and he can only assent. It seems that these operations should be explained. The purpose we know; to separate out
the sick, unable to work, from the capable. What happened to the former? The witnesses for the
–    114    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---prosecution we have been hearing since February 27th invariably answer that they were sent to
the gas chambers.

What is curious is that they have all seen them, loaded into trucks or railcars,
leave the camp, but no one has seen them arrive at the gas chamber in question, nor has anyone
been present at an extermination.

On the other hand, it suffices to read The Tragedy of the Deportation (La Tragédie de la
déportation) (published under the direction of Olga Wormser and Henri Michel, Hachette,
1962) to see that a great number of the authors of concentration camp literature have seen
convoys of the sick coming from Auschwitz and arriving at Bergen-Belsen, Neuengamme,
Buchenwald, Dora, Ravensbrück, Flossenburg, etc.

during the year 1943, and especially after
May 1944.

From Auschwitz but not only from Auschwitz: from all the concentration camps
which were, in the view of the Third Reich, work camps and not extermination camps.

Explanation: a work camp, or concentration camp, which let out deportees to industrial
works in the region where they were, was to be profitable.

And the S.S.

guard at the entrance
looked to it to see that in each of them, the number of the sick who were incapable of working
(the 'useless mouths' as Mme.

de Beauvoir said) should not threaten this return.

Every time
they thought this number excessive, they had the 'self-government' of the camp, within the
camp (Kapo, Vorarbeiter, bludgeon in hand) carry out regular raids, which were regular man
hunts - every sick man tried to escape this because he was certain that he was going to be sent to
the gas chambers.

Those who were 'selected' were sent to one or another of the above-cited camps, most
often to Bergen-Belsen and Neuengamme, specially set up for the sick from all the camps.

Since
their companions in misfortune did not see them again they came to the conclusion that they had
been sent to the gas chambers.Those who were 'selected' were sent to one or another of the above-cited camps, most
often to Bergen-Belsen and Neuengamme, specially set up for the sick from all the camps.

Since
their companions in misfortune did not see them again they came to the conclusion that they had
been sent to the gas chambers.

In [167] the camp lingo the whole operation was delineated in the
expression Himmelsfahrtkommando, kommando for departure to Heaven.

In reality not a single new item has appeared since 20th of February when the last
testimony was given.

Things are just as they were.

We have heard witnesses caught in flagrant
lies, others who have retracted what they have said, others who have told as something "seen"
only what they have simply read.

There was even a trip to Auschwitz - nothing came from that.

From the point of view of history this trial is bound to be a total failure and one little thing
will prove it.

In 1945, writing his SS-Staat, Eugen Kogon had found only one witness to attest
to the extermination of the Jews by gas.

This was a certain Janda Weiss, who lived at Brno (on
the other side of the Iron Curtain) whom nobody could cross-question.

Today, Prosecutor Fritz
Bauer has succeeded in producing 250 before the Frankfurt Tribunal!

As time goes on and as
long as trials of this type are held, the number of witnesses of this kind will only grow and
grow, and more and more will come from behind the Iron Curtain.

Already, the majority of
those at Frankfurt have come from there; they are all either communists, Jews or both.

For the next five years 500 trials are expected or are in preparation.

About 15,000 persons
are under lock and key and they may well be joined by many others.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For the next five years 500 trials are expected or are in preparation. About 15,000 persons
are under lock and key and they may well be joined by many others. That is to say, they haven't
finished showing us again and again that Germany is a country of barbarians, unworthy of
being integrated into the community of the European people, to the great pleasure of the masters
of the Kremlin and the international Zionist movement, associated in this joint enterprise for the
destruction of Europe - and that is the whole problem. Because, and I repeat, either a Europe will be created in which Germany will have her
place with equal rights with the other European peoples, in which case Bolshevism will begin to
recede, or Germany will be refused integration into the community of European peoples and
there will never be a Europe. To this political argument an economic one can be added: Germany, declared to be solely
responsible for the Second World War, must alone pay reparations and, first of all, the wrongs
the State of Israel claims to have suffered. But at 5,000 DM per victim, six million victims
makes quite a stir, just for physical damages alone. And that is quite apart from what the Claims
Conference which met at Brussels, 9th to 13th March 1964, decided was due to be paid to the
surviving Jews as an indemnity for "material goods stolen by the Germans." And these,
according to La Terre Retrouvée of April 14th, 1964, come to:
–    115    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---[168]
Germany
2 billion dollars
Poland
3 billion dollars
Rumania
1 billion dollars
Hungary
570 million dollars
France
950 million dollars
Czechoslovakia
650 million dollars
Belgium
618 million dollars
Holland
450 million dollars
Slovakia
140 million dollars
Greece
120 million dollars
9,490 million dollars
And, in addition, the war debts which will be claimed from Germany by the Allies who
conquered her, the sum of which will be fixed, according to resolutions taken at London on
February 27th, 1953, on the signing of the Peace Treaty with 're-united Germany.' Yugoslavia
has already stated a claim for 70 billion dollars, Greece for 20 billion… The others have said
nothing specific yet, but nothing is lost in the waiting.

To exact from Germany such fantastic sums, which in all exceed by far the total of what
was exacted at Versailles in 1919, is as much as to say that she shall revert to another Weimar
Republic - or something still worse!

It is another way of destroying Europe, or - to deliver her
to Bolshevism.

It is, of course, not easy to get anyone to admit that such a plan exists, neither the
Germans nor any other peoples.

Hence these trials which are but the spring-board for that
propaganda.

The vexing thing about these trials is that they are going around in circles - the more
witnesses are found, the less reliable they are.

So they are constantly referring back to the first
testimony concerning Auschwitz, that of Rudolf Hoess.

Every time the defence puts a witness
on the spot, President Hoffmaier throws in his face The Commandant of Auschwitz Speaks.

After that everything goes on as if the defence were ignorant of the fact that Rudolf Hoess
had also testified at Nuremberg on April 26th, 1946, and that after having claimed at Nuremberg
(Report of the Trial, Volume XI, pp.

410 ff.) that about three million Jews had been
exterminated (2,500,000 of them by gas), he wrote in the book in question (p.After that everything goes on as if the defence were ignorant of the fact that Rudolf Hoess
had also testified at Nuremberg on April 26th, 1946, and that after having claimed at Nuremberg
(Report of the Trial, Volume XI, pp.

410 ff.) that about three million Jews had been
exterminated (2,500,000 of them by gas), he wrote in the book in question (p.

239) that, at the
very most, 1,130,000 persons had been interned in that camp.

Or as if the defence were also
ignorant of the fact that that is not the only contradiction which a comparison of the two
successive testimonies by the same man reveals: like convoys of Jews 'never made up of.

more
than 1,000 persons' (p.

229), but which, at the rate of 'five convoys a day' (p.

236) 'brought
15,000 persons to the camp every day'(p.

239); the gas chambers which Himmler gave him the
order to.build to physically exterminate the Jews (p.

227), but on which subject 'we were never
able to get a clear and precise decision from Himmler' (p.

233); Zyklon B, which is sometimes a
liquid, sometimes tablets releasing gas on contact with air; the operation of extermination itself,
which 'lasts on an average of [169] half an hour' (p.

174) after which the doors are opened and
'the sonderkommando begins at once its work of clearing away the bodies' (p.

230) but the
handling of Zyklon B is so dangerous that the gas chamber 'has to be aired for two days before
one can go in' (p.

229).

etc.

In a word, an apocryphal document: Hoess was hanged at Auschwitz on the 4th of April
1947 and he certainly will not return to protest against what he is being made to say today.

Moreover, Dr.

Broszat, director of the Institute of Contemporary History at Munich, stated to
the court at Frankfurt last February 26th (1964), that "one could not rely on the statements of
Rudolf Hoess." (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, February 27th, 1964).

So?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Broszat, director of the Institute of Contemporary History at Munich, stated to
the court at Frankfurt last February 26th (1964), that "one could not rely on the statements of
Rudolf Hoess." (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, February 27th, 1964). So? So, the accused at the Frankfurt Trial will be condemned as well as those at the 500 other
trials; there will have been no proof, but…
–    116    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But Germany will pay and that is what is essential.
What matter the means? And what matter Europe!
Israel first, and even at the price of the dissolution of Europe - or of its bolshevisation
(read: slavisation), since bolshevism is only the modern form of pan-slavism, which amounts to
the same thing.
End of the book
–    117    –

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Marshal Rydz-Smigly, a Polish Idi Amin who bragged: “Poland wants 
war with Germany and Germany will not be able to avoid it even if she 
wants to” (Daily Mail, August 6th, 1939).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Marshal Rydz-Smigly, a Polish Idi Amin who bragged: “Poland wants 
war with Germany and Germany will not be able to avoid it even if she 
wants to” (Daily Mail, August 6th, 1939).

The Tunnel at Dora 
Paul Rassinier 
The date was March 31, 1944. For the past week the Kapos, the Lagerschutz, and the Block 
Chiefs had been particularly on edge. Quite a number of prisoners had died from blows; lice 
were found not only in the Tunnel, but even among the Kommandos outside; and the S.S.-
Führung laid the responsibility for this state of affairs on the H-Führung. On top of that, the 
weather the whole day long was terrible: it was colder than usual, and an icy rain mixed with hail 
came down without any let-up. In the evening, we got to the muster grounds, frozen, soaked, and 
hungry beyond belief. How we hoped the roll would not last too long! But, there was no such 
luck. At ten o’clock we were still standing at attention under the rain of hail, waiting for the 
order Abtreten! (break ranks!) which would liberate us. Finally it came, and we could go and eat 
the hot soup in a hurry and fall onto the straw. We got to the Block and began the shoe-cleaning. 
But, then, gesturing that we should stay outside, the Block Chief, standing framed in the 
entrance, announced that since lice had been found, the whole camp was going to be disinfected.

--- PAGE BREAK ---It was to begin that night.

Five of the 35 Blocks were picked for Entläusung (delousing) that 
night.

Consequently, that night there was no soup until that was over.

The delousing process then 
began: “Alles da drin!” (Everybody in there!).

We went into the Esszimmer with our shoes in 
our hands.

“Auszieben!” (Undress!).

We took our clothes off, wrapped them in a bundle with the 
number on top.

“Zu funf!” (By fives!).

That frightened us.

“Zu funf!” We form into lines.

With 
the Stubendienst carrying our clothes on blankets, surrounding us, all naked, in the cold, in the 
rain and the snow, we went in the direction of the building where we were to be deloused.

There 
were about 800 yards to cross.

When we got there, the four other Blocks, naked like us, were already pushing against the 
entrance.

We felt Death in our presence.

How long would it last?

There were about a thousand of 
us, all naked and shaking in the wet and the cold which penetrated to our very bones, pushing at 
the doors.

There was no way to get in.

Only forty at a time could go in.

The scene was hideous.

At first we tried to force our way in, but the delousing men kept us back with water hoses.

Then 
we wanted to go back to the Block to wait our turns; but that was impossible since the 
Lagerschutz, truncheons in hand, surrounded us.

So we had to stay there, crowded together, 
between the water and the truncheons, soaked and beaten.

We pressed together.

Every ten 
minutes, forty of us were allowed to enter the delousing chamber in a crush that was a life and 
death struggle.

Elbows went into play; there were fights, and the weaker were mercilessly 
trampled underfoot, and their bodies were found at dawn.

At about two in the morning, I 
succeeded in getting inside, Fernand behind me, where we received a haircut, cresyl, and shower.

At the exit we were given a shirt and a pair of shorts which we wore when we went out into the 
night to return to the Block.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At about two in the morning, I 
succeeded in getting inside, Fernand behind me, where we received a haircut, cresyl, and shower. At the exit we were given a shirt and a pair of shorts which we wore when we went out into the 
night to return to the Block. I felt as though I had accomplished some act of heroism. When we 
came to the Block, we went into the Esszimmer where a Stubendienst handed us our clothes 
which had been disinfected. Next came soup and bed. At reveille, the sinister comedy was just barely finishing. At least half of the Block got back only 
just in time to get dressed, get soup, get the daily ration, and hurry to the grounds to go to work. And, there were a number missing: those who had died during the execution of this sorry 
business. Others survived it only for a few hours or for two or three days and were carried away 
with the inevitable double pneumonia. The job itself probably killed as many men as it did lice. How did it happen? The S.S.-Führung was responsible only for the decision to disinfect five 
Blocks per day, and the H-Führung was left in complete control of how it was to be carried out. A schedule could have been set up: at eleven, Block 35, at midnight, 24, at one, number 32, etc... The Block Chiefs could have, within this framework, sent us in groups of one hundred at twenty-
minute intervals, for example, and in our clothes. But no, that would have been too simple. When what took place on the night of March 31st reached the ears of the S.S.-Führung, the latter 
itself set up an exact schedule the next morning for the Blocks that remained to be disinfected.

April 2, 1944: Easter. The S.S.-Führung decided on a twenty-four hour rest period which was 
not to be disturbed except by a general roll-call, that is, the Tunnel people as well as the quarry 
workers would be present. The weather was magnificent, a radiant sun in a pure calm sky. Joy;

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Gods were with us!

We got up at six instead of four-thirty: washing and food distribution was 
done at a slower pace.

Nine o’clock.

All the Kommandos were on the grounds at attention.

The Lagerschutz went in 
and out among the groups; Block Chiefs were at their stations.

The Lagerältester chatted 
familiarly with the Rapportführer.

He had a paper in his hand: a detailed list of the camp 
personnel drawn up by the Arbeitsstatistik.

About thirty S.S.

in helmets, their pistols in holsters, 
were assembled at the entrance to the camp: the Blockführer.

It looked as though all were going 
to go well.

A whistle blew, and the Blockführer spread out fan-wise, each toward the Block which it was his 
responsibility to oversee.

Each one made his count and compared his figure with that which the 
Block Chief handed him.

“Richtig” (Correct).

One by one the Blockführer came to report to the 
Rapportführer who waited, pencil in hand, and who wrote down the figures as they were given 
him.

There was not one discordant note; the roll-call would not last long.

The S.S.

wanted to take 
advantage of this Sunday and were moving fast.

We were exultant: one day of rest with nothing 
to do but to eat our soup and to stretch out in the sun.

Just a minute!

The total number of prisoners which the Rapportführer had did not tally with the 
figure given to him by the Arbeitsstatistik; there were twenty-seven fewer men on the grounds 
than on the paper.

Question: what had become of them?

The Kapo of the Arbeitsstatistik was 
sent for in a hurry.

He was asked to go over his figures right away.

One hour later he came back, 
with the same figure.

Perhaps, then, the S.S.

had made a mistake.

The count was made again, and 
the Rapportführer came up with the same figure.

They searched through the Blocks, they 
searched through the Tunnel; they found none of the missing prisoners.

It was noon.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They searched through the Blocks, they 
searched through the Tunnel; they found none of the missing prisoners. It was noon. The ten thousand or so prisoners were still on the grounds waiting for the figures of 
the Arbeitsstatistik and of the S.S.-Führung to agree. Time dragged; some men fainted: those 
whose turn it was to die fell down, never to get up again; those with dysentry relieved themselves 
as they stood; the Lagerschutz felt that things were getting slack and began to lay about. The S.S. guards whose Sunday was threatened were furious. They went off to eat, but we stayed there. At 
two o’clock they came back. Suddenly the Kapo of the Arbeitsstatistik came running: he had come up with another figure. A 
murmur of hope rose from the crowd. The Rapportführer looked over the new figure and became 
violently angry: there were still eight men missing. The Kapo of the Arbeitsstatistik went away 
again. He came back at four. Now no more than five men were missing. At eight only one was 
still missing, and we were still there, pale, drawn, and exhausted, after having stood for eleven 
hours, with empty stomachs. The S.S. decided to send us to eat. We left. Behind us the 
Totenkommando picked up some thirty dead. At nine, it all began again, in an attempt to find the missing man. At eleven forty-five, after 
various comings and goings, this missing man was found, too; the S.S.-Führung and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---nine, it all began again, in an attempt to find the missing man. At eleven forty-five, after 
various comings and goings, this missing man was found, too; the S.S.-Führung and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Arbeitsstatistik were in agreement. We went back to our Blocks and were able to go to bed, 
again leaving behind us ten or more dead. 
There you have the explanation of why the roll-calls took so long. Those employed in the 
Arbeitsstatistik, illiterate or nearly so, had been made bookkeepers only as a favour, and they 
were incapable of adding up at the first count the number of men present. The concentration 
camp was a world where every man’s place was determined by his connections and his cunning 
and not by his abilities. Accountants were made masons, carpenters became accountants, 
wheelwrights became doctors, and doctors became fitters, electricians or road-graders.  
From Paul Rassinier: The Holocaust Story and the Lies of Ulysses, Institute for Historical Review, 1978, pp. 
74-77

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dora and Jews 
Paul Rassinier 
On June 30, 1937, Buchenwald was only what its name means, a forest of beech trees, a place 
perched on a foot hill of the Harz mountains, five and a half miles from Weimar.

One reached it 
by a stony, winding path.

One day some men came by car to the foot of the hill.

They climbed to 
the top on foot, as though it were an excursion.

They carefully inspected the area.

One of them 
pointed out a clearing; then they returned after having had a good luncheon at Weimar.

“Unser Führer wird zufrieden werden,” they said.

(Our Fuhrer will be pleased.) 
Sometime later others came.

They were chained together by fives, one to the other and 
constituted a detachment of a hundred men, surrounded by about twenty S.S., guns in hand.

There was no more room in the German prisons.

They climbed up the path as best they could, 
sworn at and kicked.

When they reached the top exhausted, they were put to work without any 
delay.

A group of fifty put up tents for the S.S., while the other group put in place a circle of 
barbed wire, three strands high and about a hundred yard sin diameter.

The first day that was all 
that could be done.

They ate a meagre meal in a hurry and almost without stopping work and, 
very late in the evening, they went to sleep right on the ground, wrapped in thin coverings.

The 
next day, the first group of fifty unloaded all day long construction materials and sections of 
wooden barracks which heavy tractors managed to bring about half way up the hill; they carried 
this material the rest of the way up on their backs and placed it inside the barbed wire.

The 
second group cut down trees to clear the area.

They did not eat that day because they had started 
off in the first place with food for one day only.

But, they slept better that night in the shelter of 
the branches and among the piles of boards.

Beginning with the third day, sections of barracks began to arrive at a faster rate and began to 
pile up half way up the hill.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, they slept better that night in the shelter of 
the branches and among the piles of boards. Beginning with the third day, sections of barracks began to arrive at a faster rate and began to 
pile up half way up the hill. There were also a kitchen outfit, quantities of striped clothing, some 
tools, and some supplies. The S.S. stated in their daily report that with one hundred men they 
could not keep up with material delivered. Others were sent them. The rations then were 
insufficient. At the end of the week, some fifty S.S. struggled with about a thousand prisoners 
who they did not know where to put at night, who they could barely feed, and who overwhelmed 
their ability to supervise. The prisoners were made up into several groups, or Kommandos, each 
detailed to a particular job: the kitchen for the S.S., the orderlies for their camp, the kitchen of 
the prisoners, the construction of the barracks, the transport of material, the administration 
accounting. All of these operations were called S.S. Küche, Häftlingsüche, Barrakenkommando 
Bauleitung, Arbeitsstatistik, etc., and on paper, in reports, it looked like a simple and methodical 
organization. But it was, in fact, a complete mess, a horrible swarming of men, who went 
through the motion of eating, who worked haphazardly, and who barely slept covered in a 
jumble of branches and boards. Since it was easier to keep them under surveillance when they

--- PAGE BREAK ---were working than when they were sleeping, the days were twelve, fourteen or sixteen hours 
long.

Since there were not enough guards, they were forced to select a complement of trustees 
out of the whole lot of the prisoners on appearances alone, who, since they had uneasy 
consciences, created a reign of terror by way of excusing and justifying themselves.

Blows 
rained, not just insults and threats.

The bad treatment, the poor and insufficient food, the super-human work, the lack of medicines, 
and the pneumonia created conditions that caused this gang of men to die at an alarming rate, 
endangering the general health.

The S.S.

had to think of another way to get rid of the bodies 
other than by burial which took too much time and which was too often repeated: so they had 
turned to cremation, a procedure that was much faster and in conformity with Germanic 
traditions.

Another Kommando, in its turn, became indispensable, the Totenkommando, and the 
construction of a crematorium was put on the list of “urgent” work to be done.

Thus it happened 
that a place was built for men to die in, before the place was built for them to live in.

Everything 
is linked together: evil attracts evil, and when one is caught in the mesh of evil forces...

Moreover, the camp was not conceived in the minds of the National-Socialist authorities to be 
just a camp, but a community working under supervision for the building of the Third Reich, just 
like the other individuals of the German community who remained in relative liberty.

As a 
consequence, after the crematorium came the factory, the Guzlow.

So it is seen that the order of 
precedence for all the installations was determined first by the need to keep everything well 
under guard, second by hygienic requirements, and third by the demands of work that constituted 
the raison d’être for the camp.

Everything was subordinate to the collective interest which 
trampled down and crushed the individual.So it is seen that the order of 
precedence for all the installations was determined first by the need to keep everything well 
under guard, second by hygienic requirements, and third by the demands of work that constituted 
the raison d’être for the camp.

Everything was subordinate to the collective interest which 
trampled down and crushed the individual.

Buchenwald was thus, during the period of the first installations, a Straflager (punishment camp) 
where only those considered incorrigible in other prisons were sent.

Then, from the moment that 
the factory, the Guzlow, was ready to go, an Arbeitslager (labor camp) with Strafkommandos.

Finally, it was transformed into a Konzentrationslager (concentration camp) which is what it was 
when we knew it, a camp equipped with all the amenities of a small city, where everyone was 
sent without discrimination.

Around the central camp there were satellite camps, which it kept 
supplied with human material.

All the camps went through these three stages successively.

Unfortunately, with the war breaking out, prisoners from all places, of all kinds, in for all kinds 
of reasons, and under all kinds of disciplinary punishment, were haphazardly, because of the 
disorder of the circumstances, and indiscriminately sent to a Straflager, an Arbeitslager, or a 
Konzentrationslager.

The result was a frightening mixture of all kinds of humanity which 
resembled, under the sign of the truncheon, a gigantic basket of crabs, over which National-
Socialism, so sure of itself and so methodical in its operations, but overwhelmed on all sides by 
events which were beginning to master it, threw an immense Noah’s mantle.

Dora was born under the sponsorship of Buchenwald and in the same way.

It grew and prospered 
following the same process.

In 1903, German engineers and chemists had discovered that the stone of the Harz mountains in 
that area was rich in ammonia.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It grew and prospered 
following the same process. In 1903, German engineers and chemists had discovered that the stone of the Harz mountains in 
that area was rich in ammonia. Since no private company was willing to risk capital in its 
extraction, the Government undertook it. Germany did not possess, as did her neighbors,

--- PAGE BREAK ---that area was rich in ammonia. Since no private company was willing to risk capital in its 
extraction, the Government undertook it. Germany did not possess, as did her neighbors,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

colonies that were able to put at her disposal men from Cayenne or Nouméa. Because of this 
fact, together with the fact that she was obliged to keep her convicts inside the country, they 
were imprisoned in certain places where they were used for especially disagreeable labor. As a 
consequence, a convict prison, like all convict prisons in the world, except for a few minor 
differences, was created at Dora. In 1910, for reasons unknown, but most likely because the yield 
of ammonia was much smaller than was anticipated, quarrying the stone was stopped. It was 
resumed during the war of 1914-1918, as a sort of punitive camp for prisoners of war at a time 
when Germany was already beginning to think of going underground to escape some of the 
devastation of bombing. Again the operation was interrupted by the Armistice. Between the two 
wars, Dora was completely forgotten: wild tangled growth masked the entrance to the 
excavations and, all around, vast fields of sugar-beets were cultivated to supply the sugar 
refinery at Nordhausen, three and a half miles away. 
It was into these beet fields that on September 1, 1943, Buchenwald disgorged a first well 
escorted Kommando of two hundred men. Germany, again feeling the need to go underground or 
at least to put her war industries underground, had taken up the project of 1915 again. 
Construction of the S.S. camp and of the crematorium was begun, underground factory was set 
up, and the kitchens, showers, the Arbeitstatistik, the Revier, or infirmary, were built, last of all. 
So long as the underground work existed, the S.S. delayed as long as possible, putting off always 
a little longer, the unprofitable work of constructing Blocks for the prisoners, preferring instead 
to dig the gallery of the tunnel farther in, and to make it possible to get as many factories as 
possible under protect from the ever increasing threats from the open sky. 
When we arrived at Dora, the camp was still in the Straflager stage. We made an Arbeitslager 
out of it. When we left it with its 170 Blocks, its infirmary, its theater, its brothel, and with all its 
installations in place and its tunnel completed, it was on the point of becoming a 
Konzentrationslager. Already, at the other end of the double tunnel, there was another camp, 
Ellrich, its offspring, and which was itself in the Straflager stage. There could be no break in the 
descending curve of human misery. 
But, the English and Americans and the Russians had decided otherwise, and, on April 11, 1945, 
they came to free us. Since then the penitentiary system of East Germany has been in the hands 
of the Russians who haven’t changed things a fraction. Tomorrow, it will be in the hands of... 
who knows? Since there must be no gap in history.tentiary system of East Germany has been in the hands 
of the Russians who haven’t changed things a fraction. Tomorrow, it will be in the hands of... 
who knows? Since there must be no gap in history.

A concentration camp, when it is completely set up, is a regular city which is isolated from the 
outside world which conceived it, which is surrounded by fences of electrified barbed wire, and 
which is guarded with special guards every fifty yards on platforms, armed to the teeth. To make 
the screen between the two even more dense, an S.S. garrison bordered the camp and at a 
distance of three or four miles all around sentinels were encamped. Thus, anyone trying to 
escape would have a certain number of obstacles to overcome, or perhaps it would be better to 
say that any attempt would be doomed to failure. This isolated city had its own laws and its own 
particular social phenomena. Any ideas born there, individually or collectively, were stopped at 
the barbed wire and remained unsuspected by the rest of the world. By the same token, almost

--- PAGE BREAK ---everything that took place in the outer world, was unknown on the inside, any penetration being 
made almost impossible by that screen.

Newspapers came in; but, they were carefully selected 
and said nothing but those things that had been especially printed for the inmates in the 
concentration camp.

It did happen in wartime that the “news” for the concentration camp inmates 
was the same as that which the Germans were supposed to take as gospel, and that is why the 
newspapers were the same for both, but it was pure chance.

Use of the radio was punishable.

It 
follows that camp life, organized on the other moral and sociological principles, had quite a 
different orientation from that of normal life.

As a consequence, it revealed aspects that could not 
be judged by standards common to mankind in general.

But, it was a city, and a human city.

Inside – or on the outside, but near by – a factory was the reason for its existence and its means 
of existence: at Buchenwald, the Guzlow; at Dora, the Tunnel.

The factory was the keystone of 
the entire edifice, and its needs, which had to be satisfied, were the iron laws.

The camp was 
made for the factory, and not the factory to keep the camp busy.

The most important department of the camp was the Arbeitsstatistik, which kept a strict 
accounting of the entire population, and kept track of each man day after day in his work.

At the 
Arbeitsstatistik the personnel could tell you at any moment whatsoever of the day what each 
prisoner was doing and where he could be found.

This department, like all the others, too, was 
entrusted to prisoner trustees and kept busy a considerable and privileged number of them.

Then came the Politische-Abteilung, which kept track of the political aspects of the camp and 
which was able to give for any prisoner any information wanted about his previous life, his 
moral conduct, the reasons for his arrest...--- PAGE BREAK ---

This department, like all the others, too, was 
entrusted to prisoner trustees and kept busy a considerable and privileged number of them. Then came the Politische-Abteilung, which kept track of the political aspects of the camp and 
which was able to give for any prisoner any information wanted about his previous life, his 
moral conduct, the reasons for his arrest... It was the department of the anthropometry of the 
camp, its Sicherheitsdienst (security police), and employed only those prisoners in whom the 
S.S. had confidence. Once again the privileged. Then the Verwaltung, or the general administration, which kept track of everything that came 
into the camp: food, material, clothing, etc... It was the quartermaster of the camp. Those 
prisoners employed in office work always occupied a privileged position. These three big departments ran the camp. They had at their head a Kapo who ran them under 
the supervision of a non-commissioned officer of the S.S., or Rapportführer. There was a 
Rapportführer for all the key services, and each one of them reported every evening to the 
Rapportführer-general of the camp, who was an officer, generally an Oberleutnant. This 
Rapportführer-general communicated with the prison camp through the intermediary of his 
subordinates and the Lagerültester, or the doyen of the prisoners, who was responsible in general 
for the camp and who answered for its smooth running even with his life. Similarly, the departments of the second level: the Sanitatsdienst, or health service, which 
included doctors, male nurses, disinfection, infirmary and crematorium services; the 
Lagerschutzpolizei, or camp police; the Feuerwerk, or fire protection; the Bunker, or jail for 
those prisoners caught breaking the rules of the camp; the Kino-Theater, or movie, and the 
brothel, or Pouf.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mp police; the Feuerwerk, or fire protection; the Bunker, or jail for 
those prisoners caught breaking the rules of the camp; the Kino-Theater, or movie, and the 
brothel, or Pouf.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were also the Küche, or kitchen; the Effecktenkammer, or clothing store, which was 
attached to the Verwaltung; the Häftlingskantine, or canteen, which supplied the prisoners with 
extra food and drinks in exchange for the coin of the realm; the Bank, where the special money 
good only in the camp was issued. 
And, now to describe the mass of workers... They were divided up into Blocks constructed on the 
same plan as that of Buchenwald 48, but of wood, and with only one floor. They lived there only 
at night. They returned there at night after roll-call at about nine o’clock, and they left every 
morning before dawn, at half past four. They were supervised by the Block Chiefs who were 
surrounded by their Schreiber, Friseur, Stubendienst, who were veritable satraps. The Block 
Chief governed life in the Block through the supervision of an S.S. soldier, or Blockührer, who 
reported to the Rapportführer-general. The Blockführer were only rarely seen; generally they 
confined themselves to one friendly visit with the Block Chief during the day, that is, when the 
prisoners were away, so that it was the latter who was in effect the only authority, and practically 
all of his exactions were without appeal.with the Block Chief during the day, that is, when the 
prisoners were away, so that it was the latter who was in effect the only authority, and practically 
all of his exactions were without appeal.

The population of the camp, its social composition, and its origins were also elements that were 
de-humanizing. I have already remarked that National-Socialism drew no distinctions between 
political crime and common crime, and that consequently, there was in Germany no distinction 
between the civil and the political regime. As in the prisons of most civilized nations, there was 
something of everything in the camps – of everything and something else besides. All of the 
prisoners, whatever social or criminal element they came from, lived together, under the same 
regulations. The only thing that distinguished them was the colored triangle on their prison 
clothing which was the insignia of their classification – i.e. their reason for being there. 
Red was reserved for political crimes. For common crimes, there was a green triangle; it was 
plain for Verbrecher, or petty crimes; it was embellished with an “S” for Schwerverbrecher, or 
serious crimes, and a “K” for Kreigsverbrecher, or war crimes. Thus, a gradation was made from 
common crimes, such as a simple theft, to murder and to the theft of supplies or armaments. 
Between these two extremes, there was a whole series of intermediary crimes; the black triangle 
(professionally unemployed); the pink triangle (pederasts and homosexuals); the yellow triangle 
reversed over a red one so as to form a star (Jews); purple triangle (conscientious objectors). In 
addition, those who had done a certain term in prison, and then, following their release, were 
incarcerated again for committing new crimes wore instead of the triangle a black circle on white 
background with a large “Z” in the center, which stood for those freed from the Zuchthaus or 
prison. And, finally, those who wore a red triangle with the point up had committed minor 
crimes in the army and had been sentenced by a court-martial. 
To these were added a few special ones: the red triangle with a transverse bar for those sent to 
the Konsett for the second or third time; three black dots on a yellow and white brassard for the 
blind; the Wifo, the same circle as for the Zuchthaus people with the “Z” replaced by a “W.” 
These latter had originally been volunteer workers. They had been employed by the Wifo firm 
which had been the first to try to achieve the Cergeltungfeurer, the famous V1 and V2 rockets.d by a “W.” 
These latter had originally been volunteer workers. They had been employed by the Wifo firm 
which had been the first to try to achieve the Cergeltungfeurer, the famous V1 and V2 rockets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---atter had originally been volunteer workers. They had been employed by the Wifo firm 
which had been the first to try to achieve the Cergeltungfeurer, the famous V1 and V2 rockets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One fine day, and for no apparent reason, they got the striped clothes and were put into 
concentration camps. The secret of the V1 and V2 having gone through the trial period and into 
the intensive production stage was not to be freely circulated, even among the German people. In 
other words, they were interned for reasons of State security. The Wifo were the most 
unfortunate people in the camp: they continued to be paid their salary, half of which was paid 
them in the camp itself, the reset being sent to their families. They had the right to keep their hair 
and to write whenever they wanted to, on condition that they said nothing about what had 
happened to them; and since they were the best off, they introduced the black market into the 
camp and raised the exchange. 
As far as the population was concerned, the concentration camps were regular towers of Babel in 
which personalities clashed because of differences of origin, of their sentences, and previous 
social standing. The common law offenders hated the political criminals whom they didn’t 
understand, and the latter returned the feeling. The intellectuals looked down on the manual 
laborers, and the latter rejoiced to see the former “working at last.” The Russians wrapped the 
whole of the West in the same icy contempt. The Poles and the Czechs couldn’t stand the 
French, because of Munich etc... On the nationality level, there were enmities between the Slavs 
and Germanic people, between the Germans and the Italians, between the Dutch and the 
Belgians, or between the Dutch and the Germans. The French, who came last and began to 
receive the most magnificent parcels of food, were looked down on by everybody except the 
Belgians, who were pleasant, frank, and good. France was regarded as a land of milk and honey, 
and her inhabitants as sybaritic degenerates, who were incapable of work, who ate well, and who 
were occupied only with making love. To these sentiments the Spaniards added the concentration 
camps of Daladier. I remember having been accosted in Block 24 at Dora by a vigorous: “Ah! 
The French; now you know what a Lager means. No harm, it’ll teach you!” 
It was one of the three Spaniards (there were 26 in all at Dora) who had been interned at Gurs in 
1938, enrolled in labor companies in 1939, and sent to Buchenwald after Rethel. The three 
maintained that the only difference between the French and the German camps was the work; all 
other things, treatment, food, being just about the same. In fact they added that the French camps 
were dirtier. 
Oh, Jircszah!y difference between the French and the German camps was the work; all 
other things, treatment, food, being just about the same. In fact they added that the French camps 
were dirtier. 
Oh, Jircszah!

The S.S. guards lived in a parallel camp. In general, they were a company. At first, this company 
was a training unit for young recruits, and only Germans were in it. Later on, the S.S. became 
more international in composition: Italians, Poles, Czechs, Bulgarians, Rumanians, Greeks, 
among others filled the ranks. The necessities of war had compelled the Germans to send the 
Young recruits to the front, often with limited military instruction, or even without any special 
preparation, and the young were replaced by the old, those who had already served in the war of 
1914-1918, on whom National Socialism had made scarcely any imprint. They were less hard. In 
the last two years of the war, when there were not enough S.S., the rejects from the Wehrmacht 
and the Luftwaffe, who couldn’t be used for anything else, were assigned as guards to the camps.

--- PAGE BREAK ---years of the war, when there were not enough S.S., the rejects from the Wehrmacht 
and the Luftwaffe, who couldn’t be used for anything else, were assigned as guards to the camps.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

All the services of the camp had their parallel in the S.S. camp where everything was centralized, 
and from which daily or weekly reports were sent directly to Himmler’s offices in Berlin. The 
S.S. camp was, therefore, the administrator of the other. When the camps were just beginning 
during the Straflager period, they were administered directly; afterwards, and as soon as possible, 
the S.S. carried on the camp administration only through the prisoners themselves as 
intermediaries. One would think that this arrangement was used out of sadism, and, after the 
ware was over, that is what was said. But, it was really out of necessity to economize personnel 
that the system was used, and for that reason, in all prisons in all countries, the same situation 
holds. The S.S. itself only administrated the camp when it was impossible for them to do 
otherwise. We know what self-government by the prisoners in the camps was. All of the old 
hands who have experienced both systems are unanimous in recognizing that the former was in 
principle the better and more humane, and that if it was not in fact, it was because wartime 
circumstances and the pressure of events did not permit it. I believe it; it is better to deal with 
God than with the saints. 
So the S.S. guarded the perimeter of the camp, and it can be said that we hardly ever saw them 
inside the camp, except when they simply went through to take the salute of the prisoners, the 
famous “Müntzen ab.” They were helped in their guard duty by a company of marvelously 
trained dogs, always ready to bite and capable of hunting out an escaped prisoner tens of miles 
away. Every morning, the Kommandos that were to work outside the camp, often they traveled 
three or four miles on foot – when they had to go farther, they used trucks or trains – were 
accompanied, according to their importance, by two or four S.S., guns in hand, each with a 
muzzled dog on a leash. This special guard, which complemented the surveillance of the Kapos, 
just kept watch from afar, and did not intervene in supervision of the prisoners unless a show of 
force was called for. 
In the evening, at the roll-call by Block, when everyone was there, at a whistle, all the 
Blockführer turned toward the Block for which they were responsible, counted those present and 
then went back to report. During this operation non-coms went around the Blocks to enforce 
silence and attention. The Kapos, Block Chiefs, and Lagerschutz greatly helped them in making 
this task easy. From time to time an S.S. man stood out from the others for his brutality, but it 
was rare; and in no case was he ever more inhuman than the prisoner trustees who filled the 
positions that are mentioned in the preceding sentence.tood out from the others for his brutality, but it 
was rare; and in no case was he ever more inhuman than the prisoner trustees who filled the 
positions that are mentioned in the preceding sentence.

Once again, my personal testimony: I refer to a group of Hungarian Jews whose convoy, 
originally bound for Auschwitz, had arrived at Dora at the end of May 1944. Of the 1,500 or so 
people of this convoy, a certain number were sent to satellite camps around Dora as soon as they 
arrived. How many remained with us I do not know; maybe they filled an entire block. Because 
of the racist policies of Nazism, they were to be completely isolated from the other prisoners. 
That block was surrounded by barbed wire. And from that protected block they went to work like 
everyone else, but as a separate Kommando. For them, assembly took place within the block, 
before their leaving for work and on their return. We envied them. Fifteen days after their arrival, 
if your clogs had been stolen in the night, if you wanted more bread, or if you required some 
tobacco or something else, you only had to make a quick dash to the Jewish block in the morning

--- PAGE BREAK ---ogs had been stolen in the night, if you wanted more bread, or if you required some 
tobacco or something else, you only had to make a quick dash to the Jewish block in the morning

--- PAGE BREAK ---

between reveille and roll-call, or in the evening before lights out, and, in exchange for something 
else, you could get just about anything you wanted: it was a regular market. We admired them; at 
the gate of the camp they had been made to undress completely, and had been sent to be 
disinfected; they went in completely naked, their contact with the other prisoners was limited, 
and, all the same, they had succeeded in procuring a little of everything that could be obtained in 
the camp only with the greatest difficulties and at a very high price. 
After a little while, the special surveillance over them became hardly more than a facade: once in 
a while we could exchange a few words with them, and even have short conversations. Thus it 
was that we learned about their odyssey. They told us about what they had had to leave behind 
when they came into the camp, and, since we were old hands in their eyes, they asked if they 
would get it back, when, how, and so on... They had been transported from Hungary to Dora, 70 
to 80 persons in a car, with all of their baggage. They had made a long periplus of six to seven 
days before arriving. They had been told when leaving that they were being taken to Auschwitz, 
and when they learned that it was at Dora that they would be unloaded, they were pleased. They 
told the most appalling things about Auschwitz. There were neither women nor children among 
them. The latter had been separated out on departure, and at the moment it did not surprise us 
since that is what happened to us. 
From Paul Rassinier: The Holocaust Story and the Lies of Ulysses, Institute for Historical Review, 1978, pp. 
43-47, pp. 47-49, pp. 51-53, pp. 53-54, p. 365

--- PAGE BREAK ---s what happened to us. 
From Paul Rassinier: The Holocaust Story and the Lies of Ulysses, Institute for Historical Review, 1978, pp. 
43-47, pp. 47-49, pp. 51-53, pp. 53-54, p. 365

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paul Rassinier
Operation „Stellvertreter“
Huldigung eines Ungläubigen
Damm Verlag München

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Französische Originalausgabe: Opération „Vicaire“
Le rôle de Pie XII devant l’Histoire
La Table Ronde, Paris, 1965
Autorisierte Übersetzung von Jutta Groll
© 1966 by Damm Verlag GmbH, München
Printed in Germany
Umschlagentwurf: Karl Heinz Schneider, Mariabrunn
Druck: Buchdruckerei Hans Braun, Hausham/Oberbayern
Bindearbeiten: Dr. F. P. Datterer u. Cie., Inh. Sellier, Freising/Oberbayern

--- PAGE BREAK ---

„Ich nenne Pöbel alles das,
was niedrig und gemein denkt:
Der Hof ist voll davon.“
MARQUISE DE LAMBERT
(Brief einer Dame an ihren Sohn
über den wahren Ruhm, 1726.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---PAGE BREAK ---

„Ich nenne Pöbel alles das,
was niedrig und gemein denkt:
Der Hof ist voll davon.“
MARQUISE DE LAMBERT
(Brief einer Dame an ihren Sohn
über den wahren Ruhm, 1726.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inhalt
Vorbemerkung des Verlags
9
Vorwort des Verfassers zur deutschen Ausgabe
11
Kapitel I: Falsche Fragestellungen
19
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
Die Anklageschrift
21
Das Recht auf dichterische Freiheit
40
Portrait des SS-Offiziers Kurt Gerstein
43
Die Kronzeugen
51
Saul Friedländer und die deutschen Archive
63
Die Verteidigung
80
Kapitel II: Das eigentliche Problem
95
I.
II.
III.
IV.
Die Päpste und der Frieden
97
Die Bemühungen Pius’ XII. um eine Verhinderung des Krieges
112
Die Bemühungen Pius’ XI. um die Beendigung des Krieges
136
Die diplomatischen Bemühungen des Vatikans
146
Kapitel III: Die politischen Hintergründe des Unternehmens
165
I.
II.
III.
IV.
Der Versailler Vertrag als Ursache
167
Die Motive der Protestanten
173
Die Einheitsfront gegen den Papst
194
Für den Frieden
199
Nachwort
205
Anhang I:
Allgemeine Auffassung über Pius XII. bis zu
Rolf Hochhuth
211
I.
II.
Le Populaire (3. 3. 1939)
211
L’Humanité (3. 3. 1939)
215
Anhang II:
Selbstzeugnis Pius’ XII.
219
Anhang III:
Die Hauptargumente der Verteidiger Pius’ XII.
226
Anhang IV:
Kardinal Merry del Val und der Erste Weltkrieg
232
Anhang V:
Das Problem der deutschen Reparationsschulden
236
Personenverzeichnis
239
Literaturverzeichnis
242
Bemerkungen zur elektronischen Fassung (Mai 2001)
245

--- PAGE BREAK ---ste Weltkrieg
232
Anhang V:
Das Problem der deutschen Reparationsschulden
236
Personenverzeichnis
239
Literaturverzeichnis
242
Bemerkungen zur elektronischen Fassung (Mai 2001)
245

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
Vorbemerkung des Verlags
Bei der Wiedergabe von Zitaten aus fremdsprachlichen Origi-
nalen standen Übersetzer und Verlag vor der schwierigen Ent-
scheidung, ob eine Neuübersetzung vorgenommen werden oder
bereits vorliegende deutsche Übersetzungen verwendet werden
sollten. Wir haben uns zu dem zweiten Verfahren entschlossen,
obwohl dadurch Verzerrungen unsichtbar bleiben, wie sie leider
im zeitgeschichtlichen Bereich anscheinend absichtlich vorgenom-
men werden. Die Aufdeckung derartiger Manipulationen wäre
eine Doktorarbeit wert.
Der Verfasser hat selbstverständlich bei Dokumenten mit den
offiziellen französischen Versionen gearbeitet, die häufig stark von
den deutschen abweichen. Von der Möglichkeit, in den Anmerkun-
gen diese Differenzen aufzuzeigen, glaubten wir absehen zu dür-
fen. Bestimmend war hierfür der Wunsch, ein populär wissenschaft-
liches Werk nicht mit einem zu umfangreichen fachwissenschaft-
lichen Apparat zu belasten.
Zitate aus Texten deutschen Ursprungs sind in der Regel im
Originalwortlaut wiedergegeben. In den wenigen Fällen, in denen
die Originaltexte nicht beschafft werden konnten und die Zitate
aus dem Französischen rückübersetzt werden mußten, ist dies aus-
drücklich vermerkt.
Um einem möglichen Mißverständnis vorzubeugen, sei darauf
hingewiesen, daß man in Frankreich als „protestantisch“ alles be-
zeichnet, was gegen die katholische Kirche oder gegen den Papst
protestiert. Der deutsche Leser wird ohne Schwierigkeit unter-
scheiden, ob jeweils ein Glied der evangelischen Kirche gemeint
ist oder nicht, wenn er sich nur dieser Gegebenheit erinnert.
Wer Paul Rassinier aus seinen früheren in Deutschland erschie-
nenen Werken als Atheisten und unbeugsamen Freidenker kennt,
mag sich verwundert fragen, was gerade ihn bewogen hat, sich mit
dem „Stellvertreter“ zu beschäftigen. Ihm sei die Antwort gege-
ben, die der französische Verleger gefunden hat: „Weil er die Lüge
verabscheut und weil er Pazifist ist.“rade ihn bewogen hat, sich mit
dem „Stellvertreter“ zu beschäftigen. Ihm sei die Antwort gege-
ben, die der französische Verleger gefunden hat: „Weil er die Lüge
verabscheut und weil er Pazifist ist.“

--- PAGE BREAK ---, sich mit
dem „Stellvertreter“ zu beschäftigen. Ihm sei die Antwort gege-
ben, die der französische Verleger gefunden hat: „Weil er die Lüge
verabscheut und weil er Pazifist ist.“

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
Vorwort des Verfassers zur deutschen Ausgabe
Als das Manuskript dieses Werkes am 20. Februar 1965 dem
französischen Verleger übergeben wurde, war ein ganzer Komplex
von Dokumenten, die gegenwärtig herausgegeben werden, der
Öffentlichkeit noch völlig unbekannt. Die wichtigsten darunter
sind die Actes et documents du Saint-Siège relatifs à la seconde
guerre mondiale.
Der Verfasser hat es Rolf Hochhuth heftig zum Vorwurf ge-
macht, daß er sein Theaterstück in einer Weise schrieb, die keinen
Widerspruch duldete, ohne diese Dokumente überhaupt zu ken-
nen, und daß er dabei noch die Stirn hatte, dies sogar zuzugeben.
Das gleiche gilt für Saul Friedländer, den einzigen qualifizierten
Historiker — zumindest seinem Titel nach1 —, der sich anmaßte,
eine endgültige Meinung über das Verhalten Pius’ XII. angesichts
und während des Zweiten Weltkrieges äußern zu können, für Jac-
ques Nobécourt, der sich unter dem trügerischen Vorwand, an
einer kleinen französischen Universität ein wenig Geschichte stu-
diert zu haben, gern den Anstrich eines Historikers gibt, obwohl
er sein Geschichtsstudium mittendrin aufgab, um sich der Politik
zuzuwenden, sowie für alle anderen Gegner Pius’ XII. Es ist ganz
offensichtlich, daß eine solche Verfahrensweise, ohne Rücksicht auf
die goldene Regel des Historikers, die Objektivität, zwangsläufig
zu einer einseitigen Darstellung der Dinge führte.
Als erstes könnte nun dem Leser der Gedanke kommen, daß der
Verfasser selbst in den Fehler verfallen ist, den er den anderen
vorwirft, da ja diese Dokumente zu der Zeit, als er sein Buch
schrieb, noch unveröffentlicht waren, und daß er ebenfalls eine
einseitige Darstellung der Dinge, nur aus der entgegengesetzten
Sicht, gegeben hat. Dies trifft jedoch nicht zu.
Zunächst einmal hat der Verfasser, der auf Grund seines Ge-
sundheitszustandes im Anschluß an einen neunzehnmonatigen
1 Doktor der politischen Wissenschaften der Universität Genf, Lehrbeauftragter
für Zeitgeschichte am Institut universitaire des Hautes Études internationales
in Genf. Sein Buch zeigt, auf welch mittelmäßiges Niveau die engagierten
Intellektuellen unserer Zeit gesunken sind.gter
für Zeitgeschichte am Institut universitaire des Hautes Études internationales
in Genf. Sein Buch zeigt, auf welch mittelmäßiges Niveau die engagierten
Intellektuellen unserer Zeit gesunken sind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hte am Institut universitaire des Hautes Études internationales
in Genf. Sein Buch zeigt, auf welch mittelmäßiges Niveau die engagierten
Intellektuellen unserer Zeit gesunken sind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
Aufenthalt in den deutschen Konzentrationslagern nicht in der
Lage war, seinen Lehrstuhl wieder einzunehmen, seine ganze Zeit
damit verbracht, die Dokumente der 13 Nürnberger Prozesse
(allein 67 Bände), und des 14., der in Jerusalem stattfand, einge-
hend zu untersuchen sowie alle diejenigen, die amtlich von der
britischen und der amerikanischen Regierung veröffentlicht wor-
den sind. Und diese Dokumentation genügte für sich allein schon,
um sich über das Verhalten Pius’ XII. eine Meinung zu bilden.
Zur größeren Sicherheit jedoch, um nicht leichtfertig in diese
Auseinandersetzung einzutreten und um sich — im Gegensatz zu
all denen, die gegen Pius XII. geschrieben haben — bei dieser Ma-
terie den Geboten der Geschichtsforschung zu unterwerfen, wollte
er auch die einzigen noch unbekannten Quellen heranziehen: Er
begab sich im Juni 1964 nach Rom, wo er etwa einen Monat mit
ihrem Studium zubrachte. Dabei konnte er dank der äußersten
Zuvorkommenheit und durch die Vermittlung von Pater Robert
Leiber SJ, der 34 Jahre lang Privatsekretär Pius’ XII. war, seine
eigene, den obenerwähnten Quellen entnommene Dokumentation
mit der des Vatikans vergleichen. Damit soll gesagt werden, daß
dem Verfasser zu dem Zeitpunkt, als er sein Buch schrieb, von der
Dokumentation des Vatikans nichts unbekannt war. Der Leser,
der über die Mittel verfügt, sich diese Dokumentation anzuschaf-
fen2, wird sich bei der Lektüre der bereits erschienenen ersten bei-
den Bände leicht davon überzeugen: Sämtliche darin enthaltenen
Schriftstücke, die in irgendeinem Zusammenhang mit der hier ver-
fochtenen These stehen, sind in dem vorliegenden Werk inhaltlich
und in ihrer genauen Bedeutung angeführt.
Zu Inhalt und Bedeutung soll daher in diesem Vorwort nur
noch ein Wort gesagt werden, und auch nur, weil es in einer Arbeit,
die den Anspruch erhebt, keinen der Aspekte des gestellten Pro-
blems außer acht gelassen zu haben, nicht möglich ist, darüber still-
schweigend hinwegzugehen. Der erste Band, der sich auf den Zeit-
raum vom März 1939 bis August 1940 erstreckt, bringt auf 552
Seiten 379 Dokumente. Er beweist in überreichem Maße, daß
Pius XII. in dieser Zeit das einzige Staatsoberhaupt, wenn auch
2 Jeder Band kostet zwischen 40 und 50 DM, und es sind zehn solcher Bände
geplant.en 379 Dokumente. Er beweist in überreichem Maße, daß
Pius XII. in dieser Zeit das einzige Staatsoberhaupt, wenn auch
2 Jeder Band kostet zwischen 40 und 50 DM, und es sind zehn solcher Bände
geplant.

--- PAGE BREAK ---beweist in überreichem Maße, daß
Pius XII. in dieser Zeit das einzige Staatsoberhaupt, wenn auch
2 Jeder Band kostet zwischen 40 und 50 DM, und es sind zehn solcher Bände
geplant.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
eines der kleinsten Staaten der Welt, war, das die Überzeugung
hatte, es sei noch möglich, den Krieg durch eine internationale
Konferenz zu vermeiden. Durch eine Konferenz nämlich, die sich
zum Ziel gesetzt hätte, den Versailler Vertrag einer korrekten Re-
vision zu unterziehen und ein Werk daraus zu machen, das allen
Völkern, einschließlich des deutschen, Gerechtigkeit widerfahren
ließe, und damit — auch wenn Hitler in Deutschland herrschte —
Europa Garantien für einen dauerhaften Frieden zu geben. Man
lächelt mitleidig bei dem Gedanken, daß Churchill zehn Jahre nach
dem Krieg in seinen Mémoires3 schrieb: „Kein Krieg war jemals
leichter zu vermeiden als dieser.“ Pius XII. hatte das vorher ge-
sehen, nicht hinterher. Man muß ihm daher wohl die Huldigung
darbringen, daß er die größte und vornehmste Gestalt des Pazifis-
mus in unserer Zeit war.
Der zweite Band enthält 124 Schreiben aus der Kriegszeit an die
katholischen Bischöfe Deutschlands: Alle 124 sind Ermutigungen
zum Widerstand gegen die Unternehmungen des Nationalsozialis-
mus. Man kann dies bedauern oder begrüßen. Aber das ist nicht die
Frage, die sich dem Historiker stellt: Der Historiker muß lediglich
aufzeichnen, daß diese Briefe existieren und daß sie diesen Inhalt
haben. Das übrige ist nicht Sache der Geschichte, sondern der Ge-
schichtsphilosophie. Jeder Historiker aber hat seine eigene Auf-
fassung von der Geschichte und untersteht nur einem einzigen
Gebot, das gemeinhin so definiert wird: „Die Tatsachen sind heilig,
der Kommentar ist frei.“ Es stimmt, daß diese Briefe von Ratschlä-
gen zur Vorsicht durchzogen sind — die Umstände geboten es.
Doch sind sie deswegen nicht weniger bedeutsam: Pius XII. war
bis ins Innerste ein Gegner des Nationalsozialismus. Daneben zei-
gen sie ihn voller Angst und Spannung, unaufhörlich auf Ausschau
nach der Gelegenheit, das Ende der Heimsuchung, dieses unerträg-
lichen „gegenseitigen Mordens4“, sowie „die Rückkehr zu den
Grundsätzen der Gerechtigkeit und des wahrhaften Friedens5“
herbeizuführen. Sie zeigen ihn, wie er gegen all die Grausamkeiten
3 Bd. I, S. 68 der französischen Ausgabe.
4 Schreiben an den Berliner Bischof Graf von Preysing vom 30. April 1943.
(Siehe Anhang)
5 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1939. (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)ausamkeiten
3 Bd. I, S. 68 der französischen Ausgabe.
4 Schreiben an den Berliner Bischof Graf von Preysing vom 30. April 1943.
(Siehe Anhang)
5 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1939. (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---S. 68 der französischen Ausgabe.
4 Schreiben an den Berliner Bischof Graf von Preysing vom 30. April 1943.
(Siehe Anhang)
5 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1939. (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
dieses unmenschlichen Krieges protestiert, „in gleicher Sorge (ge-
genüber) allen Kriegsopfern, allen materiell oder seelisch unter der
Kriegsnot Leidenden . . . in Deutschland . . . wie in der übrigen
Welt . . . auf der einen oder anderen Seite . . . gleichviel, ob die
Betroffenen Kinder der Kirche oder Außenstehende sind6“, gegen-
über jenen „Hunderttausenden, die . . . nur um ihrer . . . Abstam-
mung (oder Religion) willen dem Tode geweiht oder einer fort-
schreitenden Verelendung preisgegeben sind7“ usw.
Alle diese Texte sind in diesem Werk angeführt, obgleich sie zu
dem Zeitpunkt, an dem das Buch geschrieben wurde, noch in kei-
ner Weise offiziell verbürgt waren. Wir sagen das hier noch ein-
mal, um sie hervorzuheben und deutlich zu zeigen, daß entgegen
der Behauptung Hochhuths in seinem Drama die Juden nicht „um
ihrer . . . Abstammung willen“, wie es oben hieß, von der Für-
sorge Pius’ XII. ausgeschlossen waren. Wir haben festgestellt, daß
Pius XII. in seinen öffentlichen Erklärungen und in seinen Schrei-
ben 115mal diese oder ähnliche Formulierungen verwendet hat.
Es soll hier auch noch einmal jene andere Formel hervorgehoben
werden: „ . . . allen materiell oder seelisch unter der Kriegsnot
Leidenden . . . in Deutschland . . . wie in der übrigen Welt . . . auf
der einen oder anderen Seite . . . “ Sie schließt ganz offensichtlich
die Bombenangriffe der Engländer und Amerikaner gegen die
deutsche Zivilbevölkerung ein, die ebenso ein Kriegsverbrechen
waren wie die Greueltaten in den Konzentrationslagern. Man hat
ihm einen Vorwurf daraus gemacht8. Doch mit welchem Recht,
mit Verlaub, waren die Kriegsverbrechen, die von seiten der Alli-
ierten begangen wurden, geheiligter als die von den Deutschen
begangenen?
Kurz, diese beide Bände mit diplomatischen Dokumenten des
Vatikans zum Zweiten Weltkrieg beweisen für sich allein schon,
daß der Pius XII. Hochhuths, der durch die Herren Friedländer,
Nobécourt und wie sie alle heißen, verbürgt wird, mit der wahren
historischen Gestalt nichts gemein hat, und wenn Hochhuth ihn
uns trotzdem als einen pronazistischen oder gegenüber dem Schick-
6 Schreiben an Bischof von Preysing, a. a. O.
7 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1942. (S. Text, Anm. 19 — Anm. d. Übers.)
8 Vgl. unten S. 34h ihn
uns trotzdem als einen pronazistischen oder gegenüber dem Schick-
6 Schreiben an Bischof von Preysing, a. a. O.
7 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1942. (S. Text, Anm. 19 — Anm. d. Übers.)
8 Vgl. unten S. 34

--- PAGE BREAK ---ls einen pronazistischen oder gegenüber dem Schick-
6 Schreiben an Bischof von Preysing, a. a. O.
7 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1942. (S. Text, Anm. 19 — Anm. d. Übers.)
8 Vgl. unten S. 34

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
sal der Juden gleichgültigen Papst zeigt, so ist das nichts anderes
als eine Infamie. Dies ist die These, die in dem vorliegenden Werk
verfochten wird, und sie erhält durch die neu veröffentlichten
Dokumente ihre offizielle Bestätigung.
Auch möchte der Verfasser sein Werk den deutschen Lesern
nicht präsentieren, ohne noch ein Wort zu einem Buch zu sagen,
das er nur am Rande erwähnt hat: The Catholic Church and Nazi
Germany von Guenter Lewy9.
Am 20. Februar 1965, dem Tag, an dem unser Manuskript dem
französischen Verleger übergeben wurde, war lediglich die ameri-
kanische Fassung des Buches von Lewy veröffentlicht.
In einem populärwissenschaftlichen Geschichtswerk, das sich an
die breite Öffentlichkeit wendet, ist es nicht tunlich, sich auf Texte
zu beziehen, die der Leser nicht nachprüfen kann. Auf jeden Fall
ist dies nicht die Methode des Verfassers. Obgleich er den Inhalt
des Buches kannte, hat er sich daher darauf beschränkt, in einer
Fußnote zu sagen, daß Friedländer seine Anregungen weitgehend
daraus bezog.
Inzwischen ist die Abhandlung von Lewy in Europa veröffent-
licht worden. Jedermann kann auf sie verweisen, und die kurze
Notiz, die in dem vorliegenden Werk dazu gemacht ist, genügt
nicht mehr. Es muß ein Wort zu der Abhandlung selbst gesagt
werden.
Worin besteht sie?
Im wesentlichen in einer Erklärung, wie der Nationalsozialismus
in Deutschland mit der von Pius XII. verbürgten Hilfe der katho-
lischen Kirche Deutschlands an die Macht gelangte. Ein nicht zu
überbietender Schwindel!
Zunächst einmal ist zu sagen, daß das religiöse Moment bei der
Machtergreifung Hitlers in Deutschland nur eine sekundäre Rolle
spielte: Wenn die Deutschen, ob Protestanten oder Katholiken,
unabhängig von ihrer religiösen Überzeugung in Massen ihre Stim-
men für Hitler abgaben, so nicht, weil sie Protestanten oder Katho-
liken waren, sondern weil sie 1932/33 glaubten, Hitler sei der ein-
zige Politiker, der sie aus den Fesseln des Versailler Vertrages be-
9 Deutsche Ausgabe: Die katholische Kirche und das Dritte Reich, (Anm. d.
Übers.)rn weil sie 1932/33 glaubten, Hitler sei der ein-
zige Politiker, der sie aus den Fesseln des Versailler Vertrages be-
9 Deutsche Ausgabe: Die katholische Kirche und das Dritte Reich, (Anm. d.
Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---glaubten, Hitler sei der ein-
zige Politiker, der sie aus den Fesseln des Versailler Vertrages be-
9 Deutsche Ausgabe: Die katholische Kirche und das Dritte Reich, (Anm. d.
Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
freien könne, jenes Vertrages, den sie, im übrigen mit vollem
Recht, für ihr gesamtes Unglück, insbesondere die miserablen wirt-
schaftlichen Verhältnisse, in denen sie lebten, verantwortlich mach-
ten. Wenn das religiöse Moment in dieser Angelegenheit eine Rolle
gespielt hat, so nur auf Grund der Stellungnahme der Geistlichkeit
einer jeden der beiden wichtigsten Kirchen Deutschlands gegen-
über dem Versailler Vertrag einerseits und gegenüber Hitler ande-
rerseits.
Gegenüber dem Versailler Vertrag: In dem Deutschland des
Jahres 1932/33 waren die Geistlichkeit sämtlicher Kirchen, die Füh-
rer aller politischen und philosophischen Richtungen, aller Parteien
sowie die öffentliche Meinung einmütig gegen den Vertrag und
forderten seine Revision (in Übereinstimmung übrigens mit Arti-
kel 19 der Völkerbundsakte, der diese Revision vorsah).
Gegenüber Hitler: Die protestantische Geistlichkeit war in ihrer
Mehrheit für, der katholische Klerus gegen ihn. Während bis zum
23. März 1933 der zur Konferenz in Fulda zusammengetretene
katholische Episkopat Deutschlands am Vorabend jeder Wahl ein-
mütig die Mitglieder der NSDAP exkommunizierte und der Wäh-
lerschaft empfahl, nicht für ihre Kandidaten zu stimmen, umfaßte
die protestantische Geistlichkeit, wie uns William L. Shirer sagt,
17 000 Pastoren, von denen 3000 aktive Kämpfer der NSDAP
waren (der bekannteste von ihnen war Pastor Martin Niemöller,
der heutige Kryptokommunist) und der Rest bis auf sehr wenige
Ausnahmen aus Überzeugung auf Hitlers Seite stand.
Es wäre gar nicht einmal nötig, diese Tatsache, die durch unwi-
derlegbare Texte fest untermauert wird, anzuführen, um mit
einem einzigen Schlag die These Guenter Lewys über die Verant-
wortlichkeit der katholischen Kirche Deutschlands und Pius’ XII.
an der Machtergreifung Hitlers zunichte zu machen: Der einfache
gesunde Menschenverstand sagt, daß, wenn sich in dem Deutsch-
land von 1932/33, dessen Bevölkerung zu ungefähr zwei Dritteln
protestantisch und nur zu etwa einem Drittel katholisch war
(5—6% gehörten keiner der beiden Kirchen an), die Deutschen auf
Grund ihrer religiösen Überzeugung für Hitler ausgesprochen
hätten, die protestantische Kirche die größere Verantwortung trü-
ge, da sie in Deutschland zahlenmäßig überwog.chen an), die Deutschen auf
Grund ihrer religiösen Überzeugung für Hitler ausgesprochen
hätten, die protestantische Kirche die größere Verantwortung trü-
ge, da sie in Deutschland zahlenmäßig überwog.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hen auf
Grund ihrer religiösen Überzeugung für Hitler ausgesprochen
hätten, die protestantische Kirche die größere Verantwortung trü-
ge, da sie in Deutschland zahlenmäßig überwog.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
Lewy fühlt im übrigen selbst sehr wohl, daß seine These unhalt-
bar ist, denn er empfindet das Bedürfnis, dem Leser jenen trügeri-
schen Grund anzugeben, weshalb er über das Verhalten und Schick-
sal (er sagt nicht Rolle) der protestantischen Kirche schwieg:
„Ich habe der Versuchung widerstanden, das Verhalten und das
Schicksal der katholischen und der protestantischen Kirche unter
Hitler miteinander zu vergleichen. Eine solche komplexe Frage
müßte in einem gesonderten Buch behandelt werden; kurze An-
deutungen zu diesem Problemkreis wären eher irreführend als
informativ10.“
Vermutlich hat er dieser „Versuchung“ sehr freudig „widerstan-
den“. Diese Methode ermöglichte es ihm, die Verantwortlichkeiten
zu verlagern, imaginäre Verantwortlichkeiten für die katholische
Kirche Deutschlands zu schaffen und über die sehr realen der pro-
testantischen Kirche zu schweigen. Auf diese Weise hat er nicht nur
den Leser lediglich über seine eigenen gedanklichen Konstruktio-
nen informiert, sondern vielmehr ihn irregeführt!
Der deutsche Leser wird es vielleicht sonderbar finden, daß der
Verfasser ein 1963 in Deutschland bei der Basilius Presse in der
Reihe Theater unserer Zeit erschienenes Buch: Der Streit um Hoch-
huths „Stellvertreter“ völlig mit Stillschweigen übergangen hat.
In diesem Werk sind von verschiedenen Verfassern, von denen nur
ein einziger Zeuge der Ereignisse ist, nämlich Pater Robert Leiber
SJ, verschiedene Standpunkte zum Ausdruck gebracht. Bei den
übrigen Verfassern handelt es sich um Schriftsteller, nicht um Hi-
storiker. Keiner von ihnen leistet zur Diskussion einen Beitrag, der
als positiv oder neu angesehen werden könnte. Alle diejenigen, die
sich nicht entschieden gegen Pius XII. aussprechen, sind sehr zu-
rückhaltend und gehen am eigentlichen Problem vorbei. Selbst der
Beitrag Pater Leibers steht weit unter dem, was er bei anderen Ge-
legenheiten geäußert hat. Deshalb sei die Schrift hier lediglich er-
wähnt, damit der deutsche Leser nicht denkt, der Verfasser habe
sie nicht gekannt.
10. April 1966
Paul Rassinier
10 S. 12 der französischen Ausgabe. (Zitiert nach der deutschen Ausgabe S. 10 —
Anm. d. Übers.)amit der deutsche Leser nicht denkt, der Verfasser habe
sie nicht gekannt.
10. April 1966
Paul Rassinier
10 S. 12 der französischen Ausgabe. (Zitiert nach der deutschen Ausgabe S. 10 —
Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kapitel I
Falsche Fragestellungen

--- PAGE BREAK ---10. April 1966
Paul Rassinier
10 S. 12 der französischen Ausgabe. (Zitiert nach der deutschen Ausgabe S. 10 —
Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kapitel I
Falsche Fragestellungen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
I. DIE ANKLAGESCHRIFT
„Als der junge Jesuit Riccardo Fontana durch den SS-Offizier
Gerstein Kenntnis davon erhält, auf welche Weise die verschlepp-
ten Juden im Konzentrationslager Auschwitz in dem durch die
Deutschen besetzten Teile Polens vernichtet werden, beschwört er
den damaligen Papst Pius XII. — wir schreiben das Jahr 1943 —,
sich zum Anwalt der verfolgten Juden zu machen und eine aus-
drückliche und formelle Verdammung auszusprechen. Der Papst,
der sich auf seinen Auftrag beruft, ein Vater der gesamten Mensch-
heit zu sein, und der daran erinnert, daß er sein Mitleid niemals
versagt habe, spricht nicht die von Riccardo erwarteten Worte.
Daraufhin mischt dieser sich unter einen Transport römischer Ju-
den, die praktisch unter den Fenstern des Papstes verhaftet worden
waren. Er wird mit ihnen nach Auschwitz deportiert und dort in
die Gaskammer geschickt. Dieser armselige kleine Priester wird also,
wenn es darauf ankommt, dort, wo jetzt der Papst der Stellver-
treter Christi sein sollte, dessen wahrhafter Stellvertreter sein2.“
Diesen als historisch begründet hingestellten Tatbestand nahm
Rolf Hochhuth, ein bis dahin unbekannter junger deutscher Prote-
stant, zum Anlaß, ein Theaterstück zu schreiben. Es trägt den Titel:
Der Stellvertreter. In diesem Stück sehen wir einen mit dem Natio-
nalsozialismus sympathisierenden Papst, dessen gesamtes Denken
von der Vorstellung überschattet wird, daß, wenn Hitler den Krieg
verlöre, dies gleichbedeutend wäre mit der Auslieferung Europas an
das Schlimmste, was es für die Kirche gibt: an den Bolschewismus.
Der Papst ist daher bemüht, die, wie er weiß, nur noch dürftigen
Aussichten Hitlers auf einen Sieg über den Bolschewismus nicht
zu gefährden, und bereitet ihm sowenig Schwierigkeiten wie möglich.
Dies geht so weit, daß er, obwohl im Besitz der magischen Kraft,
mit einem Wort den Judenverfolgungen Einhalt zu gebieten, nicht
nur dieses Wort, das er aus eigenem Antrieb hätte finden müssen,
unausgesprochen läßt, sondern es sogar verweigert, als er darum ge-
beten wird. Um das Bild zu vervollständigen: Er wäscht seine be-
fleckten Hände und deutet damit an, daß er jegliche Verantwortung
2 Jacques Nobécourt, Le Vicaire et l’histoire, S. 9als er darum ge-
beten wird. Um das Bild zu vervollständigen: Er wäscht seine be-
fleckten Hände und deutet damit an, daß er jegliche Verantwortung
2 Jacques Nobécourt, Le Vicaire et l’histoire, S. 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---ten wird. Um das Bild zu vervollständigen: Er wäscht seine be-
fleckten Hände und deutet damit an, daß er jegliche Verantwortung
2 Jacques Nobécourt, Le Vicaire et l’histoire, S. 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
für das weitere Schicksal der Juden ablehnt. Als man nicht nach-
läßt, bricht er, der Bitten überdrüssig, das Thema ab und geht zu
einer anderen Frage über, die für die Kirche, deren Oberhaupt er
ist, weitaus größere Bedeutung hat. Es ist dies die Frage der Kapi-
talbeteiligungen der Kirche an einer bestimmten Anzahl von Indu-
striebetrieben, mit deren Zerstörung durch die Alliierten mit großer
Wahrscheinlichkeit zu rechnen ist und die es, wenn man der Kirche
einen finanziellen Verlust ersparen will, zu verkaufen gilt, bevor es
zu spät ist. Und an wen sollte man sie verkaufen? Nun, an eben
diese Alliierten! Seine mangelnde Sympathie ihnen gegenüber, die
das ganze Stück hindurch nicht verborgen bleibt, wird hier über-
deutlich: Die Alliierten würden auf diese Weise ihr eigenes Ver-
mögen vernichten, während er selbst — ganz gleich, welchen Aus-
gang der Krieg auch nehmen würde — keinerlei Schwierigkeiten
hinsichtlich einer Rückerstattung zu befürchten brauchte, da er die-
se schon vorher erhalten haben würde. So sehen zumindest die Vor-
stellungen aus, die dem scharfsinnigen Zuschauer in diesem Zusam-
menhang vermittelt werden. Der Autor geht zwar nicht so weit, zu
behaupten, dieser Papst sähe in Hitler einen Boten der Vorsehung,
der gekommen sei, um gleichzeitig mit dem Bolschewismus durch
die Auslöschung des jüdischen Volkes — endlich! — auch den schon
zwei Jahrtausende währenden Streit zwischen Juden und Christen
aus der Welt zu schaffen — doch läge das nicht fern. Hochhuth je-
denfalls hält mit seiner Meinung nicht hinter dem Berge, wenn er
sagt:
„Ein solcher Papst ist . . . ein Verbrecher3!“
Und das soll Pius XII. gewesen sein!
In Originalfassung und unter Originaltitel gelangte Der Stell-
vertreter in Berlin am 20. Februar 1963, in Basel am 3. Dezember
und in Wien am 27. Januar 1964 zur Erstaufführung. In Über-
setzung wurde das Stück in London am 21. Juni 1963 (unter dem
Titel The Representative), in Paris am 9. Dezember 1963 (als Le
Vicaire) und in New York am 28. Februar 1964 (als The De-
puty) uraufgeführt. So seltsam das erscheinen mag, in Tel Aviv
wurde es zuletzt, nämlich erst am 20. Juni 1964, herausgebracht:
3 Rolf Hochhuth, Der Stellvertreter, S. 8328. Februar 1964 (als The De-
puty) uraufgeführt. So seltsam das erscheinen mag, in Tel Aviv
wurde es zuletzt, nämlich erst am 20. Juni 1964, herausgebracht:
3 Rolf Hochhuth, Der Stellvertreter, S. 83

--- PAGE BREAK ---s The De-
puty) uraufgeführt. So seltsam das erscheinen mag, in Tel Aviv
wurde es zuletzt, nämlich erst am 20. Juni 1964, herausgebracht:
3 Rolf Hochhuth, Der Stellvertreter, S. 83

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
Die beiden Hauptinteressenten an der allgemeinen Verbreitung des
in dem Drama behandelten Themas, die Weltbewegung des Zionis-
mus und der Staat Israel, dürfen es sich als Verdienst anrechnen,
diese Angelegenheit nicht als erste aufgegriffen zu haben. Zu bemer-
ken ist ferner, daß das Stück zwar ins Italienische übersetzt, in Rom
jedoch bisher immer noch nicht gespielt wurde. Auch in Moskau
fand noch keine Aufführung statt. Der Grund hierfür — man mag
sich dazu stellen, wie man will — ist im ersten Falle darin zu suchen,
daß das Papsttum in Friedenszeiten in Italien noch über genügend
Einfluß verfügt, um sich Verhöhnungen vor der eigenen Tür zu ver-
bitten4, auch wenn seine Macht im Kriege, als es von allen Seiten
eingekreist war, nicht ausreichte, die Festnahme von Juden an eben
dieser Stelle zu verhindern. Im Falle Moskaus dürfte der Grund
in der Chruschtschowschen Annäherungspolitik gegenüber dem Va-
tikan liegen, die auch für seine Nachfolger richtunggebend zu blei-
ben scheint.
In Berlin, London, Basel, Paris und New York lösten die ersten
Aufführungen im Theater und auf der Straße feindselige Demon-
strationen aus, die das Einschreiten der Polizei erforderlich mach-
ten. In intellektuellen Kreisen entbrannten leidenschaftliche Dis-
kussionen, deren Ende noch nicht abzusehen ist. In Wien war die
Reaktion zwar nicht geringer und nicht weniger entschieden, doch
blieb der Protest der öffentlichen Meinung korrekt und in Grenzen.
Auch in Israel verhielt man sich korrekt. Zwar entstand eine Di-
skussion darüber, ob es zweckmäßig sei, das Stück dort aufzuführen,
doch führte das nur dazu, die Generalprobe um einige Monate hin-
4 Die Genehmigung für eine römische Aufführung des Stellvertreter durch den
italienischen Staat würde bedeuten, daß dieser zuvor das Konkordat von 1929
aufkündigen müßte, durch das ihm die Erteilung einer solchen Genehmigung
gegen die Meinung des Papstes untersagt ist. Angesichts der engen Bindung des
italienischen Volkes — auch der Kommunisten, wie es das Beispiel des Don
Camillo von Guareschi zeigt — an die katholische Kirche wird man verstehen,
daß keine Regierung, auch nicht die am stärksten nach links orientierte, leicht-
fertig einen solchen Schritt wagen wird.
Es muß hinzugefügt werden, daß der Papst wohl eine Aufführung in Rom,
jedoch nicht in anderen Städten verhindern kann. Seit dem Erscheinen der
französischen Ausgabe dieses Buches fand eine Aufführung in Süditalien statt,
jedoch nur eine, denn der Skandal war so groß, die Bevölkerung so verletzt,
daß man von weiteren Aufführungen Abstand nahm.ranzösischen Ausgabe dieses Buches fand eine Aufführung in Süditalien statt,
jedoch nur eine, denn der Skandal war so groß, die Bevölkerung so verletzt,
daß man von weiteren Aufführungen Abstand nahm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dieses Buches fand eine Aufführung in Süditalien statt,
jedoch nur eine, denn der Skandal war so groß, die Bevölkerung so verletzt,
daß man von weiteren Aufführungen Abstand nahm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
auszuzögern. Im Falle Israels dürfte es sich aber wohl nur um eine
Diskussion der Form halber, um eine künstlich entfachte Erörte-
rung handeln, die einzig und allein zum Ziel hatte, eine gewisse
Zurückhaltung zu bekunden, und geschähe dies auch nur zum Schein
und aus Gründen der Diplomatie.
Ein Stück mit einem solchen Inhalt und einer solchen Form
mußte zwangsläufig Wellen schlagen. Der Skandal begann zunächst
mit einer Überraschung: Bis zum 20. Februar 1963 herrschte in
der ganzen Welt, bei Atheisten und Gläubigen, bei den Anhängern
der römisch-katholischen Kirche wie auch denen der anderen, mit
dieser konkurrierenden christlichen Bekenntnisse, die fast einhel-
lige Meinung, Papst Pius XII. habe alles getan, was in seiner Macht
stand, um den Krieg zu verhindern oder doch in Grenzen zu hal-
ten. Als ihm schließlich beides nicht gelang, habe er sich mit ganzer
Kraft dafür eingesetzt, zumindest eine Beendigung aller Grausam-
keiten herbeizuführen, wann immer er davon Kenntnis erhielt.
Bezüglich der Dinge, die man in diesem Zusammenhang den Deut-
schen zur Last legt — die der anderen werden nur noch selten
erwähnt —, hatte von Ribbentrop am 27. März 1946 in Nürnberg
folgendes erklärt: „ . . . ich weiß, daß wir vom Vatikan Proteste
erhielten, das heißt, wir hatten eine ganze Schublade voll von
Protesten aus dem Vatikan5.“ Als man Ribbentrop vorwarf, nie-
mals darauf geantwortet, ja nicht einmal Kenntnis davon genom-
men zu haben, hatte er präzisiert: „Das ist wirklich wahr. Es ist so:
Der Führer nahm gegenüber diesen Vatikan-Angelegenheiten einen
derartigen Standpunkt ein, daß von da an die Proteste mir nicht
mehr übergeben wurden6.“ Es ging hierbei um Dinge, die sich im
März 1943 in Polen zugetragen haben sollen. In Wirklichkeit
hatten sich die Proteste aus dem Vatikan schon seit langem in Rib-
bentrops Schubladen angehäuft, ohne daß man ihnen auch nur
irgendwelche Beachtung geschenkt hatte. Um den Standpunkt des
Führers wie auch seine Rechtfertigungen kennenzulernen, braucht
man ebenfalls nur die Protokolle des Nürnberger Prozesses zu stu-
5 Der Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher vor dem Internationalen Militär-
gerichtshof, Amtlicher Text in deutscher Sprache, Bd. X, S. 162
6 Ebd., S. 163Protokolle des Nürnberger Prozesses zu stu-
5 Der Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher vor dem Internationalen Militär-
gerichtshof, Amtlicher Text in deutscher Sprache, Bd. X, S. 162
6 Ebd., S. 163

--- PAGE BREAK ---erger Prozesses zu stu-
5 Der Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher vor dem Internationalen Militär-
gerichtshof, Amtlicher Text in deutscher Sprache, Bd. X, S. 162
6 Ebd., S. 163

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
dieren. Im Oktober 1939 hatte sich der Nuntius in Berlin, Msgr.
Orsenigo, als er von der Behandlung polnischer Geistlicher durch
die deutsche Polizei im besetzten Gebiet erfuhr, zu Staatssekretär
von Weizsäcker begeben, um ihm zwei Protestnoten zu überrei-
chen. Als von Steengracht, ein anderer Staatssekretär Ribbentrops,
am 26. März 1946 in Nürnberg über den Verbleib dieser Noten
verhört wurde, hatte er erklärt: „Der damalige Staatssekretär
(von Weizsäcker) hat diese ordnungsgemäß Ribbentrop weiterge-
leitet, und Ribbentrop hat sie seinerseits Hitler vorgelegt. Da der
Vatikan das Generalgouvernement nicht anerkannt hatte, und
demgemäß der Nuntius für diese Gebiete nicht zuständig war,
erklärte Hitler, als ihm diese Noten vorgelegt wurden: ,Sie stellen
eine einzige plumpe Lüge dar. Geben Sie diese Noten über den
Staatssekretär in schroffer Weise dem Nuntius zurück und sagen
Sie ihm, Sie würden niemals mehr eine derartige Sache entgegen-
nehmen7.‘ “
Dies läßt bereits folgende Schlüsse zu: Zweifellos hätten die
durch den Nuntius in Berlin dem Auswärtigen Amt übergebenen
Protestnoten auch keine größere Wirkung gehabt, wenn der Vati-
kan die von Hitler festgelegten Grenzen des neuen Polens aner-
kannt hätte. Doch anstatt sich den ganzen Krieg hindurch „schub-
ladenweise“, ohne die geringste Registrierung, in Ribbentrops
Schreibtisch anzuhäufen und anschließend in den Papierkorb zu
wandern, von wo aus sie spurlos verschwanden, würden sie sich
heute zumindest in den deutschen Archiven befinden, wo sie de-
nen, die dort nach der Wahrheit forschen, zugänglich wären —
falls sie nicht vielleicht doch sofort in einer Akte abgelegt wurden
wie jene Nr. 6, die auf so geheimnisvolle Weise — und zum Glück
für bestimmte Leute! — dann doch noch verschwand. Aber das
ist eine andere Geschichte, auf die wir bei entsprechender Gelegen-
heit zurückkommen werden. An dieser Stelle sollte lediglich be-
tont werden, daß Pius XII. durch seine Weigerung, das von Hitler
umgestaltete Polen anzuerkennen, diesem das erforderliche Argu-
ment lieferte, um sich sämtlichen diesbezüglichen Vorstellungen
des Papstes entziehen zu können. Diese Weigerung blieb im übri-
7 Ebd., S. 133altete Polen anzuerkennen, diesem das erforderliche Argu-
ment lieferte, um sich sämtlichen diesbezüglichen Vorstellungen
des Papstes entziehen zu können. Diese Weigerung blieb im übri-
7 Ebd., S. 133

--- PAGE BREAK ---ennen, diesem das erforderliche Argu-
ment lieferte, um sich sämtlichen diesbezüglichen Vorstellungen
des Papstes entziehen zu können. Diese Weigerung blieb im übri-
7 Ebd., S. 133

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
gen ohne jeden Einfluß auf seine Beurteilung durch die Nachwelt,
da jener offensichtlich feindselige Akt gegenüber der Politik Hit-
lers ihm noch nicht einmal von seinen heutigen Kritikern zugute
gehalten wird. Doch was hätte man ihm erst vorgeworfen, wenn
er in dem Bemühen und in der Hoffnung, dadurch etwas zu errei-
chen, dieses neue Polen anerkannt hätte?
Steengracht gibt uns im übrigen auch Auskunft über die Art der
Proteste des Vatikans sowie über den Personenkreis, der den An-
laß dazu bildete: „Ich habe ja gesagt, daß ich in Hunderten von
Fällen, in denen der Nuntius zu mir kam, auch wenn es sich um
Juden handelte, für die der Nuntius nicht zuständig war, und in
Fällen, in denen der Nuntius tätig wurde für die polnischen Geist-
lichen, also auch ein Gebiet, für das er nicht zuständig war, die
Fälle entgegengenommen habe . . .8.“
Es fällt auf, daß jedesmal, wenn in irgendeinem der dreizehn
Nürnberger Prozesse die Sprache auf den Vatikan kam, die Zeu-
gen der Anklage wie auch die der Verteidigung eine inhaltlich und
weitgehend auch wörtlich gleiche Darstellung der Ereignisse gaben,
in die sie seinerzeit verwickelt waren. Die Berichte zeigen keiner-
lei Abweichungen. Dies beweist, daß Pius XII. entgegen den Be-
hauptungen seiner Verleumder keineswegs einzig und allein die
Interessen der katholischen Kirche im Auge hatte und daß insbe-
sondere die Juden nicht von seiner Fürsorge ausgeschlossen waren.
Im übrigen ist meines Wissens diese Ansicht bis zum 20. Februar
1963 auch niemals von irgendeiner Seite öffentlich in Zweifel ge-
zogen worden.
Es lassen sich aber noch bessere Zeugnisse anführen: Auf pro-
testantischer Seite zeigte man sich im großen ganzen sehr zurück-
haltend, obwohl die von Luther und Calvin überkommene anti-
päpstliche Einstellung hier noch immer ihre Anhänger hat. Wir
werden allerdings noch sehen, daß die Rolle, die die Protestanten
bei der Machtergreifung Hitlers im Vorkriegsdeutschland spielten,
sowie die Lage, in der sich der Protestantismus in der Nachkriegs-
zeit befand, für diese Zurückhaltung nicht unmaßgeblich sind.
Hingegen wurden die hervorragendsten Vertreter der jüdischen
8 Ebd., S. 159e die Lage, in der sich der Protestantismus in der Nachkriegs-
zeit befand, für diese Zurückhaltung nicht unmaßgeblich sind.
Hingegen wurden die hervorragendsten Vertreter der jüdischen
8 Ebd., S. 159

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich der Protestantismus in der Nachkriegs-
zeit befand, für diese Zurückhaltung nicht unmaßgeblich sind.
Hingegen wurden die hervorragendsten Vertreter der jüdischen
8 Ebd., S. 159

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
Geisteswelt und Politik nicht müde, Pius XII. für sein Handeln
während des Krieges Lob und Dankbarkeit zu bekunden. Denken
wir an dieser Stelle gleichzeitig an die nicht nur zufriedenen, nein,
begeisterten Kommentare, mit denen man in der gesamten Presse,
einschließlich der sozialistisch und kommunistisch ausgerichteten
Blätter, seine Wahl am 2. März 1939 begrüßt hatte, so rundet sich
alles zu einem deutlichen Bild. Der Anhang zu diesem Buch ent-
hält Darstellungen aller derjenigen, die uns Pius XII. während
seiner ganzen Laufbahn als einen Papst gezeigt haben, der weder
für den italienischen Faschismus noch für den deutschen Natio-
nalsozialismus jemals auch nur die geringste Sympathie besaß. Da-
bei hat man im übrigen kaum bemerkt, daß sie für den russischen
Bolschewismus auch nicht größer war.
Angesichts dieser ziemlich allgemein verbreiteten und festver-
wurzelten Ansicht bedeutet Der Stellvertreter von Rolf Hochhuth
eine Wendung um einhundertachtzig Grad. Die daraufhin einset-
zenden Reaktionen der Öffentlichkeit forderten den Autor gewis-
sermaßen zu einer Rechtfertigung auf. Und dieser junge Mann,
der die nicht zu unterschätzende Leistung vollbrachte, plötzlich,
von einem Tag zum anderen, zum Mittelpunkt einer Welt zu
werden, die sich auf der Suche nach einem guten Gewissen befin-
det, schilderte nun vor allem den entsetzlichen Gewissenskonflikt
— den Alpdruck, wie Jacques Nobécourt es nannte9 —, der ihn
vom Beginn seines fünfzehnten (Todesjahr Hitlers) bis zu seinem
dreiunddreißigsten Lebensjahr begleitete und gegen den die seeli-
sche Zerrissenheit, die Victor Hugo uns in der Figur des Jean Val-
jean10 vor Augen führt, ganz sicher nur eine Kleinigkeit war. Die-
ser Gewissenskonflikt beruhte darauf, daß der Krieg für ihn ein
ganz bestimmtes Gesicht trug — dieser Krieg, der fast sechs Jahre
gedauert, die ganze Welt in Blut und Asche gelegt, der Europa von
den Pyrenäen bis zur Wolga, vom äußersten Norden bis zum
äußersten Süden in ein riesiges Trümmerfeld verwandelt und
fünfzig Millionen Leichen auf der Strecke gelassen hatte: Unter
diesen fünfzig Millionen Leichen, so sagte Hochhuth, gab es sechs
9 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 71—76
10 Hauptfigur des Romans Les Misérables von Victor Hugo. (Anm. d. Übers.)lassen hatte: Unter
diesen fünfzig Millionen Leichen, so sagte Hochhuth, gab es sechs
9 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 71—76
10 Hauptfigur des Romans Les Misérables von Victor Hugo. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---diesen fünfzig Millionen Leichen, so sagte Hochhuth, gab es sechs
9 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 71—76
10 Hauptfigur des Romans Les Misérables von Victor Hugo. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
Millionen tote Juden — Männer, Frauen, Kinder und Greise, ohne
jeden Unterschied —, und der Gedanke an diese sechs Millionen
hatte ihn achtzehn Jahre lang Tag und Nacht gequält.
Wir wissen jetzt, nach welchen Gesichtspunkten Hochhuth vor-
geht. So ist ihm der Krieg, der ihn weder in seinem Prinzip noch
in seinen Gesamtauswirkungen jemals gekümmert hat, durch eine
einzige seiner Folgeerscheinungen buchstäblich zu einer Qual ge-
worden: durch das Unrecht, das er den Juden zufügte — alles
übrige war belanglos! Und Hochhuth hatte nicht eher Rast
noch Ruhe, bevor er nicht den Verantwortlichen für dieses Verbrechen
gefunden hatte, das weitaus schlimmer als das Schlimmste, weitaus
schlimmer als alles überhaupt nur Vorstellbare10a war. Nach acht-
zehnjährigem, unbeschreiblichem Alptraum hatte er als guter Pro-
testant, der wie alle seine Glaubensbrüder sämtliches Unglück die-
ser Welt auf die Existenz des Papstes zurückführt — ähnlich wie
von einem nicht unbeträchtlichen Teil der öffentlichen Meinung
jegliches Mißgeschick auf das Vorhandensein der Juden zurückge-
führt wird —, den Schuldigen endlich gefunden, nämlich Pius XII.
Wohl hatte dieser in jenen sechs Jahren jedesmal, wenn er das
Wort ergriff, gegen jegliche Kriegsgreuel Protest erhoben — dies
wurde auch von Hochhuth nicht in Abrede gestellt —, doch hatte
er sich dabei stets einer ganz allgemeinen Sprache bedient, ohne
jemals — mit einer einzigen Ausnahme — auf das Martyrium der
Juden expressis verbis hinzuweisen. Dies führte zu der ersten Fol-
gerung: daß der Papst geschwiegen habe. Die zweite Folgerung
schloß sich daran an: Er habe geschwiegen — aus Sympathie für
Hitler und den Nationalsozialismus! Und Hochhuth, der sich ent-
sann, daß er Pius XII. in seinem Drama einen „Verbrecher“ ge-
nannt hatte, ging in dem Bemühen, die Unerschütterlichkeit die-
ser seiner Auffassung zu dokumentieren, sogar noch einen Schritt
weiter, indem er hinzufügte, daß er „schändlich10b“ gewesen sei.
Das Thema erhielt somit seine endgültige Gestalt: Wir erblicken
einen Papst, der nicht nur zu einem „Verbrecher“, nein, zu einem
„schändlichen Verbrecher“ wurde, und zwar einzig und allein des-
10a Hochhuth, Der Spiegel, französische Ausgabe, v. 26. April 1963, und Nouveau
Candide v. 19. Dezember 1963
10b Der Spiegel, französische Ausgabe, v. 26. April 1963e, und zwar einzig und allein des-
10a Hochhuth, Der Spiegel, französische Ausgabe, v. 26. April 1963, und Nouveau
Candide v. 19. Dezember 1963
10b Der Spiegel, französische Ausgabe, v. 26. April 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd allein des-
10a Hochhuth, Der Spiegel, französische Ausgabe, v. 26. April 1963, und Nouveau
Candide v. 19. Dezember 1963
10b Der Spiegel, französische Ausgabe, v. 26. April 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
halb, weil er schwieg! Wir werden im übrigen sehen, daß dieses
Schweigen keineswegs den Tatsachen entsprach und ihm vor allem
von solchen Leuten unterstellt wurde, die niemals wesentlich wei-
ter sahen, als ihre Nase reichte.
Und die anderen Verantwortlichen? Die Churchill, Roosevelt,
Stalin? Sowohl vor dem Kriege als auch während des ganzen Krie-
ges waren ihnen alle nur denkbaren Möglichkeiten geboten wor-
den, die Juden vor den Schrecknissen in Sicherheit zu bringen, diese
Juden, welche die NS-Lenker Deutschlands (bevor sie sie in Lagern
zusammenfaßten und danach) schon als bürgerliche Volksschicht
für gefährlich hielten, erst redet aber als demoralisierendes Element
für ihr im Kampf stehendes Volk ansahen. Aber sie haben es nicht
getan — feine Leute, kann man da nur sagen! Jacques Nobécourt,
der sehr treffend darauf aufmerksam machte, daß man eigene
Schwächen nicht durch das Versagen anderer rechtfertigt, wies dieses
Argument in sehr geschickter Weise zurück: „Das Beispiel dieser Leute
heranzuziehen, 
um 
das 
Schweigen 
Pius’ XII. 
zu 
erklären,
hieße, den Papst mit Staatsmännern, die kraft ihres Amtes zu
Realismus verpflichtet sind, auf eine Stufe stellen, während doch
die Aufgabe des Papstes gerade darin bestand, ohne Rücksicht auf
Opportunität zu jeder Zeit zu sprechen und die Botschaft des Evan-
geliums ins Gedächtnis zu rufen, indem er sie selbst genau be-
folgte11.“ Nobécourt brauchte sodann nur noch zu demonstrieren,
daß der päpstliche Auftrag, „ein Vater der gesamten Menschheit
zu sein“, und zwar ohne Ansehen der Rasse, der Nationalität oder
selbst der Religion, es Pius XII. zur Pflicht machte, „die Botschaft
des Evangeliums, die in seine Hände gegeben war“, in diesem Sinne
„ins Gedächtnis zu rufen“.
Das ist sicher, und Pius XII. bedurfte hier auch keiner Aufforde-
rung. Die „genaue Befolgung“ der Botschaft des Evangeliums be-
stand für ihn in der Notwendigkeit, sich für die Rettung des Frie-
dens — das heißt, für die Rettung der gesamten Menschheit — ein-
zusetzen und später, nachdem er in diesem Bemühen gescheitert war,
den Krieg zum Stillstand zu bringen, um zu retten, was zu retten
war.
11 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 11samten Menschheit — ein-
zusetzen und später, nachdem er in diesem Bemühen gescheitert war,
den Krieg zum Stillstand zu bringen, um zu retten, was zu retten
war.
11 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 11

--- PAGE BREAK ---ein-
zusetzen und später, nachdem er in diesem Bemühen gescheitert war,
den Krieg zum Stillstand zu bringen, um zu retten, was zu retten
war.
11 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
So gesehen, ist es gehässig, ihn eines angeblichen Schweigens zu
beschuldigen, denn er erhob seine Stimme so laut und so deutlich,
wie es ihm nur möglich war.
Doch nach der Meinung Nobécourts hätte die Pflicht zur „ge-
nauen Befolgung“ der Botschaft des Evangeliums den Papst veran-
lassen müssen, sein Handeln einzig und allein auf das Schicksal der
Juden zu beschränken, mit anderen Worten: nichts gegen den Krieg
zu unternehmen, ihn also seine Höllenfahrt fortsetzen zu lassen und
ihm den Rest der Menschheit preiszugeben.
Man wird mir erlauben, daran zu zweifeln, daß die von Nobé-
court unternommene Beweisführung sehr einleuchtend ist. Vor al-
lem heutzutage. Denn wenn man schon so weit geht, Vermutungen
darüber anzustellen, „was Papst Pius XII. erreicht hätte, wenn . . . “,
dann zwingt wirklich nichts dazu, das nur der Gegenpartei zu er-
lauben. Man könnte ebenso behaupten, Pius XII. wäre auf der
Skala der universellen Werte um einige Stufen herabgestiegen und
hätte seinem päpstlichen Amt und Auftrag jene einseitige Ausle-
gung gegeben, die er zum Mißfallen vieler von sich gewiesen hatte,
wenn er nicht von einem Gipfelpunkt menschlichen Denkens aus-
gegangen und das Heil der Juden nur in unlösbarer Einheit mit dem
Heil der ganzen Menschheit gesehen hätte, das heißt im Frieden,
dem höchsten aller Güter. Hier hätte Nobécourt von Realismus
sprechen können, diesmal allerdings von einem Realismus „niederer
Art“, um so mehr, als dieser — genau wie jener, den er Pius XII.
zum Vorwurf macht — ein bloßes Gedankengebilde bleiben mußte,
denn es steht — wie wir noch zeigen werden und wie er auch selbst
sagte – wohl eindeutig fest, daß Pius XII. im einen wie im anderen
Falle angesichts der Ereignisse „vor Türen stand, die kein Schlüssel
zu öffnen vermochte12“. Zudem könnte die große Mehrheit der üb-
rigen Menschen darauf hinweisen, wie seltsam doch eine Vaterschaft
gegenüber der gesamten Menschheit beschaffen gewesen wäre, deren
Fürsorge vorzugsweise, wenn nicht gar ausschließlich, den Juden
gegolten hätte, eine Vaterschaft, so kurzsichtig, daß sie, nachdem
ihr das Wesen des Problems entgangen war, dasselbe gar nicht
12 Ansprache an das Kardinalskollegium am 2. Juni 1943. (Zitiert nach Walter
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, Antwort an Rolf Hochhuth, Berlin 1963,
S. 76 — Anm. d. Übers.)ngen war, dasselbe gar nicht
12 Ansprache an das Kardinalskollegium am 2. Juni 1943. (Zitiert nach Walter
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, Antwort an Rolf Hochhuth, Berlin 1963,
S. 76 — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar nicht
12 Ansprache an das Kardinalskollegium am 2. Juni 1943. (Zitiert nach Walter
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, Antwort an Rolf Hochhuth, Berlin 1963,
S. 76 — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
mehr in seinem Kern angepackt hätte und die daher nicht nur für
den Tod der Juden, sondern für alle fünfzig Millionen Menschen-
leben, die der Krieg forderte, verantwortlich gewesen wäre. Und
es hätte nur noch allem die Krone aufgesetzt — doch niemandem
würde das auffallen! —, wenn der Protestant Rolf Hochhuth
unter dem gleichen frenetischen Beifall der Zionisten einen Stell-
vertreter über eben dieses Thema geschrieben, der Kommunist
Piscator das Stück auf die Bühne gebracht hätte und der christliche
Progressist Jacques Nobécourt ihnen in der gleichen Weise auf
dem Fuße gefolgt wäre. Und — wenn man’s recht überlegt —
warum auch nicht?
Es ist möglich, daß es von höchstem Geiste zeugt, eine gewisse
Verachtung für den Realismus zur Schau zu tragen und demgegen-
über einen Idealismus zu bekunden, der darin besteht, zu jeder
Zeit, ohne Rücksicht auf Opportunität, in einer einmal festgelegten
Weise zu sprechen und zu handeln. Es kann schon sein, daß dies das
Privileg und die Ehre der wahren Eliten darstellt — deren reinste
Verkörperung sicherlich jener illustre Kreis war, der die Kampagne
gegen Pius XII. startete. Jedenfalls steht die obenbeschriebene
Haltung in jenen Kreisen, deren geistige Anmaßung nur noch ihrer
Gewissenlosigkeit gleichkommt und an denen Pierre Daninos13 seine
höchste Freude findet, in bestem Ansehen. Doch wenn man weiß,
daß am Ende jeden Denkprozesses stets der Augenblick kommt, in
dem die Folgerungen, die daraus gezogen werden, sich durch das
Wort im Bereich des Sittlichen und durch die Tat im Bereich der
tatsächlichen Verhältnisse niederschlagen müssen, das heißt der
Augenblick, in dem im einen wie im anderen Falle das Ideale zum
Realen werden muß, dann ist alles nicht mehr nur „Realismus“ oder
nur „Idealismus“, und es geht, da sich das eine mit dem anderen
vermischt, lediglich noch darum, zu wissen, auf welcher Ebene „zu
jeder Zeit“ gesprochen oder gehandelt werden muß: auf der Ebene
der „Beatles“, deren Ideal von der Notwendigkeit inspiriert zu sein
scheint, auf die Alten pharisäerhaft hinabzusehen, oder auf der
Ebene Christi, der den Kreuzestod erlitt, „um alle Sünden dieser
Welt auf sich zu nehmen“, ob der Papst einzig und allein für das
13 Snobissimo, auf die Alten pharisäerhaft hinabzusehen, oder auf der
Ebene Christi, der den Kreuzestod erlitt, „um alle Sünden dieser
Welt auf sich zu nehmen“, ob der Papst einzig und allein für das
13 Snobissimo

--- PAGE BREAK ---isäerhaft hinabzusehen, oder auf der
Ebene Christi, der den Kreuzestod erlitt, „um alle Sünden dieser
Welt auf sich zu nehmen“, ob der Papst einzig und allein für das
13 Snobissimo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
Heil der Juden eintreten mußte (immer vorausgesetzt, daß er wuß-
te, in welchem Maße sie bedroht waren) oder für das der ganzen
Menschheit? Die Antwort auf diese Frage wird, indem sie zwischen
den beiden Extremen den Punkt festlegt, an dem alles nur noch
„Realismus“ ist, und den, an dem alles „Idealismus“ ist, sagen, wo
der Sophismus liegt.
Man kam sehr rasch dahinter, daß Hochhuth nach der Bewälti-
gung seines „Alptraumes“ nichts mehr zu sagen hatte — eines „Alp-
traumes“, der, vergessen wir es nicht, achtzehn Jahre lang gedauert
hatte, was sich in seinen Zügen deutlich spiegelte, in diesem Gesicht,
„das in keiner Weise fesselte, diesem Gesicht eines Studenten, der
gerade etwas Unpassendes gesagt haben könnte14“, was aber auch
zu erkennen war an seinem vollen Haar, der faltenlosen Stirn und
dem unbeteiligten Blick, an diesem ganzen Gesicht, dessen Harmo-
nie durch nichts unterbrochen wurde, es sei denn durch den etwas
zu sinnlichen Mund. Indem sie ihn ein kleines bißchen aufstachel-
ten, brachten Journalisten es fertig, ihn zu Aussagen zu bewegen
wie: er habe sich zu „einem Advokaten der katholischen Kirche“
gemacht, oder: in Berlin habe ein großer Teil der Zuschauer ihn
„für einen Katholiken15“ gehalten. Der Wert dieser Aussage wurde
einem sofort deutlich, wenn man hörte, daß er sich dabei auf sol-
che hervorragende Persönlichkeiten wie „Hans Werner Richter
und Günter Grass“ (!!!) berief. Oder er gab Dinge von sich wie:
er greife den Papst weder als Menschen noch als Papst an, sondern
deswegen, weil er „die Verkörperung der Schuld sei, die wir alle
auf uns geladen haben“, und anhand dieser Gestalt müsse es „jedem
Zuschauer möglich sein, über seine eigene Schuld nachzudenken16“.
Nicole Zand gegenüber betonte er sogar, daß „der einzige Angriff
gegen den Papst sich gegen dessen Schweigen richte, und zwar aus-
schließlich dagegen“, und daß „derjenige, der für fünfhundert
Millionen Gläubige die Verantwortung trug . . . und der von einer
beträchtlichen Anzahl Ungläubiger als die höchste sittliche Instanz
der Erde angesehen wurde, nicht das Recht hatte, still zu bleiben,
14 Guy Le Clec’h, Figaro littéraire v. 18. Dezember 1963
15 Der Spiegel v. 24. April 1963, S. 96
16 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 34r Erde angesehen wurde, nicht das Recht hatte, still zu bleiben,
14 Guy Le Clec’h, Figaro littéraire v. 18. Dezember 1963
15 Der Spiegel v. 24. April 1963, S. 96
16 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 34

--- PAGE BREAK ---de, nicht das Recht hatte, still zu bleiben,
14 Guy Le Clec’h, Figaro littéraire v. 18. Dezember 1963
15 Der Spiegel v. 24. April 1963, S. 96
16 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 34

--- PAGE BREAK ---

33
zu schweigen angesichts des Massenmordes, den die Nazis an den
Juden verübten17“.
Und so wären wir wieder einmal beim Nebenaspekt angelangt,
der aber als der wirkliche Kern der Sache angesehen wird, weil hier
Pius XII. für eine der kriegführenden Mächte hätte Partei ergrei-
fen können. Daß er das nicht tat, ist letzten Endes der ganze Vor-
wurf, den man gegen ihn erhebt. Dieser Sehweise begegnete Pius
XII. jedoch schon im voraus, indem er seine Einstellung hinsicht-
lich der Kriegsopfer kundtat:
„ . . . [dieser Krieg, der sich bereits in] einer Reihe von Hand-
lungen [äußerte], die mit den Vorschriften des geltenden inter-
nationalen Rechts wie denen des Naturrechts und selbst mit den
elementarsten Gefühlen der Menschlichkeit gleichermaßen unver-
einbar sind: die Grausamkeiten und die unerlaubte Anwendung
von Vernichtungsmitteln, selbst gegen Nichtkämpfer und Flücht-
linge, gegen Greise, Frauen und Kinder18.“
Oder hören wir von seiner Empörung bei dem Gedanken an die
„Hunderttausende, die persönlich schuldlos bisweilen nur um ihrer
Volkszugehörigkeit oder Abstammung willen dem Tode geweiht
oder einer fortschreitenden Verelendung preisgegeben sind19“.
Oder denken wir an die Worte, mit denen er noch einmal ein-
dringlich seinen Standpunkt klarzumachen versuchte, indem er
hinwies auf die „Bitten derjenigen . . . , die sich mit angsterfülltem
Herzen flehend an Uns wenden. Es sind dies diejenigen, die wegen
ihrer Nationalität oder wegen ihrer Rasse von größerem Unheil
und stechenderen und schwereren Schmerzen gequält werden und
auch ohne eigene Schuld bisweilen Einschränkungen unterworfen
sind, die ihre Ausrottung bedeuten20.“
Diese absolut eindeutigen Stellungnahmen, die man in dieser
oder jener Form fast immer antraf, sobald Pius XII. vor seinem
üblichen Zuhörerkreis das Wort ergriff (insbesondere in allen
17 Le Monde v. 19. Dezember 1968
18 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1939
19 Weihnachtsbotschaft 1942. (Zitiert nach W. Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte,
S. 73 — Anm. d. Übers.)
20 Ansprache an das Kardinalskollegium vom 2. Juni 1943. (Zitiert nach W.
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 75 f. — Anm. d. Übers.)ert nach W. Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte,
S. 73 — Anm. d. Übers.)
20 Ansprache an das Kardinalskollegium vom 2. Juni 1943. (Zitiert nach W.
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 75 f. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Verfälschte Geschichte,
S. 73 — Anm. d. Übers.)
20 Ansprache an das Kardinalskollegium vom 2. Juni 1943. (Zitiert nach W.
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 75 f. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
seinen Weihnachtsansprachen und regelmäßigen feierlichen An-
sprachen am 2. Juni jeden Jahres) oder sobald er sich schriftlich
äußerte, werden von den Verteidigern des Stellvertreter im allge-
meinen so wenig in Erwägung gezogen, als wären sie niemals aus-
gesprochen worden. Man kann nur fragen: Warum?
Die Antwort liegt uns vor in Form einer Erklärung des römi-
schen Bankiers Angelo Donati gegenüber dem Centre de Docu-
mentation juive contemporaine, Paris21. Donati schildert darin den
nachstehenden 
Meinungsaustausch 
zwischen 
dem 
Staatssekretär
Pius’ XII., Msgr. Maglione, und dem britischen Gesandten beim
Heiligen Stuhl, Sir Osborne, von dem Donati im August 1943
durch Osborne Kenntnis erhielt:
„Sie sehen“, sagte Msgr. Maglione zu Sir Osborne, „daß der
Heilige Vater [in seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft 1942] den Empfeh-
lungen Ihrer Regierung Rechnung getragen hat.“
Und Osborne entgegnete hierauf, „daß eine solche umfassende
Verurteilung, die ebensogut das Bombardement der deutschen
Städte gemeint haben könnte, nicht dem entspricht, was die eng-
lische Regierung erbeten hat“.
An dieser Stelle nun zeigt sich des Pudels Kern: Die Proteste
Pius’ XII. gegen die Greuel des Krieges waren stets so formuliert,
daß sie sie ausnahmslos, ohne Rücksicht auf den Urheber, ver-
urteilten. Was man dem Papst heute jedoch in dieser Hinsicht zum
Vorwurf macht, ist, daß er sich nicht darauf einließ, nur die
Schändlichkeiten des einen der beiden feindlichen Lager anzu-
prangern. Mit dieser Einstellung bekennt Pius XII. sich seinerseits
21 Dokument CCXVIII-78 des Centre de Documentation juive contemporaine.
Hochhuth, der dieses Schriftstück in seinem historischen Anhang (Der Stell-
vertreter, S. 259 f.) zitiert, erwähnt hierzu folgendes: „Im Herbst 1942 hat
Donati dem Papst durch Vermittlung des Ordensgenerals der Kapuziner eine
Note über die Situation der Juden in Südfrankreich überreichen lassen und um
päpstliche Hilfe gebeten. Sie blieb völlig aus.“ Aus dem Telegramm Nr. 232
vom 14. September 1942 des deutschen Botschafters beim Heiligen Stuhl, von
Bergen, erfahren wir hingegen: „Der vom Heiligen Stuhl bei der französischen
Regierung unternommene Schritt zwecks Milderung der Maßnahmen gegen
die Juden ist bisher ohne Ergebnis geblieben. Im Vatikan ist man nach wie vor
durch die dort eingehenden Nachrichten sehr beeindruckt.“ (Zitiert nach Saul
Friedländer, Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich, S. 84 f.) Die Anklage Hochhuths
schreckte offenbar vor nichts zurück!wie vor
durch die dort eingehenden Nachrichten sehr beeindruckt.“ (Zitiert nach Saul
Friedländer, Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich, S. 84 f.) Die Anklage Hochhuths
schreckte offenbar vor nichts zurück!

--- PAGE BREAK ---ort eingehenden Nachrichten sehr beeindruckt.“ (Zitiert nach Saul
Friedländer, Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich, S. 84 f.) Die Anklage Hochhuths
schreckte offenbar vor nichts zurück!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
zu der allerdings noch sehr neuen Lehre von Papsttum und Kirche,
die, von Pius X. konzipiert, bei Benedikt XV. ihre glänzendste
Formulierung fand:
„Wir bedauern es, daß Wir nicht mehr tun können, um das
Ende dieser Heimsuchung [gemeint ist der Erste Weltkrieg] her-
beizuführen. Unser apostolisches Amt gestattet es Uns nicht. Hin-
gegen gehört es zweifellos in höchstem Maße zu den Obliegen-
heiten des Pontifex Maximus, der von Gott zum obersten Inter-
preten und Schützer des ewigen Rechtes bestellt wurde, zu ver-
künden, daß es keinem Menschen, aus welchen Gründen auch
immer, gestattet ist, das Recht zu verletzen. Wir verurteilen jeg-
liches Unrecht, von welcher Seite es auch begangen sein mag. Aber
es wäre weder angemessen noch nützlich, in den eigentlichen
Streit der Kriegführenden einzugreifen22.“
Die Worte „angemessen . . . , nützlich . . . “ klingen zweifellos ein
wenig nach ganz gewöhnlichem „Realismus“, doch nur, wenn man
sie aus ihrem Zusammenhang löst und wenn man vergißt, daß ein
Papst ebenfalls den Rang und die Vorrechte eines Staatsober-
hauptes besitzt und als solches genötigt ist, sich in der Öffentlich-
keit der Sprache der Diplomatie zu bedienen, falls er seine „aposto-
lische“ Mission nicht gefährden will.
Als der Journalist, demgegenüber die obige Äußerung gemacht
wurde, dem Papst im Verlauf des Gesprächs zu bedenken gab, daß
„zahlreiche Priester in Belgien und Frankreich als Geiseln fest-
genommen 
und 
erschossen“ 
worden 
seien, 
entgegnete 
Bene-
dikt XV., daß auch von der Gegenseite Geiseln genommen und
erschossen worden seien, und zwar nicht nur Geistliche:
„Mir ist von österreichischen Bischöfen versichert worden“,
sagte er, „daß auch die russische Armee katholische Geistliche als
Geiseln festgenommen und, bei einer anderen Gelegenheit, fünf-
zehnhundert Juden vor sich hergetrieben habe, um hinter dieser
lebenden Schutzmauer, die den feindlichen Kugeln preisgegeben
war, vorzurücken. Der Bischof von Cremona teilt mir mit, daß die
22 Die Äußerung erfolgte vor dem Konsistorium am 22. Januar 1915. Sie wurde
gegenüber dem Journalisten Louis Latapie anläßlich eines Interviews wieder-
holt und von der Zeitung La Liberté in der Ausgabe vom 22. Juni 1915
abgedruckt.Konsistorium am 22. Januar 1915. Sie wurde
gegenüber dem Journalisten Louis Latapie anläßlich eines Interviews wieder-
holt und von der Zeitung La Liberté in der Ausgabe vom 22. Juni 1915
abgedruckt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Januar 1915. Sie wurde
gegenüber dem Journalisten Louis Latapie anläßlich eines Interviews wieder-
holt und von der Zeitung La Liberté in der Ausgabe vom 22. Juni 1915
abgedruckt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
italienische Armee bereits achtzehn österreichische Geistliche als
Geiseln festhalte23.“
Man vermeint, das Telegramm vor Augen zu haben, das Harold
Tittmann, 
Hauptmitarbeiter 
des 
Sonderbeauftragten 
Präsident
Roosevelts beim Heiligen Stuhl, Myron Taylor, am 5. Januar 1943
an das State Department sandte, nachdem er sich bei Pius XII. nach
der wahren Bedeutung der Weihnachtsbotschaft des Jahres 1942
erkundigt hatte:
„Was die Weihnachtsbotschaft anbelangt“, schrieb der amerika-
nische Diplomat, „so machte der Papst mir den Eindruck, daß er
aufrichtig glaubt, er habe sich klar genug geäußert, um alle, die im
Vergangenen darauf bestanden, er solle einige Worte zur Verur-
teilung der nationalsozialistischen Grausamkeiten sagen, zufrieden-
zustellen. Er schien überrascht, als ich ihm sagte, nicht alle Leute
seien derselben Ansicht.
Er sagte mir, seines Erachtens sei es für alle Welt klar, daß er die
Polen, die Juden und die Geiseln meinte, als er von Hundert-
tausenden von Menschen sprach, die man getötet oder gefoltert
habe, ohne ihnen irgendwelche Schuld beimessen zu können, ja
manchmal nur auf Grund ihrer Rasse oder ihrer Nationalität.
Er sagte mir, er habe, als er von diesen Grausamkeiten sprach,
nicht die Nationalsozialisten nennen können, ohne die Bolsche-
wisten ebenfalls zu nennen, das aber hätte seiner Meinung nach
den Alliierten wahrscheinlich nicht gefallen.
Er erklärte, er fürchte, die Berichte der Alliierten über die
Grausamkeiten seien fundiert, obgleich er mir zu verstehen gab,
daß seiner Ansicht nach ein wenig Übertreibung zu Propaganda-
zwecken im Spiele sei. Im großen und ganzen meinte er, seine
Botschaft müsse vom amerikanischen Volk gut aufgenommen wer-
den, und ich sagte ihm, ich stimmte mit ihm überein24.“
Angesichts dieser eindeutigen Darstellung und Billigung seitens
eines amerikanischen Diplomaten — dessen Zeugnis wohl ebenso-
viel Gewicht haben dürfte wie das der deutschen Diplomaten, die
23 Ebd.
24 Foreign Relations of the United States 1943 II, S. 911 ff. (Zitiert nach Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 97 — Anm. d. Übers.)
25 In seinem bereits angeführten Werk Pius XII. und das Dritte ReichEbd.
24 Foreign Relations of the United States 1943 II, S. 911 ff. (Zitiert nach Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 97 — Anm. d. Übers.)
25 In seinem bereits angeführten Werk Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich

--- PAGE BREAK ---ations of the United States 1943 II, S. 911 ff. (Zitiert nach Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 97 — Anm. d. Übers.)
25 In seinem bereits angeführten Werk Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
Saul Friedländer25 zitiert, um den Beweis zu erbringen, daß nur
Hitler alle Taten und Aussprüche des Papstes „gut aufnehmen“
konnte — hätte das Verhalten Pius’ XII. eigentlich niemals Anlaß
zu Diskussionen geben dürfen. Dies gilt auch für seine Einstellung
gegenüber den Opfern, hinsichtlich derer er stets erklärt hatte,
seine Bemühungen gälten „in gleicher Sorge allen Kriegsopfern,
allen materiell oder seelisch unter der Kriegsnot Leidenden . . . in
Deutschland . . . wie in der übrigen Welt . . . auf der einen oder
anderen Seite . . . gleichviel, ob die Betroffenen Kinder der Kirche
oder Außenstehende sind26“. Eine solche Haltung stellte den ein-
zigen Weg dar, nicht „in den Streit der Kriegführenden einzugrei-
fen“, nicht Partei zu ergreifen für die eine und gegen die andere
Seite — das heißt, einen Weg, der den Forderungen aller sittlichen
Lehren, ob auf religiöser Grundlage oder nicht, entsprach. Sie war
gleichzeitig die einzige Möglichkeit innerhalb der Grenzen, die
ihm durch das päpstliche Amt vorgezeichnet waren, „das Ende der
Heimsuchung“ — dieses „gegenseitigen Morgens“, an das zu den-
ken ihm „unerträglich“ war, wie er in seinem Schreiben an Bischof
von Preysing sagte — „herbeizuführen“. Aus dem Bemühen des
Papstes um die Beendigung des Krieges und aus seiner Sorge um
eine ganz bestimmte Gruppe der Kriegsopfer konstruierten seine
Ankläger anhand des im Stellvertreter dargestellten Themas eine
Alternative, bei der die Wahl schon von vornherein feststehen
sollte: als eine Entscheidung für eben diesen Kreis von Opfern. Mit
der Weigerung, seiner Fürsorge eine so einseitige Ausrichtung zu
geben, erbrachte Pius XII. den Beweis, daß zwischen ihm und
seinen Anklägern lediglich ein Unterschied im Grad der Einsicht
bestand. Im übrigen hatte seine Intervention im obengewünschten
Sinne bei zwei Gelegenheiten, 1939 in Polen und 1942 in Holland27,
das Los der Betroffenen nur noch härter gemacht und ihre Zahl
26 Schreiben an Msgr. von Preysing, Bischof von Berlin. (Zitiert nach Adolph,
Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 40 und 42 — Anm. d. Übers.)
27 Im Dezember 1939 baten die polnischen Geistlichen sowohl der von den
Deutschen als auch der von den Russen besetzten Gebietsteile den Papst in-
ständig darum, die Sendungen von Radio Vatikan einzustellen, da diese einzig
und allein zur Folge hätten, ihr Los zu verschlimmern. Im Juni 1942 hatte
ein für den Gebrauch der Gläubigen frei vervielfältigtes päpstliches Dokument
zum gleichen Ergebnis für die Juden und Halbjuden in Holland geführt.hätten, ihr Los zu verschlimmern. Im Juni 1942 hatte
ein für den Gebrauch der Gläubigen frei vervielfältigtes päpstliches Dokument
zum gleichen Ergebnis für die Juden und Halbjuden in Holland geführt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erschlimmern. Im Juni 1942 hatte
ein für den Gebrauch der Gläubigen frei vervielfältigtes päpstliches Dokument
zum gleichen Ergebnis für die Juden und Halbjuden in Holland geführt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
vergrößert; es war klar, daß er damit gleichzeitig auch seine
späteren Möglichkeiten für die Wiederherstellung des Friedens
aufs Spiel gesetzt hatte.
Wir übergehen schweigend die Art und Weise, in der Rolf Hoch-
huth von „unser aller Schuld“ spricht und den Papst als den „Ver-
treter“ dieser allgemeinen Schuld bezeichnet. Es ist eine wohl-
bekannte psychologische Erscheinung, daß ein Schuldiger zunächst
einmal dadurch reagiert, daß er ausruft, er sei nicht der einzige
Schuldige, und um sich herum nur noch Menschen sieht, die genau-
so schuldig sind wie er. Nicht weniger bekannt ist es, daß die erste
Sorge mehrerer Schuldiger, sobald sie unter sich sind, darin be-
steht, außerhalb ihres Kreises den Verantwortlichen für ihr ge-
meinsames Versagen zu suchen. Es ist eine immer wiederkehrende
Tatsache, daß sich dieser Verantwortliche stets findet: Man nennt
ihn, nach der Fabel, den „Sündenbock“. Hinsichtlich der Hitler-
Zeit trägt Rolf Hochhuth, damals ein kleines Kind, noch kaum
aus den Windeln heraus, und ein wenig später ein halbwüchsiger
Junge, ganz offensichtlich keinerlei Verantwortung. Nichtsdesto-
weniger legt er eine Reaktion an den Tag, die ebenfalls zu jenem
Register althergebrachter und durchaus bekannter Phänomene
gehört: So sah er sich in dem Alter, in dem man geistig zu er-
wachen beginnt, in aller Unbefangenheit ganz unvermittelt mit
der Verantwortlichkeit seiner nächsten Mitmenschen konfron-
tiert — beispielsweise der seines Vaters und der seiner älteren
protestantischen Glaubensgenossen. Da ihre Rolle bei der Macht-
ergreifung Hitlers in Deutschland nicht unbedeutend war, mußte
— so folgerte er — für den Krieg und alle seine Folgen das gleiche
gelten. Es bestand kein Zweifel: Obwohl unschuldig, gehörte er
doch zu einer Sippe von Schuldigen. Dieser Gedanke wurde ihm
unerträglich. Die Ehre der Sippe: Noch immer ist es Rodrigue28,
28 Im folgenden wird ein Vergleich zu Pierre Corneilles klassischer Tragödie
Le Cid (1636) angestellt.
Im Verlauf einer Auseinandersetzung versetzt Don Gomez, Comte de
Gormas, dem greisen Don Diègue eine Ohrfeige. Don Rodrigue, Titelheld des
Dramas und Sohn Don Diègues, symbolisiert Tapferkeit, Treue, Ehre, Pflicht
gegenüber seiner Familie: Die seinem Vater angetane Schmach ist auch die
seine. Um seines Vaters und gleichzeitig seine eigene Ehre wiederherzustellen,
fordert er den Beleidiger Gormas zum Zweikampf und tötet ihn. (Anm. d.
Übers.)seinem Vater angetane Schmach ist auch die
seine. Um seines Vaters und gleichzeitig seine eigene Ehre wiederherzustellen,
fordert er den Beleidiger Gormas zum Zweikampf und tötet ihn. (Anm. d.
Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Schmach ist auch die
seine. Um seines Vaters und gleichzeitig seine eigene Ehre wiederherzustellen,
fordert er den Beleidiger Gormas zum Zweikampf und tötet ihn. (Anm. d.
Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
der sich durch die Ohrfeige, die sein Vater empfing, am stärksten
gedemütigt fühlt, noch immer setzt Don Diègue sein Vertrauen
auf ihn. Im vorliegenden Falle hatte Rodrigue alias Hochhuth
viele Väter. Und für alle jene Protestanten, die das schlechte Ge-
wissen drückte, war der Papst die Ohrfeige, der Affront — dieser
Papst mit dem ruhigen Gewissen, dieser Papst, dessen Ruf durch
sein Verhalten vor dem Krieg und während des Krieges nicht im
geringsten beeinträchtigt worden war. Die Niederlage Luthers.
Vertauschte Rollen: das Recht auf seiten Don Gormas‘. Rodrigue
hatte zwar sehr viele Väter, im übrigen aber sehr wenig Mut: Um
den Degen zu ziehen, wartete er vorsichtigerweise, bis Don
Gormas tot war.
Doch genug des Vergleichs.
Daß es Hochhuth mit seiner Formulierung „unser aller Schuld“
vorläufig gelungen ist, die Schuld seiner eigenen Sippe auszu-
klammern, sie aufzulösen, zu ertränken in jener sogenannten all-
gemeinen Schuld und seiner Partei ein gutes Gewissen wiederzu-
geben, steht ebenso außer Zweifel wie seine persönliche naive Un-
schuld — ein Ausdruck, der hier übrigens in seinem doppelten
Sinne zu verstehen ist, vorzugsweise jedoch in seiner abwertenden
Bedeutung. Dennoch hat man den Eindruck, daß er vor allem das
Ausmaß seines ungebührlichen Verhaltens abschwächen wollte,
was man noch als positiv angesehen hätte, wäre es nicht zugleich
die niedrigste Art, sich selbst zu rechtfertigen. Denn, so darf man
sich fragen, gibt es eine gemeinere und unter Umständen verab-
scheuungswürdigere geistige Manipulation als zum Beispiel jene,
daß der Politiker oder sein geistiger Lehrmeister, der Industrie-
kapitän, einen Teil der Verantwortung für einen Krieg oder einen
Friedensvertrag auf den kleinen Monteur in den Renault-Werken
abwälzt? Wenn wir „alle schuldig sind“ im Hinblick auf den Tod
der Juden, warum sollten wir dann nicht auch alle schuld sein am
Kriege?
Womit hat ein einziger unter uns es verdient, an den Pranger
gestellt zu werden? Warum verdienen nur einige wenige Strafe,
und das auch noch in härterem Maße? Warum gehört Hochhuth
zu denjenigen, die am hartnäckigsten fordern, daß nur diese weni-
gen, in Frankfurt oder anderswo, bestraft werden? Es stellte ein-ge Strafe,
und das auch noch in härterem Maße? Warum gehört Hochhuth
zu denjenigen, die am hartnäckigsten fordern, daß nur diese weni-
gen, in Frankfurt oder anderswo, bestraft werden? Es stellte ein-

--- PAGE BREAK ---uch noch in härterem Maße? Warum gehört Hochhuth
zu denjenigen, die am hartnäckigsten fordern, daß nur diese weni-
gen, in Frankfurt oder anderswo, bestraft werden? Es stellte ein-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
mal jemand die Behauptung auf: „Wir sind alle Mörder!“ Hiermit
wurde das gleiche Thema angeschlagen, jedoch in der Absicht, zu
beweisen, daß es keinem unter uns ansteht, sich zum Richter auf-
zuwerfen. Ohne über den Wert dieses Ausspruches urteilen zu
wollen, muß man zugeben, daß der, der diesen Satz aufstellte,
immerhin ein ganz anderes geistiges Format besaß.
Von den Erklärungen und Rechtfertigungen Rolf Hochhuths,
die des Festhaltens wert wären, bleibt nur noch der Ausspruch
übrig, mit dem er sich als „ein Advokat der katholischen Kirche“
hinstellt. Wir werden nicht näher darauf eingehen: Auch das
Lächerliche hat seine Daseinsberechtigung, man darf sie ihm nicht
verwehren.
II. DAS RECHT AUF DICHTERISCHE FREIHEIT
Die Anhänger Hochhuths haben ganz offensichtlich versucht,
sich der Debatte über den Kern des Problems zu entziehen. Zu-
nächst einmal wäre zu sagen, daß keiner von ihnen die Argumente,
die ihnen entgegengehalten wurden, je für falsch erklärte. Da sie
die Beweise nicht in Abrede stellen konnten, akzeptierten sie
diese Argumente als wahr, bezeichneten sie jedoch als unzu-
reichend. Und für das Thema des nur allzu berühmten Gerstein-
Berichtes, auf dem ihr Favorit seine Anklage aufgebaut hatte, be-
gnügten sie sich mit der Versicherung, dies alles sei ja allgemein be-
kannt. Sodann flüchteten sie sich in Binsenwahrheiten über die
Tradition des Theaters, die schon immer — angefangen von den
griechischen Tragikern, auf dem Wege über Shakespeare, Corneille,
Racine, Molière, Schiller, Victor Hugo und andere, bis hin zu
Paul Claudel — darin bestanden habe, der Geschichte Persönlich-
keiten zu entnehmen und sie auf die Bühne zu bringen. Hierbei
brachten sie als Argument vor, daß Der Stellvertreter von Rolf
Hochhuth lediglich deshalb Anstoß errege, weil der Autor es sich
erlaubt habe, einen Papst auf der Bühne zu zeigen, das heißt eine
Persönlichkeit, die von zu vielen Menschen als hochheilig und
unantastbar angesehen werde. Und, so argumentierten sie weiter, es
gäbe schließlich keine wesentlichen Gründe, mit Pius XII. eine Aus-
nahme zu machen, die man weder Sokrates, Julius Cäsar, Richardnd
unantastbar angesehen werde. Und, so argumentierten sie weiter, es
gäbe schließlich keine wesentlichen Gründe, mit Pius XII. eine Aus-
nahme zu machen, die man weder Sokrates, Julius Cäsar, Richard

--- PAGE BREAK ---ehen werde. Und, so argumentierten sie weiter, es
gäbe schließlich keine wesentlichen Gründe, mit Pius XII. eine Aus-
nahme zu machen, die man weder Sokrates, Julius Cäsar, Richard

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
III., Heinrich VIII., Cromwell, Johanna von Orléans noch selbst
Alexander VI. Borgia, der ebenfalls Papst war, eingeräumt habe.
Einverstanden. Wir wollen sogar noch hinzufügen, daß die
Dramatiker, die jene berühmten Persönlichkeiten auf die Bühne
brachten, sich gegenüber der Geschichte ebensoviele Freiheiten
herausnahmen wie Rolf Hochhuth und daß ihnen das trotzdem
niemals jemand verübelte. Hierfür gibt es wenigstens zwei
Gründe: Der eine liegt darin, daß sie uns — selbst im Falle des
recht bedenkenlosen Aristophanes, der das politische Theater er-
fand, und selbst noch im Falle des plumpen Claudel — Meister-
werke des Geistes, der Kultur und der Kunst präsentierten, wäh-
rend sich bisher niemand fand, der zu behaupten gewagt hätte, daß
Der Stellvertreter in dieser dreifachen Hinsicht etwas anderes als
ein trauriges Erzeugnis sei. Der zweite Grund ist der, daß sie red-
liche Leute waren und den Ausgaben aller ihrer Werke eine Be-
merkung voranschickten, in der sie ihre Quellen anführten und
gleichzeitig deutliche Angaben darüber machten, welche Freiheiten
sie sich aus Gründen der Inszenierung, ihrer Phantasie oder ihrer
Überzeugungen gegenüber der Geschichte erlaubt hatten. Eben zu
dem Zweck, den Autoren diese Freiheiten zu gestatten, die nie-
manden, weder in den Tatsachen noch in den Absichten, täuschen,
schuf das Theater sich dann ja auch jene fiktiven Gestalten, die
Zofen und anderen männlichen und weiblichen Vertrauten, die
man unter der Bezeichnung „Nebenrollen“ findet. Hochhuth hin-
gegen hat die Ausgabe seines Stellvertreter mit einem „historischen
Anhang“ versehen und erklärt dazu, daß es „wenig üblich . . . [sei],
ein Drama . . . [damit] zu belasten29“, woraus ersichtlich wird, in-
wieweit er sich in dem, was auf diesem Gebiet üblich ist, auskennt.
Er bemerkt weiter, der Anhang solle „beweisen, daß der Verfasser
des Dramas sich die freie Entfaltung der Phantasie nur so weit er-
laubt hat, als es nötig war, um das vorliegende historische Rohma-
terial überhaupt zu einem Bühnenstück gestalten zu können29“, und
er habe sich „nur an beweisbare Tatsachen30“ gehalten. Doch beim
Lesen dieses Anhanges stellt man fest, daß außer den Sophismen,
29 Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 229
30 Ebd., S. 259n zu können29“, und
er habe sich „nur an beweisbare Tatsachen30“ gehalten. Doch beim
Lesen dieses Anhanges stellt man fest, daß außer den Sophismen,
29 Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 229
30 Ebd., S. 259

--- PAGE BREAK ---er habe sich „nur an beweisbare Tatsachen30“ gehalten. Doch beim
Lesen dieses Anhanges stellt man fest, daß außer den Sophismen,
29 Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 229
30 Ebd., S. 259

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
mit Hilfe deren er die Schuld Pius, XII. zu beweisen sucht, hinsicht-
lich derjenigen Tatsachen, gegen die der letztere sich hätte ver-
wahren müssen, nur Zeugnisse aus zweiter oder dritter Hand dar-
bietet, wobei in den meisten Fällen präzise Angaben fehlen oder,
wenn ein Hinweis erfolgt, er in einer Form gegeben wird wie
„einen Industriellen, dessen Name mir leider entfallen ist . . .31“,
„wenn ich nicht irre31“, „möglich ist es auch32“ etc. Überdies brin-
gen alle diese Zeugnisse keine Beweise, sondern lediglich eine
Überzeugung, die übrigens bei allen die gleiche ist und die in ihrer
Quintessenz 
folgendermaßen 
aussieht: 
„Der 
SS-Offizier 
Kurt
Gerstein, der mir diese Dinge erzählt hat“ oder „der diese Dinge
meinem Nachbarn erzählte, der sie dann mir weitererzählte, kann
nicht gelogen haben.“ Es sind gewissermaßen „Beweise aus innerer
Gewißheit“. Und was für welche! Sie gestatten es Hochhuth, zu
erklären: „1942, als er in der Nuntiatur erschien und hinaus-
geworfen wurde33“, und dann zu unterstellen: „Gersteins Mut und
Geschicklichkeit, die sein jahrelanges, nahezu selbstmörderisches
Doppelspiel in der SS überhaupt ermöglicht haben, sprechen dafür
[sic], daß er bei seinem Versuch, dem Nuntius Einzelheiten aus
Treblinka zu berichten, auch bis zu Orsenigo selbst vorgedrungen
ist. Die Gewalt seines Anliegens und Gersteins listige Entschlossen-
heit machen es unwahrscheinlich, daß er sich von einem subalter-
nen Priester aus der Nuntiatur hinausweisen ließ34.“
Dies heißt Erwin Piscator, der Regisseur des Stellvertreter, „wis-
senschaftlich erarbeitetes Material künstlerisch formuliert ausbrei-
ten35“, dies nennt Jacques Nobécourt „eine ständige Bezugnahme
auf die Geschichte36“. Besten Dank für solche Kunst, besten Dank
für solche Wissenschaft, besten Dank für solche Geschichte!
31 Ebd., S. 232
32 Ebd., S. 233
33 Ebd., S. 16
34 Ebd., S. 232
35 Ebd., S. 9
36 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 10olche Kunst, besten Dank
für solche Wissenschaft, besten Dank für solche Geschichte!
31 Ebd., S. 232
32 Ebd., S. 233
33 Ebd., S. 16
34 Ebd., S. 232
35 Ebd., S. 9
36 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 10

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dank
für solche Wissenschaft, besten Dank für solche Geschichte!
31 Ebd., S. 232
32 Ebd., S. 233
33 Ebd., S. 16
34 Ebd., S. 232
35 Ebd., S. 9
36 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
III. PORTRÄT DES SS-OFFIZIERS KURT GERSTEIN
Wenn man bedenkt, daß nach der Darstellung Hochhuths das
ganze Problem darin besteht, zu wissen, ob es dem SS-Obersturm-
führer Kurt Gerstein gelang oder nicht gelang, im August 1942
dem Vatikan Informationen über die Vorgänge zu übermitteln,
die sich in Belzec und Treblinka — und nicht, wie Nobécourt und
Hochhuth vorgeben, im Konzentrationslager Auschwitz — abge-
spielt haben sollen, dann ist es immerhin wichtig, über diesen
SS-Offizier Kurt Gerstein so genau wie möglich unterrichtet zu
werden. Es soll ein von ihm unterzeichnetes Dokument vorhan-
den sein, in dem es heißt, er sei „zum Verlassen der Botschaft
seiner Heiligkeit aufgefordert“ worden und er „habe dann alles
dies Hunderten von Persönlichkeiten berichtet, u. a. dem Syndi-
kus des katholischen Bischofs von Berlin, Herrn Dr. Winter, mit
der ausdrücklichen Bitte um Weitergabe an den päpstlichen
Stuhl37“. Hieraus folgert Saul Friedländer, ein weiterer General-
staatsanwalt im Fall Pius XII.: „Es besteht kein Grund zu der
Annahme, daß der Text nicht nach Rom geschickt worden ist.“
Und er fügt hinzu, selbst wenn das nicht geschehen sei, „darf man
vermuten [sic], daß Ende 1942 dem Papst ein mit dem hier zitier-
ten im wesentlichen übereinstimmender Text durch Bischof von
Preysing übersandt worden ist38“. Dies ist eine weitere Methode,
geschichtliche Wahrheit „wissenschaftlich zu erarbeiten“. Und der
Mann, der so vorgeht, ist Geschichtsprofessor am Institut uni-
versitaire des Hautes Études internationales in Genf! Nicht einen
Augenblick lang kommt es ihm in den Sinn — im Gegensatz zu
denen, die noch ein wenig Urteilsvermögen haben und die sich
die Mühe machten, das mit „Gerstein“ unterzeichnete Schriftstück
zu lesen —, daß, wenn Gerstein Dr. Winter wirklich das berichtete,
was in dem besagten Dokument niedergelegt ist, dieser ihn nur für
einen Irren halten konnte39.
Wie dem auch sei, die „wissenschaftlich erarbeitete“ Wahrheit,
37 Augenzeugenbericht zu den Massenvergasungen, Vierteljahrshefte für Zeit-
geschichte 1. Jg. (1953), S. 192 f. (Deutsche Fassung des Gerstein-Berichts)
38 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 93
39 Vgl. P. Rassinier, Das Drama der Juden Europas, S. 110 ff.Vierteljahrshefte für Zeit-
geschichte 1. Jg. (1953), S. 192 f. (Deutsche Fassung des Gerstein-Berichts)
38 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 93
39 Vgl. P. Rassinier, Das Drama der Juden Europas, S. 110 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ür Zeit-
geschichte 1. Jg. (1953), S. 192 f. (Deutsche Fassung des Gerstein-Berichts)
38 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 93
39 Vgl. P. Rassinier, Das Drama der Juden Europas, S. 110 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
zu der sich Hochhuth schließlich bekennt und die er auf die Bühne
bringt, ist folgende: Im August 1942 weist der päpstliche Nuntius
in Berlin den SS-Offizier Kurt Gerstein ab, jedoch nachdem er ihn
zuvor angehört hat. Ein junger Jesuit aus der Nuntiatur schenkt
am folgenden Tage seinen Berichten Glauben und überbringt am
2. Februar 1943 die von ihm erhaltenen Informationen dem Vati-
kan. Zwecks größerer Sicherheit folgt ihm Gerstein dorthin, es
gelingt ihm, sich Gehör zu verschaffen usw. Das Weitere läßt sich
erraten: Alles wird dem Papst bekannt, und der Papst — schweigt!
Für die in dem Stück verfochtene These ist es nämlich von Be-
deutung, daß der Papst von den Vorkommnissen wußte, und zwar
bis ins kleinste. Es ist nicht ersichtlich, warum, denn die Frage, ob
er bis ins kleinste davon wußte oder nicht, hätte angesichts der Auf-
fassung, die er von seinem päpstlichen Auftrag hatte, an seinem
Verhalten ohnehin nichts geändert. Denn, man kann es nicht oft
genug wiederholen, diese Auffassung, die einzige, die in bezug auf
sämtliche Sittenlehren akzeptierbar ist, bestand ja gerade darin,
seine Handlungsweise nicht von dieser oder jener Gruppe von
Opfern, von dieser oder jener Todesart, die sie erlitten, abhängig
zu machen, sondern in seinem Handeln dem Krieg als solchem so-
wie den Möglichkeiten seiner Beendigung Rechnung zu tragen.
Übrigens bestand seine Waffe im einen wie im anderen Fall ledig-
lich in der diplomatischen Intervention, obgleich Nobécourt dies
wohl für Pius X.40, aber nicht für Pius XII. gelten läßt. Auf alle
Fälle hat er von dieser Möglichkeit diplomatischer Intervention
jedesmal Gebrauch gemacht, wenn er von irgendwelchen Dingen
Kenntnis erhielt, ganz gleich, ob es sich hierbei um die Verfolgung
der Juden oder um die Luftangriffe handelte. Das einzige, was man
ihm vorwerfen könnte, ist, daß er dieser Intervention niemals
eine Form gab, die eine Parteinahme zugunsten der einen oder
anderen Seite der Kriegführenden bedeutet hätte. Aber gerade das
gereicht ihm zur Ehre, denn wäre ein solches Verhalten für ein
beliebiges Staatsoberhaupt auch durchaus berechtigt gewesen, für
den Stellvertreter Christi war es das nicht. Ob er etwas wußte oder
nicht, ist daher nur hinsichtlich der geschichtlichen Wahrheit von
Interesse. Nun, er wußte nicht von den Dingen, die gewußt zu
haben man ihm vorwirft, und Kardinal Tisserant41, den man ver-ußte oder
nicht, ist daher nur hinsichtlich der geschichtlichen Wahrheit von
Interesse. Nun, er wußte nicht von den Dingen, die gewußt zu
haben man ihm vorwirft, und Kardinal Tisserant41, den man ver-

--- PAGE BREAK ---daher nur hinsichtlich der geschichtlichen Wahrheit von
Interesse. Nun, er wußte nicht von den Dingen, die gewußt zu
haben man ihm vorwirft, und Kardinal Tisserant41, den man ver-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
geblich gegen Pius XII. auszuspielen suchte und den man auf Grund
seiner Meinungsverschiedenheiten mit ihm42 nicht verdächtigen
kann, hat die Frage endgültig entschieden:
„Über Auschwitz“, erklärte der Kardinal, „wurden wir erst nach
der Ankunft der Alliierten in Deutschland unterrichtet43.“
Diese Wahrheit, die man, wenn man ein Gefühl für Anstand
hat, nicht gegen die eines Hochhuth, noch selbst eines Piscator,
eines Jacques Nobécourt oder eines Saul Friedländer aufwiegen
kann, macht es unerläßlich darzulegen, was es mit jenem SS-Offi-
zier Kurt Gerstein und dem von ihm unterzeichneten Dokument
genau gesehen auf sich hat.
Der SS-Mann Kurt Gerstein ist für mich ein alter Bekannter.
Aus Sorge um Europa, das ohne Deutschland nicht denkbar ist,
bin ich bemüht zu verhindern, daß die geschichtliche Wahrheit
über die Konzentrationslager in den wilden Wogen des Deutschen-
hasses hinweggespült wird. Das Zeugnis jenes Geistlichen, dem es
gelungen war, ganz Frankreich und sogar die Journalisten der gan-
zen Welt davon zu überzeugen, daß er Tausende und aber tausende
von Menschen die Gaskammern in Buchenwald und Dora44 be-
treten sah (wo es, wie ich selbst wußte, gar keine gab), hatte mich
deshalb ebenso erregt wie am 31. Januar 1946 das mit „Gerstein“
40 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire . . . , S. 120
41 In seinem Schreiben vom 11. Juni 1940 teilt er dem Erzbischof von Paris,
Kardinal Suhard, mit, daß er „seit Anfang Dezember 1939“ den Heiligen
Vater nachdrücklich darum gebeten habe, „eine Enzyklika über die Pflicht des
einzelnen, der Stimme des Gewissens zu folgen, zu veröffentlichen“. Pius XII.
lehnte ab. Nichts ist natürlicher als das, denn am 20. Oktober 1939, das heißt
kaum mehr als einen Monat vorher, hatte er die Inauguralenzyklika seines
Pontifikats veröffentlicht, in der dieses Thema angesprochen wurde. Das
Schreiben Kardinal Tisserants wurde am 26. März 1964 von der gesamten Presse
groß herausgestellt.
42 Nobécourt, Le Monde v. 26. März 1964
43 Le Nouveau Candide v. 2. April 1964. Der Kardinal fügte hinzu, er selbst
habe während seines Versuchs, Pius XII. von der Notwendigkeit einer En-
zyklika über „die Stimme des Gewissens“ zu überzeugen, „keineswegs an die
Juden oder an den Nationalsozialismus, sondern an den Islam gedacht“. Dies
durchkreuzte alle daran geknüpften Erwartungen und machte es unmöglich,
sein Schreiben an Kardinal Suhard gegen „das Schweigen“ Pius’ XII. zu ver-
wenden. Schach und matt! Doch die Verteidiger des Stellvertreter taten, als
ob nichts gewesen wäre.
44 Siehe P. Rassinier, Die Lüge des Odysseus, S. 153 f.ard gegen „das Schweigen“ Pius’ XII. zu ver-
wenden. Schach und matt! Doch die Verteidiger des Stellvertreter taten, als
ob nichts gewesen wäre.
44 Siehe P. Rassinier, Die Lüge des Odysseus, S. 153 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---igen“ Pius’ XII. zu ver-
wenden. Schach und matt! Doch die Verteidiger des Stellvertreter taten, als
ob nichts gewesen wäre.
44 Siehe P. Rassinier, Die Lüge des Odysseus, S. 153 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
unterzeichnete Dokument. In diesem stand, daß man in den Kon-
zentrationslagern des besetzten Polens die Juden in Schüben
von 750 bis 800 Personen in Gaskammern mit einer Grundfläche von
20 qm (eine Fassung des Dokuments — es existieren nämlich zwei
davon — spricht von 25 qm) und einer Höhe von 1,90 m syste-
matisch erstickte. Wie es in dem Dokument weiter hieß, seien ins-
gesamt 25 Millionen europäische Juden auf diese Weise erstickt wor-
den. Auschwitz war lediglich zitiert; im Gegensatz zu Belzec und
Treblinka war der SS-Offizier in diesem Lager nicht Augenzeuge,
sondern hatte anhand von Rechnungen über Zyklon B, das er
selbst dorthin geliefert hatte, entsprechende Folgerungen gezogen.
Mit Verlaub gesagt, ich habe sogleich gedacht, daß ein Mann, der
solche Ungeheuerlichkeiten zu äußern vermochte, entweder gar
nicht existierte oder nur ein Irrer45 sein konnte, daß diejenigen, die
diese Dinge ernst nahmen, einen Fall für den Psychiater darstellten
und daß diese Dinge selbst der Ausdruck einer bis ins Äußerste
getriebenen Deutschfeindlichkeit waren. Da man ihnen jedoch
trotz allem Glauben schenkte, wird man verstehen, daß ich mir
einmal Klarheit verschaffen wollte. Ich gebe im folgenden einen
kurzen Überblick über das, was ich in dieser Hinsicht ermittelt
und an anderer Stelle in einem ausführlichen Bericht dargelegt
habe, auf den ich den Leser, dem es um die reine Wahrheit geht,
hinweisen möchte46:
1. Der Gerstein-Bericht liegt in zwei Fassungen vor, einer deut-
schen vom 4. Mai 1945 und einer französischen vom 26. April
1945 (was zur Genüge beweist, daß Pius XII. nicht im Jahre 1942
45 Wenn der SS-Offizier Kurt Gerstein dies dem Syndikus des katholischen
Bischofs von Berlin, Herrn Dr. Winter, wirklich berichtet hat (s. o. S. 42),
dann kann man nur allzu gut verstehen, daß dieser es niemals an den aposto-
lischen Nuntius in Berlin und dieser wiederum es nicht an den Papst weiter-
gab! Und wenn es sich um die gleichen Dinge handelt, die der Mitarbeiter des
Sonderbeauftragten Präsident Roosevelts am Vatikan, Tittmann, Ende De-
zember 1942 dem Papst mitteilte, dann ist es ebenso verständlich, daß dieser
ihm zur Antwort gab, „er fürchte, die Berichte der Alliierten über die Grau-
samkeiten seien fundiert“, wenn auch „seiner Ansicht nach ein wenig Über-
treibung zu Propagandazwecken im Spiele sei“. (Vollständig zitierter Text
des Telegramms s. o. S. 35.) Es muß dabei sogar betont werden, daß Pius XII.
sich in seiner Ausdrucksweise sehr maßvoll zeigte.
46 Rassinier, Drama der Juden und La Voix de la Paix, Juni 1964ter Text
des Telegramms s. o. S. 35.) Es muß dabei sogar betont werden, daß Pius XII.
sich in seiner Ausdrucksweise sehr maßvoll zeigte.
46 Rassinier, Drama der Juden und La Voix de la Paix, Juni 1964

--- PAGE BREAK ---mms s. o. S. 35.) Es muß dabei sogar betont werden, daß Pius XII.
sich in seiner Ausdrucksweise sehr maßvoll zeigte.
46 Rassinier, Drama der Juden und La Voix de la Paix, Juni 1964

--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
— oder Anfang des Jahres 1943, wie im Stellvertreter gesagt
wird — davon Kenntnis gehabt haben konnte). Diese beiden Fas-
sungen gehen zwar von den gleichen Tatsachen aus, doch decken
sie sich weder in ihrer äußeren Form noch in ihrem Text.
2. Weder die eine noch die andere Fassung wurde jemals irgend-
einem Gerichtshof vollständig vorgelegt oder in irgendeiner Form
offiziell veröffentlicht. Eine davon wurde am 30. Januar 1946 im
Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher in Nürnberg zitiert, je-
doch ohne daß man erfuhr, um welche der beiden es sich handelte,
und ohne daß eine weitere Angabe ihres Inhalts erfolgte. Da sie
dem Gerichtshof, obwohl dieser im übrigen darauf drang47, nicht
vorgelegt wurden, bedeutete das, daß keine der beiden Fassungen
als Beweismittel der Anklage zugelassen wurde. Aus Gründen der
Redlichkeit muß präzisiert werden, daß Bruchstücke davon, deren
Echtheit unmöglich nachzuprüfen ist, von anderen Gerichten in
anderen Prozessen — insbesondere dem Prozeß, den man im Ja-
nuar 1948 gegen die Herstellerfirma des Zyklon B anstrengte, so-
wie dem „Ärzteprozeß47a“ im Januar 1947 — zugelassen wurden
„mit der Begründung, daß dieses Dokument im Hauptkriegsver-
brecherprozeß zugelassen gewesen sei“, was keinesfalls zutrifft, und
„daß man die Entscheidungen dieses Prozesses statutgemäß nicht
in Frage stellen könnte47a“. Mit derselben juristischen Begründung
schließlich wurde das Dokument in seiner französischen Fassung
auch 1961 beim Eichmann-Prozeß in Jerusalem zugelassen.
3. Der Gerstein-Bericht ist heute aus dem Dépôt central d’archives
de la justice militaire française (Zentralarchiv des französischen
Militärgerichtshofes) sowie „aus den Akten der Spruchkammer in
Tübingen48“, die im Jahre 1949 in dieser Sache zu entscheiden
hatte, verschwunden. Ein ungemein günstiger Umstand, denn der
47 Der Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher vor dem Internationalen Mili-
tärgerichtshof (Nürnberg 1948) VI, S. 370 f. und 400 f. Als der französische
Ankläger Dubost in der Verhandlung am Morgen des 30. Januar 1946 das
Dokument vorlegte, lehnte der Vorsitzende es als Beweisunterlage glatt ab.
Während der Verhandlung am Nachmittag weigerte sich dann Dubost, es
vorzulegen!
47a Rückübersetzung (Anm. d. Übers.)
48 Léon Poliakov, L’Arche, 1. Januar 1964, und La Terre retrouvée, 1. April
1964b.
Während der Verhandlung am Nachmittag weigerte sich dann Dubost, es
vorzulegen!
47a Rückübersetzung (Anm. d. Übers.)
48 Léon Poliakov, L’Arche, 1. Januar 1964, und La Terre retrouvée, 1. April
1964

--- PAGE BREAK ---ndlung am Nachmittag weigerte sich dann Dubost, es
vorzulegen!
47a Rückübersetzung (Anm. d. Übers.)
48 Léon Poliakov, L’Arche, 1. Januar 1964, und La Terre retrouvée, 1. April
1964

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
Skandal um den Stellvertreter war mittlerweile so weit gediehen,
daß die Veröffentlichung dieses Dokumentes notwendig und nahe-
zu unvermeidlich wurde, wenn man in dieser Angelegenheit Ein-
helligkeit erreichen wollte: Es erhebt sich die Frage: Wer hatte ein
Interesse daran, es verschwinden zu lassen? Es fällt auf, daß hier
zum zweiten Mal in dem Streit um Pius XII. ein Dokument ver-
lorengegangen ist: Bekanntlich ist die Akte Nr. 6 des Vatikans in
den deutschen Archiven ebenfalls unauffindbar; dabei war es nicht
nur ein einzelnes Schriftstück, sondern ein ganzes Bündel! Es wird
heutzutage in den Archiven leicht gestohlen. Doch es hat nicht den
Anschein, als kümmerte das die für die Bewahrung der Archiv-
bestände verantwortlichen Stellen sehr: Es erfolgte nicht die ge-
ringste Nachforschung. Das Verschwinden der Vatikan-Akte Nr. 6
aus den deutschen Archiven ist sicherlich schwerwiegend, doch bis
zu einem gewissen Grade wiedergutzumachen. Man verfügt schließ-
lich immer noch über die Bestände der Engländer und Amerikaner,
die, wie zu hoffen steht, nicht der Plünderung anheimgefallen sind
wie die der Franzosen und Deutschen und die zweifellos alle not-
wendigen Nachprüfungen ermöglichen werden. Es verbleiben
außerdem die Archive des Vatikans, doch unterliegen ihre Be-
stände einer einhundertjährigen Sperrfrist, wobei eventuelle Ver-
zögerungen noch gar nicht eingerechnet sind. Gegenwärtig sind
sie bis zum Jahre 1849 freigegeben. Diese Regelung bezieht sich,
wohlgemerkt, auf die politischen Schriftstücke und nicht auf die
Acta Apostolicae Sedis, die in lateinischer Sprache vernünftiger-
weise laufend veröffentlicht werden. Ich glaube behaupten zu
können, daß man auf Grund der durch den Stellvertreter hervor-
gerufenen Polemiken für die Zeit des Nationalsozialismus eine
Ausnahme machen wird, ja, daß man sogar schon daran arbeitet49,
daß aber die Besteigung des Thrones Petri durch denjenigen, den
man schon heute „den guten Papst Johannes XXIII.“ nennt, weder
dazu angetan war, die Dinge zu erleichtern, noch sie zu beschleu-
nigen.
49 Diese Bemerkung wurde geschrieben, bevor der Vatikan offiziell diese Absicht
bekanntgab. Nunmehr ist in Rom der erste Band der diplomatischen Akten
des Vatikans erschienen. Darin wird die These der hier vorliegenden Arbeit
bestätigt., bevor der Vatikan offiziell diese Absicht
bekanntgab. Nunmehr ist in Rom der erste Band der diplomatischen Akten
des Vatikans erschienen. Darin wird die These der hier vorliegenden Arbeit
bestätigt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---offiziell diese Absicht
bekanntgab. Nunmehr ist in Rom der erste Band der diplomatischen Akten
des Vatikans erschienen. Darin wird die These der hier vorliegenden Arbeit
bestätigt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
Es gibt ferner noch die russischen Archive. Doch da man die
Gepflogenheiten der Russen auf dem Gebiet der Geschichte kennt,
darf man darauf nicht allzusehr zählen, in der nächsten Zeit zu-
mindest nicht.
Das Verschwinden des Gerstein-Berichtes, um darauf zurückzu-
kommen, ist weitaus schwerwiegender: Dieses Schriftstück wurde
niemals zum Gegenstand irgendeines diplomatischen Schrittes, und
wenn das Original seiner in zwei Sprachen50 abgefaßten Angaben
verschwunden ist, gibt es weiter keine Spur mehr. Folglich wird
es niemals mehr möglich sein, die Echtheit dieses Dokumentes
nachzuprüfen. Zwar verbleibt noch eine der beiden Versionen,
nämlich die deutsche Fassung, die von dem deutschen Historiker
Rothfels veröffentlicht wurde, doch wird diese Fassung, die auf
Grund ihrer in den Fußnoten offen zugegebenen Änderungen ge-
genüber dem Original bereits sehr verdächtig ist, bei Nichtwieder-
auffinden des Originals nichts weiter als eine Fiktion sein. Es bleibt
ferner die französische Fassung, die vor dem Tribunal von Jeru-
salem51 der Öffentlichkeit bekannt wurde, doch wenn das Original
verschwunden ist, bedeutet das, daß diese Fassung nicht vom Ori-
ginal genommen wurde und daß sie trotz des Beweiswertes, der
ihr seitens des Gerichtshofes von Jerusalem beigemessen wurde,
keinerlei historischen Wert besitzt: Die Hexenprozesse des Mittel-
alters sind voll von Zeugnissen dieser Art. Darüber hinaus sind
da auch noch die Unterschiede gegenüber der von Rothfels publi-
zierten deutschen Fassung.
4. Ein weiterer Punkt bleibt Kurt Gerstein selbst. Als er am
30. Januar 1946 vor dem Gerichtshof in Nürnberg erstmalig er-
wähnt wurde, war er bereits tot. Sein Todesdatum wird als be-
kannt angegeben, und zwar mit dem 25. Juli 1945. Doch weiß
man weder, wo er starb, noch, was aus seinem Leichnam wurde52.
Demzufolge wird dieses Datum selbst zweifelhaft. Nachstehend
50 Ja sogar in drei Sprachen, da dem Anschein nach ein oder zwei angefügte
Blätter auf englisch abgefaßt waren.
51 Attendu (Urteilsbegründung) 124 im Eichmann-Prozeß (nach Poliakov, Le
Procès de Jérusalem, S. 224 f.)
52 Mitteilung der Commission Oecuménique pour l’Aide Spirituelle aux Prison-
niers de Guerre, Genf, vom 10. März 1949 (nach Rothfels, Vierteljahreshefte
1. Jg. [1953], S. 185)de Jérusalem, S. 224 f.)
52 Mitteilung der Commission Oecuménique pour l’Aide Spirituelle aux Prison-
niers de Guerre, Genf, vom 10. März 1949 (nach Rothfels, Vierteljahreshefte
1. Jg. [1953], S. 185)

--- PAGE BREAK ---f.)
52 Mitteilung der Commission Oecuménique pour l’Aide Spirituelle aux Prison-
niers de Guerre, Genf, vom 10. März 1949 (nach Rothfels, Vierteljahreshefte
1. Jg. [1953], S. 185)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
einige Angaben zu den Umständen, unter denen sein Tod erfolgte:
Nach 
seiner 
Verhaftung 
durch 
einmarschierende 
französische
Truppen 
in 
Rottweil 
soll 
er 
dem 
amerikanischen 
Geheim-
dienst übergeben und von ihm verhört worden sein. Danach
soll er dem französischen Geheimdienst übergeben und von
diesem zwecks weiterer Verhöre in ein Pariser Militärgefängnis
gebracht worden sein. In welches, weiß man allerdings nicht,
denn die Unterlage, auf die man sich stützt, besagt lediglich:
„Prison Militaire de Paris53“. Es ist seltsam und überrascht,
daß nicht gesagt wird, in welches. In jenem unbekannten
Militärgefängnis54 soll man ihn eines Morgens erhängt vorge-
funden haben. Danach nichts mehr: Nacht und Nebel. Wir befin-
den uns in einer Zeit, in der Dokumente, Menschen, ja sogar
Leichen auf geheimnisvolle Weise verschwinden, und bald wird
sich leichter rekonstruieren lassen, was zwanzig Jahrhunderte vor
Christi Geburt bei den Eskimos oder den Hottentotten geschah,
als das, was sich vergangene Woche in Paris zutrug. Was wurde aus
dem SS-Offizier Kurt Gerstein nach dem 4. Mai 1945? Es ist nichts
darüber bekannt, doch ist es nicht ausgeschlossen, daß es noch ge-
lingen könnte, etwas darüber zu erfahren. Vielleicht würde es
genügen, die beiden amerikanischen Offiziere, die ihn verhörten
und deren Namen und Anschriften man kennt, als Zeugen vor-
zuladen. Ich betone, vielleicht! Denn es läßt sich immerhin ein Fall
denken, bei dem diese Offiziere sich auf bloße Bestätigungen be-
schränken würden: der Fall nämlich, in dem der SS-Offizier Kurt
Gerstein die Aussagen in dem Bericht, der seine Unterschrift trägt
— falls es sich überhaupt um die seine handelt! —, nur unter
Zwang, im Verlauf oder am Ende eines Verhöres vom Typ der
„sanften Vernehmungen“, gemacht hätte und ihnen in Rottweil
selbst ganz schlicht und einfach unter den Händen weggestorben
wäre. In diesem Falle wäre die Überführung in jenes unbekannte
Pariser Militärgefängnis eine reine Erfindung gewesen, einzig und
53 Ebd., S. 185
54 Poliakov erklärt, im „Cherche-Midi“, doch gibt er seine Quellen nicht an.
Poliakov ist bekannt für seine Manie, Texte zu präzisieren oder zu verbessern
(vgl. seine erste Version des Gerstein-Berichtes in Le Bréviaire de la haine,
S. 224 f.)h gibt er seine Quellen nicht an.
Poliakov ist bekannt für seine Manie, Texte zu präzisieren oder zu verbessern
(vgl. seine erste Version des Gerstein-Berichtes in Le Bréviaire de la haine,
S. 224 f.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---len nicht an.
Poliakov ist bekannt für seine Manie, Texte zu präzisieren oder zu verbessern
(vgl. seine erste Version des Gerstein-Berichtes in Le Bréviaire de la haine,
S. 224 f.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
allein zu dem Zweck, das Verbrechen zu verschleiern, und das wäre
auch der Grund, weshalb man den Namen jenes Gefängnisses nicht
kennt.
In allen übrigen denkbaren Fällen werden sie aussagen. Von dem
Punkt ausgehend, an dem sie Gerstein nach dem Verhör zurück-
ließen, wird es möglich sein, Schritt für Schritt den Weg bis zu
seinem Tode zu rekonstruieren, die Umstände zu ermitteln, unter
denen sein Tod erfolgte, vielleicht sogar seinen Leichnam aufzu-
finden. Zugleich wird man dann auch wissen, wie es sich mit der
Echtheit des ihm zugeschriebenen Berichtes verhält.
Bisher hat man sich wohl gehütet, jene beiden Offiziere zu be-
fragen. Wenn man sich auch jetzt, nachdem der Bericht verschwun-
den ist, nicht dazu entschließt, dann bedeutet das, daß er niemals
existiert hat.
Und trotz aller Fähigkeit Hochhuths und seiner Anhänger, die
geschichtlichen Wahrheiten „wissenschaftlich zu erarbeiten“, hat
dann Der Stellvertreter kein Fundament mehr.
Infolgedessen wird auch verständlich, daß sie stets auswichen,
sobald irgend jemand versuchte, sie an dieses Gebiet, nämlich die
Geschichte selbst, heranzuführen.
IV. DIE KRONZEUGEN
In einer anderen Hinsicht jedoch zeigten die Anhänger Hoch-
huths große Ausführlichkeit, die bis an die Grenzen des Schick-
lichen ging, nämlich bei den Kronzeugen. Hier wurde man wirk-
lich sehr verwöhnt, denn man begegnete Persönlichkeiten wie
Albert Camus, François Mauriac, Albert Schweitzer, Thomas
Mann und anderen.
Auf einer Konferenz am 28. November 1945 bei den Domini-
kanern hatte Albert Camus bezüglich Pius’ XII. erklärt:
„Eine Stimme hätte ich in jenen schrecklichen Jahren gern ge-
hört. Man sagt mir, sie habe gesprochen. Ich stelle jedoch fest, daß
ihre Worte nicht bis zu mir gedrungen sind55.“
Der Nobelpreisträger Albert Camus — eine Persönlichkeit also,
55 Zitiert nach L’Express v. 19. Dezember 1963, S. 27sprochen. Ich stelle jedoch fest, daß
ihre Worte nicht bis zu mir gedrungen sind55.“
Der Nobelpreisträger Albert Camus — eine Persönlichkeit also,
55 Zitiert nach L’Express v. 19. Dezember 1963, S. 27

--- PAGE BREAK ---jedoch fest, daß
ihre Worte nicht bis zu mir gedrungen sind55.“
Der Nobelpreisträger Albert Camus — eine Persönlichkeit also,
55 Zitiert nach L’Express v. 19. Dezember 1963, S. 27

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
vor der man vor Ehrfurcht in den Boden versinkt. Dennoch sei
hier in aller Bescheidenheit darauf aufmerksam gemacht, daß nicht
allzuviel übrigbliebe, müßte man alles das aus der Geschichte
streichen, was Albert Camus nicht vor die Augen oder zu Ohren
kam. So genommen, würde er selbst von einer recht beachtlichen
Anzahl von Leuten aus der Geschichte gestrichen werden. Er war
zweifelsohne ein sehr großer Philosoph, doch stellte er das mit
derartigen Aussprüchen ganz gewiß nicht sonderlich unter Beweis.
Nicht weniger Ehrfurcht empfindet man vor dem überaus gro-
ßen Schriftsteller und Nobelpreisträger François Mauriac, der im
Geleitwort zu einem Buch Léon Poliakovs56 folgendes schrieb:
„Wir hatten jedoch nicht den Trost, den Nachfolger des Gali-
läers Simon Petrus mit eindeutigem und klarem Wort, und nicht
mit diplomatischen Anspielungen die Kreuzigung dieser unzäh-
ligen ,Brüder des Herrn‘ verurteilen zu hören. In der Zeit der
Besetzung drang ich eines Tages in den verehrungswürdigen Kar-
dinal Suhard, der im stillen so viel für die Verfolgten getan hatte:
,Eminenz, weisen Sie uns, für die Juden zu beten . . . ‘, und er hob
statt jeder Antwort die Arme zum Himmel. Gewiß hatte die Be-
satzungsmacht Druckmittel, denen man nicht widerstehen konnte,
und das Schweigen des Papstes und der Hierarchie war nichts an-
deres als entsetzliche Pflicht; es ging darum, schlimmeres Übel zu
verhüten. Es bleibt, daß ein Verbrechen von solcher Weise zu
einem nicht geringen Teil auf alle Zeugen zurückfällt, die ge-
schwiegen haben, was immer die Gründe ihres Schweigens ge-
wesen sein mögen.“
Alexis Curvers hat in sehr geistreicher Weise die Abenteuer
geschildert57, die dieser Text zu bestehen hatte. Hochhuth hatte
daraus zunächst nur den ersten Satz zitiert. Die dadurch entstan-
dene Verfälschung des Sinnes war offensichtlich. Nachdem die
Verleger von Pater Marlé58, der die Sinnentstellung als erster be-
merkte, auf frischer Tat ertappt worden waren, gaben sie schließ-
lich in mehreren Auflagen den gesamten Text an. Ich bin jedoch
56 Le Bréviaire de la haine, (Text zitiert nach Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 6 —
Anm. d. Übers.)
57 Le Pape outragé
58 Figaro littéraire v. 19. Dezember 1963lagen den gesamten Text an. Ich bin jedoch
56 Le Bréviaire de la haine, (Text zitiert nach Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 6 —
Anm. d. Übers.)
57 Le Pape outragé
58 Figaro littéraire v. 19. Dezember 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---ext an. Ich bin jedoch
56 Le Bréviaire de la haine, (Text zitiert nach Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 6 —
Anm. d. Übers.)
57 Le Pape outragé
58 Figaro littéraire v. 19. Dezember 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---

53
im Besitz eines Exemplars einer deutschen Ausgabe, in der der Ver-
leger die Korrektur nur auf Kosten einer Änderung des Umbruchs
hätte vornehmen können und demzufolge sämtliche Mottos, das
heißt zwei Druckformen, ganz einfach ausließ, so daß das Vorwort
Erwin Piscators mitten in einem Absatz beginnt. Demgegenüber
umfaßt die amerikanische Ausgabe, die den vollständigen Text
François Mauriacs wiedergibt, zusätzlich noch einen Brief von
Albert Schweitzer: Zum Ruhme Hochhuths fehlte wirklich nur
noch dieser!
Um mit François Mauriac zu Ende zu kommen, sei im folgen-
den aufgezeigt, wie Alexis Curvers seine „Zeugenaussage“ beur-
teilt:
„Zum großen Glück für Mauriac ordnete der Kardinal nicht die
von diesem geforderten öffentlichen Gebete an; indessen gab er
einen Protest heraus, was Mauriac nicht tat; er handelte ,im stil-
len‘, was Mauriac nicht hindert, ihn im gleichen Atemzuge als
verehrungswürdig und für das Verbrechen verantwortlich zu be-
zeichnen.
Trotz der Druckmittel der Besatzungsmacht, denen man sich
nicht widersetzen konnte, trotz der entsetzlichen Pflicht des
Schweigens und trotz des schlimmeren Übels, das es zu verhüten
galt, forderte Mauriac von Papst, Hierarchie und allen Zeugen
einen Protestschrei, den er selbst nicht im entferntesten ausstieß,
aber der zwanzig Jahre später zu einem geradezu mit Besessen-
heit vorgetragenen Thema, zu dem Leitsatz im Feldzug gegen
Pius XII. wurde, diesem Feldzug, der in jenen vier Sätzen Mauriacs
bereits vollständig enthalten ist.“
Man könnte es nicht besser ausdrücken. Es muß jedoch hinzu-
gefügt werden, daß François Mauriac zur Zeit der Ereignisse sich
weitaus mehr Gedanken darum machte, was in Vichy gesprochen
wurde und welche Dispositionen Oberleutnant Heller von der
deutschen Propaganda-Staffel für ihn traf, als darum, was im
Vatikan gesagt wurde. Hier offenbart sich eine Eigenschaft des
„nahezu 
zeitlosen 
Klanges59“ 
einer 
Stimme: 
Sie 
überdeckt
alle anderen.
59 Le Figaro v. 3. Juli 1940. Es handelt sich um die Stimme Marschall Pétains.de. Hier offenbart sich eine Eigenschaft des
„nahezu 
zeitlosen 
Klanges59“ 
einer 
Stimme: 
Sie 
überdeckt
alle anderen.
59 Le Figaro v. 3. Juli 1940. Es handelt sich um die Stimme Marschall Pétains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich eine Eigenschaft des
„nahezu 
zeitlosen 
Klanges59“ 
einer 
Stimme: 
Sie 
überdeckt
alle anderen.
59 Le Figaro v. 3. Juli 1940. Es handelt sich um die Stimme Marschall Pétains.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
Aus dem Brief, den Albert Schweitzer am 30. Juni 1963 aus
Lambarene an den deutschen Verleger Rolf Hochhuths richtete,
sollen nur die drei wesentlichen Gedanken herausgegriffen werden:
1. „Ich habe das Versagen, das damals (in der Zeit der Juden-
verfolgung) stattfand, lebhaft miterlebt und finde, daß wir uns mit
diesem großen Problem des Ablaufs der Geschichte beschäftigen
müssen.“
Wir erfahren hier, daß Albert Schweitzer diese Zeit „lebhaft
miterlebt“ hat, also ein aktiver Zeuge war. Gegen wen? Gegen
Hitler selbstverständlich. Zwanzig Jahre später ist das immer
nützlich zu wissen.
2. „Versagt hat ja nicht nur die katholische Kirche, sondern auch
die protestantische. Die katholische hat die größere Schuld, weil
sie eine organisierte, internationale Größe war, die etwas unter-
nehmen konnte, während die protestantische eine unorganisierte,
machtlose nationale Größe war.“
Albert Schweitzer ist Protestant, und daß er für seine Kirche
spricht, setzt niemanden in Erstaunen. Er sei jedoch darauf hin-
gewiesen, daß die protestantische Kirche in Deutschland mit 40
bis 45 Millionen Mitgliedern eine weitaus größere Macht darstellte
als die katholische Kirche mit 20 bis 25 Millionen und daß sich ihre
Geistlichen 1933 nicht besonders hervortaten, als es darum ging,
Hitler an der Machtergreifung zu hindern, eher im Gegenteil,
während der katholische Episkopat gegen ihn stimmen ließ60.
3. „Es hat . . . eine Bedeutung, daß das Drama ,Der Stellver-
treter‘ erschien. Es ist nicht nur die Verurteilung einer geschicht-
lichen Persönlichkeit, die die große Verantwortung des Verschwei-
gens auf sich lud, sondern es ist auch eine ernste Mahnung an unsere
Kultur, der Duldung der Humanitätslosigkeit, mit der wir es nicht
ernst nehmen, entsagen zu wollen.“
Ein historisches Urteil? Die Vorstellung, daß die Geschichte Ur-
teile fällt, ist in den heutigen traurigen Zeiten sicherlich ziemlich
verbreitet. Nicht weniger sicher ist es, daß das Urteil, das in diesen
Worten von Albert Schweitzer gefällt wird und das sich nicht
scheut, einen Rolf Hochhuth mit der Geschichte zu identifizieren,
60 S. u. S. 173 ff.weniger sicher ist es, daß das Urteil, das in diesen
Worten von Albert Schweitzer gefällt wird und das sich nicht
scheut, einen Rolf Hochhuth mit der Geschichte zu identifizieren,
60 S. u. S. 173 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---es, daß das Urteil, das in diesen
Worten von Albert Schweitzer gefällt wird und das sich nicht
scheut, einen Rolf Hochhuth mit der Geschichte zu identifizieren,
60 S. u. S. 173 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
noch nicht einmal mittelmäßig genannt werden kann. Der gemein-
same Tenor dieser drei Gedanken kann niemandem mehr entge-
hen: Der erste Punkt stellt mit dem Hinweis auf ihn selbst als
aktiven Zeugen eine Werbung in eigener Sache dar. Der zweite ist
eine Werbung für seine Kirche, die zweifellos „auch versagt“ hat,
jedoch in weit geringerem Maße als die katholische Kirche, und
die man außerdem in vielerlei Hinsicht entschuldigen kann. Der
dritte schließlich ist eine diskrete Erinnerung an sein Werk in
Lambarene, das er mittels einer sehr geschickten Werbung in her-
vorragender Weise dahingehend zu nutzen wußte, daß er persön-
lich in den Augen einer geistig zerrütteten Welt als Inbegriff der
Humanität erschien, ein Werk jedoch, das einer beachtlichen An-
zahl redlich denkender Menschen61 mehr und mehr fast ausschließ-
lich kommerziell ausgerichtet zu sein scheint.
Es genügt im übrigen, Les Mots62 zu lesen, jenes Meisterwerk
Jean-Paul Sartres, der in weiblicher Linie von den Schweitzers
abstammt und sie daher gut kennt: Nach der Lektüre dieses Wer-
kes hegt man keine Zweifel mehr daran, daß dieser Sinn für
Reklame, der von Morvan Lebesque in einer Reportage63 aus
Lambarene bestätigt wurde, in der Familie Schweitzer erblich ist.
Bei Thomas Mann liegt der Fall ein wenig anders. Dieser deut-
sche Schriftsteller, der im Jahre 1901 (im Alter von 26 Jahren)
durch einen bemerkenswerten gesellschaftskritischen Roman, Die
Buddenbrooks, berühmt wurde, hatte 1914 die Aufmerksamkeit
der intellektuellen Kreise Frankreichs wegen des Einflusses auf sich
gezogen, den er in den intellektuellen Kreisen Deutschlands zu-
gunsten des Ersten Weltkrieges ausgeübt hatte64. Man muß anneh-
men, daß der Krieg ihm ein Bedürfnis war: Von 1933 an stellte er
sich in den Dienst des Zweiten Weltkrieges. Seine philosophischen
Beweggründe jedoch hatten in einem Vierteljahrhundert eine völ-
lige Wandlung erfahren, denn von einem Anhänger des Panger-
manismus war er zu einem Gegner des Nationalsozialismus ge-
61 G. McKnight, Le Dr Schweitzer
62 (Die deutsche Ausgabe erschien bei Rowohlt unter dem Titel Die Wörter. —
Anm. d. Übers.)
63 Canard enchaîné v. 7. Oktober 1964
64 Vgl. Stefan Zweig, Die Welt von gesternMcKnight, Le Dr Schweitzer
62 (Die deutsche Ausgabe erschien bei Rowohlt unter dem Titel Die Wörter. —
Anm. d. Übers.)
63 Canard enchaîné v. 7. Oktober 1964
64 Vgl. Stefan Zweig, Die Welt von gestern

--- PAGE BREAK ---weitzer
62 (Die deutsche Ausgabe erschien bei Rowohlt unter dem Titel Die Wörter. —
Anm. d. Übers.)
63 Canard enchaîné v. 7. Oktober 1964
64 Vgl. Stefan Zweig, Die Welt von gestern

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
worden. Die Niederwerfung des Nationalsozialismus allerdings
hatte er vorsichtshalber uns überlassen: Er selbst hatte nämlich
bei den ersten Anzeichen der Gefahr, die dieser für ihn bedeutete,
nichts Eiligeres zu tun gehabt, als schleunigst seine kostbare Person
in den Vereinigten Staaten in Sicherheit zu bringen. Kurz ge-
sagt — ein sehr großer Schriftsteller (auch er ist Nobelpreisträger),
aber ein ganz gewöhnlicher Feigling! Im Gegensatz zu seinen Mit-
würdenträgern von der Schwedischen Akademie, die sich darauf
beschränkten, nachträglich allgemeine Redensarten über die Ent-
setzlichkeit von Dingen von sich zu geben, von denen sie nicht die
geringste Ahnung hatten, äußerte er sich zu den Ereignissen, wäh-
rend sie sich abspielten, und zwar aus der vollen Kenntnis der
Tatbestände heraus, für die er sich verbürgte: Denn — dort drü-
ben war er dem Geschehen in Europa nur um so näher und sein
allerunmittelbarster Zeuge. Aus diesem Grunde war er in der Lage,
uns während der acht Minuten Sendezeit, die ihm monatlich bei
Radio BBC zur Verfügung standen, mit überaus großer Genauig-
keit über die kleinsten Vorkommnisse in Polen zu unterrichten,
und daher war er auch der erste, der im November 1941 auf die
dortigen Massenmorde an Juden und Polen und später, im Januar
1942, auf die Vergasung holländischer Juden hinwies65.
Es ist nicht bekannt, woher Thomas Mann seine Informationen
erhielt. Möglicherweise verfügte er über dieselben Quellen wie ein
gewisser Ralf Feigelson, von dem wir eine Übersicht besitzen, in
der sämtliche Nachrichten aus Polen datenmäßig aufgeführt sind:
„Mit Beginn der ersten Massenmorde in Osteuropa hatten der
65 Um es dem Leser zu ermöglichen, die Zuverlässigkeit dieser Meldungen, die
von Hochhuth mit entschieden unübertroffener Fähigkeit, die geschichtlichen
Wahrheiten „wissenschaftlich zu erarbeiten“, aufgegriffen werden (vgl. Der
Stellvertreter, Historische Streiflichter, S. 246 f.), in der richtigen Weise einzu-
schätzen, wollen wir unsererseits darauf hinweisen, daß der jüdische Ankläger
in Nürnberg Robert Kempner den ersten für Polen bestimmten Transport von
Juden auf den 28. März 1942 datiert (Eichmann und Komplizen, Europa Ver-
lag, Stuttgart, S. 185) und daß Joseph Billig vom Centre de Documentation
juive contemporaine in Paris hierfür den 27. nennt (La Condition des Juifs
en France, Revue d’Histoire de la Deuxième Guerre mondiale, Oktober 1956).
Es sei noch hinzugefügt, daß der Beschluß zur Deportation der Juden in den
Osten auf der berühmten Konferenz in Berlin-Wannsee am 20. Januar 1942
gefaßt wurde.Deuxième Guerre mondiale, Oktober 1956).
Es sei noch hinzugefügt, daß der Beschluß zur Deportation der Juden in den
Osten auf der berühmten Konferenz in Berlin-Wannsee am 20. Januar 1942
gefaßt wurde.

--- PAGE BREAK ---iale, Oktober 1956).
Es sei noch hinzugefügt, daß der Beschluß zur Deportation der Juden in den
Osten auf der berühmten Konferenz in Berlin-Wannsee am 20. Januar 1942
gefaßt wurde.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

57
jüdische und polnische Widerstand die Weltöffentlichkeit alar-
miert. Ende 1941 wurde London durch die Widerstandsbewegung
von Lodz über die Vorkommnisse in Chelmno unterrichtet. Am
16. März, 31. August und 15. November 1942 wurden drei Be-
richte aus Warschau abgesandt. Im April 1943 stieß das Getto von
Bialystock einen SOS-Ruf aus. Diese Notschreie, die nicht un-
gehört bleiben66 . . . “
Meines Wissens wurde niemals auch nur die geringste Spur einer
für London bestimmten Information über die Geschehnisse in
Chelmno „Ende 1941“ aufgefunden, auf Grund deren man be-
haupten könnte, daß London ihr Bedeutung beigemessen habe. Es
ist hingegen möglich, daß ein am 8. August 1942 vom Vertreter
des Jüdischen Weltkongresses in Genf, Riegner, an die Botschaft
der Vereinigten Staaten in Bern gerichtetes Schreibens67 auf dem
Bericht aus Warschau vom 16. März fußt. Es erhebt sich jetzt
lediglich die Frage, wann der Vatikan informiert wurde und wie
er reagierte. Mit Sicherheit läßt sich sagen, daß ihm erstmalig am
26. September 1942 durch ein Schreiben des Sonderbeauftragten
Präsident Roosevelts beim Heiligen Stuhl, Myron Taylor, an
Staatssekretär Msgr. Maglione68 genaue Fakten zur Kenntnis ge-
bracht wurden. Das Schreiben behandelt die Liquidierung des
Warschauer Gettos, „Massenexekutionen“ in Belzec, Massaker,
Deportationen nach Litauen, Lublin oder Theresienstadt, und
zwar in Transporten von je vierzig Personen pro Waggon usw.
Wohl wird darin gesagt, daß die „Leichen zur Fettherstellung und
die Knochen zur Düngerherstellung verwendet“ werden, doch
Gaskammern werden nicht erwähnt. Die Informationen seien am
30. August 1942 seitens des Genfer Büros der Jewish Agency for
Palestine übermittelt worden, das angibt, sie „von zwei durchaus
glaubwürdigen Augenzeugen (Ariern), von denen der eine am
14. August aus Polen eintraf“, erhalten zu haben. Jedoch wird
keiner der beiden Zeugen namentlich angeführt.
66 Le Monde v. 21. Januar 1964
67 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 86
68 Ebd., S. 89 f.
Ferner in U.S. Department of State Bulletin, Bd. VII (Washington 1942)
Friedländer, a. a. O., S. 90 — Anm. d. Übers.)66 Le Monde v. 21. Januar 1964
67 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 86
68 Ebd., S. 89 f.
Ferner in U.S. Department of State Bulletin, Bd. VII (Washington 1942)
Friedländer, a. a. O., S. 90 — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Januar 1964
67 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 86
68 Ebd., S. 89 f.
Ferner in U.S. Department of State Bulletin, Bd. VII (Washington 1942)
Friedländer, a. a. O., S. 90 — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
Die Antwort Msgr. Magliones erfolgte am 10. Oktober 1942. Nach
Aussage 
des 
Hauptmitarbeiters 
Myron 
Taylors, 
Tittmann,
hatte sie folgenden Inhalt:
„Nachdem die Note [Msgr. Magliones] Botschafter Taylor dafür
gedankt hat, daß er den Heiligen Stuhl auf die Frage aufmerksam
machte, erklärt sie, daß ebenfalls Berichte aus anderer Quelle über
harte Maßnahmen gegen Nichtarier zum Heiligen Stuhl gelangt
sind, daß es aber bis zum gegenwärtigen Augenblick nicht möglich
war, diese auf ihre Genauigkeit hin zu überprüfen69 . . . “
Wie verständlich ist es doch, daß seitens des Heiligen Stuhles das
Bedürfnis bestand, die Zuverlässigkeit dieser Informationen zu
überprüfen! Und wie verständlich ist es auch, daß Pius XII. am
30. Dezember 1942 in einer Unterredung mit dem obengenann-
ten Harold Tittmann die Äußerung von sich gab, „er fürchte, die
Berichte der Alliierten über die Grausamkeiten seien fundiert“,
wenn auch „seiner Ansicht nach ein wenig Übertreibung zu Propa-
gandazwecken im Spiele sei“!
Zu diesem Zeitpunkt war bereits die gemeinsame Erklärung der
Alliierten vom 18. Dezember 1942 veröffentlicht worden, in der
sie zum Schicksal der nach Osten deportierten Juden Europas Stel-
lung nahmen. In der Erklärung ist die Rede davon, daß man dabei
sei, „die oft wiederholte Absicht Hitlers zu verwirklichen, die
jüdische Bevölkerung in Europa auszurotten“, daß der Abtrans-
port der Juden „unter abstoßend grauenhaften und brutalen Be-
dingungen“ erfolge, daß „die Arbeitsfähigen in Arbeitslagern lang-
sam zu Tode geschunden“, „die Schwachen dem Kälte- und Hun-
gertod ausgesetzt“ würden und daß „die Zahl der Opfer . . . auf
viele Hunderttausende . . . geschätzt70“ werde, doch Gaskammern
werden auch in diesem Falle nicht erwähnt. Da Pius XII. durch
Myron Taylor bekannt war, aus welch zweifelhaften Quellen die
Informationen stammten, auf die in der Erklärung Bezug genom-
69 Ebd., S. 91
70 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 91 f.
Ferner in U. S. Department of State Bulletin, Bd. VII (Washington 1942)
S. 1009 (Zitiert nach Friedländer, a. a. O., S. 92 — Anm. d. Übers.)
71 Vgl. oben S. 56 f.1
70 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 91 f.
Ferner in U. S. Department of State Bulletin, Bd. VII (Washington 1942)
S. 1009 (Zitiert nach Friedländer, a. a. O., S. 92 — Anm. d. Übers.)
71 Vgl. oben S. 56 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---us XII., S. 91 f.
Ferner in U. S. Department of State Bulletin, Bd. VII (Washington 1942)
S. 1009 (Zitiert nach Friedländer, a. a. O., S. 92 — Anm. d. Übers.)
71 Vgl. oben S. 56 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
men wurde71, mußte er zwangsläufig das Bedürfnis verspüren, sie
hinsichtlich ihrer Zuverlässigkeit zu überprüfen.
Was Thomas Mann von Januar 1942 an über die Vergasungen
berichtet hatte, war völlig unbeachtet geblieben. Wie es scheint,
kann das erste Mal, bei dem diese Dinge so zur Sprache gebracht
wurden, daß man ihnen seitens der Regierungen und diploma-
tischen Kreise der Alliierten Glaubwürdigkeit beimaß, auf Novem-
ber 1943 datiert werden. Zu diesem Zeitpunkt nämlich erschien in
London das Buch eines jüdischen Professors der Rechtswissen-
schaft der Universität Warschau, der 1939 dorthin geflüchtet war,
das Werk Axis Rule in Occupied Europe von Rafael Lemkin. Frei-
lich wurde das Buch nur mit großem Vorbehalt aufgenommen,
denn man muß zugeben, daß die Vorstellung jener Millionen
systematisch in den Gaskammern umgebrachter Juden nur schwer
glaubhaft war, um so mehr als die Anklage durch einen Mann
erhoben wurde, der als Zeuge nicht annehmbarer war als Thomas
Mann. Wie dem auch sei, es scheint keine Hinweise dafür zu geben,
daß London daraufhin irgendwelche diplomatischen Interven-
tionen unternommen hat.
Es gibt ferner den Bericht des Präsidenten des Komitees zur Rettung
der 
Juden 
in 
Budapest, 
Dr. 
Rudolf 
Kastner. 
Der 
Bericht
erwähnt Massenmorde an osteuropäischen Juden, von denen Kast-
ner gegen Ende 1942 erfuhr, sowie Gaskammern, von deren Exi-
stenz er im Sommer 1943 Kenntnis erhielt. Kastner ist ein unmit-
telbarer Zeuge für das Geschehen in Ungarn und über einen von
ihm geschaffenen Informationsdienst ein mittelbarer Zeuge für die
Vorgänge in der Slowakei, in Böhmen und Mähren, Polen, Rumä-
nien und Österreich. Der Einmarsch der deutschen Truppen in
Ungarn erfolgte erst am 19. März 1944. Bis zu diesem Zeitpunkt
stand Kastner in ungehindertem Nachrichtenaustausch mit einer
parallel arbeitenden jüdischen Organisation in Konstantinopel, der
früheren Hauptstadt der Türkei, eines neutralen Landes also, in
dem die Juden niemals behelligt wurden. Es hat nicht den An-
schein, als hätten die Deutschen nach der Besetzung Ungarns die
72 Der Kastner-Bericht über Eichmanns Menschenhandel in Ungarn, sowie Alex
Weißberg, Die Geschichte von Joel BrandEs hat nicht den An-
schein, als hätten die Deutschen nach der Besetzung Ungarns die
72 Der Kastner-Bericht über Eichmanns Menschenhandel in Ungarn, sowie Alex
Weißberg, Die Geschichte von Joel Brand

--- PAGE BREAK ----
schein, als hätten die Deutschen nach der Besetzung Ungarns die
72 Der Kastner-Bericht über Eichmanns Menschenhandel in Ungarn, sowie Alex
Weißberg, Die Geschichte von Joel Brand

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
Verbindungen zwischen den Budapester Juden und denen Kon-
stantinopels unterbunden. Im Gegenteil72. So informierte Kastner
also von Ende des Jahres 1942 an bis zur Invasion Ungarns durch
die russischen Truppen die jüdische Organisation in Konstantino-
pel über alles, was er wußte oder zu wissen glaubte. Was allerdings
danach aus den übermittelten Informationen wurde, ist nicht be-
kannt. Als Joel Brand, der von Eichmann zu den Alliierten ent-
sandt wurde, um über den Tausch von einer Million Juden gegen
zehntausend Lastkraftwagen zu verhandeln, am 18. Mai 1944 in
Konstantinopel eintraf, lautete die erste Frage seiner dortigen
jüdischen Briefpartner an ihn: „ . . . Ist es wahr, daß die Deporta-
tionen begonnen haben73?“ Bald wurde ihm klar, daß die türki-
schen Juden nur sehr lose Beziehungen zur britischen und ameri-
kanischen Botschaft besaßen. Als er ihnen nahelegte, ein Tele-
gramm zu schicken, erhielt er zur Antwort: „ . . . die Sache läßt sich
nicht so übers Knie brechen . . . wir sind nicht sicher, daß unsere
Telegramme . . . ankommen. Wir wissen nicht, ob sie nicht ver-
stümmelt ankommen74.“
Er berichtete ihnen sodann, was sich abspielte, fand damit jedoch
keinen Glauben. Als es ihm schließlich gelang, mit Lord Moyne,
dem britischen Beauftragten für Palästina, Kontakt aufzunehmen,
ließ dieser ihn als Betrüger inhaftieren75. Kurzum, der Kastner-
Bericht wurde erst im Laufe des Sommers 1945 von seinem zu jener
Zeit in die Schweiz geflüchteten Verfasser niedergeschrieben; am
13. Dezember 1945 fand er vor dem Internationalen Militärge-
richtshof in Nürnberg76 erstmalig offiziell Berücksichtigung, und
erst 1961, zur Zeit des Eichmann-Prozesses77, wurde er in deut-
scher Sprache und in einer vom Original sehr weit entfernten Fas-
sung vom Kindler-Verlag München veröffentlicht.
Nur schwerlich läßt sich die Ansicht vertreten, daß man von
Pius XII. hätte fordern können, besser informiert zu sein als die
73 Weißberg, Joel Brand, S. 152
74 Ebd., S. 157
75 Ebd., S. 163 ff.
76 Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher (Nürnberg 1947) III, S. 560 f.
77 S. P. Rassinier, Zum Fall Eichmann: Was ist Wahrheit? oder Die unbelehr-
baren Sieger52
74 Ebd., S. 157
75 Ebd., S. 163 ff.
76 Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher (Nürnberg 1947) III, S. 560 f.
77 S. P. Rassinier, Zum Fall Eichmann: Was ist Wahrheit? oder Die unbelehr-
baren Sieger

--- PAGE BREAK ---5 Ebd., S. 163 ff.
76 Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher (Nürnberg 1947) III, S. 560 f.
77 S. P. Rassinier, Zum Fall Eichmann: Was ist Wahrheit? oder Die unbelehr-
baren Sieger

--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
Alliierten. Demgegenüber wird man erwidern, daß er aber doch
zumindest den Alliierten hätte Glauben schenken und ihre Infor-
mationen in der Form hätte akzeptieren können, in der sie sie ihm
zukommen ließen, was insbesondere für das Schreiben Myron
Taylors vom 26. September 1942 sowie für die Resolution der
Alliierten vom 18. Dezember 194278 gilt. Doch — warum sollte er
hinsichtlich dieser Informationen schließlich nicht dieselbe Zurück-
haltung an den Tag legen wie die Alliierten selbst gegenüber ihren
Auskunftgebern?
Sicherlich, überprüfen mußte er sie. Aber welche Mittel standen
dem Papst hierfür zur Verfügung? Seine Nuntien hatte er, weiter
nichts! Jedoch: In Polen besaß er keinen, da er sich geweigert hatte,
diesen Staat in den von Hitler reduzierten Grenzen anzuerkennen.
In der Slowakei, in Ungarn, in Ankara usw. verfügte er freilich
über Nuntien. Tatsächlich hat er dann auch jedesmal, wenn diese
ihm von irgendwelchen Erpressungen Kenntnis gaben, sich dar-
über informiert und ihnen Weisungen im Sinne eines diplomati-
schen Protestes erteilt. Nun, dem Leser ist bereits bekannt, welches
Schicksal sämtlichen Protesten des Vatikans widerfuhr, die sich
„schubladenweise“ in Ribbentrops Amtszimmer anhäuften. Joel
Brand berichtet, daß der Papst in den Jahren 1941, 1942 und
1943 in der Slowakei und von Mai bis Juni 1944 in Ungarn wiederholt
intervenierte, und zwar sowohl direkt als auch auf dem Wege über
seine Nuntien79. Im folgenden sehen wir, welchen Ausgang eine
Intervention des Nuntius in Berlin, Msgr. Orsenigo, bei Hitler
selbst nahm:
„In allerhöchstem Auftrag bin ich vor einigen Tagen nach
Berchtesgaden geflogen. Ich wurde vom Führer und Kanzler Hitler
empfangen, aber sobald ich das Thema Juden und Judentum . . .
angeschnitten hatte, drehte sich Hitler ab, ging ans Fenster und
trommelte mit den Fingern gegen die Scheibe. Sie können sich
vorstellen, wie peinlich es mir war, im Rücken meines Gesprächs-
partners mein Vorhaben vorzutragen. Ich tat es trotzdem. Dann
drehte sich plötzlich Hitler um, ging an einen Tisch, wo ein Glas
78 Vgl. oben S. 58
79 Weißberg, Joel Brand, im Rücken meines Gesprächs-
partners mein Vorhaben vorzutragen. Ich tat es trotzdem. Dann
drehte sich plötzlich Hitler um, ging an einen Tisch, wo ein Glas
78 Vgl. oben S. 58
79 Weißberg, Joel Brand

--- PAGE BREAK ---esprächs-
partners mein Vorhaben vorzutragen. Ich tat es trotzdem. Dann
drehte sich plötzlich Hitler um, ging an einen Tisch, wo ein Glas
78 Vgl. oben S. 58
79 Weißberg, Joel Brand

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
Wasser stand, faßte es und schleuderte es wütend auf den Boden.
Mit dieser hochdiplomatischen . . . Geste durfte ich meine Mission
als beendet und gleichzeitig leider als abgelehnt betrachten80.“
An folgenden Fakten, die man Pius XII. zum Vorwurf macht,
ist nicht zu rütteln: daß seine Interventionen sich nur auf Tat-
sachen gründeten, die von seinen eigenen Informationsdiensten
überprüft worden waren, daß sie stets auf dem diplomatischen
Wege erfolgten und in einem dementsprechenden Stil abgefaßt
waren (doch Nobécourt selbst bemerkt hinsichtlich Pius’ X., daß
ein Papst keine anderen Möglichkeiten habe81 — also warum
Pius XII. absprechen, was man Pius X. durchaus zugestand?) und
daß sie stets den Charakter von „Protesten gegen jegliche Grau-
samkeiten, von welcher Seite sie auch begangen sein mochten“,
gewahrt haben — von Protesten jener Art, wie sie sich beispiels-
weise wegen der Luftangriffe gegen die Zivilbevölkerung an die
Adresse der Engländer und Amerikaner richteten. Dies stellte die
einzige Form des Protestes dar, die mit seinem apostolischen Auf-
trag, „ein Vater der gesamten Menschheit zu sein“, vereinbar war.
Man kann seine Situation nur — wenn auch unvollkommen —
mit der Lage jener Sabinerin vergleichen, die sich zwischen ihrem
Bruder und ihrem Gatten hin- und hergerissen sieht, als diese auf
Geheiß der Alten beider Lager sich kämpfend gegenüberstehen.
Der Papst wandte sich gegen den Krieg insgesamt. Es war jedoch
nicht seine Aufgabe, zugunsten des einen und zum Schaden des
anderen der beiden feindlichen Lager gegen einzelne Folgen des
Krieges Stellung zu beziehen, und — es sei hier noch einmal ge-
sagt — gerade diese Einstellung gereicht ihm zur Ehre.
Die Orientierung darüber, was Pius XII. wußte und wann er es
erfuhr, sollte jedoch nur die Möglichkeit schaffen, die „Kronzeu-
gen“ der Herren Hochhuth und Genossen richtig einzuschätzen.
Darüber hinaus sollte sie deutlich machen, daß man ein allgemein
anerkanntes Talent und zugleich moralisch ein Versager sein kann.
Ausgenommen hiervon ist selbstverständlich Dr. Albert Schweit-
80 Erklärung Msgr. Orsenigos gegenüber Professor Edoardo Senatra wenige Tage
nach einer Intervention im November 1943. Die Erklärung wurde wieder-
gegeben im Petrus Blatt, dem Organ der Diözese Berlin, vom 7. April 1963.
81 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S.120ardo Senatra wenige Tage
nach einer Intervention im November 1943. Die Erklärung wurde wieder-
gegeben im Petrus Blatt, dem Organ der Diözese Berlin, vom 7. April 1963.
81 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S.120

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tage
nach einer Intervention im November 1943. Die Erklärung wurde wieder-
gegeben im Petrus Blatt, dem Organ der Diözese Berlin, vom 7. April 1963.
81 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S.120

--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
zer, dessen „Konsekration“ nicht auf seinen literarischen Fähig-
keiten, sondern lediglich auf einem geschickt in den Dienst einer
ausgeprägt kommerziellen Denkweise gestellten Exhibitionismus
beruht.
V. SAUL FRIEDLÄNDER UND DIE DEUTSCHEN ARCHIVE
Besondere Erwähnung verdient einer der zahlreichen Ankläger
dieses Prozesses, die sich im Anklagestand so ablösen, daß schon
der nächste dasteht, wenn sein Vorgänger seine gesamten Beweis-
gründe erschöpft hat, gleichsam als wolle er dessen Schwächen ver-
decken: Es ist der allerletzte Ankläger, der auf dem Plan erscheint,
der schon mehrfach erwähnte Saul Friedländer. Er wurde in Prag
geboren, ist Bürger des Staates Israel und gelangte schon recht
lange vor Erscheinen seines Buches Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich82
in den Vorteil einer für einen Autor beispiellosen Werbekampagne,
die den Eindruck vermittelte, er ginge an das Studium der deut-
schen Unterlagen zum Fall Stellvertreter heran wie ein junger Wolf
an die Schafe und er werde mit allen aufräumen, die an der Wohl-
begründetheit der Hochhuthschen These Zweifel hegten — man
werde schon sehen!
Man sah dann schließlich folgendes:
1. Ein Buch von 179 Seiten im Oktavformat, das ungefähr zu
zwei Dritteln aus Kommentaren des Autors, Dokumenten nicht-
deutscher Provenienz (von der Jewish Agency for Palestine, aus
israelischen, englischen und amerikanischen Archiven), Entlehnun-
gen von anderen Autoren (Poliakov, Nobécourt usw.) sowie
einem Nachwort von Alfred Grosser besteht. Hieraus muß man
schließen, daß jenes Bündel von Vatikan-Akten in den deutschen
Archiven, das auf knapp 75 kleinen Seiten Platz findet, wahrhaftig
82 Deutsche Ausgabe von Pie XII et le IIIe Reich, erschienen bei Rowohlt 1965.
Dieses Buch stellt im übrigen nur eine Paraphrase des bei McGraw-Hill
(New York 1964) erschienenen Werkes von Guenter Lewy, The Catholic
Church and Nazi Germany, dar. Da dieses letztgenannte Werk noch nicht in
französischer Übersetzung vorliegt, wurde eine Bezugnahme darauf vom
Autor als nicht zweckmäßig erachtet. Im übrigen bedeuten die Bemerkungen
zu dem Werk von Friedländer gleichzeitig auch eine Stellungnahme zu dem
des Verlages McGraw-Hill.de eine Bezugnahme darauf vom
Autor als nicht zweckmäßig erachtet. Im übrigen bedeuten die Bemerkungen
zu dem Werk von Friedländer gleichzeitig auch eine Stellungnahme zu dem
des Verlages McGraw-Hill.

--- PAGE BREAK ---arauf vom
Autor als nicht zweckmäßig erachtet. Im übrigen bedeuten die Bemerkungen
zu dem Werk von Friedländer gleichzeitig auch eine Stellungnahme zu dem
des Verlages McGraw-Hill.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
sehr dürftig ist, und ferner, daß die Beziehungen zwischen dem
Vatikan und dem Dritten Reich sehr locker waren. Freilich gibt
Friedländer an, er habe nur fünf Ordner mit Akten vorgefunden
und der fünfte habe auf einen sechsten hingewiesen, der jedoch
verschwunden sei. Und wenn nun dieser sechste einen siebten an-
kündigte, der siebte wiederum einen achten usw.? Dieses Ver-
schwinden von Dokumenten, deren Anzahl nicht abgeschätzt wer-
den kann, zwingt den Autor, seine Nachforschungen nicht weiter
als bis zum 16. Oktober 1943 zu führen. Aus freien Stücken da-
gegen fängt er erst am 3. März 1939 an. Die Beziehungen zwischen
Pius XII. und dem Dritten Reich begannen indessen bereits am
30. Januar 1933 — zu einer Zeit also, als er noch der Kardinal-
staatssekretär Pacelli war — und setzten sich bis in den April 1945
hinein fort. Dies bedeutet, daß die Forschungen Friedländers sich
nur auf viereinhalb von insgesamt zwölf Jahren erstrecken. Die
Untersuchung ist also zeitlich eingeschränkt, dazu aber auch noch
in ihrem Aspekt einseitig, denn Friedländer stellt uns Pius XII.
nicht nach den Vatikan-Akten des Reichsaußenministeriums dar,
sondern lediglich anhand der Korrespondenz des deutschen Bot-
schafters beim Vatikan mit dem Staatssekretär des Auswärtigen
Amtes. Hierbei gibt er jedoch nur die Berichte des Botschafters
selbst oder seiner Mitarbeiter, hingegen niemals die Texte der
Instruktionen, die als Anlaß dazu dienten. Während das Bestre-
ben der modernen Historiker mehr und mehr dahin geht, die
Fakten in ihren historischen Zusammenhang hinsichtlich Zeit und
Raum zu stellen, um so ein Höchstmaß an Objektivität zu errei-
chen, erblickt man bei Friedländer die Neigung, die Fakten so weit
wie möglich aus diesem Zusammenhang herauszureißen.
2. Da die Untersuchungen erst beim 3. März 1939 beginnen,
gestattet es die zeitliche Beschränkung seiner Forschung, die Be-
ziehungen Pius’ XII. mit dem Dritten Reich für den gesamten
Zeitraum vom 30. Januar 1933 bis 3. März 1939 mit Stillschweigen
zu übergehen. Sehen wir doch, wozu das führt:
Am 3. März 1939 verfaßte Graf Du Moulin, der Leiter des
Referats für Angelegenheiten des Vatikans im Berliner Auswärti-
gen Amt, eine Charakteristik des am Vortage gewählten Papstes.
In dieser Aufzeichnung heißt es: „Abgesprochen wird ihm . . . eineer des
Referats für Angelegenheiten des Vatikans im Berliner Auswärti-
gen Amt, eine Charakteristik des am Vortage gewählten Papstes.
In dieser Aufzeichnung heißt es: „Abgesprochen wird ihm . . . eine

--- PAGE BREAK ---Angelegenheiten des Vatikans im Berliner Auswärti-
gen Amt, eine Charakteristik des am Vortage gewählten Papstes.
In dieser Aufzeichnung heißt es: „Abgesprochen wird ihm . . . eine

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
Mitwirkung an der Gewaltpolitik Pius’ XI. . . . Mit aller Entschie-
denheit setzte er sich dem Drängen der Intransigenten entgegen
und trat gleichzeitig für Verständigung und Versöhnung ein83.“
Am gleichen Tage beglückwünschten sich aber die französischen
Zeitungen Le Populaire (sozialistisch) und L’Humanité (kommu-
nistisch) zur Wahl eines antifaschistischen und antinazistischen
Papstes84. Die deutsche Pressekampagne anläßlich der Frankreich-
reise Kardinal Pacellis im Jahre 1937 sowie den Ausspruch im
Angriff85, der Zeitschrift Goebbels‘: „Pius XI. ist zur Hälfte Jude,
Pacelli ist es ganz“, hatte Du Moulin in seiner Darstellung völlig
unberücksichtigt gelassen. Es ist andererseits bekannt, daß der wirk-
liche Verfasser der Enzyklika Mit brennender Sorge vom 14. März
1937, die eine schonungslose Verdammung des Nationalsozialismus
darstellte, Kardinal Pacelli, der spätere Pius XII., war, obwohl die
Enzyklika von Pius XI. unterzeichnet wurde. Von dieser Tatsache,
die Du Moulin ebenfalls ausgelassen hatte, weiß man durch Msgr.
Paganuzzi, einen der engsten Mitarbeiter Pius’ XI. und Pius’ XII.,
der in der italienischen Wochenzeitschrift Vita darüber folgendes
erklärte:
„Als die Veröffentlichung der berühmten Verurteilung des Na-
tionalsozialismus unmittelbar bevorstand, empfing Pius XI. ge-
meinsam mit Kardinal Pacelli zwei deutsche Kardinäle in Privat-
audienz: Faulhaber und — ich weiß nicht mehr — Schultz aus
Köln oder Bertram aus Breslau.
Der Papst gab ihnen den endgültigen Text der Enzyklika zu
lesen und fragte sie, was sie davon hielten und was sie dazu zu
sagen hätten. Die beiden Kardinäle beglückwünschten den Papst
zu der begründeten Aufdeckung der Irrtümer des Nationalsozia-
lismus sowie zu der detaillierten Ablehnung der Anschauungen,
die zum Sittengesetz, zum Naturrecht und zum bestehenden Ge-
setz in Widerspruch stünden. Sie betonten hierbei, daß eben diese
nationalsozialistischen Anschauungen für das mißliche Verhältnis
83 Note Du Moulins an Ribbentrop vom 3. März 1939, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 17 f.
84 Vgl. Anhang I
85 3. Juni 1937, zitiert nach Le Monde et la Vie, Januar 1964 (Rückübers. —
Anm. d. Übers.)ote Du Moulins an Ribbentrop vom 3. März 1939, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 17 f.
84 Vgl. Anhang I
85 3. Juni 1937, zitiert nach Le Monde et la Vie, Januar 1964 (Rückübers. —
Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---bbentrop vom 3. März 1939, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 17 f.
84 Vgl. Anhang I
85 3. Juni 1937, zitiert nach Le Monde et la Vie, Januar 1964 (Rückübers. —
Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
verantwortlich seien, das nicht nur zwischen der Kirche und dem
Reich, sondern auch zwischen der Kirche und der Gesamtheit der
deutschen Katholiken bestehe.
Der alte Papst war über die Komplimente und die Zustimmung
der beiden deutschen Kardinäle offensichtlich erfreut. Schließlich
deutete er mit dem Finger auf Kardinal Pacelli, und nach einer
bedeutungsvollen Pause erklärte er (Pius XI.) langsam: ,Danken
Sie ihm . . . Es ist alles sein Werk . . . Er ist es jetzt, der alles
macht86.‘ “
Und der unwiderlegbare Beweis hierfür wurde durch La France
catholique erbracht, die die Photokopie von einem Teil eines Kor-
rekturbogens dieser Enzyklika veröffentlichte87, auf dem keine
typographischen Korrekturen, sondern Autorenkorrekturen von der
Hand Kardinal Pacellis erscheinen.
Durch Pater Leiber schließlich weiß man, daß sämtliche Proteste
des Vatikans gegen die wiederholten Verletzungen des Konkor-
dats89, das vom Dritten Reich mit dem Vatikan abgeschlossen wor-
den war und das bereits am Tage nach seiner Unterzeichnung
sowie später noch unzählige Male verletzt wurde, aus der Feder
des Staatssekretärs Pacelli stammen, der als Vater des Konkordats-
rechts — es war von ihm geschaffen worden — im übrigen als
einziger imstande war, diese Proteste zu formulieren. Durch La
Documentation catholique, die diese Angaben aus den Acta Aposto-
licae Sedis übernimmt, weiß man ferner, daß es seiner Initiative zu
verdanken war, daß die Suprema Sacra Congregazione del Sant’Of-
fizio Bücher verurteilte wie Der Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts von
86 Zitiert nach L’Homme nouveau v. 19. April 1964
87 4. Dezember 1964
88 Pater Leiber zählte bis Ende 1937 „mehr als 55“ solcher Proteste (Stimmen
der Zeit, März 1962, und Revue des Questions allemandes, Juli-August 1963).
Die bedeutendsten davon wurden durch Michele Maccarrone veröffentlicht
(Il Nationalsocialismo e la Santa Sede, Rom 1947). Noch während der Druck-
legung dieses Buches erscheint in Deutschland ein Werk, in dem 111 dieser
Proteste in vollem Wortlaut wiedergegeben werden: Der Notenwechsel zwi-
schen dem Hl. Stuhl und der deutschen Reichsregierung von Dieter Albrecht.
Indem Friedländer seine Forschungen mit dem 3. März 1939 beginnen läßt,
verzichtet er ganz einfach darauf, diese Noten zu erwähnen. Man kann die
Redlichkeit eines solchen Vorgehens nur bewundern.cht.
Indem Friedländer seine Forschungen mit dem 3. März 1939 beginnen läßt,
verzichtet er ganz einfach darauf, diese Noten zu erwähnen. Man kann die
Redlichkeit eines solchen Vorgehens nur bewundern.

--- PAGE BREAK ---er seine Forschungen mit dem 3. März 1939 beginnen läßt,
verzichtet er ganz einfach darauf, diese Noten zu erwähnen. Man kann die
Redlichkeit eines solchen Vorgehens nur bewundern.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
Alfred Rosenberg89, Die deutsche Nationalkirche von Ernst Berg-
mann90 (ein Werk über das gleiche Thema wie das vorige, nämlich
den Mythus der Rasse und des Blutes), Die Einwanderung Israels in
Kanaan von Abt Friedrich Schmidtke, Professor an der theologi-
schen Fakultät der Universität Breslau91, und andere, außerdem
Entscheidungen der Reichsregierung wie die Sterilisation von Erb-
kranken92 und die Tötung (Euthanasie) der unheilbar Kranken,
die eine schwere Belastung für die Gesellschaft darstellen93. Fried-
länders Methode läßt es zu, all dies mit Stillschweigen zu über-
gehen und uns einen Pius XII. zu zeigen, der mit der wahren
historischen Gestalt nicht mehr gemein hat als der Pius XII. Hoch-
huths. Sie gestattet es ihm sogar, zu schreiben: „Nur das Archiv
des Vatikans kann Auskunft darüber geben, ob die Predigten des
Bischofs Graf Galen von Münster, der im August 1941 öffentlich
gegen die Tötung von Geisteskranken protestierte und Hitler
drängte, diese Aktion abzubrechen, auf eine Weisung des Papstes
zurückgingen oder der persönlichen Initiative des Bischofs zu dan-
ken waren94.“
Dies beweist, daß er diese Predigten noch nicht einmal gelesen
hat, denn sie beziehen sich unmißverständlich auf den Beschluß der
Suprema Sacra Congregazione del Sant’Offizio vom 2. Dezember
1940, der den Wert einer „päpstlichen Weisung“ besitzt und in
diesem Fall sogar eine persönliche Weisung des Papstes darstellt,
da er unter seinem Pontifikat gefaßt wurde.
Die gleiche Methode erlaubt ihm schließlich die Behauptung:
„Möglicherweise erinnert man sich daran, daß der frühere Nuntius
in München und Berlin der Initiator des Konkordates zwischen
dem Heiligen Stuhl und dem Dritten Reich gewesen ist95 . . . “,
wobei er noch nicht einmal bemerkt, daß er selbst ein Dokument
89 Verurteilt am 9. 2. 1934
90 Verurteilt am 14. 2. 1934
91 Verurteilt am 14. 3. 1934
92 Verurteilt am 21. 2. 1940
93 Verurteilt am 2. 12. 1940
Die vollständigen Texte dieser Verurtei-
lungen, die sämtlich kategorisch und un-
widerruflich sind, finden sich unter den
nebenstehenden Daten in La Documenta-
tion catholique, 5, rue Bayard, Paris, oder
in lateinischer Sprache in den Acta Apo-
stolicae Sedis, Bd. 30.
94 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 57.
95 Ebd., S. 18.den
nebenstehenden Daten in La Documenta-
tion catholique, 5, rue Bayard, Paris, oder
in lateinischer Sprache in den Acta Apo-
stolicae Sedis, Bd. 30.
94 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 57.
95 Ebd., S. 18.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aten in La Documenta-
tion catholique, 5, rue Bayard, Paris, oder
in lateinischer Sprache in den Acta Apo-
stolicae Sedis, Bd. 30.
94 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 57.
95 Ebd., S. 18.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
anführt, in dem gesagt ist, daß „das Reichskonkordat aus einem
deutschen Wunsch entstanden sei96“.
3. Die Beschränkung der Untersuchung auf die Berichte eines
Botschafters ermöglicht Bemerkungen wie diese hier: Zur gleichen
Zeit, als Tittmann von der diplomatischen Vertretung Roosevelts
am Vatikan sich mit den Antworten des Papstes auf seine Vor-
stellungen zur Weihnachtsbotschaft 1942 einverstanden erklärte,
wie auch insbesondere mit den Worten, daß diese Botschaft „vom
amerikanischen Volk gut aufgenommen werden müsse97“, be-
glückwünschte sich der deutsche Botschafter von Bergen — der
seinen Posten am Vatikan bis zum 4. Juli 1943 innehatte — gegen-
über seiner Regierung, daß eben dieser Papst dem Ersuchen der
Angelsachsen hinsichtlich einer alleinigen Verurteilung der natio-
nalsozialistischen Verbrechen nicht nachgäbe. Kurz gesagt, den
Berichten der beiden Botschafter zufolge müßte jedermann mit
dieser Weihnachtsbotschaft 1942 zufrieden gewesen sein! Es ist
jedoch wohlbekannt, daß dies keineswegs der Fall war: In Wirk-
lichkeit war jeder unzufrieden. Die Deutschen waren es, weil die
Weihnachtsbotschaft zu deutlich war — doch ihr Botschafter be-
wies ihnen, daß das nichts zu bedeuten habe, indem er hervorhob,
mit welcher Herzlichkeit er vom Papst empfangen worden sei,
oder indem er auf Informationen aus maßgeblichen Quellen hin-
wies, auf Grund deren man versichern dürfe, „mit seinem Her-
zen . . . stehe Pius XII. auf seiten der Achsenmächte98“. Die Ameri-
kaner hingegen waren unzufrieden, weil die Weihnachtsbotschaft
nicht deutlich genug war — doch ihr Botschafter erklärte ihnen,
daß sie trotz allem eindeutig sei, wodurch zu verstehen gegeben
wurde, daß sie zu keinerlei Zweifeln Anlaß gäbe, daß man auf dem
richtigen Wege sei und daß man schon zum Ziele kommen werde.
Gegenüber Berichten von Botschaftern muß man vorsichtig sein.
Jeder Historiker weiß, daß es einem Botschafter vor allem darum
96 Ebd., S. 127. Telegramm Weizsäckers vom 5. Juli 1943, in dem dieser über die
Privataudienz berichtet, die ihm anläßlich der Überreichung seines Beglaubi-
gungsschreibens gewährt wurde.
97 Vgl. oben S. 36
98 Brief Menshausens an das Reichsaußenministerium, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 66.et, die ihm anläßlich der Überreichung seines Beglaubi-
gungsschreibens gewährt wurde.
97 Vgl. oben S. 36
98 Brief Menshausens an das Reichsaußenministerium, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 66.

--- PAGE BREAK ---h der Überreichung seines Beglaubi-
gungsschreibens gewährt wurde.
97 Vgl. oben S. 36
98 Brief Menshausens an das Reichsaußenministerium, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 66.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
zu tun ist, seinen Einfluß auf die Regierung, bei der er akkreditiert
ist, hervorzuheben. Er weiß ferner, daß die Darstellung, die ein
Botschafter von einer Angelegenheit gibt, die sich auf die Außen-
politik seiner eigenen Regierung bezieht, sowie seine Darstellung
der Reaktionen, die die Außenpolitik seiner Regierung bei der
Regierung seines Amtssitzes hervorruft, nur Wert besitzen, wenn
man sie mit den Berichten der anderen Botschaften dieses Ortes
über dieselbe Angelegenheit und dieselben Reaktionen vergleicht
oder mit den ausgetauschten diplomatischen Noten, die die Folge
einer erfolgreichen Tätigkeit des Botschafters sind. Die diplomati-
sche Mission Bergens und Weizsäckers war ein völliger Mißerfolg,
und beide waren daher nur um so mehr geneigt, den Mißerfolg
der Botschafter der Alliierten herauszustellen und ihn aus den
Sympathien des Papstes für die Achsenmächte zu erklären, die auf
ihrer eigenen Persönlichkeit und Tätigkeit beruhten.
Doch worin bestand die diplomatische Mission eines Botschaf-
ters der Reichsregierung beim Heiligen Stuhl? Hierüber sind wir
durch den Bericht über ein Gespräch, das Ribbentrop persönlich
am 11. März 1940 im Vatikan mit Pius XII. und anschließend mit
dessen Staatssekretär, Msgr. Maglione, führte, sehr genau unter-
richtet: „Der Führer ist der Ansicht“, sagte Ribbentrop, „daß eine
grundsätzliche Einigung zwischen Nationalsozialismus und katho-
lischer Kirche durchaus möglich sei. Es habe aber keinen Zweck,
das Verhältnis zwischen beiden durch Anschneiden von Einzel-
fragen dieser oder jener Art oder durch provisorische Verein-
barungen regeln zu wollen. Vielmehr müsse es einmal zu einer
umfassenden, sozusagen säkularen Klärung des Verhältnisses kom-
men, die dann eine wirklich dauerhafte Grundlage für eine harmo-
nische Zusammenarbeit der Faktoren bilde . . . Außerdem sei zu
bedenken, daß die Verständigung zwischen Nationalsozialismus
und katholischer Kirche von einer Kardinalvoraussetzung abhänge,
davon nämlich, daß die katholische Geistlichkeit in Deutschland
auf jede wie immer geartete Form politischer Betätigung verzichte
und sich ausschließlich auf die ihr allein zukommende seelsorge-
rische Tätigkeit beschränke. Die Erkenntnis der Notwendigkeit
einer solchen radikalen Scheidung könne aber heute bei den katho-
lischen Geistlichen in Deutschland noch nicht als herrschend ange-orge-
rische Tätigkeit beschränke. Die Erkenntnis der Notwendigkeit
einer solchen radikalen Scheidung könne aber heute bei den katho-
lischen Geistlichen in Deutschland noch nicht als herrschend ange-

--- PAGE BREAK ---it beschränke. Die Erkenntnis der Notwendigkeit
einer solchen radikalen Scheidung könne aber heute bei den katho-
lischen Geistlichen in Deutschland noch nicht als herrschend ange-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
sehen werden . . . Die katholische Geistlichkeit müsse sich erst
fortschreitend von der Erkenntnis durchdringen lassen, daß mit
dem Nationalsozialismus eine ganz neue Form des gesamten staat-
lichen und völkischen Lebens in die Welt getreten sei99.“
Der Fall ist eindeutig: Es geht um eine Revision des Konkordats,
das dem deutschen Klerus (insbesondere durch seinen Artikel 31
über die Jugendorganisationen) eine gewisse politische Bewegungs-
freiheit beläßt, die Hitler unerträglich ist. Zwar erklärt Pius XII.
sich einverstanden hinsichtlich der „erwähnten konkreten Tat-
sachen“, doch geht er nicht näher darauf ein und „sucht . . . das
Gespräch auf bestimmte Einzelprobleme und Beschwerden der
Kurie zu bringen“. Der Reichsaußenminister bricht jedoch dieses
Thema ab und betont „erneut die Notwendigkeit einer . . . grund-
sätzlichen und umfassenden Klärung des Gesamtverhältnisses zwi-
schen Staat und Kirche“.
Die Aufgabe des Botschafters von Bergen und seines Nachfol-
gers bestand demnach darin, Pius XII. wenn nicht zu einem diplo-
matischen Notenwechsel mit dem Ziele einer Änderung des Kon-
kordats, so doch zumindest zu einer Erklärung zu veranlassen, die
der katholischen Geistlichkeit in Deutschland den Gedanken eines
Verzichts auf die Ausübung ihres politischen Einflusses sowie die
Vorstellung nahegelegt hätte, daß mit dem Nationalsozialismus
eine ganz neue Form des gesamten staatlichen und völkischen
Lebens in die Welt getreten sei. Mitten im Kriege kam das einer
Stellungnahme zugunsten der Achsenmächte gleich. Da es Bergen
nicht gelang, diesen Auftrag auszuführen, wurde er in dem Augen-
blick, als der Führer und Ribbentrop die Überzeugung gewannen,
daß er keinerlei Aussicht auf Erfolg mehr hatte, durch Weizsäcker
ersetzt.
Dies hinderte ihn nicht, die Wirkung, die er im Rahmen seiner
Amtsgeschäfte entfaltet hatte, bis zum Äußersten hervorzuheben.
An dem Tage, an dem er beauftragt wurde, das Agrément für
seinen Nachfolger einzuholen, richtete er an sein Ministerium
einen Brief, in dem er die Verwirrung im Vatikan schilderte und
99 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 41 ff., nach Akten zur deutschen aus-
wärtigen Politik D VIII S. 704 ff.r an sein Ministerium
einen Brief, in dem er die Verwirrung im Vatikan schilderte und
99 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 41 ff., nach Akten zur deutschen aus-
wärtigen Politik D VIII S. 704 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---m
einen Brief, in dem er die Verwirrung im Vatikan schilderte und
99 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 41 ff., nach Akten zur deutschen aus-
wärtigen Politik D VIII S. 704 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
darauf hinwies, daß er auf Grund der „besonders gelagerten Be-
ziehungen“, die er dort angeknüpft hatte — er hatte diesen Posten
am Vatikan seit 1920 inne! —, der einzige sei, der dort Erfolg
haben könnte, und daß ein solcher Wechsel zu einem solchen Zeit-
punkt unmöglich wäre100.
Sein Nachfolger Weizsäcker blieb nicht lange genug auf seinem
Posten, um Hitler seinen Mißerfolg deutlich werden zu lassen.
Man muß im übrigen nicht nur gegenüber Berichten von Bot-
schaftern vorsichtig sein, sondern auch gegenüber der gesamten
diplomatischen Ausdrucksweise, die nämlich nicht nur für Bot-
schafter, sondern auch für Staatsoberhäupter charakteristisch ist.
Hierfür ein Beispiel: Pius XI., den man wegen seiner über je-
den Zweifel erhabenen antinationalsozialistischen Einstellung zu
Pius XII. in Gegensatz stellt, begrüßte den in der Angelegenheit
des Konkordats gekommenen von Papen bei seiner Ankunft im
Vatikan mit den Worten, „wie ,beglückt‘ er sei, ,in Hitler eine
Persönlichkeit an der Spitze der deutschen Regierung zu sehen, die
den kompromißlosen Kampf gegen Kommunismus und Nihilis-
mus auf ihre Fahnen geschrieben‘ habe101“. Und Max Gallo102 führt
von ihm eine recht beträchtliche Anzahl ähnlicher, an Mussolini
gerichteter Aussprüche an. Es handelt sich hierbei um Äußerun-
gen, die lediglich den Wert von Höflichkeitsformeln besitzen —
zweifellos bedauerliche Äußerungen, doch Worte, die zu den guten
Sitten gerechnet werden wie die Begrüßungsworte der Gastgeberin
beim Empfang ihrer Gäste103.
Die gesamte Anhängerschaft des Stellvertreter sieht darin in-
dessen kein Hindernis, das Andenken von Pius XI. zu beweih-
100 Brief Bergens an das Reichsaußenministerium vom 6. April 1943, zitiert bei
Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 12.
101 Zitiert bei Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 235.
102 L’Italie de Mussolini
103 Ähnliche Äußerungen verzeichnet man von nahezu allen Politikern bei der
Erfüllung ihrer Repräsentationspflichten. Nachstehend einige Beispiele:
„Wir glauben an die Redlichkeit und Aufrichtigkeit Hitlers.“ (Lord Beaver-
brook, Daily Express v. 31. Oktober 1938.)
„Diejenigen, die mit Hitler in der Öffentlichkeit zusammenkamen, ob in
dienstlichen Angelegenheiten oder aus gesellschaftlichen Gründen, hielten ihn
für äußerst sachverständig, gelassen und wohlinformiert, und manch einer
war beeindruckt durch seine angenehmen Umgangsformen, sein entwaffnen-nheiten oder aus gesellschaftlichen Gründen, hielten ihn
für äußerst sachverständig, gelassen und wohlinformiert, und manch einer
war beeindruckt durch seine angenehmen Umgangsformen, sein entwaffnen-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ellschaftlichen Gründen, hielten ihn
für äußerst sachverständig, gelassen und wohlinformiert, und manch einer
war beeindruckt durch seine angenehmen Umgangsformen, sein entwaffnen-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
räuchern und das von Pius XII., der weder Hitler noch Mussolini,
geschweige denn ihren Vertretern gegenüber, jemals stärkere und
vielleicht noch nicht einmal gleichstarke Äußerungen tat, der
öffentlichen Verachtung preiszugeben.
4. Schließlich bleibt noch die Darstellungsweise zu erwähnen, in
der Friedländer sein Material präsentiert. Er gibt zu, daß es sehr
unvollständig ist, räumt ein, daß die Berichte von Botschaftern
verdächtig sind, daß ihm gewisse Unterlagen für die Beurteilung
fehlen usw. Er ist jedoch nichtsdestoweniger der Ansicht, daß die
von ihm zitierten Dokumente jedes für sich genommen sehr be-
deutsam sind und in ihrer Gesamtheit „einen nützlichen Beitrag“
für die Untersuchung des Themas darstellen oder „einen unbe-
streitbaren historischen Wert“ für das Verständnis der Ereignisse
besitzen104.
Denken wir nur daran, wie in der Zusammenfassung des Werkes
die „Vorliebe [Pius’ XII.] für Deutschland . . . , an der die Natur
des nationalsozialistischen Regimes nichts änderte“, hervorgeho-
ben wird. Als ob nicht auch Frankreich — trotz „Väterchen Com-
bes105“ zu Beginn dieses Jahrhunderts — für Pius X. „die älteste
Tochter der Kirche“ geblieben wäre! Der Ausdruck „Vorliebe für
Deutschland“ und viele andere mit der gleichen Sinngebung Wer-
des Lächeln und seine persönliche Anziehungskraft.“ (Winston Churchill,
Great Contemporaries, 1939, S. 268.)
„ . . . Der Führer ist ein großer Menschenführer, und aus diesem Grunde
bewundere ich ihn.“ (Churchill, ebd., S. 296.)
„Der römische Geist, der durch Mussolini, den größten lebenden Gesetz-
geber, verkörpert wird, hat zahlreichen Nationen gezeigt, daß man dem
Druck des Sozialismus widerstehen kann, und den Weg vorgezeichnet, den
eine Nation gehen kann, wenn sie mutig geführt wird.“ (Churchill in Queen’s
Hall, auf dem Kongreß der antisozialistischen Liga, 18. Februar 1933.)
„Der Faschismus ist eine heilsame Reaktion gegen den Bolschewismus.“
(Lord Curzon beim Empfang Mussolinis in Lausanne am 20. Oktober 1922.)
„Ich empfinde für Mussolini größte Achtung und größte Bewunderung. Er
ist ein Mann von überaus großer Charakterstärke und beachtlichem Scharf-
sinn. Sein persönliches Verhalten ist von großem Charme und vollendeter
Schlichtheit geprägt.“ (Chamberlain nach seiner Begegnung mit Mussolini in
Livorno am 30. September 1926. Zitiert bei Max Gallo, L’Italie de Mussolini,
S. 255.)
104 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 14 und 16
105 Émile Combes, ehemaliger Ministerpräsident (1902 bis 1905), leidenschaft-
licher Verfechter einer antiklerikalen Politik. (Anm. d. Übers.)solini,
S. 255.)
104 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 14 und 16
105 Émile Combes, ehemaliger Ministerpräsident (1902 bis 1905), leidenschaft-
licher Verfechter einer antiklerikalen Politik. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 14 und 16
105 Émile Combes, ehemaliger Ministerpräsident (1902 bis 1905), leidenschaft-
licher Verfechter einer antiklerikalen Politik. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
den jedesmal in einer Weise vorgetragen, daß der Leser hierfür in
Gedanken „für den Nationalsozialismus“ einsetzt. Ein kleiner Ver-
stoß gegen seine Pflichten als Autor.
Oder denken wir daran, in welchem Maße die Aufmerksamkeit
auf das Schreiben gelenkt wird, mit dem Pius XII. Hitler von
seiner Wahl unterrichtet. An dieser Stelle zitiert Friedländer Msgr.
Giovannetti106: „In seinem Umfang and den zum Ausdruck kom-
menden Empfindungen hat er [dieser Brief] nicht seinesgleichen
unter den anderen damals vom Vatikan versandten amtlichen
Schreiben.“ Dieser Kommentar „suggeriert“ eine besondere Sym-
pathie für Hitler. Doch wie hätte dieser Brief auch anders als ab-
weichend von den anderen amtlichen Schreiben sein können? Mit
welchem anderen Staat hatte der Vatikan derart schwierige Pro-
bleme zu regeln wie mit Deutschland? Man braucht nur bei Msgr.
Giovannetti selbst nachzulesen, um festzustellen, daß seine Bemer-
kung in diesem Sinne gemeint war.
Eine Methode, Texte zu zitieren: „In Norwegen gibt es nur
2000 Katholiken; daher muß der Heilige Stuhl, auch wenn er in
moralischer Hinsicht ein strenges Urteil fällt [über die Invasion
Norwegens durch die deutschen Truppen], in praktischer Hinsicht
an die dreißig Millionen deutscher Katholiken denken107.“ Geht
man auf das Werk von Abt Paul Duclos zurück, der diesen Text
als ein Zitat aus dem Osservatore Romano anführt, so stellt man
fest, daß der Text auch nicht aus dieser letztgenannten Quelle,
sondern von einem anderen Autor, G.-L. Jaray108, stammt, der ihn
ohne Quellenangabe anführt. Man stellt ferner fest, daß Duclos
den Text als „zynisch“ bezeichnet and hinzugefügt hat, daß er, falls
106 Alberto Giovannetti, Der Vatikan und der Krieg, S. 36
107 Text, der dem Osservatore Romano zugeschrieben and nach Abt Paul Duclos,
Le Vatican et la Seconde Guerre mondiale, S. 58 f. zitiert wird. Friedländer,
der diese Stelle im Anschluß an die Proteste des Papstes gegen die Invasion
Belgiens, Hollands and Luxemburgs anführt, will darauf aufmerksam
machen, daß die Invasion Norwegens keinerlei Protest seitens des Heiligen
Stuhles auslöste, was ihm die Möglichkeit gibt, die folgende Frage zu stellen
 (wenn er auch mittels einer in solchen Fällen üblichen Floskel, vor einer der-
artigen Schlußfolgerung „zurückscheut“): „Verurteilt der Papst Gewalt and
Aggression nur dann . . . wenn die Opfer katholisch sind?“ (Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47). Man sieht, was hier dem Leser eingeredet werden soll.
108 Messages de guerreVerurteilt der Papst Gewalt and
Aggression nur dann . . . wenn die Opfer katholisch sind?“ (Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47). Man sieht, was hier dem Leser eingeredet werden soll.
108 Messages de guerre

--- PAGE BREAK ---Gewalt and
Aggression nur dann . . . wenn die Opfer katholisch sind?“ (Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47). Man sieht, was hier dem Leser eingeredet werden soll.
108 Messages de guerre

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
er auf den Osservatore Romano zurückginge, nur „das Werk eines
Redaktionsassistenten sein könne and der Zensur der Zeitung ent-
gangen sei“. Doch Friedländer hat sich wohl gehütet, den ungekürz-
ten Wortlaut zu zitieren.
Ein weiterer kleiner Verstoß: Es ist bekannt, daß Friedländer,
was die Verurteilung der Euthanasie durch den Bischof Graf Galen
von Münster betrifft, nicht weiß, ob sie „der persönlichen Initia-
tive des Bischofs zu danken“ war oder „auf eine Weisung des
Papstes“ zurückging109, and es ist ebenfalls bekannt, daß er nur
deshalb nicht weiß, daß diese Verurteilung gemäß den Weisungen
des Papstes erfolgte, weil er entweder die maßgeblichen Texte
nicht herangezogen hat oder weil er in der Absicht, dem Leser
etwas zu suggerieren, tat, als hätte er sie nicht herangezogen. Doch
als der Erzbischof Constantini in der Basilika von Concordia
(Provinz Venedig) eine Ansprache hielt, in der er sagte: „Wir
wünschen von ganzem Herzen, daß diese Schlacht [gemeint ist der
Kampf der deutschen and italienischen Soldaten an der russischen
Front] uns den abschließenden Sieg and den Untergang des . . .
Bolschewismus bringen möge“, wobei er „den Segen Gottes auf
 [diejenigen herabrief], die in dieser entscheidenden Stunde das
Ideal unserer Freiheit gegen die rote Barbarei verteidigen‘110“, be-
richtete die deutsche Vatikanbotschaft nach Berlin, daß „sie [diese
Ansprache] unmöglich ohne Einverständnis des Heiligen Stuhls
gehalten worden sei111“ — wofür im übrigen nicht der geringste
Beleg gegeben wird —, and Friedländer schließt sich dieser Ansicht
an, indem er folgert, daß „Menshausens . . . Bericht anscheinend
[sic] recht plausibel [sic] die Haltung Pius’ XII. beschreibt111“.
Das gleiche Verfahren wird beim Osservatore Romano ange-
wandt: Wenn diese Zeitung über die Kriegführung zufällig eine
Meldung bringt, die Friedländer anfechtbar erscheint, so versäumt
er niemals zu bemerken, daß dieses Blatt die Meinung des Papstes
widerspiegele. Doch wenn diese Zeitung ein nach Ermessen des
109 Vgl. oben Anm. 93
110 Brief Menshausens, eines Mitarbeiters Bergens im Auswärtigen Amt, vom
23. Januar 1941, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 62—65
111 Ebd., S. 66
112 Vgl. oben S. 65 ff.es
109 Vgl. oben Anm. 93
110 Brief Menshausens, eines Mitarbeiters Bergens im Auswärtigen Amt, vom
23. Januar 1941, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 62—65
111 Ebd., S. 66
112 Vgl. oben S. 65 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 93
110 Brief Menshausens, eines Mitarbeiters Bergens im Auswärtigen Amt, vom
23. Januar 1941, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 62—65
111 Ebd., S. 66
112 Vgl. oben S. 65 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
Papstes ausreichendes Kommuniqué über einen Vorfall veröffent-
licht, so versäumt Friedländer es ebensowenig, darauf hinzuweisen,
daß der Osservatore Romano gesprochen, der Papst hingegen ge-
schwiegen habe, wodurch dem Leser die Vorstellung vermittelt
wird, daß das Blatt in diesem Falle nicht die Meinung des Papstes
widerspiegele.
Man muß von den Tatsachen ausgehen: Am 14. März 1937 ver-
urteilte der Vatikan den Nationalsozialismus (Enzyklika Mit bren-
nender Sorge) und am 19. desselben Monats den Bolschewismus
 (Enzyklika Divini Redemptoris). Da diese beiden Verurteilungen
in der Folgezeit keinerlei Änderungen erfuhren, in den Acta Apo-
stolicae Sedis zumindest nichts derartiges berichtet wird, darf an-
genommen werden, daß sie immer noch in demselben Sinne gültig
sind, in dem sie abgefaßt wurden. Hinsichtlich der Verurteilung
des Nationalsozialismus ist diese Ansicht noch um so mehr be-
rechtigt, als sie unter Pius XII. wie schon unter Pius XI. mehrmals
wiederholt wurde112 was bei der Verurteilung des Bolschewismus
nicht der Fall war. Nun präsentiert Friedländer jedoch seine Unter-
lagen derart, daß er in den daran anschließenden Kommentaren
deutlich das Gegenteil aussagt, nämlich daß Pius XII. zwar die
durch Pius XI. ausgesprochene Verurteilung des Bolschewismus
aus Furcht vor diesem unvermindert aufrechterhalten, jedoch die
Verurteilung des Nationalsozialismus — wenn nicht theoretisch,
so doch praktisch — unaufhörlich zurückgenommen habe, da er
ihn als das einzige halbwegs wirksame Bollwerk gegen die Ausbrei-
tung des Bolschewismus betrachtet habe.
In seinem Text findet man Widersprüche wie diesen: „ . . . nimmt
Pius XII. niemals offen gegen die Sowjetunion Stellung113.“ Doch,
sagt Friedländer, seit dem Kriegseintritt Deutschlands gegen Ruß-
land „beunruhigt Pius XII. vor allem eine mögliche Ausdehnung
des Kommunismus infolge des Krieges114“. Oder er bemerkt: „Vom
Frühjahr 1943 an scheint [sic] die Furcht vor der Bolschewisierung
Europas bei den politischen Überlegungen des Heiligen Stuhles
den Ausschlag zu geben113.“ Oder an anderer Stelle hören wir:
113 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 124
114 Ebd., S. 58 f.r der Bolschewisierung
Europas bei den politischen Überlegungen des Heiligen Stuhles
den Ausschlag zu geben113.“ Oder an anderer Stelle hören wir:
113 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 124
114 Ebd., S. 58 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng
Europas bei den politischen Überlegungen des Heiligen Stuhles
den Ausschlag zu geben113.“ Oder an anderer Stelle hören wir:
113 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 124
114 Ebd., S. 58 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
„Auf der anderen Seite fürchtete Pius XII. nichts mehr [auch nicht
den Nationalsozialismus also. P. Rassinier] als eine Bolschewisie-
rung Europas und hegte anscheinend [sic] die Hoffnung, ein mit
den westlichen Alliierten . . . versöhntes Hitlerdeutschland könnte
zum wichtigsten Bollwerk gegen jedes Vordringen der Sowjet-
union nach Westen werden115.“
Wenn diese These ihre Wahrscheinlichkeit aus den Berichten der
deutschen Botschafter beim Vatikan, Bergen und Weizsäcker, her-
leitet, so werden deren Berichte leider weder durch irgendeinen
Text noch durch irgendwelche Handlungen Pius’ XII. erhärtet.
Friedländer findet trotzdem etwas, um seine These zu stützen.
So zum Beispiel jene Ansprache des Papstes am 18. Oktober 1939
beim Empfang des neuen diplomatischen Vertreters Litauens beim
Heiligen Stuhl:
„Aber gerade die Pflicht dieses Unseres Amtes gestattet Uns
nicht, die Augen zu schließen, wenn ausgerechnet für das Heil der
Seelen neue unermeßliche Gefahren heraufsteigen, wenn über das
Antlitz (des christlichen) Europa in allen seinen Grundlinien sich
täglich drohender und näher der unheilvolle Schatten des Denkens
und Wirkens der Feinde Gottes breitet116.“
Die Interpretation Friedländers hierzu lautet: „Msgr. Giovan-
netti zitiert diese Äußerungen und schreibt, der Papst habe damit
auf die ,furchtbare Bedrohung durch den gottlosen Kommunismus‘
angespielt und es ,als seine Hirtenpflicht‘ betrachtet, ,davor zu
warnen‘117.“
Liest man nun aber bei Giovannetti nach, so stellt man fest,
daß er diese Äußerung dem Zeitpunkt zuordnet, als Polen gerade
zwischen Deutschland und Rußland aufgeteilt worden war und die
baltischen Staaten sich nunmehr direkt bedroht sahen. In dieser
Situation stellt jener „unheilvolle Schatten des Denkens und Wir-
kens der Feinde Gottes, der sich täglich drohender und näher über
das Antlitz Europas breitet“, den des Nationalsozialismus und des
Bolschewismus dar. Da für das Baltikum, wozu Litauen gehört, an
115 Ebd., S. 163
116 Ebd., S. 44
117 Ebd., S. 45hender und näher über
das Antlitz Europas breitet“, den des Nationalsozialismus und des
Bolschewismus dar. Da für das Baltikum, wozu Litauen gehört, an
115 Ebd., S. 163
116 Ebd., S. 44
117 Ebd., S. 45

--- PAGE BREAK ---r
das Antlitz Europas breitet“, den des Nationalsozialismus und des
Bolschewismus dar. Da für das Baltikum, wozu Litauen gehört, an
115 Ebd., S. 163
116 Ebd., S. 44
117 Ebd., S. 45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
das der Papst sich über die Person des litauischen Botschafters
wendet, bis dahin von Bolschewismus keine Rede gewesen war,
spielt Pius XII. nicht an auf die furchtbare Bedrohung durch den
gottlosen Kommunismus, wie Friedländer behauptet, sondern, wie
Giovannetti sagt, er „erweiterte das Thema und sprach von . . . der
furchtbaren 
Bedrohung 
durch 
den 
gottlosen 
Kommunismus
usw.118“. Ein feiner Unterschied ist immerhin da. Denn wenn die
Verurteilung auf den Kommunismus „erweitert“ wird, dann zielt
sie ebenso auch auf den Nationalsozialismus ab, der ja auch ein
„Feind Gottes“ ist. Woraus man wieder einmal sieht, daß die
Sorge, die Texte so zu zitieren, daß Wortlaut und Bedeutung ge-
wahrt bleiben, Friedländer nicht gerade schlaflose Nächte bereitet.
Tatsächlich stehen ausnahmslos alle Ansprachen, die Pius XII.
während des gesamten Krieges hielt, im Einklang mit den beiden
von Pius XI. unterzeichneten Enzykliken Mit brennender Sorge
und Divini Redemptoris, sowie der Enzyklika Summi Pontificatus,
mit der er am 20. Oktober 1939 sein Pontifikat einleitete und in
der er die Themen der beiden erstgenannten Enzykliken wieder
aufgriff. Alle Reden verurteilen gleichzeitig sowohl National-
sozialismus als auch Kommunismus als „Feinde Gottes“. Alle neh-
men davon Abstand, in den Streit der Kriegführenden einzugrei-
fen. Alle verurteilen „die Grausamkeiten des Krieges, von welcher
Seite sie auch begangen sein mögen“. Alle verkünden im Namen
des „Heils der christlichen Kultur“ die Notwendigkeit der „Rück-
kehr zu den Grundsätzen der Gerechtigkeit und des wahrhaften
Friedens“.
Die deutschen Botschafter beim Vatikan, die mit Befriedigung
feststellten, daß Pius XII. sich niemals bereit fand, Deutschland
allein zu verurteilen — ebensowenig wie er jemals eine einseitige
Verurteilung der Angelsachsen aussprach —, interpretierten diese
Ausdrucksweise jedesmal als einen Sympathiebeweis für Deutsch-
land, der ihrem persönlichen Wirken zuzuschreiben sei. Und Fried-
länder folgte ihnen hierin jedesmal getreulich auf dem Fuße, indem
er präzisierte, daß diese Sympathie nicht nur einem Deutschland
im allgemeinen, sondern einem Deutschland gegolten habe, das,
118 Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 143desmal getreulich auf dem Fuße, indem
er präzisierte, daß diese Sympathie nicht nur einem Deutschland
im allgemeinen, sondern einem Deutschland gegolten habe, das,
118 Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 143

--- PAGE BREAK ---f dem Fuße, indem
er präzisierte, daß diese Sympathie nicht nur einem Deutschland
im allgemeinen, sondern einem Deutschland gegolten habe, das,
118 Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 143

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
weil nationalsozialistisch, ein Bollwerk gegen den Bolschewismus
geworden sei. In Wirklichkeit beweist gerade der Tenor der ge-
samten päpstlichen Ansprachen, wie zum Beispiel der der oben-
erwähnten Begrüßungsansprache an den neuen Botschafter Li-
tauens, daß, wenn Pius XII., der Nationalsozialismus und Bolsche-
wismus zugleich als „Feinde Gottes“ und als „Gefahr für die christ-
liche Kultur“ verurteilte, überhaupt irgend etwas fürchtete, dann
das, was Weizsäcker in dem einzigen zitierenswerten aller von
Friedländer angeführten Dokumente zum Ausdruck brachte, näm-
lich, daß „Deutschland unter der Wucht des Geschehens im Osten
sich schließlich doch den Russen in die Arme werfen könnte“, wo-
bei Weizsäcker noch hinzufügte, daß „die Behauptung, die deutsche
Regierung und die russische Regierung seien schon miteinander in
Fühlung . . . [im Vatikan] unausrottbar [sei]119“.
Es war also die durch Nationalsozialismus und Bolschewismus
gemeinsam heraufgeführte Zerrüttung der christlichen Kultur, das
heißt, Europas und der gesamten Welt. Und das war nun allerdings
eine ebenso begründete Befürchtung des „Stellvertreters Christi“
wie seine Sorge um Krieg und Frieden.
5. Wir werden, namentlich bei der Analyse der Haltung Pius’ XII.
gegenüber dem Krieg, noch auf einige Argumente Friedländers
zurückkommen, die sich auf die Interpretation dieser Haltung be-
ziehen. Einstweilen genügte es, dem Leser eine Vorstellung von
der Fragwürdigkeit seiner Grundthese zu vermitteln, nach der
Pius XII. das nationalsozialistische Deutschland als ein Bollwerk
der Kultur gegen den Bolschewismus betrachtete und demzufolge
nichts tat, um es zu schwächen, hingegen alles, um eine Umkehrung
der bestehenden Bündnisse zu bewirken. Wie wir noch zeigen
werden, ist es offensichtlich, daß er, nachdem es ihm nicht gelungen
war, die Welt vor dem Krieg zu bewahren, alles tat, um ihn abzu-
kürzen, und zwar alles ausschließlich mit diesem Ziel. Ein Wort
sei an dieser Stelle trotzdem noch hinzugefügt: Wenn Friedländer
wirklich glaubt, neue und noch unveröffentlichte Unterlagen bei-
gesteuert zu haben, die zum Verständnis der Ereignisse „dienlich“
119 Telegramm Weizsäckers an Berlin vom 24. September 1943. Zitiert bei Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 136röffentlichte Unterlagen bei-
gesteuert zu haben, die zum Verständnis der Ereignisse „dienlich“
119 Telegramm Weizsäckers an Berlin vom 24. September 1943. Zitiert bei Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 136

--- PAGE BREAK ---agen bei-
gesteuert zu haben, die zum Verständnis der Ereignisse „dienlich“
119 Telegramm Weizsäckers an Berlin vom 24. September 1943. Zitiert bei Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 136

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
sein können, dann macht er sich große Illusionen. Denn man
brauchte nur Alberto Giovannetti (Der Vatikan und der Krieg),
Paul Duclos (Le Vatican et la Seconde Guerre mondiale), François
Charles-Roux (Huit ans au Vatican), Camille Cianfarra (La Guerre
et le Vatican) und Michele Maccarrone (Il Nationalsocialismo e la
Santa Sede) gelesen zu haben, wo die Dokumente zwar nicht im
vollständigen Text, aber doch zumindest dem Inhalt nach und in
weitaus objektiverer und genauerer Weise wiedergegeben werden,
um nicht nur alles das zu wissen, was in dem uns von Friedländer
vorgelegten Material ausgesagt wird, sondern noch weitaus mehr.
VI. DIE VERTEIDIGUNG
Von Ausnahmen abgesehen, war die Verteidigung in dieser
Polemik weder gehaltvoller noch brillanter als die Anklage. Der
Grund hierfür ist folgender: Da sie in ihrer Gesamtheit von dem
Verhalten Pius’ XII. nahezu überhaupt nichts begriffen hatte (und
selbst, wenn einmal das Gegenteil der Fall war), verfügte sie weder
über einen Kampfplatz noch über Munition und mußte es sich
daher gefallen lassen, auf den sorgfältig vorbereiteten Kampfplatz
geführt zu werden, den die Anklage für ihre Niederlage ausge-
wählt hatte. So stand sie da, im offenen Gelände und ohne Waffen,
zum Kampf gegen einen sicher verschanzten und bis an die Zähne
bewaffneten Gegner — der überdies das Verhalten Pius’ XII., das
moralisch so tödlich für ihn war, sehr wohl verstanden hatte. Kurz,
der gute Glaube ohne die notwendige Sachkenntnis gegen die
wohlvorbereitete Böswilligkeit.
Allerdings hatte Pius XII., als er starb, seinen geistlichen Erben
eine Art Festung von Leitgedanken hinterlassen und durch die
Weiterverfolgung des von Leo XIII., Pius X., Benedikt XV. und
Pius XI. eingeschlagenen Weges persönlich nicht wenig dazu beige-
tragen, sie gleichsam uneinnehmbar zu machen: Noch niemals, ob
man nun Bedauern oder Freude darüber empfindet, hatte die römi-
sche Kirche eine solche Ausstrahlungskraft erreicht. Sie verdankte
dies in gleichem Maße einer bis ins Äußerste gesteigerten Emp-
findsamkeit für die Probleme der menschlichen Existenz, von der
sie seit Leo XIII. unablässig Zeugnis abgelegt hatte, wie auch aufdankte
dies in gleichem Maße einer bis ins Äußerste gesteigerten Emp-
findsamkeit für die Probleme der menschlichen Existenz, von der
sie seit Leo XIII. unablässig Zeugnis abgelegt hatte, wie auch auf

--- PAGE BREAK ---hem Maße einer bis ins Äußerste gesteigerten Emp-
findsamkeit für die Probleme der menschlichen Existenz, von der
sie seit Leo XIII. unablässig Zeugnis abgelegt hatte, wie auch auf

--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
dem Gebiet der internationalen Beziehungen einer Politik der Ver-
söhnung, die sie seit Pius X. im Lichte eines unerschütterlichen
Dienstes für den Frieden erscheinen ließ. Als Johannes XXIII. im
Jahre 1958 sein Pontifikat antrat, trugen die Völker in Erinne-
rung, daß es Pius X. selbst mit übermenschlichen Anstrengungen
nicht vermocht hatte, den Ausbruch des Ersten Weltkrieges zu
verhindern, daß es Benedikt XV. nicht gelungen war, die zwischen-
staatlichen Beziehungen in den Jahren 1916/17 wiederherzustellen,
und daß er, nachdem man ihn vom Abschluß des Versailler Ver-
trages ferngehalten hatte, an der Abfassung dieses Textes, der den
Grund zum Zweiten Weltkrieg legte, in keiner Weise teilgenom-
men hatte, daß Pius XI. und Pius XII. niemals aufgehört hatten,
im Hinblick auf die Gerechtigkeit unter den Völkern in der aller-
diskretesten Weise eine Revision dieses Vertragswerkes nahezule-
gen, und daß es Pius XII. weder gelungen war, den Ausbruch des
Zweiten Weltkrieges und seine spätere Ausbreitung über die ge-
samte Erde zu verhindern, noch ihn abzukürzen. Kurz, zu der
großen Aufgeschlossenheit der Kirche gegenüber den sozialen Pro-
blemen kam beim Tode Pius’ XII. noch die Tatsache hinzu, daß die
römische Kirche unter den Mächten, die die Welt regieren, die
einzige war, der man weder am einen noch am anderen der beiden
Weltkriege irgendwelche Verantwortung beimessen konnte. Und
im Falle des Zweiten Weltkrieges kam das ganze Verdienst für
diese Nichtverantwortlichkeit, den Glanz, der dadurch auf die
Kirche zurückfiel, und den Gewinn, den sie daraus zog, Pius XII.
zu. Zu einem pronazistischen Papst wurde er dennoch in den
Augen derjenigen, die, nachdem sie Hitler in Deutschland zur
Macht verholfen hatten (und Pius XII. gehörte nicht zu ihnen,
nicht im entferntesten), anschließend kein anderes Mittel als den
Krieg sahen, um ihn wieder von dort zu vertreiben. (Man darf sich
sogar fragen, ob sie nicht Hitler an die Macht brachten, um Ge-
legenheit zu erhalten, gegen Deutschland Krieg zu führen und es
noch vollständiger zu zerschmettern als in Versailles.) Ebenso sahen
ihn die konkurrierenden religiösen Gemeinschaften, insbesondere
die protestantischen und die jüdischen, genauso wie (aus den glei-
chen Gründen) Benedikt XV. in den Augen Clemenceaus zu einem
„Papst der Deutschen“ geworden war.igiösen Gemeinschaften, insbesondere
die protestantischen und die jüdischen, genauso wie (aus den glei-
chen Gründen) Benedikt XV. in den Augen Clemenceaus zu einem
„Papst der Deutschen“ geworden war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---en, insbesondere
die protestantischen und die jüdischen, genauso wie (aus den glei-
chen Gründen) Benedikt XV. in den Augen Clemenceaus zu einem
„Papst der Deutschen“ geworden war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
Hier lag das ganze Problem von Hochhuths Stellvertreter. Aus
jenen Höhen, in die sich Pius XII. offenbar mühelos empor-
geschwungen hatte und von denen aus er über Krieg und Frieden
so häufig Äußerungen tat, die ihn als einen wahren Stellvertreter
Christi120 auswiesen und die zweifellos eines Tages wie „Bergpre-
digten“ anmuten werden, ließen sich seine Verteidiger in eine Aus-
einandersetzung hineinziehen, in der es nicht um die Kriegsgreuel
an sich ging, was noch nicht einmal einen solchen Abstieg bedeutet
hätte, sondern einzig und allein um die Nazi-Greueltaten, und
zwar nur, soweit die Juden davon betroffen waren. Als ob ein
Krieg nur grausam wäre und nicht vor allem Fragen der Gerech-
tigkeit aufwürfe. Als ob es Kriege ohne Grausamkeiten beiderseits
der Feuerlinie geben könnte. Als ob die Genfer und Haager Kon-
ventionen etwas anderes wären als eine Kriegslist, mit der diejeni-
gen, die die Fäden des Spiels in den Händen halten, die Masse der
Gutgläubigen überzeugen wollen, daß es Möglichkeiten gäbe, den
Krieg zu humanisieren, und daß daher die Frage einer Ächtung des
Krieges belanglos sei. Als ob schließlich die nichtjüdischen Opfer
unter den fünfzig Millionen Toten des Zweiten Weltkrieges, deren
Anzahl zehn- bis zwanzigmal so groß ist wie die der Juden und die
unter ganz genauso grausamen Umständen ums Leben kamen —
selbst unter dem Feuer der Alliierten! —, nicht im geringsten
interessierten.
Wie um alles in der Welt konnte ein solcher Sturz überhaupt
geschehen? Im Grunde ist die Antwort ziemlich einfach, und da
man die Wahrheit gelegentlich sogar seinen Freunden verdankt,
werden die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. es mir verzeihen, daß ich sie
120 Die Erfahrung scheint zu lehren, daß die Sprache eines Stellvertreters Christi
dem gesunden Menschenverstand nicht ohne weiteres eingeht. Das Beispiel
dafür wurde uns soeben von Papst Paul VI. geliefert, der sichtlich den Spuren
Pius’ XII. folgt, obwohl der Strom, gegen den er anschwimmen muß, unleug-
bar die Kraft eines Wildwassers besitzt. Als er am 6. Januar 1965 das diplo-
matische Korps empfing, das gekommen war, um ihm seine Neujahrswünsche
zu entbieten, sprach Paul VI. in seiner Antwort an den Doyen über das
Thema des Friedens, und nachdem er das Problem der Entwicklungsländer
angeführt hatte, schloß er seine Ausführungen mit der Erwähnung der „geisti-
gen und sittlichen Grundsätze, auf denen sich die Zivilisation von morgen
aufbauen kann“. Am Tage nach dieser Rede gab Le Figaro seinem Artikel
mit Recht die Überschrift „Neuer Friedensappell Pauls VI.“: „Papst Paul VI.Grundsätze, auf denen sich die Zivilisation von morgen
aufbauen kann“. Am Tage nach dieser Rede gab Le Figaro seinem Artikel
mit Recht die Überschrift „Neuer Friedensappell Pauls VI.“: „Papst Paul VI.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n sich die Zivilisation von morgen
aufbauen kann“. Am Tage nach dieser Rede gab Le Figaro seinem Artikel
mit Recht die Überschrift „Neuer Friedensappell Pauls VI.“: „Papst Paul VI.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
ihnen so unverblümt sage, wie es meine Art ist: In den finsteren
Stunden des Jahres 1939, von April bis September, als dieser frisch-
gewählte Papst seine ganze Kraft aufbot, um den künftigen Alli-
ierten in dem Krieg gegen Deutschland zu beweisen, daß sämtliche
europäische Probleme noch durch Verhandlungen nach Art der-
jenigen, die in München im vorhergegangenen September so er-
folgreich verlaufen war, und gemäß den Grundsätzen der Gerech-
tigkeit geregelt werden könnten, waren die meisten von ihnen,
obwohl sie in Pius XII. zugleich den Menschen und das Amt ver-
ehrten, bereits davon überzeugt, daß es keine andere Möglichkeit
mehr gab, mit Hitler „Schluß zu machen“, als zur tätlichen Aus-
einandersetzung zu schreiten. Im Jahre 1963 jetzt das Problem auf
das Terrain zu tragen, auf dem Pius XII. gestanden hatte, bedeutete
für jene anzuerkennen, daß sie dem Hirten nicht gefolgt waren
und daß sie sich getäuscht hatten. Nun, das ist menschlich; man
gibt nicht leicht zu, daß man sich geirrt hat, selbst die Heiligen tun
es nicht gerne. Die ganze Vergangenheit der Menschheit ist immer
noch so im Bewußtsein verankert, daß man es den Leuten nicht
leicht klarmachen kann, daß der Krieg stets vermeidbar ist: Ein
großer Teil derjenigen, die der Stellvertreter vor den Kopf stieß
und in die Schranken forderte, um das Andenken Pius’ XII. zu
verteidigen, die in allerbestem Glauben für ihn eintraten und dabei
nicht einmal gewahr wurden, daß sie mit seinem Denken nichts
gemein haben, ist trotz der fünfzig Millionen Toten, trotz der
Milliarden und aber Milliarden von Schäden, trotz eines Friedens,
der nach dem letzten Kriege unsicherer ist als vorher, überzeugt,
daß dieser Krieg doch sehr vorteilhafte Ergebnisse hatte und daß
erließ heute morgen, als er die beim Vatikan akkreditierten Mitglieder des
diplomatischen Korps, die gekommen waren, um ihm ihre Glückwünsche zum
Jahreswechsel zu entbieten, in Audienz empfing, einen neuen Aufruf zum
Frieden. Der Papst verbarg nicht seine Besorgnis über die gegenwärtige
Situation. Obgleich er keine der derzeitigen Krisen erwähnte, ist es klar, daß
er auf die Ereignisse in Vietnam und im Kongo sowie auf den Streit zwischen
Indonesien und Malaysia anspielte. Paul VI. wies ebenfalls erneut auf die
Notwendigkeit der Zusammenarbeit zwischen den Nationen und der Hilfe
für die noch in der Entwicklung befindlichen Völker hin.“
Doch am gleichen Tage erschien in Le Monde die Überschrift: „Paul VI.
weist anläßlich des Empfanges des diplomatischen Korps auf die Rechte der
Entwicklungsländer hin.“klung befindlichen Völker hin.“
Doch am gleichen Tage erschien in Le Monde die Überschrift: „Paul VI.
weist anläßlich des Empfanges des diplomatischen Korps auf die Rechte der
Entwicklungsländer hin.“

--- PAGE BREAK ---ölker hin.“
Doch am gleichen Tage erschien in Le Monde die Überschrift: „Paul VI.
weist anläßlich des Empfanges des diplomatischen Korps auf die Rechte der
Entwicklungsländer hin.“

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
er zweifellos . . . Kurz, ich bin bereit, eine Wette einzugehen: Es
erscheint nicht zweifelhaft, daß, wenn das Verhältnis zwischen Ost
und West sich so weit verschlechterte wie 1939 zwischen den angel-
sächsischen Mächten und Deutschland, Paul VI. an beide Seiten die
gleiche Sprache richten würde wie sein Vorgänger und daß man
ihm ebensowenig Gehör schenken oder folgen würde. Daraus
resultiert, daß nach jenem nächsten Krieg die Verteidiger eines in
gleicher Weise angeklagten Paul VI. sich in eben der gleichen Weise
in Verlegenheit gebracht fühlen würden.
Für die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. — hier brauchen wir uns nicht mit
Hypothesen auseinanderzusetzen, da wir über eine Fülle von Fak-
ten verfügen — gibt es zwar vielleicht eine Entschuldigung: Seine
erste Enzyklika, Summi Pontificatus, wurde erst am 20. Oktober
1939 veröffentlicht, zu einem Zeitpunkt also, an dem das Unheil
bereits geschehen war. Schwerer wiegt jedoch die Tatsache, daß
dieses Unheil durchaus noch wieder gutzumachen gewesen wäre.
Er sagte zu ihnen: „Da heißt es nicht mehr Heide oder Jude . . . “
und weiter beschwörend: „Ehrwürdige Brüder, die Stunde, in der
dieses Unser erstes Rundschreiben zu euch hinausgeht, ist in mehr
als einer Hinsicht wahrhaft eine Stunde der Finsternis (Luk. 22,
53) . . . “ und „Schon sind Völker in den mörderischen Strudel des
Krieges hineingezogen, und vielleicht stehen sie erst am Anfang der
Leiden (Matth. 24, 8); und doch sind bereits in Tausenden von
Familien Tod . . . , Trauer und Elend bitterer Hausgast geworden.
Das Blut ungezählter Menschen, auch von Nichtkämpfern, erhebt
erschütternde Klage, . . .121.“ Aber sie hörten nicht auf ihn, auch
nicht im folgenden Jahr, als er von Juli bis Oktober versuchte, die
Brücken zwischen den Kriegführenden wiederherzustellen.
Zu jener Zeit war ihr Papst nicht mehr Pius XII., sondern der
klägliche Churchill, und sein Weihbischof der nicht weniger kläg-
liche Roosevelt.
Alles in allem waren die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. wegen ihrer
früheren Einstellung zum Kriege ebenso gehemmt, wie seine An-
kläger aus entgegengesetzten Gründen darauf versessen waren, die
121 Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden und Enzykliken, hg. von P. Wilhelm
Jussen. Hamburg 1946. S. 151 und 172. (Anm. d. Übers.)e An-
kläger aus entgegengesetzten Gründen darauf versessen waren, die
121 Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden und Enzykliken, hg. von P. Wilhelm
Jussen. Hamburg 1946. S. 151 und 172. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---gegengesetzten Gründen darauf versessen waren, die
121 Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden und Enzykliken, hg. von P. Wilhelm
Jussen. Hamburg 1946. S. 151 und 172. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
ihre zu rechtfertigen, und darum vermied man es auf beiden
Seiten, dem Problem auf den Grund zu gehen.
Die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. hatten seine Leitidee, die Idee von
der Verteidigung des Friedens, nicht verstanden oder nicht auf-
gegriffen. Deshalb blieb ihnen als Argument nur die Beweisfüh-
rung, daß der Papst nahezu nichts von den nazistischen Greueln
gewußt und, wann immer er davon Kenntnis erhielt, dagegen pro-
testiert habe, soweit es ihm irgend möglich war, wobei die Grenze
seines Handelns nur von der Sorge bestimmt gewesen sei, das Los
der Betroffenen nicht zu verschlimmern.
Auf diesem Gebiet konnten sie angesichts gewissenloser Gegner,
deren redlichstes Argument noch die Heranziehung der Texte war,
nur die Unterlegenen sein. Infolgedessen hatten die Gegner
Pius’ XII. leichtes Spiel mit der Behauptung, daß er niemals auf-
gehört habe, dem nationalsozialistischen Deutschland seine Sym-
pathie zu bekunden, und daß er sich nur auf Grund dieser Sym-
pathie im Jahre 1939 gegen den Krieg ausgesprochen habe und
keinesfalls aus Pazifismus, was seine Friedensbemühungen unlauter
erscheinen lasse.
Die Kriegstreiber sind einfallslos: 1914 hatten die Vorfahren der
Kriegshetzer von 1939 dieses Verfahren bereits gegen Pius X. an-
gewendet, dessen Bemühungen um den Frieden von ihnen als ein
ausschließlicher 
Sympathiebeweis 
für 
Franz 
Joseph 
ausgelegt
wurden (weil dieser im Jahre 1930 seine Wahl zum Papst begünstigt
hatte, indem er sich derjenigen des Kardinals Rampolla wider-
setzte), und 1917 gegen Benedikt XV. (den „Papst der Deutschen“
Clemenceaus). Doch die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. ließen sich auf das
Thema der nazistischen Greuel festnageln und begaben sich damit
der Möglichkeit, von diesem Argument Gebrauch zu machen. Und
mit dem Hinweis auf ihren Papst, der nichts davon gewußt oder
der, soweit er davon gewußt habe, sich nicht anders habe verhalten
können, wenn er nicht das Schlimmste heraufbeschwören wollte,
führten sie keinen stärkeren Gegenschlag, als wenn sie mit Pfeilen auf
Atombomben geantwortet hätten.
Es soll hier noch einmal gesagt werden: Es ist wahr, daß Pius XII.
nichts gewußt hat. Doch da dies nicht das Problem darstellte, war
es ein sehr dürftiges Argument. Es ist ebenfalls wahr, daß er stetsEs soll hier noch einmal gesagt werden: Es ist wahr, daß Pius XII.
nichts gewußt hat. Doch da dies nicht das Problem darstellte, war
es ein sehr dürftiges Argument. Es ist ebenfalls wahr, daß er stets

--- PAGE BREAK ---nmal gesagt werden: Es ist wahr, daß Pius XII.
nichts gewußt hat. Doch da dies nicht das Problem darstellte, war
es ein sehr dürftiges Argument. Es ist ebenfalls wahr, daß er stets

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
bemüht war, das Schlimmste zu vermeiden, und daß darin der
Grund für seine „Zurückhaltung“ — das Wort stammt von ihm
selbst — lag, doch machte man ihm gerade das zum Vorwurf.
Alfred Grosser122, Mentor Saul Friedländers, ging sogar so weit,
zu sagen: „Man muß zuweilen den Mut haben, das Notwendige
dem Nützlichen vorzuziehen.“ In den Augen der Feinde Pius’ XII.
hat dieses Wort, das sie wohlweislich nicht in seinem richtigen
Zusammenhang wiedergeben, den Charakter eines Geständnisses.
Die „Zurückhaltung“ des Papstes erklärt sich aus der Sorge, das über
die Menschheit hereingebrochene Unheil nicht noch zu verschlim-
mern, sowie aus der Sorge, der Vater aller Menschen zu bleiben.
In diesem Falle bedeutete der Spielraum zwischen dem „Nützli-
chen“ und dem „Notwendigen“ zweifellos soviel wie zu entschei-
den, ob er die ungefähr 40 bis 50 Millionen Katholiken in den von
den deutschen Truppen besetzten Gebieten Europas den Repres-
salien Hitlers ausliefern sollte oder nicht, ohne dadurch das Los
der Juden in irgendeiner Weise, wenn nicht zum Schlechteren, zu
ändern. Er hätte sich auch zur völligen Stummheit verdammt:
Um des Papstes Stimme unhörbar zu machen, brauchte Musso-
lini lediglich den Osservatore Romano zu verbieten und Radio
Vatikan den elektrischen Strom zu entziehen123. Woraus man
sieht, daß es nicht einmal nötig gewesen wäre, ihn zu deportieren:
Durch Weizsäcker wissen wir, daß dies erwogen wurde. Wir wissen
aber auch124, daß Pius XII. eine solche Eventualität keineswegs
fürchtete, wie von jedermann, einschließlich seiner Ankläger, zu-
gegeben wird, obwohl sie versuchten, ihm diese Furcht zu unter-
stellen. Es hätte ferner bedeutet, sich der Möglichkeit jeglicher
späterer Bemühung zu berauben, und zwar sowohl zugunsten der
Juden selbst — von denen er manch einen rettete125! — als auch
hinsichtlich der Wiederherstellung der internationalen Beziehun-
gen, auf die er weiterhin hoffte. Sich deportieren oder unter Aus-
schluß jeder Verbindung mit der Außenwelt im Vatikan einschlie-
ßen zu lassen, hätte geheißen, das Steuer des „Schiffes Petri“ fah-
122 Radiosendung vom 27. November 1964 über Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich.
123 Ein solcher Plan bestand. Vgl. Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 123
124 Dino Alfieri, Deux dictateurs face à face, S. 30, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 471964 über Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich.
123 Ein solcher Plan bestand. Vgl. Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 123
124 Dino Alfieri, Deux dictateurs face à face, S. 30, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47

--- PAGE BREAK ---und das Dritte Reich.
123 Ein solcher Plan bestand. Vgl. Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 123
124 Dino Alfieri, Deux dictateurs face à face, S. 30, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

87
ren und dieses mit seinen an die 500 Millionen Passagieren auf den
stürmischen Ozean einer dem Wahnsinn verfallenen Welt hinaus-
treiben zu lassen . . .
Es mag noch hingehen, daß Alfred Grosser, obgleich Professor
an der École des Hautes Études in Paris, sich nicht darüber im kla-
ren ist, daß er sich mit seiner Formel von der Entscheidung zugun-
sten des „Notwendigen“ anstelle des „Nützlichen“ zugleich lächer-
lich und verabscheuenswürdig macht. Lächerlich deshalb, weil er
einen Papst zur Abdankung auffordert, und verabscheuenswürdig,
weil man, selbst ohne Hoffnung auf Rettung der Juden, trotzdem
40 bis 50 Millionen Katholiken hätte opfern müssen. Bei derarti-
gen Leuten muß man auf alles gefaßt sein. Doch das Folgende
übersteigt das Begriffsvermögen: Die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. haben
noch nicht einmal bemerkt, daß der merkwürdige Jesuit Riccardo
des Herrn Rolf Hochhuth durch sein Verständnis dafür, daß Ger-
stein vor der Öffentlichkeit schweigt, um nicht seine Familie den
Repressalien der Gestapo auszusetzen126, die Benutzung dieses Ar-
gumentes völlig unmöglich machte. Ganz zu schweigen von der
Anmaßung, daß das Leben jener zwei Dutzend deutscher Prote-
125 Zwei moralisch und finanziell durch den Vatikan unterstützte kirchliche
Organisationen waren den Juden, die sich mit ihnen in Verbindung setzen
konnten, behilflich, Italien zu verlassen, indem sie ihnen Geld und auslän-
dische Pässe besorgten. Es handelt sich hierbei um die Organisationen Oeuvre
de Saint-Raphael und Delasem, die übrigens direkt mit den jüdischen Orga-
nisationen der Vereinigten Staaten zusammenarbeiteten. Darüber hinaus wur-
den den Juden die römischen Klöster als Zufluchtsstätten geöffnet. (Vgl.
Pater Leiber, Stimmen der Zeit, März 1961.)
126 Vgl. Hochhuth, Stellvertreter, S. 69. Als Riccardo von Gerstein verlangt, er
solle nach London gehen und dort über BBC von allem berichten, was er
wußte, entgegnet Gerstein „leidenschaftlich“: „Herrgott — ahnen Sie nur,
was Sie da verlangen: Ich tue alles — aber dies kann ich nicht tun. Eine
Rede von mir am Radio London — und in Deutschland wird meine Familie
ausgerottet.“
Hierauf Riccardo: „O bitte, das — das habe ich nicht gewußt!“
Der Dialog geht folgendermaßen weiter: Gerstein: „Die würden nicht nur
meine Frau ermorden, meine Kinder — noch meine Brüder würden sie im
Lager zu Tode quälen.“
Und Riccardo bittet demütig: „Verzeihn Sie mir . . . “
Aber es versteht sich von selbst, daß Pius XII. ein „Verbrecher“ ist, weil
er für 40 bis 50 Millionen Katholiken die gleiche Sorge hegte.uälen.“
Und Riccardo bittet demütig: „Verzeihn Sie mir . . . “
Aber es versteht sich von selbst, daß Pius XII. ein „Verbrecher“ ist, weil
er für 40 bis 50 Millionen Katholiken die gleiche Sorge hegte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---bittet demütig: „Verzeihn Sie mir . . . “
Aber es versteht sich von selbst, daß Pius XII. ein „Verbrecher“ ist, weil
er für 40 bis 50 Millionen Katholiken die gleiche Sorge hegte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
stanten, die den Namen Gerstein tragen, für die Zukunft der Welt
wertvoller sei als das von 40 bis 50 Millionen Katholiken!
Ich weiß wohl, was die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. am meisten zu-
rückhielt, die Debatte zu eröffnen: Wurde sie nämlich in ihrem
tatsächlichen Ausmaß geführt, so mußte sie zwangsläufig auf die
Frage der Verantwortung für den Zweiten Weltkrieg hinauslau-
fen. Das zentrale Thema dieser Auseinandersetzung wäre in diesem
Fall jener Standpunkt geworden, der in einer Information des
deutschen Geheimdienstes formuliert wurde und der die Haltung
des Papstes vor dem Kriege wie auch während des ganzen Krieges
erklärt: „Der Papst nimmt . . . eine ganz klare Haltung im Streit
der beiden kämpfenden Parteien ein; er verurteilt den Angriff
Deutschlands und seine antikatholische Politik, aber mißbilligt
gleichzeitig auch die Bestrebungen der reichen Völker England und
Frankreich, die nicht bereit waren, einen Teil der von ihnen zufäl-
lig erworbenen kolonialen Reichtümer den verarmten Völkern
Deutschland und Italien zu überlassen127 . . . “ Mit anderen Wor-
ten: Er verurteilte den Versailler Vertrag. Dazu gehört auch —
wenn man das Andenken Pius’ XII. verteidigen wollte — die
rühmende Hervorhebung seiner wiederholten Stellungnahmen für
die Notwendigkeit, diesen Vertrag den Geboten der Gerechtigkeit
unter den Völkern anzupassen, da nur durch seine Revision der
Krieg vermieden werden könne. Dazu gehören ferner seine Stel-
lungnahmen gegen die britische und französische Kriegserklärung
an Deutschland und, nach Kriegsausbruch, gegen die Ausweitung
des Konfliktes, ganz gleich, ob sie nun von Mussolini, Churchill
oder Roosevelt verursacht wurde. Er war einzig und allein besorgt,
die „ersehnte Stunde einer Auferstehung nach den Grundsätzen
der Gerechtigkeit und eines wahren Friedens128“ zurückkehren zu
sehen. Zum Verständnis der geschichtlichen Rolle des Papstes ge-
127 Inf. III vom 18. 7. 1941, Archiv AA, StS: V. Zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 68
128 Summi Pontificatus (Zitiert nach Der Papst an die Deutschen, Pius XII. als
Apostolischer Nuntius und als Papst in seinen deutschsprachigen Reden und
Sendschreiben von 1917 bis 1956, hg. von B. Wuestenberg und J. Zabkar.
Frankfurt am Main 1956. S. 94 — Anm. d. Übers.). Das Thema wurde in
allen Weihnachtsbotschaften während des Krieges und in allen Ansprachen
vom 2. Juni vor dem Kardinalskollegium wiederaufgenommen.r.
Frankfurt am Main 1956. S. 94 — Anm. d. Übers.). Das Thema wurde in
allen Weihnachtsbotschaften während des Krieges und in allen Ansprachen
vom 2. Juni vor dem Kardinalskollegium wiederaufgenommen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1956. S. 94 — Anm. d. Übers.). Das Thema wurde in
allen Weihnachtsbotschaften während des Krieges und in allen Ansprachen
vom 2. Juni vor dem Kardinalskollegium wiederaufgenommen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
hört auch, daß er zugleich den „Angriff Deutschlands“ und die
„Bestrebungen der reichen Völker England und Frankreich“ ver-
urteilte, wie aus dem obenzitierten Text deutlich hervorgeht. Dies
brachte die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. ganz besonders in Verlegenheit,
denn es bedeutet die Verwerfung jener heutzutage so beliebten
These von der einseitigen Verantwortlichkeit Deutschlands oder
gar Hitlers an der Entfesselung des Zweiten Weltkrieges — sie hat
durch den Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher in Nürnberg
Gesetzeskraft 
erlangt 
— 
zugunsten 
der 
These 
der 
geteilten
Verantwortlichkeiten. An dieser Stelle fürchteten die Verteidiger
Pius’ XII., der Sympathie für den Nationalsozialismus oder des
Neonazismus bezichtigt zu werden. (Ich spreche dabei nicht von
Dummköpfen vom Typ des Pater Riquet, die 1939 aus übrigens
wenig edlen Gründen bedingungslose Kriegshetzer waren und sich
voller Bewunderung für das, was sie gewesen waren und sich rüh-
men, geblieben zu sein, nun unablässig im Spiegel betrachten.)
Dies habe, wie sie nicht zu Unrecht sagten, unter den gegenwärti-
gen Umständen und obwohl viele Leute hinsichtlich der meisten
„Propagandawahrheiten“ über die „Alleinschuld Deutschlands am
Kriege“, mit denen man sie förmlich überschüttet habe, ihre Mei-
nung geändert hätten, alle Aussicht, in der Öffentlichkeit vollen
Glauben zu finden. Nicht daß sie Feiglinge wären — nein, aus
taktischen Gründen. „Da wir ihnen so keinerlei Anlaß geboten
haben, uns in den Schmutz zu ziehen“, erklärte mir einer von
ihnen, und zwar kein unbedeutender, „ist unser Ansehen für den
wahren Kampf unversehrt geblieben. Es ist uns klar, daß wir die
Schlacht, wenn die Stunde gekommen ist, auf diesem Gebiet wer-
den schlagen müssen . . . “ So oder fast so lauteten seine Worte. Ich
beschränkte mich auf die Erwiderung, daß es besser gewesen wäre,
das Ansehen des Papstes unversehrt zu lassen. Und zwar nicht, weil
er Papst war, ergänzte ich — denn ich bin Atheist und deshalb
daran nicht im geringsten interessiert —, sondern weil er Pazifist
war und weil daher in seiner Person nicht nur alle Katholiken,
sondern auch alle Pazifisten verletzt worden waren, und dies ist es
wohl wert, ins Wasser zu springen, um sein Andenken zu retten.
Ohne jedes Risiko übrigens, setzte ich erläuternd hinzu, da sich
hier in diesem Wasser eine unversenkbare Boje in der Gestalt derist es
wohl wert, ins Wasser zu springen, um sein Andenken zu retten.
Ohne jedes Risiko übrigens, setzte ich erläuternd hinzu, da sich
hier in diesem Wasser eine unversenkbare Boje in der Gestalt der

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns Wasser zu springen, um sein Andenken zu retten.
Ohne jedes Risiko übrigens, setzte ich erläuternd hinzu, da sich
hier in diesem Wasser eine unversenkbare Boje in der Gestalt der

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
geschichtlichen Wahrheit befindet. Und die Meinung der Schwach-
köpfe, durch die man Gefahr läuft, unpopulär zu werden. Im Dien-
ste der geschichtlichen Wahrheit ist die Unpopularität stets nur
augenblicklich: „Die triumphierende Lüge, die vergeht“, sagte
Jaurès. Die vergeht! Und unter diesem Gesichtspunkt gesehen —
wie viele Vorteile bietet nicht demgegenüber das für den Augen-
blick abgegebene Zeugnis?
Alle diese Überlegungen, die darauf abzielten, das wirkliche
Ausmaß des Problems festzustellen, machen es unnötig, auf die
Argumente der Verteidigung im einzelnen einzugehen. So ist es
zum Beispiel unwesentlich, anzumerken, daß man durch den Ver-
such, die Aufführungen des Stellvertreter durch Demonstrationen
am Theatereingang oder durch Werfen von Stinkbomben im
Theater zu verhindern, nichts weiter zu erreichen vermochte, als
Rémy Roure die Gelegenheit zu geben, mit der Entgegnung
„Stinkbomben sind keine Antwort auf die Frage129“ einen mühe-
losen Erfolg für sich zu verbuchen.
Und wenn Pater Riquet uns sagt, daß Pius XII. am 18. März
1945 einen Friedensappell erlassen und an alle, die seinerzeit mit-
gerissen worden waren, die inständige Bitte gerichtet habe, „dem
Götzendienst des absoluten Nationalismus, dem Hochmut der
Rasse und des Blutes sowie dem Verlangen nach Hegemonie“ zu
entsagen, und Himmler als Antwort darauf den Lagerkomman-
danten eine Mitteilung gesandt habe, in der es hieß: „Kein Häft-
ling darf dem Feind lebend in die Hände fallen, alle sind zu liqui-
dieren130, so kann man ihn nur darauf aufmerksam machen, daß
Himmler niemals eine solche Mitteilung geschickt hat131. Man
stellt nicht einer Lüge eine andere entgegen, denn Lügen sind
keine Nägel, bei denen man den einen mit einem anderen austrei-
ben kann. Und was ihn selbst betrifft, kann man nur fragen: Ri-
quet oder Loriquet131a? Kurz, Pater Riquet erwies der Verteidi-
gung Pius’ XII. damit einen Bärendienst.
129 Le Figaro v. 28. Dezember 1963
130 Le Figaro v. 3. Januar 1964
131 Le Figaro littéraire v. 4. Juni 1960, unter dem Namen von Jacques Sabille,
sowie Les Mains du miracle von Joseph Kessel, der sich dabei auf den Leib-
arzt Himmlers, Dr. Kersten, beruft.anuar 1964
131 Le Figaro littéraire v. 4. Juni 1960, unter dem Namen von Jacques Sabille,
sowie Les Mains du miracle von Joseph Kessel, der sich dabei auf den Leib-
arzt Himmlers, Dr. Kersten, beruft.

--- PAGE BREAK ---garo littéraire v. 4. Juni 1960, unter dem Namen von Jacques Sabille,
sowie Les Mains du miracle von Joseph Kessel, der sich dabei auf den Leib-
arzt Himmlers, Dr. Kersten, beruft.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
Und wenn schließlich die deutsche Bundesregierung „unter tie-
fem Bedauern über die Angriffe gegen Pius XII.“ verkündet, sie
„wisse, wie sehr sie dem Papst für seine Hilfe zu Dank verpflichtet
sei, die er dem deutschen Volke beim Zusammenbruch des Nazi-
regimes zugunsten der Aussöhnung Deutschlands mit den anderen
Ländern habe angedeihen lassen132“, so ist das lediglich eine Dank-
barkeitsbezeigung ohne historischen Wert und für die Verteidi-
gung Pius’ XII. ein weiterer Bärendienst.
Selbst der so häufig zitierte Brief, den Paul VI., damals noch
Kardinal Montini, an die englische katholische Zeitschrift The
Tablet133 richtete, streift das wirkliche Problem nur:
„Eine Verurteilung und ein Protest vor aller Welt, den nicht
ausgesprochen zu haben man dem Papst vorwirft, wären nicht nur
unnütz, sondern sogar schädlich gewesen . . . Gesetzt den Fall,
Pius XII. hätte das getan, was ihm Hochhuth vorwirft, nicht getan
zu haben, dann hätte das zu derartigen Repressalien und Zerstö-
rungen geführt, daß der gleiche Hochhuth . . . nach Kriegsende ein
anderes Drama hätte schreiben können, viel realistischer und viel
interessanter als jenes, das er . . . in Szene gesetzt hat, nämlich das
Drama des ,Stellvertreters‘, dem wegen politischem Exhibitionis-
mus oder psychologischer Unachtsamkeit die Schuld zufallen
würde, in der schon so sehr gequälten Welt eine noch viel weitere
Zerstörung ausgelöst zu haben, weniger zum eigenen Schaden als
zum Schaden unzähliger unschuldiger Opfer134.“
Trotzdem muß man gelten lassen, daß dieser Text, wenn er das
wahre Problem auch nur streift, es doch gleichwohl stellt, insbe-
sondere in seinem letzten Satz: Jedermann versteht, daß es hier
um den Charakter geht, den der Krieg in der Steigerung von Re-
131a Jean Loriquet, französischer Jesuit (1767—1845), Verfasser historischer
Werke, in denen er die historischen Fakten völlig verfälschte. So nannte er
z. B. Napoleon I. den „Marquis Bonaparte, lieutenant des armées de Louis
XVIII“. Er wurde zum Gespött der französischen Historiker. Seitdem be-
zeichnet man einen Historiker, der es mit der geschichtlichen Wahrheit nicht
genau nimmt, als einen „Loriquet“. (Erläuterung d. Verf. für die deutsche
Ausgabe)
132 Osservatore Romano v. 5. Mai 1963
133 11. Mai 1963
134 Zitiert nach Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 112. (Anm. d. Übers.), als einen „Loriquet“. (Erläuterung d. Verf. für die deutsche
Ausgabe)
132 Osservatore Romano v. 5. Mai 1963
133 11. Mai 1963
134 Zitiert nach Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 112. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---t“. (Erläuterung d. Verf. für die deutsche
Ausgabe)
132 Osservatore Romano v. 5. Mai 1963
133 11. Mai 1963
134 Zitiert nach Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 112. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
pressalie zu Repressalie auf beiden Seiten angenommen hätte, und
daß Pius XII. statt des beschwichtigenden Elementes, das er stets
sein wollte, zu einem Element der Aufreizung geworden wäre.
Die beste Darlegung des Problems und folglich die beste Ant-
wort auf die Verleumdungskampagne gegen Pius XII. erfolgte
durch die deutschen Bischöfe anläßlich der Plenarkonferenz in
Hofheim/Taunus vom 4. bis 6. März 1963:
„Papst Pius XII. erfüllte seine Aufgabe als oberster Hirte der
Kirche mit bewunderungswürdiger Verantwortung und Gerech-
tigkeit in einer Zeit, die durch den Zweiten Weltkrieg und das in
vielen Völkern sich daran anschließende Chaos besonders schwierig
und spannungsreich war.
So erinnern wir uns in Dankbarkeit, daß sich Papst Pius XII. mit
aller Kraft bemüht hat, den Ausbruch des Krieges zu verhindern,
und daß er während des Krieges alles tat, um dem Blutvergießen
unter den Völkern ein Ende zu setzen.
In hervorragendem Maß gehört diesem Papst der Dank der
Menschheit, daß er seine Stimme gegen furchtbare Unmenschlich-
keiten, insbesondere gegen die Unterdrückung und Vernichtung
von Menschen und Völkern erhob, wie sie während des Krieges
und nach dem Kriege erfolgten. Wenn die Stimme Pius XII. bei
den Verantwortlichen kein Gehör fand, so fällt die Schuld auf sie
zurück135.“
Leider blieb diese Darstellung ohne Echo. Niemand unterzog
sich der Aufgabe zu beweisen, daß sich Pius XII. „mit aller Kraft
135 Katholische Nachrichten Agentur, Informationsdienst, vom 7. März 1963.
Der Objektivität halber muß gesagt werden, daß einer der Konferenzteil-
nehmer, der Erzbischof von München, Msgr. Döpfner, sich am 8. März 1964
in einer langen Ansprache davon distanzierte und einräumte:
„Es ist im Urteil historischer Rückschau durchaus die Meinung denkbar,
daß Pius XII. hätte schärfer protestieren sollen.“ Hierbei wird nur auf die
Verbrechen des Nationalsozialismus angespielt, wie aus dem Textzusammen-
hang klar hervorgeht. Und die einzige Milderung hierzu, die im Grunde gar
keine ist: „Jedenfalls dürfte die absolute Lauterkeit seiner Motive und auch
die echte Angemessenheit seiner Gründe nicht angezweifelt werden.“
Jacques Nobécourt machte sich eilends daran, den ersten dieser beiden
Sätze seinem Buch Le Vicaire et l’histoire als Motto voranzustellen und ihn
so zu den Anklageakten zu nehmen. Wirklich sehr ärgerlich für den Erz-
bischof!sich eilends daran, den ersten dieser beiden
Sätze seinem Buch Le Vicaire et l’histoire als Motto voranzustellen und ihn
so zu den Anklageakten zu nehmen. Wirklich sehr ärgerlich für den Erz-
bischof!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

93
bemüht hat, den Ausbruch des Krieges zu verhindern, und daß er
während des Krieges alles tat, um dem Blutvergießen unter den
Völkern ein Ende zu setzen“.
Und daß dies der wahre Grund war, weshalb man ihn in so
gehässiger Weise angegriffen hat.
Das wird im folgenden unsere Aufgabe sein.
Im Anhang136 haben wir die wichtigsten anderen Argumente der
Verteidigung aufgeführt, angesichts ihrer geringen Bedeutung je-
doch lediglich als Notiz.
136 Anhang III

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kapitel II
Das eigentliche Problem

--- PAGE BREAK ---eren Argumente der
Verteidigung aufgeführt, angesichts ihrer geringen Bedeutung je-
doch lediglich als Notiz.
136 Anhang III

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kapitel II
Das eigentliche Problem

--- PAGE BREAK ---

97
I. DIE PÄPSTE UND DER FRIEDEN
Am 20. September 1870 kapitulierte die von den Truppen
Viktor Emanuels belagerte Stadt Rom. Dieses Datum steht für
die endgültige Verwirklichung der italienischen Einheit137 und zu-
gleich auch für das Ende der weltlichen Macht der Päpste.
Es ist eine Scheidelinie zwischen zwei Kirchen und zwischen zwei
Epochen.
Zwischen zwei Kirchen aus folgenden Gründen:
Vor dem zum ersten Mal138 vollständig versammelten italieni-
schen Parlament konnte Viktor Emmanuel am 5. Dezember 1870
ausrufen: „Italien ist frei und einig. Unsere Aufgabe ist es von nun
an, es groß und glücklich zu machen!“ Derartige Formulierungen
pflegen die Völker leider mit blinder Begeisterung zu erfüllen: Erst
später wurde deutlich, was sie wirklich wert waren. Es mußten
nun noch die Beziehungen zwischen Staat und Papsttum festgelegt
werden. Dies erfolgte einseitig durch das sogenannte Garantie-
gesetz, das vom italienischen Parlament am 2. Mai 1871 verab-
schiedet wurde und folgenden Inhalt hat: „In seinem ersten Teil
verkündete das Gesetz die Heiligkeit und Unverletzlichkeit der
Person des Papstes, gewährte ihm in Italien die Würde eines Staats-
oberhauptes, eine Rente von 3 225 000 Lire, den freien und unver-
äußerlichen Besitz des Vatikans, des Laterans und Castel Gandolfos,
die Unverletzlichkeit seines Aufenthalts und der von ihm einberu-
fenen Konzilien, freien Verkehr mit dem gesamten Episkopat der
katholischen Welt, ohne Einmischung der Regierung, sowie in
Rom die Verwaltung der zum kirchlichen Bildungswesen gehören-
den Akademien, Seminare, Universitäten und höheren Schulen.
Im zweiten Teil verzichtete der Staat auf jeden Anspruch auf die
Besetzung der kirchlichen Ämter, die Erteilung des Exequatur und
137 Viktor Emanuel, der bereits am 14. März 1861 von einem Parlament, das
Abgeordnete aus ganz Italien außer aus dem immer noch österreichischen
Venetien und dem Kirchenstaat umfaßte, zum König von Italien prokla-
miert worden war, ist faktisch erst an diesem Tage, nachdem ihm Venetien
durch Volksentscheid am 22. Oktober 1866 zugefallen war, Herrscher ganz
Italiens.
138 In Florenz. Der erste Zusammentritt des Parlamentes in Rom erfolgte erst
am 27. November 1871.achdem ihm Venetien
durch Volksentscheid am 22. Oktober 1866 zugefallen war, Herrscher ganz
Italiens.
138 In Florenz. Der erste Zusammentritt des Parlamentes in Rom erfolgte erst
am 27. November 1871.

--- PAGE BREAK ---durch Volksentscheid am 22. Oktober 1866 zugefallen war, Herrscher ganz
Italiens.
138 In Florenz. Der erste Zusammentritt des Parlamentes in Rom erfolgte erst
am 27. November 1871.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
des Placet regium sowie die Eidesleistung der vom Papst ernannten
Bischöfe; andererseits lehnte der Staat es ab, zu kirchlichen Ent-
scheidungen seine Zustimmung auszusprechen. Sie waren in ihren
Wirkungen nichtig, wenn sie sich zu den Gesetzen des Staates in
Widerspruch befanden. Das war fast gleichbedeutend mit einer
freien Kirche in einem freien Staat139.“
Damals saß Pius IX. auf dem apostolischen Stuhl. Ohne irgend-
ein Werturteil über seine Auffassung von seinem apostolischen
Auftrag zu fällen, muß festgestellt werden, daß er ein Mensch war,
der mit Wehmut auf jene Epoche zurückblickte, in der Europa von
sich selbst noch kein anderes Bewußtsein besaß als das, die Christen-
heit zu verkörpern, und in der Kaiser Karl der Große die weltliche
Macht erst aus den Händen eines seiner Vorgänger empfangen
hatte und nach Rom zog, um sich durch ihn in seinem Amt weihen
zu lassen; in der ein anderer seiner Vorgänger den Kaiser Hein-
rich IV. nach Canossa kommen ließ; in der unter dem Kaiser
Karl V. Europa, das weiterhin die Christenheit verkörperte, noch
das Heilige Römische Reich deutscher Nation war — übrigens
weitaus „heiliger“ und „römischer“ als „deutsch“. Diese Sehnsucht
des Papstes wurde durch die auf dem Wiener Kongreß verkündete
Heilige Allianz neu belebt. Pius IX. richtete sein Augenmerk aus-
schließlich auf Fragen des Glaubens, der, seiner Vorstellung nach,
die Welt durch die päpstlichen Bemühungen regieren sollte. Die
uns von ihm hinterlassenen Texte beweisen dies zur Genüge: ins-
besondere das Dogma der Unbefleckten Empfängnis (1854), das
Dogma von der Unfehlbarkeit des Papstes (1870) und der Syllabus
(1864)140. Kurz und gut, er war ein Papst, der, gerade weil er einzig
und allein sein Augenmerk auf die Probleme des Glaubens richtete,
139 Édouard Petit, L’Italie, Juli 1929
140 Das Dogma von der päpstlichen Unfehlbarkeit wurde am 18. Juli 1870 von
einem Konzil verkündet, das bereits seit dem 28. Januar 1868 dauerte und
am 9. Oktober 1870 infolge des Falls der Stadt Rom vertagt wurde. Das
Dogma rief erhebliche Meinungsverschiedenheiten hervor. Einerseits inner-
halb der Kirche: Von den 601 Konzilvätern, die am 28. Januar 1868 zum
Konzil zusammengetreten waren, hatten 66 aus Opposition gegen die These
am Vorabend der Abstimmung Rom verlassen, doch von den 535, die dort
blieben, stimmten nur 2 dagegen. Andererseits in der Welt: Österreich kün-
digte aus Unzufriedenheit darüber das Konkordat von 1855 auf, in Deutsch-bstimmung Rom verlassen, doch von den 535, die dort
blieben, stimmten nur 2 dagegen. Andererseits in der Welt: Österreich kün-
digte aus Unzufriedenheit darüber das Konkordat von 1855 auf, in Deutsch-

--- PAGE BREAK ---sen, doch von den 535, die dort
blieben, stimmten nur 2 dagegen. Andererseits in der Welt: Österreich kün-
digte aus Unzufriedenheit darüber das Konkordat von 1855 auf, in Deutsch-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
den wirtschaftlichen oder sozialen Fragen der Zeit völlig fremd
gegenüberstand und dem es daher auch an politischem Gefühl rest-
los mangelte: Hochmütig, so sagte man, doch vor allem würdig
weigerte er sich, das Garantiegesetz anders als unter Zwang anzu-
erkennen, das heißt, er erkannte es de facto, aber nicht de jure an,
und betrachtete sich im Vatikan, den er von nun an zu verlassen
sich weigerte, als ein Gefangener der Mächte des Teufels141.
Die Nachfolger Pius’ IX. machten zwar gute Miene zum bösen
Spiel, wußten jedoch erheblichen Vorteil aus dieser neuen Situation
zu ziehen: Jeglicher weltlichen Macht entkleidet, konnte es ihnen
nicht entgehen, daß sie gleichzeitig von allen diesbezüglichen Bin-
dungen befreit waren — insbesondere von der Versuchung des
Kompromisses, da sie bei dieser Lage der Dinge nunmehr weder
zu gewinnen noch zu verlieren hatten — und daß sie nun im gei-
stigen Bereich ohne Risiko eine feste, bis zur absoluten Unbeug-
samkeit 
gehende 
Haltung 
einzunehmen 
vermochten. 
Niemals
haben Päpste mehr Freiheit besessen, zu sagen, was sie dachten, und
es so zu sagen, wie sie es dachten. Größere Freiheit heißt aber
größere Kraft. Mit Leo XIII., der im Jahre 1878 die Nachfolge von
Pius IX. antrat, begann für die Kirche ein geistiger Aufstieg, der
ihr moralisches Ansehen auf eine nie zuvor gekannte Höhe erhob.
Wir verdanken Leo XIII. eine ganze Reihe von Schriften, deren
Inhalt sicherlich anfechtbar ist, deren glänzende Form jedoch eine
unvergleichliche geistige Beweglichkeit erkennen läßt. Die berühm-
teste ist die Enzyklika Rerum novarum (1891) gegen den Marxis-
mus, doch sind alle anderen, obwohl vergessen, nicht weniger be-
merkenswert: die Enzyklika Immortale Dei (1883) über die Staats-
ordnung (sie erregte in Deutschland ein solches Aufsehen, daß der
land bildete es die Ursache für den Kulturkampf, und in der Schweiz führte
es zu einer Trennung der Kirche von Rom. Dieses Konzil, das unter der Be-
zeichnung „Erstes Vatikanisches Konzil“ abgehalten wurde, war das erste
seit dem Konzil von Trient (1545—1563). Das von Johannes XXIII. im
Jahre 1962 einberufene Zweite Vatikanische Konzil nahm die Diskussion
an dem Punkt wieder auf, an dem sie am Ende des Ersten Vatikanischen
Konzils abgebrochen worden war, erweiterte sie jedoch auf andere Themen.
141 Die Gefangenschaft der Päpste im Vatikan endete erst im Jahre 1929 mit
der Unterzeichnung eines Konkordats zwischen Pius XI. und dem unter
Mussolinis Führung stehenden Italien.auf andere Themen.
141 Die Gefangenschaft der Päpste im Vatikan endete erst im Jahre 1929 mit
der Unterzeichnung eines Konkordats zwischen Pius XI. und dem unter
Mussolinis Führung stehenden Italien.

--- PAGE BREAK ---141 Die Gefangenschaft der Päpste im Vatikan endete erst im Jahre 1929 mit
der Unterzeichnung eines Konkordats zwischen Pius XI. und dem unter
Mussolinis Führung stehenden Italien.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
Einfluß der Katholiken in der Politik gewaltig wuchs; Bismarck
kam plötzlich nicht mehr ohne sie aus, wollte er den Sieg seiner
Politik im Reichstag sichern, und mußte, um ihre für ihn uner-
läßliche Mitwirkung zu erlangen, vor ihnen kapitulieren und die
unter dem Zeichen des Kulturkampfes gegen sie verabschiedeten
Gesetze aufheben); die Enzyklika Sapientiae (1890) über die
Pflichten des christlichen Staatsbürgers (sie zeigte eine Politik auf,
die später Politik des Ralliement142 genannte wurde, nachdem sie
dem französischen Episkopat durch ein Schreiben (1892) in Erinne-
rung gerufen worden war, das diesen dazu anhielt, die Gläubigen
zur Aufgabe ihrer systematischen Opposition gegen die bestehende
Regierungsform zu veranlassen); ferner die Enzyklika Graves de
communi (1901), eine klare und umfassende Darstellung der christ-
lichen Auffassung von der Gesellschaft, die, in engem geistigen
Zusammenhang mit der Enzyklika Rerum novarum gesehen, ihm
den Ruf des „Arbeiterpapstes“ einbrachte, usw.
Das Pontifikat Pius’ X., der im Jahre 1903 die Nachfolge
Leos XIII. antrat, war von Anfang an durch ein für die Kirche
sehr schwerwiegendes Ereignis in schmerzlicher Weise geprägt,
nämlich durch das Gesetz über die Trennung von Kirche und Staat
in Frankreich. Dieses Gesetz veranlaßte ihn zu zwei päpstlichen
Rundschreiben, mit denen sich ein freier und unabhängiger Mensch
nur schwer einverstanden erklären kann, den Enzykliken Vehe-
menter (11. Februar 1906) und Gravissimo (10. August des gleichen
Jahres). Sie waren jedoch eine Entgegnung auf gewisse Exzesse in
der Konzeption des Gesetzes und seiner Anwendung, die ein freier
und unabhängiger Mensch ebensoschwer akzeptieren kann. Nach-
dem die Zeit, diese große Ausgleicherin der Gegensätze, ihr Werk
verrichtet hat, geht heutzutage die Tendenz fast allgemein dahin,
in jenen beiden ein wenig über das Ziel hinausschießenden Enzy-
kliken vor allem eine wohlverständliche Abwehrreaktion der Kir-
che gegenüber dem fanatischen Antiklerikalismus des Väterchen
142 Unter Ralliement versteht man die den französischen Katholiken von
Leo XIII. empfohlene politische Mitarbeit in der Republik. Darin inbegriffen
ist die Anerkennung der Republik, der Verzicht auf eine Restauration der
Monarchie und die Gewinnung der Massen durch soziale Reformen. (Anm.
d. Übers.)he Mitarbeit in der Republik. Darin inbegriffen
ist die Anerkennung der Republik, der Verzicht auf eine Restauration der
Monarchie und die Gewinnung der Massen durch soziale Reformen. (Anm.
d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Republik. Darin inbegriffen
ist die Anerkennung der Republik, der Verzicht auf eine Restauration der
Monarchie und die Gewinnung der Massen durch soziale Reformen. (Anm.
d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
Combes zu sehen: Dieser war vornehmlich darum besorgt, die Auf-
merksamkeit von den auf sozialen Gebiet erzielten Ergebnissen
einer Republik abzulenken, die hier die in sie gesetzten Erwartun-
gen bei weitem nicht erfüllt hatte, und eine gewaltige, von großem
Ehrgeiz erfüllte Arbeiterbewegung auf Ziele hinzuleiten, die den
wohlhabenden Schichten weniger teuer zu stehen kommen wür-
den. Staat und Kirche sind de jure auch heute noch getrennt, doch
de facto sind die Ordensgesellschaften mit allen ihren Vorrechten
zurückgekehrt, die Gemeinden halten die Kirchen instand, der
Staat subventioniert die Konfessionsschulen und . . . es hat nicht
den Anschein, als würde die geistige — und materielle! — Zufrie-
denheit der Franzosen sonderlich dadurch beeinträchtigt. Man
hat Pius X. ferner auch seine Enzyklika Pascendi (8. September
1907) zum Vorwurf gemacht, mit der er sich gegen die Einführung
des Modernismus in die kirchlichen Riten wandte, weil er ihn für
unvereinbar mit der Integrität des Glaubens ansah. Aber das ist
ein Problem, das nur die Katholiken angeht. Da der Verfasser die-
ses Werkes keinerlei Bindungen gegenüber der Kirche besitzt, also
nicht betroffen ist, maßt er sich nicht das Recht an, hierzu Stellung
zu nehmen.
Das Ende dieses Pontifikates stand unter dem Zeichen eines ande-
ren, nicht weniger schmerzlichen Ereignisses, das jedoch dieses Mal
die ganze Welt betraf: des Ersten Weltkrieges. Hierzu gibt es 240
Zeugnisse von Diplomaten, Prälaten, Professoren und Vertrauten
des Papstes, von Gläubigen oder Weltlichen, die in den Akten der
Ordentlichen und apostolischen Prozesse zum Zweck der Selig- und
Heiligsprechung Pius’ X. zusammengefaßt und veröffentlicht wor-
den sind, Verfahren, die an den Orten stattfanden, an denen er
sein Apostolat als einfacher Priester, als Prälat und dann als Papst
ausgeübt hatte, nämlich in Treviso (1923—1926 und 1944—1946),
in Mantua (1924—1927 und 1945—1946), in Venedig (1924—1930
und 1944—1946) und in Rom (1923—1931 und 1943—1946).
Alle diese Zeugnisse stimmen darin überein, daß Pius X. wegen der
Isolierungspolitik Delcassés gegenüber Deutschland, die auf das
russisch-französische Bündnis (1894) folgte, von dem Augenblick
an, in dem er den Thron Petri bestieg, das Vorgefühl, und von der
Balkankrise an die unablässige quälende Vorstellung hatte, daßauf das
russisch-französische Bündnis (1894) folgte, von dem Augenblick
an, in dem er den Thron Petri bestieg, das Vorgefühl, und von der
Balkankrise an die unablässige quälende Vorstellung hatte, daß

--- PAGE BREAK ---nzösische Bündnis (1894) folgte, von dem Augenblick
an, in dem er den Thron Petri bestieg, das Vorgefühl, und von der
Balkankrise an die unablässige quälende Vorstellung hatte, daß

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
dieser Krieg nahe sei. Aus diesen Zeugnissen geht ferner hervor,
daß er alles tat, was in seiner Macht stand, um den Krieg zu verhin-
dern, daß er, sobald er von dem Attentat in Sarajewo (am 18. Juni
1914) Kenntnis erhielt, seinen diplomatischen Apparat in Gang
setzte und in erhöhtem Maße bei den Staatsoberhäuptern inter-
venierte, insbesondere beim Kaiser von Österreich, daß er dem
letzteren Ende Juli 1914 ein Schreiben sandte, in dem er ihn be-
schwor, „das Ende seiner Regierungszeit nicht mit Blut zu be-
flecken“, daß er dem österreichischen Botschafter, der gekommen
war, um ihn von dem Ausbruch des Krieges zu unterrichten, und
ihn um seinen Segen für die österreichisch-deutschen Armeen bat,
entgegnete: „Ich segne den Frieden und nicht den Krieg!“ und ihm,
als er darauf drang, zumindest die Person seines Kaisers zu segnen,
die schneidende Antwort zuteil werden ließ: „Der Kaiser möge
sich glücklich schätzen, noch nicht den Fluch des Heiligen Vaters
empfangen zu haben!“, daß seine Mahnung an die Katholiken der
ganzen Welt vom 2. August 1914 untadelig ist und daß er mit zer-
rissenem Herzen starb, voller Verzweiflung darüber, daß es ihm
nicht gelungen war, den Lauf der Ereignisse zu unterbrechen, und
dabei unablässig wiederholte: „Oh, dieser Krieg! . . . Dieser
Krieg — ich fühle es, er wird mein Tod sein.“
Doch er war Papst. Also muß diskutiert werden! Man hat dabei
zwei Möglichkeiten: Entweder man läßt dies alles gelten, um so-
dann zu folgern: „Ja, aber der Grund dafür liegt nicht darin, daß
er diesem Krieg feindlich gegenüberstand, sondern in seiner Sym-
pathie für Österreich, dessen Kaiser im Jahre 1903 seine Wahl ge-
fördert hatte, sowie in seiner Befürchtung, Österreich könne ,zer-
schlagen‘ aus diesem Krieg hervorgehen143.“ Oder man geht vor
wie Nobécourt: Man gesteht ein, daß der Papst deutliche Vor-
ahnungen hatte, die er „in erstaunlichen prophetischen Tönen in
seinem engsten Kreise144“ äußerte; man hält es für möglich, daß er
ein derartiges Schreiben an den Kaiser von Österreich gesandt und
den österreichischen Botschafter in dieser Weise empfangen hat.
143 Pierre Dominique, Histoire des Papes. Quintessenz seiner Ausführungen.
144 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 120. Von uns kursiv gesetzt.nd
den österreichischen Botschafter in dieser Weise empfangen hat.
143 Pierre Dominique, Histoire des Papes. Quintessenz seiner Ausführungen.
144 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 120. Von uns kursiv gesetzt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hen Botschafter in dieser Weise empfangen hat.
143 Pierre Dominique, Histoire des Papes. Quintessenz seiner Ausführungen.
144 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 120. Von uns kursiv gesetzt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

103
Allerdings beruft man sich dabei darauf, daß zwar das Schreiben
wie auch der Empfang von den kirchlichen Gerichtshöfen, die über
die Seligsprechung dieses Papstes entschieden, als beweiskräftig an-
erkannt wurden, daß jedoch für das Schreiben keinerlei Textbelege,
sondern lediglich die Aussagen seines Kaplans, des Abtes Albin de
Cigala145, und seines Staatssekretärs, des Kardinals Merry del Val146,
vorliegen, daß der obenerwähnte Empfang ohne Zeugen stattfand
und nur von dem Staatssekretär, dem gegenüber sich Pius X. dar-
über vertraulich geäußert hatte, bezeugt wurde146. Sodann zieht
man den Schluß, es sei „beim gegenwärtigen Stand der Dinge nicht
möglich, sich über die Bedeutung der Interventionen Pius’ X. zu
äußern147“. Doch wenn es um die Behauptung eines Kurt Ger-
stein geht, deren Text man nicht einmal mehr vorzulegen wagt
— wenn man es überhaupt jemals konnte! —, sowie um ihre Inter-
pretation durch Leute wie Hochhuth oder Friedländer, dann er-
geben sich keine Zweifel mehr, und man hält es auch nicht mehr
für nötig, eine Möglichkeit eindeutig als eine solche zu bezeichnen.
Denn diese Leute sind Protestanten oder Juden, und man kann
mit ihnen schließlich nicht wie mit einem gewöhnlichen Kaplan
der katholischen Kirche, einem gewöhnlichen Kardinal oder einem
gewöhnlichen Papst umgehen148!
Beim Tode Pius’ X. (20. August 1914) würdigten sämtliche Zei-
tungen im Lager der Alliierten — einschließlich L’Humanité, dem
Organ der damaligen sozialistischen Partei Frankreichs — ein-
mütig seine verzweifelten Bemühungen um die Rettung des Frie-
dens. Kardinal Merry del Val berichtet149: „Ein Diplomat [sein
Name wird nicht angegeben] äußerte sich mir gegenüber zu der
tragischen Situation des durch den Krieg erschütterten Europas:
,Die letzte Klarheit‘, sagte er zu mir, ,und die letzte Aussicht auf
Frieden sind mit Pius X. erloschen, und nur noch Finsternis ist um
uns herum150.‘ “
145 Albin de Cigala, Pie X.
146 Merry del Val, Pie X, souvenirs et impressions
147 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 123
148 In Anhang IV wird ein weiteres Mittel gezeigt, mit dem man über seinen
Staatssekretär Merry del Val die Friedenspolitik Pius’ X. in Mißkredit zu
bringen versuchte.47 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 123
148 In Anhang IV wird ein weiteres Mittel gezeigt, mit dem man über seinen
Staatssekretär Merry del Val die Friedenspolitik Pius’ X. in Mißkredit zu
bringen versuchte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aire, S. 123
148 In Anhang IV wird ein weiteres Mittel gezeigt, mit dem man über seinen
Staatssekretär Merry del Val die Friedenspolitik Pius’ X. in Mißkredit zu
bringen versuchte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
Der Diplomat irrte sich: Der am 3. September gewählte Bene-
dikt XV. trat mit seiner Mahnung an die Katholiken der ganzen
Welt151 vom darauffolgenden 8. September sogleich in die Fuß-
stapfen Pius’ X.: „Das entsetzliche Schauspiel des Krieges, in dem
ein so großer Teil Europas, von Feuer und Schwert verwüstet, von
christlichem Blut getränkt ist, hat Uns mit unaussprechlichem
Entsetzen und ebensolcher Angst erfüllt . . . Wir haben den festen
Entschluß gefaßt, nichts außer acht zu lassen, was in Unserer Macht
steht, um das Ende eines so großen Unheils herbeizuführen . . .
Wir bitten und beschwören diejenigen, die die Geschicke der Völ-
ker lenken, inständig, zum Heil der menschlichen Gesellschaft
ihren Sinn auf die Beilegung ihrer Streitigkeiten zu richten . . .
Es ist genug der Zerstörungen, es ist genug Blut geflossen!“
Er ließ tatsächlich nichts außer acht: Seine erste Weihnachtsbot-
schaft am 24. Dezember desselben Jahres schlug den Staatsober-
häuptern einen Waffenstillstand während des Weihnachtsfestes
vor. Man hörte nicht auf ihn. Dennoch wartete er weiterhin un-
aufhörlich auf die Gelegenheit, die internationalen Beziehungen
wiederherzustellen. Nach dem Tode (21. November 1916) des
alten Kaisers Franz Joseph ergab sich diese Gelegenheit am 1. Au-
gust 1917, nach einer Zeit von acht Monaten also, die er dazu be-
nutzte, die Verbindung zwischen dem neuen Kaiser (dem Neffen
des vorhergehenden, er war als Karl IV. König von Ungarn und
folgte als Karl I. dem verstorbenen Franz Joseph auf den Thron
der Doppelmonarchie) und dessen Schwager, dem Prinzen Sixtus
von Parma, der sich auf der Seite der Alliierten befand, herzustel-
len. Briand und Caillaux sollen sich seinen Bemühungen ange-
schlossen haben, um eine Unterredung des Prinzen Sixtus von
Parma mit der französischen Regierung herbeizuführen. Im März
1917 hatte der neue Kaiser von Österreich ein Friedensangebot ge-
macht. Benedikt XV. nahm diesen guten Willen zur Kenntnis. Als
er außerdem erfuhr, daß der Nuntius in München, Pacelli, der
spätere Pius XII., im Juli im Verlauf einer Unterredung mit Wil-
149 Merry del Val, Pie X, S. 28
150 Im Text kursiv
151 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bd. V, S. 15—17daß der Nuntius in München, Pacelli, der
spätere Pius XII., im Juli im Verlauf einer Unterredung mit Wil-
149 Merry del Val, Pie X, S. 28
150 Im Text kursiv
151 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bd. V, S. 15—17

--- PAGE BREAK ---ünchen, Pacelli, der
spätere Pius XII., im Juli im Verlauf einer Unterredung mit Wil-
149 Merry del Val, Pie X, S. 28
150 Im Text kursiv
151 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bd. V, S. 15—17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
helm II. von diesem die Zusicherung erhalten hatte, er sei zu einem
Kompromißfrieden bereit, hielt der Papst trotz des Kriegseintritts
der Vereinigten Staaten am vorhergegangenen 6. April die Um-
stände für einen Vermittlungsversuch für günstig. Seine Mahnung
zum Frieden an die Führer der kriegführenden Nationen vom
1. August 1917 ist in zweifacher Hinsicht verdienstvoll: So wird
hier zum ersten Mal in der Geschichte des Papsttums die Aufgabe
des Stellvertreters Christi in Kriegszeiten in klaren und bestimm-
ten Worten festgelegt und ferner ein Friedensplan vorgeschlagen,
der, von dem Grundsatz des Selbstbestimmungsrechts der Völker
abgesehen, nichts anderes ist als das berühmte 14-Punkte-Pro-
gramm des Präsidenten Wilson.
Im folgenden sehen wir, wie er seine apostolische Mission auf-
faßte: „Wir haben Uns vor allem drei Aufgaben gestellt: Gegen-
über allen Kriegführenden eine vollkommene Unparteilichkeit zu
wahren, wie es sich für den gemeinsamen Vater aller Menschen, der
alle seine Kinder in gleicher Weise liebt, geziemt; sodann, Uns fort-
während zu bemühen, allen soviel Gutes zu tun wie nur möglich,
und zwar ohne Ansehen der Person, der Nationalität oder der
Religion, wie es Uns durch das universale Gesetz der Nächsten-
liebe wie auch durch das Uns von Christus anvertraute höchste
geistliche Amt vorgeschrieben ist; und schließlich, wie es Unsere
friedenstiftende Mission ebenfalls verlangt, nichts zu unterlassen,
soweit es in Unserer Macht liegt, was dazu beitragen könnte, das
Ende dieses Unheils herbeizuführen, und zwar indem Wir ver-
suchen, die Völker und ihre Führer zu maßvolleren Entschlüssen
und zu Friedensberatungen in einer ruhigen Atmosphäre mit dem
Ziel eines gerechten und dauerhaften Friedens zu bringen152.“
Dies ist genau die Haltung, die Pius XII. während des Zweiten
Weltkrieges einnahm und die ihm einbrachte, derselben Frevel be-
schuldigt zu werden: „Ein Papst der Deutschen“, sagte Clemen-
ceau bekanntlich153, „schweigsam wie Pius XII.“, überbot ihn
Nobécourt154, und Pierre Dominique fügte hinzu155: ein Papst, „der
152 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bd. I, S. 182
153 Vgl. oben S. 85
154 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 126
155 Dominique, Le Crapouillot, S. 62Nobécourt154, und Pierre Dominique fügte hinzu155: ein Papst, „der
152 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bd. I, S. 182
153 Vgl. oben S. 85
154 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 126
155 Dominique, Le Crapouillot, S. 62

--- PAGE BREAK ---ierre Dominique fügte hinzu155: ein Papst, „der
152 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bd. I, S. 182
153 Vgl. oben S. 85
154 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 126
155 Dominique, Le Crapouillot, S. 62

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
fürchtete, daß das katholische Österreich-Ungarn vernichtet wer-
den und (auf seinen Trümmern) eine Reihe von Kleinstaaten (ent-
stehen könnte), unter denen Böhmen ein von den Freimaurern be-
herrschter Staat sein und das katholische Kroatien von den ortho-
doxen Serben regiert werden würde . . . “, und der von der Vor-
stellung gepeinigt wurde, „daß die Russen siegen könnten, was
einen ungeheuren Prestigegewinn für die Orthodoxie bedeuten
würde“, u. a. m. Alles Interpretationen, zu deren Untermauerung
man keine anderen Beweise anführen kann als die im eigenen Lager
zur Zeit herrschende Stimmung, die Annahme, den Hintergedan-
ken oder die Mutmaßung — Interpretationen, die sämtlich zu be-
weisen trachten, daß die Stellungnahmen Benedikts XV. nicht aus
Liebe zum Frieden erfolgten, sondern aus einer ungewöhnlichen
Zuneigung zu dem anderen Lager und aus niederer Berechnung.
Wenn man es so nimmt, kann man über jeden beliebigen Menschen
jede beliebige Äußerung von sich geben und den edelmütigsten
Menschen im schwärzesten Licht darstellen. Man kann dann zum
Beispiel behaupten, daß Jacques Nobécourt und Pierre Dominique
nur von der Absicht geleitet seien, ganz Europa dem Bolschewismus
auszuliefern, und daß ihre Stellungnahmen gegen diese Doktrin
lediglich ein leeres Geschwätz seien, mit dem ihr Spiel getarnt wer-
den soll. Und wenn man den progressistischen Charakter — im
abwertenden Sinne des Wortes — der gesamten Schriften des erste-
ren oder die Tatsache geltend macht, daß der zweite trotz voller
Kenntnis der Auswirkungen des letzten Krieges, deren handgreif-
lichstes Beispiel darin besteht, daß die Grenze Rußlands bis auf
fünfzig Kilometer an Hamburg heranverlagert wurde, die Bemü-
hungen Pius’ XII, um eine internationale Konferenz, die den Zwei-
ten Weltkrieg hätte verhindern können, noch mit der Bemerkung
kommentiert: „Glücklicherweise nimmt man ihn nicht beim
Wort156“, wäre es wohl nicht schwer, dieser These Glauben zu ver-
schaffen. Kurz, die Argumente der Gegner Pius’ X., Benedikts XV.
und Pius’ XII. sind nichts anderes als auf bloßen Vermutungen
beruhende Wertungen und können nur als böswillige Absicht an-
gesehen werden.
156 Ebd., S. 63Argumente der Gegner Pius’ X., Benedikts XV.
und Pius’ XII. sind nichts anderes als auf bloßen Vermutungen
beruhende Wertungen und können nur als böswillige Absicht an-
gesehen werden.
156 Ebd., S. 63

--- PAGE BREAK ---Pius’ X., Benedikts XV.
und Pius’ XII. sind nichts anderes als auf bloßen Vermutungen
beruhende Wertungen und können nur als böswillige Absicht an-
gesehen werden.
156 Ebd., S. 63

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
Mit ebenso dürftigen Argumenten wurde auch der Vermitt-
lungsversuch Benedikts XV. vom 1. August 1917 torpediert. Dies
hatte zur Folge, daß der Erste Weltkrieg fünfzehn Monate länger
dauerte und die Schäden sowie die Anzahl der Kriegsopfer ihre
bekannten Ausmaße erreichten, und zwar ohne jeden Gewinn, da
der Krieg ohnehin im Versailler Vertrag endete. Was sage ich,
ohne Gewinn? Um welchen Preis!
Oh, dieser Versailler Vertrag! Als man erfuhr, daß Benedikt XV.
den Bestimmungen dieses Vertrages, die er für ungerecht und voll
von Gründen für einen neuen Krieg hielt, nicht zustimmte, fand
darin der Feldzug gegen seinen Pazifismus neue Nahrung: Man
sah darin eine Bestätigung seiner Freundschaft für Deutschland,
das durch den Vertrag zu Boden geworfen, und für Österreich, das
durch ihn zerschlagen wurde, und fügte dem noch hinzu, er habe
ein Ressentiment gehegt, weil er von der Friedenskonferenz an-
läßlich der Verhandlungen des Jahres 1915, die über den Kriegsein-
tritt Italiens entschieden, aus Prinzip ferngehalten worden war.
Man hütete sich wohl, zu bemerken, daß die Vereinigten Staaten
dem Versailler Vertrag aus den gleichen Gründen wie Benedikt XV.
ihre Zustimmung versagten.
Pius XI. und Pius XII. machten sich in diesem Punkt die Politik
Benedikts XV. zu eigen. Unter den beiden letztgenannten Ponti-
fikaten präzisierte und festigte sich die Einstellung des Heiligen
Stuhls zugunsten internationaler Verhandlungen noch, sowohl aus
einer gewissen Systematik heraus als auch um die Anwendung von
Waffengewalt zu vermeiden. Der Friede war seit Pius X. in der
Politik des Vatikans ein feststehender Faktor geworden und die
Notwendigkeit der Revision des Versailler Vertrages demzufolge
eine weitere Konstante. Als erster Politiker ahnte Briand, welcher
Prestigezuwachs daraus für die Kirche resultieren und welche Kraft
sie dann auf dem Wege zu den Vereinigten Staaten von Europa
darstellen würde. Obwohl ursprünglich Urheber des Gesetzes der
Trennung von Kirche und Staat, wurde er später gegen Clemen-
ceau zum Verfechter der Wiederaufnahme der diplomatischen Be-
ziehungen mit dem Vatikan157. Pius XI. fügte der Ursache für die-
sen Prestigezuwachs noch zwei weitere hinzu: die Missionen für
die Verbreitung des Glaubens in den Kolonien und die Normali-schen Be-
ziehungen mit dem Vatikan157. Pius XI. fügte der Ursache für die-
sen Prestigezuwachs noch zwei weitere hinzu: die Missionen für
die Verbreitung des Glaubens in den Kolonien und die Normali-

--- PAGE BREAK ---mit dem Vatikan157. Pius XI. fügte der Ursache für die-
sen Prestigezuwachs noch zwei weitere hinzu: die Missionen für
die Verbreitung des Glaubens in den Kolonien und die Normali-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108
sierung der Beziehungen zwischen der Kirche und den Staaten,
bei denen der Grundsatz der Trennung gemäß der Formel des
italienischen Garantiegesetzes „eine freie Kirche in einem freien
Staat“ galt. Diese Normalisierung erfolgte auf dem Wege einer all-
gemeinen Durchführung der Konkordatspolitik, deren Begrün-
dung und rechtliche Formulierung das Verdienst Pius’ XII., des
damaligen Kardinals Pacelli, war. Die Unterzeichnung des italieni-
schen Konkordats im Jahre 1929, die nach der Wiederaufnahme
der diplomatischen Beziehungen mit Frankreich stattfand, erregte
weltweites Aufsehen. Man versäumte nicht, darauf hinzuweisen,
daß das Papsttum, das sich mit dem aus dem Risorgimento hervor-
gegangenen Regime nicht hatte verständigen können, dies mit dem
Mussolinis sehr wohl konnte, da es in ihm nun endlich in Italien eine
Regierungsform besaß, die ihm zusagte. Daraus folgerte man, daß
das Papsttum faschistisch wäre. Bei dem mit Hitler abgeschlossenen
deutschen Konkordat war es noch schlimmer: Da das Papsttum fa-
schistisch war, war es selbstverständlich auch nazistisch. Kein Mensch
bemerkte indessen, daß diejenigen, die ihm zum Zeitpunkt der Un-
terzeichnung des deutschen Konkordats die heftigsten Vorwürfe
deswegen machten, gleichzeitig die leidenschaftlichsten Anhänger
— um ihnen einmal ein Kompliment zu machen — des Viererpaktes
waren, den die demokratischen Regierungen Englands und Frank-
reichs (im Juni 1933) mit Deutschland, obwohl es nazistisch, und
Italien, obwohl es faschistisch war, unterzeichneten.
Als die Gegner der Kirche später angesichts der Enzyklika Mit
brennender Sorge, die, obwohl im Namen des Glaubens verkündet,
eine klare, bestimmte und konzessionslose Verurteilung des Natio-
157 Gegen Briand führte man Argumente vom gleichen Schlage wie die gegen
Pius X., Benedikt XV. und Pius XII. ins Feld: Er träumte nicht deshalb von
den Vereinigten Staaten von Europa, weil er eine gerechte und dauerhafte
Friedensordnung erstrebte, sondern nur, weil er ein von Ehrgeiz erfüllter
Abenteurer war, der für den Fall eines Erfolges nach der Präsidentschaft
trachtete. Und als Beweis dafür fügte man hinzu, daß er vom Heiligen Stuhl
die Verkündung der unter Pius X. ausgesprochenen, in Anbetracht des Krie-
ges jedoch nicht veröffentlichten Verurteilung der Action française erwirken
wollte — der Action française, die zwar schon im Sterben lag, aber nichts-
destoweniger als die einzige Kraft in der französischen Politik hingestellt
wurde, die die Entwicklung auf dieses Ziel hin hindern könnte.Action française, die zwar schon im Sterben lag, aber nichts-
destoweniger als die einzige Kraft in der französischen Politik hingestellt
wurde, die die Entwicklung auf dieses Ziel hin hindern könnte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e zwar schon im Sterben lag, aber nichts-
destoweniger als die einzige Kraft in der französischen Politik hingestellt
wurde, die die Entwicklung auf dieses Ziel hin hindern könnte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

109
nalsozialismus darstellte, dann doch zugeben mußten, daß sie nicht
nazistisch war, war ihre erste Reaktion: Aber warum kündigt der
Papst dann nicht das Konkordat auf? Und sie erinnerten sogleich an
sämtliche Verbrechen des Nationalsozialismus gegen die Unverletz-
lichkeit der menschlichen Person, die in ihren Augen eine Kün-
digung des Konkordats mehr als genug rechtfertigten. Das hieß
aber das Wesen der „allumfassenden Vaterschaft“ für die große
Menschenfamilie vergessen, die nach der Glaubenslehre die Haupt-
aufgabe des Stellvertreters Christi darstellt und die nur dem Ver-
hältnis vergleichbar ist, das der Vater in einer leiblichen Familie zu
allen seinen Kindern hat. In der leiblichen Familie jedoch schleu-
dert der Vater nicht den Bannfluch gegen Ham und gibt dasjenige
seiner Kinder, das vom rechten Weg abkommt, nicht der Ächtung
durch seine anderen Kinder preis, ganz gleich, ob dieses Kind zum
Verbrecher oder gar zum Mörder wird: Er bleibt der Vater, ver-
urteilt in väterlicher Weise und trachtet das Kind auf den rechten
Weg zurückzubringen; wenn ihm das nicht gelingt, betrauert er
den Tag, an dem der zum Dieb oder Mörder gewordene Sohn, der
aber deswegen trotzdem sein Sohn bleibt, das Gefängnistor durch-
schreitet oder auf das Schafott steigt. Die Aufgabe des Vaters be-
steht nicht darin, den Sohn der Rache der Familie oder der gericht-
lichen Verfolgung auszusetzen, sondern in jeder Situation ihm zu
helfen sich wieder zurechtzufinden. Das gleiche gilt für das Ver-
hältnis des Papstes, des Heiligen Vaters!, zu den Völkern, die alle,
und zwar mit gleichem Recht, seine Kinder sind. Man sollte froh
sein und nicht darüber klagen, daß die Gebote des Glaubens in so
hervorragender Weise mit denen der Vernunft übereinstimmen:
Das gibt es nicht alle Tage!
Resümierend kann man sagen, daß diese Politik der „allumfas-
senden Vaterschaft“ für alle Nationen, die man der Initiative
Pius’ X., Benedikts XV., Pius’ XI, und Pius’ XII. verdankt, har-
monisch diejenige Leos XIII. fortsetzt, die man ebenfalls eine Poli-
tik der „allumfassenden Vaterschaft“ nennen könnte, nämlich für
die sozialen Klassen, und zwar für alle. Diese beiden einander er-
gänzenden Arten der Politik führten gemeinsam dazu, daß die
Kirche jetzt in der zweiten Hälfte des 20. Jahrhunderts in den
Augen der öffentlichen Meinung als der sicherste und mächtigsteeinander er-
gänzenden Arten der Politik führten gemeinsam dazu, daß die
Kirche jetzt in der zweiten Hälfte des 20. Jahrhunderts in den
Augen der öffentlichen Meinung als der sicherste und mächtigste

--- PAGE BREAK ---den Arten der Politik führten gemeinsam dazu, daß die
Kirche jetzt in der zweiten Hälfte des 20. Jahrhunderts in den
Augen der öffentlichen Meinung als der sicherste und mächtigste

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
Faktor des sozialen wie auch des universalen Friedens erscheint.
Für den universalen Frieden wurde dies sogar von Léon Blum,
den man nicht der Willfährigkeit der Kirche gegenüber bezichti-
gen kann, anerkannt. In seinem in den Jahren 1940/41 im Gefäng-
nis geschriebenen, doch erst 1945 veröffentlichten Buch A l’Échelle
humaine158 ging er so weit, zu wünschen, man solle dem Heiligen
Stuhl im Gegensatz zu den 1915 für die Friedenskonferenz gefaß-
ten Beschlüssen — Benedikt XV. wurde damals von ihr ausge-
schlossen — einen Platz in den internationalen Organisationen ein-
räumen, die mit der Schaffung einer neuen Friedensordnung be-
auftragt werden würden. Er begründete diesen Standpunkt mit
der folgenden Würdigung:
„Diese Rolle würde einer Kirche gewiß willkommen sein, welche
von Grund auf friedliebend ist, da sie eine Religion des Friedens
verkörpert, und welche es auch sozusagen durch ihre Funktion ist,
da ihre Verfassung auf internationalem Boden steht. Der päpst-
liche Einfluß war immer und ist noch heute im Sinne eines orga-
nischen, auf Gerechtigkeit, Gleichberechtigung der Völker und der
Menschen, auf Heiligkeit der Verträge beruhenden Friedens wirk-
sam159.“
Und was den sozialen Frieden angeht, traf das Volk mit gesun-
dem Menschenverstand die Entscheidung zwischen dem Marxismus
und der Enzyklika Rerum novarum. Gewiß nicht in seinem Voka-
bular, aber in seinem Handeln, wozu die erstaunlichen Fortschritte
der Technik, die den Lebensstandard der Arbeiterschaft seit Beginn
des 20. Jahrhunderts so beträchtlich erhöhten, viel beigetragen
haben. Dieser Entwicklung war die Enzyklika auf jeden Fall weit-
aus besser angepaßt als das Kommunistische Manifest, wenn nicht
in ihren Prämissen, so doch wenigstens in ihren Schlußfolgerungen.
So stellt der Klassenkampf, das Thema des letzteren, verglichen mit
der Zusammenarbeit der Klassen, der Schlußfolgerung der ersteren,
nur einen Mythus dar, der an Glaubwürdigkeit verliert, während
der Gedanke der Zusammenarbeit unablässig an Boden gewinnt.
Zu diesem geistigen Aufstieg der Kirche und dem steten Wach-
158 Deutsche Fassung: Blick auf die Menschheit
159 Blick auf die Menschheit, S. 120Gedanke der Zusammenarbeit unablässig an Boden gewinnt.
Zu diesem geistigen Aufstieg der Kirche und dem steten Wach-
158 Deutsche Fassung: Blick auf die Menschheit
159 Blick auf die Menschheit, S. 120

--- PAGE BREAK ---arbeit unablässig an Boden gewinnt.
Zu diesem geistigen Aufstieg der Kirche und dem steten Wach-
158 Deutsche Fassung: Blick auf die Menschheit
159 Blick auf die Menschheit, S. 120

--- PAGE BREAK ---

111
sen ihres Einflusses im sozialen und internationalen Leben seit
dem Jahre 1870 haben in erheblichem Maße auch die Argumente
beigetragen, die die Rationalisten auf dem eigentlichen Gebiet des
Glaubens gegen sie ins Feld führten: Die Päpstin Johanna, die Bor-
gias, Galilei, die Jungfrau von Orléans, die von der Kirche erst ver-
brannt und dann heiliggesprochen wurde, die Albigenser, die Bar-
tholomäusnacht, der Heilige Ignatius von Loyola, Torquemada,
Gott und Christus, die niemals existiert haben, der Vatikan, Haupt-
stadt der systematischen Massenverdummung, Väterchen Combes,
Charles Guignebert159a und Prosper Alfaric159b, die Liebschaft des
Herrn Pfarrer mit seiner Haushälterin, die Schwarzröcke mit dem
Galgenvogelgesicht, dem dicken Bauch und der Mitra des ehrwürdi-
gen Vaters einer anderen Kirche, des verstorbenen kochgeschätzten
Bruders F .·. M .·. Lorulot159c, der Pfarrer von Uruffe159d usw.
— alles uralte Kamellen! Der Stellvertreter, den man ihnen soeben
beigesellt hat, ist von der gleichen Machart und Herkunft. Offenbar
ist die Nachricht noch nicht zu den Rationalisten von heute durch-
gedrungen, daß die Kirche, die sie mit diesen alten Argumenten so
schonungslos bekämpfen, seit dem 20. September 1870 tot ist, daß
sie nicht mehr die Kirche aus Großvaters Zeiten ist, daß sie mit Ur-
urgroßvaters Argumenten nur einen schon seit langem verwesten
Leichnam bekämpfen und daß die wahre Kirche, die von diesen
einfältigen Reden gar nicht getroffen wird, sehr lebendig ist und
vor ihrer Nase blüht, wächst und gedeiht.
Aus diesem Grunde ist der 20. September 1870 nicht nur eine
159a Charles Guignebert. Geschichtsprofessor an der Sorbonne. Antiklerikal. Hat
ein berühmtes Buch geschrieben, um zu beweisen, daß Jesus Christus nie-
mals existiert hat. Dieses Buch wird noch immer von den Rationalisten gegen
die Kirche verwendet.
159b Prosper Alfaric. Professor an der theologischen Fakultät der Universität
Straßburg. Protestant. Verteidigte die These von Charles Guignebert. Be-
deutender Rationalist.
159c F .·. M .·. (Freimaurer) Lorulot. Antiklerikaler Journalist. Gestorben
1964. Gab in Frankreich zwei antiklerikale Blätter heraus, La Calotte und
La Raison, die den schlimmsten Unsinn über die Pfarrer verbreiteten.
159d Der Pfarrer von Uruffe. Uruffe ist ein kleiner Ort in den französischen Vo-
gesen. Im Jahre 1959 brachte der dortige Pfarrer ein junges Mädchen seiner
Gemeinde in andere Umstände, tötete es sodann und verging sich in sadisti-
scher Weise an dem Leichnam.den französischen Vo-
gesen. Im Jahre 1959 brachte der dortige Pfarrer ein junges Mädchen seiner
Gemeinde in andere Umstände, tötete es sodann und verging sich in sadisti-
scher Weise an dem Leichnam.

--- PAGE BREAK ----
gesen. Im Jahre 1959 brachte der dortige Pfarrer ein junges Mädchen seiner
Gemeinde in andere Umstände, tötete es sodann und verging sich in sadisti-
scher Weise an dem Leichnam.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

112
Scheidelinie zwischen zwei Kirchen, sondern natürlich auch eine
solche zwischen zwei Epochen: nämlich dem gut zehn Jahrhunderte
umfassenden Zeitraum vor diesem Datum, in dem der Glaube un-
aufhörlich vor der Vernunft auf dem Rückzug war und die weltliche
Macht der Kirche allmählich bis zum Nichts reduziert wurde, und
dem weniger als ein Jahrhundert umfassenden Zeitraum, in dem der
Glaube unaufhörlich gegenüber der durch die Rationalisten lächer-
lich gemachten Vernunft wieder an Boden gewann und die Kirche
in schwerem Kampf einen moralischen Einfluß erlangte, wie sie ihn
niemals vorher besessen hatte. Sicherlich wird dieser Einfluß sich,
wenn sie diesen Schwung beibehält, eines Tages — vielleicht schon
früher, als man denkt — in einer weltlichen Macht ausdrücken,
die zwar indirekt, aber weitaus wirksamer und größer sein dürfte
als die, die sie einstmals besessen hat.
Wenden wir uns nun der Frage zu, wie wir Pius XII. vor und im
Zweiten Weltkrieg den Tatsachen entsprechend einzuordnen haben.
II. DIE BEMÜHUNGEN PIUS’ XII.
UM EINE VERHINDERUNG DES KRIEGES
Eugenio (Maria Giuseppe Giovanni) Pacelli entstammte einer
ebenso guten wie überaus frommen bürgerlichen Familie aus der
Toskana. Einer seiner Vorfahren, Advokat an der Rota, gründete
1851 den Osservatore Romano und wurde unter Pius IX. Stellvertre-
tender Innenminister des Kirchenstaates. Sein Vater war Terziar des
Franziskanerordens und Dekan der päpstlichen Konsistorialadvo-
katen. Seine Herkunft hatte dem jungen Eugenio Pacelli also be-
reits alle Voraussetzungen in die Wiege gelegt, daß er sich zu einer
geistlichen Laufbahn hingezogen fühlen würde. Seine hervorra-
gende Intelligenz, seine umfassende Bildung, das Milieu seiner Fa-
milie sowie auch ein angeborener politischer Instinkt taten das
übrige: Im Jahre 1901, unter Leo XIII., tritt er im Alter von 25
Jahren160 — zwar einfacher Priester, aber Doktor der Theologie,
160 Er wurde am 2. März 1876 in Rom in der Via di Monte Giordano 34 (heute
Via degli Orsini) geboren.eo XIII., tritt er im Alter von 25
Jahren160 — zwar einfacher Priester, aber Doktor der Theologie,
160 Er wurde am 2. März 1876 in Rom in der Via di Monte Giordano 34 (heute
Via degli Orsini) geboren.

--- PAGE BREAK ---m Alter von 25
Jahren160 — zwar einfacher Priester, aber Doktor der Theologie,
160 Er wurde am 2. März 1876 in Rom in der Via di Monte Giordano 34 (heute
Via degli Orsini) geboren.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
des Zivilrechts, des kanonischen Rechts und des Konkordatsrechts
— als Anwärter in die diplomatische Abteilung des Staatssekreta-
riats des Vatikans ein. Im Jahre 1904 wird er Geheimkämmerer
Pius’ X., 1905 Prälat und Präfekt der Kongregation von Sankt Ivo,
sodann 
Untersekretär 
der 
Kongregation 
für 
außerordentliche
kirchliche Angelegenheiten (1911) und 1914 Sekretär derselben.
Am 24. Juni 1914 schließt er das Konkordat zwischen dem Heili-
gen Stuhl und Serbien ab. Dies ist sein erster Erfolg. Am 20. April
1917 ernennt Benedikt XV. ihn zum Nuntius in München, wo er,
nunmehr im Zentrum der Bemühungen um die Wiederherstellung
des Friedens, die Anstrengungen des Papstes in geschickter Weise
unterstützt. Nach dem Versailler Vertrag ernennt ihn Benedikt
XV. zum Nuntius in Berlin (22. Juni 1920). Da er jedoch in Mün-
chen noch durch Angelegenheiten zurückgehalten wird, die seine
Anwesenheit erfordern, insbesondere durch die Vorbereitung eines
Konkordats mit der neuen bayerischen Regierung, tritt er diesen
Posten erst am 1. August 1925 an, nachdem das besagte Konkor-
dat am 24. März 1924 unterzeichnet worden war. In Berlin gilt
seine erste Bemühung dem Abschluß eines Konkordats mit Preu-
ßen, das am 13. August 1929 zur Unterzeichnung gelangt. Sein
Ziel ist es, nach und nach zu einem allgemeinen Konkordat mit
dem Nachkriegsdeutschland zu gelangen. Leider ist, als die politi-
sche Stimmung für ein solches Vorhaben günstig geworden war,
dann Hitler an der Macht und Pacelli auch nicht mehr Nuntius in
Berlin, sondern Staatssekretär im Vatikan. Pius XI. hatte ihn dort-
hin berufen (12. Dezember 1929), weil er seine geistigen Fähigkei-
ten und Kenntnisse für die Ausarbeitung des italienischen Konkor-
dats (1929) benötigte, und mit Freude die Verdienste Pacellis an dem
Abschluß desselben festgestellt. Daraufhin hatte er ihn zunächst
zum Kardinal (16. Dezember 1930) und sodann zum Staatssekre-
tär ernannt (7. Februar 1931). Von dieser Stellung aus tat Pacelli
noch einen weiteren Schritt in Richtung auf das angestrebte allge-
meine deutsche Konkordat, indem er nämlich eines mit Baden zum
Abschluß brachte (12. Oktober 1932). Die Ironie des Schicksals
wollte es, daß, nachdem seine Bemühungen um dieses allgemeine
deutsche Konkordat unter der Weimarer Republik vergeblich ge-
wesen waren, Hitler selbst die Initiative dazu ergriff. Und dies waricksals
wollte es, daß, nachdem seine Bemühungen um dieses allgemeine
deutsche Konkordat unter der Weimarer Republik vergeblich ge-
wesen waren, Hitler selbst die Initiative dazu ergriff. Und dies war

--- PAGE BREAK ---aß, nachdem seine Bemühungen um dieses allgemeine
deutsche Konkordat unter der Weimarer Republik vergeblich ge-
wesen waren, Hitler selbst die Initiative dazu ergriff. Und dies war

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
der erste Nagel zu seiner Kreuzigung. Der zweite war die Auf-
rechterhaltung dieses Konkordats: Als es Pius XI. trotz aller Ver-
letzungen durch die Regierung des Dritten Reiches nicht aufgekün-
digt hatte, legte man dies seinem Staatssekretär zur Last, und das
noch um so mehr, als man sah, daß dieser Staatssekretär, nachdem
er am 2. März 1939 (an seinem 63. Geburtstag) Papst Pius XII. Ge-
worden war, es ebensowenig kündigte. Da der Leser den Grund
bereits kennt161, brauchen wir hierauf nicht noch einmal einzu-
gehen.
Als Staatssekretär von Pius XI. verfolgte Kardinal Pacelli in
vollem Einverständnis mit dem Papst die Politik, mit möglichst
vielen Staaten diplomatische Beziehungen aufzunehmen, die be-
stehenden Beziehungen zu festigen, die älteren Konkordate einer
Revision zu unterziehen und neue abzuschließen. Als sein Verdienst
sei an dieser Stelle noch das österreichische Konkordat (5. Juni
1933) erwähnt, ferner seine Bemühungen bei den baltischen Staa-
ten und sein allerdings vergeblicher Versuch, die 1870 (infolge der
Einnahme Roms) abgebrochenen diplomatischen Beziehungen mit
Amerika wiederherzustellen.
Es muß bezweifelt werden, daß das Konklave, das ihn auf den
Thron Petri erhob, am 2. März 1939 bei der damaligen Lage der
Dinge eine bessere Wahl hätte treffen können. Zu seinem geistigen
Format und seinem angeborenem Sinn für das Politische kommt
noch hinzu, daß er unter vier Päpsten, und zwar ausnahmslos
großen Päpsten, in Schlüsselstellungen, in denen er sich unaufhör-
lich auszeichnete, eine lange Lehre von achtunddreißig Jahren
durchlaufen hatte, wodurch er von allen Anwärtern auf den päpst-
lichen Stuhl höchstwahrscheinlich für dieses Amt am besten vor-
bereitet war. Und dann nahte mit großen Schritten der Krieg.
Kaum gewählt, mußte er sich mit ihm, wie Pius X. und Benedikt
XV., unter denen er gedient, die ihn geformt hatten und die daher
für ihn beispielgebend sein mußten, auseinandersetzen.
Sicherlich 
kann 
ein 
überzeugter 
Pazifist 
die 
Anschauung
Pius’ XII. über Krieg und Frieden nicht vorbehaltlos hinnehmen:
Er unterschied zwischen einem gerechten und ungerechten Krieg,
161 Vgl. oben S. 109h 
kann 
ein 
überzeugter 
Pazifist 
die 
Anschauung
Pius’ XII. über Krieg und Frieden nicht vorbehaltlos hinnehmen:
Er unterschied zwischen einem gerechten und ungerechten Krieg,
161 Vgl. oben S. 109

--- PAGE BREAK ---ugter 
Pazifist 
die 
Anschauung
Pius’ XII. über Krieg und Frieden nicht vorbehaltlos hinnehmen:
Er unterschied zwischen einem gerechten und ungerechten Krieg,
161 Vgl. oben S. 109

--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
zwischen einem Angriffs- und einem Verteidigungskrieg und beim
Angriffskrieg sogar zwischen einem erlaubten Angriff und einem,
dem er zuweilen das Adjektiv „ungerecht162“ beifügte, was be-
deutete, daß es seiner Vorstellung nach auch „gerechte Angriffe“
gab. Er war noch nicht zu jener Auffassung gelangt, daß es weder
einen gerechten Angriffs- noch einen gerechten Verteidigungs-
krieg, ja überhaupt weder einen gerechten noch einen ungerechten
Krieg gibt — daß vielmehr alle Kriege ungerecht sind. Aber so
anfechtbar seine Anschauung auch sein mag, so hatte sie ihn doch
zu der Überzeugung gebracht, daß alle Kriege durch eine Neu-
ordnung der Völkergemeinschaft zu vermeiden sind, zu der man
auf dem Wege internationaler Konferenzen sehr leicht gelangen
kann, sofern man Sinn für Gerechtigkeit hat. Es ist beachtlich und
anerkennenswert, daß ein Papst eine derartige Ansicht vertrat.
Man könnte, glaube ich, über ihn kein besseres Urteil fällen als
dieses:
„Noch niemals hat meines Wissens ein Papst mit soviel Entschie-
denheit die Rechtseinheit der Völkergemeinschaft163 und die unum-
schränkte Geltung des internationalen Rechts bejaht und mit soviel
Nachdruck die Auffassung von der absoluten Souveränität des
Staates, die diese Einheit zerbreche, verurteilt. Nach niemals hat
meines Wissens ein Papst als logische Folge dieser Grundsätze die
Schaffung internationaler Institutionen gefordert, die über die ge-
rechte Anwendung der internationalen Abkommen wachen und zu-
gleich, wenn das Bedürfnis dazu entsteht, ihre gerechte Revision
ermöglichen sollten. Noch niemals hat ein Papst die gerechte Ver-
teilung der wirtschaftlichen Reichtümer der Erde und den Schutz
der kulturellen Rechte der Minderheiten als wesentliche Aufgaben
dieser internationalen Institutionen bezeichnet, noch ein Papst so
nachdrücklich und so häufig zu einem wahren Kreuzzug für eine
162 Insbesondere in seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft 1948, in der man zum Beispiel
liest: „Ein Volk, das von einem ungerechten Angriff bedroht oder schon des-
sen Opfer ist, kann, wenn es christlich handeln will, nicht in passiver Gleich-
gültigkeit verharren . . . “ (Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Vorkämpfer des
Friedens, Berlin 1951, S. 47. — Anm. d. Übers.)
163 Im Text kursiv, wie auch alle folgenden in diesem Zitat kursiv gedruckten
Stellen.t verharren . . . “ (Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Vorkämpfer des
Friedens, Berlin 1951, S. 47. — Anm. d. Übers.)
163 Im Text kursiv, wie auch alle folgenden in diesem Zitat kursiv gedruckten
Stellen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Vorkämpfer des
Friedens, Berlin 1951, S. 47. — Anm. d. Übers.)
163 Im Text kursiv, wie auch alle folgenden in diesem Zitat kursiv gedruckten
Stellen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
solche Neuordnung, die Voraussetzung zu einem dauerhaften Frie-
den, aufgerufen und deswegen an alle Christen und an alle Men-
schen guten Willens überall in der Welt appelliert; vor allem hat
meines Wissens noch niemals ein Papst alle diese Erkenntnisse so
erschöpfend dargelegt164.“
Es ist wahr: kein einziger Papst — auch Pius X. und Benedikt
XV. nicht. Diese beiden schlugen zwar als erste jenen Weg ein,
waren aber nichts anderes als Vorläufer, deren Vorstellungen erst
durch ihren Nachfolger endgültig formuliert und präzisiert wurden.
In der internationalen Politik ist auch der Sozialismus nicht
weitergegangen, und 1939, in den entscheidenden Stunden, wie
auch 1945, als es galt, die sozialistische Theorie in die Praxis um-
zusetzen, blieb er weit hinter derselben zurück. Ganz anders da-
gegen Pius XII.
So sagte zum Beispiel am 7. Februar 1932 Msgr. Faulhaber,
der Erzbischof von München, in einer Ansprache in der dortigen
St. Bonifaz-Kirche folgendes:
„Die Vorbedingungen für einen erlaubten Krieg sind viel sel-
tener als früher gegeben . . .
Man wird den Prediger des Friedens . . . fragen: Was sagst du da-
zu, daß das Deutsche Reich abgerüstet und wehrlos ist, während die
anderen Völker um die Wette rüsten? Antwort: Nach dem Natur-
und Völkerrecht haben die Völker gleiches Recht, hat also auch
das Deutsche Reich das Recht, gegen einen blutigen Überfall ge-
sichert zu sein. Die Rechtsgleichheit unter den Völkern wird aber
nicht dadurch erreicht, daß die deutsche abgerüstete Wehrkraft
aufgerüstet und in den Wettstreit immer neuer Rüstungen hinein-
gezogen wird, sondern dadurch, daß die aufgerüsteten und über-
gerüsteten Völker abgerüstet werden. Das alte Sprichwort: ,Wenn du
den Frieden willst, rüste den Krieg‘, muß wie ein altes Kriegsboot
abgetakelt werden. Die endlosen Rüstungen während des Friedens
sind kein Schutz vor dem Krieg, keine Sicherung des Friedens. Das
Rüsten um die Wette gibt die ständige Bereitschaft zum Kriege, und
164 Msgr. Solages, Rektor des Institut catholique von Toulouse, Théologie de la
guerre juste, S. 153 (zitiert nach Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 103)die Wette gibt die ständige Bereitschaft zum Kriege, und
164 Msgr. Solages, Rektor des Institut catholique von Toulouse, Théologie de la
guerre juste, S. 153 (zitiert nach Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 103)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ständige Bereitschaft zum Kriege, und
164 Msgr. Solages, Rektor des Institut catholique von Toulouse, Théologie de la
guerre juste, S. 153 (zitiert nach Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 103)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
von der Bereitschaft ist der Weg nicht weit zum wirklichen Los-
schlagen . . . Wenn du den Frieden willst, rüste den Frieden165.“
Diese Gedanken beruhen auf einem der edelsten Grundsätze des
praktischen Sozialismus, und man findet sie nahezu Wort für Wort
in der Sammlung der Reden Pius’ XII. wieder, die er noch als
Msgr. Pacelli in der Zeit seiner Nuntiatur in München und Berlin
gehalten hat und die durch den deutschen Episkopat im Jahre 1930
herausgegeben wurden.
„Wenn du den Frieden willst, rüste den Frieden“: während des
Friedens selbstverständlich, aber auch während des Krieges. Dies
war die Richtschnur für das Verhalten Pius’ XII. Wenn man je-
manden tadeln muß, dann nicht ihn, weil er diesem Prinzip uner-
schütterlich treu geblieben ist, sondern die Sozialisten, weil sie es
vor dem und im Zweiten Weltkrieg aufgegeben haben, obgleich
es in den Jahren von 1919 bis 1933 Grundlage ihres außenpoliti-
schen Programms gewesen war. Pius XII. wurde der Jaurès des
Zweiten Weltkrieges und während des Krieges zu dem, was die
Kienthaler und Zimmerwalder im Ersten Weltkrieg gewesen wa-
ren, und zwar wurde er es im Namen der Gebote des Glaubens,
während Jaurès, die Kienthaler und die Zimmerwalder nur von
denen der Vernunft geleitet waren. Das ist jedoch belanglos, denn
er gelangte schließlich zu den gleichen vernunftgemäßen Schluß-
folgerungen. Dagegen fällt auf, daß, wenn man diese vernunftge-
mäßen Schlußfolgerungen bekämpft, man nichts anderes tut, als
einem Glauben, der — endlich! — vernünftig zu denken beginnt,
eine Vernunft entgegensetzen, die nur noch unvernünftig ur-
teilt. Und das ist zweifellos der Fall bei Hochhuths Stellvertreter,
Nobécourts Vicaire et l’Histoire und Friedländers Pius XII. und
das Dritte Reich. Im Namen eines anderen Glaubens übrigens, denn
die unvernünftig urteilende Vernunft ist nichts anderes als ein wei-
terer Glaube: der protestantische Glaube beim ersten, der marxi-
stisch-progressistische beim zweiten und der jüdische beim dritten
— Glaubensrichtungen, die alle drei täglich mehr und mehr dem
Obskurantismus verfallen. Moskau, Tel Aviv und Hochhuth mit
seinem Stellvertreter liefern hierfür täglich den Beweis — das ist
165 Zitiert nach Schönere Zukunft, Wien, VII. Jg. Nr. 21, vom 21. Februar 1932.antismus verfallen. Moskau, Tel Aviv und Hochhuth mit
seinem Stellvertreter liefern hierfür täglich den Beweis — das ist
165 Zitiert nach Schönere Zukunft, Wien, VII. Jg. Nr. 21, vom 21. Februar 1932.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Moskau, Tel Aviv und Hochhuth mit
seinem Stellvertreter liefern hierfür täglich den Beweis — das ist
165 Zitiert nach Schönere Zukunft, Wien, VII. Jg. Nr. 21, vom 21. Februar 1932.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
das Schicksal aller vorgefaßten Meinungen. Die Kirche erbrachte
dagegen von 1870 an täglich den Beweis dafür, daß sie mehr und
mehr ans Licht emportauchte — auf sozialem Gebiet mit Leo XIII.,
auf dem Gebiet von Krieg und Frieden mit Pius X., Benedikt XV.,
Pius XI. und Pius XII., in beiden Bereichen sodann mit Johannes
XXIII. und heute mit Paul VI. —, wobei sie sich von ihren archai-
schen Vorurteilen löste, sich hütete, in neue zu verfallen und ihre
Stellungnahmen, soweit sie Folgen in der Welt haben könnten, auf
Beobachtung und Analyse gründete.
Doch man macht Pius XII. nur sein Verhalten während des
Zweiten Weltkrieges zum Vorwurf. Um es richtig zu verstehen,
war es notwendig, es mit demjenigen seiner Amtsvorgänger zu
vergleichen und seine Persönlichkeit in diesen geschichtlichen Zu-
sammenhang einzuordnen. Da wir nun zu den Ereignissen kom-
men, muß noch gesagt werden, wie sich Pius XII. in den kritischen
Stunden, die über den Krieg entschieden, verhielt.
Da sind zunächst drei Tatsachen, die bereits in den ersten Wo-
chen seines Pontifikats zeigten, wie sehr er sich der Gefahr bewußt
war, und die zugleich seine Absichten darlegten:
1. Am Tage seiner Krönung erklärte er in seiner Erwiderung
auf die ihm durch den Kardinaldekan Msgr. Pignatelli di Belmonte
entbotenen Glückwünsche des Kardinalskollegiums, daß er „das
Steuer des Schiffes Petri ergreife, um dieses inmitten so vieler Wo-
gen und Stürme in den Hafen des Friedens zu lenken166“.
2. Seine erste Homilie, Quoniam Paschalia (April 1939), zeigte
ihn „mit Besorgnis erfüllt angesichts der Gefahren, denen Europa
durch Arbeitslosigkeit, Not und mangelnde Treue gegenüber ein-
gegangenen Verpflichtungen sowie durch die in gewissen Ländern
herrschende Mißachtung der unabdingbaren Rechte der Menschen-
würde und der Freiheit ausgesetzt ist167“. Italien war gerade in
Albanien eingefallen.
3. Aus einem Schreiben an Msgr. Maglione (20. April 1939) geht
hervor, daß er diesen, den er zu seinem Staatssekretär gemacht
166 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, 1939, S. 127, und Documentation catholi-
que, Bd. XI, Col. 419
167 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, S. 145hervor, daß er diesen, den er zu seinem Staatssekretär gemacht
166 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, 1939, S. 127, und Documentation catholi-
que, Bd. XI, Col. 419
167 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, S. 145

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, den er zu seinem Staatssekretär gemacht
166 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, 1939, S. 127, und Documentation catholi-
que, Bd. XI, Col. 419
167 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, S. 145

--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
hatte (10. März), ersuchte, „in sämtlichen Gemeinden sämtlicher
Diözesen während des Monats Mai zu einem Kreuzzug des Gebets
aufzurufen, um überall und für alle Menschen Eintracht und Frie-
den zu erlangen168“. In der Zwischenzeit nämlich hatte sich zweier-
lei ereignet: Erstens war das deutsche Protektorat Böhmen und
Mähren errichtet worden, das sogleich von den deutschen Truppen
besetzt wurde (15. März 1939), und die Slowakei zu einem selb-
ständigen Staat erhoben worden, was gleichbedeutend war mit der
Zerschlagung der Tschechoslowakei. Zweitens hatte am 31. des-
selben Monats England Polen die bedingungslose Garantie seiner
territorialen Integrität gemäß den Abmachungen des Versailler
Vertrages gegeben. Das zweite Ereignis erschien Pius XII. sogleich
als der erste Schritt einer unaufhaltsamen Entwicklung zum Krie-
ge, und er beschloß daher eine diplomatische Offensive, von der
an späterer Stelle die Rede sein wird. Die Gebete, zu denen in
„sämtlichen Gemeinden sämtlicher Diözesen“ aufgerufen wurde,
sollten diese Offensive stützen.
Hinsichtlich des ersten Ereignisses wurde Pius XII. der Vorwurf
gemacht, gegen diese, wie man sagt, Verletzung des Münchner Ab-
kommens nicht protestiert zu haben, und man verglich dieses Ver-
halten mit dem Pius’ XI. bei dem Anschluß Österreichs. Pius XI.
hatte seinerzeit zwar ebensowenig gegen die Annexion Österreichs
durch das Dritte Reich protestiert, aber vom Erzbischof in Wien,
Kardinal Innitzer, der anläßlich der Volksabstimmung Bischöfe
und Priesterschaft ersucht hatte, für das Fait accompli stimmen
zu lassen, eine Klarstellung gefordert, die einem Widerruf glich
und die im Osservatore Romano in der Ausgabe vom 6. April 1938
veröffentlicht wurde.
Zunächst einmal kann man die beiden Ereignisse überhaupt
nicht miteinander vergleichen: Der Anschluß Österreichs war le-
diglich im formellen Recht ein Gewaltstreich. Seit 1919 forderten
die Österreicher nahezu einstimmig die Angliederung an das Deut-
sche Reich (Beschluß der Nationalversammlung vom 4. März 1919
unter dem sozialistischen Kanzler Karl Renner, von der Weimarer
Verfassung in Artikel 61 bestätigt, usw.). Der Artikel 88 der Völ-
168 Ebd., S. 154h (Beschluß der Nationalversammlung vom 4. März 1919
unter dem sozialistischen Kanzler Karl Renner, von der Weimarer
Verfassung in Artikel 61 bestätigt, usw.). Der Artikel 88 der Völ-
168 Ebd., S. 154

--- PAGE BREAK ---onalversammlung vom 4. März 1919
unter dem sozialistischen Kanzler Karl Renner, von der Weimarer
Verfassung in Artikel 61 bestätigt, usw.). Der Artikel 88 der Völ-
168 Ebd., S. 154

--- PAGE BREAK ---

120
kerbundsakte stand jedoch dem Willen der beiden Völker entge-
gen. Von Salzburg bis Wien wurde Hitler ein triumphaler Einzug
bereitet.
Die Zerschlagung der Tschechoslowakei erscheint im Hinblick
auf eine Vertragsverletzung, insbesondere die Verletzung des
Münchner Abkommens, in einem gänzlich anderen Licht. Das
Münchner Abkommen hatte drei Dinge vorgesehen: den Anschluß
der Sudeten an das Reich, die Errichtung eines selbständigen Staa-
tes Böhmen und Mähren, wobei die Slowakei ebenfalls selbständig
werden, die beiden Staaten jedoch unter Beibehaltung des Namens
Tschechoslowakei zu einem Bundesstaat vereinigt werden sollten,
und schließlich noch die Garantie der territorialen Integrität, die
Deutschland diesem Bundesstaat geben würde, „sobald Prag (die
Hauptstadt dieses Staates) mit Warschau und Budapest die Frage
der polnischen und ungarischen Minderheiten geregelt haben
würde169“.
In dem neuen Bundesstaat stellten sich nun jedoch die Tschechen,
die die Mehrheit bildeten, einerseits den Polen und den Ungarn
gegenüber taub, andererseits machten sie den Slowaken, die als
autonom anzuerkennen sie sich weigerten, das Leben äußerst
schwer. Doch es soll lieber André François-Poncet, der nicht der
geringsten Sympathie gegenüber dem nazistischen Deutschland ge-
ziehen werden kann, überlassen werden darzulegen, wie und durch
wen das Münchner Abkommen verletzt wurde: „Innerhalb des
tschechoslowakischen Staates hatten die von Msgr. Tiso geführten
Slowaken die Autonomie erhalten. Aber die Tschechen weigerten
sich, das Land als selbständigen Bundesstaat anzuerkennen. Prag
forderte die Absetzung der slowakischen Minister170 wegen ihrer
separatistischen Politik. Hitler ergriff, um seine Absichten zu ver-
wirklichen, für die Slowaken Partei171. Am 13. März 1939 eilte
Monsignore Tiso172 nach Berlin und rief den Schutz173 des Führers
an174“.
169 Georges Bonnet, Le Quai d’Orsay sous trois Républiques, S. 259
170 Also ein Mißbrauch der Amtsgewalt seitens der Tschechen.
171 Das war durchaus normal, denn nach dem Münchner Abkommen waren die
Slowaken und nicht die Tschechen im Recht.
172 Slowakischer Ministerpräsident.in Mißbrauch der Amtsgewalt seitens der Tschechen.
171 Das war durchaus normal, denn nach dem Münchner Abkommen waren die
Slowaken und nicht die Tschechen im Recht.
172 Slowakischer Ministerpräsident.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sgewalt seitens der Tschechen.
171 Das war durchaus normal, denn nach dem Münchner Abkommen waren die
Slowaken und nicht die Tschechen im Recht.
172 Slowakischer Ministerpräsident.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
Zunächst haben also die Tschechen das Münchner Abkommen
verletzt175, und Hitler intervenierte lediglich auf Verlangen der
Opfer dieser Verletzung. Ganz genauso wie zum Beispiel kürzlich
die Belgier und Amerikaner im Kongo intervenierten, um im Auf-
trag der ohnmächtigen Regierung gegen Rebellen einzuschreiten,
die dabei waren, unschuldige Menschen niederzumetzeln. Und
ganz genauso wie in zahlreichen gleichgearteten Fällen die Eng-
länder, die Franzosen und die Amerikaner intervenierten, wo-
durch das Weltgewissen niemals übermäßig beunruhigt wurde, so-
fern es diese Interventionen nicht sogar billigte.
Von den entrüsteten Beiworten abgesehen, mit denen André
François-Poncet seinen Bericht schmückt, haben sich die Dinge
wirklich so zugetragen, wie er sagt: Die Tschechoslowakei ging
an der Verletzung des Münchner Abkommens durch die Tsche-
chen zugrunde.
Und was konnte Pius XII. schließlich zu den Bedingungen sagen,
unter denen dies geschah, da sie ja durch Vereinbarungen zwischen
Regierungen festgelegt worden waren, die durch das Münchner
Abkommen anerkannt wurden? Einer von ihnen, der tschechi-
schen Regierung, war Gewalt angetan worden, das ist sicher, aber
sie nahm ja auch für sich das Recht in Anspruch, einer anderen
Regierung Gewalt anzutun. Um sie an weiteren Übergriffen zu
hindern, hatte Hitler beschlossen, die Tschechoslowakei zu be-
173 Wen sonst konnte er angesichts der geographischen Lage seines Landes um
Schutz gegen das erlittene Unrecht bitten?
Die Engländer und Franzosen waren außerstande, dem Münchner Abkom-
men in diesem Punkte Geltung zu verschaffen, und darüber hinaus auch gar
nicht dazu entschlossen, da sie die Partei der Tschechen, also die des Unrechts,
ergriffen hatten.
174 André François-Poncet, Von Versailles bis Potsdam, S. 211
175 Einer derartigen Verletzung gegenüber den Slowaken machten sie sich nicht
zum ersten Mal schuldig. Am 30. Mai 1918 hatten die Tschechen und die
Slowaken, die im Ersten Weltkrieg die Partei der Alliierten ergriffen hatten,
in Pittsburg (USA) durch ihre beiderseitigen Vertreter ein Abkommen ge-
troffen, in dem die Schaffung eines tschechoslowakischen Bundesstaates vor-
gesehen war, innerhalb dessen jede der beiden ethnischen Gemeinschaften ein
selbständiger Staat sein sollte. Tatsächlich hatte Versailles dann aber einen
tschechoslowakischen Staat sanktioniert, in dem die Slowaken von den Tsche-
chen unterjocht waren, wie heutzutage die Ostdeutschen, die Ungarn usw.
von der Sowjetunion.atte Versailles dann aber einen
tschechoslowakischen Staat sanktioniert, in dem die Slowaken von den Tsche-
chen unterjocht waren, wie heutzutage die Ostdeutschen, die Ungarn usw.
von der Sowjetunion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aber einen
tschechoslowakischen Staat sanktioniert, in dem die Slowaken von den Tsche-
chen unterjocht waren, wie heutzutage die Ostdeutschen, die Ungarn usw.
von der Sowjetunion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
setzen. Die einzige Möglichkeit, Hitler an dieser Besetzung zu
hindern, bestand in einer allgemeinen Regelung sämtlicher euro-
päischen Streitigkeiten durch eine internationale Konferenz, die
sich dieses Ziel gesetzt hätte (Revision des Versailler Vertrages,
vorgesehen durch Artikel 19 der Völkerbundsakte). Aber, nach-
dem man eine derartige Konferenz der Weimarer Republik ver-
weigert hatte, verwehrte man sie nun auch Hitler, der auf den
Vorschlag Roosevelts vom 16. Mai 1933 hin bereits am nächsten
Tag, dem 17. Mai, in einer Rede vor dem Reichstag eine solche
Konferenz im Prinzip begeistert akzeptierte. Auf eine Konferenz
dieser Art konzentrierte daher Pius XII. seine Bemühungen, und
im darauffolgenden Mai machte er einen entsprechenden Vorschlag.
Diese Konferenz hätte im übrigen nicht nur die Aufgabe gehabt,
sich erneut mit dem tschechoslowakischen Problem zu befassen,
denn zur gleichen Zeit, als Hitler im Einverständnis mit den Slo-
waken die bekannte Lösung hierfür lieferte, war schon ein weiteres
Problem durch eine andere Provokation entstanden, nämlich das
polnische.
Bis dahin standen die Deutschen und die Polen in sehr gutem
Einvernehmen. Es bestand ein Bündnisvertrag vom 26. Januar
1934 zwischen ihnen, der vortrefflich funktionierte, und ihre Be-
ziehungen waren äußerst herzlich. Abermals berichtet uns Fran-
çois-Poncet darüber:
„Oberst Beck stand mit Göring auf vertrautem Fuße, und dieser
folgte jedes Jahr einer Einladung zur Jagd in den polnischen Wäl-
dern. Bei diesen freundschaftlichen Zusammenkünften sprach man
natürlich auch über die Danziger Frage und den polnischen Korri-
dor, also über Probleme, die eines Tages im Interesse der guten Be-
ziehungen der beiden Länder gelöst werden mußten. Oberst Beck
gab zu verstehen, Polen werde sich nicht weigern, Danzig an das
Reich zurückzugeben, wenn es dort wirtschaftliche Vorrechte bei-
behielte. Auch würde sich Polen mit einer exterritorialen Auto-
bahn und Eisenbahnlinie, also einer direkten Verbindung zwischen
West- und Ostpreußen, einverstanden erklären176.“
176 François-Poncet, Von Versailles bis Potsdam, S. 213t einer exterritorialen Auto-
bahn und Eisenbahnlinie, also einer direkten Verbindung zwischen
West- und Ostpreußen, einverstanden erklären176.“
176 François-Poncet, Von Versailles bis Potsdam, S. 213

--- PAGE BREAK ---len Auto-
bahn und Eisenbahnlinie, also einer direkten Verbindung zwischen
West- und Ostpreußen, einverstanden erklären176.“
176 François-Poncet, Von Versailles bis Potsdam, S. 213

--- PAGE BREAK ---

123
Die beiden Parteien waren sich also einig.
Als Ribbentrop jedoch am 21. März dem polnischen Botschafter
in Berlin, Lipski, vorschlug, diplomatische Gespräche aufzuneh-
men, um dieser Übereinstimmung eine offizielle Form zu geben,
reiste dieser nach Warschau und kehrte am 26. mit einer negativen
Antwort von dort zurück. Und wie um diesem negativen Bescheid
sein volles Gewicht zu verleihen, unterrichtete außerdem der deut-
sche Botschafter in Polen, von Moltke, am 24. März, dem Tag nach
seiner Ankunft in Warschau, Berlin darüber, daß alarmierende Ge-
rüchte über die Absichten Deutschlands gegenüber Polen in Um-
lauf seien. Am Tag darauf, dem 25. März, meldete der Chef der
Abwehr, Canaris, die Mobilmachung von drei Reservistenjahr-
gängen 
sowie 
polnische 
Truppenkonzentrationen 
um 
Danzig
herum.
Was war geschehen?
Am 18. März „hatte Litwinow . . . eine europäische Konferenz
zu dem Zweck, Hitler Einhalt zu gebieten, vorgeschlagen, diesmal
unter Teilnahme Frankreichs, Englands, Polens, Rußlands, Rumä-
niens und der Türkei177“. Am gleichen Tage „gaben mehrere Agen-
turen bekannt, daß Deutschland Rumänien soeben ein Ultimatum
gestellt habe und daß die rumänische Regierung, von Furcht er-
griffen, Hitler die Bodenschätze ihres Landes überlassen habe178“.
Dies war eine Falschmeldung. Bonnet, der erklärt, er habe erst
1944 durch die Worte des rumänischen Außenministers Grigore
Gafencu: „1939 hat es in Bukarest niemals auch nur irgendein
deutsches Ultimatum gegeben“ Gewißheit darüber erlangt, stellt
dieses Manöver als eine Provokation hin. Als die Verantwortlichen
dafür sieht er die englischen Kriegstreiber an, an deren Spitze sich
soeben Lord Halifax gesetzt hatte179. Als jedoch das Foreign Office
am 18. März 1939 an den rumänischen Geschäftsträger in London,
Tilea, eine diesbezügliche Anfrage richtete, bestätigte dieser das
Ultimatum. Chamberlain berief daraufhin sogleich sein Kabinett
ein. Es wurde der Beschluß gefaßt, daß Großbritannien die terri-
177 William L. Shirer, Aufstieg und Fall des Dritten Reiches, S. 428
178 Bonnet, Le Quai d’Orsay, S. 261
179 Ebd., S. 262sein Kabinett
ein. Es wurde der Beschluß gefaßt, daß Großbritannien die terri-
177 William L. Shirer, Aufstieg und Fall des Dritten Reiches, S. 428
178 Bonnet, Le Quai d’Orsay, S. 261
179 Ebd., S. 262

--- PAGE BREAK ---s wurde der Beschluß gefaßt, daß Großbritannien die terri-
177 William L. Shirer, Aufstieg und Fall des Dritten Reiches, S. 428
178 Bonnet, Le Quai d’Orsay, S. 261
179 Ebd., S. 262

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124
toriale Integrität Rumäniens garantieren solle. Gleichzeitig sollte
Polen, dessen Mitwirkung strategisch notwendig war, ersucht wer-
den, das gleiche zu tun. Oberst Beck erklärte sich einverstanden
unter der Bedingung, daß Großbritannien auch die territoriale In-
tegrität Polens garantiere. Auf dieser Ebene wurde am 21. März
verhandelt und am 31. März eine definitive Vereinbarung getrof-
fen. Dies war der Grund für das Umschwenken Polens: Denn auf
Grund der sich anbahnenden Beziehungen zwischen England und
Rußland war Polen durch die britische Garantie gegen die Unter-
nehmungen Rußlands weitaus mehr geschützt als durch den
deutsch-polnischen Vertrag. Nur wußte Oberst Beck nicht, daß
sich zur gleichen Zeit gleichartige Beziehungen auch zwischen dem
Dritten Reich und Rußland anbahnten.
Im Vertrauen auf diese Garantie sollte Oberst Beck von nun an
alles für erlaubt halten. Als erster erkannte Pius XII., was sich dar-
aus ergeben könnte. Als Hitler, der die Überzeugung gewonnen
hatte, daß das Umschwenken Polens unwiderruflich sei, am 26.
April gleichzeitig den deutsch-polnischen Vertrag vom 26. Januar
1934 und das britisch-deutsche Flottenabkommen vom 18. Juni
1935 aufkündigte, gab es für Pius XII. an der Notwendigkeit eines
Vermittlungsversuches keinen Zweifel mehr.
Doch Präsident Roosevelt war ihm zuvorgekommen: Am 14.
April hatte er persönlich an Hitler und Mussolini ein Schreiben
gerichtet, und zwar ausschließlich an sie. Er stellte ihnen darin ge-
radeheraus die Frage: „Sind Sie bereit zu versichern, daß Ihre
Streitkräfte das Territorium keines der nachstehend aufgezählten
Staaten angreifen oder besetzen werden?“ Es folgte eine Liste von
31 Ländern. Sodann wurde der Hoffnung Ausdruck gegeben, daß
eine solche Garantie „sechs Jahre und vielleicht sogar ein Viertel-
jahrhundert“ Frieden bedeuten könnte. Schließlich versprach er
für den Fall einer positiven Antwort die Teilnahme der Vereinig-
ten Staaten „an weltweiten Gesprächen mit dem Ziel, die Welt von
der erdrückenden Last des Rüstens zu befreien“.
Das hieß Hitler und Mussolini allein als die Kriegstreiber hin-
stellen. Und das war im Hinblick auf die diplomatischen Gepflo-
genheiten eine grobe Unhöflichkeit, wenn nicht eine Provokation.
„Eine Folge der fortschreitenden Lähmung“, sagte Mussolini beimer hin-
stellen. Und das war im Hinblick auf die diplomatischen Gepflo-
genheiten eine grobe Unhöflichkeit, wenn nicht eine Provokation.
„Eine Folge der fortschreitenden Lähmung“, sagte Mussolini beim

--- PAGE BREAK ---das war im Hinblick auf die diplomatischen Gepflo-
genheiten eine grobe Unhöflichkeit, wenn nicht eine Provokation.
„Eine Folge der fortschreitenden Lähmung“, sagte Mussolini beim

--- PAGE BREAK ---

125
Empfang dieses Schreibens. Und Göring kommentierte: „Begin-
nende Geisteskrankheit.“ Und, meiner Treu . . . !
Hitler ließ ankündigen, er werde am 28. April in einer Rede vor
dem Reichstag antworten, wie er es schon einmal auf einen höfli-
cheren, inhaltsschwereren und vernünftigeren Vorschlag desselben
Präsidenten Roosevelt am 17. Mai 1933 getan hatte.
Um einerseits einleuchtend darzulegen, inwieweit es möglich
war, den Zweiten Weltkrieg zu vermeiden, und welche Haltung
Hitler gegenüber Krieg und Frieden einnahm, und andererseits
den Unterschied zwischen jenem früheren Vorschlag und demjeni-
gen vom 14. April zu verdeutlichen, ist es notwendig, auf die Vor-
gänge des 16. und 17. Mai 1933 zurückzugehen.
Am 16. Mai 1933 hatte Präsident Roosevelt an die Staatsober-
häupter von 44 Nationen eine Botschaft gerichtet, in der er die
Hoffnungen und Pläne der Vereinigten Staaten zum Thema Frie-
den durch Abrüstung darlegte, nämlich Abschaffung aller Angriffs-
waffen, und zwar zunächst der Bomber, Panzer und schweren Ar-
tillerie, Beschränkung der gesamten Rüstung, Truppenstärke usw.
auf den Stand Deutschlands.
Die Antwort Hitlers erfolgte prompt und ohne Umschweife
schon am nächsten Tag, dem 17. Mai, in einer Rede vor dem
Reichstag. Sie war ein mitreißendes Glaubensbekenntnis für den
Frieden, eine Kriegserklärung an den Krieg und verhieß ein voll-
kommenes Einvernehmen unter den Staaten Europas, sofern der
Vorschlag Präsident Roosevelts bei den anderen Nationen die
gleiche Aufnahme finden würde wie bei Deutschland. In der Rede
hieß es:
„Der Vorschlag des amerikanischen Präsidenten Roosevelt, von
dem ich heute nacht Kenntnis erhielt, verpflichtet die deutsche
Regierung zu warmem Dank. Sie ist bereit, dieser Methode zur
Behebung der internationalen Krise zuzustimmen . . . Dieser Vor-
schlag bedeutet eine große Beruhigung für alle, die an der auf-
richtigen Erhaltung des Friedens mitarbeiten wollen . . . Deutsch-
land ist ferner ohne weiteres bereit, auf Angriffswaffen überhaupt
Verzicht zu leisten, wenn . . . die gerüsteten Nationen ihrerseits
diese Angriffswaffen vernichten . . . Deutschland wäre auch ohne
weiteres bereit, seine gesamte militärische Einrichtung überhauptpt
Verzicht zu leisten, wenn . . . die gerüsteten Nationen ihrerseits
diese Angriffswaffen vernichten . . . Deutschland wäre auch ohne
weiteres bereit, seine gesamte militärische Einrichtung überhaupt

--- PAGE BREAK ---en, wenn . . . die gerüsteten Nationen ihrerseits
diese Angriffswaffen vernichten . . . Deutschland wäre auch ohne
weiteres bereit, seine gesamte militärische Einrichtung überhaupt

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
aufzulösen und den kleinen Rest der ihm verbliebenen Waffen zu
zerstören, wenn die anliegenden Nationen ebenso restlos das glei-
che tun würden . . . Deutschland ist bereit, jedem feierlichen Nicht-
angriffspakt beizutreten, denn Deutschland denkt nicht an einen
Angriff, sondern an seine Sicherheit180.“
Die ganze Welt atmete auf. Selbst die Sozialdemokraten im
Reichstag spendeten dieser Rede Beifall. Man konnte zugegebener-
maßen keine besseren Worte finden.
Dennoch blieb die Rede ohne praktische Folgen. Als der Vor-
schlag Roosevelts am darauffolgenden 14. Oktober vor dem Völ-
kerbund zur Debatte gestellt wurde, verlangten die später im
Krieg gegen Deutschland verbündeten Mächte acht (!) Jahre, um
ihre Rüstung auf den Stand Deutschlands zu reduzieren. Dies be-
deutete, daß sie acht Jahre lang Deutschland auf dem Rüstungs-
sektor keinerlei Gleichberechtigung mit den anderen Nationen
zugestehen würden. Und 15 Jahre lang schon hatte man auf der-
artige Vorschläge, denen Deutschland positiv gegenübergestanden
war, ähnlich hinhaltende Antworten gegeben.
Das hieß die Welt zum besten haben. Doch dieses Mal verließ
Deutschland den Völkerbund und schlug damit die Türen hinter
sich zu. Die Entscheidung wurde in einer Volksabstimmung am
darauffolgenden 12. November von 96 % der deutschen Wähler-
schaft gebilligt.
Nach all dem noch zu behaupten, es habe keinerlei Verhand-
lungsmöglichkeiten mit Hitler gegeben, ist eine Entstellung der
Tatsachen. Am 14. Oktober 1933 haben die Alliierten selbst den
Beweis erbracht, daß der Mangel an Verhandlungsbereitschaft ein-
deutig auf ihrer Seite lag, genauso wie seinerzeit gegenüber der
Weimarer Republik. Sechs Jahre später lieferte das Schreiben
Roosevelts vom 14. April 1939 an Hitler und Mussolini allein
schon durch seine Formulierung dafür einen erneuten Beweis.
Hitler reagierte sehr scharf.
Am 17. April ließ er durch Ribbentrop sämtlichen von Roose-
velt aufgeführten Staaten (selbstverständlich mit Ausnahme von
Polen, Rußland, Großbritannien und Frankreich, deren so und so
180 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 206 f.er durch Ribbentrop sämtlichen von Roose-
velt aufgeführten Staaten (selbstverständlich mit Ausnahme von
Polen, Rußland, Großbritannien und Frankreich, deren so und so
180 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 206 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sämtlichen von Roose-
velt aufgeführten Staaten (selbstverständlich mit Ausnahme von
Polen, Rußland, Großbritannien und Frankreich, deren so und so
180 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 206 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
oft öffentlich wiederholte Absichten er kannte) zwei Fragen vor-
legen. Erstens: Hatten sie den Eindruck, von Deutschland bedroht
zu sein? Und zweitens: Hatten sie Roosevelt beauftragt, jenen
Vorschlag in jener Form zu unterbreiten? Die 27 Staaten, an die die
Anfrage erging, antworteten einstimmig mit einem zweifachen
Nein. Das war für ihn ein beispielloser diplomatischer Erfolg. Er
wurde am nachfolgenden 28. April in einer Rede herausgestellt, in
der Hitler die 27 Antworten verlas und seine Vorschläge für eine
internationale Konferenz, auf der die Überreste des Versailler Ver-
trages einer Revision unterzogen werden sollten, wiederholte. Da-
mit wurde Roosevelt öffentlich der Lächerlichkeit preisgegeben. Die
Folgerung Friedländers hierzu — vergessen wir nicht, daß er Pro-
fessor für Zeitgeschichte am Institut universitaire des Hautes Étu-
des internationales in Genf ist, denn es beweist, daß die Kühe in der
Schweiz genauso gut gehütet werden wie auch anderswo! — lautet:
„Die Botschaft Roosevelts findet außer in Deutschland, Italien und
anscheinend [sic] beim Vatikan in der ganzen Welt eine günstige
Aufnahme181“. In Wirklichkeit sah es anders aus: Die Russen nah-
men überhaupt nicht Stellung, sie standen nämlich mit Deutsch-
land bereits in Unterhandlungen wegen eines Nichtangriffspaktes,
der am 23. August des gleichen Jahres paraphiert wurde und die
Teilung Polens vorsah182. Die gesamte übrige Welt aber mit Aus-
nahme der polnischen, englischen und französischen Kriegstreiber
181 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 26
182 Am 3. Oktober 1938, wenige Tage nach der Münchner Konferenz, hatten die
Russen aus Verärgerung darüber, daß sie von den Westmächten nicht zuge-
zogen worden waren, über ihre Handelsmission in Deutschland Wirtschafts-
beziehungen zu Berlin aufgenommen. Die Unterhandlungen schleppten sich
hin. Doch vom 31. März, von dem Augenblick an, als die Russen die Über-
zeugung gewonnen hatten, daß der Parteiwechsel der Polen unwiderruflich
war, erkannten sie plötzlich, wie vorteilhaft diese Beziehungen für sie sein
konnten. Noch klarer wurde ihnen das durch die Rede Hitlers vom 28. April,
in der er die Russen entgegen seiner Gewohnheit nicht angriff. Am 20. März
1939 hatte Stalin — während Chamberlain den Presseagenturen Glauben
schenkte, die die Meldung von einem deutschen Ultimatum an Rumänien
verbreiteten, und Rumänien und danach auch Polen die englische Garantie-
zusicherung gab — ein offizielles Kommuniqué veröffentlicht in dem er un-
aufgefordert in Abrede stellte, daß „Moskau Rumänien und Polen für den
Fall, daß Druck auf sie ausgeübt würde, eine Garantiezusage gegeben habe“.
Am Tage nach Hitlers Rede vor dem Reichstag unternahmen die Russenin Abrede stellte, daß „Moskau Rumänien und Polen für den
Fall, daß Druck auf sie ausgeübt würde, eine Garantiezusage gegeben habe“.
Am Tage nach Hitlers Rede vor dem Reichstag unternahmen die Russen

--- PAGE BREAK ---daß „Moskau Rumänien und Polen für den
Fall, daß Druck auf sie ausgeübt würde, eine Garantiezusage gegeben habe“.
Am Tage nach Hitlers Rede vor dem Reichstag unternahmen die Russen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128
und Saul Friedländers sah in der in dieser Form unternommenen
Intervention Roosevelts einen unbeschreiblichen diplomatischen
Schnitzer. Es ist daher verständlich, daß Pius XII., der ein Gefühl
für das Lächerliche besaß, sich diesem Schritt nicht anschloß. Im
übrigen hatte Roosevelt völlig auf eigene Faust gehandelt und
Pius XII. ebensowenig um seine Unterstützung gebeten183 wie die
31 Länder, die er in seinem Schreiben anführte und von denen sich
kein einziges, selbst Polen, Frankreich und England nicht, die sein
Vorgehen billigten, in dieser Angelegenheit noch weiter offiziell
zu ihm bekannte. Warum macht man also Pius XII. einen Vor-
wurf, wenn man den anderen keinen macht?
Das Vermittlungsprojekt Pius’ XII. entsprach weit mehr der
Tonart und den Gepflogenheiten der Diplomatie. Es beruhte auf
weit vernünftigeren Vorstellungen, war besser der Situation an-
gepaßt und wesentlich substantieller, daher auch weit erfolgver-
sprechender, wenn man danach gehandelt hätte.
Der Plan sah in seinem Kern die Regelung sämtlicher zwischen
den Staaten Europas bestehenden Streitigkeiten vor und betraf
folgende fünf Länder: England, Frankreich, Italien, Deutsch-
land und Polen. Streitgegenstände bildeten zwischen England und
Deutschland die Kündigung des deutsch-englischen Flottenabkom-
mens sowie die englische Garantie für Polen, zwischen England
einen zweiten Schritt in Richtung auf ein Wirtschaftsabkommen mit Deutsch-
land. Man zeigte bei den über die russische Handelsmission geführten Ver-
handlungen von beiden Seiten mehr Einsicht, und schließlich, ein Wort ergab
das andere . . .
183 Obgleich keines der bisher veröffentlichten Dokumente eine Bestätigung die-
ser Information bietet, behauptet Msgr. Giovannetti demgegenüber (Der
Vatikan und der Krieg, S. 49), Präsident Roosevelt habe Unterstaatssekre-
tär Sumner Welles beauftragt, den Papst zu unterrichten. Dieser habe jedoch
den Vorschlag, seinerseits bei Hitler zu intervenieren, als nicht opportun ab-
gelehnt. Giovannetti steht mit dieser Behauptung allein da. Selbst Fried-
länder wagt nicht, sie zu übernehmen. Das ist im übrigen auch ohne Bedeu-
tung. Sollten sich die Dinge wirklich so abgespielt haben, so müßte man
Pius XII. zur Zurückweisung dieses Vorschlages beglückwünschen. Denn —
wie Giovannetti zugibt, Friedländer aber wohlweislich nicht anführt — „der
Umstand, daß Roosevelt sich nur an zwei der in Frage kommenden Parteien
gewandt hatte“, hat ganz den Anschein, „als ob man sie [Hitler und Musso-
lini] a priori auf die Anklagebank habe setzen wollen“ (Der Vatikan und
der Krieg, S. 48)zwei der in Frage kommenden Parteien
gewandt hatte“, hat ganz den Anschein, „als ob man sie [Hitler und Musso-
lini] a priori auf die Anklagebank habe setzen wollen“ (Der Vatikan und
der Krieg, S. 48)

--- PAGE BREAK ---mmenden Parteien
gewandt hatte“, hat ganz den Anschein, „als ob man sie [Hitler und Musso-
lini] a priori auf die Anklagebank habe setzen wollen“ (Der Vatikan und
der Krieg, S. 48)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

129
und Italien die Suezfrage, zwischen Frankreich und Italien die ita-
lienischen Forderungen in Nordafrika und zwischen Frankreich und
Deutschland dessen Politik in Europa. Schließlich bestand noch der
Gegensatz zwischen Deutschland und Polen. Das Projekt sollte in
folgender Weise durchgeführt werden: Zwei dieser fünf Staaten
gehörten nicht mehr dem Völkerbund an. Eine Beilegung der
Streitigkeiten im Rahmen dieser Organisation, das heißt eine Re-
gelung ohne Mitwirkung der Beteiligten, war daher ausgeschlossen.
Als Lösungsweg verblieb also nur eine Regelung durch Kontakte
unter den fünf Staaten. Hier erhebt Friedländer die Frage, warum
nicht auch Rußland zu dieser Regelung hinzugezogen werden
sollte, und versucht dem Leser einzureden, der Grund hierfür sei
Pius’ XII. „persönliche Abneigung gegen den Kommunismus . . . ,
die auf seine ,Kontakte‘ mit den . . . Sowjets (in Bayern) im Jahre
1919 zurückgeht184“. In Wirklichkeit ist die Antwort sehr viel ein-
facher: Weil Rußland nämlich von keinem der bewußten Streit-
fälle betroffen war. Aus dem gleichen Grunde hatte man Rußland
schon von der Münchner Konferenz ferngehalten. Daß Pius XII.
dem Kommunismus feindlich gegenüberstand, steht außer Zweifel.
Die Enzyklika Divini Redemptoris Pius’ XI., in der er seine Grund-
sätze niedergelegt hatte, bringt das deutlich zum Ausdruck. Doch
die Behauptung, er hätte Rußland auch dann nicht in sein Projekt
mit einbezogen, wenn es in die europäischen Streitfragen verwickelt
gewesen wäre, ist eine völlig unbegründete Hypothese. Aus dem
gleichen Grunde wie Rußland waren auch die Vereinigten Staaten
nicht berücksichtigt.
Um ganz sicherzugehen, daß er niemanden vor den Kopf sto-
ßen würde, ließ Pius XII., bevor er seinen Plan den Beteiligten
unterbreitete, durch seine diplomatischen Dienste entsprechend
sondieren. Im folgenden sei nun dargelegt, wie die Ereignisse sich
abspielten:
1. Am 1. Mai empfing Mussolini den Jesuitenpater Tacchi Ven-
turi, der ein persönlicher Freund von ihm war und ihn im Namen
des Papstes um seine Meinung fragte. Der Duce erbat sich einen
Tag Bedenkzeit. Am 2. Mai, wie versprochen, beantwortete er die
184 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 28her Freund von ihm war und ihn im Namen
des Papstes um seine Meinung fragte. Der Duce erbat sich einen
Tag Bedenkzeit. Am 2. Mai, wie versprochen, beantwortete er die
184 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 28

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar und ihn im Namen
des Papstes um seine Meinung fragte. Der Duce erbat sich einen
Tag Bedenkzeit. Am 2. Mai, wie versprochen, beantwortete er die
184 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 28

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130
an ihn gerichtete Frage durch eine rückhaltlose Billigung. Als der
Abgesandte des Papstes ihn daraufhin fragte, wie Hitler seiner
Meinung nach reagieren werde, erwiderte er, „er neige zu der An-
sicht, daß er . . . [den Vorschlag] nicht ablehnen werde“. Er fügte
lediglich als guten Rat hinzu, „daß es bei der Konferenzeinladung
ratsam sei, . . . klar den Zweck zu nennen, nämlich in friedlicher
Weise jene Fragen zu regeln, welche die fünf Mächte entzweit hiel-
ten, und auch jene, die sonst noch damit verbunden seien185“.
2. Mit dieser Wegzehrung versehen, unterbreitete Staatssekretär
Msgr. Maglione am folgenden Tag, dem 3. Mai, den Nuntien in
Berlin, Paris, Warschau und London den Vorschlag des Papstes.
Am 5. Mai wurde Msgr. Orsenigo in Begleitung Ribbentrops von
Hitler in Berchtesgaden empfangen. Aus dem Bericht über diese
Unterredung, den er am Tag darauf an das Staatssekretariat rich-
tete186, sowie aus dem deutschen Memorandum darüber187 geht
hervor, daß Hitler „nicht an eine Kriegsgefahr glaube, da die ge-
spannte Stimmung mehr auf Hetze als auf Tatsachen zurückzu-
führen sei“ und daß er vor der Erteilung seiner endgültigen Ant-
wort „sich zuerst mit Mussolini in Verbindung setzen müsse, denn
er wolle nichts ohne diesen unternehmen . . . Für alle Zukunft
würden er und der Duce zusammengehen.“
Für einen, der die Antwort des Duce kannte, war das ermuti-
gend188.
3. Der Pariser Nuntius, Msgr. Valerio Valeri, wurde am 6. Mai
von Außenminister Georges Bonnet empfangen. Dieser sagte ihm
zunächst, daß er, bevor er ihm eine endgültige Antwort geben
185 Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 53
186 Ebd., S. 55 ff.
187 Die Aufzeichnung wurde von einem gewissen Hewel gemacht und trägt das
Datum vom 10. Mai 1939. Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 27 f., nach
Akten zur deutschen auswärtigen Politik D VI S. 353 f.
188 Über die Antwort Hitlers sind die Ansichten geteilt. François Charles-Roux
sagt, „eine beruhigendere Antwort war nicht denkbar“, bezeichnet sie jedoch
als ein „Meisterwerk der Verstellung“ (Huit ans au Vatican, S. 318). Im
Journal du Comte Ciano, Neufchatel, findet man unter dem Datum vom
8. Mai einen Bericht über die Zusammenkunft, die er am 6. und 7. Mai mit
Ribbentrop in Rom hatte und bei der das Projekt des Papstes zur Sprache
kam. In dem Bericht heißt es: „Der Führer hält den Gedanken einer Kon-richt über die Zusammenkunft, die er am 6. und 7. Mai mit
Ribbentrop in Rom hatte und bei der das Projekt des Papstes zur Sprache
kam. In dem Bericht heißt es: „Der Führer hält den Gedanken einer Kon-

--- PAGE BREAK ---menkunft, die er am 6. und 7. Mai mit
Ribbentrop in Rom hatte und bei der das Projekt des Papstes zur Sprache
kam. In dem Bericht heißt es: „Der Führer hält den Gedanken einer Kon-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

131
könne, sich mit dem Herrn Ministerpräsidenten sowie mit Herrn
Alexis Léger, dem Generalsekretär des Außenministeriums, be-
sprechen müsse. Kurz nach diesem Bescheid rief er ihn jedoch an
und bat ihn noch am gleichen Abend erneut zu sich. Er erklärte
ihm, daß die französische Regierung den Schritt nicht als opportun
erachte, ersuchte ihn jedoch, „den Kardinalstaatssekretär zu bitten,
die Botschaft [einstweilen] nicht abzuschicken189“.
Die Ansicht Msgr. Valerio Valeris über den von ihm unternom-
menen Schritt ist in seinem Schreiben an das Staatssekretariat vom
12. Mai niedergelegt. Der Vermittlungsversuch des Papstes war zu
diesem Zeitpunkt bereits gescheitert:
„Alles in allem ist klar, daß die sogenannten demokratischen
Staaten augenblicklich keine Fühlungnahme wünschen. Sie wollen
vielmehr die der Ausdehnungslust der totalitären Staaten gezogene
Schranke befestigen und verbreitern. Sie [die Demokratien] sind
übrigens davon überzeugt, daß sich binnen weniger Monate die
Waage der Macht völlig auf ihre Seite neigen wird. Das wurde mir
von Herrn Bonnet gesagt und . . . von Herrn Bullitt, dem Botschaf-
ter der Vereinigten Staaten, wiederholt. Dieser verheimlichte mir
nicht seine Befriedigung darüber, daß der Schritt des Heiligen
Stuhles keine Folgen haben werde. Auch seine Meinung nach sei
es tatsächlich alles in allem gesehen erforderlich, daß die totalitären
Staaten mit dem Rücken an die Wand gestellt würden; nur dann
und nachdem sie die Garantien gegeben hätten, auf die Herr Roo-
sevelt in seiner Botschaft anspielte190 . . . , könne man mit der Dis-
kussion beginnen191.“
ferenz für nicht annehmbar . . . [er] schlägt vor, dem Vatikan mitzuteilen,
daß man dem Papst für seinen Vorschlag dankbar sei, es jedoch nicht für
möglich halte, ihm zuzustimmen . . . “ (Siehe auch Les Archives secrètes du
Comte Ciano 1936—1942, Paris 1948, S. 282.) Am besten hält man sich also
an die offiziellen Dokumente der beiden Parteien, die in diesem Falle über-
einstimmen: Am 6. Mai stimmte Mussolini dem Vorschlag des Papstes im
Prinzip zu. Hitler, der keinen Einwand dagegen erhob, sagte, daß er vor
Erteilung einer offiziellen Antwort zuerst Mussolini konsultieren müsse.
189 Nach dem Bericht Msgr. Valerio Valeris, zitiert von Msgr. Giovannetti, und
auch nach Msgr. Giovannetti selbst (Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 60 f.)
190 Vgl. oben S. 124, Roosevelts Botschaft und ihre Folgen.
191 Das Schreiben ist zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 61 f.auch nach Msgr. Giovannetti selbst (Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 60 f.)
190 Vgl. oben S. 124, Roosevelts Botschaft und ihre Folgen.
191 Das Schreiben ist zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 61 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---annetti selbst (Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 60 f.)
190 Vgl. oben S. 124, Roosevelts Botschaft und ihre Folgen.
191 Das Schreiben ist zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 61 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132
Am 7. Mai hatte ihm Alexis Léger seine Ablehnung des Gedan-
kens einer Konferenz in nahezu gleichen Worten ausgedrückt.
4. Der Nuntius in London, Msgr. Godfrey, wurde am 5. Mai
von Lord Halifax empfangen, der ihm den Standpunkt der briti-
schen Regierung darlegte: „Seine Heiligkeit mögen Deren gute
Dienste getrennt Deutschland und Polen, Frankreich und Italien
anbieten192.“
Auch hier also eine Ablehnung des Vermittlungsangebotes.
5. Die Antworten aus Paris und London, die dem Heiligen Stuhl
am 7. Mai vorlagen, zerstörten sämtliche Hoffnungen, die die Ant-
worten aus Italien und Deutschland in den Vorstellungen des
Staatssekretärs und des Papstes hatten aufkeimen lassen. Am 8. Mai
traf die Antwort Polens ein. Sie war offensichtlich den Stellung-
nahmen Frankreichs und Englands angeglichen. Der offizielle und
endgültige Bescheid der Achsenmächte erfolgte gemeinsam. Er traf
als letzter ein, und zwar am 9. Mai. In voller Kenntnis der nega-
tiven Antworten Frankreichs, Englands und Polens wurde darin
geltend gemacht, „wegen der inzwischen eingetretenen Besserung
der internationalen Lage halte man den Schritt [einer Fünf-Mäch-
te-Konferenz] für verfrüht und für augenblicklich nicht notwen-
dig; auch wolle man die hohe Autorität des Papstes nicht exponie-
ren193“.
Angesichts des Fait accompli konnten Hitler und Mussolini sich
auch gar nicht anders äußern.
Friedländer konnte die chronologische Entwicklung des Ver-
mittlungsversuches Pius’ XII. bis hin zum Scheitern desselben
nicht unbekannt sein, und sei es auch nur durch das von ihm so
häufig zitierte Buch Giovannettis. Aber er sagt keinen Ton dar-
über! Sollte das geschehen sein, um die Verantwortlichen an diesem
Scheitern, die von dieser Chronologie so erbarmungslos aufge-
zeigt werden, nicht kenntlich zu machen?
Der Text der Botschaft, die Pius XII. jedem der fünf Staatschefs
als Einladung zu einer gemeinsamen Konferenz zu übermitteln
gedachte, ist meines Wissens nicht offiziell bekannt gemacht wor-
192 Bericht Msgr. Godfreys, zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 64
193 Zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 59zu übermitteln
gedachte, ist meines Wissens nicht offiziell bekannt gemacht wor-
192 Bericht Msgr. Godfreys, zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 64
193 Zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 59

--- PAGE BREAK ---hte, ist meines Wissens nicht offiziell bekannt gemacht wor-
192 Bericht Msgr. Godfreys, zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 64
193 Zitiert bei Giovannetti, Der Vatikan, S. 59

--- PAGE BREAK ---

133
den. Man erfuhr den Inhalt zunächst lediglich durch Indiskretio-
nen der diplomatischen Presse, womit die Londoner News Chronicle
in ihrer Ausgabe vom 9. Mai begann. Ihre Meldung wurde in den
folgenden Tagen von der Pariser Presse aufgegriffen. Weiteren
Aufschluß über den Inhalt der Botschaft gab die Ansprache des
Papstes an das Kardinalskollegium am 2. Juni194, die einen öffent-
lichen Aufruf zum Frieden auf dem Wege internationaler Gesprä-
che darstellte. Man erfuhr den Inhalt ferner durch den herzlichen
Beifall, mit dem die Presse der gesamten Welt, namentlich die der
neutralen Länder, diese Ansprache vom 2. Juni aufnahm.
Von da an verliefen die Friedensbemühungen Pius’ XII. so wie
es Lord Halifax anläßlich der Ablehnung der Fünf-Mächte-Kon-
ferenz als wünschenswert erachtet hatte: zugunsten der Wieder-
herstellung normaler Beziehungen zwischen Polen und Deutsch-
land einerseits und Frankreich und Italien andererseits.
Doch damit hatte er ebensowenig Erfolg.
Von diesen Bemühungen Pius’ XII. erwähnt Friedländer ledig-
lich diejenigen hinsichtlich Deutschlands und Polens. Sie waren vor
allem durch die Ratschläge zur Mäßigung und Vorsicht gekenn-
zeichnet, die der Papst durch seinen Nuntius in Warschau, Msgr.
Cortesi, der polnischen Regierung mehrfach aussprechen ließ. Am
30. und 31. August ging er sogar so weit, Konzessionen zu emp-
fehlen: die Rückkehr Danzigs zum Reich, die Neuordnung des
polnischen Korridors und die Garantie gewisser Rechte für die
deutsche Minderheit in Polen195.
Friedländer interpretiert alles dies in folgendem Sinne: „ . . . der
Heilige Stuhl sagt während der letzten Wochen der . . . Krise der
Diplomatie des Reiches seine Unterstützung zu196.“ Anders ausge-
drückt, der Papst handelte aus der Sorge heraus, die deutsche Di-
plomatie zu unterstützen, nicht aber in dem Bestreben, zwischen
194 Die Ansprache findet sich in den Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bonne Presse, Bd. I,
S. 128. Ihr Text soll hier nicht wiedergegeben werden. Es genügt, daß der
Leser über Zweck und Bedeutung dieser Ansprache im Bilde ist.
195 Telegramm Osbornes, des britischen Gesandten beim Vatikan, an Lord Hali-
fax vom 30. August. Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 33, nach Documents
on British Foreign Policy, Third Series VII, S. 403 f. Ferner Journal du
Comte polonais Szembeck, Plon, Paris, S. 499
196 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 30ei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 33, nach Documents
on British Foreign Policy, Third Series VII, S. 403 f. Ferner Journal du
Comte polonais Szembeck, Plon, Paris, S. 499
196 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 30

--- PAGE BREAK ---XII., S. 33, nach Documents
on British Foreign Policy, Third Series VII, S. 403 f. Ferner Journal du
Comte polonais Szembeck, Plon, Paris, S. 499
196 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

134
Deutschland und Polen eine territoriale Neuordnung und eine
Regelung über das Schicksal der deutschen Minderheit in Polen
herbeizuführen, das heißt, eine vernünftigere Regelung als die in
Versailles festgelegte, die die Ursache des deutsch-polnischen Kon-
fliktes bildete.
Kurz, aus Sympathie für das nationalsozialistische Deutschland.
Es ist immer die gleiche Methode.
Doch wir wollen uns kurz fassen. Aus dem Zeitraum vom Schei-
tern seines Vermittlungsversuches Anfang Mai bis zum 1. Septem-
ber 1939 ragt ein Ereignis heraus: die öffentliche Mahnung zum
Frieden vom 24. August. In diesem „Aufruf an die Regierungen
und die Völker“ hieß es: „Nichts ist mit dem Frieden verloren.
Mit dem Krieg kann alles verloren sein197!“
Am folgenden Tag, dem 25. August, unternahmen die Souve-
räne von Belgien und Holland einen letzten Vermittlungsversuch.
Pius XII. schloß sich demselben an, indem er auf „das glückliche
Zusammentreffen mit seiner eigenen Rundfunkbotschaft für den
Frieden198“ hinwies.
Die letzte Geste Pius’ XII. am Ende dieses Zeitraumes bestand
darin, daß er am 31. August 1939 den Botschaftern Deutschlands,
Polens, Englands, Frankreichs und Italiens durch Kardinalstaats-
sekretär Maglione eine Note überreichen ließ, die zwei Punkte
enthielt:
1. Für Deutschland und Polen den Vorschlag einer zehn- bis
vierzehntägigen Stillhaltepause, für deren Dauer sich die beiden
Länder verpflichten sollten, sich jeglicher Maßnahmen und Zwi-
schenfälle zu enthalten, die die Spannung verschärfen könnten.
2. Für alle übrigen Empfänger ein Ersuchen um eine interna-
tionale Konferenz, deren Ziel in der Beilegung des deutsch-pol-
nischen Konfliktes sowie einer Revision des Versailler Vertrages
bestehen sollte199.
197 Un ora grave in: Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, S. 333, und Documentation
catholique, XL., Col. 1128 (Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Vorkämpfer des
Friedens, S. 12 — Anm. d. Übers.)
198 Osservatore Romano, 26. August
199 Nach Documentation catholique, 1945, Col. 163, wo angegeben wird, daß die
Überreichung der Note am 31. August um 13 Uhr erfolgte.iedens, S. 12 — Anm. d. Übers.)
198 Osservatore Romano, 26. August
199 Nach Documentation catholique, 1945, Col. 163, wo angegeben wird, daß die
Überreichung der Note am 31. August um 13 Uhr erfolgte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

135
Am Nachmittag dieses 31. August schlug Mussolini Frankreich
und Großbritannien eine Viererkonferenz für den 5. September
vor. Zuvor hatte er den Grafen Ciano beauftragt, Msgr. Maglione
mitzuteilen, daß „Italien den Vorschlag des Papstes mit ganzer
Kraft unterstütze200“.
Anlaß dieser beiden Vorschläge war die Tatsache, daß Hitler
sich am 29. August zu Verhandlungen bereit erklärt hatte, vor-
ausgesetzt, daß ihm bis zum Abend des 30. August ein mit allen
Vollmachten versehener polnischer Unterhändler geschickt würde.
Wenn nicht, so bedeute das den Krieg (Quintessenz seiner Erklä-
rungen). Alles deutete nun aber darauf hin, daß die Polen im Be-
wußtsein der Rückendeckung durch England und Frankreich die-
sen Bevollmächtigten nicht schicken würden.
In seinem Kommentar zu dem Telegramm, das Bergen am 30.
August 1939 von Rom nach Berlin sandte und in dem es hieß,
„ . . . daß im Falle des Ausbleibens eines polnischen Unterhändlers
in Berlin vielleicht mit einer neuen, und zwar päpstlichen Initia-
tive zu rechnen sei“, zog Friedländer indessen die Folgerung:
„Schließlich fand keine päpstliche Initiative in diesem Sinne statt201.“
Wie gesagt — ein Professor für Zeitgeschichte am Institut universi-
taire des Hautes Études internationales in Genf . . . Eine einzige
Frage hierzu: Erfolgte seine Ernennung auf Grund von Diplomen
oder genügte schon die Vorlage seines Taufscheins?
200 Zitiert bei Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 110, nach Civilta Catholica, Rom, v. 15.
Juni 1945
201 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 35

--- PAGE BREAK ---lomen
oder genügte schon die Vorlage seines Taufscheins?
200 Zitiert bei Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 110, nach Civilta Catholica, Rom, v. 15.
Juni 1945
201 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

136
III. DIE BEMÜHUNGEN PIUS’ XII.
UM DIE BEENDIGUNG DES KRIEGES
Und dann kam der Krieg . . .
Die erste Stellungnahme Pius’ XII., die öffentlich bekannt wur-
de, datiert vom 14. September 1939. Es handelt sich um seine
Antwort an den neuen Botschafter Belgiens, der ihm an jenem
Tage sein Beglaubigungsschreiben überreichte:
„Wir brauchen nicht zu wiederholen, wie sehr Wir bis zum
letzten Augenblick vor dem Ausbruch der Feindseligkeiten nichts
unversucht gelassen haben, was in Unserer Macht lag — sei es
durch Gebete und öffentliche Ermahnungen, sei es durch wieder-
holte und unmißverständliche vertrauliche Demarchen, um die
Menschen über die Größe der Gefahr aufzuklären und sie zu ehr-
lichen und friedlichen Verhandlungen zu veranlassen . . . “
Sodann folgte der Satz, der seine Haltung während des ganzen
Krieges kennzeichnete:
„ . . . Wir werden nicht aufhören, aufmerksam nach allen etwai-
gen Gelegenheiten, durch die die heute aufgewiegelten und entzwei-
ten Völker erneut zum Abschluß eines für alle gerechten und ehren-
vollen Friedens hingeführt werden könnten, Ausschau zu halten,
um sie mit Unserer ganzen Macht zu unterstützen202.“
Eines „für alle gerechten und ehrenvollen Friedens“, nicht aber
einer Rückkehr zum Status quo.
Friedländer bemerkt hierzu: „Selbstverständlich muß ein Friede,
der nicht von einer Rückkehr zum Status quo . . . ausgeht, den
Deutschen in die Hände spielen203.“ Folglich muß man sich also
vor einer Rückkehr zu einem „für alle gerechten und ehrenvollen
Frieden“ hüten. Bedenkt man jedoch, daß Hitler und der Zweite
Weltkrieg kamen, eben weil der Versailler Vertrag keinen „für
alle gerechten und ehrenvollen Frieden“ geschaffen hatte — ins-
202 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, S. 367, und Documentation catholique, XL,
Col. 1130. Die Hervorhebung des zweiten Teiles des Zitates wurde von uns
vorgenommen. P. R.
203 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 3702 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXI, S. 367, und Documentation catholique, XL,
Col. 1130. Die Hervorhebung des zweiten Teiles des Zitates wurde von uns
vorgenommen. P. R.
203 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 37

--- PAGE BREAK ---Sedis, XXXI, S. 367, und Documentation catholique, XL,
Col. 1130. Die Hervorhebung des zweiten Teiles des Zitates wurde von uns
vorgenommen. P. R.
203 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

137
besondere nicht für die Deutschen —, so können einen die Motive,
die den Gedankengängen Friedländers zugrunde liegen, nur er-
schrecken. Also niemals einen gerechten Frieden für die Deutschen?
Und das ihnen 1919 zugefügte Unrecht wiedergutmachen hieße
nur „ihnen in die Hände spielen“, nicht aber, gerechte Ver-
hältnisse wiederherstellen? Dann könnte man ebensogut auf der
Stelle festsetzen, das Bemühen um Gerechtigkeit sei kein sittliches
Gebot.
Derartiges Gerede hält einer Prüfung nicht stand. Pius XII.,
der es, wenn auch in weniger deutlicher Form, aus dem Mund der
Diplomaten der Alliierten vernahm, hat sich im übrigen niemals
damit aufgehalten. Seine erste Enzyklika Summi Pontificatus vom
20. Oktober folgte einer Richtschnur, die er in seiner Antwort
vom 14. September an den belgischen Botschafter festgelegt hatte:
einer Stellungnahme für die Rückkehr zum Frieden, die überdies
den Ausspruch Pius’ XI.: „Geistig gesehen, sind wir alle Semiten“
durch die Worte: „Da heißt es nicht mehr Heide oder Jude . . . “
wieder aufgriff, was ein wenig zu sehr in Vergessenheit geraten
ist. Seine Enzyklika spiegelte diesen Standpunkt so deutlich,
daß sie im Lager der Alliierten sogleich als eine „Charta der inter-
nationalen Moral“ begrüßt wurde.
Bei zahlreichen anderen Gelegenheiten bekräftigte Pius XII. die-
sen grundsätzlichen Standpunkt erneut:
In seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft 1939, in der alle die Punkte
zusammengefaßt waren, die seiner Ansicht nach die rechtlichen und
politischen Voraussetzungen für einen gerechten und dauerhaften
Frieden bildeten204.
In seinem Schreiben vom 7. Januar 1940 an Präsident Roose-
velt, mit dem er dessen Brief erwiderte, den er am 24. Dezember
1939 erhalten hatte und in dem Roosevelt ihm neben der Abreise
seines Sonderbeauftragten Myron Taylor seine Absicht ankündig-
te, „die Unterstützung der drei großen Religionen [zu suchen], um
der Welt im geeigneten Augenblick die Grundlagen für einen
dauerhaften Frieden anzubieten“.
204 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXII, S. 509te, „die Unterstützung der drei großen Religionen [zu suchen], um
der Welt im geeigneten Augenblick die Grundlagen für einen
dauerhaften Frieden anzubieten“.
204 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXII, S. 509

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138
In der Antwort Pius’ XII. auf dieses Schreiben hieß es: „Nichts
konnte Uns zu Weihnachten willkommener sein als diese Nach-
richt, denn sie stellt . . . einen wichtigen Beitrag dar zu Unseren
eigenen Bemühungen um die Schaffung eines gerechten und ehren-
vollen Friedens205.“
In seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft vom 24. Dezember 1940, die
seine Forderungen für eine Neuordnung enthält206.
In seinem Schreiben vom 20. April 1941 an den Kardinalstaats-
sekretär, in dem er diesen anwies, öffentliche Gebete für den Frie-
den zu empfehlen207.
In seiner Antwort vom 17. Juli 1941 an den neuen Botschafter
Perus anläßlich der Überreichung des Beglaubigungsschreibens.
Thema dieser Antwort ist die soziale Gerechtigkeit als Grundlage
des Friedens208.
In seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft vom 24. Dezember 1941, die die
Voraussetzungen für einen gerechten und dauerhaften Frieden
zum Gegenstand hat209.
In seiner Ansprache vom 13. Mai 1942 (anläßlich seines Bischofs-
jubiläums) über die Aufgabe der Kirche im Weltkrieg210.
In seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft vom 24. Dezember 1942 über die
christliche Gesellschaftsordnung211.
In seiner Ansprache vom 2. Juni 1943 an das Kardinalskolle-
gium, deren Thema ein Protest gegen den totalen Krieg ist212.
205 Ebd., XXXII, S. 43 f., sowie Wartime Correspondence between President
Roosevelt und Pope Pius XII., 7. Januar 1940
206 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, XXXIII, S. 5 ff.
207 Ebd., XXXIII, S. 110—112
208 Ebd., XXXIII, S. 356—358
209 Ebd., XXXIV, S. 10 ff.
210 Ebd., XXXIV, S. 154 ff
211 Ebd., XXXV, S. 9 ff.
212 Ebd., XXXV, S. 165 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---XXXIII, S. 5 ff.
207 Ebd., XXXIII, S. 110—112
208 Ebd., XXXIII, S. 356—358
209 Ebd., XXXIV, S. 10 ff.
210 Ebd., XXXIV, S. 154 ff
211 Ebd., XXXV, S. 9 ff.
212 Ebd., XXXV, S. 165 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

139
In seiner Ansprache vom 13. Juni 1943 an die italienischen
Arbeiter, die eine Entgegnung auf die Verleumdungen der Frie-
densbemühungen des Heiligen Stuhles darstellt213.
In seiner Botschaft vom 1. September 1943 an die gesamte Welt
zum vierten Jahrestag des Kriegsausbruches über das Thema,
welchen Zweck es habe, eine solche Geißel zu verlängern214.
In seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft vom 24. Dezember 1943 über die
Grundsätze eines Programmes für einen gerechten und dauerhaf-
ten Frieden215.
In seiner Botschaft vom 1. September 1944 an die gesamte Welt
zum fünften Jahrestag des Kriegsausbruches. Diese Botschaft ent-
hält eine Reihe von Erwägungen für die Zukunft über den Aufbau
der Gesellschaft sowie über Wirtschaftsprobleme216.
In seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft vom 24. Dezember 1944 über die
wahre Demokratie und die Voraussetzungen, unter denen eine in-
ternationale Organisation den Frieden in wirksamer Weise garan-
tieren kann217.
Wir haben es nicht für notwendig erachtet, aus diesen verschie-
denen Schriften die Stellen anzuführen, die das Bemühen des Pap-
stes zeigen, zwischen Völkern und Staatsmännern ein für die Wie-
deraufnahme der internationalen Beziehungen psychologisch gün-
stiges Klima zu schaffen. Doch wird sich der Leser leicht an Hand
der angegebenen Quellen darüber informieren können.
Der gleichen Sorge des Papstes um die Abkürzung des Krieges
entsprang das, was wir aus den Worten der viel zuwenig bekann-
ten amerikanischen Historikerin Anne Armstrong erfahren:
„ . . . Papst Pius XII. warnte im Juni 1944 Präsident Roosevelt
213 Ebd., XXXV, S. 171 f.
214 Ebd., XXXV, S. 277—279
215 Ebd., XXXVI, S. 11 ff.
216 Ebd., XXXVI, S. 249 ff.
217 Ebd., XXXVII, S. 10 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---XII. warnte im Juni 1944 Präsident Roosevelt
213 Ebd., XXXV, S. 171 f.
214 Ebd., XXXV, S. 277—279
215 Ebd., XXXVI, S. 11 ff.
216 Ebd., XXXVI, S. 249 ff.
217 Ebd., XXXVII, S. 10 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140
durch dessen Abgesandten Myron Taylor: Der Friedenstempel
werde nur dann dauernden Bestand haben, wenn er auf der Basis
christlicher Nächstenliebe gegründet sei, nicht aber, wenn leiden-
schaftliche Sucht nach Vergeltung oder irgendwelche Elemente des
Hasses die Bausteine seien. Der Papst sagte zu Taylor, er halte die
Forderung nach bedingungsloser Kapitulation für unvereinbar mit
der christlichen Glaubenslehre218.“
Mit der Vernunft und dem schlichten, gesunden Menschenver-
stand ist sie ebenso unvereinbar: Es gibt heutzutage kaum noch
einen Menschen, den die bekannten Tatsachen nicht überzeugt
haben, daß diese Forderung den Krieg um mindestens zwei Jahre
verlängert hat.
Doch sehen wir nun, welche praktischen Folgerungen Pius XII.
aus diesen immer wieder bekräftigten Grundsätzen gezogen hat,
das heißt, zu welchen diplomatischen Interventionen er sich da-
durch veranlaßt fühlte. Es zeigt sich, daß wir sowohl seine Inter-
ventionen zugunsten der Nichtausweitung des Krieges als auch
diejenigen, die er in Hinblick auf die Wiederherstellung des Welt-
friedens unternahm, in zwei Gruppen einteilen müssen: in jene,
die durch unwiderlegbare Texte, und in jene, die nur durch Äuße-
rungen mehr oder weniger qualifizierter Zeugen verbürgt sind.
Zur erstgenannten Gruppe gehören seine vielfältigen Interven-
tionen, durch die er den Kriegseintritt Italiens zu verhindern such-
te. „Neun Monate lang“, sagt Duclos, „verging keine Woche, in der
der Papst nicht direkt — in einer Ansprache, einem Schreiben,
einer Audienz — oder indirekt — durch Vermittlung seines Staats-
sekretärs, seiner Nuntien oder durch halboffizielle Persönlichkei-
ten — auf die italienische Öffentlichkeit und die verantwortlichen
Führer, insbesondere auf Ciano, eingewirkt hätte219.“
Und das ist durchaus zutreffend.
Nachstehend einige der wichtigsten Beweise:
Nachdem man am 4. September in Il Popolo d’Italia hatte lesen
können, „daß Italien bei dem [von Hitler unternommenen] Wie-
218 Anne Armstrong, Bedingungslose Kapitulation, die teuerste Fehlentscheidung
der Neuzeit, S. 278
219 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 111tte lesen
können, „daß Italien bei dem [von Hitler unternommenen] Wie-
218 Anne Armstrong, Bedingungslose Kapitulation, die teuerste Fehlentscheidung
der Neuzeit, S. 278
219 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 111

--- PAGE BREAK ---aß Italien bei dem [von Hitler unternommenen] Wie-
218 Anne Armstrong, Bedingungslose Kapitulation, die teuerste Fehlentscheidung
der Neuzeit, S. 278
219 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 111

--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
deraufbau und der Befreiung des neuen Europas auf keinen Fall
abseits stehen werde“, ließ Pius XII. am 6. September Mussolini
durch Pater Tacchi Venturi die Mahnung überbringen, er möge
sich mit allen ihm zur Verfügung stehenden Mitteln für den Frie-
den einsetzen.
Am 20. Oktober hieß es in der Enzyklika Summi Pontificatus:
„Das ist Unser Gebet zum Herrn, daß dieser Friede wie heiteres
Himmelsblau das Gemüt des italienischen Volkes durchziehe, be-
lebe, weite und machtvoll stärke220.“
Am 7. Dezember gab er anläßlich des Empfanges des neuen ita-
lienischen Botschafters beim Vatikan, Alfieri, seiner Überzeugung
Ausdruck, „daß seine Friedensbemühungen in dem mutigen, star-
ken und arbeitsamen italienischen Volk, das durch die Besonnen-
heit seiner Führer sowie durch sein eigenes innerstes Gefühl bis-
her vor dem Krieg bewahrt blieb, stets ein getreues Echo finden
würden221“.
Im Dezember bahnten sich neue Beziehungen zwischen dem
König von Italien, der die Neutralität dieses Landes befürwortete,
und dem Papst an. Vermittler hierbei war Graf Ciano, der die
gleiche Ansicht vertrat. Am 21. Dezember wurde das italienische
Königspaar in Begleitung des Grafen Ciano im Vatikan empfan-
gen, was seit dem Konkordat von 1929 nicht mehr vorgekommen
war. In seiner Ansprache gab der Papst dem Wunsch Ausdruck,
„daß Gott dem italienischen Volk bei vorausschauender Wachsam-
keit und versöhnlicher Weisheit nicht nur seinen inneren und äuße-
ren Frieden schenken, sondern auch die Wiederherstellung eines
ehrenvollen und dauerhaften Friedens unter den Völkern gewäh-
ren möge222“. Am 28. Dezember stattete der Papst dem König einen
Gegenbesuch ab — den ersten Besuch eines Papstes im Quirinal seit
70 Jahren — und äußerte sich dort in ähnlicher Weise.
220 Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden, S. 139 (Anm. d. Übers.)
221 Actes de Pie XII, Bonne Presse, Bd. I, S. 297
222 Ebd., S. 311Quirinal seit
70 Jahren — und äußerte sich dort in ähnlicher Weise.
220 Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden, S. 139 (Anm. d. Übers.)
221 Actes de Pie XII, Bonne Presse, Bd. I, S. 297
222 Ebd., S. 311

--- PAGE BREAK ---hren — und äußerte sich dort in ähnlicher Weise.
220 Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden, S. 139 (Anm. d. Übers.)
221 Actes de Pie XII, Bonne Presse, Bd. I, S. 297
222 Ebd., S. 311

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142
Am 17. März fand eine Begegnung zwischen Hitler und Musso-
lini am Brenner statt, aus der der Duce als Abhängiger Hitlers her-
vorging. Als der Osservatore Romano eine Kampagne für den Frie-
den startete, wurde Botschafter Alfieri am 9. April von Mussolini
beauftragt, Protest dagegen zu erheben. Msgr. Maglione erteilte
dem Botschafter daraufhin folgende Antwort: „Der Osservatore
Romano wird zwar in Italienisch gedruckt, ist aber das Organ des
Heiligen Stuhls. Er darf nicht mit den italienischen Zeitungen gleich-
gestellt werden . . . Es muß überall, vor allem aber im Ausland,
ersichtlich sein, daß er wirklich das Blatt des Heiligen Stuhls, das
heißt unparteiisch und lauter ist223.“
Am 24. April richtete er ein persönliches Schreiben an den Duce,
in dem es hieß: „Der Heilige Vater äußert aus tiefstem Herzen den
heißen Wunsch, daß Europa weitere Verheerungen und noch mehr
Leid und insbesondere unserem lieben Vaterland, Ihrem Land, ein
derartiges Elend erspart werden mögen224.“ Die Beziehungen ver-
schlechterten sich . . . Der Papst versteifte sich auf seine grundsätz-
lichen Auffassungen.
Und dann ereignete sich jener wohlbekannte Vorfall vom 13.
Mai 1940: Botschafter Alfieri war beauftragt worden, beim Heili-
gen Stuhl erneut vorstellig zu werden. Gegenstand der Kritik war
die Friedenskampagne des Osservatore Romano, zu der dieses Mal
eine am 5. Mai in der Basilika Santa Maria sopra Minerva gehaltene
päpstliche Ansprache, die einen eindringlichen Appell an das Volk
zugunsten der Neutralität Italiens darstellte, der Anlaß war, ferner
waren es drei Telegramme des Papstes an die Souveräne Belgiens,
Luxemburgs und der Niederlande, in denen er die Invasion dieser
Länder verurteilte. „Der Heilige Vater“, sagt Alfieri225, „erwiderte
mir, er begreife den Unwillen des Regierungschefs nicht . . . Es
komme, was da mag, schloß er mit ruhiger Bestimmtheit, und
wenn sie mich eines Tages verhaften und in ein Konzentrationsla-
223 Documentation catholique, 1945, Col. 523
224 Ebd.
225 Dino Alfieri, Deux dictateurs face à face, S. 30 f. (Zitiert nach Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47 — Anm. d. Übers.)und in ein Konzentrationsla-
223 Documentation catholique, 1945, Col. 523
224 Ebd.
225 Dino Alfieri, Deux dictateurs face à face, S. 30 f. (Zitiert nach Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47 — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tionsla-
223 Documentation catholique, 1945, Col. 523
224 Ebd.
225 Dino Alfieri, Deux dictateurs face à face, S. 30 f. (Zitiert nach Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 47 — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

143
ger bringen. Jeder muß seine eigenen Taten einmal vor Gott ver-
antworten.“
Man weiß, daß Mussolini sich damals bereits unwiderruflich
für ein Eingreifen in den Konflikt entschieden hatte. Pius XII.
mußte am 2. Juni vor dem Kardinalskollegium seine Ohnmacht
eingestehen. Am 10. Juni erklärte Italien Frankreich den Krieg.
Gegenüber dem Kriegseintritt Deutschlands gegen Rußland,
sodann Japans gegen die Vereinigten Staaten und als Folge davon
schließlich auch Deutschlands gegen die Vereinigten Staaten besaß
Pius XII. weitaus schlechtere, wenn nicht gar keine Interventions-
möglichkeiten. Im einen wie im anderen Fall wurde er vor die
vollendete Tatsache gestellt. Immerhin weigerte er sich nachzu-
geben: Er fand sich ebensowenig zu einem Kreuzzug gegen den
Nationalsozialismus bereit, der von den Alliierten ununterbrochen
gefordert wurde, wie zu einem Kreuzzug gegen den Bolschewis-
mus, der ebenso ununterbrochen von den Achsenmächten gefor-
dert wurde, was im einen wie im anderen Fall einem Kriegseintritt
zugunsten der einen oder der anderen Seite gleichgekommen wäre.
Auch hierfür liegen beweiskräftige Texte vor:
„Radio Moskau konnte im Jahre 1943 melden, Pius XII. habe
ein Zusammengehen mit Hitler in einem Kreuzzug gegen die Sow-
jetunion abgelehnt“, sagte der Osservatore Romano vom 16. Ja-
nuar 1945. Diese Erklärung ist niemals dementiert worden.
Wir hören es auch von Pius XII. selbst:
„Wir haben Uns im besonderen gehütet, obwohl man Uns in
dieser Hinsicht unter einen gewissen Druck setzte, Uns mündlich
oder schriftlich auch nur mit einem einzigen Wort, einem einzigen
Zeichen der Billigung oder der Ermutigung, zugunsten des 1941
gegen Rußland begonnenen Krieges zu äußern226.“
Man darf das wohl glauben, denn Friedländer selbst gibt diese
Tatsache zu227. Gleichzeitig behauptet er allerdings, daß diese Hal-
tung Pius’ XII. lediglich von seiner Sympathie für das national-
sozialistische Deutschland, das einzige Bollwerk gegen den Bolsche-
226 Feierliche Erklärung an das diplomatische Korps vom 15. Juni 1946 (Docu-
mentation catholique, 1946, Col. 205)
227 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 124
228 Vgl. oben S. 53ge Bollwerk gegen den Bolsche-
226 Feierliche Erklärung an das diplomatische Korps vom 15. Juni 1946 (Docu-
mentation catholique, 1946, Col. 205)
227 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 124
228 Vgl. oben S. 53

--- PAGE BREAK ---n Bolsche-
226 Feierliche Erklärung an das diplomatische Korps vom 15. Juni 1946 (Docu-
mentation catholique, 1946, Col. 205)
227 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 124
228 Vgl. oben S. 53

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144
wismus, bestimmt gewesen sei. Wahrhaftig, ein Musterbeispiel für
einen Widerspruch228!
Im September 1941 schickten die bis dahin neutralen Angelsach-
sen sich an, die Russen zu unterstützen. Am 9. überreichte Myron
Taylor Pius XII. ein Schreiben mit Datum vom 3. September,
durch das Roosevelt den Papst über die Gründe für diese Entschei-
dung unterrichtete. So sei die russische Diktatur für die Sicherheit
der anderen Nationen weniger gefährlich als die deutsche Diktatur
und die nationalsozialistischen Verbrechen. Es folgt ein Grund,
der den Papst dazu veranlassen sollte, die amerikanischen Katho-
liken aufzufordern, denselben Weg einzuschlagen wie ihr Präsident,
das heißt, der Pius XII. veranlassen sollte, mit eigenem Beispiel
dabei voranzugehen und dies auch vor der amerikanischen Öffent-
lichkeit zu vertreten: der Grund nämlich, daß, nachdem soeben mit
Genehmigung der Regierung in Moskau ein orthodoxer Patriarch
gewählt und eine Wiederaufnahme der Gottesdienste gestattet
worden war, sich die religiöse Situation in Rußland gebessert habe.
Der Papst lehnte jedoch das Ersuchen ab. Taylor berichtete: „Seine
Heiligkeit bestätigte, daß der Heilige Stuhl den atheistischen Kom-
munismus und die totalitären Systeme verdamme, daß er jedoch
das russische Volk weiterhin mit einer ganz väterlichen Zuneigung
betrachte.“ In seiner Weihnachtsbotschaft 1941 bestätigte er diese
Weigerung, in dem von Roosevelt gewünschten Sinne Stellung zu
nehmen, in allgemeiner Form: „Wir lieben, dessen ist Gott Zeuge,
mit gleicher Liebe alle Völker ohne irgendeine Ausnahme;
um auch nur den Anschein des Parteigeistes zu vermeiden, haben wir
Uns bis jetzt die größte Zurückhaltung auferlegt229.“
Nun wird auch deutlich, welchen Sinn man dem Wort „Zurück-
haltung“, von dem die Gegner des Pazifisten Pius XII. soviel Auf-
hebens gemacht haben, in diesem Zusammenhang zu geben hat.
Der deutsche Botschafter in Madrid hatte zweifellos recht, als er
schrieb: „Der Papst habe hierfür [für das Verhalten Roosevelts]
kein großes Verständnis gezeigt und erneut betont, daß die Aus-
dehnung des Krieges das größte Verhängnis sein würde; er freue
229 Der vollständige Wortlaut des obenzitierten Textes findet sich in den Actes
de Pie XII., Bonne Presse, Bd. III. (Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden,
S. 62 f. — Anm. d. Übers.)ein würde; er freue
229 Der vollständige Wortlaut des obenzitierten Textes findet sich in den Actes
de Pie XII., Bonne Presse, Bd. III. (Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden,
S. 62 f. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---229 Der vollständige Wortlaut des obenzitierten Textes findet sich in den Actes
de Pie XII., Bonne Presse, Bd. III. (Zitiert nach Papst Pius XII., Reden,
S. 62 f. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

145
sich, daß die USA trotz dem allen noch neutral seien, da sie nur so
für die Wiederherstellung des Friedens mit dem Heiligen Stuhl zu-
sammen wirken könnten230.“ Alle Worte und alle Schriften des
Papstes gehen in diese Richtung: Wir glauben das unbestreitbar
bewiesen zu haben.
Und wenn Bergen am 11. Dezember schrieb, „in . . . vatikani-
schen Kreisen werde das Verhalten Roosevelts unverhohlen kriti-
siert. Der Präsident habe sich nicht nur nicht bemüht, die Erweite-
rung des Krieges auf andere Länder zu verhüten, sondern schließ-
lich auch sein eigenes Land in den Krieg hineinmanövriert231“, so
steht außer Zweifel, daß er mit dieser Darstellungsweise dem Hei-
ligen Stuhl eine von ihm persönlich gehegte Ansicht unterstellte,
doch hatte er unbestreitbar recht. Tatsächlich nämlich hatte Roose-
velt sich „nicht bemüht, die Erweiterung des Krieges auf andere
Länder zu verhüten“, und „auch sein eigenes Land in den Krieg
hineinmanövriert“. Seine Handelspolitik gegenüber Japan beweist
das in reichem Maße. Der Inhalt seines Schreibens an Pius XII. vom
3. September 1941 ist ein Geständnis, da ja nicht die geringste
Provokation seitens Deutschlands vorlag. Man kann sich nur wun-
dern, daß er trotz dieses Manövrierens dennoch am darauffolgen-
den 7. Dezember durch Pearl Harbor überrascht und genau wie
der Papst vor die vollendete Tatsache gestellt wurde.
Friedländer äußerte seine Ansicht zu dieser ganzen Angelegen-
heit, indem er die am 21. März 1942 vom deutschen Botschafter
Bergen an die Wilhelmstraße übermittelten Informationen hervor-
hob:
„Wie ich geheim erfahre, hat Heiliger Stuhl, anscheinend auf
Betreiben italienischer Regierung, tatsächlich durch seine diploma-
tischen Vertreter auf die an Konferenz von Rio de Janeiro beteilig-
ten Länder (d. h. die südamerikanischen Staaten, die Roosevelt
zum Abbruch ihrer diplomatischen Beziehungen zu den Achsen-
mächten und Japan zu veranlassen suchte) im Sinne Beibehaltung
Neutralität vor Zusammentritt Konferenz eingewirkt. Durch Mel-
dung United Press habe er sich jedoch zu Dementi durch Apostoli-
230 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 68
231 Ebd., S. 69ibehaltung
Neutralität vor Zusammentritt Konferenz eingewirkt. Durch Mel-
dung United Press habe er sich jedoch zu Dementi durch Apostoli-
230 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 68
231 Ebd., S. 69

--- PAGE BREAK ---ät vor Zusammentritt Konferenz eingewirkt. Durch Mel-
dung United Press habe er sich jedoch zu Dementi durch Apostoli-
230 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 68
231 Ebd., S. 69

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146
schen Delegaten in Washington gezwungen gesehen, um Vorwurf
Einmischung oder Parteinahme zu vermeiden232.“
Daß die apostolischen Nuntien in Südamerika wie Pius XII.
selbst gegen eine Ausweitung des Krieges waren, ist selbstverständ-
lich. Daß sie ebensowenig wie der Papst ein Hehl daraus machten,
ist ebenso selbstverständlich. Aber dann gleich von „Einwirken“
zu reden, dazu gehört doch wesentlich mehr, daher auch das De-
menti. Daß Pius XII. schließlich „auf Betreiben [der] italienischen
Regierung“ gehandelt und sich ihr gefügt haben soll, das übersteigt
nun wirklich das Begriffsvermögen, wenn man sich nur vergegen-
wärtigt, mit welcher Festigkeit er den Vorhaltungen begegnete,
die ihm seitens des Duce gemacht wurden233.
Wenn der deutsche Botschafter seiner Regierung eine derartige
Mitteilung machte, um eine Erklärung für einen Mißerfolg abzu-
geben, dann mag das noch hingehen. Wenn Friedländer diese Dar-
stellung jedoch als bare Münze ausgibt, so ist das ganz einfach eine
Unterstellung, die im übrigen seiner Manier entspricht, denn seine
gesamte Abhandlung besteht ja aus nichts anderem.
Bei dieser wie bei allen anderen Gelegenheiten verhielt Pius XII.
sich so, weil er gegen die Ausweitung des Krieges war, nicht aber,
um dem Duce eine Freude zu machen. Weil er um die Wiederher-
stellung des Friedens bemüht war, verhielt er sich so, und weil eine
Ausweitung des Krieges auf noch unbeteiligte Länder niemals der
beste Weg zu diesem Ziel ist.
IV. DIE DIPLOMATISCHEN BEMÜHUNGEN DES VATIKANS
Auf der Ebene der Praxis, das heißt der Diplomatie, bleibt nun
lediglich noch zu zeigen, in welcher Weise Pius XII., nachdem er
sich bemüht hatte, eine Ausweitung des Krieges zu verhindern,
gemäß seinen eigenen Worten „nach allen . . . Gelegenheiten, durch
die die . . . Völker . . . zum Abschluß eines gerechten und für alle
ehrenvollen Friedens hingeführt werden könnten, Ausschau“ hielt
und wie er sie nutzte.
232 Telegramm Bergens an Berlin vom 21. März 1942, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 70
233 Vgl. oben S. 142ehrenvollen Friedens hingeführt werden könnten, Ausschau“ hielt
und wie er sie nutzte.
232 Telegramm Bergens an Berlin vom 21. März 1942, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 70
233 Vgl. oben S. 142

--- PAGE BREAK ---hingeführt werden könnten, Ausschau“ hielt
und wie er sie nutzte.
232 Telegramm Bergens an Berlin vom 21. März 1942, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 70
233 Vgl. oben S. 142

--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
Eines muß zunächst eingeräumt werden: Niemals, obgleich er
nicht aufhörte, es zu wünschen und zu erhoffen, erhielt er — wie
Benedikt XV. während des Ersten Weltkrieges — die Gelegenheit,
während des Zweiten Weltkrieges eine diplomatische Frieden-
soffensive einzuleiten. Er konnte höchstens versuchen, die Parteien
miteinander in Kontakt zu bringen. Welche Gelegenheiten sich
ihm dazu boten, soll nachstehend in chronologischer Reihenfolge
dargelegt werden:
1. Nachdem der Polenfeldzug zu Hitlers Vorteil beendet wor-
den war, ersuchte dieser Mussolini, der immer noch neutral war
und sich daher in einer günstigeren Position befand, Sondierungen
für einen Kompromißfrieden vorzunehmen, der auf ein Polen
ohne deutsche, ukrainische und litauische Minderheiten abzielte.
Der Duce tat daraufhin zweierlei: Einerseits beauftragte er Mitte
September Il Popolo d’Italia mit der Veröffentlichung einer Artikel-
serie, durch die England und Frankreich gedrängt werden sollten,
einem Kompromiß auf dieser Grundlage zuzustimmen. Anderer-
seits ersuchte er den Grafen Ciano, seinen Außenminister, Pius XII.
die Bitte übermitteln zu lassen, seinen Einfluß in London und Paris
für einen solchen Friedensvorschlag geltend zu machen. Die beste
Darstellung der Bedingungen dieses Kompromisses erfolgte am
22. September in einem Artikel des Osservatore Romano. Diese
Veröffentlichung stellt allein schon einen unbestreitbaren Beweis
dafür dar, daß Pius XII. einem Friedensvorschlag in dieser Form
positiv gegenüberstand. Im übrigen war es ein sehr annehmbarer
Vorschlag, denn wäre er wirksam geworden, hätte das bedeutet,
da Rußland sich nicht im Kriegszustand befand, daß der Frieden
wiedergewonnen gewesen wäre.
Hitler hielt daraufhin am nachfolgenden 8. Oktober im Reichs-
tag eine Rede, die einen Vorschlag für einen allgemeinen Frieden
darstellte: keine Kriegsabsichten gegen Frankreich und England,
mit Ausnahme der Kolonien keine Revisionsforderungen hinsicht-
lich des Versailler Vertrages mehr, einen selbständigen polnischen
Staat nach Regelung des Problems der europäischen Minderheiten
im Rahmen einer allgemeinen Konferenz, Regelung der Juden-
frage, Abrüstung, europäische Zusammenarbeit . . . Nichts darun-
ter, was nicht recht und billig gewesen wäre. Der Vorschlag warMinderheiten
im Rahmen einer allgemeinen Konferenz, Regelung der Juden-
frage, Abrüstung, europäische Zusammenarbeit . . . Nichts darun-
ter, was nicht recht und billig gewesen wäre. Der Vorschlag war

--- PAGE BREAK ---en einer allgemeinen Konferenz, Regelung der Juden-
frage, Abrüstung, europäische Zusammenarbeit . . . Nichts darun-
ter, was nicht recht und billig gewesen wäre. Der Vorschlag war

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148
noch präziser und damit noch annehmbarer als der in den Artikeln
des Il Popolo d’Italia.
Zwei Autoren, Duclos und Mourin, behaupten, ohne jedoch
ein Datum dafür anzugeben, Msgr. Maglione, der Staatssekretär
des Vatikans, habe die Nuntien in Paris und London beauftragt,
den beiden Regierungen eine in diesem Sinne abgefaßte päpstliche
Botschaft zu überreichen. Der erste Verfasser spricht von einem
„Angebot der guten Dienste“ und charakterisiert dies folgender-
maßen: „Der Papst begnügt sich damit, seinem Wunsch nach einer
Wiederherstellung des Friedens in Europa Ausdruck zu geben, und
rät den beiden Nationen, die erste Gelegenheit zur Erreichung
dieses Zieles wahrzunehmen234.“ Und der zweite erklärt: „Die
Intervention des Vatikans blieb vage und vorsichtig. Er wollte
vermeiden, daß eine zu deutliche Stellungnahme die Katholiken
der kriegführenden Länder in einen Gewissenskonflikt brächte235.“
Aus den vom Verlag Bonne Presse herausgegebenen Actes de
Pie XII236 schließlich erfahren wir zum Thema der diplomatischen
Interventionen folgendes:
„Auf dem üblichen offiziellen Wege übernahm es Pius XII. (Ende
1939/Anfang 1940) auf Ersuchen einflußreicher politischer und mili-
tärischer Kreise Deutschlands, der anderen kriegführenden Partei
einige Fragen bezüglich der Kriegsziele und Friedensbedingungen
zu übermitteln“ und ferner: „Das Eingreifen des Papstes [man er-
gänze: in den Krieg] beschränkte sich auf diese Übermittlung.“
Damit gelangt man zu der Schlußfolgerung, daß es sich um jene
Art von sondierenden Noten handelte, die in der Diplomatie des
Vatikans Tradition sind. Mit anderen Worten: Bevor er seine
„guten Dienste“ anbot, wollte Pius XII. zunächst einmal wissen,
welche Aussichten auf Erfolg sein Vorschlag haben würde.
Er hatte keine. Von der Rednertribüne des Unterhauses herab
erscholl am 12. Oktober durch die Stimme Chamberlains die Ant-
wort auf die Friedensvorschläge Hitlers: „Der gegenwärtigen deut-
schen Regierung kann keinerlei Vertrauen entgegengebracht wer-
den.“ Am Tage darauf, dem 13. Oktober, zog Hitler den Schluß
234 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 121
235 Mourin, Les Tentatives de paix dans la Seconde Guerre mondiale, S. 21
236 Bd. I, S. 32egengebracht wer-
den.“ Am Tage darauf, dem 13. Oktober, zog Hitler den Schluß
234 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 121
235 Mourin, Les Tentatives de paix dans la Seconde Guerre mondiale, S. 21
236 Bd. I, S. 32

--- PAGE BREAK ---n.“ Am Tage darauf, dem 13. Oktober, zog Hitler den Schluß
234 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 121
235 Mourin, Les Tentatives de paix dans la Seconde Guerre mondiale, S. 21
236 Bd. I, S. 32

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
daraus, „daß Chamberlain sich durch die Ablehnung seines Frie-
densangebotes mit voller Überlegung für den Krieg entschieden
habe“.
Die päpstliche Initiative fand damit ihr Ende: Es bestand für
Pius XII. kein Grund mehr, seine guten Dienste anzubieten.
2. Am 7. November 1939 boten die Königin der Niederlande
und der König der Belgier den Kriegführenden ihre Vermittlung
an. Die Könige von Dänemark, Norwegen, Schweden und Rumä-
nien sowie der Präsident der finnischen Republik unterstützten
den Schritt. Der Vatikan ebenfalls237.
3. Wie oben erwähnt, richtete er im Namen der Deutschen eine
Anfrage an die andere kriegführende Partei nach deren Kriegszie-
len und Friedensbedingungen.
4. Am 11. März 1940 soll Ribbentrop, nach Camille Cianfarra,
im Verlauf seines Besuches in Rom, von dem bereits die Rede
war238, Pius XII. einen elf Punkte umfassenden Friedensplan un-
terbreitet und ihn gebeten haben, die Alliierten davon zu unter-
richten. Außer den Dementis, die von London, Paris, Berlin und
dem Vatikan selbst ausgegeben und von der damaligen Presse ver-
öffentlicht wurden239 gestattet jedoch nichts die Annahme, daß die-
ser Plan Pius XII. von Außenminister Ribbentrop tatsächlich un-
terbreitet wurde.
5. Am 28. Juni 1940, nach der Niederwerfung Frankreichs, über-
reichte Msgr. Maglione dem deutschen, britischen und italienischen
Botschafter beim Heiligen Stuhl folgende Note:
„Tief besorgt in Voraussicht der unzähligen Todesopfer und der
nicht wiedergutzumachenden Verheerungen, zu denen das — nun-
mehr nahe bevorstehende — Wiederaufflammen der Kriegshand-
lungen führen wird, möchte Heiliger Vater — aus eigener Initia-
tive und in der alleinigen Absicht, sein äußerstes für die Rettung
der Menschheit und der Zivilisation aufzubieten, überzeugt, daß
ein gerechter und ehrenvoller Friede im Wunsche der Völker liege
und daß die Verlängerung des Krieges leicht weitere Kämpfe und
Krisen nach sich ziehen könnte — sich an Regierungen Deutsch-
237 François Charles-Roux, Huit ans au Vatican, S. 355
238 Vgl. oben S. 70
239 Siehe die Zeitungen vom 13. bis 18. März 1940re Kämpfe und
Krisen nach sich ziehen könnte — sich an Regierungen Deutsch-
237 François Charles-Roux, Huit ans au Vatican, S. 355
238 Vgl. oben S. 70
239 Siehe die Zeitungen vom 13. bis 18. März 1940

--- PAGE BREAK ---nach sich ziehen könnte — sich an Regierungen Deutsch-
237 François Charles-Roux, Huit ans au Vatican, S. 355
238 Vgl. oben S. 70
239 Siehe die Zeitungen vom 13. bis 18. März 1940

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150
land, England und Italien wenden mit der Bitte, die Wege der ge-
meinsamen Verständigung zu versuchen, um zu einer Beendigung
des Konflikts zu gelangen. S. Heiligkeit wünscht jedoch vor Ein-
leitung dieses Schrittes, daß Ew. Exzellenz Ihre Regierung vertrau-
lich befragen, welche Aufnahme eine derartige Aufforderung des
Papstes bei ihr finden könnte240.“
Am 19. Juli machte Hitler Großbritannien in einer großen
Reichstagsrede ein offizielles Friedensangebot. Wie er darin erklär-
te, habe er weder den Wunsch, Großbritannien zu vernichten, noch
die geringste Absicht, das britische Kolonialreich anzutasten. Als
Antwort darauf verkündete Lord Halifax am 21. Juli in einer
Rundfunkansprache: „Wir werden weiterkämpfen, bis die Freiheit
gesichert ist241.“
Am 26. Juli teilte von Weizsäcker, der Staatssekretär im Aus-
wärtigen Amt, dem Nuntius Orsenigo die Antwort des Reiches
auf die Botschaft Pius’ XII. mit:
„ . . . Wir glaubten schon seit einiger Zeit über eine Antwort aus
London auf die Sondierung der Kurie in der Friedensfrage so weit
unterrichtet zu sein, daß die englische Haltung als eine negative
betrachtet werden müsse.
Die deutsche Äußerung zu der Sondierung der Kurie sei nun ja
faktisch mit der Rede des Führers vom 19. d. M. gegeben. Die Ant-
wort von Lord Halifax in seiner Radioansprache vom 21. bestä-
tige vollauf unsere Ansicht von der Halsstarrigkeit der britischen
Regierung. Offenbar wolle England eben den Krieg, den es dann
mit all seinen Schrecken haben würde242.“ Der Nuntius bemerkte
daraufhin, „nun sei eben wohl nichts mehr zu wollen. Zur Ehe-
schließung gehörten immer zwei242.“
Pius XII. sah infolgedessen von einer offiziellen Intervention ab.
6. Paul Duclos macht uns mit Angaben bekannt, die ihm die
Familie des verstorbenen Dr. Domenico Russo, der erklärter Anti-
faschist und Präsident des italienischen Befreiungskomitees war,
mitgeteilt habe. Russo, ein leidenschaftlicher Kämpfer für den Frie-
240 Actes de Pie XII., Bonne Presse, XXXII, S. 298, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 52
241 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 53
242 Aufzeichnung Weizsäckers v. 26. Juli 1940, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII.,
S. 53 f.esse, XXXII, S. 298, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 52
241 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 53
242 Aufzeichnung Weizsäckers v. 26. Juli 1940, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII.,
S. 53 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 52
241 Zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 53
242 Aufzeichnung Weizsäckers v. 26. Juli 1940, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII.,
S. 53 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

151
den, war befreundet mit Francesco Nitti, Msgr. Maglione und
einer (nicht namentlich erwähnten) Persönlichkeit aus der Umge-
bung Hitlers. Diesen Auskünften nach sollen sich Msgr. Maglione
und Dr. Domenico Russo im August 1942 einig geworden sein,
daß man es vielleicht bei Hitler durchsetzen könnte, einer Initia-
tive des Papstes zugunsten einer Einstellung der Kampfhandlun-
gen und einer allgemeinen Konferenz zuzustimmen. Russo habe
daraufhin Erkundigungen eingezogen, und im Oktober habe ihm
jene nicht näher bezeichnete Persönlichkeit im Auftrage Hitlers
für den Heiligen Stuhl folgende Auskunft erteilt: „Trotz des mir
seitens des Papstes zugefügten Unrechts bin ich, wenn der Papst
sich für den Frieden einsetzen will, bereit, mich mit dem Heiligen
Stuhl ins Einvernehmen zu setzen.“ Bevor jedoch die Antwort des
Vatikans erfolgt sei, habe die Landung der Amerikaner in Nord-
afrika am 8. November 1942 alles wieder in Frage gestellt. Dr.
Russo habe seine Bemühungen über die Schweiz und später über
Portugal wiederaufgenommen. Dort sei es ihm über einen seiner
Freunde gelungen, mit dem Foreign Office in Verbindung zu tre-
ten, das ihm am 22. Juni 1943 die folgende Antwort habe zuteil
werden lassen: „Wenn der Staatssekretär des Heiligen Stuhls an
unseren dortigen Gesandten, Sir Osborne, die Frage richtet, ob
England bereit sei, eine päpstliche Vermittlung anzunehmen, wird
Sir Osborne beauftragt sein, die Anfrage zu bejahen“. Dr. Russo
soll jedoch erst am 10. Juli 1943, dem Tag, an dem die Alliierten
in Sizilien landeten, nach Rom zurückgekehrt sein. „So kommt es“,
fügt Duclos hinzu, „daß der britische Gesandte Sir Osborne, als
Kardinal Maglione ihm die vereinbarte Frage stellt, antwortet,
die Weisungen, die er erhalten hätte, seien nicht mehr gültig243.“
Was soll man von all dem halten? Es ist sicher, daß Pius XII. ein
nicht weiter präzisiertes Ersuchen Hitlers, Schritte „zugunsten einer
Einstellung der Kampfhandlungen und einer allgemeinen Kon-
ferenz“ zu unternehmen, nur hätte ablehnen können, indem er
sich zu allen seinen früheren Äußerungen in Widerspruch setzte.
War ein solcher Vorschlag von Hitler geplant, und hat er ihn so
formuliert, daß Dr. Russo daraufhin seine Bemühungen bis zu der
243 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 124rüheren Äußerungen in Widerspruch setzte.
War ein solcher Vorschlag von Hitler geplant, und hat er ihn so
formuliert, daß Dr. Russo daraufhin seine Bemühungen bis zu der
243 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 124

--- PAGE BREAK ---n Widerspruch setzte.
War ein solcher Vorschlag von Hitler geplant, und hat er ihn so
formuliert, daß Dr. Russo daraufhin seine Bemühungen bis zu der
243 Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 124

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152
Frage Msgr. Magliones an Sir Osborne gehen ließ? Möglich ist es,
aber nicht sicher: Es gibt keinerlei Bestätigung hierfür außer den
Memoiren des Chefs der deutschen Abwehr, Schellenberg244, in
denen ohne irgendwelche Namensnennungen von Friedensver-
handlungen mit den Alliierten berichtet wird, die durch die Ver-
mittlung der Schweiz, des Vatikans und Portugals geführt worden
seien und denen sich auch Himmler angeschlossen habe, die jedoch
auf Grund der Landung der Amerikaner in Nordafrika am 8. No-
vember 1942 sowie der der Engländer und Amerikaner in Sizilien
am 10. Juli 1943 gescheitert seien. Handelt es sich um die gleichen
Verhandlungen? Auf alle Fälle scheinen die letzteren ohne Wissen
Hitlers geführt worden zu sein, und wenn dieser nun seinerseits
die gleichen Personen die gleichen Schritte hätte unternehmen las-
sen, dann müßte man zugeben, daß er in eine Falle gegangen wäre.
Alle diese Zusammenhänge sind sehr dunkel. Sie könnten, falls
die Auskünfte, die Paul Duclos von der Familie Dr. Domenico
Russos gegeben wurden, zutreffend sind, allerhöchstens eine Ver-
mittlungsbereitschaft des Heiligen Stuhls bezeugen, die auf diplo-
matischer Ebene jedoch keinerlei Folgen hatte.
7. Es sei hier ferner, wenn auch nur als Randbemerkung, auf ein
Schriftstück hingewiesen, das im Falle seiner Echtheit einen Frie-
densvorschlag Hitlers im März 1943 bezeugen würde: die Protest-
note gegen die Verhaftung der römischen Juden, die der öster-
reichische Rektor von Santa Maria dell’Anima, Msgr. Hudal, der ein
offiziöser Mittelsmann des Vatikans und demzufolge in die geheim-
sten Dinge eingeweiht war, am 16. Oktober 1943 an den Militär-
kommandanten von Rom, General Stahel, richtete. In dieser Note
heißt es: „Das Reich wird in Kürze für bestimmte Missionen die
Hilfe des Vatikans in Anspruch nehmen müssen. Bereits im März
wurden Schritte in dieser Richtung unternommen. Es wäre für die
Frage des Friedens sehr schade, wenn es auf Grund dieser Juden-
verfolgung (durch eine Verstimmung des Vatikans) zu einer Mei-
nungsverschiedenheit zwischen dem Vatikan und dem Reich kom-
men sollte245.“
244 Walter Schellenberg, Memoiren
245 Nach Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 221g (durch eine Verstimmung des Vatikans) zu einer Mei-
nungsverschiedenheit zwischen dem Vatikan und dem Reich kom-
men sollte245.“
244 Walter Schellenberg, Memoiren
245 Nach Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 221

--- PAGE BREAK ---mmung des Vatikans) zu einer Mei-
nungsverschiedenheit zwischen dem Vatikan und dem Reich kom-
men sollte245.“
244 Walter Schellenberg, Memoiren
245 Nach Duclos, Le Vatican, S. 221

--- PAGE BREAK ---

153
Die Echtheit dieser Note wird durch Hochhuth verbürgt, der
das Schreiben in seinem Stellvertreter anführt. Sie wird meines Wis-
sens von niemandem bestritten. Wenn man jedoch auf die Quellen
zurückgeht, stellt man fest, daß lediglich ein beim Vatikan akkre-
ditierter Journalist, Montefiore, die Note in einem — wie Duclos
sagt, noch unveröffentlichten — Manuskript erwähnt. Als Garan-
tie für die Echtheit ist das ziemlich dürftig. Und falls die Note
trotz allem authentisch ist, bezeugt sie lediglich eine Demarche Hit-
lers beim Vatikan, der dieser in keiner Weise stattgab.
8. Schließlich sei noch ein letzter diplomatischer Schritt erwähnt,
mit dem F. W. Deakin246 den Vatikan in Verbindung bringt und
der so, wie er von jenem Verfasser dargelegt wird, kaum authen-
tisch sein dürfte. Wie F. W. Deakin sagt, seien im Juli 1943 in den
politischen Kreisen Italiens viele der Ansicht gewesen, daß der
Augenblick gekommen sei, sich um eine politische Lösung für den
Krieg zu bemühen, da ihnen jede militärische Lösung ausgeschlos-
sen schien. Das stimmt, denn auch Graf Ciano gehörte zu ihnen,
wie aus seinen Tagebüchern hervorgeht. Daß der Duce, wie Deakin
hinzufügt, einer derartigen Lösung nicht ablehnend gegenüberge-
standen habe, selbst wenn sie nur auf eine Trennung Italiens von
Deutschland abzielte, ist trotzdem zweifelhaft — mehr als zweifel-
haft. Im folgenden sei der zeitliche Ablauf dieser Demarche ge-
zeigt:
Am 17. Juli soll Bastianini, Mussolinis Unterstaatssekretär im
Außenministerium, Msgr. Maglione aufgesucht haben, um ihm ein
Memorandum zu überreichen, in dem die Situation Italiens gegen-
über Deutschland und der Achsenmächte gegenüber den Alliierten
im Kriege dargelegt worden sei und das zum Ziel gehabt habe,
den Vatikan zu Sondierungen bei den Alliierten zu veranlassen,
um ihre Absichten bezüglich Italiens in Erfahrung zu bringen.
Da er mit der Zustimmung des Duce rechnete, hoffte er einen
Emissär zu den Engländern entsenden zu können. Seine Wahl
sei auf den römischen Bankier Luigi Fummi gefallen, der Bezie-
hungen zu dem Pierpont-Morgan-Konzern hatte und Vermö-
gensverwalter des Vatikans war. Plan der Demarche: Fummi
246 F. W. Deakin, Die brutale Freundschaft, S. 455 ff.Luigi Fummi gefallen, der Bezie-
hungen zu dem Pierpont-Morgan-Konzern hatte und Vermö-
gensverwalter des Vatikans war. Plan der Demarche: Fummi
246 F. W. Deakin, Die brutale Freundschaft, S. 455 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, der Bezie-
hungen zu dem Pierpont-Morgan-Konzern hatte und Vermö-
gensverwalter des Vatikans war. Plan der Demarche: Fummi
246 F. W. Deakin, Die brutale Freundschaft, S. 455 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
würde mit einem Diplomatenpaß des Vatikans nach Lissabon
reisen und von dort mit einem portugiesischen Visum nach Eng-
land. In London würde er im Namen Italiens, Rumäniens und
Ungarns eine Botschaft von Bastianini Eden persönlich aushändi-
gen. Einverständnis Msgr. Magliones (?). Am 18. Juli: Unterre-
dung Fummi — Duce (?). Am 19. (Datum wird als ungewiß ange-
geben): Abflug Fummis nach Lissabon. In Lissabon, wo er verge-
bens auf das britische Visum gewartet haben soll, verliert man
seine Spur derart, daß man nicht angeben kann, wann er nach
Rom zurückgekehrt ist. Seine Anwesenheit in Lissabon wird ange-
zeigt durch ein Telegramm des deutschen Botschafters in . . . Ma-
drid vom 26. Juli.
Der einzige Punkt, über den in dieser Angelegenheit nach der
Darstellungsweise F. W. Deakins Gewißheit besteht, ist dieses Tele-
gramm, das sich in den deutschen Archiven befindet. Es ist zumin-
dest verwunderlich, daß es aus Madrid kommt und daß die deut-
sche Botschaft in Lissabon offenbar nichts davon gewußt hat. Im
übrigen soll auf das Telegramm nur deshalb hingewiesen werden,
weil darin von Bemühungen des Vatikans die Rede ist, die darauf
abzielten, bei den Alliierten einen Sonderfrieden mit Italien allein
zu erlangen. Friedländer führt noch drei weitere Telegramme da-
für an: Das erste kommt aus Rom247 und ist mit dem Namen Weiz-
säckers versehen. Es nimmt Bezug auf ein (wie durch Zufall nicht
wiederaufgefundenes!) Schreiben des heutigen Papstes Paul VI.,
des damaligen Kardinals Montini, Unterstaatssekretär im Vatikan,
an den deutschen Botschafter, welches Weizsäcker die Schlußfolge-
rung gestattet: „Daß Italien ,gut aus dem Krieg herauskommen
werde‘, entspricht den Wünschen des Vatikans“ und Friedländer,
auch ohne jenen Brief zu kennen, wie er zugibt, die Folgerung er-
laubt: „ . . . darf man anscheinend [sic] . . . entnehmen, daß der
Unterstaatssekretär wahrscheinlich [sic] zu den Kreisen gehörte,
die einen separaten Waffenstillstand Italiens für wünschenswert
hielten.“ Das zweite kommt von der deutschen Botschaft in Paris248
247 Telegramm Weizsäckers an Berlin vom 3. August 1943, zitiert bei Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 131 f.
248 Telegramm Schleiers (von der deutschen Botschaft in Paris) vom 18. August
1943, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 133erlin vom 3. August 1943, zitiert bei Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 131 f.
248 Telegramm Schleiers (von der deutschen Botschaft in Paris) vom 18. August
1943, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 133

--- PAGE BREAK ---1943, zitiert bei Fried-
länder, Pius XII., S. 131 f.
248 Telegramm Schleiers (von der deutschen Botschaft in Paris) vom 18. August
1943, zitiert bei Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 133

--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
und behauptet, daß nach den Vorstellungen des Vatikans der Friede m
it Italien ein „erster Schritt zu Einigung Angelsachsen mit
den Deutschen werden (soll), um europäisch-amerikanisch-christ-
liche Einheitsfront gegen Asien zu schaffen“, ohne daß jedoch ein
Beleg dafür gegeben wird. Das dritte stammt ebenfalls von der
deutschen Botschaft in Paris249 und behauptet einer Information
aus Lissabon zufolge (!), daß „der Papst durch seine Vertreter in
England und Amerika die größten Anstrengungen mache, um zu
erreichen, daß Italien ein ehrenvoller Friede gewährt würde“. Ein
viertes Telegramm, das von der deutschen Botschaft in Paris aus-
geht250, unterrichtet Berlin nicht über Anstrengungen des Vatikans
zur Erreichung eines Separatfriedens der Westmächte mit Italien,
sondern darüber, „daß in den Kreisen des Vatikans eine stärkere
Neigung erkennbar wäre, die Achsenmächte und die Anglo-Ameri-
kaner einer Annäherung zum (gemeinsamen) Kampf gegen den
Bolschewismus entgegenzuführen251“ und daß „der Papst . . . mit
allen Mitteln bestrebt (sei), Frieden zwischen Deutschland und
England anzubahnen“.
Doch man kann keinerlei Werturteil über die Telegramme fäl-
len, wenn man sich nicht zunächst die Situation vergegenwärtigt,
mit der sich die Verfasser auseinanderzusetzen hatten.
Das Jahr 1943 war in sämtlichen europäischen Hauptstädten
durch eine intensive diplomatische Aktivität gekennzeichnet, die
durch die militärischen Ereignisse ausgelöst worden war: durch
den deutsch-italienischen Zusammenbruch in Nordafrika, der im
August 1942 begonnen hatte und sich von Niederlage zu Nieder-
lage bis zur Befreiung Italiens durch die Alliierten fortsetzte, durch
249 Ebd.
250 Telegramm Schleiers an Berlin vom 31. Juli 1943, zitiert bei Friedländer,
Pius XII., S. 131
251 Nach dem Telegramm stammt diese Information von Herrn von Krug, der
sie, wie er sagte, von Präsident Laval bekam. Laval erhielt sie von einem
seiner Mitarbeiter und dieser wiederum von dem Nuntius in Vichy Msgr.
Valerio Valeri. Die Weiterleitung der Information besorgte eine fünfte Per-
son namens Schleier: Der Metzger sagt es der Bäckerfrau, diese sagt es dem
Apotheker . . .
Die zweite Information wird in folgender Form mitgeteilt: „Wie Ge-
sandter von Krug ergänzend . . . erfuhr . . . “, das heißt ohne Quellenangabe.
Und zu guter Letzt gibt Friedländer dieses Telegramm mit größter Ernst-ation wird in folgender Form mitgeteilt: „Wie Ge-
sandter von Krug ergänzend . . . erfuhr . . . “, das heißt ohne Quellenangabe.
Und zu guter Letzt gibt Friedländer dieses Telegramm mit größter Ernst-

--- PAGE BREAK ---der Form mitgeteilt: „Wie Ge-
sandter von Krug ergänzend . . . erfuhr . . . “, das heißt ohne Quellenangabe.
Und zu guter Letzt gibt Friedländer dieses Telegramm mit größter Ernst-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156
die Landung der Amerikaner in Casablanca (8. November 1942)
und durch den Fall von Stalingrad (2. Februar 1943), den Beginn
des deutschen Zusammenbruchs an der Ostfront. Als erster scheint
sich Reichsaußenminister von Ribbentrop der Wende in der mili-
tärischen Lage bewußt geworden zu sein. Im November 1942, nach
der Landung der Amerikaner in Nordafrika, legte er dem Führer
nahe, über die sowjetische Gesandtin in Stockholm, Madame Kol-
lontai, mit Stalin Verbindung aufzunehmen. Die abschlägige Ant-
wort, die er daraufhin einstecken mußte, hinderte ihn, wie er sagte,
nicht, im Februar 1943, nach dem Fall Stalingrads, einen erneuten
Vorstoß zu unternehmen, bei dem er jedoch trotz der von Roose-
velt inspirierten Erklärung von Casablanca, in der dieser die be-
dingungslose Kapitulation der Achsenmächte forderte, ebensowe-
nig Erfolg hatte. Ribbentrop fügte hinzu, daß er sich dieses Mal
über alles hinweggesetzt und Peter Kleist mit dieser Mission be-
auftragt habe252, in der Überzeugung, die Russen, die es einem
Machiavellismus der Anglo-Amerikaner zuschrieben, daß noch
keine zweite Front im Westen eröffnet worden war, und die daher
nicht mehr an die Errichtung einer solchen glaubten, zu einem Ver-
gleich veranlassen zu können. Peter Kleist bestätigt dies253.
Wie es scheint, erfolgte die erste Reaktion Mussolinis anläßlich
des Besuches von Reichsmarschall Göring in Rom am 4. Dezember
haftigkeit wieder, so als hätte er gar nicht bemerkt, daß die beiden Infor-
mationen nicht übereinstimmen: denn schließlich, ist „in den Kreisen des
Vatikans eine stärkere Neigung erkennbar“? Oder ist es der Papst selbst, der
 „mit allen Mitteln bestrebt“ ist? Es ist klar, daß, wenn es sich um den Papst
handelt, es sich nicht mehr nur um „eine stärkere Neigung“, sondern um die
überwiegende Tendenz handelt. Der erste Satz sagt jedoch ganz klar, daß sie
nicht überwiegt. Aus diesem Grunde widersprechen sich die beiden Sätze.
Wenn überhaupt irgendjemand „mit allen Mitteln bestrebt“ ist, etwas zu tun,
dann ist es im vorliegenden Fall der Verfasser dieses Telegramms, der be-
strebt ist, den Empfänger davon zu überzeugen, daß Pius XII. für eine Um-
kehrung der Bündnisse sei: und zwar indem er das auf Grund einer Infor-
mation aus fünfter Hand beweist, die überdies sehr weit davon entfernt ist,
diese Behauptung zu stützen, nämlich durch eine Reihe von Informationen,
die um so unerschütterlicher als sicher hingestellt werden, als sie nur unge-
sicherte Referenzen („Der Nuntius habe . . . erwidert“) oder sogar überhaupt
keine haben. Eine letzte Bemerkung: dieser Schleier mußte besonders qualifiziert
sein, um die Telegramme der deutschen Botschaft in Paris zu verfassen: er kennt
nicht einmal den genauen Namen des Informanten, den er nennt, der nicht „von
Krug“ ist, sondern „Krug von Nidda“!
252 Nach Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression, amerikanische Ausgabe, Ergänzungsband
B, S. 1203 f.
253 Peter Kleist, Zwischen Hitler und Stalin 1939—1945der nicht „von
Krug“ ist, sondern „Krug von Nidda“!
252 Nach Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression, amerikanische Ausgabe, Ergänzungsband
B, S. 1203 f.
253 Peter Kleist, Zwischen Hitler und Stalin 1939—1945

--- PAGE BREAK ---“ ist, sondern „Krug von Nidda“!
252 Nach Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression, amerikanische Ausgabe, Ergänzungsband
B, S. 1203 f.
253 Peter Kleist, Zwischen Hitler und Stalin 1939—1945

--- PAGE BREAK ---

157
1942. Wie Graf Ciano berichtet, habe ihm der Duce eine kurze
Zusammenfassung der unter vier Augen geführten Unterredung
der beiden Männer diktiert: „Der Duce glaubt, daß auf eine oder
die andere Weise das Kapitel des Krieges gegen Rußland, der kei-
nen Zweck mehr hat, abgeschlossen werden muß. Falls es möglich
scheint, zu einem zweiten Brest-Litowsk zu gelangen (das man
haben könnte, indem man Rußland territoriale Entschädigungen in
Mittelasien gibt), muß dafür gesorgt werden, eine Defensivlinie zu
errichten, die jede feindliche Initiative zerschlägt, und zwar bei ge-
ringstem Einsatz der Achsenkräfte. Göring sagt, dies wäre Hitlers
Ideal254.“
In Italien mischte sich die öffentliche Meinung ein, vor allem
nach dem Fall von Stalingrad: So kam es im März in Turin und
Mailand zu bedeutenden Streiks. Schließlich löste die militärische
Lage im Großrat des Faschismus jene Meinungsverschiedenheiten
aus, die zum Sturz Mussolinis führten. Die Rolle, die der italieni-
sche König, der nur gezwungenermaßen den Faschismus akzep-
tiert und dem Krieg zugestimmt hatte, in dieser Angelegenheit
spielte, ist zu bekannt und zu wenig umstritten, als daß wir dabei
verweilen wollen. Das gleiche gilt für die von Graf Ciano. Über
Krieg und Frieden gab es in Italiens öffentlicher Meinung wenig-
stens vier verschiedene Strömungen: diejenigen, die 1943 für einen
Sonderfrieden mit dem Osten eintraten; die Befürworter eines Son-
derfriedens mit dem Westen, aber eines Friedens, an dem die Ach-
senmächte, nicht nur Italien allein, beteiligt sein würden; die Be-
fürworter eines Separatfriedens Italiens mit dem Westen; und die
Radikalen, die für ein Verbleiben an der Seite Deutschlands plä-
dierten. Eine reiche italienische Memoirenliteratur legt davon
Zeugnis ab, daß alle diese Strömungen angesehene Vertreter in den
politisch führenden Kreisen hatten: Das Buch jener schlichten und
würdigen Frau, Rachele Mussolini255, der Ehefrau des Duce, gehört
zu diesem Schrifttum.
254 Journal du Comte Ciano, Neufchatel, S. 532, unter dem Datum vom 6. De-
zember 1942. (Zitiert nach Deakin, Die brutale Freundschaft, S. 111 f. —
Anm. d. Übers.) Man beachte, daß Göring mit Ribbentrop übereinstimmt und
nicht mit Hitler.
255 Rachele Mussolini, Ma Vie avec le Duce1942. (Zitiert nach Deakin, Die brutale Freundschaft, S. 111 f. —
Anm. d. Übers.) Man beachte, daß Göring mit Ribbentrop übereinstimmt und
nicht mit Hitler.
255 Rachele Mussolini, Ma Vie avec le Duce

--- PAGE BREAK ---Deakin, Die brutale Freundschaft, S. 111 f. —
Anm. d. Übers.) Man beachte, daß Göring mit Ribbentrop übereinstimmt und
nicht mit Hitler.
255 Rachele Mussolini, Ma Vie avec le Duce

--- PAGE BREAK ---

158
Die bedeutendste dieser Strömungen war die der Anhänger eines
Separatfriedens zwischen der Achse und dem Westen. Ihre Führer
brachten es fertig, Ungarn, Rumänien und die Türkei in ihr Fahr-
wasser zu ziehen und Spanien und Portugal positiv für dieses Ziel
zu interessieren; ferner bemühten sie sich um die Unterstützung
des Vatikans. Die Verfechter der Trennung Italiens von Deutsch-
land, die nur eine kleine Gruppe darstellten, weil Deutschland
praktisch bei der geringsten Willensregung dieser Art ganz Italien
besetzt hätte, was Italien auf alle Fälle zu einer Weiterführung des
Krieges bewog, taten das gleiche. In dieser Form übrigens rollte
nach dem Sturz Mussolinis das Unternehmen Badoglio ab. Sämt-
liche Reden Mussolinis, sämtliche Berichte über seine Unter-
redungen mit Hitler beweisen, daß er für einen Sonderfrieden der
Achsenmächte mit dem Osten eintrat und daß er wiederholt bei
Hitler in diesem Sinne vorstellig wurde. Aus diesem Grunde dürfte
die Äußerung Deakins, der Duce habe der Initiative Bastianinis
für einen Sonderfrieden Italiens mit dem Westen seine Zustim-
mung gegeben, nur wenig oder gar nicht den Tatsachen entspre-
chen. Auch Msgr. Maglione dürfte sich kaum dieser Initiative an-
geschlossen und in Kenntnis der Sachlage dem Bankier Fummi
einen vatikanischen Paß bewilligt haben. Bastianini berichtet es
zwar256, doch nach dem Kriege mußte er sich schließlich in Italien
aus der Affäre ziehen, und da der Duce wie auch Msgr. Maglione
tot waren, konnten sie ihm nicht widersprechen. Andererseits ge-
stattet keine einzige der durch unbestreitbare Dokumente bezeug-
ten Reden, Schriften oder Handlungen des Papstes oder Msgr.
Magliones die Annahme, daß sie einer Aktion für einen Sonderfrie-
den zwischen den Westmächten und Italien allein ihre Zustimmung
gegeben hätten. Sämtliche Äußerungen beweisen, daß sie nicht ein-
mal für einen von den Achsenmächten in diesem Sinne ausgehan-
delten Frieden mit dem Westen, sondern für einen allgemeinen
Frieden waren. Und das Telegramm des deutschen Botschafters in
Madrid? Es ist möglich, daß sich der Bankier Fummi zum angege-
benen Zeitpunkt in Lissabon befand — es ist sogar kaum zu be-
streiten. Doch Fummi war Vermögensverwalter des Vatikans, und
in dieser Eigenschaft reiste er viel mit einem Paß des Vatikans und
256 Giuseppe Bastianini, Uomini, cose, fatties ist sogar kaum zu be-
streiten. Doch Fummi war Vermögensverwalter des Vatikans, und
in dieser Eigenschaft reiste er viel mit einem Paß des Vatikans und
256 Giuseppe Bastianini, Uomini, cose, fatti

--- PAGE BREAK ---u be-
streiten. Doch Fummi war Vermögensverwalter des Vatikans, und
in dieser Eigenschaft reiste er viel mit einem Paß des Vatikans und
256 Giuseppe Bastianini, Uomini, cose, fatti

--- PAGE BREAK ---

159
der Zustimmung der italienischen Regierung, was genügt, seine
Unterredung mit dem Duce vor seiner Abreise aus Rom zu er-
klären. Der deutsche Botschafter in Lissabon schließlich hat Fum-
mis Anwesenheit in jener Hauptstadt zweifellos deswegen nicht ge-
meldet, weil er den Zweck dieser Anwesenheit kannte. Wenn nun
dieser Zweck der von Bastianini angegebene gewesen wäre, so be-
steht kein Zweifel daran, daß der Führer in dem Augenblick, in
dem er das Telegramm des deutschen Botschafters aus Madrid er-
halten und von diesem Verrat seines italienischen Partners erfah-
ren hätte, ihm gegenüber in einen Zorn geraten wäre, dessen Echo
noch heute zu hören sein würde. Aber das trat keinesfalls ein. Im
Gegenteil, man weiß, was er tat, um den von Badoglio gefangen-
genommenen Mussolini zu retten. Das beweist, daß er sowohl über
den Zweck der Reisen des Bankiers Fummi wie auch darüber orien-
tiert war, welchen Glauben er dem Telegramm seines Botschafters
in Madrid beizumessen hatte.
Diese nach Westen gerichtete diplomatische Aktivität, die sich
von der Hoffnung nährte, den Vatikan daran zu beteiligen, ge-
winnt eine ganz besondere Bedeutung, wenn man weiß, daß sie
noch durch eine andere erhöht wurde, die von der deutschen Op-
position gegen das Naziregime ausging. Diese Opposition war be-
strebt, von Pius XII. die Unterstützung der deutschen Katholi-
ken für jene Bewegung zu erlangen, die sie in Deutschland gegen
Hitler zu organisieren versuchte, und sie hatte gerade erreicht, daß
einer ihrer Anhänger, von Weizsäcker — nach ihrer Aussage wie
auch nach der Weizsäckers —, im Juli 1943 zum Botschafter in
Rom ernannt wurde. Infolgedessen erhalten auch die Telegramme
Weizsäckers einen ganz besonderen Sinn. Aus dem, was er über
seine Rolle sagte, und aus dem, was die bisher veröffentlichten
Dokumente bezeugen, geht hervor, daß er weit mehr von der
Hoffnung getragen war, Pius XII. möge zugunsten der Verhand-
lungen für einen Sonderfrieden zwischen den Achsen- und den
Westmächten Stellung nehmen, als von jener, den Papst zu bewe-
gen, bei den deutschen Katholiken die Opposition gegen Hitler zu
unterstützen. Diese Hoffnung, die er als auf Realitäten gegründet
hinstellt, die in Wirklichkeit aber nichts anderes sind als reine Kon-
struktionen eines im Grunde völlig anders ausgerichteten Gei-u
unterstützen. Diese Hoffnung, die er als auf Realitäten gegründet
hinstellt, die in Wirklichkeit aber nichts anderes sind als reine Kon-
struktionen eines im Grunde völlig anders ausgerichteten Gei-

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Hoffnung, die er als auf Realitäten gegründet
hinstellt, die in Wirklichkeit aber nichts anderes sind als reine Kon-
struktionen eines im Grunde völlig anders ausgerichteten Gei-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

160
stes spiegelt sich in seinen Telegrammen. Er wußte überdies,
daß er durch den Versuch, Ribbentrop und Hitler dahin zu brin-
gen, diese Gedankengebäude ernst zu nehmen, einerseits seine
Rolle zur Geltung brachte und andererseits absolut nichts aufs
Spiel setzte.
Denn welche Vorstellungen hegten Ribbentrop und Hitler im
Jahre 1943 von den diplomatischen Möglichkeiten? Wie wir wissen,
hatte Ribbentrop, obwohl Hitler gegen einen solchen Plan war,
nach dem Fall Stalingrads einen seiner Abteilungsleiter, Peter
Kleist, beauftragt, mit dem Osten Kontakt aufzunehmen, da die-
ser dort über die meisten und verschiedenartigsten Beziehungen
verfügte. Durch Peter Kleist ist überdies bekannt, daß bis Okto-
ber 1943257, sofern nur sein Chef die Zustimmung Hitlers erhalten
hätte, Aussichten für einen Separatfrieden der Achsenmächte mit
dem Osten bestanden258. Daß Hitler nichts von einem solchen Vor-
haben hielt, ist leicht begreiflich. Denn schließlich war die national-
sozialistische Bewegung aus dem Gegensatz zum Bolschewismus
entstanden, und nur der bis zum äußersten gehende Wirklich-
keitssinn der Deutschen hatte es Hitler ermöglicht, sie ohne irgend-
welche Schwierigkeiten dahin zu bringen, den deutsch-sowjetischen
Pakt vom 23. August 1939 zu akzeptieren.
Konnte Hitler es sich erlauben, das Unternehmen vom 23.
August 1939 zu wiederholen? Er glaubte es nicht, und alles, was
bis jetzt über ihn bekannt ist, beweist seine Überzeugung, daß ein
solches Unternehmen angesichts der durch den Fall von Stalingrad
geschaffenen militärischen Situation den sicheren Triumph des Bol-
schewismus in Europa bedeutet hätte. Vor Stalingrad und bis zu
Stalingrad stand diese Frage nicht zur Debatte: Er war sicher, Ruß-
land zu vernichten und dadurch die Westmächte zu einem Ver-
gleich zu veranlassen. Sein Irrtum nach Stalingrad bestand darin,
zu glauben, daß er, wie General de Gaulle am 18. Juni 1940 von
Frankreich sagte, nur eine Schlacht verloren habe und daß es ihm
gelingen würde, die Situation zu bereinigen, und er die Westmächte
zwingen würde, ihre Forderung nach einer bedingungslosen Kapi-
tulation zurückzunehmen. Daher die diplomatischen Offensiven,
257 Datum der Konferenz der Alliierten in Moskau
258 Kleist, Zwischen Hitler und Staline, ihre Forderung nach einer bedingungslosen Kapi-
tulation zurückzunehmen. Daher die diplomatischen Offensiven,
257 Datum der Konferenz der Alliierten in Moskau
258 Kleist, Zwischen Hitler und Stalin

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch einer bedingungslosen Kapi-
tulation zurückzunehmen. Daher die diplomatischen Offensiven,
257 Datum der Konferenz der Alliierten in Moskau
258 Kleist, Zwischen Hitler und Stalin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
für die er Ribbentrop im Westen vollen Spielraum ließ, ohne je-
doch zu hoffen, daß sie Erfolg haben könnten, solange er die Situ-
ation an der Ostfront nicht zu seinen Gunsten wiederhergestellt
haben würde, und deren Drehscheibe nur der Vatikan sein konnte:
Sie hatten zumindest den Vorteil, das Terrain vorzubereiten für
den Tag, an dem der Sieg seiner Waffen an der Ostfront die West-
mächte zum Verhandeln zwingen würde.
Doch die Einstellung des Vatikans zu all dem?
Was den Frieden angeht, läßt sich von Pius XII. nicht ein einzi-
ger Text anführen, der seine Bereitschaft erkennen ließe, als Ver-
mittler für einen Frieden aufzutreten, der nicht ein allgemeiner
Frieden wäre. Dies schließt seinerseits jede Absicht aus, für eine
Wiederherstellung des Friedens im Westen zu intervenieren, durch
die einem der Kriegführenden die Möglichkeit gegeben würde,
den Krieg im Osten fortzusetzen, oder sich für eine schlichte und
einfache Umkehrung der Bündnisse einzusetzen, geschweige denn
für einen Sonderfrieden Italiens mit den Westmächten, der bei der
militärischen Situation des Jahres 1943 an dem Tatbestand nichts
ändern, daher die Sache des Friedens in keiner Weise fördern und
nur unmotiviert sein konnte. Die von Friedländer angeführten
Telegramme erwähnen nur Gedanken oder Absichten, die Pius XII.
willkürlich unterstellt wurden, und Friedländer hütet sich jedes-
mal, wenn er eines davon zitiert, es mit den wirklichen Gedanken
und Absichten Pius’ XII. zu vergleichen, so wie dieser sie selbst
hundertmal ausgedrückt und wiederholt hat, übrigens oft am glei-
chen oder nahezu gleichen Tage wie das Telegramm, das das Ge-
genteil aussagt.
Nach all dem kann sich nur eine einzige Frage erheben: Wem
soll man glauben? Dem Papst oder einer so um seine Karriere be-
sorgten Persönlichkeit wie von Bergen259 einer so zwielichtigen Ge-
stalt wie von Weizsäcker260 oder einem so obskuren — und so
dummen261 — Menschen wie jenem Herrn Schleier? Wenn dies
wirklich die einzige Frage ist, die sich erhebt, so ist es leider auch,
wie man gemeinhin sagt, eine Frage, „die man nicht stellt“.
259 Vgl. oben S. 70 ff.
260 Vgl. oben S. 159
261 Vgl. oben Anm. 251.wirklich die einzige Frage ist, die sich erhebt, so ist es leider auch,
wie man gemeinhin sagt, eine Frage, „die man nicht stellt“.
259 Vgl. oben S. 70 ff.
260 Vgl. oben S. 159
261 Vgl. oben Anm. 251.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Frage ist, die sich erhebt, so ist es leider auch,
wie man gemeinhin sagt, eine Frage, „die man nicht stellt“.
259 Vgl. oben S. 70 ff.
260 Vgl. oben S. 159
261 Vgl. oben Anm. 251.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162
Im übrigen fühlt Friedländer wohl von selbst, wie schwach,
wenn nicht lächerlich seine Argumentation ist. Er stellt gewisse
Dokumente als „bedeutsam“ für die auf der Furcht vor dem Bol-
schewismus beruhenden pronazistischen Gefühle Pius’ XII. hin
oder zeigt, wie der Papst um den Frieden im Westen besorgt war,
um Hitler die Möglichkeit zu geben, den Bolschewismus zu ver-
nichten, und daß er die sogenannten Kriegsverbrechen des Natio-
nalsozialismus, und zwar nur die, von denen die Juden betroffen
waren, nicht deutlicher verurteilt habe, weil er Hitler in jenem
Kampf nicht schwächen wollte. Jedesmal, wenn er ein derartiges
Dokument zitiert, gibt Friedländer dem Bericht historische Be-
glaubigung durch Formeln, die der Leser bereits kennt262, wie:
„es ist möglich, daß . . . , es ist plausibel . . . , es scheint, daß . . . ,
das ist nur eine Hypothese, aber . . . “. Einflüsterungsformeln par
excellence. Er versteigt sich sogar zu einer Bemerkung wie: „Wir
machen darauf aufmerksam, daß wir kein Dokument aus dem
Jahre 1940 besitzen, das auf eine solche Absicht hinweist, und daß
es sich lediglich um eine Hypothese unsererseits handelt263“, die
um so mehr auf schlichter und einfacher Verleumdung beruht, als
Friedländer auch für die Zeit nach 1940 kein Dokument beibringt.
Dies nennt sein Manager, Alfred Grosser, eine „Interpretation
der Texte . . . klug, gediegen und scharfsinnig [sic] . . . — manch-
mal so sehr, daß sie durch Schlußfolgerungen eine dunkle oder bis-
her falsch gedeutete Formel aufhellt264“. Was die Schlußfolgerung
erlaubt: „Die Dokumente, die Friedländer vorlegt, machen es bei-
nahe zur Gewißheit [sic], daß man im Vatikan mit dem Gedan-
ken eines Umsturzes der Allianzen oder mindestens eines separa-
ten Friedens mit dem Westen gespielt hat265.“
Nein! Man verurteilt keinen Menschen auf Grund von Vorgän-
gen, die nur „möglich“ oder „plausibel“ sind, die nur wahr „schei-
nen“, die nur lediglich eine Hypothese oder nur beinahe gewiß sind.
Im Rechtswesen jedenfalls gibt es kein Gericht — abgesehen natür-
lich von den Sondergerichten, wir sind ja leider noch nicht aus der
262 Vgl. oben S. 75
263 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 53
264 Ebd., S. 165, Nachwort von Alfred Grosser
265 Ebd., S. 166bgesehen natür-
lich von den Sondergerichten, wir sind ja leider noch nicht aus der
262 Vgl. oben S. 75
263 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 53
264 Ebd., S. 165, Nachwort von Alfred Grosser
265 Ebd., S. 166

--- PAGE BREAK ---von den Sondergerichten, wir sind ja leider noch nicht aus der
262 Vgl. oben S. 75
263 Friedländer, Pius XII., S. 53
264 Ebd., S. 165, Nachwort von Alfred Grosser
265 Ebd., S. 166

--- PAGE BREAK ---

163
Zeit der Sondergerichte heraus! —, das einen Menschen, wer es
auch immer sein mag, auf in dieser Form vorgebrachte Anklagen
hin verurteilen würde, selbst wenn die Verteidigung ihnen nichts
Präzises entgegensetzen könnte. Und im vorliegenden Fall fände
sich um so weniger eines, als man nicht sagen kann, daß es „Ver-
mutungen“ sind, da man, wie der Leser soeben gesehen hat, ihnen
eine große Anzahl authentischer und unumstößlicher Texte und
Fakten entgegenhalten kann, die beweisen, daß Pius XII., nach-
dem er vergeblich alles versucht hatte, was in seiner Macht stand,
nicht nur niemals einen Separatfrieden — sei es Italiens allein,
sei es der Achse mit den Westmächten — herbeizuführen hoffte
oder suchte, sondern im Gegenteil unaufhörlich und systematisch
auf einen allgemeinen, gerechten, ehrenvollen und dauerhaften
Frieden hinzuarbeiten bemüht war, der sämtliche Kriegführenden,
ohne Ausnahme, eingeschlossen hätte.
Alle seine Äußerungen und alle seine Handlungen vor dem
Kriege und während des ganzen Krieges waren von dieser Hoff-
nung oder diesem Grundsatz diktiert und nicht von jenen gemei-
nen und niedrigen Empfindungen, die man ihm durch unehren-
hafte stilistische Kunstgriffe unterstellte und die nicht auf erwie-
sene Tatsachen gegründet sind, sondern einzig und allein auf das,
was Roger Peyrefitte „Botschaftsklatsch“ nennt266.
Denn er hat gesprochen und gehandelt. Wenig gehandelt, das
ist wahr, weil nämlich die Umstände ihm niemals mehr zu tun er-
laubten. Doch er hat viel gesagt, ungeheuer viel gesprochen, und
zwar stets für den Frieden. Wenn es dagegen um den Krieg ging,
schwieg er, doch nur dann, und zwar beharrlich. Damit erhält der
Ausdruck „das Schweigen Pius’ XII.“ seine ganze und einzig mög-
liche Bedeutung — jener Ausdruck, den alle oder nahezu alle Zei-
tungen der Welt Monate um Monate hindurch ihren Lesern be-
reitwilligst, und zwar meistens auf der Titelseite und mit großen
Überschriften, präsentierten: Eine Anklage, von der sie wußten,
daß sie grundlos war, und der sie nur zu einem Siege verhelfen
konnten durch eine von vornherein gesicherte Propagandakam-
pagne, die sich gegen einen Mann des Friedens richtete und von
266 Roger Peyrefitte, Les Ambassades und La Fin des Ambassadesiege verhelfen
konnten durch eine von vornherein gesicherte Propagandakam-
pagne, die sich gegen einen Mann des Friedens richtete und von
266 Roger Peyrefitte, Les Ambassades und La Fin des Ambassades

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164
Männern betrieben wurde, deren besonderes Kennzeichen darin
besteht, daß sie als krankhafte Deutschenhasser, Freunde der So-
wjets und fanatische Kriegstreiber den Krieg zunächst mit voller
Absicht gewollt haben und ihn dann mit Versessenheit bis zum
Ende hin wollten, trotz all der höchst annehmbaren Friedenschan-
cen, die sich ihnen boten. Männer, die überdies hinterher durch
die etwa 50 Millionen Toten und die Milliarden und aber Milliar-
den von Zerstörungen, die sie auf dem Gewissen haben, nicht sehr
in Verlegenheit gebracht zu sein scheinen. Mit einem Wort: Män-
ner, die bereit sind, wieder von neuem damit anzufangen. Gerech-
terweise muß man zugeben, daß Rolf Hochhuth und Saul Fried-
länder zu jung sind, als daß diese Anklage sie persönlich betreffen
könnte: Sie gehören zum Clan, und sie schlagen sich für den Clan.
Was man von ihren Managern und ihren Anhängern zu halten hat,
möge der Leser dem voraufgehenden Kapitel entnehmen.
Der Vollständigkeit halber bleiben jetzt noch die politischen
Hintergründe des Unternehmens „Stellvertreter“ zu analysieren.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kapitel III
Die politischen Hintergründe des Unternehmens

--- PAGE BREAK ---ber bleiben jetzt noch die politischen
Hintergründe des Unternehmens „Stellvertreter“ zu analysieren.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kapitel III
Die politischen Hintergründe des Unternehmens

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167
I. DER VERSAILLER VERTRAG ALS URSACHE
Der Stellvertreter ist nichts weiter als ein politisches Unterneh-
men. Um sich davon zu überzeugen, genügt es, die Behauptungen
Rolf Hochhuths, seiner Manager und seiner Anhänger in ihren
historischen Zusammenhang einzuordnen. Dazu müssen wir kurz
zurückblenden, zumindest bis zur Machtergreifung Hitlers in
Deutschland und auf die Rolle, die das religiöse Moment dabei
spielte.
Der Versailler Vertrag hatte mit seinen wirtschaftlichen und
finanziellen Klauseln Deutschland eine eiserne Zwangsjacke ange-
legt. Nachdem der Vertrag die deutsche Wirtschaft zerschlagen
und unfähig gemacht hatte, auch nur das Geringste zu produzie-
ren, was für den Export geeignet gewesen wäre, nahm er Deutsch-
land außerdem für den Tag, an dem es wieder erstarkt sein würde,
seine Kunden im Ausland (die Kolonien und die Donaustaaten)
und unterwarf alle etwaigen Handelsverträge mit anderen Staa-
ten drakonischen Bedingungen. So erlebte Deutschland, dessen
Staatsgebiet um 102 000 Quadratkilometer beschnitten worden
war, im Jahre 1923 einen ersten Bankrott, den die Weltkrise von
1929 (Bankkrach der Wallstreet), gegen die es gerade wegen des
Versailler Vertrages empfindlicher sein mußte als irgendein ande-
rer Staat, im Jahre 1932 endgültig zu machen drohte.
Dieses Jahr 1932 war für Deutschland ein entsetzliches Jahr:
Am 31. Juli zeigte die offizielle Statistik dort 5 392 248 Arbeits-
lose an, was 12 bis 15% seiner erwerbstätigen Bevölkerung ent-
sprach, während, wie es gegenwärtig das Beispiel der Vereinigten
Staaten zu Beginn eines jeden Winters erneut zeigt, 5% das Maxi-
mum dessen darstellen, was bei den herkömmlichen Strukturen
der Weltwirtschaft erträglich ist. Zu Beginn des Winters 1932/1933
war die 6-Millionen-Grenze überschritten und ein Ende dieser Ent-
wicklung nicht abzusehen. Es braucht, glaube ich, nicht hervorge-
hoben zu werden, welche politische Unsicherheit aus dieser wirt-
schaftlichen Instabilität resultierte: Vom Ende des Frühjahres 1932
an gab es keine parlamentarische Mehrheit mehr, und die beiden
Neuwahlen, die man nach zweimaliger Auflösung des Reichstages
innerhalb von drei Monaten in der Hoffnung vornahm, eine sol-ühjahres 1932
an gab es keine parlamentarische Mehrheit mehr, und die beiden
Neuwahlen, die man nach zweimaliger Auflösung des Reichstages
innerhalb von drei Monaten in der Hoffnung vornahm, eine sol-

--- PAGE BREAK ---es keine parlamentarische Mehrheit mehr, und die beiden
Neuwahlen, die man nach zweimaliger Auflösung des Reichstages
innerhalb von drei Monaten in der Hoffnung vornahm, eine sol-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
che zu finden, erwiesen sich nicht nur als vergeblich, sondern ver-
schlimmerten die politische Lage nur noch.
Es wird heutzutage für gewöhnlich die Meinung vertreten —
und unter Verleugnung ihrer Vorgänger von 1919 stehen die So-
zialisten und Kommunisten an der Spitze derer, die dies behaup-
ten —, daß Deutschland sich sehr wohl und sehr leicht mit den
wirtschaftlichen und finanziellen Bestimmungen des Versailler Ver-
trages abfinden konnte, daß es aber systematisch nicht gewollt habe
und einzig und allein um zu beweisen, daß es das nicht konnte, ab-
sichtlich selbst diese Situation geschaffen habe. Der Verfasser die-
ser Studie hat schon zu häufig und immer wieder dargelegt, daß
es sich, welchen Ruf und welches Ansehen die Verfechter dieser
These auch genießen mögen, nur um ungereimtes Zeug handelt.
Er wird sich daher darauf beschränken, die Sozialisten und Kom-
munisten von heute auf ihre Vorfahren von 1919 zu verweisen,
deren Urteil über diesen Punkt untadelig war und es auch geblie-
ben ist.
Fest steht, daß der alte Feldmarschall Hindenburg am 30. Januar
1933 Hitler zum Nachfolger des Reichskanzlers von Schleicher er-
nannte. Zwei Tage vorher hatte von Schleicher — dem von Papen
und diesem wiederum Brüning vorhergegangen war, alles dies in
acht Monaten und bei zwei Parlamentswahlen! — in einer Atmo-
sphäre sozialer Unruhen, die auf ihrem Höhepunkt angekommen
war und zu der die NSDAP den Schlüssel besaß, seinen Rücktritt
erklärt, nachdem er auch seinerseits im Reichstag ohne Regie-
rungsmehrheit geblieben war.
Nicht, daß Hindenburg aus freien Stücken gehandelt hätte: Er
hatte bis dahin von Hitler stets nur mit Geringschätzung gespro-
chen: „Jener böhmische Gefreite“, sagte er. Doch die Umstände ge-
boten es. Wenn man sagt, es habe keine Regierungsmehrheit ge-
geben, so handelt es sich dabei wohlverstanden um die Mehrheit
der Mittelparteien unter Ausschluß der Nationalsozialisten und
Kommunisten: Zusammen waren ihnen die beiden Extreme bei
sämtlichen Abstimmungen zahlenmäßig überlegen. Aber rein rech-
nerisch gab es noch zwei weitere Mehrheiten, die sich jeweils auf
einem Flügel aufbauten: eine Mehrheit der politischen Linken, die
die Kommunisten, Sozialdemokraten und das katholische Zen-ein rech-
nerisch gab es noch zwei weitere Mehrheiten, die sich jeweils auf
einem Flügel aufbauten: eine Mehrheit der politischen Linken, die
die Kommunisten, Sozialdemokraten und das katholische Zen-

--- PAGE BREAK ---b es noch zwei weitere Mehrheiten, die sich jeweils auf
einem Flügel aufbauten: eine Mehrheit der politischen Linken, die
die Kommunisten, Sozialdemokraten und das katholische Zen-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
trum umfaßt hätte, wozu noch die wenigen Überlebenden der de-
mokratischen Deutschen Staats-Partei gekommen wären, und eine
Mehrheit der politischen Rechten, die vom katholischen Zentrum
bis zu den Nationalsozialisten gereicht hätte. Die Kommunisten,
die systematisch und ohne einen Unterschied zu machen gegen alle
Regierungen stimmten — ein Verfahren, das, nebenbei gesagt, von
1919 an in fortschreitendem Maße sämtliche parlamentarischen
Mehrheiten nach rechts gedrängt hatte —, machten die erste Mehr-
heit unmöglich. Das war der Grund, der das katholische Zentrum
an dem Tage, an dem es die Überzeugung gewann, daß keinerlei
Möglichkeit bestand, die Unterstützung der Kommunisten gegen
Hitler im Parlament zu erlangen, bewog, ein Arrangement mit
diesem zu suchen. Der Urheber dieses Übereinkommens war der
Zentrumsführer Msgr. Kaas. Der gesamte deutsche Episkopat stand
diesem Schritt feindlich gegenüber. Doch nach den Wahlen vom
6. November 1932 hielt Msgr. Kaas in Anbetracht ihrer Ergebnisse,
die nichts oder so gut wie nichts am Kräfteverhältnis unter den
Fraktionen geändert hatten, eine Rede, deren Thema im wesent-
lichen darin bestand, daß den sozialen Unruhen ein Ende gesetzt
werden müsse, daß es nur einen Weg dazu gäbe, nämlich den, daß
Deutschland regiert werden müsse, und daß man dadurch, daß man
alle drei oder vier Monate an die Wählerschaft heranträte, nur die
Agitation im Land in Gang hielte, ohne dabei an der parlamenta-
rischen Situation irgend etwas zu ändern, und daß, da es keinerlei
Möglichkeiten gäbe, mit den Kommunisten zu einem Kompromiß
zu gelangen, nur noch ein Weg übrigbliebe, nämlich der Versuch,
mit Hitler zu einem Vergleich zu kommen. Und er setzte sich da-
für ein. Hitler, der der Überzeugung war, daß ihn, einmal Reichs-
kanzler geworden, nichts würde hindern können, auf verfassungs-
mäßigem Wege unumschränkte Vollmachten zu erlangen, zeigte
sich unter der Bedingung, daß ihm der Kanzlerposten zuteil würde,
zu einem solchen Kompromiß bereit.
Die Regierung, die der neue Kanzler am 30. Januar 1933 bildete,
umfaßte außer ihm selbst nur zwei Nationalsozialisten: den In-
nenminister Frick und den Staatsminister Göring. Die anderen acht
Posten verteilten sich auf Mitglieder der Deutschnationalen Volks-
partei und anderer kleiner Gruppen der politischen Rechten; Vize--
nenminister Frick und den Staatsminister Göring. Die anderen acht
Posten verteilten sich auf Mitglieder der Deutschnationalen Volks-
partei und anderer kleiner Gruppen der politischen Rechten; Vize-

--- PAGE BREAK ---und den Staatsminister Göring. Die anderen acht
Posten verteilten sich auf Mitglieder der Deutschnationalen Volks-
partei und anderer kleiner Gruppen der politischen Rechten; Vize-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170
kanzler war von Papen. Diese Zusammensetzung schien zu be-
weisen, daß Hitler gewillt war, verfassungsmäßig zu regieren.
Die wahre nationalsozialistische Regierung wurde erst im An-
schluß an Wahlen gebildet, die am 5. März 1933 stattfanden, denn
bereits beim ersten Zusammentritt des am 30. Januar gebildeten
Kabinetts setzte Hitler den Beschluß zu einer erneuten Auflösung
des Reichstages durch, was seinen ersten Regierungsakt darstellte.
Diese Wahlen vom 5. März 1933 nahmen eine besondere Wen-
dung und sind es wert, daß man einen Augenblick bei ihnen ver-
weilt. Zunächst einmal fanden sie unter der Kontrolle der an der
Macht befindlichen NSDAP statt — ein gewichtiges Argument.
Weiter war Msgr. Kaas, der Führer des katholischen Zentrums,
immer noch davon überzeugt, daß Hitler verfassungsmäßig regie-
ren würde; schließlich hatte dieser es ihm ja persönlich versprochen.
In einer großen Wahlrede, die er am 2. März in Köln unter dem
Vorsitz des späteren Bundeskanzlers und damaligen Bürgermeisters
von Köln, Adenauer, der dieser Meinung beipflichtete, hielt, legte
Msgr. Kaas seinen Standpunkt im einzelnen dar, wobei er klar
herausstellte, daß es für die Rettung Deutschlands nur noch eine
Lösung gäbe, da die Kommunisten . . . usw. usw. Und schließlich
bildete Vizekanzler von Papen mit Hitler gegenüber der Wähler-
schaft eine Mannschaft. Ergebnis: Hitler erhielt 17 265 800 Stim-
men gleich 43,7% und 288 Mandate, von Papen 52 Mandate mit
8% der Stimmen. Der neue Reichstag umfaßte 648 Abgeordnete:
Die Rechtsparteien verfügten also über eine überwältigende Mehr-
heit. Von da an hatte Hitler freie Bahn: Die unumschränkten Voll-
machten wurden ihm rasch in den verfassungsmäßigen Formen
gewährt, und die Art und Weise, in der er davon Gebrauch mach-
te, sammelte das deutsche Volk, das zu wiederholten Malen seine
Beschlüsse durch Volksabstimmung mit Mehrheiten, die jedesmal
an Einstimmigkeit heranreichten, begeistert billigte.
Man hat gesagt, daß die ganze Kunst Hitlers darin bestanden
habe, das deutsche Volk davon zu überzeugen, daß die Ursache
aller seiner Leiden der Versailler Vertrag sei. Doch in diesem Punkt
sprachen sämtliche deutschen Parteien, von der äußersten Linken
bis zur äußersten Rechten, die gleiche Sprache. Warum also gerade
Hitler und nicht die Sozialdemokraten, das katholische Zentrumm Punkt
sprachen sämtliche deutschen Parteien, von der äußersten Linken
bis zur äußersten Rechten, die gleiche Sprache. Warum also gerade
Hitler und nicht die Sozialdemokraten, das katholische Zentrum

--- PAGE BREAK ---tliche deutschen Parteien, von der äußersten Linken
bis zur äußersten Rechten, die gleiche Sprache. Warum also gerade
Hitler und nicht die Sozialdemokraten, das katholische Zentrum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

171
oder die Kommunisten? Die Antwort ist einfach: Hitler war ge-
schickt genug, das deutsche Volk zu der Einsicht zu bringen, daß
die feindliche Einstellung der Sozialdemokraten und des Zentrums
gegenüber dem Versailler Vertrag überwiegend Fassade war. Die
ersteren nämlich hatten ihn unterzeichnet, und beide zusammen
hatten, obwohl sie seit gut zwölf Jahren an der Regierung teilnah-
men, offenbar nicht sehr viele Anstrengungen gemacht, um die
nach Artikel 19 der Völkerbundsakte vorgesehene Revision des
Vertrages durchzusetzen. Er fügte hinzu, diese feindliche Einstel-
lung sei deshalb nur Fassade, weil die beiden Parteien völlig den
Juden ergeben seien, die er mit dem internationalen Großkapita-
lismus gleichsetzte und die, wie er anklagend sagte, die einzigen
seien, die aus diesem Vertrag Vorteil zögen. Die Kommunisten
hingegen seien nur die Agenten eines ebenfalls von den Juden in-
spirierten Unternehmens — war nicht Marx ein Jude? —, das
nur darauf abziele, ihnen einen noch umfassenderen Einfluß auf
Deutschland zu sichern, und zwar durch eine soziale Agitation,
deren Zweck nur darin bestünde, sein wirtschaftliches und politi-
sches Leben zu zerrütten, um das Land in ihre Abhängigkeit zu
bringen. Deutschland ein Opfer der Juden und Marxisten, deren
Hauptstadt Moskau sei. Es war nur ein Kinderspiel für ihn, aus
dem durch Stalin repräsentierten Bolschewismus ein wahres Schreck-
gespenst mit Klauen zu machen, dem Deutschland, falls es ihm nicht
gelingen würde, sämtliche Hypotheken, die durch den Versailler
Vertrag auf ihm lasteten, zu beseitigen, unrettbar verfallen wäre.
Alles dies wurde in einem zugleich sicheren und entschiedenen
Ton, einer klaren, mit packenden Formulierungen durchwirkten
Sprache vorgetragen, die, wie selbst ein Mann wie William L. Shi-
rer zugibt267, „oft die Gipfel der Beredsamkeit erreichte“. Es über-
zeugte und ließ Hitler in den Augen des deutschen Volkes als den
einzigen Mann erscheinen, der es aus der Sackgasse, in der es durch
den Versailler Vertrag festgehalten wurde, herausführen konnte.
Auf alle Fälle hatten die anderen es schließlich in zwölf Jahren
nicht daraus befreit. Und was ist zum Kern der Sache zu sagen? Es
ist ganz offensichtlich, daß der Nationalsozialismus wie alle Dok-
267 William L. Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, des origines à la chuteahren
nicht daraus befreit. Und was ist zum Kern der Sache zu sagen? Es
ist ganz offensichtlich, daß der Nationalsozialismus wie alle Dok-
267 William L. Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, des origines à la chute

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172
trinen, die im Feuer der Aktion geschmiedet werden — auch der
Bolschewismus macht davon keine Ausnahme —, eine inhumane
Lehre war. Dennoch wird man eines Tages sehr wohl zugeben
müssen — man kommt zwar nur ganz langsam dahin, doch man
kommt dahin —, daß er, zumindest in einem Punkt, unbestreitbar
recht hatte: Es ist in der Tat sehr wahr, daß der Versailler Vertrag
die Ursache aller übel war, unter denen das deutsche Volk litt und
von denen die anderen Völker verschont waren. Da dieser Punkt
das zentrale Thema der gesamten politischen Propaganda Hitlers
darstellte, machte er seine ganze Stärke aus, und zwar in einem
solchen Maße und so durchgreifend, daß der Stimmenanteil der
NSDAP von 1924 (Reichstagswahlen vom 7. Dezember) bis 1932
(Reichstagswahlen vom 6. November) von 3% auf 33,1% stieg.
(Bei den Reichstagswahlen vom 31. Juli 1932 hatte sie sogar 37,3%
erzielt.)
Die internationale Finanzwelt, keineswegs nur die deutsche, ent-
schied sich, insbesondere von 1928 an, dafür — auf welche Weise,
habe ich an anderer Stelle dargelegt268 —, Hitler unter Bevorzu-
gung gegenüber allen deutschen Parteien, die eine Revision des
Versailler Vertrages durch gemäßigtere Mittel und Wege forder-
ten, auf dem Gebiet der Propaganda zu subventionieren und seine
wirtschaftlichen und politischen Argumente durch ihre klingenden
und vollwichtigen Argumente zu unterstützen.
Ich werde nicht wieder darauf zurückkommen: Vielmehr soll
auf diesem Untergrund jetzt gezeigt werden, welche Rolle das re-
ligiöse Moment bei der Machtergreifung Hitlers spielte.
268 Rassinier, Zum Fall Eichmann: Was ist Wahrheit? Oder die unbelehrbaren
Sieger

--- PAGE BREAK ---jetzt gezeigt werden, welche Rolle das re-
ligiöse Moment bei der Machtergreifung Hitlers spielte.
268 Rassinier, Zum Fall Eichmann: Was ist Wahrheit? Oder die unbelehrbaren
Sieger

--- PAGE BREAK ---

173
II. DIE MOTIVE DER PROTESTANTEN
Nichts kann meines Erachtens die Rolle, die dieses Moment
spielte, besser herausstellen als ein kurzer Überblick über die vier
letzten Wahlen, die für die Weimarer Republik die Totenglocke
läuteten: die Wahl des Reichspräsidenten am 14. März und 10.
April 1932 und die drei Parlamentswahlen, die nach drei Auflö-
sungen des Reichstages am 31. Juli 1932, am 6. November 1932
und am 5. März 1933 stattfanden.
Durch Erfahrung endlich klug geworden, werde ich zunächst
einige Texte eines Mannes zitieren, der wie die meisten bekannten
Persönlichkeiten unter den Gegnern des Nationalsozialismus nie-
mals selbst gegen Hitler kämpfte, sondern sich damit begnügte,
zwischen ihm und uns die Punkte zu notieren, und der daher mir
gegenüber den Vorzug besitzt, nicht verdächtig zu sein: von Wil-
liam L. Shirer, auf den ich mich bereits zwei- oder dreimal berufen
habe. Als amerikanischer Journalist hat William L. Shirer den Na-
tionalsozialismus von seinen Anfängen bis zu seinem Untergang
Schritt für Schritt verfolgt. Außerdem ist er Protestant, und in
dieser Hinsicht ist seine Ansicht nicht uninteressant — aber nur in
dieser Hinsicht, denn im Hinblick auf die Geschichte . . . Kurz,
hören wir, was er als Zeuge der Ereignisse über die Präsidenten-
wahl vom 14. März und 10. April 1932 sagt:
„Alle herkömmlichen Partei- und Klassenbindungen gerieten in
der . . . Hitze des Wahlkampfes durcheinander. Hindenburg, der
Protestant, Preuße, Konservative und Monarchist, stützte sich auf
die Sozialdemokraten, die Gewerkschaften, die Katholiken des
Zentrums (unter Brüning) und die Reste der liberaldemokrati-
schen bürgerlichen Parteien. Für Hitler, den Katholiken, Österrei-
cher, früheren Obdachlosen, den ,Nationalsozialisten‘ und Führer
der kleinbürgerlichen Massen, waren außer seinen eigenen An-
hängern die protestantischen (bürgerlichen) Oberschichten des Nor-
dens269, die konservativen Agrarier (die Junker) und zahlreiche
Monarchisten, zu denen sich in letzter Minute der frühere Kron-
prinz gesellte270.“
269 Von mir kursiv, P. R.
270 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 151 f.69, die konservativen Agrarier (die Junker) und zahlreiche
Monarchisten, zu denen sich in letzter Minute der frühere Kron-
prinz gesellte270.“
269 Von mir kursiv, P. R.
270 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 151 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n Agrarier (die Junker) und zahlreiche
Monarchisten, zu denen sich in letzter Minute der frühere Kron-
prinz gesellte270.“
269 Von mir kursiv, P. R.
270 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 151 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

174
Oder ferner:
„Es war deutlich, daß, von den Katholiken abgesehen, die (bür-
gerlichen) Mittel- und Oberschichten zur NSDAP übergegangen
waren271.“ Man hat richtig gelesen: „ . . . von den Katholiken ab-
gesehen . . . “
Oder ferner, dieses Mal jedoch im Hinblick auf die Reichstags-
wahlen:
„Während dieser Reichstagswahlen [es handelt sich um die drei
obengenannten] konnte man nicht umhin zu bemerken, daß die
protestantische Geistlichkeit — Niemöller war ein eindrucksvolles
Beispiel dafür — sehr freimütig die Nationalisten und sogar die
republikfeindlichen Nationalsozialisten unterstützte. Ebenso wie
Niemöller begrüßten die meisten Protestanten die Übernahme des
Kanzleramtes durch Adolf Hitler im Jahre 1933 mit Befriedi-
gung272.“
Die Sonderberichterstatter sämtlicher Zeitungen der Welt haben
damals die gleiche Information, häufig in weitaus genaueren Wor-
ten, in sämtlichen Hauptstädten verbreitet. Obwohl sie seitdem
oft in Erinnerung gerufen wurde — allerdings in einer Presse, die
keinen sehr großen Leserkreis besitzt —, ist sie niemals auch nur
im geringsten dementiert worden. Die Betroffenen und ihre An-
hänger stellten sich taub: der Mantel, mit dem Noahs Scham be-
deckt wurde. Es steht also fest: Die protestantische Geistlichkeit
in Deutschland stand bei den Wahlkampagnen Hitlers an seiner
Seite.
Und welche Haltung nahm der katholische Klerus ein? Vor je-
der dieser vier Wahlen trat in Fulda die Konferenz der katholi-
schen Bischöfe zu einer politischen Stellungnahme zusammen, und
jedesmal endete sie mit einer öffentlich bekanntgemachten gemein-
samen Erklärung, die den Nationalsozialismus in heftigen Worten
als eine Rückkehr zum Heidentum und seine Mitglieder als „Ab-
trünnige der Kirche, denen man die Sakramente verweigern muß“,
verurteilte, die empfahl, nicht für seine Kandidaten zu stimmen
und es „den Katholiken [untersagte], Mitglied seiner Jugend- oder
anderen Organisationen zu sein“. Im April 1932 beim zweiten
271 Ebd., S. 161
272 Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, Bd. I, S. 259daten zu stimmen
und es „den Katholiken [untersagte], Mitglied seiner Jugend- oder
anderen Organisationen zu sein“. Im April 1932 beim zweiten
271 Ebd., S. 161
272 Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, Bd. I, S. 259

--- PAGE BREAK ---es „den Katholiken [untersagte], Mitglied seiner Jugend- oder
anderen Organisationen zu sein“. Im April 1932 beim zweiten
271 Ebd., S. 161
272 Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, Bd. I, S. 259

--- PAGE BREAK ---

175
Wahlgang der Präsidentenwahl empfahlen die katholischen Bi-
schöfe in Deutschland sogar, für den Protestanten Hindenburg zu
stimmen, während die protestantische Geistlichkeit, wie man ge-
sehen hat, für Hitler stimmen ließ!
Es soll nicht näher auf die Texte eingegangen werden, die diese
Stellungnahme bezeugen. Es genügt, eine Tatsache anzuführen,
die sie alle resümiert und die in der nichtkatholischen Presse groß
herausgestellt wurde. Sie beweist, daß der katholische Episkopat
in den entscheidenden Stunden des März 1933 und selbst noch
nach dem Sieg des Nationalsozialismus bei den Reichstagswahlen
vom 5. jenes Monats — für die die Konferenz von Fulda vom
22. Februar empfohlen hatte, wie bei den vorhergehenden Wahlen
gegen seine Kandidaten zu stimmen — dem Nationalsozialismus
immer noch mit heftiger Feindschaft gegenüberstand.
Die Eröffnungssitzung des am 5. März gewählten neuen Reichs-
tages hatte am 21. März in Potsdam stattgefunden. Ihr gingen, dem
Ritus gemäß, zwei religiöse Feierlichkeiten voraus, die eine in der
Nikolaikirche für die Protestanten, die andere in der Peter-Pauls-
Kirche für die Katholiken. In der ersteren wurde der Gottesdienst
durch den protestantischen Bischof von Berlin, Dr. Dibelius, abge-
halten, der in einer Predigt über das für seine Geisteshaltung sehr
bezeichnende Thema „Ist Gott mit uns, wer mag wider uns sein?“
den Sieg Hitlers begrüßte. Der katholische Bischof von Berlin,
Msgr. Christian Schreiber, der in der letzteren die Messe lesen
sollte, meldete sich krank — eine vorgeschützte Krankheit, wie
man in der nationalsozialistischen Presse sagte — und beauftragte
um einen Skandal zu vermeiden, einen seiner Vikare mit seiner
Vertretung.
Entgegen den Gepflogenheiten, nach denen der Reichskanzler
beiden Feierlichkeiten beizuwohnen hatte und nach denen seine
Anwesenheit bei der zweiten um so mehr gefordert wurde, als er
katholisch war, nahm er nicht daran teil. Am Tag darauf, dem 22.
März, motivierte die Kölnische Volkszeitung, die diese Tatsache
hervorhob, die Abwesenheit Hitlers und seines Propagandamini-
sters (Goebbels) damit, daß „die katholischen Bischöfe von Deutsch-
land . . . in einer Reihe von Erklärungen . . . Führer und Mitglieder
der NSDAP als Abtrünnige der Kirche bezeichnet [haben], diei-
sters (Goebbels) damit, daß „die katholischen Bischöfe von Deutsch-
land . . . in einer Reihe von Erklärungen . . . Führer und Mitglieder
der NSDAP als Abtrünnige der Kirche bezeichnet [haben], die

--- PAGE BREAK ---damit, daß „die katholischen Bischöfe von Deutsch-
land . . . in einer Reihe von Erklärungen . . . Führer und Mitglieder
der NSDAP als Abtrünnige der Kirche bezeichnet [haben], die

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176
nicht in den Genuß der Sakramente kommen dürften.“ (Erklä-
rungen der Konferenz von Fulda, auf die weiter oben angespielt
wurde.)
Der Propagandaminister fügte hinzu: „Der Kanzler hat wäh-
rend der Zeit des offiziellen Gottesdienstes zusammen mit dem
Reichsminister für Volksaufklärung und Propaganda, Dr. Goeb-
bels, auf den dasselbe zutrifft, die Gräber seiner ermordeten
SA-Kameraden auf dem Luisenstädtischen Friedhof in Berlin be-
sucht.“
Das zeigt, daß diese Verurteilung des Nationalsozialismus nicht
auf den aus eigener Initiative, ohne Berücksichtigung der Mei-
nung des Vatikans (wo Kardinal Pacelli, der spätere Pius XII.,
Staatssekretär 
war) 
handelnden 
katholischen 
Episkopat 
in
Deutschland beschränkt war, sondern daß die katholische Kirche
überall diesen Standpunkt vertrat. Für Frankreich ist das bekannt.
Das gleiche war in Österreich der Fall, wo in allen Kirchen ein
Hirtenbrief von Msgr. Johannes Gföllner, dem Bischof von Linz,
vom 23. Januar 1933 verlesen wurde, aus dem sämtliche öster-
reichischen Zeitungen und sämtliche katholischen Blätter Deutsch-
lands große Auszüge abdruckten. Der Hirtenbrief selbst soll hier
nicht wiedergegeben werden, doch sei die Einführung zitiert, die
ihm in der Münchner Zeitung Schönere Zukunft vom 7. Februar
1933 vorangestellt wurde:
„Bekanntlich haben sich die katholischen Bischöfe Deutschlands
bereits mehrfach gegen den Nationalsozialismus ausgesprochen.
Soeben wurde nun von Dr. Gföllner, dem ersten der österreichi-
schen Bischöfe, ein Hirtenbrief veröffentlicht, in dem er den Na-
tionalsozialismus als Feind der Kirche verurteilt. Und da sich die
Nationalsozialisten im katholischen Österreich, sei es in ihren Ver-
sammlungen, sei es in ihrer Presse, als echte Katholiken ausgege-
ben haben, leistet die Stellungnahme des Bischofs von Linz durch
die Aufdeckung ihres Doppelspiels einen Dienst von äußerster
Wichtigkeit. Dieser Grund veranlaßte uns, den Text seines Hir-
tenbriefes nachstehend zum Abdruck zu bringen273.“
273 Schönere Zukunft v. 7. Februar 1933, zitiert nach Documentation catholique
v. 28. Februar 1964. (Rückübersetzt. — Anm. d. Übers.)ext seines Hir-
tenbriefes nachstehend zum Abdruck zu bringen273.“
273 Schönere Zukunft v. 7. Februar 1933, zitiert nach Documentation catholique
v. 28. Februar 1964. (Rückübersetzt. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---riefes nachstehend zum Abdruck zu bringen273.“
273 Schönere Zukunft v. 7. Februar 1933, zitiert nach Documentation catholique
v. 28. Februar 1964. (Rückübersetzt. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

177
Bei dieser Verurteilung des Nationalsozialismus durch die ge-
samte Kirche hat man im allgemeinen die Ansichten des damaligen
Papstes Pius XI. nicht in Zweifel gezogen, sondern lediglich die
seines Staatssekretärs Kardinal Pacelli, und das auch erst nach dem
Kriege. Das war nur möglich, weil Kardinal Pacelli sich wenig dar-
um kümmerte, Reklame für sich zu machen und seine persön-
liche Rolle hervorzuheben: Als wohlerzogener Mensch wußte er,
daß Pius XI. in den Vordergrund gerückt werden mußte und daß
diesem überall der Vorrang vor ihm gebührte. Doch haben es
andere glücklicherweise für ihn getan. Aus Anlaß eines Zwischen-
falls im Jahre 1935 zwischen dem deutschen Staat und dem Epi-
skopat (es ging dabei um die Transferierung von Devisen) schrie-
ben deutsche katholische Emigranten, die in die Schweiz geflüchtet
waren und in Luzern Die deutschen Briefe herausgaben, in der
Nummer vom 26. August dieser Zeitschrift:
„ . . . der Papst, Kardinal Pacelli und ein Teil des deutschen Epi-
skopats wünschten, die Konferenz von Fulda [die vom 19. bis 23.
zusammengetreten war, um zu dieser Angelegenheit Stellung zu
nehmen] solle das Verbot, das den Katholiken die Mitgliedschaft
in der NSDAP, den Jugendorganisationen oder anderen Organi-
sationen der Partei untersagte, wieder in Kraft setzen.“
Dies hätte den Bruch des im Vorjahr zwischen dem Dritten
Reich und dem Heiligen Stuhl unterzeichneten Konkordats be-
deutet. Er wurde vermieden, jedoch nicht durch eine Konzession
des Papstes, Kardinal Pacellis oder des Episkopats, sondern durch
eine Konzession des Dritten Reiches im Verlauf einer Unterre-
dung zwischen Dr. Kerrl, dem Reichsminister für kirchliche An-
gelegenheiten, und Kardinal Bertram, dem Vorsitzenden der Kon-
ferenz, am 19. August in Fulda selbst. Der Minister versprach, „die
antichristlichen Extremisten der Partei zur Räson zu bringen274“,
und Hitler bestätigte dieses Versprechen telegraphisch. Trotzdem
veröffentlichte die Konferenz ein gemeinsames Schreiben der Bi-
schöfe, das am 1. September 1935 in sämtlichen katholischen Kir-
chen Deutschlands verlesen wurde und das das Pariser Wochen-
blatt Sept (von François Mauriac!) am 19. desselben Monats unge-
274 Die deutschen Briefe, wie angegeben35 in sämtlichen katholischen Kir-
chen Deutschlands verlesen wurde und das das Pariser Wochen-
blatt Sept (von François Mauriac!) am 19. desselben Monats unge-
274 Die deutschen Briefe, wie angegeben

--- PAGE BREAK ---holischen Kir-
chen Deutschlands verlesen wurde und das das Pariser Wochen-
blatt Sept (von François Mauriac!) am 19. desselben Monats unge-
274 Die deutschen Briefe, wie angegeben

--- PAGE BREAK ---

178
kürzt mit dem Kommentar veröffentlichte: „Offene und deut-
liche Erklärungen . . . Man hat einmütig beschlossen, das Neu-
heidentum [den Nationalsozialismus] zu bekämpfen und eine ak-
tive Verteidigung dagegen zu organisieren.“ In Übereinstimmung
mit Pius XI. und Kardinal Pacelli, die, wie wir gesehen haben, inter-
veniert hatten. Alles dies beweist, daß damals niemandem der Ge-
danke kam, daß der künftige Papst Pius XII. dem Nationalsozia-
lismus nicht von Grund aus feindlich gesonnen sei. Die Artikel der
französischen Zeitungen Le Populaire (sozialistisch) und L’Hu-
manité (kommunistisch), die seine Wahl begrüßten und die im An-
hang zitiert sind275, beweisen, daß es 1939 noch genauso war. Die
anderen, ebenfalls im Anhang aufgeführten Presseauszüge aus der
Nachkriegszeit276 beweisen überdies, daß sich auch lange nach dem
Kriege noch nichts daran geändert hatte.
Um mit der Rolle, die das religiöse Moment bei der Machtergrei-
fung Hitlers spielte, zum Schluß zu kommen, muß folgendes fest-
gestellt werden: Die deutschen Protestanten, die Pius XII. eine
angeblich pronazistische Einstellung vorwerfen, sind für Hitler
ein Erfolgsfaktor gewesen, gegenüber dem die katholische Kir-
che Pius XI., Kardinal Pacelli und der katholische Episkopat in
Deutschland ohnmächtig waren. Wenn man berücksichtigt, daß
in dem Deutschland der Jahre 1932/1933 die Protestanten nahezu
zwei Drittel der Bevölkerung, die Katholiken hingegen nur unge-
fähr ein Drittel ausmachten, kann man sagen, daß sie in Wirk-
lichkeit der katholischen Kirche und Kardinal Pacelli, dem Staats-
sekretär des Vatikans und späteren Pius XII., den Vorwurf ma-
chen, es nicht fertiggebracht zu haben, eine Situation aus der Welt
zu schaffen, die sie, die Protestanten, selbst geschaffen hatten.
Doch sehen wir weiter.
Bei jener feierlichen Eröffnungssitzung des neuen Reichstages
am 21. März 1933 wurde die Erklärung Hitlers zur allgemeinen
Politik mit 441 gegen 94 Stimmen angenommen. Anwesend waren
535 von insgesamt 648 Abgeordneten: Die fehlenden, insbeson-
dere die gesamte kommunistische Fraktion sowie ein Dutzend
275 Vgl. unten Anhang I, S. 211—218.
276 Vgl. unten Anhang III, S. 226—231.aren
535 von insgesamt 648 Abgeordneten: Die fehlenden, insbeson-
dere die gesamte kommunistische Fraktion sowie ein Dutzend
275 Vgl. unten Anhang I, S. 211—218.
276 Vgl. unten Anhang III, S. 226—231.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mt 648 Abgeordneten: Die fehlenden, insbeson-
dere die gesamte kommunistische Fraktion sowie ein Dutzend
275 Vgl. unten Anhang I, S. 211—218.
276 Vgl. unten Anhang III, S. 226—231.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

179
Sozialdemokraten waren festgenommen und außerstande gesetzt
worden, an der Abstimmung teilzunehmen. Msgr. Kaas, der Wort-
führer des katholischen Zentrums, hatte das Wort ergriffen, um
die Abstimmung für die Erklärung warm zu empfehlen, und seine
Fraktion folgte ihm geschlossen. Doch Msgr. Kaas repräsentierte
nicht die Meinung des katholischen Episkopats in Deutschland:
Bekanntlich hatte die Fuldaer Konferenz am 19. Februar 1933,
einige Tage bevor er am darauffolgenden 2. März unter dem Vor-
sitz und der Billigung Dr. Konrad Adenauers, des damaligen Bür-
germeisters von Köln, seine Rede hielt, in der er eine Verständi-
gung mit Hitler empfahl und sich für seine Absichten verbürgte,
das Anathem des Episkopats gegen den Nationalsozialismus er-
neuert. Andererseits trat Msgr. Kaas am nachfolgenden 2. April
von seinem Posten als Fraktionsvorsitzender des Zentrums zurück,
und am 9. begleitete er unter dem Vorwand, bei den allerersten
Verhandlungen für das Konkordat zwischen dem Dritten Reich
und dem Heiligen Stuhl als Vermittler zu dienen, von Papen und
Göring nach Rom, wo er gleichsam in der Versenkung verschwand:
Er wurde in Deutschland nie wieder gesehen. Die meistvertre-
tene allgemeine Ansicht geht dahin, daß der Heilige Stuhl ihn aus
Unzufriedenheit über seine seit November 1932 gezeigte hitler-
freundliche Haltung kraft päpstlicher Autorität endgültig von
der politischen Bühne abtreten ließ. Da sein Fall häufig als Beweis
für die Sympathien der katholischen Kirche für Hitler angeführt
wurde, ist es wichtig, dies zu betonen. Man kann sicher andere
katholische Bischöfe anführen, die mit Recht der Willfährigkeit
gegenüber dem Nationalsozialismus beschuldigt wurden: Msgr.
Gröber aus Freiburg zum Beispiel oder Msgr. Berning aus Osna-
brück. Doch das war erst nach Hitlers Machtergreifung, und außer-
dem stellen sie nur sehr seltene Ausnahmen von der allgemeinen
Linie dar, während, wie wir gleich sehen werden, auf protestanti-
scher Seite sowohl vor dem Triumph Hitlers als auch noch lange
Zeit danach die Fälle von Feindseligkeit gegenüber Hitler unter
den Bischöfen die Ausnahme bilden.
Doch kommen wir auf den Reichstag zurück: Auf die feierliche
Eröffnungsversammlung vom 21. März, in der die Erklärung zur
allgemeinen Politik mit 441 gegen 94 Stimmen (die der Sozial-Ausnahme bilden.
Doch kommen wir auf den Reichstag zurück: Auf die feierliche
Eröffnungsversammlung vom 21. März, in der die Erklärung zur
allgemeinen Politik mit 441 gegen 94 Stimmen (die der Sozial-

--- PAGE BREAK ---h kommen wir auf den Reichstag zurück: Auf die feierliche
Eröffnungsversammlung vom 21. März, in der die Erklärung zur
allgemeinen Politik mit 441 gegen 94 Stimmen (die der Sozial-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

180
demokraten auf die Stellungnahme ihres Fraktionsführers hin)
angenommen wurde, folgte zwei Tage später, am 23. März, eine
andere Versammlung, in deren Verlauf Hitler mit den gleichen
Stimmenverhältnis in der Form eines sogenannten Gesetzes zur
Behebung der Not von Volk und Reich für vier Jahre unum-
schränkte Vollmachten erhielt. Bei der Vorlage dieses Gesetzes
erklärte Hitler:
„Die Regierung beabsichtigt, von diesem Gesetz nur insoweit
Gebrauch zu machen, als es zur Durchführung der lebensnotwen-
digen Maßnahmen erforderlich ist. Weder die Existenz des Reichs-
tages noch des Reichsrates soll dadurch bedroht sein. Die Stel-
lung und die Rechte des Reichspräsidenten bleiben unberührt . . .
Der Bestand der Länder wird nicht beseitigt. Die Rechte der Kir-
chen werden nicht geschmälert, ihre Stellung zum Staat nicht ge-
ändert . . . Die Zahl der Fälle, in denen eine innere Notwendig-
keit vorliegt, zu einem solchen Gesetz die Zuflucht zu nehmen, ist
eine begrenzte277.“
Im Verlauf dieser Rede betonte er: „Ihre Sorge [die der Regie-
rung] gilt dem aufrichtigen Zusammenleben zwischen Kirche und
Staat . . . [Insbesondere] legt die Reichsregierung . . . den größten
Wert darauf, die freundschaftlichen Beziehungen zum Heiligen
Stuhle weiter zu pflegen und auszugestalten“, was eine unverhüllte
Anspielung auf seinen Wunsch darstellte, ein Konkordat mit ihm
abzuschließen.
Die Fuldaer Bischofskonferenz, die am 29. März 1933 zusam-
mengetreten war, erklärte daraufhin:
„Es ist nunmehr anzuerkennen, daß von dem höchsten Vertre-
ter der Reichsregierung, der zugleich autoritärer Führer jener Be-
wegung ist, . . . feierlich Erklärungen gegeben sind, durch die der
Unverletzlichkeit der katholischen Glaubenslehre (des katholi-
schen Glaubens und der Missionen) und den unveränderlichen . . .
Rechten der Kirche Rechnung getragen sowie die vollinhaltliche
Geltung der von den einzelnen deutschen Ländern mit der Kirche
abgeschlossenen Staatsverträge ausdrücklich zugesichert wird278.“
In seinem Kommentar hierzu fügte Msgr. Preysing, der Erz-
277 Zitiert nach Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 195n deutschen Ländern mit der Kirche
abgeschlossenen Staatsverträge ausdrücklich zugesichert wird278.“
In seinem Kommentar hierzu fügte Msgr. Preysing, der Erz-
277 Zitiert nach Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 195

--- PAGE BREAK ---mit der Kirche
abgeschlossenen Staatsverträge ausdrücklich zugesichert wird278.“
In seinem Kommentar hierzu fügte Msgr. Preysing, der Erz-
277 Zitiert nach Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 195

--- PAGE BREAK ---

181
bischof von Eichstätt, am 30. März hinzu: „Die Erklärungen des
Reichskanzlers vom 23. März vor dem deutschen Reichstag be-
rechtigen die Bischöfe, in der gegenwärtigen Stunde die bisher be-
kundete Opposition aufzugeben279.“ Es handelt sich wohlgemerkt
um die Opposition gegen die Regierung, nicht um die Oppo-
sition gegen die nationalsozialistische Doktrin. Man beachte über-
dies die vorsichtige Ausdrucksweise: in der gegenwärtigen Stunde,
sagte der Erzbischof, was nicht bedeutet: endgültig.
Sämtliche Bischöfe des Reiches gaben ihren Gläubigen die Er-
klärung von Fulda in den gleichen Worten wieder, und der Osser-
vatore Romano280, also der Heilige Stuhl, billigte sie.
Der Waffenstillstand zwischen der Kirche und dem Dritten Reich
war nicht von langer Dauer: nur gerade so lange, wie es für den
Abschluß eines Konkordats erforderlich war. Es war kaum unter-
zeichnet, als auch schon der Kampf aus Anlaß der vielfachen Ver-
letzungen, denen es seitens der Regierung des Dritten Reiches aus-
gesetzt wurde, wieder aufflammte. Es kamen die Protestnoten Kar-
dinal Pacellis, die Enzyklika Mit brennender Sorge, die wieder-
holten Verurteilungen des Nationalsozialismus durch Kardinal
Pacelli, der inzwischen Papst Pius XII. geworden war, usw. Wir
werden nicht mehr darauf zurückkommen281.
Wie verhielt sich währenddessen die protestantische Geistlich-
keit gegenüber Hitler und dem Nationalsozialismus?
Erst Anfang 1934 begannen die Beziehungen zwischen dem
Dritten Reich und der protestantischen Kirche sich zu verschlech-
tern, allerdings nur zwischen dem Dritten Reich und einer kleinen
Minderheit von Pastoren. Es kam zu Meinungsverschiedenheiten
über die Konstituierung der protestantischen Kirche als Reichs-
kirche, ein von Hitler gehegtes Parallelprojekt zu seinem Plan
eines Konkordats mit dem Heiligen Stuhl.
Zu Beginn fand dieses Projekt die Zustimmung der gesamten
protestantischen Geistlichkeit. Zumindest erhob sich unter den
278 Documentation catholique, 8. April 1933. (Zitiert nach Hans Müller, Katholi-
sche 
Kirche 
und 
Nationalsozialismus, 
Dokumente 
1930—1935, 
1963,
S. 76 ff. — Anm. d. Übers.)
279 Documentation catholique, 8. April 1933 (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)
280 Ebd., 3. April 1933
281 Vgl. oben S. 65 ff.Nationalsozialismus, 
Dokumente 
1930—1935, 
1963,
S. 76 ff. — Anm. d. Übers.)
279 Documentation catholique, 8. April 1933 (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)
280 Ebd., 3. April 1933
281 Vgl. oben S. 65 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dokumente 
1930—1935, 
1963,
S. 76 ff. — Anm. d. Übers.)
279 Documentation catholique, 8. April 1933 (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)
280 Ebd., 3. April 1933
281 Vgl. oben S. 65 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

182
17 000 Pastoren keine Stimme des Protestes. Andererseits waren,
wie uns William Shirer sagt, darunter 3000 aktive Kämpfer der
NSDAP. Sie hatten einen gewissen Ludwig Müller, den Militär-
geistlichen des ostpreußischen Wehrkreises, einen Freund des Füh-
rers und überzeugten Nationalsozialisten, an ihrer Spitze.
Sie „vertraten [innerhalb der protestantischen Kirche] . . . die
 [nationalsozialistische] Rassenlehre und das . . . [Prinzip der deut-
schen Vormachtstellung] und wollten sie auf eine alle Protestan-
ten zusammenfassende Reichskirche anwenden282“. Nachdem die
Statuten dieser „Reichskirche“ von den Vertretern der verschie-
denen protestantischen Kirchen Deutschlands — es gab davon
28 verschiedene Ausprägungen! — ausgearbeitet worden waren,
wurde sie am 14. Juli vom Reichstag offiziell anerkannt. Wie er-
innerlich, bestand der erste Vorwurf, der gegen Pius XII., den da-
maligen Kardinal Pacelli und Staatssekretär des Vatikans, erhoben
wurde, darin, daß er damals im Hinblick auf die Unterzeichnung
eines Konkordats trotz aller Untaten des Nationalsozialismus mit
der Regierung des Dritten Reiches in Verbindung getreten war.
Die Protestanten, die ihm diesen Vorwurf machten, haben schließ-
lich das gleiche getan. Ebenso wurde bereits gesagt, daß zur glei-
chen Zeit auch die demokratischen Länder England und Frank-
reich — ebenfalls ungeachtet der Missetaten des Nationalsozialis-
mus — in Hinblick auf die Unterzeichnung des berühmten Vierer-
paktes mit der Reichsregierung in Verbindung getreten waren.
Die Logik aller dieser Leute besteht anscheinend darin, daß wäh-
rend des Sommers 1933 jedermann das moralische Recht hatte,
mit dem Dritten Reich zu verhandeln, nur nicht der Heilige Stuhl!
In der Tat eine bemerkenswerte Logik.
Da in den protestantischen Kreisen kein grundsätzlicher Ein-
wand erhoben worden war, wurde der nächste Schritt in Angriff
genommen: die Ernennung des „Papstes“ der neuen Kirche. Sie
erfolgte Anfang September auf der Synode von Wittenberg. Und
jetzt setzten die Schwierigkeiten ein. Die Delegierten dieser Syn-
ode waren für Pastor Friedrich von Bodelschwingh, der Führer
hingegen für seinen Freund Ludwig Müller, was er am Vorabend
282 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 232Schwierigkeiten ein. Die Delegierten dieser Syn-
ode waren für Pastor Friedrich von Bodelschwingh, der Führer
hingegen für seinen Freund Ludwig Müller, was er am Vorabend
282 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 232

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Die Delegierten dieser Syn-
ode waren für Pastor Friedrich von Bodelschwingh, der Führer
hingegen für seinen Freund Ludwig Müller, was er am Vorabend
282 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 232

--- PAGE BREAK ---

183
der Wahl öffentlich im Rundfunk kundtat. Nachdem Pastor Fried-
rich von Bodelschwingh seine Kandidatur zurückgezogen hatte,
wurde Ludwig Müller einstimmig gewählt. Weder der Führer
noch irgendeiner der protestantischen Geistlichen hatte an Pfar-
rer Dr. Martin Niemöller gedacht. Böse Zungen haben behauptet,
er sei deswegen sehr gekränkt gewesen. Doch wenn es zutreffend
wäre, daß diese Entscheidung den Keim für seine Opposition gegen
Hitler in sich trug, müßte man einräumen, daß er es nicht sogleich
zeigte. Er hatte vorher bei der Schaffung einer Pastorenvereini-
gung, des Pfarrernotbundes, mitgewirkt, und war dessen Vorsitzen-
der geworden. Um nun über seine Absichten im Anschluß an die
Ernennung Dr. Ludwig Müllers zum Oberhaupt der Reichskirche
keine Mißverständnisse aufkommen zu lassen, richtete er an sämt-
liche Pastoren ein Rundschreiben, in dem es hieß: „Die Mitglieder
des Pfarrernotbundes stehen unbedingt zu dem Führer Adolf
Hitler283.“
Am nachfolgenden 14. Oktober, nachdem Deutschland den Völ-
kerbund demonstrativ verlassen hatte, telegraphierte Präsident
Niemöller im Namen des Pfarrernotbundes an den Reichskanzler
Adolf Hitler:
„In dieser für Volk und Vaterland entscheidenden Stunde grü-
ßen wir unseren Führer . . . geloben wir treue Gefolgschaft und
fürbittendes Gedenken283.“
Seine Tätigkeit im Namen dieser Organisation brachte ihn an
die Spitze einer der 28 protestantischen Sekten Deutschlands, der
Bekennenden Kirche, die eine Opposition gegen die kurz zuvor
geschaffene Reichskirche zu bilden suchte.
Doch diese Opposition richtete ihre Schläge weit mehr gegen
diese Kirche als gegen Hitler und den Nationalsozialismus, denn
als es Hitler gelungen war, am 25. Januar 1934 die beiden Par-
teien zum Zweck eines Übereinkommens zusammenzubringen, er-
klärte das von Niemöller aufgenommene Protokoll dieser Zusam-
menkunft Hitler gegenüber noch immer: „ . . . Wir brauchen Ihnen
nicht zu versichern, wie dankbar wir Ihnen sind, daß Sie unser
äußerlich und innerlich zersetztes Volk vom Abgrund weggeris-
283 Deutsche National Zeitung v. 16. April 1963„ . . . Wir brauchen Ihnen
nicht zu versichern, wie dankbar wir Ihnen sind, daß Sie unser
äußerlich und innerlich zersetztes Volk vom Abgrund weggeris-
283 Deutsche National Zeitung v. 16. April 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---n Ihnen
nicht zu versichern, wie dankbar wir Ihnen sind, daß Sie unser
äußerlich und innerlich zersetztes Volk vom Abgrund weggeris-
283 Deutsche National Zeitung v. 16. April 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---

184
sen und zu neuer Entfaltung seiner Kräfte freigemacht haben283.“
Und man kehrte schlecht und recht unter die Fittiche Hitlers
zurück, und die Meinungsverschiedenheiten zwischen der Bekennen-
den Kirche und den übrigen protestantischen Sekten blieben unver-
ändert bestehen. In Wirklichkeit, wie uns nochmals William L.
Shirer sagt, ließen diese Meinungsverschiedenheiten innerhalb der
Geistlichkeit deutlich werden, „daß der Widerstand der protestan-
tischen Kirchen [gegen die Nazifizierung lediglich] von einer Min-
derheit der Geistlichen und einer noch kleineren Minderheit der
Gläubigen ausging284“.
Im Juli 1935 versuchte Hitler erneut, alle diese Meinungsverschie-
denheiten zu beseitigen, die ihn zwar nicht beunruhigten, aber doch
ärgerten. Er beauftragte daher den Reichsminister für kirchliche
Angelegenheiten, Dr. Kerrl, eine erneute Zusammenkunft zu ver-
anlassen. Hieraus ging ein Reichskirchenausschuß hervor, in dem
Dr. Zoellner, ein ehrwürdiger, von allen protestantischen Gruppen
geschätzter und geachteter Pastor, den Vorsitz führte. Dr. Martin
Niemöller vertrat zwar den Standpunkt, daß seine protestantische
Kirche die einzig wahre protestantische Kirche sei, erklärte sich je-
doch zu einer Mitarbeit in diesem Reichskirchenausschuß bereit.
Im Mai 1936 richtete er an Hitler ein höfliches Schreiben, um
gegen die antichristlichen Tendenzen des Regimes zu protestieren
und ihn zu ersuchen, der Einmischung des Staates in die kirchlichen
Angelegenheiten ein Ende zu setzen. Hitler verübelte ihm das
nicht.
Erst am 27. Juni 1937 tat er mit einer über das Thema seines
Schreibens vom Mai 1936 in seiner Kirche in Berlin-Dahlem ge-
haltenen Predigt öffentlich den Sprung in die Opposition. Diese
Predigt enthielt eine Stelle, die eine Herausforderung bedeutete:
„Wir gedenken ebensowenig von unseren eigenen Kräften Ge-
brauch zu machen, um dem Arm der Obrigkeit zu entgehen, wie
ehedem die Apostel. Wir sind jedoch entschlossen, ebensowenig
auf Befehl des Menschen zu schweigen, wenn Gott zu sprechen ge-
bietet. Denn heute und immerdar müssen wir Gott mehr gehor-
chen als dem Menschen285.“
284 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 233
285 Zitiert nach Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, S. 261. (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)en ge-
bietet. Denn heute und immerdar müssen wir Gott mehr gehor-
chen als dem Menschen285.“
284 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 233
285 Zitiert nach Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, S. 261. (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---heute und immerdar müssen wir Gott mehr gehor-
chen als dem Menschen285.“
284 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 233
285 Zitiert nach Shirer, Le IIIe Reich, S. 261. (Rückübers. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

185
Am 1. Juli wurde er verhaftet und ins Gefängnis eingeliefert.
Am 2. März 1938 kam er dann vor ein Sondergericht, das ihn zu
sieben Monaten Gefängnis und 2000 Mark Geldstrafe verurteilte.
Die Gefängnisstrafe war durch die Untersuchungshaft abgegolten:
Beim Verlassen des Gerichtssaales wurde er von der Gestapo fest-
genommen und als „persönlicher Gefangener des Führers“, was
kein geringer Schutz war, in ein Konzentrationslager (für einige
Monate nach Sachsenhausen, dann nach Dachau) geschickt. Erst
die amerikanischen Truppen befreiten ihn aus diesem Lager.
Man kann mindestens sagen, daß sie ein wenig spät kam, diese
Stellungnahme des Pastors Martin Niemöller, der sich im Jahre
1924 dem Nationalsozialismus angeschlossen und ihn von da an
bei jeder Gelegenheit unterstützt hatte, insbesondere, wie man ge-
sehen hat, in seinen Wahlkampagnen, der ferner Verfasser eines
Buches war, das eine Verteidigungsschrift des Nationalsozialismus
darstellte286 und mit einer Bemerkung endete, die seine Befriedi-
gung zum Ausdruck brachte, daß die nationalsozialistische Re-
volution schließlich triumphiert und jenes nationale Wiederer-
wachen zur Folge gehabt habe.
Wenn man sicher wäre, daß dieser Sprung in die Opposition nicht
suspekt wäre, würde man gern sagen: „Besser spät als nie.“ Doch
was soll man von jenem Brief halten, den er im September 1939,
nachdem der Krieg ausgebrochen war, während er doch seit Juli
1937 inhaftiert war, an seinen Freund Großadmiral Raeder schrieb:
„Da ich bislang vergeblich auf meine Einberufung zum Dienst ge-
wartet habe, . . . melde ich mich nunmehr ausdrücklich als Frei-
williger . . . Ich bin 47 Jahre alt, körperlich und geistig völlig lei-
stungsfähig und bitte um irgendeine Verwendung im Kriegs-
dienst287.“
Freiwilliger in den Armeen des Nationalsozialismus, bei voller
Kenntnis hinsichtlich der von ihm verfolgten Ziele — das wirft
286 Vom U-Boot zur Kanzel, Warneck, Berlin 1934. (Pastor Martin Niemöller
war während des Ersten Weltkrieges U-Boot-Kommandant.) Das Buch wurde
im nationalsozialistischen Deutschland zu einem echten Bestseller und erlebte
zahlreiche Auflagen. Die Werbung dafür wurde von der nationalsozialisti-
schen Presse gemacht.
287 Deutsche National Zeitung, 16. April 1963stischen Deutschland zu einem echten Bestseller und erlebte
zahlreiche Auflagen. Die Werbung dafür wurde von der nationalsozialisti-
schen Presse gemacht.
287 Deutsche National Zeitung, 16. April 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---zu einem echten Bestseller und erlebte
zahlreiche Auflagen. Die Werbung dafür wurde von der nationalsozialisti-
schen Presse gemacht.
287 Deutsche National Zeitung, 16. April 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186
nun doch ein eigenartiges Licht auf die Natur und die Aufrichtig-
keit seiner „Opposition gegen das Regime“.
Solch ein Mann ist in Deutschland eine hervorragende Persön-
lichkeit — ein Mann, der, nachdem er jahrelang die Menschen, auf
die er einen gewissen Einfluß ausübte, veranlaßt hatte, sich dem
Nationalsozialismus anzuschließen, und der, nachdem er offenbar
nur deshalb mühelos aus dem Abenteuer herausgekommen war,
weil Hitler ihn in seinen Armeen nicht haben wollte, anschließend
forderte, gegen diejenigen, die seinem Rat gefolgt waren, erbar-
mungslos vorzugehen. Und der sich ferner unter den gewichtigsten
Anklägern Pius’ XII. und glühendsten Anhängern Rolf Hochhuths
— der im übrigen eines seiner Schäflein ist — befindet.
Die Verhaftung Pastor Niemöllers stürzte die ihres Hauptes be-
raubte Bekennende Kirche in Verwirrung: Man hörte kaum noch
etwas von ihr. Im anderen protestantischen Lager war am 12. Fe-
bruar 1937 Dr. Zoellner aus dem Reichskirchenausschuß ausgetre-
ten, weil die Polizei des Dritten Reiches ihn daran gehindert hatte,
sich zu Nachforschungen nach Lübeck zu begeben, wo neun pro-
testantische Pastoren verhaftet worden waren. Am Ende des Jahres
erklärte sein Nachfolger Dr. Marahrens, der Bischof von Hanno-
ver, öffentlich, „daß die nationalsozialistische Weltanschauung als
nationale und politische Lehre für das deutsche Volk bestimmend
und als solche auch für deutsche Christen verpflichtend sei“. Im
Frühjahr 1938 ging er sogar so weit, für sämtliche Pastoren seiner
Diözese anzuordnen, einen persönlichen Treueid auf den Führer
zu leisten. „In kurzer Zeit“, sagt uns William L. Shirer, „kam die
große Mehrheit der evangelischen Geistlichen der Anweisung
nach288.“ Und in ganz Deutschland war es ebenso. Daß sich Pa-
storen der Nazifizierung der deutschen protestantischen Kirche
widersetzten, steht außer Zweifel: Hunderte und aber Hunderte
sind verhaftet und in die Konzentrationslager geschickt worden.
Doch ebenso sind auch Hunderte und aber Hunderte von katho-
lischen Priestern verhaftet worden und in die Konzentrationslager
gewandert. Was wir sagen wollen, ist nur, daß die protestantischen
Widerstandskämpfer sich gegen die allgemeine Linie ihrer Kirche
288 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 234 f.worden und in die Konzentrationslager
gewandert. Was wir sagen wollen, ist nur, daß die protestantischen
Widerstandskämpfer sich gegen die allgemeine Linie ihrer Kirche
288 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 234 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nzentrationslager
gewandert. Was wir sagen wollen, ist nur, daß die protestantischen
Widerstandskämpfer sich gegen die allgemeine Linie ihrer Kirche
288 Shirer, Aufstieg, S. 234 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

187
wandten, während die katholischen Widerstandskämpfer in der all-
gemeinen Linie ihrer Kirche standen. Man wird mir verzeihen, daß
ich mich so häufig auf William L. Shirer berufe, doch schließlich
ist er selbst Protestant, und trotzdem hat keiner besser als er das
allgemeine Verhalten der Gesamtheit der deutschen Protestanten
charakterisiert, der Pastoren und Schäflein gemeinsam, die zwi-
schen den Anhängern einer zur nationalsozialistischen Reichskirche
umgewandelten protestantischen Kirche und den Verfechtern der
totalen politischen Unabhängigkeit der protestantischen Kirche
hin und her gerissen wurden: „Zwischen beiden Gruppen“, so
schreibt er, „stand die Mehrheit der Protestanten, die offenbar zu
zaghaft war, sich zu der einen oder anderen Gruppe zu bekennen,
. . . und schließlich größtenteils in Hitlers Armen landete, . . . seine
Einmischung in kirchliche Angelegenheiten hinnahm und sich sei-
nen Befehlen ohne offenen Widerspruch beugte289.“
Und auch ohne irgendwelchen anderen Widerspruch.
Diese Feststellungen haben keinen sehr großen Indikativen Wert:
Man muß die Furcht in Rechnung stellen, die das Regime der
Geistlichkeit und der Masse der deutschen Protestanten einflößte.
Doch schließlich erweckte dieses Regime bei den Katholiken die
gleiche Furcht und bewirkte bei ihnen trotzdem nicht, daß sie
„größtenteils“, der Klerus an der Spitze, „in Hitlers Armen“ lan-
deten und „seine Einmischung in kirchliche Angelegenheiten“ hin-
nahmen. Man muß auch zugeben, daß die Katholiken gegenüber
den Protestanten einen beachtlichen Vorteil besaßen: einen Nun-
tius in Berlin und einen Papst in Rom, der erstere unverletzlich
und der zweite außerhalb der Reichweite von Repressalien, die in
ihrem Namen Protest erheben konnten und sich dessen auch nicht
enthielten. Aber jedenfalls war es ein katholischer Bischof, Msgr.
Graf von Galen aus Münster, und nicht ein protestantischer Bi-
schof, der sich gegen die Euthanasie erhob . . .
Es war notwendig, das Verhalten der protestantischen Kirche,
ihrer Bischöfe und ihrer insgesamt 17 000 Pastoren im einzelnen
ins Gedächtnis zu rufen. Wir haben es nicht aus freien Stücken ge-
tan. „Für jede Sünde Barmherzigkeit“ — wenn dies das Gesetz des
289 Ebd., S. 232öfe und ihrer insgesamt 17 000 Pastoren im einzelnen
ins Gedächtnis zu rufen. Wir haben es nicht aus freien Stücken ge-
tan. „Für jede Sünde Barmherzigkeit“ — wenn dies das Gesetz des
289 Ebd., S. 232

--- PAGE BREAK ---amt 17 000 Pastoren im einzelnen
ins Gedächtnis zu rufen. Wir haben es nicht aus freien Stücken ge-
tan. „Für jede Sünde Barmherzigkeit“ — wenn dies das Gesetz des
289 Ebd., S. 232

--- PAGE BREAK ---

188
Gottes der Christen ist, so ist es auch das des Gewissens der Athei-
sten, obgleich es leider nicht das der Menschen im allgemeinen ist.
Wenn diese Kirche nicht dieses Gesetz ihres eigenen Gottes so weit
vergessen hätte, daß sie das Gewissen eines Unschuldigen mit einer
Sünde belastete, die sie und nicht er begangen hat, und sich nicht
heute zur Anklägerin aufwürfe, hätten wir uns wohl davor gehü-
tet.Und wenn wir es getan haben, so nicht nach Art eines Hoch-
huth, um irgendwelche x-beliebigen Verwünschungen gegen sie
auszustoßen, sondern lediglich, um an das alte Sprichwort von dem
Dieb zu erinnern, der „Haltet den Dieb!“ schreit. Wenn man von
den Prinzipien zu den Tatsachen hinabsteigt, weiß man anderer-
seits sehr wohl, daß unter einer Diktatur wie auch im Kriege der
Mensch die Maßstäbe seines Handelns verliert und sein Verhalten
sich jeglichem Werturteil entzieht. Ich habe das im Konzentrations-
lager (in der gleichen Weise wie Louise Michel) sowie bei Kampf-
handlungen im Kriege persönlich erfahren. Alle Vernunft ist aus-
geschaltet, bei den Männern des Glaubens in noch viel stärkerem
Maße. Und in diesem Punkt wird uns vor Pius XII. Achtung abge-
nötigt: Das Verhalten dieses Mannes des Glaubens nämlich wurde
von rationalen Grundsätzen bestimmt, die im Gegensatz zu denen
des Glaubens stets menschlich sind.
Unter der Diktatur Hitlers also: Nehmen wir das zur Kenntnis
und gehen wir weiter. Doch vorher?
Für die Zeit vorher bleibt die Tatsache bestehen, daß die ge-
samte protestantische Geistlichkeit und selbst jene kleine Minder-
heit, die später, erst viel später, in die Opposition ging und deren
typischster Vertreter Pastor Niemöller ist, für Hitler Partei ergrif-
fen und zu einem der Faktoren für seinen Erfolg wurden, obgleich
Deutschland Republik war und keinerlei Druck ausgeübt wurde.
Der katholische Klerus, der Heilige Stuhl, Pius XI. und Kardinal
Pacelli, der spätere Pius XII., dagegen . . .290
Auch jene Sünde wird der protestantischen Kirche vergeben
werden, denn in den Wirren jener Zeit . . . (siehe oben). Und, wie
dem auch sei, auch das steht in der Heiligen Schrift: „Dem, der viel
gesündigt hat, wird viel vergeben werden.“ Auf Grund dessen
290 Vgl. die Beschlüsse der aufeinanderfolgenden Fuldaer Bischofskonferenzen
oben S. 174h das steht in der Heiligen Schrift: „Dem, der viel
gesündigt hat, wird viel vergeben werden.“ Auf Grund dessen
290 Vgl. die Beschlüsse der aufeinanderfolgenden Fuldaer Bischofskonferenzen
oben S. 174

--- PAGE BREAK ---eiligen Schrift: „Dem, der viel
gesündigt hat, wird viel vergeben werden.“ Auf Grund dessen
290 Vgl. die Beschlüsse der aufeinanderfolgenden Fuldaer Bischofskonferenzen
oben S. 174

--- PAGE BREAK ---

189
wird man ihr sogar eine noch weitaus schwerere Sünde vergeben,
nämlich die, daß sie sich heute zur Anklägerin aufwirft. Doch wenn
man so alles vergeben hat, behält man trotzdem das Recht zu sa-
gen, daß man es gern gesehen hätte, daß von ihr diese letzte Sünde
nicht begangen worden wäre. Möge die protestantische Kirche sich
doch darüber klar werden, daß, wenn sich in dieser Angelegenheit
jemand erlauben durfte, Anklage zu erheben, dann nicht sie es war.
Und möge sie, wenn sich zufällig einer ihrer Gläubigen, der sich wie
Hochhuth so weit verirrt hat, daß er jegliches moralische Gefühl
verloren hat, bis zu einer solchen Schändlichkeit wie dem Stellver-
treter hinreißen läßt, es nur zum Anlaß nehmen, ihre eigene Schuld
einzugestehen und so demütig wie möglich einem Menschen Ach-
tung zu erweisen, der, obwohl er Papst war, dennoch vor dem
Nationalsozialismus und dem Krieg weit mehr Größe bewies als
irgendeiner ihrer Pastoren und selbst, wenn man sie alle zu einem
riesigen Bündel zusammenfassen würde, mehr als sie alle zusam-
men.
Ich weiß wohl, warum sie das nicht getan hat:
Da ist zunächst jene bereits erwähnte allgemeine Geisteshaltung,
die nur sehr wenige Menschen zu überwinden vermögen: die Hal-
tung derjenigen, die im Bewußtsein ihrer eigenen Schuld sich ein
gutes Gewissen zu verschaffen suchen, indem sie einen ebenso
Schuldigen oder noch Schuldigeren als sie selbst zu finden trachten.
Es ist ein instinktmäßiges und durchaus menschliches Verhalten.
Menschlich in dem Sinne, in dem dieses Adjektiv eine Schwäche des
Menschen hinsichtlich seiner Einsicht in die Dinge bezeichnet, in
einem Sinne, der dem Humanismus diametral entgegengesetzt ist.
Hinzu kommt in diesem besonderen Fall die den Protestanten an-
geborene antipäpstliche Einstellung, der Kern ihrer Lehre. Und
schließlich die durch den Zweiten Weltkrieg geschaffene völlig neue
politische Situation, in der sich die protestantische Kirche Deutsch-
lands heute befindet.
Das aus dem protestantischen Preußen hervorgegangene, im Zei-
chen des Kulturkampfes entstandene Deutschland des Jahres 1914
war ein Reich, in dem Protestanten und Katholiken sich im Ver-
hältnis zwei zu eins gegenüberstanden. Der Kaiser war Protestant,
der Reichskanzler war Protestant und die Führer der Armee undhres 1914
war ein Reich, in dem Protestanten und Katholiken sich im Ver-
hältnis zwei zu eins gegenüberstanden. Der Kaiser war Protestant,
der Reichskanzler war Protestant und die Führer der Armee und

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich, in dem Protestanten und Katholiken sich im Ver-
hältnis zwei zu eins gegenüberstanden. Der Kaiser war Protestant,
der Reichskanzler war Protestant und die Führer der Armee und

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190
der Polizei waren ebenfalls Protestanten. Die protestantische Kir-
che übte in diesem Deutschen Reich einen beträchtlichen Einfluß
auf die Politik aus. Ein hoher katholischer Staatsbeamter wäre
nicht denkbar gewesen.
Der Kulturkampf, Ausdruck eines liberalen Prinzips, war aus
der Reaktion Bismarcks gegen die Politik Pius’ IX. und insbeson-
dere gegen das Dogma von der päpstlichen Unfehlbarkeit entstan-
den, das dieser Papst am 18. Juli 1870 durch ein Konzil (Erstes
Vatikanisches Konzil) verkünden ließ. Auf Regierungsebene äußer-
te sich der Kulturkampf durch Ausnahmegesetze gegen die Katho-
liken (Unterdrückung der Freiheit der Kirche, obwohl diese z. B.
durch die preußische Verfassung von 1850 garantiert worden war).
Die Protestanten waren nicht davon betroffen. Hätten sich diese
Gesetze nur auf Preußen erstreckt, so hätten daraus keine ernst-
haften Nachteile entstehen können, obgleich sie von himmelschrei-
ender Ungerechtigkeit waren. Da sie jedoch ganz Deutschland be-
trafen, bewirkten sie, daß sich das katholische Drittel der Bevölke-
rung gerade in dem Augenblick gegen Bismarck zusammenschloß,
in dem es dem aufsteigenden Marxismus gelang, nahezu ein weite-
res Drittel um sich zu scharen. Um im Reichstag nicht überstimmt
zu werden, mußte Bismarck nachgeben (1880, sog. Friedensgesetz).
Da die Katholiken keinerlei Konzessionen gemacht hatten, bedeu-
tete dies die erste politische Niederlage des deutschen Protestantis-
mus, der mit der Beendigung des Kulturkampfes sein einträglich-
stes Propagandamittel einbüßte.
Von da an hörte die katholische Kirche nicht mehr auf, ihren
Einfluß auf die deutsche Politik auszuüben und in zunehmendem
Maße zu erweitern — im Wettbewerb mit der protestantischen
Kirche. Die Fortschritte waren langsam — sogar sehr langsam. Die
höchsten staatlichen Ämter blieben noch lange Zeit hindurch den
Protestanten vorbehalten, und erst 1930 wurde ein Katholik, Dr.
Brüning, Reichskanzler. Als Hitler an die Regierung kam, war je-
doch auf konfessionellem Gebiet der protestantische Einfluß vor-
herrschend, und obgleich Hitler seiner Herkunft nach Katholik
war, empfand er persönlich weit mehr Sympathie für die prote-
stantische als für die katholische Kirche: Allein die Tatsache, daß
er daran gedacht hatte, eine Nationalkirche des Reiches daraus zuolik
war, empfand er persönlich weit mehr Sympathie für die prote-
stantische als für die katholische Kirche: Allein die Tatsache, daß
er daran gedacht hatte, eine Nationalkirche des Reiches daraus zu

--- PAGE BREAK ---persönlich weit mehr Sympathie für die prote-
stantische als für die katholische Kirche: Allein die Tatsache, daß
er daran gedacht hatte, eine Nationalkirche des Reiches daraus zu

--- PAGE BREAK ---

191
machen, beweist dies unbestreitbar. Man könnte sogar hinzufügen,
daß von jeher, seit der Entstehung Deutschlands, es nahezu einmü-
tig die protestantischen Kreise waren, die den deutschen Nationa-
lismus in seiner extremsten Form zum Ausdruck brachten — eine
weitere Brücke also zwischen Hitler und ihnen. Man hat diesen
Nationalismus als „preußisch“ bezeichnet. Einverstanden, doch ich
stelle die Frage: preußisch, weil er protestantisch, oder protestan-
tisch, weil er preußisch war?
Mit dem Ende des Zweiten Weltkrieges ging auch der überwie-
gende Einfluß des Protestantismus auf die deutsche Politik zu
Ende. Zunächst wurde Deutschland in zwei Teile geteilt: 17 bis 18
Millionen seiner Einwohner kamen auf die östliche Seite des Eiser-
nen Vorhanges, 51 bis 52 Millionen auf die westliche Seite. Doch
gerade jene 17 bis 18 Millionen Deutsche, die von Deutschland ab-
getrennt wurden, sind Protestanten. Diese Tatsache hat zwei Fol-
gen:
1. Auf der anderen Seite des Eisernen Vorhanges, die der kom-
munistischen Diktatur unterworfen ist, sind der protestantischen
Geistlichkeit gewisse Stellungnahmen verboten, und allem An-
schein nach erträgt sie diese Verbote ebenso widerspruchslos wie
einst diejenigen, die ihr durch das Hitlerregime auferlegt wurden.
Insbesondere läßt sie sich sehr bereitwillig zu der sowjetischen Frie-
denslehre hinführen. Und die protestantische Geistlichkeit in West-
deutschland richtet sich nach ihr aus: Pastor Martin Niemöller,
der U-Boot-Kommandant des Ersten Weltkrieges und Verfasser
eines Buches, das das Glaubensbekenntnis eines fanatischen Natio-
nalisten darstellt und mit einer begeisterten Zustimmungserklä-
rung zu der „nationalsozialistischen Revolution“ endet, jener Frei-
willige, der sich 1939 für eine Wiederverwendung im Kriegsdienst
in den Armeen Hitlers meldete, ist heute der einflußreichste pro-
testantische Geistliche und steht an der Spitze einer Friedensbe-
wegung, die systematisch sämtliche Friedensparolen der Sowjet-
union für sich in Anspruch nimmt. Die deutschen Pazifisten haben
für die Lenkung ihrer Geschicke nichts Besseres gefunden. Kurz,
der Eiserne Vorhang ist für die in 28 Teile aufgespaltene protestan-
tische Kirche Deutschlands keineswegs ein zusätzlich trennender,
sondern weit mehr ein verbindender Faktor gewesen, und zwarKurz,
der Eiserne Vorhang ist für die in 28 Teile aufgespaltene protestan-
tische Kirche Deutschlands keineswegs ein zusätzlich trennender,
sondern weit mehr ein verbindender Faktor gewesen, und zwar

--- PAGE BREAK ---orhang ist für die in 28 Teile aufgespaltene protestan-
tische Kirche Deutschlands keineswegs ein zusätzlich trennender,
sondern weit mehr ein verbindender Faktor gewesen, und zwar

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192
insofern, als er es den einzelnen Teilen ermöglicht, von Zeit zu
Zeit eine Einheit der Anschauungen zu bekunden, zumindest über
einen Punkt: den Frieden. Dies ist im übrigen ganz allgemein eine
Tradition des Protestantismus: In eine Unzahl von Sekten mit
gegensätzlicher Auffassung über Glaubensfragen aufgespalten, hat
er niemals einen Weg gefunden, seine Einheit zu bekräftigen, außer
über Probleme, die der Religion, zu der er sich bekennt, fern-
liegen.
2. Während die protestantische Kirche Deutschlands jenseits des
Eisernen Vorhanges in ihren öffentlichen Stellungnahmen durch
das Regime auf die Rolle eines Mittlers der Pax sovietica beschränkt
wird — wobei ihr dieses Regime, nebenbei gesagt, wie allen Kir-
chen in der Ausübung ihrer Religion rechtlich nicht mehr Freiheit
als einer Privatperson zugesteht —, wird sie in Westdeutschland
in ihrem politischen Einfluß durch ein Zahlenverhältnis einge-
schränkt: Im Jahre 1965 stehen sich dort Protestanten und Katho-
liken nicht mehr — wie in dem Deutschland vor 1914 oder zwi-
schen den beiden Weltkriegen — im Verhältnis zwei zu eins, son-
dern nur noch im Verhältnis sechs zu fünf291 gegenüber, d. h. zah-
lenmäßig ziemlich gleich, mit einem leichten Übergewicht der Pro-
testanten. Politisch drückt sich diese Situation folgendermaßen aus:
Wenn der Bundespräsident protestantisch ist (Heuss), ist der Bun-
deskanzler katholisch (Adenauer), und auf diese Mannschaft folgte
ein katholischer Präsident (Lübke) und ein protestantischer Kanz-
ler (Erhard). So als hätten die beiden Kirchen innerhalb der CDU/
CSU einen Kompromiß geschlossen, einen Kompromiß, der weder
der einen noch der anderen zusagt und bei dem eine jede
die andere überwacht, bereit, die geringste Gelegenheit zu ergrei-
fen, durch die sie über die andere die Oberhand gewinnen kann.
Der außergewöhnliche Erfolg Bundeskanzler Adenauers wirkt zu-
gunsten der Katholiken, die sich auf Grund ihrer Haltung gegen-
über dem Nationalsozialismus bereits in einer günstigen Position
291 In abgerundeten Zahlen kann die Bevölkerung der Bundesrepublik Deutsch-
land nach ihrem Bekenntnis folgendermaßen veranschlagt werden: Insge-
samt: 53 Millionen Einwohner; Protestanten: zwischen 27 und 28 Millionen;
Katholiken: zwischen 23 und 24 Millionen; konfessionslos und sonstige Be-
kenntnisse: der Rest.en veranschlagt werden: Insge-
samt: 53 Millionen Einwohner; Protestanten: zwischen 27 und 28 Millionen;
Katholiken: zwischen 23 und 24 Millionen; konfessionslos und sonstige Be-
kenntnisse: der Rest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---en: Insge-
samt: 53 Millionen Einwohner; Protestanten: zwischen 27 und 28 Millionen;
Katholiken: zwischen 23 und 24 Millionen; konfessionslos und sonstige Be-
kenntnisse: der Rest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

193
befinden: Sie haben den Wind im Rücken. Gegen die Protestanten
wirkt die Unterstützung, die sie Hitler auf seinem Weg zur Macht
leisteten, sowie jener Kryptokommunismus, durch den sie glaub-
ten sich rehabilitieren zu können. Sie sind sich dessen bewußt ge-
worden. Und dann kam der Stellvertreter, dessen Ziel es war, den
Katholiken einen Schlag zu versetzen, von dem sie sich nicht erholen
würden, und der gleichzeitig sie, die Protestanten, als eines der
wesentlichen Elemente des Widerstandes gegen Hitler erscheinen
lassen sollte.
Dies ist der erste Aspekt des Unternehmens Stellvertreter: ein
Argument der Protestanten, um in Westdeutschland den politi-
schen Einfluß der Katholiken zu bekämpfen und, was zweifellos
dabei wesentlich ist, um eine Anhängerschaft zu vergrößern oder
zumindest zu bewahren, welche ihr politisches Verhalten in der
Vergangenheit und Gegenwart zuletzt äußerst unsicher gemacht
hat. Daß sämtliche protestantische Kirchen der Welt wie ein Mann
das Argument ihrerseits aufgegriffen haben, ist nur allzu natür-
lich, denn es ist in seiner Form das antipäpstliche Argument par
excellence. Doch wir haben soeben gesehen, daß es in seinem Kern,
wie Kipling sagen würde, etwas ganz anderes ist.
Das Argument eines Krämers übrigens, eines Krämers aus den
Uranfängen des Handels: „Hier alles zum gleichen Preis, aber bes-
ser als gegenüber! Der Beweis dafür . . . “ Ein Argument, an dem
der Kunde von heute nur noch mit einem Lächeln ob dieser Naivi-
tät vorübergeht. Im Verlauf der Debatte hat eine der unzähligen
gegen den Katholizismus protestierenden Sekten sehr offenherzig
— und altmodisch — das verfolgte Ziel eingestanden, indem sie
sich auf die Heilige Schrift berief: „Gehet aus von ihr [der katho-
lischen Kirche], mein Volk, daß ihr nicht teilhaftig werdet ihrer
Sünden, auf daß ihr nicht empfanget etwas von ihren Plagen! Denn
ihre Sünden reichen bis an den Himmel, und Gott denkt an ihren
Frevel292.“
Sprich: Gehet aus von ihr und kommt zu uns.
Zu diesem Schluß gelangen sie alle: Der letzte Krämer unserer
Zeit in dem abgelegensten Dörfchen ist geschickter.
292 Réveillez-vous! (Organ der Zeugen Jehovas), 22. Juli 1964, S. 19. Bei der
angeführten Stelle handelt es sich um Offenbarung 18, 4—5.mer unserer
Zeit in dem abgelegensten Dörfchen ist geschickter.
292 Réveillez-vous! (Organ der Zeugen Jehovas), 22. Juli 1964, S. 19. Bei der
angeführten Stelle handelt es sich um Offenbarung 18, 4—5.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dem abgelegensten Dörfchen ist geschickter.
292 Réveillez-vous! (Organ der Zeugen Jehovas), 22. Juli 1964, S. 19. Bei der
angeführten Stelle handelt es sich um Offenbarung 18, 4—5.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194
III. DIE EINHEITSFRONT GEGEN DEN PAPST
Es gilt jetzt, die Beweggründe zu analysieren, durch die die Geg-
ner der katholischen Kirche, die sich mit der protestantischen zu
dieser Art von „Einheitsfront“ verbündet haben, geleitet wurden.
Nur zur Erinnerung verweilen wir bei jener geistigen Bewegung,
die zu Beginn dieses Jahrhunderts, als der Sozialismus seine Einheit
verwirklicht und die Gewerkschaftsbewegung ihren Weg gefunden
hatte und als die Arbeiterschaft mit der Parole: „Der Kapitalis-
mus — das ist der Feind!“ zum Sturm auf das Regime ansetzte,
diese davon ablenkte, indem sie ihr darlegte, daß der Feind nicht
der Kapitalismus, sondern der Klerikalismus sei: „Der Klerikalis-
mus — das ist der Feind!“ Die Ablenkung gelang ausgezeichnet.
Seitdem unterscheidet sich die europäische Linke von der Rechten
nur noch durch einen Antiklerikalismus, der 30 Jahre später bis auf
geringe Abweichungen zu einer Neuauflage des Kulturkampfes
wurde. Während die Arbeiterschaft damit beschäftigt war, sich mit
den katholischen Pfarrern zu schlagen, festigte das Regime in aller
Ruhe sein inneres Gefüge und bereitete nicht weniger ruhig den
Ersten Weltkrieg vor. Wie es weiterging, ist bekannt: Die Arbei-
terbewegung hat sich niemals davon erholt! Jenem Antiklerikalis-
mus selbst widerfuhr das gleiche Schicksal wie dem Kulturkampf:
In der gleichen Weise wie Bismarck gegenüber Leo XIII. hatte nach-
geben müssen, mußten die sozial Konservativen, die die Bewegung
lanciert hatten, um die vor der Regierungsübernahme versproche-
nen Reformen nicht durchführen zu müssen, gegenüber Pius IX.
nachgeben: von sich aus die Beziehungen zum Vatikan wiederher-
stellen, nach und nach die Ausnahmegesetze gegen die katholi-
sche Kirche aufheben usw. Der Antiklerikalismus ging daran zu-
grunde. In Frankreich, wo er am heftigsten war und den meisten
Erfolg hatte, versuchen kleine Sekten ihn wiederaufleben zu las-
sen. Vergeblich. Ihre furchtbarsten Waffen sind die kleine Leder-
schürze, das Winkelmaß, der Zirkel und die Wurst am Karfreitag.
Es ist nicht wahr, daß das Lächerliche nicht mehr tötet.
Im Prinzip jedoch war die Trennung von Kirche und Staat eine
sehr gute Sache. Nur hätte sie bedeuten müssen: „Eine freie Kirche
in einem freien Staat“ gemäß der Formel Viktor Emanuels II.,mehr tötet.
Im Prinzip jedoch war die Trennung von Kirche und Staat eine
sehr gute Sache. Nur hätte sie bedeuten müssen: „Eine freie Kirche
in einem freien Staat“ gemäß der Formel Viktor Emanuels II.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ip jedoch war die Trennung von Kirche und Staat eine
sehr gute Sache. Nur hätte sie bedeuten müssen: „Eine freie Kirche
in einem freien Staat“ gemäß der Formel Viktor Emanuels II.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

195
d. h. eine Kirche, die letztlich auf den Status einer politischen Par-
tei reduziert worden wäre, mit den gleichen Rechten wie alle ande-
ren. Jedoch im Stadium der Durchführung bedeutete sie die Ver-
drängung der katholischen Kirche zugunsten einer anderen, deren
Religion der Staat und deren Priester bei der Kommunion mit
dem großen Baumeister des Universums die Lehrer sein sollten.
Und noch dazu mit Hilfe von Ausnahmegesetzen. Einzig und
allein durch Überraschung hat man es fertigbringen können, daß
der Taschenspielertrick zu Beginn dieses Jahrhunderts gelang. Aber
nicht für lange. Die Wurstesser vom Karfreitag, mit dem klei-
nen Lederschurz, dem Winkelmaß und dem Zirkel, die von einer
Rückkehr zu jenen glücklichen Zeiten träumen, in denen ihr An-
sehen hell erstrahlte, müssen sich ins Unvermeidliche schicken. Die
Geschichte wiederholt sich nicht. Auf jeden Fall hat sie sich in
dieser Hinsicht nicht wiederholt.
Väterchen Combes ist nicht wieder aus dem Grabe auferstanden,
und seine verspäteten Jünger sind für das Ausmaß der durch den
Stellvertreter ausgelösten Debatte nicht entscheidend gewesen. Das
Ausmaß wurde vielmehr durch den Bolschewismus und den inter-
nationalen Zionismus bestimmt. Und obgleich ihre beiderseitigen
Stellungnahmen in dieser Angelegenheit nicht die gleiche Absicht
verfolgen, sind sie ihnen alle beide durch die deutsche Frage, so wie
sie sich durch den Ausgang des Zweiten Weltkrieges stellte, ein-
gegeben worden. Da sie die gleichen Wege benutzen, müssen sie
überdies ganz sicher zum gleichen Endergebnis gelangen: zum
Untergang der Freiheit in Europa, und zwar dadurch, daß Europa
selbst unter den Einfluß des Bolschewismus gerät.
Ich habe häufig gesagt und geschrieben, daß der Bolschewismus
unter dem Deckmantel einer Weltrevolution, die alle Völker vom
kapitalistischen Joch befreien soll, nur die moderne Form jenes
Panslawismus ist, den unter demselben Deckmantel der Panschin-
toismus seit kurzem zu betreiben sucht. Unter Stalin kam man
schließlich zu der Auffassung, daß nicht mehr die Befreiung der
Völker durch die Revolution das Ziel sei, sondern daß mit Hilfe
eines Krieges die bolschewistische Herrschaft auf ganz Europa
ausgedehnt werden solle, das in wirtschaftliche und soziale Struk-
turen eingezwängt worden sei, die weit hinter denen des liberalenHilfe
eines Krieges die bolschewistische Herrschaft auf ganz Europa
ausgedehnt werden solle, das in wirtschaftliche und soziale Struk-
turen eingezwängt worden sei, die weit hinter denen des liberalen

--- PAGE BREAK ---die bolschewistische Herrschaft auf ganz Europa
ausgedehnt werden solle, das in wirtschaftliche und soziale Struk-
turen eingezwängt worden sei, die weit hinter denen des liberalen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

196
Kapitalismus zurückstünden, die gegenwärtig in Rußland vor-
herrschen. Das zeigt, wie jener Sozialismus beschaffen ist, und
führt gleichzeitig jene Revolution auf ihre richtigen Proportionen,
nämlich die einer Bauernfängerei, zurück.
Wie die Erfahrung zeigt, haben sich die Berechnungen Stalins
nur zur Hälfte als falsch erwiesen. Zwar ist es ihm nicht gelungen,
Rußland aus dem Zweiten Weltkrieg herauszuhalten, doch hat
dieser Krieg immerhin die Hälfte Mitteleuropas dem Panslawis-
mus ausgeliefert und seine Grenzen bis auf 50 Kilometer an Ham-
burg herangerückt. Soll nur Westdeutschland zusammenbrechen,
dann ist der Weg zum Atlantik für ihn frei. Jedesmal also, wenn
ein Schritt in Richtung auf die Rückgliederung Westdeutschlands
— und, auf dem Wege über die Wiedervereinigung, selbst die Ost-
deutschlands — in die übrigens allen offenstehende europäische
Völkergemeinschaft unternommen wird, ergehen sich die Nach-
folger Stalins in Schmähungen gegen den deutschen Militarismus,
gegen die neonazistischen Bonner Revanchisten, gegen das für den
Zweiten Weltkrieg verantwortliche Deutschland, die Kriegsver-
brecher usw. Das ist ihr moralisches Argument. Es soll in der öffent-
lichen Meinung jene offensichtliche Lüge zugkräftig erhalten, die
durch die dreizehn Nürnberger Prozesse in den Rang einer ge-
schichtlichen Wahrheit erhoben wurde, daß Deutschland, da allein
für den Zweiten Weltkrieg verantwortlich, auch allein die Last der
Wiedergutmachung der angerichteten Schäden zu übernehmen
habe.
Deutschland bezahlen lassen, jetzt und immerdar, heißt, es zum
wirtschaftlichen Zusammenbruch treiben. Mit Hilfe des sich dar-
aus ergebenden Chaos hoffen die Nachfolger Stalins zuversicht-
lich, es in ihre Gewalt zu bringen.
Und das wird das Ende des freiheitlichen Europas sein, denn
ohne ein freies, selbständiges und gleichberechtigt in die Ge-
meinschaft der Völker des alten Kontinents wiedereingegliedertes
Deutschland ist jenes Europa undenkbar. Dann werden die Gren-
zen des Panslawismus einen weiteren beachtlichen Schritt nach
Westen verlagert worden sein, und der Bolschewismus wird kaum
mehr etwas unternehmen müssen, damit sie mit der Atlantikküste
zusammenfallen.n des Panslawismus einen weiteren beachtlichen Schritt nach
Westen verlagert worden sein, und der Bolschewismus wird kaum
mehr etwas unternehmen müssen, damit sie mit der Atlantikküste
zusammenfallen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---inen weiteren beachtlichen Schritt nach
Westen verlagert worden sein, und der Bolschewismus wird kaum
mehr etwas unternehmen müssen, damit sie mit der Atlantikküste
zusammenfallen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

197
So sehen die Berechnungen des Bolschewismus aus.
Und so das Unternehmen, dem die gesamte protestantische
Geistlichkeit aus Gründen des religiösen Prestiges im Staate soeben
mit dem Stellvertreter ein Propagandaargument lieferte und dem
die internationale zionistische Bewegung sich aus materiellen
Gründen anschloß. Denn durch die erneute Bekräftigung der
Alleinschuld Deutschlands wird in der Tat die Zahlung jener Ent-
schädigungssummen gerechtfertigt, die ihr die Konsolidierung des
Staates Israel und den „Wiederaufbau des jüdischen Lebens“ in der
Welt ermöglichen. Weisen wir beiläufig darauf hin, daß diese
„Wiedergutmachungssummen“ nur von Westdeutschland gezahlt
werden! Ihr Betrag ist so hoch, daß das, was 1919 durch den Ver-
sailler Vertrag gefordert wurde, im Vergleich dazu eine Bagatelle
war. (Siehe Anhang V)
Doch die christlichen Progressisten? Zunächst einmal sind sie dar-
um bemüht, sich ein gutes Gewissen zu verschaffen und Verzei-
hung zu erwirken für die Haltung, die sie, taub gegen die Appelle
Pius’ XII., angesichts und während des Krieges eingenommen ha-
ben — eine Haltung, die während des Krieges häufig zweideutig
war: Ich kenne Fälle von Leuten, die heute sehr von oben herab
reden und die . . . Nun ja! Darüber hinaus jedoch quält sie die Ver-
suchung des Marxismus, dessen Methoden in ihren Augen allein
die katholische Kirche zu retten vermögen: die Öffnung nach links.
Gerade in dem Augenblick, in dem die Erfahrung Rußlands den
Beweis für den Bankrott des Marxismus erbracht hat und in dem
in der übrigen Welt die Linke gesellschaftlich nur noch einen
Mythus darstellt, der durch den Bolschewismus künstlich unter-
halten wird, der im politischen Fächer nicht links, sondern öst-
lich steht, d. h. an der äußersten Rechten, und zwar sehr wahr-
scheinlich noch weiter rechts als die alten Parteien, die wir ge-
wöhnlich dort einordnen. Denn an der äußersten Rechten steht
der Totalitarismus, und zwar ganz gleich, unter welcher doktri-
nären Farbe auch immer er sich versteckt. In bezug auf den Totali-
tarismus aber können jene alten Parteien dem Bolschewismus nicht,
bei weitem nicht, das Wasser reichen. Was hier gesagt werden soll,
ist, daß man von dem Augenblick an, in dem man von einer Öff-
nung nach links spricht und sich dabei nur noch an den Bolschewis-cht,
bei weitem nicht, das Wasser reichen. Was hier gesagt werden soll,
ist, daß man von dem Augenblick an, in dem man von einer Öff-
nung nach links spricht und sich dabei nur noch an den Bolschewis-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, das Wasser reichen. Was hier gesagt werden soll,
ist, daß man von dem Augenblick an, in dem man von einer Öff-
nung nach links spricht und sich dabei nur noch an den Bolschewis-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198
mus wendet, erstens die Öffnung nach der äußersten Rechten, also
der schlimmsten, hin vornimmt und daß zweitens alles, wozu man
gelangen kann, bedeutet, ihm in die Hände zu arbeiten. Wenn man
überdies aus Sorge um die Lehre die Kirche mit dem marxistischen
Denksystem ausstatten will, kann man nur noch um so sicherer da-
hin kommen. Und noch rascher: Es ist bekannt, in welches Aben-
teuer kürzlich die Öffnung nach links, mit dem Segen desjeni-
gen, den man den guten Papst Johannes XXIII. nennt, Italien bei-
nahe gestürzt hätte. Und man erschauert bei dem Gedanken, was
hätte geschehen können, wenn die italienische Geistlichkeit marxi-
stisch gewesen wäre! Die bolschewistische Politik der „den Katho-
liken dargebotenen Hand“, jenes Bolschewismus, der sie im Osten
mit der Knute behandelt, ist im Westen lediglich eine Neuauflage
des Grundsatzes von dem „Vogel, den man zu rupfen gedenkt“,
jenes Grundsatzes, den der Bolschewismus seit fünfzig Jahren mit
soviel Erfolg gegenüber dem Sozialismus praktiziert. Die Erfah-
rung lehrt, daß seine Technik auf diesem Gebiet äußerst bewährt
ist. Der geringste Vertrag, den man mit ihm schließt, das geringste
Zugeständnis gegenüber seinen Methoden oder seiner Lehre läuft
darauf hinaus, daß man den Wolf in den Schafstall einläßt, wo er
stärker ist als alle Schafe zusammen.
Es ist lediglich eine Frage des Kräfteverhältnisses.
Und diejenigen, die der Versuchung unterliegen, sind politisch
blind.
Nachdem dies gesagt ist, mag sich die katholische Kirche ruhig
wandeln, ja sogar aus dem geistigen Leben der Völker verschwin-
den, wie sie aus ihrem materiellen Leben verschwunden oder doch
nahezu verschwunden ist — der Verfasser dieser Studie sieht darin,
wie der Leser bereits verstanden hat, keinerlei Nachteil, im Gegen-
teil. Doch wenn sie dabei ihre Anhängerschaft dem Bolschewismus
überläßt, sieht die Sache ganz anders aus.
Zu diesen rein politischen Motiven, die über das Thema des
Stellvertreter Protestanten, Juden, christliche Progressisten und
Bolschewisten zu einer gemeinsamen Offensive gegen die katholi-
sche Kirche zusammengeführt haben, muß noch ein ausschließlich
religiöser Beweggrund hinzugefügt werden, der ein Dogma des
Christentums in Frage stellt und der für die internationale zioni-e katholi-
sche Kirche zusammengeführt haben, muß noch ein ausschließlich
religiöser Beweggrund hinzugefügt werden, der ein Dogma des
Christentums in Frage stellt und der für die internationale zioni-

--- PAGE BREAK ---he zusammengeführt haben, muß noch ein ausschließlich
religiöser Beweggrund hinzugefügt werden, der ein Dogma des
Christentums in Frage stellt und der für die internationale zioni-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

199
stische Bewegung charakteristisch ist: die Anklage, die seit zwei-
tausend Jahren auf dem jüdischen Volk lastet und aus ihm in den
Augen der ganzen Christenheit ein Volk der Gottesmörder macht.
Als die Einberufung des Konzils durch Johannes XXIII. Angekün-
digt wurde, mußte die internationale zionistische Bewegung darin
eine ausgezeichnete Gelegenheit erblicken, diese Anklage offiziell
aufheben zu lassen. Und zwar um so mehr, als das Los, welches
den Juden während des Zweiten Weltkrieges einzig und allein des-
wegen zuteil wurde, weil sie Juden waren, in der ganzen Welt all-
gemeine Empörung ausgelöst hatte, die nicht weniger gerecht-
fertigt bleiben würde, wenn die Vorkommnisse all der maßlosen
Übertreibungen entkleidet und auf ihre wahren Größenverhält-
nisse zurückgeführt würden, und die durch die nicht weniger all-
gemeine Sympathie, die dieses Schicksal den Juden einbrachte, in
der öffentlichen Meinung eine Atmosphäre schafft, die der Revi-
sion dieses Bannfluchurteils günstig ist.
IV. FÜR DEN FRIEDEN
Dies sind die verschiedenen Aspekte der „Operation Stellvertre-
ter“, und in dieser Weise sind sie politisch miteinander verknüpft.
Fassen wir sie noch einmal zusammen: die Sorge der protestan-
tischen Kirche um eine Rückeroberung ihrer Positionen gegenüber
der katholischen Kirche; die politische Vorherrschaft, die sie in
Deutschland eingebüßt hat; die panslawistischen Ambitionen des
Bolschewismus; die Liebe auf den ersten Blick der christlichen
Progressisten 
für 
den 
Marxismus 
bolschewistischen 
Gepräges;
schließlich das Interesse der internationalen zionistischen Bewe-
gung an den von Deutschland geforderten Kriegsentschädigun-
gen sowie ihre Sorge um eine Aufhebung der Anklage wegen
Gottesmordes oder, genauer gesagt, des Mordes an Christus, die
auf dem jüdischen Volk lastete.
Alles dies aufgepfropft auf die deutsche Frage, so wie sie sich
durch den Ausgang des Zweiten Weltkrieges stellte, das heißt auf
die einseitige Verantwortlichkeit Deutschlands an der Entfesselung
dieses Krieges. Nachdem es nicht geglückt war, in Nürnberg densich
durch den Ausgang des Zweiten Weltkrieges stellte, das heißt auf
die einseitige Verantwortlichkeit Deutschlands an der Entfesselung
dieses Krieges. Nachdem es nicht geglückt war, in Nürnberg den

--- PAGE BREAK ---ang des Zweiten Weltkrieges stellte, das heißt auf
die einseitige Verantwortlichkeit Deutschlands an der Entfesselung
dieses Krieges. Nachdem es nicht geglückt war, in Nürnberg den

--- PAGE BREAK ---

200
rechtlichen Nachweis für diese einseitige Verantwortlichkeit zu er-
bringen, gedenkt man ihn jetzt nur noch vor der öffentlichen
Meinung, mit Hilfe von spektakulären Prozessen und skandalösen
Pamphleten, zu erbringen, und zwar durch die Verbrechen, die
man die Deutschen beschuldigt, während des Krieges, das heißt nach
seiner Entfesselung, begangen zu haben. Mit gleicher Methode
könnte man ebensogut beweisen, daß die Engländer, die Franzo-
sen oder die Russen — oder alle zusammen und unter einer Decke
— für diesen Krieg allein verantwortlich seien: Man brauchte nur
Auschwitz durch Dresden, Leipzig und fünfzig andere deutsche
Städte, nicht zu vergessen Hiroshima und Nagasaki, oder durch
Katyn usw. zu ersetzen, und die Sache wäre gemacht. Das Be-
stürzendste an dieser völlig neuen Art der Beweisführung ist, daß
sie von bedeutenden Professoren unternommen wird, die eben-
so reichlich mit Diplomen versehen wie hochdekoriert sind und
deren Verdienste man tagtäglich feierlich herausstellt, wobei man
uns auffordert, uns ehrerbietig vor ihrer Wissenschaft zu vernei-
gen. Eine Tatsache, die es einem für immer verleiden kann, Ge-
lehrter zu werden!
Wir werden nicht weiter bei der Nichtigkeit jener These verwei-
len, nach der bei Ausbruch eines Krieges die Verantwortung dafür
nur einem einzigen Volk oder den Führern eines einzigen Volkes
zukommen kann. Dies hatte Pius XII. vollkommen begriffen, und
dieser These versuchte er in den Handlungen Geltung zu ver-
schaffen, die man ihm vor allem zum Vorwurf macht.
Am Ende dieser Studie bleibt nur noch eine Alternative: Ent-
weder man gibt zu, daß die Völker stets ohne Urteilsvermögen
handeln und daher an den von ihren Führern getroffenen Ent-
scheidungen stets unschuldig sind — übrigens nicht nur hinsicht-
lich Krieg und Frieden293 —, daß bei Ausbruch eines Krieges ihre
Führer, und zwar alle, ohne Ausnahme, auf beiden Fronten, allein
verantwortlich sind und daß infolgedessen der Prozeß nicht mehr
zwischen den Siegermächten und dem besiegten Volk stattfindet,
sondern zwischen der Gemeinschaft der Völker, in der Sieger und
293 Hierzu sollte man auch das Werk Psychologie des foules von Bouglé heran-
ziehen.n Siegermächten und dem besiegten Volk stattfindet,
sondern zwischen der Gemeinschaft der Völker, in der Sieger und
293 Hierzu sollte man auch das Werk Psychologie des foules von Bouglé heran-
ziehen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dem besiegten Volk stattfindet,
sondern zwischen der Gemeinschaft der Völker, in der Sieger und
293 Hierzu sollte man auch das Werk Psychologie des foules von Bouglé heran-
ziehen.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

201
Besiegte miteinander ausgesöhnt sind, und der Gemeinschaft ihrer
Führer. Oder, zweite Möglichkeit, man bleibt beim alten Schlen-
drian, verzichtet darauf, aus diesem Teufelskreis, diesem Circulus
vitiosus des Krieges, der nur wiederum Krieg hervorbringt, heraus-
zukommen, und muß dann sogleich, unverzüglich, das jüdische
Volk erneut verurteilen, zumindest für den Mord an Christus.
Bei den ersten der beiden Möglichkeiten wird das Problem rasch
gelöst sein: Die Völker sind großmütig, tragen nicht nach, Ver-
zeihen ist ihre natürliche Geisteshaltung. „Sie werden General-
amnestie beschließen und die streitenden Parteien abweisen, ohne
einer von ihnen recht zu geben und ohne daß es überhaupt nötig
ist, zu prozessieren. Die Parteien mögen gemeinsam darangehen,
die Schäden zu reparieren und endlich einmal mit diesem immer
wiederkehrenden Völkermord, der ständig über unseren Häup-
tern schwebt, ein Ende machen.“ Es ist offensichtlich sehr zweifel-
haft, daß die Führer der Völker diese Sprache freiwillig anhören,
und das ist die schwache Stelle dieser vernünftigen Überlegungen.
In den herkömmlichen Strukturen nämlich, an denen die Führer
der Völker aus Egoismus sosehr festhalten, verfügen sie noch über
genügend Kräfte, geheime oder andere, um derartige Überlegun-
gen zum Scheitern zu bringen. Doch früher oder später wird der
Geist über das Schwert siegen. Die erschreckenden Fortschritte der
Atomwissenschaft beweisen durch die Reaktionen, die sie hervor-
rufen, bereits, daß dieser Zeitpunkt nicht mehr fern ist. Nur noch
ein winziges Nachhelfen, und es wird geschafft sein. Nicht zweifel-
haft und äußerst tröstlich ist dagegen, daß die Völker diese Sprache
sprechen. Man braucht nur zu sehen, welcher Gunst sich in der
französischen öffentlichen Meinung die Kampagnen für die Am-
nestie sämtlicher als Verbrechen angerechneten Handlungen derje-
nigen erfreuen, die zugunsten des FLN (Front de Libération Natio-
nale) oder der OAS (Organisation de l’Armée Secrète) in den Alge-
rienkrieg verwickelt wurden, wo doch dieser Krieg noch kaum zu
Ende gegangen ist. Diese Tendenz ist so stark, daß die Regierung,
obwohl sie dies nicht im geringsten beabsichtigt, gezwungen ist,
der öffentlichen Meinung nachzugeben. An dem Tage, an dem
jemand aufsteht und ganz laut sagt, was alle Leute insgeheim den-
ken, und von einer europäischen Amnestie für alle Handlungengezwungen ist,
der öffentlichen Meinung nachzugeben. An dem Tage, an dem
jemand aufsteht und ganz laut sagt, was alle Leute insgeheim den-
ken, und von einer europäischen Amnestie für alle Handlungen

--- PAGE BREAK ---öffentlichen Meinung nachzugeben. An dem Tage, an dem
jemand aufsteht und ganz laut sagt, was alle Leute insgeheim den-
ken, und von einer europäischen Amnestie für alle Handlungen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

202
spricht, die sich auf einen jetzt schon 25 Jahre zurückliegenden
Krieg beziehen, einer Amnestie, die für den Krieg selbst, ein-
schließlich derer gilt, die für ihn verantwortlich sind, werden
alle Völker so reagieren wie das französische Volk angesichts der
Folgen eines Krieges, der gerade erst zu Ende ging. Die Straße der
Hoffnung wird alsdann erneut für den wahren Frieden offenstehen.
Bei der zweiten der beiden Möglichkeiten gibt es nur noch das
Gesetz der Vergeltung des Alten Testaments, das die Zähne der
Kinder stumpf macht bis ins 77. Glied, um sie dafür zu strafen,
daß die Väter unreife Trauben gegessen haben: ein Gesetz, das
auf der allerniedrigsten, bis ins Äußerste getriebenen Rachsucht
beruht und das, auch wenn es im Arsenal der Argumente der he-
bräischen Theologie und Gerichtsbarkeit sorgsamst bewahrt und
verehrt wird, nichtsdestoweniger aus den Uranfängen der Mensch-
heit stammt und im 20. Jahrhundert nur noch eine grobe Beleidi-
gung gegenüber den erhabensten Grundsätzen einer Zivilisation
darstellt, die, wenn sie auch praktisch ihre Ziele noch nicht er-
reicht hat, doch zumindest das Verdienst besitzt, daß sie theo-
retisch die Menschenwürde zu ihrem wichtigsten Anliegen erhoben
hat. Dieses Gesetz der Vergeltung führt die Menschheit von einer
Schande zur anderen: von derjenigen, die — nachdem sie alle
Menschen ohne Ausnahme unwiderruflich dazu verurteilt hatte,
Verbrecher zu sein, indem sie jenes große Kollektivverbrechen, den
Krieg, zuerst mit großem Getöse forderte und dann rechtfertigte
— darin bestand, das Kriegsverbrechen des einzelnen zu erfinden,
zu derjenigen, die 20 Jahre später seine Nichtverjährbarkeit erfand,
und vom Auschwitz-Prozeß zum Stellvertreter. All das, um letzten
Endes aus dem systematischen Deutschenhaß das fundamentale Ge-
setz der europäischen Politik zu machen und einen zusätzlichen
Kriegsherd im Vorderen Orient zu schaffen.
Die Diskussion zwischen den Anhängern der beiden Möglichkei-
ten geht weiter. Da das Eigentümliche des Hasses und der Rach-
sucht aber darin besteht, niemals die Waffen niederzulegen294, hat
es nicht den Anschein, daß sie ihrem Ende zugeht: Die Polemik um
den Stellvertreter dürfte geeignet sein zu beweisen, daß die Heuch-
ler und Exzentriker, die diese beiden Ansichten vertreten, sich auf
dem absteigenden Ast befinden, doch . . .zugeht: Die Polemik um
den Stellvertreter dürfte geeignet sein zu beweisen, daß die Heuch-
ler und Exzentriker, die diese beiden Ansichten vertreten, sich auf
dem absteigenden Ast befinden, doch . . .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

203
Aber wenn auch die Wahrheit und der gesunde Menschenver-
stand sich nach und nach durchsetzen und wenn auch theoretisch
die Masse jener bösartigen Heuchler und Exzentriker sich merklich
verringert hat, so sind ihre Anführer nichtsdestoweniger sehr
machtvoll organisiert. Praktisch sitzen sie immer noch oben und
halten die Geschicke der Welt in Händen. Sollte es ihnen gelin-
gen, die Situation zu ihren Gunsten wiederherzustellen oder sollte
jener Umschwung der öffentlichen Meinung, dessen erste Anzei-
chen bereits zu erkennen waren, zu lange auf sich warten las-
sen, so wäre das der Triumph des panslawistischen Bolschewis-
mus, das heißt durch die Vernichtung Deutschlands das Ende jenes
Europas, das trotz all dem, was Abstimmung und andere, nicht
weniger verfälschte Meinungsforschungen bezeugen, im Traum
und im Wachen in den Herzen aller Europäer ruht.
Der Leser wird mir beipflichten, daß dieser Blick in die Zukunft
es wohl wert war, diese Warnung auszusprechen.
Um so mehr als hinterher . . . Doch es ist besser, nicht daran zu
denken, was hinterher kommen würde.
294 In Rom sind sie so weit, Bomben unter die Fenster des Papstes zu legen, und
keiner jener guten Apostel, die sich über die Stinkbomben im Athénée in
Paris entrüsteten — übrigens mit vollem Recht —, hat dagegen protestiert.
Zweifellos deswegen nicht, weil Bomben die Frage besser beantworten als
Stinkbomben!?

--- PAGE BREAK ---bomben im Athénée in
Paris entrüsteten — übrigens mit vollem Recht —, hat dagegen protestiert.
Zweifellos deswegen nicht, weil Bomben die Frage besser beantworten als
Stinkbomben!?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

205
Nachwort
Kaum war der Schlußpunkt unter diese Studie gesetzt, als, wie
aus der Büchse der Pandora, ein neuer Ankläger, noch bedrohlicher
und noch kategorischer als alle seine Vorgänger, sich im Anklage-
stand erhob: „Ja, der Papst wußte“, erklärte er in einem Ton, der
keine Widerrede duldete, „er wußte und er schwieg.“
Es handelt sich diesmal um den „angesehensten italienischen
Journalisten für religiöse Angelegenheiten“. Sein Name: Carlo
Falconi. Das heißt für eine beachtliche Anzahl von Gutgläubigen
sehr wahrscheinlich, daß dieses Ansehen immerhin ein recht gut
gehütetes Geheimnis war295. Sein Manager: Candide, eine Zeit-
schrift, die bis jetzt eher zur entgegengesetzten These hingeneigt
hatte. Ziemlich überraschend also. Aber ist eine Zeitschrift, die sich
niemals ändert, nicht absurd?
Kurz: In leuchtenden Schlagzeilen, über die ganze Titelseite und
mit dem Foto Pius’ XII. bringt Candide296, die die bezeichnendsten
Auszüge der demnächst erscheinenden Abhandlung297 des neuen
Anklägers veröffentlicht, in einem grellen Rot ihre kategorische
Erklärung mit diesem Keulenschlag: „Das Dokument, das alles
enthüllt“. Dieser Schlag wird durch einen weiteren Zwischentitel
der Auszüge verdoppelt, aus dessen Formulierung zur Genüge her-
vorgeht, daß er als Gnadenstoß gemeint ist: „Das entscheidende
Dokument über den Vatikan und die Nazi-Lager.“
Man kann den Wert eines Buches nicht nach Auszügen allein be-
urteilen. Zumindest aber darf man darin die Punkte erwarten, die
an dem Buch für den eventuellen Leser am bedeutsamsten und ver-
lockendsten sind. Im vorliegenden Fall jenes „entscheidende Doku-
ment, das alles enthüllt“. Man liest also und erfährt, daß der Ver-
fasser „in den Archiven des Heiligen Stuhls“ den Beweis entdeckte,
daß „Ja, der Papst wußte“. Doch von einem Dokument erfährt
man nichts: Das Dokument ist vielmehr — halten wir uns gut
fest — die Abhandlung des Anklägers selbst!
Wirklich ein bewundernswertes Verfahren!
295 Er ist in Wirklichkeit ein ehemaliger Priester.
296 31. Mai 1965
297 Bei Éd. du Rocherehr — halten wir uns gut
fest — die Abhandlung des Anklägers selbst!
Wirklich ein bewundernswertes Verfahren!
295 Er ist in Wirklichkeit ein ehemaliger Priester.
296 31. Mai 1965
297 Bei Éd. du Rocher

--- PAGE BREAK ---gut
fest — die Abhandlung des Anklägers selbst!
Wirklich ein bewundernswertes Verfahren!
295 Er ist in Wirklichkeit ein ehemaliger Priester.
296 31. Mai 1965
297 Bei Éd. du Rocher

--- PAGE BREAK ---

206
Dagegen findet man in diesen Buchauszügen zwei neue Zeu-
gen mit ihrem Foto: Admiral Canaris, den ehemaligen Chef der
Abwehr im Dritten Reich, und von Papen, den früheren Bot-
schafter Hitlers in Ankara, wo er engste Beziehungen zu Msgr.
Roncalli (dem verstorbenen Johannes XXIII.) unterhielt, der dort
Nuntius Pius’ XII. war.
Das hier angewandte Verfahren ist nicht weniger bemerkens-
wert. Unter dem Bild des ersten findet sich folgende Erläute-
rung: „Canaris, Chef des nationalsozialistischen Geheimdienstes,
soll den Vatikan über die nationalsozialistischen Grausamkeiten
informiert haben.“ Die übliche hypothetische Ausdrucksweise aller
Ankläger Pius’ XII. Man sucht im Text nach einer Rechtfertigung
dafür: Die Formulierung ist darin wohl wieder aufgegriffen, doch
ein Beleg wird nicht gegeben. Eine schlichte Unterstellung also.
Der Text unter dem Foto von Papens hat die Form einer positi-
ven Aussage: „Der Botschafter Hitlers hatte dem Delegaten des Vati-
kans, Msgr. Roncalli, Indiskretionen übermittelt.“ Sieht man sich
den Text genauer an, so erfährt man, daß dies nur „aller Wahr-
scheinlichkeit nach“ geschah, aber erhält nicht den geringsten Hin-
weis auf diese „Indiskretionen“.
Im Falle Papens sind wir durch seine Aussagen in Nürnberg
glücklicherweise darüber informiert, was er Msgr. Roncalli hat
übermitteln können:
„ . . . unsere allgemeine Kenntnis war die, daß die Juden in Lager
nach Polen abtransportiert werden; aber von einer vorsätzlichen
Extermination . . . ist uns nichts bekannt gewesen298 . . . Ich glaube,
sie sollten deportiert werden, Mylord, nach Polen. Aber daß sie
vernichtet werden sollten, das haben wir 1944 nicht gewußt . . .
Zum Zwecke der Vernichtung — ich glaube, daß uns das damals
nicht gesagt worden seit299.“
Und er hatte am vorhergehenden 19. September im Ermitt-
lungsverfahren deutlich gemacht, daß er erst „hier [in Nürnberg]
von all den Verbrechen erfahren300 hätte“.
298 Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher, Sitzungstag 19. Juni 1946 (Nürn-
berg 1948), XVI, S. 465
299 Ebd., S. 466
300 Ebd., Sitzungstag 18. Juni 1946 (Nürnberg 1948), XVI, S. 372fahren300 hätte“.
298 Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher, Sitzungstag 19. Juni 1946 (Nürn-
berg 1948), XVI, S. 465
299 Ebd., S. 466
300 Ebd., Sitzungstag 18. Juni 1946 (Nürnberg 1948), XVI, S. 372

--- PAGE BREAK ---8 Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher, Sitzungstag 19. Juni 1946 (Nürn-
berg 1948), XVI, S. 465
299 Ebd., S. 466
300 Ebd., Sitzungstag 18. Juni 1946 (Nürnberg 1948), XVI, S. 372

--- PAGE BREAK ---

207
Er hat also Msgr. Roncalli nicht mehr sagen können. Doch der
Leser weiß durch die in dieser Studie angeführten Texte Pius’ XII.
(insbesondere seine üblichen Ansprachen vom 2. Juni jeden Jahres,
einschließlich derjenigen vom 2. Juni 1945 und seines Schreibens
an Kardinal von Preysing), daß alles dies, und außerdem weitaus
genauer, schon lange vor 1944 (seit 1939 für Polen, 1941 für die
Slowakei, 1942 für Holland usw.) im Vatikan bekannt war. Das
Schreiben Kardinal Tisserants bezeugt andererseits, daß man dar-
über hinaus dort nichts gewußt hat, vor allem nicht über Ausch-
witz, sondern „erst nach der Ankunft der Alliierten in Deutsch-
land301“ davon erfahren habe, d. h. frühestens Ende 1944 oder
Anfang 1945.
Nach den Auszügen beurteilt, trägt also die Abhandlung des
Journalisten Carlo Falconi keine neuen Gesichtspunkte in die
Debatte — außer einem: Seine Vorgänger im Anklagestand be-
schränkten sich darauf, Fakten zu verschweigen oder sie tendenziös
auszulegen, er hingegen geniert sich nicht, sogar welche zu erfin-
den. Seine Darstellungen erfolgen in der Form einer ungesicher-
ten Annahme, die Schlußfolgerungen im Indikativ der positiven
Aussage: Nur darin liegt seine Originalität.
Was die von Carlo Falconi angeführten realen Fakten betrifft,
war es keineswegs notwendig, sie in den Archiven des Heiligen
Stuhls zu ermitteln: Man fand sie bereits in der Presse, und daher
kannte jedermann sie schon lange, bevor er sie uns enthüllte. Mit
einem Wort, es waren offene Geheimnisse. Niemand hat überdies
jemals behauptet, Pius XII. habe die Fakten nicht gekannt. Be-
merkenswert ist hierbei, daß unser Verfasser, der immerhin ehr-
lich genug war, zuzugeben (was seine Vorgänger nicht oft taten),
daß sie ohne Ausnahme diplomatische Proteste des Vatikans aus-
gelöst haben, in einem sensationellen Titel trotzdem daraus fol-
gerte: „Die wahren Gründe für das Schweigen Pius’ XII.302“.
Bei der anschließenden Darlegung dieser „wahren Gründe“
unterrichtet uns Carlo Falconi, damit niemand seine Absichten
mißverstehen möge, gleich zu Beginn davon, daß „Pius XII. außer-
301 Vgl. oben S. 44 Trotzdem benutzt Carlo Falconi den Kardinal, um zu be-
weisen, daß der Papst „wußte“.
302 Candide v. 7. Juni 1965n
mißverstehen möge, gleich zu Beginn davon, daß „Pius XII. außer-
301 Vgl. oben S. 44 Trotzdem benutzt Carlo Falconi den Kardinal, um zu be-
weisen, daß der Papst „wußte“.
302 Candide v. 7. Juni 1965

--- PAGE BREAK ---gleich zu Beginn davon, daß „Pius XII. außer-
301 Vgl. oben S. 44 Trotzdem benutzt Carlo Falconi den Kardinal, um zu be-
weisen, daß der Papst „wußte“.
302 Candide v. 7. Juni 1965

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208
gewöhnlichen Mut besaß“, zugleich aber, daß er „seiner Veran-
lagung nach ängstlich und zurückhaltend“ war, und schließlich, daß
er „niemals gewagt hat“.
Nachdem er diese von einer so seltsamen Logik zeugende Vor-
stellung zum Prinzip erhoben hat, fügt er noch hinzu, daß „die im
Stellvertreter vorgebrachten Motive nicht der Wirklichkeit ent-
sprechen“. Doch hören wir, welche er selbst gefunden hat:
„die Sorge Pius’ XII., der Kirche in ganz Europa die Möglich-
keit ihres Fortbestehens zu sichern, und zwar mit ausreichenden
Kräften, um in der Nachkriegszeit die Zukunft des Kontinents
und der ganzen Welt in entscheidender Weise zu beeinflussen“;
„seine Überzeugung, daß die Schwächung des Nationalsozialis-
mus dem Kommunismus nützlich wäre, insbesondere wenn man
das blinde Vertrauen berücksichtigt, das die Staatsmänner der
Alliierten in die kommunistischen Führer setzten“;
„seine Deutschfreundlichkeit [über die, wie er sagt,] man viel
und in sehr überzeugender Weise geschrieben hat“.
Daraus sieht man kaum, was diese Abhandlung von denjenigen
der Herren Hochhuth, Friedländer, Nobécourt und Genossen un-
terscheidet, deren Hauptanklagepunkte ganz genau die gleichen
sind, nur anders formuliert.
Es soll daher über Carlo Falconi nur noch eine einzige Bemer-
kung gemacht werden, eine Bemerkung, die für alle, die ihm auf
diesem Weg vorangingen, wie für alle, die ihm darauf folgen wer-
den — und es werden zweifellos noch welche kommen —, gilt:
Wenn derartige, immer gleiche Anklagen, die durch derartige
ebenfalls immer gleiche Verfahren gestützt werden, weiterhin in
Umlauf gesetzt werden können und die Aufmerksamkeit der
Öffentlichkeit zu fesseln vermögen, dann einzig und allein des-
halb, weil die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. nicht den Mut gehabt haben,
die Debatte über die untergeordnete Frage, was er wußte oder
nicht wußte, hinauszuführen, und weil sie zugelassen haben, daßlein des-
halb, weil die Verteidiger Pius’ XII. nicht den Mut gehabt haben,
die Debatte über die untergeordnete Frage, was er wußte oder
nicht wußte, hinauszuführen, und weil sie zugelassen haben, daß

--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
ihre Gegner gerade diese Frage zum „Schlüssel des Problems“ (so
Carlo Falconi) seines Verhaltens machten. Doch bekanntlich liegt
der Schlüssel des Problems nicht dort, sondern in seiner Theorie
vom Frieden bzw. von der Wiederherstellung des Friedens, wenn
der Krieg ausgebrochen ist, einer Theorie, die übrigens in glän-
zendster und angemessenster Weise in einem soeben erschienen
Buch303 dargelegt ist, das einige von denen, die die Verteidigung
Pius’ XII. übernommen haben, so leichtfertig sie sich bisher auch
gezeigt haben mögen, vielleicht nicht ohne Gewinn lesen würden.
Den 9. Juni 1965
303 G. Herberichs, Théorie de la Paix selon Pie XII

--- PAGE BREAK ---men haben, so leichtfertig sie sich bisher auch
gezeigt haben mögen, vielleicht nicht ohne Gewinn lesen würden.
Den 9. Juni 1965
303 G. Herberichs, Théorie de la Paix selon Pie XII

--- PAGE BREAK ---

211
Anhang I
Allgemeine Auffassungen über Pius XII.
bis zu Rolf Hochhuth
I. Le Populaire (3. 3. 1939)
„Schlappe für Mussolini“
„Kardinal Pacelli, dessen Exklusion
Graf Ciano verlangt hatte, ist
bereits am ersten Tag des Konklaves
gewählt worden.“
„Um die Kontinuität seiner Politik
des Friedens und des Widerstandes
gegen den Rassenwahn zu unter-
streichen, nimmt er den Namen
Pius XII. an.“
Unter diesem Titel und diesen beiden Untertiteln, die eine fest-
gefügte Meinung und eine unverhohlene Befriedigung zum Aus-
druck bringen, konnte man in Le Populaire vom 3. März 1939 auf
der Titelseite einen dreispaltigen Artikel von Pierre Brossolette
lesen, in dem dieser sich glücklich schätzt, daß das Konklave in dem
Augenblick, in dem der Frieden so schwer gefährdet war, durch
die Wahl Kardinal Pacellis, des künftigen Pius’ XII., „zur Wah-
rung des Friedens einen nahezu unbezahlbaren Beitrag geleistet“
habe:
„Wenn das einzige Drama, das sich in diesem Augenblick ab-
spielt, nicht das des Friedens wäre, hätten wir der Papstwahl gleich-
gültig zusehen können. Wir wissen, daß die Kirche, ob freiheitlich
oder autoritär, stets die Kirche ist, daß ihr Glaube sie zu der Frei-
heit des Geistes in Gegensatz bringt, daß die Fälle, in denen die
Glaubenspraxis sie nicht zur Freiheit der Menschen in Gegensatz
gebracht hat, selten sind. Wer weiß, ob nicht morgen der Sozialis-
mus diese Erfahrung machen wird, wie sie die Republik so lange
und so bitter gemacht hat?

--- PAGE BREAK ---r Menschen in Gegensatz
gebracht hat, selten sind. Wer weiß, ob nicht morgen der Sozialis-
mus diese Erfahrung machen wird, wie sie die Republik so lange
und so bitter gemacht hat?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

213
Doch die Ernennung des Nachfolgers Pius’ XI. reihte sich nicht
in diesen Streit ein. ,Pace! Pace!‘ hatte der verstorbene Papst ster-
bend gemurmelt. Das war kein frommer und nichtiger Wunsch.
Die schwere Bedrohung, die die Diktaturen für die Welt bedeute-
ten, hatte seine letzten Jahre mit Angst und Unruhe erfüllt. Zwei-
fellos hatten die Übergriffe der totalitären Staaten gegenüber den
geistigen und materiellen Interessen der Kirche bei ihm diese klare
Erkenntnis der Gefahr beschleunigt, doch was hat das zu sagen?
Was bleibt, ist die Tatsache, daß er, als er noch kaum die Gefahr
geahnt hatte, auch schon von seiner leidenschaftlichen Frömmig-
keit dazu getrieben wurde, sich mit seiner ganzen Persönlichkeit
dagegen zu wenden, und daß im Verlauf dieser letzten Monate die
Beharrlichkeit, mit der das Papsttum handelte, ebenso wie seine
feierliche Verdammung des Fanatismus und der Gewalt zur Wah-
rung des Friedens einen nahezu unschätzbaren Beitrag geleistet
haben.“
Pierre Brossolette hatte große Angst gehabt:
„Doch würde sich die Kirche den Scharfblick ihres letzten Hir-
ten zu eigen machen? Würde sie unter den möglichen Nachfolgern
Pius’ XI. denjenigen erwählen, der die größte Eignung zu besitzen
schien, seine Politik fortzusetzen, nachdem er zuvor das tatkräf-
tigste und erlauchteste Werkzeug dieser Politik gewesen war? Ge-
nügten nicht die Intrigen, die Art der Behandlung, der Druck, den
die faschistische Regierung auf ein überwiegend aus Italienern be-
stehendes Kardinalskollegium ausübte, eine gewissermaßen plebis-
zitäre Entscheidung zugunsten der festen Haltung, die Pius XI.
eingenommen hatte, an der Person Kardinal Pacellis zu verhin-
dern? Die ganze Einstellung des Konklaves mußte sich in der Ant-
wort auf diese Fragen zeigen.
Man weiß indessen, daß Kardinal Pacelli sich gerade dadurch,
daß er Staatssekretär des verstorbenen Papstes war, in einer schlech-
ten Position befand. Die Kirche liebt keine Dynastien. Ein tiefwur-
zelndes Vorurteil hält sie für gewöhnlich davon ab, den engsten
Mitarbeiter eines Papstes zu dessen Nachfolger zu machen. Seit der
Wahl Leos XIII. war es weder Kardinal Rampolla noch Kardinal
Merry del Val noch Kardinal Gasparri gelungen, dieses Hindernis
zu überwinden. Der Staatssekretär Pius’ XI. ist erfolgreicher gewe-eit der
Wahl Leos XIII. war es weder Kardinal Rampolla noch Kardinal
Merry del Val noch Kardinal Gasparri gelungen, dieses Hindernis
zu überwinden. Der Staatssekretär Pius’ XI. ist erfolgreicher gewe-

--- PAGE BREAK ---II. war es weder Kardinal Rampolla noch Kardinal
Merry del Val noch Kardinal Gasparri gelungen, dieses Hindernis
zu überwinden. Der Staatssekretär Pius’ XI. ist erfolgreicher gewe-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214
sen: Angesichts der Notwendigkeit, durch eine aufsehenerregende
Geste die Kontinuität einer Politik zu bekräftigen, die sich weder
dazu versteht, der Gewalt das Recht einzuräumen, den Frieden zu
stören, noch das, ihn zu diktieren, ist man zu seinen Gunsten von
dieser Tradition abgewichen.“
Trotz dieser Gründe, die gegen Kardinal Pacelli sprachen, „des-
sen leidenschaftliche Frömmigkeit ihn dazu getrieben hatte, sich
gegen die Gefahr, die durch die totalitären Regime repräsentiert
wird, zu erheben“, trotz „der Intrigen und des Druckes“ war die
Antwort des Konklaves . . .
„ . . . aufsehenerregend. Trotz des durch den Telegrafo eingeleg-
ten Vetos (oder vielleicht gerade wegen dieses Vetos), trotz der in
den faschistischen Kreisen betriebenen beharrlichen Kampagne ge-
gen die Wahl eines ,politischen‘ Papstes ist Kardinal Pacelli auf den
Thron Petri gewählt worden. Die Wahl wurde nach Beratungen,
die weniger als einen Tag dauerten, bei nur drei Wahlgängen er-
reicht — ein in den Annalen der Kirche fast einmaliges Ereignis.
Etwas betreten über diesen Mißerfolg gaben die faschistischen
Kreise bereits gestern abend zu verstehen, daß sie letzten Endes
gegenüber Kardinal Pacelli eine wohlwollende Neutralität gewahrt
hätten, und man brauchte sie nicht sehr zu drängen, um sie zu der
Aussage zu veranlassen, daß sie sehr auf den neuen Papst rechneten,
da es ja schließlich leichter sei, sich mit einem ,Politiker‘ als mit
einem ,Heiligen‘ zu verständigen. Es ist nicht unsere Aufgabe, sie
eines Besseren zu belehren, obgleich wir davon überzeugt sind,
daß, wenn auch das Handeln der ,Politiker‘ zuweilen weniger ein-
drucksvoll ist als das der ,Heiligen‘, das erstere dem letzteren ge-
genüber doch zumindest den Vorteil besitzt, sich nützlicher — weil
früher — auszuwirken. Es ist für uns nicht notwendig, daß man
die Diktaturen an dem Tag, an dem sie den Krieg erklären, blitz-
artig niederschmettert. Was wir hingegen dringend fordern, ist,
daß man uns hilft, sie daran zu hindern, den Krieg zu entfesseln.
Nun ist man aber in der ganzen Welt der Überzeugung, daß der
Nachfolger Pius’ XI. mit ebenso brennendem Eifer dazu beitragen
wird wie Pius XI. selbst. Der neue Papst hat diese Überzeugung im
übrigen dadurch bestärkt, daß er den gleichen Namen wie sein
Vorgänger wählte.er Pius’ XI. mit ebenso brennendem Eifer dazu beitragen
wird wie Pius XI. selbst. Der neue Papst hat diese Überzeugung im
übrigen dadurch bestärkt, daß er den gleichen Namen wie sein
Vorgänger wählte.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

215
Möge Mussolini dies doch nur verstehen! Möge Hitler dies doch
auch verstehen! Möchten sie doch verstehen, daß die katholische
Welt sich in der Person ihres neuen Oberhauptes wie in der ihrer
Kardinäle soeben unwiderruflich gegen die Diktaturen und gegen
die Politik der Drohung, der Gewalt und des Krieges ausgespro-
chen hat. Und möchten sie dieser Politik doch rechtzeitig Einhalt
gebieten und daran denken, daß niemand auf der Welt, und hieße
er selbst Hitler oder Mussolini, eine Partie gewinnen kann, in der
er die Völker und den Papst zugleich gegen sich hat!“
Pierre Brossolette
(Le Populaire, 3. März 1939, S. 1)
II. L’Humanité (3. 3. 1939)
„Rasche Wahl Kardinal Pacellis —
Pius XII. Nachfolger Pius’ XI.“
„Die anmaßende Exklusionsforderung,
die durch die faschistischen
Regierungen von Berlin und Rom
gegen ihn erhoben wurde, hat ihre
Antwort erhalten.“
Dieser dreispaltige Titel und der Untertitel auf der ersten Seite
von L’Humanité vom 3. März 1939 sind nicht weniger bezeichnend
und zeugen von nicht weniger großer Befriedigung als die des
Populaire vom gleichen Tag. Der Verfasser des Artikels, Pierre-
Laurent Darnar, ist noch entschiedener als Pierre Brossolette. Er
zeigt uns in der Person des Kardinals Pacelli und nunmehrigen
Pius’ XII. „einen Papst, der ein Gegner des Rassenstandpunktes
und ein Freund der Gewissensfreiheit ist und der die Menschen-
würde achtet.
Beabsichtigt er nicht, mit der Wahl des Namens die Politik des-
jenigen fortzusetzen, dessen engster Mitarbeiter und Staatssekre-
tär er in all den letzten Jahren war?
Denn man konnte Kardinal Pacelli und den Papst nicht trennen,
wenn es darum ging, die Unsinnigkeit des Rassenstandpunktes, die

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd Staatssekre-
tär er in all den letzten Jahren war?
Denn man konnte Kardinal Pacelli und den Papst nicht trennen,
wenn es darum ging, die Unsinnigkeit des Rassenstandpunktes, die

--- PAGE BREAK ---

217
Verfolgungen im Dritten Reich, die Anschläge des Faschismus ge-
gen die Gewissensfreiheit und die Menschenwürde zu verurteilen.
Der frühere Staatssekretär — und jetzige Papst —, der von der
sozialistischen Volksfrontregierung im Jahre 1937 mit großen
Ehren empfangen wurde, neigt zur Verständigung mit den Demo-
kratien für die gemeinsame Verteidigung der höchsten Güter der
freien Menschen, die bedroht oder verfolgt sind.
Wie hätten die französischen Kommunisten, deren Führer Mau-
rice Thorez seine offene Hand darbot, die von April 1936 an das
Symbol einer Politik des Zusammenschlusses wurde, nicht eine
Mithilfe schätzen sollen, die nach den ehrerbietigen Worten Präsi-
dent Herriots der Sache des Friedens und der Freiheit gewidmet
sei?
Die Tatsache, daß die Wahl bereits am ersten Tag des Konklaves
erfolgte und die Entscheidung sogleich auf Kardinal Pacelli fiel,
gewinnt noch größere Bedeutung, wenn man weiß, welche un-
verschämten Exklusionsforderungen Hitler und Mussolini gegen
seine Person und gegen das, was diese für sie bedeutete, erhoben.
Als einen ,zu großen Freund Frankreichs‘ bezeichnete ihn voller
Haß der Telegrafo des Grafen Ciano zwei Tage nach dem Tode
Pius’ XI. . . . “
Die faschistischen Regierungen standen der Wahl Kardinal Pa-
cellis nicht weniger feindlich gegenüber als der letztere ihnen:
„ . . . Die faschistischen Regierungen hätten gerne mit der poli-
tischen Linie des Vatikans kurzen Prozeß gemacht, das Papsttum
in ihre Gewalt gebracht und es ihren Anordnungen unterworfen.
Da aber eine ihnen völlig hörige Kreatur fehlte, hatten sie gehofft,
zumindest einen schwachen, furchtsamen und gefügigen Menschen
auf den päpstlichen Stuhl zu bringen.
Sie haben ihre Antwort erhalten.
Sie stellt eine um so schärfere Entgegnung dar, als die Kardinäle
in der Mehrheit Italiener sind und ein großer Teil von ihnen sofort
für den von Mussolini abgelehnten Papst gestimmt haben muß.
Schon lassen Berlin und Rom ihre Wut durchblicken. Ganz sicher
werden Beleidigungen auf diesen ,Juden und Marxisten‘ herabreg-
nen! Als ob ein heimliches Einverständnis zwischen Doktrinen vor-en muß.
Schon lassen Berlin und Rom ihre Wut durchblicken. Ganz sicher
werden Beleidigungen auf diesen ,Juden und Marxisten‘ herabreg-
nen! Als ob ein heimliches Einverständnis zwischen Doktrinen vor-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218
läge, wenn sich lediglich die Menschen zu ihrem Schutz zusammen-
schließen und wenn die Gewissensfreiheit ganz einfach bei der Frei-
heit Zuflucht sucht.
Doch für die Gestapo war bereits Pius XI. ,der Papst Moskaus‘!
Die Wahl Pius’ XII. wird zweifellos ,eine bolschewistische Machen-
schaft‘ sein!
Bedauernswerte Leute! Das Ereignis ist weit tiefgründiger und
bedeutsamer!“
P.-L. Darnar
(L’Humanité, 3. März 1939, S. 1)
Wie wenn der Artikel P.-L. Darnars nicht schon genügend für
sich spräche, ging Gabriel Péri auf der dritten Seite derselben Num-
mer von L’Humanité unter der Überschrift „Die Reaktion Hit-
lers“ noch weiter.
„Berlin, 2. März. — Die Wahl Kardinal Pacellis hat in den poli-
tischen Kreisen Deutschlands sehr große Erregung ausgelöst. Es
wird die Ansicht vertreten, die Kardinäle ,hätten durch die Einset-
zung eines ›Berufspolitikers‹ in das höchste Amt der katholischen
Welt einen ungewöhnlichen Schritt getan‘.
Bekanntlich ist der neue Papst von den Nationalsozialisten stets
sehr angegriffen worden.
Tatsächlich spielte er in den ausländischen diplomatischen Krei-
sen Berlins in der Nachkriegszeit eine sehr bedeutende Rolle. Er
war es, der nach der Revolution von 1918 das neue Konkordat
zwischen dem Heiligen Stuhl und Deutschland aushandelte und
unterzeichnete . . . “
„Den Faschismus oder den Frieden retten . . . “
„ . . . Es steht weiter fest, daß das Konklave soeben den früheren
engsten Mitarbeiter Pius’ XI. gewählt hat, und zwar trotz der Rat-
schläge von Bergens und der Exklusionsforderungen des Telegrafo.“
Gabriel Péri.
(L’Humanité, 3. März 1939, S. 3 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---engsten Mitarbeiter Pius’ XI. gewählt hat, und zwar trotz der Rat-
schläge von Bergens und der Exklusionsforderungen des Telegrafo.“
Gabriel Péri.
(L’Humanité, 3. März 1939, S. 3 )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

219
Anhang II
Selbstzeugnis Pius’ XII.
Schreiben Pius’ XII. an den
Berliner Bischof Graf von Preysing
Am 30. April 1943 richtete Pius XII. an den Berliner Bischof
von Preysing folgendes Schreiben:
„Zunächst sprechen Wir dir, ehrwürdiger Bruder, innigsten
Dank aus für die guten Wünsche, die du persönlich wie im Namen
deines Klerus und deiner Diözesanen Uns bei verschiedenen Ge-
legenheiten, noch im Dezember zu den heiligen Festen um die
Jahreswende und zuletzt zum Jahrestag Unserer Wahl zum Ober-
sten Hirten der Kirche, ausgesprochen hast. Wir wissen, aus welch
treuem und von Glaubensgeist erfülltem Herzen sie kommen. Wir
danken dir und deiner Herde besonders für euer frommes Gebet.
In deinem Schreiben vom 27. Februar d. J. versicherst du Uns eurer
inständigen Fürbitte aus dem Bewußtsein heraus, ,daß wohl selten
im Anfang eines Pontifikats einem Papste eine so schwere Last
von Gott aufgebürdet worden ist‘ wie Uns ,durch den furchtbaren
Weltkrieg und all das, was er an Schmerzlichem und Sündhaftem
im Gefolge hat‘. Es ist gewiß immer Vorsicht geboten, wenn man
die Gegenwart mit der Vergangenheit vergleichen will, und es liegt
Uns fern, die Sorgen und Nöte, die auf die Schultern Unserer Vor-
gänger gedrückt haben, zu unterschätzen. Aber sicher ist der ehr-
liche Wille der Päpste, in weittragenden und erschütternden Aus-
einandersetzungen unter den Mächten dieser Erde allen mit voller
Unparteilichkeit zu begegnen, gleichzeitig aber auch die Belange
der heiligen Kirche sorgsam zu wahren, selten einer Belastungs-
probe ausgesetzt gewesen, wie der Heilige Stuhl sie gegenwärtig
zu bestehen hat. Was indes noch mehr bedrückt, ist, wie du richtig
sagst, ,all das, was der Krieg an Schmerzlichem und Sündhaftem im
Gefolge hat‘. Die hemmungslos steigende sachliche Grausamkeit
der Kriegstechnik macht den Gedanken an eine noch lange Dauer
des gegenseitigen Mordens unerträglich; was Uns seit Jahr und Tag
an Unmenschlichkeiten zu Ohren kommt, die ganz und gar außer-rausamkeit
der Kriegstechnik macht den Gedanken an eine noch lange Dauer
des gegenseitigen Mordens unerträglich; was Uns seit Jahr und Tag
an Unmenschlichkeiten zu Ohren kommt, die ganz und gar außer-

--- PAGE BREAK ---stechnik macht den Gedanken an eine noch lange Dauer
des gegenseitigen Mordens unerträglich; was Uns seit Jahr und Tag
an Unmenschlichkeiten zu Ohren kommt, die ganz und gar außer-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
halb der ernsthaften Kriegsnotwendigkeiten liegen, wirkt nachge-
rade lähmend und schaudererregend. Die Flucht in das Gebet zum
allwissenden Gott und zu dem Erlöser im Tabernakel gibt allein
die sittliche Kraft, dem Eindruck solchen Geschehens seelisch zu
widerstehen.“
Die Einstellung des Nationalsozialismus zu den Bemühungen
des Papstes, die Unmenschlichkeit des Krieges zu mildern
„Auch ihr habt die Schrecken des Krieges in der unsagbar schwe-
ren Form der Luftangriffe erfahren müssen. Wir sprechen dir und
deinen Diözesanen nochmals Unser teilnehmendes tiefes Bedauern
zum Einsturz der Hedwigskathedrale infolge des letzten Angriffs
auf Berlin aus. Die Gläubigen sollen wissen, daß Wir täglich im
besonderen für die beten und denen Unseren Segen spenden, die
an diesem Tage auf der einen oder anderen Seite von Luftangriffen
heimgesucht werden. Wir tun zur Minderung der Kriegsleiden, was
in Unseren Kräften steht, und haben, ohne Uns von der geringen
Aussicht auf Erfolg abhalten zu lassen, Uns immer wieder für mög-
lichste Schonung der Zivilbevölkerung eingesetzt. Es ist nicht
Unsere Schuld, daß eine nach allen Seiten gleichmäßige Behandlung
der Kriegsfragen Uns nötigt, jetzt, wo Deutschland der unter den
Luftangriffen am stärksten leidende Teil geworden ist, bei Ver-
mittlungen umsichtig zu Werke zu gehen — ganz abgesehen davon,
daß deutsche amtliche Stellen anläßlich der Anwesenheit des Erz-
bischofs von New York in Rom, oder besser anläßlich der Gerüch-
te, die um seinen Rombesuch gingen, die Öffentlichkeit haben wis-
sen lassen, Deutschland sei an Bemühungen des Papstes um eine
Humanisierung des Krieges nicht interessiert. Unsere Schritte für
Menschlichkeit im Kriege gelten in gleicher Sorge allen Kriegsop-
fern, allen materiell oder seelisch unter der Kriegsnot Leidenden
— und diese hoffen in Deutschland ebenso auf Unsere Hilfe wie in
der übrigen Welt.
Auch Unseren Nachrichtendienst für Kriegsgefangene hätten Wir
sehr gerne Deutschland ebenso zugute kommen lassen wie anderen
Ländern. Der Nachrichtendienst hat sich aus den an den Heiligen
Stuhl herantretenden Anfragen und Bitten um Vermittlung, de-e hätten Wir
sehr gerne Deutschland ebenso zugute kommen lassen wie anderen
Ländern. Der Nachrichtendienst hat sich aus den an den Heiligen
Stuhl herantretenden Anfragen und Bitten um Vermittlung, de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---rne Deutschland ebenso zugute kommen lassen wie anderen
Ländern. Der Nachrichtendienst hat sich aus den an den Heiligen
Stuhl herantretenden Anfragen und Bitten um Vermittlung, de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

221
nen vielfach von anderen Stellen gar nicht hätte entsprochen wer-
den können, ganz von selbst zu dem entwickelt, was er jetzt ist.
Zusammen mit Unserer übrigen Kriegshilfe hat er — Wir sagen
das mit tiefem Dank gegen Gott — viel und umfassend Gutes schaf-
fen können. Es ist Uns unerfindlich, welche sachlichen Gründe die
deutschen Behörden veranlaßt haben könnten, dem Päpstlichen
Hilfswerk den Eingang nach Deutschland zu sperren. Die deutsche
Sperre für Gefangenennachrichten von hier hat sich u. a. fühlbar
gemacht, als es sich darum handelte, einige Tausend Meldungen
von deutschen Kriegsgefangenen, die Unserem Nachrichtendienst
zugegangen waren, an die Angehörigen in Deutschland weiterzu-
leiten. Es ist schließlich gelungen, aber nur auf Umwegen und mit
größten Schwierigkeiten. Seit Herbst 1942 kommen aus Deutsch-
land, und zwar in immer steigender Zahl, Anfragen über Vermißte
oder Gefangene, deren letzter Standort an der russischen Front,
meistens bei Stalingrad, war. Es spricht eine erschütternde Not aus
diesen Anfragen. Von Unserer Seite wird jeder nur mögliche Ver-
such gemacht, um Mitteilungen über die in Rußland lebenden
Kriegsgefangenen zu erhalten, bis jetzt leider ohne Erfolg.“
Die Hirtenbriefe der deutschen Bischöfe
„Wir sind dir, ehrwürdiger Bruder, dankbar für die klaren und
offenen Worte, die du bei verschiedenen Gelegenheiten an deine
Gläubigen und damit an die Öffentlichkeit gerichtet hast; Wir den-
ken u. a. an deine Ausführungen vom 28. Juni 1942 über die
christliche Rechtsauffassung; vom Totensonntag im vergangenen
November über das Recht auf Leben und Liebe, das jedem Men-
schen zusteht; Wir denken besonders an deinen Adventshirten-
brief, der ja auch für die westdeutschen Kirchenprovinzen be-
stimmt war, über die Herrschaftsrechte Gottes, die Rechte des
einzelnen und der Familie.
Man wende nicht ein, daß bischöfliche Kundgebungen, die mut-
voll der eigenen Regierung gegenüber für die Rechte der Religion,
der Kirche, der menschlichen Persönlichkeit, für Schutzlose, von
der öffentlichen Macht Vergewaltigte eintreten, gleichviel ob die
Betroffenen Kinder der Kirche oder Außenstehende sind — daßReligion,
der Kirche, der menschlichen Persönlichkeit, für Schutzlose, von
der öffentlichen Macht Vergewaltigte eintreten, gleichviel ob die
Betroffenen Kinder der Kirche oder Außenstehende sind — daß

--- PAGE BREAK ---, der menschlichen Persönlichkeit, für Schutzlose, von
der öffentlichen Macht Vergewaltigte eintreten, gleichviel ob die
Betroffenen Kinder der Kirche oder Außenstehende sind — daß

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
solche Kundgebungen eurem Vaterland in der Weltöffentlichkeit
schaden. Jenes mutvolle Eintreten für Recht und Menschlichkeit
stellt euer Vaterland nicht bloß, wird euch und ihm vielmehr
in der Weltöffentlichkeit Achtung schaffen und kann sich in Zukunft
sehr zu seinem Besten auswirken.
Als Oberster Hirt der Gläubigen sorgen Wir Uns auch darum,
daß eure Katholiken ihre Überzeugungen und deren Bekenntnis
rein halten von einem Sichabfinden mit Grundsätzen und Taten,
die dem Gesetz Gottes und dem Geiste Christi widerstreiten, ja
ihnen mehr als einmal hohnsprechen. Es hat Uns, um ein nahe-
liegendes Beispiel zu nehmen, getröstet, zu hören, daß die Katho-
liken, gerade auch die Berliner Katholiken, den sogenannten
Nichtariern in ihrer Bedrängnis viel Liebe entgegengebracht ha-
ben, und Wir sagen in diesem Zusammenhang ein besonderes
Wort väterlicher Anerkennung wie innigen Mitgefühls dem in
Gefangenschaft befindlichen Prälaten Lichtenberg.
Aber schon der Gedanke, es könnten allmählich, vielleicht fast
unvermerkt, jene Auffassungen durch die Macht der Gewöhnung
und unter der Wirkung ihrer unaufhörlichen Verbreitung Ein-
gang auch in die Gedankenwelt der Katholiken, besonders ihrer
jungen Generation, finden, schon dieser Gedanke schmerzt Uns.
Du weißt, daß der Heilige Stuhl die Vorgänge bei euch auf litur-
gischem Gebiet für wichtig genug gehalten hat, um sich mit ihnen
zu befassen. Wir gestehen aber, daß Uns die Reinerhaltung der
christlichen Überzeugung von aller ihr drohenden Vergiftung noch
ungleich mehr am Herzen liegt als jene liturgischen Fragen. Was
würde ein noch so schöner Gottesdienst im Kirchenraum bedeu-
ten, wenn draußen im Leben Denken und Tun der Gläubigen dem
Gesetz und der Liebe Christi entfremdet wären!“
Die Gründe für die Zurückhaltung des Papstes
„Den an Ort und Stelle tätigen Oberhirten überlassen Wir es,
abzuwägen, ob und bis zu welchem Grade die Gefahr von Ver-
geltungsmaßnahmen und Druckmitteln im Falle bischöflicher
Kundgebungen sowie andere vielleicht durch die Länge und
Psychologie des Krieges verursachten Umstände es ratsam erschei-die Gefahr von Ver-
geltungsmaßnahmen und Druckmitteln im Falle bischöflicher
Kundgebungen sowie andere vielleicht durch die Länge und
Psychologie des Krieges verursachten Umstände es ratsam erschei-

--- PAGE BREAK ---geltungsmaßnahmen und Druckmitteln im Falle bischöflicher
Kundgebungen sowie andere vielleicht durch die Länge und
Psychologie des Krieges verursachten Umstände es ratsam erschei-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

223
nen lassen, trotz der angeführten Beweggründe, ad maiora mala
vitanda Zurückhaltung zu üben. Hier liegt einer der Gründe, war-
um Wir selber Uns in Unseren Kundgebungen Beschränkung
auferlegen; die Erfahrung, die Wir im Jahre 1942 mit päpstlichen,
von Uns aus für die Weitergabe an die Gläubigen freigestellten
Schriftstücken gemacht haben, rechtfertigt, soweit Wir sehen,
Unsere Haltung.
Wir haben diese Fragen ausführlicher mit dir besprochen, nicht
als ob du Unserer Ermunterung zum Handeln bedürftest, son-
dern, im Gegenteil, weil Wir einerseits dein starkes Empfinden für
die Ehre der heiligen Kirche und deinen Mut kennen, anderer-
seits wissen, daß du die Gesamtlage mit umsichtiger Nüchtern-
heit beurteilst. Für den Stellvertreter Christi wird der Pfad, den
er gehen muß, um zwischen den sich widerstreitenden Forderun-
gen seines Hirtenamtes den richtigen Ausgleich zu finden, immer
verschlungener und dornenvoller.
Wir haben die gegen die Kirche gerichteten Maßnahmen vor
Augen, von denen deine Schreiben Uns Mitteilung machten: Ein-
ziehung von Kirchengut, Wegnahme deines Bischöflichen Seminars
Hedwigshöhe, Einschränkung oder Unterbindung der Seelsorge
an den nach Deutschland verbrachten Polen, auch des Religions-
unterrichtes für polnische Kinder, Eheverbot für die Polen usw.,
alles immer wieder nur Teilstücke aus dem größeren Rahmen und
umfassenderen Plan einer Drosselung der kirchlichen Lebenskraft
im deutschen Machtraum. Am härtesten getroffen ist, wie du
weißt, die katholische Kirche im Warthegau. Wir leiden schwer
unter der namenlosen Not der Gläubigen dortselbst, um so mehr,
als jeder Versuch, für sie bei den Regierungsstellen zu vermitteln,
auf schroffste Ablehnung gestoßen ist. Die Rücksichtnahmen, von
denen weiter oben die Rede war, im Sonderfall des Warthegaues
vor allem die Befürchtung, den Rest von Seelsorge, der dort noch
besteht, auch zu gefährden, haben Uns bis jetzt davon zurückge-
halten, die dortigen kirchlichen Zustände offen zur Sprache zu
bringen.
Über die Lage und das Schicksal der in Konzentrationslager
verbrachten Priester, unter denen die Polen weitaus an erster
Stelle stehen, sind Wir verhältnismäßig gut unterrichtet. Wennache zu
bringen.
Über die Lage und das Schicksal der in Konzentrationslager
verbrachten Priester, unter denen die Polen weitaus an erster
Stelle stehen, sind Wir verhältnismäßig gut unterrichtet. Wenn

--- PAGE BREAK ---r die Lage und das Schicksal der in Konzentrationslager
verbrachten Priester, unter denen die Polen weitaus an erster
Stelle stehen, sind Wir verhältnismäßig gut unterrichtet. Wenn

--- PAGE BREAK ---

224
sich irgendwie Gelegenheit bietet, möge man jene Priester wie
ihre Mitgefangenen immer wissen lassen, daß ihnen Unser innig-
stes Mitgefühl gehört, daß in dieser von Leid und Grauen erfüllten
Zeit Uns wenige Schicksale so nahegehen wie das ihre und daß
Wir viel und täglich für sie beten.
Der Wortlaut der Denkschrift, die der deutsche Episkopat an
die höchsten Stellen des Reiches gelangen ließ, liegt Uns vor. Nun
wißt ihr ja selbst, wie geringe Aussicht auf Erfolg ein Schriftstück
hat, das als vertrauliche Eingabe an die Regierung gerichtet ist;
doch wird die Denkschrift auf alle Fälle den Wert einer Rechtferti-
gung des Episkopates vor der Nachwelt haben.“
Hilfeleistungen des Heiligen Stuhls für die Juden
„Für die katholischen Nichtarier wie auch für die Glaubensju-
den hat der Heilige Stuhl caritativ getan, was nur in seinen
Kräften stand, in seinen wirtschaftlichen und moralischen. Es hat
von Seiten der ausführenden Organe Unseres Hilfswerkes eines
Höchstmaßes von Geduld und Selbstentäußerung bedurft, um
den Erwartungen, man muß schon sagen den Anforderungen der
Hilfesuchenden zu entsprechen, wie auch der auftauchenden diplo-
matischen Schwierigkeiten Herr zu werden. Von den sehr hohen
Summen, die Wir in amerikanischer Währung für Übersee-Reisen
von Emigranten ausgeworfen haben, wollen Wir nicht sprechen;
Wir haben sie gerne gegeben, denn die Menschen waren in
Not; Wir haben um Gotteslohn geholfen, und haben gut daran
getan, irdischen Dank nicht in Rechnung zu stellen. Immerhin ist
dem Heiligen Stuhl auch von jüdischen Zentralen wärmste Aner-
kennung für sein Rettungswerk ausgesprochen worden.
Zu dem, was im deutschen Machtraum zurzeit gegen die Nicht-
arier vor sich geht, haben Wir in Unserer Weihnachtsbotschaft ein
Wort gesagt. Es war kurz, wurde aber gut verstanden. Daß den
nichtarischen oder halbarischen Katholiken, die Kinder der Kirche
sind wie alle anderen, jetzt, im Zusammenbruch ihrer äußeren
Existenz und in ihrer seelischen Not, Unsere Vaterliebe und Vater-
sorge in erhöhtem Maße gilt, brauchen Wir nicht erst zu versi-er Kirche
sind wie alle anderen, jetzt, im Zusammenbruch ihrer äußeren
Existenz und in ihrer seelischen Not, Unsere Vaterliebe und Vater-
sorge in erhöhtem Maße gilt, brauchen Wir nicht erst zu versi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

225
chern. So wie die augenblickliche Lage ist, können Wir ihnen leider
keine andere wirksame Hilfe zukommen lassen als Unser Gebet.
Wir sind aber entschlossen, je nach dem, was die Umstände hei-
schen oder erlauben, von neuem Unsere Stimme für sie zu erhe-
ben.“
Die nationalsozialistische Erziehung
„Über die beharrliche Treue der deutschen Katholiken zu ihrem
Glauben und ihrer Kirche haben Wir gerade in diesen Tagen wie-
der sehr Trostvolles gehört. Hinter allem Bedrückenden und Er-
hebenden der Gegenwart steht für Uns jedoch die eine schwere
Zukunftsfrage: Wie soll die katholische Jugend, wie die kom-
menden Generationen, einmal ganz erfaßt von dem geschlossenen
System christentumsfremder Beeinflussung und Erziehung, das
durch die Parteiorganisationen . . . und die schon bekannten Be-
stimmungen des zu erwartenden Volksgesetzbuches gebildet wird,
wie sollen sie ihren katholischen Glauben unverfälscht bewahren
und weitergeben? Wir können Uns vorerst nur trösten mit der
Verheißung der Heiligen Schrift: ,Gott ist treu. Er wird euch
nicht über eure Kräfte versuchen lassen, sondern mit der Versu-
chung auch den guten Ausgang schaffen, daß ihr bestehen könnt‘
(1. Kor. 10, 13).
Als Unterpfand dieses ,guten Ausgangs‘ erteilen Wir — . . . ,im
Zeichen des Kreuzes‘, wie du es in deinem Hirtenwort zum letzten
Papstsonntag sagst — dir selbst, ehrwürdiger Bruder, deinen Mit-
arbeitern im Apostolat und allen deinen Diözesanen in väterlicher
Liebe und aus der Fülle des Herzens den erbetenen Apostolischen
Segen304.“
304 Der Text dieses Schreibens wurde veröffentlicht in Documentation catholique
vom 2. Februar 1964. Friedländer hat ihn ebenfalls angeführt. (Zitiert nach
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 39—47. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---e veröffentlicht in Documentation catholique
vom 2. Februar 1964. Friedländer hat ihn ebenfalls angeführt. (Zitiert nach
Adolph, Verfälschte Geschichte, S. 39—47. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

226
Anhang III
Die Hauptargumente der Verteidiger Pius’ XII.
Maïmonide (Bulletin de l’Athénée israélite, Brüssel, Nr. 2, Juni
1963):
Die Ereignisse waren so, daß bereits 1937 die deutschen Zeitun-
gen schreiben konnten: „Pius XI. war zur Hälfte Jude, Kardinal
Pacelli (Pius XII.) ist es ganz.“
Édith Mutz
Dr. Safran, Großrabbiner von Rumänien:
Die Vermittlung des Papstes „rettete die Juden vor dem Unheil
zu einem Zeitpunkt, an dem die Deportation der Rumänen be-
reits beschlossen war“.
Maïmonide, a. a. O.
Am 26. Mai 1955 geleitete Paul Kletzki 94 aus 14 Ländern stam-
mende jüdische Musiker nach Rom, um dort die 9. Symphonie
von Beethoven aufzuführen.
„Aus Dankbarkeit für das von seiner Heiligkeit vollbrachte
großartige humanitäre Werk zur Rettung einer großen Anzahl
von Juden während des Zweiten Weltkrieges.“
Pinhas Lapide, israelischer Konsul in Mailand (zur Zeit Pius’ XII.):
„Der Papst persönlich, der Heilige Stuhl, die Nuntien und die
gesamte katholische Kirche haben 150 000 bis 400 000 Juden vor
dem sicheren Tode gerettet. Als ich in Venedig von Msgr. Roncalli,
dem späteren Johannes XXIII., empfangen wurde und ihm die
Dankbarkeit meines Landes für sein Handeln zugunsten der Ju-
den in der Zeit, als er noch Nuntius in Istanbul war, zum Ausdruck
brachte, unterbrach er mich mehrfach, um mich daran zu erinnern,
daß er jedesmal auf ausdrückliche Weisung Pius’ XII. gehandelt
habe. Mir ist im übrigen schwer begreiflich, daß man Pius XII.
jetzt angreift, während man hier in Israel viele Jahre lang Gefallen

--- PAGE BREAK ---l auf ausdrückliche Weisung Pius’ XII. gehandelt
habe. Mir ist im übrigen schwer begreiflich, daß man Pius XII.
jetzt angreift, während man hier in Israel viele Jahre lang Gefallen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

227
daran fand, ihm zu huldigen. Nach der Befreiung Roms gehörte
ich einer Abordnung von Soldaten der palästinensischen Brigade
an, die vom Papst empfangen wurde und ihm die Dankbarkeit der
Jewish Agency, der Spitzenorganisation der Weltbewegung des
Zionismus, für das, was er für die Juden getan hatte, übermit-
telte.“
Pinhas Lapide hebt hervor, daß Frau Golda Meïr, der israelische
Außenminister, am Todestag Pius’ XII. dem Papst herzlich ge-
dankt habe, „weil er seine Stimme für die Juden erhoben hatte“.
 „Mit dem Wort ,Stimme‘ “, fährt Pinhas Lapide fort, „meinte
Frau Meïr sicherlich die zahlreichen Demarchen des Papstes zu-
gunsten der Juden, und sie sah diese Stimme als weitaus wertvoller
als einen öffentlichen Protest an. Eins ist sicher: Zahlreiche Staats-
oberhäupter und Kirchenfürsten — selbst von anderen christlichen
Kirchen —, die in der Lage waren, dem Judentum mit Wort und
Tat zu helfen, haben gegen die ,Kreuzigung unzähliger Brüder des
Herrn‘ weit weniger getan als Pius XII.“
Le Monde, 3. Januar 1964
„Man beklagt sich, daß der Papst nicht spricht. Er kann nicht
sprechen; wenn er es täte, würde es noch mehr Unheil bedeuten.“
Unter Anführung dieser Worte, die Pius XII. im Verlauf einer
Unterredung mit Pater Paolo Dezza, dem ehemaligen Rektor der
Università Gregoriana, äußerte, weist dieser darauf hin, daß der
Erzbischof von Krakau, Kardinal Adam Sapieha, und andere pol-
nische Bischöfe den Heiligen Vater wissen ließen, daß es besser
sei, die Schreiben die er an sie gerichtet hatte, um die nazisti-
schen Grausamkeiten aufzuzeigen, nicht zu veröffentlichen, und
zwar, wie sie sagten, um das Los der Betroffenen nicht zu ver-
schlimmern. Sodann erinnert der Ordensgeistliche daran, daß der
Großrabbiner von Rom, Zoll, sich nach der Befreiung der ewigen
Stadt aus Dankbarkeit für das, was der Papst für seine Glaubens-
genossen getan hatte, taufen ließ. Er hebt hervor, daß Zoll es war,
der, nachdem er die Taufe empfangen hatte, Pius XII. ersuchte,
den Ausdruck „Verräter“, mit dem die Juden in der Liturgie der
Karwoche bezeichnet wurden, zu beseitigen.
Die Zeitungen vom 2. bis 5. Januar 1964hdem er die Taufe empfangen hatte, Pius XII. ersuchte,
den Ausdruck „Verräter“, mit dem die Juden in der Liturgie der
Karwoche bezeichnet wurden, zu beseitigen.
Die Zeitungen vom 2. bis 5. Januar 1964

--- PAGE BREAK ---pfangen hatte, Pius XII. ersuchte,
den Ausdruck „Verräter“, mit dem die Juden in der Liturgie der
Karwoche bezeichnet wurden, zu beseitigen.
Die Zeitungen vom 2. bis 5. Januar 1964

--- PAGE BREAK ---

228
Nach der Befreiung sucht Großrabbiner Ullmann Kardinal Van
Roey auf, um ihm für seine persönliche Rettung vor der Depor-
tation und für das zu danken, was er für die holländischen Juden
getan hat.
In der Slowakei erreicht der von 1941 an durch den Heiligen
Stuhl ausgeübte Druck, „daß die Deportationen der Juden im
Sommer 1943 eingestellt werden und damit ein Viertel von ihnen
überlebt“.
Der Großrabbiner von Rom, Israel Zoll, ist konvertiert und
hat sich aus Dankbarkeit gegenüber Pius XII. nach dessen Vor-
namen, Eugenio, taufen lassen. „Am 29. September 1945 sah man
eine Gruppe von Juden, deren Antlitz von Leid gezeichnet war,
den Vatikan betreten: 70 vor den Krematorien Gerettete wollten
Pius XII. für sein Verhalten während des Krieges danken.“
Maïmonide, Juni 1963
Robert M. W. Kempner, deutscher Jude und früherer amerikani-
scher Hauptankläger im Nürnberger Prozeß, gab zu Rolf Hoch-
huths Drama Der Stellvertreter die nachstehenden Erklärungen ab.
Er stützt sich dabei sowohl auf amtliche Schriftstücke als auch
auf private Unterredungen.
„1. Nur ein schneller militärischer Zusammenbruch des Hitler-
Regimes, nicht aber ein durch keine Bataillone gestützter Protest
von Pius XII. hätte seinerzeit den noch nicht ermordeten Teil der
europäischen Juden vor der Endlösung retten können. Dies wußte
der Papst ebensogut wie Franklin D. Roosevelt und Winston
Churchill. Pius XII. mußte zu dieser Überzeugung auf Grund aus-
gezeichneter Informationen und durch Erfahrungen kommen, von
denen nur einige hier mitgeteilt seien:
2. Die bereits 1942 und 1943 von Roosevelt, den Exilregierun-
gen und der Moskauer Erklärung öffentlich angedroht Bestra-
fung von Judenmördern und anderen Verbrechern blieb völlig er-
gebnislos. Das Nazi-Regime ließ sich nicht einschüchtern, und seine
Funktionäre schrieben, wie wir aus Nürnberg wissen, an den Rand
der Bekanntmachung: (1) Fühle mich geehrt; (2) Zu den Akten.lig er-
gebnislos. Das Nazi-Regime ließ sich nicht einschüchtern, und seine
Funktionäre schrieben, wie wir aus Nürnberg wissen, an den Rand
der Bekanntmachung: (1) Fühle mich geehrt; (2) Zu den Akten.

--- PAGE BREAK ---as Nazi-Regime ließ sich nicht einschüchtern, und seine
Funktionäre schrieben, wie wir aus Nürnberg wissen, an den Rand
der Bekanntmachung: (1) Fühle mich geehrt; (2) Zu den Akten.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

229
3. Der Papst hatte leider nur entmutigende Erfahrungen mit
seinen zahlreichen Protesten wegen der Verfolgung von katholi-
schen Priestern und bestimmten Juden gesammelt. Sie blieben er-
folglos, und das Reichssicherheitshauptamt sowie Organe der ,Ju-
stiz‘ ermordeten in Deutschland, Österreich, Polen, Frankreich und
anderen besetzten Ländern über 3000 katholische Priester, wie
eine jetzt von Frau B. M. Kempner vorbereitete ,Chronik der
Märtyrer-Priester‘ nachweist.
4. Als Hitlers Außenminister Ribbentrop nach Erteilung von
zahlreichen verlogenen Antworten auf Interventionen und Pro-
teste des Papstes von einer möglichen öffentlichen Stellungnahme
des Vatikans erfuhr, sandte er dem Botschafter beim Vatikan,
Ernst von Weizsäcker, die folgende erpresserische Instruktion (Tele-
gramm Nr. 181 vom 24. Januar 1943): , . . . Sollte der Vatikan po-
litisch oder propagandistisch gegen Deutschland Stellung nehmen,
so würde es unmißverständlich zum Bewußtsein zu bringen sein,
daß sich eine Verschärfung der Beziehungen (zwischen Deutsch-
land und dem Heiligen Stuhl) nicht etwa einseitig zum Nachteil
Deutschlands auswirken würde, daß es der Reichsregierung viel-
mehr weder an wirksamem Propagandamaterial noch auch an der
Möglichkeit tatsächlicher Maßnahmen fehlt, um jeden vom Vati-
kan gegen Deutschland versuchten Schlag entsprechend wirksam
zu erwidern . . . ‘
5. Zu den spätestens nach dem Siege Hitlers geplanten Maß-
nahmen gehörte u. a.: ,Jeder katholische Staat muß sich seinen
eigenen Papst wählen‘; ,Der Bischof von Münster wird einmal vor
die Gewehre kommen305‘; ,Die christlich-jüdische Pest geht ja
wohl jetzt ihrem Ende entgegen‘. Diese und ähnliche Erklärungen
Hitlers sind einem Aufsatz von sonst unveröffentlichten Teilen
des Alfred Rosenbergschen Tagebuches entnommen (Der Monat,
1949, Heft 10). Rosenberg selbst machte 1943 darauf aufmerksam:
,Der Vatikan wühlt eifrig weiter.‘
6. Bei dieser Sachlage und dem Vordringen der Alliierten . . .
konnte Pius XII. keinen öffentlichen Protest . . . erheben. Es war
vielmehr weise, auf dem Weg über die Erzbischöfe durch geeignete
305 Msgr. von Galen, der für seine Opposition gegen das Hitlerregime bekannt
war.II. keinen öffentlichen Protest . . . erheben. Es war
vielmehr weise, auf dem Weg über die Erzbischöfe durch geeignete
305 Msgr. von Galen, der für seine Opposition gegen das Hitlerregime bekannt
war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hen Protest . . . erheben. Es war
vielmehr weise, auf dem Weg über die Erzbischöfe durch geeignete
305 Msgr. von Galen, der für seine Opposition gegen das Hitlerregime bekannt
war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

230
regionale Interventionen einzugreifen, wie z. B. in der Slowakei,
Ungarn und anderwärts. Er selbst mußte nach außen schweigen
und nach innen helfen — wie dies laufend geschah — und auf ein
schnelles Vordringen der Alliierten warten. Jedes propagandisti-
sche Auftreten wäre nicht nur ,provozierter Selbstmord‘ gewe-
sen — wie Rosenberg erklärt hatte —, sondern hätte die Ermor-
dung von noch mehr Juden und katholischen Priestern beschleu-
nigt.“
Katholische Nachrichten-Agentur,
Informationsdienst Nr. 22, 30. Mai 1963
Maurice Edelmann, Präsident der Englisch-Jüdischen Vereinigung und
Abgeordneter der Labour Party:
„London, 21. Januar. — Der Labour-Abgeordnete und Präsident
der Englisch-Jüdischen Vereinigung, Maurice Edelmann, erklärte
heute in einer Rede im Londoner Rat dieser Vereinigung, die Inter-
vention Pius’ XII. habe die Rettung von Zehntausenden von Juden
während des Krieges ermöglicht. Er gab bekannt, daß der Papst
ihn bei Kriegsende empfangen und ihn darauf hingewiesen habe,
daß er dem katholischen Klerus insgeheim Weisungen zum Schutz
der Juden vor der nationalsozialistischen Verfolgung erteilt habe.“
Gazette de Liège, 23. Januar 1964
Armand Baruch gab in den Vereinigten Staaten eine Broschüre
zur Verteidigung des Andenkens Pius’ XII. heraus, die ganz be-
sonders durch die große jüdische Vereinigung B’nai B’rith ver-
breitet wurde.
„Ich breche das Schweigen, weil ich in jenen Monaten, von
denen das Stück ,Der Stellvertreter‘ handelt, Mitglied der Deut-
schen Botschaft beim Heiligen Stuhl war und weil ich aus meinen
Erfahrungen in der zwölfjährigen nationalsozialistischen Periode
des Schreckens glaube, etwas zur Beurteilung der römischen Er-
eignisse beitragen zu können . . .
Die Rolle unserer Vatikanbotschaft war nicht einfach. Hitler
in seiner Hysterie war zu jedem Verbrechen fähig. Erwägungen,
den Papst gefangenzunehmen, ihm einen Zwangsaufenthalt im
,Großdeutschen Reich‘ anzuweisen, haben bei ihm vom Septem-
ber 1943 bis zum Juni 1944, also bis zum Einzug der Alliierten inhig. Erwägungen,
den Papst gefangenzunehmen, ihm einen Zwangsaufenthalt im
,Großdeutschen Reich‘ anzuweisen, haben bei ihm vom Septem-
ber 1943 bis zum Juni 1944, also bis zum Einzug der Alliierten in

--- PAGE BREAK ---Papst gefangenzunehmen, ihm einen Zwangsaufenthalt im
,Großdeutschen Reich‘ anzuweisen, haben bei ihm vom Septem-
ber 1943 bis zum Juni 1944, also bis zum Einzug der Alliierten in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

231
Rom, immer wieder eine Rolle gespielt. Hätte sich der Papst die-
ser Aktion widersetzt, so war sogar mit der Möglichkeit zu rech-
nen, daß er ,auf der Flucht erschossen‘ würde.
Wir waren der Ansicht, es sei unsere oberste Pflicht, wenigstens
dies Verbrechen (die Ermordung des Papstes), das im Namen unse-
res Volkes begangen worden wäre, zu verhindern. Herr von Weiz-
säcker mußte an zwei Fronten kämpfen: Er mußte dem Heiligen
Stuhl, das heißt dem Papst, den Rat geben, keine unbedachten
Aktionen zu unternehmen, das heißt Aktionen, deren letzte und
katastrophale Folgen er vielleicht nicht klar erkannte . . .
Und ebensosehr mußte Weizsäcker die Nazis durch diplomatisch
formulierte Berichte davon überzeugen, der Vatikan sei ,guten‘
Willens. Die zahllosen Einzelaktionen des Vatikans zugunsten der
Juden seien so bedeutungslos, daß man sie nicht ernst zu nehmen
habe.
Schließlich waren wir, das heißt sämtliche Mitglieder der Deut-
schen Botschaft beim Vatikan, trotz aller sonstigen Differenzen in
der Beurteilung der Lage ohne Ausnahme in einem Punkt einig:
Ein flammender Protest Pius’ XII. gegen die Judenverfolgungen
hätte vermutlich ihn selbst und damit die Kurie in höchste Ge-
fahr gebracht, bestimmt aber zum damaligen Zeitpunkt, nämlich
im Herbst 1943, keinem einzigen Juden das Leben gerettet. Hitler,
einmal aufgebracht, würde um so schrecklicher reagieren, je mehr
Widerstand er spürte . . .306“
Albrecht von Kessel,
Mitarbeiter von Weizsäckers
(Osservatore della Domenica, 28. Juni 1964)
Es wäre unbillig, nicht noch die beiden Bücher: Pour ou contre
„Le Vicaire“ von Dom Claude Jean-Nesmy (Desclée de Brouwer)
und Pie XII, le Pape outragé von Alexis Curvers (Robert Laffont)
anzuführen, die zwar an dem eigentlichen geschichtlichen Problem
vorbeigegangen sind, aber trotzdem zwei beachtliche philosophi-
sche Verteidigungsschriften darstellen. Wir weisen hiermit den Le-
ser darauf hin.
306 Ausnahmsweise wurde hier wegen zu starker Abweichungen vom Original
nicht die vorliegende deutsche Fassung (in Fritz J. Raddatz, Summa iniuria
oder Durfte der Papst schweigen) verwendet, sondern die franz. Fassung
übersetzt. (Anm. d. Übers.)Abweichungen vom Original
nicht die vorliegende deutsche Fassung (in Fritz J. Raddatz, Summa iniuria
oder Durfte der Papst schweigen) verwendet, sondern die franz. Fassung
übersetzt. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---iginal
nicht die vorliegende deutsche Fassung (in Fritz J. Raddatz, Summa iniuria
oder Durfte der Papst schweigen) verwendet, sondern die franz. Fassung
übersetzt. (Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

232
Anhang IV
Kardinal Merry del Val und der Erste Weltkrieg
Am 27. Juli 1914 erkundigt sich der österreichische Botschafts-
rat beim Vatikan, Graf Palffy, bei dem Staatssekretär Pius’ X.
nach seinen Eindrücken hinsichtlich des Ultimatums an Serbien vom
23. Juli. Bereits am folgenden Tage, dem 28. Juli, gehen Gerüchte
um, nach denen der Kardinal „der Hoffnung Ausdruck gegeben
(habe), daß die Doppelmonarchie bis zum Letzten gehen würde“,
das heißt, bis zum Kriege. Sogleich hielt er in einem Tagebuch die
mit Graf Palffy geführte Unterredung für sich selbst und für die
Geschichte schriftlich fest.
„(Graf Palffy) zu mir gekommen, um meine Eindrücke über das
Ultimatum an Serbien zu erfahren. Ich sagte, es schiene sehr hart.
,Glauben Eure Eminenz, daß Serbien es annehmen wird?‘ fragte
mich der Graf. ,Ich zweifle sehr daran‘, antwortete ich, ,vor allem
hinsichtlich einiger Punkte307‘. ,Alles oder nichts!‘ rief der Graf
aus. ,Doch das bedeutet den Krieg‘, sagte ich. ,Ja‘, erwiderte der
Graf, ,und ich persönlich hoffe, daß Serbien es nicht annehmen
wird.‘ ,Doch dann besteht die Gefahr eines allgemeinen Welten-
brandes‘, bemerkte ich. ,Soll die Katastrophe nur kommen, das
wird besser sein als in der gegenwärtigen Situation zu verharren‘,
sagte der Graf. Ich entgegnete lediglich, daß das mir äußerst
schwerwiegend schiene. Es ist wahr, daß ich nach dem furchtbaren
Verbrechen von Sarajewo dem Grafen Palffy sagte, daß Österreich
hart bleiben müsse und daß es Anspruch auf feierlichste Genugtu-
307 Um über die Bedeutung der voraufgehenden Frage und dieser Antwort
keinerlei Zweifel bestehen zu lassen, muß hervorgehoben werden, daß das
Gespräch am 27. Juli stattfand, daß das Ultimatum an Serbien vom 23. Juli
stammt, daß Serbien das Ultimatum mit Ausnahme eines Punktes annahm,
der eine Unmenge von Einzelpunkten umfaßte, daß die diplomatischen Ge-
spräche zwischen der Doppelmonarchie und Serbien am 27. Juli seitens der
ersteren zum Ziel hatten, Serbien zu einem Nachgeben auf der ganzen Linie
zu veranlassen, und daß Graf Palffy über den Ausgang eben dieser diplo-
matischen Gespräche den Kardinal um seine Meinung ersuchte. Bekanntlich
führten sie zu keinem Ergebnis: Am folgenden Tag, dem 28. Juli, griff
Österreich-Ungarn Serbien an.n Ausgang eben dieser diplo-
matischen Gespräche den Kardinal um seine Meinung ersuchte. Bekanntlich
führten sie zu keinem Ergebnis: Am folgenden Tag, dem 28. Juli, griff
Österreich-Ungarn Serbien an.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r diplo-
matischen Gespräche den Kardinal um seine Meinung ersuchte. Bekanntlich
führten sie zu keinem Ergebnis: Am folgenden Tag, dem 28. Juli, griff
Österreich-Ungarn Serbien an.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

233
ung308 sowie auf die Wahrung seiner Existenz habe, aber ich habe
niemals die Hoffnung oder die Meinung geäußert, Österreich möge
zu den Waffen greifen. Nichts anderes wurde gesagt. Dies sei um
der Wahrheit willen festgestellt309.“
Nachstehend der Text des Berichtes, den Graf Palffy am 29. Juli
an 
den 
österreichisch-ungarischen 
Außenminister, 
den 
Grafen
Berchtold, sandte:
„Als ich vor zwei Tagen den Kardinal-Staats-Sekretär besuchte,
lenkte er natürlich das Gespräch sofort auf die großen Fragen
und Probleme, die heute Europa beschäftigen. Von einer beson-
deren Milde und Versöhnlichkeit war aber in den Bemerkungen
Seiner Eminenz nichts zu fühlen. Die an Serbien gerichtete Note,
die er als äußerst scharf bezeichnete, billigte er trotzdem rück-
haltlos und gab gleichzeitig indirekt der Hoffnung Ausdruck, daß
die Monarchie auch durchhalten werde. Freilich, meinte der Kar-
dinal, sei es schade, daß Serbien nicht schon viel früher ,klein ge-
macht‘ worden sei, denn damals wäre dies vielleicht ohne einen so
großen Einsatz an unübersehbaren Möglichkeiten durchführbar
gewesen wie heute. Diese Äußerung entspricht auch der Denkung-
sart des Papstes, denn im Verlauf der letzten Jahre hat Seine Heilig-
keit mehrmals das Bedauern geäußert, daß Oesterreich-Ungarn
es unterlassen habe, seinen gefährlichen Nachbar an der Donau zu
,züchtigen‘310.“
Der Vergleich dieser beiden Texte zeigt deutlich, welchen Glau-
ben man den Mitteilungen beimessen kann, durch die die Botschaf-
ter ihren Regierungen über die Gespräche berichten, die sie mit den
berufenen Persönlichkeiten derjenigen führen, bei denen sie akkre-
308 Von uns kursiv, um hervorzuheben, daß es nicht am 27. Juli war, als der
Kardinal Österreich riet, „hart zu bleiben“, was seine Zustimmung zum Krieg
bedeutet hätte, sondern am 28. Juni. Am 27. Juli fordern seine Worte klar
zur Versöhnung auf, der Leser ersieht aus dem Text selbst deutlich, daß
daran kein Zweifel besteht.
309 Zitiert nach Osservatore Romano v. 23. Mai 1936.
310 Graf Sforza, Mémoires. (Bericht des Gesandten Grafen Moriz Palffy aus
Rom-Vatikan, 29. Juli 1914 Nr. 33. Zitiert nach Österreich-Ungarns Außen-
politik von der bosnischen Krise 1908 bis zum Kriegsausbruch 1914, Diplo-
matische Aktenstücke des österreichisch-ungarischen Ministeriums des Äußern,
8. Bd., ausgew. u. bearb. v. L. Bittner u. a., Wien und Leipzig 1930, S. 894. —
Anm. d. Übers.)Kriegsausbruch 1914, Diplo-
matische Aktenstücke des österreichisch-ungarischen Ministeriums des Äußern,
8. Bd., ausgew. u. bearb. v. L. Bittner u. a., Wien und Leipzig 1930, S. 894. —
Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Diplo-
matische Aktenstücke des österreichisch-ungarischen Ministeriums des Äußern,
8. Bd., ausgew. u. bearb. v. L. Bittner u. a., Wien und Leipzig 1930, S. 894. —
Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

234
ditiert sind — Mitteilungen, die im Falle der gegen Pius XII. erho-
benen Anklage das ganze Argument Friedländers ausmachen.
In seinen 1923 veröffentlichten Mémoires zitiert Graf Sforza,
der vor dem Faschismus italienischer Botschafter in Paris und 1945
italienischer Außenminister war, den Bericht des Grafen Palffy
zum Beweis dafür, daß „der Vatikan zumindest zu Anfang mit
Befriedigung auf ein Unternehmen [den Krieg] blickte, in dem
die Vernichtung Serbiens eine Verminderung des Einflusses Ruß-
lands zur Folge gehabt hätte“, weil nämlich der Vatikan in Ruß-
land „das Haupthindernis für eine Aussöhnung der Ostkirche mit
dem Heiligen Stuhl“ sah. Er führt jedoch nicht die Richtigstellung
Kardinal Merry del Vals an, die er im übrigen nicht kannte, da
sie erst am 23. Mai 1936 veröffentlicht worden war. Dagegen zi-
tiert er ein Telegramm vom 24. Juli 1914, das von dem bayerischen
Gesandten beim Vatikan, Baron von Ritter, abgefaßt ist und den
Bericht des Grafen Palffy mit folgenden Worten bekräftigt: „Papst
billigt scharfes Vorgehen Österreichs gegen Serbien und schätzt im
Kriegsfalle mit Rußland die russische und französische Armee nicht
hoch ein. Kardinalsekretär hofft ebenfalls, daß Österreich diesmal
durchhält, und wußte nicht, wann es sonst noch Krieg führen
wollte, wenn es nicht einmal eine ausländische Agitation, die zum
Morde Thronfolgers geführt hat und außerdem bei jetziger Kon-
stellation Österreichs Existenz gefährdet, entschlossen ist, mit den
Waffen zurückzuweisen. Daraus spricht auch die große Angst der
Kurie vor dem Panslavismus311.“
Kardinal Merry del Val lebte noch. Seine Entgegnung lautete:
„Die beklemmenden Tage zwischen dem 29. Juni und dem 20. Au-
gust 1914 haben sich meinem Gedächtnis so eingeprägt, daß ich
mich an alles, was ich in meinen Gesprächen, sei es mit Baron von
Ritter, sei es mit anderen Diplomaten, sagte, erinnere und auch
daran, mit welcher Sorgfalt ich meine Worte abwog. Es ist sehr
richtig, daß ich nach dem entsetzlichen Verbrechen von Sarajewo
wiederholt erklärte, daß Österreich hart bleiben müsse, daß es vol-
311 Graf Sforza, Mémoires. (Telegramm Ritters Nr. 216 vom 24. Juli 1914.
Zitiert nach Bayerische Dokumente zum Kriegsausbruch und zum Versailler
Schuldspruch, hg. v. P. Dirr, 3. erw. Aufl., München und Berlin 1925,
S. 206. — Anm. d. Übers.)tters Nr. 216 vom 24. Juli 1914.
Zitiert nach Bayerische Dokumente zum Kriegsausbruch und zum Versailler
Schuldspruch, hg. v. P. Dirr, 3. erw. Aufl., München und Berlin 1925,
S. 206. — Anm. d. Übers.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

235
len Anspruch auf feierlichste Genugtuung und auf wirksame Wah-
rung seiner Existenz habe. Aber ich habe mich keineswegs der
Ausdrücke bedient, die mir in dem Telegramm des Barons von Rit-
ter zugeschrieben werden, noch jemals die Hoffnung geäußert,
daß Österreich zu den Waffen greifen würde. Dies stellt eine Deu-
tung und Interpretation dar, der ich in keiner Weise zustimme312.“
Pierre Dominique313 und Jacques Nobécourt314, denen im Jahre
1964 alle diese Texte bekannt sind, zitieren sie, und beide geben
zu, daß sowohl der Bericht des Grafen Palffy als auch das Tele-
gramm des Barons von Ritter verdächtig sind, die Version von
Kardinal Merry del Val dagegen nicht, doch bringt sie das nicht in
Verlegenheit: Beide legen den Akzent auf den Ausdruck „hart
bleiben“ (tener forte im Original), wie wenn er am 27. Juli 1914
gesprochen worden wäre und nicht, wie der Kardinal sagt, „nach
dem entsetzlichen Verbrechen von Sarajewo“.
Um den Schluß zu ziehen, daß der Vatikan für den Ersten Welt-
krieg mitverantwortlich ist.
Doch es ist klar, daß dieser Ausdruck, unter seinem wirklichen
Datum eingeordnet, nicht den Sinn hat, den sie ihm geben, und
den Vatikan in keiner Weise mitverantwortlich macht.
Wann wird man einmal mit dieser Art von Geschichtsschreibung
aufhören?
312 Osservatore Romano v. 22. Oktober 1923.
313 Dominique, Le Crapouillot, April 1964, S. 61.
314 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 120 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---it dieser Art von Geschichtsschreibung
aufhören?
312 Osservatore Romano v. 22. Oktober 1923.
313 Dominique, Le Crapouillot, April 1964, S. 61.
314 Nobécourt, Le Vicaire, S. 120 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

236
Anhang V
Das Problem der deutschen Reparationsschulden
So wie die Dinge zur Zeit liegen, ist die Regelung sämtlicher
etwaigen Forderungen aller der Länder, die sich durch Deutsch-
land auf Grund des Krieges für geschädigt halten, durch ein am
27. Februar 1953 in London zwischen den ehemaligen Alliierten
und Deutschland unterzeichnetes Abkommen bis zum Zeitpunkt
der Unterzeichnung des Friedensvertrages mit dem wiederverei-
nigten Deutschland zurückgestellt worden. Als Gegenleistung da-
für hat Westdeutschland sich bereit erklärt, schon jetzt alle aus
rassischen, religiösen oder politischen Gründen verfolgten oder
materiell geschädigten Personen zu entschädigen. Dies fand seinen
Ausdruck in dem sog. Entschädigungsgesetz sowie dem Rückerstat-
tungsgesetz, die beide verschiedentlich durch Ergänzungsgesetze
(Bundesergänzungsgesetze) präzisiert wurden, insbesondere am 1.
Oktober 1953, 29. Juni 1956 und 19. Juli 1957 sowie erst kürz-
lich am 24. Juni 1964. Man hätte erwarten können, daß Ost-
deutschland sich diesen Maßnahmen anschließen würde. Aber nein,
durchaus nicht. So macht man von allen Seiten Rechnungen fertig:
Die einen, die im Namen geschädigter Staaten aufgestellt werden,
sollen, zumindest theoretisch, bei Abschluß des Friedensvertrages
vorgelegt werden, von dem man die endgültige Sanktionierung
der gegenwärtigen Teilung Deutschlands erhofft, was bedeutet,
daß Westdeutschland diese Rechnungen wird allein bezahlen müs-
sen. Die anderen, im Namen der einzelnen Opfer des Nationalso-
zialismus ausgestellten Rechnungen können schon jetzt West-
deutschland allein vorgelegt werden.
Unter den erstgenannten Rechnungen wurden bisher lediglich
die von Jugoslawien (70 Milliarden Dollar, wie es in L’Express
vom 20. Februar 1964 heißt) und die von Griechenland (20 Mil-
liarden Dollar) bekanntgegeben. Man darf sicher sein, daß die
Rechnung, die Deutschland, ob wiedervereinigt oder nicht, prä-
sentiert werden wird, wenn erst Rußland und seine Satelliten die
ihren aufgestellt haben werden, besonders gepfeffert sein wird.daß die
Rechnung, die Deutschland, ob wiedervereinigt oder nicht, prä-
sentiert werden wird, wenn erst Rußland und seine Satelliten die
ihren aufgestellt haben werden, besonders gepfeffert sein wird.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ie Deutschland, ob wiedervereinigt oder nicht, prä-
sentiert werden wird, wenn erst Rußland und seine Satelliten die
ihren aufgestellt haben werden, besonders gepfeffert sein wird.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

237
Unter den zweitgenannten Rechnungen erscheinen die Abfin-
dungen für Personenschäden (Tote, Entschädigungsberechtigte, In-
validität usw.) sowie Betrug an Sachwerten (Diebstahl von Ver-
mögenswerten), die den Opfern des Nationalsozialismus zugefügt
wurden. Im Anschluß an Verträge, die am 10. September 1952
in Luxemburg zwischen Westdeutschland einerseits und der Confe-
rence on Jewish Material Claims against Germany und dem Staat
Israel andererseits abgeschlossen und die dann durch alle die oben-
genannten aufeinanderfolgenden Gesetze genauer bestimmt wur-
den, setzte Westdeutschland schließlich die jedem Opfer des Na-
tionalsozialismus zustehende Entschädigung für Personenschäden
auf 5000 DM (1250 Dollar) oder im Todesfall auf 3000 DM
(750 Dollar) für jeden seiner Berechtigten fest. Im Laufe des Jah-
res 1964 sind sämtliche Opfer des Nationalsozialismus, ob Juden
oder nicht, auf dieser Grundlage entschädigt worden.
Mit den in den zehn Jahresraten zahlbaren 3 Milliarden DM, die
dem Staat Israel durch die Luxemburger Verträge zugestanden
wurden und die in der Folge durch verschiedene Verhandlungen
(insbesondere jene, die der Eichmann-Prozeß im Jahre 1960/61
unvermeidlich machte) auf 4 Milliarden, zahlbar in fünfzehn Jah-
resraten, erhöht wurden, hält sich der Staat Israel, der sich zum
Erben der 6 Millionen Juden, die von den Nationalsozialisten ver-
nichtet worden sein sollen, einsetzte, für geschädigt: Bei 750 Dollar
für jeden von ihnen kommt er selbstverständlich nicht auf seine
Rechnung. Daher seine fortwährenden Reklamationen im Sinne
einer Erhöhung der ihm zugebilligten Entschädigung. Wenn man
seinen Forderungen entspricht . . .
Die Conference on Jewish Material Claims against Germany
ihrerseits verliert das Problem der Rückerstattung jener Vermögen
315 Diesbezüglich klärte uns eine Kontroverse zwischen jüdischen Organisationen,
die sich über mehrere Nummern der Zeitung Le Monde (11., 19. und 29.
März 1964) erstreckte, darüber auf, daß die bis jetzt von Deutschland ge-
leisteten Jahresraten an die Conference on Jewish Material Claims against
Germany nicht unter die Opfer des Nationalsozialismus aufgeteilt wurden,
sondern der Reihe nach unter die jüdischen Mitgliedsorganisationen dieser
Stelle (in diesem Jahr sind die jüdischen Organisationen Frankreichs an der
Reihe), und zwar, um „zum Wiederaufbau des jüdischen Lebens beizutragen“
(Bau von Synagogen, Einrichtung von Bibliotheken, Subventionierung vonahr sind die jüdischen Organisationen Frankreichs an der
Reihe), und zwar, um „zum Wiederaufbau des jüdischen Lebens beizutragen“
(Bau von Synagogen, Einrichtung von Bibliotheken, Subventionierung von

--- PAGE BREAK ---en Organisationen Frankreichs an der
Reihe), und zwar, um „zum Wiederaufbau des jüdischen Lebens beizutragen“
(Bau von Synagogen, Einrichtung von Bibliotheken, Subventionierung von

--- PAGE BREAK ---

238
nicht aus den Augen, die man Deutschland als Diebstahl an den Ju-
den der ganzen Welt zur Last legt. Bei ihrer Tagung in Brüssel am
8., 9. und 10. März 1964 hat sie eine Aufstellung der Summen vor-
genommen, die Deutschland in dieser Hinsicht den Juden der gan-
zen Welt rückerstatten soll. La Terre retrouvée (1. April 1964) gibt
diese Aufstellungen im einzelnen wieder:
Deutsche Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2000 Millionen Dollar
Slowakische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
140 Millionen Dollar
Polnische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3000 Millionen Dollar
Belgische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
618 Millionen Dollar
Rumänische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1000 Millionen Dollar
Tschechoslowakische Juden
.
.
.
.
650 Millionen Dollar
Ungarische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
570 Millionen Dollar
Französische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
950 Millionen Dollar
Holländische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
450 Millionen Dollar
Griechische Juden
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
120 Millionen Dollar
Gesamtbetrag
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
9498 Millionen Dollar
Rund: 10 Milliarden Dollar315.
Die allgemeine Endsumme, die man auf Grund dieser bekannten
und sehr unvollständigen Angaben erhält, erreicht bereits astro-
nomische Ausmaße: über 100 Milliarden Dollar! Man erschauert
bei dem Gedanken, wie diese Summe aussehen wird, wenn einmal
jeder seine Rechnung präsentiert hat.
Im Vergleich dazu war, wie ich bereits gesagt habe, das, was
durch den Versailler Vertrag von Deutschland gefordert wurde,
nur eine Bagatelle.
Der Beweis dafür ist erbracht.
Jugendorganisationen usw.). Auf diese Weise hat nach Aussage des Präsi-
denten der jüdischen Organisationen Frankreichs (Le Monde v. 19. März
1964) Dr. Nahum Goldmann der Präsident der jüdischen Organisation in
Amerika, hundert Millionen Dollar (!) für seine Organisation erhalten, von
der nicht ein einziges Mitglied auch nur den geringsten Schaden seitens
Deutschlands erlitten hat. Von Zeit zu Zeit erfährt man auch, daß ein Jude,
ohne den geringsten Schaden erlitten zu haben, sich für einen angeblichen
Diebstahl entschädigen läßt, der gestützt wird durch . . . eine falsche Zeugen-
aussage: Auerbach-Skandal, Deutsch-Skandal usw. Ein ungezügeltes Gang-
stertum. Die Herrschaft der Sittenlosigkeit in ihrer schönsten Blüte. Doch was
macht das schon: Deutschland zahlt ja — Westdeutschland allein!bach-Skandal, Deutsch-Skandal usw. Ein ungezügeltes Gang-
stertum. Die Herrschaft der Sittenlosigkeit in ihrer schönsten Blüte. Doch was
macht das schon: Deutschland zahlt ja — Westdeutschland allein!

--- PAGE BREAK ---h-Skandal usw. Ein ungezügeltes Gang-
stertum. Die Herrschaft der Sittenlosigkeit in ihrer schönsten Blüte. Doch was
macht das schon: Deutschland zahlt ja — Westdeutschland allein!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

239
Personenverzeichnis
Adenauer, Konrad 170, 179, 192
Adolph, Walter 30, 33, 37, 91, 225
Albrecht, Dieter 66
Alfaric, Prosper 111
Alfieri, Dino 86, 141, 142
Aristophanes 41
Armstrong, Anne 139 f.
Auerbach 238
Badoglio 158 f.
Baruch, Armand 230
Bastianini 153 f., 158 f.
Beaverbrook, Lord 72
Beck, Oberst 122, 124
Benedikt XV., Papst 35, 80 f., 85, 104,
106 ff., 113 f., 116, 118, 147
Berchtold, Graf 233
v. Bergen 34, 69 ff., 75, 77, 135, 145 f.,
161
Bergmann, Ernst 68
Berning 179
Bertram 65, 177
Billig, Joseph 56
Bittner, L. 233
Blum, Léon 110
v. Bodelschwingh, Friedrich 182 f.
Bonnet, Georges 120, 123, 130 f.
Bouglé 200
Brand, Joël 60 f.
Briand 104, 107 f.
Brossolette, Pierre 211, 213, 215
Brüning, Heinrich 168, 173, 190
Bullitt 131
Caillaux 104
Calvin 26
Camus, Albert 51 f.
Canaris 123, 206
Chamberlain 73, 123, 127, 148 f.
Charles-Roux, François 80, 130, 149
Chruschtschow 23
Churchill, Winston 13, 29, 73, 84, 88,
228
Cianfarra, Camille 80, 149
Ciano, Graf 135, 140 f., 147, 153, 157,
211, 217
de Cigala, Albin 103
Claudel, Paul 40 f.
Clemenceau 81, 85, 105 ,107
Combes, Émile 73, 101, 111, 195
Constantini 75
Corneille, Pierre 38, 40
Cortesi 133
Curvers, Alexis 52 f., 231
Curzon, Lord 73
Daninos, Pierre 31
Darnar, Pierre-Laurent 215, 218
Deakin, F. W. 153, 158
Delcassé 101
Deutsch 238
Dezza, Paolo 227
Dibelius, Otto 175
Dirr, P. 234
Döpfner 92
Dominique, Pierre 102, 105 f., 235
Donati, Angelo 34
Dubost 57
Duclos, Paul 74, 80, 86, 116, 135, 140,
148, 150 ff.
Eden 154
Edelmann, Maurice 230
Eichmann 47, 49, 59 f., 237
Erhard, Ludwig 192
Falconi, Carlo 205, 207 ff.
Faulhaber 65, 116
Feigelson, Ralf 56
Fontana, Riccardo 21
François-Poncet, André 120 ff.
Franz Joseph II., Kaiser 85, 104
Frick 169
Friedländer, Saul 11, 14, 34, 36 f., 43,
45, 57 f., 63 ff., 68 f., 71 ff., 86, 88,
103, 117, 127 ff., 132 f., 135 ff.,
142 f., 145 f., 150, 154 f., 161 f., 164,
208, 225
Fummi, Luigi 153 f., 158 f.
Gafencu, Grigore 123
v. Galen, Graf 68, 75, 187, 229
Gallo, Max 72 f.
Gasparri 213
de Gaulle, Charles 160
Gerstein, Kurt 21, 40, 42 ff., 49 f.,
87 f., 103
Gföllner, Johannes 176
Giovannetti, Alberto 74, 77 f., 80, 128,
130 ff.
Godfrey 132
Goebbels, Joseph 65, 175 f.f.
Gasparri 213
de Gaulle, Charles 160
Gerstein, Kurt 21, 40, 42 ff., 49 f.,
87 f., 103
Gföllner, Johannes 176
Giovannetti, Alberto 74, 77 f., 80, 128,
130 ff.
Godfrey 132
Goebbels, Joseph 65, 175 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Gaulle, Charles 160
Gerstein, Kurt 21, 40, 42 ff., 49 f.,
87 f., 103
Gföllner, Johannes 176
Giovannetti, Alberto 74, 77 f., 80, 128,
130 ff.
Godfrey 132
Goebbels, Joseph 65, 175 f.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240
Göring, Hermann 122, 125, 156 f.,
169, 179
Goldmann, Nahum 238
Grass, Günter 32
Gröber 179
Grosser, Alfred 63, 86 f., 162
Guareschi 23
Guignebert, Charles 111
Halifax, Lord 123, 132 f., 150
Heinrich IV., Kaiser 97
Heller 53
Herberichs, G. 209
Herriot 217
Heuss, Theodor 192
Himmler, Heinrich 90
v. Hindenburg, Paul 168, 173, 175
Hitler, Adolf 13, 15 ff., 21 f., 25 f., 28,
37 f., 54, 58, 61, 68, 71 ff., 81, 83,
86, 108, 113, 120 ff., 130 ff., 135 f.,
140, 142 f., 147 f., 150 ff., 157 ff.,
162, 167 ff., 174 f., 177 ff., 183 f.,
186 ff., 190 f., 193, 206, 215, 217,
229 ff.
Hochhuth, Rolf 11, 14, 21 f., 27 f.,
30 ff., 34, 38 ff., 51 ff., 56, 62 f.,
68, 72, 82, 87, 91, 103, 117, 153,
164, 167, 173, 186, 189, 208, 211,
228
Hudal 152
Hugo, Victor 27, 40
Innitzer 119
Jaray, G.-L. 74
Jaurès 90
Jean-Nesmy, Dom Claude 231
Johannes XXIII., Papst 48, 81, 99,
118, 198 f., 206 f., 226
Jussen, Wilhelm 84
Kaas 169 f., 179
Karl d. Große, Kaiser 98
Karl I., Kaiser 104
Karl V., Kaiser 98
Kastner, Rudolf 59 f.,
Kempner, B. M. 229
Kempner, Robert M. W. 56, 228
Kerrl 177, 184
Kersten 90
v. Kessel, Albrecht 231
Kessel, Joseph 90
Kleist, Peter 156, 160
Kletzki, Paul 226
Kollontai 156
v. Krug 155
Latapie, Louis 35
Lapide, Pinhas 226 f.
Laval 155
Lebesque, Morvan 55
Le Clec’h, Guy 32
Léger, Alexis 131 f.
Leiber, Robert 12, 17, 66, 87
Lemkin, Rafael 59
Leo XIII., Papst 80, 99 f., 109, 112,
118, 194, 213
Lewy, Guenter 15 ff., 63
Lipski 123
Litwinow 123
Loriquet, Jean 90 f.,
Lorulot 111
Lübke, Heinrich 192
Luther, Martin 26, 39
Maccarrone, Michele 66, 80
Maglione 34, 57 f., 70, 118, 130, 135,
142, 148 f., 151 ff., 158
Mann, Thomas 51, 55 f., 59
Marahrens 186
Marlé 52
Mauriac, François 51 ff., 177
Marx, Karl 171
McKnight, G. 55
Meïr, Golda 227
Menshausen 69, 75
Michel, Louise 188
Molière 40
v. Moltke 123
Montefiore 153
du Moulin, Graf 64 f.
Mourin 148
Moyne, Lord 60
Müller, Hans 181
Müller, Ludwig 182 f.
Mussolini, Benito 72 f., 86, 88, 99, 108,
124, 126, 128 ff., 135, 141 ff., 147,
154, 156 ff., 215, 217
Mussolini, Rachele 157
Mutz, Édith 226
Niemöller, Martin 16, 174, 183 ff., 188,
191
Nitti, Francesco 151
Nobécourt, Jacques 11, 14, 28 ff.,
42 ff., 62 f., 92, 102 f., 105 f., 117,
208, 235
Orsenigo 25, 42, 61 f., 130, 150
Osborne, Sir 34, 133, 151 f.
Paganuzzi 65
Palffy, Graf 232 ff.Nitti, Francesco 151
Nobécourt, Jacques 11, 14, 28 ff.,
42 ff., 62 f., 92, 102 f., 105 f., 117,
208, 235
Orsenigo 25, 42, 61 f., 130, 150
Osborne, Sir 34, 133, 151 f.
Paganuzzi 65
Palffy, Graf 232 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Nobécourt, Jacques 11, 14, 28 ff.,
42 ff., 62 f., 92, 102 f., 105 f., 117,
208, 235
Orsenigo 25, 42, 61 f., 130, 150
Osborne, Sir 34, 133, 151 f.
Paganuzzi 65
Palffy, Graf 232 ff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

241
v. Papen, Franz 72, 168, 170, 179, 206
v. Parma, Sixtus 104
Paul VI., Papst 82 ff., 90 f., 118, 154
Péri, Gabriel 218
Pétain 53
Petit, Édouard 98
Peyrefitte, Roger 163
Pignatelli di Belmonte 118
Piscator, Erwin 31, 42, 45, 53
Pius IX., Papst 98 f., 112, 190, 194
Pius X., Papst 35, 44, 62, 73, 80 f.,
85, 100 f., 103 f., 106 ff., 113 f., 116,
118, 232
Pius XI., Papst 65 f., 72, 76, 78, 80 f.,
99, 107, 109, 113 f., 118 f., 137,
177 f., 181, 213 ff., 217 f., 226
Pius XII., Papst 11 und ständig
Poliakov, Léon 47, 49 f., 52, 63
v. Preysing, Graf 13 f., 37, 43, 180,
207, 219
Racine 40
Raddatz, Fritz J. 231
Raeder, Erich 185
Rampolla 85, 213
Rassinier, Paul 45 f., 60, 172
Renner, Karl 119
v. Ribbentrop, Joachim 24 f., 61, 65,
70 f., 123, 126, 130, 149, 156, 160 f.,
229
Richter, Hans Werner 32
Riegner 57
Riquet 89 f.
v. Ritter 234 f.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. 29, 36, 46, 57,
69, 84, 88, 122, 124 ff., 131, 137,
139, 144 f., 156, 228
Rosenberg, Alfred 68, 229 f.
Rothfels, Hans 49
Roure, Rémy 90
Russo, Domenico 150 ff.
Sabille, Jacques 90
Safran 226
Sapieha, Adam 227
Sartre, Jean-Paul 55
Senatra, Edoardo 62
Sforza, Graf 233 f.
Shakespeare 40
Shirer, William L. 16, 123, 126, 171,
173 f., 180, 182, 184, 186 f.
Solages 116
Suhard 45, 52
Schellenberg, Walter 152
Schiller, Friedrich 40
v. Schleicher 168
Schleier 154 f., 161
Schmidtke, Friedrich 68
Schreiber, Christian 175
Schultz 65
Schweitzer, Albert 51, 53 ff., 62
Stahel 152
Stalin, Josef 29, 127, 156, 196
v. Steengracht 25 f.
Taylor, Myron 36, 57 f., 61, 137, 140,
144
Thorez, Maurice 217
Tilea 123
Tiso 120
Tisserant 44 f., 207
Tittmann, Harold 36, 46, 58, 69
Ullmann 228
del Val, Merry 103 f., 213, 232, 234 f.
Valeri, Valerio 130 f., 155
Van Roey 228
Venturi, Tacchi 129, 141
Viktor Emanuel II., König 97, 194
Viktor Emanuel III., König 141
Weißberg, Alex 59 ff.
v. Weizsäcker 25, 69 ff., 77, 79, 86, 150,
154, 159, 161, 229, 231
Welles, Sumner 128
Wilhelm II., Kaiser 104
Wilson 105
Winter 43, 46
Wuestenberg, B. 88
Zabkar, J. 88
Zand, Nicole 32
Zoellner 184, 186
Zoll, Israel 227 f.
Zweig, Stefan 55150,
154, 159, 161, 229, 231
Welles, Sumner 128
Wilhelm II., Kaiser 104
Wilson 105
Winter 43, 46
Wuestenberg, B. 88
Zabkar, J. 88
Zand, Nicole 32
Zoellner 184, 186
Zoll, Israel 227 f.
Zweig, Stefan 55

--- PAGE BREAK ---229, 231
Welles, Sumner 128
Wilhelm II., Kaiser 104
Wilson 105
Winter 43, 46
Wuestenberg, B. 88
Zabkar, J. 88
Zand, Nicole 32
Zoellner 184, 186
Zoll, Israel 227 f.
Zweig, Stefan 55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

242
Literaturverzeichnis
Acta Apostolicae Sedis, Bonne Presse, Paris
Actes et documents du Saint-Siège relatifs à la seconde guerre mondiale, Libre-
ria Editrice Vaticana
Actes de Pie XII, Documentation Catholique, Paris
Adolph, Walter: Verfälschte Geschichte, Antwort an Rolf Hochhuth, Morus,
Berlin 1963
Albrecht, Dieter: Der Notenwechsel zwischen dem Hl. Stuhl und der deutschen
Reichsregierung, Matthias-Grünewald, Mainz 1965
Alfieri, Dino: Deux Dictateurs face à face, Cheval Ailé, Genf 1948
Armstrong, Anne: Bedingungslose Kapitulation, die teuerste Fehlentscheidung
der Neuzeit, Molden, Wien 1965
franz.: Capitulation sans conditions, Presses de la Cité, Paris 1964
Bastianini, Giuseppe: Uomini, cose, fatti, Milano 1946
Bayerische Dokumente zum Kriegsausbruch und zum Versailler Schuldspruch,
herausg. von P. Dirr, 3., erw. Aufl., München 1925
Blum, Léon: A l’Échelle humaine, Gallimard, Paris 1948
deutsch: Blick auf die Menschheit, Rowohlt, Hamburg
Bonnet, Georges: Le Quai d’Orsay sous trois Républiques, Fayard, Paris 1964
Bouglé, Celestin: Psychologie des foules, Paris 1921
Brand, Joël: Un Million de Juifs contre 10 000 camions, du Seuil, Paris 1957
Charles-Roux, François: Huit ans au Vatican 1932—1940, Flammarion,
Paris 1947
Churchill, Winston: Great Contemporaries, London 1939
—: Mémoires, Plon, Paris 1948
Cianfarra, Camille: La Guerre et le Vatican, Portulan, Paris 1946
de Cigala, Albin: Pie X, Fleurus, Paris 1927
Corneille, Pierre: Le Cid, Classiques Garnier, Paris
Curvers, Alexis: Pie XII, le Pape outragé, Robert Laffont, Paris 1964
Daninos, Pierre: Snobissimo, Hachette, Paris 1963
deutsch: Snobissimo oder die Kunst, sich in Szene zu setzen, Ullstein,
Darmstadt 1966
Deakin, F. W.: Die brutale Freundschaft, Kiepenheuer und Witsch, Köln 1964
franz.: L’Axe brisé, Stock, Paris 1964
Dominique, Pierre: Histoire des Papes, Crapouillot, Paris 1964
Duclos, Paul: Le Vatican et la Seconde Guerre mondiale, Pedone, Paris 1955
Falconi, Carlo: Le Silence de Pie XII, du Rocher, Paris 1965
François-Poncet, André: Von Versailles bis Potsdam, Mainz 1949
franz.: De Versailles à Potsdam, Flammarion, Paris 1948
Friedländer, Saul: Pius XII. und das Dritte Reich, Rowohlt, Hamburg 1965
franz.: Pie XII et le IIIe Reich, du Seuil, Paris 1964
Gallo, Max: L’Italie de Mussolini, Perrin, Paris 1965
Giovannetti, Alberto: Der Vatikan und der Krieg, Bachem, Köln 1961
franz.: L’Action du Vatican pour la paix, Fleurus, Paris 1958Seuil, Paris 1964
Gallo, Max: L’Italie de Mussolini, Perrin, Paris 1965
Giovannetti, Alberto: Der Vatikan und der Krieg, Bachem, Köln 1961
franz.: L’Action du Vatican pour la paix, Fleurus, Paris 1958

--- PAGE BREAK ---llo, Max: L’Italie de Mussolini, Perrin, Paris 1965
Giovannetti, Alberto: Der Vatikan und der Krieg, Bachem, Köln 1961
franz.: L’Action du Vatican pour la paix, Fleurus, Paris 1958

--- PAGE BREAK ---

243
Herberichs, G.: Théorie de la Paix selon Pie XII, Pedone, Paris 1965
Hochhuth, Rolf: Der Stellvertreter, Rowohlt, Hamburg 1963
Hugo, Victor: Les Misérables, Classiques Garnier, Paris
Jaray, G.-L.: Messages de guerre, Fleurus, Paris 1946
Jean-Nesmy, Dom Claude: Pour ou contre „Le Vicaire“, Desclée de Brouwer,
Paris 1964
Kastner, Rudolf: Bericht über Eichmanns Menschenhandel in Ungarn, Kindler,
München 1961
Katholische Kirche und Nationalsozialismus, Dokumente 1930—1935,
herausg. von Hans Müller, Nymphenburger, München 1963
Kempner, Robert: Eichmann und Komplizen, Europa, Stuttgart o. J.
Kessel, Joseph: Les Mains du miracle, Gallimard, Paris 1954
Kleist, Peter: Zwischen Hitler und Stalin 1939—1945, Athenäum, Bonn 1950
franz.: Entre Hitler et Staline, Plon, Paris 1950
Lewy, Guenter: The Catholic Church and Nazi Germany, McGraw-Hill,
New York 1964
deutsch: Die Katholische Kirche und das Dritte Reich, Piper, München 1965
Maccarrone, Michele: Il Nationalsocialismo e la Santa Sede, Rom 1947
McKnight, G.: Le Dr Schweitzer, Stock, Paris 1964
Mourin, —: Les Tentatives de Paix dans la Seconde Guerre mondiale, Payot,
Paris 1949
Mussolini, Rachele: Ma Vie avec le Duce, Cheval Ailé, Genf 1948
Niemöller, Martin: Vom U-Boot zur Kanzel, Warneck, Berlin 1934
Nobécourt, Jacques: „Le Vicaire“ et l’histoire, du Seuil, Paris 1964
Österreich-Ungarns Außenpolitik von der bosnischen Krise 1908 bis zum Kriegs-
ausbruch 1914, Diplomatische Aktenstücke des österreichisch-ungarischen Mini-
steriums des Äußeren, 8. Bd., ausg. und bearb. von L. Bittner u. a., Wien 1930
Der Papst an die Deutschen, Pius XII. als Apostolischer Nuntius und als Papst in
seinen deutschsprachigen Reden und Sendschreiben von 1917 bis 1956, herausg.
von B. Wuestenberg und J. Zabkar, Scheffler, Frankfurt 1957
Petit, Édouard: L’Italie, Aristide Quillet, 1929
Peyrefitte, Roger: Les Ambassades, Flammarion, Paris 1957
—: La Fin des Ambassades, Flammarion, Paris 1958
Pius XII., Vorkämpfer des Friedens, Berlin 1951
Pius XII., Reden und Enzykliken, herausg. von P. Wilhelm Jussen SJ,
Hamburg 1946
Poliakov, Léon: L’Arche, Calmann-Lévy, Paris 1964
—: La Terre retrouvée, Calmann-Lévy, Paris 1960
—: Le Procès de Jérusalem, Calmann-Lévy, Paris 1963
—: Le Bréviaire de la haine, Calmann-Lévy, Paris 1951
Der Prozeß gegen die Hauptkriegsverbrecher vor dem Internationalen Militär-
gerichtshof, Amtlicher Text in deutscher Sprache, 42 Bände,
Nürnberg 1947—1949
franz.: Compte rendu des débats de Nuremberg
amerik.: I. M. T., Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression (Ergänzungsband B)
Raddatz, Fritz J.: Summa iniuria oder Durfte der Papst schweigen?, Rowohlt,
Hamburg 1963anz.: Compte rendu des débats de Nuremberg
amerik.: I. M. T., Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression (Ergänzungsband B)
Raddatz, Fritz J.: Summa iniuria oder Durfte der Papst schweigen?, Rowohlt,
Hamburg 1963

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244
Rassinier, Paul: Das Drama der Juden Europas, Pfeiffer, Hannover 1965
franz.: Le Drame des Juifs européens, Sept Couleurs, Paris 1964
—: Zum Fall Eichmann: Was ist Wahrheit? oder Die unbelehrbaren Sieger,
Druffel, Leoni 1963
franz.: Le véritable Procès Eichmann ou les Vainqueurs incorrigibles,
Sept Couleurs, Paris 1962
—: Die Lüge des Odysseus, Priester, Wiesbaden 1959 und Damm, München
1964
franz.: Le Mensonge d’Ulysse, Librairie française, Paris 1950
Sartre, Jean-Paul: Les Mots, Gallimard, Paris 1964
deutsch: Die Wörter, Rowohlt, Hamburg 1965
Schellenberg, Walter: Memoiren, Politik und Wirtschaft, Köln 1959
franz.: Le Chef du Contre-espionnage nazi parle . . . , Julliard, Paris 1957
Sforza, Carlo Comte: Mémoires, Plon, Paris 1921
Shirer, William L.: Aufstieg und Fall des Dritten Reiches,
Kiepenheuer und Witsch, Köln 1961
franz.: Le IIIe Reich, des origines à la chute, Stock, Paris 1961
del Val, Merry Pie X, Souvenirs et impressions, Fleurus, Paris 1927
Vierteljahreshefte für Zeitgeschichte im Auftrag des Institutes für Zeitgeschichte
München herausg. von Hans Rothfels und Theodor Eschenburg, Deutsche Ver-
lags-Anstalt Stuttgart, 1. Jg. 1953
Weißberg, Alex: Die Geschichte von Joel Brand, Kiepenheuer und Witsch,
Köln 1957
Zweig, Stefan: Die Welt von gestern, Erinnerungen eines Europäers,
S. Fischer, Frankfurt 1962
franz.: Le Monde d’hier, Albin Michel, Paris 1939

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, Kiepenheuer und Witsch,
Köln 1957
Zweig, Stefan: Die Welt von gestern, Erinnerungen eines Europäers,
S. Fischer, Frankfurt 1962
franz.: Le Monde d’hier, Albin Michel, Paris 1939

--- PAGE BREAK ---

245
Bemerkungen zur elektronischen Fassung (Mai 2001)
Bei der Bearbeitung wurden folgende Korrekturen und Ergänzungen
vorgenommen :
S. 7 :
(Die Reihenfolge der beiden Zeilen Anhang IV und Anhang V im
Inhaltsverzeichnis wurde richtiggestellt.)
S. 41 :
Bühenstück — Bühnenstück
S. 80 :
Cianfara — Cianfarra
S. 108 : Kopliment — Kompliment
S. 112 : Guiseppe — Giuseppe
S. 116 : (Fußnote 162) : Weihnachstbotschaft — Weihnachtsbotschaft
S. 125 : einnnahm — einnahm
S. 141 : (Fußnotenverweis) : gewähren möge221 — gewähren möge222
S. 153 : (Fußnote 246) : Daekin — Deakin
S. 156 : (Fußnote 251) : (Gegenüber dem französischen Original fehlte dieser Satz) :
Eine letzte Bemerkung: dieser Schleier mußte besonders qualifiziert sein,
um die Telegramme der deutschen Botschaft in Paris zu verfassen: er kennt
nicht einmal den genauen Namen des Informanten, den er nennt, der nicht
„von Krug“ ist, sondern „Krug von Nidda“!
S. 158 : Guiseppe — Giuseppe
S. 163 : Krigführenden — Kriegführenden
S. 178 : (Fußnote 275) : (Fehlende Seitenangabe) : 211—218.
S. 178 : (Fußnote 276) :  (Fehlende Seitenangabe) : 226—231
S. 182 : Deligierten — Delegierten
S. 188 : typischter — typischster
S. 193 : (Fußnote 292) : Réveillez-vouz! — Réveillez-vous!
S. 205 : bewunderswertes — bewundernswertes
S. 224 : was nur nur in seinen Kräften stand — was nur in seinen Kräften stand
S. 239 : Cianfara — Cianfarra
S. 239 : Darnar, Pierre-Laurant — Darnar, Pierre-Laurent
S. 241 : Piux IX. — Pius IX.
S. 241 : Rousso — Russo
S. 242 : Cianfara — Cianfarra
S. 242 : Guiseppe — Giuseppe
S. 243 : Hochhut — Hochhuth
S. 243 : Petit, Édouard: L’Italie, Aritide Quillet, 1929 — Aristide
Bemerkung : Auf Seite 21 beginnt die Fußnotennumerierung bei 2!