

X


La


j * >



#$1


✓ 4 , a L\'

CASE CLOSED: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination

of John F. Kennedy. Random House., 607 pages, $25
Reviewed by Alan Houston.


L'* ZsjcJl



Vjpuj
l r\ ~iks


4


( i


j\£&


vjttku


Gerald Posner's CASE CLOSED has been hailed as a brilliant
defense of the Warren Commission's findings by critics as diverse
as columnist Tom Wicker, historian Steven Ambrose, and CIA critic
David Wise. While Posner has some valid criticisms of certain
assassination researchers and and witnesses, Posner's book itself
is filled with omissions, distortions, and outright lies-the very
thing that Posner accuses the Warren Commission critics of doing.

The first section of CASE CLOSED is intended to prove that
Oswald was indeed the lonely, frustrated Marxist that the Warren
Commission and the House Select Committee on Assassinations
(HSCA) painted him to be, and that he could not possibly have
been a low-level illelligence operative, as many researchers have
suggested. Unfortunately, much of this section relies on highly
questionable sources. He quotes a psychiatrist, Renatus Hartogs,
who examined Oswald briefly as a teenager, and who told the
Warren Commission that Oswald exhibited "definite signs of
dangerousness." He fails to mention that in 1975, Hartogs lost
a $350,00 judgement to a young woman who said that he had forced
her to have sex with him as part of his "therapy." Posner relies
on Marina Oswald's testimony throughout the book, yet even the
Warren Commission regarded her testimony as unreliable at best.

One of the Warren Commission's own counsels, Norman Redlich,
wrote that "Marina Oswald has lied to the Secret Service, the
FBI, and this Commission on matters which are of vital concern to
the people of this country and the world." Marina herslf has
admitted that she was threatened with deportation and told the
Commission what it wanted to hear.

Posner relies on FBI reports throughout his book, yet at
least sixty people have said that the FBI-as well as the Warren
Commission-distorted their testimony, and there is proof that the
FBI altered documents,

Posner also quotes repeatedly from the book MARINA AND LEE,
by Priscilla Johnson Mcmillan. Mcmillan is widely regarded by
researchers as a CIA employee posing as a journalist, w i te h g e a d N<3i vJrVitcOr
reason. A reporter with an extraordinary range of contacts within
the intelligence community, she contracted with Marina Oswald,
while she was still being held in protective custody by the
Secret Service, to write an account of her life with Oswald. The
book did not appear until the late seventies. Meanwhile, McMillan
provided shelter for Svetlana Stalin when she defected to
America. In his book PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, Mark Lane quotes Marina as
saying after the book was published, that much of the book was
false, and Mcmillan knew it to be false.

Posner quotes throughout from Oswald's "historic diary," and


he notes that the HSCA verified it as being in Oswald’s
handwriting. He fails to mention that they also concluded that it
appeared to have been written in one or two sittings, and that
the diary has anachronisms which prove that it is not a
contemporaneous account. The "diary" is not a diary at all, but
was written long after the events occurred, possibly to conceal
Oswald's contacts with American or Soviet intelligence.

Posner relies on the assurances of the controversial KGB
defector, Yuri Nosenko, and Oswald's KGB files to prove that
Oswald had no contact with American or Soviet intelligence.
Posner, of course, did not actually see these files, only read
summaries of them. The contents of these files were supposed to
be aired on "Nightline," but at the last moment the KGB got cold
feet. Forrest Sawyer told Dick Russell, author of THE MAN WHO
Knew TOO MUCH, that the files "didn’t reveal a damn thing,” and
added that he was allowed to examine material only from the KGB's
Second Directorate. His request to see the far more telling First
Directorate files was refused. "These days," Sawyer concluded,
"you can bet that a Russian intelligence agency won't put out
anything that would upset the CIA."

Posner's reliance on questionable sources-a quack
psychiatrist, Marina's unreliable testimony, a work of CIA
disinformation, a phony diary, and the questionable assurances
of the FBI and the KGB-render most of Posner's book worthless.
Posner also omits certain facts that would tend to connect Oswald
with the CIA. He refers blandly to Richard Snyder as an "American
consul" who handled Oswald's defection and return. He fails to
mention that Snyder had worked with the CIA in 1949-50, and that
the HSCA had discovered that Snyder's CIA file had been "red-
flagged" as a matter of "cover." A book entitled WHO’S WHO IN THE
CIA, published in East Berlin in 1968, lists Snyder as having
been with the CIA since 1951. When the Oswalds returned to the
U.S., Snyder returned Oswalds' s passport to him several months
ahead of his scheduled departure, although the embassy had
specifically instructed him in writing not to do so.

As for some of Posner's outright lies, here are just a few
samples: Rose Cheramie was a prostitute who was thrown from a car
by two men. Before the assassination, she told a policeman,
Francis Fruge , that Kennedy would be killed. Posner distorts the
HSCA report on Cheramie to make it appear that she had made up
the story afterword. In fact, the report confirms that Cheramie
warned the policeman before the assassination. The report goes on
to say that Fruge was able to identify Cheramie 's companions, one
of whom was Sergio Archaca Smith-who just happened to be a good
friend of David Ferrie, the right wing extremist, former CIA
contract agent, and employee of mob boss Carlos Marcello, whom
most researchers suspect of playing a major role in the Kennedy
as? assination.

Posner claims that the only evidence linking Mafia boss
Santos Trafficante to the assassination was the testimony of
Cuban exile Jose’ Aleman, and that there was no tape-recorded
evidence of conspiracy. In his updated edition of CONSPIRACY,
Anthony Summers states that "It can now be reported that the
Assassinations Committee was provided with an FBI surveillance


tape of Trafficante, recorded following the murder of Sam
Giancana. Trafficante was heard to say "now only two people are
alive who know who killed Kennedy, and they aren't talking."

In his list of mysterious deaths, taken from Jim Marr's book
CROSSFIRE, Posner states that "Charles Mentesana was one of
several news cameramen who filmed Lt. Carl Day carrying the
Carcano rifle out of the Book Depository." Actually, Marrs states
that Mentesana filmed a rifle OTHER than the Carcano being
removed from the Depository. A recent article in THE THIRD
DECADE, a journal of research on the JFK case, discussed this
film, which shows a rifle other than the Carcano being removed
from the roof of the Depository. Since Jim Garrison also mentions
this film in his book, Posner cannot claim that he simply made an
error. He simply lied about it. Posner also fails to mention that
Federal agent Frank Ellsworth told Dick Russell that that the
Mannlicher-Carcano was actually found on a lower floor than the
sixth floor. Posner states that the policemen who found the rifle
on the sixth floor and identified it as a Mauser quickly
corrected corrected themselves. In fact, only one officer,
Seymour Weitzman, said that he may have been mistaken. All of the
other of ficers , including Deputies Boone and Mooney, swore under
oath that Captain Fritz, in their presence, examined the rifle on
the sixth floor and pronounced it to be a 7.65 German Mauser.
Deputy Roger Craig later said that the rifle had "Mauser" stamped
on the barrel. There is no evidence that any of these officers
recanted their descriptions of the rifle. The Deputy who was with
Weitzman when he found the rifle was shown the Carcano during the
Warren Commission proceedings, and flatly rejected it as the one
he had seen. A CIA document, written several days after the
assassination, also refer to the rifle as a Mauser. (Weitzman,
the only officer to recant his discription of the rifle, later
identified, to two researchers, Watergate burgler Bernard Barker
as being one of the men he had encountered behind the grassy
knoll). Thus, the evidence proves that three rifles were found in
the vicinity of the Book Depository, and that the Dallas police
concealed two of these rifles. Posner refers to the testimony of
Julia Mercer, who saw a man take out a rifle from a truck driven
by Jack Ruby before the assassination, and he states that an
investigation proved this story to be false. The source of the
statement regarding this alleged investigation was a Dallas
police ofLicer. Posner also fails to mention that Mercer said
that her statements had been distorted by the Sheriff's office
and the FBI.

Referring to a picture taken of General Walker's house,
Posner notes that Marina told the Warren Commission that a hole
in the picture, obliterating the license plate number of a car,
had been added since Lee had shown it to her. Posner writes that
"Marina may be mistaken. A photo of evidence taken from Oswald's
flat after the assassination shows that the hole was in the print
at that time." In fact, a picture printed in the books CONSPIRACY
and HIGH TREASON, shows that the original photograph was intact.

Before the assassination, someone posing as Oswald
deliberately attracted attention to himself. Posner's accounts of
the Oswald imposter sightings are-like everything else in his


book-filled with distortions. For example, in the case of auto
salesman Albert Bogard, who said that a Lee Oswald had made a
high speed test-drive of a car, Posner states that "none of his
fellow workers supported Bogard 's story except one." In fact,
three other witnesses, Frank Pizzo, Oran Brown, and Eugene Wilson
corroberated Bogard’ s story. Posner observes that one witness
"did remember a five-foot tall "Oswald," not a very good
imposter." He fails to mention that this witness was blind in one
eye and had cataracts. Regarding Oswald’s alleged visit to the
Cuban and Soviet embassies in Mexico, Posner states that Sylvia
Duran identified the man as being the real Oswald. Posner fails
to mention that she was twice arrested by the Mexican police, on
orders of the CIA, and subjected to brutal treatment. It was then
that she said that the man was the real Oswald that she had seen.
When Anthony Summers showed her films of the real Oswald, she did
not believe that he was the man she had seen. (There is now
evidence that both the real Oswald and an imposter may have
visited the embassies).

Posner uses the testimony of Charles Givens to place Oswald
on the sixth floor at 11:50. He fails to mention that this was
actually Givens' second version of his story. In his first
version, Givens said that he left the sixth floor at 11:30, and
did not go back up to the sixth floor. An FBI report stated that
Givens, who was wanted on a drug charge, might be willing to
change his story for money. When Warren Commission counsel David
Belin interviewed Givens for a second time, he was aware of
Givens' first account, but he went ahead and suborned perjury
from Givens, and Posner uses this perjured testimony to make his
case against Oswald. Posner also accepts the testimony of Tippet
witness Helen Markham, who told Mark Lane that Tippet s killer
was "a short man, somewhat on the heavy side, with bushy hair.
When the Warren Commission questioned Markham about her

statements, she denied making them. Lane, however, produced a
recording of the conversation, proving that Markham was a liar.
Despite this, the Warren Commission accepted her (revised)
testimony, and Posner also accepts it. Thus, Posner, while
dismissing many conspiracy witnesses because of minor

inconsistencies in their statements, is willing to use proven
liars when it suits him. (Not surprisingly, Posner was formerly a
lawyer) .

One of Posner's main contentions in his book is that there
is no credible evidence of a relationship between Oswald, David
Ferrie, and Guy Banister, whose office address was stamped on
some of the pro-Castro leaflets that Oswald was handing out in
New Orleans. He bases this claim on inconsistencies in some of
the witnesses' statements, as well as the claim of Banister’s
secretary, Delphine Roberts, that sne lied to author Anthony
Summers. Posner, however, omits many witnesses, such as ex-CIA
employee William Gaudet, who told Summers that he had seen Oswald
with Banister and Ferrie. Posner states that there was a rumor
that Ferrie 's library card was found on Oswald, that this was not
true, and that Ferrie produced his library card. Posner fails to
mention that two witnesses told the HSCA that Ferrie came by on
the day of the assassination, frantically asking about Oswald’s


vw3"S* woiw.vvv.-3wv, *w.'N v> -.wrjww,' •\r«


library card. The card that Ferrie displayed to the FBI had long
since been expired. Michael Kurtz, a historian and author of
CRIME OF THE CENTURY, was able to locate several more witnesses
to an Oswald-Banister-Ferrie relationship, and the statements of
one of these witnesses, George Wilcox, who was interviewed by
Kurtz prior to the publication of Summers* book, matches some of
the things that Delphine Roberts told Anthony Summers, proving
that Roberts was telling the truth to Summers, and is lying to
Posner now. A recent PBS special on the assassination produced a
photograph of Oswald and Ferrie in the same frame.

One could go on and on. Posner’s chapters on Jack Ruby and
the Garrison investigation are filled with similar omissions and
distortions. Apparently, the overwhelming majority of reviewers
who have praised this book never even considered the possibility
that a clever, articulate apologist for the Warren Commission
such as Posner might also be a greedy opportunist. Only Warren
Commission critics, it seems, could be out for money or fame.
Posner’s book proves otherwise.

As for Posner's chapter on the physical evidence, it is
worthless. The best study of the medical and ballistics evidence
is Michael Kurtz* CRIME OF THE CENTURY, which Posner lists in his
bibliography, but which he obviously did not read. Kurtz
demonstrates that the HSCA's "experts" made almost as many
mistakes as the Warren Commission did. He points out the HSCA
pathology panel all agreed that the bullet which struck JFK in
the back did so at a slightly upward angle, yet none of the panel
members recognized the significance of this. A bullet coming at a
downward angle from the sixth floor of the Book Depository could
hardly enter Kennedy's body at an upward angle, unless JFK had
been leaning over when hit. All of the films and photographs of
the assassination depict Kennedy as sitting upright when struck.
Therefore, this bullet must have come from someplace lower than
the sixth floor, which means that there were two gunmen firing at
Kennedy from behind. Posner’s book uses a computer trajectory
study-which was originally commissioned for a mock trial of
Oswald by the American Bar Association-which depicts the bullet
entering Kennedy's back at a downward angle, a blatant distortion
of the evidence.

Posner also quotes Dr. Cyril Wecht, a Warren Commission
critic, as admitting that the X-rays do not support a shot from
the front. Wecht is mistaken here. Michael Kurtz notes that a
wound ballistics expert, Larry Sturdivan, told the HSCA that JFK
was definitely not struck in the head by an exploding bullet
fired from the grassy knoll because the X-rays do not depict "a
cloud of bullet fragments very near the entrance wound." Kurtz
notes that Sturdivan was shown only the computer-enhanced X-rays.
In the original, unenhanced X-rays, there is indeed a cloud of
bullet fragments clustered in the right front portion of the
head. Kurtz also notes that after learning of the acoustics
evidence, the HSCA requested Dr. David O. Davis, an eminent
radiologist, to review the JFK skull X-rays. He conceded that the
X-ray evidence was compatible with a shot from the front only if
Kennedy’s head was "tilted to the left side, that is, with the
right ear elevated and the left depressed." The Zapruder film


in exactly that position at the moment of


shows shows the head
the head shot .

Thus, two of the HSCA's own experts, apart from Dr. Wecht,
provide evidence that JFK was indeed shot from the front with an
exploding bullet. If Posner showed Wecht only the computer
enhanced X-rays, it’s no wonder that he didn't see these bullet
fragments .

Kurtz refutes virtually every thing else in Posner's chapter
on the physical evidence. As for Dr. Michael Baden’s statement
that only in movies do people fall backward when shot, this is
nonsense, as any combat veteran can tell you. Michael Kurts notes
that World War II films of people being shot in the head
demonstrate without exception that people always fall backward in
the direction of the bullet. These films do not depict any
explosion of brain tissue, such as can be seen in the Zapruder
f ilm .

In his book, Posner refers to the claim of Chauncey Holt, a
former CIA employee and career criminal, as being one of the
"tramps" who were arrested in the railroad yards behind the
grassy knoll and photographed in Dealey Plaza. The other two
tramps have been identified as Charles Rogers, a CIA agent who
butchered his parents and put them in the fridge, and. Charles
Harrelson, a mob hitman-and father of actor Woody Harrelson-now
in prison. Posner notes that when the Dallas Police files on the
JFK assassination were released, the names of three different men
were produced, and one of these men, Harold Doyle, came forword
with his story. Unfortunately, Posner hasn't read the book THE
MAN ON THE GRASSY KNOLL, by John Craig and Phillip Rogers, which
refutes Doyle's claim. The authors were two detectives who
stumbled on the assassination material by pure chance. They point
out that between six to eight men, not three, were arrested in
the railroad yards, so Doyle and his two friends may have been
genuine tramps, but they were not the men in the photographs.
Lois Gibson, a leading forensic artist, compared a picture of
Doyle to the tramp which he claimed to be, and concluded that he
was not that man. But she compared pictures of Holt, Rogers, and
Harrelson to the tramps, and concluded that they matched ( several
other photographic experts have identified Harrelson as being one
of the tramps. When Harrelson was arrested for the murder of a
federal judge, he claimed to have been involved in the JFK
assassination). Furthermore, there is a photograph showing
Oswald, Holt, and Rogers in the same frame. The authors were able
to locate several witnesses in Houston who were told by a now
deceased woman of a visit that Oswald, Rogers, and Harrelson had
made to her home prior to the assassination. The testimony of
these witnesses, as well as this photograph, is the hard evidence
that researchers have long needed to put Oswald directly in the
company of members of the CIA and the mafia.

Posner also refers to Mark Lane's book PLAUSIBLE DENIAL,
which deals with the case of Hunt vs. Liberty Lobby. E. Howard
Hunt sued the lobby over an article implicating him in the JFK
assassination conspiracy. Hunt lost the case. At the trial,
Marita Lorenz, a former CIA operative, directly implicated Hunt
in the assassination. Posner quotes former HSCA investigator


rr » C" WjPJ 1 -L


•X'-n.rfSM


f


Edwin Lopez as saying out that the HSCA checked out Lorenz'
allegations, and that there was nothing to them. Lopez is
apparently unaware that three witnesses have come forward to
support Lorenz' allegations. Apart from her claims. Lane was able
to destroy Hunt’s alibi under cross examination, and prove that
Hunt was in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963. Hunt had claimed that his
children had been with him, yet his children did not even testify
on his behalf. Another witness, journalist Joseph Trento,
testified that he had seen a CIA memo which stated that one day
the CIA would have to explain Hunt's presence in Dallas on the
day of the assassination.

Posner also criticizes Dick Russell's book THE MAN WHO KNEW
TOO MUCH, which is one of the most important books every written
about the JFK assassination. Posner states that the main subject
of Russell's book, Richard Case Nagell, was so unreliable that
even Garrison didn't use him, and refers to his questionable
mental state. The reason Garrison didn't use Nagell was that, at
the time, Nagell refused to reveal what intelligence organization
he was working for, and was vulnerable under cross examination.
As for his mental state, Nagell was injured in a plane crash in
1957, but a psychiatrist who examined him in the mid sixties
found that there was no evidence of brain damage. Russell was
able to corroberate much of Nagell 's story with interviews with
other witnesses, as well as government documents. One document
which Nagell supplied to Russell states, directly, without
qualification, that Nagell was employed by the CIA and was
investigating Oswald and his anti-Castro activities prior to the
assassination. Nagell 's story must therefore be taken seriously.
Apart from Nagell 's story, Russell was able unearth on his own a
great deal of new evidence, all of which Posner ignores in his
book .

Posner s book is a cynical, sanctimonious, thoroughly
dishonest piece of fool's gold which will be praised only by
people who are not in possession of the facts. Perhaps the best
comment on CASE CLOSED was made by Marina Oswald, who told Tom
Brokaw to "forget about this book. It's like wallpaper covering
termites." She might have added that the paperhanger was a
weasel.
