.
Panoramas of Our Times
By Chalmers M. Roberts
Washlniton Pont BUff Writer
MEMOIRS by newspapermen, and therehave been some good ones, are usually no
more than footnotes to history.

But Arthur •
Kroek, who tells of “60 years on the firing
tine at home, and Edgar Ansel Mowrer, who
writes “a personal history of our times” cov-
ering almost as long a period, most of it '
spent abroad, are notable exceptions.

These two fat volumes demonstrate that
working journalists are men of conviction
and that they often have a role in shaping
history — and that they sometimes pur-
posely try to shape history.

For those who
ifrffue over the ability of, or necessity for,
newspapermen to hew tp “objectivity,”
Knock and Mowrer provide plentiful grist
for case studies.

•£rY V)r : V .

* Krock is perhaps the better known in
Washington because he worked here so long
and for the powerful New York Times.

Mow-
rer’s pieces for the Chicago' Daily News
foreign service, a powerful instrument of in-
fluence in its heyday, strongly affected
thinking at home about affairs abroad espe-
cially in Europe.

••-^v
Each man was the product of his environ-
ment and each has written enough of his
early life — Mowrer in the Midwest and
Krock in a border state — to demonstrate
that truism.

Each went on to hub shoulders
with the great and to absorb their ideas and
theii times but not to give up the continuing
quest for facts or lose the determination to
tell all the world the truth as he saw it.

Krock is a conservative in domestic affairs
and Mowrer an unyielding opponent of tyr-
anny as the sees ' it in foreign affairs.

The
leader of each book will soon spot the view-
reader will find each volume a panorama
our times, and the historians will find each a
gold mine of insight.

Krock deals with many men, but chiefly
with Presidents Roosevelt, Truman, Eisen-
hower, Kennedy and Johnson.

His admira-
♦ irvr» -f IT 1   .

..

...

_ _
Book Review
‘Memoirs’
By Arthur Krock (Funk and Wagnalls, 508
► PP-.

$10)
‘Triumph and Turmoil’ ._ _
Book Review
‘Memoirs’
By Arthur Krock (Funk and Wagnalls, 508
► PP-.

$10)
‘Triumph and Turmoil’ .

By Edgar Ansel Mowrer QVaybright and
' Tattey, 454 pp., $10).

tice William O.

Douglas, who found no con-
flict of interest in dropping word to Krock
of what the President had said at a White
House dinner.

Krock writes with charm, with an Old
South flavor.

Memoranda of conversations
■with the great are illuminating (one special
case is Defense Secretary James Forrestal)
and all this is mixed with quips and with
recollections of "Marse Henry” Watterson of
the Louisville Courier-Journal and of FPA
at the Algonquin roundtable, as well as wiitih
out-of-sorts remarks about current trends at
the New York Times.

Especially valuable for
historians is a Krock appendix of Clark M.

Clifford’s 1946 top secret memorandum to
President Truman on Soviet-American rela-
tions at the onset of the Cold War, a memo-
randum useful today in gauging Clifford as
Defense Secretary.

Mowrer is a more intense man, far more
deeply versed in history and literature, pre-
ferring the sharp retort to the quip, but al-
ways full of joie de vtvre.

It was Mowrer, perhaps more than any
writer, who raised the ailarm about Adolf
Hitier.

His 1932 book, “Germany Puts the
Clock Back/* served that purpose for his re-
viewer as for many others.

He was kicked
out of Germany by Hitler and out of Italy
by Mussolini (with whom he rode the train
to Rome to install fascism) and barred by
Stalin from the Soviet Union.

He was at Oa-
poretto with the Italians in World War I and
tion for Eisenhower’s domestic lull and for I W4U“ vue lluallans ln world war I and
Truman’s pugnacious foreign policy outshine 11, Journalism for a while in World War II
is toward FDR, JFK and LBJ •10,,ln ^lmer Davis’s propaganda machine..
Panoramas of Our Times
By Chalmers M. Roberts
Washlniton Pont BUff Writer
MEMOIRS by newspapermen, and there

He was kicked
out of Germany by Hitler and out of Italy
by Mussolini (with whom he rode the train
to Rome to install fascism) and barred by
Stalin from the Soviet Union. He was at Oa-
poretto with the Italians in World War I and
tion for Eisenhower’s domestic lull and for I W4U“ vue lluallans ln world war I and
Truman’s pugnacious foreign policy outshine 11, Journalism for a while in World War II
is toward FDR, JFK and LBJ •10,,ln ^lmer Davis’s propaganda machine. • lit1  1 , j i
his feelings toward FDR, JFK and LBJ
To the extent that he reveals them,
Ki ock tells us that among his major sources
were Bernard Baruch, Herbert Bayard
Swope and Joseph P. Kennedy. In the latter
case, it meant that Krock knew the Kennedy
boys almost from infancy (Sen. Ted from
kindergarten days, in fact) and his insights
into their upbringing are fascinating. An un-
expected source on prime occasions was Jus-
Mowrer’s journalistic scoops and how he
got them are as fascinating as Krock’s. Each
has much to say, too, on the never ending
battle between officialdom and the press
both at home and abroad. Memoirs are the stuff of history, each the
view as one man saw it, None is in itself
complete but these two volumes are fat addi-
tions to the totality of the 20th century. © 1968, Tha WMhington Foit Co.