C.B.

Sharrett 
120 E.

State St, 
Doylestown, PA 18901 
April 8, 1977 
Harold Weisberg 
Route 12 
Frederick, MD 
Dear Mr.

Weisberg, 
Having endured the Vietnam War and sundry personal tragedies I doubt that 
I am in need of a security blanket; I know "life is real”, that the world 
is mean and man uncouth.

If I felt in need of psychoanalysis there are 
numerous clinicians in my own area without any need to consult you.

I must 
say I rather resent your condescending, vitriolic tone to what I considered 
an essentially friendly letter posing relatively simple questions and remarks.

Furthermore, you have not really articulated your precise criticisms of the 
Committee except to say they are "crooks'* and starting with the presumption 
of guilt (which I must argue for a number of reasons).

Either Preyer, Stokes 
and the others are criminals or agents or not; either Tanenbaum and Lehner 
are incompetents or they aren't.

So far the criticsm you have given me is 
fairly subjective and often unreasonable.

You must understand that the 
pressure* those people have been working under has been intense, with 
insufficient funding, no access to documents, no ability even to make phone calls.

Still, what they have been able to get together thusfar certainly strikes 
me as positive.

Is it bad that they say the Warren Commission lied on some 
crucial areas, like Oswald's ties to the CIA, or the anti-Castro plots, or 
Ruby's Mafia background, or the fallaciousness of the medi^cal evidence??

The point is I see and hear a totally different story when I deal with the 
Committee firsthand and then I get a picture from you that I find incomprehensible.

I don't feel that I am stupid or imperceptive on this since I have spoken with 
many other people who have talked to the staKf and their attitude is more or 
less the same.The point is I see and hear a totally different story when I deal with the 
Committee firsthand and then I get a picture from you that I find incomprehensible. I don't feel that I am stupid or imperceptive on this since I have spoken with 
many other people who have talked to the staKf and their attitude is more or 
less the same. The point is, I see a group of basically naive people (who 
are rapidly becoming more knowledgeable of the situation) trying to do 
a job against ridiculous odds and the Bacchae of the news media and I just 
naturally must support the underdog. Methinks you are overcome with what scientists call the NIH (Not Invented Here) 
syndrome (if you'll pardon a little psychoanalysis of my own), i.e.,"you either 
do it my way or not at all." I pick this up in your constant harangues against 
the "nuts" and "assassination ripoff artists"—I hear enough of this in Time 
magazine without hearing it from a man who has been in the vanguard of 
assassination research. I am aware you have been making such statements for 
some time and frankly it is a bit tiresome. We are all aware there are a few 
people ripping us off but it does no one any good to keep circulating those 
kinds of attacks. I have hoped for xanix a long time that there could be more 
cooperation among people interested in this matter but as long as egos and 
tempers get in the way it will be hopeless to mobilize people politically on 
the assassination issue. Getting back to the Committee, I am not seeking reassurance on the nature of Man, 
I am simply suggesting a little more reasonableness and patience in making

--- PAGE BREAK ---2) April 8, 1977 
judgments on this affair.

You apparently made up your mind very early on, 
before the Committee itself could really be organized much less make any 
real headway or develop it methodology# I know politicians are bastards, 
but in this instance I would focus on Congress itself rather than the group 
of young people making a rather valiant effort# X am perfectly willing to 
face the possibility that the Committee may be a set-up job, a complete farce, 
or whatever, but at this point I think even a weak-kneed investigation may 
do something to awaken the public consciousness (the really insurmountable 
task) and cause a demand fpr still more inquiries.

The waters are indeed 
becoming increasingly muddy of late; even Sprague has second thoughts about 
Congressional investigations, but putting it into the hands of a Special 
Prosecutor would put the ball back into the court of the Executive, just 
where it shouldn't be.

So what are the options??

Harold Weisberg can 
continue doing 800-page tomes on JFK and it will be terrific except no one 
but people like myself will read them and they will have minimal effect on 
the course of history or how it is written.

Keeping this question in a 
nublie forum,however, as ludicrous as it often 3eems, might make people more 
inclined to read Post-Mortem and to think about political murders critically.

I suppose we do not see eye-to-eye on this subject so it's better to drop 
it.

My final statement is that the bottom line with the House probe, to my 
perception, is that the opposition saw it as a threat therefore it died.

One 
can examine the various components of this collapse, from the news stories 
to the Sprague business, but the basic message is what looked like an 
incredibly promising venture eight months ago is mysteriously shot to hell 
today.

Perhaps we are all naive if we think any investigation will make 
the world safe for ±k democracy without the full awareness of the public.One 
can examine the various components of this collapse, from the news stories 
to the Sprague business, but the basic message is what looked like an 
incredibly promising venture eight months ago is mysteriously shot to hell 
today.

Perhaps we are all naive if we think any investigation will make 
the world safe for ±k democracy without the full awareness of the public.

Regarding the questions on the King case, I do not claim to be an authority 
no* am I trying to satiate my lust for the gory details by getting "high on 
the heady stuff" of conspiratorialism.

I am simply a citizen trying to 
separate facts from fantasy and again I'm forced to say I felt your attitude 
was abusive on this score.

The points I addressed to you came from sources 
I consider reliable, not from Argosy magazine or a few lectures.

I am rather 
convinced that Fensterwald, Lesar, Livingston and Wayne Chastain know a good 
deal about the identity of Raoul.

Huie and Foreman also know more than they 
have said 3ince Huie at least did a good deal of research on the Raoul 
business which he later contradicted; Trent Gough has a tape of a phone call 
with Huie that tends to prove Huie a liar.

Regarding "Frenchy", I know you 
give little credence to the tramps photographs, but at this point there is 
no way I can accept the idea they were what they appeared to be.

Gerry 
gatrick Hemming has identified "Frenchy" as a mercenary from the Florida Keys 
group and also identified his closest associate, who has apparently been 
located by the Committee.

Unless all of the information I've gathered is 
nonsense and these people have been misleading us it seems there are indeed 
connections between the Kennedy and King murders.

I only wanted more of your 
own analysis.

Despite the occasional tone of this letter I am by no means angry and am not 
trying to start some kind of a feud.

You could hardly expect me to sit still 
for some of the remarks of your last letter, however.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Despite the occasional tone of this letter I am by no means angry and am not 
trying to start some kind of a feud. You could hardly expect me to sit still 
for some of the remarks of your last letter, however. I majr very well make 
mistakes or appear foolish at times, but no more so, I trust, than anyone 
else trying to solve these problems. I try to use discretion in my actions 
to avoid harming or embarrassing another party, and I have no desire to make 
a dime out of any of the work I do on this matter. I thank/ff-ou for your 
attention and I hope to hear from you in the future.