The 
Strange 
Life 
Of an FBI 
Informer 
f f 
, 
idiltf 
By Warren Brown 
BY HIS OWN account, he was "one hell 
of a man.” He could “skin more heads” 
love more women, outtalk and outsmart most 
men around him. So, he says, it was only nat- 
ural that back in the rough-and-tumble 19<30s, 
when Freedom Riders and hooded night- 
riders were taking to the Alabama highways, 
when “race-mixing agitators” from the 
North were doing everything to raise the ire 
of “good ol’ boys” from the South — it was 
only natural that the FBI would pick him, 
Gary Thomas Rowe Jr., to infiltrate the “in- 
visible empire” of the Alabama Knights, 
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Incorporated. 
“I was a hell-raiser.” says Rowe. “I loved ex- 
citement and I always wanted to be in law en- 
forcement . . . Yeah, and I wanted to serve 
my country. Going undercover gave me a 
chance to do all of those things.” 
By other accounts, it gave him a chance to 
do a lot of other things, too. And that's why 
Tommy Rowe, at 45, speaks in the past tense 
Brown is a Post national staff writer. 
when he describes his manhood. That’s why 
he’s out of work, worried and bitter. Very 
bitter. 
Lots of folks in Alabama, in law enforce- 
ment and on the streets, say Rowe was a 
crook and a murderer. They say he used his 
"position” with the FBI to get money and to 
get away with the violence that excited him 
so much. Birmingham police say he is a 
prime suspect in the 1963 bombing of the 16th 
Street Baptist Church there that blew away 
four black girls. They say he pulled the trig- 
ger that fired the shot that killed civil rights 
worker Viola Gregg Liuzzo on a lonely Ala- 
bama highway in 1965. 
In Lowndes County, Ala., where Liuzzo was 
slain, the people are doing more than talking. 
Two weeks ago a grand jury there voted to 
indict Rowe for the Liuzzo murder — 13 
years and two federal conspiracy convictions 
after the fact. 
If there is a trial — Rowe last week was 
still awaiting the arrest warrant his lawyer 
told him to expect — it’ll be filled with irony. 
See ROWE, Page C4 
v.conspiracy convictions 
after the fact. 
If there is a trial — Rowe last week was 
still awaiting the arrest warrant his lawyer 
told him to expect — it’ll be filled with irony. 
See ROWE, Page C4 
v.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rowe, the star prosecution witness in the 1965 Liuzzo case, 
will be the defendant.

Eugene Thomas and Collie Leroy Wil- 
kins, two admitted Klansmen who spent six years in federal 
prison because Rowe testified against them on conspiracy 
charges stemming from the killing, are, according to Ala- 
bama law enforcement sources, expected to bear witness 
against Rowe this time.

The blacks Rowe says he wanted to help by putting the 
Klan out of business have already moved against him.

Seventeen blacks and one white sat on the grand jury that 
voted to indict him.

Blacks, largely excluded from the 1965 
Liuzzo murder panels in the county they once called 
“Bloody Lowndes,” are also expected by some local officials 
aodunedia representatives to play a major role in any new 
trial of the case.

Rowe, a big man with a baby-fat face, says he can “hardly 
believe” what is happening.

He alternately lashes out at the 
Birmingham Police Department, the FBI and “those ma- 
niacs,” Wilkins and Thomas, for his current predicament 
He says the Birmingham police would like to put an end ' 
to his book, “My Undercover Years with the Ku Klux Klan,H 
and to an NBC movie based on it.

The book contains numer- 
ous allegations, some of which tend to be supported by 
available FBI documents, that police in Birmingham and 
nearby Alabama towns worked with the Klan in many of its 
actions against civil rights workers.

NBC officials say the 
movie, which can be released any time in the next two 
years, closely follows the book.

“The FBI has used me and discarded me, and they’re now 
afraid to vouch for my credibility,” Rowe insists.

And Wil- 
kins and Thomas?

“Those bastards are just out for revenge.

They now have the cover of the law .

.

.

They’re all after 
my ass.” 
A Product of His Times 
ROWE’S IS A complicated story, rooted in the hatreds, 
fears and violence of the times that gave it birth.

It is a 
tale filled with varying degrees of villainy and lacking in 
any clear-cut heroes.They’re all after 
my ass.” 
A Product of His Times 
ROWE’S IS A complicated story, rooted in the hatreds, 
fears and violence of the times that gave it birth.

It is a 
tale filled with varying degrees of villainy and lacking in 
any clear-cut heroes.

Rowe himself is an example.

When he’s careful, he'll tell you he never loved blacks.

When he’s not careful, he’ll say he never loved “niggers.” In 
any case, he’ll tell you he never hated them, either.

He grew up in Savannah, Ga., on Tattnell Street, once the 
dividing line between Savannah’s black and white neighbor- 
hoods.

“We used to play with them,” Rowe says of the 
blacks.

“Our back yard was the only thing that separated us 
from them.

I once wanted to have one of my .

.

.

black 
friends over for dinner, but my daddy told me that you just 
didn’t do things like that” 
His daddy, Gary Sr., was a “common laborer” who was 
“kind of looked down upon” by other whites, Rowe 
remarks.

And when his daddy spoke about “the niggers,” it 
“never much bothered me.

I just thought that that was the 
way things was.

That was just life.” 
Rowe left Savannah when he was “around 19.” He left 
with barely two years of high school, went to Tennessee, 
where he married the first of three wives, and eventually 
wound up in Birmingham 
He liked guns and policemen, and his affinity for both got 
him into trouble.

In 1952, while working as an ambulance 
driver in Birmingham, he was arrested for carrying a con- 
cealed gun without a license.

He was acquitted of the 
charge the same year.

Four years later he was arrested and 
accused of imoersonating a Birmingham police officer, that 
charge brought a conviction and a $25 fine.

Rowe became a bouncer in a white Birmingham night 
spot and quickly earned a reputation as a man who could 
“skin heads,” or beat people up.Four years later he was arrested and 
accused of imoersonating a Birmingham police officer, that 
charge brought a conviction and a $25 fine.

Rowe became a bouncer in a white Birmingham night 
spot and quickly earned a reputation as a man who could 
“skin heads,” or beat people up.

It was while working in that 
capacity, he says, that he first received “feelers” from the 
Ku Klux Klan, and later from the FBL He says the Klan 
wanted a man who could fight and the FBI wanted a fighter 
who could spy, and both got what they wanted.

Others tell another story.

They say that Rowe’s infatua- 
tion with police work led him to the FBI and that his fasci- 
nation with violence and excitement led him to the Klan.

All lies, says Rowe.

“If 1 personally believed what the Klan 
believes, I never would've worked for the FBI.

I didn’t join 
until the FBI asked me to join.

The FBI paid my initiation 
and bought my sheets.” His entry into the “invisible em- 
pire” was urged and arranged, he says, by Barrett G.

Kemp, 
then in charge of the FBI’s Klan investigations in the Bir- 
mingham area.

A bureau spokesman says ail past and 
present FBI agents who worked with Rowe have been ad- 
vised to keep mum because of the pending charges in Lown- 
des County.

Learning Secret* in Bed 
BUT FBI documents now on file in the Birmingham 
Public Library, originally made available through the 
Freedom of Information Act, seem to support those who say 
Rowe approached the FBI, and not vice versa.

For example, a memo dated Dec.

5, 1960, sent to the spe- 
cial agent in charge in Birmingham from the “Director, 
FBI” in Washington, reads: “Based on information set forth 
in correspondence from your office, you are hereby 
authorized to take steps to develop Rowe as a potential ra- 
cial informant, including the direction of his activities.

“This is being done in view of the fact that you have been 
in contact with Rowe and accepting information volun- 
teered by him since May 1960 .

.

" the memo said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. " the memo said. It added: 
“You should make it clear to Rowe that his cooperation with 
the FBI must be voluntary and confidential, and that he can 
in no way consider himself an FBI employe. Caution should 
be exercised at all times during contacts with him to be cer- 
tain he is not a plant [working for the Klan against the 
bureau].” 
A deal was struck. Rowe was paid $60 a month plus $25 for 
car expenses, according to FBI records. Judging from the 
bureau's memos, he quickly became a valuable non-em- 
ploye 
“Since his short association with the Klan. he has ad- 
vanced quite rapidly [within the organization],” one memo 
said. Another made the familiar refrain: “BH 248 PCI RAC 
(one of the bureau’s codes for Rowe] . . . has provided reli- 
able information in the past ...” 
Many of the memos were sent from the Birmingham FBI 
office to the “Director, FBI.” Some did not reflect reality. For example, one memo, written in June 1961, read: 
“There has been no indication of any marital difficulties, 
nor any derogatory information [about Rowe] that could 
possibly embarrass the bureau.” The truth was that Rowe’s 
second marriage was failing apart at the time, fractured by 
his attempts to work regular jobs while keeping up with the 
bureau and the Klan. “Of course, my being a womanizer 
didn’t help any, either,” Rowe adds. In fact, h* says the bureau encouraged his escapades.

--- PAGE BREAK ---“They told n e to sleep with as many Klan wives as possible 
to find out .hat their husbands were up to.

I did.

I was 
knocking them off like ducks.

I got more information from 
those women than I ever got from the men.” 
The bureau ostensibly didn't want Rowe involved in vio- 
lence, and the Birmingham office worked mightily to con- 
vince Washington that their man was all right on that score.

In November 1960, the Birmingham office wrote: “Inform- 
ant [Rowe| uses good judgment in his contacts with mem- 
bers and officers of the Klan .

.

.

and is always alert to trou- 
ble and possible violence by the organization.

His good judg- 
mepjjias been used in the past to avoid being present at 
possible incidents of violence .

.

“They Would Have Killed Me” 
ROWE SAYS he tried to avoid violence whenever possi- 
ble, But he adds that it wasn't always possible — that 
he often had to "skin” some black heads and “knock” some 
integration-minded white ones “in order to maintain credi- 
bility” with the Klan.

"There was no other way.

They would 
have killed me if I didn't act like them,” he remarks of his 
fellow Klansmen.

t 
So when nine Freedom Riders and many bystanders were 
brutally beaten by Klansmen in Birmingham on May 14, 
1961, Rowe was there.

He even got his throat cut in the inci- 
dent.

“People were swinging and hitting all around me," he 
recalls.

“All of a sudden, 1 seen this great big nigger coming 
at me with a knife.

When 1 held my hand up to block him, 
this nigger swiped my throat” 
In two separate memos dated May 18, 1961, the Birming- 
ham FBI vaguely referred to and then deleted any refer- 
ence to the wound Rowe said he "almost died” from.

The 
first memo’reads: 
‘It is recommended that BH 248 PCI RAC be paid $175 for 
the month of May only .

.

.

[The payment] is in addition to 
the regular monthly payment to BH 248 PCI RAC..

[The payment] is in addition to 
the regular monthly payment to BH 248 PCI RAC.

This addi- 
tional sum includes $15 for services rendered in reference 
to the racial incident of 5/14/61, and $50 for medical expen- 
ses for an injury received by informant at the incident The I 
information furnished by BH 248 PCI RAC has been most 
valuable regarding the AK.

KKKK, Inc., and the incident” 
All references to injuries and medical expenses were dele- j 
ted from the second “decoded" memo.

But the available FBI documents, which cover Rowe’s .

early years with the Klan.

do include many notes about ap- J 
parent collusion between Klansmen and some police offi- 
cials in the Birmingham area.

Most of those notes were sup- 
plied by Rowe, but others were provided by bureau agents 
themselves.

A memo dated Nov.

5,1960, reads: "Informant [Rowe] has 
been alert to advise of the Klan influence on local law en- 
forcement agencies; and through written report on Aug.

9, 
1960, he advised that through the Jefferson County Sheriff's 
Office [which includes Birmingham], he received a pistol 
permit by showing his membership card from the Klan.” 
The Birmingham FBI was particularly suspicious of Bir- 
mingham Police Sgt.

Thomas H.

Cook, whom they believed 
to be acting as a double agent with the Klan on many mat- 
ters, including the 1961 Freedom Riders beatings.

A memo 
dated May 5,1961, reads: ‘The bureau is aware that Sgt Tom 
Cook of the Birmingham Police Department has been fur- 
nishing information concerning potential violence — given 
him by the Birmingham FBI office — to the Alabama 
Knights, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.

Incorporated.

"In view of this situation, information in the enclosed let- 
terhead memorandum will not be furnished to the BPD, in 
view of the great probability of exposing BH 248 PCI RAC 
[Rowe] .

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"In view of this situation, information in the enclosed let- 
terhead memorandum will not be furnished to the BPD, in 
view of the great probability of exposing BH 248 PCI RAC 
[Rowe] . . Cook, who now works as a private investigator in Birming- 
ham, acknowledges that he worked "undercover” for the 
FBI "as well as for the Birmingham police.” But he contends 
that he was "never officially connected with the Klan,” and 
he denies working with Klansmen to help set up the Free- 
dom Rider beatings. "I knew a lot of them because it was part of my job,” he 
says of his relationship with local Klansmen. “I knew Rowe, 
too. A lot of the stuff in those files is just Rowe talking 
Rowe would lie about anything in order to make a point 
with someone in law enforcement It’s just part of his 
makeup, I suppose," Cook said. The former policeman concedes that some of "the stuff in 
those files is damaging. "But I don't know how you fight 
something like that. It's like fighting a ghost,” he says. “They Used to Call Me ‘Fed’ ” 
THERE ARE many ghosts in the Rowe saga. And for 
Rowe the most haunting is that of Viola Gregg Liuzzo. He said in his book that her killing — the sheer brutality of 
it — ‘‘turned my life Inside out" 
To the big question, he says he didn't do it “I swear on a 
stack of Bibles, by Jesus Christ, by God, by all that's holy, 
that I didn’t kill that woman," he says. “Collie Leroy Wilkins 
I 
‘-They told me to sleep with as many Klan selves os possible to find out 
what their husbands were up to . . . M got more information from 
those women than I ever got from the men.** 
i 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The FBI’s Man in the KUm 
"• *' •• • • •' •   •* ... • • w**,-, .j^.***^^*^ r.■'.•v w r, *. ?• - . ~;

--- PAGE BREAK ---killed that woman.

He knows it.

I know it And that'll be the 
truth to the day we die, I swear to Christ” 
But it’s the “little” questions that torment Rowe.

He was 
sitting in the back of the chase car next to Wilkins, who was 
on the right rear side, Rowe says.

Both he and Wilkins, he 
says, stuck guns out the car window as they passed Liuzzo’s 
car.

But Rowe says he did not fire a shot.

Wilkins, a rough, 
21-year-oid, dedicated Klansman at the time, did all of the 
shooting.

Rowe contends.

If true, why didn’t Rowe attempt to knock Wilkins’ gun 
away?

Why didn’t he say something or do something at the 
time that would have saved ‘‘that woman's” life?

“Everyone always asks that question,” says Rowe.

“They 
just don’t understand that I was in a life-or-death situation.

A \<xl£l people in the Klan always suspected me of working 
for the FBL They used to call me ‘Fed.’ They were always 
testing me.

There were several guns in that car that night If 
I had knocked Wilkins' arm away.

I would’ve been killed.” 
Rowe accused Wilkins of the Liuzzo killing in two state 
trials.

He also testified against Thomas and W.

0.

Eaton.

As a 
result the late Matt Murphy, the defense attorney, accused 
Rowe of violating his “sacred” Klan oath.

He used terms like 
“white nigger” in describing Liuzzo.

The victim was riding 
hutae car with a black man —1Who survived the attack — at 
the time she was killed.

Murphy played on that.

He invoked 
white supremacy.

The state trials, one with an all-white jury and the other 
with a nearly all-white jury, ended with no convictions.

Rowe, who was not charged in the original case, testified 
against the three again in a federal conspiracy trial This 
time they were convicted of violating Liuzzo’s civil rights 
and sentenced to 10 years in jaiL Wilkins and Thomas 
served six, plus four years’ probation.

Eaton.

42, died of "an 
apparent heart attack” before he could appeal and was bur- 
ied March 12, 1966.

in Bessemer.42, died of "an 
apparent heart attack” before he could appeal and was bur- 
ied March 12, 1966.

in Bessemer.

Ala., “with full Klan hon- 
ors ” according to a United Press International report on 
that date.

**Ym Going lo Gel Killed One Day" 
ROWE LEFT Alabama for San Diego, Calif., where he 
lived under an assumed identity provided by the gov- 
ernment He worked for about two years as a U.S.

marshal, a 
“reward” the Justice Department admits it gave him for his 
Klan work.

He said he got into a money dispute with the 
Justice Department and was “forced to resign” from the 
marshal’s job.

He spent the rest of his time in California try- 
ing to run a bar.

In 1975, Rowe “surfaced” again to testify before the Sen- 
ate intelligence committee about his Klan activities.

Wear- 
ing a crudely cut white mask, he repeated his charge that 
the FBI instructed him to have sex with Klan wives — a 
charge bureau officials denied.

His testimony before the 
committee led to the birth of his ghost-written book.

Some people say Rowe would not have his present prob- 
lems if he had left “the whole story” alone.

Rowe is one of 
them.

Eugene Thomas, who now admits he drove the chase 
car in the Liuzzo killing, is another.

In a segment aired July 10 on the ABC-TV News program 
“20/20,” Thomas and Wilkins made their first public allega- 
tion that Rowe killed Liuzzo.

Thomas subsequently told The 
Post he had no intention of becoming reinvolved in the case 
after he finished his probation.

“But people from ABC News 
started contacting us way back in 1977,” he says, speanng or 
himself and Wilkins.

“They just kept after us for a story 
until we said okay.” 
Thomas says he and Wilkins and Eaton said nothing in 
their defense in the earlier trials because Murphy, their 
first attorney, advised them not to take the witness stand or 
to do anything that would place them in the car with Rowe.

“Our attorney just made a ‘not guilty’ plea,” Thomas says, 
“and we stood on that ...--- PAGE BREAK ---

“They just kept after us for a story 
until we said okay.” 
Thomas says he and Wilkins and Eaton said nothing in 
their defense in the earlier trials because Murphy, their 
first attorney, advised them not to take the witness stand or 
to do anything that would place them in the car with Rowe. “Our attorney just made a ‘not guilty’ plea,” Thomas says, 
“and we stood on that ... All four of us were in that car. I 
mean, hell, that was a known fact But we kept silent and’ 
were tried on a lesser charge.” 
Still, what would be the sense of talking now? “Now, we 
have served our time and finished our parole ” Thomas says. “It was hell being in jail for something you know you were 
not guilty of, and that Rowe, well, he’s got away with a lot. - 
“If we had come out here and wanted to tell this story be- 
fore, nobody would have believed us. They would have said 
it was revenge ... We just would like to see Rowe pay for 
what he did do, because we paid for what we didn’t do.” 
Nowadays, Rowe lives in a small southern town under an 
assumed name. The Justice Department no longer provides 
protection for him. In fact, one department official 
remarks, “We haven’t had any contact with him for years. He’s just a citizen . . . It’s his business what he does. It’s 
really up to him.” 
Rowe knows that And though he and his lawyer have 
vowed to fight extradition to Alabama, he says he “won't- 
run away anywhere.” 
“The way I figure it is that I’m going to get killed one 
day,” he says. “I’m prepared for a hit Anybody could get 
hit you know, and maybe that’s what it’s going to take to 
get somebody to really look into this mess. But 111 tell you 
this — whoever they send to hit me had better be good, be- 
cause if he ain’t, mark my word, the bastard will never see 
home again.” 'l