H E R A C L I T U S
O S W A L D    S P E N G L E R

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INDEX
Foreword by Rodolfo Mondolfo:
Interpretations of Heraclitus in the last half-century 
1
Characteristics of Spengler's interpretation  
3
    I. Theodor Gomperz
7
II. John Burnet
11
III. Karl Reinhardt
17
IV. Vittorio Macchioro
25
    V. Werner Jaeger
33
VI. Abel Rey
37
VII. Guido De Ruggiero
43
VIII. Olof Gigon
47
IX. Guido Calogero
67
    X. Aldo Testa
75
XI. Partial studies: Hermann Fraenkel
79
Conclusion 
87
Essay by Oswald Spengler:
Heraclitus. – A study on the energetic thought fundamental 
to his philosophy (1904):
I
93
II
99
III
105
    A. Pure movement
111
I. First formulation: πάντα ῥεῖ
111
1. The cosmos as an energetic process
111
2. Fire
125
3.    πάντα ῥεῖ as a formal principle of organic nature     131
II. Second formulation: the struggle of opposites
139
B. The formal principle
139
        I. The idea of form in general
151
II. The form as a condition of movement
159
III. The idea of unity and necessity
167

--- PAGE BREAK ---truggle of opposites
139
B. The formal principle
139
        I. The idea of form in general
151
II. The form as a condition of movement
159
III. The idea of unity and necessity
167

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foreword
Interpretations of Heraclitus in the Last Half-
Century
This prologue to Spengler's essay on Heraclitus aims 
to integrate it by means of news concerning the 
development of Heraclitean studies in the last half 
century, examining the most important and 
characteristic among the interpretations that have 
appeared simultaneously and successively to Spengler's 
essay. Spengler, in presenting his interpretation in 
contrast to the previous ones, said that perhaps all 
possible explanations of Heraclitean thought had 
already been attempted, and listed nine divergent forms, 
contrasting them with his own  (the tenth). However, in 
addition to those remembered and rejected by him, 
other different ones, unknown to him, had already 
appeared at that time, and many more have appeared 
since, multiplying the interpretative divergences and 
raising new problems concerning the understanding of 
the Heraclitean thought.
Consequently, any further study of Heraclitus and 
any effort aimed at understanding him are subject to a 
double requirement, namely: that of a knowledge (at 
least synthetic) of the main interpretations proposed, 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---raclitus and 
any effort aimed at understanding him are subject to a 
double requirement, namely: that of a knowledge (at 
least synthetic) of the main interpretations proposed, 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and that of a direct contact with the documents 
concerning the personality and thought of Heraclitus 
that have come down to us from antiquity. To the first 
requirement the present prologue responds briefly, for 
the last half century; to the second I am preparing a 
systematic edition – which I have been preparing for 
years, and which will try to be more complete than those 
existing to date – of the ancient texts concerning the 
Dark One of Ephesus: testimonies, fragments, imitations, 
presented in the original text (Greek or Latin) and in 
Spanish translation with extensive commentary. The 
following pages are therefore linked to this forthcoming 
edition.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, 
presented in the original text (Greek or Latin) and in 
Spanish translation with extensive commentary. The 
following pages are therefore linked to this forthcoming 
edition.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Characteristics of Spengler’s Interpretation
Spengler's essay, which appeared in 1904 as a 
dissertation for his doctorate in philosophy at the 
University of Halle, had a remarkable impact at the 
beginning of our century because of the originality of its 
interpretation of the Heraclitean doctrine. It outlined 
some of the essential features of Spengler's own thought, 
who, like Lassalle sixty years earlier, had found in the 
Heraclitean doctrine, or rather in his own interpretation 
of it, a path of orientation and formation for his personal 
philosophical construction.
Spengler's sympathy for Heraclitus stemmed from 
the suggestions he thought he found in him for his own 
orientation, despite his historical theory of the mutual 
incommunicability of cultures, which already had in this 
essay a first affirmation. However, there was associated 
with it the idea of an analogous process of the various 
cultural cycles, by which Heraclitus, aristocratic asserter 
of the creative struggle of all real distinction, in nature 
and in history, seemed to justify in advance the modern 
claim of the Germanic Herrenvolk to world domination. 
And furthermore, for Spengler, who linked his political 
ideas with the energetic physics of Mach and Ostwald, 
an interpretation of Heraclitus in an energetic sense was 
of particular interest.
The whole effort of his essay, therefore, is directed 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---energetic physics of Mach and Ostwald, 
an interpretation of Heraclitus in an energetic sense was 
of particular interest.
The whole effort of his essay, therefore, is directed 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

towards a representation of the philosopher of Ephesus 
as totally isolated among the pre-Socratics who seek a 
substantial principle (aρχη) of all things: Heraclitus 
would affirm, according to Spengler, the idea of a pure 
happening, devoid of substance, governed by a law. 
Nothing durable in nature and in human life except the 
flow, the becoming, the struggle of opposites, the form 
or rhythm of movement (logas), which is the law of 
measure or harmony, fatality of the eternal ineliminable 
struggle.
To emphasize this energetic interpretation of 
struggle, Spengler denies on the one hand that fire is in 
Heraclitus the principle of things, declaring it purely a 
transitory metamorphosis like the others, and only more 
aesthetically apt to represent the restlessness and power 
of change; On the other hand, he denies that Heraclitus 
affirms a real identity of the opposites, attributing to him 
only the assertion of an identity of form between them, 
considered as antinomies, that is, insofar as neither of 
the two can exist without its opposite, each living the 
death of the other; and he denies, finally, that logas, the 
law of movement and struggle, can be identified with 
fire or understood as an intellectual principle or as God.
All these theses are opposed to those of other 
interpreters, which therefore awaken in the reader some 
doubt and the need for a comparison with the 
explanations of others, no less than with the original 
texts. Let us see, then, in the meantime what other 
interpreters later than those already considered by 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spengler have to say.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6

--- PAGE BREAK ---nal 
texts. Let us see, then, in the meantime what other 
interpreters later than those already considered by 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spengler have to say.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I. Theodore Gomperz
The year before the publication of Spengler's essay, 
the second edition of the first volume of Theodore 
Gomperz's major work, Griechische Denker (Wien 1903; 
trans. French, Paris 1904; Italian, Firenze 1933), whose 
first edition in booklets, published from 1893 to 1902, 
had aroused great interest among Hellenists, but 
remained unknown to Spengler, who cites only an 
earlier work by Gomperz (from 1886, in Wiener 
Sitzungsberichte).
Gomperz includes Heraclitus among the Ionian 
naturalists, linking him – despite his proud presumption 
of owing nothing to any master – with the school of and 
especially Anaximander. He considers him the first 
speculative brain among the Greeks, justifying in part 
his pride in the superiority of his enigmatic wisdom, 
which makes him contemptuous of the mythological 
poets and the vulgar who follow them, as well as of the 
erudition (polymathia) of the antecedent investigators. 
The originality of Heraclitus is not for Gomperz in his 
theory of primordial matter – fire being the most apt for 
the process of universal life which never has rest, nor in 
that of the cycles of transformation and recovery of fire 
(downward and upward paths, coincident and 
identical), but in the discovery of the relations between 
the life of nature and that of the spirit, for which reason 
the natural order appears to him, more than to 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---ident and 
identical), but in the discovery of the relations between 
the life of nature and that of the spirit, for which reason 
the natural order appears to him, more than to 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Anaximander, as a moral order.
The divine universal principle represents for 
Heraclitus the universal intelligence and life (Zeus), 
which in every being, as well as in the entire cosmos, 
manifest themselves as an incessant cycle of construction 
and destruction, which has been and will be realized 
infinitely many times in the infinite course of time. The 
theory of cosmic cycles is associated with that of the 
universal flow of "eternally living" matter, comparable 
to the flow of a river whose water changes without 
ceasing. Everything moves and changes even when its 
transformation escapes our perception; which seems to 
Gomperz a Heraclitean anticipation of the discovery of 
the invisible movements that the atomist theory will 
later explain.
As a counterpart to incessant change, Heraclitus 
affirms the coexistence of opposites, in which Gomperz 
sees the relativity of properties presented: both lead to 
the negation of all stability of being and to the identity of 
opposites, the paradoxical character of which 
particularly satisfies Heraclitus, who prefers obscure 
and enigmatic assertions. However, his exaggerations 
and speculative orgies serve to give prominence to 
truths not recognized before him. Heraclitus would have 
thus highlighted the principle of relativity, in the 
sensations relative to the individual, in the institutions 
relative to the times; all of which explains and justifies 
changes and contradictions that could not be accounted 
for by a rigid and static conception of reality.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---institutions 
relative to the times; all of which explains and justifies 
changes and contradictions that could not be accounted 
for by a rigid and static conception of reality.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus we arrive at the coexistence of opposites, which 
has become the foundation of all valuation, of all life and 
activity, of all harmony. Conflict is father and king of all 
beings, of all hierarchy of values, which could not be 
produced without the clash of opposing forces in the 
cosmos and human society. Hence the exaltation of the 
heroes killed in battle.
However, Heraclitus reserves for us an even greater 
surprise with the intuition of a unique law that 
dominates the life of nature as well as that of men: the 
law of measure, divine law, eternal lakes, whose 
universal empire replaces the arbitrary multiplicity of 
the gods of polytheism. Gomperz judges such an idea 
inspired Heraclitus by the Pythagorean discoveries of 
the law of number in astronomy and acoustics. 
Unconcerned with exact research, Heraclitus could, 
nevertheless, become a herald of the new philosophy. 
His explanations are often puerile, but his brilliant 
intuition of analogies allows him to extend from one 
field to another the discoveries of others. His choice of 
fire as primordial matter, which helped him to unify the 
natural world with the soul and the social world, also 
served him well in this respect.
Towards the intuition of the universal law he was 
driven by the demand for an eternal permanence in the 
face of the universal flux of things; he finds such 
permanence in the immutable law which is unified with 
animate and intelligent matter in the mystical 
conception of universal reason. It is not easy to 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---f things; he finds such 
permanence in the immutable law which is unified with 
animate and intelligent matter in the mystical 
conception of universal reason. It is not easy to 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

recognize this law or universal reason, because nature 
loves to hide itself; but (adds Heraclitus) we must expect 
the unexpected and see, even in human laws, the divine 
law that dominates everything.
By this idea of an immutable eternal law – says 
Gomperz – Heraclitus could be the source of a religious 
and conservative current; by the principle of relativity, 
on the other hand, he was the initiator of a skeptical and 
revolutionary current. On the one hand comes from him 
the resigned fatalism of the Stoics and the Hegelian 
identity of rational and real; on the other the radicalism 
of the Hegelian left and of Proudhon. It can be said, 
Gomperz concludes, that Heraclitus is conservative 
because he sees in every negation the positive element; 
he is revolutionary because in every affirmation he sees 
the negative element. Relativity inspires him with the 
justice of his historical assessments, but prevents him 
from considering any existing institution as definitive.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---e sees 
the negative element. Relativity inspires him with the 
justice of his historical assessments, but prevents him 
from considering any existing institution as definitive.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II. John Burnet
Contemporaneously to Gomperz's work (and equally 
unknown to Spengler) another book of systematic 
research on pre-Socratic philosophy had appeared in 
England, which also marks a milestone in the path of 
modern studies concerning the subject: I refer to John 
Burnet's fundamental work, Early Greek Philosophy, 
whose first edition came out in 1893, and the second, of 
1905. served for the French translation (l’aurore de la 
philosophie grecque). The long chapter devoted to 
Heraclitus (as well as the others) introduces new points 
of view in the interpretation of the author under study.
Burnet links with the historical moment and the 
religious revival of the time the prophetic and inspired 
tone found in Heraclitus as well as in Pindar, Aeschylus 
and other great personalities of the same time. This idea 
finds further development in the suggestive book by 
Karl Joel, Der Ursprung der Natur Philosophie aus dein 
Geiste der Mystik, Jena 1903, and in his later Geschichte 
der antiken Philosophie, I, Tübingen 1921, when 
considering the strong self-affirmation of the personality 
that characterizes all the pre-Socratics.
The great discovery which Heraclitus boasts of 
having accomplished (says Burnet) is that of the unity of 
opposites which converts their struggle into harmony. 
Anaximander had considered as evil and injustice the 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---oasts of 
having accomplished (says Burnet) is that of the unity of 
opposites which converts their struggle into harmony. 
Anaximander had considered as evil and injustice the 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

division of the One in the opposites; Heraclitus, on the 
other hand, affirms that the unity of the One is precisely 
in the contrary tension of the opposites. One and 
multiple are co-eternal and identical; opposition and 
struggle are sovereign justice. That is why he chooses as 
universal substance the "ever-living" fire, whose life is 
flux and incessant change.
The process of this change does not seem to be 
related to the condensation and rarefaction of 
Anaximenes. Heraclitus presents it as a double path, 
downward and upward, in which the celestial fire turns 
half into water (sea), and the latter half into earth and 
half into préster (hurricane cloud of inflamed vapors); 
the earth then liquefies again into water, and the latter 
evaporates in exhalations that feed the celestial fire, 
while the vapors falling as rain turn into sea, and the 
latter into earth. In the reality of the double inverse 
cycle, however, the cosmos is always conserved, because 
all change is effected according to measures; and if there 
are sometimes imbalances (as in the alternation of day 
and night), they are always limited and annulled by 
their very consequences.
The fundamental opposition is thus established 
(according to Burenet) between fire on the one hand and 
water and earth on the other; and this is most clearly 
seen in man, the microcosm which suggests to 
Heraclitus the explanations of the macrocosm. In man 
the soul is identified with fire or dry exhalation, the 
body with water and earth; which explains: 1. the 
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch suggests to 
Heraclitus the explanations of the macrocosm. In man 
the soul is identified with fire or dry exhalation, the 
body with water and earth; which explains: 1. the 
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

alternation of wakefulness and sleep, which are one the 
communication with the cosmic fire, such as of coals 
burning by contact with the flame, and the other the 
isolation, as of coals far from the fire which are 
extinguished; 2. the succession of life and death. Not 
only does the soul die when transformed into water and 
weakens when moistened, but the dry soul is the best, 
and the death of fire (in battle) assures it a divine destiny 
denied to the death of water; and all opposition to the 
death of water is the death of the soul.
The concept of living and dead is related to the very 
antithesis of dry and wet. In the cosmos the vicissitudes 
of day and night, summer and winter, have the same 
cause; night and winter are produced by the damp 
darkness that rises from the earth and from the sea; day 
and summer, by the clear vapors that feed the sun, 
which moves on its daily and annual path in search of 
new food, like cattle in the pasture. According to the 
Hippocratic writing On the Regime, water and fire have 
a mutual dependence, for the former gives nourishment 
to the latter, and the latter gives movement to the 
former, so that neither can ever prevail completely, 
because in destroying its opposite it destroys itself.
This necessary persistence of the universal 
equilibrium is linked to the problem of the great cosmic 
year and the universal conflagration, whose affirmation 
is attributed to Heraclitus by the Stoics and witnesses 
coming from them, followed by the sea of modern 
historians of Greek philosophy. Burnet wants to refute 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---se affirmation 
is attributed to Heraclitus by the Stoics and witnesses 
coming from them, followed by the sea of modern 
historians of Greek philosophy. Burnet wants to refute 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as erroneous such an attribution. In Heraclitus (he says) 
there is no idea of the great cosmic year in the sense of a 
cycle of formation and destruction of the world; what 
can be drawn from the allusions of Plato and Aristotle 
concerning a parallelism between the periods of man 
and the cosmos in Heraclitus, is only the idea of a great 
period of time in the course of which each partial 
measure of fire can fulfill the whole cycle of its way 
downward and upward; and this period Heraclitus 
thought of as a year (360 days), four days each being 
equivalent to a human generation (30 years), so that he 
composed it of 10,800 solar years.
But this idea of a cycle of each singular measure or 
portion of fire is in direct contrast (Burnet continues) 
with the other of a universal periodic conflagration, and 
the solution of Zeller, who says that Heraclitus did not 
realize this contradiction, contrasts with the Platonic 
testimony that Heraclitus said that always the One is 
manifold and the manifold One, while Empedocles 
alternated unity with multiplicity in the cosmic cycle. 
With a subtle interpretation of Aristotle's phrase 
(Physics, rose, 3) referring to the Heraclitean assertion 
that "all things sometime become fire," Burnet wants to 
show that only the Stoics begin to speak of a Heraclitean 
theory of conflagration. But the Heraclitean fragments 
usually cited in support (Diels, B65, 66, 67) may refer to 
successive particular changes, rather than to a 
simultaneous universal conflagration against which all 
the fragments speak of insurmountable measures in the 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---67) may refer to 
successive particular changes, rather than to a 
simultaneous universal conflagration against which all 
the fragments speak of insurmountable measures in the 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

changes, watched over by the Erinyes and declare 
impossible the elimination of the struggle, which would 
mean universal death.
Heraclitus, Burnet maintains, declares the cosmos 
eternal, and therefore must have thought of a constant 
permanence of the conflict of fire and water of which the 
Hippocratic writing On the Regime speaks. A single 
instant of universal conflagration would destroy the 
tension of the opposites and thus render impossible the 
birth of a new world. The tension of opposites 
constitutes the "hidden harmony" of the universe, i.e., its 
structure by opposing tensions like those of the bow or 
the lyre. War reigns throughout the cosmos as it does 
among men; without contrasts there would be neither 
life nor harmony. Opposites are correlative because they 
are the two faces of all reality, which cannot exist one 
without the other, such as day and night, hunger and 
satiety, rest and movement, up and down, hot and cold, 
dry and humid, good and evil, etc.
The struggle between them is eternal divine justice 
and levity; the opposites are unified and coincide in 
God, for whom all are good in spite of human 
distinctions between good and evil. God, the unity of all 
opposites, the only one God, the unity of all opposites, 
the only who cannot be thought of anthropomorphically. 
Heraclitus continues the struggle of Xenophanes against 
vulgar religion; Burnet, on the other hand, refuses to 
consider him with Pfleiderer as linked with the religion 
of the mysteries. His religion is a religion of the 
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---s against 
vulgar religion; Burnet, on the other hand, refuses to 
consider him with Pfleiderer as linked with the religion 
of the mysteries. His religion is a religion of the 
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

universal unity which is the harmony of opposites; this 
is the only Wisdom or "common" to all beings (contrary, 
however, to the "common sense" or vulgar opinion of 
the masses) to which the ethics of the wise man must be 
inspired, who looks into the divine law, recognizing in 
the changeable human laws imperfect copies of the 
unique eternal exemplar.
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III. Karl Reinhardt
In the modern work of historical reconstruction of 
pre-Socratic philosophy, the book by K. Reinhardt, 
Parmenides und die Geschichte der griechischen 
Philosophie, published in Bonn in 1916, has a prominent 
place. Although his thesis concerning a disruption of the 
traditional chronological and doctrinal relationship 
between Xenophanes and Parmenides on the one hand, 
and between Heraclitus and Parmenides on the other, 
has been rejected by subsequent critical research, 
Reinhardt's work, with its broad mastery of the sources, 
even many neglected by others, and its critical 
independence of interpretative traditions, has 
contributed to an important renewal of many traditional 
views.
By way of contrast, it can be compared with the work 
of Tannery, whose effort was directed against Aristotle 
and the tradition that considered them as 
metaphysicians to restore to the pre-Socratics the 
character of physicists (physiologists = naturalists) 1). 
Reinhardt, on the other hand, opposes Aristotle himself 
and the tradition coming from him and headed by 
1) However, Tannery did not consider Heraclitus a physicist 
either, but, above all, a theologian and moralist, who would have 
had a certain contempt for physics.
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd headed by 
1) However, Tannery did not consider Heraclitus a physicist 
either, but, above all, a theologian and moralist, who would have 
had a certain contempt for physics.
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Theophrastus, reproaching them for having considered 
all the pre-Socratics justly as cosmologists or physicists; 
he claims for Parmenides and Heraclitus the character of 
philosophers essentially concerned with a logical 
problem (of identity and contradiction, of opposites) and 
were not concerned with the physical problem of 
cosmology.
In this displacement of the point of view lies his 
interpretation of Heraclitus, as well as of Parmenides, 
and his thesis of the disruption of the chronological-
doctrinal relationship between the two.
Reinhardt starts from a critical analysis of the group 
of Heraclitean fragments (1/8 of the total that we have) 
that have come to us through Hippolytus, who, in his 
Refutation of Heresies, wanted to demonstrate that the 
heresy of Noetus was heresy and not Christian. 
Reinhardt wants to show that the source of the 
Heraclitean quotations of Hippolytus (and of Clement) 
is in the Allegorical Apophasis of Simon Magus; 
Hippolytus himself, by introducing them with a "he 
says" (Φησί) – which according to Reinhardt always 
means in him: "he wants to say" – would indicate them 
as interpretations and not as textual quotations. The 
Gnostic interpretation had justly (Reinhardt argues) 
transformed the meaning of the Heraclitean phrases. 
Heraclitus spoke of "dike who will comprehend 
everything," and the Gnostics had converted this into the 
Christian idea of final judgment and punishment by fire; 
and thus the legend of a Heraclitean affirmation of 
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---rehend 
everything," and the Gnostics had converted this into the 
Christian idea of final judgment and punishment by fire; 
and thus the legend of a Heraclitean affirmation of 
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

universal conflagration would have been formed, which 
Reinhardt rejects as does Burnet, but on other grounds.
He recognizes it as affirmed by Aristotle (which 
Burnet denied), but reproaches it as an error, coming 
from the Aristotelian pretension of making Heraclitus a 
physicist equal to the other pre-Socratics, with his theory 
of the cycle of creation and destruction of the cosmos 
and with the theory of the universal flux. Theophrastus 
and the Stoics follow Aristotle; however, Theophrastus 
himself (reproduced by Aetius) must confess the lack of 
a true cosmogony in Heraclitus. Plato, on the other 
hand, had opposed the eternal immutability of the 
Heraclitean cosmos to the Empedoclean cycle; and 
Heraclitus, in fact, says Reinhardt, not only always 
speaks of cosmos in the sense of the actual order, but in 
his Fr. 30 (Diels) he affirms that this cosmos has been 
created neither by gods nor by men, but that it always 
exists (¿orí, according to Reinhardt, has here existential 
and not copulative sense) as fire that is kindled and 
extinguished according to measures. That is to say, 
always with equilibrium and limits of change, which 
exclude a universal conflagration, whose idea Clement 
wanted to introduce, adding in the fragment to the 
words "this cosmos" the interpolation: "the same of all" 
(the previous and the successive ones).
The idea of measure is repeated with insistence in 
Heraclitus; in all change (always particular and never 
universal) each form "lives the death" of another and 
vice versa, with constant equilibrium, in the microcosm 
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---tence in 
Heraclitus; in all change (always particular and never 
universal) each form "lives the death" of another and 
vice versa, with constant equilibrium, in the microcosm 
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and in the macrocosm equally. Always identity of 
opposites and never cycle or imbalance: neither 
(Reinhardt maintains) in the vicissitudes of day and 
night, summer and winter, which Heraclitus explains 
with the constant and always equal play of light and 
dark vapors, sometimes collected in the nearest cup of 
the sun, sometimes (in its absence) in the farthest of the 
stars, with the light ones prevailing, sometimes the dark 
ones.
The exclusion of any cycle thus leads Reinhardt to 
the problem of the great cosmic years, attributed by 
Censorinus to Heraclitus. The Greeks (he says) did not 
know the great cosmic year (quite distinct from the 
astronomical) until Diogenes of Babylon introduced it 
from Eastern astrology into Stoicism; then the Stoics 
wanted to find antecedents of the conflagration in 
Hesiod, Orpheus, Heraclitus, etc., as is seen in Plutarch, 
de defect. oracul., 11, who opposes the Stoic exegesis. 
For Heraclitus emphasized the Stoics in their theory of 
generation (30 years in which the cycle from newborn to 
grandfather can take place); counting the generation as a 
day, Heraclitus formed a great year of 360 generations (= 
10,100 solar years).
But, according to Reinhardt, it is not about the great 
cosmic year, with its conflagration, but about an 
eschatological theory concerning the vicissitudes of 
births and deaths in the migration of the soul towards 
damnation or eternal beatitude. The eschatological 
concerns, expressed in many Heraclitean fragments, are 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---issitudes of 
births and deaths in the migration of the soul towards 
damnation or eternal beatitude. The eschatological 
concerns, expressed in many Heraclitean fragments, are 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

related to Orphic-Pythagorean hopes; Heraclitus wants 
to show that death – in the soul as in the cosmos – is just 
another form of eternity. However, at this point 
Reinhardt recognizes that an idea of cycle (orbis aetatis) 
and a calculation of its duration is introduced, for which 
Heraclitus does not multiply generation by an arbitrary 
sacred number (like other authors), but by that of the 
days of the solar year; and by this means he believes he 
finds the secret of secrets, determining the double 
eschatological period (generation and great year of 
migration) which represents in the microcosm what the 
day and the solar year represent in the macrocosm. 
Reinhardt does not realize what a disproportion there 
would be in this parallel, with cycles so small for the 
macrocosm and so great for the microcosm; and he 
insists instead on showing that the Heraclitean 
eschatology, which makes the souls of the heroes 
permanent custodians of the living and the dead, is 
irreconcilable with the periodic conflagration which 
should destroy them all, and that a contradiction on this 
fundamental point cannot be admitted in Heraclitus.
From the foregoing discussion Reinhardt deduces the 
conclusion of a complete separation of Heraclitus from 
the Milesian cosmogony. The roots of his thought (he 
says) lie in the logical problem of Parmenides, and not in 
the physical problem of the Milesians; physics interests 
him only in order to solve the logical problem of 
contraries, which had led the Eleatics to the repudiation 
of the sensible world. Heraclitus, on the other hand, he 
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---nterests 
him only in order to solve the logical problem of 
contraries, which had led the Eleatics to the repudiation 
of the sensible world. Heraclitus, on the other hand, he 
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

wants to show that unity exists only in oppositions, and 
that contrast is not an external manifestation, but the 
intimate essence of unity. By using physics as a solution 
of the problem of opposites, he is no longer interested in 
the cosmogonic problem; and fire is not for him the 
principle, but a form of manifestation of the universal 
intelligence, which governs everything, being the unity 
of all opposites. Thus the Heraclitean doctrine is not a 
doctrine of flux, but, on the contrary, of permanence in 
change, of unity in discord, of eternity in expiration.
Therefore Reinhardt argues that Heraclitus supposes 
the Eleatics because the solution of the problem of 
opposites requires their previous approach; and this, 
according to Reinhardt (who seems to forget at this 
point Anaximander and the Pythagoreans), would have 
been had only with Parmenides. The Eleatics say: the 
opposites are mutually exclusive, and therefore the 
sensible world (world of opposites) is false, and the only 
truth is the immutable unity of being conceived by 
reason, which rejects non-being. Heraclitus replies: 
opposites demand each other; therefore, the world of 
opposites is the only true one, opposition is unity and 
harmony, flux (unity of being and non-being) is the true 
permanence.
Now, says Reinhardt, the prior discovery of the 
opposites as such was necessary, so that the solution of 
their problem could be attempted, with identity in 
change, being in becoming, union in struggle, harmony 
in contrast. All that means conciliation of sensation and 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---olution of 
their problem could be attempted, with identity in 
change, being in becoming, union in struggle, harmony 
in contrast. All that means conciliation of sensation and 
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

logos against their irreconcilable mutual opposition 
affirmed by the Eleatics. Only with the Eleatic problem 
can Fr. 1 (Diels) of Heraclitus be understood, which 
opposes the logos and its reality to men characterized by 
their incomprehension. This common logos is neither the 
law of the world nor cosmic intelligence, but the logical 
law, intrinsic necessity of logos in the gnoseological 
sense. That is why Fr. 50 says: "you must not give reason 
to me, but to the logos that is in you, and confess that all 
is one". This logos is what is common to all (Fr. 2), with 
which each one is always related (Fr. 72), so that to 
understand it, one must investigate oneself (Fr. 101).
In all this Reinhardt sees a solution of the 
Parmenidean problems, constituted by the discovery of 
the opposites, the irreconcilability of sense and reason, 
the impossibility of becoming by its opposition to being. 
To try new solutions, the Eleatic question had to be old; 
therefore it was necessary to move Parmenides 
backward or Heraclitus forward; and this second 
solution seems more plausible to Reinhardt, who in the 
same polemic of Heraclitus against Xenophanes (made 
by Reinhardt later than Parmenides and coming from 
him, against the tradition and general opinion of 
historians) finds a confirmation of the posteriority and 
dependence of Heraclitus himself with respect to 
Parmenides.
Plato already associated Heraclitus with Empedocles 
in the attempts to overcome the Eleatic negation; 
moreover, Heraclitus would show in his style, in his 
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---ect to 
Parmenides.
Plato already associated Heraclitus with Empedocles 
in the attempts to overcome the Eleatic negation; 
moreover, Heraclitus would show in his style, in his 
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rhetorical skill, in his language foreign to mythology and 
close to a later terminology, his belonging to a later 
epoch. Add to this his knowledge of the four qualities 
(hot, cold; dry, wet), which Reinhardt (without taking 
Anaximander into account) considers the creation of a 
later physics contrary to Milesian physics, which would 
have known only the states of aggregation of the four 
elements. The theory of the qualities comes (says 
Reinhardt) from the consideration of the microcosm, that 
is, from the Italic medical schools, from Alcmeon to 
Philistion; and its knowledge distances Heraclitus even 
more from the Milesians, and together with the 
abandonment of physics and the religious intonation 
which seeks mysterious relations between micro and 
macrocosmos (as did Alcmeon) and the theoretical 
affinity that unites him with Hippasus of Metapontus 
brings him closer to the western group, of Magna 
Graecia, where Pythagoreans and Eleatics flourished.
But in the relation to this group (according to 
Reinhardt) Heraclitus is not the one who gives, but the 
one who receives problems and theories; so he must be 
considered as the heir of the logical problem of 
Parmenides, whose solution he attempts with the 
affirmation of the unity of opposites.
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---s problems and theories; so he must be 
considered as the heir of the logical problem of 
Parmenides, whose solution he attempts with the 
affirmation of the unity of opposites.
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IV. Vittorio Macchioro
Among the many studies on Heraclitus that have 
appeared in Italy during the first quarter of our century 
1), the essay by V. Macchioro, Eraclito, 1922 (later 
inserted in the second edition of his book Zagreus), 
deserves to be mentioned for the peculiarity of its 
thesis.)
The thesis of Macchioro, of an interpretation of 
Heraclitus by means of Orphism, had certainly 
antecedents in Pfleiderer (Die Philosophie Heraklits, 
Berlin 1886), Nestle (Heraklit und die Orphiker, 
Philologus 1905) and others, in whose number we have 
yet seen Reinhardt; but no one had expressed and 
applied it in so strict and systematic a manner. 
Macchioro starts, like Reinhardt (but with a contrary, 
constructive aim, and without having news of the other), 
from the group of Heraclitean fragments quoted by 
Hippolytus; and he wants to valorize them by observing 
that in the interpretation of quotations we must take into 
account their character of quotations, intentional and not 
accidental; which proves their connection with the order 
1) Let us remember, among others: E. Bodrero, Eraclito, Torino 
1910; B. Donati, II valore della guerra e la filosofia di Eraclito, 
Genova 1912; AI. Losacco, Eraclito e Zenone l'eleate, Pistoia 1914; A. 
Covotti, Doseure di Efeso, Soc. Reale di Napoli 1917; M. Cardini, 
Eraclito di Efeso, Lanciaeo 1918.
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---to, 
Genova 1912; AI. Losacco, Eraclito e Zenone l'eleate, Pistoia 1914; A. 
Covotti, Doseure di Efeso, Soc. Reale di Napoli 1917; M. Cardini, 
Eraclito di Efeso, Lanciaeo 1918.
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of ideas by whose ratification the quoting writer takes 
them out of the original whole, known and present to 
him, who therefore could interpret it in its genuine 
meaning.
Now Hippolytus, in Book X of his Refutation of all 
Heresies, wants to show in Heraclitus the doctrinal 
source of Noetus, who identified, in the trinity and the 
divine passion, the Father with the Son, affirming that 
one God is the creator and father of the universe, 
invisible-visible, unbegotten-generated, immortal-
mortal; and to prove it he quotes, inserting his 
explanations, the Heraclitean fragments which in Diels 
have the numbers from 50 to 67, in addition to 1, 
declaring to take them from a chapter (κεφόλαιως) of the 
book of Heraclitus, which contained in synthesis all the 
essential thought of him. Direct and scrupulous 
quotations, Macchioro maintains; for when Hippolytus 
does not quote verbatim, but ad senstan, as for 
Empedocles, he says: "thus he expresses himself, more or 
less" (τως, τοιοντόν τινα τρύτον)  2).
Therefore, in attributing to Heraclitus an anticipation 
of the Noetian identity of Father and Son, related to the 
divine passion, Hippolytus must have found in the book 
of Heraclitus the only Greek myth where there is a 
divine father and son, distinct and identical, linked with 
a passion, death and resurrection, that is, the myth of 
Dionysus Zagreus son of Zeus, killed by the Titans and 
resurrected by the father. To this Zagreus (= child) 
Macchioro finds him mentioned in the Heraclitean 
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---is, the myth of 
Dionysus Zagreus son of Zeus, killed by the Titans and 
resurrected by the father. To this Zagreus (= child) 
Macchioro finds him mentioned in the Heraclitean 
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fragment 52: "the Aeon, child who plays with the cups, 
of whom is the kingdom"; and in front of him he finds 
the Father in fragment 53: "Pólemos (= Zeus), father of 
all things, who made the gods and men, the free and the 
slaves". Thus we have God the Father and the Son, who 
is the unity of all opposites (fragment 67); and we have 
explained the statement of Clement Alexandrinus, that 
"Heraclitus drew everything from Orpheus", and that of 
the epigram quoted by Diogenes Laertius, stating that to 
understand Heraclitus one needs the guidance of an 
"initiate in the mysteries" (mystes). In mysticism 
precisely (says Macchioro), with its initiation and 
palingenesia in God, was the affinity between Orphism 
and Christianity, which drove Noetus towards 
Heraclitism.
Incidentally, Macchioro argues, the parallel between 
Heraclitus and Noetus in Hippolytus should not be 
limited (with Bernays and others) only to the doctrine of 
the communion of passion between father and son 
(patripassianism); Hippolytus wanted, on the contrary,
2) Note the difference with respect to Reinhardt who 
maintained that it was a matter of interpretations and not 
quotations. The provenance of his quotations, declared by 
Hippolytus, from a chapter of Heraclitus, raises, however (no less 
than the division into three discourses asserted by Diogenes 
Laertius) a problem not considered by Macchioro. i.e. whether these 
divisions belonged to the original work or to some later 
compilation.
27

--- PAGE BREAK ---hree discourses asserted by Diogenes 
Laertius) a problem not considered by Macchioro. i.e. whether these 
divisions belonged to the original work or to some later 
compilation.
27

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to show this parallel in all principles; and therefore, by 
accepting the quotations in the order offered by 
Hippolytus and recognizing the authority of his 
commentary, one can reconstruct the chapter from 
which Hippolytus draws the quotations, which 
Macchioro identifies with the Theological Discourse 
mentioned by Diogenes Laertius as one of the three 
parts of the Heraclitean book (the other two being the 
discourse on the universe and the political one). In fact 
the chapter used by Hippolytus presented the Orphic 
theogony; and the ancients called all theogonies 
"theology".
With the help of Orphism can thus be understood, 
according to Macchioro, not only the fragments quoted 
by Hippolytus, but others, and the theological discourse 
of Heraclitus can be reconstructed. Fragment 96: "the 
corpses should be thrown away more than dung", 
means, according to the explanations of Plutarch, 
Plotinus and Julian, that the body separated from the 
soul loses all appreciation; which is the doctrine of the 
Orphics, whose rite of cremation (ekpyrosis), testified by 
the Orphic cemeteries (timboni) of Magna Grecia, was 
the means to reach the palingenesia. The corporeal life 
for the Orphics is an evil and a true death; death on the 
other hand is rest (Frs. 20 and 21); and the human being 
is a real death (Frs. 20 and 21) and he finds the 
unexpected (Fr. 27), that is to say, eternal bliss. If the 
soul knew what awaits it after death (says Plutarch, de 
anima vi, cit. by Estob), it would no longer endure life, 
28

--- PAGE BREAK ---unexpected (Fr. 27), that is to say, eternal bliss. If the 
soul knew what awaits it after death (says Plutarch, de 
anima vi, cit. by Estob), it would no longer endure life, 
28

--- PAGE BREAK ---

according to Heraclitus. Heraclitus' scholastic doctrine, 
then, was that of Orphicism.
To fragment 27, which promises bliss (to) the 
initiated, there is fragment 14 which (says Clementus 
Alexandrinus) promises punishment after death and fire 
to those who celebrate orgies at night, to bacchantes and 
initiates. However, notes Macchioro, Clementus 
interrpret as infernal punishment the fire of the 
ekpyrosis (conflagration) which in Heraclitus had no 
such meaning; neither could the contemptuous address 
have the indication of bacchantes and initiates. One 
could, indeed, threaten punishments (those infernal 
punishments that play an important role in the Orphic 
eschatology), but only for the reason that Clement adds, 
that is, "for being initiated into the mysteries without 
sanctity".
The mystical religiosity, then, was not for Heraclitus 
purely external ritual, but intimate, and became a 
philosophical doctrine as it appears in the fragment 62: 
"immortals-mortals mortals-immortals, living death, 
dying to live of those". Here, says Macchioro, the myth is 
reflected in Zagreus, whose passion and resurrection the 
initiate renews himself with mystical palingenesis, in 
agreement with the explication of this fragment given by 
Clement and Maximo Tirio. The soul that enters the 
body as in a tomb is released not only with death (which 
it cannot bring about itself) but also with the catharsis of 
initiation, with the palingenesis in the mystery.
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs the 
body as in a tomb is released not only with death (which 
it cannot bring about itself) but also with the catharsis of 
initiation, with the palingenesis in the mystery.
29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mystery and death for Heraclitus (says Macchioro) 
are two forms of palingenesis, moments of becoming 
universal, which fragment 51 explains as harmony of 
opposite tensions. Harmony, not in the musical sense, 
since the example of the bow together with that of the 
lyre, but of structure, which Macchioro explains with the 
double possibility of stretching and relaxing the string in 
both, which signifies unity in variability. Here is concord 
in discord (Fr. 8), the identity of living and dead, awake 
and asleep, etc. (Fr. 88), of straight and curved path (Fr. 
59), up and down (Fr. 60). This Heraclitean identification 
of opposites proceeds, according to Macchioro, from the 
identification of life and death made by him as asserted 
by Plutarch and Sextus Empiricus; for which reason, 
Sextus adds, souls are dead in us when we live and alive 
when we die. That is to say, the Heraclitean intuition of 
the identity of opposites would have mystical origin, 
from Orphism.
From this mystical religiosity comes the respect for 
the rites expressed in fragment 14, which is not 
condemnation but justification of the phallic rite, of the 
Bacchic rage, of the Lenca festivals. But the rite for 
Heraclitus should not be exteriority, but intimate 
mystical experience; and that is why fragment 5 
reproaches and condemns the rites that are not spiritual 
"remedies" (Fr. 68), that is, that do not respond to the 
requirement of catharsis and palingenesis of the soul.
The mystery had to be lived experience, not dogma 
or theoretical teaching; and lived experience had to be 
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---espond to the 
requirement of catharsis and palingenesis of the soul.
The mystery had to be lived experience, not dogma 
or theoretical teaching; and lived experience had to be 
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the inspiration that Heraclitus drew from Orphism for 
his philosophy. From there comes, according to 
Macchioro, the contempt expressed by Heraclitus for the 
intelligence of men (Frs. 1, 17, 34, 78) and his pretended 
wisdom (Frs. 40, 70) that does not reach to understand 
the essence of things and the unity of opposites (Frs. 61, 
67, 111), all good and just for God, in contrast to human 
distinctions (Fr. 102). Relative human knowledge is 
mistaken (Fr. 50); intelligence does not understand the 
hidden harmony (Fr. 54); another form of knowledge is 
needed, that is, mystical intuition, communion with God 
in the catharsis of mystery or death (Fr. 26).
Close to this catharsis Macchioro believes that 
Heraclitus placed the dream, because it would subtract 
man from the common world (Fr. 89) and would grant 
him a communion with the universal logos through the 
divinatory power of reverie (Cf. Fr. 75 Testimonies of 
Chalcidius and Sextus Empiricus interpreted by 
Macchioro in a very debatable sense). With this mystical 
anti-intellectualism Macchioro explains the Heraclitean 
dogmatism, his confession that one should not listen to 
him but to the logos (Fr. 50), his affirmations of the 
importance of hope and faith for knowledge (Frs. 86, 19) 
and his demand for the investigation of oneself, of one's 
own interiority in order to know and understand (Frs. 
101, 116). By this mysticism, finally, Heraclitus may have 
seemed to Noetus a prophet of Christian thought.
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32

--- PAGE BREAK ---ority in order to know and understand (Frs. 
101, 116). By this mysticism, finally, Heraclitus may have 
seemed to Noetus a prophet of Christian thought.
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V. Werner Jaeger
W. Jaeger has dedicated few but very dense and 
penetrating pages to Heraclitus in the chapter on 
Philosophical Thought and the Discovery of the Cosmos 
in his book Paideia, I, Berlin 1933 (English translation 
Mexico 1942).
Heraclitus, says Jaeger, is no longer to be regarded as 
a naturalist, whose fire may signify a physical theory 
such as the water of Thales or the air of Anaximenes. He 
is certainly under the powerful influence of the earlier 
natural philosophy, and is based on the ideas created by 
it, of the cosmos as totality, of the incessant cycle of 
becoming in which the permanence of being is 
manifested; but what he seeks is no longer an objective 
intuition of being in which man is immersed and sunk, 
but he wants to show the convergence of all the forces of 
nature in man, as of spokes in the center of the circle. 
They are men, no doubt, instruments of a higher, 
universal power; but this power lives in them also; and 
its knowledge is not achieved by gathering external facts 
through a multiple dispersed history incapable of 
providing wisdom, but through the investigation of 
itself, of the interiority considered not in its particular 
idiosyncrasy but in its relationship and identity with the 
universal logos. That is why Heraclitus says: "however 
far you go you will not find the limits of the soul, so 
deep is its logos".
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---t in its relationship and identity with the 
universal logos. That is why Heraclitus says: "however 
far you go you will not find the limits of the soul, so 
deep is its logos".
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The logos, whose dimension of depth is first affirmed 
with Heraclitus, extends to the total sphere of human, as 
well as cosmic; from him proceed in man the word and 
action (Fr. 1), that is, all life, which in the knowledge of 
the logos must acquire a conscious orientation. 
Heraclitus presents himself as a prophet of this logos, 
interpreter of the enigmas of life and of the nature that 
loves to hide itself. Men live as if asleep, each in his own 
particular world of sleep; they must be awakened to the 
consciousness of the common logos, which each must 
follow and obey as well as the citizen to the law of the 
polis and even more.
The whole universe has its law just as the polis has its 
law; rather, in the divine law all human laws are 
nourished; and this divine law is understood by means 
of the logos, the organ of sense of the cosmos, spirit and 
fire that penetrates the cosmos as life and thought, and 
which knows itself and knows its universal action. His 
presence in man gives man a place as a cosmic being in 
the cosmos already neglected by earlier naturalism. His 
revelation constitutes the superiority of Heraclitus, for it 
is the teaching of the way of life, which must follow 
nature and divine law, in word and action.
The new teaching of Heraclitus is in the doctrine of 
the opposites and of the unity of the whole, related of 
course to the representations of Milesian naturalism, but 
vivified by the direct intuition of the process of human 
life. In Anaximander there was the struggle of opposites, 
which fell under the sanction of judging time; in 
34

--- PAGE BREAK ---ism, but 
vivified by the direct intuition of the process of human 
life. In Anaximander there was the struggle of opposites, 
which fell under the sanction of judging time; in 
34

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Heraclitus the struggle is generative of all things, and is 
itself Dike, unity and harmony. The new Pythagorean 
idea of harmony intervenes to illuminate the law of 
oppositions that interchange and identify themselves in 
the process of cosmic life, where the death of one is 
always the life of another, change is permanence, and 
everything is one and the same, realizing its unity by 
opposite tensions, as in the bow and the lyre.
Thus, in contrast to the previous philosophy, the 
doctrine of Heraclitus appears as the first philosophical 
anthropology. Undoubtedly man is part of the cosmos, 
subject to its law; the anthropological circle is 
surrounded by the cosmological and theological; but, by 
the immanence of the divine law in the spirit, man can 
reach the highest wisdom, the consciousness of being a 
member of a universal community that comprises in 
itself the polis and its laws. And from the idea of the 
divine law Heraclitus' religiosity rises to that of the 
legislator, "the one, the only wise, who wants and does 
not want to be called Zeus". Against the opinion of his 
time that considered tyrannical the government of one 
alone, Heraclitus, inspired by his religiosity, affirms that 
"obedience to the decree of one alone is also law".
By this path Heraclitus overcomes the previous 
separation and antithesis between cosmological and 
religious thought. The previous cosmology offered a 
vision of being separated from the human; Orphism 
affirmed the divine character of the soul in the face of 
the whirlwind of cosmic becoming. But there was 
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---osmology offered a 
vision of being separated from the human; Orphism 
affirmed the divine character of the soul in the face of 
the whirlwind of cosmic becoming. But there was 
35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

already in cosmology the idea of the world's governing 
Dike. Heraclitus, unifying the human soul with the 
cosmic "eternally living fire," also unifies cosmic law 
with human law, and with the cosmic religion of the 
"divine nomos" founds in the norm of the world the 
norm of life of philosophical man.
36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VI. Abel Rey
In his book La jeimesse de la Science grecque (Paris 
1933) A. Rey accepts Tannery's judgment that Heraclitus 
was essentially a theologian and a moralist; but, in 
accordance with the particular orientation of his 
research, he directs his chapter on Heraclite: la physique 
des contraires to the determination of the contribution to 
be recognized in the historical development of Greek 
and Western physics.
In this field Heraclitus, "metaphysician of mobility", 
appears to him proceeding along the same lines as the 
Ionian cosmogony, but with an accentuation of 
becoming, which comes to form the very essence of 
being; a becoming that is true transformation in which 
being (fire) is hidden, but which is realized with a 
constant compensating correlation of its forms. 
Heraclitus chooses fire for its mobility; he found it 
already in the cosmogonies of Anaximander and 
Anaximenes as a product of the processes of 
differentiation, and he erects it as a principle, as a result 
of the demand for fundamental unity that he 
experiences in the face of the very multiplicity of 
becoming.
However, because of the obvious influence of 
Rivaud's researches (Le Probleme du devenir et la 
notion de la matiére dans la philosopbie grecque, Paris 
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---tiplicity of 
becoming.
However, because of the obvious influence of 
Rivaud's researches (Le Probleme du devenir et la 
notion de la matiére dans la philosopbie grecque, Paris 
37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1906), Rey believes that neither in Heraclitus nor in his 
predecessors does the principle of change correspond to 
a true concept of substance, which begins only with 
Eleatism. Fire is the source of change produced by 
discord and struggle (pólemos), by the action of which 
the opposites leave the one and return to it. This idea of 
the opposites was also proper to Pythagorean physics, 
and anticipated in germ by Anaximander with the 
separation between hot and cold, and by Anaximenes 
with the opposite processes of rarefaction and 
condensation (echoed in Heraclitus, fragment 91 Diels: 
"it disperses and gathers"),
But a physics of opposites is a physics of qualities, a 
qualitative explanation of becoming, suggested by the 
observation that every quality, in changing, evolves 
towards its opposite. Hence the conclusion that 
opposites replace each other; that is, the physics of 
opposites, the affirmation of which is presented in 
history accompanied by the formation of "tables of 
oppositions" (Pythagoreans) on the one hand and by the 
birth of dialectics (Eleatics) on the other hand: all 
characteristics of the historical moment and of its 
demand for rational clarity.
The logic of contrariety expresses in scientific form 
the religious idea of destiny, replacing it by that of a 
necessary law of becoming, assimilated, as it is by 
Anaximander, to the social idea of justice. But at the time 
of Heraclitus, with the Pythagoreans, research on 
numbers and measures had already been developed; 
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, as it is by 
Anaximander, to the social idea of justice. But at the time 
of Heraclitus, with the Pythagoreans, research on 
numbers and measures had already been developed; 
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---

therefore the new scientific demand makes physics 
evolve from quality to quantity. This is what appears in 
the multiple Heraclitean fragments that affirm the idea 
of measure in the mutual changes between contraries 
and in all becoming.
Here appears the idea of harmony, which the 
Pythagoreans had also applied to the relations between 
sounds. Bernays and Burnet have held that in Heraclitus 
it means only structure; Campbell added to it the idea of 
the unity of the opposite tensions manifested in the two 
halves of the string stretched between ends in the bow 
and the lyre; Rey thinks that even the musical sense 
should be added to it, the relationship between contrary 
sounds, acute and grave, in the octave, which was the 
first Pythagorean harmony. Besides the fragments where 
Pythagoras is mentioned, Heraclitus refers to him (he 
affirms Rey with Burnet) in others, where he speaks of 
three types of life 1), or rejects the idea of a southern 
hemisphere (Fr. 120), or accepts the term cosmos; 
therefore his idea of harmony must have been 
assimilated to the Pythagorean one.
In any case, with the law of equilibrium between 
opposites, qualitative physics tends towards a 
quantitative form. On the other hand, in Heraclitus the 
struggle of the opposites leads to their unity and 
identification. Against Pythagorean dualism, Heraclitus 
still adheres to a kind of monism. The real is one and 
multiple at the same time; this is why Plato differentiates 
Heraclitus from Empedocles, who distinguishes and 
39

--- PAGE BREAK ---raclitus 
still adheres to a kind of monism. The real is one and 
multiple at the same time; this is why Plato differentiates 
Heraclitus from Empedocles, who distinguishes and 
39

--- PAGE BREAK ---

alternates the phases of unity and multiplicity. 
Heraclitus' unity is realized in change by the law of 
justice and measure; even in imbalances (day-night, 
summer-winter) there is compensation and justice that 
bring them back to equilibrium.
This idea of necessary justice (compensation and 
measure) constitutes for Rey the most important 
contribution of Heraclitus to physical science. The 
account of Diogenes Laertius, in spite of its lightness, 
shows us another important idea: the upward and 
downward motion, which becomes one of the necessary 
stages of later physical mechanics, together with the 
double process of rarefaction and condensation of 
Anaximenes. Both are inspired by observations 
(evaporation and condensation of vapor for 
Anaximenes, movement of the sieve for Heraclitus); and 
both thus anticipate in germ the later idea of the 
elements 2). The double motions are subjected to the law 
of justice and compensation for which equilibrium is 
always conserved. Rey, therefore, adheres to Burnet's 
argument against the attribution of the theory of 
universal conflagration to Heraclitus, and to the 
explanation of the great Heraclitean year, given by 
Burnet himself, as the period necessary to each measure 
    1) Fr. in Bywater, corresponding to Frs. 104 5- 20 Diels. On 
the unacceptability of Burnet and Rev's interpretation see my study 
Origen del ideal filosófico de la vida, Rev. de estud. clás., Mendoza 
1944. 
40

--- PAGE BREAK ---g to Frs. 104 5- 20 Diels. On 
the unacceptability of Burnet and Rev's interpretation see my study 
Origen del ideal filosófico de la vida, Rev. de estud. clás., Mendoza 
1944. 
40

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of fire to accomplish the double path below and above.
Rey concludes that in Heraclitus the application of 
the idea of measure (metra) and justice (Dike) to the 
processes of becoming is carried out under the influence 
of a theological and moral requirement; all Heraclitean 
physics, therefore, is linked to an ethical-religious end 
and to the need for a path of spiritual health. Thus 
Tannery's interpretation of a moralist and theologian 
Heraclitus would be confirmed by Rey through the 
examination of his physics.
2) Whose distinction in Aristotle is distributed in two even 
series, one characterized by upward motion, the other by 
downward. Rey leaves implicit this observation of an influence of 
Heraclitus on Aristotelian physics, without expressing it.
41

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42

--- PAGE BREAK ---pward motion, the other by 
downward. Rey leaves implicit this observation of an influence of 
Heraclitus on Aristotelian physics, without expressing it.
41

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VII. Guido de Ruggiero
In the third edition of La filosofia greca (Bari 1034, 
part I of his Storia della filosofia) G. De Ruggiero 
considers it opportune to separate Heraclitus, creator of 
the dialectic, from the Milesian whose physical 
investigations he despised as polymathia that do not 
teach to reason. De Ruggiero admits in Heraclitus some 
suggestion of the mysteries, but, against Pfleiderer and 
Macchioro, he believes that in constructing his 
philosophy Heraclitus ended by belittling them.
The opposition between the two interpretations of 
Heraclitus (philosophy of flux and philosophy of 
identity) seems fictitious to De Ruggiero: the Heraclitean 
dialectic seeks the harmony of opposites, permanence in 
change. A dramatic sense of cosmic becoming inspires it; 
becoming is the struggle of opposites that live one the 
death of the other; the struggle proceeds from 
qualitative opposition, which instead of separating the 
opposites, pushes them towards and against each other 
by their unity and community of nature (cf. the unity of 
day and night, living and dead, etc.). However, 
according to De Ruggiero, Heraclitus does not affirm an 
identity, but a unity of opposites; not a mutual 
conversion, but a common inherence in the same being, 
from which each one wants to expel the other. That is 
why unity belongs to that being and not to the 
opposites. In the dialectic of Heraclitus the principle of 
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---e same being, 
from which each one wants to expel the other. That is 
why unity belongs to that being and not to the 
opposites. In the dialectic of Heraclitus the principle of 
43

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the opposition and struggle of opposites that existed 
already in Anaximander is developed, with the 
difference that the struggle, which was injustice for 
Anaximander, it becomes justice for Heraclitus, who 
sees in it, beyond the destructive aspect, the constructive 
one, that is the continuous creation of life and harmony 
by opposing tensions.
This is the intimate rationality, that is to say the 
divine Logos that loves to hide itself in nature: if the 
elimination of the struggle could be realized, it would be 
death. Thus the divine Logos is the law of war; and God, 
by welcoming the opposites into himself, expresses their 
identical nature and the necessity of their mutual 
struggle. With this character of rational ideal principle 
the Heraclitean logos asserts itself as a common 
universal thought which integrates in itself all the 
individual opposing points of view, justifying them all 
as unconscious cooperators in the common work. Hence 
the Heraclitean exhortation to all to rely on the common 
logos, abandoning the claim to a particular reason of 
their own 1).
On the other hand that ideal logos (observes De 
Ruggiero) has in Heraclitus its ingenuous aspect of an 
extremely subtle and mobile body: fire; and cosmology 
is the history of the cycle of changes of fire, in the series 
of the elements where Dike has fixed to each one its 
place and its limits. The physical application of the 
dialectic is the weak part of the Heraclitean system; but 
it rises again in the affirmation of the law of 
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---each one its 
place and its limits. The physical application of the 
dialectic is the weak part of the Heraclitean system; but 
it rises again in the affirmation of the law of 
44

--- PAGE BREAK ---

compensation and of the double identical up-down path. 
With this law De Ruggiero believes incompatible the 
conflagration, whose affirmation in fragment 6 he 
considers a later interpolation.
In psychology De Ruggiero considers fundamental 
the opposition fire-water (= soul-body), and believes 
that this interpretation of the microcosm has inspired 
Heraclitus all his doctrine of the macrocosm. The soul, 
spark of divine fire, arrives in union with it (common 
logos) to the comprehension of the cosmic law; this 
would be the meaning of fragment 115, relative to the 
thought that by itself increases.
As far as the soul is concerned, it seems to De 
Ruggiero that the spirit of the Heraclitean system would 
lead to a denial of personal immortality; however, he 
recognizes that some fragments seem to assume it, but 
he believes that they can be interpreted even in the sense 
of a reflux of souls in the universal logos.
Finally, the traditional opposition between eleatic 
philosophy (immutable being) and Heraclitean 
philosophy (becoming) seems wrong to De Ruggiero; 
the real opposition is between two logics: that of identity 
and the dialectic of opposites.
1) However, this interpretation poses a problem: with such an 
exhortation, would not Heraclitus be renewing the invocation of the 
elimination of struggle, which he reproached Homer for?
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VIII. Olof Gigon
O.

Gigon's

"Heracliteanuld not Heraclitus be renewing the invocation of the 
elimination of struggle, which he reproached Homer for?
45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VIII. Olof Gigon
O.

Gigon's

"Heraclitean

Investigations" 
(Untersuchungen zu Heraklit, Leipzig 1935), which is 
one of the fundamental works on the subject appearing 
in this century, is presented in opposition to Reinhardt's 
book. However, the acceptance of the conclusions of the 
important works of Emil Weerts (Heraklit und die 
Herakliteer, Berlin 1926; Plato und der Heraklitismus, 
Ein Beitrag zum Problem der Historie im platonischen 
Dialog, Philol. Suppl., Leipzig 1931), which want to 
separate Heraclitus from the πάντα 
ε
ῥῖ, indicated by 
Plato as characteristic of the Herakliteans, creates an 
even more radical opposition with Spengler's 
interpretation.
These investigations are characterized by an 
analytical method, of particular discussion of each 
fragment replacing the usual synthetic interpretation of 
the Heraclitean doctrine; however, Gigon attempts to 
reconstruct the order of grouping of the fragments 
around five themes: 1) the principle (doctrine of the 
logos and oppositions), 2) cosmology, 3) physiology 
(doctrine of life), 4) life in this world and in the hereafter, 
5) theology. From this reconstruction we will examine 
the essential lines, ignoring the particular disputes – 
philological and historical – about each of the fragments, 
despite their importance for the understanding of each 
of the Heraclitean ideas, on the analysis of which any 
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---es – 
philological and historical – about each of the fragments, 
despite their importance for the understanding of each 
of the Heraclitean ideas, on the analysis of which any 
47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

synthetic interpretation must be based.
1. The fragments concerning the principle comprise 
two groups, one concerning the doctrine of logos, the 
other that of oppositions (polemos and harmony).
The first group, in Gigon's opinion, should form the 
proem of the Heraclitean work, to which should belong 
the fragments that in Diels have the numbers 1, 2, 17, 34, 
50, 72, 89, 108, 113 (whose duplicate would be 116) and 
114, with which may also be related 40 and 104. 
Fragment 1, located at the beginning of the work 
according to the testimonies of Aristotle and Sextus 
Empiricus, affirms Ja eternal truth of the logos, that is to 
say (Gigon interprets) of the speech of Heraclitus that 
contains precisely the eternal truth unknown to men, 
although they are always under the rule of those, in their 
own words and actions.
The logos that dominates everything is therefore the 
common, the divine law that nourishes all human ones, 
whose idea would be suggested by the initiated 
ethnographic science (Hecateo) and by the activity of the 
legislators, which led to the distinction between the 
variable written laws and the eternal unwritten 
(άγραφος νόμος) and common (κοινός).
That is why Heraclitus says that one must follow 
what is common and not believe oneself to be in 
possession of a particular intelligence (Fr. 2); thus logos 
is manifested as law and essence of the world, and 
nomos as the criterion of right thinking, coinciding in an 
48

--- PAGE BREAK ---in 
possession of a particular intelligence (Fr. 2); thus logos 
is manifested as law and essence of the world, and 
nomos as the criterion of right thinking, coinciding in an 
48

--- PAGE BREAK ---

idea of the divine that comes from Xenophanes. 
Heraclitus, in the face of the mass of fools, presents 
himself as an enlightened educator, in struggle (as did 
Xenophanes) with Homer, Hesiod, etc. Men, 
participating in the common logos, could be wise (Fr. 
113), but generally do not understand it (Fr. 2) and 
remain strangers to it (Fr. 72), without acquiring 
intelligence either by the acquisition of much knowledge 
(Fr. 40).
To this proem, a promise of revelation whose 
prophetic tone imitates the Delphic oracle and the Sibyl 
(Frs. 92 and 93) was to follow the explanation of the 
universal law (logos) by means of the doctrine of the 
pólemos. The material principle (αρχή) of the Milesians 
is replaced by a logical principle: the union of opposites 
(Fr. 10) which means a permutation between unity and 
totality. Thus the divergent converges towards itself, in a 
harmony (= conjunction: Gigon excludes all musical 
sense) by opposite tensions like those of the bow and the 
lyre (Fr. 51), where opposition becomes unity (Fr. 8).
The doctrine of opposites is evidenced by examples 
used as proofs (cf. for the identity of good and evil in Fr. 
58 the example of the physicians who cut and burn the 
diseased parts); but the oppositions present themselves 
in two distinct forms, one more evident is the succession 
or permutation of the opposites, another that more 
needs proof is the unity or coincidence of them. To this 
difference alludes, according to Gigon, fragment 54: "the 
hidden harmony (= conjunction) is stronger than the 
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---t more 
needs proof is the unity or coincidence of them. To this 
difference alludes, according to Gigon, fragment 54: "the 
hidden harmony (= conjunction) is stronger than the 
49

--- PAGE BREAK ---

visible one"; which would mean that the identity of the 
opposites has more power than the succession of them 
(example: day and night). But the occult demands proof; 
and in experiencing the demand for proof, Heraclitus 
differs from the Milesians.
And it differs even in the approach to oppositions. In 
the previous naturalists (then even in the Parmenidean 
doxa) the unique principle bifurcated into two material 
opposites, by means of which the cosmos was 
constructed; in Heraclitus the opposites are not objects 
but properties, considering the idea of opposition itself, 
conceived theoretically, in a purely formal antithetics.
Against Reinhardt, who argued that Heraclitus 
proceeded from Parmenides, Gigon objects that there is 
nothing in him of Parmenidean terminology, nor can it 
be believed that he attempted to overcome the Eleatic 
opposition between being and becoming, by making 
becoming a presupposition of being, because he never 
considers as a problem their relation of mutual 
permutation. But neither does Parmenides present the 
Heraclitean terminology, so that an opposition to 
Heraclitus or an intention to perfect his logical 
abstraction should be excluded. An antecedent of the 
Heraclitean oppositions can be sought in the 
Pythagoreans and Alcmeon, but Gigon differentiates 
them because they are dualisms referring to medicine, 
whose even series are in static equilibrium 
physiognomy, while in Heraclitus there is conjunction 
(harmony) in motion.
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---them because they are dualisms referring to medicine, 
whose even series are in static equilibrium 
physiognomy, while in Heraclitus there is conjunction 
(harmony) in motion.
50

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gigon further denies – against Bernays, Frederich, 
Biwater, Diels, Burnet, etc. – the possibility of using in 
the reconstruction of the Heraclitean theory of opposites 
the Hippocratic On the Diet (which he considers linked 
with sophistry, and only stylistically influenced by 
Heraclitus); Philo, Quid rer. divin. her. 207 ff; Sextus, 
Pyrrh. Hypot. I, 53 ff; and the pseudo-Aristotelian De 
mundo 5.
2. Let us turn to cosmology. It affirms the mutual 
permutation between one and all (Fr. 10); but, together 
with the succession of opposites, it also affirms their 
unity, as a requirement of the universal logos, not the 
author's personal opinion (Fr. 50). It is not, however, a 
question of mystical unity, but of the application of the 
doctrine of opposites in cosmology (used, however, by 
later mysticism in formulas attributed to Linus, Museo, 
Orphics, etc.). To this unity can be related the identity of 
the ways above and below (fragment 60), anticipated in 
part by Anaximander and Xenophanes; fragment 90 
presents it in concrete form as an exchange between fire 
and things, paralleled with that between gold and 
commodities (in both cases: one and many).
Here the much discussed problem of conflagration 
arises. The transfer of each contrary into the other (Fr. 
88), applied to the opposition of world-fire (multiplicity-
unity), there is, according to Giren, conflagration as real 
cyclical phase, as the even series of fragments 65 and 67 
demand the realization of each of their terms. Now, the 
oppositions of hunger-satiety (Fr. 65), war and peace (Fr. 
51

--- PAGE BREAK ---cyclical phase, as the even series of fragments 65 and 67 
demand the realization of each of their terms. Now, the 
oppositions of hunger-satiety (Fr. 65), war and peace (Fr. 
51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67) are identified with that of cosmic distinction and 
absorption in the unity of fire; therefore, the real 
(periodic) existence of the one demands that of the other. 
Thus also fragment 30: "this cosmos is eternally living 
fire, etc. (which may have been at the beginning of the 
cosmology) has to be related to the doctrine of opposites.
Cosmos in Heraclitus and other pre-Socratics always 
means the systematic order of things opposed to chaotic 
dispersion; Heraclitus (as well as Xenophanes) affirms, 
against Anaximander, the uniqueness of this order ("the 
same for all things"), and – probably against Hesiod 
(Theogony 74ff.) – its eternity ("no one created it, God or 
man, but it always was and will be"); but adds its eternal 
identity with its opposite: identity of the universe 
(multiplicity) with fire (unity). Fragment 7 perhaps 
wants to explain this coincidence with the hypothesis of 
a conversion of all things into smoke, in whose unity the 
nose would distinguish multiplicity.
There was already in the cosmos of the Milesians fire 
(celestial) as a part against the others (air, sea, earth), but 
Heraclitus makes it the whole. The deniers of the 
conflagration, on the other hand, must always limit it to 
a part of the cosmos, in equilibrium with the rest, while 
Heraclitus affirms it as a totality, eternal like the cosmos, 
always living because it is the source of all life, and 
always in motion, like the Milesian αρχή. It cannot be 
identified with anything particular, neither the soul, nor 
the celestial fire, nor the ray (Fr. 64), nor the logos or "the 
wise" (Fr. 32) or the god (Fr. 67). It is unified totality and 
52

--- PAGE BREAK ---with anything particular, neither the soul, nor 
the celestial fire, nor the ray (Fr. 64), nor the logos or "the 
wise" (Fr. 32) or the god (Fr. 67). It is unified totality and 
52

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as such identifies itself with its opposite, the totality 
unfolded in the cosmos; the paradox of identification 
must be resolved in the alternating succession of the 
opposites (Fr. 65), where each lives the death of the other 
(Frs. 36, 76). That is why the measures of kindling and 
extinguishing of the ever-living fire (Fr. 30) must be 
understood in a temporal sense and not spatial: as a 
cycle or alternation of two contrary moments, which 
then become four with Empedocles.
However, fragment 31 of Heraclitus distinguishes 
degrees in the realization of the changes of fire: 1) sea, 2) 
earth and prester, 3) return to the sea. The scheme could 
also be valid for the continuous process of particular 
changes, but fragment 31 must be cosmogonic; probably 
inspired by Xenophanes in the idea of the primordial sea 
from which the earth is born and into which it sinks 
again. The prestér should be interpreted in the sense of 
the exhalations that the Heraclitean doxography 
presents as the source and nourishment of the stars; the 
whole fragment, therefore, delineates the process of 
inner development of the cosmos, from sea to land and 
stars and vice versa. However, Aetius (A 5 Diels) and 
Lucretius I, fragment 82 ff. give a different scheme.
In what relation to cosmogony are the notices 
concerning generation and the great year in Heraclitus 
(A 13, S and 19 Diels)? Reinhardt wanted to interpret 
them as referring to eschatology; but Heraclitus, by 
making use, in his calculation, of the number of days of 
the astronomical year, showed that he was standing on 
53

--- PAGE BREAK ---interpret 
them as referring to eschatology; but Heraclitus, by 
making use, in his calculation, of the number of days of 
the astronomical year, showed that he was standing on 
53

--- PAGE BREAK ---

other ground than eschatological; even if the polemic of 
Plutarch, against the interpretation of the partisans of 
the conflagration, shows that Heraclitus had not 
expressed himself clearly. Gigon has opportune recourse 
to the ideas of the epoch relative to time. In Pherecydes 
and Anaximander Time is the regulator of vicissitudes, 
and Heraclitus identifies it with destiny; moreover 
Scythinus (in imitation of Heraclitus, C 3) declares it "the 
first and last who has everything in himself" and returns 
to himself by the opposite way.
Therefore, it can be thought of a law of a double way, 
which would be realized in the generation for men and 
in the great year for the cosmos; the great year should 
therefore have two parts, fire and cosmos. A 
confirmation of the conflagration can also be found in 
the eschatological fragment 66 ("the coming fire will 
judge and condemn all things").
With his eyes fixed on his doctrine of opposites, 
Heraclitus is not interested in the Milesian problem of 
the process of transformation of the elements; he is 
satisfied with speaking of the disjunction and mutual 
generation of opposites. In problems such as that of the 
form of the earth he shows an empiricism that links him 
with Xenophanes; and in astronomy he also accepts the 
new sun every day of Xenophanes (Fr. 6), which was 
framed in his theory of the fire that is kindled and 
extinguished in measured periods (Fr. 30) and perhaps 
suggested it. The same demand for measures for the sun 
is expressed in fragment 94 with the threat of 
54

--- PAGE BREAK ---at is kindled and 
extinguished in measured periods (Fr. 30) and perhaps 
suggested it. The same demand for measures for the sun 
is expressed in fragment 94 with the threat of 
54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

intervention by Dike's ministering Erinyes, which Gigon 
interprets as an allusion to eclipses, of which Thales, 
Archilochus and Xenophanes had been interested; 
moreover Hesiod had placed Dike on the threshold of 
the house of the day.
By declaring the sun the only source of light (Fr. 99) 
Heraclitus explained the difference between sun and 
moon with differences between pure and impure 
medium, light and dark exhalations; but he corrects the 
Xenophanean theory of the stars (burning clouds, which 
did not explain the stability of their form), by the 
mythical representation of the cups; and consequently 
attributes to the sun the size of a foot (Fr. 3), repudiating 
in his empiricism the much larger measurements of the 
naturalists. The theory of the exhalations as food for the 
stars was also Milesian and Xenophanean heritage; but 
proper to Heraclitus is the distinction of them into light 
and dark to explain the oppositions of day and night, 
summer and winter; without being considered (with 
Reinhardt) as coinciding with the opposition of the ways 
above and below.
3. The reconstruction of cosmology is followed by 
that of physiology (doctrine of life). Fragment 88 affirms 
the identity of the opposites – living and dead, awake 
and asleep, young and old – as a result of their 
reciprocal permutation. With this Gigon links fragment 
84: "changing rests". The permutation between life and 
death (confirmed in the Frs. that speak of opposites that 
live one the death of the other) appears again in Meliso, 
55

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt 
84: "changing rests". The permutation between life and 
death (confirmed in the Frs. that speak of opposites that 
live one the death of the other) appears again in Meliso, 
55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in Empedocles, in the Phaedo, etc. Its parallel with the 
series wakefulness-sleep was traditional; as for the 
mutual change between young and old, Gigon links it 
with the other between yesterday and tomorrow in 
Scythinus (imitation of Heraclitus), with the Heraclitean 
bipartition of generation, and with the flow of human 
ages in Epicarmo, fragment 2 Diels (170 Kaibel), 
considered by Bernays, Zeller, etc., an imitation of 
Heraclitus. However, Rostagni (Il verbo di Pitagora) 
links him with Pythagoras, with whom Gigon relates 
only the permutation between life and death.
This relationship between life and death, 
wakefulness and sleep, returns in the obscure and much 
discussed fragment 26, which Gigon interprets: 
"sleeping in the darkness of the night, man lights up an 
inner light in reverie, and even while living he borders 
with the dead, just as the waking with the sleeping". 
However, it can be understood that the living borders 
with the dead in the world of the dream (world of ghosts 
and the dead), but how can he in the waking border 
with the world of the dream? Gigon proposes a division 
of the fragment: the 2a part with the 88 already 
examined, the 1a with the 89 which says that the 
awakened have a unique common world.
Fragment 26 can be related to 21: "what we see while 
awake is death, what we see while asleep is dream". 
Why is the visible world death? Answer (according to 
Gigon) fragment 76: "the fire lives the death of the earth, 
the air that of the fire, the water that of the air, the earth 
56

--- PAGE BREAK ---hy is the visible world death? Answer (according to 
Gigon) fragment 76: "the fire lives the death of the earth, 
the air that of the fire, the water that of the air, the earth 
56

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that of the water". Quoted by reliable witnesses, this 
fragment cannot be a stoic forgery; and it presents 4 
elements instead of the 3 of fragments 31 and 36, even 
fragment 126 presents four qualities. The number 4 was 
already in the Pythagorean tetraktys, and in addition 
here is presented the opposition of life-death, and the 
cycle that returns to the starting point, according to the 
idea expressed in fragment 103. With this opposition 
and identity of life and death Gigon links fragment 123: 
"nature loves to hide itself", that is, it is a becoming that 
is life and death together without our seeing it.
This brings us to fragment 36: "for souls it is death to 
become water, for water to become earth, but from earth 
water is born and from water the soul". The doxography, 
on traces of Aristotle (A 15 Diels), speaks of a cosmic 
soul, but the plural evidently refers to human souls. The 
idea of Anaximander is repeated: "from where things are 
born, in this they dissolve"; linked with the identity of 
the ways above and below (Fr. 60) and with the 
Xenophanesque theory (Milesian inheritance) that man 
is made of earth and water. From water the soul is 
exhaled (fragment 12), parallelled with the water flow, 
which in the human body is represented by the blood, 
source of the power of thought for Empedocles and 
already in the Odyssey food for the souls. The meaning 
of fragment 12 according to Gigon is the following: the 
soul remains one and identical through the flow of the 
exhalations that nourish it, as a river through the flow of 
the waters. Thus the soul can increase its measure 
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng: the 
soul remains one and identical through the flow of the 
exhalations that nourish it, as a river through the flow of 
the waters. Thus the soul can increase its measure 
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(fragment 115) just as the body in its development; and 
in feeding itself with exhalations it has its parallelism 
with the sun.
By this flow – of the soul and of the river – we go 
down and we do not go down in the same river, say 
fragments 49a and 91. Gigon (with others) repudiates as 
inauthentic the 49a and considers it with Weerth 
belonging to the later Heraclites and not to Heraclitus 
the universal flux (πάντα ε
ῥῖ), which would make all 
philosophical dogmatics impossible.
Other fragments belong to Heraclitean psychology. 
Fragment 117 (the soul is weakened by becoming wet in 
drunkenness), fragment 77 (becoming wet is pleasure 
and death for the soul), and fragment 118 (the dry soul is 
the best and wisest). Fragment 119 introduces us to the 
wisdom of life: "what decides the destiny of man is his 
nature". So perhaps Heraclitus has investigated himself 
(fragment 101), in accordance with the Delphic motto. 
But the limit of the soul is unreachable (fragment 45).
An ethical thought is expressed in fragment 111: the 
disease makes soft the health, the hunger the satiety, the 
fatigue the rest; for that reason the fragment does not 
say that to have what they wish is not the best thing for 
the men, and 85 recognizes difficult to fight with the 
desire; and 46 and 43 repudiate presumption and 
insolence.
For the Heraclitean psychology the doxography 
offers some supplementary information. Theophrastus 
58

--- PAGE BREAK ---o fight with the 
desire; and 46 and 43 repudiate presumption and 
insolence.
For the Heraclitean psychology the doxography 
offers some supplementary information. Theophrastus 
58

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(de sensu) places Heraclitus among those who make 
sensation proceed from contrast; Sextus (following 
Posidonius) attributes to him an opposition between 
sensation and reason, which does not seem in 
accordance with fragments 55, 107 and 101a; but he adds 
the comparison between the soul that comes in contact 
with the world and the coals approaching the fire that 
are ignited; Tertullian attributes to him an affirmation of 
the unity of the soul, diffused throughout the body such 
as the breath in all the cavities of the zampona. Gigon 
overlooks the fragment 67a, which parallels the soul 
with the spider ready to run in every part of the web 
that receives shock or offense.
4. With this we come to the chapter on life in this 
world and in the hereafter. In the aggregation of the 
problems of life to those of the cosmos Gigon sees the 
Xenophanean influence on Heraclitus; however he still 
remembers Pythagoras. With fragment 80 ("it is 
necessary to know that war is common, and justice is 
struggle, and everything happens in struggle and as it 
suits") Heraclitus wants to correct Homer and Hesiod: 
Hesiod (Works, 276 ff.) who to the law of struggle for 
animals opposed that of Dike for men; Homer, who, in 
spite of declaring Mars (god of war) common (Il. XVIII, 
309), voted for the disappearance of fighting (ibid., 107). 
Archilochus had repeated (Fr. 38 Diehl) the Homeric 
motto: Mars is common; and in fragment 42 Heraclitus, 
by assailing him together with Homer, could be proof 
that he too had united the invective against war to the 
59

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Homeric 
motto: Mars is common; and in fragment 42 Heraclitus, 
by assailing him together with Homer, could be proof 
that he too had united the invective against war to the 
59

--- PAGE BREAK ---

recognition of its universality.
With this antihomeric polemic, which thus inspires a 
capital position of Heraclitus, Gigon believes that 
fragment 125 is related (the compound concoction 
decomposes if it is not shaken). More likely a linkage for 
fragment 53, where pólemos, father of all things, 
substitutes the Homeric Zeus, father of all. "All things" 
are here those of the human world, where pólemos 
determines the distinctions of free and slaves, men and 
gods (namely, the heroes deified by death in battle). One 
can place here fragment 29 which opposes the best 
(áristoi), who prefer an eternal glory, to the majority 
who gorge themselves like cattle; confirmed by fragment 
49 (repeated by Democritus): "one to me is worth ten 
thousand if he is optimal"; and by fragments 4, 13 and 37 
which repudiate animal pleasures. Also fragment 20 
(referring to those who by being born want to live and 
have mortal lots) belongs to the polemic against bestial 
life and to the exaltation of war; and so do fragments 24 
and 25 (gods and men honor those killed by Mars; the 
greater deaths achieve greater lots); very doubtful on the 
other hand the same belonging of fragment 52 (Aion is a 
child who plays with dice) proposed by Gigon.
Fragments 20, 24 and 25 lead us to the consideration 
of the afterlife, referred to in the much discussed 
fragment 62 ("immortals-mortals, mortals-immortals, 
etc."), where is engraved, as in fragment 36, the 
opposition and permutation between life-death, which 
signifies their unity. Gigon identifies mortals with men, 
60

--- PAGE BREAK ---s-immortals, 
etc."), where is engraved, as in fragment 36, the 
opposition and permutation between life-death, which 
signifies their unity. Gigon identifies mortals with men, 
60

--- PAGE BREAK ---

immortals with gods, i.e., heroes deified by their death 
in battle, which fragment 63 turns into custodians of the 
living and the dead (cf. Hesiod, Works, 123). The heroes, 
therefore, do not live in the hereafter, but on earth; and it 
is confirmed by the anecdote referred to by Aristotle, of 
Heraclitus who says to his visitors: "there are gods even 
here". Present everywhere, but invisible, contrary to 
what the vulgar cult assumes (Fr. 5), the heroes of 
Heraclitus, according to Gigon, result from a 
combination of the Pythagorean theory of the 
transmigrations of the soul with representations from 
the epic.
Gigon considers even fragment 28 to be 
eschatological: "the most reputable knows only opinions; 
and yet Dike will punish the makers and witnesses of 
lies"; where Heraclitus would define with modesty his 
sincere effort towards the unattainable truth, and would 
threaten the adversaries (those of fragment 40) with the 
future punishment of Dike. Fragment 27 (things await 
men after death that they do not imagine) would extend 
the threat to all; and the nature of the punishment would 
be explained in fragment 66, with the fire that will seize 
everything.
Despite Reinhardt's objections, Gigon recognizes this 
fragment as a genuine quotation and identifies this fire 
with the anonymous being of fragment 16 (how to hide 
from what never has a sunset?).
Gigon believes that Heraclitus did not relate this 
61

--- PAGE BREAK ---ine quotation and identifies this fire 
with the anonymous being of fragment 16 (how to hide 
from what never has a sunset?).
Gigon believes that Heraclitus did not relate this 
61

--- PAGE BREAK ---

eschatology with its cosmology, nor has the problem 
been raised of whether the immortals survive in the 
conflagration; there would be between physical and 
human-religious problems a separation, as in the two 
Empedoclean poems. However, Gigon does not consider 
that by introducing the conflagration into the 
eschatology, Heraclitus bridges the gap between the two 
shores.
The punishment of fire would threaten even the 
followers of Bacchic cults (Fr. 14).
The whole Heraclitean polemic against superstitious 
or impious cults (Fr. 5 and 15) shows a demand for 
religious enlightenment, a Xenophanean inheritance, 
linked to the anti-Homeric polemic common to both. The 
same must be said of the polemics against Hesiod for his 
opposition of lucky and unlucky days (Fr. 106), and 
against the funeral pomp (fragment 96: "the corpses 
must be thrown more than dung"; where Gigon excludes 
all Orphic inspiration). By this radical illuminism 
Heraclitus could be related to Cynicism in the epigrams 
quoted by Diogenes Laertius, and in the legend of the 
dogs that devoured him.
5. Finally, there remains theology, where the 
influence of Xenophanes is most evident.
Fragment 78 opposes god to man: divine nature has 
intelligence, human nature does not. Man (adds Fr. 79) is 
a rat in comparison with god; his opinions (Fr. 70) are 
child's play; for wisdom and beauty in comparison with 
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---has 
intelligence, human nature does not. Man (adds Fr. 79) is 
a rat in comparison with god; his opinions (Fr. 70) are 
child's play; for wisdom and beauty in comparison with 
62

--- PAGE BREAK ---

god he is like the monkey in comparison with man (Frs. 
82 and 83). Thus is concretized the Xenophanean 
affirmation of incomparability between god and mortals. 
Fragment 102, which to the human dualism of just and 
unjust things opposes the justice of everything for god, 
would refer, according to Gigon, to war: misfortune for 
man, Dike for god.
Fragment 32 presents god as the one, the wise one, 
who lets himself and does not let himself be called Zeus. 
"Wise" (explains Fr. 41) is the one who understands and 
governs all; but referred to god (Fr. 108) must be 
recognized as transcendent and separate from all things. 
In these affirmations, unity and transcendence come 
from Xenophanes, but the idea of σοφός (wisdom) or 
lógos, logical law of the world, is added. That he can and 
cannot be called Zeus (supreme god), is not related, 
according to Gigon, to the supposed etymology coming 
from zen (to live), but to the alterations introduced by 
the myth in the idea of god: Heraclitus, like Xenophanes, 
wants to restore to him his spiritual character. But the 
first to apply to God the attribute of σοφός had been 
(according to Heraclides Ponticus) Pythagoras; and even 
if he, Epicarmo repeats it, the problem of his origin must 
be solved according to Gigon in favor of Pythagoras, 
well known in Magna Graecia (where Heraclitus was 
unknown). It would be he, therefore, the precursor of 
Heraclitus on this point, even if Heraclitus denies (Fr. 
(108) that anyone had already recognized the 
transcendence of σοφός. For a dependence of Epicarmus 
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---the precursor of 
Heraclitus on this point, even if Heraclitus denies (Fr. 
(108) that anyone had already recognized the 
transcendence of σοφός. For a dependence of Epicarmus 
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---

on Heraclitus, Gigon finds no evidence either in 
Epicarmean fragments 1 and 2.
To the transcendent divine σοφός some critics also 
refer fragment 41, whose text presents difficulties. Gigon 
refers it to human wisdom, interpreting: "the only wise 
thing is to know how everything is governed even in the 
particulars". It would be an echo of the only sophia of 
Xenophanes fragment 2, but transforming his personal 
boast into a general philosophical demand; logical 
demand of the explanation of the how (law of the 
opposites) substituted to the Milesian explanation of the 
what (material principle).
This idea of divine ruling or steering is applied in 
fragment 64 to the lightning, which is not the universal 
fire (essence and not rudder of the cosmos), nor god 
himself, but the weapon of Zeus, by whose blows beings 
are driven, like cattle to the pasture by the whip (Fr. 11). 
However, this idea of lightning was to be linked with 
that of fire (Fr. 66).
Fragment 67 presents the predicates of god in a series 
of pairs of opposites, typically Heraclitean (cf. fragments 
57, 65, etc.). God enters the world of opposites and 
receives each time the name of one of them, just as fire 
receives each time the name of each incense burned in it. 
The contrary forms of divine appearance (particular 
gods) are identified, such as Dionysos and Hades (Fr. 
15), gods of life and death; Heraclitus always presents 
oppositions of states and values, not distinctions of parts 
64

--- PAGE BREAK ---lar 
gods) are identified, such as Dionysos and Hades (Fr. 
15), gods of life and death; Heraclitus always presents 
oppositions of states and values, not distinctions of parts 
64

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the cosmos.
For Heraclitean theology Gigon rejects the 
doxographic identification between god and fire, as well 
as any analogous identification applied to the Milesians. 
Heraclitus, in his view, is linked to Xenophanes, whose 
theology (in the silloi) affirmed the uniqueness of God, 
his eternity, his form distinct from the human (possibly, 
by Pythagorean influence, it will have been the ideal 
spherical form), his spirituality and immobility This 
theology, documented by the fragments, has nothing to 
do with the antinomies attributed to Xenophanes by the 
De Melisso Xenophane Gorgia, a later elaboration, who 
wants to link him with Eleatism. On the contrary, Gigon 
does not consider Xenophanes as the head of Eleatism, 
but as a precursor of Heraclitus, because of his 
empiricism, his struggle against myth, his aim of 
education and not erudition, in a word his illuminism. 
Nevertheless, the theology of Xenophanes had a great 
influence on later illuminism, while Heraclitus, with his 
doctrine of opposites, has remained in tradition as the 
dark one, as opposed to the sun of the Eleatics.
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66

--- PAGE BREAK ---n later illuminism, while Heraclitus, with his 
doctrine of opposites, has remained in tradition as the 
dark one, as opposed to the sun of the Eleatics.
65

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IX. Guido Calogero
Against Reinhardt, G. Calogero (Eraclito, in "Giornale 
critico della filosofia italiana", 1936) affirms the priority 
of Heraclitus over Parmenides, not only as more 
probable historically and evidenced by allusions of the 
Parmenidean poem, but as useful to the understanding 
of Heraclitus himself, who shows, in a more typical way 
than Parmenides, the characteristic of the archaic 
mentality, constituted by the indistinction of the 
ontological, logical and linguistic spheres.
This archaic characteristic, for whose documentation 
Calogero relies on the researches of Ernst Cassirer, Ernst 
Hoffmann, J. Stenzel and others, clarifies much of the 
aforementioned Heraclitean obscurity, and appears 
already in the solemn opening fragment of the work (Fr. 
1) which speaks of the logos. This is a speech, because it 
is said that men understand it neither before nor after 
hearing it; and it is Heraclitus' own speech (thus); but it 
is declared to be true and it is affirmed that according to 
it everything happens and men speak and act. So the 
logos is word, truth and reality at the same time, a 
confluence of ontological, logical and linguistic values; 
and that is why fragment 2 declares it common and 
fragment 50 asks that it be heard as an expression of 
truth and not of a personal opinion.
From this triple sense (confirmed by Fr. 72) it seems 
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---ment 2 declares it common and 
fragment 50 asks that it be heard as an expression of 
truth and not of a personal opinion.
From this triple sense (confirmed by Fr. 72) it seems 
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to be distinguished that of the word logos in fragments 
45 and 115, where however the logos of the soul signifies 
the essence of its nature, which constitutes the notion of 
it and is expressed in the name; just as in fragment 39 
the logos of Bias signifies its fame and its worth at the 
same time; that is, always a union of the ontological and 
logical aspect with the linguistic one, the latter being 
presented in isolation in fragments 87 and 108.
The aforementioned indistinction does not mean an 
explicit theoretical affirmation of identity, but is an 
inheritance of the archaic mentality, which is also 
manifested in the parallelism between the verbal 
expression of truth and its real manifestation, implicit in 
Heraclitus' "puns", which are in reality attempts at 
etymology inspired by the conviction to give the etymon 
(= truthful) sense of the word. Thus fragment 114 wants 
to confirm the value of logos by saying that he who 
wants to speak intelligently (ξυν-νω) must base himself 
on the common (ξυνω); thus fragment 48 (imitated in 
form by the Hippocratic On the Diet. 21) says that the 
bow (βιος) has the name of life (βίος) and the action of 
death, to document the coincidence of the opposites. In 
both cases the word documents the truth of the idea and 
the reality of the fact: there is always a confluence and 
reciprocal communication of the three spheres, 
linguistic, logical and ontological, whose conviction we 
not only see reflected in the Platonic Cratylus, but 
manifested in the same time of Heraclitus in Aeschylus, 
and before and after in others (cf. the examples cited by 
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion we 
not only see reflected in the Platonic Cratylus, but 
manifested in the same time of Heraclitus in Aeschylus, 
and before and after in others (cf. the examples cited by 
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Calogero of the Aeschylean Agamemnon, of Homer, 
Hesiod, the Orphics, etc.).
According to Calogero, this equation between the 
enunciated reality-truth and the contemplated one has 
influenced the formation and formulation of the 
Heraclitean conception. Just as he expresses the real 
concordance of the contraries (Fr. 51) with the same verb 
όμολογεΐν used by the verbal declaration of the consent 
of men (Fr. 50), in the same way the law of the world 
(logos) affirmed by him can be called dialectical. 
Dialectic in the sense of the reciprocal linkage of 
opposite values, which is sometimes a linkage between 
knowledge of values and existence of disvalues (Fr. 23: 
men would not know the name of Dike if there were no 
real injustices; which affirms a relationship between 
reality, knowledge and word); but more often it is real 
permutation of opposites, which live one the death of 
the other in a becoming son of struggle (Frs. 8, 36, 53, 62, 
76, 77, 80, 126).
In the Heraclitean vision of the river of things, what 
is essential is not the flow in which the later disciples 
fixed their attention, but conflict and opposition: 
coincidentia oppositorum, which presents itself in the 
most diverse forms, either of reciprocal transformation 
(Fr. 88), or of unity of the real that is divided into 
opposites (Fr. 67), or of identification between unity and 
multiplicity (Fr. 50; cf. 30, 41, 57). On the one hand the 
relation of opposites tends towards opposition, on the 
other towards identity: harmony (structure) by opposing 
69

--- PAGE BREAK ---and 
multiplicity (Fr. 50; cf. 30, 41, 57). On the one hand the 
relation of opposites tends towards opposition, on the 
other towards identity: harmony (structure) by opposing 
69

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tensions (Frs. 8, 51, 54). To this reciprocal conditioning of 
the opposites is added the aspect of relativity: relativity 
to human or animal subjects (Frs. 4, 9, 13, 37), relativity 
to the terms of comparison (Frs. 79, 82), objective and 
subjective relativity at the same time (Fr. 61), relativity to 
the antecedent situation (Fr. 111), relativity proper to 
human antitheses that are unified in a universal value 
for God (Fr. 102).
The general intuition of necessity which pushes each 
particular aspect of the world to overcome itself in 
opposition thus manifests itself in a variety of forms, the 
progenitors of later dialectical and relativistic 
conceptions, as Hegel had to recognize; but Heraclitus 
does not distinguish these forms, but gathers them all 
together, as proofs of the truth of his logos. Moreover, he 
deduces the law from an indiscriminate observation of 
things and words, as in fragment 48, where the 
opposition and identity of death and life results from the 
comparison between the name and the work of the bow. 
An analogous indistinction between the verbal plane 
and the real plane is recognized by Calogero in fragment 
60: one and the same path up and down. He refers to the 
cosmic cyclical process, but takes as a symbol the 
identity of the way up with the way down. The royal 
road is unique, but its consideration and denomination 
as ascent and descent represent a mental and verbal 
antithesis (and coincidence) that Heraclitus makes real; 
probably by suggestion of experiences related to his 
homeland, in whose toponomastics some slope will have 
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd verbal 
antithesis (and coincidence) that Heraclitus makes real; 
probably by suggestion of experiences related to his 
homeland, in whose toponomastics some slope will have 
70

--- PAGE BREAK ---

had the name of ascent, another of descent. Heraclitus 
notes that in the opposition of names there is an identity 
of the thing.
The later Heraclitans, in order to vindicate the 
doctrine of the master against Eleatism, have 
emphasized the idea of flow (becoming), while 
Heraclitus emphasized the idea of opposition; in this 
case the river, which is always the same, is always 
different, because new waters are always flowing in it, 
so that it is not possible to enter it twice. Seneca, in his 
translation of fragment 49a adds: the name of the river 
remains the same, but the water passes. The explanation 
must have been Heraclitean; the identity of the river is in 
the name, but for Heraclitus verbal identity means real 
identity; and when later that Heraclitean unity between 
word and truth is broken with Cratylus, the 
consequence is the renunciation of the word, substituted 
by gestures, which seem more coherent with the flow. 
Heraclitus anticipated in part this separation between 
thing and word when he said (Fr. 32) that the only 
universal Wisdom admits and does not admit the name 
of Zeus; which means, according to Calogero (in 
agreement with the Platonic Cratylus and contra other 
interpretations), that which can and cannot be called 
Life, because it is Life-Death, according to the binomial 
of opposites that expresses, better than any other, the 
eternal cosmic struggle.
Likewise in fragment 67 the God, unity of every even 
series of opposites, transforms himself into them just as 
71

--- PAGE BREAK ---expresses, better than any other, the 
eternal cosmic struggle.
Likewise in fragment 67 the God, unity of every even 
series of opposites, transforms himself into them just as 
71

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fire takes its name from every incense burned in it. 
"Taking name" is equivalent to "becoming"; instead of 
the Parmenidean opposition between names and reality 
(Fr. 8, verses 38 and 53), Heraclitus affirms their mutual 
identification; and thus verbal antitheses are for him real 
antitheses. The idea of antithesis also explains the 
fragments of criticism of sensible perceptions (55, 101 a, 
107) which grasp each time only one of the opposites.
These antitheses are presented in Heraclitus in two 
forms: in binomials of opposite terms (day-night, 
summer-winter, war-peace, hunger-satiety) and in 
binomials of terms that are one the negation of the other 
(divergent-convergent, discordant-harmonious) and 
sometimes express it in its own form of negation, with a 
privative a- or not- (immortals-mortals, totality-not-
totality). Later, especially with Aristotle, the oppositions 
of otherness, contrariety, contradiction will be 
distinguished. But the word contradiction (αντίφασις) 
still shows that the opposition was born on the verbal 
terrain which Heraclitus did not yet distinguish from the 
logical-ontological terrain. This is why Heraclitus 
presents himself as a Sibylline asserter-denier, prophet 
of yes and no, who loves contradictory expressions, such 
as: "he who does not expect will not find the 
unexpected", he who hears and does not understand is 
"present absent". In the anecdote of Homer confused by 
the children who were killing lice ("what we find and 
take we do not have, what we neither take nor find we 
have"), the enigmatic discourse, imitated later by 
72

--- PAGE BREAK ---er confused by 
the children who were killing lice ("what we find and 
take we do not have, what we neither take nor find we 
have"), the enigmatic discourse, imitated later by 
72

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Luciano in his Sale of Lives, means the equivalence of 
yes and no, which in fragment 49a is formulated as 
coincidence of being and not being.
But it is not yet a question of absolute being, whose 
idea is affirmed only with Parmenides, but of our being 
in relation to the river, that is, in the sense of being. "In 
the same river we go down and we do not go down 
twice; we are and we are not." In such a sense the 
opposition being-not being must have been frequently 
repeated in Heraclitus, since it is found repeatedly in the 
imitation of the Hippocratic On the Diet, and Aristotle 
himself recalls that in the opinion of many Heraclitus 
would have attributed to the same thing being and not 
being. From that being-not-being (είναι καί μη είναι) 
expressed (λεyείν) by Heraclitus is then engendered by 
reaction (says Calogero) "the being" (εoν) of Parmenides, 
which is also word-truth-reality together.
73

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74

--- PAGE BREAK ---essed (λεyείν) by Heraclitus is then engendered by 
reaction (says Calogero) "the being" (εoν) of Parmenides, 
which is also word-truth-reality together.
73

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74

--- PAGE BREAK ---

X. Aldo Testa
Another point of view applies in his interpretation of 
Heraclitus is A. Testa, I presocratici, Rome 1938 (chap. V: 
Eraclito e la discorsivita deiressere, Rome 1938).
In the discussion of the problem of reality, 
Heraclitus, according to Testa, "in probable relation to 
Eleatism" – that is, with the position of Xenophanes, 
which for Testa already contains the whole of Eleatism – 
is certainly more concerned with the flow of things than 
with the unity of substance. But the traditional 
interpretation, by its exclusive insistence on the flux and 
identity of opposites, has altered the genuine 
Heraclitean thought, in which the unity of being also 
plays its essential role.
About contraries Heraclitus affirms several different 
things, namely: 1) the generation of things by the union 
of contraries (Frs. 8, 80, 53); 2) the permutation-of 
contraries coincident with flux (Frs. 26, 91, 49); 3) the 
identity of contraries (Fr. 88); 4) the relativity of them; 
and 5) the reciprocal conditioning of opposite values (Fr. 
111). For Heraclitus one cannot speak of identity of 
opposites in the Hegelian sense (in which becoming is 
produced by the intimate contradiction of all 
determination), but insofar as Heraclitus considers 
becoming as a succession of different states, in whose 
particularities, mutually compared, change appears; but 
75

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion of all 
determination), but insofar as Heraclitus considers 
becoming as a succession of different states, in whose 
particularities, mutually compared, change appears; but 
75

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the multiplicity on which Heraclitus' gaze is fixed, in 
considering the distinction, is a multiplicity that unfolds 
in unity (Frs. 10 and 50). Heraclitus insists on change, 
but what changes is not a particular finite real, a, that 
becomes not-a, but the being that comprises a and not-a 
in itself, as universal that contains the particulars and 
results from them: "from all the one, and from the one 
all".
Multiplicity demands a unity; because of this 
underlying unity the reality of each particular 
determination does not exclude, in its realization, that of 
each other. The Heraclitean one coincides with the 
Eleatic whole being; however, from both arises an 
immediate antinomy: unity against multiplicity 
(Eleatics), multiplicity against unity (Heraclitus). The 
Eleatics resolve this antinomy with the identity of being, 
which is reduction to unity; Heraclitus, with the 
permutation of beings, which is the development of 
unity in multiplicity.
But the Heraclitean permutation, according to Testa, 
is not a transformation of an exclusive particular reality 
(a) into another equally exclusive definite one (b), which 
would be inexplicable and absurd, but a transition from 
one to another form carried out by the underlying 
universal. Indeed, every reality, which is a 
determination of the multiple one, implies the 
universality of the latter in its own particularity, and 
therefore can be changed into another determination 
contained in the same multiple one. In other words, 
76

--- PAGE BREAK ---implies the 
universality of the latter in its own particularity, and 
therefore can be changed into another determination 
contained in the same multiple one. In other words, 
76

--- PAGE BREAK ---

when Heraclitus affirms the identity of things among 
which there is the possibility of permutation (and there 
is among all), he does not affirm it in relation to the 
particularity of each, but in relation to the universality of 
the one that is in each and becomes all. "They are the 
same thing living and dead, awake and asleep, young 
and old, because these things in changing are those, and 
those inversely are these" (Fr. 88), would mean that in 
realizing each particular aspect, reality does not coincide 
with it but with all that can be, that is, with all the 
aspects that can be realized as determinations of the 
universal One, which is either this one, or that one.
Of course, this interpretation of Heraclitus sees in 
him a development of the principle of the permutation 
and identity of opposites, expressed many centuries 
later by G. Bruno, when he affirms that each particular 
thing is the presence of the "substance in the part", 
which has in itself the "essence of the universe", and 
therefore contains in its own unity all the forms, whose 
complicatio always demands the explicatio, or 
successive unfolding of all the forms 1). But even 
recognizing the connection of this theory with 
Heraclitism, the whole plant cannot be recognized as 
already developed in the germ.
Notwithstanding Testa's effort to demonstrate his 
interpretative thesis, when Heraclitus says (Fr. 36) that 
"for souls it is death to become water, for water to 
become earth; but from the earth water is born and from 
water the soul", he effectively affirms the death of each 
77

--- PAGE BREAK ---) that 
"for souls it is death to become water, for water to 
become earth; but from the earth water is born and from 
water the soul", he effectively affirms the death of each 
77

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for the birth of the other; and the living of each thing the 
death of another (fragments 76, 77, 62) is not yet, for 
him, living the immortal universality of that which dies 
only in its particularity, according to Testa's explanation. 
Such an explanation can be considered implicit as a 
problem or requirement in the Heraclitean doctrine; but 
what is implicit becomes explicit and express only by 
means of a progressive development in the approach to 
problems that is laboriously elaborated throughout the 
historical course of philosophy.
1) I refer on this point to my essay on G. Primo in my book Tres 
filósofos del renacimiento, ed. Losada, Buenos Aires, 1947.
78

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed throughout the 
historical course of philosophy.
1) I refer on this point to my essay on G. Primo in my book Tres 
filósofos del renacimiento, ed. Losada, Buenos Aires, 1947.
78

--- PAGE BREAK ---

XI. Partial studies: Hermann Fraenkel
To the synthetic examination of the most 
characteristic interpretations of Heraclitean thought as a 
whole, published in the last half century, we could add a 
review of the most important studies, published in the 
same period, on particular points and aspects of the 
doctrine of the Dark One of Ephesus. We have had the 
opportunity to recall, for example, the studies of Emilio 
Weerts (Heraklit und die Herakliteer and Plato und der 
Heraklitismus) aimed at distinguishing the doctrine of 
Heraclitus from the later alteration that reduced it to the 
exclusive theory of flux. Let us recall, moreover, among 
others, the discussion of many fragments carried out by 
W. A. Heidel 1); the many studies of E. Loew on the 
problem of reality in Heraclitus, on the information 
about him in Sextus, on his theory of knowledge, his 
discovery of the empirical path of investigation, the 
polemic of Parmenides against him, the relation of his 
system with Protagoras according to Sextus Empiricus, 
the relation between life and logic in the Heraclitean 
doctrine 2); those of H. Gomperz, son of Theodore, on 
the original order of succession of the first fragments of 
Heraclitus and on the doctrine of unity as a starting 
point for the understanding of Heraclitus 3); those of W. 
Capelle on the theory of the soul as exhalation and on 
the first Heraclitean fragment 4); of A. Busse on the 
meaning of the word logas in Heraclitus 5); of Bruno 
79

--- PAGE BREAK ---those of W. 
Capelle on the theory of the soul as exhalation and on 
the first Heraclitean fragment 4); of A. Busse on the 
meaning of the word logas in Heraclitus 5); of Bruno 
79

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Snell on the Heraclitean language 6), etc.), and so on.
We will now dwell only on two of Hermann 
Fraenkel's Heraclitean studies, one concerning 
Heraclitean theology, the other a form of thought 
favored by Heraclitus.
The first (Heraclitus on God and the phenomenal 
World, Trans, of Amer. Philol. Assoc., 1938) refers to 
fragment 67. Fraenkel, claiming against doxography the 
predominance of metaphysical interest in the pre-
Socratics, considers important that fragment which 
refers precisely to the metaphysical problem of the 
relation between absolute and relative, One and many, 
God and the phenomenal world. The assumptions of the 
fragment are: 1. the theory that all existence or 
generation proceeds from a mutual action of opposites;
1) W. A. Heidel, On ccrtain fragment of the presocratics, in Proc. 
Amer. Acad. of Arts a. Sciences, 1913. Sciences, 1913 (see on 
Heraclitus pp. 695-716).
2) E. Loew. Das heraklitische Wirklichkeitsproblem, Wien 1914; 
Die Bedeutung des Berichtes bei Sextus, etc., Wien. Stud. 1917; Ein 
Beitrag zum heraklitisch-parmenideischen Erkenntnisprobleni, 
Arch. f. Gesch. d. Philos. 1917; Heraklit der Entdecker des 
empirisch-physikalischen Weges des Forschung, Rhein. Mus. 1930; 
Das Lehrgedichte. des Pennendes eine Kampfschrift gegen die 
Lehre Heraklits, Rhein. Mus. 1930; Das heraklitisch-protagoreische 
System nach der Darstellung des Sextus Empiricus, Philol. 
Wochenschr. 1931; Das Verhältnis von Leben und Logik bei 
Heraklit, Wien. Stud. 1933.
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---Das heraklitisch-protagoreische 
System nach der Darstellung des Sextus Empiricus, Philol. 
Wochenschr. 1931; Das Verhältnis von Leben und Logik bei 
Heraklit, Wien. Stud. 1933.
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. the reciprocal identity of the opposites in each even 
series. To these two theories the fragment adds as a third 
the reciprocal coincidence of the various even series in 
the One, God.
According to the integration accepted by Diels for the 
Lagunian text, God, confluence of all oppositions, (day 
and night, winter and summer, war and peace, satiety 
and hunger, etc.), in whose multiplicity its unity is 
manifested, would be compared to fire, which, when 
mixed with incense, is named each time according to 
their taste. Fraenkel observes that the word interpreted 
by Diels in the sense of incenses (which neither mix with 
fire nor give it its name) means also perfumes; and these 
were indeed mixed by the Greeks with oil and gave their 
name to the resulting ointment, which was offered to the 
gods and was considered to give vigor and grace to the 
body anointed with it. Using this comparison, therefore, 
Heraclitus would distinguish the substance (God and 
3) H. Gomperz, Ueber die ursprüngliche Reihenfolge einiger 
Briichstucke Heraklits, Hermes 1923; Heraklits Einheitslehre v. A. 
Patin als Ausgangspunkt zürn Verständnis Heraklits, Wien. Stud. 
i9"*23-
4) W. Gapelle, Heraclitewn, Hermes 1924; Der erste Fragment 
des Herakleitos, Hermes 1924.
5) A. Busse, Der Wortsinn von Logos bei Heraklit, Rhein. Mus. 
1926.
6) B. Snell, Die Sprache Heraklits, Hermes 1926.
81

--- PAGE BREAK ---mes 1924; Der erste Fragment 
des Herakleitos, Hermes 1924.
5) A. Busse, Der Wortsinn von Logos bei Heraklit, Rhein. Mus. 
1926.
6) B. Snell, Die Sprache Heraklits, Hermes 1926.
81

--- PAGE BREAK ---

oil), which always remains unique and equal, from the 
changeable forms (series of opposites and different 
perfumes) that give it equally changeable names; and 
this idea, by probable Heraclitean inspiration, is justly 
expressed again by Plato in Timaeus 49ff, using the 
simile of the oil that receives the different perfumes.
The proposed correction allows us to understand the 
theological idea expressed in the fragment, that is, the 
idea of the One that unfolds in the many, indicated by 
the names. The classification of the many is realized in a 
system of oppositions that create the movement in the 
persistence of being; being, therefore, turns out to be the 
source of the oppositions and the center of confluence in 
which all of them are mutually identified. The result is 
positive in the highest degree: God who gives his 
strength to the opposites, like oil to perfumes, and who 
manifests his eternal being by ceaselessly producing and 
reconciling the contradictions of life.
Fraenkel's other study (A Thought Pattern in 
Heraclitus, in Amer. Journ. of Philol. 1938) highlights the 
frequent use in Heraclitus of a type of reasoning 
constituted by the proportion with its geometrical 
medium: this scheme serves Heraclitus to determine in 
his metaphysics the idea of the transcendent absolute; in 
his gnoseology, that of the enlightened sage, and in his 
physics the mutual relationship between the elements.
Fraenkel starts from the clumsy legend created 
around the death of Heraclitus, through the combination 
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---sage, and in his 
physics the mutual relationship between the elements.
Fraenkel starts from the clumsy legend created 
around the death of Heraclitus, through the combination 
82

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and deformation of ideas that we find expressed in the 
fragments; one of these – as it seems to Fraenkel from 
the comparison with a Platonic quotation – must have 
contained the phrase "to bury oneself in the refuse", 
linked to the possession of a barbaric soul. In comparing 
the vulgar, attached to coarse materiality, with one who 
is buried in the refuse (enlightened man: vulgar man = 
vulgar man: one buried in the garbage), Heraclitus was 
employing this mental scheme of proportion, which 
appears repeatedly in his fragments.
Thus those who equate man with God; Fragment 79, 
man versus God = a rat versus man; Frs. 82 and 83: the 
most beautiful and wisest man versus God = a monkey 
versus man. Thus Fr. 1 (the vulgar versus the 
enlightened = asleep versus awake), fragment 34 (the 
unintelligent = deaf or absent), Fr. 107 (the Greeks = 
barbarians), etc. In all of them there is an inversion of the 
current valuations to affirm a superior absolute value in 
opposition to the relative values of the common opinion. 
This absolute value in some fragments is God whose 
transcendence, indefinable by another way, manages to 
have the only possible determination by way of a 
comparison with known values, carried out according to 
the scheme of the geometric mean. Some fragments 
employ, as we have seen, the human value of wisdom or 
beauty by reducing it to that of a rat or a monkey in 
comparison with God; in others the human value, 
converted into a disvalue by comparing it with the 
supreme absolute value, would be either the perfection 
83

--- PAGE BREAK ---rat or a monkey in 
comparison with God; in others the human value, 
converted into a disvalue by comparing it with the 
supreme absolute value, would be either the perfection 
83

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the visible world in general (compared with garbage 
thrown at random: Fr. 124; or human existence (child's 
play: Fr. 52), or human communities and laws (Fr. 114).
Again the value that Heraclitus wants to determine 
by means of the same scheme of proportion is that of the 
enlightened sage, in whose comparison the common 
man is like the ass, who prefers straw to gold (Fr. 9); and 
this simile of bestial enjoyments returns in another form 
in Frs. 4 and 29 in relation to the pasture of cattle, in Frs. 
13, 37 and 5 in relation to the means of purification. 
Fraenkel also finds applications of the geometrical 
means in Fr. 35 (the gods before men are as free men 
before slaves), 99 (the darkness before the light of the 
stars is as the latter before that of the sun). But the sun, 
exalted in fr. 99, is devalued in a relationship that 
Fraenkel believes to have existed between Frs. 3, 45 and 
99: the sun is reduced to the size of a foot, while no foot, 
no matter how far it walks, can reach the depths of the 
soul; the sun has insurmountable measures guarded by 
the Erinyes, while the soul has infinite depths.
Another important application of the same scheme is 
found in the Heraclitean theory of the three elements, 
coincident with the three states of matter (solid, liquid, 
gaseous), whose reciprocal proportion is measured by a 
logos (proportional law) in mutual conversions. Earlier, 
Anaximenes had affirmed a single substance, air, 
convertible into an indefinite multiplicity of forms; at the 
same time of Heraclitus, Parmenides accepted a duality 
of elements (fire and night), whose mixtures are 
84

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce, air, 
convertible into an indefinite multiplicity of forms; at the 
same time of Heraclitus, Parmenides accepted a duality 
of elements (fire and night), whose mixtures are 
84

--- PAGE BREAK ---

governed by laws of addition and subtraction (not of 
proportion); and an echo of another theory of two 
elements (earth and water), predating Xenophanes, 
Fraenkel finds in Semonides of Amorgo (Fr. 7 against 
women) with the earth = passive element and the sea = 
active element. A central position maintains the sea in 
Anaximander and Xenophanes; and also in Heraclitus, 
being in him the central point of the double way upward 
and downward (Fr. 31), that is, the geometrical medium 
between fire and earth. The sea produces soul and life in 
evaporation, death in precipitation (Fr. 36).
The scheme of the geometrical medium remains in 
the Empedoclean theory of the four elements, where 
(explains Plato) because they are three-dimensional 
beings, a double medium (air and water) is required 
between the two extremes (fire and earth); but 
Heraclitus had preceded Philolaus and Plato in the use 
of the Empedoclean schem. However, the repeated use 
of the scheme by Heraclitus shows that it must have 
been introduced and familiarized in Greek science; and 
as its introduction must be attributed to Pythagorean 
mathematics, so Heraclitus bears witness, indirectly but 
surely, to one of the advances already made by the early 
Pythagoreans in the path of science.
Let me add this important document to those I have 
vindicated in my Nota sulle dottrine del pitagorismo (in 
Zeller-Mondolfo, La filosofia dei Greci, t. II, pag. 642 
sigs., Firenze 1938) against the thesis of radical negation 
of the ancient Pythagorean science, which have become 
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fashionable among modern critics since a quarter of a 
century ago.
86

--- PAGE BREAK ---he thesis of radical negation 
of the ancient Pythagorean science, which have become 
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fashionable among modern critics since a quarter of a 
century ago.
86

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Conclusion
This rapid survey of interpretations of Heraclitus 
proposed in the last half century, though far from a 
complete enumeration, can, however, by means of the 
obvious divergences between the various interpreters 
and the multiplicity of the problems raised and 
discussed by them or arising from their discussions, give 
a sufficient idea of the complication and difficulty of an 
adequate understanding of the thought of the Dark One 
of Ephesus. In my synthetic exposition I have generally 
refrained from criticism of the opinions and 
interpretations related, limiting myself to expressing 
some objection only when I could do so in a few words. 
In most cases a discussion cannot be usefully effected 
except by a careful analysis and collation of texts, 
irreconcilable with a synthetic review.
But my aim in this prologue was not to solve but to 
point out the problems involved; that is, to lead my 
readers to the knowledge and conviction of the 
difficulties of interpreting Heraclitus and of the 
multiplicity of the problems involved in a serious and 
conscientious study of his fragments.
Awakening awareness of the problems is the first – 
necessary – step towards the deepening of the study that 
can lead to solving them. This foreword will have 
achieved its purpose if it succeeds in communicating 
87

--- PAGE BREAK ---s the first – 
necessary – step towards the deepening of the study that 
can lead to solving them. This foreword will have 
achieved its purpose if it succeeds in communicating 
87

--- PAGE BREAK ---

such a conviction to its readers. A further step must be 
the careful examination of all the data we have, that is, 
by an analytical study of the ancient testimonies and the 
Heraclitean fragments, accompanied by a discussion of 
the many problems that have arisen about each of them. 
And that further contribution I hope to offer soon to 
Latin American readers, with the hope that it can serve 
to renew impetus to Heraclitean studies in Ibero-
America.
Rodolfo Mondolfo
January of 1946
88

--- PAGE BREAK ---

89

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H E R A C L I T U S
A STUDY ON THE ENERGETIC THOUGHT
FUNDAMENTAL TO HIS PHILOSOPHY.
(1904)
91

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92

--- PAGE BREAK ---AGE BREAK ---

89

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H E R A C L I T U S
A STUDY ON THE ENERGETIC THOUGHT
FUNDAMENTAL TO HIS PHILOSOPHY.
(1904)
91

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
In Heraclitus, Greek philosophy of the 6th and 5th 
centuries did not achieve a school, but rather a series of 
independent, powerful thinkers who were far ahead of 
their time in terms of maturity and astonishingly 
creative, the likes of whom did not reappear until 
philosophy took root in Athens and reached its peak. 
Greece never produced more powerful men than these, 
who, following one another, created a picture of the 
cosmos with master strokes, not so much critically and 
with the intention of satisfying the requirements of strict 
science, but with high intuition and a powerful view of 
the meaning of the world, its past and future. In this 
sense, one must judge their achievements. Instead of the 
cool rigor of discernment and analysis, as possessed by 
Aristotle, one finds here, to use Goethe's words, the 
“exact sensual imagination,” a direction toward forms 
and thoughts, not their abstract conclusions, concepts, 
and laws. Heraclitus is not only the deepest, but also the 
most versatile and comprehensive mind among them. 
The systems of Anaximander, Xenophanes, and 
Pythagoras find kindred aspects in his. The great 
problems of Greek thought—the relationship between 
form and thing in itself, the concept of law, the concept 
of the inner unity of all being or happening, the origin of 
being, the origin of otherness—which were discovered 
at that time and condensed into naive and bold 
93

--- PAGE BREAK ---, the concept 
of the inner unity of all being or happening, the origin of 
being, the origin of otherness—which were discovered 
at that time and condensed into naive and bold 
93

--- PAGE BREAK ---

formulas, he united in the fundamental ideas of his 
teaching, while the others represent them individually. 
It would be incorrect, for this reason, to see 
Heraclitus as a successor or imitator of these teachings. 
Whether there was an Anaximander or Xenophanes and 
him was that of master to disciple or some other closer 
relationship is highly unlikely, considering the 
intellectual and political independence of the Hellenic 
cities and the self-confident lifestyle of these 
philosophers, which was far removed from the norm. 
question of little importance. The possibility of indirect 
influence does exist. But of the numerous possible 
influences arising from observation, experience, 
impressions and other opinions, only those that 
encountered related, essentially pre-existing elements 
can have had an effect. The fact that Heraclitus' 
independence has never been questioned can be 
concluded with great certainty from his character. If a 
similar direction in the thinking of these philosophers 
can be observed (such as the similarity of their starting 
points and the parallel treatment of the same questions), 
this follows from the organic unity of intellectual life 
within a limited cultural epoch, as history frequently 
shows. (cf. the αταραξία = imperturbability as the basis 
of all ethical teachings in the 3rd century, the problem of 
method in Bacon, Descartes, Galileo.) 
The idea with which Heraclitus gave a new 
conception of cosmic existence is an energetic one: that 
of a pure (immaterial), lawful process. The removal of 
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---escartes, Galileo.) 
The idea with which Heraclitus gave a new 
conception of cosmic existence is an energetic one: that 
of a pure (immaterial), lawful process. The removal of 
94

--- PAGE BREAK ---

this idea from the views of others, and equally from the 
Ionians, Eleatics, and atomists, is an extraordinary one. 
Heraclitus remained completely alone among the Greeks 
with this idea; there is no second conception of this kind. 
All other systems contain the concept of a substantial 
foundation ( ρχή = principle, πειρον = infinite, τ
ἀ
ἄ
ὸ 
πλέον = the full, λη = matter, τ πλ ρες = the full and
ὕ
ὸ
ῆ

also Plato's world of appearances, γένεσις in contrast to 
the world of ideas, αίτία τής γένεσεως = cause of 
becoming), and the Stoics, who later appropriated 
Heraclitus' words and formulas, first had to fill them 
with the spirit of Democritus in order to make them 
acceptable to the age. This explains above all the 
frequent misunderstandings in the interpretation of this 
teaching, not because it is insufficiently known to us,¹) 
but because it stands in contrast to our familiar way of 
thinking. 
The history of Heraclitean research shows how, in 
order to assimilate a difficult, foreign idea, for lack of an 
adequate modern explanation of the idea, one resorts to 
all kinds of other ideas in order to be able to stick to 
familiar concepts and views. It is doubtful whether any 
possible explanation has not already been attempted. 
Heraclitus appears as a disciple of Anaximander 
(Lassalle, Gomperz), Xenophanes (Teichmüller), the 
Persians (Lassalle, Gladisch), the Egyptians (Tannery, 
Teichmüller), the mysteries (Pfleiderer), as a hylozoist 
(Zeller), empiricist and sensualist (Schuster), 
“theologian” (Tannery), as a precursor of Hegel 
95

--- PAGE BREAK ---Egyptians (Tannery, 
Teichmüller), the mysteries (Pfleiderer), as a hylozoist 
(Zeller), empiricist and sensualist (Schuster), 
“theologian” (Tannery), as a precursor of Hegel 
95

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Lassalle). His great idea resembles Hamlet's soul: 
everyone understands it, but everyone differently. The 
attempt to interpret the ideas of a philosopher who was 
unfamiliar with the sharp, long-practiced language of a 
highly developed science does not lead to the desired 
goal. Teichmüller (Vol. I, p. 80) says: “Anyone who seeks 
precise concepts in Heraclitus is wasting their time. For 
Heraclitus, philosophy consisted solely of an allegorical 
generalization of a few striking facts. If we wanted to 
define Heraclitus' way of thinking more precisely, we 
would destroy it.” A consequence of this view is that, 
due to insufficient definition of concepts and untenable 
analogies, we arrive at the most serious errors. An 
example is the application of the term άρχή (= principle), 
which Anaximander used to his philosophy and which 
only makes sense within hylozoism, to others, including 
Heraclitus, in whose system it is completely irrelevant. 
One must be cautious, even skeptical, not only in 
explaining Greek elements of thought in themselves, but 
above all in distinguishing them from modern ones. We 
must not forget that our main concepts are the result of 
the entire development of modern philosophy since the 
16th century and only have unconditional validity 
within this circle of ideas. The complexes of ideas that 
arose within cultures as different as the ancient and 
modern ones, which already differ in their different 
conceptions of science in general, correspond to 
thoroughly peculiar concepts on both sides. Even such 
an obvious as the concept of matter is not the same for 
Democritus and in modern natural science; there, the 
96

--- PAGE BREAK ---respond to 
thoroughly peculiar concepts on both sides. Even such 
an obvious as the concept of matter is not the same for 
Democritus and in modern natural science; there, the 
96

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cause of motion lies in the essence of matter (τύχη: the 
event), here it is an independent factor outside, bound to 
the ether as energy.
Another difficulty lies in the fact that Heraclitus was 
certain of his view, but did not always find an adequate 
expression for it in language. Not only the lack of a 
scientific language with appropriately created 
expressions, but also the absence of a proper polemic 
among these philosophers, which would have forced 
them to express themselves sharply and cautiously, but 
also the impossibility of expressing a new knowledge of 
nature that contradicted appearances using the familiar 
symbols of language that had developed under different 
influences and opinions. 
Goethe, whose views on nature were inspired by a 
similar spirit, was well aware of this limitation. "All 
languages have arisen from obvious human needs, 
human activities, and general human feelings and 
perceptions. When a higher human being gains an
1) The opinion of Th. Gomperz (Vienna. Sitzungsber. 113 (1886) p. 
947). The other writings used here are: Schleiermacher, Heraclitus the 
Obscure (Works, III. Section, II. Vol.); Zeller, Philosophy of the Greeks, 
Vol. I.; F. Lassalle, The Philosophy of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus; 
P. Schuster, Heraclitus of Ephesus; E. Pfleiderer, The Philosophy of 
Heraclitus of Ephesus; G. Teichmüller, New Studies on the History of 
Concepts, Vol. I, II; G. Schäfer, The Philosophy of Heraclitus of Ephesus 
and Modern Heraclitus Research; G. Tannery, Rév. philos. 1883, XVI, 
Héraclite et le concept de Logos.
97

--- PAGE BREAK ---Concepts, Vol. I, II; G. Schäfer, The Philosophy of Heraclitus of Ephesus 
and Modern Heraclitus Research; G. Tannery, Rév. philos. 1883, XVI, 
Héraclite et le concept de Logos.
97

--- PAGE BREAK ---

inkling and insight into the secret workings and goings-
on of nature, the language handed down to him is not 
sufficient to express something so utterly remote from 
human things. When contemplating unusual natural 
phenomena, he must always resort to human 
expressions, whereby he almost always falls short, 
belittles his subject matter, or even distorts and destroys 
it." (Eckermann, Conversations with Goethe III, June 20, 
1831.) 
A presentation of Heraclitus' entire teaching is 
impossible due to the loss of his writings. Here, we will 
merely attempt to develop the principle that this thinker 
made the basis of his world system and which can be 
summed up in a few words: πάντα ρεί, the idea of pure, 
lawful becoming. It is inherent in the words that the 
execution must take place on two sides: becoming itself 
and its law. This separation is purely methodological. It 
must be emphasized that it does not correspond to a 
dualistic structure of the Heraclitean cosmos. All the 
ideas mentioned below are one and the same 
fundamental principle, which, conceived as a unity, has 
been preserved in the fragments (and perhaps already in 
Heraclitus' aphoristic style of writing in his book) only 
in a number of different representations, as they sprang 
from the imagination of a passionate artistic man. 
98

--- PAGE BREAK ---eady in 
Heraclitus' aphoristic style of writing in his book) only 
in a number of different representations, as they sprang 
from the imagination of a passionate artistic man. 
98

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II
It would be an obstacle to understanding this 
teaching if we had lost knowledge of the great and tragic 
personality of Heraclitus. We would not understand 
why this philosopher made αγών (struggle), the most 
important custom of his time, a custom of the cosmos, 
what he meant by fire, to which he attributed a 
dominant role in the universe. His teaching is, even for 
that time and for a Greek, unusually personal, without 
much mention of himself. 
We see a man whose entire feeling and thinking were 
under the sway of an unbridled aristocratic inclination, 
strongly influenced by birth and upbringing and 
provoked and intensified by resistance and 
disappointment. Here we must seek the ultimate reason 
for every trait of his life and every peculiarity of his 
thoughts. Even in the energetic concentration of the 
system, in the avoidance and disdain of all details and 
insignificant matters, and in the writing in short, strong 
phrases familiar only to him, we recognize the hand of 
the aristocrat. 
The Hellenic nobility, ¹) whose downfall was taking 
place at this time, created the most significant and 
beautiful period of Hellenic culture. Through established 
the type of the perfect Hellenic man for all time through 
its customs, an incomparably high and noble culture of 
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd 
beautiful period of Hellenic culture. Through established 
the type of the perfect Hellenic man for all time through 
its customs, an incomparably high and noble culture of 
99

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the individual (καλoκαγαθíα = probity); it represented 
not only rights or interests, but a worldview and a 
custom (Burckhardt). It was a proud, happy, ruling and 
ruling caste, proud of its blood, rank, weapons, and 
“anti-banausia”; it was the sole possessor of the spirit 
and the arts. One can understand the immense ethical 
power of the caste and its view of life over the spirit of 
the individual. It could itself succumb, but once under 
its spell, it was impossible to escape. 
Heraclitus possessed all its self-confidence and pride, 
a strong, unintentional nobility that was foreign to any 
reflection on himself; he was passionately attached to its 
brave, healthy, lively customs, to fighting, to the pursuit 
of glory. 2) This proud, unyielding man loved the 
difference between rulers and those who obeyed them, 
he had reverence for the traditional customs and 
institutions, 3) which were no longer sacred to 
democracy. He was too profound a judge of character to 
judge the people of his time by their birth and rank 
alone. He believed in the Homeric distinction between 
the αριστοί, people with a grand and noble outlook on 
life, and the masses (oí πολλοί), in whom he discovered 
the shortcomings of their class with mocking insight 4). 
He did not allow himself to be drawn into attacks and 
disputes with the people (δημος), which his taste and
1) On the nobility, see Wachsmuth, Hell. Altert. I, 347 ff. J. 
Burckhardt, Griech. Kulturgesch. I, 171 ff., IV, 86 ff.
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---d 
disputes with the people (δημος), which his taste and
1) On the nobility, see Wachsmuth, Hell. Altert. I, 347 ff. J. 
Burckhardt, Griech. Kulturgesch. I, 171 ff., IV, 86 ff.
100

--- PAGE BREAK ---

self-control forbade him to do, which was one of the first 
virtues of the noble Greek 5); without anger or outbursts, 
he judged the people from from above, coldly, 
maliciously, with contempt and disgust, sometimes 
concealing his rising resentment with a sarcastic remark 
6). 
The name of the weeping philosopher, given to him by 
antiquity, did not come about without reason, as 
betrayed by anecdotes 1) and some of his aphorisms, 
which speak with a bitter, wounded tone. Linked by his 
ancestry and deep devotion to an ideal of life, he was 
born at a time when this ideal no longer had any 
possibility of existence. The power and customs of the
2) Fr. 24: Αρηιφάτους θεο τιμ
σι κα νθρωποι. Fr. 25: Μόροι
᾿
ὶ
ῶ
ὶἄ

γ ρ μέζωνες μέζονας μοίρας λαγχάνουσι. (The numbering of the
ὰ

fragments is according to H. Diels, Heraclitus of Ephesus, Greek 
and German, Berlin 1901.)
3) Fr. 33: Νόμος κα βουλ πείθεσθαι νός. Fr. 44: Μάχεσθαι χρ
ὶ
ῇ
ἑ
ὴ 
τ ν δ μον περ το νόμου κως π ρ τείχεος.
ὸ
ῆ
ὑ
ῦ
ὅ
ὑὲ
4) "Aqistos (xapi s) in Homer in the sense of nobility II. VII, 159,
ɛ

327, XIX, 193. Od. I, 245 and frequently. Likewise in Heraclitus Fr. 
13, 29, 49, 104. Οι πολλοί in Fr. 2, 17, 29.
5) Among many others, Fr. 29: Α ρε νται γ ρ ν ντία πάντων
ἱ
ῦ
ὰ
ἓ
ἀ

ο ριστοι, κλέος έναον θνητ
ν, ο δ πολλο κεκόρηνται κωσπερ
ἱἄ
ἀ
ῶ
ἱ
ὲ
ὶ
ὅ

κτήνεα· Fr. 104: Δήμων οιδο σι πείθονται κα διδασκάλωι χρέωνται
ἀ
ῖ
ὶ

μίλωι …
ὁ
6) Fr. 43: "Υβριν χρ σβεννύειν μ λλον  πυρκαΐην. Also Fr. 47.
ὴ
ᾶ
ἢ
101

--- PAGE BREAK ---νται κωσπερ
ἱἄ
ἀ
ῶ
ἱ
ὲ
ὶ
ὅ

κτήνεα· Fr. 104: Δήμων οιδο σι πείθονται κα διδασκάλωι χρέωνται
ἀ
ῖ
ὶ

μίλωι …
ὁ
6) Fr. 43: "Υβριν χρ σβεννύειν μ λλον  πυρκαΐην. Also Fr. 47.
ὴ
ᾶ
ἢ
101

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nobility had declined or disappeared. Democracy began 
to reign. He was too rigid and too defiant to give in or 
complain uselessly. One of the first and most influential 
dignities in Ephesus, which fell to him by inheritance 
(that of the βασιλευς: king), was no longer for him what 
it should have been. He renounced it. 2) The life of the 
πολις (state) lost its aristocratic form and the masses 
began to rule. So he left the city where he could have 
been a minor ruler and went into the mountains, into 
voluntary solitude, an existence that to the sociable 
Greek, who had grown together with the fate of his city, 
seemed the most terrible thing imaginable. He remained 
there irreconcilable, enduring a life that ultimately 
brought him close to madness, if one is to believe 
Theophrastus. ³) 
As a Hellene, he considered fame, one might say 
celebrity, to be the highest good. 4) The question is 
whether his self-imposed solitude and the strange traits 
that attracted admiring attention to him might not have 
compensated him for a role in Ephesus. Every Greek 
wanted to be talked about, at any price. Herostratus is a 
famous example of what one could attempt for this 
purpose. But one sees this also in Alcibiades, 
Themistocles, and every other person who can be 
considered a true Hellene. One must not forget in 
Heraclitus this national form of ambition, an unfortunate 
trait of the Greek character. This characteristic, which 
appears ignoble in our eyes, is not a striving that denies 
the opponent magnanimity and recognition, but an 
102

--- PAGE BREAK ---rtunate 
trait of the Greek character. This characteristic, which 
appears ignoble in our eyes, is not a striving that denies 
the opponent magnanimity and recognition, but an 
102

--- PAGE BREAK ---

irrepressible, consuming envy, even hatred of anyone 
who was happier, an unbearable consciousness that 
leads to self-destruction, to be admired less than others, 
which made the Greeks with their lively sensibility into 
a deeply unhappy people. 
For philosophy, it followed that in earlier times, a 
problem was never dealt with by a series of thinkers one 
after the other. Here, everyone starts from scratch, 
perhaps from the opposite point of view, and hardly 
anyone gratefully accepts the discoveries of their 
predecessors. 
Rather, they know how to emphasize the differences, 
even exaggerate them, and until Aristotle, each of the 
greats looked down on the others with sufficient 
derision. As a Greek, one cannot expect Heraclitus to 
acknowledge the merits of others. On the contrary, he
1) He was once watching children playing when people from 
Ephesus passed by and stopped. He snapped at them: What are you 
gawking at here? Isn't this better than ruling the state with you? 
(Diog. Laert. IX, 3.)
2) Fr. 121. Also Fr. 85: Θυμ
ι μάχεσθαι χαλεπόν τι γ ρ ν
ῶ
ὅ
ὰ
ἂ 
θέληι, ψυχ ς 
νε ται.
ῆὠ
ῖ
3) The strong impression this man made on his contemporaries 
gave rise to well-known stories such as that he had deposited his 
writings in the Temple of Artemis so that they would only come 
into the hands of posterity (Diog. Laert. IX, 6).
4) Fr. 24, 25, 29. 9
103

--- PAGE BREAK ---tories such as that he had deposited his 
writings in the Temple of Artemis so that they would only come 
into the hands of posterity (Diog. Laert. IX, 6).
4) Fr. 24, 25, 29. 9
103

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tends to emphasize contrasts in paradoxes and 
antitheses, and when he does mention a famous name, 
he certainly always does so with malice (Fr. 40, 57, 129; 
Plutarch de Iside 48, 370). The peculiarity of his fate 
increased his self-awareness as an unusual person and 
led to an exaggeration of his drive for originality, to a 
fundamental rejection of all foreign opinions, even to the 
point of avoiding common phrases that might sound 
trivial to him. Under these conditions, the genesis of his 
thoughts can be traced and the degree of their 
dependence on contemporary systems can be measured. 
104

--- PAGE BREAK ---at might sound 
trivial to him. Under these conditions, the genesis of his 
thoughts can be traced and the degree of their 
dependence on contemporary systems can be measured. 
104

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III
For every thinking person, there is a form of thinking 
that arises from the same psychological causes as 
worldview and the results of thinking, and is closely 
linked to them. In the broadest sense, not only as a type 
of logical reasoning, but also as a method of selecting 
and utilizing impressions of all kinds, it acts as a 
mediator between personality and system, and in some 
circumstances even as an independent cause of value. 
The style of thinking and the doctrine itself are related. 
This circumstance is important for Heraclitean 
philosophy. Heraclitus lived in a time of naive thinking 
that had not yet matured to the point of reflection on 
itself—in the fortunate position of being able to draw 
from the fullness of life, of being able to indulge his 
desires without being restricted by significant 
preparatory work in his field to research on a smaller 
scale within fixed directions, a happiness of which 
Goethe was aware when he once emphasized: When I 
was eighteen, Germany was also only eighteen. 
(Eckermann, Conversations with Goethe I, Feb. 15, 
1824.) 
Heraclitus was only an aristocrat according to his 
worldview, in terms of his entire way of thinking he can 
be described as a psychologist. The two are often found 
in conjunction with each other. This is not meant to say 
anything about the subject of his investigations, but 
105

--- PAGE BREAK ---e can 
be described as a psychologist. The two are often found 
in conjunction with each other. This is not meant to say 
anything about the subject of his investigations, but 
105

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rather to indicate a method of treatment. He does not 
consider nature in itself as an object, according to 
appearance, origin, and purpose; rather, his method is 
an analysis of natural processes, insofar as they are 
processes and changes, according to their lawful 
relationships; one can call his system a psychology of 
world events. This new philosophical question leads to 
the discovery of new problems. Heraclitus can be 
considered the first social philosopher, the first 
epistemologist, the first psychologist. His aphorisms 
about people are not sayings with an ethical tendency 
like the gnomes of Bias or Solon, but for the first time 
truly observed, thoroughly objective remarks that 
completely avoid a didactic tone. 
Let us not forget an essential difference that separates 
Heraclitus and the whole of Greek philosophy from the 
newer one. The people, whose educators were 
gymnastics, music, and Homer, who invented the word 
κοσμος (order, structure of the universe) for the world 
because they saw in it above all the meaning of order 
and beauty, did not treat philosophy as a science 
(abstract scientific investigations have always been 
subordinated to the metaphysical end), but as a way of 
creating a worldview that allowed them to see their 
place in the universe, and as an opportunity to express 
their joy in form. It would be wrong to place Greek 
thought, which arose under the open sky, in a southern, 
sunny landscape, from a cheerful and easy-going life, at 
a deeper level than our own because of this kinship with 
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---ek 
thought, which arose under the open sky, in a southern, 
sunny landscape, from a cheerful and easy-going life, at 
a deeper level than our own because of this kinship with 
106

--- PAGE BREAK ---

art that is foreign to us. For the Hellenes of the classical 
period, philosophy is a plastic art, the architecture of 
thought. The plastic strength of the Hellenes, their 
ability to subject everything they learned and created to 
a unified style, is tremendous, and this sense of form 
gives rise to a tendency to conceive philosophical 
systems as works of art. 
Heraclitus is the most important artist among the 
pre-Socratics. This is evidenced not only by the rich and 
colorful pathos of his style, but above all by the 
ingenious plasticity of his presentation. He sees his 
ideas, he does not calculate them. Their intuitive 
character, which is foreign to all dialectics, as it is 
especially supported by the opposing system of 
Parmenides 1), are supported by the always aptly 
chosen. 
At times, there was no other means of 
communication left, because his problem with linguistic 
representation gave rise to difficulties that he could not 
always overcome, despite his energy of thought. His 
main idea completely contradicts appearances and 
conventional thinking and requires a high degree of
1) Cf. Fr. 8, where he calls the rhetorical method zonidov 
dopnyós, leader to slaughter. (Allegedly against Pythagoras, cf. note 
to Byw. Fr. 138.) 12 examples (such as those of the bow and the lyre, 
of the mixed drink), in which he attempts to reproduce an image 
that is tangible to him.
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---oras, cf. note 
to Byw. Fr. 138.) 12 examples (such as those of the bow and the lyre, 
of the mixed drink), in which he attempts to reproduce an image 
that is tangible to him.
107

--- PAGE BREAK ---

abstract thinking to be found at all. Thanks to his 
relentless consistency and a sure view of the field of his 
investigations, he achieved an inner unity of his system 
that has probably never been achieved again. It is 
concentrated with great simplicity on one idea and is 
unassailable in its details thanks to its inherent logic. 
Heraclitus can be described as a realist, even though 
he is easily mistaken for the opposite. Every concept that 
seems to point to symbolist intentions can be traced back 
to a real basis upon closer examination. He has a 
thoroughly healthy view of tangible ¹) and often a great 
subtlety in distinguishing between them 2). But he does 
not deny the aristocrat anywhere; his thinking has a true 
imperial style, a very summary approach even for that 
time. 3) Only the great, fundamental ideas are worth his 
consideration, with a pronounced aversion to actual 
scientific research into details. He has has a definite, 
strictly limited view of how one should think. One 
should not want to know everything, only what is 
valuable and great; select little, but penetrate it 
thoroughly. He wants depth, substance, clarity, not 
breadth of knowledge. Hence his polemic: πολυμαθίη 
νόον χειν ο διδάσκει. 
σίοδον γ ρ ν δίδαξε κα
ἔ
ὐ
Ἡ
ὰ
ἂ
ἐ
ὶ 
Πυθαγόρην α τίς τε Ξενοφάνεα κα κατα ον (Much
ὖ
ὶἙ
ῖ

scholarship does not teach understanding. For it would 
have taught it to Hesiod and Pythagoras and equally to 
Xenophanes and Hecataeus – Fr. 40). Μαθίη 
(apprehension) is the mere acknowledgment of things. 
The collection of facts without overview and 
108

--- PAGE BREAK ---od and Pythagoras and equally to 
Xenophanes and Hecataeus – Fr. 40). Μαθίη 
(apprehension) is the mere acknowledgment of things. 
The collection of facts without overview and 
108

--- PAGE BREAK ---

understanding, is abhorrent to him. However, it is not a 
matter of knowing little: χρ γ ρ ε μάλα πολλ
ν
ὴ
ὰ
ὖ
ῶ 
στορας φιλοσόφους νδρας ε ναι xα
ἵ
ἄ
ἶ
θ' Ηράκλειτον. (it is 
necessary, then, that they have knowledge of many, 
many things the men who love wisdom, according to 
Heraclitus – Fr. 35.) "Ιστορίη is the penetrating critical 
observation (not knowledge from books: Gomperz in op. 
cit. 1002 f. "Ιστορίη witness, critic, in Homer: arbitrator. 
Cf. Porphyr. de abst. II, 49: "Ιστορίη γαρ πολλώυ όίτώς 
φιλόσοφος = knowledgeable, then, of many things is the 
philosopher of truth). A scientific philosophy will never 
arise on such a basis. But here one must distinguish 
between questions that lie outside the main focus and 
the basic idea itself; this has been exhaustively 
explained. One must not judge the logic of the line of 
thought by its unsystematic presentation. The work is a 
collection of aphorisms, like a remark by Theophrastus 
and the fragments themselves. Heraclitus did not 
attempt to be didactic in the most modest sense, let 
alone popular, as evidenced by his style, which is by no 
means designed for easy understanding and 
corresponds perfectly to his misanthropic worldview. 
1) Fr. 55: ”Οσων ψις κο μάθησις, τα τα γ
 προτιμέω.
ὄ
ἀ
ὴ
ῦ
ἐὼ
2) An example: Oú yàg poovéovo (seeing through reflection) 
τοια τα ο πολλοί, ποίοις γκυρε σιν, ο δ μάθοντες (perceiving
ῦ
ἱ
ὁ
ἐ
ῦ
ὐὲ

with the senses ), γινώσκουσιν (understand), ωυτο σι δ δοκέουσι
ἑ
ῖ
ὲ

(have the feeling of having understood it).
3) The impression of this method on later, somewhat stricter 
philosophers Diog, Laert. IX, 8: Σαφ
ς δ ο δ ν κτίθεται.
ῶ
ὲὐὲἐ
109

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110

--- PAGE BREAK ---of having understood it).
3) The impression of this method on later, somewhat stricter 
philosophers Diog, Laert. IX, 8: Σαφ
ς δ ο δ ν κτίθεται.
ῶ
ὲὐὲἐ
109

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Pure Movement
I. First formulation: πάντα ε (everything flows)
ῥῖ
1. The cosmos as an energy process.
The basic idea on which Heraclitus based his view of 
the cosmos is already fully contained in the famous 
πάντα 
ε . However, the mere concept of flowing
ῥῖ

(change) is too vague to reveal the finer and deeper 
gradations of this idea, whose value does not lie in 
asserting a mere the diversity of successive states of the 
visible and tangible world, which no one doubts. Right 
at the outset, it is important to emphasize the important 
difference between Heraclitus' conception of the course 
and innermost character of world events themselves, 
which he said were inaccessible to our perception, and 
the view that the world of things we must logically 
understand as the appearance of these events and their 
effect on the senses. 
If we take this distinction, which Heraclitus' teaching 
undoubtedly contains, although it does not appear 
fundamentally separated in the fragments of his writing, 
as a basis, we avoid one of the most common 
misunderstandings in the assessment of this teaching. If 
111

--- PAGE BREAK ---oes not appear 
fundamentally separated in the fragments of his writing, 
as a basis, we avoid one of the most common 
misunderstandings in the assessment of this teaching. If 
111

--- PAGE BREAK ---

one wants to reduce events in nature to their most 
original elements, the concept of change is still capable 
of several interpretations. One can assume a substrate 
with the sole determination of permanence, in which 
case change appears as the way in which the permanent 
exists at every moment. Kant, from this cautious and 
unassailable standpoint, described the statement that 
substance persists as a tautology. “For it is merely this 
persistence that is the reason why we apply the category 
of substance to phenomena, and it would have been 
necessary to prove that in all phenomena there is 
something persistent, in which the changeable is nothing 
but the determination of its existence.” ¹) 
In order to arrive at a simpler and more vivid idea, 
one adds to this characteristic of the substrate those of 
filling space, impenetrability, and qualitative constancy, 
thus obtaining the concept of (physically conceived) 
matter, in relation to which change can only be thought 
of as a spatial one. This Democritean concept of the 
displacement of mass particles (περιφορά), which is also 
found in more recent natural science, does not lie in 
πάντα ε . It is possible to abandon the concept of
ῥῖ

substrate altogether, whether as that which persists in 
the change of appearances (which physically manifests 
itself as the unchanging relationship of forces acting on a 
body to the resulting accelerations) or as actual matter, 
1) Critique of Pure Reason (Kehrbach), p. 177.
112

--- PAGE BREAK ---

can be abandoned, whereby the concept of change (of 
becoming, flowing) acquires a new and richer content.or as actual matter, 
1) Critique of Pure Reason (Kehrbach), p. 177.
112

--- PAGE BREAK ---

can be abandoned, whereby the concept of change (of 
becoming, flowing) acquires a new and richer content.

The most general basic concepts that are 
indispensable for the schematic illustration of natural 
processes, to which every knowledgeable person tends, 
are subject to change over the centuries to a 
development determined by the respective state of 
science, so that they now only fully satisfy the thinking 
of a limited period of time, but are so necessary to it that 
it is not possible without difficulty to free oneself from 
their influence in order to understand the different 
concepts of an earlier epoch (in this case Heraclitus). 
When Plato in Philebus explains the phenomenal world 
as a product of empty space (τό μη óv = non-being, 
άπειρόν = infinity) and mathematical form (πέρας = 
finitude), we can hardly form a corresponding idea from 
these concepts. 
Most attempts to understand Heraclitus' special ideas 
are influenced by the view that is characteristic of 
modern natural science and of many philosophers since 
Hobbes—and not only as a Most attempts to understand 
Heraclitus' particular train of thought are influenced by 
the view that has been characteristic of modern natural 
science and many philosophers since Hobbes—and not 
only as a “working hypothesis” (Ostwald) which, as a 
result of long-standing habits of thought, almost 
necessarily divides what is given in perception into an 
active and a passive component. Here, then, a distinction 
is made between two quantities: matter and 
113

--- PAGE BREAK ---thought, almost 
necessarily divides what is given in perception into an 
active and a passive component. Here, then, a distinction 
is made between two quantities: matter and 
113

--- PAGE BREAK ---

independent energy, which is separate from it and 
whose object is matter. The second concept, unknown in 
Greek philosophy, is to be understood in a thoroughly 
substantial sense. As a result, however, the need to 
assign a carrier for this energy to which it is bound is so 
strong that, after its fundamental separation from 
matter, the wave theory of light led to the assumption of 
a second type of matter, the ether, simply because it was 
impossible to imagine a quantity with these 
characteristics acting without a carrier. (Lord Kelvin 
proved that this hypothetical ether with properties such 
as those required by the wave motion of light rays is not 
viable.) 
A physical carrier of motion is not necessary to 
conceive of action in space. The energetic theory 
proposed by Mach and Ostwald is much closer to 
Heraclitus' idea. After the critical philosophers of the 
18th century had explained things as coordinated 
complexes of sensations, and thereby proved the 
ultimate goal of almost all philosophical research, the 
understanding of things in themselves, to be impossible 
and erroneous, it was no longer possible to conceive of 
substance as material. Energetics recognizes this 
criticism at least in relation to the concept of matter and 
defines nature as a sum of energies (although this 
concept is again understood in a thoroughly substantial 
sense). "We acquire our knowledge of the external world 
only through the stimulation of our sense organs by the 
objects of that world in a certain way; the nature and 
114

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntial 
sense). "We acquire our knowledge of the external world 
only through the stimulation of our sense organs by the 
objects of that world in a certain way; the nature and 
114

--- PAGE BREAK ---

intensity of these stimulations we attribute to the 
“properties” of matter. But if we take away those 
properties from the objects, we are left with nothing that 
is accessible to our experience, and matter disappears 
when we try to think of it in isolation (Ostwald, Chem. 
Energie, 2nd ed., p. 5). This approach of energetics to 
Heraclitus is important because it makes it possible for 
the first time to put his thoughts into a modern, scientific 
form. What exists in space is exclusively energy: “If we 
remove its different types from matter, nothing remains. 
Not even the space it occupied. Thus, matter is nothing 
more than a spatially arranged group of different 
energies, and everything we say about it, we say only of 
these energies” (Ostwald, Überwind. d. wissensch. 
Materialismus. p. 28). However, Kant's aforementioned 
definition can be applied to this substance, namely that 
it persists (J. K. Mayer's law) and only its mode of 
existence changes (the “forms” of energy: light, heat, 
electricity). 
The Greek view is different from the outset. The 
concept of force was first created by Galileo and was 
unknown to the Greeks. Let us therefore distinguish 
between motion and energy. Motion (a relational 
concept) presupposes only something moving and 
nothing else. Energy (the substantially conceived cause 
of motion) is itself a second quantity alongside the 
moving object, even if this is again to be thought of only 
as a group of energies. We say: “the force acts at a 
point.” In contrast, the monistic Greek philosophy 
115

--- PAGE BREAK ---

recognizes only immanent and ideal causes of motion 
( νάγκη = necessity, φιλία κα νε κος = love and strife,
ἀ
ὶ
ῖts at a 
point.” In contrast, the monistic Greek philosophy 
115

--- PAGE BREAK ---

recognizes only immanent and ideal causes of motion 
( νάγκη = necessity, φιλία κα νε κος = love and strife,
ἀ
ὶ
ῖ

λόγος = reason, τύχη = chance); Democritus' atoms move 
as a result of τύχη (chance); it is in their nature to move. 
They do not need any energy to strike them. For Greek 
monism, what exists in space (best described by 
Parmenides as το πλέον, that which fills space) has thus 
become a completely different quantity as the only and 
indivisible substance. It is this concept of substance that 
is missing in Heraclitus. 
The first problem of Greek philosophy, for which the 
myth left a gap but also provided no guidance, is that of 
the “origin” of things. The chaos at the beginning of the 
world, which a Greek would have defined as a 
qualitatively indeterminable mass with no rules 
governing its movement, gave rise to the idea of a 
primordial substance. Αρχή (principle) is a substance. 
According to Thales and Anaximenes, the world 
consists of the qualitative transformations of this initially 
existing substance. The significance of Anaximander lies 
in the fact that he eliminated sensory qualities in order 
to define it. The άπειρον (infinite), conceived as αρχή 
(principle), is something completely beyond perception, 
whose specific effect on the senses only allows qualities 
and thus things to arise. At least here a physically 
conceived background for sensations is still assumed. 
The unconditional skepticism toward the concept of 
substance is difficult. Parmenides rightly remarked that 
all thinking refers to a being, that everything that is 
116

--- PAGE BREAK ---

thought acquires the property of substance at that 
moment. 
Since Greek thinking knows no separation between 
the moving and the moved, and Heraclitus emphasizes 
the unity in world events, his statement κ πάντων ν
ἐ
ἓ 
κα ξ ν ς πάντα (of all things the one, and of the one
ὶἐἑὸng knows no separation between 
the moving and the moved, and Heraclitus emphasizes 
the unity in world events, his statement κ πάντων ν
ἐ
ἓ 
κα ξ ν ς πάντα (of all things the one, and of the one
ὶἐἑὸ

all) is equivalent to Xenophanes' Ev xai πav (one and 
all), so the assumption of a “pure, uniform, unceasing 
becoming” that the Eleatics deny ¹), must exclude the 
concept of substance in every sense. 
In the execution of this idea, the extreme difficulties 
of linguistic representation arise; one of the cases where 
we notice that language itself contains philosophical 
principles. Our entire philosophy is a correction of 
language usage, remarked Lichtenberg; “we therefore 
always teach true philosophy using the language of false 
philosophy.” We cannot express the denial of being 
precisely in language. Oιδεν μένει, πάντα χωρεί (there is 
nothing firm, everything flows): one senses that the 
subjects of these sentences already contain a proper 
being. Language is Eleatic philosophy. 
Heraclitus explains things fundamentally as a change 
occurring in every sense: λέγει που Η
῾
ράκλείτος oτι 
1) Xenophanes in Clem. Strom. V, 109 p. 714 P. (Diels): Αιε δ
ὶ
᾽ 
ν τα τ
ν μίμνει κινούμενος ο δ ν ο δ μετέρχεσθαί μιν πιτρέπει
ἐ
ὐῶ
ὐὲ
ὐὲ
ἐ

λλοτε λλη. (It always remains in the same situation without
ἄ
ἄ

moving for u¿daT "1 it is up to him to move now here, now there).
117

--- PAGE BREAK ---

πάντα χωρά. καί
 oιδεν 
μένει. (Heraclitus says 
somewhere, that everything flows, and nothing is firm; 
Plato, Cratyl. p. 402 A.) Plato (Theaetetus 181, B. ff.) 
divides this complete transformation (μεταβολή = 
change in Fr. 91, νταμοιβή = exchange in Fr. 90) is
ἀverything flows, and nothing is firm; 
Plato, Cratyl. p. 402 A.) Plato (Theaetetus 181, B. ff.) 
divides this complete transformation (μεταβολή = 
change in Fr. 91, νταμοιβή = exchange in Fr. 90) is
ἀ

divided by Plato (Theaetetus 181, B. ff.) into a spatial 
(περιφορά = translation) and qualitative (αλλοίωσή = 
alteration). It must be firmly established that for a Greek 
there is only one real quantity in the external world in 
order to find the rejection of the concept of substance in 
this idea. Heraclitus never uses the concept of substance, 
which should have been familiar to him from the 
philosophy of the time (αρχή: principle, άл ioоv: infinite
ɛ

– Teichmüller vol. I, p. 147). He is also unfamiliar with 
the concept of empty space, which easily follows from 
the assumption of moving matter. Heraclitus attempted 
to find an appropriate expression for his new idea. In the 
sentences: συνάψιες λα κα ο χ λα, συμφερόμενον
ὅ
ὶ
ὐ
ὅ

διαφερόμενον, συν ιδον δι ιδον, κα κ πάντων ν κα
ᾶ
ᾶ
ὶἐ
ἓ
ὶ 
ξ ν ς πάντα (connections: the integers and the non-
ἐ
ἑὸ
integers, the convergent and the divergent, the 
concordant and the discordant, and from all things is 
born the one and from the one all – Fr. 10) and: γνώμη, 
τέη κυβέρνησε πάντα δι πάντων (the reason that
ὁ
ἐ
ὰ

governs things by means of all – Fr. 41., cf. Pseudo-Linus 
13 Mullach; κατ’ εριν συνέπαντα κνβερνάται δια. 
παντός: by discord everything is governed, by means of 
everything), one undoubtedly sees the attempt at an 
energetic formula to express the pure, immaterial action 
in space. 
118

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This action is beyond sensory perception. What we 
see and feel is always something that exists, a persistent 
state: θάνατός (death, that which is motionless) εστιν, 
ιωσα γερθέντες ρέομεν (everything we see while
ὁ
ἐ
ὁd sensory perception. What we 
see and feel is always something that exists, a persistent 
state: θάνατός (death, that which is motionless) εστιν, 
ιωσα γερθέντες ρέομεν (everything we see while
ὁ
ἐ
ὁ

awake is death – Fr. 21). The senses deceive: This insight 
made him a skeptic of knowledge. The background of 
the world around us, the “becoming” that acts in space, 
is not visible. 
Heraclitus speaks of an invisible harmony as 
opposed to the visible harmony in the world of 
appearances ( ρμονίη φαν ς φανερ ς κρείττων (the
ἁ
ἀ
ὴ
ῆ

invisible harmony is superior to the visible: Fr. 54). Fr. 
123 says the same thing: φυσις κρυπτεσθαι φιλει, nature 
tends to be hidden; 1) in nature, the deeper essence is 
hidden; one must first interpret the impression of the 
senses. This appearance of the energetic process is also 
different for us: 
 θε ς (= φύσις, κόσμος) άλλοιο ται
ὁ
ὸ
ῦ

κωσπερ π ρ, κόταν συμμιγ ι θυώμασιν, νομάζεται
ἥ
ῦ
ὁ
ῆ
ὀ

καθ δον ν κάστου (the god = nature, cosmos – is
᾽ἡ
ὴ
ἑ

permuted as fire, when mixed with aromas, is named 
according to the taste of each of them – Fr. 67). 
From this theory it necessarily follows that becoming 
and flowing must be uninterrupted: xvx óv dúoταται µỳ
ɛ

xivovμ vos (the compound mixture decomposes if it is
ɛ
1) φιλει does not mean it loves to hide. The word should not 
sound so personal. Cf. φιλει in Fr. 87 according to Diels: A vacuous 
person tends to stand rigidly by every word.
119

--- PAGE BREAK ---1) φιλει does not mean it loves to hide. The word should not 
sound so personal. Cf. φιλει in Fr. 87 according to Diels: A vacuous 
person tends to stand rigidly by every word.
119

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not stirred – Fr. 125). This image of the mixing pot is an 
example of the mastery with which Heraclitus knows 
how to give his ideas a happy vividness. (Nietzsche 
draws attention to the aptness of the expression 
“reality.”) A balance of antagonistic forces would be 
eternal rest. It is necessary for the existence of the 
cosmos that different tensions constantly confront each 
other, resist each other, measure themselves against each 
other; there must be no moment of rest, but rather a 
minimum of imbalance must always be present in space. 
1)
 We must think of eternal activity as the ebb and flow 
of tensions (opposites). An attempt to express this is Fr. 
91: άλλ’ οξυτηται κα τάχει μεταβολ ς σκίδνησι κα
ὶ
ῆ
ὶ 
πάλιν συνάγει κα πρόσεισι κai απασι (but by the
ὶ

liveliness and rapidity of its change it spreads and again 
is gathered and comes and goes). As concise expressions 
for this idea are the almost synonymous expressions 
ovµg góµε νου διαφερόμενον (convergent divergent – in
ɛ

Fr. 10: συνάψιες 
λα κα ο χ 
λα, συμφερόμενον
ὅ
ὶ
ὐ
ὅ

διαφερόμενον, συν ιδον δι ιδον κτλ = connections:
ᾶ
ᾶ

totalities and non-totalities, convergent-divergent. 
concordant-discordant, etc.; Plato Sophist. 242e: 
diagεgóuevov deì Evμγέgerai = the divergent always 
converges; Lucian. vit. auct. 14: α
ν πα ς στι παίζων
ἰὼ
ῖἐ

1) The same means the doctrine of entropy, the foundation of 
modern theoretical physics.
120

--- PAGE BREAK ---

πεσσεύων συνδιαφερόμενος = time is a child playing a 
game with dice, converging diverging; Plato Symp. 
187A: τ
 ν· γάρ φησι διαφερόμενον α τ
 α τ
ὸ
ἕ
ὐὸ
ὐῷ 
ξυμφέρεσθαι. says, then, that the One, diverging 
converges itself with itself) and δ ς νω κάτω (= way
ὁὸἄice, converging diverging; Plato Symp. 
187A: τ
 ν· γάρ φησι διαφερόμενον α τ
 α τ
ὸ
ἕ
ὐὸ
ὐῷ 
ξυμφέρεσθαι. says, then, that the One, diverging 
converges itself with itself) and δ ς νω κάτω (= way
ὁὸἄ

upwards downwards – in Fr. 60: δ ς νω κάτω μία κα
ὁὸἄ
ὶ 
αυτή = the way upwards and downwards is one and the 
same; Diog. Laert. IX, 8: καλε σθαι 
ῖ
μεταβολήν (cf. Fr. 91) 
όδόν άνω κάτω = call the change upward and 
downward). 
This idea that action in space, i.e., the rise and fall of 
opposing tensions, occurs in such a way that there is a 
constant striving for equilibrium, is known in energetics 
as Helm's law: Every form of energy strives to move 
from places where it is present in higher intensity to 
places of lower intensity (Helm, Lehre von der Energie, 
p. 59 ff.). The difference lies exclusively in Heraclitus' 
non-substantial way of thinking. The attempt to give 
abstract considerations abstract consideration in a form 
that is understandable and pleasing to the eye is a 
tendency to which Heraclitus most easily and willingly 
succumbs and which ultimately leads to the idea of a 
wave-like movement. (It is the only easily overlooked 
idea of a movement bound to a place.) The Ionian, who 
could gaze at the sea every day, must have known how 
much the restlessness of a sought-after and never 
achieved union is reflected in its movement, from the 
lightly curved line to the high meandering waves. In this 
sense, half abstraction and half artistic observation, one 
121

--- PAGE BREAK ---

can well understand the phrase παλίντροπος ρμονίη
ἁ

κόσμου, 
κωσπερ τόξου κα λύρης = harmony by
ὅ
ὶaves. In this 
sense, half abstraction and half artistic observation, one 
121

--- PAGE BREAK ---

can well understand the phrase παλίντροπος ρμονίη
ἁ

κόσμου, 
κωσπερ τόξου κα λύρης = harmony by
ὅ
ὶ

opposite tensions of the cosmos, like that of the bow and 
of the cithara (Fr. 51). 1) 
 The line of the ancient Greek bow is the same as that 
of the lyre (Arist. Rhet. III, 11 p. 1412 h 35: τόξον φόρμιγέ 
άχορδος = the bow is a cithara without strings), an 
evenly curved line whose ends approach each other. To 
come closer to Heraclitus' idea of the lines of opposing 
forces seeking balance, one could think of the arsis and 
thesis of metrics and the tone line of melodies. This 
avoids the error of assuming vibrating particles. This 
idea applies to the entire the cosmos: “For he says that 
one thing is different from itself and yet harmonious, 
like the harmony of a bow and a lyre” (Plato, 
Symposium 187 A). A comparison allows us to fully 
appreciate the significance of this idea: ν ( ράγκην)
ἣ
ἀ

είμαρμένην ο πολλο καλο σιν μπεδοκλ ς δ φιλίαν
ἱ
ὶ
ῦ
Ἐ
ῆ
ὲ

μο κα νε κος ‘
ὁ
ῦ
ὶ
ῖ
Ηράκλειτο δε παλίντροπον άρμονίην 
κόσμον οκωσπερ λυρας καί τόξον (necessity is called 
fatality by most; Empedocles calls it friendship and 
hatred together; Heraclitus, on the other hand, harmony
1) Which was mostly interpreted symbolically; by Lassalle (I, p. 
114) as a symbol of the Apollonian cult, by Pfleiderer (p. 90) and 
Schäfer (p. 76) as symbols of cheerful life and death, which is far too 
sentimental for Heraclitus; on the other hand, it is used as an image 
of the world process by Bernays (Ges. Abh. I, p. 41) and by Zeller (I, 
p. 548).
122

--- PAGE BREAK ---death, which is far too 
sentimental for Heraclitus; on the other hand, it is used as an image 
of the world process by Bernays (Ges. Abh. I, p. 41) and by Zeller (I, 
p. 548).
122

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by opposing tensions, like those of the lyre and the bow – Plut. 
de anim. procr. 27 p. 1026). 
If one imagines what the ειμαρμένη (fatality), the 
great, omnipresent and unconditional fate, is in the 
imagination of a Greek, one will also understand the 
meaning of Heraclitus' harmony (which is synonymous 
with λoγos: reason or νóμos: law). 
All these attempts to gain a new view of events 
spring from the denial of persistent being. Everything is 
not in a state of flux – “everything” would still be a form 
of being – but rather the background of appearance is to 
be thought of exclusively as pure action, if you will, as 
the sum of tensions.
123

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. Fire
Heraclitus mentions fire in a way that forces us to 
think of it as being, as a state; thus, even for him, there 
are states in the world of appearances essentially 
coinciding with the states of aggregation – which in this 
system, where the concept of substance is rejected, 
demand an explanation. The fact that there are states of 
rest in nature (from which the assumption of persistent 
substances first arose) cannot be disputed. Heraclitus 
mentions them (θάνατός στιν, 
κόσα γερθέντες
ἐ
ὁ
ἐ

ρέομεν = death is all that we see awake – Fr. 21) and
ὁ

attributes them to the deception of the senses. The eye is 
prevented from seeing becoming and flowing (Fr. 54 and 
123. See p. 20). It appears to humans in several typical 
forms, forms of sensory appearance (γ = earth, π ρ =
ῆ
ῦon of the senses. The eye is 
prevented from seeing becoming and flowing (Fr. 54 and 
123. See p. 20). It appears to humans in several typical 
forms, forms of sensory appearance (γ = earth, π ρ =
ῆ
ῦ

fire, θάλασσα = sea, water, πρηστήρ = weather; these are 
already the elements of the Empedocles), which change 
among themselves and have a transient existence. They 
have a purely subjective reality. In the past, people 
spoke of light, heat, and electricity as natural forces. 
Today, they are referred to in a similar sense as forms of 
energy, tacitly that they are manifestations of “energy in 
itself,” that unknowable cause of events. This is how 
Heraclitus conceives of fire, the sea, the earth, and the 
storm: things that only appear to have existence and 
duration, which they would like to convince the 
knowing mind of, and which, removed from the eye, are 
125

--- PAGE BREAK ---he earth, and the 
storm: things that only appear to have existence and 
duration, which they would like to convince the 
knowing mind of, and which, removed from the eye, are 
125

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nothing more than eternal restless flow and becoming, 
one like the other. 
This gives us the concept of fire: a manifestation of 
the cosmic process, but not yet its meaning. Heraclitus 
describes this natural phenomenon, which in itself 
should have no advantage over others, in a mysterious 
way. Because of this high significance, one might believe 
that the main point of the entire teaching has been found 
here; the idea contained herein has also been subject to 
many misunderstandings. The interpretation of fire 
merely as a symbol of change ¹) can be dismissed; one no 
longer seeks obscure symbolism in this philosopher. But 
it is understandable how the idea and designation of fire 
as αρχή (principle) could have become commonplace 
since Aristotle. 2) 
Aρχή is a very specific term which, due to many 
assumptions that cannot be separated from it, can only
1) In this sense, especially Schleiermacher and Zeller, who 
believes that Heraclitus was not yet able to separate the symbol 
from its sensual form.
2) Simpl. in Arist. Phys. 6 a: “Innaσos zai Hoazλ. nvg éлoiýσavto 
tv άoxv. Zeller (I, p. 541); ”the substance in which the reason and 
essence of all things is sought.“ Teichmüller (I, p. 135): the basic 
substance, like the air of Anaximenes and the water of Thales.” 
Pfleiderer (p. 119 ff.): “the secondary concrete form of metaphysical 
ideas.” Gomperz, Lassalle, and Heinze (teaching of Logos, p. 4) also 
describe fire as matter.
126

--- PAGE BREAK ---Thales.” 
Pfleiderer (p. 119 ff.): “the secondary concrete form of metaphysical 
ideas.” Gomperz, Lassalle, and Heinze (teaching of Logos, p. 4) also 
describe fire as matter.
126

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be used in a limited way. The Ionians coined it; if 
understood correctly, it encompasses the entire system 
of these philosophers. Above all, it contains the idea of 
development and transformation back into a normal 
state. The question posed by the Ionians was: Where did 
things come from? A substance emerges, namely a 
temporally and physically original substance (because 
αρχή means both), which, in Anaximander, takes on 
qualities while remaining itself. Despite its qualitative 
variability, the αρχή has the conceptual characteristics of 
a substance. According to Anaximenes, the other states 
arise from the air through a spatial (volume) change of 
this initial substance (πυκνωσις = condensation, μάνωσις 
= rarefaction), a view that does not contradict that of 
Democritus. How could one connect Heraclitus with this 
problem? None of his statements bear any relation to 
this question. Heraclitus knows no substance, that alone 
is decisive; but he also does not know the idea of 
development from an original and normal state. It is 
impossible to ask about a primordial substance in the 
context of his thoughts. His problem was: How does the 
cosmic process take place? The supposed states and 
substances are in truth the changing form of its 
appearance: vòs τροπα πρ
τον θάλασσα, θαλάσσης δ
ὶ
ῶ
ὲ 
τ μ ν μισυ γ , τ δ μισυ πρηστήρ (transformations
ὸ
ὲ
ἥ
ῆ
ὸ
ὲἥ

of fire: first the sea, from the sea one half earth, the other 
half weather – Fr. 31). Fire is therefore not considered to 
be substance, but as τροπή = change (ανταμοιβή = 
exchange in Fr. 90). This distinction is valuable. Tροπή 
and αρχή are the strongest opposites; αρχή a substance, 
127

--- PAGE BREAK ---sidered to 
be substance, but as τροπή = change (ανταμοιβή = 
exchange in Fr. 90). This distinction is valuable. Tροπή 
and αρχή are the strongest opposites; αρχή a substance, 
127

--- PAGE BREAK ---

something existing and persistent in itself, τροπή a 
metamorphosis, a form. As αρχή can always only be 
assumed to be one of the existing substances that is 
present first for whatever reason; the others are 
dependent on it. τροπή is equally fire and every other 
phenomenon. One wonders whether Anaximander 
could have used this expression. 
Heraclitus placed fire at the center of the equally 
valid types of phenomena. The reason for this choice is 
to be found in the less scientific than artistic character of 
his thinking. He was guided here by the same feeling 
that has made fire and the sun the object of religious 
worship throughout the ages. This most mysterious, 
noble, and purest of all natural phenomena appeared to 
the people of a distant time as something sacred, and 
Heraclitus' reverent nature, receptive to aesthetic 
impressions, did not shy away from this impression. He 
saw here the purest representation of the character of the 
restless (πΰρ άείζωον = ever-living fire). This reflected 
his penchant for vividness. Fire is the most terrible and 
powerful of the elemental forces which truly dominates 
nature. That is why he loved it. (τ δέ πάντα ο ακίζει
ὰ
ἰ

κεραυνός: all things are ruled by lightning – Fr. 64.; 
Πάντα γαρ το πΰρ έπελθόν κρίνει καί καταλήψεται: fire, 
supervening, will judge and condemn all things – Fr. 66.) 
There is no scientific reason for this preference, and it is 
also unlikely that he wanted or was able to base it on 
such reasons. The visible form of cosmic movement is 
constantly changing. Fire, as one of the possible forms 
128

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd it is 
also unlikely that he wanted or was able to base it on 
such reasons. The visible form of cosmic movement is 
constantly changing. Fire, as one of the possible forms 
128

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(τροπαί), is the most beautiful and noble, but not a 
physically more important or more original form than a 
substance, the αρχή. 
It is a manifestation like any other, and transient like 
any other: πυρός τε 
νταμοιβ
 τ
 πάντα κα π ρ
ἀ
ὴ
ὰ
ὶ
ῦ 
πάντων 
κωσπερ χρυσο
 χρήματα κα χρημάτων
ἁ
ὅ
ῦ
ὶ

χρυσός (from fire are changed all things and fire from all 
things, just as from gold commodities and from 
commodities gold – Fr. 90). The τροπαί (forms) are in a 
state of constant mutual dissolution; this is one aspect of 
their nature. Heraclitus found a fitting phrase for this 
change of equivalent phenomena: πυρ τ ν 
έρος
ὸ
ἀ

θάνατον κα 
ρ ζ ι τ ν πυρ ς θάνατον, δωρ ζ ι τ ν
ὶἀὴ
ῆ
ὸ
ὸ
ὕ
ῆ
ὸ 
γ ς θάνατον, γ τ ν δατος (fire lives the death of air,
ῆ
ῆ
ὸ
ὕ

and air lives the death of fire, water lives the death of 
earth, earth the death of water – Fr. 76). One can 
understand the meaning of this expression: the 
momentary predominance of one form already 
determines an increase in power of the other, which 
finally reaches a degree that must bring about a change. 
In this case, fire is considered, as already mentioned, not 
in a physical sense, but in an aesthetic sense, as the most 
perfect of all conceivable forms. “According to 
Heraclitus, there is a hierarchy of values among the 
elements, determined by their distance from the moving 
and living fire itself” (E. Rohde, Psyche II, p. 146). The 
cosmos, the great order of the course of all world events 
is, in a certain sense, truly identical with fire (κόσμον 
τ ν α τ ν πάντων ο τε τις θε
ν ο τε νθρώ πων
ὸ
ὐὸ
ἁ
ὔ
ῶ
ὔ
ἀ

129

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ποίησε, λλ ν α ε κα στι κα σται π ρ είζωον,
ἐ
ἀ
᾽ἦ
ἰὶ
ὶἔ
ὶἔ
ῦ
ἀ

πτόμενον μέτρα κα 
ποσβεννύμενον μέτρα: this
ἁ
ὶ
ἀν α τ ν πάντων ο τε τις θε
ν ο τε νθρώ πων
ὸ
ὐὸ
ἁ
ὔ
ῶ
ὔ
ἀ

129

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ποίησε, λλ ν α ε κα στι κα σται π ρ είζωον,
ἐ
ἀ
᾽ἦ
ἰὶ
ὶἔ
ὶἔ
ῦ
ἀ

πτόμενον μέτρα κα 
ποσβεννύμενον μέτρα: this
ἁ
ὶ
ἀ

cosmos, the same as all, was not made by any of the 
gods, nor by men, but has always been, is and will be 
ever-living fire, which is kindled according to measures 
and extinguished according to measures – Fr. 30). 
In Heraclitus' opinion, the universe, sublime nature, 
the most sublime, purest, and noblest form; the cosmos 
is therefore only in a state of perfection when change has 
taken on exclusively the form of fire, a state that recurs 
regularly in the course of time (Fr. 30, 66). All other 
forms (solid, liquid, gaseous) appear to be of lesser value 
in comparison to the beauty and power of fire. (This is 
the meaning of the words χρησμοσύνη = necessity and 
κόρος = fullness in Fr. 65). Teichmüller (I, p. 136 ff.) 
rightly sees here a hint and variation of the Greek idea 
that appears developed in Aristotle's entelechy, the path 
from the potential to the actual. 
130

--- PAGE BREAK ---hmüller (I, p. 136 ff.) 
rightly sees here a hint and variation of the Greek idea 
that appears developed in Aristotle's entelechy, the path 
from the potential to the actual. 
130

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. Πάντα ε as the formal principle
ῥῖ
of organic nature.
We come to the other, one might say external area of 
application of the Heraclitean principle of motion, the 
visible and tangible changes in nature that surround us. 
The basic idea contained in the formula πάντα ε
ῥῖ 
appears here as the formal principle of life and events of 
all kinds. We must therefore distinguish between the 
never knowable background of things, the actual 
becoming and acting, and its external appearance as the 
world of the senses. The application to the latter is 
universally recognized and easily comprehensible, and 
is usually understood solely as πάντα ε .
ῥῖ 
Only the restlessness of the energetic process is 
invisible (as are, for example, the etheric waves of light); 
everyone can see the changes in the phenomenal world, 
which constitute what is popularly called the “life of 
nature.” The second distinction is more important. 
Events in nature lack the appearance of regularity, of a 
strict, unchanging rule. In the growth of a plant, the play 
of the waves, the course of atmospheric events, humans 
do not tend to have this impression. One cannot speak 
here of a uniform, or even a continuous, change in all 
cases. In the energetic process, movement is a conceptual 
necessity, even a tautology; here it is possible, at most 
the rule. Before Heraclitus, no one had noticed a rule 
131

--- PAGE BREAK ---l 
cases. In the energetic process, movement is a conceptual 
necessity, even a tautology; here it is possible, at most 
the rule. Before Heraclitus, no one had noticed a rule 
131

--- PAGE BREAK ---

here. Simple observation teaches us that this life and 
these events lack rhythm. Therefore, to the artistic eye of 
Heraclitus, the harmony of appearance (which he 
nevertheless assumes) is valued less than that other 
harmony, which arises from a metrical rule of regularity 
and is only imagined (άρμονίη γ ρ φαν ς φανερ ς
ὰ
ἀ
ὴ
ῆ 
κρείττων: the hidden harmony is better than the 
manifest one – Fr. 54). 
The transformation itself escapes no one, only its law 
is hidden. But it is there, if one knows where to find it. 
And it is the same as that of eternal action. ¹) This is a 
great thought. It was Heraclitus' opinion that nature is 
essentially under the influence of this change, which is 
also complete and universal: for it is impossible for a 
river to flow into the same sea twice α τ
ι ο δ θνητ ς
ὐῶ
ὐὲ
ῆ 
ο σίας δ ς πτεσθαι κατ ξιν (it is not possible to enter
ὐ
ὶἅ
ὰἕ

twice in the same river nor to touch twice a mortal 
substance in the same state – Fr. 91). This idea, in 
keeping with a general tendency toward Heraclitus, has 
been given a moralizing interpretation that completely 
negates its simple meaning. Schuster explains that no 
thing in the world can escape ultimate destruction (p. 
201 f.), and Lassalle quotes as a counterpoint the verse: 
“Everything that comes into being is worth being 
destroyed” (I, p. 374). This completely misinterprets the 
deepest meaning of the idea. Heraclitus wants to 
contradict a teleological conception of being. 2) He sees 
the “course of the world” as eternally the same, without 
beginning or end: xóoμov vov α τ ν πάντων ο τε τις
ὐὸ
ἁ
ὔ

132

--- PAGE BREAK ---

θε
ν ο τε νθρώπων ποίησε, λλ ν v α ε κα στιν
ῶ
ὔ
ἀ
ἐ
ἀ
᾽ἦ
ἰὶ
ὶἔ

κα σται κιλ (this world the same as all, none of the
ὶἔnning or end: xóoμov vov α τ ν πάντων ο τε τις
ὐὸ
ἁ
ὔ

132

--- PAGE BREAK ---

θε
ν ο τε νθρώπων ποίησε, λλ ν v α ε κα στιν
ῶ
ὔ
ἀ
ἐ
ἀ
᾽ἦ
ἰὶ
ὶἔ

κα σται κιλ (this world the same as all, none of the
ὶἔ

gods or men made it, but it was always and is and will 
be, etc. – Fr. 30). The change of appearances is always 
the same, always repeating itself; this idea condensed 
into a doctrine of eternal return. Any attempt at a 
concept of development, such as that already proposed 
by Anaximander (the biological view), is completely 
absent here, as is any reference to the concept of 
causality. There is no better image for this idea than that 
chosen by Heraclitus himself: ποταμο σι το σι α το σι
ῖ
ῖ
ὐ
ῖ

μβαίνουσιν τερα κα τερα δατα πι
ε (to those
ἐ
ἕ
ὶἕ
ὕ
ἐ
ῤῥῖ

who enter the same rivers, other and other waters follow 
– Fr. 12). We see the course of the world as if we were 
standing on the bank of a river; it flows incessantly, 
always the same, without beginning and end, without 
cause or goal. We can only understand the events in the 
cosmos by their character, not as an event in its entirety.
Heraclitus' view of life is a remarkable example of 
this idea:  τ ς γενέσεως ποταμ ς ο τος νδε λεχ
ς δέων
ὁῆ
ὸ
ὗ
ἐ
ῶ

ο ποτε στήσεται (the river of generation, flowing thus
ὔ
1) The expression ódòs vo zátw is found in relation to the
ɑ

phenomenal world: μεταβολ ν 
ρ ς σωμάτων κα γενέσεως
ὴ
ὁᾷ
ὶ

λλαγ ν, δ ν νω κα κάτω, κατ τ ν Η. (Maxim. Τyr. XII, 4 p.
ἀ
ὴ
ὁὸ
ἄ
ὶ
ὰὸ
῾

489).
2) Teichmüller (I, 137) believes he has discovered a certain 
teleology, but is unable to prove it.
133

--- PAGE BREAK ---ν, δ ν νω κα κάτω, κατ τ ν Η. (Maxim. Τyr. XII, 4 p.
ἀ
ὴ
ὁὸ
ἄ
ὶ
ὰὸ
῾

489).
2) Teichmüller (I, 137) believes he has discovered a certain 
teleology, but is unable to prove it.
133

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unceasingly, will never stop). 1) Instead of the individual 
living being, he takes the entire sequence of a species as 
an indivisible whole, whose phases (the life of the 
individual) are only moments and stages of a great and 
uninterrupted metamorphosis. According to this more 
morphological than physiological view, life is to be 
thought of as an alternation of youth and old age, of 
increase and decrease in strength (Ανθρωπος, πως ν
ὅ
ἐ 
ε φρόν φάος, πτεται ποσ βεννυται: man, like a light
ὐ
ῃ
ἅ
ἀ

in the night, goes on and off – according to Byw. Fr. 77, 
changed and expanded by Diels). This idea makes the 
meaning of the phrase ζ ν τ ν θάνατον (live the death)
ῆ
ὸ

quite clear. In another saying: γενόμενοι ζώειν θέλουσι
ἐ

μόρους τ γειν. μ λλον δ ναπαύεσθαι κα πα δας
᾽ἔ
ᾶ
ὲἀ
ὶ
ῖ

καταλείπουσι μόρνυς γενέσθαι (born, they want to live 
and have their mortal destinies. Rather enjoy the rest, 
and leave behind them children for other mortal 
destinies to be begotten – Fr.20), the word ναπαύεσθαι,
ἀ

a rest between two periods of highest activity in life, is 
important in supporting this view. 
1) Plut. cons. ad Apoll. 10. (See Bernays Rh. Mus. Vol. I, 50.) The 
preceding sentences contain Heraclitean thoughts and prove the 
above view: τ α τό τ νι ζ
ν κα τεθνηκ ς κα τ γρηγορ ς κα
᾿
ὐ
᾽ἔ
ῶ
ὶ
ὸ
ὶὸἐ
ὸ
ὶ 
τ καθε δον κα νέων κα γηραιών· τάδε γ ρ μεταπεσόντα κε νά
ὸ
ῦ
ὶ
ὶ
ὰ
ἐ
ῖ

στι κ κε να πάλιν μεταπεσόντα τα τα .... Ο τω 
 φύσις κ τ ς
ἐ
ἀ
ῖ
ῦ
ὕ
ἡ
ἐ
ῆ 
α τ ς 
λης πάλαι μ ν το ς προγόνους 
μ
ν 
νέσχεν, ε τα
ὐῆ
ὕ
ὲ
ὺ
ἡῶ
ἀ
ἶ

συγχέασ α το ς One and the same thing in us the living and the
᾽
ὐ
ὺ

dead, the awake and the sleeping, the young and the old; these, 
then, by changing, are those, and those, inversely, by changing, are 
134

--- PAGE BREAK ---ame thing in us the living and the
᾽
ὐ
ὺ

dead, the awake and the sleeping, the young and the old; these, 
then, by changing, are those, and those, inversely, by changing, are 
134

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A consequence of the constant change in the sensory 
world, which must logically be extended to the 
perceiving human being, is doubt about knowledge. 
Before Heraclitus, no one had seen a problem here, and 
it is proof of great intellectual energy to have overcome 
the unconscious pride that a time in which philosophical 
thinking is just emerging tends to place. From the basic 
features of this doctrine, complete agnosticism could 
have developed, and Protagoras actually took this step, 
but Heraclitus was too powerful and positive to be led 
astray by a negative disposition of his philosophy, 
which actually justified him in not being mistrustful and 
dismissive of the main questions (as Lassalle wanted to 
suggest by quoting that Faust quote). 2) Epistemology is 
not one of Heraclitus' important problems. Only because 
it casts the great main idea in a sharper light by 
demanding an insight into the restless, ever-changing 
character of the world and an overcoming of 
appearances can it be considered in this context. Fr. 21: 
θάνατός στιν κόσα γερθέντες ρέομεν: death are all
ἐ
ὁ
ἐ
ὀ

things that we see awake, that is: the external world 
appears to be at rest. Arist. Metaph. I, 6: ώς αισθητών αεὶ 
εόντων κα πιστήμης περ α τ
ν ο κ ο σης: because
ῥ
ὶἐ
ὶ
ὐῶ
ὐ
ὔ

these.... In this way nature brought forth our progenitors from the same 
matter of old; then, having destroyed them, she begot our parents, then us, 
then she will make others return upon others, and the river of generation, 
which flows without ceasing, will never stop).
2) p. 28. 31
135

--- PAGE BREAK ---d them, she begot our parents, then us, 
then she will make others return upon others, and the river of generation, 
which flows without ceasing, will never stop).
2) p. 28. 31
135

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sensible things are always in flux and because there is no 
scientific knowledge about them. 
This skepticism is directed only against a science that 
bases itself on permanent conditions. Fr. 107: κακοί 
µágτvqes άv θρώποισι φθαλμο κα 
τα βαρβάρους
ὀ
ὶ
ὶὦ

ψυχ ς χόντων = bad witnesses for men are the eyes
ὰ
ἐ

and ears of those who have barbarous souls; i.e. for 
people who uncritically remain at the level of mere 
sensory perception. All creations of culture, state, 
society, customs, views, are products of nature; they are 
subject to the same conditions of existence as the rest, to 
the strict law that nothing remains and everything 
changes. It is one of Heraclitus' greatest discoveries to 
have noticed this inner relationship between culture and 
nature. The resistance and balance of opposing tensions 
means for energetic events what war means for human 
existence. (Fr. 8: návrα xar' ριν γίνεσθαι = everything is
ἔ

produced by discord). War justifies the aristocratic 
hierarchy that Heraclitus loved. There can be no eternal 
and permanent relationships; gods and humans, free 
and slaves are subject to the law of necessary change. 
(Fr. 53) Heraclitus knew well that aristocracy in Greece 
at that time was doomed to perish. 
In this chaos of transformations, there can be no 
lasting values; that is the ultimate consequence of such a 
view. This insight, against which the mind resists the 
longest, was emphatically defended by Heraclitus. We 
have before us a thoroughly thought-out system of 
relativism. Indeed, where there is no standstill and no 
136

--- PAGE BREAK ---d resists the 
longest, was emphatically defended by Heraclitus. We 
have before us a thoroughly thought-out system of 
relativism. Indeed, where there is no standstill and no 
136

--- PAGE BREAK ---

resting point, the concepts of ethics and aesthetics can 
only apply to the individual and only be applied on a 
case-by-case basis. This is the case with the appreciation 
of physical beauty (Fr. 82, 83), of wisdom (ανηρ νήπιος 
κουσε πρ ς δαίμονος κωσπερ πα ς πρ ς νδρός: man
ἤ
ὸ
ἥ
ῖ
ὸἀ

can be called infant in comparison to god, as well as 
child in comparison of man – Fr. 79), of what is precious, 
pleasant, useful (ονους σúquar ν λέσθαι μ λλον 
ἂ
ἑ
ᾶ
ἢ 
χρυσός: asses would choose garbage rather than gold – 
Fr. 9; Fr. 37, 58, 61, 110-111.) The values and qualities of 
things lie between two extremes and are only capable of 
subjective application. 
137

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II. Second formulation: The struggle
of opposites.
We learned about the idea of pure movement in the 
version πάντα ε . There is a second form of the same
ῥῖ- PAGE BREAK ---

138

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II. Second formulation: The struggle
of opposites.
We learned about the idea of pure movement in the 
version πάντα ε . There is a second form of the same
ῥῖ

idea, which differs only in the changed point of view of 
the observer. One can imagine the entire process of 
becoming as a unity; then one gets the impression of the 
beginning and the end, of the lack of a resting point and 
point of reference, of flow in the truest sense. We can 
then observe the same process with regard to its 
individual phases in juxtaposition and succession and 
compare the series of individual states according to their 
mutual relationship. These excerpts from the 
uninterrupted sequence of events (the things, states, 
properties of things are such), subjectively highlighted, 
are of different kinds, are mutually exclusive, and stand 
in contrast to one another. In this mental act lies the 
origin of contrast; it arises through comparison; a 
contrast can only lie in the relationship of one factor to 
another that is equally given. We have seen how the 
phrase πάντα ε can have a twofold application The
ῥῖ

doctrine of opposites follows from this.
It is erroneously claimed that Heraclitus denied 
opposites or declared them to be identical (Lassalle II, p. 
266). On the contrary, Heraclitus emphasized opposites, 
precisely because he was an aristocrat who possessed 
139

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the “pathos of distance” to the highest degree and it did 
not even occur to him to want to weaken or deny 
differences. He does not speak of an identity of 
opposites as contradictio in adjecto but of an identity of 
the origin and relative character of opposites. It is not 
the opposition that is disputed, but its objective reality. 
Heraclitus, however, usually says rather vaguely and 
misleadingly that two extremes are “the same”: ταότό τ᾽ 
νι ζ
ν κα τεθνηκός (are the living and the dead the
ἔ
ῶ
ὶed, but its objective reality. 
Heraclitus, however, usually says rather vaguely and 
misleadingly that two extremes are “the same”: ταότό τ᾽ 
νι ζ
ν κα τεθνηκός (are the living and the dead the
ἔ
ῶ
ὶ

same – Fr. 88), or: ο δ σκότος ο δ φ
ς, ο δ πονηρ ν
ὐὲ
ὐὲ
ῶ
ὐὲ
ὸ 
ο δ γαθ ν τερόν φησιν ε ναι  
ὐὲἀ
ὸ
ἕ
ἶ
ὁΗράκλειτος, λλ ν
ἀ
ὰἕ 
κα ὶτό airó. (Heraclitus says that neither darkness and 
light, nor evil and good, are different things, but are one 
and the same thing. – Hippol. ref. haer. IX, 10.) Finally, 
in a statement against Hesiod, 
στις 
μέρην κα
ὅ
ἡ
ὶ 
ε φρόνην ο κ γίνωσκεν. στι γ ρ ν" (who has not
ὐ
ὐ
ἐ
ἔ
ὰ
ἕ

known day and night: they are therefore one and the 
same thing – Fr. 57.) According to all previous 
assumptions, this can only be a judgment about the form 
of these phenomena. They are equally moments in one 
and the same process, as contrasts that exist uniformly in 
an excitement of the senses and that only through this 
mutual contrast stand out from an infinity of events and 
thereby begin to exist for the senses. In a further 
statement: ο ξυνι σιν, 
κως διαφερόμενον ωυτ
ι
ὐ
ᾶ
ὅ
ἑ
ῶ 
μολογέει (they do not understand how the divergent
ὁ

agrees with itself – Fr. 51) the latter expression is 
undoubtedly chosen deliberately because of its 
relationship to λóγος, which in this doctrine denotes the 
140

--- PAGE BREAK ---

formal, lawful order. 
'Ομολογέΐν can therefore be translated as: in 
accordance with form, with relation. The quotations 
cited are to be understood in this sense. It is only a 
matter of identity of form. The statement that good and 
evil are the same (Fr. 33 58 from Arist. Top. VIII, 5, 159b 
30: αγαθόν καί κακόν εϊναι ταύτόν) is therefore not to be 
understood in Nietzsche's sense. There is an even more 
precise explanation of this idea: ώς Ηράκλειτος τὸ 
γαθ ν κα τ κακ ν ε ς τα τ ν λέγειν συνιέναι δίκην
ἀ
ὸ
ὶ
ὸ
ὸ
ἰ
ὐὸόν) is therefore not to be 
understood in Nietzsche's sense. There is an even more 
precise explanation of this idea: ώς Ηράκλειτος τὸ 
γαθ ν κα τ κακ ν ε ς τα τ ν λέγειν συνιέναι δίκην
ἀ
ὸ
ὶ
ὸ
ὸ
ἰ
ὐὸ

τόξου καί  λύρας (just as Heraclitus says that the good 
and the bad converge into the same, in the manner of the 
bow and the lyre – Simpl. in Phys. fol. 11a). Here again 
appears the familiar image in which the course of 
antagonistic becoming is excellently represented. 
Heraclitus' intention is unmistakeable: the opposing 
facts are identical insofar as each only exists in relation 
to the other, through the existence of the other. In this 
mutual dependence, they are equal to each other. This 
idea is clearly expressed in the following aphorism: ταύτ 
τ νι ζ
ν κα τεθνηκός, κα τ γρηγορ ς κα τ
᾽ἔ
ῶ
ὶ
ὶ
ὸἐ
ὸ
ὶ
ὸ 
καθε δον, κα νέον κα γηραιόν. τάδε γ ρ μεταπεσόντα
ῦ
ὶ
ὶ
ὰ

κε νά στι κ κε να πάλιν μεταπεσόντα τα τα (One and
ἐ
ῖ
ἐ
ἀ
ῖ
ῦ

the same thing are the living the dead, and the waking 
and the sleeping, and the new and the old. These, then, 
in changing are those, and those inversely in changing 
are these – Fr. 88). The reversal into the opposite is only 
possible under the condition of completely equal 
characteristics. We perceive the contrast in all its 
141

--- PAGE BREAK ---n changing 
are these – Fr. 88). The reversal into the opposite is only 
possible under the condition of completely equal 
characteristics. We perceive the contrast in all its 
141

--- PAGE BREAK ---

strength; it was far from Heraclitus' intention to deny 
this; for us, opposites are the most real aspect of 
existence. But they are not things that exist in and of 
themselves, they are not permanent, and above all, they 
are not things that can exist without their opposite. 
It is a great testament to Heraclitus' powers of 
judgment to have understood the phenomenon of 
opposites correctly, despite popular opinion and the 
powerful and deceptive judgment of the senses. Only in 
relation to each other and measured by us do opposing 
values arise. The many antitheses that characterize 
Heraclitus' style are meant to embody nothing other 
than this favorite idea. The subjective origin of value 
concepts means that properties must always lie between 
two extremes, in that the absence of one is equivalent to 
the existence of the other. Heraclitus used the phrase ζ ν
ῆ 
τ ν θάνατον in the sentences: ζ ι π ρ τ ν 
έρος
ὸ
ῆ
ῦ
ὸ
ἀ

θάνατον κα 
ρ ζ ι τ ν πυρ ς θάνατον, δωρ ζ ι τ ν
ὶἀὴ
ῆ
ὸ
ὸ
ὕ
ῆ
ὸ 
γ ς θάνατον, γ τ ν δατος (fire lives the death of air
ῆ
ῆ
ὸ
ὕ

and air lives the death of fire, water lives the death of 
earth, earth the death of water – Fr. 76); ζ ν μ ς τ ν
ῆ
ἡᾶ
ὸ 
κείνων (ψυχ
ν) θάνατον κα ζ
ν κείνας τ ν μέτερον
ἐ
ῶ
ὶῶ
ἐ
ὸ
ἡ

θάνατον (we live the death of those [souls] and they live 
our own death – Fr. 77). Cf. Plut. de Ei 18, 392: πυρ ς
ὸ 
θάνατος έρι γένεσις: the death of fire is birth for the air.
ἀ

(See also Fr. 62.) 
In this sense, he approaches the problem of good and 
evil; not ethically, by regulating the application of these 
value concepts, but purely psychologically, by clarifying 
142

--- PAGE BREAK ---

their origin: νθρώποις γίνεσθαι κόσα θέλουσιν ο κ
ἀ
ὁ
ὐ 
μεινον· νο σος γιείην ποίησεν δύ, κακ ν γαθών,
ἄ
ῦ
ὑ
ἐ
ἡ
ὸ
ἀalue concepts, but purely psychologically, by clarifying 
142

--- PAGE BREAK ---

their origin: νθρώποις γίνεσθαι κόσα θέλουσιν ο κ
ἀ
ὁ
ὐ 
μεινον· νο σος γιείην ποίησεν δύ, κακ ν γαθών,
ἄ
ῦ
ὑ
ἐ
ἡ
ὸ
ἀ

λιμ ς κόρον, κάματος νάπαυσιν. (for men it is not
ὸ
ἀ

better that everything they want happens: it is sickness 
that makes way to health, evil to good, hunger to satiety, 
fatigue to rest – Fr. 110-111; connected, separated by 
Diels without reason.) 
The unpsychological desire to see evil banished from 
the world, which seemed to him extremely naive and a 
complete misjudgment of reality, has provoked a 
mocking remark against Homer. Good is not an 
unshakable value in and of itself, but rather the contrast 
and reflection of the evil that surrounds it. Heraclitus 
adds that we would lack not only the impression of this 
quality, but even its very concept, if its opposite did not 
exist: Δίκης νομα ο κ ν ιδεσαν, ε τα τα (scil. δικία)
ὄ
ὐἂ
ἤ
ἰ
ῦ
ἀ

μ ν. = you would not know the concept of justice if
ὴἦ

these things did not exist (i.e. injustice; Fr. 23.) 
Opposites are not only necessary for their mutual 
existence; they have a decisive significance for the world 
process. Without existing differences, an event (which 
consists in the striving for equilibrium) is inconceivable. 
One of the first sentences of energetics is: “For 
something to happen, it is necessary and sufficient that 
uncompensated differences in the intensity of energy 
exist.” (Ostwald, Chem. Energie, p. 48.) Compare this 
with Heraclitus' words: είδέναι δε γρη τ ν πόλεμον
ὸ

όντα ξυνόν, κα δίκην ριν, κα γινόμενα πάντα κατ
ἐ
ὶ
ἔ
ὶ
᾽ 
ριν κα χρεώμενα (one must know that war is common,
ἔ
ὶ

143

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and justice is discord and everything is engendered by 
discord and necessity – Fr. 80) and:  κυκεών διίσταται
ὁ

μ᾽ 
ριν κα χρεώμενα (one must know that war is common,
ἔ
ὶ

143

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and justice is discord and everything is engendered by 
discord and necessity – Fr. 80) and:  κυκεών διίσταται
ὁ

μ

ὴκινούμενος (the compound concoction dissolves if 
not stirred – Fr. 125). 
Pythagoreanism, which in its emphasis on the metric 
and formal runs parallel to Heraclitus, arrives at a 
similar insight: παρ μ ν ο ν τούτων τοσο τον στι
ὰ
ὲ
ὖ
ῦ
ἔ

λαβε ν, τι τ νάντια ρχα τ
ν ντων (from these [the
ῖ
ὅ
ἀ
ἀ
ὶῶ
ὄ

Pythagoreans] we may therefore learn that contraries are 
the principles of beings – Arist. Metaph. I, 5. 986 b. 9). 
The contradiction of opposites appears to the artistic 
eye of this Hellene as άγων (struggle). This was again in 
keeping with his instinct for an unscientific but tangibly 
more plastic and sublime conception of the cosmos. And 
here he could be wholeheartedly involved. Probably 
none of these ancient philosophers represents the type of 
Hellenes of noble descent in their virtues and 
weaknesses as purely as he does. Certainly, no one in the 
development of his worldview has so unreservedly 
surrendered to the influences of his inclinations, desires, 
and feelings. The inclusion of the άγων in this 
intellectual creation is the most significant example of 
how the great impressions of his life and his longing for 
a shattered inner existence unconsciously shaped 
philosophical ideas without losing their full beauty. 
The άγων ¹) is one of the most unique and significant 
creations of Greek culture. Without it, the life of the 
Hellenes in ancient times is almost unimaginable. The 
144

--- PAGE BREAK ---beauty. 
The άγων ¹) is one of the most unique and significant 
creations of Greek culture. Without it, the life of the 
Hellenes in ancient times is almost unimaginable. The 
144

--- PAGE BREAK ---

gymnastic nature that formed its original meaning made 
it a customary exercise for this youthful people, who 
rejoiced in their strength and agility. In it the fullness of 
life, health, the feeling of power, the genuine Greek joy 
in beauty and symmetry of form. In this perfection, it 
was a privilege of the nobility (άθλητήρες = athletes in 
Homer). But its significance goes deeper and is linked to 
the life interests of the entire people. The excessive, 
irresistible desire for glory, which no other people 
possessed to such an extent, found full satisfaction in the 
άγων and at the same time protection from the 
dangerous effects of this passion, which threatened to 
destroy the nation and did destroy it when the άγων in 
its classical form came to an end. This is where its great 
necessity for Greek culture lies. This custom slowly took 
hold in all circles and became a form of almost all 
expressions of life. Even war had an an agonal character; 
people fought with weapons agreed upon in advance; 2) 
in Homer, the masses of the warring people do not 
count, and the great ones rarely fall. An γ
ν was held
ἀῶ

on every occasion and for all conceivable things or 
advantages. 
1) Curtius, Altertum und Gegenwart I, p. 132 ff.; L. Schmidt, 
Ethics of the Greeks I, p. 190 ff.; Burckhardt, Greek Cultural History 
IV, p. 89 ff.
2) As in the war between Chalkis and Eretria (Burckhardt I, p. 
173).
145

--- PAGE BREAK ---32 ff.; L. Schmidt, 
Ethics of the Greeks I, p. 190 ff.; Burckhardt, Greek Cultural History 
IV, p. 89 ff.
2) As in the war between Chalkis and Eretria (Burckhardt I, p. 
173).
145

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were competitions for physical beauty, 1) for 
artistic achievements; 2) rhapsodes, singers, poets, and 
historians competed against each other; we still find it in 
the political life of democratic Athens, where ostracism, 
through a certain equality, was intended to preserve the 
possibility of combat. The Greek mind was familiar with 
the idea of competitions between gods, forces of nature, 
virtues, even abstract concepts and greatness (the φιλία 
= love and νεΐκος = strife of Empedocles). In Heraclitus, 
artistic taste and aristocratic class consciousness came 
together. He loved this most distinguished habit of his 
caste for its beauty and bravery. With the naive 
confidence of youth, he formed a philosophical 
worldview according to his ideal way of life. The world 
is a terrible and eternal γ
ν, which is governed by
ἀῶ

strict laws of struggle. The struggle in nature is a 
compelling fact that every natural philosophy must 
reckon with, either in agreement or in regretful 
acknowledgment of the inevitable. For Heraclitus, there 
could be no doubt about this; this state of affairs 
corresponded to his inclination. The struggle created the 
hierarchy that he loved most: πόλεμος πάντων μ ν
ὲ 
πατήρ στι, πάντων δ βασιλεύει κα το ς μ ν θεο ς
ἐ
ὲ
ὶ
ὺ
ὲ
ὺ 
δειξε το ς δ νθρώπους, το ς μ ν δούλους ποίησε
ἔ
ὺ
ὲἀ
ὺ
ὲ
ἐ

το ς δ λευθέρους (war is the father of all things and of
ὺ
ὲἐ

1) Krause, Gymnastics p. 357.
2) Plin. XXXIV, 53; XXXV, 58. 72. 37
146

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all things is king; it makes some gods, others men, some it 
makes slaves, others free – Fr. 53). 
It is the prerequisite for all events: Ηράκλειτος τὸ 
ντίξουν σύμφερον κα κ τ
ν διαφερόντων καλλίστην
ἀ
ὶἐ
ῶ

ρμονίαν [κα πάντα κατ ριν γινερθα ] (Heraclitus
ἁ
ὶ
᾽ἔ
ὶs slaves, others free – Fr. 53). 
It is the prerequisite for all events: Ηράκλειτος τὸ 
ντίξουν σύμφερον κα κ τ
ν διαφερόντων καλλίστην
ἀ
ὶἐ
ῶ

ρμονίαν [κα πάντα κατ ριν γινερθα ] (Heraclitus
ἁ
ὶ
᾽ἔ
ὶ

says that what is opposed becomes concordant and from 
the divergent is formed the most beautiful harmony, and 
that everything is engendered by discord – Fr. 8) and: 
κα γινόμενα πάντα κατ ριν (and justice is produced
ὶ
᾽ἔ

by discord – from Fr. 80). Accordingly, struggle is 
justifiable (κα δίκην ριν: and justice discord – from Fr.
ὶ
ἔ

80). From this insight into the great necessity of struggle, 
not only as a natural phenomenon, but above all in 
history, one understands the accusation against Homer: 
τ ν μ ν 
μηρον, ε χόμενον κ τε θε
ν ριν κ τ
ὸ
ὲ
Ὅ
ὐ
ἔ
ῶ
ἔ
ἔ
᾿ 
νθρώπων 
πολέσθαι, λανθάνειν φησ τ
 πάντων
ἀ
ἀ
ὶ
ῇ

γενέσει καταρώμενον, κ μάχης κα ντιπαθείας τ ν
ἐ
ὶἀ
ὴ 
γένεσιν χόντων. (says that Homer, in vowing to
ἐ

extinguish discord between gods and men, does not 
realize that he imprecates against the generation of all 
things, those which have the generation of strife and 
antipathy – Plut. de Iside 48, 370.) In these sentences 
appears for the first time ever the insight into how 
dearly man must pay for the best of his culture with 
suffering and cruelty. For the brave spirit of Heraclitus, 
war holds no terror; he thinks of it with joy and longing. 
One must remember that in the γών — and Greek
ἀ

warfare at that time was nothing else — strict and 
measured forms were observed, that among the 
147

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hellenes it was intended above all to have an effect on 
the eye, in order to understand how the concept of 
harmony could develop here. The right, measured 
relationship between opposites in battle appears to the 
spectator as such ( κ τ
ν διαφερόντων καλλίστην
ἐ
ῶ

ρμονίαν: the most beautiful harmony is born of the
ἁld develop here. The right, measured 
relationship between opposites in battle appears to the 
spectator as such ( κ τ
ν διαφερόντων καλλίστην
ἐ
ῶ

ρμονίαν: the most beautiful harmony is born of the
ἁ

divergent –  Fr. 8). Before his eyes, the battle dissolved 
into harmony. Heraclitus, however, presupposes a great 
aesthetic ability to not only perceive harmony as such 
but also to enjoy it. (Τ
 θε
ι καλ πάντα κα γαθ κα
ῷ
ῶ
ὰ
ὶἀ
ὰ
ὶ 
δίκαια, νθρωποι δ 
 μ ν δικα πειλήφασιν, 
 δ
ἄ
ὲἃ
ὲ
ἄ
ὑ
ἃ
ὲ 
δίκαια: for the god all things are beautiful and good and 
just; men, on the other hand, consider some unjust, 
others just – Fr. 102. By θεός, Heraclitus here means a 
spirit of the highest conceivable ability; only such a spirit 
can find great and undivided harmony in the cosmos.) 
He also notes gradations of harmony: ρμονίη φανερ
ἁ
ὴ 
φαν ς κρείττων (the hidden harmony is superior to the
ἀ
ῆ

manifest one – Fr. 54). 
This idea already contains the metrical principle. 
Heraclitus and the Pythagoreans discovered and used 
this genuinely Hellenic idea of the value of 
(mathematical) formal relationships, the former out of 
his artistic sensibility, the latter as a result of 
mathematical considerations. The oldest writer on 
Pythagoreanism, Philolaos, gives a definition of the term 
entirely in the Heraclitean sense: πολυμιγέων νωσις κα
ἕ
ὶ 
διχ φρονεόντων 
ᾶ
ων σνμφρασις (harmony is the unity 
of many things mixed and the context of divergent 
148

--- PAGE BREAK ---

meanings – Nicom. Arithm. p. 59), and Aristotle 
confirms this teaching of the Pythagoreans: τ ν
ὴ 
ρμονίαν κρ σιν κα σύνθεσιν ναντίων ε ναι (harmony
ἁ
ᾶ
ὶ
ἐ
ἶt of divergent 
148

--- PAGE BREAK ---

meanings – Nicom. Arithm. p. 59), and Aristotle 
confirms this teaching of the Pythagoreans: τ ν
ὴ 
ρμονίαν κρ σιν κα σύνθεσιν ναντίων ε ναι (harmony
ἁ
ᾶ
ὶ
ἐ
ἶ

is fusion and synthesis of opposites – de anim. I, 4 at the 
beginning). 1) 
According to Heraclitus, the cosmos is a pure and 
eternal event. The only constant in this process is mass. 
Αρμονία is the same as λόγος  (reason, measure). The 
theory of this concept forms the second part of the 
problem. 
1) Cf. Bauer, Der ältere Pythagoräismus, p. 23 ff. Zeller, Phil. d. 
Griechen, I, p. 401 ff. 
149

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B. The formal principle. 
I. The idea of form in general.
The general, or more correctly, the naive and more 
primitive conception of things is directed toward a 
comprehension of substance, of its inner essence. Only 
an advanced analysis of the process of cognition teaches 
us that the world we perceive is a creation of the senses 
and that the idea of matter (and energy) itself is a 
construct of our thinking. This gives another element of 
appearance, namely form or mathematical relationship. 
Through the idea of a substance and the properties 
conceived in it, we form a picture of the inner structure 
of things in order to explain natural processes 
completely. 
Once we have recognized that it is impossible and 
even absurd to unlock nature in this way, we will refrain 
altogether from to give a visible representation of its 
innermost nature. It then seems obvious to find the 
important and significant aspects of phenomena in their 
mathematical dimensions, in their formal relationships. 
It is even possible to determine natural phenomena 
completely in purely numerical terms without adding a 
hypothesis about their “essence,” and this exhausts 
everything that can be determined with certainty as a 
result of the limitations of cognitive activity through the 
151

--- PAGE BREAK ---ding a 
hypothesis about their “essence,” and this exhausts 
everything that can be determined with certainty as a 
result of the limitations of cognitive activity through the 
151

--- PAGE BREAK ---

investigation of the relationships between objects and 
between objects and the subject can be determined with 
certainty. (An example is Hertz's electromagnetic theory 
of light, which is defined exclusively by a number of 
equations.) The Pythagoreans and Heraclitus discovered 
this valuable and fruitful aspect of phenomena and were 
the first to subject it to observation. In emphasizing the 
formal over the material, we must once again point out 
the important difference in the decomposition of what is 
given in perception into its components. Materialistic 
natural science and most modern philosophers 
distinguish between mass and energy as subordinate 
quantities, like Descartes' substances and Spinoza's 
attributes. Heraclitus, most Greek philosophers, and also 
contemporary energetics distinguish between substance 
and form. Substance is to be understood here as the sum 
of everything that appears to us (mass energy, if you 
will, as opposed to the sum of all natural laws, which is 
to be regarded as “form.” Aristotle distinguished 
similarly between υλη = matter and μορφή = form; 
Heraclitus, the “becoming” as a given thing, the λόγος as 
its form). Substance is not broken down into parts or 
functions; rather, apart from this absolutely given thing, 
only its form is of interest, which is represented in a 
series of (numerical) relationships. 
There can be no doubt about the value of form in this 
sense. The lawful relationship is the only constant in 
natural processes. “If one could measure all sensory 
elements, one would say that the body consists in the 
152

--- PAGE BREAK ---rm in this 
sense. The lawful relationship is the only constant in 
natural processes. “If one could measure all sensory 
elements, one would say that the body consists in the 
152

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fulfillment of certain equations that exist between the 
sensory elements. These equations or relationships are 
therefore the actual constant.” (Mach, Principles of 
Thermodynamics, p. 423). The deeper thought 
penetrates into nature, the more numbers gain in 
importance over images. Form has a cognitive value. It 
was in this respect that they came to appreciate the 
Pythagoreans. Philolaus teaches: xai πάντα μ ν τ
ὲ
ὰ 
γιγνωσκόμενα ριθμ ν χοντι. ο γ ρ τι
ν ο όν τε
ἀ
ὸ
ἔ
ὐ
ὰ
ὁῶ
ἷ

ο δ ν ο τε νοηθ μεν ο τε γνωσθ μεν νευ τούτω. (the
ὐὲ
ὔ
ῆ
ὔ
ῆ
ἄ

known things have a certain number. For it would not 
be possible for any of them to be thought or known 
without – Stob. Ecl. 22, 7. p. 456.) For Heraclitus, whose 
inclinations took a completely different path and whose 
taste in the events of the world admired above all the 
harmony of relationships, the aesthetic value of form, i.e. 
in relation to becoming, whose rhythm is taken into 
account.
Λογος (reason) is identical with μετρον (measure) for 
Heraclitus. This term does not denote a force, much less 
an intelligence, but rather a relationship. This concept, 
which was lost in later Greek philosophy, has mostly 
been misunderstood under the influence of Stoic, 
Christian-Hellenistic, and above all our dualistic views. 
Modern dualism stems from the Christian worldview, 
from which and against which more recent philosophy 
has developed. It is natural that belief in a world order 
of some kind influences the formation of metaphysical 
ideas. The Christian antithesis of world and God, which 
153

--- PAGE BREAK ---ophy 
has developed. It is natural that belief in a world order 
of some kind influences the formation of metaphysical 
ideas. The Christian antithesis of world and God, which 
153

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dominated medieval natural philosophy, continued in a 
series of further antitheses: thought and extension, 
intelligence and substance, matter and energy. Despite 
growing abstraction, the basic division has remained the 
same. The Greek is under the influence of a different 
worldview. He did not perceive the gods as rulers. They 
are amiable and helpful companions of man, with whom 
they share virtues, weaknesses, pain, misfortune, 
passions, and powerlessness, and with whom they are 
subject to the same superior fate. The concept of the 
ειμαρμένη (fatality) is decisive for Greek philosophy. 
The ειμαρμένη is completely impersonal; it has never 
been depicted in the never been depicted in the visual 
arts; they are an inexorable law, fixed for all time and 
inescapable. The Hellenes could speak of the gods with 
joy and contentment, but they thought of the ειμαρμένη 
with quiet dread. They are familiar from Greek tragedy, 
whose ultimate meaning is a resigned acceptance of this 
terrible power. In this belief found the secret certainty 
that ultimately something determines the course of 
events, that nothing human, no soul, is determined by 
any will, reason, or feeling, and is not accessible to any 
request, the same belief that in philosophy becomes a 
knowledge of the ανάγκη = necessity (the λογος = 
reason), the universal law of the world. This: to allow no 
exceptions is the early great insight of Heraclitus, which 
he owed to that belief. Except for Socrates, none of the 
Greek philosophers knew a personal God; Θεός is a 
physical concept in their mouths; for scientific insights 
into nature, Olympus never came into consideration. 
154

--- PAGE BREAK ---none of the 
Greek philosophers knew a personal God; Θεός is a 
physical concept in their mouths; for scientific insights 
into nature, Olympus never came into consideration. 
154

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus, one knows only the visible world in which one 
lives, the cosmos, and nothing else. Nothing led to the 
assumption of a substantial energy or world soul. The 
law lies in the world as a relationship, whether it be 
called θεός, λόγος, νάγκη, or τύχη. It is important to
ἀ

note that all these concepts are derived in a direct line 
from the concept of fate as a norm and legal cause of 
change. The λόγος (reason) is the ειμαρμένη (fatality), an 
immanent fate, not a personal cause, which was not 
misunderstood in ancient times: 
ν ( νάγκην)
ἣ
ἀ

είμαρμένην ο πολλο καλο σιν· μπεδοκλ ς δ φιλίαν
ἱ
ὶ
ῦ
Ἐ
ῆ
ὲ

μο κα νε κος· 
ὁ
ῦ
ὶ
ῖ
Ηράκλειτος δ παλίντροπον ρμονίην
ὲ
ἁ

κόσμου κωσπερ λύρας κα τόξου (what (necessity) the
ἥ
ὶ

majority call fatality; Empedocles calls friendship and 
hatred together; Heraclitus, harmony by opposite 
tensions, like that of the lyre and the bow – Plut. de 
anim. proer. 27 p. 1026). 
Heraclitus conceives of the world as pure movement. 
The λόγος is therefore its rhythm, the beat of movement. 
In this system, which knows no persistent being, is the 
appreciation of the metric. Let us recall once again the 
extent to which the Greeks developed a sensitivity for 
forms; it was not limited to the visual arts; all 
expressions of life occur involuntarily within the limits 
of a certain measure (this is the meaning of καλοκαγαθία 
= probity, σωφροσύνη = prudence, αύτάρκεία = 
moderation, and all similar ideals of Hellenic life). 
Today, we perceive this entire culture as a work of art in 
its own right. 
155

--- PAGE BREAK ---= probity, σωφροσύνη = prudence, αύτάρκεία = 
moderation, and all similar ideals of Hellenic life). 
Today, we perceive this entire culture as a work of art in 
its own right. 
155

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Heraclitus had emphasized harmony in the struggle 
of opposites. This harmony is a metric one. Several 
sayings of this kind have been preserved have been 
preserved: Κόσμον τ ν α τ ν πάντων ο τε τις θε
ν
ὸ
ὐὸ
ἁ
ὔ
ῶ 
ο τε νθρώπων ποίησε, λλ ν α ε κα στι κα σται
ὔ
ἀ
ἐ
ἀ
᾽ἦ
ἰὶ
ὶἔ
ὶἔ

π ρ 
είζωον, 
πτόμενον μέτρα κα 
ποσβεννύμενον
ῦ
ἀ
ἁ
ὶἀ

μέτρα (This cosmos, the same as all, was not made by 
any of the gods or men, but always was, is and will be 
ever-living fire, which is kindled according to measure 
and extinguished according to measure – Fr.30), Ηλιος
῞

γ ρ ο χ περβήσεται μέτρα· ε δ μ , ρινύες μιν Δίκης
ὰ
ὐ
ὑ
ἰ
ὲ
ὴἘ

πίκουροι ξευρήσουσιν (he sun will not trespass his
ἐ
ἐ

measures; otherwise the Erinyes, ministers of Justice, 
will know how to find him – Fr. 94). Θάλασσα διαχέεται 
κα μετρέεται ε ς τ ν α τ ν λόγον πο ος πρόσθεν ν
ὶ
ἰ
ὸ
ὐὸ
ὁ
ῖ
ἦ 
ηγενίσθαι γή (spills back into sea and has its measure in 
the same proportion as it had before it became land – Fr. 
31: “The transformation of water takes place in the same 
mathematical ratio"). It is clear from this that in cosmic 
processes of all kinds a μετρov (measure) is contained. 
One may assume that the repeated mention of the δικε 
(justice) is intended to emphasize the strict regularity of 
this relationship. In any case for Heraclitus, the value of 
the mathematical form of natural processes is very high. 
It would still be necessary to ask about the 
relationship of this idea with the corresponding idea of 
Pythagoras. Pythagoras himself, about whose own 
teachings nothing is certain, and who, according to 
general assumption, was not a writer, is mentioned once 
156

--- PAGE BREAK ---sponding idea of 
Pythagoras. Pythagoras himself, about whose own 
teachings nothing is certain, and who, according to 
general assumption, was not a writer, is mentioned once 
156

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by Heraclitus, and then only because of his scientific 
method. ¹) A relationship of dependence can never be 
proven. It is as unlikely as it is unimportant. Only the 
actual parallelism of the two systems is of interest. The 
oldest Pythagoreanism begins with the observation of 
the existence of mathematical relationships in all forms 
and processes of nature. The doctrine of numbers is only 
a later conclusion from this fact. 2) One proceeds from 
the distinction between matter and form (απειρον-περας 
= infinite-finite), entirely in the spirit of Heraclitus (τα 
πάντα:  the totality of things, κόσμος: the world, λόγος: 
reason, law, μέτρον: measure). A passage from Philolaos 
makes this parallelism clear: 'Avάyxa và córra eiμer 
návia 
 περαίνοντα

πειρα 
 περαίνοντά τε κα
ἢ
ἢἄ
ἢ
ὶ 
πειρα πε τοίνον φαίνεται ο τ
 κ περαινόντων
ἄ
ἐ
ὶ
ὔ᾽ἐ

πάντων όντα ο τ ξ πείρων πάντων, δ λών τ ρα,
ἐ
ὔ᾽ἐἀ
ῆ
᾽ἄ

τι κ περαινόντων τε κα πείρων  τε κόσμος κα τ ν
ὅ
ἐ
ὶἀ
ὅ
ὶὰἐ 
α τ
 συναρμόχθη (it is clear that things are either all
ὐῷ

limited or infinite, or limited and infinite together; since, 
therefore, it is manifest that they are (constituted) 
neither of all limited (elements) nor of all infinite; it is 
clear, therefore, that the cosmos is constituted of all 
limited (elements) and infinite, harmoniously ordered). 
One can see the similarity between the two views, 
but they are limited to the most general basis. The 
formal aspect of Philolaus, which is to be understood as 
the geometric-arithmetic determinability of things, 
subsequently became something quite different from 
Heraclitus' μέτρον, which is to be regarded as the 
157

--- PAGE BREAK ---o be understood as 
the geometric-arithmetic determinability of things, 
subsequently became something quite different from 
Heraclitus' μέτρον, which is to be regarded as the 
157

--- PAGE BREAK ---

measure of time in motion. The problem itself is a 
generally Hellenic one; the details of its formulation are 
entirely individual. 
1) Fr. 40 and similarly Fr. 129. The latter is declared by Diels to 
be unecht, but its content is confirmed by 40 and 80.
2) Cf. Bauer, Der ältere Pythagoräismus p. 200 ff. Aristotle 
presented number theory in a contradictory and certainly incorrect 
manner. Philolaos is the oldest and most reliable author (Bauer p. 
181 ff.). The idea of number as dogy tov övrov (Arist. Metaph. I, 5. 
985 b. 23) is a distortion of the original teaching originating from 
later Pythagoreans.
158

--- PAGE BREAK ---uthor (Bauer p. 
181 ff.). The idea of number as dogy tov övrov (Arist. Metaph. I, 5. 
985 b. 23) is a distortion of the original teaching originating from 
later Pythagoreans.
158

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II. Form as a condition of movement.
The idea of the value of measure has a special 
meaning for Heraclitus. In a world without any material 
quality, which is nothing but a ceaseless striving of 
differences within the course of a movement, there is 
nothing permanent except measure. If we seek we seek 
to determine precisely the relationship between measure 
and movement, we obtain its character as the form of 
movement. This already expresses its absolute necessity 
for movement. Movement is as inconceivable without a 
form as a body without shape. The word rhythm is most 
appropriate for this principle, which takes into account 
the rhythm of becoming, for it is certain that Heraclitus 
perceived above all the artistic and musical aspect of this 
idea and wanted to capture it. The Greeks demanded 
beauty of proportions in everything created for the eye. 
No one made an exception. Anaxagoras attributed 
beauty and (aesthetic-ethical) perfection to his νους 
(spirit); for more recent philosophers, it would have 
been love and compassion. “Wisdom,” that is, perfect 
logic and clarity in all actions, was one of the first 
characteristics of Greek beauty. Heraclitus once uses the 
expression τ σοφόν (the wise) for the principle: ν τ
ὸ
Ἓ
ὸ 
σοφ ν μο νον λέγεσθαι ο κ θέλει κα θέλει Ζην ς
ὸ
ῦ
ὐ
ἐ
ὶἐ
ὸ 
ο νομα (the One, the only wise, does not want and yet
ὔ

wants to be called by the name of Zeus – Fr. 32). The 
δ ς νω κατω (way up and down) is definitely to be
ὁὸ
ἄ

159

--- PAGE BREAK ---ἐ
ὶἐ
ὸ 
ο νομα (the One, the only wise, does not want and yet
ὔ

wants to be called by the name of Zeus – Fr. 32). The 
δ ς νω κατω (way up and down) is definitely to be
ὁὸ
ἄ

159

--- PAGE BREAK ---

understood rhythmically; it is the arsis and thesis of 
Greek meter. To put oneself in Heraclitus' idea of 
rhythmic flow, one could one could imagine the 
rhapsodic recitation of Homeric verses. Αρμονίη 
(harmony) is the λόγος (reason, law), insofar as it is 
beautiful (hence, καΧλίστη άρμονίη: the most beautiful 
harmony – Fr. 8), and indeed the invisible rhythm of the 
great world events, which possesses flawless harmony, 
the more beautiful one. (Fr. 54). The important passage 
reads in full: Αρμονίη φαν ς φανερ ς κρείττων, ν
ἀ
ὴ
ῆ
ἐ ή 
τ ς διαφορ ς κα τ ς τερότητας  μιγνύων θε ς κρυψε
ὰ
ὰ
ὶὰἑ
ὁ
ὸἔ

κα xavédvoer. (the hidden harmony is better than the
ὶ

manifest one; in it God, blending differences and 
diversities, concealed and submerged them – Plut. de 
anim. procr. 27 p. 1026.) 
The rhythm of movement obeys a law. The reference 
to the lawfulness of nature is a new idea in Greek 
philosophy. Anaximander and Xenophanes are not yet 
familiar with it. The expression νόμος (law) for ρμονίη,
ἁ

λόγος (harmony, reason) is characteristic of Heraclitus: 
ξ ν νόωι λέγοντας σχυρίζεσθαι χρ τ
ι ξυν
ι πάντων,
ὺ
ἰ
ὴῶ
ῶ

κωσπερ νόμωι πόλις κα πολ σχυροτέρως, τρέφονται
ἥ
ὶ
ὺἰ

γ ρ πάντες ο νθρώπειοι νόμοι π ν ς το θείου·
ὰ
ἱἀ
ὑὸἑὸ
ῦ

κρατε γ ρ (it is necessary for those who speak
ῖ
ὰ

intelligently to stand firmly on what is common to all, as 
well as a city on the law, and much more strongly. For 
all human laws are nourished by the one divine law; 
this, then, rules as much as it wills, and it is sufficient for 
all things and is superior to them – Fr. 114). It should be 
160

--- PAGE BREAK ---l human laws are nourished by the one divine law; 
this, then, rules as much as it wills, and it is sufficient for 
all things and is superior to them – Fr. 114). It should be 
160

--- PAGE BREAK ---

noted that the term νόμος is more comprehensive than 
our “law,” encompassing not only the actual laws, but 
the entire sum of institutions, customs, constitution, and 
administration of the πόλις (state), i.e., the complete 
rules and forms of public life. Thus the application of the 
term νόμος to the manner of becoming is to be 
understood. The difference between human and divine, 
i.e., physical laws in the aphorism just quoted coincides 
with the distinction between visible and invisible 
harmony (Fr. 54). 
It is striking at first and has given rise to errors that 
Heraclitus used a large number of terms (λóyos, νόμος, 
ρμονίη, τ σοφόν, μέτρον, γνώμη, ε μαρμένη, δίκη,
ἁ
ὸ
ἱ

Θεóς, Zευς = reason, law, harmony, the wise, measure, 
intelligence, fatality, justice, God, Zeus), 1) all of which 
could have been replaced by an apt and exhaustive 
expression. Surely only the lack of such an expression 
for this specific, newly created idea led to that. Λόγος is 
is the most satisfactory of terms; it contains features of 
this principle that can only be expressed individually 
with νόμος or ρμονίη. There is no identity between
ἁ

these terms, only an identity between the ideas they 
represent. They are intended to replace that one non-
existent term and are therefore used interchangeably, 
depending on the relationship that is currently under 
1) The expression δόγμα (doctrine), which also occurs, is 
apocryphal (Bernays, Rhein. Mus. IX, p. 248).
161

--- PAGE BREAK ---

consideration and which they best reflect. 
Thus, we find once γνώμη (intelligence): Ε ναι γ ρ ν
ἶ
ὰ
ἓ 
τ σοφόν, πίστασθαι γνώμην, τέη γκυβέρνησε πάντα
ὸ
ἐ
ὁ
ἐ

δι
 πάντων (Only one thing is wise: to know the
ὰion and which they best reflect. 
Thus, we find once γνώμη (intelligence): Ε ναι γ ρ ν
ἶ
ὰ
ἓ 
τ σοφόν, πίστασθαι γνώμην, τέη γκυβέρνησε πάντα
ὸ
ἐ
ὁ
ἐ

δι
 πάντων (Only one thing is wise: to know the
ὰ

Intelligence that governs all things by means of all – Fr. 
41). Noteworthy is the word κόσμος (order, universe) for 
the overall impression of the world around us. Kόσμος, 
in Heraclitus, does not yet have the comprehensive, 
substantial meaning of “universe”; this word was first 
used by him and Pythagoras in a philosophical sense 
and, according to its origin, has the meaning of “order.” 
The phrase κόσμος ὁ αΰτός απάντων (Fr. 30. Gomperz 
translates: This one order of things, the world. Schuster: 
The one world that encompasses everything within 
itself) is almost identical for Heraclitus with visible 
harmony: the strictly formal order in the course of 
events, which is visible and the same for all (Fr. 89: το ςῖ 
γρηγορόσι να κα κοιν ν κόσμον ε ναι = for the
ἐ
ἕ
ὶ
ὸ
ἶ

awakened there is a single common cosmos). Κόσμος 
can therefore only the impression of the phenomenal 
world, the whole picture of nature that unfolds before 
our senses, not the world as mass. 
The most important term, according to Heinze ¹) of 
Heraclitus in this sense, is λόγος. It has already been 
pointed out earlier that there is a tendency to see 
Heraclitus as a pantheist and mystic. Nowhere has this 
been more significant than in the assessment of this 
concept. Zeller (I, p. 555) finds here the explicit 
“pantheism,” Pfleiderer (p. 132 ff.) constructs a 
162

--- PAGE BREAK ---Nowhere has this 
been more significant than in the assessment of this 
concept. Zeller (I, p. 555) finds here the explicit 
“pantheism,” Pfleiderer (p. 132 ff.) constructs a 
162

--- PAGE BREAK ---

connection with the mysteries, Teichmüller has 
interpreted Heraclitus as a religious fantasist. The term 
λόγος is always brought close to the concept of God. 
Pfleiderer translates “conscious intelligence” (p. 234 ff.), 
Bernays similarly “acting intelligence” (Rhein. Mus. IX, 
p. 252), Teichmüller “world soul” (I, p. 198), Schuster 
“the intelligence stirring in the burning fire” (p. 345), in 
stark contrast, but correctly, “law of motion” (p. 93), 
Schäfer “world reason” and “all-ordering force” (p. 55). 
To avoid these often completely unclear concepts of a 
being, Lassalle's expression “objective law of reason,” 
which is too reminiscent of the νους of Anaxagoras, is 
also unsuitable. 3) 
1) Doctrine of the Logos, p. 9. Also according to Lassalle II, p. 
264.
2) Tannery goes furthest (Rév. philos. 1883, XVI, p. 292): Au 
milieu des “physiologues” ioniens, Héraclite a une position tout spé 
ciale, ou plutôt il n'est rien moins que physiologue, c'est un 
“théologue”.
3) Teichmüller (I, p. 167-181) provides a detailed compilation of 
the meanings of óyos in the pre-Heraclitean period. Nowhere here 
does one find the meaning of reason, but rather meaning, content of 
thoughts. Heraclitus uses the word in very different ways. Fr.45: 
ψυχ ι πείρατα 
ν ο κ ν ξείροιο, π σαν πιπορευό μενος δόν·
ὴ
ἰὼ
ὐ
ἂ
ἐ
ᾶ
ἐ
ὁ

ο τω βαθ ν λόγον 
χει (roughly disposition, education,
ὕ
ὺ
ἔ

organization); Fr. 108: ózóowv kóyovs йzováα ... (dispute); Fr. 87: 
βλ ξ νθρωπος π παντ λόγωι πτο σθαι φιλε (word); Fr. 139: ο
ὰἄ
ἐὶ
ὶ
ἐ
ῆ
ῖ
ὗ 
πλέων λόγος  τ
ν λλων (of which there is talk). In any case, it
ἦ
ῶ
ἄ

follows from this that the meaning intelligence is impossible.
163

--- PAGE BREAK ---ι φιλε (word); Fr. 139: ο
ὰἄ
ἐὶ
ὶ
ἐ
ῆ
ῖ
ὗ 
πλέων λόγος  τ
ν λλων (of which there is talk). In any case, it
ἦ
ῶ
ἄ

follows from this that the meaning intelligence is impossible.
163

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A translation must be dispensed with; the entire 
meaning of this concept cannot be exhausted by any of 
the newer philosophies. Heinze (p. 19) recognized the 
identity of λόγος and είμαρμένη (fatality); from this 
follows the completely impersonal and mechanical in 
λόγος. Likewise, the identity with νόμος (law), μέτρον 
(measure) and ρμονίη (harmony) is certain. In the
ἁ

vicinity of these words, λόγος cannot remotely have the 
meaning it later assumed in Hellenistic-Christian 
philosophy. This transformation was carried out by the 
Stoics, who equated Heraclitus' λόγος (as πνευμα: 
breath) with the active principles of philosophy since 
Anaxagoras (νους: intellect, δημιουργός: creator) and, 
with the Heraclitean fire (in memory of the fire atoms of 
the soul in Democritus), to a transcendent, acting, 
substantial world soul, λόγος σπερματικός (seminal 
reason), which stands in opposition to the other 
substances that behave passively. Thus, Heraclitus' 
becoming (πάντα ρε = everything flows) is transformed
ῖ

into material movement (ποιε ν 
ῖ
κα ὶπάσχειν: acting and 
suffering) and the entire system is made materialistic. 
Heinze, who suggests expressions such as “law of 
reason,” “rational world process,” and “rational 
relationship” for λoγoς (p. 35), adds: “We have come to 
know this law as the logos that reigns in everything in 
its more detailed definitions, and we need only 
emphasize that it is entirely immanent in the world, 
never conceived as transcendent; it is materially 
conceived as fire, and fire is spiritualized as the Logos” 
164

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(p. 24). This is not correct. One has becoming and the 
law of this becoming; an identity of π ρ (fire; a mode of
ὐconceived as fire, and fire is spiritualized as the Logos” 
164

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(p. 24). This is not correct. One has becoming and the 
law of this becoming; an identity of π ρ (fire; a mode of
ὐ

appearance of becoming) and λoγoς is impossible in 
principle. Let us note that this is a law according to 
which movement takes place: γινομένων γ ρ πάντων
ὰ

κατ
 τ ν λόγον τόνδε 
πείροισιν οίκασι (even
ὰ
ὸ
ἀ
ἐ

everything that happens according to the Logos 
resembles the inexperienced – Fr. 1). Θάλασσα μετρέεται 
ε ς τ ν α τ ν λόγον (the sea is measured according to
ἰ
ὸ
ὐὸ

the same Logos – Fr. 31). The phrase κατ τ ν λόγον
ὰ
ὸ

(according to the Logos) yields the meaning with 
complete certainty. The designations θε ς
ὸ (God) and 
Zεὐς (Jupiter) 1) are to be understood as the absolute 
necessity and power of the λoγoς (cf. Fr. 114: κρατε γ ρ
ῖ
ὰ 
τοσο τον κώσον θέλει κα ξαρκε π σι xαi n qı ivetαi
ῦ
ὁ
ἐ
ὶἐ
ῖ
ᾶ
ɛ
ɣ

= it rules as much as it wills and suffices all things and is 
superior to them). The same purpose is served by the 
term, familiar to a seafaring people, of steering, which 
here is intended to convey both necessity and 
expediency. (Fr. 64: τ δ πάντα ο ακίζει κεραυνός = all
ὰ
ὲ
ἰ

is ruled by lightning; Fr. 41: γνώμη, τέη γκυβέρνησε
ὁ
ἐ

πάντα δι
 πάντων = the intelligence that rules
ὰ

everything by means of everything; cf. Pseudo-Linus 13, 
Mullach: xar' Ĕqiv ovváпavτα κυβερν ται δι παντός =
ᾶ
ὰ

according to the discord everything is ruled as a whole; 
Fr. 94 belongs here: Ηλιος γ ρ ο χ περβήσεται μέτρα·
ὰ
ὐ
ὑ

ε δ μ , Ερινύες μιν Δίκης πίκουροι ξευρήσουσιν =
ἰ
ὲ
ὴ
ἐ
ἐ

the sun, then, will not pierce its measures: otherwise the 
Erinyes, ministers of Justice, will know how to find it.) 
165

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Λoγoς is the formal law of becoming and, as such, 
necessary for its conception. Movement without form is 
inconceivable. 
1) Fr. 32: ν τ σοφ ν μο νον λέγεσθαι ο κ θέλει κα θέλει
Ἕ
ὸ
ὸ
ῦ
ὐ
ἐ
ὶἐK ---

Λoγoς is the formal law of becoming and, as such, 
necessary for its conception. Movement without form is 
inconceivable. 
1) Fr. 32: ν τ σοφ ν μο νον λέγεσθαι ο κ θέλει κα θέλει
Ἕ
ὸ
ὸ
ῦ
ὐ
ἐ
ὶἐ

Zyvos oùvoua. According to Diels and others, this refers to the 
difference between the popular idea of a personal god and the 
philosophical (physical) application of the name. According to 
Bernays (Rhein. Mus. IX, 257), Zεὐς was chosen because of its 
resemblance to ζην (live).
166

--- PAGE BREAK ---personal god and the 
philosophical (physical) application of the name. According to 
Bernays (Rhein. Mus. IX, 257), Zεὐς was chosen because of its 
resemblance to ζην (live).
166

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III. The idea of unity and necessity.
The idea of a law existing within nature was new. 
Heraclitus went even further and found that a single law 
is decisive for the totality of all processes. Xenophanes 
had also found the idea of an inner unity of the world 
and made it the center of his teaching. His εν και πάν 
(one and all) meant a unity of being in the absolute 
sense, without any determination of the content of this 
concept. This is something essentially different and more 
imperfect. Xenophanes knows no norm, no form or 
quality of being, only the world and “God,” which are 
one. His unity is both qualitative and conceptual, a 
completely general and pantheistic idea. For Heraclitus, 
since a substance is not assumed, this determination can 
only refer to the form of the energetic process and 
assume it to be constant and regulated. One must 
understand the great difference. Heraclitus' idea is 
concretely defined and clearly presented; the unity is 
that of λoγoς within movement. All changes taking place 
in the cosmos are subject to the same rule. We find the 
effects of this one and eternal law in invisible becoming, 
in visible nature, in life, in culture. The law of eternal 
recurrence is the same in the big picture as the change of 
life and death and the upheavals of states, customs, and 
cultural conditions in the small. That is why Heraclitus 
calls the λόγος (Fr. 2) and πόλεμος (Fr. 80) ξυνός = 
common, (cf. also ν τ σοφόν: the one wise – Fr. 32).
ἓ
ὸ

167

--- PAGE BREAK ---, and 
cultural conditions in the small. That is why Heraclitus 
calls the λόγος (Fr. 2) and πόλεμος (Fr. 80) ξυνός = 
common, (cf. also ν τ σοφόν: the one wise – Fr. 32).
ἓ
ὸ

167

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Here we must once again recall the harmony that is 
based on the assumption of an equal rhythm in all 
processes. From this assumption, which contains a 
common rule for all events occurring alongside and after 
one another, and thus already excludes an end to the 
world, follows the congruence of all physical, ethical, 
social, and other laws and, at the same time, their 
necessity and logical consistency. The sentence: 
τρέφονται πάντες ο νθρώπειοι νόμοι π ν ς το
ἱἀ
ὑὸἑὸ
ῦ 
θείου (thus are nourished all human lives by the one 
divine – Fr. 114) can be taken as proof of these far-
reaching conclusions. All the relationships and 
conditions on which the life of individuals and entire 
communities depend are the laws of the cosmos, which 
prevail here in a different form, and therefore equally 
unconditional, inevitable, defying any attempt to escape 
them, a profound and terrible realization that was fitting 
for this unyielding and courageous personality. There is 
a strong fatalism in this. This does not contradict the 
Hellenic sensibility; ειμαρμένη (fatality) is the only 
dogma that none of their thinkers had any doubt. The 
Hellenes loved to imagine this ειμαρμένη, which lay 
silently like a storm cloud over men and gods and could 
send down unexpected destructive lightning bolts at any 
moment, with a secret delight in the horrible. From this 
arose the tragedy. Indeed, one cannot conceive of a 
better concept of the law that governs the cosmos than 
when one chooses the fate that reigns, for example, in 
the life of Oedipus as a comparison. Invisible and 
inevitable, it is silent, but all the more impressive for 
168

--- PAGE BREAK ---mos than 
when one chooses the fate that reigns, for example, in 
the life of Oedipus as a comparison. Invisible and 
inevitable, it is silent, but all the more impressive for 
168

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that. Heraclitus' conviction of the existence of the 
ειμαρμένη of his teaching is deeply imprinted in the idea 
of the Logos. It is probable that he used the expression 
ειμαρμένη precisely for λóyos. In any case, both are the 
same, as one can see; the equality of both concepts was 
generally felt: 'Ηράκλειτος 
ο σίαν είμαρμένης
ὐ

πεφήνατο λόγον τ ν δι
 ο σίας τ ς το
 παντ ς
ἀ
ὸ
ὰ
ὐ
ῆ
ῦ
ὸ 
διήκοντα· α τη δ΄ στ τ α θέριον σ
μα, σπέρμα τ ς
ὕ
ἐ
ὶ
ὸ
ἰ
ῶ
ῆ 
το παντ ς γενέσεως: κα περιόδου μέτρον τεταγμένης·
ῦ
ὸ
ὶ

πάντα δ καθ ε μαρμένην, τ
ν δ α τ ν πάρχειν κα
ὲ
᾿ἱ
ῶ
᾽ὐὴ
ὑ
ὶ 
νάγκην· γράφει γο ν· Εστι γ ρ ε μαρμένη nários
ἀ
ῦ
῎
ὰ
ἱ

(Heraclitus showed that the essence of fatality is the 
reason that penetrates through the substance of the 
universe. This is the ethereal body, seed of the 
generation of the universe and of the (cosmic) cycle, 
ordered according to measure. Everything is produced 
in accordance with destiny, and this is also the necessity. 
He writes, then: There is a fatality in everything. – Stob. 
Ecl. I, 5 p. 178). ¹) Diogenes Laertius also notes on his 
teaching: πάντα τε γίνεσθαι καθ
 ε μαρ μένην
᾽
ἱ

(everything happens according to a fatality – ΙΧ, 7) and: 
το το (= τροπαί) δ γίνεσθαι καθ ε μαρ μένην (these
ῦ
ὲ
᾽
ἶ

[changes], happen according to fatality – ΙΧ, 8). Finally, 
the expression is mentioned three times by Aëtius as 
Heraclitean (Diels Appendix B. 8). It is therefore very 
likely that Heraclitus also used the word for the 
corresponding idea. This similarity between λόγος and 
είμαρμένη must render impossible the opinion that 
λόγος is a personal or at least intellectual principle. Any 
conceivable intelligence, whether understood as God, 
169

--- PAGE BREAK ---λόγος and 
είμαρμένη must render impossible the opinion that 
λόγος is a personal or at least intellectual principle. Any 
conceivable intelligence, whether understood as God, 
169

--- PAGE BREAK ---

world soul, or something else, is thus already 
subordinate to the είμαρμένη. This is required by the 
Hellenic belief, which places fate unconditionally at the 
top. In this system, there is no room for even the 
slightest coincidence. Hesiod, who believed in the 
predestination of certain days, thereby invited 
Heraclitus' mockery, who regarded the assumption of 
mysterious “powers” as naivety (Fr. 57). According to 
his conviction, any possibility of deviation from the 
lawful course of events is unthinkable. 
Heraclitus's world of thought, viewed as a whole, 
appears as a grandly conceived poem, a tragedy of the 
cosmos, equal to the tragedies of Aeschylus in their 
powerful sublimity. Among the Greek philosophers, 
with the possible exception of Plato, he is the most 
important poet. The idea of an eternal and never-ending 
struggle that forms the content of life in the cosmos, in 
which an imperious law reigns and a harmonious 
regularity is maintained, is a high creation of Greek art, 
to which this thinker was far closer than to natural 
science proper. A final thought, in which he surveys the 
world and rejoices in the effortless, innocent, and 
painless nature of its becoming and acting, has been 
preserved: α ών πα ς στι παίζων πεσσεύων· παιδ ς 
ἰ
ῖ
ἐ
ὸ
ἡ 
βασιληΐη: time is a child playing with dice: of a child is 
the kingdom. 2)
170

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1) Fr. 137, quoted by Diels with some doubt. What matters here is 
only the general idea.
2) Fr. 52. In Luc. vit. auct. 14: πα ς παίζων πεσσεύων, συνδια
ὶis 
the kingdom. 2)
170

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1) Fr. 137, quoted by Diels with some doubt. What matters here is 
only the general idea.
2) Fr. 52. In Luc. vit. auct. 14: πα ς παίζων πεσσεύων, συνδια
ὶ

βασιληΐη (Bernays). Zeller sees here an image of the aimlessness of 
the world-forming force (I, p. 536), Bernays an image of the 
construction and destruction (Rhein. Mus. VIII, 112), Teichmüller 
(II, p. 191 ff.) recognizes the effortlessness and lightness in this idea.
171