BA 4-950
A。
Manuscript Fouml 1n BREMER's Venicle,
Moy 16,1973
F7. PR.GEO.CO.
IPLOR
:n
c712134-77-789
EQU.1Y
LAW#
DATE
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ae prevlously.reported, a lio-page manuscript
of ARTHUR H.BREMaR reflecting perconal experience8 and
observations during the period or April 4, 1972 through
May 13,1972,wao found among the personal effects of BREicR
during the 3earch of his 1967 Rambi.er on May 16,1972.
A typed copy of this manuscript appears in the foilowing
BREMER's peraonal pougession8,along with the manuscript.
3.5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
After I wrote the last page and showered and ate lunch and
feel claimed down now。
Heardasongontheradiothough
was turning away from rock and roll music which only vasn't
  a    6   e
ahead and hate your nabor,go ahead and chieat a friend"
but I heard, at the time, "Go ahead and kill (or shoot)
your nabor," which diaturhed me greatly.
Apri2 4, 1972 Tusday 6:30 a.m.
Hurrah!Hurrah!(
Great day for democracy and capitalism!
A 50% voter turn out is expected! Now THAT'S confidence in
America。 Tried to bury pages l-148 in Sheridan Park just
south of Miiw.on the lake front at 8-lo but the place was
too crowded。Kids in parlred car3 and cars positioning for
a good dark spot。 The ground was too rocky. I was too near
a land fiil sight (rill never recover it after few.veeks)
and a big 6o0 foot shear cliff!
Want togetrid of 1t in
or near the big'city.
Oh Jesus! My birth vas at 2:40.p.n. August 21, 1950 and
that'g the time my plane lcaves。 Ashes to Ashes. Copy
at any birth certificate cost 2 bucks.
1G

--- PAGE BREAK ---1t in
or near the big'city.
Oh Jesus! My birth vas at 2:40.p.n. August 21, 1950 and
that'g the time my plane lcaves。 Ashes to Ashes. Copy
at any birth certificate cost 2 bucks.
1G

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150
Apr11·5,1972
Consider ycsterday,the last mirute rush, the burying of
·the.book and the trip and No CAR one of my worst days 1n
yeara。 If I attempted to say half of what was donc to me,
Youheard
I wouldn't do the emotion of despairjustice。
of "one Day 1n the Life of Ivan Dynerovich"? . Yesterday was
my day. I could write 150 pages alone describing that day.
Wallace gothis bigvotes from Republicans who didn't have
any choice of candidatea on their own ballot. Had only
about $1055 when I left。
Took a 4 hour valk around this slum. Alleys and some parts.
of sidevallks are dirt。 Not concrete dirt covered, but airt。
Some of the weeds between the curbs and the sidevalks are
taller than me 5'6. But mostly they average between my
Waist and chest level,sometines groving this high on both
sides or the sidewalk giving an impression of walking thru
an animal trail in a woods. Littcr abounds. A junk dealer
with a truck to pick up from the vacant lots and streets
Carsareoftenparkcdverynearor
hashisfortunemade.
on the pedestrian walks betveen city block8,some with a tire
ortvoremovedand
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---a truck to pick up from the vacant lots and streets
Carsareoftenparkcdverynearor
hashisfortunemade.
on the pedestrian walks betveen city block8,some with a tire
ortvoremovedand
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

151
other deformities.These junlk:cars are parked on the city
streets。The natives have been seen parking cars with thc
engine running and going across the street to shop.In
midmorning and midafternoonwereobservedwereobserved
school aged children some with parents。Perhaps Easter
vacation. My Hovard Johnson's is $23 and $l occupation tax
and some other tax。 I'm charged 2o per call from ny room
which is very noticably smaller than my Madison,Wis。room
for under $17 total. I'm at 140 St. and 135 Av. (it may
be the other vay around).Downtown fs barely visable vith
binocculars, being a good 12 miles off on the horizon。: I'11
spend tomorrou there and get out'of this cold peopled placc.
Could buy a car for around $4oo - may do it. Live at YlicA。
HaveoneinCanada?
Read the sexy parts of the Little Red Book.
Whoregand
(furnished
with
cleansing and circumcision and incest。Must of been hot
room)
stuff 2,0oo years ago. I'll pick up the modern version
tomorrow:
Got a little tanning from the clear skys。Must of began
to cry 8 distint times yesterday night. Watched Tv til1
2:l0 a.m. Great movies of the i4o'B。 Surprisingly got up
at 8:00.
DamnthisAvisandmyroom:
And thecreditcard application.
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1.52
SHIT!
I've got a thousand bucks.
If I can't get a car (auto license into Canada?) and live
for 1o days on that。 W E'L L !
IfIfail
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---tcard application.
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1.52
SHIT!
I've got a thousand bucks.
If I can't get a car (auto license into Canada?) and live
for 1o days on that。 W E'L L !
IfIfail
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

153
I give a puzzeled disbelieving look to the New Yorkcrs
accent。 A curious distortion.of the language。 Yesterday
I had one wash cloth and 2 bath towels,today theopposite。
The girl doesn' likemebecause Ileft mytoe nails on
therugatthefootofmybed.
Should of taken the fucking Airport Helicopter to dovntown.
I'm,so close...so close.
Apri113,1972
A lifetime of events has happened since I lastwrote 1n
here.I didn't write because I was tired of it bored vith
it。I wanted to AcT instead。And I aidn't want to confess
in here after I rent thru so much to bury the first J5o or
BO pages。 Let me TRY to sum things up BRIErLY. I sure wish

for entertainment.
My last night at the Howard Johnson'sin the Jamaica arca,
New York.City I didn't glcep much。A beautiful naked lady
(floor to ceiling) smoking*cigarettes and I had to watch
her。Her table room light was on and a thin vail of curtain
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---rca,
New York.City I didn't glcep much。A beautiful naked lady
(floor to ceiling) smoking*cigarettes and I had to watch
her。Her table room light was on and a thin vail of curtain
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
allovedmetowatch'asshepassionatelykissedamanwho
wore clothes. I never saw them in each others arms more
than a rninute at a tine。 They must of been fighting.
Thru binocularsIsawthem gesture like Italians and open
theirmouths very vide very often.
For $16 I took a helicopter to Wall St., closer to Le Guardia.
Some guy asked me what I thought of helicopters and the
possible improvements that.could be made upon them..I guess
he designed 'em。 Couldn't help him。 Got a'limoslne
(Lincoin Continental (Nixon vas in one today)) for $11
:(an hour）($2 tip） and the chaffuer in charfuer'g hat (was
( 6          
meatourthrutheopenmarkets andChinatownand theBoveryand
narrow streeted financial district。'I asked him for help in
gettingmeahotel(a lot
of
.'em are residential only）and
he got me the Fifth Ave. Hotel.Sounds impressive but it
dian't compare to the Howard Johnson's。1
Kids running in the
halls (in diapers) a stink in the hall and room, a dump.
Nice looking restaurant from the outside but it wasnit open
till 1l:30 the next morning。
Iate at a herosandvitchjoint,
got sick on the shit。 Walked 20 niles (lo blocks to a mile)
thru mid-lianhattan.
Never saw so many street
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---wasnit open
till 1l:30 the next morning。
Iate at a herosandvitchjoint,
got sick on the shit。 Walked 20 niles (lo blocks to a mile)
thru mid-lianhattan.
Never saw so many street
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
venders.
Onafewstreetgwereaigns
"mhis street
patroled by----prfvate police."
wow!I always carried my
gun. outside my hotel in N.Y.C. I really felt good being
stare at by the poor people in my limosine.Took a taxi
totheWaldorf~Astoria and never got lookedatbyANyoNE.
Driver bobed his head a lot,a nervous wreck。I thought the
Waldorf was the best N.y.C. had to offer. I'was wrong. For
$37 plus I gota room little better than the $23'Fifth Ave.
Joint. The bed cryed-out everytime I turned and at night I
couldhearthebedsin the 2 rooms next tomine dothe same.
I took a'lot of their stationaxy.
That's what I payed for.
They Spend all their money on their lobby, and hallways to
a lesser degree。 The individual rooms are flops。 Maybe
the $6o - $18o suites are something.’ Rooms are $23 - $40.
AndIhadtwinbedsinmyroom!
Park Av.traffic was
SHITTY
4:00.
No one under 25 can rent a car in N.Y.state。I made a
8 am reservation home..
-"left too late. But WAIT..
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---are $23 - $40.
AndIhadtwinbedsinmyroom!
Park Av.traffic was
SHITTY
4:00.
No one under 25 can rent a car in N.Y.state。I made a
8 am reservation home..
-"left too late. But WAIT..
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156
After 3 days in N. Y. I decided to go to a maasage parlor
at ll pm I looked up.their ratinga in Screw newspaper, checked
、
the ones I wanted and wa8 going to 3 or 4 that night。 I
couldn't do it。 I walked past a place and then got lost.
(on porpose maybe). I felt like I vas going to get raped.
Called the best place for a reservation and was told "you
Just come in, sir." 'I twisted my guts for hours sitting
before thc store with fear andanticipation and then was
told that。 I put the phone right down cussed.then and went
straight to bed for an anticipated 3 hours before my flight.
Overslept。 liade a 4pm reservation. Was kind of glad I still
had time to go to a model studio..It was 3.blocks from the
Waldorf,the Victorian。I walked pagt it about 6 times then
ate lunch at a self-service, then walked past it AT LEAST
12 more timcs。I had to think things thru and get relaxcd
and this and that and the other。Walked into an Adult book
store to try to get a horny feeling. Lousy borning fuck
books and the good photo magazines were wrapped up in ..
cellophane.Fuck them.
Wallcedpastitanddowntheblock
andaround theblockandstopped atastreetcornerahellof
a Jot of times。Tryed to see a 25d dirty movie but they were
closed

--- PAGE BREAK ---d up in ..
cellophane.Fuck them.
Wallcedpastitanddowntheblock
andaround theblockandstopped atastreetcornerahellof
a Jot of times。Tryed to see a 25d dirty movie but they were
closed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

157
t was Sunday。
Had Jugtvatched thatmorningand madefun
of a dopey preacher on T.v. and figured if he waa against
it I.wanted it。Watched young female asseg bounch for
encourage event, wasn't a hell of a lot of iem.
Whenyou
wanta girl...neveraround.
Apri1 19,1972
entry. I think I renember I was tirea and wanted to sleep.
Finish up the sumary the next day.I'll try to finish it no.
I have to turn back to sce how far I got.
Saw a hairy hippie type leave the entrance to the'Victorian.
Two old Jaays standing and talking right in front of the place
finally left (they were beginning to give me funny looks)
and I somehow walked up the Screky stairs into.the place on the
2nd floor。
It waa niccly furnished, you could see they made
an erfort.
The.stairs (carpet covered) screked, that's all.
A hairy character:asked if was there before and showed me a
booklct of about 20 nude and near nude girls and said that 2
ofthen were worlring that day,a Sunday afternoon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---at's all.
A hairy character:asked if was there before and showed me a
booklct of about 20 nude and near nude girls and said that 2
ofthen were worlring that day,a Sunday afternoon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

158
I picked out_the blonde (the best looking I thought)。·The
2 were gitting on a sofa ofr to my left。I was conscience
.ofsomeonetherebut neverlookeddirectlyinthcirdirection
until the guy said, "Alga, you have a  session in studio 2."
($18) This vas right after I signed a statement that I would
"behave in a gentalmanly manner."
Alga and Ilooked ateach
other,I thought her rear end was kind of fat and her face and
hair and figure generally attractive。 She led me into a
room locked it,turncd the'lights out.and lit incest all
with her back generally tovards me.Piped in music began.
I handed her 3 tens and said we'd have to take it.easy a8
I just ate lunch, she didn't hear me (I think I was kind of
wispering rather than my voice cracking)and had'to repeat
it once or tvice。She glanced at my offering hand and said
"put it on the table."
Again with her back tovard me she began to undress.I took
off my vested buginess suit and overcoat and layed on my
stomackc on the massage table, nude。 She didn't sce my organ
yet。 I started some talk about a burglar alarm that vas
ringing and vas ri.nging for the last 2 days。We talked about
the weather.
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---he massage table, nude。 She didn't sce my organ
yet。 I started some talk about a burglar alarm that vas
ringing and vas ri.nging for the last 2 days。We talked about
the weather.
25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

159
She started by maosaging the fleshy part above and behind
my collar bones,then the upper back,lower back,buttocks
.and legs。She weg completely nude except for a yellou nylon
bikini panty.
"Do you vant to turn over now?" I obliged and was fully
erect and pretty much relaxed。 We had tallked about the
music, stereo tapes rather than a radio. I·looked at her more
closely now and sav she was beautiful。 Beautiful.1
Her
breasts were perfcctly beautifui her rear end was not fat
AT ALL. I glided my hand over her hack:and side and rear
for acloserinspection。
"you're not supposed to do. that."
"Touch me."
"RuM.
"That's the rules."
"Are you kidding?"
I had gently held and caressed her waist line with one hand
as I lay down and she did not protest。 She saw I was looking
at her private parts. When I slided my hand down she started
this line of conversation。I thought she wanted more money
before we started theheavy stuff.
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---t。 She saw I was looking
at her private parts. When I slided my hand down she started
this line of conversation。I thought she wanted more money
before we started theheavy stuff.
26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16o I sat up & looked into her beautiful big brown cyes,
"Are you kidding?"
(that's rota clugie here it's true)
Shetalkcdabout the rules."customers aren't alloved to
touch the girls.
By this time she was massaging my erect
penis with one hand. up & down too quickly to be enjoyed.
I moved her hand inmind ina slowermore pleasurable
motion. We talked about "the rules." rhen there was a long
&thoughtthewholethingthru.
I sat up gently & tryed to put my head to her breasts she
stepped back just out of head resting range。I kept my
hand, which was arcund her waist, on her side & we looked at
each other along time.I
Later I slowly reached out to
brush hcr brest with my hand,I moved slowly enought for
her to move away but I surely didnit vant her to。.She
covered with her arm a little。I sat up again & looked
into her eyes.
She looked directly into mine。I think I
recongised that same look inJoan。
She was not going to
(that defince,butit wasn't
give ground.
about sex we foughtover.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---oked
into her eyes.
She looked directly into mine。I think I
recongised that same look inJoan。
She was not going to
(that defince,butit wasn't
give ground.
about sex we foughtover.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162
2"r'n virgo."j n, she was still defensl ′she said
this with a very vcry little smile & nod & lokked at me.
Damn!
"you don't like your Job do you?"
"Not rcally."
"rhen why are you here?"
"I have another job. I'm only here on the weekends."
"What do you do"
"I'm a telephone operator at an airline."
She said she didn't go to school.I sensed that she did。
I never heard of a phone operator for an airlines。
by plane。Thought she wanted to satisfy my question with a
lie. Thought she didnit like me for my crev cut &
straight cloths. She was dressed somewhat like a hippie,
whenshewasdressed.
by fucking but wouldnit.ywhenever she was close I held
her more private parts & she.did not protest. Told her she
had a warm tummy. She wouldn't renove her bikini,
"rules". I slipped my hand up & darted it here & away
from her brcast over & over again, never

--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
I laycd back d..n & startcd talking about .cr tips。She
was open about it。 "sometimes I get $2, $5, $10, $15, $25,
or $50." I had given her $30., & didn't know, wasn't sure
thatshehad counted it。
"why do you get $30' sometimes."
"Because the customers like me."
that you don't do for $2?"
She looked right at me & damn it cause she said, "Nothing."
Another short silence. "you said that one of the rules
was that the customers was supposed to climax if you canit
other way."
"his is the only vay I can do it/"
!hat. Don't you'read books?"!
"Sure."
"what books do you read?"
"oh, mostly horoscope books?"
We both knew I was talking about sex books. So I changed
he subject a little. Tryed to talk about something she was
interested in "I'm Leo." what sign are you?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---y horoscope books?"
We both knew I was talking about sex books. So I changed
he subject a little. Tryed to talk about something she was
interested in "I'm Leo." what sign are you?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

163
touching it pu、gctting close & driving h
madwith
anticipation. I stoppcd & smiled。 Guess she was
relieved.
She told he she was 2o. I said I was 2l. I know ↑
look older in the suit (& that spair tire I gained).
I felt sorry for the kid. She was just like everybody
else.
It was a job & she was only on it for the money.
I sat up for the last time, "I'm sorry," Maybe she
dian't understand.I repeated my self once or twice
& shook her arm gently for enphisis。 She smiled. I
siad, "o. K.?" she shook her head. I
knew her bettcr now. She was the quiet type。 She had
said that for fun she went to "vo-gees.." Where
everyonetakesofftheirclothsandmakeslove toeach
other."
That in a response to an earlier question after she
refused my advances.Though she was making that up too。
She had also said the boss made up the rules & that she
could get firet for fucking,though。Not in those words。
I had said I wouldn't tell.She said she would because
she was very honest.I went into a crazy confusion at
that。I'm sure she never layed with anyone on the job.
Anyone.But·looki.ngback
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---aid I wouldn't tell.She said she would because
she was very honest.I went into a crazy confusion at
that。I'm sure she never layed with anyone on the job.
Anyone.But·looki.ngback
30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164。
nowIrememnl..rshcwasnude&wore aw..esmileinthc
photo I pickcd her out from。Maybe a nude shot was onc
of the bassis
"rules" also。
(Lousyamatureboxcamcra
shots.)
Ea.rlier I had told her she coul.d push &
pull on that thing for a'week & I couldn't come. It
was true。I needed,I wantcd & was prepared for a wild
2 hour of sucking & fucking & tongueing & everything.
Just looking at bare however beautiful tits & getting
a hard job veren'tgoing to do it。
I commented that she must have strong fingcrs.
Sheinvited me to feel herforearms &smiled when I
aid。 Time was up。
A little buzzer rang & went off by itself。
We had never even began.
I went to my cloths to dress & she went to hers。
I asked her to wipe the excess off (of my oily dick) bu
shemisunderstood&wiped theexcessoilin theheated
containerontoit。
She commented about my yellow underpants being
like hers.
I thought how wonderful if my pants could get
to know her pants. But I
31

--- PAGE BREAK ---

165.
She I refcr to her in.uy thoughits at "Broun-cyes"
vaited till vc verc both fully dressed.I asled her vhy..she
went to vo-gecs & shc said she just lilcd thcn I said she
was a crazy girl &: rubed her pants covcred ass.
She opened
the .dloor C: I left zithout looling bacl, a mistale, a grcat
mistale in ny life tine.
It surprised ne that I could renermber cverything ve
said April the Oth C: today is the l9th.Thought I'n still a
virgin. I'n thanlful to Alga for siving me a peck at vhat its
lile。
But earlier I was angry. I felt I had payed her'to
give her
a good time。
She goto feel ne.cveryinere out

--- PAGE BREAK ---still a
virgin. I'n thanlful to Alga for siving me a peck at vhat its
lile。
But earlier I was angry. I felt I had payed her'to
give her
a good time。
She goto feel ne.cveryinere out

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166。
everyhore.
An. I couldn't cven sec lcrsi  And it had cost
I didn't gross that much a day.I stood close to her
after it thinling
that a horny man hatcs nothing as much as
he hatcs a cocl-tcaser & that shc vould be a thie not to
return a part of (or all ot) the $30. (rhe $s0 men "lile"
her & I didn't "lile" hez. I vas moze lile a '$2 man) Dat shc
kept it C complaincnted mc on ry suit. I told her it vas
lousy.
(Just a disguise to get,to llixon. I wouldn't vcar
closc
a ugly thing C: spcnd $70 plus for it for any other reason).
All ry nervousness, vas for nothing. I spent almost
all the tine attacling her t:she politely defended hersele.
Cnce she snizfled c: I aslced if she vas crying. "of coarse not.
What do I have to cry about?!
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167。
I went straight to the Astoria & took a cab to the
Westside Airlines.Terminal on 42nd Strcet.A young black
driver vith a funny first name that all black mothers seem
to give their kids.He stopped & sped up stopped & spcd up
&I asled him to quit it befor I puke all over.his cab.We
talked about the careless drivers & dangerous traffic & he
said 3 seperate times, "This is Nev Yorl, man,"& shook his
head.Attived vitha reservation but without a ticlet 15
minutes before my plane vas scheduled to leave,about 4:00 p.n.
waiting in lines in front of it.I got to'the counter 1o
minutes after scheduled departure.
Theguy couldn't hold it
forme.
I think he said United had no other flights to
Milwaukee until Monday afternoon. He directed me vay across
tha building.to the Northvest counter.It was the veek-end &
the hole damn airport vas.busy.He had a 5:0o (Ithink) flight
to Milvaukee all full up.But I got a stand-by ticket on it.
If a rescrvation didn't show up to buy his ticket, I got the
flight. I carryed my bags, he
3.4irport vas.busy.He had a 5:0o (Ithink) flight
to Milvaukee all full up.But I got a stand-by ticket on it.
If a rescrvation didn't show up to buy his ticket, I got the
flight. I carryed my bags, he
3.4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168。
didn't want me to check them yet, to a seat & paccd all around
the seating area.. I nceded a car to hide the guns in to gat
Ifelt that alone in my
across theborder vlth them.
baggage or cn my body they would be found out right away.
And I had to meet Nixon in Ottawa by the 13th (his arrival).
Thursday the l3th. I was lucky to get a seat at the boarding
gate it was so. full. This plane came Erom somewhere, vent to
N.Y., then Milv., then Minneapolis, St. Paul. Tjats why so
manypeople.
I got a scat, seat C (of A, B,C) in row 33 ( of 33
rows in the plane). Whereas befor on a sparsly populated
plane in the 3rd row frcm the front （lst class） I had a
smooth trip & excellent service, this trip was lousy. A fat.
boring sheltered snob cf a therolgy student talked non-stop
with a equally sheltered & fasinatcd (alvays smiling) high
school student.I waited 30 minutes for dinner & shen I got
it，last in the whole plane,ve had turbilence & the'fastcn
seatbelts"signwenton.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eltered & fasinatcd (alvays smiling) high
school student.I waited 30 minutes for dinner & shen I got
it，last in the whole plane,ve had turbilence & the'fastcn
seatbelts"signwenton.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169.Impossible tc.o with thc dinner table (.n。I hurricd &
drank down half my coffce befor it spilled over my pants.
Got avay with only a tie stain and an everlasting predulce
against theology students & capacity plane'trips
I could hear & watch the stuardesses privately
talk & work way back thcir.It's a job their in it for what
they can get. One of 'em wispered "shit" a couple times.
Wonder how nuch money there is in theology.
Apri1 2l,1972 FriGey
The funnyest thing happened to me when I
:arrived in N.Y.just after I got off the plane.I forgot
the loud speaker.wow! The captain or the plane smiled
& nodded as he gave me them.
In the washroon,I didn't
quietheartheannouncinent& asked afella nexttomeif
he heard what was said. He didn't. "ylell they mentioned
mynanie."
I throught a copule seconds & said, "oh yeah,
now I knou"" : Irony abounds.
36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In liilvaukce at llitcholl Field,I got dissy watching
everyones luggage go round & round for 15 ninutes or more
(probably more) untill I finally got mine. I vaited for a
cab outside, then got snart & vallcd in front of the othcr cab.-
vaiter to vhere thc cabs first entcr the terminal arca. Got
the first one that cane along. Sven so, thc cabbie lad ne
share it ith 2 guys traveling together.
That night vas frantic. I did everything very
quiclly because I figured I was behind scheule. I could of,
should of been in Ottaa by thcn if I vas 25 & had a credit
card.
In the old German var movies the ilazies alvays asled
everyonc for "your papors".
Today the motels&rent-a car
firns vant'your credit card".
I did my cloths first thing because that vould take
the mosttine.
2 loads one_light, one darl, just ihat I had
in my bags.
I lool at my map. I vanted to enter Canada
in a relatiyely out of the vay

--- PAGE BREAK ---first thing because that vould take
the mosttine.
2 loads one_light, one darl, just ihat I had
in my bags.
I lool at my map. I vanted to enter Canada
in a relatiyely out of the vay

--- PAGE BREAK ---

171.
area. Too long c id tinc consuning around t . Grcat Lales
thru Miinnesota. I choosc just north of Detroit。 I
called the Chcsapelkc & Ohio Car Ferry (across Lake liichigan to
Landington, iichigan &·they had a .boat leaving about 2:30 that
night, about 2 hours avay.
I decided to take it rather thcn
drive arounl the Lale thru Illinois. I figured I could catch
sone sleep that night & be moving at thc same time.
Whcn I leaft for H.Y.City I knev I had a front
right flat tire on my car.
Itvas a Sun night&Ireally
hadtolookfor a station.
Went to a place which had chargcd my dead battery
once。
lulled off to the side of the sevicc area。 The place
gave a free car vash (inside) to any one buying any amount of
gas that night. Some fucling thing I never heard of befor-
just a fill AllY anount.
Thc guy said sure he coulf fix the flat but I'd havc
to vait for the wash jobs a head of me.
38