.eliminate one false lead'-for him;Jerry got the number Ray called- from
Stein and, when, in Hew Orleans, .had -phoned' it.

It turned out to be that
of a Louisiana State Police barracks on Airline Highway.

At this point
in his
md said there was a funny thing about it
contact with him
story, Jerry laughed
Huie says Ray told him the man who first mads
was'named ‘‘Raoul".

So, whan the number turned out to be an, active one,
Jerry asked for “Raul".

Lo and behold, there was a '“Raul" at that num-
ber.

He' answered the phone.

.His name is Raul Esquev.il.

Cohan, whose experience with the police in the south is.

unlike
that reported by his colleague, Jack Nelson, unlike that reflected in
the indictments and convictions of police charged with civil-rights raur
d'ers, felt this,, because it was a.

.policeman, had to be a false lead.

He may have-been right.

Unfortunately, he assumed it without
checking it out.

-In support of Jerry ’ s.

belief,, it does seem unusual
that a Louisiana - State Trooper could have been in • Canada .when Ray.

was
and contacted Ray at the bar,' if that :Ray,story is true.

On the,other
hand,, we have seen Klan chapters in.

the Chicago police and Minute men.

in
the New.

York State :Police, so it is not beyond possibility that there
could be racist police in the south.

Jerry, like Huie,.

did not put himself in Ray’s position, did not
face a survival problem if he fingered any co-conspirators.

Ray had,
at one and the same tine, to defend himself without giving any conspir-
ators more than the existing reason - that he lives and can always talk
- to get him knocked off.

He.

therefore, had to improvise and dissemble.

So, it is', also- not beyond possibility that he blended several of the
characters, to give one example.

It is also possible that he used the
name "Raoul” becaiise it is the wr*ong name.

What Cohan learned certainly is not proof that Raul Esquevil is
part of the Ray saga.It is also possible that he used the
name "Raoul” becaiise it is the wr*ong name.

What Cohan learned certainly is not proof that Raul Esquevil is
part of the Ray saga.

But he ignored what it is not-,safe to ignore,,
that he had gotten a good, live phone number from Charles Stein who bad'
seen Ray make the call and jotted the number down.

Not until July 1969 did I learn this story from Bud.

Immediately
I wrote Jerry asking for confirmation and further information, including
where to find Stein and the number.

I had spent much time in Louisiana
investigating local angles of the John Kennedy murder.

I knew;there is
no State Police barracks in New Orleans on Airline Highway, but that is
a long highway.

I had driven it as far as Baton Rouge on-one trip- and
to near Jackson, just below the Mississippi state line on another.

It
continues to and through Mississippi, Recalling this triggered recol-
lection of my investigations of exactly a year earlier, when I had been
tracing out the swept-over leads on the anti-Castro camps near Hew Or-
leans, on the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain.

There I found-proof of
the existence of not the one glossed over-by the FBI and the Warren Com-
mission but of four, three confirmed by St.

- Tammany Parish officials.

In that investigation I learned the state police had become involved.

This was after.the FBI was forced to raid an ammo dump right where
people live.

The existence was no secret.

The careless Cubans:.- had
started a fire the locals had expected to blow them all sky-high.

.It
was not the local state police who conducted the investigation.

A ser-
geant whose name I have was sent down from Baton Rouge.

This was con-
firmed to me by the cooperative personnel of the.St, Tammany Parish
.Sheriff’s office, who had.

conducted their own quiet investigation, and
by a lieutenant of the local unit of the state troopers..

Feeling better too late than never, I recounted to Jerry, whom
I know,-what Bud had told ®9.conducted their own quiet investigation, and
by a lieutenant of the local unit of the state troopers.. Feeling better too late than never, I recounted to Jerry, whom
I know,-what Bud had told ®9. I asked Stein’s latest address, and. this
phone number. His' brief reply of July 28 Is;
Harold,
Wish I could help, but I’m afraid I can’t on either count. I
no longer have the phone - number, and I have no idea where Charley
Stein is. The world seams to. have swallowed him up. . Matter of
fact, I looked for him rays elf when I was In Hew Orleans. Troop A of the state police is at 124.00 Airline Highway, Baton
Rouge.. Its phone number is 389--7581® Raul V. Esquivel, Sr., lives at