1
ITnt Lawrence
1
7
From the Cl A to the DrawnoBsard
by Connecticut Walker
Vint Lawrence at work: Now a successful political illustrator in
Washington, he helped to run the CIA'S secret war in Laos, 7962-66.
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Hhat happens to a former CIA
agent who leaves the spy busi-
ness after a brief but brilliant
career and becomes a hot po-
litical artist?
According to Vint Lawrence, a tall,
strapping, gentle 36-year-old former
secret agent in Laos, the transition was
rough. "At first," he says, "my former
agency colleagues couldn't believe that
I'd really left the CIA to become an
artist. They'd come up to me at parties
and ask, 'What are you really doing?'
I'd tell them, and after listening for a
few minutes they'd smile. That's a great
cover/ they'd say. Tou really have your
story down pat.'"
It's not his 'story' that Lawrence has
down but his new career. In the six
years since he left the government, he
has become one of a handful of nation-
ally successful cartoonists. His drawings
of former Supreme Court Justice Wil-
liam O. Douglas, Jordan's King Hussein,
Secretary of State Kissinger, President
Ford and many other political and pop-
ular personalities ranging from Barbra
Streisand to Franklin Delano Roosevelt
illustrate posters and invitations to
fund-raisers as well as newspaper and
magazine articles. His work has ap-
peared in various magazines—Harper's,
Audubon, Washington Monthly, Poto-
mac, and Washingtonian, among others.
"Vint is as well-known and success-
ful a commercial illustrator as there is
in Washington," says Andrew Born-
His view of F

--- PAGE BREAK ---nthly, Poto-
mac, and Washingtonian, among others.
"Vint is as well-known and success-
ful a commercial illustrator as there is
in Washington," says Andrew Born-
His view of F

--- PAGE BREAK ---

How Lawrence sees Cera/d Ford and Henry Kissinger (bell clapper): "I
deal with the public function or image of a person," says the artist.
stein, former art director for Washing-
tonian magazine, "and it's difficult to
be a success, because the demand here
as in the rest of the country is very
limited. Vint publishes an enormous
number of drawings in a year.
Nader the Viking
"He has a marvelous way of captur-
ing a certain characteristic in a person.
His drawings are strong but not nasty.
He has made people into various types
of animals or inanimate objects. For
example, he showed a series of humor-
ous writers as an endangered species
and a group of people as male chauvin-
ist pigs. He drew Ralph Nader as a sail
on a Viking ship. And he did a fantastic
drawing of Mao Tse-tung, turning his
mouth into a map of China and his wart
into Taiwan. He's a damned good artist,
and at what he does—drawing people
—he's one of the best."
In the 1960's Lawrence was one of
the most promising young agents to
work for William Colby, former director
of the CIA. "He was one of our real
stars," recalls Colby. "He was bright, in-
telligent, and courageous. He could re-
late well with foreign types, get their
confidence; they respected him."
From 1962 to 1966, Lawrence helped
run what became known as the CIA's
"secret war in Laos." Under President
Kennedy's orders the CIA recruited
30,000 Meo and other Lao mountain
tribesmen into a clandestine army to
combat the North Vietnamese. Law-
rence was the American "case officer."
He slept, ate, and lived with the tribes-
men, learning their dialect, sharing their
paramilitary jungle operations.
After four years in Laos, Lawrence
was asked by Colby, then head of the
Far East division of CIA's clandestine ser-
vices, to return to agency headquarters
and become his executive assistant. It
was .customary for Colby to bring young
officers, or what he calls "good field
continued nof CIA's clandestine ser-
vices, to return to agency headquarters
and become his executive assistant. It
was .customary for Colby to bring young
officers, or what he calls "good field
continued n

--- PAGE BREAK ---ser-
vices, to return to agency headquarters
and become his executive assistant. It
was .customary for Colby to bring young
officers, or what he calls "good field
continued n

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1
r _
continued
types/' into the home office to learn
how the rest of the agency operated.
Lawrence reluctantly returned to Wash-
ington.
For a year he served as Colby's spe-
cial aide. "I knew then/' he says, "that
I'd never have another assignment like
the one I had had. I had gotten too
much recognition too soon. Ahead of
me was a job as a junior officer in an
embassy somewhere."
In 1968, Lawrence asked for a leave
of absence to marry an Austrian-born
fashion photographer he had met on
a skiing trip two years earlier. He also
wanted to return to his alma mater,
Princeton, to study anthropology. (He
had graduated in 1960 with a BA in art
history.) His studies were interrupted
after a few months when Paul Nitze,
then Deputy Secretary of Defense
under Robert McNamara, asked him to
become his aide at the Pentagon.
Quickly, life as a Washington bureau-
crat became "senseless" to Lawrence.
One December morning he went to a
public telephone between a weapons
display and the credit union in the
Pentagon and dialed his wife. "I told
her I'd decided to become an artist,"
he says. "We went out to lunch and
talked some more about it All along
she'd been advising me to go ahead
and try. So. at the age of 30, I began a
new career."
Brief stay at art school
Lawrence attended art school for a
few months, but "I left to work on my
own," he says. "You can learn things
about paper, preparing a canvas and so
forth from art school, but it's all eye-
wash. It ends up clouding your devel-
opment The real work has to be done
by yourself.
"What sustained me when I left the
umbrella of the 'company7 [CIA]," he
continues, "was the desire to become
an artist It's one thing to be dissatisfied
with your job and another to have
something else that you really want to
do more. I wanted to be an artist"
Lawrence works at home, often
dressed in a rugby shirt or lumberman's
wool jacket. He occasionally takes time
out to babysit for his son Gabriel, 6,
and his daughter Rebecca, 3, to play
• • » •
A map of Vietnam on the troubled face
of Lyndon Johnson makes this portrait
one of Lawrence's most memorable.
tennis or attend a weekly yoga class
with his wife.
He works as a free lance. Art directors
from magazines and newspapers come
to him with requests for illustrations,
although sometimes he goes to them
with ideas. He generally gets about $300
for a drawing that he'll think about for
a week or so and draw in two or three
days. Simultaneously, he starts on five
oil paintings — "enough so I'll get
scared and really go to work."
Lawrence's political portraits differ
from the issue-oriented editorial car-wo or three
days. Simultaneously, he starts on five
oil paintings — "enough so I'll get
scared and really go to work."
Lawrence's political portraits differ
from the issue-oriented editorial car-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

toons of, say, Herblock, Oliphant or Bill
Mauldin. They are more detached,
more detailed and less slanted. They are
also less ferocious and exaggerated than
the caricatures of David Levine.
"Levine's work is marvelous," re-
marks Lawrence, "but he works by ex-
ploding parts of the face—enlarging a
subject's nose or pulling out his jowls.
My drawings don't destroy people's
faces. They are more symbolic and less
funny. I deal with the public function
or image of a person. This image is
more real to most people than anything
else. We tend to make mythological
figures out of people in public life. I
draw and make comments upon what
everyone else sees."
Lawrence rarely meets the people he
draws. "I keep my distance on pur-
pose," he says. "Meeting the subjects of
my drawings would make me nervous."
Lawrence does keep abreast of pol-
itics. He subscribes to lots of news-
papers and magazines, clips and files
photos and stories to build up images
of people he may want to draw.
Women are tough
Unfortunately, comments Lawrence,
he is rarely asked to draw women. "I
love to draw women, but the press
doesn't write much about them," he
says. "Drawing women is difficult
There's something about a woman's
face that you can't handle the way you
would handle a man's face. There's a
flair to a woman's face that doesn't exist
in a man's. You can't become side-
tracked in a bulbous nose. When you
reduce a woman's face to line, you
often make her look older and less
beautiful. So to do a woman's face well,
I think, you must become much more
abstract."
Meanwhile, he's doing all right,
thank you, drawing mostly men.