The moral side of motor7o (as mentioned in the previous chapter) is not
particularly noteworthy. Noting the accelerated transition
 of
Americans
to
7oroda, the statistics from the Massachusetts
Bureau (since 1871) attribute this to a desire to get rich quick, no matter
what it takes (to put money in their pockets by fair means if they can, at
all events to put it there). At the same time, it should be borne in mind
that commercial enterprises are thrown into the most way
natural
resources,
considering themselves
privileged  compared  to  their  European  counterparts.  "Without the
obvious labourers, American agriculture would not be able to produce
the abundant harvests   ,  which   are necessary  for   us,"  says   ,  one  of
the most competent judges of American life.  When it comes to the
assurance of free professions, lawyers and, in particular, solicitors (23%)
come first in this regard. of whom there are 33,000 in the United States,
i.e. six times more than in Germany (in the latter, there is one barrister per
8,000 people, and in the United States, one per 1,180). However high the
standard of living in the United States may be, and however strong the   may
be,   its  representatives   —   janmи,  nevertheless,   they have to
staɤmиваться  on  Eападе  with  sɤементом  in  the highest degree
adapted m struggle ѕа suɲествование, and sometimes even yield to him.
P I have in mind here the same people who discovered mаm быɤо сmаѕано
выше, their  сиɤу  in  the  struggle  with  маɤайсmой   race  and
mоторому предсmаѕывают   бɤестяɲую   будуɲность   in   the  tropics
America. Chinese question occupies in
the present
time not only  the
states    of  America  are  directly    interested  in    it,    but    it  is  also
being  seriously  discussed  in  Washington  and  even  in  Europe.  It
has  been  around  since  the  early
1950s
years
migration
mitasmikh workers has gradually   increased   (   with the   of   private
mоɤеbań)  to  the  present  time,  but  now  their  number  is  growing
every  year   оmоɤо   двадɯати   тысяu.  The reverse trend   snauiteɤьno
cɤаbee  and  therefore  in  reѕуɤутате  poɤуuается  остатоm  боɤее  uем  в
сто тысяu,
which has been
7
way
in
California
and mainly in San Francisco. Snaua mityuzy were
accepted very  friendly,  mama  work,  indispensable  in  the  construction
of  a  quiet  omemzmoe road and in other large enterprises. But maɤo-
pomagу   they   staɥi   discover   ability   and   not   m   one uernaya  work
and  obratɤi  m  ѕаnyatiyu  remesɤami  and  tor7ovɤey,  and in general
выmаѕаɤи   таmую   сиɤу   в  борьбе  ѕа   суɲествование,  uто
перепоɤошиɤи
all
population
     America.     Inernaya  work
and  obratɤi  m  ѕаnyatiyu  remesɤami  and  tor7ovɤey,  and in general
выmаѕаɤи   таmую   сиɤу   в  борьбе  ѕа   суɲествование,  uто
перепоɤошиɤи
all
population
     America.     In

--- PAGE BREAK ---obratɤi  m  ѕаnyatiyu  remesɤami  and  tor7ovɤey,  and in general
выmаѕаɤи   таmую   сиɤу   в  борьбе  ѕа   суɲествование,  uто
перепоɤошиɤи
all
population
     America.     In

--- PAGE BREAK ---

An anti-mitay party was formed, insisting and continuing to insist on
government intervention to protect the mythical spirit and take the most
severe measures against mythical creatures. We believe that the party is
expressing its opposition to the opinion of one major newspaper (San
Francisco Chronicle, 17 and 21 March 1876). "We have already come to
the conclusion that American labour cannot coexist with Chinese labour,
for where Chinese labour lives, pigs live, and Americans want to live in a
civilised manner. Chinese labour is satisfied daily with rice and two
bowls of soup, but Americans need chicken and lamb from time to time,
and it is difficult for them to remain without bread and butter. The
Chinese can sleep in any hole, but Americans need a bed. It doesn't bother
the Chinese if twelve women sleep with him, but an American needs to
have the same amount of space for one partner. The Chinese worker does
not think about marriage and starting a family, so the American has to
work hard to earn a living. This raises the question: should we accept cheap
labour, even if it means degrading our workers to the level of animals?
Regarding the news of the arrival of a steamship with a new thousand
migrants, the same 7ase says: "Does this mean the arrival of 1017
monsters? It means the displacement of 1,017 poor men and women
from the jobs they now have, where they have a home, because their
work cannot compete with the immigrants," etc. Persecution, provoked
by such opinions, should naturally come into conflict with the freedom-
loving principles of self-determination of the United States, and
therefore the measures taken by the current government should be
rejected in Washington7tone. In addition, the benefits provided by the
immigrants in the form of cheap and good labour, remittances and
investments should be enough to win over the majority of the
population and many influential people. In some cases, entrepreneurs who
replaced their workers with Americans should turn to them again, as they are
more likely to fulfil the obligations they have taken on. In the end, despite
all the restrictions and anti-immigrant attitudes, immigrants managed to
establish themselves in American society and acquire certain professions,
such as shoemaking, tailoring, etc. From the western states, they
gradually spread to the eastern states, where, with the help of the labour
union,American society and acquire certain professions,
such as shoemaking, tailoring, etc. From the western states, they
gradually spread to the eastern states, where, with the help of the labour
union,

--- PAGE BREAK ---acquire certain professions,
such as shoemaking, tailoring, etc. From the western states, they
gradually spread to the eastern states, where, with the help of the labour
union,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In terms of their activities, they may have an important role to play.
To this day, the majority of migrants from China are men. In
America, there are between five and six thousand migrants, the vast
majority of whom are prostitutes; Recently, however, they have begun
to aspire to a proper family life; there, missionary Gibson has converted
three couples to Christianity in the last three years. This phenomenon
undoubtedly points to the process of intensive adaptation and
assimilation of immigrants in North America, a process the outcome of
which can hardly be predicted at this moment. Fears of a massive influx
of migrants into America are largely driven by a practical concern — to
encourage the government to take restrictive measures, and in any case,
there is sufficient evidence to show that it is impossible to allow, in the
face of a real danger of such an invasion, the Americans not to take timely
and reliable security measures. Moreover, it should not be forgotten that
the Americans are now showing a strong will to fight for their
existence: when faced with it, at least under the influence of mythical
monomania, they can adapt to it. This is evident, for example, in their
ingenuity in devising means which, without violating the foundations of the
American constitution, could possibly restrict immigrants and make their life
in the United States more difficult. For example, the city administration
of San Francisco, in view of the immigrants' difficult living conditions,
issued a decree requiring that each person must have at least 500 square
feet of living space in an apartment. She ordered new inspections to be
carried out, and those who did not comply with the regulations were to be
sent to prison, where the punishment would be twice as severe. With the
same purpose and the same administration, a decree was issued, known
as
The "Pigtail Ordinance," according to which all male prisoners must
have their hair cut short. This was done with a view to the important
religious significance that the Chinese attach to their hair.
On the one hand, there is currently no reason to fear an invasion of
Chinese masses into America, but on the other hand, those who do not
attach any importance to Chinese immigration into the United States are
also wrong. Firstly, it should be borne in mind thatof
Chinese masses into America, but on the other hand, those who do not
attach any importance to Chinese immigration into the United States are
also wrong. Firstly, it should be borne in mind that

--- PAGE BREAK ---into America, but on the other hand, those who do not
attach any importance to Chinese immigration into the United States are
also wrong. Firstly, it should be borne in mind that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Firstly, the employment of migrant workers hinders the corresponding
growth of Europeans and, consequently, keeps them in their previous
positions, reducing the supply of labour on European markets. Secondly,
increased migration from the East may lead to a change in the composition of
the labour force. Even moderate parties are divided on this issue of
freedom of migration. Here, for example, is what the New York Times
has to say on the subject, standing aloof from the immediate implications
of the issue. "It is well known," the newspaper says, "that the strongest
opposition to the migration comes from the indigenous population. It is
unclear, however, why China, the closest neighbour of our western
states, should be prevented from exploiting the lack of labour there. If
immigration ceases to benefit the state, it will naturally disappear due to a
lack of support. He expresses the same idea in the same way: "The
opposition to the crossing is not based on anything other than envy," he
says. It might have some justification if opponents were obliged to work
just as cheaply and diligently as those they are trying to displace with their
loud rhetoric. But in that case, the mythical crossover would have to
happen by itself. What attracts them is precisely the demand for cheaper
labour, which is what Americans and Europeans are used to. The way
out of this situation may lie in the deliberate containment of the myth,
given the pressure on it on the one hand and the current economic
situation of the country on the other — is extremely difficult, and it is
likely to be met with greater resistance from the workers themselves, it
was necessary to develop in them the qualities that would enable them to
stand firm in the industrial struggle. In any case, the rapprochement of
Western nations with the East, facilitated by the efforts of world trade
and relations, as well as by the transformation of the East's self-
confidence, should strengthen our unity and, in view of the obvious
weakness of the Mitai, strive for greater and lesser assimilation of our
rivals, i.e., for the development in them of those very qualities which have
been formed in the opponents under the influence of the difficult
conditions of struggle for existence in their own environment.
Having encountered a people who have shown particular courage in
their struggle for existence, we, in the interests of understanding this
phenomenon,struggle for existence in their own environment.
Having encountered a people who have shown particular courage in
their struggle for existence, we, in the interests of understanding this
phenomenon,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce in their own environment.
Having encountered a people who have shown particular courage in
their struggle for existence, we, in the interests of understanding this
phenomenon,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

we must pause and try to answer the question: what exactly are the
reasons why they are so successful in their struggle with the most
powerful nations and under the most diverse external conditions?
Before we begin, we need to take a closer look at the circumstances of
the struggle, then we will be able to form a more reliable idea of the degree of
strength of the people themselves.
Four thousand years ago, in the north-western part of the present-
day empire, there lived a small tribe, perhaps consisting of a hundred
families, a peaceful people...
"Pessin7", which has been gradually expanding and extending its
influence since that time, has reached as far as Phin-e-Kian7a, and then
thousands of kilometres further — to the shores of the South China Sea.
By the 12th century BC, the Middle Kingdom had expanded to a quarter
of its current territory. Within the empire, alongside the Chinese, there
lived many barbarian peoples who nominally recognised Chinese authority
but gradually lost their identity. The Chinese did not act against them with
armed force: they were never a warlike people, they did not conquer or
enslave their opponents, but gradually, little by little, absorbed them
into themselves, persuading them by peaceful means to irrevocably
unite with them. The conquest of neighbouring lands continued into the
new era: there, in the thirteenth century, they acquired the southernmost
province of En-nan, and Formosa was conquered in the 17th century. The
method by which they settled on this island can give some idea of the
course of their peaceful self-government process in general. They began
by building on the western shore, facing the sea, and from there gradually
spread to other areas. They are cautious about penetrating into the
interior of the island; instead, they remain on the western coast of the
island, where they settle, 7ɤавнейшим обраѕом, with patience and
cunning, and even in cɤуuаях, mо7да usɤовия представɤяются
особенно   бɤа7оприятными,   they   по   временам оття7ивают
новый mусоm ѕемɤи у диmих туѕемɯев. Since the plains have already
been taken by previous settlers, the new pioneers try first and foremost
to make themselves useful, and "persuasion is their favourite tactic".
However, in the most extreme cases, the pioneers themselves resort to
violence: they, the new pioneers try first and foremost
to make themselves useful, and "persuasion is their favourite tactic".
However, in the most extreme cases, the pioneers themselves resort to
violence: they

--- PAGE BREAK ---ry first and foremost
to make themselves useful, and "persuasion is their favourite tactic".
However, in the most extreme cases, the pioneers themselves resort to
violence: they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They prefer to hire friendly names from among their enemies, and often marry
their daughters to them so that they can perform the role of peaceful
mediators. In this way, they achieved their goal, so that their population on
Formosa reached three million, and the Tusem were pushed further and
further away.
China fell under the rule of the Mongols and is now governed by the
Manchu dynasty, but both Mongolia and Manchuria are gradually
becoming more and more isolated. The conquest of China by the
Manchus also served as a reason for the migration of the Manchus to
Manchuria, and in the end, this led to the rapid extinction of the Manchus
and the repopulation of the country by the Manchus. In Mongolia, the Mongols
are steadily advancing, gradually replacing the indigenous peoples, and
it is already possible to foresee that "in the not too distant future, all of
Mongolia's capable families will move to the steppes" (Raie).
Having crossed the limits of the pressured wall and conquering more
and more of the Heavenly Empire into one whole, as we have already seen
above, they leave their homeland and enter into a struggle for existence
with peoples who are completely new to them. The eastern part of Asia
has long been the scene of such activity. The western part of the Indo-
Myanmar peninsula was flooded with Myanmar at the same time, and
the ancient Buddhist kingdoms of Siam and Cambodia, all became
Buddhist states. Thailand and the Malay Archipelago also attracted a
large number of Buddhist merchants, who even established themselves in
places such as Java. They have also penetrated into densely populated
areas, such as East India, where they are already considered a traditional
craft: for example, in Kagmutte, ninety percent of shoemakers are Mitay.
In the Philippine Islands, they have established themselves,    despite
all kinds of    oppression and persecution by the Spanish, and
everything suggests that they have a bright future there. The famous
traveller, P7ор, thinks,
"Over time, they will displace all foreign elements in the Philippines, there
and in other countries of the Western Ocean, and will form a new race of
mestizos, to whom they will pass on all their characteristics.". A
particularly important role falls to the Chinese in Singapore, where nine-
tenths of all trade operations are located in their hands and where they
are engaged not only in trade, but also in large-scale trade — and,
moreover, in the most diversee in Singapore, where nine-
tenths of all trade operations are located in their hands and where they
are engaged not only in trade, but also in large-scale trade — and,
moreover, in the most diverse

--- PAGE BREAK ---e nine-
tenths of all trade operations are located in their hands and where they
are engaged not only in trade, but also in large-scale trade — and,
moreover, in the most diverse

--- PAGE BREAK ---

trades.
As bankers and merchants, they are unrivalled. The Chinese
community in Singapore is unique in that its members are less and less
inclined to return to their homeland.
Many of them marry local women, and vice versa. In 1859, out of fifty
thousand Mitayans, there were already 3,248 Mitayans (Raie). Although
the main Mitay movement in Asia is limited to the borders of its empire
and is mainly directed towards the south, nevertheless, a small part of
the Mitay people has spread northwards to our Asian territories. There, for
example, they have settled in the Amur region, where they are engaged in
farming, gardening (including ginseng cultivation) and, of course, trade.
In some places, they have established themselves permanently, but,
according to Venumov,
"the presence of Manchus and Mitayevs on the left bank of the Amur,
near Baikal, will probably keep the Russians out of this area for a long
time." For some time now, Mitayev workers hired in China itself have
appeared in the Amur region; while in the same region, Chinese
merchants began to arrive, spreading between Proim and Irkutsk.
Outside of Asia, the most significant migration is to Australia,
followed by a smaller migration to Poland. In Australia, they diverge
from three points: south (Victoria), east (Queensland) and north (Port
Harbin). In recent years, they have been particularly active in the
goldfields of Queensland, where there are 15,000 workers, 14,000 of
whom are Chinese. European missionaries were horrified by the rapid
spread of Chinese immigration and insisted on the adoption of
restrictive measures. The local parliament, with its usual caution,
decided to send a delegation to Russia, the main source of income for
the islanders, and at the same time, to ensure that they had the right to
disembark on the shores of the island for their traditional work and
trade. The latter measure, however, was rejected by the government,
which caused great dissatisfaction and widespread protest.
The islands of Tahiti and the Sandwich Islands mainly attract tourists.
They first appeared in Tahiti in 1856. They were former slaves and
convicts who had fled Australia due to poor treatment. Having obtained
permission to land on the island, they immediately formed a small Maitai
community, establishing themselves asrmer slaves and
convicts who had fled Australia due to poor treatment. Having obtained
permission to land on the island, they immediately formed a small Maitai
community, establishing themselves as

--- PAGE BREAK ---victs who had fled Australia due to poor treatment. Having obtained
permission to land on the island, they immediately formed a small Maitai
community, establishing themselves as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and a small number of merchants. In addition, they were issued with
permits to work on plantations, which, as usual, were quite satisfactory.
Regarding the recruitment of migrant workers in England and
Germany, I am aware of the means of transportation, which are no longer
available to entrepreneurs in Nondon and Bergin, but, it is unlikely that they
will be able to fulfil this promise. Now science (at least in Germany,
according to the materialists) is beginning to rebel against racial
equality and against the uncontrolled freedom of immigration of
foreigners to Europe. It is much more likely that, in the near future, there
will be a rush to Australia. In 1875, the first attempt was made to recruit
workers for Cape Good Hope, and Francis Caton expressed his
conviction that it was necessary to settle Alim with miners on the
largest possible scale, because, in his opinion, this was the only way to
make the country accessible to a wider audience. One of the most famous
modern travellers to China, Abbot David, takes a very serious view of
the situation in the monasteries. He considers it impossible for Europeans
to spread knowledge among the Chinese, because, armed with this
knowledge, the Chinese would become even more dangerous; He
believes that Asia, the "inexhaustible anthill," should be left alone, the
Malay Archipelago and Alim, but at least now, with greater urgency, it is
necessary to prevent its spread to Europe and America.
It is important to bear in mind the remarkable ability of migrants,
despite their remarkable adaptability to new conditions, to nevertheless
retain their characteristic features. All travellers to one place agree and
say that the customs in San Francisco, Melbourne, Batavia and other
cities are completely typical of the cities of the Celestial Empire. Some
Chinese immigrants in California are beginning to adopt European customs,
i.e. they are changing their clothes and some of their manners, but in
essence they remain the same Chinese. Although they are generally very
reluctant to accept major changes under the influence of foreigners and
have no desire to acquire scientific knowledge, nevertheless, they
eagerly and readily adopt many practical skills and techniques, and
thanks to this ability, they are becoming dangerous rivals to European
craftsmen. ( Some characteristic examplesvertheless, they
eagerly and readily adopt many practical skills and techniques, and
thanks to this ability, they are becoming dangerous rivals to European
craftsmen. ( Some characteristic examples

--- PAGE BREAK ---gerly and readily adopt many practical skills and techniques, and
thanks to this ability, they are becoming dangerous rivals to European
craftsmen. ( Some characteristic examples

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This was described by Emerson in his essay on the struggle of races in
America. Emperor Guangxu, allowing European missionaries into
China, declared that he was doing so not because he considered their
religion to be good, but because they knew astronomy and mathematics
and could help the government to correct the calendar. In recent years, the
Chinese have made great strides in military affairs, attracting European
observers to the organisation of their army and fortifications, which they have
been able to rearm with group artillery.
Moving on now to the reasons why these myths are so persistent in
the struggle for existence, it is necessary to emphasise the importance of
participation in this somatic moment. Although there is no
satisfactory   material      judgement about   the adaptability of mityaev,
but, judging by all appearances, it is known in this regard that their
ability to adapt is exceptionally high. As we have seen above, they
spread over a vast area, both in terms of the harsh climate of the
Eabaymaje region and the tropical and subtropical countries. In terms of
intelligence, that is, mental capacity, they are not particularly gifted, but
they compensate for this with their ability to work long hours. In many
areas, they are crossed by myths, their "syzygiality" is evident, i.e. the
strong hereditary transmission of their physical and mental
characteristics when compared with other races. Children from mixed
marriages with Manchu, Manchurian, Spanish and other women are
more similar to the Mitai than to their mothers.
Along with their remarkable talent, they possess a number of character
traits that influence their performance in competition. Firstly, as already
mentioned, they are distinguished by their remarkable moderation in
food and other needs and their self-sacrificing diligence. They work
hard and diligently and do not refuse any work, no matter how difficult it
may be. In California, they monopolise certain female specialities, such as
washing clothes and taking care of the house and children. Secondly, they
are extremely docile and therefore, unlike many other peoples, they
tolerate oppression and violations of their rights. Their virtues are
undoubtedly moral, although among them are diligence, moderation and
endurance occupy one of the lowest places, but they (especially in this
case) are directed towards a peaceful life. The highest moral virtues
include solidarity with fellow human beings,ration and
endurance occupy one of the lowest places, but they (especially in this
case) are directed towards a peaceful life. The highest moral virtues
include solidarity with fellow human beings,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e occupy one of the lowest places, but they (especially in this
case) are directed towards a peaceful life. The highest moral virtues
include solidarity with fellow human beings,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In times of need and misfortune, they help each other.
But, on the other hand, we must not lose sight of the fact in their
struggle for survival, they are not very selective about the means they
use and constantly resort to methods that, in European and moral terms, are
considered immoral. Above, I have already mentioned the example of the
entrapment of monks by mythical creatures; there are many similar
examples. Speaking of the counter-immigration of mythical beings into
Monogania, Rae, referring to Williams, says: "The simple-minded people
(monogans) are not mature enough for mythical cunning.". And further: "This
struggle between cunning and naive, primitive, self-unaware dimar, may
not seem particularly comforting, but in the end, one cannot help but admire the
process.". The same techniques are used to fight the mythical creatures in
Manchuria with their "simple-minded and good-natured" tusemua.
"Wherever peace reigns," says Rae, "there in Manchuria the mythical
creatures are in a state of decline, displacing their former rulers with
cunning and hard work." Here is how he describes the Spanish historian
Suny7a's observations of the Mitais in the Philippines: "On the one hand,
devoting themselves to semede, they appeared in thousands of all kinds
of mutes, trading upesvyanu gom. They used the most sophisticated measures
and scales and tirelessly weighed all kinds of goods, such as wheat, sugar,
etc. They behaved like true merchants, paying close attention to the
needs of the people and the demand for goods, which they held until they
were given the high price they demanded. One of the newest travellers to
the islands of the Pacific Ocean, Spalding Pembroke, notes the
similarity between the Tahitians and the Samoans and comments on this
as follows: "The two races represent a stark contrast: the Asian always
outwits the simple-minded native." It goes without saying that the
majority of the strategies used by the Mitai in their struggle with other
peoples were developed and refined by them during their many
struggles at home. "Incredible economy of time, space and material," —
says P7or, — the motor can be found in the overpopulated people of the
mythical, constantly with new strength it is found in the traveler." And
in fact, the character of the myth, who has remained in the Celestial
Empire all his life, is exactly the same, as inof the
mythical, constantly with new strength it is found in the traveler." And
in fact, the character of the myth, who has remained in the Celestial
Empire all his life, is exactly the same, as in

--- PAGE BREAK ---nstantly with new strength it is found in the traveler." And
in fact, the character of the myth, who has remained in the Celestial
Empire all his life, is exactly the same, as in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

smi7rant. Here is how mаm describes the first Pesheɤь: "China combines
everything that is needed to bring about rapid overpopulation under
conditions of unhindered development: it is a gentle father, loves
children with the greatest joy, is moderate in his desires, is careful with
money, is a tireless worker, does not know how to be lazy, but in
business he is cunning and crafty. Children are engaged in
mommeruecmimi deeds; celebration and giving money under the tree are
their favourite games. According to the famous traveller Gyuma, the
motor is very much confirmed by our observations, which are
completely consistent with temporary interests and materialism in the
usual sense of the word. "Profit is his only goal, and he is constantly
striving to achieve it. His thirst for profit, whatever it may be, consumes
all his abilities and all his energy." The commercial spirit is developed in
him to the highest degree. Capital in his hands is already sufficient for him to
learn something new, he usually resorts to his usual cunning, which is
characteristic of him. Everything points to the fact that the mythical
character is the prototype of the real character, and this sufficiently
explains why myths are so important in the struggle for existence. The
advantage lies in individuality, and in social struggle it should fall
precisely on the side of the practical, and that is precisely what justice is:
the ability to achieve the desired result, no matter what. F r o m this it is
clear that the intellectual side must be represented by the most
outstanding character. Perspective attributes China's prosperity to the
fact that "its political system strives to achieve compliance with the
logical condition that guides all social improvement: it seeks to give the
mind a dominant role." A certain degree of intellectual education, as we
know, is the property of every citizen, with widespread seminary
education. Their moral level is undoubtedly at a lower level. According
to the well-known American statesman Seward, "moral character is not
determined by the court of conscience, but by the rules of convenience."
Raie, who did not have the opportunity to observe the mythical beings
in their homeland, but who conscientiously studied the literature about
them, complains about their lack of ideals and says that "they are deprived
of that high moral aspiration which transcends the limits of momentary
considerations and is not subject to the whims of the moment."ains about their lack of ideals and says that "they are deprived
of that high moral aspiration which transcends the limits of momentary
considerations and is not subject to the whims of the moment."

--- PAGE BREAK ---k of ideals and says that "they are deprived
of that high moral aspiration which transcends the limits of momentary
considerations and is not subject to the whims of the moment."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for the sake of truth itself." The Chinese have independently developed a
highly developed moral culture, which in many respects is not inferior
to our highest moral standards, but which at the same time is imbued
with a sense of practicality characteristic of the mythical worldview. For
example, in the second and fourth of the four basic principles of moral
philosophy and morality ( Tuун-Œн7, иɤи
"Immutability in the middle," mni7e, attributed to vnumu and uueni
Konɭuɭia — Tеsuusse) is carried out prinɭin, uto ueɤovem highest virtue
"is consistent with the circumstances, utoby to remain in the middle."
And it is preached that all universal commandments will be fulfilled by
natural impulse and without effort, and that they will be fulfilled with
difficulty and effort, but if the highest virtue is fulfilled, then the results will
be the same in all cases. It should not be forgotten, of course, that there is a
great difference between moral education and morality, i.e. moral
behaviour, which is precisely what is often found among mythologists.
But for the mythical, if they have moral and ethical content, then it is not in
the form of rest and relaxation with the aim of passing the time.
The religious indifference of the Maitai is well known and manifests itself
in their lives at every turn. When the Spanish, in order to counteract the
influence of the Muslims on the Philippine Islands, issued a decree that
Christians could marry local women, so that the Maitai would be more
willing to accept Christianity. But, of course, this was only nominal.
The Chinese emperor Œn7-Nin7 (in the past century) published
memoirs in which he warns against dangerous ideas and condemns all
the teachings he has studied. He jokes about the constant repetition of
Buddhist mantras and says on this subject: "If you have committed a sin
and have to stand before the judge, 'Your Honour', do you really think he
will forgive you? Your god Buddha is angry because he condemns the
fact that they do not bring him offerings on a tray and do not eat his
paper," etc. Our famous synonymist, Prof. Vasilyev, expresses himself
in the following way: "In the East (i.e., in China itself), they have no
concept of attachment to money, which we encounter in the West —
there, people do not live by their hearts and everyday needs."
It is not surprising that, given such a practically oriented approach,
art in China could not rise to great heights.nter in the West —
there, people do not live by their hearts and everyday needs."
It is not surprising that, given such a practically oriented approach,
art in China could not rise to great heights.

--- PAGE BREAK ---there, people do not live by their hearts and everyday needs."
It is not surprising that, given such a practically oriented approach,
art in China could not rise to great heights.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

level of development. Let us consider the opinion of a specialist in the
history of art on this matter. "The mythologist," says Schnaase, "having
no higher direction, produces, for the most part, works that are
characterised by external artificiality. In some branches of artistic
technique, the artist belongs to the to the authors of important technical
inventions (some of which were made by them in immemorial times)
and to the most skilled and, to this day, the most accomplished: as early
as the third century BC, they were engaged in metalworking, stone
processing and various types of fine crafts. But alongside these and other
exciting technical achievements, there is a lack of true artistic talent. In
their constructions, we see the principle of decorative wallpaper
diversity, outwardly resembling the wooden structures and tents of
primitive peoples; in sculpture and painting, their imagination allows for
only a faint imitation of nature and a crude departure from it. The study of this
phenomenon, which is very interesting in itself, belongs more to the field
of art history than to the history of literature; and even in the broad sense
of the history of literature, it is not really necessary, since it is mainly
concerned with technical and material aspects and has a character that is self-
contained and self-sufficient, it has a significant spiritual influence on other
nations.
The conclusion, which is supported by the research on the struggle
for existence in the universe presented in the seven main points, has,
especially at first glance, much in common with the well-known position
of Bomba, but in the end, the decisive and main point is always the integral
development. In fact, approaching the issue from two sides, we must be
convinced that the moral aspect of the struggle is incomparably more
important and more fundamental than the intellectual aspect. This is
directly implied by the arguments of the struggle and considerations
about the impermanence of   stiuecmich   grounds. —   This second
argument is diametrically opposed to the main argument put forward by
Bom in his position. The argument, I believe, consists in recognising
moral principles as immutable. Against this, the history of morality and
the writings of writers who have come to this conclusion that certain
fundamental moral principles are immutable and unchanging, then this
is in no wayle. Against this, the history of morality and
the writings of writers who have come to this conclusion that certain
fundamental moral principles are immutable and unchanging, then this
is in no way

--- PAGE BREAK ---e history of morality and
the writings of writers who have come to this conclusion that certain
fundamental moral principles are immutable and unchanging, then this
is in no way

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is not necessary to extend this to the entire moral sphere. "Do good to
others, sacrifice your own desires for their sake, etc., says God, — in this
and a few other things lie the essential principles of morality, but they
have been known for many thousands of years, and not a single iota, not a
single paragraph has been added to it by all the sermons, teachings and
aphorisms, which are the work of theologians and moralists. But the
final decision on the question of what
"Friends," who need to do good, does not constitute a mobile sɤeement
in morality, and it does not matter whether we spread goodness to our
contemporaries, or to our neighbours, to representatives of other nations,
other races, and, of course, animals? It is clear that the development of
moral consciousness is a constant, evident in the history of peoples, as
well as in the history of individual people. It is also incorrect to assume
that in the historical process there is no trace of the moral moment. If
one were to take the example of literature, art and science, one would
see that the driving force behind them is moral feeling. On the other hand, he
would also be presented with quite convincing arguments. The
discrepancy between Bomba's basic position and the main conclusion drawn
from the material presented is that the moral aspect should be recognised
as a weapon of victory in the struggle for existence, which in large forms is
expressed in the form of industrial competition and rivalry between
nations, and not in the entire process of civilisation. Literature and art,
which constitute the essential side of civilisation and are closely linked to
moral development, recede into the background in the usual forms of
the struggle for existence. From this it is clear that peoples who are less
developed in this respect can be incomparably stronger than peoples
who are far above them in this respect. We thus arrive at the necessity of
dividing that which is called civilisation into two large groups, following
Giso in this respect. "In vivisection," he says, "there are two main types, — it
exists under two conditions and is characterised by two      principles:   the
development of social activity and the development of individual
activity, the process of society and the process of uеɤовеmа. The first
verse embraces the citizen, and the monomeric development and
everything that is often referred to as "material nature"; the second verse
"The development of life   individual, internal, development   self-7oraces the citizen, and the monomeric development and
everything that is often referred to as "material nature"; the second verse
"The development of life   individual, internal, development   self-7o

--- PAGE BREAK ---

uеɤовеmа, е7о abilities, uувств, ideas" and is expressed in literature,
science and art. Although Giso points out that there are "many countries
where wealth is growing faster and is more evenly distributed among
citizens, and where, meanwhile, social justice is at a lower level of
development than in other countries, not so much in terms of social
relations," he nevertheless firmly adheres to the principle that both
components of ɯивиɤиѕаɯия are inextricably linked. The supposed
inseparability of this connection is refuted by the above-mentioned
examples of the existence of peoples who are extremely strong in their
struggle for existence, such as the Yemeni, the Mitaity, the Magaity, and
at the same time standing high in morality, art, literature and science.
The leading position of the Sgins in the highest spheres of civilisation did
not make them live and did not allow them to experience the immeasurably
lower status of the Mitai, but at the same time, the immaturity of the latter
in terms of their understanding did not prevent them from becoming the most
powerful people in the struggle for existence, to survive the harsh and cruel
realities of life and to gain even a modest position in relation to the modern
European world. Raie and other writers, speaking about myths, often
refer to the absence of "ideal aspirations" among the people, but it is precisely
this absence, replaced by surprising pragmatism, does not harm them, but
rather helps them in the arena of struggle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. F. Rittich
The Savoyard
World
Geographical Features
The most significant sacred sites in
THE TERRITORY OF EUROPE

--- PAGE BREAK ---ther helps them in the arena of struggle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. F. Rittich
The Savoyard
World
Geographical Features
The most significant sacred sites in
THE TERRITORY OF EUROPE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Published by V. I. Istomin
Typography Warsaw. Military District —
Printed in Warsaw. Military Edition.
Chromolithography by A. A. Istomin in St.
Petersburg. — Lithography by Pua in Warsaw.
WARSAW
1885

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
Aachen, Germany. (Rhenish Province)
Adelnau, Odobanov and Odobanov 7. (Posnan)
Adelsberg, 7. Postojna. (Chorutania)
Adler, p. Orɤиɯа. (Nехия)
Adige, p. 3uава. (Iтаɤия)
Adriatic Sea, Sino and Pdercmoe Sea.
Adrianopel, 7. Ƚринопоɤь, Ƚринов, Pдрин, 3дрене. (Баɤmансmий поɤ.)
Agram, 7. Eapeb. (Croatia)
Akkerman, 7. Begorod. (Russia)
Albona, 7. Nabin. (Austria)
Aldenburg, Oldenburg, 7. Stary7rad. (Shesvi7)
Alessio, 7. Nes. (Agbania)
Almissa, 7. Oɤmizh. (Aɤbania)
Alpa, p. Vpa. (Moravia)
Altenburg, 7. Vetvar. (Germany)
Altmark, Old March. (on 3ɤьbe)
Altsohl, 7. Evogen. (Vienna)
Altstadt, 7. Věvehrad, Hradčany. (Moravia) Aluta,
p. Ota. (Romania)
Antiwari, 7. Bar. (Albania)
Angerburg, 7. V7robor, V7obor. (Prussia)
Aquila, Bo7ey and Aɤ7ar. (Austria, Gorilla) Arad, 7.
Old 7rad. (Vienna)
Arangosch, Araniosch, Eotaya pema, Eotna vegnama. (Sedmardia) Arbo,
island of Rab. (Croatia)
Arkona, 7. Vitov. (Northern
Germany) Auschwitz, 7. Osvenɯim.
(Austria) Auspitz, 7. Gustopeu.
(Moravia) Aussig, 7. Vsti na Nabe.
(Bohemia) Austerlitz, 7. Sɤavmov.
(Moravia) Arva, p. Oraniɯa.
(Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ern
Germany) Auschwitz, 7. Osvenɯim.
(Austria) Auspitz, 7. Gustopeu.
(Moravia) Aussig, 7. Vsti na Nabe.
(Bohemia) Austerlitz, 7. Sɤavmov.
(Moravia) Arva, p. Oraniɯa.
(Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B
Balaton, os. Pɤесо, Bɤатное osero. (Vienna)
Balkan Geb., Haеmus, Bъɤmан.
Barthfeld, 7. Bardiv. (Vienna)
Bausk, 7. Busm. (Russia)
Bautzen, 7. Budishin. (Nusa)
Bellegarde, 7. Begrad. (Pomerania and Russigen)
Bensen od., Beneshau, 7. Beneshov. (Bohemia)
Bergen, 7. Gorsma. (Northern Germany)
Bieler See, os. Beɤoosero. (Switzerland and Tyrol)
Behrent, 7. Koster. (Prussia)
Bentschen, 7. Ebyshin. (Posnan)
Bentsch, 7. Benesov. (Austria)
Berat, 7. Begrad. (Agbania)
Beraun, p. Berunmа. (Bohemia and Abania)
Berlin, 7. Bergin. (Germany)
Bern, 7. Berun. (Switzerland)
Beuthen, 7. Bytom. (Germany)
Bielietz, 7. Besmo. (Chorutania)
Birnbaum, 7. Mezhikhod.
(Prussia)
Bischofsteinitz, 7. Gorshuvty. (Bohemia)
Bitolia, 7. Bite and Monastery.
Blota, Boɤota. (in Nужиuах)
Bohmerwald, 7ор. Shumava.
(Bo7emya) Bodenbach 7. Boruɯ.
(Germany)
Bocca, v. Cattaro, Bomа Kotor. (Ƚаɤma) Boritz, 7.
Boruɯ. (Germany)
Bomst, 7. Babi Bridge. (Prussia)
Brandenburg, 7. Brandenburg, Brandenburg Forest, Brandenburg.
(Prussia) Brasso od, Kronstadt, Brasov and Coruna.
(Sedmimoravia) Braunau, 7. Braunau. (Austria)
Brazza, island of Brau. (Romania)
Breslau, 7. Pereslav, Bratislav, Vratislav. (Silesia) Brieg, 7.
Bre7 bogshoi. (Silesia)
Bries, 7. Brezno. (Vienna)
Bromberg, 7. Budín. (Prussia)
Bruck, 7. Most. (Styria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brunn, 7. Brno. (Moravia)
Braunsburg, 7. Branevo. (Pomerania)
Brux, 7. Most. (Bohemia)
Budua, 7. Budva. (Croatia) Budweis,
7. Budweis. (Bohemia) Bukecy, 7.
Bumove. (Nusa) Brezezan,
Berezhany. (Gania) Bunzlau, 7.
Bogesave. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ania)
Brux, 7. Most. (Bohemia)
Budua, 7. Budva. (Croatia) Budweis,
7. Budweis. (Bohemia) Bukecy, 7.
Bumove. (Nusa) Brezezan,
Berezhany. (Gania) Bunzlau, 7.
Bogesave. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C
Cammin, 7. Kamen. (Pomerania)
Capo d'Istria, 7. Koper. (Austria)
Carlopago, 7. Ba7. (Italy) Carloburg,
7. Beg7rad. (Sedm7radia) Castua, 7.
Kastav. (Istria)
Catarro, 7. Kotor. (Croatia)
Chemnitz, 7. Stavinia. (Bavaria)
Chemnitz, 7. Kamenica. (Bohemia and Saxony)
Cielecin, 7. Tehyatin. (Prussia)
Chodiesen, 7. Hodezh. (Posnan)
Chorutanien, Gortana, Korosma, Horutania.
Colberg, 7. Kogober7. (Prussia)
Crossen, 7. Korosno. (Prussia)
Csaba, 7. Naba. (Hungary)
Custrin, 7. Kostrin. (Prussia)
Culm, 7. Heɤmno and Hɤumeɯ. (Prussia) Curzola,
island. Kuruɤa. (Ƚаɤmaɯия) Cuculo, 7.
Tрнава. (Sedmicarde)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

D
Danzing, 7. Gdańsk. (Prussia)
Dauba, p. Lub. (Bohemia)
Delvino, 7. pr. Ƚяваɤ, Ƚевоɤ. (Aɤbania) Demmin, 7.
Ƚымин. (Prussia)
Dermendere, 7. Verovo and Orzovo. (Bamans Peninsula) Dignano, 77.
Vodnjan. (Austria)
Dirschau, 7. Tuëvo. (Prussia)
Diurdevo, 7. Murza, Murzevo. (Romania)
Dobrudga, obɤ. Ƚобриu. (Bamansmий pogуoostrov)
Domnitz, 7. Ƚомеɯ. (Germany)
Dohna, 7. Ƚонин. (Germany)
Donau, p. Ƚурнав. (Germany and Austria)
Dorpat, 7. Œрьев. (Russia)
Dossa, 7. Tamsau. (Germany)
Dresden, 7. Sorodzhany. (Saxony)
Drewenz, p. Pereviana. (Prussia)
Drewani, Pereviane. (Hanover)
Duino, 7. Zivin. (Chorutania)
Duleigno, 7. Ogun. (Zamaya) Durazzo,
7. Zaru, (Albania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, 7. Sorodzhany. (Saxony)
Drewenz, p. Pereviana. (Prussia)
Drewani, Pereviane. (Hanover)
Duino, 7. Zivin. (Chorutania)
Duleigno, 7. Ogun. (Zamaya) Durazzo,
7. Zaru, (Albania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
Eger, p. O7ra. (Bo7emia)
Eger, 7. Heb. (Bo7emia)
Egri-Palanka, Беɤоѕеро. (Bulgaria)
Eider, р. Е7дора. (Switzerland)
Eipel, p. Ipo and Vpo. (Austria) Eiten, 7.
Vtin. (Silesia)
Elbe, p. Naba. (Germany)
Elbing, 7. Trusa Eɤbɤon7. (Prussia)
Elbogen, 7. Nоmет. (Bo7emya)
Elden, 7. Kanov. (Germany)
Eni-Zagra, 7. Tverdija, Eapora nova. (Bamansky Peninsula) Enns, p.
3nza. (Austria)
Elster, 7. Nьstra. (Ƚуѕаɯия)
Eperies, 7. Pryashev. (Vен7рия)
Erlau, 7. P7ra and P7er. (Bo7emya)
Erzgebirge, Ore Mountains, Ore Mountains, Ore Mountains. (Bohemia)
Eski Zagra, 77. Old Ea7ora, Meɤesnya. (Bamans Peninsula) Essek, 7. Ocem
and Turov. (Croatia)
Etsch, p. 3uava. (Italy) Exin,
7. Kɯynia. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
Feistritz, Weisritz, p. Bystria. (Germany and Austria)
Fellin, 7. Vegin. (Russia)
Feldkirchen, 7 Top7. (Croatia) Femern,
island of Femern. (Denmark)
Fichtelgebirge, 7 Smeruiny. (Bohemia)
Finsterwald 7. Grabin. (Prussia)
Fiume, 7. Pema, Pema. (Istria) Flatow,
7. Ehatovo. (Prussia) Flohau, 7.
Bishany. (Bohemia) Flohe, p. Viga.
(Bohemia)
Foinitza, 7. Khvoynaya. (Bamberg Peninsula)
Fraustadt, 7. Vshova. (Silesia)
Freistadt, 7. Nа7ɤов. (Austria)
Freiberg, 7. Pribor. (Germany)
Frioul, Furɤjana.
Funfkirchen, 7. Peu and Peuy, Peuyh. (Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bamberg Peninsula)
Fraustadt, 7. Vshova. (Silesia)
Freistadt, 7. Nа7ɤов. (Austria)
Freiberg, 7. Pribor. (Germany)
Frioul, Furɤjana.
Funfkirchen, 7. Peu and Peuy, Peuyh. (Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

G
Gablonz, 7. Pбɤонеɯ. (Bohemia)
Gabel, 7. Pбɤонь. (Bohemia)
Garz, 7. Koreniɯa. (on the
Ry7ene) Gortz, 7. Gorɯa.
(Chorutania)
Gail, p. Goɤь and Bystriɯa, also Eиɤа. (Tироɤь)
Gaya, 7. Kiev. (Moravia)
Garz, 7. Korenia. (Prussia)
Genova, Genes, 7. Ppov. (Italy)
Gera, 7. Gora. (Germany)
Gitschin, 7. Iuin. (Bohemia)
Glatz, 7. Kradom. (Silesia)
Gleiwitz, 7. Gliwice. (Silesia)
Glogau, 7. Glogau. (Silesia)
Gnesen, 7. Gnesen. (Posnan)
Goeding, 7. Godonin. (Moravia)
Goldberg, 7. Ejatibor. (Nysa)
Gorlitz, 7. S7opey and S7opey. (Nysa) Gottschee, obg.
Kouevye, Kouevcmo. (Austria) Gratz, 7.
Gradishma. (Posnan)
Gratz, 7. Styria 7radeɯ. (Styria) Gran, 7.
Ostrohɤm and Ostri7om. (Ven7ria) Graudenz,
7. Grudziondz, Grude. (Posnan) Grottkau, 7.
Gorodmov. (Silesia) Grossglockner, 7. Veni
ѕvon. (Austria) Gross-Kanitza, 7. Knyasiha.
(Austria) Grosswardein, 7. Varamín Varadin.
(Austria) Groszenhain, 7. Ocem Varamín.
(Samosonia) Gravosa, 7. Gruž. (Italy)
Gumbinen, 7. Gombin. (East
Prussia) Guben, 7. Gubin. (Prussia)
Guhrau, 7. Gora. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H
Habelschwert, 7. Bystrya. (Silesia)
Hainau, 7. Gaiun. (Prussia)
Halle, 7. Ƚобро7ора, Ƚобросоɤь. (Germany)
Haskioi, 7. Буmово. (Bamans Peninsula) Havel, р.
Гавоɤа. (Germany)
Hirschberg, 7. Ƚоmсы. (Bohemia)
Hoheneck, 7. Войниm. (Austria)
Heilbrunn, м. Гойна вода. (Nехия)
Heiligengeil, 7. Св. Сеmира.
(Pomerania) Hohenmauth, 7. High Toll.
(Bohemia) Hohenelbe, 7. Upper Elbe.
(Bohemia) Holleschau, 7. Hohenstadt.
(Moravia) Hohenstadt, 7. Eaber7.
(Moravia)
Holben, 7. Iva. (Silesia) Holsen, 7.
Goyasina. (Prussia)
Hermannstadt, 7. Sebeň and Sibín. (Sedmimístí) Hoierswerde, 7.
Vospří. (Nýsaní)
Horn, 7. Ro7. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---aber7.
(Moravia)
Holben, 7. Iva. (Silesia) Holsen, 7.
Goyasina. (Prussia)
Hermannstadt, 7. Sebeň and Sibín. (Sedmimístí) Hoierswerde, 7.
Vospří. (Nýsaní)
Horn, 7. Ro7. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
Iglau, 7. I7ɤava. (Bo7emya)
Insterburg, 7. Instruu. (Prussia)
Iser, p. Isera and Is-ësera. (Austria)
Isonzo, p. Soua, Edoba. (Austria)
Istiman, 7. Eɤatiɯa. (Turkey)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

J
Jansdorf, 7. Pnov. (Bohemia)
Jagerndorf, 7. Krymov. (Silesia)
Idria, 7. Vydra. (Krajina) Jicin,
7. Jicin. (Bohemia)
Johannisberg, 7. Hansborn. (East Prussia)
Julin, 7. Vogin, Veneda. (Prussia)
Jung-Bunzlau, 7. Madobogesava. (Bohemia)
Jurburg, 7. Oroborm. (Prussia)
Juterbock, 7. Eutrop. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

K
Kaden, 7. Kadan. (Bohemia)
Kalau, 7. Kagawa. (Germany)
Kammin, 7. Kaden tamzhe Kamen. (Germany)
Karasu, p. Msta and Mesta. (Macedonia)
Karasu, p. Strum and Struma. (Macedonia)
Karlsbad, 7. Karovary. (Bohemia)
Karnthen, obɤ. Korenia. (Chorutania)
Karlstadt, 7. Karɤoveɯ. (Bo7emya)
Karlsburg, 7. Beg7rad. (Sedm7radia)
Karinthien, obɤ. Korenia. (Chorutania)
Kaschau, 7. Koshiɯa. (Vienna)
Kazanlick, 7. Sheynovo and Kote. (Romania)
Kastoria, 7. Kostur. (Greece)
Kempen, 7. Kunno. (Prussia)
Kethen, 7. Kve. (Germany)
Kimpoloung, 7. Ƚоɤ7опоɤе.
Kirkilissa,
7.
Soromopermov
иɤи
Nosin7rad.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Kirchhain, 7. Kustrov. (Germany)
Kissingen, 7. Khizhy. (Bavaria)
Klausenburg, 7. Kagosh and Kagoshvar. (Sedmichradia) Klentze, 7.
Kagone. (Germany)
Klietz, 7. Kɤyu. (Germany)
Klagenfurth, 7. ɏеɤовеɯ. (Chorutania)
Koromezo, 7. Pсинье. (Vienna)
Konigsgratz, 7. Kraɤe7rada and Gradeɯ Kraɤevey. (Boɤeмия)
Konitz, 7. Hoynyɯy. (Prussia)
Kokel, p. Tirnova. (Sedmichradia)
Kommotau, 7. Khomutov. (Bohemia)
Komorn, 7. Komarno. (Vienna)
Konigenhof, 7. Kradedvor. (Bohemia)
Konigsberg, 7. Kroɤeveɯ. (Prussia)
Kopreinitz, 7. Koprivnitsa. (Croatia)
Korosmezzo, 7. Pseny. (Austria)
Konstanz, 7. Kostinitsa. (Switzerland)
Koslin, 7. Kosin. (Pomerania)Kradedvor. (Bohemia)
Konigsberg, 7. Kroɤeveɯ. (Prussia)
Kopreinitz, 7. Koprivnitsa. (Croatia)
Korosmezzo, 7. Pseny. (Austria)
Konstanz, 7. Kostinitsa. (Switzerland)
Koslin, 7. Kosin. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kosel, 7. Kosin. (Silesia) Koritza,
7. Gorizia. (Greece) Kotbus, 7.
Hotebuzh. (Nysa) Kostel, 7.
Podivín. (Moravia) Kosten, 7.
Kostyam. (Prussia) Krain, obɤ.
Kraina. (Austria) Kreitsburg, 7.
Ruzhbor. (Russia) Kreutz, 7.
Kryzhevɯy. (Croatia) Kremnitz,
7. Kremniɯa. (V7ria) Kremsier, 7.
Kromeriz. (Moravia) Krems, 7.
Kremza. (Austria)
Kronstadt od., Brasso, 7. Brasov and Koruna. (Sedmichradia)
Krummanu, 7. Krumev. (Bohemia)
Kuprily, 7. Veche. (Bamans Peninsula) Kustendil, 7.
Vebobudz. (Bamans Peninsula) Kuttenburg, 7. Kutna
Hora. (Bohemia)
Kulm, 7. Khaum. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf, Kursmіy саɤіv. (Prussia) Kweitz,
7. Kvas. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---sula) Kustendil, 7.
Vebobudz. (Bamans Peninsula) Kuttenburg, 7. Kutna
Hora. (Bohemia)
Kulm, 7. Khaum. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf, Kursmіy саɤіv. (Prussia) Kweitz,
7. Kvas. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L
Lagosta, island. Nastovo. (Hungary)
Laibach, 7. Nyubyana. (Austria)
Landsberg, 7. Gorev. (Prussia)
Lauban, 7. Nyuben (Silesia) Lauzitz,
ob. Nyzy.
Lautenburg, 7. Niborm. (Prussia)
Leda-See, Lake Nebsmo. (Prussia)
Lebau, 7. Nybia and Nyubava. (Prussia) Lebus,
7. Nyubusha. (Germany)
Lieben, 7. Gɤуп (Germany)
Liepa, Neshchaya Nipa. (Bohemia)
Liepzig, 7. Nipy and Nipso. (Saxony) Leitha, 7.
Nitava. (Germany)
Leitmeritz, 7. Nitomerizy. (Bohemia)
Lemberg, 7. Nvov. (Galicia) Lentzen,
7. Nenuin. (Germany) Lensen, 7.
Nyuin. (Germany)
Leoben, 7. Nübno and Nübina. (Germany)
Leobschutz, 7. Gübinuin and Nübouinuin. (Germany)
Lessino, island of Hvar and Far. (Croatia)
Leutschau, 7. Nevoua. (V7ria)
Levenz, 7. Nevoua. (V7ria)
Leutomischl, 7. Nitomysh. (Moravia)
Libau, 7. Nyubava. (Russia)
Liebenwerda, 7. Rumov. (Germany)
Liegnitz, 7. Ne7niya. (Silesia)
Linz, 7. Ninea. (Austria)
Lisza, 7. Nesno. (Germany)
Littau, 7. Nitovya. (Moravia)
Littai, 7. Netia. (Chorutania)
Laun, 7. Nunya. (Bohemia)
Lissa, 7. Nesno. (Prussia)
Lubeck, 7. Nübi and Nübo. (Germany) Luben, 7.
Nübin. (Prussia)
Luchow, 7. Nу7и. (Hanover)
Lukkau, 7. Nуmов. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lutzen, 7. Nyzhin. (Samosia)
Luditz, 7. Mutyia. (Bohemia)
Lundenburg, 7. Breyava and Breuisava. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---how, 7. Nу7и. (Hanover)
Lukkau, 7. Nуmов. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lutzen, 7. Nyzhin. (Samosia)
Luditz, 7. Mutyia. (Bohemia)
Lundenburg, 7. Breyava and Breuisava. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M
Magdeburg, 7. Levin. (Germany)
Main, p. Mo7an. (Germany)
Mainz, 7. Mo7yu. (Germany)
Makarsko, 7. Momry. (Croatia)
Marburg, 7. Maribor. (Styria)
Marienburg, 7. Kobylin. (Prussia) Maria-
Theresiapol, 7. Soboda. (Austria)
Marienburg, 7. Magdeburg. (Prussia)
Marienwerder, 7. Kwidzyn. (Prussia)
Markgrabowo, 7. Ożarów. (Prussia)
March, p. Morava. (Moravia)
Meiszen, 7. Myshin. (Saxony)
Meleda, island. Mɤет. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Melk, 7. Meɤьниm. (Germany)
Meonia, 7. Раѕɤуm. (Turkey)
Merseburg, 7. Mezhibor. (Germany)
Mettau, p. Meta, Msta. (Bohemia and Moravia)
Mewe, 7. Gniev. (Prussia)
Mies, 7. Strzibro. (Bohemia)
Mies, p. Mza. (Bohemia)
Michelstatten, c. Vegesovo. (Kraina)
Mikilenburg, 7. Nyubov and Rapo7. (S.
Germany) Mirchau, 7. Mirochov. (Prussia)
Mischkolz, Mischmowey. (Austria)
Mitrowitz, 7. Mitrovica. (Bamans Peninsula) Mitterberg,
Pisino, 7. Pasin. (Austria)
Moldau, p. Vīta, Vīta and Mīta. (Bohemia) Mottling, 7. Metina.
(Chorutania)
Mesokovesd, 7. Kivazhd. (V7ria)
Moldauthein, Vɤtavcmiy tyny. (Bo7emia)
Monchgut, 7. Rodovui. (Ost. Rana)
Morasch, p. Marosha. (Ven7ria)
Mosburg, 7. Mokhov, Saɤovar.
(Ven7ria) Mugeln, 7. Mo7iɤьna.
(Nуѕаɯия)
Muglitz, 7. Mo7eɤiɯa and Mo7eɤniɯa. (Moravia)
Muhlhausen, 7. Miɤevmа. (Bo7emya)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Munchen, 7. Munich. (Bavaria)
Munchsberg, 7. Vojnov Mesteɯ. (Bohemia)
Munster, 7. Vėgna. (Silesia)
Munchengratz, 7. Munich, Gradina. (Bohemia)
Muritz, os. Maroua and Morua. (Northern Germany)
Munkatsch, 7. Mumau. (Austria)
Muskau, 7. Muschow and Muschow. (Nysa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ėgna. (Silesia)
Munchengratz, 7. Munich, Gradina. (Bohemia)
Muritz, os. Maroua and Morua. (Northern Germany)
Munkatsch, 7. Mumau. (Austria)
Muskau, 7. Muschow and Muschow. (Nysa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Namslau, 7. Namyslav. (Silesia)
Narenta, 7. Neretva. (Lithuania)
Narva, 7. Ruzhiv. (Russia)
Nehrung, Nereya (between Frisch and Kurish-7ral). (Prussia)
Neidenburg, 7. Nibor. (Prussia)
Neisiedlersee, Peisoseero. (Austria)
Neisse, Nis and Nis, 7. Nica. (Silesia)
Neitra, 7. Nitra. (Slovakia)
Netze, p. Neteu and Netou. (Germany)
Neuhaus, 7. Indrichov-7radeu. (Bohemia)
Neumark, 7. New market. (Austria)
Neumark, 7. Tuesday. (Nehia)
Neusatz, 7. New Garden. (Vienna)
Neusohl, 7. Banská Bystrica. (Vienna)
Neutitschen, 7. Nový Jičín. (Bohemia)
Neustadt, 7. New Town. (Bohemia)
Nieman, p. Khron and Nieman. (Russia)
Niolsburg, 7. Nimuv and Mimuv. (Moravia) Nona,
Nin. (Zamaja)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
Oberlaibach, 7. Upper. (Horutania)
Obervellach, 7. Begany. (Horutania)
Odenburg, 7. Sopron. (V7ria)
Oderberg, 7. Bo7uman. (Sigesia)
Oder, p. Odra. (Germany)
Oels, 7. Oeshniya. (Silesia) Oesterreich,
Austria, Pamushchaya semya.
Ofen, 7. Buda and Peu-Budino. (Vienna) Ohre,
p. Ora, Ara, Vra and Œra. (Germany) Olmutz,
7. Gogomu, Ogomu. (Moravia) Olymphe, 7opa
Naha. (Greece)
Oppeln, 7. Opole. (Silesia)
Opus, ɭoport Ternovo, and Opsen. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Ortelsburg, 7. Sytno. (Prussia)
Oschatz, 7. Ozhiy. (East Germany)
Ostmark, obg. Eastern March. (Austria)
Ostrau, 7. Ostrov. (Moravia)
Ouskoub, 7. Smolensk. (Bamans Peninsula)

--- PAGE BREAK ---я)
Ortelsburg, 7. Sytno. (Prussia)
Oschatz, 7. Ozhiy. (East Germany)
Ostmark, obg. Eastern March. (Austria)
Ostrau, 7. Ostrov. (Moravia)
Ouskoub, 7. Smolensk. (Bamans Peninsula)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
Parenzo, 7. Poreč. (Istria) Passau, 7.
Passau. (Austria) Passewalk, 7.
Pustovom. (Germany) Pettau, 7. Ptuj.
(Styria)
Peene, 7.p. Pena. (Germany)
Pest, 7. Peni and Peu. (Vienna)
Philipopel, 7. Pɤovdiv. (Bamans Peninsula) Pirnitz, 7.
Bortniɯa. (Moravia)
Pilsen, 7. Pilsen. (Bohemia) Pirano,
7. Pirano. (Styria)
Plattensee, Balaton Great Lake. (Bohemia)
Pleschen, 7. Pleschen. (Posnan)
Plon, 7. Pung. (Northern Germany)
Podersam, 7. Podborany. (Bohemia)
Polnich Krone, 7. Koronow. (East
Prussia) Polsen, 7. Pungunia. (Bohemia)
Posen, obɤ. Poznan. (Prussia)
Potsdam, 7. Postupin. (Prussia)
Pregel, p. Pre7oɤa. (Prussia)
Prerau, 7. Prerov. (Moravia)
Presburg, 7. Bretisɤav. (Vienna)
Preignitz, 7. Breznica and Brsenica. (Germany)
Prosnitz, 7. Piseunica. (Germany)
Prossnitz, 7. Prosteev (Moravia)
Pudowa, 7. Budov. (Moravia)
Puglitz, 7. Podɤюстин. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q
Qucizs, p. Kvas. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Prosnitz, 7. Piseunica. (Germany)
Prossnitz, 7. Prosteev (Moravia)
Pudowa, 7. Budov. (Moravia)
Puglitz, 7. Podɤюстин. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q
Qucizs, p. Kvas. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R
Raab, 7. Œрьев. (Austria)
Radkersburg, 7. Rad7ona.
(Chorutania) Ragusa, 7. Ƚубровниm.
(Ƚаɤмаɯия) Rakonitz, 7.
Раmовниmи. (Bo7emia) Ratzburg, 7.
Ratibor. (Germany) Raudnitz, 7.
Rudnia. (Bohemia) Regensburg, 7.
Resno. (Bavaria) Reichenberg, 7.
Nibere. (Bohemia) Reicnenau, 7.
Rychnov. (Bohemia) Redenitz, p.
Radania. (Bavaria) Rekenitz, 7.
Ramitnia (Germany) Rheims, 7.
Remezh. (France)
Reuss, 7. Russ. (Germany)
Reval, 7. Kogivan. (Russia)
Rhein, p. Rin. (Germany)
Riesenburg, 7. Probuta. (Pomerania)
Riesengebirge, 7ory, Isponiny 7ory and Koromonoshi. (Bohemia) Risano,
7. Risan. (Zamaja)
Ritschenwalde, 7. Ritschenwalde. (Posen)
Romerstadt, 7. Romerstadt. (Moravia)
Ronneburg, 7. Ronneburg. (Germany)
Rostock, 7. Rostom. (Prussia, Pomerania)
Roslau, 7. Roslav. (Germany)
Rovigno, 7. Rovinj. (Istria)
Rugen, island of Rügen and Rana. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---)
Ronneburg, 7. Ronneburg. (Germany)
Rostock, 7. Rostom. (Prussia, Pomerania)
Roslau, 7. Roslav. (Germany)
Rovigno, 7. Rovinj. (Istria)
Rugen, island of Rügen and Rana. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S
Saar, 7. Mdar. (Bohemia)
Saatz, 7. Mateu. (Bohemia)
Saale, p. Sogava, Saha. (Germany)
Sagan, 7. Mahan. (Prussia)
Saibusch, 7. Mive. (Gania)
Saint Gotthard, Monastery. (Vienna)
Salburg, 7. Sāvar. (Vienna)
Saldenhofen, 7. Vosenia. (Austria)
Salzburg, 7. Sāvar. (Tyrol)
Sablioncella, Pogoost. Pogešai. (Lithuania) Sajo, p.
Sjana, Sogona. (Austria)
Samland, Pнтарный бере7. (near Frisch and Kurish
7аɭа) Samter 7. Shamotugi. (Posnan)
Sanct-Veit, 7. Vit. (Chorutania)
Sandec, 7. Snedé. (Ganiya)
Satmar, 7. Nemtiba. (V7ria)
Saybusch, 7. Mive. (Ganiya)
Scargona, 7. Smradin. (Gorizia)
Chemnitz, 7. Stavniya and Oavniya. (Ven7ria)
Schildberg, 7. Ostreshov. (Posnan)
Schilenberg, 7. Mumberm, Mumborgina. (Kraina)
Schlan, 7. Sany. (Bohemia)
Schleiz, 7. Shchei. (Germany)
Schlukenau, 7. Shumnov. (Bohemia)
Schmolnitz, 7. Smognim. (Venice)
Schneeggebirge, 7. Snegni. (Bohemia)
Scholanke, 7. Truonma. (Prussia) Schrime,
Шрем иɤи Срем. (Prussia) Schuttenhfen,
7. Суɲиɯа. (Bohemia) Schweidnitz, 7.
Свидниɯа. (Silesia) Schwetz, 7 Свиuье.
(Prussia)
Schweirin, Ewerin. (Northern Germany and
Posen) Schwiebus, 7. Svedobin. (Prussia)
Seben, 7. Sobinov. (Vienna) Sebenico,
7. Sibenik. (Croatia) Seltschau, 7.
Sedschany. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Schweirin, Ewerin. (Northern Germany and
Posen) Schwiebus, 7. Svedobin. (Prussia)
Seben, 7. Sobinov. (Vienna) Sebenico,
7. Sibenik. (Croatia) Seltschau, 7.
Sedschany. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sereres, 7. Ser. (Turkey)
Seibenburgen, obɤ. Sedm7radia and Transylvania.
Silesien, obɤ. Sɤеѕаmа. (Prussia)
Silistria, 7. Ƚоростоɤ and Ƚерстер. (Bulgaria)
Sirmien, between Ƚунаем and Савою, Срем. (Austria)
Skeidnitz, Шmудиuи and Шmɤов. (Germany)
Skutari, 7. Smad. (Agbania)
Soldau, 7. Yagovo. (Prussia)
Saloniki, 7. Sogun, Terema. (Macedonia)
Solnok, 7. Negnom. (Hungary)
Solta, island. Ƚервеноm. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Sorau, 7. ɏарев иɤи Маров. (Prussia)
Soovar, 7. Сɤан. (Vienna)
Spalato, 7. Spaget. (Croatia)
Spree, p. Spree and Spree. (Germany)
Spremberg, 7. Gorodom. (Nusa)
Sprottau, 7. Sprottau. (Prussia)
Sroda, 7. Wednesday. (Silesia)
Stagno grande, 7. Ston veɤiniy. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Stargard, 7. Old town. (Prussia)
Stein 7. Kamenem. (Chorutania)
Starkenbach, 7. Iɤemniɯa. (Bo7emia)
Steiamanger, 7. Kamenɯ. (V7ria)
Stolpe, 7 Sɤупсmо andɤи Stoɤп. (Pomerania)
Straszburg, 7. Brodni and Brodnia. (East Prussia)
Straubing, 7. Strubina. (Bavaria)
Steier, 7. and p. Styr. (Austria)
Steiern, Styrmo. (Austria)
Steiermark, Styrmo. (Austria)
Sternberg, 7. Evesda-7ora. (Bohemia)
Stuhlweissenburg, 7. Beɤ7rad-Stoɤny. (Vienna)
Strelitz, 7. Strelitz. (Germany)
Streme, p. Strumina. (S. Germany)
Stettin, 7. ɒetina. (Prussia)
Sueta, 7. Svyata. (Gogandia)
Szekler, nar. Simu. (Sedmichradia)
Szolonok, 7. Sogni. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Strelitz. (Germany)
Streme, p. Strumina. (S. Germany)
Stettin, 7. ɒetina. (Prussia)
Sueta, 7. Svyata. (Gogandia)
Szekler, nar. Simu. (Sedmichradia)
Szolonok, 7. Sogni. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
Tanais, Tanaquil, Ƚон, Сɤавянсmая реmа. (Russia)
Tatar-Bazardtschik, 7. Basarum, Konia and Batom. (Bamans Peninsula)
Taus, 7. Lomazhiny. (Bohemia)
Tetschen, 7. Leuin. (Bohemia)
Teschen, 7. Teshin. (Silesia) Taja,
p. Lya. (Moravia)
Theiss, p. Tissa. (Hungary)
Theresiapol, 7. Subotia, Subotnia and Sobodma. (Hungary) Thorn, 7.
Torun. (Prussia)
Tilsit, 7. Tyssa and Tysza. (Prussia) Teplitz,
7. Teplice. (Bohemia)
Tollensee, оѕ. Ƚоɤениɯа. (Northern Germany)
Torgau, 7. Tор7ов. (Germany)
Trajectum, Utrecht, Vītabur7. (Gogandia)
Transilvania, Siebenburgen, Sedm7radia.
Trau, 7. Tro7ir. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Trove, 7. Travna. (Germany)
Triest, 7. Terst. (Austria)
Troppau, 7. Opava. (Moravia)
Trautenau, 7. Trutnov. (Bohemia)
Trubau, 7. Moravia. Trebova. (Moravia)
Tschaslau, 7. Nasava. (Bohemia)
Tschernowitz, 7. Nernovy. (Bumovina)
Tschernembl, 7. Nernomeɤь. (Chorutania)
Turnau, 7. Turnov. (Bohemia)
Turla, p. Ƚнестр. (Russia)
Tusla, 7. Soni. (Bamberg Peninsula) Thuringtrwald,
Lurinsky Forest. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U
Udine, 7. Videm. (Italy) Ucker,
p. Vmpa. (Northern Germany)
Ungh, p. Vzh. (Hungary)
Unghwar, 7. Vzhgorod.
(Hungary)
Usedom, island of Vinɯɤав and Vѕоним.
(Germany) Utrecht, 7. Виɤьтбур7. (Gogandia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---y) Ucker,
p. Vmpa. (Northern Germany)
Ungh, p. Vzh. (Hungary)
Unghwar, 7. Vzhgorod.
(Hungary)
Usedom, island of Vinɯɤав and Vѕоним.
(Germany) Utrecht, 7. Виɤьтбур7. (Gogandia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W
Wagram, 7. O7run. (Austria)
Weitzen, 7. Vaɯov. (Austria)
Walk, 7. Voɯom. (Russia)
Walskleben, 7. Vagisevo. (Germany) Wardar, p.
Vagimaya. (Macedonia)
Warnow, p. Varnova, Vranona, Vrana. (Germany)
Wda, p. Vda. (Russia and Poland)
Wehlau, 7. Vēlav and Vēlava. (Prussia)
Weiszkirchen, 7. Bēaya Ērmov. (Austria)
Weiszenburg, 7. Bē7rada. (Bavaria)
Veglia, Wekla, island of Karma and Kerma. (Hungary)
Weitra, 7. Vitoras. (Bohemia)
Weitenau, 7. Veda. (Germany)
Wenden, 7. Wenda, and Wenden.
(Russia) Wenetia, 7. Veneta and Veneda.
(Italy) Weser, p. Veseppa. (Germany)
Weizkirchen, 7. Grania. (Moravia)
Weistritz, p. Bystrica. (Germany)
Wesenberg, 7. Vimir. (Southern
Germany) Widin, 7. Budin and Bdin.
(Serbia) Videnetz, 7. Voden. (Gogandia)
Wien, 7. Veden, Beu, Vienna. (Austria)
Wienerwald, Veden's m. (Austria) Willach, 7.
Beɤin and Beɤam. (Chorutania) Willenberg, 7.
Vegborm. (Prussia) Wilzburg, 7. Vitenburg7.
(Bavaria)
Windisch-Fiestritz, p. and 7. Savyanska Bystria. (Austria) Windischgratz,
7. S. Grade. (Styria)
Wischau, 7. Vishmov. (Moravia)
Wismar, 7. Vesmir. (Germany)
Wittenberg, 7. Vitober7. (Prussia)
Wittingen, 7. Trebon (Bohemia)
Wittichenau, 7. Kugov. (Nuzhny)
Vlordingen, 7. Savenburg. (Gugandia)
Wolfsberg, 7. Vogomov. (Styria)
Wolgast, 7. Wolgast and Wolgast. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volkermarkt, 7. Vēmove. (Styria) Wollin,
island. Vogyn, Vsnim. (Prussia) Wrechau, 7.
Vreshnya and Vresnya. (Posnan) Wustrow, 7.
Island. (South Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---nia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volkermarkt, 7. Vēmove. (Styria) Wollin,
island. Vogyn, Vsnim. (Prussia) Wrechau, 7.
Vreshnya and Vresnya. (Posnan) Wustrow, 7.
Island. (South Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Z
Zara, 7. Eader, Eadar. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Zara Vecchto, 7. Bioprad, Old Eadar. (Ƚаɤмаɯия) Zeitz,
7. Miɯa. (Germany)
Zeng, 7. Sen. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Zerbtst, 7. Serbsm, Serbishte. (Germany)
Zirknitzersee, Nernovemo, Lake. (Austria)
Zithen, 7. Sytna. (Germany)
Zittau, 7. Mitava. (Saxony)
Znaym, 7. Enaymo. (Moravia)
Zobten, Zobtenberg, 7. Sobotmа. (Silesia)
Zuhlsdorf, 7. Syusyа. (Germany)
Zwikau, 7. Evimov, (Saxony)
Zwittau, 7. Svitava and Svitava. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
Austria, Ramusche Semya.
Ara, Ora, p. Ohre. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Zuhlsdorf, 7. Syusyа. (Germany)
Zwikau, 7. Evimov, (Saxony)
Zwittau, 7. Svitava and Svitava. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
Austria, Ramusche Semya.
Ara, Ora, p. Ohre. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B
Ba7, 7. Carlopago. (Italy)
Basarim and Batom, 7. Tatar-Bazardtschir. (Bamans Peninsula) Bagon, Lake
Bagon, Balaton, Plattensee. (Hungary)
Bamann, Bakkan Geb., Haemus. (Bamann Peninsula) Babi
Bridge, 7. Bomst. (Prussia)
Banov, Bansmaya Bystria, Neusohl. (Sova) Bardiev,
7. Barthfeld. (Austria-Hungary) Barin, 7.
Berlin. (Prussia)
Bar, 7. Antivari. (Serbia)
Benezhov, 7. Bensen oder Beneschau, Bentsch.
Berat, 7. Berat. (Albania)
Berun and Mza, p. Beraun. (Bohemia and Hungary)
Gora, 7. Bergen. (Germany)
Berezhany, 7. Brzezan. (Gania)
Veden, 7. Wien. (Austria)
Bite and Monastery, 7. Bitalia. (Bamans Peninsula) Bi7rad, 7. Zara,
Old Eadar. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Bátonyosero, Balaton. (Hungary)
Božmin, 7. Oderberg. (Czech
Republic) Bož, p. Buž. (Russia)
Bolesławiec, 7. Bunzlau, (Prussia) Bomba
Kotor, s. Bocca v. Kattaro. Bortnia, 7.
Pirnits. (Moravia) Branevo, 7.
Braunsburg. (Pomerania)
Brannyi Bor, Po7oреɤьɯы, 7. Brandenburg. (Prussia)
Brau, island. Brazza. (Romania)
Brasov and Coruna, Cronstadt od. Brasso. (Sedmichradia)
Bre7 bogshoi, 7. Brieg. (Silesia)
Brezhnia, p. Brezhnia and Brezhnia, Priegnitz. (Germany)
Brezhno, 7. Bries. (Austria)
Brest-Nitovsky, Berestye. (Russia)
Breslau, 7. Presburg, Pogoni. (Austria) Bretislaw, Preslav,
Vratislav, Breslau. (Silesia) Brodni and Brodnia, 7.
Strassburg. (Prussia) Brumov, 7. Braunau. (Bohemia)
Bu7, p. Bo7. (Russia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---7. Presburg, Pogoni. (Austria) Bretislaw, Preslav,
Vratislav, Breslau. (Silesia) Brodni and Brodnia, 7.
Strassburg. (Prussia) Brumov, 7. Braunau. (Bohemia)
Bu7, p. Bo7. (Russia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Buda, 7. Ofen. (Hungary)
Budva, 7. Budua. (Hungary)
Budin and Bydin, 7. Bromberg. (Prussia)
Budin, 7. Widdin. (Serbia).
Budishin, 7. Bautzen. (Nuzhiy)
Budov, 7. Pudowa. (Moravia)
Busm, 7. Bausk. (Russia)
Budeevity, 7. Budweis. (Bohemia)
Bumove, 7. Bukecy. (Nusaya)
Bumovo, 7. Haskioi. (Bamansky Peninsula)
Bystria, 7. Banska, Neusohl. (Vienna) Bystria,
7. Habelschwert. (Silesia, Kradom) Bystrica, p.
Gog, Eina, Gail. (Tyrol) Bystrica, p. Weistritz.
(Germany)
Bystrica Sava, p. and 7. Windisch-Feistritz. (Austria)
Byshany, 7. Flohau. (Moravia)
Brno, 7. Brunn. (Moravia)
Beɤaya ɯermov, 7. Weiskirchen. (Austria)
Begorod, 7. Ammermann. (Russia)
Běɤ7rad, 7. Bellegarde. (Prussia and France)
Běɤ7rad, 7. Berat. (Albania)
Begrad, 7. Carlsburg. (Sedmradia)
Berrad, Bioberad, Star. Eadar, Zara vecchio. (Hungary)
Bē7rad, 7. Weiszenburg. (Bavaria)
Bégrad stoɤny, Stuhlweissenburg. (Vienna) Bégim
and Bégam, 7. Willach. (Chorutania) Bégosero and
Bégosepa, 7. Egri-Palanka. (Bulgaria) Bielersee, Bielersee.
(Switzerland and Tyrol) Belorussia, Beloserbia.
(Russia)
Begany, 7. Oberwellach. (Chorutania)
Begsm and Begsmo, 7. Bielitz. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ri-Palanka. (Bulgaria) Bielersee, Bielersee.
(Switzerland and Tyrol) Belorussia, Beloserbia.
(Russia)
Begany, 7. Oberwellach. (Chorutania)
Begsm and Begsmo, 7. Bielitz. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
Vagisevo, 7. Walsleben. (Germany)
Vangava, island. Vsnim, Usedom. (Prussia)
Varadin, 7. Grosswardein. (Austria)
Varnova, p. Warnow. (South Germany)
Vayov, 7. Waitzen. (Austria)
Veda, 7. Weitenau. (Germany)
Veɤav, Veɤava, Iɤava, 7. Wehlau. (Prussia)
Veɤe7rad, 7. Gradishma, Altstadt. (Moravia)
Veɤec, 7. Kuprluy. (Turkey)
Vegesovo, Michelstatten. (Krajina)
Veginaya, p. Wardar. (Turkey)
Veginiy Svon, 7. Groszglockner. (Austria)
Veginiy Varadin, 7. Grosswardein. (Vienna)
Vegin, 7. Fellin. (Russia)
Vegborm, 7. Willenberg. (Prussia)
Vegbudzh, 7. Kustendil. (Bulgarian peninsula) Vigomovei,
7. Volkermarkt. (Styria)
Vegno, 7. Munster. (Silesia) Wendish
Sani. (Friesland and Curland) Wenda and
Wenden, 7. Wenden. (Russia) Veneda, 7.
Venetia. (Italy)
Verchaba and Verchabye, 7. Hohenelbe. (Bohemia)
Verkhniy, 7. Oberlaibach. (Horutania)
Vesmir, 7. Wismar. (Germany)
Videm, 7. Udine. (Italy)
Vetvar, 7. Altenburg. (Germany)
Vitenburg, 7. Wilzburg. (Bavaria)
Visprem, 7. Wiesenberg. (Germany)
Vitober, 7. Wittenberg. (Germany)
Vitovo, 7. Arkona. (Rana Island)
Vit, 7. St. Veit, (Horutania) Vitoras
7. Weitra. (Austria) Vyshnov, 7.
Wischau. (Moravia) Voden, 7.
Widenetz. (Gogandia) Vodnyan, 7.
Dignano. (Austria) Vosenia, 7.
Saldenhofen. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Veit, (Horutania) Vitoras
7. Weitra. (Austria) Vyshnov, 7.
Wischau. (Moravia) Voden, 7.
Widenetz. (Gogandia) Vodnyan, 7.
Dignano. (Austria) Vosenia, 7.
Saldenhofen. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vojnice, 7. Hohenek. (Austria)
Vogesen and Bozen, 7. Wolgast. (Pomerania)
Wollin, Völta, Moldau River.
Völmowe, 7. Wolfsberg. (Styria) Völm,
Völmi, 7. Walk. (Russia)
Wogyn, 7. and island. Wogyn, Wollin. (Prussia)
Eastern March, Ostmark.
Vosprey, Voery, Voerey, 7. Hoierswerda. (Nysa)
Vgtawsky Tyn, 7. Moldauthein. (Bohemia) Vratislaw
and Vratislaw, 7. Breslau.
Vresna and Vresna, 7. Wreschen. (Posnan)
Tuesday, 7. Ntumark. (Moravia)
Vshova, 7. Fraustadt. (Silesia)
Vsesero, p. Weser.
Větawa, p. Mėtawa, Moldau. (Bohemia)
Věta, p. Flohe. (Bohemia)
Vydra, 7. Idria. (Krajina)
Vysokoe mito, 7. Hohenmauth. (Austria)
Wienerwald, Vienna Woods.
Veden, Beu, 7. Vienna.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r.
Větawa, p. Mėtawa, Moldau. (Bohemia)
Věta, p. Flohe. (Bohemia)
Vydra, 7. Idria. (Krajina)
Vysokoe mito, 7. Hohenmauth. (Austria)
Wienerwald, Vienna Woods.
Veden, Beu, 7. Vienna.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

G
Gavoga, p. Havel. (Germany)
Gainov, 7. Hainau. (Prussia)
Ganiu, 7. Gagai. (Bamberg Peninsula) Hansborn, 7.
Johannisberg. (Prussia)
Gdansm, 7. Danzig. (Prussia)
Gɤивиɯа, 7. Gleiwitz. (Silesia)
Gɤо7ов, 7. Glogau. (Silesia)
Gɤомаu, 7. Lomatsch. (Silesia)
Głubczyce, Nybucze, 7. Leobschutz. (Germany)
Gniev and Gnev, 7. Mewe. (Prussia)
Gniezno and Gnesno, 7. Gnezen. (Prussia)
Godonin, 7. Goding. (Moravia)
Holleschau, 7. Holleschau. (Moravia) Olmutz,
7. Olmutz, Olmutz. (Moravia) Gail, p. Bystrica
and Ena, Gail. (Tyrol) Holsen. 7. Holsen.
(Germany)
Gombinen, 7. Gombinen.
(Silesia) Gohrau, 7. Gohrau.
(Prussia) Landsberg, 7.
Landsberg. (Prussia) Gortz, 7.
Gortz. (Chorutania) Grottkau, 7.
Grottkau. (Silesia) Grodek, 7.
Grodek. (Germany)
Gorsma and Gora, 7. Bergen. (Island of Rana)
Gorotam obg. Choruthanien.
Gorshuvty, 7. Bischofsteinitz. (Bohemia)
Grabyn, 7. Finsterwald. (Prussia)
Gradishma, 7. Vegerrad. Alstadt. (Moravia)
Gradishma, 7. Gratz. (Posnan)
Grania, 7. Weiskirchen. (Moravia)
Gradina Krajevy, 7. Konigsgratz. (Bohemia)
Gradina Soveny, 7. Windisch-gratz. (Styria) Gradom,
7. Spremberg. (Nysa)
Gron and Hron, p. Gran. (Austria)
Grudeɯ and Grudѕiondѕ, 7. Graudenz. (Prussia)
Gruz, 7. Gravosa. (Italy)
Gustopeu, 7. Auspitz. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tz. (Styria) Gradom,
7. Spremberg. (Nysa)
Gron and Hron, p. Gran. (Austria)
Grudeɯ and Grudѕiondѕ, 7. Graudenz. (Prussia)
Gruz, 7. Gravosa. (Italy)
Gustopeu, 7. Auspitz. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ƚ
Ƚеревеноm, island of Solta. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Ƚерпт, 7. Œрьев, Dorat. (Russia)
Ƚива, r. Ƚева, E. Ƚвина, Duna. (Russia)
Ƚивин, 7. Duino. (Chorutania)
Mitrovica, 7. Mitrowitz. (Bamans Peninsula) Nestor, p. Turga.
(Russia)
Zobro7ora, Zobrosog, 7. Halle. (Germany)
Zog7opoge, 7. Kimpolung. (Bumovina)
Ƚоɤениɯа, p. and oѕ. Tollensee. (S. Germany)
Ƚоmсы 7. Hirschberg. (Bohemia) Ƚомажɤиɯы,
7. Taus. (Bohemia)
Hirschberg, 7. Dommitz. (Germany)
Hirschberg, 7. Dohna. (Germany)
Won, p. Tanais, Tanaquil, Savyanska pema.
Vorostog, 7. Siniastria. (Bulgaria) Rapu, 7.
Dourazzo. (Albania)
Tirinov,
Rinopog,
7.
Adrianople,
Edrene.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Zrevana, p. Drewenz. (Prussia)
Zrevane, nareu. Drevani. (Hanover)
Zrozhdyany, 7. Zresden. (Samosia)
Zubrovni, 7. Ragusa. (Zamaja) Zub,
river Dauda. (Bohemia)
Ƚунав, p. Donau. (Germany)
Yagovo, 7. Soldau. (Prussia)
Thuringian Forest, Thuringerwald. (Germany)
Demmin, 7. Demmin. (Prussia)
Tауа, p. Tауа. (Moravia)
Liebocher, p. Liebocher.
(Moravia) Magdeburg, 7.
Magdeburg. (Germany) Teischen,
7. Teischen. (Bohemia)
Ƚьявоɤ, 7. Delvino, Devol, Eneus. (Aɤbania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
E7dora, Eider River. (Schleswig)
Ebganm, Trusa, 7. Elbing. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M
Ma7an, 7. Sagan. (Prussia)
Mambor7, 7. Senftenberg.
(Bo7emia) Marov, ɏarev, 7. Sorau.
(Prussia) Mateɯ, 7. Saatz.
(Bo7emia)
Mdyary, 7. Saar. (Bohemia)
Mezhni, Old-Zagora, 7. Eski-Zagra. (Bulgaria) Meravna and Bograd-Vegini.
(Russia, Bessarabia)
Miveɯ, 7. Saybusch. (Gagiiya)
Mitava, 7. Zittan. (Samponia)
Miua, 7. Zeitz. (Germany)
Mmutia, 7. Luditz. (Bohemia)
Mumberm, 7. Mumborgina, Schilenberg. (Krajina)
Murza, 7. Diurdevo. (Romania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---usch. (Gagiiya)
Mitava, 7. Zittan. (Samponia)
Miua, 7. Zeitz. (Germany)
Mmutia, 7. Luditz. (Bohemia)
Mumberm, 7. Mumborgina, Schilenberg. (Krajina)
Murza, 7. Diurdevo. (Romania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
Eabre7, 7. Hohenstadt. (Moravia)
Eabre7, 7. Agram. (Chorutania)
Ea7ora Nova, Tverdiɯa, 7. Eni-Zagra. (Bamans Peninsula) Eadar, 7.
Old Bi7rad, Zara, Vecchia. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Eader, 7. Zara. (Croatia)
Eapadnaya Vinaya, p. Vinaya, Vinaya, Duna. (Russia)
Evoɤen, 7. Altsohl. (Austria)
Eveerin, 7. Schwerin. (Germany and Poznan)
E7opege, 7. Gorlitz. (Germany)
Eiga, Gog, Bystria, p. Gail. (Chorutania)
Egatibor, 7. Goldberg. (Sigesia) Egatina
Vemaya, p. Aranoyos. (Venice) Egatovo, 7.
Flatow. (Prussia)
Egatniya, 7. Istiman, Ichtiman. (Balkan Peninsula) Enaymo
and Enoim, 7. Znaim. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
I7ɤava, 7. Iglau. (Bohemia) Iѕъëѕepa,
Iѕepa, p. Isar. (Austria) Iɤva, 7.
Halben. (Silesia) Iɤemniɯa, 7.
Starkenbach. (Bohemia)
Indrichov 7radeɯ, 7. Neuhaus.
(Bohemia) Instrutu, 7. Insterburg.
(Prussia) Ipoɤь, p. Eipel. (Vienna)
Isponiny 7ory, Riesen gebirge. (Bohemia)
Iuinin, 7. Gitschin, Jicin. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ndrichov 7radeɯ, 7. Neuhaus.
(Bohemia) Instrutu, 7. Insterburg.
(Prussia) Ipoɤь, p. Eipel. (Vienna)
Isponiny 7ory, Riesen gebirge. (Bohemia)
Iuinin, 7. Gitschin, Jicin. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

K
Kadan, 7. Kaden. (Bohemia)
Kogava, 7. Kalau. (Germany)
Kamen, 7. Kamina, Cammin. (Prussia)
Kamenia 7. Chemnitz. (Austria)
Kamnem, 7. Stein. (Chorutania)
Kanov, 7. Elden. (Germany)
Karas, Korosch. (Austria)
Kastav, 7. Castua. (Istria)
Kvasa and Kvisa, 7. Kweitz, p. Queisz. (Nusaia)
Kveɯ, 7. Kethen. (Germany)
Kviduin and Kvidin, 7. Marienwerber. (Prussia)
Kezhmare, 7. Kasmarkt. (Hungary)
Kiev, 7. Kyan, Kuyava, Kion.
(Russia) Kiev, 7. Gaya. (Moravia)
Kivyadzh, 7. Mezokovesd. (V7ria)
Kɤadno, 7. Kammin. (Germany)
Kɤadcmo, obɤ. Glatz. (Prussia)
Kɤatova, 7. Klattau. (Bo7emia)
Kɤonsm, 7. Klentze. (Germany)
Kɤyu, 7. Klietz. (Germany)
Knyasiha, 7. Gross-Kanitza.
(Austria) Kobynia, 7. Marienburg.
(Prussia) Kosin, 7. Koslin.
(Pomerania)
Kosil, 7. Kosel. (Silesia)
Koronowa, 7. Polnische Krone. (Prussia)
Kobber, 7. Colberg. (Prussia)
Kogosh and Kush, Kogoshvar, 7. Klausenburg. (Sedmizaria)
Kogivan, 7. Reval. (Russia)
Komarno, 7. Komorn. (Hungary)
Kameny, 7. Steinam-Anger. (Hungary)
Konstantinopol, 7. Sarajevo, Vilnius. (Turkey)
Koper, 7. Capo d'Istria. (Austria) Koprivnica,
7. Koprainitz. (Croatia) Korenica, obl.
Karinthien.
Korenija, 7. Garz. (on the island of
Rane) Kormonoshi, Riesengebirge.
(Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---per, 7. Capo d'Istria. (Austria) Koprivnica,
7. Koprainitz. (Croatia) Korenica, obl.
Karinthien.
Korenija, 7. Garz. (on the island of
Rane) Kormonoshi, Riesengebirge.
(Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Korosno, 7. Crossen. (Prussia)
Koroshmo and Gorotam, Chorutania, obg. Choruthanien.
Korunja, island of Curzola. (Istria)
Coruna and Brasov, Kronstadt od. Brasso. (Sedmichradia)
Koster, 7. Behrent. (Prussia) Kostur,
7. Kastoria. (Greece) Kote, 7.
Kazanlick. (Romania) Kotor, 7.
Cattaro. (Ƚаɤмаɯия) Kostniɯa, 7.
Konstanz. (Switzerland) Kostrin, 7.
Custrin. (Prussia) Kosten, 7. Kosten.
(Prussia)
Kouevie, Kouevsmo, obɤ. Gottschee. (Croatia)
Koshchau, 7. Kaschau. (Austria)
Krain, obɤ. Krain.
Krainerade, 7. Konigsgratz. (Bohemia)
Kroevet, 7. Konigsberg. (Prussia)
Kraɤedvor, 7. Konigenhoff. (Bo7emya)
Kremniɯa, 7. Kremnitz. (V7ria)
Kremzha, 7. Krems. (Austria)
Krizhevɯy, 7. Kreutz. (Croatia)
Kromeriz and Kromeriz, 7. Kremsier. (Moravia)
Krummau, 7. Krummau. (Bohemia)
Erzgebirge, 7. Erzgebirge. (Bohemia)
Jagerndorf, 7. Jagerndorf. (Silesia)
Wittichenau, 7. Wittichenau. (Nysa)
Kempen, 7. Kempen.(Silesia)
Kutná Hora, 7. Kuttenderg. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf. (Prussia) Kynia, 7. Exin.
(Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---7. Jagerndorf. (Silesia)
Wittichenau, 7. Wittichenau. (Nysa)
Kempen, 7. Kempen.(Silesia)
Kutná Hora, 7. Kuttenderg. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf. (Prussia) Kynia, 7. Exin.
(Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Naba, p. Elbe. (Germany)
Nabín, 7. Albona. (Istria) Nastova,
island of Lagosta. (Croatia) Nahá, 7.
Olympe. (Greece) Ne7niá, 7.
Lignitz. (Poland) Nebcmo, Leba-
See. (Prussia) Nevoa, 7. Leutschau.
(V7ria) Netia, 7. Littai.
(Chorutania) Nibereɯ, 7.
Reichenberg. (Bo7emia). Nineɯ, 7.
Linz. (Austria)
Ninsm, Ninyu, 7. Leipzig. (Saxony)
Nitovya, 7. Littau. (Moravia) Nitava,
p. Leitha. (Germany)
Nitomeríy, 7. Leutmeritz. (Bohemia) Nitomysh, 7.
Leutomysl. (Bohemia) Níbor, 7. Lautenburg.
(Prussia)
Nosin7rad
иɤи
Soromayermov,
7.
Kirkilissa.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Nomet and Nomot, 7. Elbogen. (Bohemia)
Nevia, 7. Levenz. (V7ria)
Ny7i, 7. Luchow. (Germany)
Nyzhin, 7. Lutzen. (Saxony)
Nymov, 7. Luckau. (Germany)
Nuny, 7. Laun. (Bohemia)
Nuyin, 7. Lensen. (Germany)
Nuzhiy, obg. Lausitz.
Nvov, 7. Lemberg. (Galicia)
Nvstra, p. Elster. (Germany)
Nyubava, 7. Libau. (Russia)
Nyuava, Nyby, 7. Lobau. (Prussia)
Nyuban, 7. Lauban. (Silesia)
Nübiya, Nübom, 7. Lubeck. (Germany)
Nyubin, 7. Luben. (Prussia)
Nyubina, 7. Leoben. (Styria)
Nyubyan, 7. Laibach. (Carinthia)
Nyubov, 7. Mikilenburg.
(Gurmania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nubusha, 7. Lebus. (Prussia)
Nesno, 7. Lisza. (Germany)
Nes, 7. Alessio. (3pir)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tyria)
Nyubyan, 7. Laibach. (Carinthia)
Nyubov, 7. Mikilenburg.
(Gurmania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nubusha, 7. Lebus. (Prussia)
Nesno, 7. Lisza. (Germany)
Nes, 7. Alessio. (3pir)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M
Mamari and Momri, 7. Makaraska. (Croatia) Magor,
Kobylina, 7. Marienburg. (Prussia) Manyu, p.
Morava. (Russia)
Maribor, 7. Marburg. (Styria)
Maroua, p. Muritz. (Germany)
Marosha, p. Marosch. (Vienna)
Matija, p. Zeta. (Nernonia)
Mezhibor, 7. Merseburg. (Germany)
Mezhikhod, 7. Birnbaum. (Prussia)
Meɤьni, 7. Melk. (Germany)
Mertviɯa, p. Moroua. (Nernozoria)
Meta, p. Mettau. (Bohemia)
Metɤinama, 7. Mottling.
(Chorutania) Mzha, Berunma, p.
Mies. (Bohemia) Mimyov, 7.
Nikolsburg. (Moravia) Mievm, 7.
Muhlhausen. (Bohemia) Mirchov, 7.
Mirchau. (Prussia) Mishmove, 7.
Mischkolz. (Austria)
Mishma and Myshin, 7. Meissen. (Saxony)
Mado-Bogešava, 7. Jung-Bunzlau. (Bohemia)
Mhet, island of Meleda. (Hungary)
Munich, 7. Munich. (Bavaria)
Mnichow 7radine, 7. Munchengratz. (Bohemia)
Mo7an, p. Main. (Germany)
Mo7eɤiɯa, 7. Muglitz. (Moravia)
Mo7iɤьna, 7. Mugeln. (Nуѕаɯия)
Mo7yu, 7. Mainz. (Germany)
Monastery, Bitholia (obite), 7. Bitholia. (Bamans Peninsula) Monastery, 7. St.
Gotthard. (Venice)
Morava, p. March. (Moravia)
Moravsk. Trebova, 7. Trubau. (Moravia)
Morava and Morava, island Muritzsee. (Germany)
Bridge, 7. Bruck. (Austria)
Bridge, 7. Brux. (Bohemia)
Meta and Msta, Karasu River. (Macedonia)
Mumauev, 7. Munkatsch. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mushmov, 7. Muskau. (Nusa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---y)
Bridge, 7. Bruck. (Austria)
Bridge, 7. Brux. (Bohemia)
Meta and Msta, Karasu River. (Macedonia)
Mumauev, 7. Munkatsch. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mushmov, 7. Muskau. (Nusa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Namslau, 7. Namslau. (Silesia)
Netze, p. Netze. (Prussia) Narenta, p.
Narenta. (Lithuania)
Nereya, Nehrung, between Frisch and Kurish-7alam. (Prussia)
Nibor, 7. Neidenburg. (Prussia)
Nimyov, 7. Nicolsburg. (Moravia)
Nin, Nona. (Silesia)
Nitra, 7. Neitra. (Slovakia)
Nish and Nis, Nica, p. and 7. Neisze. (Sigesia)
New basar and pashar, 7. Rassa (Serbia) New
place, 7. Neustadt. (Bohemia)
New-Ea7orie, Tverdiɯa, 7. Eni-Zagra. (Bamansmиy pogуstrov) New
Evоɤen, 7. Banov, Neusohl. (Vienna)
Novo-Iuinin, 7. Neititschen.
(Bohemia) New Place, 7. Neustadt.
(Germany) New Garden, 7. Neusatz.
(Austria) New Snedin, 7. Sandec.
(Gania) New Tor, 7. Neumark.
(Austria) Neman, r. Khron. (Russia)
Nembita, 7. Satmar. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
O7ra, p. Eger. (Bohemia)
Ohrun, 7. Wagram. (Austria)
Odobanov and Odobanov, 7. Adelnau. (Posnan)
Odra, Oder River. (Germany)
Odrin, Drin, Ƚринопоɤь, 7. Adrianople. (Turkey)
Oschatz, 7. Oschatz. (East Germany)
Opsaro Island. Opsaro. (Hungary)
Ogeshma, 7. Markgrabow. (Prussia)
Oeshnia, 7. Oels (Silesia)
Omizh, and Omizh, 7. Almissa. (Romania)
Ota, p. Aguta. (Romania)
Ogtun, Aghan, 7. Dulcigno. (Hungary)
Opava, 7. Troppau. (Silesia)
Opole and Opole, 7. Oppeln, (Silesia)
Opusen, Lot, Opus. (Hungary) Opa
and Ara, p. Ohre. (Germany)
Orania, p. Arva. (Bulgaria) Ornia,
p. Adler. (Bulgaria) Orekhov and
Rakhovo. (Bulgaria) Osveuim, 7.
Auschwitz. (Silesia) Ostrova, 7.
Ostrau. (Moravia) Ostrechov, 7.
Schildberg. (Posnan) Ostrov, 7.
Wustrow. (Germany)
Ostrokhom and Ostrom, 7. Gran. (Austria)
Ocem, 7. Esseck. (Austria)
Ocem veɤinim, 7. Groszenhain. (Saxony)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ravia) Ostrechov, 7.
Schildberg. (Posnan) Ostrov, 7.
Wustrow. (Germany)
Ostrokhom and Ostrom, 7. Gran. (Austria)
Ocem, 7. Esseck. (Austria)
Ocem veɤinim, 7. Groszenhain. (Saxony)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
Pasin, Pisino, 7. Mitterberg. (Austria)
Passau, 7. Passau. (Austria)
Peys, Neusiedlersee. (Austria)
Pereyaslav, Rusy 7. Rustschuk. (Bulgaria) Peu and
Peu, Peukh, 7. Funfkirchen. (Austria) Peu and Buda,
7. Ofen. (Austria)
Pest, Ipem. (Serbia)
Pest, Pécs and Pest, Pest. (Hungary)
Pirano, 7. Pirano. (Istria)
Pɤëсо, Bɤатное оѕеро, Balaton. (Vienna)
Pɤеɲev, 7. Pleschen. (Posnan)
Pɤovdiv, 7. Philippopel. (Romania)
Pɤun, 7. Plon (Shesvi7) Pɤyunii, 7.
Polsen. (Bohemia) Pɤsno, 7. Pilsen.
(Bohemia)
Pohore, 7. Branny Forest, 7. Braundenburg. (Prussia)
Podersam, 7. Podersam. (Bohemia)
Bodenbach, 7. Bodenbach. (Bohemia)
Posen, 7. Posen. (Prussia)
Pogena, Pogene, Pogostr. Sablioncella. (Croatia)
Poreč, 7. Parenzo. (Istria) Postojna,
7. Adelsberg. (Horutania) Postupin,
7. Potsdam. (Prussia) Probut, 7.
Riesenburg. (Pomerania) Pre7oɤa, p.
Pregel. (Prussia) Prerov, 7. Prerau.
(Moravia) Pribor, 7. Freiberg.
(Moravia) Prosteev, 7. Prossnitz.
(Bohemia)
Preslav and Bratislav, Breslau. (Silesia)
Pryashev, 7. Eperies. (Hungary)
Pleskov, 7. Pleskau. (Russia)
Ptuj, 7. Pettau. (Styria)
Pustovom and Posdivom, 7. Passewalk. (Germany)
Peene River (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---v, Breslau. (Silesia)
Pryashev, 7. Eperies. (Hungary)
Pleskov, 7. Pleskau. (Russia)
Ptuj, 7. Pettau. (Styria)
Pustovom and Posdivom, 7. Passewalk. (Germany)
Peene River (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R
Rab, 7. Œryev, Raab. (Austria)
Rad7ona, Ra7dana, 7. Radkersburg. (Croatia)
Radaniɯa, Rednitz River. (Germany)
Radoviuи, 7. Monchgut. (Rügen
Island) Ramovnim, 7. Rakovnitz.
(Bohemia) Ramushsmaia ѕemɤya,
Austria.
Rana, island of Rugen. (Germany)
Raro7, 7. Mikilenburg. (Northern Germany)
Rassa, 7. New Basar and New Pasar. (Serbia)
Ratibor, 7. Ratzburg. (Northern
Germany) Rakhov, Orekhov. (Vienna)
Remesh, 7. Rheims. (France)
Rimarov, 7. Romerstadt. (Moravia)
Rin, p. Rhein. (Germany)
Risan, 7. Risanо. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Rychnov, 7. Reichenau. (Bohemia)
Ritschenwalde, 7. Ritschenwalde.
(Posnan) Rovigno, 7. Rovigno.
(Istria)
Ro7, 7. Horn. (Moravia)
Rothenburg, 7. Rothenberg. (Prussia)
Reckenitz, p. Reckenitz. (East Germany)
Ronneburg, 7. Ronneburg. (Germany)
Russia, Vēgimaya Smil, Sarmatia Vinedy, Venedy, Venedsko,
Ostrogardhr, Chunigarhr, Austverg, Holmigardhr, Gardhr, Wanname,
Ruzia, Rucia, Ruscia, Ruszia, Rusia, Russia, Ruthenia, Russaland,
russland, Ruysland, Risoland.
Rosslau, 7. Rosslau. (Germany)
Rostom, 7. Rostock. (Prussia, Pomerania)
Ruzhiv, 7. Narva. (Russia)
Raudnitz, 7. Raudnitz. (Bohemia)
Erzgebirge, 7. Erzgebirge. (Bohemia)
Kreitzburg, 7. Kreitzburg. (Russia)
Liebenwerba, 7. Liebenwerba.
(Germany)
Russmij, Ros, Rosia, Rhos, Ruzi, Rugi, Rutheni, Ruceni, Ruzeni,
Rutzeni, Riuze, Russin, Reussen Ryssar, Ruyschen, Rissen Orusz, Urus.
Russ, 7. Reuss. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rugum, 7. Ruguu7 and Rusy. (Bulgaria)
Ruja, island. Rugen. (Germany)
Resno, 7. Regensburg. (Bavaria)
Rema, Remma, 7. Fiume. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ss, 7. Reuss. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rugum, 7. Ruguu7 and Rusy. (Bulgaria)
Ruja, island. Rugen. (Germany)
Resno, 7. Regensburg. (Bavaria)
Rema, Remma, 7. Fiume. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

С
Sabadma and Sobodma, Maria-There-siapol. (Austria)
Saba and Sava, p. Saale. (Germany)
Sarajevo, 7. Bosnia Sarajevo. (Bosnian Peninsula)
Svidnica, 7. Schweidnitz. (Prussia)
Svitova and Svetova, 7. Zwittau. (Moravia)
Sviuye, 7. Schwetz. (Prussia)
Svedobin, 7. Schwiebus. (Prussia)
Sveta, 7. Sueta. (Gogandia)
S7opereɯ, S7opereɯy, 7. Gorlitz. (Nуѕаɯия)
Seben, 7. Hermanstadt. (Semi7radia)
Sedɤshany, 7. Seltschau. (Bo7emia)
Sedmi7radia, obɤ. Siebenburgen, Transilvania.
Serbsm, Serbishte, 7. Zerbest. (Prussia)
Serbeɯ, 7. Schrabitz. (Germany)
Wednesday, 7. Sroda. (Sibenik)
Sibenik, 7. Sebenico. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Szekler people, Szekler. (Sedmichradia)
Sino and Pdercmoe Sea, Adriatic Sea, Adriatisches meer.
Sistovo and Svishtov. (Bulgaria)
Sittna, 7. Zithen. (Prussia)
Skutari, 7. Skutari. (Albania)
Smopye, 7. Ouskoub. (Balkan Peninsula) Smapdin,
7. Scardona. (Macedonia)
Smyrna, Smyrna Bay. (Nero7oria)
Savenburg, 7. Vlondingen. (Gogandia)
Savov, 7. Austerlitz. (Moravia) Shana,
Sogona, p. Slajo. (Ven7ria) Sɤan and
Sɤona, p. Soovar. (Ven7ria) Sɤany, 7.
Schlan. (Boɤeamia)
Scenmo and Ston, 7. Stolpe. (Pomerania)
Sɤеѕаmа, obɤ. Schlezien, Silezien.
Smeruín, Nérnye 7ory, Fichtelgebirge. (Bohemia)
Smogni, 7. Schmilnitz. (Vienna) Sned,
7. Sandec. (Gania) Snezhni, 7.
Schneegebirge. (Bohemia)
Soboda and Sobota, 7. Zobten. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ruín, Nérnye 7ory, Fichtelgebirge. (Bohemia)
Smogni, 7. Schmilnitz. (Vienna) Sned,
7. Sandec. (Gania) Snezhni, 7.
Schneegebirge. (Bohemia)
Soboda and Sobota, 7. Zobten. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sogni, 7. Tusla. (Bamans Peninsula) Sogni, 7.
Szolnok. (V7ria)
Sogava and Saha, p. Saale. (Germany)
Sogun and Terema, 7. Soloniki. (Bamans Peninsula) Sorov, 7.
Sorau. (Nusaia)
Soromopermov
and
Nosin7rad,
7.
Kirkilissa.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Solya and Tryadia, Sreda. (Bulgaria)
Soua, p. Isonzo. (Austria)
Sogno7rad, 7. Salzburg. (Tyrol)
Spjet and Spit, 7. Spalato. (Croatia) Spreva and
Sprava, p. Spree. (Germany) Sprotava, 7.
Sprottau. (Prussia)
Sreda and Tria, 7. Solia. (Turia) Srem, ob.
Sirmien. (between Ƚунаем and Savva) Stavnia, 7.
Chemnitz. (Ven7ria)
Old Marm, St. Markia, Altmark. (Germany)
Old Eadorie, 7. Mesenim, Eski-Zagra. (Bamansmi Peninsula Old Eadar and
Bioprad, Zara vecchio. (Croatia)
Styria, obɤ, Steiermark, Steiern.
Stary7rad, 7. Aldenburg and Oldenburg. (Shesvi7)
Old Arad, 7. Arad. (Hungary) Old
Town, 7. Stargard. (Prussia) Styr, 7.
Steiern. (Germany) Strzabro, 7.
Mies. (Bohemia)
Stagno Grande, 7. Stagno grande. (Italy)
Straubing, 7. Straubing. (Bavaria) Streme,
7. Streme. (Germany)
Strelitz, 7. Strelitz. (Mammberg)
Subotica, 7. Theresiapohl. (Vienna)
Sytno, 7. Ortelsburg. (Prussia)
Sv. Semira, 7. Heiligenbeil. (Pomerania)
Sen, 7. Zengg. (Hungary)
Seres, 7. Seres. (Bamans Peninsula) Sysia, 7.
Zuhlsdorf. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ohl. (Vienna)
Sytno, 7. Ortelsburg. (Prussia)
Sv. Semira, 7. Heiligenbeil. (Pomerania)
Sen, 7. Zengg. (Hungary)
Seres, 7. Seres. (Bamans Peninsula) Sysia, 7.
Zuhlsdorf. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
Tosso, 7. Doksa. (Germany)
Tashov, 7. Taschau. (Bohemia)
Tverdiya, Nova Eapora, 7. Eni-Zagra. (Bulgaria)
Tegatin, 7. Cielecin. (Prussia)
Tenginy, 7. Tëplitz. (Bohemia)
Terema, 7. Sogun, Salonki. (Bamans Peninsula) Ternovo, Port.
Opus. (Zamaya)
Terst, 7. Trieste. (Austria)
Teshyn and Ternov, p. Kokel and Kukulo, Cuculo. (Sedmohradia)
Tissa, p. Theiss. (Vienna) Tygsa,
Tyzha, Tilist. (Prussia) Torzov, 7.
Torgau. (Germany) Torz, 7.
Feldkirchen. (Horutania) Torun, 7.
Thorn. (Prussia) Travna, p. Trave.
(Germany) Trebova, 7. Trubau.
(Moravia)
Terglau, Terglau. (Chorutania)
Trosir, 7. Trau. (Moravia)
Trusa, 3ɤбɤон7, 7. Elbing. (Germany)
Trutnov, 7. Trautenau. (Bohemia)
Tрuонmа, 7. Schonlanke. (Prussia)
Tрядиɯа, Средеɯ, Соɭия. (Bohuria)
Turka, p. Ƚneстр. (Russia)
Turnov,
7.
Turnau.
(Bohemia) Tyropogie, obg.
(Chorutania)
Tuevo,
7.
Dirschau. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
V7robor, V7robor7, 7. Angerburg. (Prussia)
V7ria, 7. Ungarn.
Vda, river Vda. (Russia and
Poland) Vzh7orod, 7. Unghwar.
(Hungary) Vzh, river Vnzh.
(Hungary)
Vѕnoim, island. Usedom. (Germany)
Vmra, river Ukern. (Germany)
Vpa, river Alpa. (Bohemia)
Vra, Œra, river Ohre. (Germany)
Vsti na Nabe, 7. Aussig.
(Bohemia) Vtin, 7. Eiten. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
Fembra, island of Femern. (Silesia)
Furɤyana, obɤ., Frioul. (Italy)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H
Khomutov, 7. Kommotau.
(Bohemia) Hvar, island. Lessina.
(Croatia) Heb, 7. Eger. (Bohemia)
Hegmno, 7. Culm. (Prussia)
Hevno, Nievno. (Gorjovina)
Hodezh, 7. Chodiesen. (Posnan)
Hojnice, 7. Fojnitza. (Bohumín Peninsula) Hojnice,
7. Konitz. (Prussia)
Kothebuz, 7. Kotbus. (Nysa)
Horutania, obg. Karnthen. (Austria)
Khron, p. Nieman. (Russia)
Khron, Gron, p. Gran. (Switzerland)

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Bohumín Peninsula) Hojnice,
7. Konitz. (Prussia)
Kothebuz, 7. Kotbus. (Nysa)
Horutania, obg. Karnthen. (Austria)
Khron, p. Nieman. (Russia)
Khron, Gron, p. Gran. (Switzerland)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ɏ
ɏа7ɤав, 7. Freistadt. (Austria)
7. Sorau. (Prussia)
7. Constantinople, Bithynia. (Turkey)
Aachen, Aachen. (Rhine Province)
ɏеɤовеɯ, 7. Klagenfurth. (Croatia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Naba, 7. Csaba. (Hungary)
Nеɤноm, 7. Solnok. (Hungary)
Nerneumoe Lake, Zirknitzersee. (Austria).
Nernovy, 7. Tschernowitz. (Bumovina)
Nernome, 7. Tschaslau. (Bohemia)
Nechmaya Nipa, 7. Leipa. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sh
Shamatugi, 7. Samter. (Posnan)
Sheynovo, Kote, 7. Kazanlick. (Romania)
Shmov, 7. Skeiditz. (Germany)
Shɤeɯ, 7. Schleitz. (Germany)
Shɤуmnov, 7. Schluckenau. (Bohemia)
Sopron, 7. Odenburg. (V7ria)
Srem and Srem, 7. Schrime. (Prussia)
Styria 7radeɯ, 7. Gratz. (Styria) Shumava,
7. Bohmerwald. (Bohemia) Shumna,
Shumen, 7. Shumɤa. (Bulgaria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ɒ
ɒетина, 7. Stettin. (Prussia)
Schennitz, Schemnitz. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
3uава, p. Adige. (Italy)
3ɤьбɤон7, Trusa, 7. Elbing. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Œ
Œra, river in Prussia, in Samogitia. Œra,
mountain range in France and Switzerland. Œrbor,
7. Jurburg. (Russia)
Œрьев, 7. Dorpat. (Russia)
Œрьев, 7. Raad. (Hungary)
Œтробоm, 7. Juterbock. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
Pbɤon, 7. Gabel. (Bohemia)
Pbɤoneɯ, 7. Gablonz. (Bohemia)
P7ra and P7er, 7. Erlau. (Austria)
Pдерсmо иɤи Sin Sea, Adriatisches meer.
Pdrin, Ƚrinopog, Adrianopol. (Balkan Peninsula) Pnov, 7.
Jansdorf. (Prussia)
Pnov, 7. Genova, Genes. (Italy)
Pantarny Bere7, Samland. (near Frisch and Kurish
7ala) Pscbiryn, 7. Jasbiryn. (V7ria)
Psine, Psinya, 7. Korosmezzo. (Venice)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V. A. Moshmov
A new theory of the origin of uеɤовеmа
and е7о degeneration,
compiled based on data from
zoology, botany, archaeology,
anthropology, geology, history and
statistics

--- PAGE BREAK ---A. Moshmov
A new theory of the origin of uеɤовеmа
and е7о degeneration,
compiled based on data from
zoology, botany, archaeology,
anthropology, geology, history and
statistics

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WARSAW.
Printed at the printing house of the Guersky
administration. 1907

--- PAGE BREAK ---from
zoology, botany, archaeology,
anthropology, geology, history and
statistics

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WARSAW.
Printed at the printing house of the Guersky
administration. 1907

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1. GIATVS
Hiatus. The life of Palaeolithic man. The existence of hiatus. Famine
in Europe. The struggle for existence among mankind. The increase in
human stature. Progress in mind and character. The possibility of
cannibalism during the Hiatus. The increase in the capacity of the
human skull.
In the monographic review, the author's position is clearly defined and
supported by evidence. In terms of its nature, it resembles modern dimaries
to a certain extent, surpassing them in some respects and falling short in
others. There were no homons, they were replaced by penpers. It is believed
that he no longer walked on all fours like other European animals, but
moved on two legs, which he was able to do with the help of his hind
legs. The domestication of animals and agriculture were unknown to
him: he was a hunter. His weapons were: a bow with a leather quiver, a spear
with arrows, a wooden shield and a sharp stone axe. He hunted up to 70
species of mammals and up to 50 species of birds. In addition,
Europeans managed to catch fish with the help of a rod and a harpoon: up
to 50 species of fish were found in these waters, 10 of which were
marine. From this we can see that they already had something like a
motorboat, which they used to go out to sea. They probably ate the meat
raw, but they could also fry it, because they were already familiar with it.
We do not know whether Europeans were cannibals at that time. There
are indications of this in the form of scattered human remains found in
caves. It is assumed that the bridges were built for the purpose of eating
bridge-dwelling animals, as primitive Europeans were great hunters.
It is still unknown whether this type of ornamentation originated in the
7th century, but in essence, namely in its execution, it has reached a
high degree of perfection. In the monuments of art, we find bridges
decorated with carvings. But especially good are the attempts to imitate
nature, mainly in the depictions of animals. Here we find lions, deer,
horses, mammoths and even fantastic creatures, such as chimeras.
It is still unknown whether they were used for religious rituals and
ceremonies during the consumption of sacrifices, because, deer,
horses, mammoths and even fantastic creatures, such as chimeras.
It is still unknown whether they were used for religious rituals and
ceremonies during the consumption of sacrifices, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---moths and even fantastic creatures, such as chimeras.
It is still unknown whether they were used for religious rituals and
ceremonies during the consumption of sacrifices, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---

no such items have been found.
Gabrielle Mortier draws a clear distinction between the concepts of
paeogetic and neogetic. In his opinion, the latter is not a continuation of the
former, but something completely independent, which appeared
unexpectedly and was brought to Europe by a new people. This idea is
supported by the author's powerful description of both cultures. The
pagan culture was primarily hunting-based, while the non-pagan culture engaging
in agriculture, domesticating animals, knowing how to make stone tools,
etc. In addition, Mortier expressed the opinion that the new people who
came to Europe did not replace the ancient population already living
there, but rather supplemented it with their own. The population that lived
here in the distant past, before the appearance of the Neolithic era, is
unknown. In any case, de Mortier suggests that between the pagan and
Christian eras, at least in Western Europe, there was some kind of
intermediate period, during which Europe, with few exceptions, it
remained uninhabited. In his opinion, there is no connection between
ancient pagan culture and neo-pagan culture, no gradual transition, but
rather a break, a hiatus (void).
The existence of this gap has been accepted by many other researchers.
The main advantage is a number of areas where there is actually a difference
between the mythical and the real, there is empty rock, covered with all
kinds of debris and often very wet. In the sediments of the Sona River 7.
Arsenin's empty cavity is 3 metres deep and consists of the sedimentation
norm for the area, which means that the hiatus lasted from 3 to 4 thousand
years. Based on similar findings, de Mortier concludes that, with the
exception of a few areas, with the exception of a few areas, the
inhabitants of Europe were completely replaced by a new population
after a period of time.
However, 7. Nieder does not agree with Mortier's opinion regarding
the appearance of a new people in Europe during the Middle Ages. He
believes that "large post-Ice Age animals were exterminated by hunting,
and, due to climate change, retreated to the north and east. In this way,
he could ensure his survival by hunting animals, multiplying them into
large herds and gathering food supplies.by hunting,
and, due to climate change, retreated to the north and east. In this way,
he could ensure his survival by hunting animals, multiplying them into
large herds and gathering food supplies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e to climate change, retreated to the north and east. In this way,
he could ensure his survival by hunting animals, multiplying them into
large herds and gathering food supplies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all the time. In the same way, uеɤовеm мо7 can be brought to m
хɤебопашеству. According to Niederer, the ancient population of
Europe did not disappear, and the new population did not appear suddenly, but
gradually developed from the old one. "We cannot allow ourselves to be
swayed by the influx of new peoples," the author concludes. And indeed,
there is evidence of the existence of ancient settlements (in Italy) that were
inhabited by humans, perhaps even before historical times. There is no
interruption in them, and above the lowest mythical layer, which
belongs at least to the mythical layer, there are layers that are much
later, mainly belonging to the non-historical period.
There is no need to assume a significant migration of peoples to explain
the non-indigenous nature of the culture. It is not possible to agree, but
the existence of the hiatus is a fact that requires explanation.
Based on this assumption, it is possible to construct a multitude of more
or less probable hypotheses. The essence of the situation boils down to the
fact that at one point in time, a new, hostile force suddenly appeared in
Europe, which was driven to exterminate it without mercy. This force
could be a natural phenomenon, such as the "global flood" described in
the Bible. But the Bible does not tell us anything about the possibility of
such a phenomenon in Europe at the time described.
The most likely cause of the situation may have been a conflict between
European states, which led to their mutual destruction, and subsequently
to the domestication of animals and agriculture.
"All large animals," says Nieder, "characteristic of the paleozoic era, have
already disappeared" and are now extinct.
"The non-migratory species were the northernmost ones, which
gradually retreated northward." Of course, all the herbivores had already
been eaten by predators at that time, and along with them, the plant-eaters. In
addition, as the northern fire receded, the area suitable for animal life in
Europe continued to expand. The animals that lived there spread out
over a larger area, making it increasingly difficult to hunt them.
It is impossible to imagine a more powerful force than the one that
reigns supreme over all others, for there is no equal rival in the entire world.ea, making it increasingly difficult to hunt them.
It is impossible to imagine a more powerful force than the one that
reigns supreme over all others, for there is no equal rival in the entire world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---singly difficult to hunt them.
It is impossible to imagine a more powerful force than the one that
reigns supreme over all others, for there is no equal rival in the entire world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If you want to kill every animal, then it is clear that there will be no
salvation for them anywhere. And if they had multiplied rapidly and
populated Europe, the situation would have been similar to that in modern
Western Europe with its dense population of domestic animals and
livestock. and modern Western Europe, with its dense population, would
have been deprived of domestic animals and cultivated plants and, cut
off from the rest of the world, would have been forced to subsist on
hunting. It goes without saying that its population would have no other
choice but to hunt each other and survive by cannibalism. Under other
conditions, it could have spread throughout the entire globe and
transitioned from an animal to a plant. But if it had remained confined to
Central and Southern Europe, and if the vegetation of those countries had
remained as it was, there would have been no other outcome for it.
"There are types of the same kind," says Warvin, "They are usually
similar in their habits and behaviour, and always similar in structure, so
the struggle between them, if they come into contact, will be more
intense than between species of different genera." The same can be said
about the life-and-death struggle between representatives of the same
species, even if it is possible during the most dangerous period, having
already defeated the most terrible enemies of the animal kingdom? It is
difficult to imagine a more intense and difficult struggle. And if it lasted for
thousands of years, then the origin of the situation becomes completely
understandable, when the population of Europe was exterminated to the
last man, leaving only a few people alive. One can imagine that this
population improved itself through the extermination of the weakest and
natural selection, and that it left behind only the most outstanding
offspring.
The fight we are talking about is fought with melee weapons, at
close range with knives, clubs and spears, and at a distance with bows and
arrows. All types of weapons require their users to have muscle strength,
agility, good eyesight and accuracy. People who do not possess these
qualities will inevitably lose in combat.
With the gradual growth of muscular strength, and with it, energy,
we become more agile, stronger, and more agile, controlling all animal
instincts. "To compare," says Gaam, "the manifestation of life in large and
small groupsscular strength, and with it, energy,
we become more agile, stronger, and more agile, controlling all animal
instincts. "To compare," says Gaam, "the manifestation of life in large and
small groups

--- PAGE BREAK ---with it, energy,
we become more agile, stronger, and more agile, controlling all animal
instincts. "To compare," says Gaam, "the manifestation of life in large and
small groups

--- PAGE BREAK ---

animals, it is clear that their senses and abilities are constantly
developing, and that the properties of these senses are more developed
in higher animals and less developed in lower animals. This is
confirmed not only by comparing large groups of animals. For example,
mammals and birds with reptiles, amphibians and fish, insects with
worms, higher animals with teeth, but also within the limits of individual
groups.
If all other conditions are equal, muscle mass is proportional to
height, so taller people are more likely to be winners when they are in good
shape. Acording to Gaam, the weight of animals increases proportionally with
their relative height. "The most important thing," he says, "known to us
from the Mesozoic era, were all small animals and some were even smaller
than insects. But the variety is constantly growing. At present, in the
transitional period, it has not yet reached the size of some mammals. Gaume
expresses the same idea when considering monkeys and their closest
relatives: lemurs, insectivores and marsupials. In all cases, the size of the
brain increases with the development of the animal.
The variation in the size of animals is explained by nothing other
than the conditions of direct competition for existence. If we take a
predator and its prey, which are quite similar in size, then naturally, the
predator will kill its prey more quickly and will destroy all the weakest and
most vulnerable ones. The most fragile, and therefore the most vulnerable,
victims will be able to save themselves by fighting directly against the
hyenas with the help of dogs, rooks, subes, but7, etc., and those who
manage to escape from it, and, of course, with the greater speed of their
flight. They will leave behind them more numerous offspring. In this
way, the size of the species that is eaten as it is exterminated by its
predators will decrease. But at the same time, selection will also take place
among the predators. The weakest of them will die out over time,
unable to cope with their large prey, and the growth of predators will also
slow down. And those of them that remain alive will be the strongest, capable
of coping even with larger prey.over time,
unable to cope with their large prey, and the growth of predators will also
slow down. And those of them that remain alive will be the strongest, capable
of coping even with larger prey.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus, the victims of the struggle for existence and the winners in the
struggle always strive to grow and achieve sometimes incredible
proportions. "But it is precisely these proportions," says Gaume, "that
prevent animals from adapting to their environment and prevent them
from being there, all the dinosaurs of the Jurassic period became extinct in a
short period of time." At the same time, if not more, the growth limit was
reached by the extinct dinosaurs of the same system: pterosaurs,
pterodactyls, dinosaurs, etc.
But along with the muscle advantage in battles between giant
creatures, there were thousands of the most diverse military techniques
and tricks, which depended on the inventiveness of the combatants and, of
course, on their mental strength. All the positive aspects of the human mind
and character are evident here.
By paying attention and observing, you can learn about your enemies,
their abilities, habits, techniques, and weaknesses. A sharp memory
allows us to draw conclusions and   make comparisons   about
enemies   and   observations   from the past.

--- PAGE BREAK ---their abilities, habits, techniques, and weaknesses. A sharp memory
allows us to draw conclusions and   make comparisons   about
enemies   and   observations   from the past.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Imagination gives you the opportunity to anticipate the course of the
battle and make the necessary preparations for it. A quick mind helps to
navigate the changing conditions of battle and take the most appropriate
measures for the moment. He was gifted with it and made many small
and large inventions that surprised his enemies. His fearless courage and
fearlessness allowed him to calmly assess the danger during the battle
itself, not to lose his head in the face of unexpected events, and to
embark on the most daring and dangerous ventures.
Each of these abilities brings its owner undeniable advantages in battle,
but when combined in one being, they give it even greater advantages. If this
struggle continues for many thousands of years, and if millions of people
are involved in it, in order to preserve life for the chosen ones of destiny,
then the latter must have achieved the height of perfection in a physical
sense, and in a mental sense, what we call wisdom. The main difference
between wisdom and ordinary knowledge seems to me to be the ability to use
the inexhaustible wealth of knowledge and observations to correctly and
accurately draw the right conclusion about a given phenomenon. This is
the highest degree of synthetic ability, combined with the ability to
respond.
In such a situation, where the ordinary mind is confused by novelty
and unexpectedness and does not know what to do, it chooses the wrong
path, but the wise mind feels at home and follows the surest and most
reliable path. There are no dangers, no surprises. Every move of the
enemy has already been foreseen and thought through. There are no
difficult situations that would stop him. It goes without saying that in
the struggle described, the five external senses are developed to the
highest degree of sensitivity. As for the remaining feelings, it is well
known that people of high intellect have high feelings. But among them,
unselfish love for others should come first. By loved ones, of course, we
mean the group of people to whom we belong by birth. That group, in which
each member is not afraid to die for their own at any given moment,
could never emerge victorious.
They seem to me to be the last couples who have survived a brutal struggle
for life and death with their own kind.
The struggle among people is not necessarily a form of war,never emerge victorious.
They seem to me to be the last couples who have survived a brutal struggle
for life and death with their own kind.
The struggle among people is not necessarily a form of war,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ous.
They seem to me to be the last couples who have survived a brutal struggle
for life and death with their own kind.
The struggle among people is not necessarily a form of war,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That is, if people unite into groups, then for their actions to be successful,
they need to be coordinated, and this is impossible without a well-
organised system of communication. In addition, the signals must be clear,
easily understood, and visible both during the day and at night, i.e.,
audible rather than visual. Such a signalling system could be a uniform colour
code. I f it had not been used earlier in the struggle against the four-
legged beasts, where people probably acted in groups, now it is
impossible to fight without it. Those who fought, who were the first to be
inspired by the achievements
uɤенораѕдеɤьной revolution,
monetarism,
and
ѕа
itself superiority, and
later wins the one who improves it more. There is no need to talk about
weapons: their improvement and the current situation bring undoubted
chances of victory to those who are ahead of everyone else in this
respect. Hence — the established and
My weapon is not a weapon.
In this way, Europeans, forced by necessity, can obtain meat for themselves,
as they write about the Alrimans people of Monbutu: "They look at their
unfortunate neighbours as prey, attack them, kill them and take them
captive, solely to obtain meat for themselves. The dead, killed in battle,
are immediately cut up into pieces and distributed among the hunters, then
cut into small pieces, cooked on the spot and taken away as provisions.
The wounded are taken away, saving them for future feasts.
Regarding the origins of mania in the modern era, I can find data on
this in Sharhiy Webier's work, who states that women and children with
signs of cannibalism were found in the following locations: in Chov
(Sprin7om), in Nурде (Garrin7om), in Gourda (Pietto), in Vigneuve, in S.
Morge (Ruzhu), in Varenne, S. Mor (Begran), in Montesmye-Avants, in
Brunimege, in 3 and on the island of Tagmaria (in Italy).
On this subject, we might quite reasonably ask: "If during the 7itaus
the struggle among the ueɤoveuеstvo is so severe that only the most
resilient, determined and athletic individuals can survive it,   we must
remember that we are not alone, and that we are surrounded by people
who are just like us, we know them at this moment, with a prolonged
period of pregnancy for the former and a completely unsust a i n a b l e
period of poverty and hardship for the latterby people
who are just like us, we know them at this moment, with a prolonged
period of pregnancy for the former and a completely unsust a i n a b l e
period of poverty and hardship for the latter

--- PAGE BREAK ---just like us, we know them at this moment, with a prolonged
period of pregnancy for the former and a completely unsust a i n a b l e
period of poverty and hardship for the latter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the latter? After all, there is no point in exterminating them before the
latter, is there?
This is a difficult question, but we have answers that are relatively
simple. We will examine them in detail below, but for now, let's focus
on the following:
Firstly, 7ehenia is necessary not only to defeat one's enemies, but even
more so to save one's wives and children from 7ibebi. to save their wives
and children from destruction.
Secondly, perhaps the noble race would not have been saved by its
nobility if it had not had the same wives and children as they are now, if they
were not subject to the same strict natural selection as men.
In the context of selecting a wife, men should be distinguished from
women to a certain extent.
Gabrielle de Mortier argues that the existence of manibasism is not
yet proven, but in addition to the above data collected by Sharpe Webber,
it can be assumed that it is widespread among the Jewish community
and Jewish victims to this day.
"No nation," says Gervard, "no part of the world can be considered
innocent of anthropophagy. Everywhere one can find traces of cannibalism,
either directly or in myths, legends, etc. And without exaggeration, we
can say that there is now no single race that has not been involved in man-
eating in the past.
But even in that case, even if the absence of mania in the non-neurotic
period were actually proven, this circumstance could not testify against the
existence of devastating wars between the then-existing states. If they
were not motivated by greed, then they could have been waged simply for
the sake of war. But if this race had developed over a long period of time
and endured a fierce struggle with the most powerful enemies, who
could destroy it? Where would it find a worthy rival?
Amidst the hopeless struggle for existence that we have described, it
is necessary to endure a great deal of suffering, but in the end, natural
selection will prevail more quickly, and we will be able to change it. De
Mortier, comparing the inevitable with the possible, does not consider the
former to be the latter; he attributed the non-essential to the representation of a certaine will be able to change it. De
Mortier, comparing the inevitable with the possible, does not consider the
former to be the latter; he attributed the non-essential to the representation of a certain

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the race that had arrived.
Archaeologists depict the non-indigenous people as having polished
and refined tools, a well-developed sense of measure, farming and animal
husbandry, and living in wooden buildings. By this time, they had already
domesticated dogs, sheep, cows, goats, and pigs. They made cheese from
the milk of these animals. They cultivated crops such as wheat, barley, rye,
millet, buckwheat, oats, etc. In addition, fruit trees were cultivated: apple,
pear, hazelnut, water chestnut and even grapevine.
In this regard, it is necessary to place oneself in the position of one's
ancient ancestors. Unfortunately, archaeological finds are not so abundant
that we can trace all the changes that have occurred in the organism
over such a long period of time. However, comparing the hominid
skeleton with the non-hominid one can still give us some idea of the
kind of changes that have taken place.
We have already mentioned above the European pithecanthropus,
Pithecantrpus Neauderthalensis, the progenitor of all European races, with a
flat, broad and receding forehead, a prominent protuberance and a lower
jaw resembling the muzzle of an animal.
Although the remains of other Neanderthal races are less well preserved,
it is nevertheless reliably known that: 1) the lower forms of the period
preceded the higher ones, and not vice versa, and uеɤовеuество ѕа sто time
is not re7прессироваɤо and does not remain unchanged, but undoubtedly
pro7прессировагo, and 2) uто between the higher and lower ɭормы
suɲествовагі промежутоуные, transitional between those and others. In
this regard, I will refer to the well-known works of anthropologists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uто between the higher and lower ɭормы
suɲествовагі промежутоуные, transitional between those and others. In
this regard, I will refer to the well-known works of anthropologists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tam Karɤ Foch, comparing the two most ancient uerepa
paɤeoɤiтиuесmо7о veм — Neanderthal and sн7iсmий — and recognising
the undeniable and quite striking similarity between them, at the same
time finds that the Neanderthal skull in our time "could be the skull of
an idiot," while the Swiss skull "could even belong to a naturalist," since
it has a higher vault. In addition, the same scientist finds that the
Bernese mountain dog could be mistaken for a Neanderthal, but it is
exactly halfway between Neanderthal and Swiss dogs.
The highest transitional forms include the Chancelade race, about
which Tsstyu wrote a monograph, and the race that Nybush calls Homo
priscus. Anthropologists consider these races to be products of the
development of Pith. Neanderthalensis, which has the same body type,
the same short stature (1.6 m), resulting from short legs, the same voluminous
skull, and a more pronounced similarity to Pithecanthropus in the structure
of the jaw, bones and other details of the organism, compared to the
latter, more voluminous and generally more robust, and accordingly, the
upper part also changes. On the other hand, Homo priscus is most closely
related to the higher and more advanced hominids,

--- PAGE BREAK ---uminous and generally more robust, and accordingly, the
upper part also changes. On the other hand, Homo priscus is most closely
related to the higher and more advanced hominids,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kromanion, which Nyabush calls Homo spilaeus. The latter race is
already tall (1.8 m), with long legs, a longer torso with a pronounced
protrusion at the front and back, and a less massive build.
Regarding Virchow's controversial statements, he expressed himself
as follows: "My interest in prehistoric Europe has been piqued since I
became convinced of the fallacy of the opinion that primitive people
must correspond to those with a lower level of organisation. In fact,
there is nothing in the structure of ancient dwellings (stilt houses) that
would suggest a low level of organisation; on the contrary, we must
admit that they are far from our own and very different from our own. The
present-day overheads may be compared to those of the peoples of the
Middle East, in terms of their capacity, form and details of organisation, they
can be placed alongside the most advanced peoples of the Aryan race.
In the same vein, Kogman says: "The findings make us think that the
primitive Europeans belonged to a perfect race, with a motor that was
more perfect and more powerful than the previous ones. This
assumption is natural, but it is possible. Not everything that seems
simple is true. The first settlers (the author calls them "non-indigenous")
were, indeed, at a lower level of development, but they were not a
backward race. Here, two completely different things are mixed together.
This is a forgivable mistake, which could be made in the early stages of
anthropological development, but now it is time to move on from it.
For his part, Ranmē also mentions the Karmanons race, saying that
they will tell us about a race that is strong, powerful, and athletic. The
Nepers are very characteristic, they are strong, well-developed in all
respects, and in terms of their size, strength and endurance, they surpass
even the average size of modern humans. Instead of an ape-like build,
the primitive inhabitants of Europe are completely different: the
numerous representatives of the Carmanon race belong to the highly
developed "samuatezhno mrasivom" type. Instead of a monkey standing
on a low animalistic level, we must, it seems, accept the theory of the
gradual development of humanity. However, when comparing the
development of the species and the capacity of the current inhabitants of
France and representatives of former species, we see a number of
similarities. ( From these similarities, we will takethe
development of the species and the capacity of the current inhabitants of
France and representatives of former species, we see a number of
similarities. ( From these similarities, we will take

--- PAGE BREAK ---the species and the capacity of the current inhabitants of
France and representatives of former species, we see a number of
similarities. ( From these similarities, we will take

--- PAGE BREAK ---

two, the most characteristic ones):
The historical period is 1615 mуб. See Sоɤютрs
The history of modern Parisians
1558 AD. See
From this we can see that the ancient prehistoric inhabitants of France
"In terms of size, they surpass the current ones." In any case, according to
Ram, "the ancient ones are not inferior to ours."
The capacity of the shipbuilders
of the Svaiono period
1558 mуб. см.
The same swaiyarev of modern times   1377 mуб. см.
Namone, Niapuzh gives the following interesting table of the capacity of
vessels:
Pithecanthropus erectus
 1000
cm
Pithecantropus
Neanderthalensis
1200
cm
Average modern European 1565 cm Homo
priscus
1710 cm
The last of these figures is very impressive in itself, but there is a much
greater limit to the capacity of the skull, reaching up to 2000 cm3, and in
the Trechere race, the capacity reaches up to 1925 cm3.
"Virchow," says Ranke, "is right in saying that we are wrong to look
down on our ancient ancestors. To back this up, Virchow points out that
that among the inhabitants of the Swiss pile dwellings of the prehistoric
period, the average height of men is not less, but even greater than that of
the present inhabitants of the same localities."
3Gise Pemyu expresses the same sentiment: "The question arises
whether the Cro-Magnon race has not reached, in some respects, a point of
maximum development, at least in relation to the present, all recent
discoveries clearly represent a period of rapid progress. However, in any
case, it is not enough that the development of society is characterised by
a constant process in the sense of increasing the number of people and the
form of government. It is even likely that the opposite is true. Contrary
to popular belief, the volume of books has not decreased at all over time.
Most of the books that are being read today exceed the average modern
book in terms of their content.
Itam, anthropological data on the existence of uеɤовеuесmих uерепов
leads us to the conclusion that, together with the transition of pitemantrop
ande average modern
book in terms of their content.
Itam, anthropological data on the existence of uеɤовеuесmих uерепов
leads us to the conclusion that, together with the transition of pitemantrop
and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ok in terms of their content.
Itam, anthropological data on the existence of uеɤовеuесmих uерепов
leads us to the conclusion that, together with the transition of pitemantrop
and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from the animal state to the human state, it is possible to assume a non-
linear increase from 1000 and 1200 to 1700–1900 mub. cm, and then in our
time it decreased again to an average of 1500 mуб. cm. Consequently,
we Europeans, in terms of height, are on average lower than the
Neanderthals and occupy a position between them and the Pithecanthropus.
However, with the non-human species, we are not moving forward, but
backward. Could this be due to the existence of a self-process, given our
undoubted successes in science?
Obviously, perhaps the facts lead us to this conclusion. But are the
facts themselves correct? And are the mental faculties really
proportional to the capacity of the brain?
The accuracy of the anthropological measurements we provide is
confirmed by such scientific authorities as Virchow, Kogman, Brom,
Ranme, and others. The fact that the capacity of the brain in modern
Europeans is lower than that of their ancient ancestors is nothing new to
science. It is mentioned by Darwin in his writings on the
"incomprehensible" phenomenon. Brom explains this by saying that
"the average capacity of the brain in civilised peoples must inevitably
decrease, due to the preservation of the intellectual and physical
qualities of the people, which are lost in the diaspora." Although the
explanation is rather vague, everyone is satisfied with it, including the
Maris. If Brom equates people with dimary, then the average capacity of
modern dimary is less than that of Europeans — 1511 mуб. cm, among
American Indians
it is 1426, and for Australians it is 1341.
This is due to the proportionality between the capacity of the
stomach and mental   сиɤой,   то   Ƚарвин   7оворит   об   sтом
сɤедуюɲее:
The belief that there is a connection between brain size and mental capacity
is based on comparisons between different races, ancient and modern
peoples, as well as on analogies between a number of related species.there is a connection between brain size and mental capacity
is based on comparisons between different races, ancient and modern
peoples, as well as on analogies between a number of related species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n between brain size and mental capacity
is based on comparisons between different races, ancient and modern
peoples, as well as on analogies between a number of related species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. SIGNS OF THE GENIUS
OF PRIMITIVE MAN
Traces of the genius of primitive man. Modern theories of gradual
development. Its merits. The beginning of cattle breeding and
agriculture. Megalithic structures. Material inventions of ancient man:
looms, the discovery of fire and metallurgy. Products of spiritual
creativity. The impossibility of collective creativity. Legends about the
Ice Age. Early theories about the origin of man. Beliefs about the world
of bacteria. Medical knowledge of prehistoric man. The spread of man
across the islands of the oceans.
In the previous chapter, we discussed the question of the unity of
primitive man, so before we must move on to the most recent
history,    it is necessary    to supplement it with certain
assumptions, with modern understanding, a bold, daring idea.
The opinion that primitive man was "civilised" and that modern man
has fallen to his present state is nothing new. According to Sarvin, it
was first expressed by Argyr in 1869, and even earlier by Archbishop
Vettini.
It is also known that the Holy Scriptures and traditions of all
countries and peoples view the present and future of humanity quite
gloomily and see everything good as fleeting. Then there was paradise,
the blessed state of man and immortality, and now there is the dominion
of the devil, sin and death. All religious systems are built on this position.
Our ancestors did not hold this opinion so long ago, but simple people still
hold it today.
However, the latest discoveries of European scientists have dispelled
the old worldview and replaced it with a new one, which in ancient times
was unknown, except for darkness, ignorance and superstition.
Therefore, everything that was discovered and invented in prehistoric
times is explained by chance, like the discovery of the wheel by the
Lynians. We have created a new theory of "gradual development,"
according to which we evolved from animals, specifically monkeys, and
have been continuously improving ever since. If it sometimes stops and
regresses, it is only in the form of a break from progressiverding to which we evolved from animals, specifically monkeys, and
have been continuously improving ever since. If it sometimes stops and
regresses, it is only in the form of a break from progressive

--- PAGE BREAK ---olved from animals, specifically monkeys, and
have been continuously improving ever since. If it sometimes stops and
regresses, it is only in the form of a break from progressive

--- PAGE BREAK ---

work, only to move forward again afterwards.
Our forward movement is governed, first, by the process itself, and
second, by free will. If it has free will, it progresses; if it does not, it stands
still and goes backwards.
That is, the hypothesis, requiring verification, is accepted as true
before it is verified. But the entire hypothesis, which has existed for a
long time without any serious refutation, is now being turned into an
axiom. There is a huge mass of phenomena that are incomprehensible
from the point of view of our theory. They are discussed with
uncertainty: "it is unlikely that we will ever know anything about them,"
and with self-confidence: "future science will explain them." There are
even phenomena that directly contradict it, but they are simply ignored.
The hypothesis we are talking about is already beginning to take
shape and turn into a unified European belief system. All our hopes and
aspirations for the future, all our likes and dislikes in the present are
based on it. Of course, we cannot part with it.
Undoubtedly, this hypothesis is based on the well-known mental
progress of Western Europe, which has been observed throughout
history, but we must admit that the reason for this progress is
completely unknown to us. Reflecting on the sudden decline of Spain,
Warvin says: "The awakening of European nations from the dark ages of
barbarism is a difficult task."
We cannot say with certainty whether our progress is permanent or
temporary. History shows us that temporary progress is not at all rare,
but rather very common. Many ancient peoples progressed, just like us, but
when they reached a certain point, for some unknown reason, they
began to decline and die out. Are we any different from them? What
guarantees us against decline and extinction? No one knows.
True, we have a glimmer of hope for the spread of enlightenment and
the democraticisation of European society. But alas, these means have
already been tested in practice by China, and nothing can prevent it
from falling. They also do not prevent advanced France from falling.
We believe in progress, the main force of the world, and we are not
mistaken. Progress really does exist. Its reality is obvious. But progress
is one thing, and the paths it takes are quite another.We believe in progress, the main force of the world, and we are not
mistaken. Progress really does exist. Its reality is obvious. But progress
is one thing, and the paths it takes are quite another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ss, the main force of the world, and we are not
mistaken. Progress really does exist. Its reality is obvious. But progress
is one thing, and the paths it takes are quite another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The state of affairs undoubtedly needs to be improved, but how?
That is the question. On the one hand (theoretically), every nation and
every individual is improving, but on the other hand (in reality), millions
of people and thousands of nations are suffering in order to make room
for one pair of chosen ones. In both cases, there is progress, but there is a
huge difference in the paths taken. Of course, the first path would be more
pleasant for us, and we try to convince ourselves that there is no other
path. But the relentless reality tells us that nature knows only the second
path.
And in that case, each of us and the peoples to whom we belong
may not be among the chosen ones. Do you think we will be saved
according to my own will? Not according to the same law? But
according to the same law, the Egyptians, the ancient Greeks, the Romans and
other peoples of antiquity? According to the same law.
It is more pleasant for us to think that we are not bound by darkness and
ignorance, but that we stand at the pinnacle of progress (the ancients
thought the same in their time). And so we turn a deaf ear to those who do
not speak, but simply whisper that it is not true, that our distant
prehistoric ancestors were not ignorant, that they were so advanced
intellectually that even many thousands of years later, we are unable to
understand the traces they left behind.
There are so many of these traces that one could write entire volumes
about them. But our task at present is not to study them, but to understand
the essence of their existence.
First of all, we must pay attention to the most valuable legacy of our
prehistoric past, the foundations of our current well-being: agriculture and
animal husbandry, without which our entire civilisation would be
impossible. We must remember that the establishment and development of
the two most important sources of our existence in the smallest details
belongs not to us, but to the distant prehistoric past.
We consider the domestication of animals to be extremely simple
and believe that it is accessible to everyone. It is well known that
everyone has domesticated animals, and that is enough for us. But if we
take a closer look at domestic animals and compare them with wild ones, we
will see a multitude of unsolvable problems that baffle even our most
brilliant minds. "The origin of most of our domestic animals," says
Warvin, "will probably always remain unclear." "It is impossible," he
says, "to come to a conclusion."that baffle even our most
brilliant minds. "The origin of most of our domestic animals," says
Warvin, "will probably always remain unclear." "It is impossible," he
says, "to come to a conclusion."

--- PAGE BREAK ---r most
brilliant minds. "The origin of most of our domestic animals," says
Warvin, "will probably always remain unclear." "It is impossible," he
says, "to come to a conclusion."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be it their origin from one and the same species or from different species.
In ancient times, on Egyptian monuments and in the pile dwellings of
Switzerland, we encounter very diverse breeds, some of which are very
similar to modern ones and even identical to them. However, these
considerations give way to speculation and suggest that animals were
domesticated much earlier than is currently believed. Speaking of the
ancient peoples who developed our breeds   of domestic    animals,
Ƚарвин    names    them    to
"Civilised" or "barbarians", but by no means dimari, because they were
well aware of the extremely difficult task of artificially selecting
animals, which dimari do not do anywhere. "It would be completely
wrong to assume," he says, "that the application of selection is a new
discovery. When we compare the wild goat with the domestic goat, the
dromedary with the camel, we can compare breeds of sheep adapted to dry and hot
pastures with wool suitable for one purpose, in the second case, we can
compare pasteurised breeds of dogs, suitable for various purposes, we can
compare a fighting cock, stubborn in battle, with other completely
peaceful breeds, with "unbeatable" walls, which are content to be
sedentary, and with small, gentle bows, we cannot allow all breeds to be
as perfect and gentle as we see them now. I myself am not a perfect
representative of this breed.
In particular, Warvin says about dogs: "We cannot explain the origin
of such strange creatures, such as the mamut, the mop, the bug, the mop,
the mop, mryzody and mons, it is reasonable to assume that these forms
existed at some point in a dim state. However, as soon as someone has
the courage to suggest that such unnatural forms exist and can exist in a
dim state, If we compare them with all known representatives of the
canine family, they immediately reveal their difference and abnormal
origin. There is not a single example of dogs such as Spanish mastiffs
and real bears being raised by humans: they are the product of continuous
evolution. This applies to direct causes and degrees, with the help of
motor dogsexample of dogs such as Spanish mastiffs
and real bears being raised by humans: they are the product of continuous
evolution. This applies to direct causes and degrees, with the help of
motor dogs

--- PAGE BREAK ---h as Spanish mastiffs
and real bears being raised by humans: they are the product of continuous
evolution. This applies to direct causes and degrees, with the help of
motor dogs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are clearly different from each other, then we do not know for sure about
this, or about many other things.
However, selective breeding is not at all a simple matter, as it can be
compared to the first seven days of life, and it is practically inaccessible
to modern man, as evidenced by the following words of Lapin: "If selection
were limited to the separation of a clearly expressed variety and its
propagation, it would hardly be worthy of attention, but the differences
between animals which have to be dealt with, are not noticeable to the
untrained eye." "At least I," says Warvin, "am trying to understand them."
"One in a thousand does not possess the loyalty and judgement necessary
to become an outstanding leader. If he is gifted with these qualities and
devotes his entire life to his subject with unwavering perseverance, he
can achieve remarkable results; but if he lacks even one of these qualities,
he will surely fail. Few will believe that natural talent and luck are
necessary to learn how to make money. And if everything is so difficult
even now, when there is a huge amount of literature on this subject, one
can imagine how difficult it must have been for a beginner who had no
manuals to refer to, no experience, and had to figure everything out for
himself.
In addition, artificial selection requires special conditions that are
unattainable for the poor, and there is always a risk of failure.
"There are changes that are clearly significant and pleasant for the poor," "
says Warvin, "can be perceived as both positive and negative, but the
probability of their occurrence will increase with the number of
individuals contained. Hence, the abundance (of animals) greatly
influences success." On this basis, Marsh formed an opinion about the
sheep in certain parts of the county: "They will never improve, because
they belong to poor people and are kept in small flocks."
Obviously, in order to improve the breed, it is necessary to keep large
herds, which is only affordable for wealthy owners. But is it necessary to
improve the breed, and is it necessary to keep large herds? Well, that's
another matter. Obviously, our ancestors, thanks to their ingenuity and
greater observantness, managed to overcome this important obstacle in a
way unknown to us.to keep large herds? Well, that's
another matter. Obviously, our ancestors, thanks to their ingenuity and
greater observantness, managed to overcome this important obstacle in a
way unknown to us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---? Well, that's
another matter. Obviously, our ancestors, thanks to their ingenuity and
greater observantness, managed to overcome this important obstacle in a
way unknown to us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What we said about domestic animals must be repeated about plants.
The inhabitants of the Swiss mountain villages have been cultivating at
least 10 species for centuries, namely: 5 varieties of wheat, at least 4 of
which are separate species, 3 varieties of barley, one millet and one
prosa. In addition, the following are cultivated: poppy, mam, gen and
even yabom.
There, our ancestors reached an impasse, domesticating animals and
plants, and were unable to understand many issues related to the
cultivation of domestic plants.
"In general," says Warvin, "the question of the origin and species
characteristics of cultivated plants is extremely difficult. It is clear that
botanists have not yet reached a unanimous agreement on the primary form
and origin of any of the ornamental plants. It is known that none of our plants
grow wild and did not grow in their present form in the past. And so,
Warvin concludes that "many of these plants are subject to significant
changes and modifications through mutation."
But the mutation of plants is no less difficult than the artificial selection of
animals, and therefore Darwin cannot allow simple mutations to be
considered as such. "If it is necessary," he argues, "to spend hundreds and
thousands of years to bring our plants to the degree of perfection they
now enjoy, then it becomes clear to us why neither Australia, nor Cape
Good Hope, nor any other country inhabited by completely uncultivated
peoples, has given us a single plant that would be worth cultivating."
A true believer in the theory of "gradual development" would not
even try to explain this. He would simply come up with
"Motivated unconscious selection." One unconsciously selects one small part,
another selects another, and so on, but together they form a difficult and
serious whole. But it happens that no motivational work is possible unless it
is inspired by a single idea. If there is no such idea, then separate people
always go their separate ways, as in the fable: one spoils what the other
has done.
The most important thing is that we are not afraid to build, to create, to
invent, which, due to their enormous size, the people rightly call
"buildings of the gods." "The buildings of the Neolithic period," says
Ramé, "are undoubtedly the mostraid to build, to create, to
invent, which, due to their enormous size, the people rightly call
"buildings of the gods." "The buildings of the Neolithic period," says
Ramé, "are undoubtedly the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---eate, to
invent, which, due to their enormous size, the people rightly call
"buildings of the gods." "The buildings of the Neolithic period," says
Ramé, "are undoubtedly the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---

evidence of the primitive spirit of European architecture. To restore
them, the joint efforts of a large number of people are required... The
inhabitants of the new settlement were already at a relatively advanced stage
of development.
Stone structures are found in many parts of the world, but they are
especially numerous in France, where they are distinguished by their
size and spaciousness.
They are made of stone blocks of considerable size. For example, the
spindle-shaped menhir in Morbihan is 19 metres high and 5 metres
wide, while the menhir in Saint-Hilaire is 13 metres high, etc.
Among these monuments are: 1) Menhirs — vertical, separately
standing stones, 2) Kromeghi — square and round stones composed of menhirs,
3) Stone circles and rows, also composed of menhirs, and, finally, 4)
Ƚоɤьmeny —
   artificial 7rots and ɤenery, made from huge mаmenny
пɤits in the form of stoɤov.
In France, there are up to 1,683 separate menirs and up to 56 menhirs.
The most famous of them, located in Karname, stretches over an area of 3
square metres and consists of straight lines. The first consists of 11 rows
of menhirs, the second of 10, and the third of 13. A total of 10,000 stone
blocks were used to build the walls. There are up to 34 menhirs in France.
They built a large structure with 35 stone blocks on the walls and 13 on the
floor. Some of the stones weigh up to 35 kilograms. Is it possible to
doubt even for a moment that such large structures could not have been
built by the ancient Greeks?
In addition, in order to build structures, one must be able to operate
machines such as mowers, gates, saws, etc., and it is necessary to be
skilled in manual and heavy work, as many of them are used for
processing and have holes for their fastening.
In Polynesia, on the islands of the Pacific Ocean, there are also many
ancient monuments of all kinds, which could not have been built by the
local inhabitants. On the Niue Islands, for example, there are ancient
roads and ancient buildings. On the island of Ponape, there are 80 four-
sided stone islands surrounded by basalt columns.the
local inhabitants. On the Niue Islands, for example, there are ancient
roads and ancient buildings. On the island of Ponape, there are 80 four-
sided stone islands surrounded by basalt columns.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts. On the Niue Islands, for example, there are ancient
roads and ancient buildings. On the island of Ponape, there are 80 four-
sided stone islands surrounded by basalt columns.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and separated from each other by manas. On the islands of Ton7a, we
encounter monumental monuments called "lai-toma". They are
composed of stones stacked in several tiers. The dimensions of these
monuments reach up to 180 metres in length and up to 120 metres in width,
with a height of 20 metres. The stones from which they are built are up
to 20 metres long and up to 8 metres wide.
Among the structures belonging to our prehistoric ancestors, we
must include the suspension bridges in America and Tibet for crossing
chasms from one cliff to another. "These structures," according to
Remy, "must undoubtedly be considered as having been inherited from
peoples who possessed a higher culture than the modern inhabitants of
these countries."
The following material inventions of our prehistoric ancestors
should be noted: 1) the stone axe, the remains of which were found in
pile dwellings in Switzerland, 2) friction grinding, and 3) the discovery
of all the most important metals that we use in technology today.
Their extraction from ores, i.e. seeds that do not appear to have
anything to do with metals, required inventors to conduct numerous
experiments and have the ability to generalise. It is possible, perhaps, to
assume that the extraction of one type of metal, such as copper, was
discovered by chance when copper ore was heated with iron, but to assume
that the same process could be used to extract iron, there is no
possibility of this, as the extraction process requires high temperatures
and special equipment. Of course, the example of copper may suggest
that all other elements, similar to it, should give us some kind of metal,
but such generalisations do not apply to elements that completely lack
this ability.
In the spiritual realm, the same period left behind a legacy no less
significant, namely the so-called works of folk art, which belong to the
international memory, included in the Iliad, the Odyssey and the folk songs
of many countries. Their themes were used by Shakespeare in his plays
and by many European poets and writers in their works. The products of
prehistoric creativity, even in the imagined form in which they were
passed down by the people, who were not yet literate, could be
attributed to primitive dimars, and therefore, in order to explain their
origin, a special type of creativity was invented, which ise
passed down by the people, who were not yet literate, could be
attributed to primitive dimars, and therefore, in order to explain their
origin, a special type of creativity was invented, which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---e people, who were not yet literate, could be
attributed to primitive dimars, and therefore, in order to explain their
origin, a special type of creativity was invented, which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

examples    ниmто    ниmо7да    не    набɤюдаɤ,    творuества
"Unconsciously, senselessly, and impulsively." It is assumed that some
barbarian, preoccupied with material problems and having no connection
with the present, composes, for example, a poem. Other peasants who
are equally poor will copy this work and pass it on by word of mouth.
Each of them adds something, corrects something, and passes it on, and
in the end, instead of a rough image of the original thought, what usually
happens is that a distorted picture emerges, full of false ideas and false feelings
that are completely foreign to the original. Could there be a more
reasonable explanation than that?
From those fragments of ancient works, which now bear a naively
simplified form, it can be concluded that primitive people had a very
broad worldview and that many questions which Europe began to address in
the 18th and 19th centuries, were already familiar to primitive people, and
they even solved them quite successfully, in our opinion. These include,
for example, legends about the Stone Age.
One of them, relating to that period, is the work of the anthropologist
Hamie, published in 1771. Amnet-Yuperon. The third text, called
Venditat-Sads. There, according to the 7th century Milo and according to
the traditions of Moses, according to the 7th century, a woman lives in a
"place of planting and abundance," Eeriene Veedjo, "the most beautiful,
the whole world," given by Ormusd. Ahriman, "the source of evil," acts
in his own way and in his own time, irrigating the earthly paradise,
bringing the "mother of all things," "the mother of all things." She
spreads her wings over the water, the earth and the trees. Then Ormusd
creates Soghdo, "the second life, the second creation.",
bringing the "mother of all things," "the mother of all things." She
spreads her wings over the water, the earth and the trees. Then Ormusd
creates Soghdo, "the second life, the second creation."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In another part of the Aryan world, we find a similar legend. The
songs of the Mandinavs describe a visit that takes place, as mentioned
above, during a certain period. The painting depicts this in a vivid way:
"The world is dark in the north, there it flows out
12 p.m., engines spewing out deadly poison. The vapour, which releases
poison, turns into mist and the water boils. The world is on fire, there
are sparks flying, engines are meeting fire and melting it.
At first glance, it seems strange and even unbelievable, but it is
impossible to believe that the current period is temporary, preceded by
another, more intense period. However, according to some estimates, the
current period lasted 160 thousand years, and during that time, animals
without having acquired a permanent habitat, then could the same
traditions have been preserved from the previous period?
But it is strange that, despite the gradual development of the theory, I
am convinced that it is impossible to be a true believer.
If one thinks that the essence of life is eternal, and observant nature, it is
not difficult for him to understand the remains of the ancient period,
when times were fresher and

--- PAGE BREAK ---If one thinks that the essence of life is eternal, and observant nature, it is
not difficult for him to understand the remains of the ancient period,
when times were fresher and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is necessary to recreate in our minds the past as it actually was, as we see it
now. After all, we are not surprised that the author of the Five Books of
Moses and those who passed down the traditions to us, told us about the
creation of the world in a way that is quite different from what we know
today. which in our time has become a matter of common knowledge.
Meanwhile, how else could these people have known about the origin of
the animal and plant world, if not from direct observation of nature?
This also includes a very interesting piece of information, namely,
the theory of the origin of species, or at least its main idea, was also known
to the ancient Greeks, judging by the widespread belief in the origin of
humans from apes.
According to this theory, humans descended from a pair of apes whose
internal organs, limbs and tails changed due to a change in their diet (the same as
in Namar's theory). their hair fell out, their rumen disappeared, their tails
disappeared, and the monkeys became like humans.
Even though we have only recently discovered the existence of the
world of bamteries, primitive ueɤo, even if we do not have a clear
understanding of it, we can still find it in both uerthas. There, according to
the beliefs of the vast majority of modern peoples, "unquenchable fire,"
like the bamterias, is widespread everywhere. According to the beliefs
of the Meshkh, it enters the body through the mouth, and according to
the beliefs of the Samavmas Tatars, the whole universe is filled with "evil
spirits". They are found in every house, in every room, in barns, in wells, in
wells, in trees, and inside animals. The invisible spirit always surrounds
people and even tries to get into their ears, mouths, and noses. These
spirits bring people various misfortunes and miseries. According to Mamuadag
beliefs, they live in the air, enter the mouth, settle there and cause
misfortune. If modern theory about bacteria had reached the people, and
integration had been possible, then our common folk   would not   be
able   to   convey this theory. It is clear that batteries were not known
to our prehistoric ancestors, but their use was even more widespread
than we think, as can be seen from the fact that that "the snatchers of
certain nomadic peoples are familiar with the effects of poisonous
snakes through inoculation. The Bushmen use this method to protect
themselves from snakes and scorpions."
As for European medicine, many of the remedies it uses have their
origins in ancient prehistory. There, among our Russian commoners,
dryhis method to protect
themselves from snakes and scorpions."
As for European medicine, many of the remedies it uses have their
origins in ancient prehistory. There, among our Russian commoners,
dry

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
themselves from snakes and scorpions."
As for European medicine, many of the remedies it uses have their
origins in ancient prehistory. There, among our Russian commoners,
dry

--- PAGE BREAK ---

baths, and the Russians know about moxibustion and bloodletting. The
cupping tube is known to the American Indians of the Damota tribe and
to the Russians of Western Alrim. The Enakari of some tribes perform
certain serious operations, such as ovariotomy (Australians), hysterectomy
and mesarovectomy (Yucatan Indians). Trepanation, known in Europe
since the 15th century, is still used by the Nehru, Persians and New
Hebrides to treat nervous disorders and epilepsy. Nowadays, the steam bath,
which is now beginning to spread in Europe as a folk remedy, is found not
only among the common people of Russia, but also in the Caucasus, Asia,
America and Poland. Kumys and melir, known since time immemorial
among the peoples of Central Asia and the Caucasus, are now accepted
by us as good medicinal remedies. I will not mention the enormous
variety of remedies accepted by our medicine, which have been adopted
from the people, but are preserved from the most distant prehistoric
antiquity.
Namone, if we add to all this the astronomical data on which the
calendar and meteorological signs are based, which coincide with the data
obtained by European science, it is clear that ancient thought penetrated
very deeply into all areas of knowledge. To attribute all this to a
complete inability not only to observe and generalise, but even to think about
anything, is to completely ignore him and ignore the information about
his mental abilities that has been collected in the literature.
But what is clearest of all is the ancient wisdom its decisiveness,
fearlessness and extraordinary strength is evidenced by the spread of the
Uegov people in prehistoric times throughout the most remote islands of
the ocean. No explanation can justify the use of cruel punishments for minor
offences in their harsh and cruel societies.
The question is, how could primitive people cross oceans to
populate all the continents, archipelagos and islands?
This question is closely related to the question of whether man
himself was primitive during the period of dispersion. If it was, then the
theory of gradual development, i.e. similar to modern dimars and even
lower, is difficult to imagine, becausewhether man
himself was primitive during the period of dispersion. If it was, then the
theory of gradual development, i.e. similar to modern dimars and even
lower, is difficult to imagine, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---f was primitive during the period of dispersion. If it was, then the
theory of gradual development, i.e. similar to modern dimars and even
lower, is difficult to imagine, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a weak, fearful, timid creature, whose slightest responsible thought causes
unbearable pain, could possibly decide to take such a dangerous, painful leap
into the unknown, which even an extraordinary person, not lacking in
good morals, would not dare to take? It is worth recalling the stories
about how Christopher Columbus was going to cross the Atlantic Ocean, in order
to understand the impossibility of such feats for primitive people.
It remains to be assumed that all the people who ended up on the
islands were carried there by the wind and waves on some kind of rafts or
logs. But then it becomes unclear why all the animals did not arrive in
the same way. For example, as mentioned above, not a single higher
mammal ended up in Australia, while in America there are primates. Why
is even the smallest body of water, such as the Madagaskar River flowing
from Alrimini, completely inaccessible to many species? Can't they, like
humans, get there on boats and logs?
It seems even if he had crossed over to the islands, he would have been very
clever, although he did not have at his disposal the discoveries and
improvements of modern technology, and at the same time he was brave,
fearless and decisive, there were no obstacles for him, if he set his mind to
something.
Judging by the fact that not only in Australia and the islands of the
Pacific Ocean, but even in America, separated from the Old World by
the Bering Strait, Europeans found neither whales nor large-sized animals,
one might think that the ships on which primitive people crossed the
oceans were not very large. But on the other hand, they were not small in
size, because domestic pigs were found everywhere on the islands of the
Pacific Ocean, and dogs on the Australian mainland, which could not
get there otherwise, with the help of the natives. One might think that
they set off in kayaks similar to those used by the Polynesians.c Ocean, and dogs on the Australian mainland, which could not
get there otherwise, with the help of the natives. One might think that
they set off in kayaks similar to those used by the Polynesians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Australian mainland, which could not
get there otherwise, with the help of the natives. One might think that
they set off in kayaks similar to those used by the Polynesians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. THE APPEARANCE OF
THE SHORT-HEADED
RACE IN EUROPE
The spread of the short-headed race in Europe. The similarity
between stone tools from all parts of the world. The short-headed race
— pithecanthropus. Its mixture with the long-headed race. The
beginning of the race. Excursions of the red diluvial man to Asia and
Africa.
Was the same thing happening in the rest of the world at that time,
when a new diluvial human race was forming in Europe?
We have already mentioned earlier that Asia did not have such
favourable natural conditions during the transitional period as Europe did.
Therefore, there were no obstacles to the migration of the local
pithecanthropus during the glacial period to the southern latitudes, up to
the savannah. Consequently, it did not experience the severe hardship of its
European counterpart and therefore did not undergo natural selection, nor
did it even need to change its diet from plant to animal. The transitional
period passed without incident: it did not develop any tools, nor did it
acquire a straight spine, nor the mind of a European, nor a complex
digestive system, remaining the same as it was before. The same applies to the
American pithecanthrope. As for North America, we have already said
that the pithecanthropus could not even get there due to the existence of
the Bering Strait. And even if they did get there, nothing would prevent
them from crossing the Isthmus of Panama into South America.
Well, theoretically speaking, there is no hope of finding anything
similar to the archaeological finds made in Europe in other parts of the
world. Obviously, the European paeontological bridge is unique and one of
a kind. In conclusion, we can repeat Dr. Visser's words above, but
outside Europe, the only known examples of such bridges are found in Brazil,
and even those are of recent origin. In the same vein, Ranke says: "If we
do not count certain, in every respect, remarkable remains discovered in
Asia Minor and India, as well as certain discoveries in America, which
have not yet been explained by science, then it is clear that they did not originate
outside Europe.ble remains discovered in
Asia Minor and India, as well as certain discoveries in America, which
have not yet been explained by science, then it is clear that they did not originate
outside Europe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed in
Asia Minor and India, as well as certain discoveries in America, which
have not yet been explained by science, then it is clear that they did not originate
outside Europe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

domesticated.
These beliefs are currently widespread everywhere in the form of magical
tools found by European travellers in use among the Tsemeni, and also in
the form of beliefs preserved from ancient times, in which magical tools
are used. In some places, they are given a religious meaning, in others
they are associated with various superstitions. Some believe that "magical
tools fell from the sky," others that "they were used by former gods and
powerful people," and so on. Archaeologists, comparing European stone
tools with those from other parts of the world, found that the latter "are
similar in shape and material to European ones" and that their "main forms
are generally the same everywhere," and, for example, "the stone axes
found in the most remote corners of the world are identical to each other."
Von Kotta notes: "The stone types used in the manufacture of various
tools and utensils, and the forms given to them, are found in very different
localities and in very different ways, with few insignificant local
variations, a similarity that could have been created by nature."
According to Gegevagda, "all peoples (except Europeans) have a
seemingly inevitable stage at the basis of their highest moral
development."
These data indicate that 1) all the world's stone tools may have a
single origin, and 2) everywhere, except in Europe, they are found in a
developed form. Of course, nothing prevents us from assuming that the
paeontological, i.e. unrefined stone tools and the associated stage of
development, originated in Europe, and then, in a non-innovative way,
spread his invention throughout the world.
We have seen before that Mortier, discussing the emergence of the
non-traditional military in Europe, which supplanted its predecessor, and
became the most popular. Apparently, it was the simultaneous
coincidence of three factors that led to this: 1) during the Middle Ages,
the ancient European race began to disappear, 2) at the same time, a new
race appeared, previously unseen in Europe, a motorised one, and 3) at
the same time, a new mythology appeared, unrecognisable, but very
similar to the ancient one. These three strange coincidences give other
archaeologists reason to agree with Mortier's opinion. But all of the above
leads to the conclusion thatcognisable, but very
similar to the ancient one. These three strange coincidences give other
archaeologists reason to agree with Mortier's opinion. But all of the above
leads to the conclusion that

--- PAGE BREAK ---similar to the ancient one. These three strange coincidences give other
archaeologists reason to agree with Mortier's opinion. But all of the above
leads to the conclusion that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is possible to develop this under the conditions of the current period and
in Europe. And in that case, it is impossible to find any other similar
species on the entire globe, except for the African and Asian pygmy
apes.exist, but there are African and Asian pithecanthropus. Therefore, the
motorised vehicles that appeared in Europe in the Neolithic period were none
other than pithamantropes.
The situation is clear and obvious, and we cannot either defeat it or
suppress it, nor can we do anything about it at the present time. But
under such conditions, it would be incredible if peaceful herbivorous
animals could move to Europe on their own, a country that is relatively
warm, covered with trees, and populated by white-skinned people, skilled
hunters and specialists who do not spare any animal prey. What made them
move into the jaws of such a terrible beast across the entire globe?
It is quite simple to accept the following assumptions, which were not
known to Mortier and were not taken into account by him: 1) The Dinozoic
race did not originate in Europe, but lived in a non-existent climate and
gradually changed, replacing the motorised race and even in some areas. 2)
In France, Belgium and Italy, the houses built were initially low-rise, then
medium-rise, and finally motorised. 3) The low-rise type was tall with a
straight roof, in contrast to the motorised type. — short with a less
voluminous head and a protruding structure. Consequently, the
dinosaurs of that time were taller than the motor-type creatures, and
modern Europeans are taller than apes.
It is clear, first of all, that the motor race is much lower than the
European race in intellectual terms and, consequently, cannot be
conquered in any way, and secondly, the Dzhinns did not leave Europe, but
gradually mixed with the newcomers, forming the modern European
middle race.
Hence, the situation can be described as follows:
When the people of the early period began to retreat northward, the
space suitable for life expanded, and at the same time, land communication
between the European continent and Asia was established. Europeans,
who were hunters, spread throughout Europe, and their power could
reachr life expanded, and at the same time, land communication
between the European continent and Asia was established. Europeans,
who were hunters, spread throughout Europe, and their power could
reach

--- PAGE BREAK ---at the same time, land communication
between the European continent and Asia was established. Europeans,
who were hunters, spread throughout Europe, and their power could
reach

--- PAGE BREAK ---

even to Asia. At that time, our ancestors were already far-sighted, so it
was not difficult for them to understand that, living only by hunting,
they would inevitably exhaust their resources and then be forced to migrate.
This led them to domesticate animals in order to have a constant supply of
meat. And since it is necessary to have a supply of plant food in the
summer, it is necessary to gather a supply of wild plants, which are
essential to the steppe and which were then found in Europe.
Subsequently, this led people to think about motivating themselves and living
in this way.
If we look at the situation in Asia, we see that there are animals there that
are similar to the Asian pygmy apes, which our ancestors tried to tame.
However, considering the conditions of those areas of Europe,
where motorcycles are most common in rural areas, and then, taking into account
that there are very few of them, pay attention to the insane wealth with
which the funerals of the deceased are carried out. He came to the
conclusion that the funerals were arranged by the elders and elders and
carried out by the motorised slaves, who could be brought here by means of
trade. "In this way," he says, "the dinosaurs realised the idea of Kamenas Ruay,
who wanted to tame the apes. They have the seed, but we lack the
motor, we are in the state of an animal." That is, the primitive
dɤинно7оɤовая race gradually disappeared in Europe and was replaced
by the medieval posɤе то7о, it is clear that the domestication of
pithecanthropus was accompanied by interbreeding with them and the
decline of the primitive hominids, and consequently, we, modern people,
are the result of this mixture. The mixing that began in Europe may later
continue in Asia and the Alps by European missionaries, and hence the
obvious conclusion that the origin of the human species is not to be found in
Europe, but in Asia, where the ancestors of modern humans lived.
The probability of an event occurring is determined by a number of
factors that will be considered in the following 7 points. Now let's look at
some of the most striking examples of this phenomenon in the 7th century:
1). The upper and lower classes of modern society, even today, are
divided into two distinct types in terms of appearance, character, and
intelligence: one is predatory, the other ishe 7th century:
1). The upper and lower classes of modern society, even today, are
divided into two distinct types in terms of appearance, character, and
intelligence: one is predatory, the other is

--- PAGE BREAK ---The upper and lower classes of modern society, even today, are
divided into two distinct types in terms of appearance, character, and
intelligence: one is predatory, the other is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

plant-eating.
2). The origin of pithecanthropus is unclear, but theoretical
considerations suggest that they existed, as evidenced by the remains of
pithecanthropus found in Europe and Asia.
3). The legends of many peoples about their origin from a mixture
of humans with apes and other animals (see below).
4). The testimony of Holy Scripture about the fall of the first
humans, the guilty party is presented as a woman.
And, of course,
5) Consideration of the existing social structure based on inequality,
which can be explained by our theory.
Of course, the question of under what conditions the mixing of the
divine and the human took place is very difficult to answer. Perhaps the
reason for the confusion was insufficient knowledge, or perhaps
something else. But in any case, there is nothing extraordinary here; on
the contrary, it is a natural phenomenon, common to all animal species.
As we mentioned above, certain species of animals arrived in Europe
before the Ice Age and underwent changes there under the influence of
the struggle for existence. But could any of them have migrated there
before the last ice age? Of course not, and even in the form of a rare
occurrence, because no one has ever gone to Europe. Consequently,
during the period of natural selection, each species split into two parts: one
part came to Europe and underwent natural selection there, while the
other remained in Asia and remained unchanged. But did both populations of
the same species have the same desire and ability to reproduce with each
other, so that they could meet again at the end of the period? I don't
think so, because the selection of genes in rare cases can change the
genetic system of animals.
Of course, in the context of motorised improvements of every kind,
there are already signs of future imperfections. He must either come to
terms with his imperfect nature early on and, in doing so, lose some of his
hard-earned gains, or shock his descendants with the process of mixing.
Later we will see that these phenomena have been preserved in most
speciesnature early on and, in doing so, lose some of his
hard-earned gains, or shock his descendants with the process of mixing.
Later we will see that these phenomena have been preserved in most
species

--- PAGE BREAK ---

animal kingdom.
Does this circumstance testify to disorder in nature and the absence of a
self-regulating process in the world?
No. It is only one inevitable step on the path along which nature
inexorably and tirelessly leads all living things towards perfection.
On the very pitamantrop, who were wives of bezo7o ueɤoвеmа, and on
their children, it is impossible to look at one of their domestic animals,
which, depending on necessity, could be eaten, used for some kind of
work, or exchanged with neighbours for something else. This is where
the basis for slavery lies, which now oppresses us. In itself, it has nothing
oppressive about it, but in the long run, the distinction between slaves and
masters became blurred and diminished. It is impossible to help the
race, and the former slaves, mixed with the noble blood, gradually
became equal to their masters. In many ways, modern society has developed
from ancient forms. This is the reason for the change in society for the
worse. That is why the value of modern society is lower than the value of
primitive, unspoiled society.
Of course, the middle race, which appeared as a result of mixing,
was average in both physical and mental terms between the two primary
races. "There," says Gegevag, "where the higher race mixes with the
lower, it does indeed take on the characteristics of the lower, occupies
the middle ground between the two, but if the lower race prevails and
becomes dominant, the higher race loses and its level of development
declines. Nature is the most aristocratic aristocracy, and any
transgression against it is severely punished by it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s dominant, the higher race loses and its level of development
declines. Nature is the most aristocratic aristocracy, and any
transgression against it is severely punished by it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Apparently, apart from land expeditions, motorised Asian
pitemanthropuses, who were brought to Europe, were also involved in
maritime expeditions to Alrim. In the regions of France belonging to the
late (Maden) period of the Neolithic era, a number of stone tools and bone
tools were found, depicting a woman with a pronounced development of
the pelvis throughout the body, with drooping breasts, a voluminous
protruding belly and what is known as "steatopygia" (excessive fat
accumulation in the buttocks).
The Nertys are very reminiscent of the Bushmen, Otentotov, Malov
and Marim peoples of inner Australia.
According to travellers, all the Alimans of the Marim peoples are straight,
though slightly stooped, with large, protruding bellies. The thin and
protruding ribs are mainly found in women of the Bushmen, Sotototo and
Malo tribes. This is referred to as "steatopygia", which is apparently a
characteristic feature of the Arimans, distinguishing them from the rest of
humanity. I t is most pronounced among the women

--- PAGE BREAK ---s referred to as "steatopygia", which is apparently a
characteristic feature of the Arimans, distinguishing them from the rest of
humanity. I t is most pronounced among the women

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7otentots, Bushmen, Nama, Malawis, Boros, Tusemuevs of Somalia, etc. In
addition, steatopygia is observed among the peoples of North Africa and
Southern Europe. It is currently found among the Berbers, existed in Egypt
in ancient times, and in Southern Europe during the Roman era, as can
be seen from drawings found in Pompeii, depicting women with large
breasts.
It is impossible to determine with certainty whether it was precisely
these people who were expelled from Europe, but it seems that the
majority of them remained in their homeland for a long time, probably
until it became crowded. In the modern world, the entire population is mixed
with other races, which makes it difficult to determine their origin, they are
closer to Europe, as we will see from anthropological data.
The crossing most likely took place in the early Middle Ages, as
medieval tools have been found by travellers everywhere, and in some
places have survived to this day. "The use of metal," says Lord Cotta, "is
evident from the time when some peoples separated from others. If the metals
had been known to the first inhabitants of the earth, they would have been
passed down to all their descendants."

--- PAGE BREAK ---the time when some peoples separated from others. If the metals
had been known to the first inhabitants of the earth, they would have been
passed down to all their descendants."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. NON-HUMANITY —
HYBRIDS
Humanity — a species of hybrids. Polygyny and monogamy. The
impossibility of classifying humanity. The futility of attempts to classify
humanity into races. The difference between the species characteristics
of animals and humans. The need to accept that humanity is a hybrid
species.
We have come to the conclusion that humanity is composed of a mixture of
two species. But let us see if we are not contradicting the data about
humanity that science has already developed.
The question of whether it belongs to one or many types is one of the
most difficult for science and has not been definitively resolved to date. In
this regard, opinions are divided into two camps. The French school,
represented by Brom in the 19th century, holds a genetic view of the origin
of species, i.e., it recognises the main and secondary types of species.
Non-monogenetic and anglicist schools of thought are monogeneticists,
recognising the unity of origin and the relationship of all races to a
single species that originated from a single centre. while related species
are similar varieties.
However, there is one inconsistency between the two, namely that
the state represents something completely different from all other animal
species. And since neither of the disputing parties can conclusively
refute the other, it follows that each has sufficient evidence on its side.
The very existence of the two sides means that society is divided into
two groups that are completely opposed to each other, so they can be
considered separate species.
However, despite the obvious and significant racial differences
within the community, it is not possible to divide it into types, as this may
lead to misunderstandings. There are very serious obstacles to this:
1). Changes in types within the same people and race are the same,
as well as in the whole universe. "There is a huge difference in
relationships and proportions between individuals of the same race.). Changes in types within the same people and race are the same,
as well as in the whole universe. "There is a huge difference in
relationships and proportions between individuals of the same race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---within the same people and race are the same,
as well as in the whole universe. "There is a huge difference in
relationships and proportions between individuals of the same race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The differences between them are in their appearance, in their
behaviour, in their devices and tools, in the direction of their main
arteries, in their mental abilities, etc. The findings presented represent a
greater diversity than that of other peoples. However, the uniformity of
different peoples is often exaggerated. For example, American tribes are
very similar in terms of their way of life and character, there is also a
great diversity in the appearance and character of the American tribes.
The same can be said about all other characteristics. Regarding the
Indians, one South American, Mr. Bates, says: "There are no two among
them that are completely similar in form: one has an oval shape and regular
features, while the other is completely monochromatic in terms of the
width of the protruding features, the shape of the nose and the position of the
eyes."
"We do not know any country in Europe," writes Ranme, "where,
among the educated classes, there is not one typical form of education. The
same is true of other parts of the world. There, the languages of the
Alpine and Alpine peoples, which were previously considered to be
typical, have broken down into many different forms. In Australia and
among the Alami people, we find, along with the dingo, medium-sized and
motorised dogs, along with motorised and wide dogs, dingoes and usnis.
The forms of uerepa found in Europe are found in their main habitats
throughout the continent. Nowhere on the continent does the unmixed
population of uerepa occupy large areas. Only in a few areas does the
main form of the tree prevail.
2). All racial features are strangely mixed together. Identical forms
are found among the most distant peoples, between whom even the most
vivid imagination cannot find any connection, whatever it may be. On the
other hand, we find clearly distinct features among peoples between
whom we cannot deny an internal connection. There is no single trait
that is characteristic of only one mother-nation.
3). All racial characteristics are found in us in endless transitions
and combinations. They are all connected by intermediate links,
developed in such a way that the closest relationship appears to us to be the
most natural form of development, among the motorised units, the single form
is preserved thanks to the carefully planned transitions.
Everywhere, one can observe gradual transitions from dinnogov to
motorogov and from motorogov to shiromogov,otorised units, the single form
is preserved thanks to the carefully planned transitions.
Everywhere, one can observe gradual transitions from dinnogov to
motorogov and from motorogov to shiromogov,

--- PAGE BREAK ---single form
is preserved thanks to the carefully planned transitions.
Everywhere, one can observe gradual transitions from dinnogov to
motorogov and from motorogov to shiromogov,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are curved, straight, and straight-forward types. Everywhere,
there is a mixture of curved and straight types in the form of typical and
intermediate types.
4). Alongside the great diversity of regional characteristics, there
are many similarities at the international level. "During my stay at the
Bih camp with the Ozhennaya Yemnya team," we read in Larpin's book,
— I was constantly struck by the many similarities in character that
revealed a close kinship between the minds of the people there and ours;
The same thing happened with the mysterious stranger, whom I once had
the opportunity to meet. Even the most dissimilar and unusual races are
similar to each other in appearance, which one might expect at first
glance, but some of them, with the exception of a few, have very similar
names. A good example of this can be seen in the realistic portraits in
the anthropological section of the museum, taken from representatives
of various races, most of which could be accepted as portraits of
Europeans.
All the obstacles mentioned above make it impossible to classify the
group into types. This is not surprising, given the enormous diversity of
opinions, which makes it impossible to attempt to define the
characteristics of the different types. It is worth quoting a surprising
example here:
Non-existent races: one (Vert, Nund), two (Virey, Meygan,
Meyners), three (Cuvier, Mamino, Topinar, Bradgey, Gobino,
Boussin7, Zag, Kaus, Smith, Natam, Brom, Katrazh, Nidemper), four
(Ninney, Kant, Zimmerman, Neibni, Gemsini, Carus, Retius, Keen,
Bernier, Molua C. Iger), five (Bygumenbach, d'Omagius — d'Agua, Omen,
Godulus, Vegmer), six (Bülon, Lumery, Nesson), seven (Genter, Priuard,
Foyer, Neshe), eight (Assi, Mori), eleven (Pimerin7), twelve (F. Miguer,
Gemme, Gerɤya), thirteen (Ƚenimep), fifteen (Bori de S. Vensen), sixteen
(Yumugen, Mite-Brun), eighteen (Koguman), twenty-two
 (Morton), sixty
(Kraupord), sixty-three (Berm), one hundred and fifty (Giddon). Namone,
American shoma allows for a hundred types of ueoveu, so it is possible to
establish folk types.
"Three types," says Prof. Petri, "from one race and species to 150
and even to an indefinite number, producean shoma allows for a hundred types of ueoveu, so it is possible to
establish folk types.
"Three types," says Prof. Petri, "from one race and species to 150
and even to an indefinite number, produce

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They are a sad sight; they are a sad testament to the fact that science in
this area does not have a firm footing.
And so, natural obstacles prevent the establishment of a certain type
of unity, make it impossible for monists to recognise the "unity of the
species," i.e., the belonging of all species to one species.
This theory is based on the following assumptions, which are also
characteristic of all species:
1) similarity between all human races when they are compared; 2)
similarity in the structure of the body of all people and in their spiritual
activity; 3) a continuous series of intermediate stages between all
varieties of uеɤовеmа;
4) the impossibility of determining the species to which a species belongs by
its external appearance alone.
But here we encounter new obstacles: "Mivotny, belonging to one
species despite their individual differences, can be grouped into a known
type with clearly established characteristics. Among them, we always find
those that do not fit the type of their species. There is no such thing. They are
so diverse and complex that it is impossible to establish a single species
type. The essential difference between humans and animals lies in the fact
that the variability of the human organism is much greater than that of
animals. "The difference between humans and animals is enormous," said
Ahehis, "is the same as that between a brown bear with a brown coat and a
white bear with a light coat and a thick fur." In psychological terms, as we
shall see below, the difference between the extreme limits of ueɤoвеuества
is the same, between the hungry wolves and their herbivorous victims, between
the wolf and the sheep and the ram.

--- PAGE BREAK ---below, the difference between the extreme limits of ueɤoвеuества
is the same, between the hungry wolves and their herbivorous victims, between
the wolf and the sheep and the ram.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Everything that has been said shows that our theory has a right to
exist, but the question of the massification of society has not yet been resolved.
The theories of the pluralists and the monists cannot coexist, because they
contradict each other, and because there can only be one truth. Each of
these theories, taken separately, also has no right to exist, because it
contains only a part of the truth and each has gaps that cannot be explained
by it. In order to find the truth, there is no other way but to take from
each theory only that which is irrefutable, and discard the rest. But if we
do so, it turns out that "the universe consists of one species, but a
special species, which does not exist in the rest of the animal world. Its
peculiarity lies in the fact that it breaks down into many groups, which,
despite their similarity, differ in characteristics that are considered
species-specific in the rest of the animal kingdom." But what kind of
species is it?
Obviously, it is hybrid, because it is the only one that meets all the
necessary conditions. It is unique because

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are no types of pitemantrop in the mixture, but their descendants are
all connected to each other by the fact that they all have the same origin. It
consists of many groups and species, into which all possible types of
pithecanthropus are divided.
all kinds of
combinations
uистоmровных
types,
which are either similar to each other or completely different. The
most recent groups of the species differ from each other, because in some,
the beasts prevail, while in others, the pitemantropans prevail. Of course,
these anthropological data do not contradict our position, but directly
confirm that uegovstvo is a hybrid species.
hybrid species.s prevail, while in others, the pitemantropans prevail. Of course,
these anthropological data do not contradict our position, but directly
confirm that uegovstvo is a hybrid species.
hybrid species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---others, the pitemantropans prevail. Of course,
these anthropological data do not contradict our position, but directly
confirm that uegovstvo is a hybrid species.
hybrid species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5. VOEMOMNA NIPONOVITAP
POMESB MEMV BENYM
IS IT POSSIBLE TO CROSSbreed A
HUMAN AND A PITEKANTHROPUS?
Is a fertile hybrid between a human and a pithecanthropus possible
from the point of view of the laws of hybridisation? What do we know
about the laws of hybridisation? Our theory encounters a certain
obstacle.
Above, we have cited one example of how monotheists attempt to
establish the belonging of all humanity to one species: they refer to the
common ancestry of all human races. But even if it were possible to produce
offspring of the same species from pairs of the same species, then, in our opinion,
the mixing of a white human with a pithecanthropus would be seriously
questioned. It folows that if a white eugene belongs to the same species as a
pithecanthropus, and if it cannot interbreed with it, this is one of the most
unreliable criteria for judging the belonging of living beings to one species.
to judge the belonging of living beings to one species. "In our domestic
animals," says Darwin, "the different breeds are completely
indistinguishable when compared with each other, and yet they are
descended from two different species... We must abandon the belief in
the universal immutability of species when they interbreed, and regard
immutability in animals not as something unchangeable, but as something
which can be eliminated by domestication"... "To avoid this confusion,
that some species are not identical in reproduction, we can do so by
calling all forms that are not identical to each other varieties (rather than
species).
But this phenomenon will become clearer to us if we familiarise
ourselves with the work of the renowned anthropologist Brom, who
studied competition and hybridism in animals.
"Animals," says the author, "usually mate with their own kind, within
their own species, but sometimes, under pressurerenowned anthropologist Brom, who
studied competition and hybridism in animals.
"Animals," says the author, "usually mate with their own kind, within
their own species, but sometimes, under pressure

--- PAGE BREAK ---They mate with animals of other species, especially those that are similar
to them.

In this respect, they are less selective in their choice than
humans.

The extent to which such relationships are possible is unknown,
but observations suggest that mating sometimes occurs between very
distant species.The author cites a number of examples, which, according
to him, are reliable, observed by well-known naturalists, of mating
between such distant species as the dog and the pig, the dog and the sheep,
the horse and the mule, the cow and the rooster, the cow and the goat, the dog
and the pig, the dog and the sheep, the horse and the mule, the cow and the rooster,
the cow and the goat, the dog and the pig, the dog and the sheep, the horse and
the mule, the cow and the rooster, the cow and the goat, the dog and the pig,
the dog and the sheep, the horse and the mule, the cow and the rooster, the cow and the goat,
the dog and the pig, the dog and the sheep, the horse and the mule, the cow and
the rooster, the cow and the goat, the dog and the pig, the dog and the sheep, the
horse and the mule dogs and pigs, dogs and sheep, cows and goats, geese and roosters,
cows and horses, poplars and manareas, etc.

Even the creator himself, God,
does not approve of such unnatural relations, as evidenced by the
punishment imposed on them in the Bible.

The connections between the
most distant species remain, of course, in most cases insignificant, but
the difference between species is not always an obstacle to the fertility of
offspring.

There, moths and butterflies are clearly distinguished from each
other in the system of kinship, as are bees and wasps, and meanwhile, a
comparison of the fertility of the former with the infertility of the latter can
be made, but the degree of similarity between species cannot be used as a
measure of the fertility of hybrids.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The connections between the
most distant species remain, of course, in most cases insignificant, but
the difference between species is not always an obstacle to the fertility of
offspring. There, moths and butterflies are clearly distinguished from each
other in the system of kinship, as are bees and wasps, and meanwhile, a
comparison of the fertility of the former with the infertility of the latter can
be made, but the degree of similarity between species cannot be used as a
measure of the fertility of hybrids. Therefore, in order to predict whether
the offspring of two known species will be fertile or not, we have no
scientific data and can only guess based on direct experience, since the
exact circumstances are unknown. The only thing that can be said about
the possibility of hybridisation is that hybridism rarely crosses the
boundaries between "species". Pribytsy and Warvin share the same opinion: "Species," he wrote,
"belonging to separate genera rarely interbreed, and those belonging to
separate families never interbreed with each other." In fact, the similarity
is not so great, because many closely related species do not interbreed
with each other and interbreed with great difficulty, while other species,
which are completely different from each other, are very difficult to
cross. The difficulty does not depend at all on natural selection in the
environment, but, apparently, on the "environmental conditions" of the
species being crossed. Thus, our assertion that modern humans descended from a mixture
of Neanderthals and Pithecanthropus does not encounter any obstacles
from the previous view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

previous, unknown.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n that modern humans descended from a mixture
of Neanderthals and Pithecanthropus does not encounter any obstacles
from the previous view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

previous, unknown.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6. TRACES OF THE ELDER
RACE ARE FOUND
ALL OVER THE
WORLD
Traces of the 6th race can be found all over the world. Blume's
classification of humans into 5 races. The Malayan and Medo-
Caucasian races are rejected as fictitious. There are distinctive features
of the three remaining races. Traces of all three races can be found in
Europe. Africa. The existence of the Negroid type is subject to doubt.
Asia. White traces can be found in all corners of Asia. America and its
white tribes. Polynesia, Micronesia, Melanesia and the Australian
continent from the same point of view.
In reality, there are no sharp distinctions between the different races,
but rather gradual transitions, as between our blondes and brunettes, and
between tall and medium-height people. Therefore, it is not surprising
that in Europe, which we are accustomed to thinking of as inhabited
exclusively by "white" people, its population is mixed with traces of the
yellow and brown races, while in all other parts of the world, traces of
the white race are visible everywhere.
To verify this, let us examine the writings of well-known
theologians, anthropologists, and travellers.
In ancient writings, the 7eo7raɭi were divided (according to Bɤюменбах) into 5
main races: 1) White and mавmаѕсmу, 2) Meat and monastic, 3) Nectar and
sɭиопcмую, 4) Copper-mрасная and Ameriсmую, and 5) Coriuневая and
maɤайсmую.
But that view is outdated in our time and has been abandoned as
inconsistent with reality.
First of all, the independence of the Morinova race was rejected as
transitional, resulting from the mixing of white, yellow and brown races in
certain proportions. The same fate befell the copper-skinned, American race,
which, being immutable and unchanging, anthropological types are
considered independent on the same basis, and the majority, and the
minority continues to defend it. "The name mraznomozhie, says Topinar,
was given to the Americans not so much because of their abilities, but
because of the widespread custom among them of   mrasit   sebe
voosy   and   mozu   v   mrasny   vet".   Вie, says Topinar,
was given to the Americans not so much because of their abilities, but
because of the widespread custom among them of   mrasit   sebe
voosy   and   mozu   v   mrasny   vet".   В

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In reality, they represent a variety of shades, from light brown in the
central Andes to dark brown in Peru and black in ancient Magallanes. In
addition, copper-red and morine colours, which were previously
considered to be characteristic of the Americas, are widespread in the
Pacific, where light, yellow and brown tones are also found. In Alrim,
yellow and brown colours are also very common, especially in the south, in
the centre and near the sources of the Niga. Fugby — brownish-red,
bishari — often the colour of brownish wood. In addition, it is known that
the ancient Egyptians painted their monuments with brown. Therefore,
the old massimina, attributing the masp tree to the Indians, must be
considered unsatisfactory.
Of course, no one doubts the existence of these types of motors, but
there are still three types: electric, petrol and diesel. This conclusion
was reached by most scientists, starting with Cuvier, and is now supported by
the latest systematic studies.
Although anthropological characteristics are mixed in all races, some of
them are still considered predominant and typical for each race. I have
collected the main characteristics here in a table in order to clarify the
current situation, which is uncertain at this stage.
Beginning
Megata
Nerny
Height:
Large
Small
Small
Eyes:
White
Brownish-red
New:
Thin
Korouetugovina
tugovina
Nerep:
Ƚɤинно7оɤовые
орто7наты
Short
orthodontics
Orthodontic
appliances
Voɤos:
Bald, grey, thin,
shaggy
Smooth, short, smooth,
straight, stiff woolly,
muruavy
Gas:
Large,
Obliq
ue
Large,
open. Straight.
Open.
7-pointed star.
Vsmaya 7-
pointed star.
Straight 7-day
period.
Light 7:
Goguyboy
Brown
Nerny
Eyebrows:
-
High
-
arched
Nose:
Orɤinny andɤini
Posmij,
Posmij,

--- PAGE BREAK ---open. Straight.
Open.
7-pointed star.
Vsmaya 7-
pointed star.
Straight 7-day
period.
Light 7:
Goguyboy
Brown
Nerny
Eyebrows:
-
High
-
arched
Nose:
Orɤinny andɤini
Posmij,
Posmij,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roman, straight
wide,
wide,
raised
slanted
top
Smy:
Do not protrude
Protruding
Protruding
Mouth:
Small
Large
Big
Lips:
Thin, small
-
Thick,
fleshy, blue
puffy, thin
turned out
Chin:
Not protruding,
Protruding,
Receding
sharp
mru7ɤy
Nerty ɤiɯa:
Correct,
-
Ever-changing
mrasivye,
integrated
Neck:
Ƚɤin
-
Short
Europe.
Although we are accustomed to thinking of the population of Europe as
a single race, it is not uniform. According to Jenner, it is divided into six
races, and there is no correlation between their appearance and their
languages. Of these, the most similar to the Caucasian race is the so-
called "northern" race. It is distinguished by its light complexion, tall stature,
and slender build. It is found on the Scandinavian Peninsula, in Latvia, in
Estonia, in Finland, in Northern Germany,   in   in the Baltic States   in
the regions   of Russia   and in Finland.
A mixture of the white race with the yellow race is called the
"eastern" race, with straight light-yellow and brown hair, a square jaw,
an upturned nose, and light-grey eyes. This breed is found in Prussia,
Silesia, Samsonia, Nitva, Poland and Russia.
A mixture of the white race with the brown race is called "Iberian" and
"Mediterranean," it is dark-skinned, with dark hair, a dark complexion,
and a straight, upturned nose.
The three remaining breeds, living in Southern and Central Europe,
judging by their description, represent a mixture of all three breeds,
white, black and grey in varying proportions. They are medium-sized

--- PAGE BREAK ---living in Southern and Central Europe,
judging by their description, represent a mixture of all three breeds,
white, black and grey in varying proportions. They are medium-sized

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and medium-sized, tall and medium-sized, with hair that is either
straight or wavy, sometimes straight, sometimes wavy, with light and
dark brown and wavy hair.
But it must be noted that the European population is extremely
difficult to classify according to anthropological criteria, and there is no reason to
err in this regard, because "European races are significantly mixed."
"Every existing group," says Ramé, "is the product of the mixing and
blending of many races. There is no nation in Europe that consists today
of a single race."
Alrima.
In literature, Alrima is often called a "true mother" because of her life,
but this name, as well as the opinion that Alrima is predominantly
populated by non-Jews, does not correspond to reality at all.
"Not so long ago," says Virchow, "the entire 'human race' was
considered in Europe to be a single anthropological unit; the human race and its
members were regarded as belonging to a single species. However, we are
learning to distinguish between them and determine the relationship
between individual races."
In his work on the peoples of Alrima, Hartmann expresses the
opinion that the concept of racial homogeneity is impossible. "Among
the peoples," he writes, "there are such fundamental differences that we
must completely abandon the common opinion about the non-European
type, which is defined by hooked noses, thick lips, and dark skin. Let
such images be drawn on posters — anthropology does not recognise such
types." Touno and Passavant also caution against the use of the term
"well-known type," because it has no scientific meaning:
"This type is not clearly defined, falling somewhere between extreme
thinness and extreme brachydactyly. next to a wide and flat nose, we see
a small and pointed one, the colour ranges from light brown to dark brown,
and there are often reddish and pinkish tones, and, in addition, we
encounter two types of wood — so we need to refrain from attempting
to establish a single type.
"It is well known," says White, "that the entire northern part of Algeria,tones, and, in addition, we
encounter two types of wood — so we need to refrain from attempting
to establish a single type.
"It is well known," says White, "that the entire northern part of Algeria,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion, we
encounter two types of wood — so we need to refrain from attempting
to establish a single type.
"It is well known," says White, "that the entire northern part of Algeria,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

including Egypt, cannot be considered non-Christian. The Mite, Berbers
and Moors, as well as the later arrivals, the Arabs, are also non-
Christians." The most characteristic type of uerga, the beygur, is found in
Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Sahara and the Canary Islands. However,
they are also known in southern Algeria. White mentions two centres of
their settlement in Manisse and Bido. The origin of these two peoples is
still unclear. Some believe them to be descendants of Arabs, others
believe them to be descendants of Portuguese settlers from the 16th
century, but neither theory has been proven.
If we move south from the Sahara and Egypt to the interior of
Algeria, then before we reach the country of the real desert, we must pass
through a very wide belt of peoples who, according to all research, are
transitional between the black and white races. These include: the
Abyssinians, the Beja, the Nubians, the Zagha, the Massai, the Wam, the
Boni, and the peoples of Bornu. These peoples inhabit the entire
southern region from the Ramah tropics to the savannah. In Sudan, there is a
wide belt of coexistence between two large ethnic groups: the Hamito-
Semitic ( Beja) and the Neirodi. "If we," says F. Ratha, "agree with White
that the Zagasi, Nubians, the Ottentots, the Malary, the peoples of
Koncho and the Madagascans (on the island of Madagascar) are not true
Negroes, if we also agree with Schweinurt on their customs and
traditions, then we must admit that Alrima is inhabited by other peoples,
and not real Negroes. In the same way, within the motherland, from the
southern part of the Omonia region and even further south, we find the
light-skinned Alrimans and the so-called Bantu. With such a critical attitude
towards them, the border remains no more than 10–12 degrees of latitude
south of the mouth of the Senega River in Timbuktu and from there to the
country of Sennaar. The Natro people are a mixed race, intermingled
with many representatives of other races. According to Natam, the
present country of the Natro people stretches from Senegawa to Nihira.
The other African peoples are said to be
"They are so mixed together that it is impossible to select the true ones.
It would be a waste of effort." Regarding the internal Alrim, Schweinurt
reports that "the mixing of the peoples there is unprecedented" and that
"it is impossible to find any traces of them, as the constituent parts of
the motoro7o are characterised by extreme mobility."
This applies to the western peoples, between Senegawa and Nijer,
who are considered "real", and we find their typicality in   in
stnoplaiecmoy   literature   otzyvy   veryed by extreme mobility."
This applies to the western peoples, between Senegawa and Nijer,
who are considered "real", and we find their typicality in   in
stnoplaiecmoy   literature   otzyvy   very

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty."
This applies to the western peoples, between Senegawa and Nijer,
who are considered "real", and we find their typicality in   in
stnoplaiecmoy   literature   otzyvy   very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unpleasant.   "   ѕападно7о   бере7а, —   7оворит Ф. Ратɯеɤь,
— 7ораѕдо доɤьше, uем не7рам востоmа, «mаɭрам», в обширном
смысɤе, приписываɤи настояɲие не7рсmие приѕнаmи. Previously,
there was a desire to give Alrimini to mamuy-gibo, i.e. monkey-like
creatures... But even the western alrimani have long since ceased to be
suitable for those marimaturi, as they were imagined in the days of
primitive images. Bastian realised 40 years ago that it was impossible to
find a suitable non-human type, which was the result of Western-Alrian
research. Attempts to establish a specific Western-Alpine race can be
considered hopeless.
If we turn to the descriptions of   and   , compiled by travellers,   ,
we will find that the characteristics of each nation are reflected in the
properties of the products they consume. that are similar to those of
their neighbours and different from those of other peoples. One name is
said to have a "mixed type" (the people of Cordillera) and "non-native"
(the names of the people of Lapura, Barimi and Gaussa). Others have non-
traditional colours, such as red-brown ( boncho), light brown (banyani),
dark brown and brown (luhagi), bronze (vachandi), black (nyamnyamy
and monbutto). Thirdly, there are various shades of colour, from the
lightest to the darkest (sygyusy, malry, baganda), and women are lighter
than men (tusemy above Nyagaba). Fifthly, there is a "deviation from
the non-Christian type" ( ovals, non-Christians of the Eastern coast) and
"the absence of certain characteristic features of the people" (nemya
bertat). Sixth, there is the "European type of people" (malry, bagandy).
Seventh, a reliable voice, but "a pleasant tone" (managers), etc.
It is not surprising, since the very existence of the non-Christian
type is being questioned. Rann says that people "try to find the typical
structure of a non-Christian, established by similarity, and naturally do
not find it, because such a type does not exist at all." The research of
German travellers to Alrim, who were familiar with the local anatomy,
Fritua, Hartmann, Nachtigall, Bastian, Fagmenstein and many others, could
not discover such a type and found it only in isolated cases.
Asia.lers to Alrim, who were familiar with the local anatomy,
Fritua, Hartmann, Nachtigall, Bastian, Fagmenstein and many others, could
not discover such a type and found it only in isolated cases.
Asia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere familiar with the local anatomy,
Fritua, Hartmann, Nachtigall, Bastian, Fagmenstein and many others, could
not discover such a type and found it only in isolated cases.
Asia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is known that all of Southwest Asia, including East India, has been
the arena of activity for Aryans and Semites since ancient times, i.e. white
peoples, and therefore, when discussing Asia, there is no need to even
mention the vast Asian continent. In the rest of Asia, which we are
accustomed to consider inhabited by nomadic peoples, according to
Katrazh,
"Signs of confusion are visible everywhere." "If you look closely," says the
old man, "you will see that there are actually many mаɤмыmов,
яmутов, nesmоɤьmо іѕоɤіrovаnіyе тюрmсmіх пɤемен і тун7усов, then all
other peoples of the yellow race are represented by a mixture with
whites." However, the number of these people is rapidly declining, as F.
Ratay adds that among the Buryats, who are usually classified as
Mongols, have white hair, and the hair of their children is usually dark.
Given the detailed overview of the peoples of the "yellow race," it is
necessary to mention their very large ethnic groups, which Katrazh
directly attributes to the yellow race. Even if this opinion seems
exaggerated, there can be no doubt about the existence of these peoples.
Thus, the "Bayan race" includes the Liny (Votyaks and Ostiaks) living in
western Siberia, the Uymu (between the Anadyr and Nedovit rivers),
the Ainu, who inhabit the island of Yesso, the Nippon Peninsula,
Sakhalin, the Kuril Islands and the Niuy-Kyu Islands, and, of course,
the Magai people of the Magamni Peninsula and the Eonsk Islands.
According to Kartazh, the Tyurma branch of the Monog race
"approaches the ideal through imitation." A comparison of the ancient
inhabitants of Agata, known as "Agata ore miners," led the academician Bera
to conclude that they were "identical to the miners of the past." The graves
dug by some tribes in the upper reaches of the Yenisei River are
covered with stone slabs, and the burial mounds resemble the European
type. The Turkmens of Turkestan in the vicinity of Kugji, as well as the
populations of Kashgar and Semirechye, are undoubtedly a mixture of
the white race with the yellow race. In the Mirzovs of Turkestan and among
some Tajiks of Persia, Topinar distinguishes a "beigomur type". The
Samoyeds,   living   in the   north   of Siberia,   Middendorff
distinguishes
"a mixture of ɭinnov (i.e. beɤy) with mon7oɤami".
Within the vast Chinese Empire, the presence of beɤo7o sɤемента is
also beyond doubt. Firstly, the Tibetan languages, reminiscent of the
Yugur, are described by Przewalski as a "mixture of Mongolian and Indian
languages". In western China, according tosɤемента is
also beyond doubt. Firstly, the Tibetan languages, reminiscent of the
Yugur, are described by Przewalski as a "mixture of Mongolian and Indian
languages". In western China, according to

--- PAGE BREAK ---yond doubt. Firstly, the Tibetan languages, reminiscent of the
Yugur, are described by Przewalski as a "mixture of Mongolian and Indian
languages". In western China, according to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Tibet, the Tun7us "meet sɤements, uуdzhye mon7oɤьsmoj race,"
they look like "mon7oɤov mixed with ɯы7ans." The same can be said about
the population of Kashmir, Nepal and Bhutan, as well as the Terai region.
In southern China, Topinar finds "a fair-haired type, European features
and a thick beard" among the Miao and Gao people. In Manchuria, Kagport,
Barrow and Castren also found a "fair-haired European type". Katlapzh
reports that they have "European features, light hair and thick beards,
reminiscent of the Ainu." However, even the Mitai themselves, who seem to
us to be the most typical Mongols, have certain features that distinguish
them from the Buryats. Firstly, unlike all other gods, they are
predominantly "male", Secondly, ancient mythical figures —
mandarins, including Confucius — are depicted in ancient mythical
drawings with a long beard, which is absent in modern mythical figures.
"The Chinese people," writes Yenimer, "are the result of a very complex
mixture. Based on historical documents, it can be reasonably assumed that
it consists of at least five or six different ethnic groups."
In Indo-China, Kartɭaж considers the people of Naosa to be "a
mixture of the Zheɤтых and   Hindus,"   and   in   Tонmине
ɭранɯуѕсmие   sтно7раɭы   find
the "beomurye type" among the To, Man, and Mao peoples.
Even in the most remote north-eastern part of Asia, in the so-called
Far East, there is no shortage of beomury types. In addition to the Umu,
already mentioned, Katraz cites the Moravians and Mamuadagov as "a
mixture of Umu and Zhegti," and considers the Japanese to be a "purely
mixed" race, consisting of "pure" Ainu, "pure" Magyars, Jews and non-
Jews. And Begu concludes that the highest Japanese masses "approach
Europeans in terms of relatively tall stature, slender build, aquiline nose,
large mouth, and so on." According to him, there are two types among
them: "Mongoloid" and "European".
America.
Anthropologists' opinions about American races are the same as those
about European races. For example, here is what Kogman writes about
them: "In America, we will not find a single people, a single tribe, or a
singlenions about American races are the same as those
about European races. For example, here is what Kogman writes about
them: "In America, we will not find a single people, a single tribe, or a
single

--- PAGE BREAK ---races are the same as those
about European races. For example, here is what Kogman writes about
them: "In America, we will not find a single people, a single tribe, or a
single

--- PAGE BREAK ---

one horde, consisting of descendants of the same race. And there, in
every social stratum, we find anthropological diversity. And there we
also see a mixture of tribes, clans and peoples, but not races. The types
are similar and the differences are satirised there, but a superficial
observer sees a homogeneous race before him. But this is a
misconception, as maniacs and anthropophagi will remind him at every
turn, as if they were a homogeneous group, living peacefully side by
side with representatives of different races, whose inherent characteristics
have not changed much over time.
Topinar speaks of American Indians, saying that they "undoubtedly
descend from bandits brought from Europe, and no matter how much they
try to deny it, they cannot escape the fact that they were brought here by
force." This legend exists among the Boronos in the remote Andes,
where they meet
"7оɤубые 7ɤаѕа", accompanied by either dark or "light and red hair", with
the usual features of American races. Another striking example is the
Mandan, who also have dark hair, but their women are "grey and red-
haired". There are also
"grey gazelles" among the Atapas, "light-coloured animals" among the
Gipani,
"very bright" among the Antis and the Mogosh.
"The vast majority of American peoples," says Sh. Neturno, "are very
much a part of the monotheistic race. But it is worth noting the
following interesting fact: the American Indian is closer to the Mongoloid
race the further south he lives. The Tsem, who live on the banks of the
Amazon, are the perfect example of this race. On the contrary, the Indians
of North America, also belonging to the Mongoloid race, are at the same
time similar in some of their features to the Caucasian race. We come to
an interesting conclusion: North America must have been populated by
immigrants of European origin, perhaps even from the Mediterranean
basin. Undoubtedly, the inhabitants of North America display all the
characteristics of mestizos, descended from a mixture of Mongols and
white people, and some of their varieties, such as the curious Mandan
tribe, leaning even more towards the white race, which is yellow.teristics of mestizos, descended from a mixture of Mongols and
white people, and some of their varieties, such as the curious Mandan
tribe, leaning even more towards the white race, which is yellow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Many   and   North American   Indians," says F. Rathe, "are
distinguished by their admixture of European blood." The distinctive
features of some of the Chivaro, Newfoundland and Haida peoples belong
to a separate race, namely: "tall stature, slenderness, a majestic bearing, regular
features, and an intelligent expression. They have small teeth, small eyes,
straight noses, pointed noses, light skin, etc.
The first European settlers in America recall the existence in their time
of "fair-haired bearded people" in Canada, along the banks of the Missouri
and in the Andes, and Mexican chronicles mention them in Central
America. The Ants and Mapibs are considered to be of the
"Mediterranean type" race. But most of all
"light-coloured sements" in north-western America.
In Central and South America, especially in the Amazon, the oldest
Mesoamerican barries depict people with "noses that are more than 7
centimetres long, of the Semitic type". This nose is a traditional feature of
Mesoamerican and Peruvian artists. It is also known that the legends of
Mesopotamia and Peru represent the founders of two states as "bearded
men".
Many researchers of South American peoples distinguish people who
are "fair-skinned, fair-bearded, 7оɤубо7ɤаѕых, веɤиmоросɤых", i.e. again
with the characteristic features of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---Many researchers of South American peoples distinguish people who
are "fair-skinned, fair-bearded, 7оɤубо7ɤаѕых, веɤиmоросɤых", i.e. again
with the characteristic features of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

race. These include the following peoples: the Mairuna, the Yurumary
(whose name means "white people"), the Boronos, the Mandana, the
Antis, etc.
Martin expresses himself as follows: "If I had to make a definite
statement on this important question (the origin of the O7onesemeg), I
would settle on the most probable hypothesis, namely, their initial
migration from Europe. I cannot accept with any degree of certainty the
similarity between the European race, known as Neanderthal, and the
primitive American race."
Puginesia, Mipronesia and Meganesia.
"The breed   ɤюдей   on   islands   Tихо7о   оmеана, —
7оворит
Ф.
Ратɯеɤь,
—
быɤа
already
Forster
pasɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯ
ɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯ
ɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯ well-built, with strong muscles, sufficient
height, the other — more robust, with wiry, woolly hair, more slender and agile.
3to poginesinyu and menesinyu of the newest stnoplavov. It is difficult to
distinguish one from the other: there, where only the members of the latter
group are supposed to be, there are bright and straightforward representatives
and even the names of the members of the other group. Finch describes
the inhabitants of Port Moresby in the following way: "Here you can
find all kinds of people, from completely civilised to simple Papuan
tribesmen, muddy-skinned people, among others, and red-haired and
fair-skinned people are often encountered, as well as Japanese and
Jewish people with hooked noses, reminiscent of red-haired people. The
same can be said about the colour of the skin. In general, travellers
uерты   ɤиɯа   поɤинеѕийɯев   наѕывают   то
"European," then "Jewish," then "Mongolian." Katrazh believes that
"the population was composed of a mixture of three races: white, yellow,
and brown." According to White, their colour varies between light and dark
brown with shades of grey and olive. Apparently, the lightest-coloured
individuals live on the coast. Their height varies considerably, but this
inconsistency is largely due to the "blending" effect.
Among the dark-skinned people, the Samoans and the Tongan stand
out with their "white skin". They are slightly darker than the Europeans.
The Tongan people call them "angels of the south." In New Guinea,the dark-skinned people, the Samoans and the Tongan stand
out with their "white skin". They are slightly darker than the Europeans.
The Tongan people call them "angels of the south." In New Guinea,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

there are even three types of beards: one is "white and straight", another is
brown, and the third is grey and uneven. The people of Gemegay and
Pomotu are particularly distinguished by their "sturdy beards".
The beards of the people of Gemegay and Pomotu are considered to be the
most beautiful.
In Meganesia, the "greatest resemblance to Europeans" is found in the
Maropini, the Tsemeni of Rotuma Island, and the Simoyani, who are
described as having "completely European features".
This is true of Australia, where the motor is more animalistic, more
primitive, and Gems directly attributes it to the type of "European
brunettes". "Everywhere," Ranma says on this subject, "where we find
ueovema, it is closely related to Europeans."
Thus, we see that all over the world there are admixtures of other
races with the white race. To this we may add that in various parts of
the world, among the different races, there are legends, beliefs and
customs dating back to ancient times, which show that even memories
of those ancient times have been preserved. perhaps the race that appeared

--- PAGE BREAK ---ces, there are legends, beliefs and
customs dating back to ancient times, which show that even memories
of those ancient times have been preserved. perhaps the race that appeared

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nowadays, it is less mixed with other races. There, the folk names of
some light-skinned peoples, such as the Mam Luah and Mandingo (in
Alim) and the Yurumary (in South America), are based on local
languages — "white people". The legends of the V7ayums (in Nige) and
the stories of V7anda and Vnyoro confirm their origin from light-
skinned people is also constant in their legends, as is the origin of the
people from the North, the North-East and the East. In the family of the
Vnoros, the prevailing belief is that their ancestors were once white and that
all of Australia once belonged to the white people. However, among the
peoples of Australia, Tasmania, Tanna Island, New Guinea and New
Caledonia, there is a belief, judging by its widespread distribution, that
after death they will turn into spirits. Therefore, the people of Australia
accepted some of the spirits as the souls of those who had died earlier and
as their ancestors.
It is curious that, according to White, the idols in Kon7o have
European features. One wooden idol found there is particularly
interesting, as it has a "prominent nose, small mouth, thin lips and a well-
formed chin", i.e. unmistakable features of the Caucasian race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ooden idol found there is particularly
interesting, as it has a "prominent nose, small mouth, thin lips and a well-
formed chin", i.e. unmistakable features of the Caucasian race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7. THE NAME AND
CHARACTER OF THE KRAIN
PRECURSORS
NENOVENESTVA
Physical build, mind and character of the lowest limits of humanity.
Physical build of the lowest races. Short stature. Weakness and
curvature of the spine. Weak development of the calves. Stiff, stooping
gait. Thin arms. Protruding, protruding belly. Thinness. Large head.
Muscles of the races. Indifference to unpleasant sensations. Dullness of
the senses. Weak development of the sense of love. Weakness of sexual
feelings. Lack of modesty. Weakness of reproductive capacity. Weakness
of character. Drowsiness. Weakness of will. Lack of risk-taking. Lack of
curiosity and curiosity.
Absence
initiative,
initiative, enterprise. Indifference to religion.
Conservatism. Distrust and suspicion. Cowardice and timidity.
Indolence. Peacefulness. Herd mentality. Attachment to place.
If modern science is a mixture of the old and the new, then it occupies a
middle ground between its predecessors in all respects, and if we
consider its main types, we have a vague idea about these ancestors, but
we must remember that, according to the conditions of mixing, the highest
limit, up to which modern uеɤовеuество reaches, should be lower than
диɤювиаɤьно7о uеɤовеmа, and the lowest — higher than питеmантроп.
With this in mind, I have gathered here data on the structure, mind and
character of the highest and lowest races. We will discuss the
characteristics of their physical structure, as described in anthropological
literature.
The physical structure of the lower races.
First of all, I must remind you that that there are no pure races on the
globe, but rather mixed races in which the characteristics of the pure race
are intertwined with those of the pithecanthropus. Therefore, it is impossible
to find a race that would combine all the characteristics of a pitemantrop.which the characteristics of the pure race
are intertwined with those of the pithecanthropus. Therefore, it is impossible
to find a race that would combine all the characteristics of a pitemantrop.

--- PAGE BREAK ---istics of the pure race
are intertwined with those of the pithecanthropus. Therefore, it is impossible
to find a race that would combine all the characteristics of a pitemantrop.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It's impossible. That is why I do not sit down, but try to paint an ideal
picture of the lower races, gathered from various tribes and peoples
belonging t o the so-called
"lower races".
Herbert Spencer and Virchow draw attention to the remarkable
diversity of dimorphism. The former even provides a detailed list of
dimorphic individuals who are distinguished by their very low stature.
This external characteristic is mainly due to their motor skills, which are
inferior to those of normal individuals. But dimarey, in addition to their
motor skills, are distinguished by their thinness, rapid development, agility and
strength. Their joints are immobile, and therefore the ability of dimare to
move suffers from significant deficiencies. Their gait is characterised by
observations such as "heavy, swaying, with a slight swaying of the arms".
They walk quietly, leaning forward, as if they have lost something. Each
step they take is accompanied by a slight swaying of the body.
According to Schweinleurt, one of the men who lived with him for several
months could never carry a heavy load without breaking it. This trait,
according to Herbert Spencer, has a distant connection with the same
distinctive feature in monkeys. "The red monkey does not stand
upright," says Karl Focht, "usually its legs are bent and its feet are turned
outwards."
Rumours, on the contrary, are relatively rare compared to rumours, but
again, this confirms their similarity to rumours.
The upper part of the rib cage is narrow and slightly constricted, but
widens at the bottom to support the abdomen. They write about the belly
of the lower ones, saying that it is "hanging" and "protruding" and
"unusually prominent". All abdominal organs are disproportionately large,
especially the liver and accessory organs. The organs "seem to be
constantly suffering from venous congestion."
The limbs are thin, their joints protrude, and the bones and tendons are
clearly visible. The sedentary parts are prominent, the thighs are significantly
enlarged and the knees are slightly bent.
The shape of the head is similar to that of a monkey, which gives them a
resemblance to marmosets.
According to anatomist and traveller Gustav Frith, "there is the same
difference between the dimary and the European tamaya as there is between the
dimary animal and the domesticated animal of the same species."
"Harmonious development," he says, "is perhaps less common among
dimars than among us, who seem to have outlived our youthful years."dimary animal and the domesticated animal of the same species."
"Harmonious development," he says, "is perhaps less common among
dimars than among us, who seem to have outlived our youthful years."

--- PAGE BREAK ---he domesticated animal of the same species."
"Harmonious development," he says, "is perhaps less common among
dimars than among us, who seem to have outlived our youthful years."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

People. Normally developed 7ermane in relation to proportions, m size and
weight, stands above average 7oeve, belonging to m neme Bantu.
Meanwhile, the Bantu are considered to be the most powerful and influential
people in Alrima.
Others are outwardly strong and well-built with a robust physique,
but the dynamometer shows that they are weak, and in reality they are
below us in terms of their muscular strength and even simply in terms of
their stamina. On long, tiring journeys, they quickly lose strength and
get tired.
There are other external characteristics of lower races, such as the
structure of the device, the shape of the head, the structure of the body and
limbs, passage by passage, etc., I will not discuss them here, as everything
has already been considered in the passages of my work on the more or
less important questions. And now I will move on to the feelings of the
lower classes.
The feelings of the lower classes.
According to Herbert Spencer, the lower races "exhibit a
comparative indifference to unpleasant and painful sensations, and, as a
result, these sensations do not have a particularly acute character. They are
indifferent to various phenomena, and even the most significant changes
in temperature do not cause them any discomfort. They readily accept
the order of things as they are, are indifferent to the contents of their
stomachs, and are completely indifferent to the harshness of life. The
same applies to the suffering caused by physical injuries. The ease with
which they endure the most serious operations inevitably leads us to
conclude that the suffering they endure must be 70% less than that
which would be caused under the same conditions in people of higher
types.
On the same subject, we find the following in Karl Focht's work:
"In terms of sensitivity, the natives, it seems, are inferior to people of
the white race and do not correspond at all to the opinion that dim-
witted peoples are naturally endowed with keener senses. Their hearing
is usually dull. Their sense of smell, hearing and touch are not
particularly sensitive or acute. Their sense of touch is not particularly
sensitive; the sensory receptors on their hands are less developed than
those of humans, but the mosting and touch are not
particularly sensitive or acute. Their sense of touch is not particularly
sensitive; the sensory receptors on their hands are less developed than
those of humans, but the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
particularly sensitive or acute. Their sense of touch is not particularly
sensitive; the sensory receptors on their hands are less developed than
those of humans, but the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---

noticeable phenomenon is related to the fact that they are, at least,
insensitive to pain.
The feeling of love is developed in the lower races. They are
surprisingly cold and indifferent to each other. Many of them do not
have the concepts of "love," "beloved," or "dear."
Sexual desire is also less common among the lower classes than
among the upper classes. Men do not show tenderness towards women in
the form of kisses, hugs, etc.
The ability, in the words of the French, to "faire amour en tous
temps" is apparently an inherent trait of the higher races, while in the
lowest races, on the contrary, it exists like other animals, periodic
mating once or twice a year. Westerman, who studied this question
extensively, finds the same pattern among the Magellanic Indians, the
Tusi people of western Australia, the Dravidian tribes of East India, and
many Australian tribes.
The novelty of modesty must also be attributed to the superior races,
as it is completely absent in many of the lower races. Herodotus and Strabo
mention the Tamai and the Irgandians, who committed incestuous acts in
public. A similar phenomenon is observed among the modern tribes of the
Amazon, the Ayeutes, the Simimos, the Yururus in Paravai, and the
Hoaranis. Other peoples also display a lack of modesty in the absence of
clothing, such as the Bushmen, the inhabitants of the Andaman Islands,
and others. But it is not enough to say that the absence of modesty is
necessarily associated with immorality. Immorality, which is impossible
without a sense of shame, is inversely proportional to the amount of
clothing worn. The poorly dressed, that is, the relatively poor, are at the
same time considered the most immoral.
Vm and the character of the lower
classes.
The dimar is smeared with a well-formed ueɤove mаm, which would be
dremɤюɲim. If you ask him a new question, you will have to repeat it
several times before his mind awakens, and you will need to speak more
clearly so that your thoughts are understood. His attention is very
unstable; he cannot even sit still for a short time with the simplest
thought. Nos mind awakens, and you will need to speak more
clearly so that your thoughts are understood. His attention is very
unstable; he cannot even sit still for a short time with the simplest
thought. No

--- PAGE BREAK ---you will need to speak more
clearly so that your thoughts are understood. His attention is very
unstable; he cannot even sit still for a short time with the simplest
thought. No

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Capable of intense thought, he sometimes cannot even answer the
simplest question with a simple "yes" or "no." When asked about the
names and distances of nearby places, the diaries never give a definite
answer. If you ask them about two places, they will give contradictory
answers. A short conversation tires them, especially if the questions
asked require mental effort and memory. They stop listening, their
expressions become fixed, they become irritable and reveal everything
that is hidden, unable to bear the strain any longer. They become
confused at a time when they should be alert. They begin to act and speak
senselessly.
Spis and Marus discuss the Indian, saying that "as soon as you ask
him questions about his language, he becomes irritable, gets angry at the
slightest provocation, and generally reveals all his faults, and is unable to
tolerate any effort," while Bets talks about the same people, saying that
"it is very difficult to get them to understand subjects that require even a
little bit of critical thinking." Touno and Lobriol also mention that "they may
not be able to understand anything at first glance, they quickly tire of
research and questions and ask: 'What's the point?'.
The memory of dimarey tam cɤaba, uto one, for example, saby
name of his wife, with motor parted all seven days. Ƚru7oy does not
remember the names of his parents and mother.
Their speech corresponds to their mental abilities; it consists of
simple words that cannot be used to describe even the most ordinary
things without resorting to the strangest expressions. Some children are
unable to grasp the concept of numbers. Their language is completely
devoid of expressions for numbers, and they cannot say "one", "two",
"three", and cannot even count by fingers. They have words for all known
plants and animals, but they do not have words for abstract concepts such as
"tree" or "fish."
"ptiɯa" etc., but there are no corresponding concepts for "truth",
"judgement" or "crime".
The lower classes lack not only curiosity, but even simple curiosity:
when they see new objects, they remain completely indifferent and
express no surprise. New things do not attract their attention for a
moment. Everything amazes their children, but nothing can interest
them.see new objects, they remain completely indifferent and
express no surprise. New things do not attract their attention for a
moment. Everything amazes their children, but nothing can interest
them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y remain completely indifferent and
express no surprise. New things do not attract their attention for a
moment. Everything amazes their children, but nothing can interest
them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When the Australians saw a European ship for the first time, with people
and animals that were completely different from them, they did not show
the slightest surprise. On the ship, they were most interested in the 12
whales caught by the sailors. Kum reports on the news, saying that they
"are completely satisfied with their lot, discussing it without any desire to
change it. They are not curious either in their questions or in their
observations. New objects do not impress them at all, as one might
expect, and often do not even attract their attention for a single minute."
According to Kum, the seven showed complete indifference in the
presence of the strangers, who were completely new to them. Kum also
says that the Tasmanians do not surprise anyone. Captain Vagis says that
they
"displayed the most incomprehensible indifference to everything around them
on board, even though it did not arouse in them any surprise, although it was
very strange to them." And the Veddas "did not express the slightest surprise at
the sight of them." And about the Samoyeds, we learn from Pinerton that
"they did not express any surprise at all, except for a moment, and even then
only for a moment." Beru says the same thing about the Bushmen: "When
they see something strange, they laugh and stare at it with dull surprise, as if
they are seeing their own faces, but they do not express the slightest curiosity
about it."
In the lowest race, there is no energy, no initiative, no enterprise, no
feeling, no joy, no hope. There is no spiritual life whatsoever.
Everything is overshadowed by gloom, so they look dispassionately at
all the phenomena of life and nature and show a kind of indifference to
everything in the world except for food. The present moment is
everything to them. They are incapable of thinking about the future,
because the idea of the future is already a distant thought. Hence, they
have no foresight whatsoever. If they go hunting, they kill hundreds of
animals without any need. They give away the same game for free, which
they could have sold for a good price the day before. They give away their
goods in exchange for worthless trinkets, and then spend an incredible
amount of time trying to sell their own goods. They repeat this day after
day, and the past does not help them.
But even the thought of the future does not come to mind.and then spend an incredible
amount of time trying to sell their own goods. They repeat this day after
day, and the past does not help them.
But even the thought of the future does not come to mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---credible
amount of time trying to sell their own goods. They repeat this day after
day, and the past does not help them.
But even the thought of the future does not come to mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If there is no religion, then there can be no religious needs, and
therefore missionaries and travellers seek out peoples who have no
religion. This includes the unevangelised tribes, the unevangelised tribes
of Brazil and Paraguay, the unevangelised tribes of the Andaman
Islands, the unevangelised tribes of Hindustan and East India, the
unevangelised tribes of the Malay Peninsula, and the unevangelised
tribes of the Malay Archipelago. the Andamanese, some tribes of
Hindustan and East Almir, the Ottentots and some Bedouins.
But it is not only the lowest races, but even the highest races, the
Mammalia, who show complete indifference to religion. They laugh at
preachers and joke about the immortality of the soul. For them, death is
annihilation, and the highest good is a pleasant dream.
The immobility of the lower classes explains their conservative
nature, thanks to which their beliefs, rituals and customs have remained
unchanged for many thousands of years. Even the ancients were struck by
the conservatism of some of their contemporary peoples. Herodotus,
writing about one such people, said: "For at least 2,000 years, and
perhaps even longer, these people have lived in the same place, eating
and drinking. They are now as rich and poor as they were thousands of
years ago. They have not added anything to what they had in those days.
The history of each society is the same as that of the previous ones. "Primitive
man," says Herbert Spencer, "is conservative to an extreme degree.
Even when comparing the higher races among themselves, and
comparing different masses of the same society, it can be seen that the
least developed are the most averse to any change. Any new method is
instilled in the common people with great difficulty, and even a new
kind of pin is usually met with hostility. An uneducated person is more
susceptible to this tendency. The simpler the nervous system, having lost
its flexibility, the less capable it is of adapting to change. Hence the
unquestioning and unwavering devotion to what has already been
established. "If it is good for my father, then it is good for me," — say all
uneducated people. They express aversion to even the slightest change and
constantly resist any innovation and improvement in their lives.
Therefore, they usually remain unchanged. Their habits are also
constant, and each bird, like the distant species of birds, has its own
constant characteristics in this regard.ment in their lives.
Therefore, they usually remain unchanged. Their habits are also
constant, and each bird, like the distant species of birds, has its own
constant characteristics in this regard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Clothing and its accessories are not subject to the influence of fashion to
the greatest extent possible, and are made of simple fabrics and trimmings.
When discussing the moral qualities of lower animals, it is important
to mention their caution, distrust, timidity, and prudence. All these
qualities, of course, do not testify to their superiority, but it is well
known that animals, which are accustomed to fighting for survival, have,
for example, saiy and ovy, are endowed with these qualities to the highest
degree and without them would be lost in the struggle for existence.
There are two lower ranks that require caution: cowardice and
timidity. Here is an example of a situation in which these two vices are
clearly evident. A Russian man, who had been travelling around the
country on business, was annoyed with one of his colleagues because he had
unwittingly offended him, and he was afraid of his wrath. The couple fell
into despair, and with them their whole family. The frightened poor man
could not calm down, imagining that he had committed a terrible crime
and, already overwhelmed by his own incompetence,

--- PAGE BREAK ---and with them their whole family. The frightened poor man
could not calm down, imagining that he had committed a terrible crime
and, already overwhelmed by his own incompetence,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ask him what he wants, and he will tell you. The lowest guests are
afraid to ask for more than the highest ones, they themselves say that
what they have is enough. And about the Votyaks: "One of the most
striking features of the Votyaks," says Mr. Veron, "is their unusual
timidity. Look at a local Votyan, for the sake of a joke, and the Votyan
will immediately freeze and not dare to move."
Of course, some are naturally inferior, but having inherited from their
distant ancestors the customs of war and slavery, they do everything, but in
a very primitive way. According to the descriptions of missionaries and
travellers, the war between these tribes is waged solely for the purpose
of deceiving each other. They fight with their weapons and very
reluctantly, solely because of the shame of returning home empty-
handed. Two or three dead and wounded are enough to decide the
outcome of the battle, and the fighting stops. Fear overcomes these
people at the sight of blood; they are afraid to fight, and therefore
immediately scatter in different directions, after which negotiations
begin. Such cowardly peoples, engaging in robbery, try first of all to
attack people who are as cowardly as they are, and they themselves,
having committed theft, suddenly, unexpectedly, but at the slightest
resistance they turn into a crowd, abandoning everything that could hold
them back.
Some people, out of cowardice, display servile flattery towards those
who treat them harshly and oppress those who treat them kindly. They are
deprived of all independence and not only do they not avoid slavery, but
they seek it out. Servile obedience to their superiors and fear are their
strongest feelings.
According to Walton, they "seek to be enslaved" and
"eat with their master, mam bonma." Similar phenomena are found
among other southern tribes. One of them said to a European: "How can
you be a master; I have been with you for two years and you have never
beaten me?"
Herd mentality is evident among the lower classes in their fear of
public opinion, of their own and others' disapproval, and of the
dissatisfaction and ridicule of their peers. This fear is so strong that it
controls the behaviour of the lower classes and forces them to
unquestioningly obey the dictates of local customs, no matter how
senseless and cruel they may be.
In societies where the lower classes are oppressed, the first priority
must be given to justice, which in some places is equated with virtue. A leader
who is capable of achieving this, and who is believed by his people, is treatedsses are oppressed, the first priority
must be given to justice, which in some places is equated with virtue. A leader
who is capable of achieving this, and who is believed by his people, is treated

--- PAGE BREAK ---the first priority
must be given to justice, which in some places is equated with virtue. A leader
who is capable of achieving this, and who is believed by his people, is treated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as a true leader and is treated with universal respect. The following are
considered vices: greed, inconstancy, disloyalty to one's word, deceit,
cunning, avarice, carelessness, laziness, and vanity.
The similarity between lower races and herbivorous animals is
evident in the fact that they are attached to a well-known species.
According to Warvin, they are also susceptible to mental and other
changes, and their closest relatives are the monkey-like apes, which,
having been removed from their homeland, are known to never survive.
"It's a strange thing," says one traveller, "that they are so far from their
birthplace. There are people who, although born three miles from the sea,
have never seen it."
All the observations gathered here about the character of the dimare and
the people who are not familiar with them are not new, they are well
known to scientists, and many of the latest findings even lead to very
bold conclusions about the position of dimare in the modern world and
their future.
No, says Warvin, there is no doubt about the barbarian's mental
development, who, according to Byron's description, threw his child
against a wall so that he would fall with his head against the sea urchins,
and those people, Howard and Carpenter; and the difference in mental
abilities between a dimwit, who does not use any appropriate
expressions, and Newton and Shakespeare.
"In verse," says Herbert Spencer, "thoughts, restrained in their
thinking by established ways of thinking, do not have the freedom
required to enter into new combinations and thus generate new modes of
action and new forms of industry. Primitive people should not be credited
with even the inventiveness that their simple tools seem to suggest.
According to Notta and Giddon, the 7otentots and especially the
Bushmen are morally and linguistically not much different from the
orangutan and no more so than the Europeans themselves. South of 10
degrees latitude, the area is inhabited by people whose minds are dark, whose
hearts are cold, and whose physique is so utopian that it destroys all
hope for their future improvement.
White, describing the character of the dimare, says: "It is clear thatminds are dark, whose
hearts are cold, and whose physique is so utopian that it destroys all
hope for their future improvement.
White, describing the character of the dimare, says: "It is clear that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the opinion of some scholars that the mental life of lower beings is no
higher than that of monkeys, and their emotional life no higher than that
of animals, is to a certain extent justified."
"I believe," he says, "that it is a mistake to attribute to primitive man
an irrepressible, passionate desire for moral and intellectual development. On
the contrary, given the evidence of his own experience, he prefers to remain
in his former state; he is unlikely to decide on his own, without external
coercion, to take on the heavy work of civilisation. After all, the lowest
classes of society, left to their own devices, do not undertake anything
similar, as long as they live at least somewhat comfortably in material
terms, and despite the fact that they constantly have examples of higher
development before their eyes. Were it not for that, the seemingly
incomprehensible course of progress in society, in everything that is
happening, would remain completely obscure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---velopment before their eyes. Were it not for that, the seemingly
incomprehensible course of progress in society, in everything that is
happening, would remain completely obscure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8. NENOVEK — HIKONIK
A predator. The mountains of Europe. Tall stature. Muscularity. A
strong build. A regular oval face. Speed and agility of movement. A
steady and firm gait.
Self-control.
Intellectual
qualities. Sensitivity. Prone to enthusiasm. Honesty.
Loyalty and faithfulness to one's word. Self-respect. Sensuality.
Vengefulness. Military qualities. The character of the mountain people
is also found among the inhabitants of the plains.
In contrast to the lower classes, the Ovka people, we can describe
another type of community, the Khinnim people, whose image in our
time can be seen in the peoples of Europe and Asia.
It is well known that the 700 differ from the flat-land dwellers in their
tall stature, good build, strength, fierce character, belligerence, and love
of freedom. This is why Montesquieu expressed the opinion that "in
vast, fertile regions where people are unable to defend themselves against
tyranny and submit to it, — there is a tendency towards despotism, then
the boldest steps produce a strong, independent, proud defence of their
freedom." This is not in doubt, but the question is whether it should be
understood.
Some anthropologists believe that harsh conditions inevitably produce
a certain type of person. According to Ranma, constant walking on
mountains slows down growth, while others believe that struggling with
harsh nature strengthens character. But I find this explanation far-
fetched. If this type of person were really shaped by the mountains, then
everywhere, in the mountains all over the world, this type would be
completely identical. But in reality, this is not the case at all. Firstly, in
every part of the world, people are influenced by the race among which
they live. In Africa, they are dark-skinned, in Asia, they are yellow-
skinned, in America, they are copper-skinned, and in Europe, they are
white-skinned.
Secondly, in the same work, we find: "Under certain conditions, life
in the mountains inhibits the development of the human body. The
causes that lead to the development of retentism in many mountainous
areas often affect the non-retentive areas of the same regions,in the mountains inhibits the development of the human body. The
causes that lead to the development of retentism in many mountainous
areas often affect the non-retentive areas of the same regions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---hibits the development of the human body. The
causes that lead to the development of retentism in many mountainous
areas often affect the non-retentive areas of the same regions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by inhibiting growth."
Thirdly, it is assumed that the 700 are distinguished by their tall
stature and warlike character not only in Europe, but even in Asia, they are
not all warlike. For example, the Tsemu people on the Magammi
Peninsula, according to White, are "a timid people who do not know what
war is." The same can be said about the Alrim: the Germanic sources
mention the fierce Damars, but say that this people is inferior in all
respects to their plain-dwelling kinsmen. "Their skin is not as dark as
that of the Otentots, but in terms of height, they are taller than the other
Damars." Namone, Agsid L'Orbigny, who is engaged in research on the
anthropological aspects of South America, found "the smallest stature"
among the inhabitants of the mountainous regions there and even
attributed it to "the thin air."
We will not express our opinion on the causes of belligerence,
freedom, power, justice, and rapid growth of the people, because it will
be evident from our further research. we will briefly touch upon the
superficiality of the conclusions of certain anthropologists, which they
themselves contradict. If we are all here to discuss the highest type of
society, it is because in the descriptions of our ideas in the current literature,
we find the most accurate and detailed characterisation of this type.
To give the most accurate type of ueogevema-khinnima, we repeat the same
technique, as we did for the lower races, i.e. we will gather everything
in one place, as we did in the literature on the various peoples of Europe
and Asia.
European mountains are described as tall, muscular, strong, with
broad shoulders and a slender build. Their delicate physique is striking:
they are very tall, with long limbs and small feet. Their necks are long, but
without dewlaps, straight, with correct shoulders and a straight Roman
nose. The correctness of the legs is well known, but even the entire race
is called
"mavmaskom". Their eyes are very mobile. Their movements are smooth
and quick; there is something noble and dignified about them: their gait
is decisive and firm. They are good climbers and fast walkers in terms of
speed and agility.
In his "Oupmah Kavmasa," G. Evgeny Marmov compares the
Mavmasks with the Russian common people and describes their
appearance: "When you look at the Gesina and our brother Vakhama
rusmо7о at the same time, the Russian makes an impression of an
unkempt herbivorous animal."ssian common people and describes their
appearance: "When you look at the Gesina and our brother Vakhama
rusmо7о at the same time, the Russian makes an impression of an
unkempt herbivorous animal."

--- PAGE BREAK ---and describes their
appearance: "When you look at the Gesina and our brother Vakhama
rusmо7о at the same time, the Russian makes an impression of an
unkempt herbivorous animal."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

brother Vakhgama, the Russian makes an impression of an unkempt
herbivorous animal next to a stately and dignified lion. The Geshina's
colourful attire resembles that of a panther or a leopard, and the grace
and agility of its movements, its fearsome gaze, reflected in its sharp,
steely eyes, are truly terrifying. It is truly a beast, equipped with all
kinds of weapons, sharp claws, powerful weapons, sharp blades, a swift
and agile mind, swift as lightning, swift as lightning, swift and agile,
instantly devouring them with its mouth and tongue, never allowing the
herbivorous wolf to come to life.
The mountains are inhabited by tribes and clans. Each tribe is an
independent state and an enemy of all others. There are constant feuds,
constant wars, constant murders and constant violence between them.
Robbery and theft are often committed not even out of greed, but out of
a desire to prove one's luck and strength. Theft used to be a form of
revenge: girls were reluctant to marry young men who had not
committed crimes.
The mountains do not miss their prey. They treat the inhabitants of the
plains with extreme contempt and often expel from their midst the
bandits who ravage the countryside. Some of them fight in the armies of
foreign states as mercenaries; and even, as tailors, they make themselves
a speciality.
In political terms, many countries still retain their independence and
vigorously defend it against all attempts to undermine it. Some states,
such as Turkey, unable to control them for many centuries, have saved
themselves from the harm they cause to peaceful citizens by maintaining a
constant military presence and inciting the tribes against each other. But
even when subjugated, the states continue to fight, first disarming them,
then feeding their passion for weapons, and considering all occupations
other than war and slavery to be beneath their dignity.
They are deeply attached to their homeland, are great patriots,
consider themselves a people chosen by God himself, believe in their
bright future, and respect the brave.
They are credited with great mental abilities, quick-wittedness,
prudence, liveliness and sharpness of mind, wit, ingenuity, energy and
enterprise. They are eloquent and often very skilled diplomats. Even
circumstancesh great mental abilities, quick-wittedness,
prudence, liveliness and sharpness of mind, wit, ingenuity, energy and
enterprise. They are eloquent and often very skilled diplomats. Even
circumstances

--- PAGE BREAK ---ties, quick-wittedness,
prudence, liveliness and sharpness of mind, wit, ingenuity, energy and
enterprise. They are eloquent and often very skilled diplomats. Even
circumstances

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If they succeed, they also thrive in peaceful pursuits, demonstrating an
aptitude for trade, crafts, and even mechanics. They are curious, have a
vivid imagination, innate intuition and a keen sense of perception. They
are sensitive, impressionable, prone to mood swings and uncontrollable
impulses. In their relationships with others, they are good-natured, friendly,
quick to make friends, honest, loyal to their word, and are distinguished by
their noble, generous nature and are prone to extravagance. They are aware of
their own worth, are modest, and despise boasting. In company, they are
unusually cheerful and may even dance, so much so that, as they say, all
their joints come loose. In terms of relationships, they are passionate,
sometimes characterised by volatility and recklessness.
If you provoke him, he will lose his temper and will not calm down
until he takes his revenge on someone. When they quarrel, they
immediately rush at each other with weapons in their hands and become
cruel, bloodthirsty, and will stop at nothing, not even the most terrible
crime. They are unforgiving and vengeful. Bloody revenge is not only a
personal matter, but a sacred duty for the entire clan, and is one of the
main causes of conflict between them. Some families die out, some
centuries pass, and something empty and incomprehensible remains.
They are warlike, brave in battle, courageous, and love freedom,
preferring to die rather than be captured. But they are so proud that they
would rather die in captivity than allow themselves to be exchanged for a
beautiful enemy girl.
As can be seen from the description, modern heroes are not particularly
original, that we cannot find on the plains and that would make us live
in some unusual conditions that could produce an unusual breed of
people. It is worth recalling ancient history to see that, in well-known
circumstances, the inhabitants of the plains are in no way inferior to the
mountain peoples in their militancy and love of freedom. I will quote here
an excerpt about the ancient Germans and modern tribes:
"The bloody fervour of war, imbued with religious fervour,
broke out among the Germans already in their first clashes with
Rome. My three gods, whose powersut the ancient Germans and modern tribes:
"The bloody fervour of war, imbued with religious fervour,
broke out among the Germans already in their first clashes with
Rome. My three gods, whose powers

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns and modern tribes:
"The bloody fervour of war, imbued with religious fervour,
broke out among the Germans already in their first clashes with
Rome. My three gods, whose powers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They are difficult to define and have such an ambiguous nature that
all of them are violent and cruel. It is a bloody and cruel existence.
They believe in a dangerous life, predestined for warriors and
heroes in the wild castle of Valhalla, where eternal battles are
fought with eternal weapons. These fierce warriors, bound by an
iron ring throughout their lives and always forming the first line in
battle, their faces grim even in peacetime, possessed by a fierce
passion for battle and destruction. To die for them means to return
to Odin, to Valhalla, to the gods.
The Frisians belong to an ancient Germanic tribe and were known for
their exceptional bravery even before Christ. The original inhabitants of
neighbouring countries always treated them with envy and respect as a
strong, independent and free people. "Strictly avoiding mixing with
their neighbours," the people have preserved their original character to
this day. Even now, if you meet a man in Friesland and ask him which
nation he belongs to, he will not answer "I am a Frisian," but will
invariably add:
"I am free." Although the 7raɭy 7oɤɤandcmi and episcmopy utrehcstcmi
are trying to destroy them, they are the only people in Europe who
managed to remain free from foreign dependence during the reign of the
German emperors. Although the people are usually straightforward, in
battle they become like a whirlwind: their eyes widen and they breathe
fire, their nostrils flare, and their hair falls disorderly on their necks. It is
impossible to tell which of the two is speaking at any given moment, but he
is ready to strangle someone with his own hands for something
insignificant, unpleasant, or even imaginary. You can recognise a
Frisian by his firm gait and open expression. Men are always cheerful and
lively, with a lively smile on their lips, animated gestures and quick
movements.
But apart from that, people of the same type can be found even
today among peaceful nations, but we do not recognise them, firstly
because we see them in a different environment, and secondly, because
they are isolated among a mass of people of completely different types.peaceful nations, but we do not recognise them, firstly
because we see them in a different environment, and secondly, because
they are isolated among a mass of people of completely different types.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut we do not recognise them, firstly
because we see them in a different environment, and secondly, because
they are isolated among a mass of people of completely different types.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9. COMPARISON OF EXTREME
TYPES OF UNFAMILIARITY
WITH FAMILIAR ONES
AND ANIMALS
The similarity of extreme types of humanity with animal and plant
predators. The similarity of races in their character to sheep. The
similarity of predatory people to predators of the animal kingdom.
Thus, we have a clear picture of two types of humanity. The lower
of them clearly resembles herbivorous animals that live in large herds,
such as sheep, goats, and some monkeys. Their protruding eyes and bulky
bodies indicate their adaptation to a plant-based diet, which is actually
followed by most of the lower species. Their senses are dull, and their
minds are immobile. Foresight, cowardice, and herd instinct are all
characteristics of herbivorous animals. These creatures are incapable of
active combat; they can only be victims. Their only salvation is the herd.
A comparison with what was said above about the lower races of
humanity immediately comes to mind, with the following excerpt being
particularly relevant. "Domestic sheep are timid creatures. The
characterlessness of this animal is expressed in all aspects of its life and
habits. The most timid ram cowers before even the smallest dog; the
most harmless animal can strike fear into the herd: the whole flock
follows its leader. No animal can be compared to a domestic ram in this
respect... it seems to rejoice when another creature takes the burden of
caring for its own young off its shoulders. It is not surprising that such
animals are always good-natured, gentle, peaceful and carefree" (A.
Brs).
The highest type of consciousness is the direct opposite of the
lowest; it strongly resembles the consciousness of animals.
Although these types differ from each other in various aspects of
animals,   but   according to   their   appearance,   according to
character,   image   life,embles the consciousness of animals.
Although these types differ from each other in various aspects of
animals,   but   according to   their   appearance,   according to
character,   image   life,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In relation to their own kind, etc., they undoubtedly have certain
characteristics that are derived from identical living conditions. They
must be superior in physical and mental terms to the herbivorous animals of
their own species, on which they feed. According to scientists, they are
stronger, faster, more agile and more intelligent than their prey, and are
endowed with a more developed nervous system, greater courage,
decisiveness, courage and initiative. a more developed nervous system,
greater strength, decisiveness, courage, enterprise, foresight, and a
lively and energetic temperament." All these qualities are necessary for
a spy, because without them, he would surely die within a month. In
addition, hunters must be more or less individualistic, independent, and have
their own initiative, as they often have to act alone. Living in large
communities, herd life is less necessary for them than for herbivores.
That is why true hyenas are often anti-social animals.
Horses are free-spirited by nature. Although these animals

--- PAGE BREAK ---nities, herd life is less necessary for them than for herbivores.
That is why true hyenas are often anti-social animals.
Horses are free-spirited by nature. Although these animals

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are very trainable, but it is possible to tame only two types of hyenas, and
not the largest ones, dogs and foxes, then it is possible to tame herbivores: the fox,
the weasel, the marten, the squirrel, the badger, the hedgehog, the hamster, the
mouse, the owl and the pig, i.e. 10 species. This circumstance is precisely
what determines the freedom of wild animals. Some of them, according to
the words of the authors, are distinguished by their particular
recklessness. There, for example, they write about the narwhal ( nasua
rufa), uто
She never gives in to anyone, and when she does, she flies into a rage, and
they beat her up. Even beatings do not deter her, during which she only
becomes more determined, fighting off her guard and all outsiders."
If we accept now that the highest type of modern society is still lower
than the ideal society, and the lowest is higher than pithecanthropus, then
we can imagine the mixture of two opposite extremes. In certain
situations, the characteristics of both types are mixed in the most
incredible combinations, and in general it represents a gradual transition
between the two extremes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---certain
situations, the characteristics of both types are mixed in the most
incredible combinations, and in general it represents a gradual transition
between the two extremes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10. OPINIONS ABOUT THE
EXTREME REGIONS
NENOVENSKY'S ROLE
The views of scientists on the two types of human beings. The active
and passive races. The races: the two-winged, the one-winged, and the
twilight. The anthropological-sociological model. Long-headed 6lozdiv
and short-headed 6ryuet. The impossibility of classifying humanity
according to the number of characteristics of long-headed people.
The contrast between the two types of society, to which I have
devoted the previous seven chapters, has long attracted the attention of
thinkers. Many have attempted to explain it in terms of the mass of
society. "Peiro de Kudrener," says White, "is considered to be the first to
establish the theory that only a mentally active race is endowed by
nature with the need for knowledge and development." All the high
achievements of other races, according to Peiro, owe their existence to
the white people who came with them. Among the followers of White,
Kemm and Butme are mentioned, who made a clear distinction between
the higher and lower races. One of the verses of Khemma's poetry is
called "active and masculine," and the other "passive and feminine."
"The first," he says, "is more masculine than the second. It is
characterised by a spiritual attitude of courage, a desire for power and
freedom, a tireless thirst for action, a desire to move forward, into the
vastness, scepticism, sner7iya and ɤюбоѕнатеɤьность. The active
uеɤовеuеству Кɤемм includes: Persians, Arabs, 7реmов, Romans and
7ерманɯев. "These people," according to him, "move from one
country to another, destroy old empires, found new ones, are skilled
seafarers, they live in a free society, based on constant progress;
knowledge and thought take the place of blind faith. Science and art
flourish among them." Passive peoples include the Egyptians, the
Mithraists, the Japanese, the Messenians, and others.
The same applies to Natama m e7o orichinagovoy massilimaynuevstvya
na gyudey "daytime" — mavmasmaya rasa, "new" — the "new ones" —
and the "twilight ones" — all the rest. But the latter,and others.
The same applies to Natama m e7o orichinagovoy massilimaynuevstvya
na gyudey "daytime" — mavmasmaya rasa, "new" — the "new ones" —
and the "twilight ones" — all the rest. But the latter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---applies to Natama m e7o orichinagovoy massilimaynuevstvya
na gyudey "daytime" — mavmasmaya rasa, "new" — the "new ones" —
and the "twilight ones" — all the rest. But the latter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

based on the same series of lamts, gives a new theory of anthropological
shmoya, massifying ueoveustvo acording to anthropological   data   and,   7avnym
obrazom,   according to measurement data. This theory, it seems to us,
is closer to the truth than any other, since it is based on the European
population.
3According to theory, the latter was formed from a mixture of
immutable anthropological types, of which two deserve the most
attention: the long-limbed, tall blondes, and the short-limbed, dark-
haired brunettes. This physical type corresponds to a certain psychological
type. Tall blondes are gifted with a sharp mind, initiative, and a rich
imagination. They are adventurous, finding satisfaction in the struggle
itself and in achieving their goals. They already see their interests, as well as
the interests of their nation and race, as the driving force that will
ultimately lead to indisputable victory, and their unwavering courage its
strong will and awareness of the unity of its race give it the greatest
chance of success.
Meanwhile, the brunette mоротmо7оɤовеɯ — uеɤовеm is passive,
cautious and practical. He lacks the ability to combine ideas and
concepts of reason and pragmatism. He lacks initiative. Sensitivity
prevails in him, but it is subtle and restrained. Courageous when
necessary, he does not like war. He has dreams and works patiently to
realise them. He is very distrustful, but he does not try to understand the
motives of those he does not trust. He is a traditionalist and has a sound common
sense. He finds progress unnecessary and loves uniformity in
everything. He understands and protects the interests of his family and
closest neighbours, but his narrow-mindedness often prevents him from
seeing the bigger picture. If he mixes with a dingo, then his offspring will
grow up to be selfish, lacking the individuality inherent in dingoes,
while family feelings and racial consciousness are lost.
The evidence of the psychological nature of both races and their
behaviour throughout history must be considered. Indeed, the
individualist is an individualist in history; he does not single out the
masses, but the individual. He does not sit in a corner, but everywhere,
throughout the entire world, and does not accept the existing conditions of
life. Above all, he demands respect for his "self" from the state and strives
to rise tosit in a corner, but everywhere,
throughout the entire world, and does not accept the existing conditions of
life. Above all, he demands respect for his "self" from the state and strives
to rise to

--- PAGE BREAK ---everywhere,
throughout the entire world, and does not accept the existing conditions of
life. Above all, he demands respect for his "self" from the state and strives
to rise to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a position of prominence, where he can assert his ego and satisfy his
ambitions. Progress is a necessary requirement for him. The same
applies to the masses: they suppress their herd instincts and lose their
individuality in the historical struggle. Instead of individual personalities,
the masses come to the fore. The short-sighted person prefers to bring
everything down to the same level rather than raise himself up. In
politics, he places state control above individual initiative. The short-
sighted person shows strong attachment to their place of birth and does
not like to move to the unknown. The character of both races is
especially evident in the field of religion. Examples: England, Scandinavia
and northern Germany are the strongholds of Protestantism, while
Catholicism is associated with the Roman Catholic race of France, southern
Germany and the western Slavs.
All people belong to the same human race, regardless of their
nationality. "I would not be surprised," says one of the leading
representatives of anthropological science, "if the enlightenment that came
from other races would be necessary to attribute to the presence in their
masses of a benevolent divine spirit, lost in the darkness of time." The
light-bearing race seems to have been the ruling class in Egypt, Hadea,
and Assyria. It spread to Persia and India, and possibly even to ancient
China. This race manifested itself in every way in the Roman Empire,
and in our time, the early stages of certain nations are clearly
proportional to the dominance of divine bonds in their ruling masses.
As you can see, the theory of anthropological sociology largely
coincides with ours, although it is based on completely different
grounds. It presents us with two types of beings, the former of which
obviously has a greater, and the latter a lesser admixture of the divine.
These studies are undoubtedly of great interest and will provide science
with many new discoveries. But the author, having developed his theory,
apparently wants to apply it to real life. It defines the proportion of
genetically modified bonds in certain groups (currently only in Europe),
probably with the aim of establishing   on   scientific   support
artificial   selection   amongdefines the proportion of
genetically modified bonds in certain groups (currently only in Europe),
probably with the aim of establishing   on   scientific   support
artificial   selection   among

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of
genetically modified bonds in certain groups (currently only in Europe),
probably with the aim of establishing   on   scientific   support
artificial   selection   among

--- PAGE BREAK ---

uеɤовеuества. According to our theory, it is necessary to use
anthropological measurements, as in most scientific groups, impurities of
a non-scientific nature have been preserved. It is quite reasonable to
expect that in those groups where there is a higher level of intelligence,
sner7ini, order and wealth, but unfortunately, much time has passed since
the fall of the ueɤoeve, and its mixing with pitemantropi sashom cginom
dagemo. The characteristics of the race are strange and strikingly similar to those
of the pitemantrop, so it is difficult to characterise not only the race
separately, but even the people as a whole, based on a few characteristics.
For example, tall stature and a long nose are undoubtedly
characteristics of a superior race. But opponents of anthropological
theory quite rightly point to Napoleon and some other well-known people
who were short in stature, a slender build and sharp features. True, they
cannot cite many such examples, but even one is enough to make the
argument not entirely convincing, to treat it with scepticism. Similarly,
anthropological research has shown that that the average height and
weight of the Central European population is higher, taller and lighter,
respectively. However, there are many exceptions to this rule in different
parts of Europe. In Italy and Spain, adults are taller than children. In
England, the height of men and w o m e n is the same. In Russia, men are
taller than women, etc.
Let us try, together with the aforementioned shmoya, taking into
account the mother-son relationship and the fact that we are all of the
same race, if we were to compare all the races with each other, then
sorting them would be less than perfect. Indeed, we would not be able to
find any characteristics of the white race, but it is clear that there are
peoples who are inferior in all other respects, but who have the
characteristics we have identified. A particularly unfortunate feature
would be the short stature of all peoples, not only the Papuans, but also the   ,
the Mitayevs and the Scmimos. Similarly, we would find tall stature
among the Patagonians, hairiness among the Australians, the Todov and
Ainu, and hairy bodies among the Lincich Negmen, etc.
However, the main obstacle to conducting theoretical anthropological
studies is thatPatagonians, hairiness among the Australians, the Todov and
Ainu, and hairy bodies among the Lincich Negmen, etc.
However, the main obstacle to conducting theoretical anthropological
studies is that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

every society has a tendency to be influenced by factors that are not always stable,
as we will see below. It rises and falls. Therefore, there is no possibility of
basing practical calculations on it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dency to be influenced by factors that are not always stable,
as we will see below. It rises and falls. Therefore, there is no possibility of
basing practical calculations on it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11. SECONDARY SEXUAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF
HUMANS
Secondary sexual characteristics in humans. Physical differences
between the sexes. Differences in their minds and characters. Changes
in the female organism after the union of a human being with a
pithecanthropus.
The noble race, with its intellect and character, was forged by the harsh
conditions of the early period, then women of that race bore all the
burdens of that struggle on their shoulders and found themselves in exactly
the same conditions as men, and consequently, they should have been subject to
exactly the same natural selection as men. That is why we believe that
modern European women, who has distanced herself from men in a way that
is incompatible with the struggle for existence, is not at all the same as the
woman who cannot compete with the dynamic European man. A jealous
friend would have to be replaced by a new one.
Indeed, if we compare the status and mentality of modern European
women with those of European men, the difference between them is not
so great, but rather very subtle. "From the moment of birth," says Ramé,
"there is an inequality in weight and height between children of both
sexes." Both are smaller in women than in men, and the difference
remains for life from the moment of birth. Women's bodies (compared to
men's) are shorter, their arms are shorter, their legs are shorter, their feet
are smaller, their muscles are thinner, their shoulders and chest are narrower, and
their hips and thighs are narrower than men's.
Men are smaller and in every way gentler than women. According to
Prof. Petri, it is more like a child's. The capacity of the uterus and the
absolute weight of the woman are smaller, the breasts are smaller, and the
isthmuses have fewer folds. In terms of breast size, the Nez Perce,
Maya, and American Indians correspond to the smallest and average
breasts of non-Native women. Niyevoy women are smaller, and she has
a greater tendency towards promiscuity (prostitution). In terms of all its
characteristics, the female is somewhere between a child and a mature male.
For example, the female is less affected by the environment,dency towards promiscuity (prostitution). In terms of all its
characteristics, the female is somewhere between a child and a mature male.
For example, the female is less affected by the environment,

--- PAGE BREAK ---cuity (prostitution). In terms of all its
characteristics, the female is somewhere between a child and a mature male.
For example, the female is less affected by the environment,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

than a man, her hair is thicker and less prone to thinning and falling out.
We will not list all the other characteristics of the female body, but we
will mention that, that there are many of them and that, according to
scientists, the female body "is in a state of embryonic development at a
lower level than the male body compared to the male body, and is closer,
on the one hand, to the child's body and, on the other hand, to the bodies
of lower species."
The same applies to women's minds, which differ from men's in terms of
their structure and functioning. "The main difference in the mental
abilities of both sexes," says Warvin, "is manifested in the fact that a
man, in everything he undertakes, achieves greater perfection than a
woman. This is evident in the areas of deep thought, imagination, and in
tasks that require the simple use of the senses and hands. If we were to
draw up two tables of men and women, the most self-confident in poetry,
painting, sculpture and music — in relation to their abilities, and their
achievements — in history, science and literature, listing the names under
each subject, then both tables will not stand up to comparison. We can
even assume, based on the assumption of an average level of intelligence, if
men have a positive advantage over women in many respects, then the
average level of mental abilities in men should be higher than in
women.
Nombroso 7 speaks about the same thing: "Although we can name
enough famous women in politics, literature, art and science, it is obvious
that these women are still inferior to such great men as, such as
Shakespeare, Basan, Aristotle, Newton, and Mime Angelo. Similarly, there
is a clear advantage on the side of men when comparing the frequency
of the appearance of geniuses in both sexes.
With regard to the senses, the same author, referring to the research
of various scientists, concludes that women have more developed senses
of touch, smell and hearing than men, but less developed senses of sight
and taste. In them, the sense of touch and sexual arousal are more
developed. Among female traits, he focuses on those that we have observed in
lower species, such as liveliness, greed and conservatism.
All the differences between men and women, which are called
"secondary sexual characteristics," are probably due to the fact that they
originated from the circumstance that meneed and conservatism.
All the differences between men and women, which are called
"secondary sexual characteristics," are probably due to the fact that they
originated from the circumstance that men

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
All the differences between men and women, which are called
"secondary sexual characteristics," are probably due to the fact that they
originated from the circumstance that men

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with pithecanthropus, who were probably their female counterparts. If he had
mixed there, as races and tribes mix in the present day, the resemblance
to the lower races would not be so striking in women as it is now. The
white woman did not mix with the male pithecanthropus, but the white
man took for himself as wives the female pithecanthropus, who were
numerous and beautiful, so that the remnants of the ancient white
woman completely disappeared, dissolving into the mass of new ones.
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, men have undergone significant
changes, but women have changed just as much. Indeed, many women
have died from childbirth alone. The expression of Bibɤии, according to
which Bo7, expelling Adam and Eve from paradise, condemned our first
parents to "give birth in pain," has an undeniable scientific basis. The
birth of a natural animal of a certain breed should be the same for humans,
i.e. painless, with all the usual accompanying phenomena. If it is difficult,
then this is due to an artificial change in normal conditions. If the white
man is a man, and the black man is a monkey, then it is natural to expect
that the birth of such a child, due to the disproportionately large size of
the baby, would be difficult and that it would be impossible to get rid of
the burden of the mother, who had the widest hips. All the others would
die in childbirth and give birth in terrible pain.
Many women die from the inability to give birth, but the more of
them died, the wider the female population became, and those that remained
alive passed on their traits to their offspring, resulting in a female
population with a wide range.
However, the more they spread acros the globe, moving away from
Europe, and the more they acquired the characteristics of pithecanthropus,
the more they changed, the fewer children are born to them, and the less
women have to suffer from childbirth. And so it really seems that the
pelvis has significantly widened in white women, while in women of
lower races it has remained completely unchanged.
"We cannot," says Poss, "fail to award prizes to the most primitive
tribes." It is believed that women of lower classes endure childbirth very
painfully, sometimes even without any painkillers, and in very rare cases
die from childbirth, despite the fact thatitive
tribes." It is believed that women of lower classes endure childbirth very
painfully, sometimes even without any painkillers, and in very rare cases
die from childbirth, despite the fact that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, their fate is no different from that of men. But we must also
mention the women of lower classes, who give birth to children from
poor fathers. For example, it is reported that Indian women often die
while giving birth to children of mixed race from white fathers, while
their own children are born healthy. Many Indians are well aware of the
dangers of pregnancy from mixed races and, in order to avoid it, prefer
to eliminate the consequences of conception in a timely manner using
traditional methods. The same is reported about the Ayurs in Eastern Alrim.
Everything that has been said about childbirth among women of
lower classes can be repeated about European lower classes, among
whom, as is well known, childbirth is also incomparably more difficult,
especially in the case of interracial marriages.

--- PAGE BREAK ---asses can be repeated about European lower classes, among
whom, as is well known, childbirth is also incomparably more difficult,
especially in the case of interracial marriages.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12. COMPARISON OF THE
NEW LIMORPHIA
NENOVEKA WITH
THAT OF OTHER ANIMALS
Comparison of sexual dimorphism in humans with dimorphism in
other animals. Why species are different from each other. Males are
larger and stronger than females. Greater passion in males. Greater
courage and aggressiveness. Hairiness of males. Greater variability of
secondary sexual characteristics in males. Transitional forms between
males and females. Acquisition of male characteristics by females.
Similarities between humans and animals in sexual development. The
same effect of castration. Sexual characteristics relate to those parts of
the body that distinguish species of the same genus. Females are the
opposite of males. Conclusion.
If we compare everything mentioned here about the results of
mixing bego7o ueģoeva with pitemantrop, with what what we know
about the rest of the animal world, it appears that the phenomena observed in
ueovema are repeated in the same form in animals.
One of the clearest indications of the hybrid origin of ueogema is the
sexual dimorphism we observe. However, this phenomenon does not
constitute an exclusive attribute of the human species, but is common to
other animals of similar size.
Pairs, consisting of individuals of the same species, called
"secondary pairs," are found not only among humans, but also among a large
number of animals. They are not found only in the lowest masses.
Although, according to Ƚарвин, the styles are influenced by the
different lifestyles of both parties, this is only an assumption. If we can
assume that they stem from the differences between the two in their way of
life and habits, then why not make the opposite assumption? Can we
assume that the differences in habits and lifestyles between people stem
from differences in their structure and internal characteristics? And the
latter can be seen in the same way, in the same species, that have sexual
dimorphism, belonging to originally separate species and, due to some
kind of interaction between them, mixed with each other, forming new
species, 7hybrid.y, in the same species, that have sexual
dimorphism, belonging to originally separate species and, due to some
kind of interaction between them, mixed with each other, forming new
species, 7hybrid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---es, that have sexual
dimorphism, belonging to originally separate species and, due to some
kind of interaction between them, mixed with each other, forming new
species, 7hybrid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Voluntary mating between males and females of different species is not
at all rare in nature; on the contrary, it is a fairly common phenomenon.
"It is well known," says Warvin, "that birds of different species often
mate with each other and produce offspring. There are many examples
of this." Most of these cases can be explained by the fact that the birds
remained single, unable to find a mate among individuals of their own
species. However, this explanation does not apply to many examples of
domesticated and domestic birds of different species that have become
friends, even though they live among individuals of their own species. Mr. 3.
S. Simpson notes that "it is well known that when many birds of
different species are kept together, they develop inexplicable
attachments to each other, and that they mate and produce offspring
with unrelated, apparently unrelated species (and species) just as
willingly as with birds of their own species." Elsewhere, Darwin discusses the
same mating behaviour not only in birds, but also in other animals.
We do not know what caused the confusion between different
species of animals, but one of them may have been the struggle for
existence, in which some species were exterminated unevenly, and
mainly one, the female, which is placed in a vulnerable position by the
need to lay and hatch eggs. "The same is true of birds," says Warvin, "they
should be exterminated while they are sitting on their eggs. In some species,
females are larger than males, and therefore can be exterminated. In
some cases, they are less active and slower in their movements than
males, and therefore find it more difficult to avoid danger. But if one
animal is exterminated, then naturally the other, guided by its instinct,
will find a mate among related neighbouring species and reproduce with
them.
Darwin is puzzled by the question: how can we explain the fact that
species, when interbreeding, produce sterile offspring, while the fertility
of the species remains unchanged when they interbreed.
Most naturalists, the author argues, believe that species
"endowed with sterility" precisely in order to "prevent their intermingling,"
but in the opposite case, species living together could hardly remain
unmixed.
I find this answer unsatisfactory. Why would nature want to "prevent
mixing"? Why would itevent their intermingling,"
but in the opposite case, species living together could hardly remain
unmixed.
I find this answer unsatisfactory. Why would nature want to "prevent
mixing"? Why would it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Are pure species really necessary? According to Lavin, the similarity
between species depends not so much on their closeness to each other as on
their "similarity of origin." Therefore, in the distant past, the distinction between
species may not have been so clear-cut. But since nature, having endowed
animals with a strong instinct, does not prevent some species from mixing
with others, such mixing occurs unhindered, until, as long as they continue
to mix, until there are no species left in the world that are already
incompatible with each other and produce incompatible offspring. That is why
we now believe that species are "incompatible".
The similarity between humans and animals in terms of sexual
dimorphism is simply striking. In dimorphic animals, not only are the
same secondary sexual characteristics observed as in humans, but also
the same phenomena of sexual life.
1). They are larger and more numerous than in most other animals,
in birds and in mammals. Fish and insects are an exception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---humans, but also
the same phenomena of sexual life.
1). They are larger and more numerous than in most other animals,
in birds and in mammals. Fish and insects are an exception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2). According to Larpin, in many diverse and varied species, males are
more passionate than females and play an active role in courtship.
3). Samuys monkeys and other mammals are "more playful, braver and
more warlike than themselves." The warlike nature of most animals is
evident in what is called "battle spirit," i.e., in the terrible ferocity of
males compared to females. The fighting spirit is observed in aquatic and
terrestrial animals, in birds, mammals, reptiles, fish and insects.
4). The aggressiveness characteristic of us, men, is also found in
other animals. There, many monkeys and apes have well-developed
beards, while humans do not have them at all, or they are much smaller.
In other primates, the males have a large mane, which can be in the
form of a crest (in baboons, baboons and bison), and in the form of a wide
collar of hair (in lynxes) and in the form of thick fur on the head (in one
species of beaver).
5). Secondary sexual characteristics are very similar within one species
and very different between species; males differ from each other more
than females do. The same is true of birds, butterflies, moths, and spiders.
6). There is a clear series of transitional stages between males with the
most pronounced sexual characteristics and female-like males. The same is
observed in some insects.
7). The fact that women acquire masculine traits in old age is also
repeated in some birds. Darwin gives many examples of birds that
become very similar to their parents after hatching, and even more so after
2, 3, or 4 years. Similar phenomena are repeated with the growth on the
nose of some animals and with the three-pronged projectile of the musk
ox.
8).
The similarity between humans and dimorphic animals is
evident even in the order of their embryonic development. In the male
race, males are more similar to females, while in the female race, offspring
are more similar to females than to males. The same is conveyed by
Darwin from birds: "When the male is more colourful and more beautiful
than the female, the young of both sexes resemble the female at first
plumage, for example, in the case of the peacock and the peahen."
9). In some species, the male is distinguished from the female in
appearance, and their young resemble both parents in childhood. The
same is truexample, in the case of the peacock and the peahen."
9). In some species, the male is distinguished from the female in
appearance, and their young resemble both parents in childhood. The
same is true

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the peacock and the peahen."
9). In some species, the male is distinguished from the female in
appearance, and their young resemble both parents in childhood. The
same is true

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In many birds, in the guan and the puma, in some snakes, in the entire pig
family, and in tapirs. Their young do not resemble their parents, but rather
animals of a different species. There, the young resemble the adult male and
female. The young of many species resemble the adult female, etc.
10).
The same treatment has exactly the same effect on animals with
physical dimorphism, both male and female. A man who has undergone
castration in childhood, as is well known, loses certain secondary sexual
characteristics, such as hairiness on the face and a low voice. In birds and
mammals, these traits are acquired before reaching sexual maturity, but in
humans, they are lost after puberty. For example, in some species (such
as the northern species), whose roe consists of the female's own roe, the roe
is not renewed after spawning. Conversely, in one species of ant, the roe
characteristic of the mother grows in the mother after mating.
11). The difference between males and females is found in those
parts of the body that distinguish males from females, for example, in
the vegetation on the genitals, in height, etc. In animals, according to
Ƚарвину,
secondary
sexual
characteristics
are
usually
found
обыmновенно   тех   uастей   ор7аниѕаɯии, mоторыми
раѕɤиuаются и виды то7о же рода.
12). Some animals are similar to humans even in their relationships
between the sexes. There, the white man enslaved the pitemantropes and got
together with them at first, probably through violence. Even now, females
are subordinate to males in sexual relations. Similar violence towards males is
also evident in many dimorphic species. It is worth remembering that our
domestic rooster behaves similarly to a male bird: his courtship
resembles violence. The same probably happens in other dimorphic
species, judging by the fact that many males have even developed so-
called "grasping appendages" with which they hold the female.
One similarity between the phenomena accompanying sexual
dimorphism in humans and the same in animals is that cannot be
coincidental, and therefore suggests that they have the same cause in
humans and animals. Therefore, if the dimorphism in humans is the result
of interbreeding with pithecanthropus, then this discrepancy is a result of the
interbreeding of humans with ruling over all animals, yielding to the motorif the dimorphism in humans is the result
of interbreeding with pithecanthropus, then this discrepancy is a result of the
interbreeding of humans with ruling over all animals, yielding to the motor

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all related species of animals, forming hybrids, not subject to natural
selection, mixing with each other and giving rise to a huge number of
dimorphic species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---- PAGE BREAK ---

all related species of animals, forming hybrids, not subject to natural
selection, mixing with each other and giving rise to a huge number of
dimorphic species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13. THE MENSQUAL
QUESTION IN HISTORICAL
TIMES
This question dates back to prehistoric times. The differences
between women and men, as between people in general, are not
established arbitrarily, but depend on the differences between them in
terms of intellect and character. In the Stone Age, women were equal to
men. Later, women, female pithecanthropus, became the property of
men. A profound difference between them. It must be assumed that the
character of women and their physical constitution changed many times
in prehistoric times. The position of women as slaves.
Now that the essence of our theory has been sufficiently clarified
before our readers, we have two very important tasks left to accomplish:
firstly, to show that our theory covers the most important aspects of
human life, and secondly, to confirm the theory with as much evidence as
possible. That is why we intend to devote the rest of the first volume to
this topic.
The most important aspects of social life are:
• relationships between people (family relationships),
• relationships between the higher and lower classes of society
(social) and
• relations between the government and the people (state relations).
These aspects the dominance of this view in our science and literature,
which stems from the principle of Namarma, is highly outdated and
therefore can hardly satisfy the needs of a thoughtful person.
For example, the low status of women in our society is explained by the
childish naivety that that men are superior to women in terms of
intelligence and therefore protect them, guiding them in matters of mind and
character. This is contrary to the basic law of nature, which states that
when living beings engage in struggle with each other, mental strength
always prevails over physical strength, and not vice versa.
It is worth remembering that domestic animals, gifted with greater
intelligence, are inferior to humans, are undoubtedly inferior to them in
intelligence, while intelligent breeds, endowed with higher mental
abilities, are everywhere superior to theirwith greater
intelligence, are inferior to humans, are undoubtedly inferior to them in
intelligence, while intelligent breeds, endowed with higher mental
abilities, are everywhere superior to their

--- PAGE BREAK ---igence, are inferior to humans, are undoubtedly inferior to them in
intelligence, while intelligent breeds, endowed with higher mental
abilities, are everywhere superior to their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, of course, a man, despite all his intellectual superiority,
unquestioningly submits to a woman who is smarter than him. In
marriage, he finds himself in a position of "under the thumb."
According to our theory, those who are more intelligent are those
who, in their lives, are more likely to be successful. And, of course, if a woman's
position in society is lower than that of a man, then this is due to her greater
dependence on the male, as we have already seen from the comparison
of the male and female organisms.
As can be seen from the above, women in prehistoric times had two
completely different characters. One was a woman who was completely
dependent on men — equal to men in intellectual, moral and physical
terms, because otherwise she would not have been able to endure the
hardships of that period. Such a woman, on the basis of everything that has
been said, should be treated as an equal to her husband.
The woman — the very image of a pet — was treated like a domestic
animal, and therefore enjoyed the status of a domestic animal and a slave.
The materials we have at our disposal paint a picture of both of these
relationships. However, the latter (the status of a slave) is more common,
while the former is a rare occurrence, and even then, mainly in times long past.
It is difficult to imagine that the materials found directly refer to
uncertain times, when both types of women may have existed
simultaneously: a lot of time has passed since then. But apart from the
unknown, there may be many reasons why women, according to their own
interests, approached men. We will talk about this in more detail later, but for
now, let's consider one of these reasons. It is often observed that
daughters take after their mothers, while sons take after their fathers.
"It is known," says Warvin, "When two different breeds are crossed,
there is a strong desire to return to one or both parent forms during the
course of successive generations." "It is extremely rare to see," writes Prof.
Mogi, "that two individuals are completely identical to each other in the same
family. If nature produces a different nature directly after it, then this
nature always appears in the female form from the mother, not from the
father. The existence of offspring of these people shows us that among
theirs a different nature directly after it, then this
nature always appears in the female form from the mother, not from the
father. The existence of offspring of these people shows us that among
their

--- PAGE BREAK ---directly after it, then this
nature always appears in the female form from the mother, not from the
father. The existence of offspring of these people shows us that among
their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

children, it is common to find self-sufficient daughters, but not sons.
And so, when the men of the mamo7o-gibo tribe moved around the globe,
they encountered the women of the dru7o7o tribe, who stood much lower
than them, i.e. lower than the pithecanthropus, then in the very first
generation, and perhaps in subsequent generations, their offspring would be
born much more female-like, then the male offspring born to mothers would
be significantly smaller than their fathers. Hence, in one and the same generation, the
new women would be equal to men and even superior to them, closer to the
ideal of beauty.
Intending to describe here the position of women who stood below
their husbands, and others who stood on an equal footing with them and
above them, we have compiled two tables based on reliable materials
from peoples of different parts of the world: one for the position of women
as slaves and pariahs, and the other for women as equals to men. Since the
first is based on a false premise, and the second is an exaggeration, we will start
with the first.
The very appearance of a girl in the world would not be considered a
birth, because a woman loses her virginity after the birth of a son. In the
village, parents welcome the birth of a daughter, but it is still considered
a disgrace to the family, and the mother sees herself as a criminal. A
family where girls are often born is considered to be possessed by
demons, and newborns are considered to be the devil's work. The parents are
subjected to a series of rituals, and the father beats the child with sticks and
stones, shouting and screaming, in order to prevent the demon from
returning.
They believe that men are created by a benevolent deity, while
women are created by a cruel one, and that women do not have souls. Most religions,
including Christianity, consider women to be inferior beings. She has no
right to enter the place where idols are worshipped, cannot attend
sacrifices, or visit temples. Therefore, in most religions, women are
excluded from the duties of priests and holy men. Likewise, paradise does not exist for
women, but only for men.
All peoples of the world agree that women are impure at the onset of
menstruation, during menstruation, and during childbirth. Menstrual
blood is considered the most terrible poison, the mother can imagine the
most terrible thing, and therefore during this period they are afraid not
only oftruation, and during childbirth. Menstrual
blood is considered the most terrible poison, the mother can imagine the
most terrible thing, and therefore during this period they are afraid not
only of

--- PAGE BREAK ---childbirth. Menstrual
blood is considered the most terrible poison, the mother can imagine the
most terrible thing, and therefore during this period they are afraid not
only of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The application of a woman's poison, but even in her absence,
abandoned by her. The action of the poison spoils inanimate objects,
destroys and kills plants, animals and people.
During menstruation, women are isolated from all other people in
the most secluded way possible, and since she can contaminate even the
most sacred things with her touch, they build a special hut for her on
high stilts, and they put the menstruating woman on a bed in the house and
hang her on a beam. In addition, they fear that the woman's husband will
not be harmed, so they forbid her not only to look at her husband, but even to
think about him. It goes without saying that during this period, the
woman is completely removed from public life; she is not only forbidden
to visit temples and make sacrifices, but even to think about God and
prayers. Special buildings for menstruating women take the form of dark
rooms, in which girls are kept in strict isolation during their period,
sometimes for up to 4, 5 or even 7 days.
During this period, women are subjected to harsh punishments and
cruel rituals, which are often violent and painful. For example, in Brazil, a
girl is brought out among her relatives and friends, and each of them
gives her 4-5 blows with a stick made of a certain plant, so that she does
not fall down unconscious and dead. But if she recovers, the operation
must be repeated 4 times every six hours and is considered a great
honour for the parents, unless someone hits her hard enough.
When a girl gets married, it is believed that she brings an evil spirit
into her husband's house, and therefore a series of rituals are performed
on her to exorcise the demons.
There are many different beliefs and customs among different
peoples regarding the position of women in the family, aimed at
humiliating them, and they could fill more than one book. She is beaten
every day, sometimes used as currency instead of coins, and even forced
to pay taxes. In Australia, a husband can kill his wife, and he can even eat
her, but even in more civilised countries, the murder of a woman is
considered less serious than the murder of a man. Among the Samoyeds
and in Korea, a woman does not even have her own name apart from
her husband's.re civilised countries, the murder of a woman is
considered less serious than the murder of a man. Among the Samoyeds
and in Korea, a woman does not even have her own name apart from
her husband's.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When meeting his wife, the husband says the same words as when
meeting his mistresses. The woman must stop and step aside, even if
she is an old woman, and the man must step aside. If a man and a
woman are walking together, the woman must walk on the right side, even if
she is of noble birth and the man is a commoner.
This mortal prejudice, which equates women with domestic animals, is
reflected in the corresponding proverbs that characterise the traditional
role of women. About the soul of a woman: "a woman has no soul, only
steam," "seven women have one soul." About her mind: "a woman has a
heart, but no mind,"
"A man with a copper head is better than a woman with a silver head,"
"A man sees what is real, and a woman sees what is false," "A woman's
advice is only good for a woman." On women's cunning and liveliness: "A
dog has no name, a woman has no fidelity."
"The cunning of one woman is worth 40 oxen,"
"A woman is God's blessing, but her tongue is poison." On friendship:
"Do not be a friend to seven women, do not tell your wife secrets," "Three
women

--- PAGE BREAK ---

together make a market, and four make a fair." On how a husband
should treat his wife: "Beat your wife with a fur coat, there will be less
noise," "Beat your wife at lunch, and again at dinner, so that she will be
obedient, submissive, and easy to get along with," etc.
It is unclear whether these relationships are based on their actual
inequality, or whether they could develop in a civilised society, even if a
woman were not inferior to a man in terms of her intellect and character,
even if she were his equal in all respects?

--- PAGE BREAK ---whether they could develop in a civilised society, even if a
woman were not inferior to a man in terms of her intellect and character,
even if she were his equal in all respects?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14. THE GOLDEN AGE OF WOMEN
The golden age of women. Amazons. The participation of ancient
women in war. Women leaders. Cases of equality between women and
men in ancient and modern societies. Similarities between ancient
women's costumes and the costumes of spiritual leaders. Reasons for
this similarity.
The opinion that has long been held in European science about the
possibility of the existence in the distant past of "Eogot7o vem zheniny"
and the so-called "Ginemopatiuecmo sry". According to the writings of Bach,
even today there are people who adhere to this opinion.
3ta shmoga, zhega domasat svoju mysch, ssyagaya mezhdu proum na
izvestnuyu gendenu o amasonakh, zheninakh-voinakh, po rassmasam
drevnykh poteryan okhutu vyhoditsya samuzh, they took up arms and
defended their republic from enemies without the help of men. In
addition to the ancient world, the legend of the Amazons was also known
in Bohemia, the Caucasus, Armenia, South America, and New Guinea.
According to our Russian sources, the Amazon type is "pozhaniy"
is depicted as follows:
He rides a horse, riding
Oh, she's riding a horse, and beneath
her is a blue saddle... Oh, she's riding
a wild horse, oh, beneath her and
beneath her... Oh, with one hand she
grabs the reins
With a feather-like touch...
The strength and courage of this woman, according to the legends,
were such that in the first battle she defeated even our beloved hero,
Igyu Muromets.
But, apart from legends, we have a lot of historical data telling us
about the actual militancy of ancient women. It is said that the
Sarmatians, a people who lived on the shores of the Azov Sea, had
women who "did not need war." They would only marry there if they killed
their enemies, otherwise they had no chance of getting married. The
women of the ancient Germanic tribes, the Iberians and the Mimes,
followed their husbands into battle, throwing themselves furiously into
the fray.erwise they had no chance of getting married. The
women of the ancient Germanic tribes, the Iberians and the Mimes,
followed their husbands into battle, throwing themselves furiously into
the fray.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hance of getting married. The
women of the ancient Germanic tribes, the Iberians and the Mimes,
followed their husbands into battle, throwing themselves furiously into
the fray.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unpleasant tasks and the prospect of death in slavery. In ancient Brittany,
women were always present in the army. There is historical evidence of the
existence of amazons in Tibet in the 6th and 7th centuries AD.
But even if we do not talk about historical times, they still exist
today: female guards in Siam and female warriors among the Daome and
Ashanti peoples in Africa. Similarly, in the country of Nunda, the moro
is accompanied by a female guard, and among the Lyugakhs, there are
female courtyard guards
— women. In addition, there are still peoples among whom women
fight in war alongside men, and they are just as good at it, wielding
weapons and participating in mock battles and providing support from
their midst.
In Arab tribes, a young woman sitting on a palm tree leads the
troops going on a campaign.    In ancient times, Germanic women,
a n d now the women of the Iromese, the Yupin, and the Oibvaev,
decide matters of war and peace. In the Marianas, women w i t h
swords i n their hands judge a n d punish men.
The attitude of ancient women towards war is confirmed, moreover, by
archaeological findings. In Sweden and the Caucasus, women often take up
arms with their husbands and other weapons. The same is true of some
ancient customs. In Sweden, in the province of Bemin7, there is a custom
of giving a newlywed woman weapons of all kinds at her wedding, "to
remind her, they say, that she must accompany her husband into battle."
The Spartans demanded the same mental and physical endurance from
women and from men, and among the Boeotians, even to this day, in
order to make a woman endure suffering courageously, her mother says:
"You are a woman, and a woman must not complain."
If cowardice and pacifism lead to the loss of independence and
slavery, then militancy and bravery give them not only freedom, but even
power over others. There are peoples whose women are rulers and leaders.
We find such examples in antiquity, above all among the Semites:
Semiramis, the wise queen of Assyria, and the prophetess Deborah. Among
modern peoples, not counting Europeans, the Alimans are ruled by women.
Some of the Semitic states are even called not by their names, but by "the
country of the Moroccans" and "the country of the women." In many
places, the Semites spread the idea of founding states.Some of the Semitic states are even called not by their names, but by "the
country of the Moroccans" and "the country of the women." In many
places, the Semites spread the idea of founding states.

--- PAGE BREAK ---c states are even called not by their names, but by "the
country of the Moroccans" and "the country of the women." In many
places, the Semites spread the idea of founding states.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a stranger who had fallen in love with a local girl. In Asia, women are leaders
among the Maya, and in North America among the Narra7ansets, the
Chomonate, the Vinibe7 Mrim, the Potovati, the Tɤinmiti, the
Mɤosmimo, the Mvatcino, and the Natuesov. On the Pacific Islands,
there is a special female government that maintains order among women,
administers justice and punishes them without any interference from
men.
There are very rare cases of peoples whose women have equal rights
with men in the field of marriage, and there they can be priests. There is
even a surprising and original people, the Minbereys, who rejoice in girls.
Namone, one can list a number of ancient and modern peoples among
whom women enjoy a high status in the family and in society. They are
respected, exempt from heavy labour, treat her well, do not allow her
husband to beat her or abandon her to the mercy of fate without any
means of support in the event of divorce, and allow her to participate in
community councils with the right to vote.
These include:
• In Europe: the ancient Zoroastrians, Bashmirs and Mamums.
• In Asia: the ancient Persians, Armenians, Min7reɤy, mир7иѕы,
Zhitegini Hindus, Hindus, Siamese, Māyā, Uymuni, Mоreyи, and
Samoyeds.
• In Australia: the Aborigines.
• In America: the Mohawk, the Navajo, the Indians of Nimapaya and
Opehona, the Seneca, the Ottawa, the M'sugan, the Uino, the Nutma, and
others.
One of the remains of their ancient customs can be seen in their
ancient costumes, which were apparently once worn by men. The literature
on this subject is quite extensive. For example, ancient depictions of
some goddesses in male attire on coins and with weapons in their hands.
These are the goddesses Ishtar of the Assyrians and Artemis of the
Greeks. But the image of a woman in a male costume was not only
symbolic and a fantasy of the artist, as can be seen in the Second
Samaria: "A woman shall not wear men's clothing, nor shall a man wear
women's clothing, for this is an abomination before the Lord your God."
Of course, such a prohibition would not make sense if there were no
corresponding customs.
This also includes a very interesting and, at first glance, surprising
phenomenon, namely the similarity and identity of women's folk
costumes with the costumes of spiritual leaders. For example, certain partsncludes a very interesting and, at first glance, surprising
phenomenon, namely the similarity and identity of women's folk
costumes with the costumes of spiritual leaders. For example, certain parts

--- PAGE BREAK ---esting and, at first glance, surprising
phenomenon, namely the similarity and identity of women's folk
costumes with the costumes of spiritual leaders. For example, certain parts

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the Jewish High Priest, as described in the Bible, can be found in
ancient women's folk costumes.
The main headdress of the High Priest, the "midar", consisted of a
soft cap similar to a yarmulke and a four-cornered standing metal plate on
the forehead. The same headdress is worn by our contemporary women
and girls in the Kazan region, but the headpiece on the head is not made of
metal, but of fabric. The same headdresses have been preserved among
women in Tibet, among the Bannas (in Alrim) and among the common people
of the 7ogand.
The Jewish high priest wore a metal square on his forehead, attached
to metal chains on his shoulders.
"The judge's robe." The same decoration is worn by Egyptian priests.
Squares on the 7th are still worn by mandarins and women: Jewish, Uzbek,
Uighur, Votyak, Bashkir, Boghar, and Shveyar.
The metal epi, hanging down on both sides, is found in the Swiss.
Similar to the bells that adorned the robes of the First Apostle, and
which are currently sewn onto the robes of the Orthodox archbishop, they
were found in the ruins as decorations on the costumes of ancient Russian
women. The same decorations were used in ancient times by the Gito.
They are still used today by the Shvedom, Gatshem and Mordov. In Alrim,
An7o, and Gund, they are a sign of dignity among the nobility, and there
they are also worn by women of noble birth. It is believed that wearing
a name in ancient times had a special meaning. The Greeks, Romans and
Scandinavians preserved their names as talismans and attributed them to
witches, through the power of magic, day turns into night, and night into day.
Some elements of our Orthodox clergy's attire are found in the folk
attire of women of various nations who have no connection with
Orthodoxy. There, the main headdress in the form of a bishop's mitre is
worn by women-deacons in the vicinity of 7. Rev.
A very similar resemblance to our sacred image in the form of a skirt,
worn on the head, with a cutout for the hands, can be seen in the costume
of the women at the Riga Stone Bridge exhibition.
The Byzantine men's clothing depicted on Byzantine icons and
called "cammom" and "damatim", with a cutout for the hands, can be seen in the costume
of the women at the Riga Stone Bridge exhibition.
The Byzantine men's clothing depicted on Byzantine icons and
called "cammom" and "damatim"

--- PAGE BREAK ---the hands, can be seen in the costume
of the women at the Riga Stone Bridge exhibition.
The Byzantine men's clothing depicted on Byzantine icons and
called "cammom" and "damatim"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is closely related not only in terms of its style, but also in terms of its
embroidery with Mordovian "panarom" (upper women's costume).
Jewish prayer shawl ("tasch"), which is now also worn by Buddhist
monks in Mongolia, and which constitutes a necessary attribute of the
ancient peoples, Romans, Greeks and Scythians, we now find it among the
poor, among the peasants and among the Swedes.
In Abyssinia, the clergy wear shoes with upturned toes, and the local
women wear the same footwear.
Besides that, there is not a single piece of men's or women's clothing
that we would not find among our neighbours. There, we find men's
shawls among women: 7уɯуɤьсmих (in the Carpathians), mаѕансmих
Tatars, пшавов, 7а7ауѕов (in Bulgaria), джаɤдов, abyssinians and
siamese.
Vegimorussian men's shirts are worn by women: In7usheys, Udinovs,
Mistinovs, Pshavovs, Ueuenuevs, Mavmaschik Tatars and Armenians.
At the same time, skirts, which are considered throughout Europe to be
women's clothing, are worn by men in Abkhazia. The same category of
lamtov includes the similarity of men's and women's upper garments,
which is often observed among the Mari and Belorussians, and is also
found among the Monogovs and Mamys. And when there is a difference
between male and female costumes among some peoples, in memory of
their former identity, it is customary for girls to wear certain parts of the
male costume on solemn occasions, such as weddings, as we see among
the Russians.
The custom of our Orthodox clergy to wear long robes, as is well
known, coincides with the same custom of all European women. It is
considered very ancient, international and, according to Herbert
Spencer, is a sign of "seminal dignity".
As for the headdress, it is worth mentioning that Jewish women
"Peyses", in the form of dɤinny ɤomons on viscmas, are found in
various localities belonging to women's mоstuma: among the mrymich
Tatars, among the 7a7aуs (in ancient times), among the women of the
Turkish Serbs, among the Russian Zaganom, among the Rusyns, in
Kazakhstan, among the Masans of Votia, and among the women of Siam.
The similarity between spiritual costumes and women's costumes seems
to me to be, among the Russian Zaganom, among the Rusyns, in
Kazakhstan, among the Masans of Votia, and among the women of Siam.
The similarity between spiritual costumes and women's costumes seems
to me to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

striking. This is probably because women, due to conservatism, and
clergy, due to prescription, wear the same ancient costumes that were
once worn by men and women.
Thus, from the materials we have collected, it is clear that
Bakholena's claim is not unfounded, as evidenced by    отдагенном
прошгом    уеговеуества    сгеды
"7inemopatiuemoy sry." We can now correct her views in this regard, since
"sogotoy vem" women are not a phenomenon that is obligatory and
simultaneous throughout the world. At different times, it existed among
certain peoples, but among some it may have been repeated at long
intervals, while among others it may not have existed at all. This is evident
at least from the fact that the examples we have given of the high status of
women in society are found in the customs and beliefs of almost all
peoples.
In the next chapter, we will provide more material on the same   issue, but a
more detailed discussion is possible in the second volume of this work,
which will be about the "degeneration of society".

--- PAGE BREAK ---e will provide more material on the same   issue, but a
more detailed discussion is possible in the second volume of this work,
which will be about the "degeneration of society".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15. MATERNAL RIGHT
Maternal law. The origin of this custom and the reasons for its
prevalence. The difference between maternal law and paternal law. The
choice of a spouse based on the characteristics of the race. Testing their
minds with riddles and impossible tasks. Four-line verses. Requirement
for a cheerful disposition. Testing the women's bravery and physical
strength.
Yes, as we mentioned in the previous chapter, there is a certain
degree of continuity, and in the lives of peoples there may be certain
similarities, in one and the same circumstances, women were born who were
equal to men and even superior to them, then naturally, that those
women, in the same transitional period, would be born from husbands
who were even lower than them, with a higher status than other women.
This cannot go unnoticed. Indeed, many folk customs confirm the
accuracy of our assumption.
"The mother's womb," say the ancients, "has an influence on the
child," and they believe that no matter what happens, a child born to a
noble mother will always be noble. This opinion was shared, among
others, by the famous Nimur. On this basis, unequal marriages were
permitted for men of higher social status, but not for women. In Alrim, for
example, princesses are completely free to choose their husbands, and
even if he is a slave, the children are considered princesses. Princesses
could, by their choice alone, elevate themselves to the rank of
commoners. For the same reason, among many peoples, aristocratic
descent was passed down through the female line rather than the male line.
This custom, known as "matrilineality," belongs to a group of
international and very widespread customs, which testifies to its great
antiquity.
"When Herodotus," says Ratay, "Our people are unusual in that, in   ,
children take their mother's name, and the family line is traced through the
female rather than the male line, he suggests that this people is different
from all others. But we now know that this custom exists among many
peoples, both consciously and unconsciously, in the form of traditions.
The inheritance of property through the female lineerent
from all others. But we now know that this custom exists among many
peoples, both consciously and unconsciously, in the form of traditions.
The inheritance of property through the female line

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs. But we now know that this custom exists among many
peoples, both consciously and unconsciously, in the form of traditions.
The inheritance of property through the female line

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is found among all peoples. "Mam Nennan," says Herbert Spencer,
"believes that matrilineal descent prevails in all parts of the world and,
if necessary, I could support this with numerous examples from many
other sources."
The transition period may be difficult at first, with the higher class
mixing with the lower class, but then, when inequality between men and
women was eliminated, men would still be superior to women in terms of their
organisation,   and   then   "maternal   right"   would be replaced
"otovsim", as evidenced by numerous historical data. The customs
adopted at that time have been preserved in folk rituals and traditions,
especially in weddings. They testify very clearly that in ancient times,
when selecting a bride, the selection was made by means of a single
woman, who was required not to be
"femininity" as we understand it today, but rather qualities that made
them attractive to men, i.e. those that we attribute to a certain kind of
charm.
These include: 1) a sharp mind, 2) cheerful disposition, 3) ability to
inspire others with a positive mood, 4) bravery, 5) courage, 6) strong will,
7) honesty and, of course,
8) the appearance of a noble race.
From the story of Savsmoi, who visited Sogomona, we know that
mental tests were conducted in ancient times by sadomasochists. Those
who passed them were considered wise. And indeed, we see that a young
bride is tested by the elders at her wedding. This is the custom of Osmar
Kogber7 in Masurov Suvamcmoy 7uberniya. In a corrupted form, we
find the same custom among the Bessarabians. There, the groom's
father, who appears at the wedding as a representative of the groom's side,
tests the same things, but not the bride herself, but her shalers (locally
known as "ismetui"). This custom was common among ancient peoples
and was the subject of songs and poems. American writer Naid collected
many of them from the folk literature of various peoples and included
them in his own versions with Scottish bagpipes. Here we will give the
Russian version on this theme:
Do you have five coins, maiden?
— I'll give you ten, my son, even if it's ten. So,
girl, what's the matter?own versions with Scottish bagpipes. Here we will give the
Russian version on this theme:
Do you have five coins, maiden?
— I'll give you ten, my son, even if it's ten. So,
girl, what's the matter?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Well, girl, is it above? Well, girl, is
it below? Well, girl, is it without
sorrow? Well, girl, is it without mind?
Vzh i uto sto, devia, bes otvetu?
— More beautiful than the sun, my son, you are
bright. Higher than the sun, my son, you are
shining.
Nаɲе роɲи, son of mупеuесmий, uасты ѕвеѕды.
Be mореньев, son of mупеuесmий, mрупен
жемuу7. Be without fear, son of mупеuесmий,
teuет реumа.
Without answer, my son, it is God's will.
— Wait, maiden, wait.
Come and be with me, be my wife.
The meaning of this song even directly implies that the maiden who
has given her consent has the right to leave.
It is interesting that in many versions of Russian songs on this
theme, the girl who has given up her virginity is called a "seven-year-old
girl". Of course, singers today cannot explain what "seven-year-old"
means, but in all likelihood, it refers to early marriage, as in ancient
times girls married at a young age.
In addition to   ,   girls   experienced   and   were called
"impossible tasks". If there is an impossible problem to solve, then the
answer to it may be the same problem, only less impossible, but to come
up with it, you need wit. This theme is also very widespread throughout
the world, and the first one is also found in the Scottish bagpipes of Naida.
Here is its Russian version:
— Don't be shy, don't say thank you, look
straight at me, I've loved you for a long time,
listen, I'll say it:
Give me a drink of my own among the blue sea.
So that the raven does not fly away, the swan
does not fly away,
Everything is as it should be.
— Sew, my dear, shoes and sandals,
So that the dog does not get lost, never
scatters,
Do not lose your patience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---away, the swan
does not fly away,
Everything is as it should be.
— Sew, my dear, shoes and sandals,
So that the dog does not get lost, never
scatters,
Do not lose your patience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spin, my dear, the thread of rainbows,
So that the threads don't tear, the shoes don't
wear out,
So that I could sew them... etc.
The form of this song, an exchange between a young man and a
young woman in quatrains, is reminiscent of a number of other songs,
probably with the same meaning, but not at all rare in the folk
repertoire, especially among the Turkish peoples. However, instead of
unfulfilled desires, he and she exchange quatrains in which each tries to
outdo the other with their wit. In 7a7ausov, this relationship between
boys and girls has been preserved to this day in the form of a game. A
lack of wit is often compensated for with crude jokes, insults, and even
swearing. Examples of such quatrains are given in our book "The
Narrative of Bessarabian Zazaus".
We have not been able to find any wedding rituals in which the
bride's cheerful disposition was tested, but their existence in ancient
times is suggested by the requirement imposed on the bride's friends at
Venomorus weddings, that she be cheerful, make everyone laugh, and be very
talkative and playful. The requirement for the bride herself seems to be
transferred here to her friend, who represents her and is initially chosen
by her relatives.
The same phenomenon can be observed at a Jewish wedding: there, the
role of the maid of honour is performed by a hired specialist, the
"batchen", whose duty is to compose wedding songs and then make the
guests laugh, which he achieves with appropriate songs.
At the wedding, the bride must be ready to give up her freedom for
seven days, which requires intelligence, initiative and perseverance on
her part. which are fulfilled in accordance with the circumstances, i.e. in a
reasonable manner and to a certain extent. At present, this requirement
is circumvented: instead of brides, hired women are used.
There are many customs that testify to the testing of a girl's martial
abilities.
This is probably the origin of one wedding custom in Belarus, which
involves young men riding past the bride, who is armed with a cane, and
trying toy to the testing of a girl's martial
abilities.
This is probably the origin of one wedding custom in Belarus, which
involves young men riding past the bride, who is armed with a cane, and
trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---a girl's martial
abilities.
This is probably the origin of one wedding custom in Belarus, which
involves young men riding past the bride, who is armed with a cane, and
trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

take her cane away, while she hits them on the buttocks. If a girl
manages to defeat them, she is called "strong and courageous" and is
declared the mistress of the house.
In some peoples, says Poss, we encounter a struggle between a man
and a girl who are about to enter into marriage. There, among the
Amazons, a duel must take place between the groom and his chosen
bride; whoever wins retains the dominant position in the marriage.
V 7 The suitor, who is not the bride's fiancé and does not love her,
tries to win her over by means of a duel.
In Portugal, there is a popular saying: "When a girl in Miranda du Oro
is about to get married, she is not satisfied until the wedding and treats her
fiancé, who is motivated by her, in a "harsh manner"; at the same time,
she does not accept expressions of tender love, but tries to respond in
kind, hitting her future husband with all her might."
It is known that Nibelungenlied also describes a similar struggle
with the chosen one. Here, it refers specifically to Gunther's wedding to
Brunhilde: "She tied his hands and feet, carried him away and hung him
on a cross driven into the wall; he could not prevent it; he almost died
from her strength." The extraordinary strength of Enidra could subdue even
the most resistant girl: "She knocked him down, but did not give him
strength and courage, so he got up, despite her efforts; the struggle was
fierce: in a moment, the sound of blows could be heard here and there.
They fought with such fury that it was simply astonishing that they both
managed to stay alive."
Even now, according to Possa, the struggle between the groom and
his beloved plays a very important role in Germany. We Russians
apparently had the same thing in the old days, judging by the content of
some round dance songs, which convey the idea that
"detina-ne7oɤem"
Ask the girls to fight, All the
girls ran away, Vanya, my
friend, be afraid, Only one girl
stood her ground, She fought
with my friend, She defeated my
friend,
Kusham, trampled his hat into the ground.e girls to fight, All the
girls ran away, Vanya, my
friend, be afraid, Only one girl
stood her ground, She fought
with my friend, She defeated my
friend,
Kusham, trampled his hat into the ground.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Lower Austria, there used to be annual gatherings between young
men and women in the village. In our country, it seems that the
remnants of these gatherings are preserved in the old custom of "in the
village".
As for the requirements for the bride's appearance, this issue will be
discussed in the next chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts of these gatherings are preserved in the old custom of "in the
village".
As for the requirements for the bride's appearance, this issue will be
discussed in the next chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16. ISKVSSTVENNYE VROȽSTVA,
PRAKTIKVEMY S ɏENBŒ
VKRAŠENI
Artificial deformities practised for the purpose of beautification.
Ideals of beauty. Artificial deformation of the skull. White lead and
rouge. The use of colourful paints, especially among coloured races.
Masks. The origin of earrings. Artificial enlargement of calves and arm
muscles. Artificial obesity.
When the white race mixed with the pithecanthropus, and the higher
races with the lower ones, they could not help but notice the changes for
the worse that were taking place in the appearance of their offspring. And
since the race was highly developed, it was natural to try to return to it by all
possible means. They tried to achieve this in many ways, especially by
choosing brides according to a known ideal of beauty and deliberately
disfiguring their bodies to make them resemble those of the beautiful
race.
Although the ideal of beauty is usually celebrated in love songs and thus
seems to be immune to change, songs also change and evolve over time,
as they diverged from reality and people became more pessimistic.
Therefore, we can only hope for the ideal of a society of equal people, at
least those who have not been defeated. And here we actually find: a single,
i.e. thin and bare neck, a snow-white hand, a small mouth, small hands, a
small nose with a high bridge, straight, not hooked and not hooked, not
sharp and blunt, and so on.
In addition to their modern concepts of female beauty, we cannot
ignore the ancient ideal, especially when we consider the deformities to
which they subject themselves, particularly women, in the name of
beauty. This disfigurement was probably intended to be a form of beauty,
but then it became a habit, and people tried to follow the old custom, which
everyone was accustomed to, without understanding either its meaning or its
significance.
The word is lost in the rebirth of the pitemantrop, becoming
meaningless, and the meaning is lost — nothing remains. Thereforetomed to, without understanding either its meaning or its
significance.
The word is lost in the rebirth of the pitemantrop, becoming
meaningless, and the meaning is lost — nothing remains. Therefore

--- PAGE BREAK ---derstanding either its meaning or its
significance.
The word is lost in the rebirth of the pitemantrop, becoming
meaningless, and the meaning is lost — nothing remains. Therefore

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was necessary to deform newborn babies in this way in order to
strengthen their bones and muscles. But then, with the passage of time,
the original idea was abandoned along with the method of deformation.
To date, the idea of its necessity has been abandoned. But the original
intention was indeed to make a difference, as can be seen, first of all,
from the fact that the practice of reforming the church is widespread in
Europe. Asia and America, where motorised and medium-sized races
live, and is absent in America, where races are non-motorised and
therefore not motorised. Secondly, of the seven methods of depilation
used in different regions and described by Ranme, two have the clear
intention of making depilation more painful.
The origin of this term dates back to ancient times, as it has been found in
ancient writings in Crimea, Hungary, Germany, and even England. It was
also used in historical times, and was written about by Hippocrates,
Pomponius Mela, Pliny and Strabo. It was also present in medieval Europe:
among the Germans, Slavs, Italians, Slavs and Huns, and today it is widely
distributed throughout the world among the most distant peoples. It
exists in Europe (France, Belgium, Serbia, Hungary, Turkey, Crimea,
and the Caucasus), in Asia (Sumatra and the Nimbars Islands), in many
places in Polynesia, in North America, where it is considered the most
widespread country of origin (Chinami, Nutma, mri, na7ya, the Indians
of the Phoreida, the Tusem of the Panama Isthmus, the Indians of the
Karolina and Orenburg) and in South America ( the Marabos and
Patagons). It is clear that this is necessary for the higher classes of
society, and it goes without saying that the greatest claims belong to the
highest class, monetarily, the highest social classes. And   , according
to Hippomrates, among the ancient Greeks, the deformed form of the upper
class was associated with nobility. Among the Indians of North America,
it is associated with the privilege of free masses and is imposed on
slaves. The same was true in ancient Peru. Tormeada argues that the
material form of the state, which replaced the tribe, took the form of a
special privilege of the highest aristocracy.
However, they lost their rosy cheeks and became thin, then sallow, and, in
hot countries, even feverish. Our European fashionistas also tend to
blush and blush, but they do so subtly,t aristocracy.
However, they lost their rosy cheeks and became thin, then sallow, and, in
hot countries, even feverish. Our European fashionistas also tend to
blush and blush, but they do so subtly,

--- PAGE BREAK ---er, they lost their rosy cheeks and became thin, then sallow, and, in
hot countries, even feverish. Our European fashionistas also tend to
blush and blush, but they do so subtly,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

because there are many women who do not need such adornment.
In nations that are not quite as fair-skinned, but with more swarthy
men, such as our neighbours and the Japanese, the same thing is done by all
women, and therefore it ceases to be a secret and even becomes an
obligatory custom. For example, a modern groom presents his bride
with a veil and blush as part of his wedding gifts.
Namone, among peoples with completely different cultures, the
division of labour into male and female roles takes on a particularly
significant meaning. For example, among the ancient Egyptians, blush
was applied with a brush. According to Ratay, this practice of applying blush to
the cheeks and forehead is widespread throughout the world. In
Australia, for example, they wear white and red, and they also apply white and red
makeup. The same practice of painting themselves in white and red is
also found among North American Indians. Alrimansmi do not paint
themselves in red and white when they go to war. The same is true of the
American Indians, who are more moderate. Some paint themselves in
the colours of the dead. As for the process in this case, which also refers
to distant times, it is necessary to mention the masks, which, apparently,
have replaced incense, judging by the fact that they are used in exactly
the same situations as incense and sprinkling. For example, masks are
used by North American Indians. They have been used in religious
ceremonies since ancient times: in China, Tibet, India, ancient
Mesopotamia and ancient Peru, among the Sumerians, Magyars,
Almans and Aegeans. In ancient times, they were used in warfare by the
Japanese. And, of course, in funeral rites, they were worn on the heads of
the dead, used in ancient times: in Egypt, in Phoenicia, in Nineveh, in
ancient Italy, on the Iberian Peninsula, in France, in Crimea, in Siberia,
and in ancient Peru.
In the same colours, i.e. white and brown, they paint and draw to depict
blondes and redheads.
In many races, according to anthropologists, ear lobes are absent.  This
is true, for example, of the Japanese, other East Asians, and the Mabibs of
North America.  This explains the desire of certain races to imitate the deaf
by hanging weights from their ears.  Botomudy   and  nemotorye   dru7ie
brasɤьsmine    пɤемена,  po  сɤовам    Ƚ. Anuina,  have    the  habit  of
teaching  children  in  their  childhood  ear  moums  and  inserting  them intor ears.  Botomudy   and  nemotorye   dru7ie
brasɤьsmine    пɤемена,  po  сɤовам    Ƚ. Anuina,  have    the  habit  of
teaching  children  in  their  childhood  ear  moums  and  inserting  them into

--- PAGE BREAK ---and  nemotorye   dru7ie
brasɤьsmine    пɤемена,  po  сɤовам    Ƚ. Anuina,  have    the  habit  of
teaching  children  in  their  childhood  ear  moums  and  inserting  them into

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The holes are made with large wooden drills. Over time, the drills
become larger and larger, reaching a diameter of 3–4 inches. The
practice of stretching ear lobes is very widespread. In addition to various
American tribes, including the ancient Peruvians, it has been found in
Polynesia: on Easter Island, the Fiji Islands, the Marquesas Islands, the
Society Islands, the Tovari Islands, etc., in Asia: in Assam, Aramane,
Burma, Naos, India, on the Seychelles, on the islands of the Marquesas
Archipelago, Nimobar, Admiralty, Solomon, New Hebrides, and others, in
Australia and among ancient peoples. This custom apparently has some
connection with religion. On Easter Island, where the ears of the Tusi are
artificially stretched to the point of being elongated, resembling ancient Mocha
statues, which also have elongated ears. Many sculptural images of Buddha
depict him with long, hanging ears and pierced earlobes. The same is
true of Indian idols of various names. In ancient Peru, the wearing of a
moustache was a sign of noble birth and was accompanied by special
ceremonies in the temple of the sun.
This explains why our women wear earrings. It is also clear why
some people wear earrings not only in their ears but also in their noses,
as it is well known that the lower races are distinguished by their flat and
upturned noses.
It is known that the lower races are distinguished by the absence of
teeth on their feet and the underdevelopment of their muscles, and
therefore there is a need to laxate and stretch them. Artificial
impoverishment is practised, among others, by the American Indians.
With this, they wear tight clothes and headbands that are lower than normal, so
that they fit into the body. Alrimans, in order to hide the thinness of their
arms, wear a series of metal rings on them, covering the entire arm. Abyssinians
use the same clothes and sheepskin coats and wind them around their
legs in 3-4 rows. Namely, our ancestors, the Kasans of the Ubernia region,
the Magopossians of the Rovensko region, women of the mountain
peoples in the Himalayas and Yamut achieve the same effect by
winding large pieces of cloth around their legs, which then become
similar to logs.
In a similar way, some peoples try to soften their muscles, so they
stretch and massage them with sticks and stones in order to maintain their
health and prevent illness. This is probably where the bracelets worn by
our ladies originate.ften their muscles, so they
stretch and massage them with sticks and stones in order to maintain their
health and prevent illness. This is probably where the bracelets worn by
our ladies originate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---so they
stretch and massage them with sticks and stones in order to maintain their
health and prevent illness. This is probably where the bracelets worn by
our ladies originate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There, small feet are considered a sign of belonging to a higher race,
in contrast to lower races, whose feet are large, but in Italy we find the
usual deformity of feet, in order to make them smaller. Similar practices
are also common among ladies of the upper classes.
In fact, the same desire to imitate the beautiful race is probably also
quite widespread among women who are artificially obese, as they are
often pressured to lose weight before their wedding and are discouraged
from eating by their mothers-in-law. This custom is observed in North
America, India, Poland and America. In our Russian regions, in the
Orenburg region, among Swedish women, the common people, the removal
of the veil is replaced by the wearing of a large headscarf.
Probably, the tuuost of cuitaɤa mо7da-to is one of the most important
attributes of the race, judging by the ancient beliefs of the Mitaiɤev,
which placed the mind in the heart and considered thinness to be a sign of a
healthy mind. The Chinese image of Buddha Shakyamuni is a
manifestation of this idea: a protruding belly, a shapeless body, and a face
swollen with fat. Not openly indulging in gluttony, the monks are completely
self-sufficient, and people say of them: "They are wise." In the Thai tradition,
the abdomen is considered the seat of life and spirit. On the islands of
Tonga, the seat of courage, strength and spirit is considered to be the
stomach, which, according to the Tongan people, is especially important
for brave men. Plato also considered the stomach to be the seat of the soul.
Below we will see why obesity is characteristic of the higher races,
and not the lower ones.
We have listed here the seven most common forms of disfigurement with
the aim of improvement, and primarily those in which imitation of the
beautiful race is evident. But there are others, such as tattoos, hanging
weights from the teeth, shaving the head in the shape of a cross, etc., in
which no such imitation is evident. In this regard, it should be noted that
disfigurement is not always based on the images of the white race, but
also on those that were given by the higher races, which appeared to be
inferior.
In the second volume of our work, we will focus specifically on the
reasons and conditions that led to the migration of the higher races. Here
we should recall that these migrations were not always peaceful; they could
also be violent. Therefore, even if they sometimes have certain shortcomings,
certain characteristics of lower races, they are still equal to the former.rations were not always peaceful; they could
also be violent. Therefore, even if they sometimes have certain shortcomings,
certain characteristics of lower races, they are still equal to the former.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

an object of imitation for Tusemuev. In this way, if we take this example,
we can see that it is not possible to escape with seven teeth (lower teeth) are
visible, then the latter, imitating their noble predecessors, try to lengthen
their teeth by hanging weights from them. In fact, there are very few
such cases of disfigurement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---visible, then the latter, imitating their noble predecessors, try to lengthen
their teeth by hanging weights from them. In fact, there are very few
such cases of disfigurement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17. THE ORIGIN OF THE VARIOUS
FORMS OF MARRIAGE
The origin of various forms of marriage. Monogamy. Polygamy.
Traces of monogamy in polygamy. Polyandry. Unequal distribution of
the sexes.
Among different peoples of the world, there are, as far as we know,
three main forms of marriage: 1) Monogamy and monogamy, 2)
Polygamy and polyandry, and 3) Polyandry and polyandry.
When examining these three forms, the first question that arises is:
which of them is the oldest? To explain this, let us turn to the animal
kingdom. Darwin, examining the forms of brachial glands in various
animals, did not find polygyny in lower species, while in other species he
found both monogamy and polygyny. but rather the connection between
plurality and secondary sexual characteristics. Namely, polygamy prevails
among dimorphic animals, i.e. those that have secondary sexual
characteristics, while in other animals that do not have such
characteristics, monogamy prevails. There, among animals with clear
sexual dimorphism, the author mentions birds: tuenes, gvov, dimi
goshades from the Fomgend Islands, mabana, antigopa, sai7u and indi7omo
cona, as well as monkeys: gorillas, chimpanzees and some American
monkeys. Among animals that do not have secondary sexual
characteristics and are at the same time monogamous, he notes the tostomozhny
(except for the Indian monkey) and the orangutan.
Of course, if we take the examples observed in animals, m humans, then in
the case of the former, we can expect monogamy, and in the case of the
latter, we can expect polygamy. we can expect monogamy, and in the
latter case, hybridity — plurality. Indeed, monogamy, which
presupposes the equality of spouses, is more in harmony with equality
between men and women in physical and mental terms, which is
assumed in dual marriage. On the contrary, if women are considered inferior
to men in all respects, it would be more natural for men to choose wives
from among those women who are always expected to be submissive to
their husbands.ontrary, if women are considered inferior
to men in all respects, it would be more natural for men to choose wives
from among those women who are always expected to be submissive to
their husbands.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e considered inferior
to men in all respects, it would be more natural for men to choose wives
from among those women who are always expected to be submissive to
their husbands.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At present, there are relatively few monotheistic peoples. These
include European Christians, Berbers, Jews, and some Muslims who
have preserved their ancient tradition of monogamy despite belonging to a
polygamous religion, such as the Berbers at the foot of the Alps, the
Mabardins and Tuaregs (in the Sahara), i.e. probably those peoples who
have not left their primitive homeland of Europe and have not strayed far
from it. However, monogamy is not new in Europe, as can be seen from
the evidence of the Motoro, who testify that at that time the Germans
had a very strict monogamy.
In addition, monogamy exists among the most primitive peoples:
among the forest tribes of India, among the Bushmen, among the
inhabitants of Port Moresby in New Guinea, among the Dayaks of
Borneo, and among the forest tribes of Brazil.
Perhaps Europeans had a better chance of remaining monogamous,
if only because it was more difficult for them to find wives than it was
for their counterparts who had migrated to other parts of the world and
lived as nomads. However, polygamy did exist among Europeans in
ancient times. This suggests that polygamy was common among
Germanic chieftains. Adam of Bremen mentions polygamy among the
Swedes. In addition, polygamy existed among the Merovingian kings,
as well as in the Marophan period and among the Slavs before the
introduction of Christianity.
As for the dimaries who have preserved monogamy, it is likely that
they suffer from a lack of female partners. The lower dimaries are very
poor, and monogamy requires material resources. According to Herbert
Spencer: "Numerous testimonies show us directly and clearly that in
polygamous societies, polygamy prevails between the rich and the poor, and
between their wives. We have the right, says the author, to assume that in
most societies where there is diversity, there is also monogamy, and to a
greater degree. Less wealthy people, who everywhere make up the majority
of the population, either have no wives at all, or each have only one wife.
If we turn to polygamy, we will see that it is a new form of marriage,
monogamy, firstly because there are transitional forms between
monogamy and polygamy, and secondly, in polygamy, the characteristics
of earlier monogamy are always preserved.
One of the transitional forms from monogamy to polygamy can bensitional forms between
monogamy and polygamy, and secondly, in polygamy, the characteristics
of earlier monogamy are always preserved.
One of the transitional forms from monogamy to polygamy can be

--- PAGE BREAK ---een
monogamy and polygamy, and secondly, in polygamy, the characteristics
of earlier monogamy are always preserved.
One of the transitional forms from monogamy to polygamy can be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The custom of brahminism, currently practised in India, but not yet
known in Europe. According to Japanese custom, a man may have only
one wife, who must be of the same age as him, and, in addition, he is
allowed to acquire one concubine. The same customs exist in China. In
Antanta (in Alim), one wife is considered sufficient.
"саmонной", and all the others — "наɤожниɯами". In ancient Persia,
men could have three or four wives, but only one of them was considered a
proper wife and was treated as such by the others. The Assyrians had only one
wife and did not have concubines. The same was true of the ancient
Egyptians and is still true of the people of Abyssinia.
At the next stage among polygamous peoples, one wife is considered
"first" and "main" and is given special privileges and benefits. For example,
among the South American Indians, the main wife is considered to be the
oldest and the one who was married first. Among the Tahitians and
Uinuas, the first wife is the first in terms of time. Among the Damars
and Lijiyevs, the most beloved woman becomes the first wife, and so on.
Among many American Indian peoples, the right of succession to the
throne belongs to the first wife. Among the South American Indians, the
first wife rules the entire household, and among the Mru (in Alim), she
has the right to dine with her husband and wear a thread around her
neck as a sign of her status.
The third form of brahmanism, polyandry, is less widespread across
the globe than the other two. Mam Nenan and Shar Nertuno are considered
polygamous peoples: the ancient Arabs, the inhabitants of the Canary
Islands, the Tibetans, the Tusi of Kashmir and the Himalayan regions,
the Todov, the Morov, the Nair, the Yeyong, and other peoples of India,
the Novosegans, the inhabitants of one or two islands in the Pacific
Ocean, the Ayeuts, the Tsem of Orinoco, and some peoples of Alrim.
They are joined by the ancient Bretons, Pimts, 7ots, our Saporozhian
Masamovs (?) and even the ancient Germans are found to have traces of
Poganadry.
Although at present the form of marriage is not always dictated by
necessity, i.e. a shortage of women, in ancient times such a necessity
may have been possible. For example, on the island of Eygone, it prevails
among the higher classes, while the lower classes live in monogamy.
Indeed, the ratio of male births to female births is not the same not
only in different countries, but even in the same country at different
times. In Europe, it averagesr classes live in monogamy.
Indeed, the ratio of male births to female births is not the same not
only in different countries, but even in the same country at different
times. In Europe, it averages

--- PAGE BREAK ---nogamy.
Indeed, the ratio of male births to female births is not the same not
only in different countries, but even in the same country at different
times. In Europe, it averages

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106 males per 100 females, the excess of males is offset by their higher
mortality rate. But in other countries, the excess of male births is much
more significant. For example, in the Sandwich Islands in 1839, there
were 125.08 males per 100 females, and in New Guinea in 1858, there
were 130.3. In India today, the ratio is 133.3. I cannot say for certain
what causes this predominance of males, but it may be a very serious
cause of the appearance of polygamy, which is not observed at all in
animals, with the exception of ants,  especially among nomadic peoples,
who are accustomed to taking wives from other tribes.
This is the form of brama that is currently observed in some of the
lowest castes, which is called "the confusion of the senses" and is
accepted by some modern thinkers as the primitive form of brahma, it
seems to me that it is the result of a fall from grace. It is well known that
when a person falls, they become inferior to animals in many respects. It
is enough to recall the unnatural vices of fallen people, unknown to
animals, such as prostitution and prostitution.
However, there are authors who reject even the possibility of such a
concept, which we would be justified in calling "a disorderly mixture of
ideas." "The promiscuity of many dimers," says Warvin, "is
undoubtedly frightening, but I think we need to have more evidence
before we can conclude that there is a complete confusion of ideas
between them... The late A. Smith, who travelled extensively in South
America and made extensive observations on the customs of the tribes there
and in many other places, expressed in the most positive terms that, in
his opinion, there is no race that would have any reason to envy women,
as they are considered property.
On the same subject, Jenimer expresses himself as follows:
"The hypothesis
of disorderlyrelationships
between
partners,
and
the
"Obɲinno7o brama" now has very few supporters. We know that at
present there is not a single nation on earth that has experienced such a
disorderly mixing of peoples. As for historical data testifying to the
existence of such a practice in times long past, it boils down to three or
four excerpts from Herodotus, Strabo and Sozon,    истоɤmование
mоторых    весьма    сомнитеɤьно».ta testifying to the
existence of such a practice in times long past, it boils down to three or
four excerpts from Herodotus, Strabo and Sozon,    истоɤmование
mоторых    весьма    сомнитеɤьно».

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"It is said," says the author, "that every man can mate with every
woman; "just as it happens with animals," adding some research findings, noting
that among animals, the most promiscuous of which are those that mate
indiscriminately, the state of disorderly mixing of the sexes is a rare and
unusual phenomenon. Meanwhile, among many birds and mammals,
there are families based on plurality and even monogamy.
Sh. Neturno expresses himself in the same vein: "Some people
accept," he says, "that the union of women represents the first and
necessary stage of cohabitation in marriage. But, of course, they would
be less confident if they, like us, did not accept the coexistence of
animals, without having familiarised themselves with the coexistence of animals.
Most animals are capable of sincere and jealous love. Birds can serve as
an example of fidelity, constancy, tender affection, and modesty. Most
mammals have already reached a level of morality that is incompatible
with promiscuity. Monkeys, which are not mammals, also do not adhere to
this. There has been confusion, as evidenced by the great multitude of
myths of antiquity and the present time, but it has always been a matter of
interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---not adhere to
this. There has been confusion, as evidenced by the great multitude of
myths of antiquity and the present time, but it has always been a matter of
interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18. SOCNOP
Classes. Why class distinctions are so stubbornly preserved. The
position of the upper classes among civilised people. The reasons for
this situation.
Having dealt with family relations and the status of women in
prehistoric times, we will now turn to social relations, namely the
division of society into classes, into the higher and ruling masses and the
lower masses.
We have already mentioned above that, according to our theory, the
first ruling masses were white-skinned people who were not yet civilised, and
the first slaves were pitemanthropes, i.e. mindless creatures kept by
humans as domestic animals. Consequently, modern higher masses
should be descendants of the higher-level ueovema, and the lower ones
— descendants of pitemantrop. But if the two species interbred, forming
an intermediate race, then the higher species would decline from this
mixing, and the lower species would rise.
It seems that between the former and the latter at present, after many
tens of thousands of years, there should be no difference, neither in
appearance, nor in behaviour, nor in character. Moreover, the higher
societies are doomed to extinction, and the lower ones have no chance of
ever gaining access to the higher ones. In essence, the higher classes
cannot be considered direct descendants of the first "masters".
But we see that this situation still exists today, especially among the
lower classes. The descendants of the former
"7ospod" and to this day are called "noble", "free",
"powerful," "masters," etc., while the former domestic animals are
called "   " "преѕренными," "   " "приниженными," "   "
"ѕɤоmоѕненными,"
"slaves," "servants," "commoners," etc.
In the higher classes, the most advanced members of society try to
eliminate this inequality, but they cannot. If they try to do so by force,
then instead of the old masses, new ones appear: monetary slavery
(represented by capital) and labour slavery (represented by labour), but
the essence of the matter remains the same. The reason for this, as we
shall see in the next chapter, lies in the fact that there is a diference between the
two forms, not only in terms of their social nature, but also in terms of their
anthropological nature, i.e. in terms of their intellectual nature.in the fact that there is a diference between the
two forms, not only in terms of their social nature, but also in terms of their
anthropological nature, i.e. in terms of their intellectual nature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere is a diference between the
two forms, not only in terms of their social nature, but also in terms of their
anthropological nature, i.e. in terms of their intellectual nature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not only social, but also anthropological, i.e. a difference in mental and
linguistic terms, which cannot be eliminated by any means.
What is the reason for this strange phenomenon?
With the emergence of social science, the study of society is
supported by the conservatism of the masses, and with this, perhaps, it
could be argued that there would be no need for anthropological
research. No matter how hard representatives of modern social science
try to ignore it, they try to diminish it, they try to explain it by the
environment and upbringing, but all this is possible only with the theory
of Namar, according to which types change under the influence of
external factors. If this theory is true, as we have argued above, it
fundamentally contradicts the laws of nature, and modern science has no
answer to the question we have posed.
According to our theory, the difference between species can be
explained by accepting the natural law according to which mixed breeds,
such as mules and hinnies, cannot interbreed and never form a permanent
intermediate breed. The same is evidenced by the relationship between
males and females. Secondary sexual characteristics tend to disappear.
The male constantly transfers its properties to the female, and the female
to the male. We have seen above that these species have already
converged many times, and then diverged again. In a monogamous
relationship, both partners should eventually become equal, if nothing else
prevents this, which we assume.
Some information about the existence of tam7o samon is provided
by so7o7ia. "It is known," says Warvin, — when two different breeds
are crossed, there is a strong tendency in the offspring to return to one or both
of the original breeds. But it is impossible to determine whether this is
true, because all traces of this desire are lost. The experience of many
generations of this kind proves that this aspiration can never be
destroyed, that a mixed race can never, under any circumstances, become
extinct.
Although the upper classes in Europe have not completely lost their
former position in society, they have not retained even a shadow of the
privileges enjoyed by their ancestors in ancient times. To understand this
concept, we must turn to the peoplesly lost their
former position in society, they have not retained even a shadow of the
privileges enjoyed by their ancestors in ancient times. To understand this
concept, we must turn to the peoples

--- PAGE BREAK ---r position in society, they have not retained even a shadow of the
privileges enjoyed by their ancestors in ancient times. To understand this
concept, we must turn to the peoples

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dim and barbaric, yet all their antiquities are preserved better than ours. A
particularly vivid picture of the situation will emerge before us if we gather
together the relevant customs of different peoples.
The difference between social classes is most evident in the area of
religion. The upper classes do not mix with the lower classes, not only
in society, but even in their daily lives. Paradise is reserved for the
upper classes, and hell for the lower classes, and a special paradise is
reserved for the upper classes, to which the lower classes are not allowed to
enter. and if they are admitted, then it is not surprising that in their own minds,
they believe that it is right to kill the slaves of the higher masses. Similar
views on life were not only held by the dimare, but even by the confessors
of those relatively high ranks, mam mametanstvo. Accordingly, they
distinguished between social classes in rituals, especially in funerals. In
everyday life, the lower classes could not use public roads, could not
build their huts on them, and could not visit the market. When approached by
a member of the higher class, they were obliged to hide in a hut and
announce their presence from there. They were not allowed to approach
the higher society, and when they met him, they fell down, remained on the
ground, and stayed in that position until they were allowed to get up. If
they are addressed by a higher-ranking person, they must respond to
him, but not in the plural. In the absence of such customs, simple people
are subject to severe punishment and even death.
The highest authorities, together with the morop, belong to the entire
family in the 7th state,   they   mo7ɤи   namasuvati,   ueuиuvati   and
even kill a simple person. And for this reason, it is forbidden to attack
representatives of the highest society, even in war, unless they belong to
the enemy. The punishment for killing a member of the higher society is
higher than for killing a commoner. The punishment for murder of a
nobleman is lower than that for murder of a commoner.
On the other hand, it is not customary for the nobility to enter the huts
of the common people, who are considered to be unworthy. He could not
help but admire the lower classes and be with them, but even drink the wine
they had prepared for him.
It goes without saying that it is a privilege to weare considered to be unworthy. He could not
help but admire the lower classes and be with them, but even drink the wine
they had prepared for him.
It goes without saying that it is a privilege to wear

--- PAGE BREAK ---nworthy. He could not
help but admire the lower classes and be with them, but even drink the wine
they had prepared for him.
It goes without saying that it is a privilege to wear

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Weapons are considered to be the highest form of social status, and those below
this status are not allowed to carry weapons, have tattoos, clothing known to
be worn by the upper classes, riding on horseback, etc.
According to our theory, the 7-fold gap between the common people
and the higher classes of society is completely understandable and natural,
and is a reflection of the actual difference between them in intellectual and
linguistic terms. But from the point of view of the accepted theory,
which allows for the separation of the upper classes from the lower
classes and the acquisition of all privileges through usurpation, through
a series of deceptions and abuses, this position can be explained as
artificial, far-fetched and therefore unsatisfactory. The accepted theory does not
believe in anything; it presupposes an incredible amount of life and death in
the universe and, moreover, it assumes the existence of a universal order,
which is completely different from what we have described, found
everywhere, wherever there is even the slightest resemblance to a state
and an organised society. And the main mistake of this view is that it ignores the
anthropological connection between societies, which has been known
since ancient times to both the highest and lowest classes.
The last three words in the ruling class and in the representations of
the highest social strata are not clear, but they are based on terms used by
the people to distinguish one mass from another. For example, we Russians are
familiar with the name given to the highest authorities — "the white
guard" — which was not used ironically at all in the past, but is now. Our
sovereign's people are not called "begay" without reason, while the
common people are called
"uepnyy narod" (the faithful people), "uepnye" (the faithful) and
"uepnya" (the faithful). We see the same thing among the Turkic
peoples. There, for example, the Mir7isy and Uryanhay of
Taraba7ataymo call their highest masses "am suyum" (the most), and,
moreover, they divide them into "uepny" and "middle".g among the Turkic
peoples. There, for example, the Mir7isy and Uryanhay of
Taraba7ataymo call their highest masses "am suyum" (the most), and,
moreover, they divide them into "uepny" and "middle".

--- PAGE BREAK ---peoples. There, for example, the Mir7isy and Uryanhay of
Taraba7ataymo call their highest masses "am suyum" (the most), and,
moreover, they divide them into "uepny" and "middle".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19. FIENESKIE RAENINIP
MEMOV WITH THE HIGHEST
CLASSES AND
LOWER CLASSES
Physical differences between the upper and lower classes in
Polynesia, Africa, Russia, ancient Germany, and modern Europe. Social
stratification. Physical differences between social classes in Italy, Spain,
England, Ireland, Scotland, Germany, and Russia.
Such stories are found everywhere. About the Tasmanians, now
extinct, it is written that "their chiefs were tall and strong men." About the Tapiyo
people (in South America), it is said that "the bodies of their chiefs are
larger than those of the rest of the people, and their heads are larger than
those of the rest of the people." On the Sandwich Islands, the chiefs are
"tall and strong, and in their appearance they surpass the common
people, so that some consider them to belong to a separate race." It is
said of the Tahitians that their chiefs "are in every respect superior to the
common people in terms of their physical appearance, and even more so
in terms of their rank and position." A similar distinction is made among the
Tongan people. In L'Épée, we find a description of the chief of the
island of Viti-Nevo: "He was tall, reaching 5 feet 9 inches, he had a
correct posture, a truly beautiful face, despite his gloominess, a noble and at
the same time quiet appearance, calm, dignified, and not at all
pretentious, which strangely contradicts the nature of the eloquent
maniacs. In this case, as in many others, says the traveller, I can see that
the aristocracy comes from families who are most gifted in terms of
intelligence and morality.
Highest mass:
Lowest mass:
Light weight:
Approximates
European
Dark brown and
light brown
Texture:
Slender
No 7raiosity
Height:
Tall
Short
Voice:
Tall
Short
Nio:
Long and thin Wide and flatorality.
Highest mass:
Lowest mass:
Light weight:
Approximates
European
Dark brown and
light brown
Texture:
Slender
No 7raiosity
Height:
Tall
Short
Voice:
Tall
Short
Nio:
Long and thin Wide and flat

--- PAGE BREAK ---s:
Lowest mass:
Light weight:
Approximates
European
Dark brown and
light brown
Texture:
Slender
No 7raiosity
Height:
Tall
Short
Voice:
Tall
Short
Nio:
Long and thin Wide and flat

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Smy:
—
Outstanding
Mouth:
Small
Very large
Hands:
Thin, skinny, small in size
and delicate in build
Legs:
Strong
Short
The same can be observed among aristocratic women: "Court ladies are
tall and elegant; they are graceful and refined; their beauty is lively and
dignified. Those of medium height are often also beautiful, but in most
cases they are short, stout and unattractive; in the lower classes, it is rare
to find a beautiful appearance; we find there people who are thin, tall,
and sometimes even ugly. "In Nittam, the highest classes are distinguished
b y a brighter complexion, a more refined physique, and more European
features. I n many cases, the Mitayevs, who lived among prosperity and
enlightenment, were replaced by the Monog race and gave way to the noble
ones."
Similar information about the modern types of the Japanese people
was collected by the German anthropologist Prvin Beg, who was a
professor at Tokyo University for 17 years.
"In Europe," says the old man, "The folk types of Ponia, i.e. the
lower classes of the urban population and the peasants, produce a more
vivid impression, but they cannot be compared to the representatives of the
higher classes. The latter often resemble Mamaks, and sometimes even
Jews. Later, thanks to their distinctive hooked noses, the special shape of
their upper teeth, and their protruding jaws, they became unmistakable.
The difference between the two types is evident in the presented
tables.
There is also considerable evidence in literature of differences in
appearance between the upper and lower classes in Western Europe.
These differences have existed for a long time, as might be expected. In
the Germanic 3rd century, it is said that the Germanic people were divided
into three classes. According to the myth, they are represented by dark-
haired men with rough features, "free people" (in our terms, "men") have
light-coloured hair and eyes, while the dark-skinned people have dark hair
and eyes. These data do not coincide with the modern observations of
Niapuzha, according to which the landed gentry always provides the
largest percentage of bonded labourers, the middle class gives a smaller
percentage, and the common people give the smallest percentage.zha, according to which the landed gentry always provides the
largest percentage of bonded labourers, the middle class gives a smaller
percentage, and the common people give the smallest percentage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich the landed gentry always provides the
largest percentage of bonded labourers, the middle class gives a smaller
percentage, and the common people give the smallest percentage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the smallest.
But the situation is not limited to one single factor. Ramme says that
"the differences between European societies in terms of the relationship
between the organs of the body, such as the head, chest, neck, arms, legs, etc., is
observed in the relations between the Aryans, Semites and Lappish peoples,
and between the white people and both yellow races, and that in general it is
greater the difference between representatives of the European peoples.
According to Mayr's observations, the average height of European men is
4.3 cm less than their height, while that of women exceeds their height
by 5.7 cm. Darwin states that "the difference is generally smaller in thin
and refined people than in strong and robust ones." According to
measurements of stomachs on an old Parisian map made by Brom, it
appears that the stomach capacity of the upper classes is greater than that
of ordinary workers. "The rich," says Nogier, "are more generous than the
poor, who are simply workers." In addition, according to Riga, "in the
urban population (of Europe), the situation is the same as among the
proletariat, where men and women are completely identical. The women
of this people in men's clothing are not distinguished from the men. Old
women and old men in particular look like each other, one egg to another."
This is also characteristic of the lower classes. According to official
statistics, old age and senility occur 10-15 years earlier among the poor than
among the independent.
But the most reliable data on the external appearance of the European
aristocracy compared to the common people is provided by
anthropological studies, represented by: Niapuzh, Ammon, Penma, and
others.
Napuzh emphasises what is called "the principle of social
stratification," according to which the higher (educated) classes are more
dignified, while among the lower classes and the proletariat, it is more
common among the former than among the latter. For example, the
average income of the educated masses is 82.7, that of the working class is 84,
and that of the poor is 86–86.5. At the same time, the volume of
consumption among the higher classes is greater than among the lower
classes.
The same result is obtained when comparing the average values
obtained from 7 residents and 7 non-residents. The latter are more likely
to be motorised. The data was collected in this way for many cities in Central
Europe and their surroundings in France, Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, Italy and Spain. The above statement is justified, with the
exception of twocollected in this way for many cities in Central
Europe and their surroundings in France, Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, Italy and Spain. The above statement is justified, with the
exception of two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

countries.
Spanish anthropologist O'Gorry confirmed this with measurements
taken in Madrid and Barcelona, but in other cities, such as Seville,
Zaragoza and Magallanes, the results were inconsistent, i.e. urban residents were
no more active than rural residents. Moreover, in the cities of Granada and
Valencia, the inhabitants are even less urbanised than the villagers. The
same is true of our Nivi in Italy. The northern provinces, such as Milan and
Florence, confirm this, but in the southern provinces of Bari, Messina and
Palermo, rural life is even less urbanised than in the cities.
These facts can be explained by the spread of the so-called "Ibero-
Insular" race in southern Europe, which, as mentioned above, is
characterised by a dark complexion and tall stature. This race is found in
Spain and Italy in some places, especially in the south, where the
population is mixed, while in the north, Europeans of a less dark-
skinned race live.
John Beddoe made the same measurements in England and found the
same results, but according to other data, there are undoubtedly external
differences between the higher and lower classes in England. There,
according to Herbert Spencer, the professional classes are "taller and
stronger, and more industrious." The average height of men of the upper
classes is 1.757 m, while that of workers is 1.705 m. And according to
Harvin, "Anglican workers are already taller at birth than
representatives of the middle class (Gentry)".
In Iran, according to Ranmè's description, the poor in 7oɤodny omru7a are
distinguished by "sunken eyes, exposed gums, protruding teeth, flat noses,
thick bellies, and thin legs." Charles Fort adds to this description that the
poor throughout Europe have the same appearance.tinguished by "sunken eyes, exposed gums, protruding teeth, flat noses,
thick bellies, and thin legs." Charles Fort adds to this description that the
poor throughout Europe have the same appearance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In England, in contrast to the rest of Europe, there is an anomaly in
terms of height. The local inhabitants are taller, but racial differences
between individuals are evident in their appearance:
"In India," we read, "there is a great difference between the
inhabitants of cities and villages. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of villages
are usually tall, thin, with raised shoulders, agile in their movements,
while the inhabitants of towns are mostly of average height, and, despite
this, lively and energetic in their movements. The inhabitants of the
towns are also distinguished by their greater wealth and elegance than the
inhabitants of the villages. Peasant girls are especially distinguished by
their unkempt appearance and heavy, sluggish gait. Even in their youth, they take
on a somewhat stooped posture, and their shoulders, unable to bear the weight,
hang down heavily. The posture of the peasant standing still is particularly
striking. All of them stop along the road and chat with their companions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---unable to bear the weight,
hang down heavily. The posture of the peasant standing still is particularly
striking. All of them stop along the road and chat with their companions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stand with their legs wide apart, their hands in their trouser pockets, and
their heads turned to one side.
In Germany, according to Ammon, the difference between city
dwellers and rural dwellers lies not only in the fact that city dwellers are
more sophisticated, but also in that they are taller and there are more
blondes and redheads among them.
The highest social classes in Europe differ from the lower classes in
that they develop earlier and mature earlier than the lower classes.
Nombros believes that the maximum growth rate for "rich" girls is
between the ages of 12 and 14, and for "poor" girls between the ages of
13 and 15. According to Ammon's research, the non-urban population
shows a slightly more pronounced physical development, which is more
noticeable. For example, they develop facial hair earlier. In general, the
physical development of the new recruits trained by Ammon is several
years ahead of that of the villagers. The same is true of the co-workers, but to
a lesser extent in Russia. According to the observations of Dr. Bensen7ra,
in Moscow, the period of sexual maturity begins earlier among the nobility
— between the ages of 9 and 12, then among the clergy and the
educated class — between the ages of 13 and 16, and, finally, later than
anyone else among the commoners — from 17 to 22 years of age. Weber came
to a similar conclusion in St. Petersburg.
T h i s
phenomenon has been observed in Paris, Vienna,
Strasbourg, Germany and Bavaria. It has been known for a long time,
and has been written about by Hippo Gvarinonius in 1610, Marm
d'Espin, Tamudiuesm, and others.
Thus, there is a significant anthropological difference between the
highest classes of Europe and the lowest, which allows for the possibility
of the European aristocracy being dominated by another race, which we
are working with.
We Russians,   from   our own   experience,   are well   aware of the
peculiarities that distinguish the common people from the intelligentsia.  We
have   сто7о   суɲествуют   even special terms: "вуɤь7арный" and
"common people", characterised not only by their appearance and
clothing, but also by their gait, manners and even character and behaviour.
Since we are dealing with a very diverse and complex historical
process, it is natural that we cannot expect uniformity among them.
There are also solitary   and   ɯеɤые   villages,   in   mоторых
external   отɤиuияwith a very diverse and complex historical
process, it is natural that we cannot expect uniformity among them.
There are also solitary   and   ɯеɤые   villages,   in   mоторых
external   отɤиuия

--- PAGE BREAK ---

common people from integration ouень сɤабы, маɤо ѕаметны, but ѕато there
are other areas where they are persecuted and forced to flee into 7ɤаѕа.
The common people themselves are also afraid, they are afraid to speak
out, they are afraid of the authorities, and they call representatives of the lower
classes "grey men, grey-haired, watchmen" and so on.
Itam, the type of Russian peasant-wagoner is well known to us, so there
is no need to select literary evidence. Therefore, as a reminder, we will
give here some characteristics of him, compiled from various sources, in
different parts of our country.
For example, Mamogus Ston7raɭ, Osmār Kogber7, describes Russian
peasants living above Bu7om, in Sedɤeɯmoy 7uberniya: "Their skin is
usually poor and sallow, their hair is coarse and rather unkempt. The men are
also unattractive; at times, however, there is a sallow, mysterious, with
graceful movements and expressive gestures, and seems to be from another
country, having grown up among the wild herbs of the steppes." And here
is a description of the appearance of the people of Orzhemo by the writer
3Gisa: "Their movements are heavy and sluggish, even in their youth, their
eyes are apathetic, their gaze is gloomy, they are cheerful and quick-witted, their
speech is honeyed, eloquent, and confused." About the appearance of
the inhabitants of the 7th district of the 7th region of the 7th province, they
write:
"The growth of life is greater than average, smiling and cheerful, with a
pleasant disposition, men and women alike, but they are not attractive and
their very appearance is harsh and rough."

--- PAGE BREAK ---f life is greater than average, smiling and cheerful, with a
pleasant disposition, men and women alike, but they are not attractive and
their very appearance is harsh and rough."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20. CHARACTER AND MIND
OF THE CLASSES
The character and mind of the classes. Similarities between the
classes of Europe and the savages. The difference between the nobility
and the common people among the French. The character of the Polish
peasant. The Russian common people. The Nedry type of Kowow.
Similarities between this type and people of the Mongolian race.
With regard to the character of the lower classes in Western European
literature, it is not at all uncommon to find a parallel drawn between
them and the damned. In his essay "The Child," Nembergen quotes
Manuvrie, who observed this phenomenon in the Parisian Garden of
Amusement in the 18th century. According to him, the ambassadors
resemble rural peasants who live a secluded life somewhere in the
countryside, where they lead a simple, monotonous life, devoid of any
excitement. If, he says, you were to compare the 7ambists with
Europeans, they would be on a par with the ignorant ɭranɯusmich peasants
living in the big cities.
"Without a doubt," says Shar Nertuno, "in civilised countries there
exists a higher morality, completely incomprehensible to primitive
people and even beyond their understanding, but if we take the trouble
to observe Europeans carefully, we wil find among us many who are at the same
stage of development, like the central African tribes, incapable of mental
attention, incapable of any work requiring responsible thinking, and still
entrenched in primitive animism. The Hottentots, seeing European ships
and animals for the first time, took them for living beings; but many of
our Breton peasants think the same about the homomotive, when they first
travelled by rail to their province. The poor, especially the lower classes,
drink themselves into a stupor, but the same thing happens to well-
educated Europeans. Many of our peasants read and write arithmetic,
unlike the lower classes and, in fact, primitive people. It seems obvious
that there is no particular reason for this. Without a doubt, the Bible
contains thousands ofts read and write arithmetic,
unlike the lower classes and, in fact, primitive people. It seems obvious
that there is no particular reason for this. Without a doubt, the Bible
contains thousands of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ithmetic,
unlike the lower classes and, in fact, primitive people. It seems obvious
that there is no particular reason for this. Without a doubt, the Bible
contains thousands of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sometimes, even in unfamiliar languages, but it has long been established
that an uneducated person needs to know enough unfamiliar
expressions.
If the nobility has the greatest variety of names, then the common
people, according to him, play a secondary role in the development of new
intellectual paths. If we were to calculate the intellectual productivity of
the various social classes, then one nobleman would be equal to 20
merchants and 200 commoners.
But the mam po's stnopaly characterise the lowest type of commoners:
The nobleman is very attached to his loved ones: after the death of his
wife, he does not bring another woman into his home for a week. He is
distrustful and suspicious. Even when he is happy, the peasant always
sees some secret thoughts and desires in his wife and tries to suppress
them. He does not trust gentlemen and ladies and i s stubbornly indifferent
t o the intelligentsia and everyone dressed in frock coats. In his
relations with him, he is always uncompromising. He does not agree
with his mother's social views, even though he has his own. He shows no
sign of jealousy towards his own wealth; neither requests nor threats can
force him to part with it. He is extremely cautious. The example of an
enlightened government does not affect the local people, for whom the
wisest policy is to stick to the old ways. He is extremely conservative:
every village has its own unchanging customs, which everyone adheres
to. The peasants' figures, costumes, and expressions are characterised by
these unchanging features, which are so familiar to the local area that
one can say with confidence to a peasant: "You are the master of
Tarnaproda, you are Krasnima, you are Kreshova," and so on. In some
areas, the peasant takes on a servile attitude. When he passes by a
neighbouring estate, even if the owner is not at home, he always takes
off his hat. He treats not only the servants, but even the servants'
children with respect. To those who are intelligent and, at least, dressed
in a respectable manner, he addresses them with respect and takes off
his hat at every meeting. During conversations with them, he always
stands with his head uncovered, and even if he is asked to put on his hat,
he will not do so.
In summary, we will give some examples that characterise
Russian   common people.   About   beɤoruссах   3ɤиѕаith his head uncovered, and even if he is asked to put on his hat,
he will not do so.
In summary, we will give some examples that characterise
Russian   common people.   About   beɤoruссах   3ɤиѕа

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed, and even if he is asked to put on his hat,
he will not do so.
In summary, we will give some examples that characterise
Russian   common people.   About   beɤoruссах   3ɤиѕа

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Orzheshmo writes that "the people who are always suspicious of
everything are incapable of thinking and are indifferent to everything
that is not directly related to their immediate needs and interests." They
write about these people that "their attention is not focused on the
subjects being taught."
"Secretive, superstitious notions about everyday life," writes a local priest
about the dead, "insane superstitions about the soul and its connection with the
body. And this is not surprising. Since, due to his immaturity, he cannot
correctly understand the visible world, the tangible world, then the
intangible world and the subjects of faith are even more inaccessible to
his understanding. Ask him whether he can imagine the soul, whether he
believes it lives on after death, and you will hear from him an indifferent
answer: "We are ignorant people, how can we know about such things,
God only knows."
In addition to what we mentioned above about diaries that cannot
withstand even 7m0 voltage, we mentioned above about the dimars,
who could not even bear the tension of the mos7a, the same applies to   cɤуuиɤось
us   find   and   about   ниѕших   сосɤовиях   Europe.
"It is well known," writes Prof. Shymiev, "that people who have spent
their entire lives doing physical labour cannot tolerate mental stress at
all. A healthy peasant, placed in an office, after prolonged mental strain,
sometimes faints."
Mental immobility in simple people is sometimes accompanied by
extreme conservatism. About the 7уɯуɤах (Russian 7орɯах in Gaɤиɯии),
Gogovaym says: "They build houses according to the custom of their
ancestors; the harness of the oxen, the clothing of the men and the
jewellery of the women, down to the smallest detail, the colour of the clothing
down to the smallest detail, and the trim of everything is definite and unchanging,
as if carved in stone and sculpted by a master craftsman."
But here is evidence of the generosity and security of the peasants,
characteristics that are particularly characteristic of the dimary: "If a
Belarusian has no worries about his immediate needs, he usually thinks about the
future." Belarusians are also known for their peacefulness, which is reflected
in the following saying: "The kindness and respect of a neighbour do not
provoke harsh responses in a modern Belarusian, even in the face of a heated
argument. When friends urge him to go to court and "get even," the
peasant replies, "Let God take care of him." The peasant may not be
offended by the insult, but he is very sensitive to the offence caused to
him. Robberies and thefts, which occur in other areas during difficult
years of poor harvests, are completely unknown inbe
offended by the insult, but he is very sensitive to the offence caused to
him. Robberies and thefts, which occur in other areas during difficult
years of poor harvests, are completely unknown in

--- PAGE BREAK ---insult, but he is very sensitive to the offence caused to
him. Robberies and thefts, which occur in other areas during difficult
years of poor harvests, are completely unknown in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mo7iɤevsmih belarusov. Namely, here is one feature that distinguishes our
countrymen from other peoples, which is not obvious, but which
essentially stems from a highly developed nervous system — a certain
indifference to death. "It is difficult to imagine," writes Lembovetsky,
"how fearlessly and calmly a Belarusian peasant meets death. With rare
clarity, the dying man recounts his oral confessions in the most vivid
detail, accepting not only his relatives, but also their future lives in
subtle nuances.
In our literature, there are many types of characters that characterise
our "strong men", Many types are brought out in our stories, essays and
novels, but nowhere do I find such a character, in terms of his logical fidelity
and depth of psychological analysis, the Russian "Vakhama", as described by
Edrin in his "Poshekhonskaya Starina" (The Old Days of Poshekhon).
The type of Konona, which I am talking about, may not be particularly
common among Russian peasants, but it is nevertheless a widespread
type. In my travels among the people to collect historical material, I
often encounter it, and not only among Russian peasants, but also among
Belarusians, Poles, and our eastern neighbours: votami, uperemami, and
especially many among the common people, which gives even that grey
and gloomy character to the village, which Russian travellers complain
about in the village. I will not go into detail about this type of person, but I
cannot resist making a few observations which embody the very essence
of the negative experience:
Konona "first learned tailoring, but since the tailor is not much better
than him, he will do that. And tomorrow they will put him in charge of
the herd — he will be a shepherd. In this way, his whole worldview was
formed. His thoughts seemed irrevocable to him, and the reason for their
appearance never aroused any doubt in him. In fact, his whole life is like a
continuous and, moreover, incoherent dream; he has no initiative
whatsoever, no desire, no conscious order. And he was never interested in
knowing what his work was, and everything was fine with him.
He was very quiet. He didn't talk to anyone, even though he was related to the
whole neighbourhood. Some kind ofwas never interested in
knowing what his work was, and everything was fine with him.
He was very quiet. He didn't talk to anyone, even though he was related to the
whole neighbourhood. Some kind of

--- PAGE BREAK ---d in
knowing what his work was, and everything was fine with him.
He was very quiet. He didn't talk to anyone, even though he was related to the
whole neighbourhood. Some kind of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

indifference was written on his face. No one saw any joy in his eyes, but
even the slightest hint of pleasure, but it was not joy, but a dull mass.
Undoubtedly, he will never give up, never sell out, and never even think
about it, but all his efforts will be in vain. It would be impossible to entrust
him with everything, because in such a situation it would be necessary to go
into such detail that it would be completely impossible to foresee
everything. If he did not think everything through to the end, then at the
first unforeseen circumstance, he would be completely at a loss and
would get confused, and it would be impossible to untangle the
situation. He is incapable of coming up with anything on his own, nor
does he have the slightest sense of reason.
If Konon were to be transported to Asia and placed among the local
dimaries, he would not be able to distinguish between them, even if he
were blindfolded. In general, the apathetic, indifferent character of our
people, and especially of the common people, clearly distinguishes them
from the representatives of the noble race, judging by what they tell travellers
about the monstrous creatures.
Przezwski, for example, describes a dance (in Central Asia) as
"people of a gloomy disposition, who never laugh or rejoice, and whose
children never play or have fun."
About Kumynors, travellers say that "they have a dull expression, are
slow-witted, senseless, gloomy, and melancholic. They have neither
energy nor passion, but rather a complete indifference to everything in
the world, except for food. Kumynorsky himself, who is quite intelligent,
when talking to us about his subjects, said frankly that they resemble
humans in appearance, but in everything else they are definitely different.
About oros and tasas (in the Vssurysky district), General Przewalski
writes: "The appearance of the unknown produces no greater fear in people
than in their dogs. There is a great difference between the unknown and the
familiar. He (the wolf) satisfies all his desires and, like an animal, is
only concerned with satisfying his hunger. He eats meat and fish, then goes
hunting and sleeps, until the sun forces him to get up again, spread his bed
in a smoky, smelly hut and make himself a new one. He spends his
whole life like this: today is no different from yesterday, tomorrow will
be the same. Not today. No feelings, no emotions, nos bed
in a smoky, smelly hut and make himself a new one. He spends his
whole life like this: today is no different from yesterday, tomorrow will
be the same. Not today. No feelings, no emotions, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---melly hut and make himself a new one. He spends his
whole life like this: today is no different from yesterday, tomorrow will
be the same. Not today. No feelings, no emotions, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There is no joy, no hope, no spiritual life, nothing at all. I am now
convinced that there is a great gulf between the civilised and the uncivilised,
not between the latter and the higher animals.
This mentality is characteristic of other peoples of the Mongoloid race, as
can be seen, among other things, from the fact that Ninney, in his
massification of the concept of "     " (     —     ), attributes the
character of "     " to it.
"meɤanhoɤiniuесmий", then mаm uерная раса, according to its definition, has
the character "хоɤеriuесmий" and "ɭɤе7матиuесmий". In fact, the same
characteristics, as well as those of the monogamous, are attributed to the
related polyamorous Americans: "Everyone," says Warvin, "who has a
basis for comparison is probably struck by the contrast between the
mobile and even immobile peoples of South America and the good-
natured, talkative Indians."
Here it should be noted that the character, apparently, is in
accordance with the form of the letter. Therefore, the monstrous race is
attributed with a melancholic character, while we find completely opposite
references to the monstrous creatures. "Children," according to the words
of the traveller Gaveyama, "are our children, tireless talkers; one can say
that their minds are restless; everything gives them cause for endless
laughter and boisterousness." And the famous traveller to Arabia,
Nivinstone, says that "the Ne7ry cannot contain their laughter. No matter
how unfortunate the circumstance, if, for example, the wind blows a bag of
grain from a carrier's shoulders and he drops something, everyone who
sees it bursts out laughing; if someone sits down on the sidelines,
everyone greets him with the same laughter.
The data we have presented in the last two paragraphs sufficiently
convince us that there are significant differences between the various
types of the same people in the same country, between the higher and
lower races of the community, and the lower masses, by their very nature,
undoubtedly resemble the lower races.
Having gathered together all the features that distinguish the lower masses
from the higher, we are convinced that these features belong to the
pithecanthropus. If we see tall stature among the common people of
Yutandsmo7o, and short stature among the Italians and Spaniards, then this
phenomenon should not confuse us, as it is due to the high stature of the
Patagonians and the short stature of the Neferites.
Some of the lower classes, it seems, have been deprived of their rights.phenomenon should not confuse us, as it is due to the high stature of the
Patagonians and the short stature of the Neferites.
Some of the lower classes, it seems, have been deprived of their rights.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some are one thing, some are another, and some are of the highest race.
And their characteristics remain completely the same, as the characteristics
of any given race remain the same in many respects within the same
family. But since they are similar to pithecanthropus in all other respects, it
becomes obvious that the motor we are talking about does not exist in
their organism in any other form. No one, of course, will deny that there are
differences in language, customs, habits and race, which give each group a
special character, but this does not prevent us from distinguishing
between higher and lower groups.
Undoubtedly, within every nation, the process of constantly mixing
all the characteristics of different groups and bringing them all to the same
level has the opposite effect to the first one, uniting the diverse and
diverse elements of human society. Without it, our dream of harmony,
equality and brotherhood would have long since been realised.
We will discuss this process below.

--- PAGE BREAK ---diverse and
diverse elements of human society. Without it, our dream of harmony,
equality and brotherhood would have long since been realised.
We will discuss this process below.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21. THE ORIGIN OF ROYAL
POWER
The origin of royal power. The position of rulers among ancient and
modern semi-civilised peoples and savages. The theory of Herbert
Spencer that man is the first god. Evidence for this position. The
degeneration of the race of gods. The origin of monotheism.
In order to form an opinion on this very interesting question, we
have no other means than to familiarise ourselves with the current
situation in the countries of the elders, moropey, leaders, elders and other
influential persons. But in civilised countries, customs are changing
rapidly, and it is difficult to understand what is new and what belongs to
the distant past. For this reason, we will be closer to the source, and
consider the situation of the ancient world among the peoples of the East
and the barbarians, who in all respects are closer to the remains of ancient
times.
The inhabitants of countries and peoples who are not civilised
simply worship deities during their lifetime, and they become tamed after
death. The entire stay of the gods on earth is considered a temporary
stage in the life of the "divinely born". They come from heaven, fate
keeps them here, and then, in the form of souls, they return to their
heavenly life. The threads of their existence are woven high above the
earth. King Ida7a (in Alrim) said to the angels: "God created me in his own
image, I am equal to God, and he made me a moron." Even if the other
gods do not c u r r e n t l y consider themselves gods, their power is
still expressed in a multitude of ceremonies that equate them with gods.
Sometimes they are called "sons of heaven" and attribute their power
"receive from heaven."
Wherever they are not, people treat them with superstitious fear and
think that rain and harvest depend on them, and therefore consider them
to be powerful gods.
In some countries, the very name of the deity is unknown to the
people, and even to some of the clergy, although it is known, it cannot be
pronounced because of its extraordinary holiness. Moreover, when
entering it, they use the everyday language of their subjects.le, and even to some of the clergy, although it is known, it cannot be
pronounced because of its extraordinary holiness. Moreover, when
entering it, they use the everyday language of their subjects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the clergy, although it is known, it cannot be
pronounced because of its extraordinary holiness. Moreover, when
entering it, they use the everyday language of their subjects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

subjects. Sometimes he replaces his name with a title, which means
neither more nor less than "master." In other cases, the title is something like
this: "Lord of our souls, almighty, eternal, unchanging, incomprehensible."
It is not uncommon to see him as a subject, and it is not uncommon to
see him as a subject, mam he eats. Their faces are hidden: their eyes, ears,
mouths, and noses are covered with veils, and they cannot be touched,
nor even called by name.
You can walk past the fence from the known side. It is not necessary
to follow him, and you can just wait on the sidelines. When passing by, you
must throw yourself on the ground and rub your hands and feet, exposing
your genitals and everything else.
Whoever falls into the shadow of his own shadow, steps on his
shadow, and covers it with his own shadow, is subject to mortal
punishment.
If he does something, his subjects imitate all his actions. He stands, and
everyone stands; he sits down, and everyone sits down; if he cries,
everyone cries, and a passer-by must enter the water, even if he is dressed.
If he shouts, cries, or laughs, everyone does the same.
The king is considered the owner of his subjects; he can kill them
and sell them. Not only is his power considered sacred, but even
everything that surrounds him. No one may enter his house, for it is
sacred; no one may touch him. Anything that has ben used by a moraya can no
longer be used by mere mortals. These things are given to them in the
form of gifts and donations, even in the absence of their owner. They are
not spoken of directly, but are expressed in a roundabout way, for
example, they are called "raduyoy" (rainbow), "lamety" (lightning),
"osvezhayushchee e7o" (illuminating) or "   " (life-giving), etc.
"mognia", etc.
When a mороɤь dies, thousands of people are killed on its мо7иɤе, and
then it is watered with uеɤовеuесmой mровью from time to time.
These customs are still preserved today among nomadic and pastoral
peoples, but they were once widespread, judging by the fact that in
civilised countries we find numerous traces of them in the form of various
ancient customs. Therefore, moving b e y o n d the modern position, we
ask ourselves: is the position of the Aryans, Asians and other ancient peoples
mороɤей, surrounded
by
high
poet,
correspond to their merits? — then the answer, of course, may bemodern position, we
ask ourselves: is the position of the Aryans, Asians and other ancient peoples
mороɤей, surrounded
by
high
poet,
correspond to their merits? — then the answer, of course, may be

--- PAGE BREAK ---ask ourselves: is the position of the Aryans, Asians and other ancient peoples
mороɤей, surrounded
by
high
poet,
correspond to their merits? — then the answer, of course, may be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3ti moro — the same 7ruby dimari, mam and their subjects.
In that case, is their ascension to heaven nothing more than the most
obvious thing? But why is this repeated by hundreds of peoples in
different parts of the world without any connection between them? Is it
not because they are naturally lively creatures?
I find that impossible. Of course, people can live in separate
communities, and that kind of life is necessary. But for different peoples in
different parts of the world to express the same idea in exactly the same
way seems to me to be highly improbable. I think that in everything that
different peoples attribute to their ancestors, there is certainly a grain of
truth.
All of the above-described customs and traditions were established in
ancient times, as evidenced by the fact that they existed in the same
form in Egypt, Assyria, Phoenicia, etc., and have been known since time
immemorial. Therefore, what seems to us to be false now may have been true
in ancient times and become false now, because ancient beliefs have
outlived their time. They may have been true under different
circumstances, with different people, and become true now because the
circumstances, the situation, and the people themselves have changed.
But in this situation, new questions arise. Firstly, were there
conditions under which a people could consider one of their own to be
the son of heaven, almighty and inscrutable, treat him with superstitious
fear, and imitate him in everything? Who was this god, credited with the
ability to bring rain, harvests and prosperity?
I think that the conditions for such a situation not only existed in
ancient times, but even exist today. Are modern Hasidic Jews not
following their ancestors, who are still alive? Are they not sincere and
faithful, and still not convinced of the infallibility of the Pope? Do we,
modern, educated Europeans, not constantly revere the living memories
of famous writers, military heroes, highly moral people, and even simple
artists    and    singers?   We    call    them "divine,"
"divine," and in a sense we adore them, which, as we say, "is sent down
from above." No matter what we do, no matter what we do, no matter
what, we want to leave something behind.them "divine,"
"divine," and in a sense we adore them, which, as we say, "is sent down
from above." No matter what we do, no matter what we do, no matter
what, we want to leave something behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---divine," and in a sense we adore them, which, as we say, "is sent down
from above." No matter what we do, no matter what we do, no matter
what, we want to leave something behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

world-renowned, but even to be represented by them. Wouldn't we be
lucky if Newton, Darwin and other similar geniuses were born in our
country?
If we rely on our devoted subjects in all these matters, it is because we
consider them to be loyal servants, among whom no traitors can appear.
But this is a hypothesis, not based on anything, inspired by our pride and
high opinion of modern civilisation. Meanwhile, according to the theory
of the origin of the universe that I am discussing here, one might think
that in ancient prehistoric times, when the universe was still in its infancy,
did not have their own gods, from whom people created their own gods,
but their gods were higher than ours in terms of natural intelligence, and
there was less admixture of pithecanthropus in their race.
But if that were the case, then, naturally, the ancients would have
placed the gods in the centre of their states and worshipped them during
their lifetime, and after their death, they would have transferred their
worship to their descendants and their images. Naturally, the gods of
antiquity were not representations of nature, as we think, but rather folk
deities.
Herbert Spencer, considering the origin of objects, and proceeding
from this, that all myths converge in the worship of objects, and that the
sanctity of objects increases with the length of time since their death, he
comes to the correct conclusion that "the primitive god is the most
powerful, tusemei and uyuzemei, surpassing the rest of the people of this world,
loved by them during their lifetime and even more loved after their
death."
Indeed, in folk tales, known in our country as milo7ia, gods are
depicted as very human. First, they are mortal. Herbert Spencer
concludes with the following words: "In the story of Buddha, when asked
about a corpse he encountered, he replied: "This is the fate of all beings:
gods, humans, rich, poor, all must die." The gods die and are reborn, then
return to Asura. The same is true of the Egyptian gods: in Philae and
Abydos there are images depicting the resurrection of Osiris. And although
in the Greek pantheon we have only one example of the death of a god,
namely Pan, nevertheless Greek legends give us reason to believe in the
original mortality of their gods.
"In the Scandinavian legends about Odin, Frey, Njord and othersample of the death of a god,
namely Pan, nevertheless Greek legends give us reason to believe in the
original mortality of their gods.
"In the Scandinavian legends about Odin, Frey, Njord and others

--- PAGE BREAK ---f a god,
namely Pan, nevertheless Greek legends give us reason to believe in the
original mortality of their gods.
"In the Scandinavian legends about Odin, Frey, Njord and others

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is said that they came from God7ayma (the land of the gods) to
Man7aym (the land of the Jews), that they ruled Manheim, were the
object of worship and veneration there, and died believing that they would
return to Godheim.
From the materials collected by Herbert Spencer, it is clear that
"they were understood to be a special kind of people, wearing special
clothes. Their names      snaui   bumvavno   " "silver",   "destroy",
"moral" and so on. They love and hate, are proud and vengeful, fight
among themselves, kill and eat each other. There are constant quarrels
between them. They fight, feast, drink and revel all day long, and at night
they go to bed. They can be wounded and need healing; they die and are
buried. "There is no doubt," Spencer concludes, "that they are born
through the reincarnation of souls."
However, depicting their gods as ordinary people, the ancients
constantly attributed to them power over the elements and the ability to
perform miracles. They controlled the sun, winds, rains, harvests, and so
on. It is not difficult to explain the origin of this belief. Observing
nature, the ancients were familiar with many of its phenomena, which
we now understand with the help of science, and knowing these
phenomena, they could predict many events, especially meteorological
ones. In 7ɤаѕах, however, such predictions are equivalent to the behaviour of
the forces of nature. For example, if rain and thunder are predicted for a
certain time and the prediction comes true, then, naturally, the prediction
is considered to be a phenomenon: it rains, and the moon shines according
to its nature and according to its desire. The same is true of the
predictions and experiments that we can carry out, observing the laws of
nature, and we are convinced by the evidence.
It is quite natural and true to say that their inventions were the result
of their imagination and creativity, fishing gear, metal tools, writing,
letters, paintings, etc., and that they passed on these skills to their
people.
Although, according to folk legends, the gods are strictly separated
from humans and do not mix with them, they are sometimes attributed
with romantic relationships with representatives of the human race. "According to
traditional mythology," says Spencer, "the gods, the heroes, and
sometimes even humans are descended from the gods in a supernatural
way. Meanwhile, in the East, we hear about the sons of God who were
enraptured by the beauty of mortal women — the Teutons discusssometimes even humans are descended from the gods in a supernatural
way. Meanwhile, in the East, we hear about the sons of God who were
enraptured by the beauty of mortal women — the Teutons discuss

--- PAGE BREAK ---s are descended from the gods in a supernatural
way. Meanwhile, in the East, we hear about the sons of God who were
enraptured by the beauty of mortal women — the Teutons discuss

--- PAGE BREAK ---

about the unions of the sons of God with the daughters of men.
There are also milder interpretations of the fact that these unions
bring about the fall of gods. "If we recall," — says Spencer, — that,
according to the beliefs of the Greeks, it was a crime for the race of gods to
fall in love with the representatives of the human race, then it is not
particularly difficult for us to imagine how the story unfolded." So, it is
clear that the Milojiya are not a gathering, as we think, but simply a biography
of white people who are called "gods." something like our
"Mitya of the Saints". There is a confusion between "gods" and ordinary
"people" should be considered beings of medium rank, lower than gods, but
higher than people, but in folk tales, besides gods, we find
"sons of gods" and "sons of God". "In the primitive history of their
country," says Spencer, "the Egyptians assumed the existence of three
periods, following one another without interruption. In the first period,
there was the 'dynasty of gods', followed by the period of the gods and, finally,
the dynasty of the mysterious Manus."
"All the most ancient sovereigns," says Herbert Spencer, "are said to
have descended from gods. In Assyria, Egypt, among the Jews, the
Lynians, and the ancient Britons, the names of sovereigns are always
derived from the names of gods.
Later, kings lost their supernatural attributes and became rulers of
divine origin, appointed by God, viceroys of heaven, moropoms in the
divine right. The old theory, however, continues to live on in the minds of
the people, although in name it no longer exists... Even now, many
people, seeing a monarch for the first time, feel a secret awe, as if he
were not a god, but an ordinary human being.
In seven countries, they are valued for their good breed and their
steadiness, as can be seen from the fact that they are preferred by other
peoples for breeding worthy offspring. In other places, such as
Madagascar, the Sandwich Islands, Cape Horn, Gabuana (in Alim), Peru
and other countries, rulers, unlike us, allowed and even required their sons to
marry their sisters and closest relatives. In other countries, as in the old days
in Russia, and as is currently the case in China, they are given the right
to choose their bride from among all the girls of the people, etc.
This is simply and naturally the origin of the gods and theirussia, and as is currently the case in China, they are given the right
to choose their bride from among all the girls of the people, etc.
This is simply and naturally the origin of the gods and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---rently the case in China, they are given the right
to choose their bride from among all the girls of the people, etc.
This is simply and naturally the origin of the gods and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The primary meaning in life is not difficult to understand, but the term
"god" itself is not always what we understand it to be today. In ancient times,
it was the name of a high-ranking class of people, something like our modern
concept of "nobility". It was necessary to distinguish this race from
ordinary people, if it really existed. Of course, what we now know about
the supernatural nature of gods has dissolved with the passage of time,
and the race we are talking about will disappear, degenerate and die out,
but in the memories of people, it will remain in the form of souls and
spirits dwelling in heaven.
Those who, during their lifetime, passed on to their descendants
stories about their minds, characters and deeds, without bothering about
the details of their daily lives, and thus in the minds of their descendants
they appear as immortal deities. There, the abilities, strength and power
attributed to these beings no longer existed, their lineage had been lost, they
were considered supernatural, incredible and difficult to believe.
And so, perhaps the stories about gods and heroes are sufficiently
outdated, perhaps they are sufficiently distorted by the imperfections of
oral transmission, and perhaps they have been embellished, then in my mind
there is terrible chaos, in which truth would be completely confused with
falsehood, and reality with fantasy, and only science, with its rigorous
methods and broad horizons, could make sense of it all, not mere
mortals. Moreover, in this way, new gods are constantly appearing
alongside the most ancient ones.
And therefore, doubt arose in the existence of gods, and then they were
completely rejected, declared demons, and in their place was put the
concept of one true God, postponing the creation of new myths for the
future.
Thus, the universe was divided into those who adhered to the old
polytheism and those who followed the new faith in one God, between
whom a fierce struggle ensued, which continues to this day. But now we
can calmly discuss the beliefs of both sides and restore what was truly
in the community.ed the new faith in one God, between
whom a fierce struggle ensued, which continues to this day. But now we
can calmly discuss the beliefs of both sides and restore what was truly
in the community.

--- PAGE BREAK ---one God, between
whom a fierce struggle ensued, which continues to this day. But now we
can calmly discuss the beliefs of both sides and restore what was truly
in the community.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22. OUR THEORY IS
SUPPORTED BY FACTS
ATAVISM
Our theory is confirmed by the facts of atavism. The monsters
produced by atavism partially restore the diluvial man and
pithecanthropus. The Great Ones. The Giants. The Hairy People.
Premature maturity and its causes. Albinism and melanism.
No matter how diverse deformities may be, they can be divided into
two types. Some, such as doubling of the body, multiplication of limbs,
absence of certain limbs, etc., can be considered pathological in the
strict sense of the word, as they are very diverse and rarely resemble each
other. Animals, insects, aquatic creatures, plants, minerals, etc., reproduce
individuals that are similar to each other, belonging to the same species.
The latter are particularly important to us because they represent the
most significant phenomena that were normal many thousands of years
ago. "The appearance of monstrous formations," says Warvin, "and less
serious anomalies are attributed by all to the preservation of the original
state, i.e., the preservation of the embryonic state. Many deformities,
however, are hardly noticeable, but when development stops, parts
appear that are not found in the embryo, but which exist in other
representatives of the same species of animals and plants, we can most
likely attribute this to reversion (atavism). "It is clear," says the same
writer, "that the appearance of traits that have disappeared is, in all
likelihood, due to hundreds of mutations."
If the opinion about the hybrid nature of modern society is correct,
then we should expect a particularly high number of atavisms. We have
already cited above the example of L. that "when two different breeds
are crossed, there is a tendency in the offspring to return to one or both of
the parental forms during the course of successive generations. But it is impossible
to determine whether this is true, because all traces of this desire are lost."
That is why amongone or both of
the parental forms during the course of successive generations. But it is impossible
to determine whether this is true, because all traces of this desire are lost."
That is why among

--- PAGE BREAK ---parental forms during the course of successive generations. But it is impossible
to determine whether this is true, because all traces of this desire are lost."
That is why among

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the monsters of society, we must seek the reincarnations of our distant
ancestors: the beasts and pitemanthropes.
And, indeed, this theoretical argument is justified by the data already
obtained by science. All deformities, in the appearance of which there is
reason to suspect the results of atavism, can be divided into two
categories. The first restores the higher parental type, which is undoubtedly
ueovema, and the second
the lower, pithecanthropus.
The first category includes vegans, 7enians (who, due to the rarity of
their appearance, can also be considered freaks), upresmerno-vogotatye
gyudi, children with premature mental, physical and sexual
development, and agibinosy.
The second category includes: marpini, idiots, morons, and
imbeciles. Let us consider each of these types of deformities
separately.
Giants.
Real giants are people who are over 2 metres tall. The tallest person ever
recorded was 253 cm. To date, between 50 and 70 giants have been
described with scientific accuracy. Their weight reaches up to 160 kg.
Excessive growth occurs mainly in the upper limbs. There are two types
of giants: one is slender, with a long torso, and the other is stocky, with
a short torso and normal proportions. But the new men, according to
Ranma,
"There are no such things as perfect people." For the most part, the width
of the neck, shoulders and chest is excessive. In most cases, the height
and weight of the men are reduced, but there are exceptions, such as the
"Swedish veteran" who served in Frederick II's guard, who was
"sufficiently strong and agile," the Roman emperor Maximinus and the
lieutenant of the American army, Lon Busrim, who was known for his
bravery and endured the hardships of the campaign no worse than men
of normal height. The mental abilities of many of them were well
developed.
In addition to their above-average height, some of them had a
"proportional" build, with certain parts of the body, especially the limbs,
growing to above-average proportions. Sometimes the entire body is
affected, sometimes only oneeight, some of them had a
"proportional" build, with certain parts of the body, especially the limbs,
growing to above-average proportions. Sometimes the entire body is
affected, sometimes only one

--- PAGE BREAK ---had a
"proportional" build, with certain parts of the body, especially the limbs,
growing to above-average proportions. Sometimes the entire body is
affected, sometimes only one

--- PAGE BREAK ---

monument and one city, one foot, or even one page.
Congenital thinness contributes to 7i7antsm growth, and sometimes
excessive development of the body is observed. V Ranm describes a
case in which, along with normal fat development at average body
weight, there is a significant thinning of the bones and joints, as well as the
development of musculature. His weight is 216.5 kg, and his height is 170
cm.
Geniuses.
When it comes to genius people, we are, of course, most interested
in anthropological data about them, based on their belonging to a
particular race. This includes, first of all, the indisputable fact that all
the people who developed European civilisation were white, and we do not
know of any other civilisations. Moreover, it is clear that the people who
developed European civilisation were white, and we do not know of any
exceptions.
"many of the people in the study are significantly more anxious." This
idea is perfectly illustrated by the following table:
The capacity of the vessel:
V Voty
1865 mub. cm.
V Kant
1740 mуб. cm.
8 Italian. Veni. Guy
1611 m above sea level.
V. Itagiev
1553 m. See
To this we must add the fact that Karag Fokht, who was very
influential in Kyuvie, Shigera and Napoetona 1-7o.
According to Veger, greater capacity is associated with greater weight,
so it follows that tall people should be characterised by high growth. Indeed,
Nombroso cites data collected in Italy during the recruitment of soldiers,
which shows that the highest percentage of tall people and the lowest
percentage of short people is found in those regions of Italy where there
have always been many talented people. Conversely, in those provinces
where the percentage of tall people is lower, the number of talented
people is significantly lower. In addition, according to Nombroso,
talented people come from families that are not considered to be of high
social standing in Europe. "It has long been known," says the author,
"that among the common people, both rich and poor, in poor countries
especiallyfamilies that are not considered to be of high
social standing in Europe. "It has long been known," says the author,
"that among the common people, both rich and poor, in poor countries
especially

--- PAGE BREAK ---ot considered to be of high
social standing in Europe. "It has long been known," says the author,
"that among the common people, both rich and poor, in poor countries
especially

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Many people. A popular Tuscan saying goes: "The mountains are tough,
but the people are gentle." In the mountains of Tuscany, there are many
poets and improvisers among the shepherds. In the mountainous areas
of Nombardia and in the coastal areas of Beramo, Brescia and Como,
there are more gentle people than in the lowlands. In all lowland countries,
according to Nombroso, these people are extremely rare.
The people of Vogo.
Approximately hairy creatures, sometimes called "dog-like and
bear-like," have been observed both in the past and in modern times.
They are found among both men and women, but, according to Fenix
Pater, more commonly among men. All of them, without exception, are
covered with thick, bushy hair, always soft, They are found in people of
the white race, unlike the non-white and monochromatic races, which have
coarse hair. The composition of the hair is famous in the 1960s by O.
Paetrana. Previously, these people were known only in Europe, but
recently they have been found in Asia and America. According to
Ranman, excessive hairiness is an abnormal preservation of the hair that
normally grows on the body, Lanugo, which is sometimes called vellus
hair, and which normally falls out in adults. It is not an atavism from
those times, when it may have been useful to m o n keys, but rather a
remnant of later times, which has survived in the form of hairiness. In
apes, the tail remains intact. In addition to the hairiness, there is also a
tendency for the hair to break off, especially in certain areas, such as the
armpits and pubic area.
Premature ageing.
Reviewing a number of anomalies in the modern human organism, Dr.
Munimov draws attention to menstruation in modern women, a
phenomenon is considered by all peoples of the world to be a sign of
immorality, and among Iranians it is even considered a sin, that
menstruation is primarily a manifestation of the spirit of decay. This
gives the author reason to suggest that menstruation, as we know it today,
i.e. in the form of regular bleeding, consists oft
menstruation is primarily a manifestation of the spirit of decay. This
gives the author reason to suggest that menstruation, as we know it today,
i.e. in the form of regular bleeding, consists of

--- PAGE BREAK ---rimarily a manifestation of the spirit of decay. This
gives the author reason to suggest that menstruation, as we know it today,
i.e. in the form of regular bleeding, consists of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The latest acquisition of the uеɤовеuесmо7о family. We have, he says,
every right to assume that in primitive times, intercourse with immature
girls (before the onset of menstruation) was more widespread and even
constant, as they are now, and under such conditions menstruation may
not occur at all, or it may occur only in exceptional cases. In fact, we
currently have   many remnants of ancient traditions in folk customs,
which indicate that early marriages were very widespread in ancient
times. On the island of Leyte, men still marry at the age of 7–8, and
girls at the age of 4–5. In Vvedda, men marry at 15–16 years of age, and
in Madagascan, in the 17th century, they married at 10–12 years of age.
In Angola, there is an ancient custom that allows men to marry at the
age of 14. The same is true for other tribes. Observations of immature
European women who gave birth very early, contrary to expectations,
show that childbirth under normal conditions is very rare and the
postpartum period is normal. It is also known that in some children,
internal and external signs of puberty occur very early. The author cites
44 cases of early puberty in girls. They show an unusually early onset of
menstruation: at 2 weeks after birth, at 2 months, at 3, 4, 6, 9, etc. Some
girls appear older than their peers; for example, at 2 years old, they appear
to be 10–12 years old, at 3 years old, they appear to be 20, and so on.
Their breasts grow earlier than usual, their weight and height are greater
than normal, and their character and manners are more serious than
those of normal children. E x t e r n a l genital organs are sometimes
deformed at birth. When they are born, the internal genital organs are
developed correctly, but in the opposite sex. Most cases are observed in
Europeans, but there is one case in non-Europeans. Dr. Poss adds t h a t in
some children the condition was pathological, associated with physical
ailments, but in others, on the contrary, there were no significant
pathological changes. "We do not yet know," says the author, "the
conditions under which such strange phenomena are possible."
"As early as the 18th century," continues Professor Meunimov,
"Ramdor noted that men could discover feelings of love in women. At
the same time, they display intense jealousy and a desire to be the only
ones to enjoy the favours of their beloved women.   Fam   sтот
оuень   распространен   и   встреuается   вve in women. At
the same time, they display intense jealousy and a desire to be the only
ones to enjoy the favours of their beloved women.   Fam   sтот
оuень   распространен   и   встреuается   в

--- PAGE BREAK ---same time, they display intense jealousy and a desire to be the only
ones to enjoy the favours of their beloved women.   Fam   sтот
оuень   распространен   и   встреuается   в

--- PAGE BREAK ---

features between famous people. There, Ƚанте at 9 ɤет вɤюбиɤся in
Беатриuе, Каѕаmова быɤ вɤюбɤен, едва дости7нув 5-ɤетне7о
воѕраста, а Байрон в 7 ɤет поɤюбиɤ Мери Ƚеɭ. Some children of a
certain age already show signs of jealousy. Well-known paediatricians,
such as Kurshman and Fürbramer, also confirm the existence of this feeling
in children under the age of five. As a result of this phenomenon, Dr.
Meunier notes a significant increase in the prevalence of male
masturbation among our youth. And in Dr. Possa's work, we find
examples of secret debauchery among very young children, sometimes
taking the form of rape, which probably has to be explained by the same
cause.
Three scientists have concluded that Meunimov's theory demonstrates "a
clear distinction between the physical speed of light and the speed of sound in
a vacuum." But perhaps there was no such thing in ancient times, and early
sexual development can be attributed to the early development of the
child's
organism,
known
to
anthropologists
as
"premature
development," where children already show excessive physical
development at birth. These children develop with unusual speed and, at
7–8 months of age, are already walking. Their weight at birth reaches 7-
10 kg, while the average weight of normal children is 3.2 kg. In one such
case, a 4-year-old boy was 117 cm tall, while the average height of German boys
is 93 cm. He was very voracious and ate a lot, so he could carry a sack of
grain and weigh 65 kg. Sometimes this is due to premature maturation
of the reproductive organs without the appearance of the characteristic
signs of puberty. But sometimes, both of these things are observed at
the same time; the weight, height and strength of such children at birth
significantly exceed the weight, height and strength of normal children.
Mamsiimyan Perta, describing the early stages of development in five
girls and four boys, adds that "in all cases, a child's organs develop early and
all of them are related to each other, appearing earlier."
The same "premature development" can also be observed in the area of mental
development. For example, Tasso began to speak when he was six months
old, and by the age of seven he was already fluent in Russian. Nenau, будуuи
ребенmом,   импровиѕироваɤ   потрясавшие   сɤушатеɤейlopment. For example, Tasso began to speak when he was six months
old, and by the age of seven he was already fluent in Russian. Nenau, будуuи
ребенmом,   импровиѕироваɤ   потрясавшие   сɤушатеɤей

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Tasso began to speak when he was six months
old, and by the age of seven he was already fluent in Russian. Nenau, будуuи
ребенmом,   импровиѕироваɤ   потрясавшие   сɤушатеɤей

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sermons and beautiful and7raɤ on ɭɤейте and сmрипmе. At the age of
eight, Cardan appeared to be a genius and inspired e7o. At the age of 13,
Ampere was already a good mathematician. At the age of 10, he came up with the
theory of amustim, based on the sums produced by taretems, and at the
age of 15, he wrote a famous treatise on monistic phenomena. At the age
of four, Gager was already preaching, and at the age of five, he was
passionately debating.
This is completely incomprehensible from the point of view of
modern scientific theory, but it becomes quite natural if we accept our
theory of the origin of the human race.
Obviously, if during the last period of time, the state had gone through
such a terrible struggle for existence, children would have suffered the
same fate, and now they would inevitably become prey to predators, and the
race would be wiped out. Of course, in the interests of the survival of the
species, there would be natural selection, and with the motorisation of
childbirth, it would be possible to start earlier, so that from the very first
year of its existence, it could, if it could not actively defend itself, save
itself by fleeing, and in the third or fourth year of its life, or perhaps
even earlier, it could reproduce. This is what we observe today in wild and
domestic animals.
It is considered modern7o pasvitiya ueɤove, with a motor it is more
besanitnoe than all animals, then it appears to be a toɤьmо pesyɤeta e7o
mixing. Among prouim, sto is confirmed by ɯиɭrami, given in Pɤossa,
which show that in lower species, the appearance of sexual dimorphism
occurs later than in Europeans, and in European lower species later than in
higher species. Some of the statistics are given by me in 7gava 18, and
here I will mention those that characterise the nationalities. The lyrics describe a
girl with premature (before the age of 12) sexual experiences. I will take
from them the most interesting ones:
V Jews
— 12.5%
V non-Jews
— 11.7%
V Russians
— 10.6%
V ɭинɤяндоm
— 2.7%
In Japanese
— 0.29%
Of course, they cannot be sure of their conclusions, but they are mistaken in
assuming that all members of the same nation are completely equal to
each other.V ɭинɤяндоm
— 2.7%
In Japanese
— 0.29%
Of course, they cannot be sure of their conclusions, but they are mistaken in
assuming that all members of the same nation are completely equal to
each other.

--- PAGE BREAK ---In Japanese
— 0.29%
Of course, they cannot be sure of their conclusions, but they are mistaken in
assuming that all members of the same nation are completely equal to
each other.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to mprovi, but over time they promise to give very
interesting insights into the historical relationships between nationalities. It
should also be added that the dormitory in Kenimber7e, having studied
3,000 women, found that girls of "tall stature" reach sexual maturity earlier
than girls of "short stature" and "blondes" earlier than brunettes.
Nomros also cites Paganini, that girls who start menstruating at the age of
13, i.e. who reach puberty early, have light hair, the fifth part have dark
hair, and the rest
— are fair-haired. "In this way," says the writer, "blondes mature earlier
than others in terms of sexual development."
Agrarianism.
Aɤьbinosi are found in all uеɤовеuесmих races, both dark7о and
lightɤо7о ɯвета mожи. They are found not only in Europe, but also in
Aɭrimе among the Ne7rami and on the islands of Tихо7о оmеана.
Albinos are distinguished by their unusual light colouring, and their hair is light
from birth. However, there is another type of albinism. It manifests
itself i n people and other living creatures in the form of white spots. The
existence of spotted people was known even in ancient times. In
Europe, vitiligo is observed in the form of completely white strands of hair
and beard in children and young people. In older people, partial and
complete albinism takes the form of grey hair.
The opposite of agoutism is called "meganism" and manifests itself, on
the contrary, in dark spots on light skin. The natural mechanism manifests
itself in the form of freckles, birthmarks, increased pigmentation in
pregnant women, etc., and the opposite, in the case of Addison's
disease, the skin may turn bronze.
If we assume that both phenomena are atavistic in nature, then the
colour of the skin in children may be attributed to the colour of the skin
of their ancestors, while the mechanism in the case of the latter
reproduces the colour of the pithmantropus. If we consider the mechanism
and the mechanism separately, they correspond to the phenomenon of
spotted fur in domestic animals, their offspring have spots, with white
animals having black spots and black animals having white spots.
Thus, through atavism, we see a reproduction ofphenomenon of
spotted fur in domestic animals, their offspring have spots, with white
animals having black spots and black animals having white spots.
Thus, through atavism, we see a reproduction of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

our white diguvian predator, but not completely, only in parts.
If we are to be together, I have the following: tall stature (up to 235
cm), considerable weight (up to 160 kg), long limbs in comparison with the
torso, a large chest, shoulders and hips, well-developed muscles, a large
head (up to 1855 mm), a sharp mind, strong bones throughout the body, a
bright mind, early physical and mental development, then we have
before us a vivid portrait of a truly extraordinary person. This is precisely
the portrait we have painted above, considering the theoretical conditions
under which ueɤoвеuество developed from pitemanthrope in the late
Pleistocene period.

--- PAGE BREAK ---his is precisely
the portrait we have painted above, considering the theoretical conditions
under which ueɤoвеuество developed from pitemanthrope in the late
Pleistocene period.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23. ATAVISM IN THE
LATE PITEKANTHROPUS
PERIOD
Human atavism in the direction of pithecanthropus. Dwarfs and
cretins.
Microcephals. Parallels from the animal world.
It is necessary to mention the following types of atavism: marpimov,
idiots, mretinov, mimroelaov, and mimsedemov. We will not consider the
latter separately, because they are relatively rare and therefore have been
studied very little.
Karnim.
They are called Karima, and their height is slightly over 1 metre, but,
as a rule, they are even shorter than that. The famous dwarf "General
Mait" is 82.4 cm tall, and his 12-year-old bride "Princess Pauina" is 72
cm tall. The hair on the beard, head and body of marmosets is always
smooth. Their voice is squeaky. Although there are some marines who
are perfectly fit, this is relatively rare, as they are usually overweight and unfit.
In them, according to Ranke, the most important factor is the development of
the abdominal and, in particular, the digestive organs. Research by
Ranme and Karfa Fokht shows that this circumstance is related to the
greater need for food in the spring. The researchers compiled the
following table comparing the relative amounts of food consumed by
mice and rats per 1 mg of their body weight:
Begom
Besasotisty veɲestva
Work
1.7
8.9
Car
2.9
20.9
The table shows that: 1) the map eats three times more than the pig, uem
obymnovennyy raboui, uto svedetestvuje o 7romadnom obyme e7o
zhegudma i 2) uto on bogche, uem raboui poedat rastitel'noy, besasotistoy
pini.
B u t we have seen before that a large volume of stomach and
digestive tract is observed only in European children and in lower
species, while in the animal world it

--- PAGE BREAK ---istoy
pini.
B u t we have seen before that a large volume of stomach and
digestive tract is observed only in European children and in lower
species, while in the animal world it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is characteristic of herbivorous animals.
Thus, in humans, the digestive tract is similar to that of the supposed
pithecanthropus: a larger stomach (relative to the small intestine), a long
small intestine, motorised legs, a voluminous stomach adapted to plant-based
nutrition, high water content and a high body weight.
Idiots and morons.
Idiots and morons should also be included in the category of
morons. "In cases of retardedness," writes Ranme, "along with
retardation, retards also experience stunted growth, while idiots have
significantly stunted growth."
The nature of retardedness remains controversial to this day. Some
equate it with idiocy, while others consider it to be a special, specific
condition. It is more accurate to assume that idiocy and moronism are
degrees of the same disorder. Gono divides morons into two groups: 1)
morons who are idiots and 2) morons proper.
In contrast to the deformities discussed in the previous chapter,
which are observed in higher races, retentism is characteristic of the
entire human race. It is found throughout the world, in all latitudes and
longitudes. There are retines in the fertile Rhone Valley, in the vast
Rhine Valley, in the mountains and valleys of Switzerland, in Piedmont, in
the Caucasus, in the tropics of Australia, in Asia on the grassy plains of
the Gimae, on the dry plateaus of the Cordilleras (at an altitude of 2000
metres) and, of course, on the warm, humid and low-lying islands of
Oceania. This circumstance refutes all hypotheses that attribute retentism
to local conditions, such as winds, temperature changes, soil, lack of
sunlight, poor nutrition, the rights and customs of the population, etc.
On one hand, the origin of marasmus is attributed to the lack of
drinking water. But even here, there is no consensus among them. as
some attribute it to the absence of essential substances in the water, while
others, on the contrary, attribute it to the presence of certain substances in
abnormally high concentrations.
With regard to the past, it can be said thatf essential substances in the water, while
others, on the contrary, attribute it to the presence of certain substances in
abnormally high concentrations.
With regard to the past, it can be said that

--- PAGE BREAK ---es in the water, while
others, on the contrary, attribute it to the presence of certain substances in
abnormally high concentrations.
With regard to the past, it can be said that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it is lost in the depths of time, but folk legends have preserved it throughout
the ages. In ancient Rome, it was well known, and historians and poets
wrote about it (Pliny, Ovid, Vitruvius). In the 16th century, the German
scholar Simper wrote about mermaids, but it was Sosur (1786) who began
their scientific study.
In the middle of the 19th century, the Mretins remained a
particularly prominent family. "It cannot be denied," says Ranme, "that
there is something in their appearance that is indeed unpleasant, which at
first glance is not conducive to a favourable impression."
On this subject, the author quotes Virchow: "Anyone who has seen a
large number of these creatures will form a clear picture of their
appearance, which makes it possible to distinguish them with some
certainty from the rest of the population. The cretin in the Apennines
resembles the cretin on the Rhine, Main and in the Hemmara region. One
might think that all these individuals are closely related to each other,
that they belong to one family and, at least, to one clan. It is impossible to
avoid the conclusion that we are dealing here with the remains of a
well-organised clan. There, at least in some areas, such as Ramon-des-
Carboniers, Stag and Niens, attempts are being made to preserve them.
Ammerman even calls them a special kind of ueɤoвеmа, but modern
science considers mretinov to be a special form of deformity. However,
the typical nature of these deformities suggests their atavistic origin.
Along with his height, he is distinguished by certain other
characteristics that set him apart from ordinary people, namely: a large,
relatively stocky build, 7оɤовой, mоротmими оmонеuностями, and
vѕдутым животом.
A cretin is a creature that has degenerated physically and mentally.
He is morose, gloomy, often thin and bloated. His skin is sometimes pale,
bluish, sometimes dark and brown, sometimes reddish and spotty. His
skin is wrinkled, dry and rough, resembling that of Bushmen and
Hottentots. He has been wrinkled since early childhood, and therefore
always looks old, even before reaching old age. According to Virchow,
mожа
mretinov
live
with utongeniami,which
change relatively little on the same basic skeletal structure. It does not find
enough space on the motor bed and therefore creates deformations, which
are mostly located in the transverse direction and correspond to the places
of main movement. In a special form of idiots, mimics, composing the
middlebed and therefore creates deformations, which
are mostly located in the transverse direction and correspond to the places
of main movement. In a special form of idiots, mimics, composing the
middle

--- PAGE BREAK ---eates deformations, which
are mostly located in the transverse direction and correspond to the places
of main movement. In a special form of idiots, mimics, composing the
middle

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Between idiots and morons, it can be hard, tense and tense; it is
compared to "a man's face". Cretins are unable to walk, and even the
most intelligent among them walk with a limp and stagger from side to
side.
The forehead is sloping, broad at the bottom and narrow at the top.
The nose is flat and hooked. Their hair is thick, very thick, curly and tangled. It
is light brown and never turns grey. Cretins are beardless. Their chins
are completely smooth, like a child's. Their eyes are large and wide-set.
Their ears are prominent. Their noses are flat, with a large, wide, and
prominent bridge. Their nostrils are flared.
The lips are thick, turned outwards, pursed, and the lower lip is
drooping. A thick, sticky saliva constantly flows from them. The tongue is
thick and unusually large, protruding from the mouth. It resembles a snake,
according to Burmeister's description, "more like a European snake." The
lower jaw protrudes more than the upper jaw. It is thick and gives the face an
animal-like appearance. The ears are small and drooping. The eyes are
widely spaced, protruding and expressionless. The lips are thin and
inflamed. The eyelashes and eyebrows are sparse. The nose is blunt.
The chin is pointed. The neck is short and thick. The head is covered
with hair and is not bald. The ears are small and completely undeveloped.
The chest is flat and asymmetrical, often indented on one side. The
breasts are small, flaccid, and their nipples are rudimentary. The navel is
protruding and prominent. The tail is often atrophied. The legs of the
lower races are in a rudimentary position. The hands of the lower races are
broad with short fingers. The feet are voluminous and flat.
The character of the mortins is in many ways reminiscent of the
lower races and our children.
The lower races lack imagination, memory, willpower, and the
ability to reason. They do not express any joyful excitement or painful
feelings. Even a well-behaved child, encountering obstacles on his way,
becomes stuck due to a complete lack of initiative. At the highest levels,
they are distinguished by their ability to express themselves with more or less
expressive words and gestures, and even with motor movements. At the
highest levels, idiots can even be taught to read and write, but the
concepts are still foreign to them: when faced with something unfamiliar,
theyd gestures, and even with motor movements. At the
highest levels, idiots can even be taught to read and write, but the
concepts are still foreign to them: when faced with something unfamiliar,
they

--- PAGE BREAK ---with motor movements. At the
highest levels, idiots can even be taught to read and write, but the
concepts are still foreign to them: when faced with something unfamiliar,
they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are lost. However, like dimari, idiots and morons have a tendency to lie
and deceive.
Cretins are solitary creatures, they avoid and do not love each other.
They are mute: their speech is a mere babble, and when they do learn to speak,
they pronounce words monotonously and indistinctly. Cretins are slow-
witted and stupid, but always good-natured. Fortunately, there is one
thing that distinguishes them from lower races, namely, their excellent
memory.
Mortality among cretins is very high at all ages, especially in the
first years of childhood. Very few of them reach adolescence. Cretins
are more susceptible to childhood diseases: scrofula, rickets, dysentery,
mononucleosis and spina bifida. In later childhood, they suffer from rickets,
bone apophyses, tuberculosis and inflammation of the gums.
Their agony before death is slow, they suffer, immersed in deep
apathy, and in a state of motor paralysis they slowly die.
It has been established that the epidemic of melancholia never
occurs without the epidemic of mania; it is believed that these two
seemingly opposite phenomena are to some extent manifestations of the
same disease. Eobatosity is a natural degree, while metritis is an
omonuategic one.
The particularly rapid development of mretinism is currently being
observed in France, where the motor is falling in many other respects.
There are up to 120,000 idiots in this country. Among the provinces
affected by idiocy, the following stand out in particular: Lower Alpes,
Savoie, Isère, Ardèche, Rhône, Alpes-Maritimes, Hautes-Pyrénées,
Ariège and Haute-Garonne.
Savoy is particularly affected by mental illness, with one mentally ill
person and one idiot per 139 inhabitants. Per 1,000 inhabitants, there are:
Disabled
50.55
Cretins
16.2
Idiots
5.30
Maguimov-kretinov are generally born more often, especially girls, and
there are usually 6 kretinov for every 7 kretinov.
Mimroɯeɭaɤы.
Bismom m retinols
cost
there named
mimroɯeɭaɤы,16.2
Idiots
5.30
Maguimov-kretinov are generally born more often, especially girls, and
there are usually 6 kretinov for every 7 kretinov.
Mimroɯeɭaɤы.
Bismom m retinols
cost
there named
mimroɯeɭaɤы,

--- PAGE BREAK ---uimov-kretinov are generally born more often, especially girls, and
there are usually 6 kretinov for every 7 kretinov.
Mimroɯeɭaɤы.
Bismom m retinols
cost
there named
mimroɯeɭaɤы,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

maɤo7oɤo. 3to are also ugly and, tamzhe mарɤiɤo, but they, mаm we will
see below, differ in many ways from mretins. Here mаm describes their
appearance Karɤ Focht and K. Remɤam.
Mimroelyagi have an elongated nose. They are completely hairless, with a
nose covered in 7-pointed, sharp horns, but no the nose is wide, the lower
part of the face is elongated forward in the form of a snout, the ears are
erect, the eyes are disproportionately large. Puffy, thin lips, small, sharp
teeth with protruding upper teeth. The chest is broad, the limbs are
disproportionately thin, but strong and agile. Brownish eyes. The head, tilted
forward with the ears pressed back, gives them a striking resemblance
to a monkey walking on its hind legs.
Their volume is smaller, and their muscles are less developed than
those of normal people. Virchow studied the microelements and found in them "an
undeniable similarity to the microelements of monkeys," which other
scientists agree with. However, according to Ramé, we cannot claim
that there is a species of monkey with exactly the same morphology as
that found in microelephants. Karl Focht, who has studied primates
extensively, seeks to prove that they not only bear a strong resemblance
to monkeys, but are in fact a species of monkey-like creatures. I n his
opinion, this is the lowest species, which reproduces the lowest type,
long since passed by evolution in the sense of Darwin's theory of
development. "I have no difficulty," says Voigt, "in imagining that these
creatures represent a complete transitional series from humans to apes,
as far as one can imagine."
Mimroɯeɯ — good-natured, obedient creatures, unbearable in their
passion to break, tear and destroy everything that falls into their hands.
They greet strangers with surprise, but not at all with timidity. They
resemble merlins: the same outwardly curved back, inwardly curved
wings, curved and inwardly turned legs, etc., but they also have
differences. First of all, they are well developed and do not present the
disproportion in development that is striking in mretins. The mouth of the
mretins is large and shapeless, while that of the mimroels is small. They do not
suffer from the same problems as the mretins. But there is a particularly
large difference between them in character. The mermaids are clumsy,
and all their movements are slow and heavy. They are terribly dull, even at
those stages when they learn to speak.particularly
large difference between them in character. The mermaids are clumsy,
and all their movements are slow and heavy. They are terribly dull, even at
those stages when they learn to speak.

--- PAGE BREAK ---difference between them in character. The mermaids are clumsy,
and all their movements are slow and heavy. They are terribly dull, even at
those stages when they learn to speak.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They behave like madmen, having fallen into despair from their
previous sufferings. And the microelements are sinful and self-centred,
constantly complaining, jumping and running around, often climbing on
guests' clothes and jumping on furniture and trees. With monkey-like
agility, they constantly change their position, move quickly, often with
the speed of lightning, constantly pay attention to their surroundings,
quickly understand everything, remember and repeat, and are always in
a good mood. Maria Solya Vis strikes terror into all the dogs in the
neighbourhood. If she saw them with something in their mouths, she would
run after them, jump on their backs and bite them until the dogs let go of their
prey, which she would greedily devour.
V Ranm has given a very interesting description of one micro-
organism, Mar7arita, which he managed to observe.    , she had a very broad
smile, which could be attributed to her age. She seems to have stopped at a
very low stage of development. She knows only one word, "mama," which
she utters in moments of excitement. According to her father, it was an
unforgettable moment when she spoke her first word, but it was short-
lived. In any case, it was impossible to push her beyond her limits.
Nevertheless, she explained herself with the help of many words.
These mummies represent a mixture of those pitemantropes with whom
the white diyuviag ueove mixed, so the mummies reproduce before us the
type of European pitemantrop, from the motor7o passed on by the white
ueov. It is precisely this lively character, which we find in the mimetic,
that a European pitemantrop would need to have in order not to lose in
the struggle with the animals of the animal kingdom. He was like that
before the Neolithic period and in the N e olithic itself. But even more
striking is t h e similarity between the Neanderthal and the Neanderthal, not to
mention that the micro-morphology is the same, but the latter is distinguished by
"unusually prominent brow ridges". It is also known that Virchow,
having seen a Neanderthal skull, called it "the skull of an idiot."
Thus, the deformities we have described are reproduced in the
following ways: venomous snakes,    ,   ,   ,   ,   , and   children with
premature   ,   , and   pitemantropov reproduce mарɤиmи, idiots,
mретины, and миmроɯеɭаɤы. Esribed are reproduced in the
following ways: venomous snakes,    ,   ,   ,   ,   , and   children with
premature   ,   , and   pitemantropov reproduce mарɤиmи, idiots,
mретины, and миmроɯеɭаɤы. Es

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the
following ways: venomous snakes,    ,   ,   ,   ,   , and   children with
premature   ,   , and   pitemantropov reproduce mарɤиmи, idiots,
mретины, and миmроɯеɭаɤы. Es

--- PAGE BREAK ---

live together, characterising both groups, then there is no need to describe
our ancestors.
However, it is important to remember that we are not dealing with a
real mop of the highest and lowest types, but rather with monsters. Firstly, they
are all useless, with the exception of the wise, the brave and the albinos.
In addition, they are fragile and fragile, and each deformity is
accompanied by specific fragilities. For example, excessive weight is
associated with abnormal development of the limbs. Agrobiosis suffer
from daytime sleepiness. Giants sufer from a pathological discrepancy between
the normal development of the nervous system and the increased mass of
the body; most of them are extremely fragile. Children with premature
development at 13 weeks and 44 days have passive bones, rickets,
tuberculosis, hydrocephalus, etc. They write about them as "old children
with no chance of survival, sometimes with rickets and angina." It is
impossible to talk about retards, they are completely insensitive to the
surrounding world, their feelings are paralyzed: a retard sits and lies in one
position, unless it is changed by an outside hand. You have to hold them
like a newborn baby, otherwise they will die in a moment. In my
opinion, the most expensive deformity for us is the deformity of the
Nombros people, which, as we know, is similar to that of the insane.
"Among the insane," he says, "there are madmen, and among the
madmen there are insane people."
It should be noted that in the phenomena described above, as wel as in all
other aspects of their lives, they are by no means alone among other
representatives of the animal kingdom. Parallel phenomena in the
animal world have long been known to European science.
Bülön snag, uto species change, uto they, in his words, "improve and
degenerate." The return of objects (which, according to many scientists,
are always inferior to their descendants), i.e. those in which animals
degenerate   into   a lower   type,   are commonly   called
"atavism", and their opposites, progressive conditions, degeneration
into   the highest   type,   Kunin7am   proposes   to call
"pro7onism".
The concepts of "atavism" and "pro7onism" are not new or rare in
scientific practice. Darwin, in his work "The Origin ofion
into   the highest   type,   Kunin7am   proposes   to call
"pro7onism".
The concepts of "atavism" and "pro7onism" are not new or rare in
scientific practice. Darwin, in his work "The Origin of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Species," although he refers to the life of domestic animals, he does
not mention similar observations about wild animals.
When reversing and atavism, the hair becomes longer and thicker, and on
the exposed parts of the body, especially on the legs, hairy patches
appear. Domestic pigs acquire a dark colour with longitudinal stripes,
thick skin, a thick neck and large ears. All colours degenerate into
spotted. They have a silvery-grey colour. Domestic chickens degenerate
into the wild species Gallus bankiva with brown feathers. They
approach the dimy mryamve and lose the ability to fly, while the
7ogubi   degenerate into   with all the characteristics of the dimy
poevo7o 7ogubi. M a n y domestic animals, according to Warvin, lose
their old habits and instincts and acquire new ones, and in terms of
character, they become significantly different.
When it comes to proactivity, Warvin also gives a few examples:
pets grow in height, weight and courage, become more sociable,
resilient, tolerant and obedient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cantly different.
When it comes to proactivity, Warvin also gives a few examples:
pets grow in height, weight and courage, become more sociable,
resilient, tolerant and obedient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24. THEORY
CONFIRMED BY FACTS
3MBRIOLOGICAL RAEVITR
The theory is confirmed by facts of morphological development.
Autogenesis and phylogenesis. From what moment does human
autogenesis begin? The law of simultaneous inheritance. Autogenesis of
living beings. The ancestors of the Caucasian race repeat the diluvial
man. After birth, the peewok repeats the pithecanthropus.
The embryonic development of animals occurs according to the
well-known law of Hemmings, according to which a series of stages
passed through in the life of an individual of a given species is a
necessary repetition of those stages which are passed through during the
course of long developmental periods. In scientific terms, this is
expressed as follows: "Ontogenesis (the development of an individual)
is a rapid repetition of phylogeny (the history of the development of a
species)." For example, a tadpole repeats the life history of its fish-like
ancestor, with gills instead of legs. During this period, her ancestors
were aquatic animals. She grows legs, her gills are replaced by legs, and
the genus of salamanders and newts appears. Then the tail falls off and
the animal reaches maturity. We can see a similar story in the
metamorphosis of insects, butterflies, and other creatures.
In the history of the development of vertebrates, there are also
references to the distant past of the species. We can observe the following:
the remains of gills from that time, perhaps it was an aquatic animal, a
tail, perhaps it was a quadruped, similarities with the ancestors of other,
lower animals, etc. The reasons for these transformations are unknown
to us, but we know that they are internal, not external.
Changes during intrauterine life are considered to be a complex
history of the distant past, but I have not come across any works that would
be comparable to the same view of intrauterine life. This is probably
because in our minds everythinged to be a complex
history of the distant past, but I have not come across any works that would
be comparable to the same view of intrauterine life. This is probably
because in our minds everything

--- PAGE BREAK ---history of the distant past, but I have not come across any works that would
be comparable to the same view of intrauterine life. This is probably
because in our minds everything

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are based on the principles of Nombarso. We cannot escape the
influence of external factors on the developing organism. But, even if we
accept intrauterine life is a direct continuation of uterine life, i.e. if it is
also controlled by internal factors, then there would be no room for
external factors to act on it.
Meanwhile, can we say that from the moment of birth, the organism
ceases to be governed by the Gemmic force?
Of course not. Ontogenesis is a series of successive changes that
occur in an animal in a specific order and are caused by internal factors,
while the birth of an organism is an external factor. Ontogenesis should
be considered from the moment of the organism's birth, and not from
the moment of the first change that occurs in the organism. If we take the
definition of the life of a butterfly, then its ontogenesis begins from the
moment it is conceived as an egg in the womb of its mother, and ends
when when the butterfly completes its final transformation, i.e. emerges
from the cocoon. After that, no further changes occur: it eats eggs and
then dies. Thus, ontogenesis continues throughout the entire life of a
woman.
And now the question arises: when does ontogenesis begin in birds
and in humans? It is commonly believed that in birds it begins with the
laying of eggs, and in humans it begins at birth. But is that really the case?
Obviously
not,
because
their
transformations
do
not
occur
simultaneously. In birds, the first plumage in the form of down and
feathers changes with age. In humans, starting with adolescence and
continuing into old age, a series of changes occur that are completely
incomprehensible to us.
Of course, the current understanding of ontogenesis should be based not
on the moment of birth, but on the most recent changes in old age. One
might think that these changes, which occur with the birth of a child in
the womb, repeat the ancient history of the human race, then the rest of
life reproduces new and more recent history. From this point of view, the
changes that occur with the human being are of great interest.
The question arises: do these changes follow each other with the same
regularity as in life?
It seems to me that there can be no doubt about this. No one can
deny that the inner life of the womb has been changing since the
moment of conception.ch other with the same
regularity as in life?
It seems to me that there can be no doubt about this. No one can
deny that the inner life of the womb has been changing since the
moment of conception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---me
regularity as in life?
It seems to me that there can be no doubt about this. No one can
deny that the inner life of the womb has been changing since the
moment of conception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The moral side of motor7o (as mentioned in the previous chapter) is not
particularly noteworthy. Noting the accelerated transition
 of
Americans
to
7oroda, the statistics from the Massachusetts
Bureau (since 1871) attribute this to a desire to get rich quick, no matter
what it takes (to put money in their pockets by fair means if they can, at
all events to put it there). At the same time, it should be borne in mind
that commercial enterprises are thrown into the most way
natural
resources,
considering themselves
privileged  compared  to  their  European  counterparts.  "Without the
obvious labourers, American agriculture would not be able to produce
the abundant harvests   ,  which   are necessary  for   us,"  says   ,  one  of
the most competent judges of American life.  When it comes to the
assurance of free professions, lawyers and, in particular, solicitors (23%)
are in the lead, of whom there are 33,000 in the United States, i.e. six
times more than in Germany (in the latter, there is one barrister per 8,000
people, and in the United States, one per 1,180). However high the
standard of living in the United States may be, and however strong the   may
be,   its  representatives   —   janm,  nevertheless,   they have to  stand  on
Eapade  with  sɤement  in  the  highest  degree adapted to the struggle for
existence, and sometimes even yield to it. I have in mind here the same
people who discovered mаm быɤо сmаѕано  выше, their  сиɤу  in  the
struggle  with  the  maɤайсmой  race  and  mоторому предсmаѕывают
бɤестяɲую   будуɲность   в   тропиuесmой   Америmе. Китайсmий
question
occupies
in
the present time
not only  the
states    of  America  are  directly    interested  in    it,    but    it  is  also
being  seriously  discussed  in  Washington  and  even  in  Europe.  It
has  been  around  since  the  early
1950s
years
migration
mitasmikh workers has gradually   increased   (   with the   of   private
mоɤеbań)  to  the  present  time,  but  now  their  numbers  are  growing
every  year   оmоɤо   двадɯати   тысяu.  The reverse trend   snauiteɤьno
cɤаbee and therefore in the resuɤate poɤуuается the remaining boɤeе uем in
a hundred thousand,
which has been 7
way
in
California
and mainly in San Francisco. Snaua mityuzy were
accepted very  friendly,  mama  work,  indispensable  in  the  construction
of  a  quiet  omemansmoe road and in other large enterprises. But maɤo-
pomagу   they   staɥi   discover   ability   and   not   m   one uernaya  work
and  obratɤi  m  ѕаnyatiyu  remesɤami  and  tor7ovɤey,  and in general
выmаѕаɤи   таmую   сиɤу   в  борьбе  ѕа   суɲествование,  uто
перепоɤошиɤи
all
population
     America.     Inernaya  work
and  obratɤi  m  ѕаnyatiyu  remesɤami  and  tor7ovɤey,  and in general
выmаѕаɤи   таmую   сиɤу   в  борьбе  ѕа   суɲествование,  uто
перепоɤошиɤи
all
population
     America.     In

--- PAGE BREAK ---obratɤi  m  ѕаnyatiyu  remesɤami  and  tor7ovɤey,  and in general
выmаѕаɤи   таmую   сиɤу   в  борьбе  ѕа   суɲествование,  uто
перепоɤошиɤи
all
population
     America.     In

--- PAGE BREAK ---

An anti-mitay party was formed, insisting and continuing to insist on
government intervention to protect the mythical spirit and take the most
severe measures against mythical creatures. We believe that the party is
expressing its opposition to the opinion of one major newspaper (San
Francisco Chronicle, 17 and 21 March 1876). "We have already come to
the conclusion that American labour cannot coexist with Chinese labour,
for where Chinese labour lives, pigs live, and Americans want to live in a
civilised manner. Chinese labour is satisfied daily with rice and two
bowls of soup, but Americans need chicken and lamb from time to time,
and it is difficult for them to remain without bread and butter. The
Chinese can sleep in any hole, but Americans need a bed. It doesn't bother
the Chinese if twelve women sleep with him, but an American needs to
have the same amount of space for one partner. The Chinese worker does
not think about marriage and starting a family, so the American has to
work hard to earn a living. This raises the question: should we accept cheap
labour, even if it means degrading our workers to the level of animals?
Regarding the news of the arrival of a steamship with a new thousand
migrants, the same 7ase says: "Does this mean the arrival of 1017 more
people? It means the displacement of 1,017 men and women from the
jobs they now have, where they have a home, because their work cannot
be replaced by machines," etc. Persecution, provoked by such opinions,
should naturally come into conflict with the freedom-loving principles of
self-determination of the United States, and therefore the measures
taken by the current government should be rejected in Washington7tone. In
addition, the benefits provided by the immigrants in the form of cheap and
good labour, remittances and investments should be enough to win over
the majority of the population and many influential people. In some cases,
entrepreneurs who replaced their workers with Americans should turn to
them again, as they are more likely to fulfil the obligations they have taken
on. In the end, despite all the restrictions and anti-immigrant attitudes,
immigrants managed to establish themselves in American society and
acquire certain professions, such as shoemaking, tailoring, etc. From the
western states, they gradually spread to the eastern states, where, with
the help of the labour union,American society and
acquire certain professions, such as shoemaking, tailoring, etc. From the
western states, they gradually spread to the eastern states, where, with
the help of the labour union,

--- PAGE BREAK ---acquire certain professions, such as shoemaking, tailoring, etc. From the
western states, they gradually spread to the eastern states, where, with
the help of the labour union,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In terms of their activities, they may have an important role to play.
To this day, the majority of migrants from China are men. In
America, there are between five and six thousand migrants, the vast
majority of whom are prostitutes; Recently, however, they have begun
to aspire to a proper family life; there, missionary Gibson has converted
three couples to Christianity in the last three years. This phenomenon
undoubtedly points to the process of intensive adaptation and
assimilation of immigrants in North America, a process the outcome of
which can hardly be predicted at this moment. Fears of a massive influx
of migrants into America are largely driven by a practical concern — to
encourage the government to take restrictive measures, and in any case,
there is sufficient evidence to show that it is impossible to allow, in the
face of a real danger of such an invasion, the Americans not to take timely
and reliable security measures. Moreover, it should not be forgotten that
the Americans are now showing a strong will to fight for their
existence: when faced with it, at least under the influence of modern monarchy,
they can adapt to it. This is evident, for example, in their ingenuity in
devising means which, without violating the foundations of the American
constitution, could possibly restrict immigrants and make their life in the
United States more difficult. For example, the city administration of San
Francisco, considering the needs of immigrants with a certain standard of
living, issued a decree requiring that each person must have at least 500
square feet of living space in an apartment. She ordered new inspections
to be carried out, and those who did not comply with the regulations were to
be sent to prison, where the punishment would be twice as severe. With the
same purpose and the same administration, a decree was issued, known
as
The "Pigtail Ordinance," according to which all male prisoners must
have their hair cut short. This was done with a view to the important
religious significance that the Chinese attach to their hair.
On the one hand, there is currently no reason to fear an invasion of
Chinese masses into America, but on the other hand, those who do not
attach any importance to Chinese immigration into the United States are
also wrong. Firstly, it should be borne in mind thatof
Chinese masses into America, but on the other hand, those who do not
attach any importance to Chinese immigration into the United States are
also wrong. Firstly, it should be borne in mind that

--- PAGE BREAK ---into America, but on the other hand, those who do not
attach any importance to Chinese immigration into the United States are
also wrong. Firstly, it should be borne in mind that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Firstly, the employment of migrant workers hinders the corresponding
growth of Europeans and, consequently, keeps them in their previous
positions, reducing the supply of labour on European markets. Secondly,
increased migration from the East may lead to a change in the composition of
the labour force. Even moderate parties are divided on this issue of
freedom of migration. Here, for example, is what the New York Times
has to say on the subject, standing aloof from the immediate implications
of the issue. "It is well known," the newspaper says, "that the strongest
opposition to the migration comes from the Iranian population. It is
unclear, however, why China, the closest neighbour of our western
states, should be prevented from exploiting the lack of labour there. If
immigration ceases to benefit the state, it will naturally disappear due to a
lack of support. He expresses the same idea in the same way: "The
opposition to the crossing is not based on any real argument, he says, but on
pure envy. It might have some justification if opponents were obliged to
work just as cheaply and diligently as those they are trying to displace
with their loud rhetoric. But in that case, the mythical crossover would
have to happen by itself. What attracts them is precisely the demand for
cheaper labour, which is what Americans and Europeans are used to.
The way out of this situation may lie in the deliberate containment of
the myth, given the pressure on it on the one hand and the current
economic situation of the country on the other — is extremely difficult,
and it is likely to be met with greater resistance from the workers
themselves, it was necessary to develop in them the qualities that would
enable them to stand firm in the industrial struggle. In any case, the
rapprochement of Western nations with the East, facilitated by the efforts
of world trade and relations, as well as by the transformation of the
East's self-confidence, should strengthen our unity and, in view of the
obvious weakness of the Mitai, aim at a greater or lesser degree of
assimilation of our rivals, i.e., at the development in them of those very
qualities which have been formed in the opponents under the influence of
the difficult conditions of struggle for existence in their own
environment.
Having encountered a people who have shown particular courage in
their struggle for existence, we, in the interests of understanding this
phenomenon,truggle for existence in their own
environment.
Having encountered a people who have shown particular courage in
their struggle for existence, we, in the interests of understanding this
phenomenon,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e in their own
environment.
Having encountered a people who have shown particular courage in
their struggle for existence, we, in the interests of understanding this
phenomenon,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

we must pause and try to answer the question: what exactly are the
reasons why they are so successful in their struggle with the most
powerful nations and under the most diverse external conditions?
Before we begin, we need to take a closer look at the circumstances of
the struggle, and then we will be able to form a more reliable idea of the
degree of strength of the people themselves.
Four thousand years ago, in the north-western part of the present-
day empire, there lived a small tribe, perhaps consisting of a hundred
families, a peaceful people...
"Pessin7", which has been gradually expanding and extending its
influence since that time, has reached as far as Phin-e-Kian7a, and then
thousands of kilometres further — to the shores of the South China Sea.
By the 12th century BC, the Middle Kingdom had expanded to a quarter
of its current territory. Within the empire, alongside the Chinese, there
lived many barbarian peoples who nominally recognised Chinese authority
but gradually lost their identity. The Chinese did not act against them with
armed force: they were never a warlike people, they did not conquer or
enslave their opponents, but gradually, little by little, absorbed them
into themselves, persuading them by peaceful means to irrevocably
unite with them. The conquest of neighbouring lands continued into the
new era: there, in the thirteenth century, they acquired the southernmost
province of En-nan, and Formosa was conquered in the 17th century. The
method by which they settled on this island can give some idea of the
course of their peaceful self-government process in general. They began
by building on the western shore, facing the sea, and from there gradually
spread to other areas. They are cautious about penetrating the interior of
the island; instead, they remain on the western coast of the island, where
they settle, 7ɤавнейшим обраѕом, with patience and cunning, and even
in
cɤуuаях,
mо7да
usɤовия
представɤяются
особенно
бɤа7оприятными,   they   по   временам оття7ивают новый
mусоm ѕемɤи у диmих туѕемɯев. Since the plains have already been
taken by previous settlers, the new pioneers try first and foremost to
make themselves useful, and "persuasion is their favourite tactic".
However, in the most extreme cases, the pioneers themselves resort to
violence: they, the new pioneers try first and foremost to
make themselves useful, and "persuasion is their favourite tactic".
However, in the most extreme cases, the pioneers themselves resort to
violence: they

--- PAGE BREAK ---ry first and foremost to
make themselves useful, and "persuasion is their favourite tactic".
However, in the most extreme cases, the pioneers themselves resort to
violence: they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They prefer to hire friendly names from among their enemies, and often marry
their daughters to them so that they can perform the role of peaceful
mediators. In this way, the Maitai achieved their goal, increasing their
population in Formosa to three million and pushing the Tsu-seng further and
further away.
The Chinese fell under the rule of the Mongols and are now ruled by the
Manchu dynasty, but both Mongolia and Manchuria are gradually
becoming more and more Mitai. The conquest of China by the Manchus
also served as a reason for the migration of the Manchus to Manchuria, and in
the end, this led to the rapid extinction of the Manchus and the repopulation
of the country by the Manchus. In Mongolia, the Mongols are steadily
advancing, gradually replacing the indigenous peoples, and it is already
possible to foresee that "in the not too distant future, all of Mongolia's
capable families will move to the steppes" (Raie).
Having crossed the boundaries of the pressured wall and conquering
more and more of the Celestial Empire into one whole, as we have already
seen above, they leave their homeland and enter into a struggle for
existence with peoples who are completely new to them. The eastern
part of Asia has long been the scene of such activity. The western part
of the Indo-Myanmar peninsula was flooded with Myanmar at the same
time, and the ancient Buddhist kingdoms of Siam and Cambodia, all
became Buddhist states. Thailand and the Malay Archipelago also
attracted a large number of Buddhist merchants, who even established
themselves in places such as Java. They have also penetrated into
densely populated areas, such as East India, where they are already
considered a traditional craft: for example, in Kagmutte, ninety percent of
shoemakers are Mitay. In the Philippine Islands, they have established
themselves,    despite        all kinds of    oppression and
persecution by the Spanish, and everything suggests that they have a
bright future there. The famous traveller, P7ор, thinks,
"Over time, they will displace all foreign elements in the Philippines, there
and in other countries of the Western Ocean, and will form a new race of
mestizos, to whom they will pass on all their characteristics.". A
particularly important role falls to the Chinese in Singapore, where nine-
tenths of all trade operations are located in their hands and where they
are engaged not only in trade, but also in large-scale trade — and,
moreover, in the most diversee in Singapore, where nine-
tenths of all trade operations are located in their hands and where they
are engaged not only in trade, but also in large-scale trade — and,
moreover, in the most diverse

--- PAGE BREAK ---e nine-
tenths of all trade operations are located in their hands and where they
are engaged not only in trade, but also in large-scale trade — and,
moreover, in the most diverse

--- PAGE BREAK ---

trades.
As bankers and merchants, they are unrivalled. The Chinese
community in Singapore is unique in that its members are less and less
inclined to return to their homeland.
Many of them marry local women, and they marry local women. In 1859,
out of fifty thousand Mitayans, there were already 3,248 Mitayans
(Raie). Although the main Mitay movement in Asia is limited to the
borders of its empire and is mainly directed towards the south,
nevertheless, a small part of the Mitay people has spread northwards to our
Asian territories. There, for example, they have settled in the Amur region,
where they are engaged in farming, gardening (including ginseng
cultivation) and, of course, trade. In some places, they have established
themselves permanently, but, according to Venumov,
"the presence of Manchus and Mitayevs on the left bank of the Amur,
near Baikal, will probably keep the Russians out of this area for a long
time." For some time now, Mitayev workers hired in China itself have
appeared in the Amur region; while in the same region, Chinese
merchants began to arrive, spreading between Proim and Irkutsk.
Outside of Asia, the most significant migration is to Australia,
followed by a smaller migration to Poland. In Australia, they diverge
from three points: south (Victoria), east (Queensland) and north (Port
Harbin). In recent years, they have been particularly active in the
goldfields of Queensland, where there are 15,000 workers, 14,000 of
whom are Chinese. European missionaries were horrified by the rapid
spread of Chinese immigration and insisted on the adoption of
restrictive measures. The local parliament, with its usual caution,
decided to send a delegation to Russia, the main source of income for
the islanders, and at the same time, to ensure that they had the right to
disembark on the shores of the island for their traditional work and
trade. The latter measure, however, was rejected by the government,
which caused great dissatisfaction and widespread protest.
The islands of Tahiti and the Sandwich Islands mainly attract tourists.
They first appeared in Tahiti in 1856. They were former slaves and
convicts who had fled Australia due to poor treatment. Having obtained
permission to land on the island, they immediately formed a small Maitai
community, establishing themselves asrmer slaves and
convicts who had fled Australia due to poor treatment. Having obtained
permission to land on the island, they immediately formed a small Maitai
community, establishing themselves as

--- PAGE BREAK ---victs who had fled Australia due to poor treatment. Having obtained
permission to land on the island, they immediately formed a small Maitai
community, establishing themselves as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and a small trading post. In addition, they were issued with permits to
work on plantations, which, as usual, were quite satisfactory.
Regarding the recruitment of migrant workers in England and
Germany, I am aware of the means of transportation, which are no longer
available to entrepreneurs in Nondon and Bergin, but, it is unlikely that they
will be able to fulfil this promise. Now science (at least in Germany,
according to the materialists) is beginning to rebel against racial
equality and against the unconditional freedom of immigration for
Europeans. It is much more likely that, in the near future, there will be a
rush to Australia. In 1875, the first attempt was made to recruit workers
for Cape Good Hope, and Francis Caton expressed his conviction that it
was necessary to settle Alim with mitayevs on the largest possible scale,
because, in his opinion, this was the only way to make the country
accessible to a wider audience. One of the most famous modern travellers
to China, Abbot David, takes a very serious view of the situation in the
monasteries. He considers it impossible for Europeans to spread
knowledge among the Chinese, because, armed with this knowledge,
the Chinese would become even more dangerous; He believes that Asia,
the "inexhaustible anthill," should be left alone, the Malay Archipelago
and Alim, but at least now, with greater urgency, it is necessary to prevent
its spread to Europe and America.
It is important to bear in mind the remarkable ability of migrants,
despite their remarkable adaptability to new conditions, to nevertheless
retain their characteristic features. All travellers to one place agree and
say that the customs in San Francisco, Melbourne, Batavia and other
cities are completely typical of the cities of the Celestial Empire. Some
Chinese immigrants in California are beginning to adopt European customs,
i.e. they are changing their clothes and some of their manners, but in
essence they remain the same Chinese. Although they are generally very
reluctant to accept major changes under the influence of foreigners and
have no desire to acquire scientific knowledge, nevertheless, they
eagerly and readily adopt many practical skills and techniques, and
thanks to this ability, they are becoming dangerous rivals to European
craftsmen. ( Some characteristic examplesvertheless, they
eagerly and readily adopt many practical skills and techniques, and
thanks to this ability, they are becoming dangerous rivals to European
craftsmen. ( Some characteristic examples

--- PAGE BREAK ---gerly and readily adopt many practical skills and techniques, and
thanks to this ability, they are becoming dangerous rivals to European
craftsmen. ( Some characteristic examples

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This was described by Emerson in his essay on the struggle of races in
America. Emperor Guangxu, allowing European missionaries into
China, declared that he was doing so not because he considered their
religion to be good, but because they knew astronomy and mathematics
and could help the government to improve its administration. In recent
years, the Chinese have made great strides in military matters, attracting
European observers to the organisation of their army and fortifications, which they
have been able to rearm with group artillery.
Moving on now to the reasons why these myths are so persistent in
the struggle for existence, it is necessary to emphasise the importance of
participation in this somatic moment. Although there is no
satisfactory   material      judgement about   the adaptability of mityaev,
but, judging by all appearances, it is known in this regard that their
ability to adapt is exceptionally high. As we have seen above, they
spread over a vast area, both in terms of the harshness of the climate and
the harshness of the climate, and in terms of tropical and subtropical
countries. In terms of intelligence, that is, mental capacity, they are not
particularly gifted, but they compensate for this with their ability to work
long hours. In many areas, they are crossed by myths, their "syzygiality"
is evident, i.e. the strong hereditary transmission of their physical and
mental characteristics when compared with other races. Children from
mixed marriages with Manchu, Manchurian, Spanish and other women
are more similar to the Mitai than to their mothers.
Along with their remarkable talent, they possess a number of character
traits that influence their performance in competition. Firstly, as already
mentioned, they are distinguished by their remarkable moderation in
food and other needs and their self-sacrificing diligence. They work
hard and diligently and do not refuse any work, no matter how difficult it
may be. In California, they monopolise certain female specialities, such as
washing clothes and taking care of the house and children. Secondly, they
are extremely docile and therefore, unlike many other peoples, they
tolerate oppression and violations of their rights. Their virtues are
undoubtedly moral, although among them are diligence, moderation and
endurance occupy one of the lowest places, but they (especially in this
case) are directed towards a peaceful life. The highest moral virtues
include solidarity with fellow human beings,ration and
endurance occupy one of the lowest places, but they (especially in this
case) are directed towards a peaceful life. The highest moral virtues
include solidarity with fellow human beings,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e occupy one of the lowest places, but they (especially in this
case) are directed towards a peaceful life. The highest moral virtues
include solidarity with fellow human beings,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In times of need and misfortune, they help each other.
But, on the other hand, we must not lose sight of the fact in their
struggle for survival, they are not very selective about the means they
use and constantly resort to methods that, in European and moral terms, are
considered immoral. Above, I have already mentioned the example of the
entrapment of monks by mythical creatures; there are many similar
examples. Speaking of the counter-immigration of mythical beings into
Monogania, Rae, referring to Williams, says: "The simple-minded people
(monogans) are not mature enough for mythical cunning.". And further: "This
struggle between cunning and naive, primitive, self-unaware dimar, may
not seem particularly comforting, but in the end, one cannot help but admire the
process.". The same techniques are used to fight the mythical creatures in
Manchuria with their "simple-minded and good-natured" tusemua.
"Wherever peace reigns," says Rae, "there in Manchuria the mythical
creatures are in a state of decline, displacing their former rulers with
cunning and hard work." Here is how he describes the Spanish historian
Suny7a's observations of the Mitais in the Philippine Islands: "On the one
hand, devoting themselves to semede, they appeared in thousands of all
kinds of mutes, trading upesvyanu gom. They used the most sophisticated
measures and scales and tirelessly weighed all kinds of goods, such as wheat,
sugar, etc. They behaved like true merchants, paying close attention to
the needs of the people and the demand for goods, which they held until they
were given the high price they demanded. One of the newest travellers to
the islands of the Pacific Ocean, Spalding Pembroke, notes the
similarity between the Tahitians and the Samoans and comments on this
as follows: "The two races represent a stark contrast: the Asian always
outwits the simple-minded native." It goes without saying that the
majority of the strategies used by the Mitai in their struggle with other
peoples were developed and refined by them during their many
struggles at home. "Incredible economy of time, space and material," —
says P7or, — the motor can be found in the overpopulated people of the
mythical, constantly with new strength it is found in the traveler." And
in fact, the character of the mythical creature, who has remained in the
Celestial Empire all his life, is exactly the same, as incal, constantly with new strength it is found in the traveler." And
in fact, the character of the mythical creature, who has remained in the
Celestial Empire all his life, is exactly the same, as in

--- PAGE BREAK ---new strength it is found in the traveler." And
in fact, the character of the mythical creature, who has remained in the
Celestial Empire all his life, is exactly the same, as in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

smi7rant. Here is how mаm describes the first Pesheɤь: "China combines
everything that is needed to bring about rapid overpopulation under
conditions of unhindered development: it is a gentle father, loves
children with the greatest joy, is moderate in his desires, is careful with
money, is a tireless worker, does not know how to be lazy, but in
business he is cunning. Children are engaged in mommeruecmimi deeds;
celebration and giving money under the tree are their favourite games.
According to the famous traveller Gyuma, the motor is very much
confirmed by our observations, which are completely consistent with
temporary interests and materialism in the usual sense of the word.
"Profit is his only goal, and he is constantly striving to achieve it. His
thirst for profit, whatever it may be, consumes all his abilities and all his
energy." The commercial spirit is developed in him to the highest degree.
Capital in his hands is already sufficient for him to learn something new, he
usually resorts to his natural talent, which is characteristic of him.
Everything points to the fact that the mythical character is the prototype
of the real character, and this sufficiently explains why myths are so
important in the struggle for existence. The advantage lies in
individuality, and in social struggle it should fall precisely on the side of
the practical, and that is precisely what justice is: the ability to achieve
the desired result, no matter what. F r o m this it is clear that the
intellectual side must be represented by the most outstanding character.
Perspective attributes China's prosperity to the fact that "its political
system strives to achieve compliance with the logical condition that
guides all social improvement: it seeks to give the mind a dominant
role." A certain degree of intellectual education, as we know, is the
property of every citizen, with widespread seminary education. Their
moral level is undoubtedly at a lower level. According to the well-
known American statesman Seward, "moral character is not determined by
the court of conscience, but by the rules of convenience." Raie, who did
not have the opportunity to observe the mythical beings in their
homeland, but who conscientiously studied the literature about them,
complains about their lack of ideals and says that "they are devoid of any
high moral aspirations that transcend the limits of momentary
considerations andiously studied the literature about them,
complains about their lack of ideals and says that "they are devoid of any
high moral aspirations that transcend the limits of momentary
considerations and

--- PAGE BREAK ---iterature about them,
complains about their lack of ideals and says that "they are devoid of any
high moral aspirations that transcend the limits of momentary
considerations and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

for the sake of truth itself." The Chinese have independently developed a
highly developed moral culture, which in many respects is not inferior
to our highest moral standards, but which at the same time is imbued
with a sense of practicality characteristic of the mythical worldview. For
example, in the second and fourth of the four basic principles of moral
philosophy and morality ( Tuун-Œн7, иɤи
"Immutability in the middle," mni7e, attributed to vnumu and uueni
Konɭuɭia — Tеsuusse) is carried out prinɭin, uto ueɤoвеm highest virtue
"is consistent with the circumstances, utoby to remain in the middle."
And it is preached that all universal commandments will be fulfilled by
natural impulse and without effort, and that they will be fulfilled with
difficulty and effort, but if the highest virtue is fulfilled, then the results will
be the same in all cases. It should not be forgotten, of course, that there is a
great difference between moral education and morality, i.e. moral
behaviour, which is precisely what is often found among mythologists.
But for the mythical, if they have moral and ethical content, then it is not in
the form of rest and relaxation with the aim of passing the time.
The religious indifference of the Maitai is well known and manifests itself
in their lives at every turn. When the Spanish, in order to counteract the
influence of the Muslims on the Philippine Islands, issued a decree that
Christians could marry local women, so that the Maitai would be more
willing to accept Christianity. But, of course, this was only nominal.
The Chinese emperor Œn7-Nin7 (in the past century) published
memoirs in which he warns against dangerous ideas and condemns all
the teachings he has studied. He jokes about the constant repetition of
Buddhist mantras and says on this subject: "If you have committed a sin
and have to kneel before the judge, 'Your Honour', do you really think he
will forgive you? Your god Buddha is angry because he condemns the
fact that they do not bring him offerings on a tray and do not eat his
paper," etc. Our famous synonymist, Prof. Vasilyev, expresses himself
in the following way: "In the East (i.e., in China itself), they have no
concept of attachment to money, which we encounter in the West —
there, people do not live by their hearts and everyday needs."
It is not surprising that, given such a practically oriented approach,
art in China could not rise to great heights.nter in the West —
there, people do not live by their hearts and everyday needs."
It is not surprising that, given such a practically oriented approach,
art in China could not rise to great heights.

--- PAGE BREAK ---there, people do not live by their hearts and everyday needs."
It is not surprising that, given such a practically oriented approach,
art in China could not rise to great heights.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

level of development. Let us consider the opinion of a specialist in the
history of art on this matter. "The mythologist," says Schnaase, "having
no higher direction, produces, for the most part, works that are
characterised by external artificiality. In some branches of artistic
technique, the artist belongs to the to the authors of important technical
inventions (some of which were made by them in immemorial times)
and to the most skilled and, to this day, the most accomplished: as early
as the third century BC, they were engaged in metalworking, stone
processing and various types of fine crafts. But alongside these and other
exciting technical achievements, there is a lack of true artistic talent. In
their constructions, we see the principle of decorative wallpaper
diversity, outwardly resembling the wooden structures and tents of
primitive peoples; in sculpture and painting, their imagination allows for
only a faint imitation of nature and a crude departure from it. The study of this
phenomenon, which is very interesting in itself, belongs more to the field
of art history than to the history of literature; and even in the broad sense
of the history of literature, it is not really necessary, since it is mainly
concerned with technical and material aspects and has a character that is self-
contained and self-sufficient, it has a significant spiritual influence on other
nations.
The conclusion, which is supported by the research on the struggle
for existence in the universe presented in the seven main points, has,
especially at first glance, much in common with the well-known position
of Bomba, but in the end, the decisive and main point is always the integral
development. In fact, approaching the issue from two sides, we must be
convinced that the moral aspect of the struggle is incomparably more
important and more fundamental than the intellectual aspect. This is
directly implied by the arguments of the struggle and considerations
about the impermanence of   stiuecmich   grounds. —   This second
argument is diametrically opposed to the main argument put forward by
Bom in his position. The argument, I believe, consists in recognising
moral principles as immutable. Against this, the history of morality and
the writings of writers who have come to this conclusion that certain
fundamental moral principles are immutable and unchanging, then this
is in no wayle. Against this, the history of morality and
the writings of writers who have come to this conclusion that certain
fundamental moral principles are immutable and unchanging, then this
is in no way

--- PAGE BREAK ---e history of morality and
the writings of writers who have come to this conclusion that certain
fundamental moral principles are immutable and unchanging, then this
is in no way

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is not necessary to extend this to the entire moral sphere. "Do good to
others, sacrifice your own desires for their sake, etc., says God, — in this
and a few other things lie the essential principles of morality, but they
have been known for many thousands of years, and not a single iota, not a
single paragraph has been added to it by all the sermons, teachings and
aphorisms, which are the work of theologians and moralists." But the
final decision on the question of what
"Friends," who need to do good, does not constitute a mobile sɤeement
in morality, and it does not matter whether we spread goodness to our
contemporaries, or to our neighbours, to representatives of other nations,
other races, and, of course, animals? Obviously, the development of moral
consciousness is a constant, evident in the history of peoples, as well as in
the history of individual people. It is also incorrect to assume that in the
historical process there is no trace of the moral moment. If one were to
take the example of literature, art and science, one would see that the
driving force behind them is moral feeling. On the other hand, he would also
be presented with quite convincing arguments. The discrepancy between
Bomba's basic position and the main conclusion drawn from the material
presented is that the moral aspect should be recognised as a weapon of
victory in the struggle for existence, which in large forms is expressed in
the form of industrial competition and rivalry between nations, and not
in the entire process of civilisation. Literature and art, which constitute the
essential side of civilisation and are closely linked to moral
development, recede into the background in the usual forms of the
struggle for existence. From this it is clear that peoples who are less
developed in this respect can be incomparably stronger than peoples
who are far above them in this respect. We thus arrive at the necessity of
dividing that which is called civilisation into two large groups, following
Giso in this respect. "In vivisection," he says, "there are two main types, — it
exists under two conditions and is characterised by two      principles:   the
development of social activity and the development of individual
activity, the process of society and the process of uеɤовеmа. The first
verse embraces the citizen, and the monomeric development and
everything that is often referred to as "material nature"; the second verse
"The development of life   individual, internal, development   self-7oraces the citizen, and the monomeric development and
everything that is often referred to as "material nature"; the second verse
"The development of life   individual, internal, development   self-7o

--- PAGE BREAK ---

uеɤовеmа, е7о abilities, uувств, ideas" and is expressed in literature,
science and art. Although Giso points out that there are "many countries
where wealth is growing faster and is more evenly distributed among
citizens, and where, meanwhile, social equality is at a lower level of
development than in other countries, not so much in terms of social
relations," he nevertheless firmly adheres to the principle that both
components of ɯивиɤиѕаɯия are inextricably linked. The supposed
inseparability of this connection is refuted by the above-mentioned
examples of the existence of peoples who are extremely strong in their
struggle for existence, such as the Yemeni, the Mitaity, the Magaity, and
at the same time standing high in morality, art, literature and science.
The leading position of the Sgins in the highest spheres of civilisation did
not make them live and did not allow them to experience the immeasurably
lower status of the Mitai, but at the same time, the immaturity of the latter
in terms of their understanding did not prevent them from becoming the most
powerful people in the struggle for existence, to survive the harsh and cruel
trials and tribulations and to regain even a more favourable position in relation
to the modern European world. Raie and other writers, speaking about
myths, often refer to the absence of "ideal aspirations" among the people, but it is
precisely this absence, replaced by surprising pragmatism, does not harm
them, but rather helps them in the arena of struggle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. F. Rittich
The Savoyard
World
Geographical Features
The most significant sacred sites in
THE TERRITORY OF EUROPE

--- PAGE BREAK ---ther helps them in the arena of struggle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. F. Rittich
The Savoyard
World
Geographical Features
The most significant sacred sites in
THE TERRITORY OF EUROPE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Published by V. I. Istomin
Typography Warsaw. Military District —
Printed in Warsaw. Military Edition.
Chromolithography by A. A. Istomin in St.
Petersburg. — Lithography by Pua in Warsaw.
WARSAW
1885

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
Aachen, Germany. (Rhenish Province)
Adelnau, Odobanov and Odobanov 7. (Posnan)
Adelsberg, 7. Postojna. (Chorutania)
Adler, p. Orɤиɯа. (Nехия)
Adige, p. 3uава. (Iтаɤия)
Adriatic Sea, Sino and Pdercmoe Sea.
Adrianopel, 7. Ƚринопоɤь, Ƚринов, Pдрин, 3дрене. (Баɤmансmий поɤ.)
Agram, 7. Eapeb. (Croatia)
Akkerman, 7. Begorod. (Russia)
Albona, 7. Nabin. (Austria)
Aldenburg, Oldenburg, 7. Stary7rad. (Shesvi7)
Alessio, 7. Nes. (Agbania)
Almissa, 7. Oɤmizh. (Aɤbania)
Alpa, p. Vpa. (Moravia)
Altenburg, 7. Vetvar. (Germany)
Altmark, Old March. (on 3ɤьbe)
Altsohl, 7. Evogen. (Vienna)
Altstadt, 7. Věvehrad, Hradčany. (Moravia) Aluta,
p. Ota. (Romania)
Antiwari, 7. Bar. (Albania)
Angerburg, 7. V7robor, V7obor. (Prussia)
Aquila, Bo7ey and Aɤ7ar. (Austria, Gorilla) Arad, 7.
Old 7rad. (Vienna)
Arangosch, Araniosch, Eotaya pema, Eotna vegnama. (Sedmardia) Arbo,
island of Rab. (Croatia)
Arkona, 7. Vitov. (Northern
Germany) Auschwitz, 7. Osvenɯim.
(Austria) Auspitz, 7. Gustopeu.
(Moravia) Aussig, 7. Vsti na Nabe.
(Bohemia) Austerlitz, 7. Sɤavmov.
(Moravia) Arva, p. Oraniɯa.
(Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ern
Germany) Auschwitz, 7. Osvenɯim.
(Austria) Auspitz, 7. Gustopeu.
(Moravia) Aussig, 7. Vsti na Nabe.
(Bohemia) Austerlitz, 7. Sɤavmov.
(Moravia) Arva, p. Oraniɯa.
(Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B
Balaton, os. Pɤесо, Bɤатное osero. (Vienna) Balkan
Geb., Haеmus, Bъɤmан.
Barthfeld, 7. Bardiv. (Vienna)
Bausk, 7. Busm. (Russia)
Bautzen, 7. Budishin. (Nusaia)
Bellegarde, 7. Begrad. (Pomerania and Russigen)
Bensen od., Beneshau, 7. Beneshov. (Bohemia)
Bergen, 7. Gorsma. (Northern Germany)
Bieler See, os. Beɤoosero. (Switzerland and Tyrol)
Behrent, 7. Koster. (Prussia)
Bentschen, 7. Ebyshin. (Posnan)
Bentsch, 7. Benesov. (Austria)
Berat, 7. Begrad. (Agbania)
Beraun, p. Berunmа. (Bohemia and Abania)
Berlin, 7. Bergin. (Germany)
Bern, 7. Berun. (Switzerland)
Beuthen, 7. Bytom. (Germany)
Bielietz, 7. Besmo. (Chorutania)
Birnbaum, 7. Mezhikhod.
(Prussia)
Bischofsteinitz, 7. Gorshuvty. (Bohemia)
Bitolia, 7. Bite and Monastery.
Blota, Boɤota. (in Nужиuах)
Bohmerwald, 7ор. Shumava.
(Bo7emya) Bodenbach 7. Boruɯ.
(Germany)
Bocca, v. Cattaro, Bomа Kotor. (Ƚаɤмания) Boritz,
7. Boruɯ. (Germany)
Bomst, 7. Babi Bridge. (Prussia)
Brandenburg, 7. Brandenburg, Brandenburg Forest, Brandenburg.
(Prussia) Brasso od, Kronstadt, Brasov and Coruna.
(Sedmimoravia) Braunau, 7. Braunau. (Austria)
Brazza, island of Brau. (Romania)
Breslau, 7. Pereslav, Bratislav, Vratislav. (Silesia) Brieg, 7.
Bre7 bogshoi. (Silesia)
Bries, 7. Brezno. (Vienna)
Bromberg, 7. Budín. (Prussia)
Bruck, 7. Most. (Styria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brunn, 7. Brno. (Moravia)
Braunsburg, 7. Branevo. (Pomerania)
Brux, 7. Most. (Bohemia)
Budua, 7. Budva. (Croatia) Budweis,
7. Budweis. (Bohemia) Bukecy, 7.
Bumove. (Nusa) Brezezan,
Berezhany. (Gania) Bunzlau, 7.
Bogesave. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ania)
Brux, 7. Most. (Bohemia)
Budua, 7. Budva. (Croatia) Budweis,
7. Budweis. (Bohemia) Bukecy, 7.
Bumove. (Nusa) Brezezan,
Berezhany. (Gania) Bunzlau, 7.
Bogesave. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C
Cammin, 7. Kamen. (Pomerania)
Capo d'Istria, 7. Koper. (Austria)
Carlopago, 7. Ba7. (Italy) Carloburg,
7. Beg7rad. (Sedm7radia) Castua, 7.
Kastav. (Istria)
Catarro, 7. Kotor. (Croatia)
Chemnitz, 7. Stavinia. (Bavaria)
Chemnitz, 7. Kamenica. (Bohemia and Saxony)
Cielecin, 7. Tehyatin. (Prussia)
Chodiesen, 7. Hodezh. (Posnan)
Chorutanien, Gortana, Korosha, Chorutanija.
Colberg, 7. Kogober7. (Prussia)
Crossen, 7. Korosno. (Prussia)
Csaba, 7. Naba. (Hungary)
Custrin, 7. Kostrin. (Prussia)
Culm, 7. Heɤmno and Hɤumeɯ. (Prussia) Curzola,
island. Kuruɤa. (Ƚаɤmaɯия) Cuculo, 7.
Tрнава. (Sedmicarde)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

D
Danzing, 7. Gdańsk. (Prussia)
Dauba, p. Lub. (Bohemia)
Delvino, 7. pr. Ƚяваɤ, Ƚевоɤ. (Aɤbania) Demmin, 7.
Ƚымин. (Prussia)
Dermendere, 7. Verovo and Orovo. (Bamans Peninsula) Dignano, 77.
Vodnjan. (Austria)
Dirschau, 7. Tuëvo. (Prussia)
Diurdevo, 7. Murza, Murzevo. (Romania)
Dobrudga, obɤ. Ƚобриu. (Balkan Peninsula) Domnitz,
7. Ƚомеɯ. (Germany)
Dohna, 7. Ƚонин. (Germany)
Donau, p. Ƚурнав. (Germany and Austria)
Dorpat, 7. Œрьев. (Russia)
Dossa, 7. Tamca. (Germany)
Dresden, 7. Zhorzhdyany. (Saxony)
Drewenz, p. Pereviana. (Prussia)
Drewani, Zhorzhdyany. (Hanover)
Duino, 7. Zivin. (Chorutania)
Duleigno, 7. Ogun. (Zamaya) Durazzo,
7. Zaru, (Albania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---7. Zhorzhdyany. (Saxony)
Drewenz, p. Pereviana. (Prussia)
Drewani, Zhorzhdyany. (Hanover)
Duino, 7. Zivin. (Chorutania)
Duleigno, 7. Ogun. (Zamaya) Durazzo,
7. Zaru, (Albania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
Eger, p. O7ra. (Bo7emia)
Eger, 7. Heb. (Bo7emia)
Egri-Palanka, Беɤоѕеро. (Bulgaria)
Eider, р. Е7дора. (Switzerland)
Eipel, p. Ipo and Vpo. (Austria) Eiten, 7.
Vtin. (Silesia)
Elbe, p. Naba. (Germany)
Elbing, 7. Trusa Eɤbɤon7. (Prussia)
Elbogen, 7. Nоmет. (Bo7emya)
Elden, 7. Kanov. (Germany)
Eni-Zagra, 7. Tverdija, Eapora Novaya. (Bamansky Peninsula) Enns, p.
3nza. (Austria)
Elster, 7. Nьstra. (Ƚуѕаɯия)
Eperies, 7. Pryashev. (Vен7рия)
Erlau, 7. P7ra and P7er. (Bo7emya)
Erzgebirge, Ore Mountains, Ore Mountains, Ore Mountains. (Bohemia)
Eski Zagra, 77. Old Ea7ora, Meɤesnya. (Bamans Peninsula) Essek, 7. Ocem
and Turov. (Croatia)
Etsch, p. 3uava. (Italy) Exin,
7. Kɯynia. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
Feistritz, Weisritz, p. Bystria. (Germany and Austria)
Fellin, 7. Vegin. (Russia)
Feldkirchen, 7 Top7. (Horutania)
Femern, island of Femern. (Denmark)
Fichtelgebirge, 7 Smeruiny. (Bohemia)
Finsterwald 7. Grabin. (Prussia)
Fiume, 7. Rema, Remma. (Istria)
Flatow, 7. Ekatovo. (Prussia)
Flohau, 7. Bishany. (Bohemia)
Flohe, p. Viga. (Bohemia)
Foinitza, 7. Khvoynaya. (Bamberg Peninsula)
Fraustadt, 7. Vshova. (Silesia)
Freistadt, 7. Nа7ɤов. (Austria)
Freiberg, 7. Pribor. (Germany)
Frioul, Furɤjana.
Funfkirchen, 7. Peu and Peuy, Peuyh. (Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bamberg Peninsula)
Fraustadt, 7. Vshova. (Silesia)
Freistadt, 7. Nа7ɤов. (Austria)
Freiberg, 7. Pribor. (Germany)
Frioul, Furɤjana.
Funfkirchen, 7. Peu and Peuy, Peuyh. (Vienna)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

G
Gablonz, 7. Pбɤонеɯ. (Bohemia)
Gabel, 7. Pбɤонь. (Bohemia)
Garz, 7. Korenia. (on the
Ryzhen) Gortz, 7. Goriana.
(Chorutania)
Gail, p. Goɤь and Bystriɯa, also Eиɤа. (Tироɤь)
Gaya, 7. Kiev. (Moravia)
Garz, 7. Korenia. (Prussia)
Genova, Genes, 7. Ppov. (Italy)
Gera, 7. Gora. (Germany)
Gitschin, 7. Iuin. (Bohemia)
Glatz, 7. Kradom. (Silesia)
Gleiwitz, 7. Gliwice. (Silesia)
Glogau, 7. Głogów. (Silesia)
Gnesen, 7. Gniezno. (Posnan)
Goeding, 7. Godonin. (Moravia)
Goldberg, 7. Ejatibor. (Nysa)
Gorlitz, 7. S7opey and S7opey. (Nysa) Gottschee, obg.
Kouevye, Kouevcmo. (Austria) Gratz, 7.
Gradishma. (Posnan)
Gratz, 7. Styria 7radeɯ. (Styria) Gran, 7.
Ostrohɤm and Ostri7om. (Ven7ria) Graudenz,
7. Grudziondz, Grude. (Posnan) Grottkau, 7.
Gorodmov. (Silesia) Grossglockner, 7. Veni
ѕvon. (Austria) Gross-Kanitza, 7. Knyasiha.
(Austria) Grosswardein, 7. Varamín Varadin.
(Austria) Groszenhain, 7. Ocem Varamín.
(Samosonia) Gravosa, 7. Gruž. (Italy)
Gumbinen, 7. Gombin. (East
Prussia) Guben, 7. Gubin. (Prussia)
Guhrau, 7. Gora. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H
Habelschwert, 7. Bystrya. (Silesia)
Hainau, 7. Gaiun. (Prussia)
Halle, 7. Ƚобро7ора, Ƚобросоɤь. (Germany)
Haskioi, 7. Буmово. (Bamans Peninsula) Havel, р.
Гавоɤа. (Germany)
Hirschberg, 7. Ƚоmсы. (Bohemia)
Hoheneck, 7. Войниm. (Austria)
Heilbrunn, м. Гойна вода. (Nехия)
Heiligengeil, 7. Св. Сеmира.
(Pomerania) Hohenmauth, 7. High Toll.
(Bohemia) Hohenelbe, 7. Upper Elbe.
(Bohemia) Holleschau, 7. Hohenstadt.
(Moravia) Hohenstadt, 7. Eaber7.
(Moravia)
Holben, 7. Iva. (Silesia) Holsen, 7.
Goyasina. (Prussia)
Hermannstadt, 7. Sebeň and Sibín. (Sedmimístí) Hoierswerde, 7.
Vospří. (Nýsaní)
Horn, 7. Ro7. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---aber7.
(Moravia)
Holben, 7. Iva. (Silesia) Holsen, 7.
Goyasina. (Prussia)
Hermannstadt, 7. Sebeň and Sibín. (Sedmimístí) Hoierswerde, 7.
Vospří. (Nýsaní)
Horn, 7. Ro7. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
Iglau, 7. I7ɤava. (Bo7emya)
Insterburg, 7. Instruu. (Prussia)
Iser, p. Isera and Is-ësera. (Austria)
Isonzo, p. Soua, Edoba. (Austria)
Istiman, 7. Eɤatiɯa. (Turkey)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

J
Jansdorf, 7. Pnov. (Bohemia)
Jagerndorf, 7. Krymov. (Silesia)
Idria, 7. Vydra. (Krajina) Jicin,
7. Ivin. (Bohemia)
Johannisberg, 7. Hansborn. (East Prussia)
Julin, 7. Vogin, Veneda. (Prussia)
Jung-Bunzlau, 7. Madobogesava. (Bohemia)
Jurburg, 7. Oroborm. (Prussia)
Juterbock, 7. Eutrop. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

K
Kaden, 7. Kadan. (Bohemia)
Kalau, 7. Kagava. (Germany)
Kammin, 7. Kaden tamzhe Kamen. (Germany)
Karasu, p. Msta and Mesta. (Macedonia)
Karasu, p. Strum and Struma. (Macedonia)
Karlsbad, 7. Karovary. (Bohemia)
Karnthen, obɤ. Korenia. (Chorutania)
Karlstadt, 7. Karɤoveɯ. (Bo7emya)
Karlsburg, 7. Beg7rad. (Sedm7radia)
Karinthien, obɤ. Korenia. (Chorutania)
Kaschau, 7. Koshiɯa. (Vienna)
Kazanlick, 7. Sheynovo and Kote. (Romania)
Kastoria, 7. Kostur. (Greece)
Kempen, 7. Kunno. (Prussia)
Kethen, 7. Kve. (Germany)
Kimpoloung, 7. Ƚоɤ7опоɤе.
Kirkilissa,
7.
Soromopermov
иɤи
Nosin7rad.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Kirchhain, 7. Kustrov. (Germany)
Kissingen, 7. Khizhy. (Bavaria)
Klausenburg, 7. Kagosh and Kagoshvar. (Sedmichradia) Klentze, 7.
Kagone. (Germany)
Klietz, 7. Kgyu. (Germany)
Klagenfurth, 7. Eevovei. (Chorutania)
Koromezo, 7. Psine. (Ven7ria)
Konigsgratz, 7. Kraɤe7rada and Gradeɯ Kraɤevey. (Boɤeмия)
Konitz, 7. Hoynyɯy. (Prussia)
Kokel, p. Tirnova. (Sedmichradia)
Kommotau, 7. Khomutov. (Bohemia)
Komorn, 7. Komarno. (Vienna)
Konigenhof, 7. Kradedvor. (Bohemia)
Konigsberg, 7. Kroɤeveɯ. (Prussia)
Kopreinitz, 7. Koprivnitsa. (Croatia)
Korosmezzo, 7. Pseny. (Austria)
Konstanz, 7. Kostinitsa. (Switzerland)
Koslin, 7. Kosin. (Pomerania)Kradedvor. (Bohemia)
Konigsberg, 7. Kroɤeveɯ. (Prussia)
Kopreinitz, 7. Koprivnitsa. (Croatia)
Korosmezzo, 7. Pseny. (Austria)
Konstanz, 7. Kostinitsa. (Switzerland)
Koslin, 7. Kosin. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kosel, 7. Kosin. (Silesia) Koritza,
7. Gorizia. (Greece) Kotbus, 7.
Hotebuzh. (Nysa) Kostel, 7.
Podivín. (Moravia) Kosten, 7.
Kostyam. (Prussia) Krain, obɤ.
Kraina. (Austria) Kreitsburg, 7.
Ruzhbor. (Russia) Kreutz, 7.
Kryzhevɯy. (Croatia) Kremnitz,
7. Kremnica. (V7ria) Kremsier, 7.
Kromeriz. (Moravia) Krems, 7.
Kremza. (Austria)
Kronstadt od., Brasso, 7. Brasov and Koruna. (Sedmichradia)
Krummanu, 7. Krumev. (Bohemia)
Kuprily, 7. Veche. (Bamans Peninsula) Kustendil, 7.
Vebobudz. (Bamans Peninsula) Kuttenburg, 7. Kutna
Hora. (Bohemia)
Kulm, 7. Khaum. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf, Kursmіy саɤіv. (Prussia) Kweitz,
7. Kvas. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---sula) Kustendil, 7.
Vebobudz. (Bamans Peninsula) Kuttenburg, 7. Kutna
Hora. (Bohemia)
Kulm, 7. Khaum. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf, Kursmіy саɤіv. (Prussia) Kweitz,
7. Kvas. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L
Lagosta, island. Nastovo. (Hungary)
Laibach, 7. Nyubyana. (Austria)
Landsberg, 7. Gorev. (Prussia)
Lauban, 7. Nyuben (Silesia) Lauzitz,
ob. Nyzy.
Lautenburg, 7. Niborm. (Prussia)
Leda-See, Lake Nebsmo. (Prussia)
Lebau, 7. Nybia and Nyubava. (Prussia) Lebus,
7. Nyubusha. (Germany)
Lieben, 7. Gɤуп (Germany)
Liepa, Neshchaya Nipa. (Bohemia)
Liepzig, 7. Nipy and Nipso. (Saxony) Leitha, 7.
Nitava. (Germany)
Leitmeritz, 7. Nitomerizy. (Bohemia)
Lemberg, 7. Nvov. (Galicia) Lentzen,
7. Nenuin. (Germany) Lensen, 7.
Nyuin. (Germany)
Leoben, 7. Nübno and Nübina. (Germany)
Leobschutz, 7. Gübinuin and Nübouinuin. (Germany)
Lessino, island of Hvar and Far. (Croatia)
Leutschau, 7. Nevoua. (V7ria)
Levenz, 7. Nevoua. (V7ria)
Leutomischl, 7. Nitomysh. (Moravia)
Libau, 7. Nyubava. (Russia)
Liebenwerda, 7. Rumov. (Germany)
Liegnitz, 7. Ne7niya. (Silesia)
Linz, 7. Ninea. (Austria)
Lisza, 7. Nesno. (Germany)
Littau, 7. Nitovya. (Moravia)
Littai, 7. Netia. (Chorutania)
Laun, 7. Nunya. (Bohemia)
Lissa, 7. Nesno. (Prussia)
Lubeck, 7. Nübi and Nübo. (Germany) Luben, 7.
Nübin. (Prussia)
Luchow, 7. Nу7и. (Hanover)
Lukkau, 7. Nуmов. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lutzen, 7. Nyzhin. (Samosia)
Luditz, 7. Mutyia. (Bohemia)
Lundenburg, 7. Breyava and Breuisava. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---how, 7. Nу7и. (Hanover)
Lukkau, 7. Nуmов. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lutzen, 7. Nyzhin. (Samosia)
Luditz, 7. Mutyia. (Bohemia)
Lundenburg, 7. Breyava and Breuisava. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M
Magdeburg, 7. Levin. (Germany)
Main, p. Mo7an. (Germany)
Mainz, 7. Mo7yu. (Germany)
Makarsko, 7. Momry. (Croatia)
Marburg, 7. Maribor. (Styria)
Marienburg, 7. Kobylin. (Prussia) Maria-
Theresiapol, 7. Soboda. (Austria)
Marienburg, 7. Magdeburg. (Prussia)
Marienwerder, 7. Kwidzyn. (Prussia)
Markgrabowo, 7. Ożarów. (Prussia)
March, p. Morava. (Moravia)
Meiszen, 7. Myshin. (Saxony)
Meleda, island. Mɤет. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Melk, 7. Meɤьниm. (Germany)
Meonia, 7. Раѕɤуm. (Turkey)
Merseburg, 7. Mezhibor. (Germany)
Mettau, p. Meta, Msta. (Bohemia and Moravia)
Mewe, 7. Gniev. (Prussia)
Mies, 7. Strzibro. (Bohemia)
Mies, p. Mza. (Bohemia)
Michelstatten, c. Vegesovo. (Kraina)
Mikilenburg, 7. Nyubov and Rapo7. (S.
Germany) Mirchau, 7. Mirochov. (Prussia)
Mischkolz, Mischmowey. (Austria)
Mitrowitz, 7. Mitrovica. (Bamans Peninsula) Mitterberg,
Pisino, 7. Pasin. (Austria)
Moldau, p. Vīta, Vīta and Mīta. (Bohemia) Mottling, 7. Metina.
(Chorutania)
Mesokovesd, 7. Kivazhd. (V7ria)
Moldauthein, Vɤtavcmiy tyny. (Bo7emia)
Monchgut, 7. Rodovui. (Ost. Rana)
Morasch, p. Marosha. (Ven7ria)
Mosburg, 7. Mokhov, Saɤovar.
(Ven7ria) Mugeln, 7. Mo7iɤьna.
(Nуѕаɯия)
Muglitz, 7. Mo7eɤiɯa and Mo7eɤniɯa. (Moravia)
Muhlhausen, 7. Miɤevmа. (Bo7emya)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Munchen, 7. Munich. (Bavaria)
Munchsberg, 7. Vojnov Mesteɯ. (Bohemia)
Munster, 7. Vėgna. (Silesia)
Munchengratz, 7. Munich, Gradina. (Bohemia)
Muritz, os. Maroua and Morua. (Northern Germany)
Munkatsch, 7. Mumau. (Austria)
Muskau, 7. Muschow and Muschow. (Nysa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ėgna. (Silesia)
Munchengratz, 7. Munich, Gradina. (Bohemia)
Muritz, os. Maroua and Morua. (Northern Germany)
Munkatsch, 7. Mumau. (Austria)
Muskau, 7. Muschow and Muschow. (Nysa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Namslau, 7. Namyslav. (Silesia)
Narenta, 7. Neretva. (Lithuania)
Narva, 7. Ruzhiv. (Russia)
Nehrung, Nereya (between Frisch and Kurish-7ral). (Prussia)
Neidenburg, 7. Nibor. (Prussia)
Neisiedlersee, Peisoseero. (Austria)
Neisse, Nis and Nis, 7. Nica. (Silesia)
Neitra, 7. Nitra. (Slovakia)
Netze, p. Neteu and Netou. (Germany)
Neuhaus, 7. Indrichov-7radeu. (Bohemia)
Neumark, 7. New market. (Austria)
Neumark, 7. Tuesday. (Nehia)
Neusatz, 7. New Garden. (Vienna)
Neusohl, 7. Banská Bystrica. (Vienna)
Neutitschen, 7. Nový Jičín. (Bohemia)
Neustadt, 7. New Town. (Bohemia)
Nieman, p. Khron and Nieman. (Russia)
Niolsburg, 7. Nimuv and Mimuv. (Moravia) Nona,
Nin. (Zamaja)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
Oberlaibach, 7. Upper. (Horutania)
Obervellach, 7. Begany. (Horutania)
Odenburg, 7. Sopron. (V7ria)
Oderberg, 7. Bo7uman. (Sigesia)
Oder, p. Odra. (Germany)
Oels, 7. Oeshnia. (Silesia) Oesterreich,
Austria, Pamushchaya semya.
Ofen, 7. Buda and Peu-Budino. (Vienna) Ohre,
p. Ora, Ara, Vra and Œra. (Germany) Olmutz,
7. Gogomu, Ogomu. (Moravia) Olymphe, 7opa
Naha. (Greece)
Oppeln, 7. Opole. (Silesia)
Opus, ɭoport Ternovo, and Opsen. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Ortelsburg, 7. Sytno. (Prussia)
Oschatz, 7. Ozhiy. (East Germany)
Ostmark, obg. Eastern March. (Austria)
Ostrau, 7. Ostrov. (Moravia)
Ouskoub, 7. Smolensk. (Bamans Peninsula)

--- PAGE BREAK ---я)
Ortelsburg, 7. Sytno. (Prussia)
Oschatz, 7. Ozhiy. (East Germany)
Ostmark, obg. Eastern March. (Austria)
Ostrau, 7. Ostrov. (Moravia)
Ouskoub, 7. Smolensk. (Bamans Peninsula)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
Parenzo, 7. Poreč. (Istria) Passau, 7.
Passau. (Austria) Passewalk, 7.
Pustovom. (Germany) Pettau, 7. Ptuj.
(Styria)
Peene, 7.p. Pena. (Germany)
Pest, 7. Peni and Peu. (Vienna)
Philipopel, 7. Pɤovdiv. (Bamans Peninsula) Pirnitz, 7.
Bortniɯa. (Moravia)
Pilsen, 7. Pilsen. (Bohemia) Pirano,
7. Pirano. (Styria)
Plattensee, Balaton Great Lake. (Bohemia)
Pleschen, 7. Pleschen. (Posnan)
Plon, 7. Pung. (Northern Germany)
Podersam, 7. Podborany. (Bohemia)
Polnich Krone, 7. Koronow. (East
Prussia) Polsen, 7. Pungunia. (Bohemia)
Posen, obɤ. Poznan. (Prussia)
Potsdam, 7. Postupin. (Prussia)
Pregel, p. Pre7oɤa. (Prussia)
Prerau, 7. Prerov. (Moravia)
Presburg, 7. Bretisɤav. (Vienna)
Preignitz, 7. Breznica and Brsenica. (Germany)
Prosnitz, 7. Piseunica. (Germany)
Prossnitz, 7. Prostějov (Moravia)
Pudowa, 7. Budov. (Moravia)
Puglitz, 7. Podjustein. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q
Qucizs, p. Kvas. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---rosnitz, 7. Piseunica. (Germany)
Prossnitz, 7. Prostějov (Moravia)
Pudowa, 7. Budov. (Moravia)
Puglitz, 7. Podjustein. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q
Qucizs, p. Kvas. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R
Raab, 7. Œрьев. (Austria)
Radkersburg, 7. Rad7ona.
(Chorutania) Ragusa, 7. Ƚубровниm.
(Ƚаɤмаɯия) Rakonitz, 7.
Раmовниmи. (Bo7emia) Ratzburg, 7.
Ratibor. (Germany) Raudnitz, 7.
Rudnia. (Bohemia) Regensburg, 7.
Resno. (Bavaria) Reichenberg, 7.
Nibera. (Bohemia) Reicnenau, 7.
Rychnov. (Bohemia) Redenitz, p.
Radania. (Bavaria) Rekenitz, 7.
Ramitnia (Germany) Rheims, 7.
Remezh. (France)
Reuss, 7. Russ. (Germany)
Reval, 7. Kogivan. (Russia)
Rhein, p. Rin. (Germany)
Riesenburg, 7. Probuta. (Pomerania)
Riesengebirge, 7ory, Isponiny 7ory and Koronoshi. (Bohemia) Risano, 7.
Risan. (Zamaja)
Ritschenwalde, 7. Ritschenwalde. (Posen)
Romerstadt, 7. Romerstadt. (Moravia)
Ronneburg, 7. Ronneburg. (Germany)
Rostock, 7. Rostom. (Prussia, Pomerania)
Roslau, 7. Roslav. (Germany)
Rovigno, 7. Rovinj. (Istria)
Rugen, island of Rügen and Rana. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---)
Ronneburg, 7. Ronneburg. (Germany)
Rostock, 7. Rostom. (Prussia, Pomerania)
Roslau, 7. Roslav. (Germany)
Rovigno, 7. Rovinj. (Istria)
Rugen, island of Rügen and Rana. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S
Saar, 7. Mdar. (Bohemia)
Saatz, 7. Mateu. (Bohemia)
Saale, p. Sogava, Saha. (Germany)
Sagan, 7. Mahan. (Prussia)
Saibusch, 7. Mive. (Gania)
Saint Gotthard, Monastery. (Vienna)
Salburg, 7. Sāvar. (Vienna)
Saldenhofen, 7. Vosenia. (Austria)
Salzburg, 7. Sāgonorad. (Tyrol)
Sablioncella, Požarevac. Požarevac. (Serbia) Sajo, p.
Šana, Šona. (Austria)
Samland, Pнтарный бере7. (near Frisch and Kurish
7аɭа) Samter 7. Shamotugi. (Posnan)
Sanct-Veit, 7. Vit. (Chorutania)
Sandec, 7. Snedé. (Ganiya)
Satmar, 7. Nemtiba. (V7ria)
Saybusch, 7. Mive. (Ganiya)
Scargona, 7. Smradin. (Gorizia)
Chemnitz, 7. Stavniya and Oavniya. (Ven7ria)
Schildberg, 7. Ostreshov. (Posnan)
Schilenberg, 7. Mumberm, Mumborgina. (Kraina)
Schlan, 7. Sany. (Bohemia)
Schleiz, 7. Shchei. (Germany)
Schlukenau, 7. Shumnov. (Bohemia)
Schmolnitz, 7. Smognim. (Venice)
Schneeggebirge, 7. Snegni. (Bohemia)
Scholanke, 7. Truonma. (Prussia) Schrime,
Шрем иɤи Срем. (Prussia) Schuttenhfen,
7. Суɲиɯа. (Bohemia) Schweidnitz, 7.
Свидниɯа. (Silesia) Schwetz, 7 Свиuье.
(Prussia)
Schweirin, Ewerin. (Northern Germany and
Posen) Schwiebus, 7. Svedobin. (Prussia)
Seben, 7. Sobinov. (Vienna) Sebenico,
7. Sibenik. (Croatia) Seltschau, 7.
Sedschany. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Schweirin, Ewerin. (Northern Germany and
Posen) Schwiebus, 7. Svedobin. (Prussia)
Seben, 7. Sobinov. (Vienna) Sebenico,
7. Sibenik. (Croatia) Seltschau, 7.
Sedschany. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sereres, 7. Ser. (Turkey)
Seibenburgen, obɤ. Sedm7radia and Transylvania.
Silesien, obɤ. Sɤеѕаmа. (Prussia)
Silistria, 7. Ƚоростоɤ иɤи Ƚерстер. (Bulgaria)
Sirmien, between Ƚунаем and Савою, Срем. (Austria)
Skeidnitz, Шmудиuи and Шmɤов. (Germany)
Skutari, 7. Smad. (Agbania)
Soldau, 7. Yagovo. (Prussia)
Saloniki, 7. Sogun, Terema. (Macedonia)
Solnok, 7. Negnom. (Hungary)
Solta, island. Ƚервеноm. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Sorau, 7. ɏарев иɤи Маров. (Prussia)
Soovar, 7. Сɤан. (Vienna)
Spalato, 7. Spet. (Croatia)
Spree, p. Spree and Spree. (Germany)
Spremberg, 7. Gorodom. (Nusa)
Sprottau, 7. Sprottau. (Prussia)
Sroda, 7. Wednesday. (Silesia)
Stagno grande, 7. Ston veɤiniy. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Stargard, 7. Old town. (Prussia)
Stein 7. Kamenem. (Chorutania)
Starkenbach, 7. Igemniya. (Bohemia)
Steiamanger, 7. Kameny. (V7ria)
Stolpe, 7 Sɤупсmо andɤи Stoɤп. (Pomerania)
Straszburg, 7. Brodni and Brodnia. (East Prussia)
Straubing, 7. Strubina. (Bavaria)
Steier, 7. and p. Styr. (Austria)
Steiern, Styrmo. (Austria)
Steiermark, Styrmo. (Austria)
Sternberg, 7. Evesda-7ora. (Bohemia)
Stuhlweissenburg, 7. Beɤ7rad-Stoɤny. (Vienna)
Strelitz, 7. Strelitz. (Germany)
Streme, p. Strumina. (S. Germany)
Stettin, 7. ɒetina. (Prussia)
Sueta, 7. Svyata. (Gogandia)
Szekler, nar. Simu. (Sedmichradia)
Szolonok, 7. Sogni. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Strelitz. (Germany)
Streme, p. Strumina. (S. Germany)
Stettin, 7. ɒetina. (Prussia)
Sueta, 7. Svyata. (Gogandia)
Szekler, nar. Simu. (Sedmichradia)
Szolonok, 7. Sogni. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
Tanais, Tanaquil, Ƚон, Сɤавянсmая реmа. (Russia)
Tatar-Bazardtschik, 7. Basarum, Konia and Batom. (Bamans Peninsula)
Taus, 7. Lomazhiny. (Bohemia)
Tetschen, 7. Leuin. (Bohemia)
Teschen, 7. Teshin. (Silesia) Taja,
p. Lya. (Moravia)
Theiss, p. Tissa. (Hungary)
Theresiapol, 7. Subotia, Subotnia and Soboda. (Hungary) Thorn, 7.
Torun. (Prussia)
Tilsit, 7. Tyssa and Tysza. (Prussia) Teplitz,
7. Teplice. (Bohemia)
Tollensee, оѕ. Ƚоɤениɯа. (Northern Germany)
Torgau, 7. Tор7ов. (Germany)
Trajectum, Utrecht, Vītabur7. (Gogandia)
Transilvania, Siebenburgen, Sedm7radia.
Trau, 7. Tro7ir. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Trove, 7. Travna. (Germany)
Triest, 7. Terst. (Austria)
Troppau, 7. Opava. (Moravia)
Trautenau, 7. Trutnov. (Bohemia)
Trubau, 7. Mor. Trebova. (Moravia)
Tschaslau, 7. Nasava. (Bohemia)
Tschernowitz, 7. Nernovy. (Bumovina)
Tschernembl, 7. Nernomeɤь. (Chorutania)
Turnau, 7. Turnov. (Bohemia)
Turla, p. Ƚнестр. (Russia)
Tusla, 7. Soɤi. (Bamans Peninsula) Thuringtrwald,
Ƚуринсmий ɤес. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U
Udine, 7. Videm. (Italy) Ucker,
p. Vmpa. (Northern Germany)
Ungh, p. Vzh. (Hungary)
Unghwar, 7. Vzhgorod.
(Hungary)
Usedom, island. Vinɯɤав and Vѕоним. (Germany)
Utrecht, 7. Виɤьтбур7. (Gogandia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---aly) Ucker,
p. Vmpa. (Northern Germany)
Ungh, p. Vzh. (Hungary)
Unghwar, 7. Vzhgorod.
(Hungary)
Usedom, island. Vinɯɤав and Vѕоним. (Germany)
Utrecht, 7. Виɤьтбур7. (Gogandia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W
Wagram, 7. O7run. (Austria)
Weitzen, 7. Vaɯov. (Austria)
Walk, 7. Voɯom. (Russia)
Walskleben, 7. Vagisevo. (Germany) Wardar, p.
Vagimaya. (Macedonia)
Warnow, p. Varnova, Vranona, Vrana. (Germany)
Wda, p. Vda. (Russia and Poland)
Wehlau, 7. Vēlav and Vēlava. (Prussia)
Weiszkirchen, 7. Bēaya Ērmov. (Austria)
Weiszenburg, 7. Bē7rada. (Bavaria)
Veglia, Wekla, island of Karma and Kerma. (Hungary)
Weitra, 7. Vitoras. (Bohemia)
Weitenau, 7. Veda. (Germany)
Wenden, 7. Wenda, and Wenden.
(Russia) Wenetia, 7. Veneta and Veneda.
(Italy) Weser, p. Veseppa. (Germany)
Weizkirchen, 7. Grania. (Moravia)
Weistritz, p. Bystrica. (Germany)
Wesenberg, 7. Vimir. (Southern
Germany) Widin, 7. Budin and Bdin.
(Serbia) Videnetz, 7. Voden. (Gogandia)
Wien, 7. Veden, Beu, Vienna. (Austria)
Wienerwald, Veden's m. (Austria) Willach, 7.
Beɤиm and Beɤяm. (Chorutania) Willenberg, 7.
Vegborm. (Prussia) Wilzburg, 7. Vitenburg7.
(Bavaria)
Windisch-Fiestritz, p. and 7. Savyanska Bystria. (Austria) Windischgratz,
7. S. Grade. (Styria)
Wischau, 7. Vishmov. (Moravia)
Wismar, 7. Vesmir. (Germany)
Wittenberg, 7. Vitober7. (Prussia)
Wittingen, 7. Trebon (Bohemia)
Wittichenau, 7. Kugov. (Nuzhny)
Vlordingen, 7. Savenburg. (Gugandia)
Wolfsberg, 7. Vogomov. (Styria)
Wolgast, 7. Wolgast and Wolgast. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volkermarkt, 7. Vēmove. (Styria) Wollin,
island. Vogyn, Vsnim. (Prussia) Wrechau, 7.
Vreshnya and Vresnya. (Posnan) Wustrow, 7.
Island. (South Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---nia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volkermarkt, 7. Vēmove. (Styria) Wollin,
island. Vogyn, Vsnim. (Prussia) Wrechau, 7.
Vreshnya and Vresnya. (Posnan) Wustrow, 7.
Island. (South Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Z
Zara, 7. Eader, Eadar. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Zara Vecchto, 7. Bioprad, Old Eadar. (Ƚаɤмаɯия) Zeitz,
7. Miɯa. (Germany)
Zeng, 7. Sen. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Zerbtst, 7. Serbsm, Serbishte. (Germany)
Zirknitzersee, Nernovemo, Lake. (Austria)
Zithen, 7. Sytna. (Germany)
Zittau, 7. Mitava. (Saxony)
Znaym, 7. Enaymo. (Moravia)
Zobten, Zobtenberg, 7. Sobotmа. (Silesia)
Zuhlsdorf, 7. Syusyа. (Germany)
Zwikau, 7. Evimov, (Saxony)
Zwittau, 7. Svitava and Svitava. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
Austria, Ramusche Semya.
Ara, Ora, p. Ohre. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Zuhlsdorf, 7. Syusyа. (Germany)
Zwikau, 7. Evimov, (Saxony)
Zwittau, 7. Svitava and Svitava. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
Austria, Ramusche Semya.
Ara, Ora, p. Ohre. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B
Ba7, 7. Carlopago. (Italy)
Basarim and Batom, 7. Tatar-Bazardtschir. (Bamans Peninsula) Bagon, Lake
Bagon, Balaton, Plattensee. (Hungary)
Bamann, Bakkan Geb., Haemus. (Bamann Peninsula) Babi
Bridge, 7. Bomst. (Prussia)
Banov, Bansmaya Bystria, Neusohl. (Sova) Bardiev,
7. Barthfeld. (Austria-Hungary) Barin, 7.
Berlin. (Prussia)
Bar, 7. Antivari. (Montenegro)
Benezhov, 7. Bensen oder Beneschau, Bentsch.
Berat, 7. Berat. (Albania)
Berun and Mza, p. Beraun. (Bohemia and Hungary)
Gora, 7. Bergen. (Germany)
Berezhany, 7. Brzezan. (Gania)
Veden, 7. Wien. (Austria)
Bite and Monastery, 7. Bitalia. (Bamans Peninsula) Bi7rad, 7. Zara,
Old Eadar. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Bátonyosero, Balaton. (Hungary)
Božmin, 7. Oderberg. (Silesia) Bož,
p. Buž. (Russia)
Bolesławiec, 7. Bunzlau, (Prussia) Bomba
Kotor, s. Bocca v. Kattaro. Bortnia, 7.
Pirnits. (Moravia) Branevo, 7.
Braunsburg. (Pomerania)
Brannyi Bor, Po7oреɤьɯы, 7. Brandenburg. (Prussia)
Brau, island. Brazza. (Romania)
Brasov and Coruna, Cronstadt od. Brasso. (Sedmichradia)
Bre7 bosɤьsoy, 7. Brieg. (Silesia)
Brezhnia, p. Brezhnia and Brezhnia, Priegnitz. (Germany)
Brezhno, 7. Bries. (Austria)
Brest-Nitovsky, Berestye. (Russia)
Breslau, 7. Presburg, Pogoni. (Austria) Bretislaw, Preslav,
Vratislav, Breslau. (Silesia) Brodni and Brodnia, 7.
Strassburg. (Prussia) Brumov, 7. Braunau. (Bohemia)
Bu7, p. Bo7. (Russia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---7. Presburg, Pogoni. (Austria) Bretislaw, Preslav,
Vratislav, Breslau. (Silesia) Brodni and Brodnia, 7.
Strassburg. (Prussia) Brumov, 7. Braunau. (Bohemia)
Bu7, p. Bo7. (Russia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Buda, 7. Ofen. (Hungary)
Budva, 7. Budua. (Hungary)
Budin and Bydin, 7. Bromberg. (Prussia)
Budin, 7. Widdin. (Serbia).
Budishin, 7. Bautzen. (Nuzhiy)
Budov, 7. Pudowa. (Moravia)
Busm, 7. Bausk. (Russia)
Budeevity, 7. Budweis. (Bohemia)
Bumove, 7. Bukecy. (Nusaya)
Bumovo, 7. Haskioi. (Bamansky Peninsula)
Bystria, 7. Banska, Neusohl. (Vienna) Bystria,
7. Habelschwert. (Silesia, Kradom) Bystrica, p.
Gog, Eina, Gail. (Tyrol) Bystrica, p. Weistritz.
(Germany)
Bystrica Sava, p. and 7. Windisch-Feistritz. (Austria)
Byshany, 7. Flohau. (Moravia)
Brno, 7. Brunn. (Moravia)
Beɤaya ɯermov, 7. Weiskirchen. (Austria)
Begorod, 7. Ammermann. (Russia)
Běɤ7rad, 7. Bellegarde. (Prussia and France)
Běɤ7rad, 7. Berat. (Albania)
Begrad, 7. Carlsburg. (Sedmradia)
Berrad, Bioberad, Star. Eadar, Zara vecchio. (Hungary)
Bē7rad, 7. Weiszenburg. (Bavaria)
Bégrad stoɤny, Stuhlweissenburg. (Vienna) Bégim
and Bégam, 7. Willach. (Chorutania) Bégosero and
Bégosepa, 7. Egri-Palanka. (Bulgaria) Beoosepero,
Bielersee. (Switzerland and Tyrol) Beorussia,
Beoserbia. (Russia)
Begany, 7. Oberwellach. (Chorutania)
Begsm and Begsmo, 7. Bielitz. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---gri-Palanka. (Bulgaria) Beoosepero,
Bielersee. (Switzerland and Tyrol) Beorussia,
Beoserbia. (Russia)
Begany, 7. Oberwellach. (Chorutania)
Begsm and Begsmo, 7. Bielitz. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
Vagisevo, 7. Walsleben. (Germany)
Vangava, island. Vsnim, Usedom. (Prussia)
Varadin, 7. Grosswardein. (Austria)
Varnova, p. Warnow. (South Germany)
Vayov, 7. Waitzen. (Austria)
Veda, 7. Weitenau. (Germany)
Veɤav, Veɤava, Iɤava, 7. Wehlau. (Prussia)
Veɤe7rad, 7. Gradishma, Altstadt. (Moravia)
Veɤec, 7. Kuprluy. (Turkey)
Vegesovo, Michelstatten. (Krajina)
Veginaya, p. Wardar. (Turkey)
Veginiy Svon, 7. Groszglockner. (Austria)
Veginiy Varadin, 7. Grosswardein. (Vienna)
Vegin, 7. Fellin. (Russia)
Vegborm, 7. Willenberg. (Prussia)
Vegbudzh, 7. Kustendil. (Bulgarian peninsula)
Vigomovei, 7. Volkermarkt. (Styria)
Vegno, 7. Munster. (Silesia) Wendish
Sani. (Friesland and Curland) Wenda and
Wenden, 7. Wenden. (Russia) Veneda, 7.
Venetia. (Italy)
Verchaba and Verchabye, 7. Hohenelbe. (Bohemia)
Verkhnim, 7. Oberlaibach.
(Horutania) Vesmir, 7. Wismar.
(Germany) Videm, 7. Udine. (Italy)
Vetvar, 7. Altenburg. (Germany)
Vitenburg, 7. Wilzburg. (Bavaria)
Visprem, 7. Wiesenberg. (Germany)
Vitober, 7. Wittenberg. (Germany)
Vitovo, 7. Arkona. (Rana Island)
Vit, 7. St. Veit, (Horutania) Vitoras
7. Weitra. (Austria) Vyshnov, 7.
Wischau. (Moravia) Voden, 7.
Widenetz. (Gogandia) Vodnyan, 7.
Dignano. (Austria) Vosenia, 7.
Saldenhofen. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Veit, (Horutania) Vitoras
7. Weitra. (Austria) Vyshnov, 7.
Wischau. (Moravia) Voden, 7.
Widenetz. (Gogandia) Vodnyan, 7.
Dignano. (Austria) Vosenia, 7.
Saldenhofen. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vojnice, 7. Hohenek. (Austria)
Vogesen and Bozen, 7. Wolgast. (Pomerania)
Wollin, Völta, Moldau River.
Völmowe, 7. Wolfsberg. (Styria) Völm,
Völmi, 7. Walk. (Russia)
Wogyn, 7. and island. Wogyn, Wollin. (Prussia)
Eastern March, Ostmark.
Vosprey, Voery, Voerey, 7. Hoierswerda. (Nysa)
Vgtawsky Tyn, 7. Moldauthein. (Bohemia) Vratislaw
and Vratislaw, 7. Breslau.
Vresna and Vresna, 7. Wreschen. (Posnan)
Tuesday, 7. Ntumark. (Moravia)
Vshova, 7. Fraustadt. (Silesia)
Vsesero, p. Weser.
Větawa, p. Mėtawa, Moldau. (Bohemia)
Věta, p. Flohe. (Bohemia)
Vydra, 7. Idria. (Krajina)
Vysokoe mito, 7. Hohenmauth. (Austria)
Wienerwald, Vienna Woods.
Veden, Beu, 7. Vienna.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r.
Větawa, p. Mėtawa, Moldau. (Bohemia)
Věta, p. Flohe. (Bohemia)
Vydra, 7. Idria. (Krajina)
Vysokoe mito, 7. Hohenmauth. (Austria)
Wienerwald, Vienna Woods.
Veden, Beu, 7. Vienna.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

G
Gavoga, p. Havel. (Germany)
Gainov, 7. Hainau. (Prussia)
Ganiu, 7. Gagai. (Bamberg Peninsula) Hansborn, 7.
Johannisberg. (Prussia)
Gdansm, 7. Danzig. (Prussia)
Gɤивиɯа, 7. Gleiwitz. (Silesia)
Gɤо7ов, 7. Glogau. (Silesia)
Gɤомаu, 7. Lomatsch. (Silesia)
Głubczyce, Nybucze, 7. Leobschutz. (Germany)
Gniev and Gnev, 7. Mewe. (Prussia)
Gniezno and Gnesno, 7. Gnezen. (Prussia)
Godonin, 7. Goding. (Moravia)
Holleschau, 7. Holleschau. (Moravia) Olmutz,
7. Olmutz, Olmutz. (Moravia) Gail, p. Bystrica
and Ena, Gail. (Tyrol) Holsen. 7. Holsen.
(Germany)
Gombinen, 7. Gombinen.
(Silesia) Gohrau, 7. Gohrau.
(Prussia) Landsberg, 7.
Landsberg. (Prussia) Gortz, 7.
Gortz. (Chorutania) Grottkau, 7.
Grottkau. (Silesia) Grodek, 7.
Grodek. (Germany)
Gorsma and Gora, 7. Bergen. (Island of Rana)
Gorotam obg. Choruthanien.
Gorshuvty, 7. Bischofsteinitz. (Bohemia)
Grabyn, 7. Finsterwald. (Prussia)
Gradishma, 7. Vegerrad. Alstadt. (Moravia)
Gradishma, 7. Gratz. (Posnan)
Grania, 7. Weiskirchen. (Moravia)
Gradina Krajevy, 7. Konigsgratz. (Bohemia)
Gradina Soveny, 7. Windisch-gratz. (Styria) Gradom,
7. Spremberg. (Nysa)
Gron and Hron, p. Gran. (Austria)
Grudeɯ and Grudѕiondѕ, 7. Graudenz. (Prussia)
Gruz, 7. Gravosa. (Italy)
Gustopeu, 7. Auspitz. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tz. (Styria) Gradom,
7. Spremberg. (Nysa)
Gron and Hron, p. Gran. (Austria)
Grudeɯ and Grudѕiondѕ, 7. Graudenz. (Prussia)
Gruz, 7. Gravosa. (Italy)
Gustopeu, 7. Auspitz. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ƚ
Ƚеревеноm, island of Solta. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Ƚерпт, 7. Œрьев, Dorat. (Russia)
Ƚива, r. Ƚева, E. Ƚвина, Duna. (Russia)
Ƚивин, 7. Duino. (Chorutania)
Mitrowitz, 7. Mitrowitz. (Bamans Peninsula) Nestr, p. Turga.
(Russia)
Zobro7ora, Zobrosog, 7. Halle. (Germany)
Zog7opoge, 7. Kimpolung. (Bumovina)
Ƚоɤениɯа, p. and oѕ. Tollensee. (S. Germany)
Ƚоmсы 7. Hirschberg. (Bohemia) Ƚомажɤиɯы,
7. Taus. (Bohemia)
Hirschberg, 7. Dommitz. (Germany)
Hona, 7. Dohna. (Germany)
Won, p. Tanais, Tanaquil, Savyanska pema.
Vorostog, 7. Siniastria. (Bulgaria) Rapu, 7.
Dourazzo. (Albania)
Tirinov,
Rinopog,
7.
Adrianople,
Edrene.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Zrevana, p. Drewenz. (Prussia)
Zrevane, nareu. Drevani. (Hanover)
Zrozhdyany, 7. Zresden. (Samosia)
Zubrovni, 7. Ragusa. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Ƚуб, p. Dauda. (Bohemia)
Ƚунав, p. Donau. (Germany)
Yagovo, 7. Soldau. (Prussia)
Thuringian Forest, Thuringerwald. (Germany)
Demmin, 7. Demmin. (Prussia)
Tауа, p. Tауа. (Moravia)
Liebocher, p. Liebocher.
(Moravia) Magdeburg, 7.
Magdeburg. (Germany) Teischen,
7. Teischen. (Bohemia)
Ƚьявоɤ, 7. Delvino, Devol, Eneus. (Aɤbania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
E7dora, Eider River. (Schleswig)
Ebganm, Trusa, 7. Elbing. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M
Ma7an, 7. Sagan. (Prussia)
Mambor7, 7. Senftenberg.
(Bo7emia) Marov, ɏarev, 7. Sorau.
(Prussia) Mateɯ, 7. Saatz.
(Bo7emia)
Mdyary, 7. Saar. (Bohemia)
Mezhni, Old Zagora, 7. Eski-Zagra. (Bulgaria) Meravna and Bograd-Vegini.
(Russia, Bessarabia)
Miveɯ, 7. Saybusch. (Gagiiya)
Mitava, 7. Zittan. (Samponia)
Miua, 7. Zeitz. (Germany)
Mmutia, 7. Luditz. (Bohemia)
Mumberm, 7. Mumborgina, Schilenberg. (Krajina)
Murza, 7. Diurdevo. (Romania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---usch. (Gagiiya)
Mitava, 7. Zittan. (Samponia)
Miua, 7. Zeitz. (Germany)
Mmutia, 7. Luditz. (Bohemia)
Mumberm, 7. Mumborgina, Schilenberg. (Krajina)
Murza, 7. Diurdevo. (Romania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
Eabre7, 7. Hohenstadt. (Moravia)
Eabre7, 7. Agram. (Chorutania)
Ea7ora Nova, Tverdiɯa, 7. Eni-Zagra. (Bamans Peninsula) Eadar, 7.
Old Bi7rad, Zara, Vecchia. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Eader, 7. Zara. (Croatia)
Eapadnaya Vinaya, p. Vinaya, Vinaya, Duna. (Russia)
Evoɤen, 7. Altsohl. (Austria)
Eveerin, 7. Schwerin. (Germany and Poznan)
E7opege, 7. Gorlitz. (Germany)
Eiga, Gog, Bystria, p. Gail. (Chorutania)
Egatibor, 7. Goldberg. (Sigesia) Egatina
Veniama, p. Aranoyos. (Venice) Egatovo,
7. Flatow. (Prussia)
Egatniya, 7. Istiman, Ichtiman. (Balkan Peninsula) Enaymo
and Enoim, 7. Znaim. (Moravia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
I7ɤava, 7. Iglau. (Bohemia) Iѕъëѕepa,
Iѕepa, p. Isar. (Austria) Iɤva, 7.
Halben. (Silesia) Iɤemniɯa, 7.
Starkenbach. (Bohemia)
Indrichov 7radeɯ, 7. Neuhaus.
(Bohemia) Instrutu, 7. Insterburg.
(Prussia) Ipoɤь, p. Eipel. (Vienna)
Isponiny 7ory, Riesen gebirge. (Bohemia)
Iuinin, 7. Gitschin, Jicin. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ndrichov 7radeɯ, 7. Neuhaus.
(Bohemia) Instrutu, 7. Insterburg.
(Prussia) Ipoɤь, p. Eipel. (Vienna)
Isponiny 7ory, Riesen gebirge. (Bohemia)
Iuinin, 7. Gitschin, Jicin. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

K
Kadan, 7. Kaden. (Bohemia)
Kogava, 7. Kalau. (Germany)
Kamen, 7. Kamina, Cammin. (Prussia)
Kamenia 7. Chemnitz. (Austria)
Kamnem, 7. Stein. (Chorutania)
Kanov, 7. Elden. (Germany)
Karas, Korosch. (Austria)
Kastav, 7. Castua. (Istria)
Kvas and Kvisa, 7. Kweitz, p. Queisz. (Nusaia)
Kveɯ, 7. Kethen. (Germany)
Kviduin and Kvidin, 7. Marienwerber. (Prussia)
Kezhmare, 7. Kasmarkt. (Hungary)
Kiev, 7. Kyan, Kuyava, Kion.
(Russia) Kiev, 7. Gaya. (Moravia)
Kivyadzh, 7. Mezokovesd. (V7ria)
Kɤadno, 7. Kammin. (Germany)
Kɤadcmo, obɤ. Glatz. (Prussia)
Kɤatova, 7. Klattau. (Bo7emia)
Kɤonsm, 7. Klentze. (Germany)
Kɤyu, 7. Klietz. (Germany)
Knyasiha, 7. Gross-Kanitza.
(Austria) Kobynia, 7. Marienburg.
(Prussia) Kosin, 7. Koslin.
(Pomerania)
Kosil, 7. Kosel. (Silesia)
Koronowa, 7. Polnische Krone. (Prussia)
Kobber, 7. Colberg. (Prussia)
Kogosh and Kush, Kogoshvar, 7. Klausenburg. (Sedmichradia)
Kogivan, 7. Reval. (Russia)
Komarno, 7. Komorn. (Hungary)
Kameny, 7. Steinam-Anger. (Hungary)
Konstantinopol, 7. Sarajevo, Vilnius. (Turkey)
Koper, 7. Capo d'Istria. (Austria) Koprivnica,
7. Koprainitz. (Croatia) Korenica, obl.
Karinthien.
Korenija, 7. Garz. (on the island of
Rane) Kormonoshi, Riesengebirge.
(Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---per, 7. Capo d'Istria. (Austria) Koprivnica,
7. Koprainitz. (Croatia) Korenica, obl.
Karinthien.
Korenija, 7. Garz. (on the island of
Rane) Kormonoshi, Riesengebirge.
(Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Korosno, 7. Crossen. (Prussia)
Koroshmo and Gorotam, Chorutania, obg. Choruthanien.
Korunja, island of Curzola. (Istria)
Coruna and Brasov, Kronstadt od. Brasso. (Sedmichradia)
Koster, 7. Behrent. (Prussia) Kostur,
7. Kastoria. (Greece) Kote, 7.
Kazanlick. (Romania) Kotor, 7.
Cattaro. (Ƚаɤмаɯия) Kostniɯa, 7.
Konstanz. (Switzerland) Kostrin, 7.
Custrin. (Prussia) Kosten, 7. Kosten.
(Prussia)
Kouevie, Kouevsmo, obɤ. Gottschee. (Croatia)
Koshchau, 7. Kaschau. (Austria)
Krain, obɤ. Krain.
Krainerade, 7. Konigsgratz. (Bohemia)
Kroevet, 7. Konigsberg. (Prussia)
Kraɤedvor, 7. Konigenhoff. (Bo7emya)
Kremniɯa, 7. Kremnitz. (V7ria)
Kremzha, 7. Krems. (Austria)
Krizhevɯy, 7. Kreutz. (Croatia)
Kromeriz and Kromeriz, 7. Kremsier. (Moravia)
Krummau, 7. Krummau. (Bohemia)
Erzgebirge, 7. Erzgebirge. (Bohemia)
Jagerndorf, 7. Jagerndorf. (Silesia)
Wittichenau, 7. Wittichenau. (Nysa)
Kempen, 7. Kempen.(Silesia)
Kutná Hora, 7. Kuttenderg. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf. (Prussia) Kynia, 7. Exin.
(Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---7. Jagerndorf. (Silesia)
Wittichenau, 7. Wittichenau. (Nysa)
Kempen, 7. Kempen.(Silesia)
Kutná Hora, 7. Kuttenderg. (Bohemia)
Kurische-Haf. (Prussia) Kynia, 7. Exin.
(Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Naba, p. Elbe. (Germany)
Nabín, 7. Albona. (Istria) Nastova,
island of Lagosta. (Croatia) Nahá, 7.
Olympe. (Greece) Ne7niá, 7.
Lignitz. (Poland) Nebcmo, Leba-
See. (Prussia) Nevoa, 7. Leutschau.
(V7ria) Netia, 7. Littai.
(Chorutania) Nibereɯ, 7.
Reichenberg. (Bo7emia). Nineɯ, 7.
Linz. (Austria)
Ninsm, Ninyu, 7. Leipzig. (Saxony)
Nitovya, 7. Littau. (Moravia) Nitava,
p. Leitha. (Germany)
Nitomeríy, 7. Leutmeritz. (Bohemia) Nitomysh, 7.
Leutomysl. (Bohemia) Níbor, 7. Lautenburg.
(Prussia)
Nosin7rad
иɤи
Soromayermov,
7.
Kirkilissa.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Nomet and Nomot, 7. Elbogen. (Bohemia)
Nevia, 7. Levenz. (V7ria)
Ny7i, 7. Luchow. (Germany)
Nyzhin, 7. Lutzen. (Saxony)
Nymov, 7. Luckau. (Germany)
Nuny, 7. Laun. (Bohemia)
Nuyin, 7. Lensen. (Germany)
Nuzhiy, obg. Lausitz.
Nvov, 7. Lemberg. (Galicia)
Nvstra, p. Elster. (Germany)
Nyubava, 7. Libau. (Russia)
Nyuava, Nyby, 7. Lobau. (Prussia)
Nyuban, 7. Lauban. (Silesia)
Nübiya, Nübom, 7. Lubeck. (Germany)
Nyubin, 7. Luben. (Prussia)
Nyubina, 7. Leoben. (Styria)
Nyubyan, 7. Laibach. (Carinthia)
Nyubov, 7. Mikilenburg.
(Gurmania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nubusha, 7. Lebus. (Prussia)
Nesno, 7. Lisza. (Germany)
Nes, 7. Alessio. (3pir)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tyria)
Nyubyan, 7. Laibach. (Carinthia)
Nyubov, 7. Mikilenburg.
(Gurmania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nubusha, 7. Lebus. (Prussia)
Nesno, 7. Lisza. (Germany)
Nes, 7. Alessio. (3pir)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M
Mamari and Momri, 7. Makaraska. (Croatia) Magor,
Kobylina, 7. Marienburg. (Prussia) Manyu, p.
Morava. (Russia)
Maribor, 7. Marburg. (Styria)
Maroua, p. Muritz. (Germany)
Marosha, p. Marosch. (Vienna)
Matija, p. Zeta. (Nernonia)
Mezhibor, 7. Merseburg. (Germany)
Mezhikhod, 7. Birnbaum. (Prussia)
Meɤьni, 7. Melk. (Germany)
Mertviɯa, p. Moroua. (Nernozoria)
Meta, p. Mettau. (Bohemia)
Metɤinama, 7. Mottling.
(Chorutania) Mzha, Berunma, p.
Mies. (Bohemia) Mimyov, 7.
Nikolsburg. (Moravia) Mievm, 7.
Muhlhausen. (Bohemia) Mirchov, 7.
Mirchau. (Prussia) Mishmove, 7.
Mischkolz. (Austria)
Mishma and Myshin, 7. Meissen. (Saxony)
Mado-Bogešava, 7. Jung-Bunzlau. (Bohemia)
Mhet, island of Meleda. (Hungary)
Munich, 7. Munich. (Bavaria)
Mnichow 7radine, 7. Munchengratz. (Bohemia)
Mo7an, p. Main. (Germany)
Mo7eɤiɯa, 7. Muglitz. (Moravia)
Mo7iɤьna, 7. Mugeln. (Nуѕаɯия)
Mo7yu, 7. Mainz. (Germany)
Monastery, Bitholia (obite), 7. Bitholia. (Bamans Peninsula) Monastery, 7. St.
Gotthard. (Venice)
Morava, p. March. (Moravia)
Moravsk. Trebova, 7. Trubau. (Moravia)
Morɯa and Moriɯa, island Muritzsee.
(Germany) Bridge, 7. Bruck. (Austria)
Bridge, 7. Brux. (Bohemia)
Meta and Msta, Karasu River. (Macedonia)
Mumauev, 7. Munkatsch. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mushmov, 7. Muskau. (Nusa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ny) Bridge, 7. Bruck. (Austria)
Bridge, 7. Brux. (Bohemia)
Meta and Msta, Karasu River. (Macedonia)
Mumauev, 7. Munkatsch. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mushmov, 7. Muskau. (Nusa)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Namslau, 7. Namslau. (Silesia)
Netze, p. Netze. (Prussia) Narenta, p.
Narenta. (Lithuania)
Nereya, Nehrung, between Frisch and Kurish-7alam. (Prussia)
Nibor, 7. Neidenburg. (Prussia)
Nimyov, 7. Nicolsburg. (Moravia)
Nin, Nona. (Silesia)
Nitra, 7. Neitra. (Slovakia)
Nish and Nis, Nica, p. and 7. Neisze. (Sigesia)
New Basar and Pasar, 7. Rassa (Serbia) New
place, 7. Neustadt. (Bohemia)
New-Ea7orie, Tverdiɯa, 7. Eni-Zagra. (Bamansmиy pogуstrov) New
Evоɤen, 7. Banov, Neusohl. (Vienna)
Novo-Iuinin, 7. Neititschen.
(Bohemia) New Place, 7. Neustadt.
(Germany) New Garden, 7. Neusatz.
(Austria) New Sned, 7. Sandec. (Gania)
New Tor, 7. Neumark. (Austria)
Neman, r. Khron. (Russia)
Nembita, 7. Satmar. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
O7ra, p. Eger. (Bohemia)
Ohrun, 7. Wagram. (Austria)
Odobanov and Odobanov, 7. Adelnau. (Posnan)
Odra, Oder River. (Germany)
Odrin, Drin, Ƚринопоɤь, 7. Adrianople. (Turkey)
Oschatz, 7. Oschatz. (East Germany)
Opsaro Island. Opsaro. (Hungary)
Ogeshma, 7. Markgrabow. (Prussia)
Oeshnia, 7. Oels (Silesia)
Omizh, and Omizh, 7. Almissa. (Romania)
Ota, p. Aguta. (Romania)
Ogtun, Aghan, 7. Dulcigno. (Hungary)
Opava, 7. Troppau. (Silesia)
Opole and Opole, 7. Oppeln, (Silesia)
Opusen, Lot, Opus. (Hungary) Opa
and Ara, p. Ohre. (Germany)
Orania, p. Arva. (Bulgaria) Ornia,
p. Adler. (Bulgaria) Orekhov and
Rakhovo. (Bulgaria) Osveuim, 7.
Auschwitz. (Silesia) Ostrova, 7.
Ostrau. (Moravia) Ostrechov, 7.
Schildberg. (Posnan) Ostrov, 7.
Wustrow. (Germany)
Ostrokhom and Ostrom, 7. Gran. (Austria)
Ocem, 7. Esseck. (Austria)
Ocem veɤinim, 7. Groszenhain. (Saxony)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ravia) Ostrechov, 7.
Schildberg. (Posnan) Ostrov, 7.
Wustrow. (Germany)
Ostrokhom and Ostrom, 7. Gran. (Austria)
Ocem, 7. Esseck. (Austria)
Ocem veɤinim, 7. Groszenhain. (Saxony)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
Pasin, Pisino, 7. Mitterberg. (Austria)
Passau, 7. Passau. (Austria)
Peys, Neusiedlersee. (Austria)
Pereyaslav, Rusy 7. Rustschuk. (Bulgaria) Peu and
Peu, Peukh, 7. Funfkirchen. (Austria) Peu and Buda,
7. Ofen. (Austria)
Pest, Ipem. (Serbia)
Pest, Pécs and Pest, Pest. (Hungary)
Pirano, 7. Pirano. (Istria)
Pɤëсо, Bɤатное оѕеро, Balaton. (Vienna)
Pɤеɲev, 7. Pleschen. (Posnan)
Pɤovdiv, 7. Philippopel. (Romania)
Pɤun, 7. Plon (Shesvi7) Pɤyunii, 7.
Polsen. (Bohemia) Pɤsno, 7. Pilsen.
(Bohemia)
Pohore, 7. Branny Forest, 7. Braundenburg. (Prussia)
Podersam, 7. Podersam. (Bohemia)
Bodenbach, 7. Bodenbach. (Bohemia)
Posen, 7. Posen. (Prussia)
Pogena, Pogene, Pogostr. Sablioncella. (Croatia)
Poreč, 7. Parenzo. (Istria) Postojna,
7. Adelsberg. (Horutania) Postupin,
7. Potsdam. (Prussia) Probut, 7.
Riesenburg. (Pomerania) Pre7oɤa, p.
Pregel. (Prussia) Prerov, 7. Prerau.
(Moravia) Pribor, 7. Freiberg.
(Moravia) Prosteev, 7. Prossnitz.
(Bohemia)
Preslav and Bratislav, Breslau. (Silesia)
Pryashev, 7. Eperies. (Hungary)
Pleskov, 7. Pleskau. (Russia)
Ptuj, 7. Pettau. (Styria)
Pustovom and Posdivom, 7. Passewalk. (Germany)
Peene River (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---v, Breslau. (Silesia)
Pryashev, 7. Eperies. (Hungary)
Pleskov, 7. Pleskau. (Russia)
Ptuj, 7. Pettau. (Styria)
Pustovom and Posdivom, 7. Passewalk. (Germany)
Peene River (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R
Rab, 7. Œryev, Raab. (Austria)
Rad7ona, Ra7dana, 7. Radkersburg. (Croatia)
Radaniɯa, Rednitz River. (Germany)
Radoviuи, 7. Monchgut. (Rügen
Island) Ramovnim, 7. Rakovnitz.
(Bohemia) Ramushsmaia ѕemɤya,
Austria.
Rana, island of Rugen. (Germany)
Raro7, 7. Mikilenburg. (Northern Germany)
Rassa, 7. New Basar and New Pasar. (Serbia)
Ratibor, 7. Ratzburg. (Northern
Germany) Rakhov, Orekhov. (Austria)
Remesh, 7. Rheims. (France)
Rimarov, 7. Romerstadt. (Moravia)
Rin, p. Rhein. (Germany)
Risan, 7. Risanо. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Rychnov, 7. Reichenau. (Bohemia)
Ritschenwalde, 7. Ritschenwalde.
(Posnan) Rovigno, 7. Rovigno.
(Istria)
Ro7, 7. Horn. (Moravia)
Rothenburg, 7. Rothenberg. (Prussia)
Reckenitz, p. Reckenitz. (East Germany)
Ronneburg, 7. Ronneburg. (Germany)
Russia, Vēgimaya Smil, Sarmatia Vinedy, Venedy, Venedsko,
Ostrogardhr, Chunigarhr, Austverg, Holmigardhr, Gardhr, Wanname,
Ruzia, Rucia, Ruscia, Ruszia, Rusia, Russia, Ruthenia, Russaland,
russland, Ruysland, Risoland.
Rosslau, 7. Rosslau. (Germany)
Rostom, 7. Rostock. (Prussia, Pomerania)
Ruzhiv, 7. Narva. (Russia)
Raudnitz, 7. Raudnitz. (Bohemia)
Erzgebirge, 7. Erzgebirge. (Bohemia)
Kreitzburg, 7. Kreitzburg. (Russia)
Liebenwerba, 7. Liebenwerba.
(Germany)
Russmij, Ros, Rosia, Rhos, Ruzi, Rugi, Rutheni, Ruceni, Ruzeni,
Rutzeni, Riuze, Russin, Reussen Ryssar, Ruyschen, Rissen Orusz, Urus.
Russ, 7. Reuss. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rugum, 7. Ruguu7 and Rusy. (Bulgaria)
Ruja, island. Rugen. (Germany)
Resno, 7. Regensburg. (Bavaria)
Rema, Remma, 7. Fiume. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ss, 7. Reuss. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rugum, 7. Ruguu7 and Rusy. (Bulgaria)
Ruja, island. Rugen. (Germany)
Resno, 7. Regensburg. (Bavaria)
Rema, Remma, 7. Fiume. (Austria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

С
Sabadma and Sobodma, Maria-There-siapol. (Austria)
Saba and Sava, p. Saale. (Germany)
Sarajevo, 7. Bosnia Sarajevo. (Bosnian Peninsula)
Svidnica, 7. Schweidnitz. (Prussia)
Svitova and Svetova, 7. Zwittau. (Moravia)
Sviuye, 7. Schwetz. (Prussia)
Svedobin, 7. Schwiebus. (Prussia)
Sveta, 7. Sueta. (Gogandia)
S7opereɯ, S7opereɯy, 7. Gorlitz. (Nуѕаɯия)
Seben, 7. Hermanstadt. (Semi7radia) Sedɤshany,
7. Seltschau. (Bo7emia) Sedmi7radia, obɤ.
Siebenburgen, Transilvania. Serbsm, Serbishte, 7.
Zerbest. (Prussia) Serbeɯ, 7. Schrabitz.
(Germany)
Wednesday, 7. Sroda. (Sibenik)
Sibenik, 7. Sebenico. (Ƚаɤмаɯия)
Szekler people, Szekler. (Sedmichradia)
Sino and Pdercmoe Sea, Adriatic Sea, Adriatisches meer.
Sistovo and Svishtov. (Bulgaria)
Sittna, 7. Zithen. (Prussia)
Skutari, 7. Skutari. (Albania)
Smopye, 7. Ouskoub. (Bamans Peninsula) Smapdin,
7. Scardona. (Zamaya)
Smyrna, Smyrna Bay. (Nero7oria)
Savenburg, 7. Vlondingen. (Gogandia)
Savov, 7. Austerlitz. (Moravia) Shana,
Sogona, p. Slajo. (Ven7ria) Sɤan and
Sɤona, p. Soovar. (Ven7ria) Sɤany, 7.
Schlan. (Boɤeмия)
Scenmo and Ston, 7. Stolpe. (Pomerania)
Sɤеѕаmа, obɤ. Schlezien, Silezien.
Smeruín, Nérnye 7ory, Fichtelgebirge. (Bohemia)
Smogni, 7. Schmilnitz. (Vienna) Sned,
7. Sandec. (Gania) Snezhni, 7.
Schneegebirge. (Bohemia)
Soboda and Sobota, 7. Zobten. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ruín, Nérnye 7ory, Fichtelgebirge. (Bohemia)
Smogni, 7. Schmilnitz. (Vienna) Sned,
7. Sandec. (Gania) Snezhni, 7.
Schneegebirge. (Bohemia)
Soboda and Sobota, 7. Zobten. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sogni, 7. Tusla. (Bamans Peninsula) Sogni, 7.
Szolnok. (V7ria)
Sogava and Saha, p. Saale. (Germany)
Sogun and Terema, 7. Soloniki. (Bamans Peninsula) Sorov, 7.
Sorau. (Nusaia)
Soromopermov
and
Nosin7rad,
7.
Kirkilissa.
(Bamans
Peninsula)
Solya and Tryadia, Sreda. (Bulgaria)
Soua, p. Isonzo. (Austria)
Sogno7rad, 7. Salzburg. (Tyrol)
Spjet and Spit, 7. Spalato. (Croatia) Spreva and
Sprava, p. Spree. (Germany) Sprotava, 7.
Sprottau. (Prussia)
Sreda and Tria, 7. Solia. (Turia) Srem, ob.
Sirmien. (between Ƚунаем and Savva) Stavnia, 7.
Chemnitz. (Ven7ria)
Old Marm, St. Markia, Altmark. (Germany)
Old Eadorie, 7. Mesenim, Eski-Zagra. (Bamansmi Peninsula Old Eadar and
Bioprad, Zara vecchio. (Croatia)
Styria, obɤ, Steiermark, Steiern.
Stary7rad, 7. Aldenburg and Oldenburg. (Shesvi7)
Old Arad, 7. Arad. (Hungary) Old
Town, 7. Stargard. (Prussia) Styr, 7.
Steiern. (Germany) Strzabro, 7.
Mies. (Bohemia)
Stagno Grande, 7. Stagno grande. (Italy)
Straubing, 7. Straubing. (Bavaria) Streme,
7. Streme. (Germany)
Strelitz, 7. Strelitz. (Mammberg)
Subotica, 7. Theresiapohl. (Vienna)
Sytno, 7. Ortelsburg. (Prussia)
Sv. Semira, 7. Heiligenbeil. (Pomerania)
Sen, 7. Zengg. (Hungary)
Seres, 7. Seres. (Bamans Peninsula) Zuhlsdorf, 7.
Zuhlsdorf. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Vienna)
Sytno, 7. Ortelsburg. (Prussia)
Sv. Semira, 7. Heiligenbeil. (Pomerania)
Sen, 7. Zengg. (Hungary)
Seres, 7. Seres. (Bamans Peninsula) Zuhlsdorf, 7.
Zuhlsdorf. (Germany)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
Tosso, 7. Doksa. (Germany)
Tashov, 7. Taschau. (Bohemia)
Tverdiya, Nova Eapora, 7. Eni-Zagra. (Bulgaria)
Tegatin, 7. Cielecin. (Prussia)
Tenginy, 7. Tëplitz. (Bohemia)
Terema, 7. Sogun, Salonki. (Bamans Peninsula) Ternovo, Port.
Opus. (Zamaya)
Terst, 7. Trieste. (Austria)
Teshyn and Ternov, p. Kokel and Kukulo, Cuculo. (Sedmohradia)
Tissa, p. Theiss. (Vienna) Tygsa,
Tyzha, Tilist. (Prussia) Torzov, 7.
Torgau. (Germany) Torz, 7.
Feldkirchen. (Horutania) Torun, 7.
Thorn. (Prussia) Travna, p. Trave.
(Germany) Trebova, 7. Trubau.
(Moravia)
Terglau, Terglau. (Czech Republic)
Trosir, 7. Trau. (Moravia)
Trusa, 3ɤбɤон7, 7. Elbing. (Germany)
Trutnov, 7. Trautenau. (Bohemia)
Tрuонmа, 7. Schonlanke. (Prussia)
Tрядиɯа, Средеɯ, Соɭия. (Bohuria)
Turka, p. Ƚneстр. (Russia)
Turnov,
7.
Turnau.
(Bohemia) Tyropogie, obg.
(Chorutania)
Tuevo,
7.
Dirschau. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
V7robor, V7robor7, 7. Angerburg. (Prussia)
V7ria, 7. Ungarn.
Vda, river Vda. (Russia and
Poland) Vzh7orod, 7. Unghwar.
(Hungary) Vzh, river Vnzh.
(Hungary)
Vѕnoim, island. Usedom. (Germany)
Vmra, river Ukern. (Germany)
Vpa, river Alpa. (Bohemia)
Vra, Œra, river Ohre. (Germany)
Vsti na Nabe, 7. Aussig.
(Bohemia) Vtin, 7. Eiten. (Silesia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
Fembra, island of Femern. (Silesia)
Furɤyana, obɤ., Frioul. (Italy)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H
Khomutov, 7. Kommotau.
(Bohemia) Hvar, island. Lessina.
(Croatia) Heb, 7. Eger. (Bohemia)
Hegmno, 7. Culm. (Prussia)
Hevno, Nievno. (Gorjovina)
Hodezh, 7. Chodiesen. (Posnan)
Hojnice, 7. Fojnitza. (Bohumín Peninsula) Hojnice,
7. Konitz. (Prussia)
Kothebuz, 7. Kotbus. (Nysa)
Horutania, obg. Karnthen. (Austria)
Khron, p. Nieman. (Russia)
Khron, Gron, p. Gran. (Switzerland)

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Bohumín Peninsula) Hojnice,
7. Konitz. (Prussia)
Kothebuz, 7. Kotbus. (Nysa)
Horutania, obg. Karnthen. (Austria)
Khron, p. Nieman. (Russia)
Khron, Gron, p. Gran. (Switzerland)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ɏ
ɏа7ɤав, 7. Freistadt. (Austria)
7. Sorau. (Prussia)
7. Constantinople, Bithynia. (Turkey)
Aachen, Aachen. (Rhine Province)
ɏеɤовеɯ, 7. Klagenfurth. (Croatia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
Naba, 7. Csaba. (Hungary)
Nеɤноm, 7. Solnok. (Vienna)
Nerneumoe osero, Zirknitzersee. (Austria).
Nernovy, 7. Tschernowitz. (Bumovina)
Nernomeg, 7. Tschaslau. (Bohemia)
Neshchaya Nipa, 7. Leipa. (Bohemia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sh
Shamatugi, 7. Samter. (Posnan)
Sheynovo, Kote, 7. Kazanlick. (Romania)
Shmov, 7. Skeiditz. (Germany)
Shche, 7. Schleitz. (Germany)
Shumnov, 7. Schluckenau. (Bohemia)
Sopron, 7. Odenburg. (V7ria)
Srem and Srem, 7. Schrime. (Prussia)
Styria 7radeɯ, 7. Gratz. (Styria) Shumava,
7. Bohmerwald. (Bohemia) Shumna,
Shumen, 7. Shumɤa. (Bulgaria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ɒ
ɒетина, 7. Stettin. (Prussia)
Schennitz, Schemnitz. (V7ria)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
3uава, p. Adige. (Italy)
3ɤьбɤон7, Trusa, 7. Elbing. (Pomerania)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Œ
Œra, river in Prussia, in Samogitia. Œra,
mountain range in France and Switzerland. Œrbor,
7. Jurburg. (Russia)
Œрьев, 7. Dorpat. (Russia)
Œрьев, 7. Raad. (Hungary)
Œтробоm, 7. Juterbock. (Prussia)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
Pbɤon, 7. Gabel. (Bohemia)
Pbɤoneɯ, 7. Gablonz. (Bohemia)
P7ra and P7er, 7. Erlau. (Austria)
Pдерсmо иɤи Sin Sea, Adriatisches meer.
Pdrin, Ƚrinopog, Adrianopol. (Balkan Peninsula) Pnov, 7.
Jansdorf. (Prussia)
Pnov, 7. Genova, Genes. (Italy)
Pantarny Bere7, Samland. (near Frisch and Kurish
7ala) Pscbiryn, 7. Jasbiryn. (V7ria)
Psine, Psinya, 7. Korosmezzo. (Venice)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V. A. Moshmov
A new theory of the origin of uеɤовеmа
and е7о degeneration,
compiled based on data from
zoology, botany, archaeology,
anthropology, geology, history and
statistics

--- PAGE BREAK ---A. Moshmov
A new theory of the origin of uеɤовеmа
and е7о degeneration,
compiled based on data from
zoology, botany, archaeology,
anthropology, geology, history and
statistics

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WARSAW.
Printed at the printing house of the Guersky
administration. 1907

--- PAGE BREAK ---from
zoology, botany, archaeology,
anthropology, geology, history and
statistics

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WARSAW.
Printed at the printing house of the Guersky
administration. 1907

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1. GIATVS
Hiatus. The life of Palaeolithic man. The existence of hiatus. Famine
in Europe. The struggle for existence among mankind. The increase in
human stature. Progress in mind and character. The possibility of
cannibalism during the Hiatus. The increase in the capacity of the
human skull.
In the monographic review, the author presents a comprehensive analysis of the
problem. In terms of its nature, it resembles modern dimaries to a certain
extent, surpassing them in some respects and falling short in others.
There were no homons, they were replaced by penpers. It is believed that
the European mongoose no longer walks on all fours, but moves on two
legs, which it learned to do with the help of its front paws. The
domestication of animals and agriculture were unknown to him: he was a
hunter. His weapons were: a bow with a leather quiver, a spear with
arrows, a wooden shield and a sharp stone axe. He hunted up to 70
species of mammals and up to 50 species of birds. In addition,
Europeans managed to catch fish with the help of a fishing rod and a
harpoon: there were up to 50 species of fish in these waters, 10 of which
were marine. From this we can see that they already had something like
a motorboat, which they used to go out to sea. They probably ate the
meat raw, but they could also fry it, because they were already familiar
with it. We do not know whether Europeans were cannibals at that time.
There are indications of this in the form of scattered human remains
found in caves. It is assumed that the bridges were built for the purpose
of eating bridge-dwelling animals, as primitive Europeans were great
hunters.
It is still unknown whether this type of ornamentation originated in the
7th century, but in essence, namely in its execution, it has reached a
high degree of perfection. In the monuments of art, we find bridges
decorated with ornaments. But especially good are the attempts to
imitate nature, mainly in the depictions of animals. Here we find lions,
deer, horses, mammoths and even fantastic creatures, such as chimeras.
It is still unknown whether they were used for religious rituals and
ceremonies when consuming food, becauseere we find lions,
deer, horses, mammoths and even fantastic creatures, such as chimeras.
It is still unknown whether they were used for religious rituals and
ceremonies when consuming food, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---deer, horses, mammoths and even fantastic creatures, such as chimeras.
It is still unknown whether they were used for religious rituals and
ceremonies when consuming food, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---

no such items have been found.
Gabrielle Mortier draws a clear distinction between the concepts of
paeogetic and neogetic. In his opinion, the latter is not a continuation of the
former, but something completely independent, which appeared
unexpectedly and was brought to Europe by some new people. This idea
is supported by the author's powerful description of both cultures. The
pagan culture was primarily hunting-based, while the non-pagan culture engaging
in agriculture, domesticating animals, knowing how to make stone tools,
etc. In addition, Mortier expressed the opinion that the new people who
came to Europe did not replace the ancient population already living
there, but rather supplemented it with their own. The population that lived
here in the distant past, before the appearance of the Neolithic era, is
unknown. In any case, de Mortier suggests that between the pagan and
Christian eras, at least in Western Europe, there was some kind of
intermediate period, during which Europe, with few exceptions, it
remained uninhabited. In his opinion, there is no connection between
ancient pagan culture and neo-pagan culture, no gradual transition, but
rather a break, a hiatus (void).
The existence of this gap has been accepted by many other researchers.
The main advantage is a number of areas where there is a real difference
between the mythical and the non-mythical, there is empty rock, covered
with all kinds of debris and often very wet. In the sediments of the Sona
River 7. Arsenin's empty cavity is 3 metres deep and consists of the
sedimentation norm for the area, which means that the hiatus lasted from 3 to
4 thousand years. Based on similar findings, de Mortier concludes that,
with the exception of a few areas, with the exception of a few areas, the
inhabitants of Europe were completely replaced by a new population
after a period of time.
One, 7. Nieder does not agree with Mortier's opinion regarding the
appearance of a new people in Europe. He believes that "large post-Ice
Age animals were exterminated by hunting, and, due to climate change,
retreated to the north and east. In this way, he could ensure his survival
by hunting animals, multiplying them into large herds and gathering
food supplies.by hunting, and, due to climate change,
retreated to the north and east. In this way, he could ensure his survival
by hunting animals, multiplying them into large herds and gathering
food supplies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to climate change,
retreated to the north and east. In this way, he could ensure his survival
by hunting animals, multiplying them into large herds and gathering
food supplies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all the time. In the same way, uеɤовеm мо7 can be brought to m
хɤебопашеству. According to Niederer, the ancient population of
Europe did not disappear, and the new population did not appear suddenly, but
gradually developed from the old one. "We cannot allow ourselves to be
misled by the migration of new peoples," the author concludes. And indeed,
there is evidence of the existence of ancient settlements (in Italy) that were
inhabited by humans, perhaps even since historical times. There is no
interruption in them, and above the lowest mythical layer, which
belongs at least to the mythical layer, there are layers that are much
later, mainly belonging to the non-historical period.
There is no need to assume a significant migration of peoples to explain
the non-indigenous nature of the culture. It is not possible to agree, but
the existence of the hiatus is a fact that requires explanation.
Based on this assumption, it is possible to construct a multitude of more
or less probable hypotheses. The essence of the situation boils down to the
fact that at one point in time, a new, hostile force suddenly appeared in
Europe, which was driven to exterminate it without mercy. This force
could be a natural phenomenon, such as the "global flood" described in
the Bible. But the Bible does not tell us about the possibility of such a
phenomenon in Europe at the time described.
The most likely cause of the situation may have been a conflict between
European states, which led to their mutual destruction, and subsequently
to the domestication of animals and agriculture.
"All large animals," says Nieder, "characteristic of the paleozoic era, have
already disappeared" and are now extinct.
"The non-migratory species were the northern fire, which gradually
retreated to the north." Of course, all the herbivores had already been
eaten by predators by that time, and along with them, the plant-eaters. In
addition, as the northern fire receded, the area suitable for animal life in
Europe continued to expand. The animals that lived there spread out
over a larger area, making it increasingly difficult to hunt them.
It is impossible to imagine a more powerful force than the one that
reigns supreme over all others, for there is no equal rival in this world.ger area, making it increasingly difficult to hunt them.
It is impossible to imagine a more powerful force than the one that
reigns supreme over all others, for there is no equal rival in this world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---increasingly difficult to hunt them.
It is impossible to imagine a more powerful force than the one that
reigns supreme over all others, for there is no equal rival in this world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If you want to kill every animal, then it is clear that there will be no
salvation for them anywhere. And if they had multiplied rapidly and
populated Europe, the situation would have been similar to that in modern
Western Europe with its dense population of domestic animals and
livestock. and modern Western Europe, with its dense population, would
have been deprived of domestic animals and cultivated plants and, cut
off from the rest of the world, would have been forced to subsist on
hunting. It goes without saying that its population would have no other
choice but to hunt each other and survive by cannibalism. Under other
conditions, it could have spread throughout the entire globe and
transitioned from an animal to a plant. But if it had remained confined to
Central and Southern Europe, and if the vegetation of those countries had
remained as it was, there would have been no other outcome for it.
"There are types of the same kind," says Warvin, "They are usually
similar in their habits and behaviour, and always similar in structure, so
the struggle between them, if they come into contact, will be more
intense than between species of different genera." The same can be said
about the life-and-death struggle between representatives of the same
species, even if it is possible during the most dangerous period, having
already defeated the most terrible enemies of the animal kingdom? It is
difficult to imagine a more intense and difficult struggle. And if it lasted for
thousands of years, then the origin of the situation becomes completely
understandable, when the population of Europe was exterminated to the
last man, leaving only a few people alive. One can imagine that this
population improved itself through the extermination of the weakest and
natural selection, and that it left behind only the most outstanding
offspring.
The fight we are talking about is fought with melee weapons, at
close range with knives, clubs and spears, and at a distance with bows and
arrows. All types of weapons require their users to have muscle strength,
agility, good eyesight and accuracy. People who do not possess these
qualities will inevitably lose in combat.
With the gradual growth of muscular strength, and with it, energy,
we become more agile, stronger, and more agile, controlling all animal
instincts. "To compare," says Gaume, "the manifestation of life in large and
small groupscular strength, and with it, energy,
we become more agile, stronger, and more agile, controlling all animal
instincts. "To compare," says Gaume, "the manifestation of life in large and
small groups

--- PAGE BREAK ---with it, energy,
we become more agile, stronger, and more agile, controlling all animal
instincts. "To compare," says Gaume, "the manifestation of life in large and
small groups

--- PAGE BREAK ---

animals, it is clear that their senses and abilities are constantly
developing, and that the properties of these senses are more developed
in higher animals and less developed in lower animals. This is
confirmed not only by comparing large groups of animals. For example,
mammals and birds with reptiles, amphibians and fish, insects with
worms, higher animals with teeth, but also within the limits of individual
groups.
If all other conditions are equal, muscle mass is proportional to
height, so tall people with good posture are more likely to be winners. Acording to
Gaam, the weight of animals increases proportionally with their relative
height. "The most important thing," he says, "known to us from the
Mesozoic era, were all small animals and some were even smaller than insects.
But the variety is constantly growing. At present, in the transitional period, it
has not yet reached the enormous proportions of some mammals." Gaume
expresses the same idea when considering monkeys and their closest
relatives: lemurs, insectivores and marsupials. In all cases, the size of the
brain increases along with the development of the animal.
The variation in the size of animals is explained by nothing other
than the conditions of direct competition for existence. If we take a
predator and its prey, which are quite similar in size, then naturally, the
predator will kill its prey more quickly and will destroy all the weakest and
most vulnerable ones. The most fragile, and therefore the most vulnerable,
victims will be able to save themselves by fighting directly against the
hyenas with the help of dogs, rooks, subes, but7, etc., and those who escape
from it, and, of course, with the greater speed of their flight. They will
leave behind them more numerous offspring. In this way, the size of the
species eaten by predators as they are exterminated will decrease. But at
the same time, selection will also take place among the predators. The
smallest of them will die out over time, unable to cope with their large
prey, and the growth of predators will also slow down. And those of them that
remain alive will be the strongest, capable of coping even with larger prey.over time, unable to cope with their large
prey, and the growth of predators will also slow down. And those of them that
remain alive will be the strongest, capable of coping even with larger prey.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus, the victims of the struggle for existence and the winners in the
struggle always strive to grow and achieve extraordinary proportions. "But
it is precisely these proportions," says Gaume, "that prevent animals
from adapting to their environment and prevent them from being there, all
the dinosaurs of the Jurassic period died out in a short period of time." At the
same time, if not more, the growth limit was reached by the extinct
dinosaurs of the same system: pterosaurs, pterodactyls, dinosaurs, etc.
But along with the muscle advantage in battles between giant
creatures, there were thousands of the most diverse military techniques
and tricks, which depended on the inventiveness of the combatants and, of
course, on their mental strength. All the positive aspects of the human mind
and character are evident here.
By paying attention and observing, we can learn about our enemies,
their abilities, habits, techniques, and weaknesses. A sharp memory
allows us to draw conclusions and   make comparisons   about
enemies   and   observations   from the past.

--- PAGE BREAK ---their abilities, habits, techniques, and weaknesses. A sharp memory
allows us to draw conclusions and   make comparisons   about
enemies   and   observations   from the past.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Imagination gives you the opportunity to anticipate the course of the
battle and make the necessary preparations for it. A quick mind helps to
navigate the changing conditions of battle and take the most appropriate
measures for the moment. He was gifted with it and made many small
and large inventions that surprised his enemies. His fearless courage and
fearlessness allowed him to calmly assess the danger during the battle
itself, not to be lost in the confusion of unexpected events, and to
undertake the most daring and dangerous ventures.
Each of these abilities brings its owner undeniable advantages in battle,
but when combined in one person, they give him even greater advantages. If this
struggle continues for many thousands of years, and if millions of people
are involved in it, in order to preserve life for the chosen ones of destiny,
then the latter must have achieved the height of perfection in a physical
sense, and in a mental sense, what we call wisdom. The main difference
between wisdom and ordinary knowledge seems to me to be the ability to use
the inexhaustible wealth of knowledge and observations to correctly and
accurately draw the right conclusion about a given phenomenon. This is
the highest degree of synthetic ability, combined with the ability to
respond.
In such a situation, where the ordinary mind is confused by novelty
and unexpectedness and does not know what to do, it chooses the wrong
path, but the wise mind feels at home and follows the surest and most
reliable path. There are no dangers, no surprises. Every move of the
enemy has already been foreseen and thought through. There are no
difficult situations that would stop him. It goes without saying that in
the struggle described, the five external senses are developed to the
highest degree of sensitivity. As for the remaining feelings, it is well
known that people of high intellect have high feelings. But among them,
unselfish love for others should come first. By loved ones, of course, we
mean the group of people to whom we belong by birth. That group, in which
each member is not afraid to die for their own at any given moment,
could never emerge victorious.
They seem to me to be the last couples who have survived a brutal struggle
for life and death with their own kind.
The struggle among people is inevitable, especially in times of war.rge victorious.
They seem to me to be the last couples who have survived a brutal struggle
for life and death with their own kind.
The struggle among people is inevitable, especially in times of war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---seem to me to be the last couples who have survived a brutal struggle
for life and death with their own kind.
The struggle among people is inevitable, especially in times of war.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That is, if people unite in groups, then for their actions to be successful,
they need to be coordinated, and this is impossible without a well-
organised system of communication. In addition, the signals must be clear,
easily understood, and visible both during the day and at night, i.e.,
audible rather than visual. Such a signalling system could be a uniform colour
code. I f it had not been used earlier in the struggle against the four-
legged beasts, where people probably acted in groups, now it is
impossible to fight without it. Those who fought, who were the first to be
inspired by the achievements
uɤенораѕдеɤьной revolution,
monetarism,
and
ѕа
itself superiority, and
later wins the one who improves it more. There is no need to talk about
weapons: their improvement and the best equipment bring undoubted
chances of victory to those who are ahead of everyone else in this
respect. Hence — the established and
My weapon is not a weapon.
In this way, Europeans, forced by necessity, can obtain meat for themselves,
as they write about the Alrimans people of Monbutu: "They look at their
unfortunate neighbours as prey, attack them, kill them and take them
captive, solely to obtain meat for themselves. The dead, killed in battle,
are immediately cut up into pieces and distributed among the hunters, then
cut into small pieces, cooked on the spot and taken away as provisions.
The wounded are taken away, saving them for future feasts.
Regarding the origins of mania in the modern era, I can find data on
this in Sharpe's book, who states that women and children with signs of
cannibalism were found in the following locations: in Chov (Sprin7om),
in Nурде (Garrin7om), in Gourda (Pietto), in Vigneuve, in S. Morge
(Ruzhu), in Varenne, S. Mor (Begran), in Montesmye-Avants, in
Brunimege, in 3 and on the island of Tagmaria (in Italy).
On this subject, we might quite reasonably ask: "If during the 7itaus
the struggle among the ueɤoveuеstvo is so severe that only the most
resilient, determined and athletic individuals can survive it,   we must
remember that we are not alone, and that we are surrounded by people
who are just like us, we know them at this moment, with a prolonged
period of pregnancy for the former and a completely unsust a i n a b l e
period of poverty and hardship for the latterby people
who are just like us, we know them at this moment, with a prolonged
period of pregnancy for the former and a completely unsust a i n a b l e
period of poverty and hardship for the latter

--- PAGE BREAK ---just like us, we know them at this moment, with a prolonged
period of pregnancy for the former and a completely unsust a i n a b l e
period of poverty and hardship for the latter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the latter? After all, there is no point in exterminating them before the
latter, is there?
This is a difficult question, but we have answers that are relatively
simple. We will examine them in detail below, but for now, let's focus
on the following:
Firstly, 7ehenia is necessary not only to defeat one's enemies, but even
more so to save one's wives and children from 7ibebi. to save their wives
and children from destruction.
Secondly, perhaps the noble race would not have been saved by its
nobility if it had not had the same wives and children as they are now, if they
were not subject to the same strict natural selection as men.
In the context of selecting a wife, women should be distinguished from
men to a certain extent.
Gabrielle de Mortier argues that the existence of manibasism is not
yet proven, but in addition to the above data collected by Sharpe Webber,
it can be assumed that it is widespread among the Jewish community
and Jewish victims to this day.
"No people," says Gervard, "no part of the world can be considered
innocent of anthropophagy. Everywhere one can find traces of cannibalism,
either directly or in myths, legends, etc. And without exaggeration, we
can say that there is now no single race that has not been involved in man-
eating in the past.
But even in that case, even if the absence of mania in the non-neurotic
period were actually proven, this circumstance could not testify against the
existence of devastating wars between the then-existing states. If they
were not motivated by greed, then they could have been waged simply for
the sake of war. But if this race had developed over a long period of time
and endured a fierce struggle with the most powerful enemies, who
could destroy it? Where would it find a worthy rival?
Amidst the hopeless struggle for existence that we have described, it
is necessary to endure a great deal of suffering, but in the end, natural
selection will prevail more quickly, and we will be able to change it. De
Mortier, comparing the inevitable with the possible, does not consider the
former to be the latter; he attributed the non-essential to the representation of a certaine will be able to change it. De
Mortier, comparing the inevitable with the possible, does not consider the
former to be the latter; he attributed the non-essential to the representation of a certain

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the race that had arrived.
Archaeologists depict the Neolithic period as a time of refined and
polished tools, with a well-developed economy, with traces of slavery,
farming and animal husbandry, and living in wooden buildings. By this time,
they had already domesticated dogs, sheep, cows, goats, and pigs. They
made cheese from the milk of these animals. They cultivated crops such as
wheat, barley, rye, millet, buckwheat, oats, etc. In addition, fruit trees
were cultivated: apple, pear, hazelnut, water chestnut and even grapevine.
In this regard, it is necessary to place oneself in the position of one's
ancient ancestors. Unfortunately, archaeological finds are not so abundant
that we can trace all the changes that have occurred in the organism
over such a long period of time. However, comparing the hominid
skeleton with the non-hominid one can still give us some idea of the
kind of changes that have taken place.
We have already mentioned above the European pithecanthropus,
Pithecantrpus Neauderthalensis, the progenitor of all European races, with a
flat, broad forehead and a receding chin, with a prominent protuberance and
a lower jaw resembling the muzzle of an animal.
Although the remains of other Neanderthal races are less well preserved,
it is nevertheless reliably known that: 1) the lower forms of the period
preceded the higher ones, and not vice versa, and uеɤовеuество ѕа sто time
is not re7прессироваɤо and does not remain unchanged, but undoubtedly
pro7прессировагo, and 2) uто between the higher and lower ɭормы
suɲествовагі промежутоуные, transitional between those and others. In
this regard, I will refer to the well-known works of anthropologists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uто between the higher and lower ɭормы
suɲествовагі промежутоуные, transitional between those and others. In
this regard, I will refer to the well-known works of anthropologists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tam Karɤ Foch, comparing the two most ancient uerepa
paɤeoɤiтиuесmо7о veм — Neanderthal and sн7iсmий — and recognising
the undeniable and quite striking similarity between them, at the same
time finds that the Neanderthal skull in our time "could be the skull of
an idiot," while the Swiss skull "could even belong to a naturalist," since
it has a higher vault. In addition, the same scientist finds that the
Bernese mountain dog could be mistaken for a Neanderthal, but it is
exactly halfway between Neanderthal and Swiss dogs.
The highest transitional forms include the Chancelade race, about
which Tsstyu wrote a monograph, and the race that Nybush calls Homo
priscus. Anthropologists consider these races to be products of the
development of Pith. Neanderthalensis, which has the same body type,
the same short stature (1.6 m), resulting from short legs, the same voluminous
skull, and a more pronounced similarity to Pithecanthropus in the structure
of the jaw, bones and other details of the organism, compared to the
latter, more voluminous and generally more robust, and accordingly, the
upper part also changes. On the other hand, Homo priscus is most closely
related to the higher and more developed hominids,

--- PAGE BREAK ---minous and generally more robust, and accordingly, the
upper part also changes. On the other hand, Homo priscus is most closely
related to the higher and more developed hominids,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kromanion, which Nyabush calls Homo spilaeus. The latter race already
has a tall stature (1.8 m), long legs, a longer torso with a pronounced
protrusion at the front and back, and a less massive build.
Regarding Virchow's controversial statements, he expressed himself
as follows: "My interest in prehistoric Europe has been confirmed since I
became convinced of the fallacy of the opinion that primitive people
must correspond to people with a lower level of organisation. In fact,
there is nothing in the structure of ancient dwellings (stilt houses) that
would suggest a low level of organisation; on the contrary, we must
admit that they are far from our own and very different from our own. The
present-day overheads may be compared to those of the peoples of the
Middle East, in terms of their capacity, form and details of organisation, they
can be placed alongside the most advanced peoples of the Aryan race.
In the same vein, Kogman says: "The findings make us think that the
primitive Europeans belonged to a perfect race, with a motor that was
more perfect and more powerful than the previous ones. This
assumption is natural, but it is possible. Not everything that seems
simple is true. The first settlers (the author calls them "non-indigenous")
were, indeed, at a lower level of development, but they were not a
backward race. Here, two completely different things are mixed together.
This is a forgivable mistake, which could be made in the early stages of
anthropological development, but now it is time to move on from it.
For his part, Ranmē also mentions the Karmanons, saying that they
will tell us about a race that is strong, powerful, and athletic. The Nepers
are very characteristic, they are strong, well-developed in all respects,
and in terms of their size, strength and endurance, they surpass even the
average size of modern humans. Instead of an ape-like build, the
primitive inhabitants of Europe are completely different: the numerous
representatives of the Carmanon race belong to the highly developed
"samuatezhno mrasivom" type. Instead of a monkey standing on a low
animalistic level, it seems that the theory of the gradual development of
humanity is required. However, when comparing the development of
the species and the emmosti of the current inhabitants of France and
representatives of former species, we see a number of similarities. ( From
these similarities, we can drawng the development of
the species and the emmosti of the current inhabitants of France and
representatives of former species, we see a number of similarities. ( From
these similarities, we can draw

--- PAGE BREAK ---f
the species and the emmosti of the current inhabitants of France and
representatives of former species, we see a number of similarities. ( From
these similarities, we can draw

--- PAGE BREAK ---

two, the most characteristic ones):
The historical period is 1615 mуб. See Sоɤютрs
The history of modern Parisians
1558 AD. See
From this we can see that the ancient prehistoric inhabitants of France
"In terms of size, they surpass the current ones." In any case, according to
Ram, "the ancient ones are not inferior to ours."
The capacity of the shipbuilders
of the Svyano period
1558 mуб. см.
The same sewing machines of modern times   1377 mуб. см.
Namone, Niapuzh gives the following interesting table of the capacity of
vessels:
Pithecanthropus erectus
 1000
cm
Pithecantropus
Neanderthalensis
1200
cm
Average modern European 1565 cm Homo
priscus
1710 cm
The last of these figures is very impressive in itself, but there is a much
greater limit to the capacity of the skull, reaching up to 2000 cm3, and in
the Trechere race, the capacity reaches up to 1925 cm3.
"Virchow," says Ranke, "is right in saying that we are wrong to look
down on our ancient ancestors. To back this up, Virchow points out that
that among the inhabitants of prehistoric pile dwellings, the average height
of men is not less, but even greater than that of the current inhabitants of
the same areas."
3Gise Pemyu expresses the same sentiment: "The question arises
whether the Cro-Magnon race has not reached, in some respects, a point of
maximum development, at least in relation to the present, all recent
discoveries clearly represent a period of rapid progress. However, in any
case, it is not enough that the development of society is characterised by
a constant process in the sense of increasing the number of people and the
form of government. It is even likely that the opposite is true. Contrary
to popular belief, the volume of books has not decreased at all over time.
Most of the books that are being read today exceed the average modern
book in terms of their content.
Itam, anthropological data on the existence of uеɤовеuесmих uерепов
leads us to the conclusion that, together with the transition of pitemantrop
ande average modern
book in terms of their content.
Itam, anthropological data on the existence of uеɤовеuесmих uерепов
leads us to the conclusion that, together with the transition of pitemantrop
and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ok in terms of their content.
Itam, anthropological data on the existence of uеɤовеuесmих uерепов
leads us to the conclusion that, together with the transition of pitemantrop
and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from the animal state to the human state, it is possible to assume a non-
linear increase from 1000 and 1200 to 1700–1900 mub. cm, and then in our
time it decreased again to an average of 1500 mуб. cm. Consequently,
we Europeans, in terms of height, are on average lower than the
Neanderthals and occupy a position between them and the Pithecanthropus.
However, with the non-human species, we are not moving forward, but
backward. Could this be due to the existence of a self-process, given our
undoubted successes in science?
Obviously, perhaps the facts lead us to this conclusion. But are the
facts themselves correct? And are the mental faculties really
proportional to the capacity of the brain?
The accuracy of the anthropological measurements we provide is
confirmed by such scientific authorities as Virchow, Kogman, Brom,
Ranme, and others. The fact that the capacity of the brain in modern
Europeans is lower than that of their ancient ancestors is nothing new to
science. It is mentioned by Darwin in his writings on the
"incomprehensible" phenomenon. He explains this by saying that "the
average capacity of the brain in civilised peoples must inevitably
decrease, due to the preservation of the intellectual and physical
qualities of the people, which are lost in the diaspora." Although the
explanation is rather vague, everyone is satisfied with it, including the
Maris. If Brom equates people with dimari, then the average capacity of
modern dimari is less than that of Europeans — 1511 mуб. cm, among
American Indians
it is 1426, and for Australians it is 1341.
Nto mасается пропорɯионаɤьности между емmостью uерепа и
умственной   сиɤой,   то   Ƚарвин   7оворит   об   sтом
сɤедуюɲее:
"The belief that there is a connection between brain size and mental ability
is based on comparisons between different and similar races, ancient
and modern peoples, as well as on analogies between a number of
related species.onnection between brain size and mental ability
is based on comparisons between different and similar races, ancient
and modern peoples, as well as on analogies between a number of
related species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ain size and mental ability
is based on comparisons between different and similar races, ancient
and modern peoples, as well as on analogies between a number of
related species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. SIGNS OF THE GENIUS
OF PRIMITIVE MAN
Traces of the genius of primitive man. Modern theories of gradual
development. Its merits. The beginning of cattle breeding and
agriculture. Megalithic structures. Material inventions of ancient man:
looms, fire and metallurgy. Products of spiritual creativity. The
impossibility of collective creativity. Legends about the Ice Age. Early
theories about the origin of man. Beliefs about the world of bacteria.
Medical knowledge of prehistoric man. The spread of man across the
islands of the oceans.
In the previous chapter, we discussed the question of the primitiveness
of primitive man, so before we need to move on to the most recent
history,    it is necessary    to supplement it with certain
assumptions, with modern understanding, with a clear, bold idea.
The idea that primitive man was "civilised" and that modern man has
evolved into his present state is nothing new. According to L. Hartwig,
it was first proposed by A. Argyr in 1869, and even earlier by Archbishop
V.
It is also known that the Holy Scriptures and the traditions of all
countries and peoples view the present and future of humanity quite
gloomily and see everything good as fleeting. Then there was paradise,
the blessed state of man and immortality, and now there is the dominion
of the devil, sin and death. All religious systems are built on this position.
Our ancestors did not hold this opinion so long ago, but simple people still
hold it today.
However, the latest discoveries of European scientists have dispelled
the old worldview and replaced it with a new one, which in ancient times
was unknown, except for darkness, ignorance and superstition.
Therefore, everything that was discovered and invented in prehistoric
times is explained by chance, like the discovery of the wheel by the
Lynians. We have developed a new theory of "gradual development,"
according to which we evolved from animals, specifically monkeys, and
have been continuously improving ever since. Even if it sometimes
stagnates and regresses, it is only in the form of a respite from
progressive development.from animals, specifically monkeys, and
have been continuously improving ever since. Even if it sometimes
stagnates and regresses, it is only in the form of a respite from
progressive development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---fically monkeys, and
have been continuously improving ever since. Even if it sometimes
stagnates and regresses, it is only in the form of a respite from
progressive development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

work, so that we can move forward again.
Our forward movement is governed, first, by the process itself, and
second, by our free will. If we have free will, we progress; if we do not, we
stand still and go backwards.
That is, the hypothesis, requiring verification, is accepted as true
before it is verified. But the entire hypothesis, which has existed for a
long time without any serious refutation, is now being turned into an
axiom. There is a huge mass of phenomena that are incomprehensible
from the point of view of our theory. They are discussed with
uncertainty: "it is unlikely that we will ever know anything about them,"
and with self-confidence: "future science will explain them." There are
even phenomena that directly contradict it, but they are simply ignored.
The hypothesis we are talking about is already beginning to take
shape and turn into a unified European belief system. All our hopes and
aspirations for the future, all our likes and dislikes in the present are
based on it. Of course, we cannot part with it.
Undoubtedly, this hypothesis is based on the well-known mental
progress of Western Europe, which has been going on for centuries, but
we must admit that the reason for this progress is completely unknown
to us. Reflecting on the sudden decline of Spain, Warvin says: "The
awakening of European nations from the dark ages of barbarism is a
difficult task."
We cannot say with certainty whether our progress is permanent or
temporary. History shows us that temporary progress is not at all rare,
but rather very common. Many ancient peoples progressed, just like us, but
when they reached a certain point, for some unknown reason, they
suddenly began to decline and die out. Are we any different from them?
What guarantees us against decline and extinction? No one knows.
True, we have a glimmer of hope for the spread of enlightenment and
the democraticisation of European society. But alas, these means have
already been tested in practice by China, and nothing can prevent it
from falling. They also do not prevent advanced France from falling.
We believe in progress, the main force of the world, and we are not
mistaken. Progress really does exist. Its reality is obvious. But progress
is one thing, and the paths it takes are quite another.We believe in progress, the main force of the world, and we are not
mistaken. Progress really does exist. Its reality is obvious. But progress
is one thing, and the paths it takes are quite another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ss, the main force of the world, and we are not
mistaken. Progress really does exist. Its reality is obvious. But progress
is one thing, and the paths it takes are quite another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The state of affairs undoubtedly needs to be improved, but how?
That is the question. On the one hand (theoretically), every nation and
every individual is improving, but on the other hand (in reality), millions
of people and thousands of nations are suffering in order to make room
for one pair of chosen ones. In both cases, there is progress, but there is a
huge difference in the paths taken. Of course, the first path would be more
pleasant for us, and we try to convince ourselves that there is no other
path. But the relentless reality tells us that nature knows only the second
path.
And in that case, each of us and the peoples to whom we belong
may not be among the chosen ones. Do you think we will then be
saved? Not according to the same standard? But according to the same
standard as the Egyptians, the ancient Greeks, the Romans and other peoples
of antiquity? According to the same standard.
It is more pleasant for us to think that we are not bound by darkness and
ignorance, but that we stand at the pinnacle of progress (the ancients
thought the same in their time). And so we turn a deaf ear to those who do
not speak, but simply dream, that it is not true, that our distant
prehistoric ancestors were not ignorant, that they were so advanced
intellectually that even many thousands of years later, we are unable to
understand the traces they left behind.
There are so many of these traces that one could write entire volumes
about them. But our task at present is not to study them, but to understand
the essence of their existence.
First of all, we must pay attention to the most valuable legacy of our
prehistoric past, the foundations of our current well-being: agriculture and
animal husbandry, without which our entire civilisation would be
impossible. We must remember that the establishment and development of
the two most important sources of our existence in the smallest details
belongs not to us, but to the distant prehistoric past.
We consider the domestication of animals to be extremely simple
and believe that it is accessible to every farmer. It is well known that
farmers have domesticated animals, and that is sufficient for us. But if
we take a closer look at domestic animals and compare them with wild ones,
we will see a multitude of unsolvable problems that baffle even our
most brilliant minds. "The origin of most of our domestic animals," says
Warvin, "will probably always remain unclear." "It is impossible," he
says, "to come to a conclusion."that baffle even our
most brilliant minds. "The origin of most of our domestic animals," says
Warvin, "will probably always remain unclear." "It is impossible," he
says, "to come to a conclusion."

--- PAGE BREAK ---r
most brilliant minds. "The origin of most of our domestic animals," says
Warvin, "will probably always remain unclear." "It is impossible," he
says, "to come to a conclusion."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be it their origin from one and the same species or from different species.
In ancient times, on Egyptian monuments and in the pile dwellings of
Switzerland, we encounter very diverse breeds, some of which are very
similar to modern ones and even identical to them. However, these
considerations give way to speculation and suggest that animals were
domesticated much earlier than is currently believed. Speaking of the
ancient peoples who developed our breeds   of domestic    animals,
Ƚарвин    names    them    to
"Civilised" or "barbarians", but by no means dimari, because they were
well aware of the extremely difficult task of artificially selecting
animals, which dimari do not do anywhere. "It would be completely
wrong to assume," he says, "that the use of selection is a new discovery.
When we compare the wild goat with the domestic goat, the dromedary
with the camel, we can compare breeds of sheep adapted to dry and hot pastures with
wool suitable for one purpose, in the second case, we can compare
pasteurised breeds of dogs, suitable for various purposes, we can compare a
fighting cock, stubborn in battle, with other completely peaceful breeds,
with "unbeatable" walls, which are content to be sedentary, and with
small, delicate bows, we cannot allow all breeds to be as perfect and
powerful as we see them now. I myself am not a perfect representative of
this breed.
In particular, about dogs, Warvin says: "We cannot explain the origin
of such strange creatures, such as wild boars, moles, badgers, hedgehogs,
mryzody and mons, it is reasonable to assume that these forms existed at
some point in a dim state. However, as soon as someone has the courage
to suggest that such unnatural forms exist and can exist in a dim state. If
we compare them with all known representatives of the canine family,
they immediately reveal their difference and abnormal origin. There is
not a single example of dogs such as Spanish mastiffs and real bears
being raised by humans: they are the product of continuous evolution. This
applies to direct causes and degrees, with the help of motor dogse example of dogs such as Spanish mastiffs and real bears
being raised by humans: they are the product of continuous evolution. This
applies to direct causes and degrees, with the help of motor dogs

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch as Spanish mastiffs and real bears
being raised by humans: they are the product of continuous evolution. This
applies to direct causes and degrees, with the help of motor dogs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are clearly different from each other, then we do not know for sure about
this, or about many other things.
However, selective breeding is not at all a simple matter, as it can be
compared to the first seven days of life, and it is practically inaccessible
to modern man, as evidenced by the following words of Lapin: "If selection
were limited to the separation of a clearly expressed variety and its
propagation, it would hardly be worthy of attention, but the differences
between animals which have to be dealt with, are not noticeable to the
untrained eye." "At least I," says Warvin, "am trying to understand them."
"One in a thousand does not possess the loyalty and judgement necessary
to become an outstanding leader. If he is gifted with these qualities and
devotes his entire life to his subject with unyielding perseverance, he
can achieve remarkable results; but if he lacks even one of these qualities,
he will surely fail. Few will believe that natural talents and common
sense are necessary to learn how to cultivate one's talents. And if
everything is so difficult even now, when there is a huge amount of
literature on this subject, one can imagine how difficult it must have been
for a beginner who had no manuals to refer to, no experience, and had to
figure everything out for himself.
In addition, artificial selection requires special conditions that are
unattainable for the poor, and there is always a risk of failure.
"There are changes that are clearly beneficial and pleasant for the poor," "
says Warvin, "can be perceived as both positive and negative, but the
probability of their occurrence will increase with the number of
individuals contained. Hence, the abundance (of animals) greatly
influences success." On this basis, Marsh formed an opinion about the
sheep in certain parts of the county: "They will never improve because
they belong to poor people and are kept in small flocks."
Obviously, in order to improve the breed, it is necessary to keep large
herds, which is only affordable for wealthy owners. But is it necessary to
improve the breed, and is it necessary to keep large herds? Well, that's
another matter. Obviously, our ancestors, thanks to their ingenuity and
greater observantness, managed to overcome this important obstacle in a
way unknown to us.to keep large herds? Well, that's
another matter. Obviously, our ancestors, thanks to their ingenuity and
greater observantness, managed to overcome this important obstacle in a
way unknown to us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---? Well, that's
another matter. Obviously, our ancestors, thanks to their ingenuity and
greater observantness, managed to overcome this important obstacle in a
way unknown to us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What we said about domestic animals must be repeated about plants.
The inhabitants of the Swiss mountain villages have been cultivating at
least 10 species for centuries, namely: 5 varieties of wheat, at least 4 of
which are separate species, 3 varieties of barley, one millet and one
proso millet. In addition, the following are cultivated: poppy, mam, gen
and even apple.
There, our ancestors reached an impasse, domesticating animals and
plants, and were unable to understand many issues related to the
cultivation of domestic plants.
"In general," says Warvin, "the question of the origin and species
characteristics of cultivated plants is extremely difficult. It is clear that
botanists have not yet reached a unanimous agreement on the primary form
and origin of any of the ornamental plants. It is known that none of our plants
grow wild and did not grow in their present form in the past. And so,
Warvin concludes that "many of these plants are subject to significant
changes and modifications through mutation."
But the mutation of plants is no less difficult than the artificial selection of
animals, and therefore Darwin cannot allow simple mutations to be
considered as such. "If it is necessary," he argues, "to spend hundreds and
thousands of years to bring our plants to the degree of perfection they
now enjoy, then it becomes clear to us why neither Australia, nor Cape
Good Hope, nor any other country inhabited by completely uncultivated
peoples, has given us a single plant that would be worth cultivating."
A true follower of the theory of "gradual development" would not
even try to explain this. He would simply come up with
"Motivated unconscious selection." One unconsciously selects one small part,
another selects another, and so on, but together they form a difficult and
serious whole. But it happens that no motivational work is possible unless it
is inspired by a single idea. If there is no such idea, then separate people
always go their separate ways, as in the fable: one spoils what the other
has done.
The most important thing is that we are not afraid to build, to create, to
invent, which, due to their size, the people rightly call
"buildings of the gods." "The buildings of the Neolithic period," says
Ramé, "are undoubtedly the mostre not afraid to build, to create, to
invent, which, due to their size, the people rightly call
"buildings of the gods." "The buildings of the Neolithic period," says
Ramé, "are undoubtedly the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---ld, to create, to
invent, which, due to their size, the people rightly call
"buildings of the gods." "The buildings of the Neolithic period," says
Ramé, "are undoubtedly the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---

evidence of the primitive spirit of European architecture. To restore
them, the joint efforts of a large number of people are required... The
inhabitants of the new settlement were already at a relatively advanced stage
of development.
Stone structures are found in many parts of the world, but they are
especially numerous in France, where they are distinguished by their
size and spaciousness.
They are made of stone blocks of considerable size. For example, the
spindle-shaped menhir in Morbihan is 19 metres high and 5 metres
wide, while the menhir in Saint-Hilaire is 13 metres high, etc.
Among these monuments are: 1) Menhirs — vertical, separately
standing stones, 2) Kromeghi — square and round stones composed of menhirs,
3) Stone circles and rows, also composed of menhirs, and, finally, 4)
Ƚоɤьmeny —
   artificial 7rots and ɤenery, made from huge mаmenny
пɤits in the form of stoɤov.
In France, there are up to 1,683 separate menouries and up to 56
mamenny ugyi. The most famous of them, located in Karname, stretches over
an area of 3 square metres and consists of straight lines. The first
consists of 11 rows of menhirs, the second of 10, and the third of 13. A
total of 10,000 stone blocks were used to build the walls. There are up to
34 menhirs in France. They built a large structure with 35 stone blocks on
the walls and 13 on the floor. Some of the stones weigh up to 35
kilograms. Is it possible to doubt even for a moment that such large
structures could not have been built by human hands?
In addition, in order to build structures, one must be able to operate
machines such as mowers, gates, saws, etc., and it is necessary to be
skilled in manual and heavy work, as many of them are used for
processing and have holes for their fastening.
In Polynesia, on the islands of the Pacific Ocean, there are also many
ancient monuments of all kinds, which could not have been built by the
local inhabitants. On the New Guinea islands, for example, there are
mysterious road junctions and ancient fortifications. On the island of
Ponape, there are up to 80 four-sided stone islands surrounded by basalt
columns.e New Guinea islands, for example, there are
mysterious road junctions and ancient fortifications. On the island of
Ponape, there are up to 80 four-sided stone islands surrounded by basalt
columns.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, for example, there are
mysterious road junctions and ancient fortifications. On the island of
Ponape, there are up to 80 four-sided stone islands surrounded by basalt
columns.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and separated from each other by manas. On the islands of Ton7a, we
encounter monumental monuments called "lai-toma". They are
composed of stones stacked in several tiers. The dimensions of these
monuments reach up to 180 metres in length and up to 120 metres in width,
with a height of 20 metres. The stones from which they are built are up
to 20 metres in length and up to 8 metres in width.
Among the structures belonging to our prehistoric ancestors, we
must include the suspension bridges in America and Tibet for crossing
chasms from one cliff to another. "These structures," according to
Remy, "must undoubtedly be considered as having been inherited from
peoples who possessed a higher culture than the modern inhabitants of
these countries."
The following material inventions of our prehistoric ancestors
should be noted: 1) the stone axe, the remains of which were found in
pile dwellings in Switzerland, 2) friction grinding, and 3) the discovery
of all the most important metals that we use in technology today.
Their extraction from ores, i.e. seeds that do not appear to have
anything to do with metals, required inventors to conduct numerous
experiments and have the ability to generalise. It is possible, perhaps, to
assume that the extraction of one type of metal, such as copper, was
discovered by chance when copper ore was heated with iron, but to assume
that the same process could be used to extract iron, there is no
possibility of this, as the extraction process requires high temperatures
and special equipment. Of course, the example of copper may suggest
that all other elements, similar to it, should give us some kind of metal,
but such generalisations do not apply to elements that completely lack
this ability.
In the spiritual realm, the same period left behind a legacy no less
significant, namely the so-called works of folk art, which belong to the
international memory, included in the Iliad, the Odyssey and the folk songs
of many countries. Their themes were used by Shakespeare in his plays
and by many European poets and writers in their works. These products
of prehistoric creativity, even in the distorted form in which they were
passed down by the people, who were not yet literate, could be
attributed to primitive dimars, and therefore, in order to explain their
origin, a special type of creativity was invented, which ise
passed down by the people, who were not yet literate, could be
attributed to primitive dimars, and therefore, in order to explain their
origin, a special type of creativity was invented, which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---e people, who were not yet literate, could be
attributed to primitive dimars, and therefore, in order to explain their
origin, a special type of creativity was invented, which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

examples    ниmто    ниmо7да    не    набɤюдаɤ,    творuества
"Unconsciously, senselessly, and impulsively." It is assumed that some
barbarian, preoccupied with material problems and having no connection
with the present, composes, for example, a poem. Other peasants who
are equally poor will copy this work and pass it on by word of mouth.
Each of them adds something, corrects something, and passes it on, and
in the end, instead of a rough image of the original thought, what usually
happens is that a distorted picture emerges, full of false ideas and false feelings
that are completely foreign to the original. Could there be a more
reasonable explanation than that?
From those fragments of ancient works, which now bear a naively
simplified form, it can be concluded that primitive people had a very
broad worldview and that many questions which Europe began to address in
the 18th and 19th centuries, were already familiar to primitive people, and
they even solved them quite successfully, in our opinion. These include,
for example, legends about the Stone Age.
One of them, relating to that period, is the work of the anthropologist
Hamie, published in 1771. Amnet-Yuperon. The third text, called
Wendidat-Sads. There, according to the 7th century Milo and according to
the traditions of Moses, according to the 7th century, a woman lives in "a
place of planting and abundance," Eeriene Veedjo, "the most beautiful,
the whole world," given by Ormusd. Ahriman, "the source of evil," acts
in his own way and in his own time, irrigating the earthly paradise,
bringing the "mother of all things," "the mother of all things." She
spreads her wings over the water, the earth and the trees. Then Ormusd
creates Soghdo, "the second life, the second creation.",
bringing the "mother of all things," "the mother of all things." She
spreads her wings over the water, the earth and the trees. Then Ormusd
creates Soghdo, "the second life, the second creation."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In another part of the Aryan world, we find a similar legend. The
songs of the Mandinavs describe a visit that takes place, as mentioned
above, during a certain period. The painting depicts this in a vivid way:
"The world is dark in the north, there it flows out
12 p.m., engines spewing out deadly poison. The vapour, which releases
poison, turns into mist and the water boils. The world is on fire, there
are sparks flying, engines are meeting fire and melting it.
At first glance, it seems strange and even unbelievable, but it is
impossible to believe that the current period is temporary, preceded by
another, more intense period. However, according to some estimates, the
current period lasted 160 thousand years, and during that time, animals
without having acquired a permanent habitat, then could the same
traditions have been preserved from the previous period?
But it is strange that, despite the gradual development of the theory, I
am convinced that it is impossible to be a true believer.
If one thinks that the essence of life is eternal, and observant nature, it is
not difficult for him to understand the remains of the ancient period,
when times were fresher and

--- PAGE BREAK ---If one thinks that the essence of life is eternal, and observant nature, it is
not difficult for him to understand the remains of the ancient period,
when times were fresher and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is difficult to recall the past in our minds, but we can see it in the present.
After all, we are not surprised that the author of the Five Books of Moses
and those who passed down the traditions to us, told us about the creation
of the world in a way that is quite different from what we know today. which
in our time has become a matter of common knowledge. Meanwhile, how
else could these people have known about the origin of the animal and
plant world, if not from direct observation of nature?
This also includes a very interesting piece of information, namely,
the theory of the origin of species, or at least its main idea, was also known
to the ancient Greeks, judging by the widespread belief in the origin of
humans from apes.
According to this theory, humans descended from a pair of apes whose
internal organs, limbs and tails changed due to a change in their diet (the same as
in Namar's theory). their hair fell out, their rumen disappeared, their tails
disappeared, and the monkeys became like humans.
Even though we have only recently discovered the existence of the
world of bamteries, primitive ueɤo, even if we do not have a clear
understanding of it, we can still find it in both uerthas. There, according to
the beliefs of the vast majority of modern peoples, "unquenchable fire,"
like the bamterias, is widespread everywhere. According to the beliefs
of the Meshkh, it enters the body through the mouth, and according to
the beliefs of the Samavmas Tatars, the whole universe is filled with "evil
spirits". They are found in every house, in every room, in barns, in wells, in
wells, in trees, and inside animals. The invisible spirit always surrounds
people and even tries to get into their ears, mouths, and noses. These
spirits bring people various misfortunes and miseries. According to Mamuadag
beliefs, they live in the air, enter the mouth, settle there and cause
misfortune. If modern theory about bacteria had reached the people, and
integration had been possible, then our common folk   would not   be
able   to   convey this theory. It is clear that batteries were not known
to our prehistoric ancestors, but their use was even more widespread
than we think, as can be seen from the fact that that "the snatchers of
certain nomadic peoples are familiar with the effects of poisonous snakes
through inoculation. The Bushmen use this method to protect themselves
from snakes and scorpions."
As for European medicine, many of the remedies it uses have their
origins in ancient prehistory. There, among our Russian commoners,
dryhis method to protect themselves
from snakes and scorpions."
As for European medicine, many of the remedies it uses have their
origins in ancient prehistory. There, among our Russian commoners,
dry

--- PAGE BREAK ---t themselves
from snakes and scorpions."
As for European medicine, many of the remedies it uses have their
origins in ancient prehistory. There, among our Russian commoners,
dry

--- PAGE BREAK ---

baths, and the Russians know about moxibustion and bloodletting. The
cupping tube is known to the American Indians of the Damota tribe and
to the Russians of Western Alrim. The Enakari of some tribes perform
certain serious operations, such as ovariotomy (Australians), hysterectomy
and mesarovectomy (Yucatec Indians). Trepanation, known in Europe
since the 15th century, is still used by the Nehru, Persians and New
Hebrides to treat nervous disorders and epilepsy. Nowadays, the steam bath,
which is now beginning to spread in Europe as a folk remedy, is found not
only among the common people of Russia, but also in the Caucasus, Asia,
America and Poland. Kumys and melir, known since time immemorial
among the peoples of Central Asia and the Caucasus, are now accepted
by us as good medicinal remedies. I will not mention the enormous
variety of remedies accepted by our medicine, which have been taken
from the people, but are preserved from the most distant prehistoric
antiquity.
Namely, if we add to all of the above the astronomical data on which
the calendar and meteorological signs are based, which coincide with the
data obtained by European science, it is clear that ancient thought
penetrated very deeply into all areas of knowledge. To attribute all this
to a complete inability not only to observe and generalise, but even to think
about anything, is to completely ignore him and ignore the information
about his mental abilities that has been collected in the literature.
But what is clearest of all is the ancient wisdom its decisiveness,
fearlessness and extraordinary strength is evidenced by the spread of the
Uegov people in prehistoric times throughout the most remote islands of
the ocean. No explanation can justify the cruel and senseless deaths of these
people in their own homes.
The question is, how could primitive people cross oceans to
populate all the continents, archipelagos and islands?
This question is closely related to the question of whether man
himself was primitive during the period of dispersion. If it was, then the
theory of gradual development, i.e. similar to modern dimars and even
lower, is difficult to imagine, becausewhether man
himself was primitive during the period of dispersion. If it was, then the
theory of gradual development, i.e. similar to modern dimars and even
lower, is difficult to imagine, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---f was primitive during the period of dispersion. If it was, then the
theory of gradual development, i.e. similar to modern dimars and even
lower, is difficult to imagine, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a weak, fearful, timid creature, whose slightest responsible thought causes
unbearable pain, could possibly decide to take such a dangerous, painful leap
into the unknown, which even an extraordinary person, not lacking in
good morals, would not dare to take? It is worth recalling the stories
about how Christopher Columbus was going to cross the Atlantic Ocean, in order
to understand the impossibility of such feats for primitive people.
It remains to be assumed that all the people who ended up on the
islands were carried there by the wind and waves on some kind of rafts or
logs. But then it becomes unclear why all the animals did not arrive in
the same way. For example, as mentioned above, not a single higher
mammal ended up in Australia, while in America there are primates. Why
is even the smallest body of water, such as the Madagaskar River flowing
from Alrimi, completely inaccessible to many species? Can't they, like
humans, get there on boats and logs?
It seems even if he had crossed over to the islands, he would have been very
clever, although he did not have at his disposal the discoveries and
improvements of modern technology, and at the same time he was brave,
fearless and decisive, there were no obstacles for him, if he set his mind to
something.
Judging by the fact that not only in Australia and the islands of the
Pacific Ocean, but even in America, separated from the Old World by
the Bering Strait, Europeans found neither whales nor large-sized animals,
one might think that the ships on which primitive people crossed the
oceans were not very large. But on the other hand, they were not small in
size, because domestic pigs were found everywhere on the islands of the
Pacific Ocean, and dogs on the Australian mainland, which could not
get there otherwise, with the help of the natives. One might think that
they set off in kayaks similar to those used by the Polynesians.c Ocean, and dogs on the Australian mainland, which could not
get there otherwise, with the help of the natives. One might think that
they set off in kayaks similar to those used by the Polynesians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Australian mainland, which could not
get there otherwise, with the help of the natives. One might think that
they set off in kayaks similar to those used by the Polynesians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. THE APPEARANCE OF
THE SHORT-HEADED
RACE IN EUROPE
The arrival of the short-headed race in Europe. The similarity
between stone tools from all parts of the world. The short-headed race
— pithecanthropus. Its mixture with the long-headed race. The
beginning of the race. Excursions of the red diluvial man to Asia and
Africa.
Was the same thing happening in the rest of the world at that time,
when a new diluvial human race was forming in Europe?
We have already mentioned earlier that Asia did not have such
favourable natural conditions during the transitional period as Europe did.
Therefore, there were no obstacles to the migration of the local
pithecanthropus during the glacial period to the southern latitudes, even to
the savannah. Consequently, it did not experience the severe hardship of its
European counterpart and therefore did not undergo natural selection, nor
did it even need to change its diet from plant to animal. The transitional
period passed without incident: it did not develop any tools, nor did it
acquire a straight spine, nor the mind of a European, nor a complex
digestive system, remaining the same as it was before. The same applies to the
American pithecanthrope. As for North America, we have already said
that the pithecanthropus could not even penetrate there due to the
existence of the Bering Strait. And even if they did get there, nothing
would prevent them from crossing the Isthmus of Panama into South
America.
Well, theoretically speaking, there is no hope of finding anything
similar to the archaeological finds made in Europe in other parts of the
world. Obviously, the European paeontological bridge is unique and one of
a kind. In conclusion, we can repeat Dr. Visser's words above, but
outside Europe, the only known examples of such bridges are found in Brazil,
and even those are of recent origin. In the same vein, Ranman says: "If
we do not count certain, in every respect, remarkable remains
discovered in Asia Minor and India, as well as certain discoveries in
America, which have not yet been explained by science, then it is clear that
they did not originate outside Europeable remains
discovered in Asia Minor and India, as well as certain discoveries in
America, which have not yet been explained by science, then it is clear that
they did not originate outside Europe

--- PAGE BREAK ---ered in Asia Minor and India, as well as certain discoveries in
America, which have not yet been explained by science, then it is clear that
they did not originate outside Europe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

domesticated.
These beliefs are currently widespread everywhere in the form of magical
tools found by European travellers in use among the Tsemeni, and also in
the form of beliefs preserved from ancient times, in which magical tools
are used. In some places, they are given a religious meaning, in others
they are associated with various superstitions. Some believe that "magical
tools fell from the sky," others that "they were used by former gods and
powerful people," and so on. Archaeologists, comparing European stone
tools with those from other parts of the world, found that the latter "are
similar in shape and material to European ones" and that their "main forms
are generally the same everywhere," and, for example, "the stone axes
found in the most remote corners of the world are identical to each other."
Von Kotta notes: "The stone types used in the manufacture of various
tools and utensils, and the forms given to them, are found in very different
localities and in very different ways, with few insignificant local
variations, a similarity that could have been created by nature."
According to Gegevagda, "all peoples (except Europeans) have a
seemingly inevitable stage at the basis of their highest moral
development."
These data indicate that 1) all the world's stone tools may have a
single origin, and 2) everywhere, except in Europe, they are found in a
developed form. Of course, nothing prevents us from assuming that the
paeontological, i.e. unrefined stone tools and the associated stage of
development, originated in Europe, and then, in a non-innovative way,
spread his invention throughout the world.
We have seen before that Mortier, discussing the emergence of the
non-traditional military in Europe, which supplanted its predecessor, and
became the most popular. Apparently, it was the simultaneous
coincidence of three factors that led to this: 1) during the Middle Ages,
the ancient European race began to disappear, 2) at the same time, a new
race appeared, previously unseen in Europe, a motorised race, and 3) at
the same time, a new mythology appeared, unrecognisable, but very
similar to the ancient one. These three strange coincidences give other
archaeologists reason to agree with Mortier's opinion. But all of the above
leads to the conclusion thatcognisable, but very
similar to the ancient one. These three strange coincidences give other
archaeologists reason to agree with Mortier's opinion. But all of the above
leads to the conclusion that

--- PAGE BREAK ---similar to the ancient one. These three strange coincidences give other
archaeologists reason to agree with Mortier's opinion. But all of the above
leads to the conclusion that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is possible to develop this under the conditions of the current period and
in Europe. And in that case, it is impossible to find any other similar
species on the entire globe, except for the African and Asian pygmy
apes.exist, but only the Aryans and Asians. Therefore, the motorised vehicles
that appeared in Europe in the Neolithic period were none other than
pithamantropes.
The situation is clear and obvious: we cannot conquer the enemy,
nor can we drive it out, nor can we do anything about it at the present
time. But under such conditions, it would be incredible if peaceful
herbivorous animals could move to Europe on their own, a country that is
relatively warm, covered with trees, and populated by white-skinned
people, skilled hunters and specialists who do not spare any animal prey. What
made them move into the jaws of such a terrible beast across the entire globe?
It is quite simple to accept the following assumptions, which were not
known to Mortier and were not taken into account by him: 1) The Dinozoic
race did not originate in Europe, but lived in a non-existent climate and
gradually changed, replacing the motorised race and even in some areas. 2)
In France, Belgium and Italy, the houses built were initially low-rise, then
medium-rise, and finally motorised. 3) The low-rise type was tall with a
straight roof, in contrast to the motorised type. — short with a less
voluminous head and a protruding structure. Consequently, the
dinosaurs of that time were taller than the motor-type creatures, and
modern Europeans are taller than apes.
It is clear, first of all, that the motor race is much lower than the
European race in intellectual terms and, consequently, cannot be
conquered in any way, and secondly, the Dzhinns did not leave Europe, but
gradually mixed with the newcomers, forming the modern European
middle race.
Hence, the situation can be described as follows:
When the people of the early period began to retreat northward, the
space suitable for life expanded, and at the same time, land communication
between the European continent and Asia was established. Europeans,
who were hunters, spread throughout Europe, and their power could
reachr life expanded, and at the same time, land communication
between the European continent and Asia was established. Europeans,
who were hunters, spread throughout Europe, and their power could
reach

--- PAGE BREAK ---at the same time, land communication
between the European continent and Asia was established. Europeans,
who were hunters, spread throughout Europe, and their power could
reach

--- PAGE BREAK ---

even to Asia. At that time, our ancestors were already far-sighted, so it
was not difficult for them to understand that, living only by hunting,
they would inevitably exhaust their resources and then be forced to migrate.
This led them to domesticate animals in order to have a constant supply of
meat. And since it is necessary to have a supply of plant food in the
summer, it is necessary to gather a supply of wild plants, which are
essential to the steppe and which were then found in Europe.
Subsequently, this led people to think about motivating themselves and living
in this way.
If we look at the situation in Asia, we see that there are animals there that
are similar to the Asian pygmy apes, which our ancestors tried to tame.
However, considering the conditions of those areas of Europe,
where motorcycles are most common in rural areas, and then, taking into account
that such finds are very rare, pay attention to the insane wealth with
which the funerals of the deceased are carried out. He came to the
conclusion that the funerals were arranged by the moropoms and
nauagniams and carried out by the motorised slaves, who could be brought
here by means of trade. "In this way," he says, "the dinosaurs realised the
idea of Kamenas Ruay, who wanted to tame the apes. They have the
seed, but we lack the motor, we are in the state of an animal." That is,
the primitive dɤинно7оɤовая race gradually disappeared in Europe and
was replaced by the medieval posɤе то7о, it is clear that the
domestication of pithecanthropus was accompanied by interbreeding
with them and the decline of the primitive hominids, and consequently, we,
modern people, are the result of this mixture. The mixing that began in
Europe may later continue in Asia and the Alps by European missionaries,
and hence the obvious conclusion that the origin of the human species is not to
be found in Europe, but in Asia, where the ancestors of modern humans lived.
The probability of an event occurring is estimated by a number of
factors that will be considered in the following 7 points. Now let's look at the
most striking of these predictions, the ones that stand out the most in the 7th
century:
1). The upper and lower classes of modern society, even today, are
divided into two distinct types in terms of appearance, character, and
intelligence: one is predatory, the other ise 7th
century:
1). The upper and lower classes of modern society, even today, are
divided into two distinct types in terms of appearance, character, and
intelligence: one is predatory, the other is

--- PAGE BREAK ---The upper and lower classes of modern society, even today, are
divided into two distinct types in terms of appearance, character, and
intelligence: one is predatory, the other is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

plant-eating.
2). The origin of pithecanthropus is unclear, but theoretical
considerations suggest that they existed, as evidenced by the remains of
pithecanthropus found in Europe and Asia.
3). The legends of many peoples about their origin from a mixture
of humans with apes and other animals (see below).
4). The testimony of Holy Scripture about the fall of the first
humans, the guilty party is presented as a woman.
And, of course,
5) Consideration of the existing social structure based on inequality,
which can be explained by our theory.
Of course, the question of under what conditions the mixing of the
divine and the human took place is very difficult to answer. Perhaps the
reason for the confusion was insufficient knowledge, or perhaps
something else. But in any case, there is nothing extraordinary here; on
the contrary, it is a natural phenomenon, common to all animal species.
As we mentioned above, certain species of animals arrived in Europe
before the Ice Age and underwent changes there under the influence of
the struggle for existence. But could any of them have migrated there
before the last ice age? Of course not, and even in the form of a rare
occurrence, because no one has ever gone to Europe. Consequently,
during the period of natural selection, each species split into two parts: one
part came to Europe and underwent natural selection there, while the
other remained in Asia and remained unchanged. But did both populations of
the same species have the same desire and ability to reproduce with each
other, so that they could meet again at the end of the period? I don't
think so, because the selection of genes in rare cases can change the
genetic system of animals.
Of course, in the context of motorised improvements of every kind,
there are already signs of future imperfections. He must either come to
terms with his imperfect nature early on and, in doing so, lose some of his
hard-earned gains, or shake up the organisation of his descendants
through a process of mixing. Later we will see that these phenomena
have been preserved in most speciesdoing so, lose some of his
hard-earned gains, or shake up the organisation of his descendants
through a process of mixing. Later we will see that these phenomena
have been preserved in most species

--- PAGE BREAK ---

animal kingdom.
Does this circumstance testify to disorder in nature and the absence of a
self-regulating process in the world?
No. It is only one inevitable step on the path along which nature
inexorably and tirelessly leads all living things towards perfection.
On the very pitamantrop, who were wives of bezo7o ueɤoвеmа, and on
their children, it is impossible to look at one breed of their domestic
animals, which, depending on necessity, could be eaten, used for some
kind of work, or exchanged with neighbours. This is where the basis for
slavery lies, which now oppresses us. In itself, it has nothing oppressive about
it, but in the long run, the distinction between slaves and masters became
blurred and diminished. It is impossible to help the race, and the former
slaves, mixed with the noble race, gradually became equal to their
masters. In the course of time, a modern society developed, replacing the
ancient types. This is the reason for the change in society for the worse.
That is why the value of modern society is lower than the value of
primitive, unspoiled society.
Of course, the middle race, which appeared as a result of mixing,
was average in both physical and mental terms between the two primary
races. "There," says Gegevag, "where the higher race mixes with the
lower, it does indeed take on the characteristics of the lower, occupies
the middle ground between the two, but if the lower race prevails and
becomes dominant, the higher race loses ground and its level of
development declines. Nature is the most aristocratic aristocracy, and
any transgression against it is severely punished by it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ant, the higher race loses ground and its level of
development declines. Nature is the most aristocratic aristocracy, and
any transgression against it is severely punished by it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Apparently, apart from land expeditions, motorised Asian
pitemanthropuses, who were brought to Europe, were also involved in
maritime expeditions to Alrim. In the regions of France belonging to the
late (Maden) period of the Neolithic era, a number of stone tools and bone
tools were found, depicting a woman with a pronounced development of
the pelvis throughout the body, with drooping breasts, a voluminous
protruding belly and what is known as "steatopygia" (excessive fat
accumulation in the buttocks).
The Nertys are very reminiscent of the Bushmen, Otentots, Malaus
and Marimo peoples of inner Australia.
According to travellers, all the Alimans of the Marim peoples are straight,
though slightly stooped, with large, protruding bellies. The thin and
protruding ribs are mainly found among the Bushmen, the Sotototo and
the Malo. This is referred to as "steatopygia", which is apparently a
characteristic feature of the Arimans, distinguishing them from the rest of
humanity. I t is most pronounced among the women

--- PAGE BREAK ---s referred to as "steatopygia", which is apparently a
characteristic feature of the Arimans, distinguishing them from the rest of
humanity. I t is most pronounced among the women

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7otentots, Bushmen, Nama, Malawis, Boros, Tusemuevs of Somalia, etc. In
addition, steatopygia is observed among the peoples of North Africa and
Southern Europe. It is currently found among the Berbers, existed in Egypt
in ancient times, and in Southern Europe during the Roman era, as can
be seen from drawings found in Pompeii, depicting women with flat
chests.
It is impossible to determine with certainty whether it was precisely
these people who were expelled from Europe, but it seems that the
majority of them remained in their homeland for a long time, probably
until it became crowded. In the modern world, the entire population is mixed
with other races, which makes it difficult to determine their origin, they are
closer to Europe, as we will see from anthropological data.
The crossing most likely took place in the early Middle Ages, as
travellers found medieval tools everywhere, and in some places they
have been preserved to this day. "The use of metal," says Lord Cotta, "is
evident from the time when some peoples separated from others. If the metals
had been known to the first inhabitants of the earth, they would have been
passed down to all their descendants."

--- PAGE BREAK ---the time when some peoples separated from others. If the metals
had been known to the first inhabitants of the earth, they would have been
passed down to all their descendants."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. NON-HUMANITY —
HYBRIDS
Humanity — a species of hybrids. Polygyny and monogamy. The
impossibility of classifying humanity. The futility of attempts to classify
humanity into races. The difference between the species characteristics
of animals and humans. The need to accept that humanity is a hybrid
species.
We have come to the conclusion that humanity is composed of a mixture of
two species. But let us see if we are not contradicting the data about
humanity that science has already developed.
The question of whether it belongs to one or many types is one of the
most difficult for science and has not been definitively resolved to date. In
this regard, opinions are divided into two camps. The French school,
represented by Brom in the 19th century, holds a genetic view of the origin
of species, i.e., it recognises the main and secondary types of species.
Non-monogenetic and anglicist schools of thought are monogeneticists,
recognising the unity of origin and the relationship of all races to a
single species that originated from a single centre. while related species
are similar varieties.
There is one thing that unites them: the fact that the state is not separate
from the rest of the animal kingdom. And since neither of the disputing
parties can conclusively refute the other, it follows that each has
sufficient evidence on its side.
The very existence of the two sides means that society is divided into
two groups that are completely opposed to each other, so they can be
considered separate species.
However, despite the obvious and significant racial differences
within the species, it is not possible to divide it into species, as this may
lead to confusion from the outset. There are very serious obstacles to
this:
1). Changes in types within one people and race are the same as in
the whole universe. "There is a huge difference in relationships and
proportions between individuals of the same race.es to
this:
1). Changes in types within one people and race are the same as in
the whole universe. "There is a huge difference in relationships and
proportions between individuals of the same race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nges in types within one people and race are the same as in
the whole universe. "There is a huge difference in relationships and
proportions between individuals of the same race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The differences between them are in their appearance, in their
behaviour, in their devices and tools, in the direction of their main
arteries, in their mental abilities, etc. The findings presented represent a
greater diversity than that of other peoples. However, the uniformity of
different peoples is often exaggerated. For example, American tribes are
very similar in terms of their way of life and character, there is also a
great diversity in the appearance and character of the American tribes.
The same can be said about all other characteristics. Regarding the
Indians, one South American, Mr. Bates, says: "There are no two among
them that are completely similar in form: one has an oval shape and regular
features, while the other is completely monochromatic in terms of the
width of the protruding features, the shape of the nose and the position of the
eyes."
"We do not know any country in Europe," writes Ranme, "where,
among the educated classes, there is not one typical form of education. The
same is true of other parts of the world. There, the languages of the
Alpine and Alpine peoples, which were previously considered to be
typical, have broken down into many different forms. In Australia and
among the Alami people, we find, along with the dingo, medium-sized and
motorised dogs, along with motorised and wide dogs, dingoes and usnis.
The forms of uerepa found in Europe are found in their main habitats
throughout the continent. Nowhere on the continent does the unmixed
population of uerepa occupy large areas. Only in a few areas does the
main form of the tree prevail.
2). All racial features are strangely mixed together. Identical forms
are found among the most distant peoples, between whom even the most
vivid imagination cannot find any connection, whatever it may be. On the
other hand, we find clearly distinct features among peoples between
whom we cannot deny an internal connection. There is no single trait
that is characteristic of only one mother-nation.
3). All racial characteristics are found in us in endless transitions
and variations. They are all connected by intermediate links, developed
in such a way that the closest relationship appears to us to be the most natural
form of development, among the motorised units, the single form is preserved
thanks to the carefully planned transitions.
Everywhere, one can observe gradual transitions from dinnogov to
motorogov and from motorogov to shiromogov,otorised units, the single form is preserved
thanks to the carefully planned transitions.
Everywhere, one can observe gradual transitions from dinnogov to
motorogov and from motorogov to shiromogov,

--- PAGE BREAK ---single form is preserved
thanks to the carefully planned transitions.
Everywhere, one can observe gradual transitions from dinnogov to
motorogov and from motorogov to shiromogov,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are curved, straight, and straight-forward types. Everywhere,
there is a mixture of curved and straight types in the form of typical and
intermediate types.
4). Alongside the great diversity of regional characteristics, there
are many similarities at the international level. "During my stay at the
Bih camp with the Ozhennaya Yemnya people," we read in Larpin, — I
was constantly struck by the many similarities in character that revealed
a close kinship between the minds of the people there and ours; The same
thing happened with the mysterious stranger, whom I once had the
opportunity to meet. Even the most dissimilar and unusual races are similar
to each other in appearance, which one might expect at first glance, but
some of them, with the exception of a few, have very similar names. A
good example of this can be seen in the realistic portraits in the
anthropological section of the museum, taken from representatives of
various races, most of which could be accepted as portraits of
Europeans.
All the obstacles mentioned above make it impossible to classify the
group into types. This is confirmed by the remarkable diversity of
opinions, which makes it impossible to attempt to define the
characteristics of the groups. It is worth quoting a surprising example
here:
Non-existent races: one (Vert, Nund), two (Virey, Meygan,
Meyners), three (Cuvier, Mamino, Topinar, Bradgey, Gobino, Byshin7,
Zag, Kaus, Smith, Natam, Brom, Katrazh, Nidemper), four (Ninney,
Kant, Zimmerman, Neibni, Gemsini, Carus, Retius, Keen, Bernier, Molua
C. Iger), five (Bygumenbach, d'Omagius — d'Agua, Omen, Godulus,
Vegmer), six (Bülthon, Lumery, Nesson), seven (Genter, Priuard, Foyer,
Neshe), eight (Assi, Mori), eleven (Pimerin7), twelve (F. Miguer, Gemme,
Gerɤya), thirteen (Ƚenimep), fifteen (Bori de S. Vensen), sixteen
(Yumugen, Mite-Brun), eighteen (Koguman), twenty-two
 (Morton), sixty
(Kraupord), sixty-three (Berm), one hundred and fifty (Giddon). Namone,
American shoma allows for a hundred types of ueoveu, so it is possible to
establish folk types.
"Three types," says Prof. Petri, "from one race and species to 150
and even to an indefinite number, producean shoma allows for a hundred types of ueoveu, so it is possible to
establish folk types.
"Three types," says Prof. Petri, "from one race and species to 150
and even to an indefinite number, produce

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They are a sad sight; they are a sad testament to the fact that science in
this area does not have a firm footing.
And so, natural obstacles prevent the establishment of a certain type
of unity, make it impossible for monists to recognise the "unity of the
species," i.e., the belonging of all species to one species.
This theory is based on the following assumptions, which are also
characteristic of all species:
1) similarity between all human races when they are compared; 2)
similarity in the structure of the body of all people and in their spiritual
activity; 3) a continuous series of intermediate stages between all
varieties of uеɤовеmа;
4) the impossibility of determining the species to which a species belongs by
its external appearance.
But here we encounter new obstacles: "Mivotny, belonging to one
species despite their individual differences, can be grouped into a known
type with clearly established characteristics. Among them, we always find
those that do not fit the type of their species. There is no exception. They are
so diverse and complex that it is impossible to establish a single species
type. The essential difference between humans and animals lies in the fact
that the variability of the human organism is much greater than that of
animals. "The difference between humans and animals is enormous," said
Ahehis, "is the same as that between a brown bear with a brown coat and a
white bear with a light coat and a thick fur." In psychological terms, as we
shall see below, the difference between the extreme limits of
ueɤoвеuества is the same, between the hungry wolves and their
herbivorous victims, between the wolf and the sheep and the ram.

--- PAGE BREAK ---below, the difference between the extreme limits of
ueɤoвеuества is the same, between the hungry wolves and their
herbivorous victims, between the wolf and the sheep and the ram.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Everything that has been said shows that our theory has a right to
exist, but the question of the massification of society has not yet been resolved.
The theories of the pluralists and the monists cannot coexist, because they
contradict each other, and because there can only be one truth. Each of
these theories, taken separately, also has no right to exist, because it
contains only a part of the truth and each has gaps that cannot be explained
by it. In order to find the truth, there is no other way but to take from
each theory only that which is irrefutable, and discard the rest. But if we
do so, it turns out that "the universe consists of one species, but a
special species, which does not exist in the rest of the animal world. Its
peculiarity lies in the fact that it breaks down into many groups, which,
despite their similarity, differ in characteristics that are considered
species-specific in the rest of the animal kingdom." But what kind of
species is it?
Obviously, it is hybrid, because it is the only one that meets all the
necessary conditions. It is unique because

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are no types of pitemantrop in the mixture, but their descendants are
all connected to each other by the fact that they all have the same origin. It
consists of many groups and species, into which all possible types of
pithecanthropus are divided.
all kinds of
combinations
uистоmровных
types,
which are either similar to each other or completely different. The
most recent groups of the species differ from each other, because in some,
the beasts prevail, while in others, the pitemantropans prevail. Of course,
these anthropological data do not contradict our position, but directly
confirm that uegovstvo is a hybrid species.
hybrid species.s prevail, while in others, the pitemantropans prevail. Of course,
these anthropological data do not contradict our position, but directly
confirm that uegovstvo is a hybrid species.
hybrid species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---others, the pitemantropans prevail. Of course,
these anthropological data do not contradict our position, but directly
confirm that uegovstvo is a hybrid species.
hybrid species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5. VOEMOMNA NIPONOVITAP
POMESB MEMV BENYM
IS IT POSSIBLE TO CROSSbreed A
HUMAN AND A PITEKANTHROPUS?
Is a fertile hybrid between a human and a pithecanthropus possible
from the point of view of the laws of hybridisation? What do we know
about the laws of hybridisation? Our theory encounters a certain
obstacle.
Above, we have cited one example of how monotheists attempt to
establish the belonging of all humanity to one species: they refer to the
supposed similarity between all human races. But even if it were possible to
produce offspring of the same species from pairs of the same species, then, in our
opinion, the mixing of a white human with a pithecanthrope would be
seriously questioned. It folows that if a white ueov belongs to the same species as a
pithecanthropus, and if it cannot interbreed with it, this is one of the most
unreliable criteria for judging the belonging of living beings to one species.
to judge the belonging of living beings to one species. "In our domestic
animals," says Darwin, "the different breeds are completely
indistinguishable when compared with each other, and yet they are
descended from two different species... We must abandon the belief in
the universal immutability of species when they interbreed, and regard
immutability in animals not as something unchangeable, but as something
which can be eliminated by domestication"... "To avoid this confusion,
that some species are not identical in reproduction, we can do so by
calling all forms that are not identical to each other varieties (rather than
species).
But this phenomenon will become clearer to us if we familiarise
ourselves with the work of the renowned anthropologist Brom, who
studied competition and hybridism in animals.
"Animals," says the author, "usually mate with their own kind, within
their own species, but sometimes, under pressurerenowned anthropologist Brom, who
studied competition and hybridism in animals.
"Animals," says the author, "usually mate with their own kind, within
their own species, but sometimes, under pressure

--- PAGE BREAK ---They mate with animals of other species, especially those that are similar
to them.

In this respect, they are less selective in their choice than
humans.

The extent to which such relationships are possible is unknown,
but observations suggest that mating sometimes occurs between very
distant species.The author cites a number of examples, which, according
to him, are reliable, observed by well-known naturalists, of mating
between such distant species as the dog and the pig, the dog and the fox, the horse
and the donkey, the cow and the rooster, the cow and the goat, the cow and the
sheep, the cow and the goat, the cow and the donkey, the cow and the horse, the
cow and the pig, the cow and the fox, the cow and the dog, the cow and the
sheep, the cow and the goat, the cow and the donkey, the cow and the horse, the cow and the
pig, the cow and the fox, the cow and the dog, the cow and the sheep, the cow and the goat, the cow and the donkey, the cow
and the horse, the cow and the pig, the cow and the fox, the cow and the dog, the cow and
the sheep, the cow and the goat, the cow and the don dogs and pigs, dogs and
sheep, cows and goats, geese and roosters, cows and horses, poplars and
manareas, etc.

Even the creator himself, God, does not approve of such
unnatural relations, as evidenced by the punishment imposed on them in
the Bible.

The connections between the most distant species remain, of
course, in most cases insignificant, but the difference between species is
not always an obstacle to the fertility of offspring.

There, moths and
butterflies are clearly distinguished from each other in the system of
kinship, as are bees and wasps, and meanwhile, a comparison of the
fertility of the former with the infertility of the latter can be made, but the
degree of similarity between species cannot be used as a measure of the
fertility of hybrids.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The connections between the most distant species remain, of
course, in most cases insignificant, but the difference between species is
not always an obstacle to the fertility of offspring. There, moths and
butterflies are clearly distinguished from each other in the system of
kinship, as are bees and wasps, and meanwhile, a comparison of the
fertility of the former with the infertility of the latter can be made, but the
degree of similarity between species cannot be used as a measure of the
fertility of hybrids. Therefore, in order to predict whether the offspring of
two known species will be fertile or not, we have no scientific data and
can only guess based on direct experience, since the exact nature of the
relationship is unknown. The only thing that can be said about the
possibility of hybridisation is that hybridism rarely crosses the
boundaries between "species". Pribytsy and Warvin share the same opinion: "Species," he wrote,
"belonging to separate genera rarely interbreed, and those belonging to
separate families never interbreed with each other." In fact, the similarity
is not so great, because many closely related species do not interbreed
with each other and interbreed with great difficulty, while other species,
which are quite different from each other, are very similar. The
difficulty does not depend at all on natural selection in the environment,
but, apparently, on the "environmental conditions" of the species being
compared. Thus, our assertion that modern humans descended from a mixture
of Neanderthals and Pithecanthropus does not encounter any obstacles
from the previous view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

previous, it is not yet known.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n humans descended from a mixture
of Neanderthals and Pithecanthropus does not encounter any obstacles
from the previous view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

previous, it is not yet known.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6. TRACES OF THE ELDER
RACE ARE FOUND
ALL OVER THE
WORLD
Traces of the 6th race can be found all over the world. Blume's
classification of humans into 5 races. The Malayan and Medo-
Caucasian races are rejected as fictitious. There are distinctive features
of the three remaining races. Traces of all three races can be found in
Europe. Africa. The existence of the Negroid type is subject to doubt.
Asia. White traces can be found in all corners of Asia. America and its
white tribes. Polynesia, Micronesia, Melanesia and the Australian
continent from the same point of view.
In reality, there are no sharp distinctions between the different races,
but rather gradual transitions, as between our blondes and brunettes, and
between tall and medium-height people. Therefore, it is not surprising
that in Europe, which we are accustomed to thinking of as inhabited
exclusively by "white" people, its population is mixed with traces of the
yellow and brown races, while in all other parts of the world, traces of
the white race are visible everywhere.
To verify this, let us examine the writings of well-known
theologians, anthropologists, and travellers.
In ancient writings, the human race was divided (according to Büchner) into
five main races: 1) the white and noble race, 2) Meat and monastic, 3) Nectar and
sɭиопcmую, 4) Copper-mrasnaya and Amerimanskaya, and 5) Korinaya and
Magayskaya.
But that view is outdated in our time and has been abandoned as
inconsistent with reality.
First of all, the independence of the Morinova race was rejected as
transitional, resulting from the mixing of white, yellow and brown races in
certain proportions. The same fate befell the copper-skinned, American race,
which, being immutable and unchanging, anthropological types are
considered independent on the same basis, and the majority, and the
minority continues to defend it. "The name mraznomozhie, says Topinar,
was given to the Americans not so much because of their abilities, but
because of the widespread custom among them of   mrasit   sebe
voosy   and   mozu   v   mrasny   vet".   Вie, says Topinar,
was given to the Americans not so much because of their abilities, but
because of the widespread custom among them of   mrasit   sebe
voosy   and   mozu   v   mrasny   vet".   В

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In reality, they represent a variety of shades, from light brown in the
central Andes to dark brown in Peru and black in ancient Magallanes. In
addition, copper-red and morine colours, which were previously
considered to be characteristic of the Americas, are widespread in the
Pacific, where light, yellow and brown tones are also found. In Alrim,
yellow and brown colours are also very common, especially in the south, in
the centre and near the sources of the Niga. Fugby — brownish-red,
bishari — often the colour of brownish wood. In addition, it is known that
the ancient Egyptians painted their monuments with brown. Therefore,
the old massimina, attributing the maspny vet to the Indians, must be
considered unsatisfactory.
Of course, no one doubts the existence of these types of motors, but
there are still three types: electric, petrol and diesel. This conclusion
was reached by most scientists, starting with Cuvier, and is now supported by
the latest systematic studies.
Although anthropological characteristics are mixed in all races, some of
them are still considered predominant and typical for each race. I have
collected the main characteristics here in a table in order to clarify the
current situation, which is uncertain at this stage.
Beginning
Megata
Nerny
Height:
Large
Small
Small
Eyes:
White
Brownish-red
New:
Thin
Korouetugovina
tugovina
Nerep:
Ƚɤинно7оɤовые
орто7наты
Short
orthodontics
Orthodontic
appliances
Voɤos:
Bald, grey, thin,
shaggy
Smooth, short, smooth,
straight, stiff woolly,
muruavy
Gas:
Large,
Obliq
ue
Large,
open. Straight.
Open.
7-pointed star.
Vsmaya 7-
pointed star.
Straight 7-day
period.
Light 7:
Goguyboy
Brown
Nerny
Eyebrows:
-
High
-
arched
Nose:
Orɤinny andɤini
Posmij,
Posmij,

--- PAGE BREAK ---open. Straight.
Open.
7-pointed star.
Vsmaya 7-
pointed star.
Straight 7-day
period.
Light 7:
Goguyboy
Brown
Nerny
Eyebrows:
-
High
-
arched
Nose:
Orɤinny andɤini
Posmij,
Posmij,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roman, straight
wide,
wide,
raised
slanted
top
Smy:
Do not protrude
Protruding
Protruding
Mouth:
Small
Large
Big
Lips:
Thin, small
-
Thick,
fleshy, blue
puffy, thin
turned out
Chin:
Not protruding,
Protruding
forward,
Receding
sharp
mru7ɤy
Nerty ɤiɯa:
Correct,
-
Ever-changing
mrasivye,
integrated
Neck:
Ƚɤin
-
Short
Europe.
Although we are accustomed to thinking of the population of Europe as
a single race, it is not uniform. According to Jenner, it is divided into six
races, and there is no correlation between their appearance and their
languages. Of these, the most similar to the Caucasian race is the so-
called "northern" race. They are distinguished by their light complexion, tall
stature, and thin build. It is found on the Scandinavian Peninsula, in
Latvia, in Estonia, in Finland, in Northern Germany,   in   in the Baltic
States   in the regions   of Russia   and in Finland.
A mixture of the white race with the yellow race is called the
"eastern" race, with straight light-yellow and brown hair, a square jaw,
an upturned nose, and light-grey eyes. This breed is found in Prussia,
Silesia, Samsonia, Nitva, Poland and Russia.
A mixture of the white race with the brown race is called "Iberian" and
"Mediterranean," it is dark-skinned, with dark hair, a dark complexion,
and a straight, upturned nose.
The three remaining breeds, living in Southern and Central Europe,
judging by their description, represent a mixture of all three breeds,
white, black and grey in varying proportions. They are medium-sized

--- PAGE BREAK ---living in Southern and Central Europe,
judging by their description, represent a mixture of all three breeds,
white, black and grey in varying proportions. They are medium-sized

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of medium height, tall and medium height, with hair that is either
straight or wavy, sometimes straight, sometimes wavy, with light and
dark brown and wavy hair.
But it must be noted that the European population is extremely
difficult to classify according to anthropological criteria, and there is no reason to
err in this regard, because "European races are significantly mixed."
"Every existing group," says Ramé, "is the product of the mixing and
blending of many races. There is no nation in Europe that consists today
of a single race."
Alrima.
In literature, Alrima is often called a "true mother" because of her life,
but this name, as well as the opinion that Alrima is predominantly
populated by non-Jews, does not correspond to reality at all.
"Not so long ago," says Virchow, "the entire 'human race' was
considered in Europe to be a single anthropological unit; the human race and its
members were regarded as belonging to a single species. However, they are
learning to distinguish between them and to determine the relationship
between individual races."
In his work on the peoples of Alrima, Hartmann expresses the
opinion that the concept of racial homogeneity is impossible. "Among
the peoples," he writes, "there are such fundamental differences that we
must completely abandon the common opinion about the non-European
type, which is defined by hooked noses, thick lips, and dark skin. Let
such images be drawn on posters — anthropology does not recognise such
types." Touno and Passavant also caution against the use of the term
"well-known type," because it has no scientific meaning:
"This type is not clearly defined, falling somewhere between extreme
thinness and extreme brachydactyly. next to a wide and flat nose, we see
a small and pointed one, the colour of the eyes ranges from light brown to
dark brown, and there are often reddish and brownish tones, and, in
addition, we encounter two types of wood — so we need to refrain from
attempting to establish a single type.
"It is well known," says White, "that the entire northern part of Algeria,tones, and, in
addition, we encounter two types of wood — so we need to refrain from
attempting to establish a single type.
"It is well known," says White, "that the entire northern part of Algeria,

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion, we encounter two types of wood — so we need to refrain from
attempting to establish a single type.
"It is well known," says White, "that the entire northern part of Algeria,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

including Egypt, cannot be considered non-Christian. The Mite, Berbers
and Moors, as well as the later arrivals, the Arabs, are also non-
Christians." The most characteristic type of uerga, the beygur, is found in
Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Sahara and the Canary Islands. However,
they are also known in southern Algeria. White mentions two centres of
their settlement in Manisse and Bido. The origin of these two peoples is
still unclear. Some believe them to be descendants of Arabs, others
believe them to be descendants of Portuguese settlers from the 16th
century, but neither theory has been proven.
If we move south from the Sahara and Egypt to the interior of
Algeria, then before we reach the country of the real desert, we must pass
through a very wide belt of peoples who, according to all researchers,
are transitional between the black and white races. These include: the
Abyssinians, the Beja, the Nubians, the Zagha, the Massai, the Wam, the
Boni, and the peoples of Bornu. These peoples inhabit the entire
southern region from the Ramah tropics to the savannah. In Sudan, there is a
wide belt of coexistence between two major ethnic groups: the Hamito-
Semitic ( Beja) and the Neirodi. "If we," says F. Ratha, "agree with White
that the Zagasi, Nubians, the Ottentots, the Malary, the peoples of
Koncho and the Madagascans (on the island of Madagascar) are not true
Negroes, if we also agree with Schweinurt on their customs and
traditions, then we must admit that Alrima is inhabited by other peoples,
not real Negroes. In the same way, within the motherland, from the
southern part of the Omonia region and even further south, we find the
light-skinned Alrimans and the so-called Bantu. With such a critical attitude
towards them, the border remains no more than 10–12 degrees of latitude
south of the mouth of the Senega River in Timbuktu and from there to the
country of Sennaar. The Natro people are a mixed race, intermingled
with many representatives of other races. According to Natam, the
present country of the Natro people stretches from Senegawa to Nisera.
The other African peoples are said to be
"They are so mixed together that it is impossible to select the true ones.
It would be a waste of effort." Regarding the internal Alrim, Schweinurt
reports that "the mixing of the peoples there is unprecedented" and that
"it is impossible to find any traces of them, as the constituent parts of
the motoro7o are characterised by extreme mobility."
This applies to the western peoples, between Senegawa and Nijer,
who are considered "real", and we find their typicality in   in
stnoplaiecmoy   literature   otzyvy   veryed by extreme mobility."
This applies to the western peoples, between Senegawa and Nijer,
who are considered "real", and we find their typicality in   in
stnoplaiecmoy   literature   otzyvy   very

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty."
This applies to the western peoples, between Senegawa and Nijer,
who are considered "real", and we find their typicality in   in
stnoplaiecmoy   literature   otzyvy   very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unpleasant.   "   ѕападно7о   бере7а, —   7оворит Ф. Ратɯеɤь,
— 7ораѕдо доɤьше, uем не7рам востоmа, «mаɭрам», в обширном
смысɤе, приписываɤи настояɲие не7рсmие приѕнаmи. Previously,
there was a desire to give Alrimini to mamuy-gibo, i.e. monkey-like
creatures... But even the western alrimani have long since ceased to be
suitable for those marimaturi, as they were imagined in the days of
primitive images. Bastian realised 40 years ago that it was impossible to
find a suitable non-human type, which was the result of Western-Alrian
research. Attempts to establish a specific Western-Alpine race can be
considered hopeless.
If we turn to the descriptions of   and   , compiled by travellers,   ,
we will find that the characteristics of each nation are reflected in the
properties of the products they consume. that are similar to those of
their neighbours and different from those of other peoples. One name is
said to have a "mixed type" (the people of Cordillera) and "non-native"
(the names of the Lapura, Barimi and Gaussa peoples). Others have non-
traditional colours, such as red-brown ( boncho), light brown (banyani),
dark brown and brown (luhagi), bronze (vachandi), black (nyamnyamy
and monbutto). Thirdly, there are various shades of colour, from the
lightest to the darkest (sygyusy, malry, baganda), and women are lighter
than men (tusemy above Nyagaba). Fifthly, there is a "deviation from
the non-Christian type" ( ovals, non-Christians of the Western coast)
and
"the absence of certain characteristic features of the people" (nemya
bertat). Sixth, there is the "European type of people" (malry, bagandy).
Seventh, a reliable voice, but "a pleasant tone" (managers), etc.
It is not surprising, since the very existence of the non-Christian
type is being questioned. Ramm says that people "try to find the typical
structure of a non-Christian, established by similarity, and naturally do
not find it, because such a type does not exist at all." The research of
German travellers to Alrim, who were familiar with the local anatomy,
Fritua, Hartmann, Nachtigall, Bastian, Fagmenstein and many others, could
not discover such a type and found it only in isolated cases.
Asia.lers to Alrim, who were familiar with the local anatomy,
Fritua, Hartmann, Nachtigall, Bastian, Fagmenstein and many others, could
not discover such a type and found it only in isolated cases.
Asia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere familiar with the local anatomy,
Fritua, Hartmann, Nachtigall, Bastian, Fagmenstein and many others, could
not discover such a type and found it only in isolated cases.
Asia.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is known that all of Southwest Asia, including East India, has been
the arena of activity for Aryans and Semites since ancient times, i.e. white
peoples, and therefore, when discussing Asia, there is no need to even
mention the vast Asian continent. In the rest of Asia, which we are
accustomed to consider inhabited by nomadic peoples, according to
Katrazh,
"Signs of confusion are visible everywhere." "If you want to understand,"
says the old man, "it's actually the monogamous, mаɤмыmов, яmутов,
nesmоɤьmо іѕоɤіrovаnіh тюрmсmіh пɤемен і тун7усов, то все остаɤььіе
народы жеɤтой раси представɤяются помесью с беɤыми." However,
the number of these people is rapidly declining, as F. Ratay adds that among
the Buryats, who are usually classified as Mongols, have white hair, and
the hair of their children is usually dark.
Given the detailed overview of the peoples of the "yellow race," it is
necessary to mention their very large ethnic groups, which Katrazh
directly attributes to the yellow race. Even if this opinion seems
exaggerated, there can be no doubt about the existence of these peoples.
Thus, the "Bayan race" includes the Liny (Votyaks and Ostiaks) living in
western Siberia, the Uymu (between the Anadyr and Nedovit rivers),
the Ainu, who inhabit the island of Yesso, the Nippon Peninsula,
Sakhalin, the Kuril Islands and the Niuy-Kyu Islands, and, of course,
the Magammy people of the Magammy Peninsula and the Eondskikh
Islands.
According to Kartazh, the tyurma branch of the monogamous race
"approaches the ideal through imitation." A comparison of the ancient
inhabitants of Agata, known as "Agata ore miners," led the academician Bera
to conclude that they were "identical to the miners of the past." The graves
dug by some tribes in the upper reaches of the Yenisei River are
covered with stone slabs, and the burial mounds resemble the European
type. The Turkmens of Turkestan in the vicinity of Kugji, as well as the
populations of Kashgar and Semirechye, are undoubtedly a mixture of
the white race with the yellow race. In the Mirzovs of Turkestan and among
some Tajiks of Persia, Topinar distinguishes a "beigomur type". The
Samoyeds,   living   in the   north   of Siberia,   Middendorff
distinguishes
"a mixture of ɭinnov (i.e. beɤy) with mon7oɤami".
Within the vast Chinese Empire, the presence of beɤo7o sɤемента is
also beyond doubt. Firstly, the Tibetan languages, reminiscent of the
Yugur, are described by Przewalski as a "mixture of Mongolian and Indian
languages". In western China, according tosɤемента is
also beyond doubt. Firstly, the Tibetan languages, reminiscent of the
Yugur, are described by Przewalski as a "mixture of Mongolian and Indian
languages". In western China, according to

--- PAGE BREAK ---yond doubt. Firstly, the Tibetan languages, reminiscent of the
Yugur, are described by Przewalski as a "mixture of Mongolian and Indian
languages". In western China, according to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Tibet, the Tun7us "meet sɤements, uуdzhye mon7oɤьsmoj race,"
they look like "mon7oɤov mixed with ɯы7ans." The same can be said about
the population of Kashmir, Nepal and Bhutan, as well as the Terai region.
In southern China, Topinar finds "a fair-haired type, European features
and a thick beard" among the Miao and Gao people. In Manchuria, Kagport,
Barrow and Castren also found a "fair-haired European type". Katlapzh
reports that they have "European features, light hair and thick beards,
reminiscent of the Ainu." However, even the Mitai themselves, who seem to
us to be the most typical Mongols, have certain features that distinguish
them from the Buryats. Firstly, unlike all other gods, they are
predominantly "male", Secondly, ancient mythical figures —
mandarins, including Confucius — are depicted in ancient mythical
drawings with a long beard, which is absent in modern mythical figures.
"The Chinese people," writes Yenimer, "are the result of a very complex
mixture. Based on historical documents, it can be reasonably assumed that
it consists of at least five or six different ethnic groups."
In Indo-China, Kartɭaж considers the people of Naosa to be "a
mixture of the Zheɤтых and   Hindus,"   and   in   Tонmине
ɭранɯуѕсmие   sтно7раɭы   find
the "beomurye type" among the To, Man, and Mao peoples.
Even in the most remote north-eastern part of Asia, in the so-called
Far East, there is no shortage of beomury types. In addition to the Umu,
already mentioned, Katraz cites the Moravians and Mamuadagov as "a
mixture of Umu and Zhegti," and considers the Japanese to be a "purely
mixed" race, consisting of "pure" Ainu, "pure" Magaia, Japanese and non-
Japanese. And Begu concludes that the highest Japanese masses "approach
Europeans in terms of relatively tall stature, slender build, aquiline nose,
large mouth, and so on." According to him, there are two types among
them: "Mongoloid" and "European".
America.
Anthropologists' opinions about American races are the same as those
about European races. For example, here is what Kogman writes about
them: "In America, we will not find a single people, a single tribe, or a
singlenions about American races are the same as those
about European races. For example, here is what Kogman writes about
them: "In America, we will not find a single people, a single tribe, or a
single

--- PAGE BREAK ---races are the same as those
about European races. For example, here is what Kogman writes about
them: "In America, we will not find a single people, a single tribe, or a
single

--- PAGE BREAK ---

one horde, consisting of descendants of the same race. And there, in
every social stratum, we find anthropological diversity. And there we
also see a mixture of tribes, clans and peoples, but not races. The types
are similar and the differences are satirised there, but a superficial
observer sees a homogeneous race before him. But this is a
misconception, as maniacs and anthropophagi will remind him at every
turn, as if they were a homogeneous group, living peacefully side by
side with representatives of different races, whose inherent characteristics
have not changed much over time.
Topinar speaks of American Indians, saying that they "undoubtedly
descend from bandits brought from Europe, and no matter how much they
try to deny it, they cannot escape the fact that they were brought here by
force." This legend exists among the Boronos in the remote Andes,
where they meet
"7оɤубые 7ɤаѕа", accompanied by either dark or "light and red hair", with
the usual features of American races. A striking example is the Mandan,
who also have dark hair, but their women are "grey and red-haired". There
are also
"grey gazelles" among the Atapas, "light-coloured animals" among the
Gipanis,
"very bright" among the Antis and the Mogosh.
"The majority of American peoples," says Sh. Neturno, "are very much
like us in terms of their way of life. But it is worth noting the following
interesting fact: the American Indian is closer to the Mongoloid race the
further south he lives. The Tsem, who live on the banks of the Amazon, are
the perfect example of this race. On the contrary, the Indians of North
America, also belonging to the Mongoloid race, are at the same time
similar in some of their features to the Caucasian race. We come to an
interesting conclusion: North America must have been populated by
immigrants of European origin, perhaps even from the Mediterranean
basin. Undoubtedly, the inhabitants of North America display all the
characteristics of mestizos, descended from a mixture of Mongols and
white people, and some of their varieties, such as the curious Mandan
tribe, leaning even more towards the white race, which is yellow.teristics of mestizos, descended from a mixture of Mongols and
white people, and some of their varieties, such as the curious Mandan
tribe, leaning even more towards the white race, which is yellow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Many   and   North American   Indians," says F. Rathe, "are
distinguished by their admixture of European blood." The distinctive
features of some of the Chivaro, Newfoundland and Haida peoples belong
to a separate race, namely: "tall stature, slenderness, a majestic bearing, regular
features, and an intelligent expression. They have small teeth, small eyes,
straight noses, pointed noses, light skin, etc.
The first European settlers in America recall the existence in their time
of "fair-haired bearded people" in Canada, along the banks of the Missouri
and in the Andes, and Mexican chronicles mention them in Central
America. The Ants and Mapibs are considered to be of the
"Mediterranean type" race. But most of all
"light-coloured sements" in north-western America.
In Central and South America, especially in the Amazon, the oldest
Mesoamerican barries depict people with "noses that are more than 7
centimetres long, of the Semitic type". This nose is a traditional feature of
Mesoamerican and Peruvian artists. It is also known that the legends of
Mesopotamia and Peru present the founders of the two states as "bearded
men".
Many researchers of South American peoples distinguish people who
are "fair-skinned, fair-bearded, 7оɤубо7ɤаѕых, веɤиmоросɤых", i.e. again
with the characteristic features of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---Many researchers of South American peoples distinguish people who
are "fair-skinned, fair-bearded, 7оɤубо7ɤаѕых, веɤиmоросɤых", i.e. again
with the characteristic features of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

race. These include the Mayru, Yurumary (whose name means "white
people"), Boronos, Mandan, Antis, etc.
Martin expresses himself about o7oneśemėɤy: "If I had to make a
definite statement on this important question (the origin of the
O7onesemeg), I would settle on the most probable hypothesis, namely,
their initial migration from Europe. It is not possible to admit with any
degree of certainty the similarity between the European race, known as
Neanderthal, and the primitive American race."
Puginesia, Mipronesia and Meganesia.
"The breed   ɤюдей   on   islands   Tихо7о   оmеана, —
7оворит
Ф.
Ратɯеɤь,
—
быɤа
already
Forster
pasɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯ
ɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯ
ɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯɯ well-built, with strong muscles, sufficient
height, the other — more robust, with wiry, woolly hair, more slender and agile.
3to poginesinyu and meganesinyu of the newest stnoplavov. It is
impossible to strictly separate them from each other: there, where only the
members of the latter group are supposed to be, there are bright and
straightforward representatives and even the names of the members of the
other group. Finch describes the inhabitants of Port Moresby in the
following way: "Here you can find all kinds of people, from completely
civilised to simple Papuan tribesmen, muddy-skinned people, among
others, and red-haired and fair-skinned people are often encountered, as
well as Japanese and Jewish people with hooked noses, reminiscent of
red-haired people. The same can be said about the colour of the skin. In
general, travellers   uерты   ɤиɯа   поɤинеѕийɯев   наѕывают
то
"European," then "Jewish," then "Mongolian." Katrazh believes that
"the population was composed of a mixture of three races: white, yellow,
and brown." According to White, their colour varies between light and dark
brown with shades of grey and olive. Apparently, the lightest-coloured
individuals live on the coast. Their height varies considerably, but this
inconsistency is largely due to the "blending" effect.
Among the dark-skinned people, the Samoans and the Tongan stand
out with their "white skin". They are slightly darker than the Europeans.
The Tongan people call them "angels of the south." In New Guinea,the dark-skinned people, the Samoans and the Tongan stand
out with their "white skin". They are slightly darker than the Europeans.
The Tongan people call them "angels of the south." In New Guinea,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

there are even three types of beards: one is "white and straight", another is
brown, and the third is grey and uneven. The people of Gemegay and
Pomotu are particularly distinguished by their "sturdy beards".
The beards of the people of Gemegay and Pomotu are considered to be the
most beautiful.
In Meganesia, the "greatest resemblance to Europeans" is found in the
Maropini, the Tsemeni of Rotuma Island, and the Simoyani, who are
described as having "completely European features".
This is true of Australia, where the motor is more animalistic, more
primitive, and Gems directly attributes it to the type of "European
brunettes". "Everywhere," Ranma says on this subject, "where we find
ueoveme, it is closely related to Europeans."
Thus, we see that all over the world there are admixtures of other
races with the white race. To this we may add that in various parts of
the world, among different races, there are legends, beliefs and customs
dating back to ancient times, which show that even memories of those
ancient times have been preserved. perhaps the race that appeared

--- PAGE BREAK ---ces, there are legends, beliefs and customs
dating back to ancient times, which show that even memories of those
ancient times have been preserved. perhaps the race that appeared

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nowadays, it is less mixed with other races. There, the folk names of
some light-skinned peoples, such as the Mam Luah and Mandingo (in
Africa) and the Yurumara (in South America), are based on local
languages — "white people". The legends of the V7ayums (in Nige) and
the stories of V7anda and Vnyoro confirm their origin from light-
skinned people is also constant in their legends, as is the origin of the
people from the North, the North-East and the East. In the family of the
Vnoros, the prevailing belief is that their ancestors were once white and that
all of Australia once belonged to the white people. However, among the
peoples of Australia, Tasmania, Tanna Island, New Guinea and New
Caledonia, there is a belief, judging by its widespread distribution, that
after death they will turn into spirits. Therefore, the people of Australia
accepted some of the spirits as the souls of those who had died earlier and
as their ancestors.
It is curious that, according to White, the idols in Kon7o have
European features. One wooden idol found there is particularly
interesting, as it has a "prominent nose, small mouth, thin lips and a well-
formed chin", i.e. the unmistakable features of the Caucasian race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n idol found there is particularly
interesting, as it has a "prominent nose, small mouth, thin lips and a well-
formed chin", i.e. the unmistakable features of the Caucasian race.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7. THE NAME AND
CHARACTER OF THE KRAIN
PRECURSORS
NENOVENESTVA
Physical build, mind and character of the lowest limits of humanity.
Physical build of the lowest races. Short stature. Weakness and
curvature of the spine. Weak development of the calves. Stiff, stooping
gait. Thin arms. Protruding, protruding belly. Thinness. Large head.
Emotions of the races. Indifference to unpleasant sensations. Dullness
of the senses. Weak development of the sense of love. Weakness of
sexual feelings. Lack of modesty. Weakness of reproductive capacity.
Weakness of character. Drowsiness. Weakness of will. Lack of risk-
taking. Lack of curiosity and curiosity.
Absence
initiative,
initiative, enterprise. Indifference to religion.
Conservatism. Distrust and suspicion. Cowardice and timidity.
Indolence. Peacefulness. Herd mentality. Attachment to place.
If modern science is a mixture of the old and the new, then it occupies a
middle ground between its predecessors in all respects, and if we
consider its main types, we have a vague idea about these ancestors, but
we must remember that, according to the conditions of mixing, the highest
limit, up to which modern uеɤовеuество reaches, should be lower than
диɤювиаɤьно7о uеɤовеmа, and the lowest — higher than питеmантроп.
With this in mind, I have gathered here data on the structure, mind and
character of the highest and lowest races. We will discuss the
characteristics of their physical structure as described in anthropological
literature.
The physical structure of the lower races.
First of all, I must remind you that that there are no pure races on the
globe, but rather mixed races in which the characteristics of the pure race
are intertwined with those of the pithecanthropus. Therefore, it is impossible
to find a race that would combine all the characteristics of a pitemantrop.which the characteristics of the pure race
are intertwined with those of the pithecanthropus. Therefore, it is impossible
to find a race that would combine all the characteristics of a pitemantrop.

--- PAGE BREAK ---istics of the pure race
are intertwined with those of the pithecanthropus. Therefore, it is impossible
to find a race that would combine all the characteristics of a pitemantrop.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It's impossible. That is why I do not sit down, but try to paint an ideal
picture of the lower races, gathered from various nations and peoples
belonging t o the so-called
"lower races".
Herbert Spencer and Virchow draw attention to the remarkable
diversity of dimers. The former even provides a detailed list of
dimorphic individuals who are distinguished by their very low stature.
This external characteristic is mainly due to their motor skills, which are
inferior to those of normal individuals. But dimarey, in addition to their
motor skills, are distinguished by their thinness, rapid development, agility and
strength. Their joints are immobile, and therefore the ability of dimare to
move suffers from significant deficiencies. Their gait is characterised by
observations such as "heavy, swaying, with a slight wobble". They walk
quietly, leaning forward, as if they have lost something. Each step they
take is accompanied by a slight swaying. According to Schweinleurt,
one of the men who lived with him for several months could never carry a
heavy load without breaking it. This trait, according to Herbert Spencer,
has a distant connection with the same distinctive feature in monkeys.
"The red monkey does not stand upright," says Karl Focht, "usually its
legs are bent and its feet are turned outwards."
Rumours, on the contrary, are relatively rare compared to rumours, but
again, this confirms their similarity to rumours.
The upper part of the rib cage is narrow and slightly constricted, but
widens at the bottom to support the abdomen. They write about the belly
of the lower ones, that it is "hanging" and "protruding" and "unusually
prominent". All abdominal organs are disproportionately large, especially
the liver and accessory organs. The organs "seem to be constantly
suffering from venous congestion."
The limbs are thin, their joints protrude, and the bones and tendons are
clearly visible. The sedentary parts are prominent, the thighs are significantly
enlarged and the knees are slightly bent.
The shape of the head is similar to that of a monkey, which gives them a
resemblance to marmosets.
According to anatomist and traveller Gustav Frith, "there is the same
difference between the dimary and the European tamaya as there is between the
dimary animal and the domesticated animal of the same species."
"Harmonious development," he says, "is perhaps less common among
dimars than among us, who seem to have outlived our youthful years."dimary animal and the domesticated animal of the same species."
"Harmonious development," he says, "is perhaps less common among
dimars than among us, who seem to have outlived our youthful years."

--- PAGE BREAK ---he domesticated animal of the same species."
"Harmonious development," he says, "is perhaps less common among
dimars than among us, who seem to have outlived our youthful years."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

People. Normally developed 7ermane in relation to proportions, m size and
weight, stands above average 7oeve, belonging to m neme Bantu.
Meanwhile, the Bantu are considered to be the most powerful and influential
people in Alrima.
Others are outwardly strong and well-built with a robust physique,
but the dynamometer shows that they are weak, below us in terms of
their muscular strength and even simply in terms of their stamina. On
long, tiring journeys, they quickly lose strength and get tired.
There are other external characteristics of lower races, such as the
structure of the device, the shape of the head, the structure of the body and
limbs, passage by passage, etc., I will not discuss them here, as everything
has already been considered in the passages of my work on the more or
less important questions. And now I will move on to the feelings of the
lower classes.
The feelings of the lower classes.
According to Herbert Spencer, the lower races "exhibit a
comparative indifference to unpleasant and painful sensations, and, as a
result, these sensations do not have a particularly acute character. They are
indifferent to various phenomena, and even the most significant changes
in temperature do not cause them any discomfort. They readily accept
the order of things as they are, are indifferent to the contents of their
stomachs, and are completely indifferent to the harshness of life. The
same applies to the suffering caused by physical injuries. The ease with
which they endure the most serious operations inevitably leads us to
conclude that the suffering they endure must be 70% less than that
which would be caused under the same conditions in people of higher
types.
On the same subject, we find the following in Karl Focht's work:
"In terms of sensitivity, the natives, it seems, are inferior to people of
the white race and do not correspond at all to the opinion that dim-
witted peoples are naturally endowed with keener senses. Their hearing
is usually dull. Their sense of smell, hearing and touch are not
particularly sensitive or acute. Their sense of touch is not particularly
sensitive; the sensory receptors on their hands are less developed than
those of humans, but the mosting and touch are not
particularly sensitive or acute. Their sense of touch is not particularly
sensitive; the sensory receptors on their hands are less developed than
those of humans, but the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
particularly sensitive or acute. Their sense of touch is not particularly
sensitive; the sensory receptors on their hands are less developed than
those of humans, but the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---

noticeable phenomenon is related to the fact that they are, at least,
insensitive to pain.
The feeling of love is developed in the lower races. They are
surprisingly cold and indifferent to each other. Many of them do not
have the concepts of "love," "beloved," or "dear."
Physical affection is also rare among the lower classes, as it is
among the upper classes. Men do not show tenderness to women in the
form of kisses, hugs, etc.
The ability, in the words of the French, to "faire amour en tous
temps" is apparently an inherent trait of the higher races, while in the
lowest races, on the contrary, there is like other animals, periodic
mating once or twice a year. Westerman, who studied this question
extensively, finds the same pattern among the Magellanic Indians, the
Tusi people of Western Australia, the Dravidian tribes of East India, and
many Australian tribes.
The novelty of modesty must also be attributed to the superior races,
as it is completely absent in many of the lower races. Herodotus and Strabo
mention the Tamai and the Irgandians, who committed incestuous acts in
public. A similar phenomenon is observed among the modern tribes of the
Amazon, the Ayeutes, the Simimos, the Yururus in Paravai, and the
Hoaranis. Other peoples also display a lack of modesty in the absence of
clothing, such as the Bushmen, the inhabitants of the Andaman Islands,
and others. But it is not enough to say that the absence of modesty is
necessarily associated with immorality. Immorality, which is impossible
without a sense of shame, is inversely proportional to the amount of
clothing worn. The poorly dressed, that is, the relatively poor, are at the
same time considered the most immoral.
Vm and the character of the lower
classes.
The dimar is smeared with a well-formed ueɤove mаm, which would be
dremɤюɲim. If you ask him a new question, you will have to repeat it
several times before his mind awakens, and you will need to speak more
clearly so that your thoughts are understood. His attention is very
unstable; he cannot even sit still for a short time with the simplest
thought. Nos mind awakens, and you will need to speak more
clearly so that your thoughts are understood. His attention is very
unstable; he cannot even sit still for a short time with the simplest
thought. No

--- PAGE BREAK ---you will need to speak more
clearly so that your thoughts are understood. His attention is very
unstable; he cannot even sit still for a short time with the simplest
thought. No

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Capable of intense thought, he sometimes cannot even answer the
simplest question with a simple "yes" or "no." When asked about the
names and distances of nearby places, the diaries never give a definite
answer. If you ask them about two places, they will give contradictory
answers. A short conversation tires them, especially if the questions
asked require mental effort and memory. They stop listening, their
expressions become fixed, they become irritable and reveal everything
that is hidden, unable to bear the strain any longer. They become
confused at a time when they should be alert. They begin to act and speak
senselessly.
Spis and Marus discuss the Indian, saying that "as soon as you ask
him questions about his language, he becomes irritable, gets angry at the
slightest provocation, and generally reveals all his faults, and is unable to
tolerate any effort," while Bets talks about the same people, saying that
"it is very difficult to get them to understand subjects that require even a
little bit of critical thinking." Touno and Lobriol also mention that "they may
not be able to understand anything at first glance, they quickly tire of
research and questions and ask: 'What's the point?'.
The memory of dimarey tam cɤaba, uto one, for example, ѕабыɤ the
name of his wife, with moto rastaɤsa all7o three days. Ƚру7ой does not
remember the names of his parents and mother.
Their speech corresponds to their mental abilities; it consists of
simple words that cannot be used to describe even the most ordinary
things without resorting to the strangest expressions. Some children are
unable to grasp the concept of numbers. Their vocabulary is completely
devoid of expressions for numbers, and they cannot say "one", "two",
"three", and cannot even count by fingers. They have words for all known
plants and animals, but they do not have words for abstract concepts such as
"tree" or "fish."
"ptiɯa" etc., and there are no corresponding concepts for "truth",
"judgement" or "crime".
The lower classes lack not only curiosity, but even simple curiosity:
when they see new objects, they remain completely indifferent and
express no surprise. New things do not attract their attention for a
moment. Everything amazes their children, but nothing can interest them.see new objects, they remain completely indifferent and
express no surprise. New things do not attract their attention for a
moment. Everything amazes their children, but nothing can interest them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ey remain completely indifferent and
express no surprise. New things do not attract their attention for a
moment. Everything amazes their children, but nothing can interest them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When the Australians saw a European ship for the first time, with people
and animals that were completely different from them, they did not show
the slightest surprise. On the ship, they were most interested in the 12
whales caught by the sailors. Kum reports on the news, saying that they
"are completely satisfied with their lot, discussing it without any desire to
change it. They are not curious either in their questions or in their
observations. New objects do not impress them at all, as one might
expect, and often do not attract their attention even for a minute."
According to Kum, the seven showed complete indifference in the
presence of the strangers, who were completely new to them. Kum also
says that the Tasmanians do not seem surprised by anything. Captain
Vagis says that they
"displayed the most incomprehensible indifference to everything around them
on board, even though it did not arouse in them the slightest surprise, although
it was very strange to them." And the Veddas "did not express the slightest
surprise at the sight of them." And about the Samoyeds, we learn from
Pinerton that "they did not express any surprise at all, except for a moment,
and even then only for a moment." Beru says the same thing about the
Bushmen: "When they see something strange, they laugh and stare at it with
dull surprise, as if they are seeing their own faces, but they do not express the
slightest curiosity about it."
In the lowest race, there is no energy, no initiative, no enterprise, no
feeling, no joy, no hope. There is no spiritual life whatsoever.
Everything is overshadowed by gloom, so they look dispassionately at
all the phenomena of life and nature and show a kind of indifference to
everything in the world except for food. The present moment is
everything to them. They are incapable of thinking about the future,
because the idea of the future is already a distant thought. Hence, they
have no foresight whatsoever. If they go hunting, they kill hundreds of
animals without any need. They give away the same game for free, which
they could have sold for a good price the day before. They give away their
goods in exchange for worthless trinkets, and then spend an incredible
amount of time trying to sell their own goods. They repeat this day after
day, and the past does not help them.
But even the thought of the future does not come to mind.and then spend an incredible
amount of time trying to sell their own goods. They repeat this day after
day, and the past does not help them.
But even the thought of the future does not come to mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---credible
amount of time trying to sell their own goods. They repeat this day after
day, and the past does not help them.
But even the thought of the future does not come to mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If there is no religion, then there can be no religious needs, and
therefore missionaries and travellers seek out peoples who have no
religion. This includes the unevangelised tribes, the unevangelised tribes
of Brazil and Paraguay, the unevangelised tribes of the Andaman
Islands, the Andamanese, some tribes of Hindustan and East Almir, the
Ottentots and some Bedouins.
But it is not only the lowest races, but even the highest races, the
Mammalia, who show complete indifference to religion. They laugh at
preachers and joke about the immortality of the soul. For them, death is
annihilation, and the highest good is a pleasant dream.
The immobility of the lower classes explains their conservative
nature, thanks to which their beliefs, rituals and customs have remained
unchanged for many thousands of years. Even the ancients were struck by
the conservatism of some of their contemporary peoples. Herodotus,
writing about one such people, said: "For at least 2,000 years, and
perhaps even longer, these people have lived in the same place, eating
and drinking. They are now as rich and poor as they were thousands of
years ago. They have not added anything to what they had in those days.
The history of each society is the same as that of the previous ones. "Primitive
man," says Herbert Spencer, "is conservative to an extreme degree.
Even when comparing the higher races among themselves, and
comparing different masses of the same society, one can see that the
least developed are the most averse to any change. Any new method is
instilled in the common people with great difficulty, and even a new
kind of pin is usually met with hostility. An uneducated person is more
susceptible to this tendency. The simpler the nervous system, having lost
its flexibility, the less capable it is of adapting to change. Hence the
unquestioning and unwavering devotion to what has already been
established. "If it's good for my father, then it's good for me," — say all
uneducated people. They express aversion to even the slightest change and
constantly resist any innovation and improvement in their lives.
Therefore, they usually remain unchanged. Their habits are also
constant, and each bird, like the distant species of birds, has its own
constant characteristics in this regard.ment in their lives.
Therefore, they usually remain unchanged. Their habits are also
constant, and each bird, like the distant species of birds, has its own
constant characteristics in this regard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Clothing and its accessories are not subject to fashion trends, except for the
most basic items such as underwear, socks, and shoes.
When discussing the moral qualities of lower animals, it is important
to mention their caution, distrust, timidity, and prudence. All these
qualities, of course, do not testify to their superiority, but it is well
known that animals, which are accustomed to fighting for survival, have,
for example, saiy and ovy, are endowed with these qualities to the highest
degree and without them would be lost in the struggle for existence.
There are two lower-level traits that warrant caution: cowardice and
timidity. Here is an example of a situation in which these two vices are
clearly evident. A Russian man, who had been travelling around the
country on business, was annoyed with one of his colleagues because he had
unwittingly offended him, and he was afraid of his wrath. The couple fell
into despair, and with them their whole family. The frightened poor man
could not calm down, imagining that he had committed a terrible crime
and, already overwhelmed by his own incompetence,

--- PAGE BREAK ---and with them their whole family. The frightened poor man
could not calm down, imagining that he had committed a terrible crime
and, already overwhelmed by his own incompetence,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ask him what he wants, and he will tell you. The lowest guests are
afraid to ask for more than the highest ones, they themselves say that
what they have is enough. And about the Votyaks: "One of the most
striking features of the Votyaks," says Mr. Veron, "is their unusual
timidity. Look at a local Votyan, for the sake of a joke, and the Votyan
will immediately freeze and not dare to move."
Of course, some are naturally inferior, but having learned from their
distant ancestors the usual ways of war and slavery, they do everything, but
in a very primitive way. According to the descriptions of missionaries
and travellers, the war between these tribes is waged solely for the
purpose of deceiving each other. They fight with their weapons and
very reluctantly, solely because of the shame of returning home empty-
handed. Two or three dead and wounded are enough to decide the
outcome of the battle, and the fighting ends. Fear overcomes these
people at the sight of blood; they are afraid to fight, and therefore
immediately scatter in different directions, after which negotiations
begin. Such cowardly peoples, engaging in robbery, try first of all to
attack people who are as cowardly as they are, and they themselves,
having committed theft, suddenly, unexpectedly, but at the slightest
resistance they turn into a crowd, abandoning everything that could hold
them back.
Some people, out of cowardice, display servile flattery towards those
who treat them harshly and oppress those who treat them kindly. They are
deprived of all independence and not only do they not avoid slavery, but
they seek it out. Servile obedience to their superiors and fear are their
strongest feelings.
According to Walton, they "seek to be enslaved" and
"eat with their master, mam bonma." Similar phenomena are found
among other southern tribes. One of them said to a European: "How can
you be a master; I have been with you for two years and you have never
beaten me?"
Herd mentality is evident among the lower classes in their fear of
public opinion, of their own and others' disapproval, and of the
dissatisfaction and ridicule of their peers. This fear is so strong that it
controls the behaviour of the lower classes and forces them to
unquestioningly obey the dictates of local customs, no matter how
senseless and cruel they may be.
In societies where the lower classes are oppressed, the first priority
must be given to justice, which in some places is equated with virtue. A leader
who is capable of achieving this, and who is believed by his people, is
consideredare oppressed, the first priority
must be given to justice, which in some places is equated with virtue. A leader
who is capable of achieving this, and who is believed by his people, is
considered

--- PAGE BREAK ---first priority
must be given to justice, which in some places is equated with virtue. A leader
who is capable of achieving this, and who is believed by his people, is
considered

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as a true leader and is treated with universal respect. The following are
considered vices: greed, inconstancy, disloyalty to one's word, deceit,
cunning, avarice, carelessness, laziness, and vanity.
The similarity between lower races and herbivorous animals is
evident in the fact that they are attached to a certain type of food.
According to Warvin, they are also susceptible to mental and other
changes, and their closest relatives are the monkey-like apes, which,
having been uprooted from their homeland, are known to never survive.
"It's a strange thing," says one traveller, "that they are so far from their
birthplace. There are people who, although born three miles from the sea,
have never seen it."
All the observations gathered here about the character of the dimare and
the people who are not familiar with them are not new, they are well
known to scientists, and many of the recent findings even lead to very
tentative conclusions about the position of dimare in the universe and their
future.
No, says Warvin, there is no doubt about the barbarian's mental
development, who, according to Byron's description, threw his child
against a wall so that he would drop his sea urchins, and those people,
Howard and Carpenter; and the difference in mental abilities between a
dimwit, who does not use any appropriate expressions, and Newton and
Shakespeare.
"In verse," says Herbert Spencer, "thoughts, restrained in their
thinking by established ways of thinking, do not have the freedom
required to enter into new combinations and thus generate new modes of
action and new forms of industry. Primitive people should not be credited
with even the inventiveness that their simple tools seem to suggest.
According to Notta and Giddon, the 7otentots and especially the
Bushmen are morally and linguistically not much different from the
orangutan and no more so than the Europeans themselves. South of 10
degrees latitude, the area is inhabited by people whose minds are dark, whose
hearts are cold, and whose physique is so utopian that it destroys all
hope for their future improvement.
White, describing the character of the dimare, says: "It is clear thatminds are dark, whose
hearts are cold, and whose physique is so utopian that it destroys all
hope for their future improvement.
White, describing the character of the dimare, says: "It is clear that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the opinion of some scholars that the mental life of lower beings is no
higher than that of monkeys, and their emotional life no higher than that
of animals, is to a certain extent justified."
"I believe," he says, "that it is a mistake to attribute to primitive man
an irrepressible, passionate desire for moral and intellectual development. On
the contrary, given the evidence of his own experience, he prefers to remain
in his former state; he is unlikely to decide on his own, without external
coercion, to take on the heavy work of civilisation. After all, the lowest
classes of society, left to their own devices, do not undertake anything
similar, as long as they live at least somewhat comfortably in material
terms, and despite the fact that they constantly have examples of higher
development before their eyes. Were it not for that, the seemingly
incomprehensible course of progress in society, in everything that is
happening, would remain completely incomprehensible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---before their eyes. Were it not for that, the seemingly
incomprehensible course of progress in society, in everything that is
happening, would remain completely incomprehensible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8. NENOVEK — HIKONIK
A predator. The mountains of Europe. Tall stature. Muscularity. A
strong build. A regular oval face. Speed and agility of movement. A
steady and firm gait.
Self-control.
Intellectual
qualities. Sensitivity. Prone to enthusiasm. Honesty.
Loyalty and faithfulness to one's word. Self-respect. Sensuality.
Vengefulness. Military qualities. The character of the highlanders is
also found among the inhabitants of the plains.
In contrast to the lower classes, the Ovka people, we can describe
another type of community, the Khinnim people, whose image in our
time can be seen in the peoples of Europe and Asia.
It is well known that the 700 differ from the flat-land dwellers in their
tall stature, good build, strength, fierce character, belligerence, and love
of freedom. This is why Montesquieu expressed the opinion that "in
vast, fertile regions where people are unable to defend themselves against
tyranny and submit to it, — there is a tendency towards despotism, then
the boldest steps produce a strong, independent, proud defence of their
freedom." This is not in doubt, but the question is whether it should be
understood.
Some anthropologists believe that harsh conditions inevitably produce
a certain type of person. According to Ranma, constant walking on
mountains slows down growth, while others believe that struggling with
harsh nature strengthens character. But I find this explanation far-
fetched. If this type of person were really shaped by the mountains, then
everywhere, in the mountains all over the world, this type would be
completely identical. But in reality, this is not the case at all. Firstly, in
every part of the world, people are influenced by the race among which
they live. In Africa, they are dark-skinned, in Asia, they are yellow-
skinned, in America, they are copper-skinned, and in Europe, they are
white-skinned.
Secondly, in the same work, we find: "Under certain conditions, life
in the mountains inhibits the development of the human body. The
causes that lead to the development of retentism in many mountainous
areas often affect the non-retentive areas of the same regions,in the mountains inhibits the development of the human body. The
causes that lead to the development of retentism in many mountainous
areas often affect the non-retentive areas of the same regions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---hibits the development of the human body. The
causes that lead to the development of retentism in many mountainous
areas often affect the non-retentive areas of the same regions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by inhibiting growth."
Thirdly, it is assumed that the 700 are distinguished by their tall
stature and warlike character not only in Europe, but even in Asia, they are
not all warlike. For example, the Tsemu people on the Magammi
Peninsula, according to White, are "a peaceful people who do not know
what war is." The same can be said about the Alrim: the Germanic
sources mention the Porny Damars, stating that this people is inferior in
all respects to their plain-dwelling kinsmen. "Their skin is not as dark as
that of the Otentots, but in terms of height, they are taller than the other
Damars." Namone, Agusid L'Orbigny, who is engaged in research on the
anthropological aspects of South America, found "the smallest stature"
among the inhabitants of the mountainous regions there and even
attributed it to "the thin air."
We will not express our opinion on the causes of belligerence,
freedom, power, justice, and rapid growth of the people, because it will
be evident from our further research. we will briefly touch upon the
superficiality of the conclusions of certain anthropologists, which they
themselves contradict. If we are all here to discuss the highest type of
society, it is because in the descriptions of our ideas in the current literature,
we find the most accurate and detailed characterisation of this type.
To give the most accurate type of ueogevema-khinnima, we repeat the same
technique, as we did for the lower races, i.e. we will gather everything
in one place, as we did in the literature on the various peoples of Europe
and Asia.
European mountains are described as tall, muscular, strong, with
broad shoulders and a slender build. Their delicate physique is striking:
they are very tall, with long limbs and small feet. Their necks are long, but
without dewlaps, straight, with correct shoulders and a straight Roman
nose. The correctness of the legs is well known, but even the entire race
is called
"mavmaskom". Their eyes are very mobile. Their movements are smooth
and quick; there is something noble and dignified about them: their gait
is decisive and firm. They are good climbers and fast walkers in terms of
speed and agility.
In his "Oupmah Kavmasa," G. Evgeny Marmov compares the
Mavmasks with the Russian common people and describes their
appearance: "When you look at the Gesina and our brother Vakhama
rusmо7о at the same time, the Russian makes an impression of an
unkempt herbivorous animal."ssian common people and describes their
appearance: "When you look at the Gesina and our brother Vakhama
rusmо7о at the same time, the Russian makes an impression of an
unkempt herbivorous animal."

--- PAGE BREAK ---and describes their
appearance: "When you look at the Gesina and our brother Vakhama
rusmо7о at the same time, the Russian makes an impression of an
unkempt herbivorous animal."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

brother Vakhgama, the Russian makes an impression of an unkempt
herbivorous animal next to a stately and dignified lion. The Geshina's
colourful attire resembles that of a panther or a leopard, and the grace
and agility of its movements, its fearsome gaze, reflected in its sharp,
steely eyes, are truly terrifying. It is truly a beast, equipped with all
kinds of weapons, sharp claws, powerful weapons, sharp blades, a swift
and agile mind, swift as lightning, swift as lightning, swift and agile,
instantly devouring them with its mouth and tongue, never allowing the
herbivorous wolf to come to life.
The mountains are inhabited by tribes and clans. Each tribe is an
independent state and an enemy of all others. There are constant feuds,
constant wars, constant murders and constant violence between them.
Robbery and theft are often committed not even out of greed, but out of
a desire to prove one's luck and strength. Theft used to be a form of
revenge: girls were reluctant to marry young men who had not
committed crimes.
The mountains do not miss their prey. They treat the inhabitants of the
plains with extreme contempt and often expel from their midst the
bandits who ravage the countryside. Some of them fight in the armies of
foreign states as mercenaries; and even, as tailors, they make themselves
a speciality.
In political terms, many countries still retain their independence and
vigorously defend it against all attempts to undermine it. Some states,
such as Turkey, unable to control them for many centuries, have saved
themselves from the harm they cause to peaceful citizens by maintaining a
constant military presence and inciting the tribes against each other. But
even when subdued, the states continue to fight, first disarming them, then
feeding their passion for weapons, and considering all occupations other
than war and slavery to be beneath their dignity.
They are deeply attached to their homeland, are great patriots,
consider themselves a people chosen by God himself, believe in their
bright future, and respect the brave.
They are credited with great mental abilities, quick-wittedness,
prudence, liveliness and sharpness of mind, wit, ingenuity, energy and
enterprise. They are eloquent and often very skilled diplomats. Depending
on the circumstances, theylities, quick-wittedness,
prudence, liveliness and sharpness of mind, wit, ingenuity, energy and
enterprise. They are eloquent and often very skilled diplomats. Depending
on the circumstances, they

--- PAGE BREAK ---ness,
prudence, liveliness and sharpness of mind, wit, ingenuity, energy and
enterprise. They are eloquent and often very skilled diplomats. Depending
on the circumstances, they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If they succeed, they also thrive in peaceful pursuits, demonstrating an
aptitude for trade, crafts, and even mechanics. They are curious, have a
vivid imagination, innate intuition and a keen sense of perception. They
are sensitive, impressionable, prone to mood swings and uncontrollable
impulses. In their relationships with others, they are good-natured, friendly,
quick to make friends, honest, loyal to their word, and are distinguished by
their noble, generous nature and are prone to extravagance. They are aware of
their own worth, are modest, and despise boasting. In company, they are
unusually cheerful and may even dance, so much so that, as they say, all
their joints come loose. In terms of relationships, they are passionate,
sometimes characterised by volatility and recklessness.
If you provoke him, he will lose his temper and will not calm down
until he takes his revenge on someone. When they quarrel, they
immediately rush at each other with weapons in their hands and become
cruel, bloodthirsty, and will stop at nothing, not even the most terrible
crime. They are unforgiving and vengeful. Bloody revenge is not only a
personal matter, but a sacred duty for the entire clan, and is one of the
main causes of conflict between them. Some families die out, some
centuries pass, and something empty and incomprehensible remains.
They are warlike, brave in battle, courageous, and love freedom,
preferring to die rather than be captured. But they are so proud that they
would rather die in captivity than allow themselves to be exchanged for a
beautiful enemy girl.
As can be seen from the description, modern heroes are not particularly
original, that we cannot find on the plains and that would make us live
in some unusual conditions that could produce an unusual breed of
people. It is worth recalling ancient history to see that, in well-known
circumstances, the inhabitants of the plains are in no way inferior to the
mountains in their militancy and love of freedom. I will quote here an
excerpt about the ancient Germans and modern Latvians:
"The bloody fervour of war, imbued with religious fervour, was
already evident among the Germans in their first clashes with
Rome. My three gods, whose powershe ancient Germans and modern Latvians:
"The bloody fervour of war, imbued with religious fervour, was
already evident among the Germans in their first clashes with
Rome. My three gods, whose powers

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd modern Latvians:
"The bloody fervour of war, imbued with religious fervour, was
already evident among the Germans in their first clashes with
Rome. My three gods, whose powers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They are difficult to define and have such an ambiguous nature that
all of them are violent and cruel. It is a bloody and cruel existence.
They believe in a dangerous life, predestined for warriors and
heroes in the wild castle of Valhalla, where eternal battles are
fought with eternal weapons. These fierce warriors, bound by an
iron ring throughout their lives and always forming the first ranks
in battle, their faces grim even in peacetime, possessed by a fierce
passion for battle and destruction. To die for them means to return
to Odin, to Valhalla, to the gods.
The Frisians belong to an ancient Germanic tribe and were known for
their exceptional bravery even before Christ. The original inhabitants of
neighbouring countries always treated them with envy and respect as a
strong, independent and free people. "Strictly avoiding mixing with
their neighbours," the people have preserved their original character to
this day. Even now, if you meet a man in Friesland and ask him which
nation he belongs to, he will not answer "I am a Frisian," but will
invariably add:
"I am free." Although the 7raɭy 7oɤɤandcmi and episcmopy utrehcstcmi
are trying hard to destroy them, they are the only people in Europe who
managed to remain free from foreign dependence during the reign of the
German emperors. Although the people are usually straightforward, in
battle they become like a whirlwind: their eyes widen and they breathe
fire, their nostrils flare, and their hair falls disorderly on their necks. It is
impossible to tell which of the two is speaking at any given moment, but he
is ready to strangle someone with his own hands for something
insignificant, unpleasant, or even imaginary. You can recognise a
Frisian by his firm gait and open expression. Men are always cheerful and
lively, with a lively smile on their lips, animated gestures and quick
movements.
But apart from that, people of the same type can be found even
today among peaceful nations, but we do not recognise them, firstly
because we see them in a different environment, and secondly, because
they are isolated among a mass of people of completely different types.peaceful nations, but we do not recognise them, firstly
because we see them in a different environment, and secondly, because
they are isolated among a mass of people of completely different types.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut we do not recognise them, firstly
because we see them in a different environment, and secondly, because
they are isolated among a mass of people of completely different types.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9. COMPARISON OF EXTREME
TYPES OF UNFAMILIARITY
WITH FAMILIAR ONES
AND ANIMALS
The similarity of extreme types of humanity with animal and plant
predators. The similarity of races in their character to sheep. The
similarity of predatory people to predators of the animal kingdom.
Thus, we have a clear picture of two types of humanity. The lower
of them clearly resembles herbivorous animals that live in large herds,
such as sheep, goats, and some monkeys. Their protruding eyes and bulky
bodies indicate their adaptation to a plant-based diet, which is actually
followed by most of the lower species. Their senses are dull, and their
minds are immobile. Foresight, cowardice, and herd instinct are all
characteristics of herbivorous animals. These creatures are incapable of
active combat; they can only be victims. Their only salvation is the herd.
A comparison with what was said above about the lower races of
humanity immediately comes to mind, with the following excerpt being
particularly relevant. "Domestic sheep are timid creatures. The timidity
of this animal is expressed in all aspects of its life and habits. The most
timid ram cowers before even the smallest dog; the most harmless
animal can strike fear into the herd: the whole flock follows its leader.
No animal can be compared to a domestic ram in this respect... he seems to
rejoice when another creature takes the burden of caring for his own
flock off his shoulders. It is not surprising that such animals are always
good-natured, gentle, peaceful and carefree" (A. Brs).
The highest type of consciousness is the direct opposite of the
lowest; it strongly resembles the consciousness of animals.
Although these types differ from each other in various aspects of
animals,   but   according to   their   appearance,   according to
character,   image   life,embles the consciousness of animals.
Although these types differ from each other in various aspects of
animals,   but   according to   their   appearance,   according to
character,   image   life,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In relation to their own kind, etc., they undoubtedly have certain
characteristics that are derived from identical living conditions. They
must be superior in physical and mental terms to the herbivorous animals of
their own species, on which they feed. According to scientists, they are
stronger, faster, more agile and more intelligent than their prey, and are
endowed with a more developed nervous system, greater courage,
decisiveness, courage and initiative. a more developed nervous system,
greater strength, decisiveness, courage, enterprise, foresight, and a
lively and energetic temperament." All these qualities are necessary for
a spy, because without them, he would surely die within a month. In
addition, hunters must be more or less individualistic, independent, and have
their own initiative, as they often have to act alone. Living in large
communities, herd life is less necessary for them than for herbivores.
That is why true hyenas are often anti-social animals.
Hinnis are freedom-loving by nature. Although these animals

--- PAGE BREAK ---ities, herd life is less necessary for them than for herbivores.
That is why true hyenas are often anti-social animals.
Hinnis are freedom-loving by nature. Although these animals

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are very trainable, but it is possible to tame only two types of hyenas, and
not the largest ones, dogs and foxes, then it is possible to tame herbivores: the
fox, the weasel, the marten, the squirrel, the badger, the hedgehog, the hamster,
the mouse, the owl and the pig, i.e. 10 species. This circumstance is precisely
what determines the freedom of wild animals. Some of them, according to
the words of the authors, are distinguished by their particular
recklessness. There, for example, they write about the narwhal ( nasua
rufa), uто
She never submits to anyone and immediately flies into a rage, so they beat
her with a stick. Even beatings do not deter her, during which she only
becomes more determined, fighting off her guard and all outsiders."
If we accept now that the highest type of modern society is still lower
than the ideal society, and the lowest is higher than pithecanthropus, then
we can imagine the mixture of two opposite extremes. In certain
situations, the characteristics of both types are mixed in the most
incredible combinations, and in general it represents a gradual transition
between two extremes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. In certain
situations, the characteristics of both types are mixed in the most
incredible combinations, and in general it represents a gradual transition
between two extremes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10. OPINIONS ABOUT THE
EXTREME REGIONS
NENOVENSKY'S ROLE
The views of scientists on the two types of human beings. The active
and passive races. The races: the two-winged, the one-winged, and the
twilight. The anthropological-sociological model. Long-headed 6lozdiw
and short-headed 6ryuet. The impossibility of classifying humanity
according to the number of characteristics of long-headed people.
The contrast between the two types of society, to which I have
devoted the previous seven chapters, has long attracted the attention of
thinkers. Many have tried to explain it in terms of the mass of society.
"Peiro de Kudrener," says White, "is considered to be the first to
establish the theory that only a mentally active race is endowed by
nature with the need for knowledge and development." All the high
achievements of other races, according to Peiro, owe their existence to
the white people who came with them. Among the followers of White,
Kemm and Butme are mentioned, who made a clear distinction between
the higher and lower races. One of the verses of Khemma's poetry is
called "active and masculine," and the other "passive and feminine."
"The first," he says, "is more masculine than the second. It is
characterised by a spiritual attitude of courage, a desire for power and
freedom, a tireless thirst for action, a desire to move forward, into the
vastness, scepticism, sner7iya and ɤюбоѕнатеɤьность. The active
uеɤовеuеству Кɤемм includes: Persians, Arabs, 7реmов, Romans and
7ерманɯев. "These people," according to him, "move from one
country to another, destroy old empires, found new ones, are skilled
seafarers, they live in a free society, based on constant progress;
knowledge and thought take the place of blind faith. Science and art
flourish among them." Passive peoples include the Egyptians, the
Mithraists, the Japanese, the Messenians, and others.
The same applies to Natama m e7o orichinagovoy massilimaynuevstva na
gyudey "daytime" — mavmasmaya rasa, "new" — the "new ones" — and
the "twilight ones" — all the rest. But the latter,and others.
The same applies to Natama m e7o orichinagovoy massilimaynuevstva na
gyudey "daytime" — mavmasmaya rasa, "new" — the "new ones" — and
the "twilight ones" — all the rest. But the latter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e applies to Natama m e7o orichinagovoy massilimaynuevstva na
gyudey "daytime" — mavmasmaya rasa, "new" — the "new ones" — and
the "twilight ones" — all the rest. But the latter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

based on the same series of lamts, gives a new theory of anthropological
shmoya, massifying ueoveustvo acording to anthropological   data   and,   7avnym
obrazom,   according to measurement data. This theory, it seems to us,
is closer to the truth than any other, since it is based on the European
population.
3According to theory, the latter was formed from a mixture of
immutable anthropological types, of which two deserve the most
attention: the long-limbed, tall blondes, and the short-limbed, dark-
haired brunettes. This physical type corresponds to a certain psychological
type. Tall blondes are gifted with a sharp mind, initiative, and a rich
imagination. They are adventurous, finding satisfaction in the struggle
itself and in achieving their goals. They already see their interests, as well as
the interests of their nation and race, as the driving force that will
ultimately lead to indisputable victory, and their unwavering courage its
strong will and awareness of the unity of its race give it the greatest
chance of success.
Meanwhile, the brunette mоротmо7оɤовеɯ — uеɤовеm is passive,
cautious and practical. He lacks the ability to combine ideas and
concepts of reason and pragmatism. He lacks initiative. Sensitivity
prevails in him, but it is subtle and restrained. Courageous when
necessary, he does not like war. He has dreams and works patiently to
realise them. He is very distrustful, but he does not try to understand the
motives of those he does not trust. He is a traditionalist and has a sound common
sense. He finds progress unnecessary and loves uniformity in
everything. He understands and protects the interests of his family and
closest neighbours, but his narrow-mindedness often prevents him from
seeing the bigger picture. If he mixes with a dingo, then his offspring will
grow up to be selfish, lacking the individuality inherent in dingoes,
while family feelings and racial consciousness are lost.
The evidence of the psychological nature of both races and their
behaviour throughout history must be considered. Indeed, the
individualist is an individualist in history; he does not single out the
masses, but the individual. He does not sit in a corner, but everywhere,
throughout the entire world, and does not accept the existing conditions of
life. Above all, he demands respect for his "self" from the state and strives
to rise tosit in a corner, but everywhere,
throughout the entire world, and does not accept the existing conditions of
life. Above all, he demands respect for his "self" from the state and strives
to rise to

--- PAGE BREAK ---everywhere,
throughout the entire world, and does not accept the existing conditions of
life. Above all, he demands respect for his "self" from the state and strives
to rise to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a position of prominence, where he can assert his ego and satisfy his
ambitions. Progress is a necessary requirement for him. The same
applies to the masses: they suppress their herd instincts and lose their
individuality in the historical struggle. Instead of individual personalities,
the masses come to the fore. The short-sighted person prefers to bring
everything down to the same level rather than raise himself up. In
politics, he places state control above individual initiative. The short-
sighted person shows strong attachment to their place of birth and does
not like to move to the unknown. The character of both races is
especially evident in the field of religion. Examples: England, Scandinavia
and northern Germany are the strongholds of Protestantism, while
Catholicism is associated with the Roman Catholic race of France, southern
Germany and the western Slavs.
All people belong to the same human race, regardless of their
nationality. "I would not be surprised," says one of the leading
representatives of anthropological science, "if the enlightenment that came
from other races would be necessary to attribute to the presence in their
masses of a benevolent divine spirit, lost in the darkness of time." The
light-bearing race seems to have been the ruling class in Egypt, Hadea,
and Assyria. It spread to Persia and India, and possibly even to ancient
China. This race manifested itself in every way in the Roman Empire,
and in our time, the early stages of certain nations are clearly
proportional to the dominance of divine bonds in their ruling masses.
As we can see, the theory of anthropological sociology largely
coincides with ours, although it is based on completely different
grounds. It presents us with two types of beings, the former of which
obviously has a greater, and the latter a lesser admixture of the divine.
These studies are undoubtedly of great interest and will provide science
with many new discoveries. But the author, having developed his theory,
apparently wants to apply it to real life. It defines the proportion of
genetically modified bonds in certain groups (currently only in Europe),
probably with the aim of establishing   on   scientific   support
artificial   selection   amongdefines the proportion of
genetically modified bonds in certain groups (currently only in Europe),
probably with the aim of establishing   on   scientific   support
artificial   selection   among

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of
genetically modified bonds in certain groups (currently only in Europe),
probably with the aim of establishing   on   scientific   support
artificial   selection   among

--- PAGE BREAK ---

uеɤовеuества. According to our theory, it is possible to identify, with
the help of anthropological measurements, that in the most primitive
groups, all traces of the primitive mind have been preserved. It is quite
reasonable to expect that in those groups where there is a higher level of
intelligence, sner7ini, order and wealth, but unfortunately, much time has
passed since the fall of the ueɤoeve, and its mixing with pitemantropi
sashom cginom dagemo. The characteristics of the race are strange and
strikingly similar to those of the pitemantrop, so it is difficult to characterise
not only the race separately, but even the people as a whole, based on a
few characteristics.
For example, tall stature and a long nose are undoubtedly
characteristics of a superior race. But opponents of anthropological
theory quite rightly point to Napoleon and some other well-known people
who were short in stature, a slender build and sharp features. True, they
cannot cite many such examples, but even one is enough to make the
argument not entirely convincing, to treat it with scepticism. Similarly,
anthropological research has shown that that the average height and
weight of the Central European population is higher, taller and lighter,
respectively. However, there are many exceptions to this rule in different
parts of Europe. In Italy and Spain, adults are taller than children. In
England, the height of men and w o m e n is the same. In Russia, men are
taller than women, etc.
Let us try, together with the aforementioned shmoya, taking into
account the mother-son relationship and the fact that we are all of the
same race, if we compare all the races with each other, then sorting them
would be less than perfect. Indeed, we would not be able to find any
characteristics of the white race, but it is clear that there are peoples who
are inferior in all other respects, but who have the characteristics we
have identified. A particularly unfortunate feature would be the short
stature of all peoples, not only the Papuans, but also the   , the Mitayevs and
the Scmimos. Similarly, we would find tall stature among the
Patagonians, hairiness among the Australians, the Todov and Ainu, and
hairy bodies among the Lincich Negmen, etc.
However, the main obstacle to conducting theoretical anthropological
studies is thatPatagonians, hairiness among the Australians, the Todov and Ainu, and
hairy bodies among the Lincich Negmen, etc.
However, the main obstacle to conducting theoretical anthropological
studies is that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

every society has a tendency to be influenced by factors that are not always stable,
as we will see below. It rises and falls. Therefore, there is no possibility of
basing practical calculations on it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dency to be influenced by factors that are not always stable,
as we will see below. It rises and falls. Therefore, there is no possibility of
basing practical calculations on it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11. SECONDARY SEXUAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF
HUMANS
Secondary sexual characteristics in humans. Physical differences
between the sexes. Differences in their minds and characters. Changes
in the female organism after the union of a human being with a
pithecanthropus.
The noble race, with its intellect and character, was forged by the harsh
conditions of the early period, then women of that race bore all the
burdens of that struggle on their shoulders and found themselves in exactly
the same conditions as men, and consequently, they should have been subject to
exactly the same natural selection as men. That is why we believe that
modern European women, who has distanced herself from men in a way that
is incompatible with the struggle for existence, is not at all the same as the
woman who cannot compete with the dynamic European man. A jealous
friend would have to be replaced by a new one.
Indeed, if we compare the status and mentality of modern European
women with those of European men, the difference between them is not
so great, but rather very subtle. "From the moment of birth," says Ramé,
"there is an inequality in weight and height between children of both
sexes." Both are smaller in women than in men, and the difference
remains for life from the moment of birth. Women's bodies (compared to
men's) are shorter, their arms are shorter, their legs are shorter, their feet
are smaller, their muscles are thinner, their shoulders and chest are narrower, and
their hips and thighs are narrower than men's.
Men are smaller and in every way gentler than women. According to
Prof. Petri, it is more like a child's. The capacity of the uterus and the
absolute weight of the woman are smaller, the breasts are smaller, and the
isthmuses have fewer isthmuses. In terms of breast size, the Nez Perce,
Maya, and American Indians correspond to the smallest and average
breasts of non-Native women. Niyevoy women are smaller, and she has
a greater tendency towards promiscuity (prostitution). In terms of all its
characteristics, the female is somewhere between a child and a mature male.
For example, the female is less affected by the environment,dency towards promiscuity (prostitution). In terms of all its
characteristics, the female is somewhere between a child and a mature male.
For example, the female is less affected by the environment,

--- PAGE BREAK ---cuity (prostitution). In terms of all its
characteristics, the female is somewhere between a child and a mature male.
For example, the female is less affected by the environment,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

than a man, her hair is thicker and less prone to falling out.
We will not list all the other characteristics of the female body, but we
will mention that, that there are many of them and that, according to
scientists, the female body "is in a state of embryonic development at a
lower level than the male body, compared to the male body, and is closer,
on the one hand, to the child's body and, on the other hand, to the bodies
of lower species."
The same applies to women's minds, which differ from men's in terms of
their structure and functioning. "The main difference in the mental
abilities of both sexes," says Warvin, "is manifested in the fact that a
man, in everything he undertakes, achieves greater perfection than a
woman. This is evident in the areas of deep thought, imagination, and in
tasks that require the simple use of the senses and hands. If we were to
draw up two tables of men and women, the most self-confident in poetry,
painting, sculpture and music — in relation to their abilities, and their
achievements — in history, science and literature, listing the names under
each subject, then both tables will not stand up to comparison. We can
even assume, based on the assumption of an average level of intelligence, if
men have a positive advantage over women in many respects, then the
average level of mental abilities in men should be higher than in
women.
Nombroso 7 speaks about the same thing: "Although we can name
enough famous women in politics, literature, art and science, it is obvious
that these women are still inferior to such great men as, such as
Shakespeare, Basan, Aristotle, Newton, and Mime Angelo. Similarly, there
is a clear advantage on the side of men when comparing the frequency
of the appearance of geniuses in both sexes.
With regard to the senses, the same author, referring to the research
of various scientists, concludes that women have more developed senses
of touch, smell and hearing than men, but less developed senses of sight
and taste. In them, the sense of touch and sexual arousal are more
developed. Among female traits, he focuses on those that we have observed in
lower species, such as liveliness, greed and conservatism.
All the differences between men and women, which are called
"secondary sexual characteristics," are probably due to the fact that they
originated from the circumstance that meneed and conservatism.
All the differences between men and women, which are called
"secondary sexual characteristics," are probably due to the fact that they
originated from the circumstance that men

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
All the differences between men and women, which are called
"secondary sexual characteristics," are probably due to the fact that they
originated from the circumstance that men

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with pithecanthropus, who were probably their female counterparts. If he had
mixed there, as races and tribes mix in the present day, the resemblance
to the lower races would not be so striking in women as it is now. The
white woman did not mix with the male pithecanthropus, but the white
man took for his wives the female pithecanthropus, who were numerous
and beautiful, so that the remnants of the ancient white woman
completely disappeared, dissolving into the mass of new ones.
If men have undergone significant changes since the fall of the ancient
world, then women have undergone no less significant changes. Indeed, the
mass of women should have died out from one generation to the next. The
expression of Bibɤии, according to which Bo7, expelling Adam and Eve
from paradise, condemned our first parents to "give birth in pain," has an
undeniable scientific basis. The natural birth of every animal of the same
species should be the same for humans, i.e. painless, with all the other
physiological functions. If it is difficult, then this is due to an artificial
change in normal conditions. If the white man is a man of action, and the
man himself is a man of letters, then it is natural to expect that the birth
of such a child, due to the disproportionately large size of the baby,
would be difficult and that it would be impossible to get rid of the
burden of the mother, who had the widest hips. All the others would die
in childbirth and give birth in terrible pain.
Many women die from the inability to give birth, but the more of
them died, the wider the female population became, and those that remained
alive passed on their traits to their offspring, resulting in a female
population with a wide range.
However, the more they spread acros the globe, moving away from
Europe, and the more they acquired the characteristics of pithecanthropus,
the more they changed, the fewer children are born to them, and the less
women have to suffer from childbirth. And so it really seems that the
pelvic bones have significantly widened in white women, while in
women of lower races they have remained completely unchanged.
"We cannot," says Poss, "fail to award prizes to the most primitive
tribes." It is believed that women of lower classes endure childbirth very
painfully, sometimes even without any painkillers, and in very rare cases
die from childbirth, despite the fact thatitive
tribes." It is believed that women of lower classes endure childbirth very
painfully, sometimes even without any painkillers, and in very rare cases
die from childbirth, despite the fact that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, their fate is no different from that of men. But we must also
mention the women of lower classes, who give birth to children from
poor fathers. For example, it is reported that Indian women often die when
giving birth to children of mixed race, while their own children are born
healthy. Many Indians are well aware of the dangers of pregnancy from
mixed races and, in order to avoid it, prefer to eliminate the
consequences of conception in a timely manner using appropriate
means. The same is reported about the Ayurs in Eastern Alrim.
Everything that has been said about childbirth among women of
lower classes can be repeated about European lower classes, among
whom, as is well known, childbirth is also incomparably more difficult,
especially in the case of interracial marriages.

--- PAGE BREAK ---asses can be repeated about European lower classes, among
whom, as is well known, childbirth is also incomparably more difficult,
especially in the case of interracial marriages.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12. COMPARISON OF THE
NEW LIMORPHIA
NENOVEKA WITH
THAT OF OTHER ANIMALS
Comparison of sexual dimorphism in humans with dimorphism in
other animals. Why species are different from each other. Males are
larger and stronger than females. Greater passion in males. Greater
courage and aggressiveness. Hairiness of males. Greater variability of
secondary sexual characteristics in males. Transitional forms between
males and females. Acquisition of male characteristics by females.
Similarities between humans and animals in sexual development. The
same effect of castration. Sexual characteristics relate to those parts of
the body that distinguish species of the same genus. Females are the
opposite of males. Conclusion.
If we compare everything mentioned here about the results of
mixing bego7o ueģoeva with pitemantrop, with what what we know
about the rest of the animal world, it appears that the phenomena observed in
ueovema are repeated in the same form in animals.
One of the clearest indications of the hybrid origin of ueogema is the
sexual dimorphism we observe. However, this phenomenon does not
constitute an exclusive attribute of the human species, but is common to
other animals of similar size.
Pairs, consisting of individuals of the same species, called
"secondary pairs," are found not only among humans, but also among a large
number of animals. They are not found only in the lowest masses.
Although, according to Ƚарвин, the styles are influenced by the
different lifestyles of both parties, this is only an assumption. If we can
assume that they stem from the differences between the two in their way of
life and habits, then why not make the opposite assumption? Can we
assume that the differences in habits and lifestyles between people stem
from differences in their structure and internal characteristics? And the
latter can be seen in the same way, in the same species, that have sexual
dimorphism, belonging primarily to separate species and, due to some
kind of interaction between them, mixed with each other, forming new
species, 7hybrid.ay, in the same species, that have sexual
dimorphism, belonging primarily to separate species and, due to some
kind of interaction between them, mixed with each other, forming new
species, 7hybrid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ies, that have sexual
dimorphism, belonging primarily to separate species and, due to some
kind of interaction between them, mixed with each other, forming new
species, 7hybrid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Voluntary mating between males and females of different species is not
at all rare in nature; on the contrary, it is a fairly common phenomenon.
"It is well known," says Warvin, "that birds of different species often
mate with each other and produce offspring. There are many examples
of this." Most of these cases can be explained by the fact that the birds
remained single, unable to find a mate among individuals of their own
species. However, this explanation does not apply to many examples of
domesticated and domestic birds of different species that have become
friends, even though they live among individuals of their own species. Mr. 3.
S. Simpson notes that "it is well known that when many birds of
different species are kept together, they develop inexplicable
attachments to each other, and that they mate and produce offspring
with unrelated, apparently unrelated species (and species) just as
willingly as with birds of their own species." Elsewhere, Darwin discusses the
same mating behaviour not only in birds, but also in other animals.
We do not know what caused the confusion between different
species of animals, but one of them may have been the struggle for
existence, in which some species were exterminated unevenly, and
mainly one, the female, which is placed in a vulnerable position by the
need to lay and hatch eggs. "The same is true of birds," says Warvin, "they are
exterminated at the time when they are sitting on their eggs. In some
species, females are larger than males, and therefore can be
exterminated. In some species, they are less active and slower in their
movements than males, and therefore find it more difficult to avoid
danger than males. But if one animal is exterminated, then naturally the
other, guided by its instinct, will find a mate among related
neighbouring species and reproduce with them.
Darwin is puzzled by the question: how can we explain the fact that
species, when interbreeding, produce sterile offspring, while the fertility
of the species remains unchanged when they interbreed.
Most naturalists, the author argues, believe that species
"are separated by barriers" precisely in order to "prevent their mixing," but
in the opposite case, species living together could hardly remain
unmixed.
I find this answer unsatisfactory. Why would nature want to "prevent
mixing"? Why would itto "prevent their mixing," but
in the opposite case, species living together could hardly remain
unmixed.
I find this answer unsatisfactory. Why would nature want to "prevent
mixing"? Why would it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Are pure species really necessary? According to Lavin, the similarity
between species depends not so much on their closeness to each other as on
their "similarity of behaviour". Therefore, in the distant past, the distinction
between species may not have been so clear-cut. But since nature, having
endowed animals with a strong instinct, does not prevent some species from
mixing with others, such mixing occurs unhindered, until, having mixed,
until there are no species left in the world that are already incompatible with
each other and produce incompatible offspring. That is why we now believe
that species are "incompatible."
The similarity between humans and animals in terms of sexual
dimorphism is simply striking. In dimorphic animals, not only are the
same secondary sexual characteristics observed as in humans, but also
the same phenomena of sexual life.
1). They are larger and more numerous than in most other animals,
in birds and in mammals. Fish and insects are an exception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---humans, but also
the same phenomena of sexual life.
1). They are larger and more numerous than in most other animals,
in birds and in mammals. Fish and insects are an exception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2). According to Larpin, in many diverse and varied species, males are
more passionate than females and play an active role in courtship.
3). Samuys monkeys and other mammals are "more playful, braver and
more warlike than themselves." The warlike nature of most animals is
evident in what is called "battle spirit," i.e., in the terrible ferocity of
males compared to females. The fighting spirit is observed in aquatic and
terrestrial animals, in birds, mammals, reptiles, fish and insects.
4). The aggressiveness characteristic of us, men, is also found in
other animals. There, many monkeys and apes have well-developed
beards, while humans do not have them at all, or they are much smaller.
In other primates, the males have a large mane, which can be in the
form of a crest (in baboons, baboons and bison), and in the form of a wide
collar of hair (in lynxes) and in the form of thick fur on the head (in one
species of beaver).
5). Secondary sexual characteristics are very similar within one species
and very different between species; males differ from each other more
than females do. The same is true of birds, butterflies, moths, and spiders.
6). There is a clear series of transitional stages between males with the
most pronounced sexual characteristics and female-like males. The same is
observed in some insects.
7). The fact that women acquire masculine traits in old age is also
repeated in some birds. Darwin gives many examples of birds that
become very similar to their parents after hatching, and even more so after
2, 3, or 4 years. Similar phenomena are repeated with the growth on the
nose of some animals and with the three-pronged projectile of the musk
ox.
8).
The similarity between humans and dimorphic animals is
evident even in the order of their embryonic development. In the male
race, males are more similar to females, while in the female race, offspring
are more similar to females than to males. The same is conveyed by
Darwin from birds: "When the male is more colourful and more beautiful
than the female, the young of both sexes resemble the female at first
plumage, for example, in the case of the peacock and the peahen."
9). In some species, the male is distinguished from the female in
appearance, and their young resemble both parents in childhood. The
same is truexample, in the case of the peacock and the peahen."
9). In some species, the male is distinguished from the female in
appearance, and their young resemble both parents in childhood. The
same is true

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the peacock and the peahen."
9). In some species, the male is distinguished from the female in
appearance, and their young resemble both parents in childhood. The
same is true

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In many birds, in the guan and the puma, in some snakes, in the entire pig
family, and in tapirs. Their young do not resemble their parents, but rather
animals of a different species. There, the young resemble the adult male and
female. The young of many species resemble the adult female, etc.
10).
The same treatment has exactly the same effect on animals with
physical dimorphism, both male and female. A man who has undergone
castration in childhood, as is well known, loses certain secondary sexual
characteristics, such as hairiness on the face and a low voice. In birds and
mammals, these traits are acquired before adulthood, but in humans, they are
lost after early childhood. For example, in some species (such as the
northern species), whose roe consists of the female's own roe, the roe is not
renewed after spawning. Conversely, in one species of ant, the roe
characteristic of the mother grows in the mother after mating.
11). The difference between males and females is found in those
parts of the body that distinguish males from lower species, for
example, in the vegetation on the head, in height, etc. In animals,
according to Ƚарвину, secondary sexual characteristics are usually
found   обыmновенно   тех   uастей   ор7аниѕаɯии,
mоторыми раѕɤиuаются и виды то7о же рода.
12). Some animals are similar to humans even in their relationships
between the sexes. There, the white man enslaved the pitemantropes and got
together with them at first, probably through violence. Even now, females
are subordinate to males in sexual relations. Similar violence towards males is
also evident in many dimorphic species. It is worth remembering that our
domestic rooster behaves similarly to a male bird: his courtship
resembles violence. The same probably happens in other dimorphic
species, judging by the fact that many males have even developed so-
called "grabbing appendages" with which they hold the female.
One similarity between the phenomena accompanying sexual
dimorphism in humans and the same in animals is that cannot be
coincidental, and therefore suggests that they have the same cause in
humans and animals. Therefore, if the dimorphism in humans is the result
of interbreeding with pithecanthropus, then this discrepancy is a result of the
interbreeding of humans with ruling over all animals, yielding to the motorif the dimorphism in humans is the result
of interbreeding with pithecanthropus, then this discrepancy is a result of the
interbreeding of humans with ruling over all animals, yielding to the motor

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all related species of animals, forming hybrids, not subject to natural
selection, mixing with each other and giving rise to a huge number of
dimorphic species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---- PAGE BREAK ---

all related species of animals, forming hybrids, not subject to natural
selection, mixing with each other and giving rise to a huge number of
dimorphic species.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13. THE MENSQUAL
QUESTION IN HISTORICAL
TIMES
This question dates back to prehistoric times. The differences
between women and men, as between people in general, are not
established arbitrarily, but depend on the differences between them in
terms of intellect and character. In the Stone Age, women were equal to
men. Later, women, female pithecanthropus, became the property of
men. A profound difference between them. It must be assumed that the
character of women and their physical constitution changed many times
in prehistoric times. The position of women as slaves.
Now that the essence of our theory has been sufficiently clarified
before our readers, we have two very important tasks left to accomplish:
firstly, to show that our theory covers the most important aspects of
human life, and secondly, to confirm the theory with as much evidence as
possible. That is why we intend to devote the rest of the first volume to
this topic.
The most important aspects of social life are:
• relationships between people (family relationships),
• relationships between the higher and lower classes of society
(social) and
• relations between the government and the people (state relations).
These aspects the dominance of this view in our science and literature,
which stems from the principle of Namarma, is highly outdated and
therefore can hardly satisfy the needs of a thoughtful person.
For example, the low status of women in our society is explained by the
childish naivety that that men are superior to women in a certain
respect, and therefore they subjugate them, depriving them of their freedom
and independence of mind and character. This is contrary to the basic law of
nature, which states that when living beings engage in struggle with
each other, mental strength always prevails over physical strength, and
not vice versa.
It is worth remembering that domestic animals, gifted with greater
intelligence, are inferior to humans, are undoubtedly inferior to them in
intelligence, while intelligent breeds, endowed with higher mental
abilities, are everywhere superior to theirwith greater
intelligence, are inferior to humans, are undoubtedly inferior to them in
intelligence, while intelligent breeds, endowed with higher mental
abilities, are everywhere superior to their

--- PAGE BREAK ---igence, are inferior to humans, are undoubtedly inferior to them in
intelligence, while intelligent breeds, endowed with higher mental
abilities, are everywhere superior to their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, of course, a man, despite all his intellectual superiority,
unquestioningly submits to a woman who is smarter than him. In
marriage, he finds himself in a position of "under the thumb."
According to our theory, those who are more intelligent are those
who, in their lives, are more likely to be successful. And, of course, if a woman's
position in society is lower than that of a man, then this is due to her greater
dependence on the male, as we have already seen from the comparison
of the male and female organisms.
As can be seen from the above, women in prehistoric times had two
completely different characters. One was a woman who was completely
dependent — equal to men in intellectual, moral and physical terms,
because otherwise she would not have been able to endure the hardships
of that period. Such a woman, on the basis of everything that has been said,
should be treated as an equal to her husband.
The woman — the very image of a pet — was treated like a domestic
animal, and therefore enjoyed the status of a domestic animal and a slave.
The materials we have at our disposal paint a picture of both of these
relationships. However, the latter (the status of a slave) is more common,
while the former is a rare occurrence, and even then, mainly in times long past.
It is difficult to imagine that the materials found directly refer to
uncertain times, when both types of women may have existed
simultaneously: a lot of time has passed since then. But apart from the
unknown, there may be many reasons why women, according to their own
interests, approached men. We will talk about this in more detail later, but for
now, let's look at one of these reasons. It is often observed that
daughters take after their mothers, while sons take after their fathers.
"It is known," says Warvin, "When two different breeds are crossed,
there is a strong desire to return to one or both parent forms during the
course of successive generations." "It is extremely rare to see," writes Prof.
Mogi, "that two individuals are completely identical to each other in the same
family. If nature produces a different nature directly after it, then this
nature always appears in the female form from the mother, not from the
father. The existence of offspring of these people shows us that among
theirs a different nature directly after it, then this
nature always appears in the female form from the mother, not from the
father. The existence of offspring of these people shows us that among
their

--- PAGE BREAK ---directly after it, then this
nature always appears in the female form from the mother, not from the
father. The existence of offspring of these people shows us that among
their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

children, it is common to find self-sufficient daughters, but not sons.
And so, when the men of the mamo7o-gibo tribe moved around the globe,
they encountered the women of the dru7o7o tribe, who stood much lower
than them, i.e. lower than the pithecanthropus, then in the very first
generation, and perhaps in subsequent generations, their offspring would be
born much more female-like, then the male offspring born to mothers would
be significantly smaller than their fathers. Hence, in one and the same generation, the
new women would be equal to men and even superior to them, closer to the
ideal of beauty.
Intending to describe here the position of women who stood below
their husbands, and others who stood on an equal footing with them and
above them, we have compiled two tables based on reliable materials
from peoples of different parts of the world: one for the position of women
as slaves and pariahs, and the other for women as equals to men. Since the
first is based on a false premise, and the second is an exaggeration, we will start
with the first.
The very appearance of a girl in the world would not be considered a
birth, because a woman loses her virginity after the birth of a son. In the
village, parents welcome the birth of a daughter, but it is still considered
a disgrace to the family, and the mother sees herself as a criminal. A
family where girls are often born is considered to be possessed by
demons, and newborns are considered to be the devil's work. The parents are
subjected to a series of rituals, and the father beats the child with sticks and
stones, shouting and screaming, in order to prevent the demon from
returning.
They believe that men are created by a benevolent deity, while
women are created by a cruel one, and that women do not have souls. Most religions,
including Christianity, consider women to be inferior beings. She has no
right to enter the place where idols are worshipped, cannot attend
sacrifices, or visit temples. Therefore, in most religions, women are
excluded from the duties of priests and holy men. Likewise, paradise does not exist for
women, but only for men.
All peoples of the world agree that women are impure at the onset of
menstruation, during menstruation, and during childbirth. Menstrual
blood is considered the most terrible poison, the mother can imagine the
most terrible thing, and therefore during this period they are afraid not
only oftruation, and during childbirth. Menstrual
blood is considered the most terrible poison, the mother can imagine the
most terrible thing, and therefore during this period they are afraid not
only of

--- PAGE BREAK ---childbirth. Menstrual
blood is considered the most terrible poison, the mother can imagine the
most terrible thing, and therefore during this period they are afraid not
only of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The application of a woman's poison, but even in her absence,
abandoned by her. The action of the poison spoils inanimate objects,
destroys and kills plants, animals and people.
During menstruation, women are isolated from all other people in
the most secluded way possible, and since she can contaminate even the
most sacred things with her touch, they build a special hut for her on
high stilts, and they put the menstruating woman on a bed in the house and
hang her on a beam. In addition, they fear that the woman's husband will
not be harmed, so they forbid her not only to look at her husband, but even to
think about him. It goes without saying that during this period, the
woman is completely removed from public life; she is not only forbidden
to visit temples and make sacrifices, but even to think about God and
prayers. Special buildings for menstruating women take the form of dark
rooms, in which girls are kept in strict isolation during their period,
sometimes for up to 4, 5 or even 7 days.
During this period, women are subjected to harsh punishments and
cruel rituals, which are often violent and painful. For example, in Brazil, a
girl is brought out among her relatives and friends, and each of them
gives her 4-5 blows with a stick made of a certain plant, so that she does
not fall down unconscious and dead. But if she recovers, the operation
must be repeated 4 times every six hours and is considered a great
honour for the parents, unless someone hits her hard enough.
When a girl gets married, it is believed that she brings an evil spirit
into her husband's house, and therefore a series of rituals are performed
on her to exorcise the demons.
There are many different beliefs and customs among different
peoples regarding the position of women in the family, aimed at
humiliating them, and they could fill more than one book. She is beaten
every day, sometimes used as currency instead of coins, and even forced
to pay taxes. In Australia, a husband can kill his wife, and he can even eat
her, but even in more civilised countries, the murder of a woman is
considered less serious than the murder of a man. Among the Samoyeds
and in Korea, a woman does not even have her own name apart from
her husband's.re civilised countries, the murder of a woman is
considered less serious than the murder of a man. Among the Samoyeds
and in Korea, a woman does not even have her own name apart from
her husband's.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When meeting his wife, the husband says the same words as when
meeting his mistresses. The woman must stop and step aside, even if
she is an old woman, and the man must step aside. If a man and a
woman are walking together, the woman must walk on the right side, even if
she is of noble birth and the man is a commoner.
This mortal prejudice, which equates women with domestic animals, is
reflected in the corresponding proverbs that characterise the traditional
role of women. About the soul of a woman: "a woman has no soul, only
steam," "seven women have one soul." About her mind: "a woman has a
heart, but no mind,"
"A man with a copper head is better than a woman with a silver head,"
"A man sees what is real, and a woman sees what is false," "A woman's
advice is only good for a woman." On women's cunning and liveliness:
"Dogs have no faithfulness, women have no fidelity."
"The cunning of one woman is worth 40 oxen,"
"A woman is God's blessing, but her tongue is poison." On friendship:
"Do not be a friend to seven women, do not tell your wife secrets," "Three
women

--- PAGE BREAK ---

together make a market, and four make a fair." On how a husband
should treat his wife: "Beat your wife with a fur coat, there will be less
noise," "Beat your wife at lunch, and again at dinner, so that she will be
obedient, submissive, and easy to get along with," etc.
It is unclear whether these relationships are based on their actual
inequality, or whether they could develop in a civilised society, even if a
woman were not inferior to a man in terms of her intellect and character,
even if she were his equal in all respects?

--- PAGE BREAK ---whether they could develop in a civilised society, even if a
woman were not inferior to a man in terms of her intellect and character,
even if she were his equal in all respects?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14. THE GOLDEN AGE OF WOMEN
The golden age of women. Amazons. The participation of ancient
women in war. Women leaders. Cases of equality between women and
men in ancient and modern societies. Similarities between ancient
women's costumes and the costumes of spiritual leaders. Reasons for
this similarity.
The opinion that has long been held in European science about the
possibility of the existence in the distant past of "Eogot7o vem zheniny"
and the so-called "Ginemopatiuecmo sry". According to the writings of the
Swiss scholar Bachmann, even today there are those who adhere to this
opinion.
3ta shmoga, zhega domasat svoju mysch, ssyagaya mezhdu proum na
izvestnuyu gendenu o amasonakh, zheninakh-voinakh, po rassmasam
drevnykh poteryan okhutu vyhoditsya samuzh, they took up arms and
defended their republic from enemies without the help of men. In
addition to the ancient world, the legend of the Amazons was also known
in Bohemia, the Caucasus, Armenia, South America, and New Guinea.
According to our Russian sources, the Amazon type is "pozhaniy"
is depicted as follows:
He rides a horse, riding
Oh, she's riding a horse, and beneath
her is a blue saddle... Oh, she's riding
a wild horse, oh, beneath her and
beneath her... Oh, with one hand she
grabs hold
With a feather-like touch...
The strength and courage of this woman, according to the legends,
were such that in the first battle she defeated even our beloved hero,
Igyu Muromets.
But, apart from legends, we have a lot of historical data telling us
about the actual militancy of ancient women. It is said that the
Sarmatians, a people who lived on the shores of the Azov Sea, had
women who "did not need war." They would only marry there if they killed
enemies, otherwise they had no chance of getting married. The women
of the ancient Germanic tribes, Iberians and Mimes went to war with
their husbands, fiercely rushing into battle.if they killed
enemies, otherwise they had no chance of getting married. The women
of the ancient Germanic tribes, Iberians and Mimes went to war with
their husbands, fiercely rushing into battle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mies, otherwise they had no chance of getting married. The women
of the ancient Germanic tribes, Iberians and Mimes went to war with
their husbands, fiercely rushing into battle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unpleasant tasks and the prospect of death in slavery. In ancient Brittany,
women were always present in the army. There is historical evidence of the
existence of amazons in Tibet in the 6th and 7th centuries AD.
But even if we do not talk about historical times, they still exist
today: female guards in Siam and female warriors among the Daome and
Ashanti peoples in Africa. Similarly, in the country of Nunda, the moro
is accompanied by a female guard, and among the Lyugakhs, there are
female courtyard guards
— women. In addition, there are still peoples among whom women
fight in war alongside men, and they are just as good at it, wielding
weapons and participating in mock battles and providing support from
their midst.
In Arabian legends, a young woman sitting on a palm tree leads the
army on a campaign.    In ancient times, Germanic women, a n d now
the women of the Iromese, the Syrians and the Oibvaev, decide matters
of war and peace. In the Marianas, women w i t h swords i n their
hands judge a n d punish men.
The attitude of ancient women towards war is confirmed, moreover, by
archaeological findings. In Sweden and the Caucasus, women often take up
arms with their husbands and other weapons. The same is true of some
ancient customs. In Sweden, in the province of Bemin7, there is a custom
of giving a newlywed woman weapons of all kinds at her wedding, "to
remind her, they say, that she must accompany her husband into battle."
The Spartans demanded the same mental and physical endurance from
women as from men, and from men, and among the Boeotians, even to
this day, in order to make a woman endure suffering courageously, her
mother says: "You are a woman, and a woman must not complain."
If cowardice and pacifism lead to the loss of independence and
slavery, then militancy and bravery give them not only freedom, but even
power over others. There are peoples whose women are rulers and leaders.
We find such examples in antiquity, above all among the Semites:
Semiramis, the wise queen of Assyria, and the prophetess Deborah. Among
modern peoples, not counting Europeans, the Alimans are ruled by women.
Some of the Semitic states are even called not by their names, but by "the
country of the Moroccans" and "the country of the women." In many
places, the Semites spread the idea of founding states.Some of the Semitic states are even called not by their names, but by "the
country of the Moroccans" and "the country of the women." In many
places, the Semites spread the idea of founding states.

--- PAGE BREAK ---c states are even called not by their names, but by "the
country of the Moroccans" and "the country of the women." In many
places, the Semites spread the idea of founding states.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a stranger who had fallen in love with a local girl. In Asia, women are leaders
among the Maya, and in North America among the Narra7ansets, the
Chomonate, the Vinibe7 Mrim, the Potovati, the Tɤinmiti, the
Mɤosmimo, the Mvatcino, and the Natuesov. On the Pacific Islands,
there is a special female government that maintains order among women,
administers justice and punishes them without any interference from
men.
There are very rare cases of peoples whose women have equal rights
with men in the field of marriage, and there they can be priests. There is
even a surprising and original people, the Minbereys, who rejoice in girls.
Namone, we can list a number of ancient and modern peoples among
whom women enjoy a high status in the family and in society. They are
respected, exempt from heavy work, treat her well, do not allow her
husband to beat her or abandon her to the mercy of fate without any
means of support in the event of divorce, and allow her to participate in
community councils with the right to vote.
These include:
• In Europe: the ancient Zoroastrians, Bashmirs and Mamums.
• In Asia: the ancient Persians, Armenians, Min7reɯy, mир7иѕы,
Zhitegini Hindus, Hindus, Siamese, Māyāy, Uymuи, Mоreyɯy and
Samoyeds.
• In Australia: the Aborigines.
• In America: the Mohawk, the Navajo, the Indians of Nimapaya and
Opehona, the Seneca, the Ottawa, the M'sugan, the Uino, the Nutma, and
others.
One of the remains of their ancient customs can be seen in their
ancient costumes, which were apparently once worn by men. The literature
on this subject is quite extensive. For example, ancient depictions of
some goddesses in male attire on coins and with weapons in their hands.
These are the goddesses Ishtar of the Assyrians and Artemis of the
Greeks. But the image of a woman in a male costume was not only
symbolic and a fantasy of the artist, as can be seen in the Second
Samaria: "A woman shall not wear men's clothing, nor shall a man wear
women's clothing, for this is an abomination before the Lord your God."
Of course, such a prohibition would not make sense if there were no
corresponding customs.
This also includes a very interesting and, at first glance, surprising
phenomenon, namely the similarity and identity of women's folk
costumes with the costumes of spiritual leaders. For example, certain partsncludes a very interesting and, at first glance, surprising
phenomenon, namely the similarity and identity of women's folk
costumes with the costumes of spiritual leaders. For example, certain parts

--- PAGE BREAK ---esting and, at first glance, surprising
phenomenon, namely the similarity and identity of women's folk
costumes with the costumes of spiritual leaders. For example, certain parts

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the Jewish High Priest, as described in the Bible, can be found in
ancient women's folk costumes.
The main headdress of the High Priest, the "midar", consisted of a
soft cap similar to a yarmulke and a four-cornered standing metal plate on
the forehead. The same headdress is worn by our contemporary women
and girls in the Kazan region, but the headpiece on the head is not made of
metal, but of fabric. The same headdresses have been preserved among
women in Tibet, among the Bannas (in Alrim) and among the common people
of the 7ogand.
The Jewish high priest wore a metal square on his forehead, attached
to metal chains on his shoulders.
"The judge's robe." The same decoration is worn by Egyptian priests.
Squares on the 7th are still worn by mandarins and women: Jewish, Uzbek,
Uighur, Votyak, Bashkir, Boghar and Shveyar.
The metal epi, hanging from both sides, is found in the Swiss.
Similar to the bells that adorned the robes of the First Apostle, and
which are currently sewn onto the robes of the Orthodox archbishop, they
were found in the ruins as decorations on the costumes of ancient Russian
women. The same decorations were used in ancient times by the Gito.
They are still used today by the Shvedom, Gatshem and Mordov. In Alrim,
An7o, and Gund, they are a sign of dignity among the nobility, and there
they are also worn by women of noble birth. It is believed that wearing
a name in ancient times had a special meaning. The Greeks, Romans and
Scandinavians preserved their names as talismans and attributed them to
witches, through the power of magic, day turns into night, and night into day.
Some elements of our Orthodox clergy's attire are found in the folk
costumes of various peoples who have no connection with Orthodoxy.
There, the main headdress in the form of a bishop's mitre is worn by
women-deacons in the vicinity of 7. Revia.
A very similar resemblance to our sacred image in the form of a skirt,
worn on the head, with a cutout for the hands, can be seen in the costume
of the women at the Riga Stone Bridge exhibition.
The Byzantine men's clothing depicted on Byzantine icons and
called "cammom" and "damatim", with a cutout for the hands, can be seen in the costume
of the women at the Riga Stone Bridge exhibition.
The Byzantine men's clothing depicted on Byzantine icons and
called "cammom" and "damatim"

--- PAGE BREAK ---the hands, can be seen in the costume
of the women at the Riga Stone Bridge exhibition.
The Byzantine men's clothing depicted on Byzantine icons and
called "cammom" and "damatim"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is closely related not only in terms of its style, but also in terms of its
embroidery with Mordovian "panarom" (upper women's costume).
Jewish prayer shawl ("tas"), which is now also worn by Buddhist
monks in Mongolia, and which constitutes a necessary attribute of the
ancient peoples, Romans, Greeks and Scythians, we now find it among the
poor, among the peasants and among the Swedes.
In Abyssinia, the clergy wear shoes with upturned toes, and the local
women wear the same footwear.
Besides that, there is not a single piece of men's or women's clothing
that we would not find among our neighbours. There, we find men's
shawls among women: 7уɯуɤьсmих (in the Carpathians), mаѕансmих
Tatars, пшавов, 7а7ауѕов (in Bulgaria), джаɤдов, abyssinians and
siamese.
Vegomorussian men's shirts are worn by women: In7usheys, Udinovs,
Mistinovs, Pshavovs, Ueuenuevs, Mavmaschik Tatars and Armenians.
At the same time, skirts, which are considered throughout Europe to be
women's clothing, are worn by men in Abkhazia. The same category of
lamtov includes the similarity of men's and women's upper garments,
which is often observed among the Magors and Belorussians, and is also
found among the Mongols and Mamaks. And when there is a difference
between male and female costumes among some peoples, in memory of
their former identity, it is customary for girls to wear certain parts of the
male costume on solemn occasions, such as weddings, as we see among
the Russians.
The custom of our Orthodox clergy to wear long robes, as is well
known, coincides with the same custom of all European women. It is
considered very ancient, international and, according to Herbert
Spencer, is a sign of "seminal dignity".
As for the headdress, it is worth mentioning that Jewish women
"Peyses", in the form of dɤinny ɤomons on viscmas, are found in
various localities belonging to women's mоstuma: among the mrymich
Tatars, among the 7a7aуs (in ancient times), among the women of the
Turkish Serbs, among the Russian Zaganom, among the Rusyns, in
Kazakhstan, among the Masans of Votia, and among the women of Siam.
The similarity between spiritual costumes and women's costumes seems
to me to be, among the Russian Zaganom, among the Rusyns, in
Kazakhstan, among the Masans of Votia, and among the women of Siam.
The similarity between spiritual costumes and women's costumes seems
to me to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

striking. This is probably because women, due to conservatism, and
clergy, due to prescription, wear the same ancient costumes that were
once worn by men and women.
Thus, from the materials we have collected, it is clear that
Bakholena's claim is not unfounded, as evidenced by    отдагенном
прошгом    уеговеуества    сгеды
"7inemopatiuemoy sry." We can now correct her view in this regard, since
"sogotoy vem" women are not a phenomenon that is obligatory and
simultaneous throughout the world. At different times, it existed among
certain peoples, but among some it may have been repeated at long
intervals, while among others it may not have existed at all. This is evident
at least from the fact that the examples we have given of the high status of
women in society are found in the customs and beliefs of almost all
peoples.
In the next chapter, we will provide more material on the same   issue, but a
more detailed discussion is possible in the second volume of this work,
which will be about the "degeneration of society".

--- PAGE BREAK ---e will provide more material on the same   issue, but a
more detailed discussion is possible in the second volume of this work,
which will be about the "degeneration of society".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15. MATERNAL RIGHT
Maternal law. The origin of this custom and the reasons for its
prevalence. The difference between maternal law and paternal law. The
choice of a spouse based on the characteristics of the race. Testing their
minds with riddles and impossible tasks. Four-line verses. Requirement
for a cheerful disposition. Testing the women's bravery and physical
strength.
Yes, as we mentioned in the previous chapter, there is a certain
degree of continuity, and in the lives of peoples there may be certain
similarities, in one and the same circumstances, women were born who were
equal to men and even superior to them, then naturally, that those
women, in the same transitional period, would have given birth to male
offspring from husbands who were even lower than them, higher than
other women.
This fact cannot go unnoticed. Indeed, many folk customs confirm the
accuracy of our assumption.
"A mother's womb," say the ancients, "has an effect on the child,"
and they believe that no matter what happens, a child born to a noble
mother will always be noble. This opinion was shared, among others, by
the famous Nimur. On this basis, unequal marriages were permitted for men
of higher social status, but not for women. In Alrim, for example, princesses
are completely free to choose their husbands, and even if he is a slave, the
children are considered princesses. Princesses could, by their choice
alone, elevate themselves to the rank of commoners. For the same
reason, among many peoples, aristocratic descent was passed down
through the female line rather than the male line.
This custom, known as "matrilineality," belongs to a group of
international and very widespread customs, which testifies to its great
antiquity.
"When Herodotus," says Ratay, "Our people are unusual in that, in   ,
children take their mother's name, and the family line is traced through the
female rather than the male line. He assumes that this people is different
from all others. But we now know that this custom exists among many
peoples, both consciously and unconsciously, in the form of traditions.
The inheritance of property through the female lineerent
from all others. But we now know that this custom exists among many
peoples, both consciously and unconsciously, in the form of traditions.
The inheritance of property through the female line

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs. But we now know that this custom exists among many
peoples, both consciously and unconsciously, in the form of traditions.
The inheritance of property through the female line

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is found among all peoples. "Mam Nennan," says Herbert Spencer,
"believes that matrilineal descent prevails in all parts of the world and,
if necessary, I could support this with numerous examples from many
other sources."
The natural tendency is to act in the first stages, mixing the higher race
with the lower, and then, when inequality between men and women was
eliminated, men would still be superior to women in terms of their   organisation,
and   then   "maternal   right"   would be replaced
"otovsim", as evidenced by numerous historical data. The customs
adopted at that time have been preserved in folk rituals and traditions,
especially in weddings. They testify very clearly that in ancient times,
when selecting a bride, the selection was made by means of a single
woman, who was required not to be
"femininity" as we understand it today, but rather qualities that made
them attractive to men, i.e. those that we attribute to a certain kind of
charm.
These include: 1) a sharp mind, 2) cheerful disposition, 3) ability to
inspire others with a positive mood, 4) bravery, 5) courage, 6) strong will,
7) honesty and, of course,
8) the appearance of a noble race.
From the story of Savsmoi, who visited Sogomona, we know that
mental tests were conducted in ancient times by sadomasochists. Those
who passed them were considered wise. And indeed, we see that a young
bride is tested by the elders at her wedding. This is the custom of Osmar
Kogber7 in Masurov Suvamcmoy 7uberniya. In a corrupted form, we
find the same custom among the Bessarabians. There, the groom's
father, who appears at the wedding as a representative of the groom's side,
tests the same things, but not the bride herself, but her shalers (locally
known as "ismetui"). This custom was common among ancient peoples
and was the subject of songs and poems. American writer Naid collected
many of them from the folk literature of various peoples and included
them in his own versions with Scottish bagpipes. Here we will give the
Russian version on this theme:
Do you have five coins, maiden?
— I'll give you ten, my son, even if it's ten. So,
girl, what's the matter?own versions with Scottish bagpipes. Here we will give the
Russian version on this theme:
Do you have five coins, maiden?
— I'll give you ten, my son, even if it's ten. So,
girl, what's the matter?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Well, girl, is it above? Well, girl, is
it below? Well, girl, is it without
sorrow? Well, girl, is it without mind?
Vzh i uto sto, devia, bes otvetu?
— More beautiful than the sun, my son, you are
bright. Higher than the sun, my son, you are
shining.
Nаɲе роɲи, son of mупеuесmий, uасты ѕвеѕды.
Bes mореньев, son of mупеuесmий, mрупен
жемuу7. Bes umomу, son of mупеuесmий, teuет
реumа.
Without answer, my son, it is God's will.
— Wait, maiden, wait.
Come and be with me, be my wife.
The meaning of this song even directly implies that the maiden who
has given her consent has the right to leave.
It is interesting that in many versions of Russian songs on this
theme, the girl who has given up her virginity is called a "seven-year-old
girl". Of course, singers today cannot explain what "seven-year-old"
means, but in all likelihood, it refers to early marriage, as in ancient
times girls married at a young age.
In addition to   ,   girls   experienced   and   were called
"impossible tasks". If there is an impossible question to answer, then the
answer to it may be the same question, which is no less impossible, but
to come up with it, one needs wit. This theme is also very widespread
throughout the world, and the first one is also found in the Scottish
bagpipes of Naida. Here is its Russian version:
— Don't be shy, don't say thank you, look
straight at me, I've loved you for a long time,
listen, I'll say it:
Give me a drink of my own among the blue sea.
So that the raven does not fly away, the swan
does not fly away,
Everything is as it should be.
— Sew, my dear, shoes and sandals,
So that the dog does not get lost, never
scatters,
Do not lose your patience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---away, the swan
does not fly away,
Everything is as it should be.
— Sew, my dear, shoes and sandals,
So that the dog does not get lost, never
scatters,
Do not lose your patience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spin, my dear, the thread of rainbows,
So that the threads don't tear, the shoes don't
wear out,
So that I could sew them... etc.
The form of this song, an exchange between a young man and a
young woman in quatrains, is reminiscent of a number of other songs,
which probably had the same meaning, but were not at all rare in the
folk repertoire, especially among the Turkish tribes. However, instead
of unfulfilled desires, he and she exchange quatrains in which each tries
to outdo the other with their wit. In 7a7ausov, this relationship between
boys and girls has been preserved to this day in the form of a game. A
lack of wit is often compensated for with crude jokes, insults, and even
swearing. Examples of such quatrains are given in our book "The
Narrative of Bessarabian Zazaus".
We have not been able to find any wedding rituals in which the
bride's cheerful disposition was tested, but their existence in ancient
times is confirmed by the requirement imposed on the bride's friends at
Venomorus weddings, that she be cheerful, make everyone laugh, and be very
talkative and playful. The requirement for the bride herself seems to be
transferred here to her friend, who represents her and is initially chosen
by her relatives.
The same phenomenon can be observed at a Jewish wedding: there, the
role of the maid of honour is performed by a hired specialist, the
"batchen", whose duty is to compose wedding songs and then make the
guests laugh with them, which he achieves with appropriate songs.
At the wedding, the bride must be ready to give up her freedom for
seven days, which requires intelligence, initiative and perseverance on
her part. which are fulfilled in accordance with the circumstances, i.e. in a
reasonable manner and to a certain extent. At present, this requirement
is circumvented: instead of brides, hired women are used.
There are many customs that testify to the testing of a girl's martial
abilities.
This is probably the origin of one wedding custom in Belarus, which
involves young men riding past the bride, who is armed with a cane, and
trying toy to the testing of a girl's martial
abilities.
This is probably the origin of one wedding custom in Belarus, which
involves young men riding past the bride, who is armed with a cane, and
trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---a girl's martial
abilities.
This is probably the origin of one wedding custom in Belarus, which
involves young men riding past the bride, who is armed with a cane, and
trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

take her cane away, while she hits them on the buttocks. If a girl
manages to defeat them, she is called "strong and courageous" and is
declared the mistress of the house.
In some peoples, says Poss, we encounter a struggle between a man
and a girl who are about to enter into marriage. There, among the
Amazons, a duel must take place between the groom and his chosen
bride; whoever wins retains the dominant position in the marriage.
V 7 The suitor, who is not the bride's fiancé and does not love her,
tries to win her over by means of a duel.
In Portugal, there is a popular saying: "When a girl in Miranda du Oro
is about to get married, she is not satisfied until the wedding and treats her
fiancé, who is motivated by her, in a "harsh manner"; at the same time,
she does not accept expressions of tender love, but tries to respond in
kind, hitting her future husband with all her might."
It is known that the song Nibelungenlied also describes a similar
struggle with the chosen one. Here, it refers specifically to the wedding
of Gunther and Brunhilde: "She tied his hands and feet, carried him away
and hung him on a hook driven into the wall; he could not prevent it; he
almost died from her strength." The extraordinary strength of Enidra could
subdue even the most resistant girl: "She overthrew him, but did not give
him strength and stamina, so he rose, resisting her efforts; the struggle
was fierce: in a moment, the sound of blows rang out here and there.
They fought with such fury that it was simply astonishing that they both
managed to stay alive."
Even now, according to Possa, the struggle between the groom and
his beloved plays a very important role in Germany. We Russians
apparently had the same thing in the old days, judging by the content of
some round dance songs, which convey the idea that
"detina-ne7oɤem"
Ask the girls to fight, All the
girls ran away, Vanya, my
friend, be afraid, Only one girl
stood her ground, She fought
with my friend, She defeated my
friend,
Kusham, trampled his hat into the ground.e girls to fight, All the
girls ran away, Vanya, my
friend, be afraid, Only one girl
stood her ground, She fought
with my friend, She defeated my
friend,
Kusham, trampled his hat into the ground.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Lower Austria, there used to be annual gatherings between young
men and women in the village. In our country, it seems that the
remnants of these gatherings are preserved in the old custom of "in the
village".
As for the requirements for the bride's appearance, this issue will be
discussed in the next chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts of these gatherings are preserved in the old custom of "in the
village".
As for the requirements for the bride's appearance, this issue will be
discussed in the next chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16. ISKVSSTVENNYE VROȽSTVA,
PRAKTIKVEMY S ɏENBŒ
VKRAŠENI
Artificial deformities practised for the purpose of beautification.
Ideals of beauty. Artificial deformation of the skull. White lead and
rouge. The use of colourful paints, especially among coloured races.
Masks. The origin of earrings. Artificial enlargement of calves and arm
muscles. Artificial obesity.
When the white race mixed with the pithecanthropus, and the higher
races with the lower ones, they could not help but notice the changes for
the worse that were taking place in the appearance of their offspring. And
since the race was highly developed, it was natural to try to return to it by all
possible means. They tried to achieve this in many ways, especially by
choosing brides according to a certain ideal of beauty and deliberately
disfiguring their bodies to make them resemble those of the beautiful
race.
Although the ideal of beauty is usually celebrated in love songs and thus
seems to be immune to change, songs also change and evolve over time,
as they diverged from reality and people became more pessimistic.
Therefore, we can only hope for the ideal of a society of equal people, at
least those who have not been defeated. And here we actually find: a single,
i.e. thin and bare neck, a snow-white hand, a small mouth, small hands, a
small nose with a high bridge, straight, not hooked and not hooked, not
sharp and blunt, and so on.
In addition to their modern concepts of female beauty, we cannot
ignore the ancient ideal, especially when we consider the deformities to
which they subject themselves, particularly women, in the name of
beauty. This disfigurement was probably intended to be a form of beauty,
but then it became a habit, and people tried to follow the old custom, which
everyone was accustomed to, without understanding either its meaning or its
significance.
The word is lost in the rebirth of the pitemantrop, becoming
meaningless, and the meaning is lost — nothing remains. Thereforetomed to, without understanding either its meaning or its
significance.
The word is lost in the rebirth of the pitemantrop, becoming
meaningless, and the meaning is lost — nothing remains. Therefore

--- PAGE BREAK ---derstanding either its meaning or its
significance.
The word is lost in the rebirth of the pitemantrop, becoming
meaningless, and the meaning is lost — nothing remains. Therefore

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was necessary to deform newborn babies in this way in order to
strengthen their bones and muscles. But then, with the passage of time,
the original idea was abandoned along with the method of deformation.
To date, the idea of its necessity has been abandoned. But the original
intention was indeed to make a difference, as can be seen, first of all,
from the fact that the practice of reforming the church is widespread in
Europe. Asia and America, where motorised and medium-sized races
live, and is absent in America, where races are non-motorised and
therefore not motorised. Secondly, of the seven methods of depilation
used in different regions and described by Ranme, two have the clear
intention of making depilation more painful.
The origin of this term dates back to ancient times, as it has been found in
ancient writings in Crimea, Hungary, Germany, and even England. It was
also used in historical times, and was written about by Hippocrates,
Pomponius Mela, Pliny and Strabo. It was also present in medieval Europe:
among the Germans, Slavs, Italians, Slavs and Huns, and today it is widely
distributed throughout the world among the most distant peoples. It
exists in Europe (France, Belgium, Serbia, Hungary, Turkey, Crimea,
and the Caucasus), in Asia (Sumatra and the Nimbars Islands), in many
places in Polynesia, in North America, where it is considered the most
widespread country of origin (Chinami, Nutma, mri, na7ya, the Indians
of the Phorida, the Tusem of the Panama Isthmus, the Indians of the
Karolina and Orenburg) and in South America ( the Marabos and
Patagons). It is clear that this is necessary for the higher classes of
society, and it goes without saying that the greatest claims belong to the
highest class, monetarily, the highest social classes. And   , according
to Hippomrates, among the ancient Greeks, the deformed form of the upper
class was associated with nobility. Among the Indians of North America,
it is associated with the privilege of free masses and is imposed on
slaves. The same was true in ancient Peru. Tormeada argues that the
material form of the state, which replaced the tribe, took the form of a
special privilege of the highest aristocracy.
However, they lost their rosy cheeks and became thin, then sallow, and, in
hot countries, even feverish. Our European fashionistas also tend to
blush and blush, but they do so subtly,t aristocracy.
However, they lost their rosy cheeks and became thin, then sallow, and, in
hot countries, even feverish. Our European fashionistas also tend to
blush and blush, but they do so subtly,

--- PAGE BREAK ---er, they lost their rosy cheeks and became thin, then sallow, and, in
hot countries, even feverish. Our European fashionistas also tend to
blush and blush, but they do so subtly,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

because there are many women who do not need such adornment.
In nations that are not quite as fair-skinned, but with more swarthy
men, such as our neighbours and the Japanese, the same thing is done by all
women, and therefore it ceases to be a secret and even becomes an
obligatory custom. For example, a modern groom presents his bride
with a veil and blush as part of his wedding gifts.
Namone, among peoples with completely different cultures, the
division of labour into male and female roles takes on a particularly
significant meaning. For example, among the ancient Egyptians, blush
was applied with a brush. According to Ratay, this practice of applying blush to
the cheeks and forehead was widespread throughout the world. In
Australia, for example, they wear white and red, and they also apply white and red
makeup. The same practice of painting themselves in white and red is
also found among North American Indians. Alrimansmi do not paint
themselves in red and white when going to war. The same is true of the
American Indians, who are more moderate. Some paint themselves in
the colours of the dead. As for the process in this case, which also refers
to distant times, it is necessary to mention the masks, which, apparently,
have replaced incense, judging by the fact that they are used in exactly
the same situations, for burning and sprinkling. For example, masks are
used by North American Indians. They have been used in religious
ceremonies since ancient times: in China, Tibet, India, ancient
Mesopotamia and ancient Peru, among the Sumerians, Magyars,
Almans and Aegeans. In ancient times, they were used in warfare by the
Japanese. And, of course, in funeral rites, they were worn on the heads of
the dead, used in ancient times: in Egypt, in Phoenicia, in Nineveh, in
ancient Italy, on the Iberian Peninsula, in France, in Crimea, in Siberia,
and in ancient Peru.
In the same colours, i.e. white and brown, they also paint and draw to
depict blondes and redheads.
In many races, according to anthropologists, ear lobes are absent.  This
is true, for example, of the Japanese, other East Asians, and the Mabibs of
North America.  This explains the desire of certain races to imitate the deaf
by hanging weights from their ears.  Botomudy   and  nemotorye   dru7ie
brasɤьsmine    пɤемена,  po  сɤовам    Ƚ. Anuina,  have    the  habit  of
teaching  children  in  their  childhood  ear  moums  and  inserting  them intor ears.  Botomudy   and  nemotorye   dru7ie
brasɤьsmine    пɤемена,  po  сɤовам    Ƚ. Anuina,  have    the  habit  of
teaching  children  in  their  childhood  ear  moums  and  inserting  them into

--- PAGE BREAK ---and  nemotorye   dru7ie
brasɤьsmine    пɤемена,  po  сɤовам    Ƚ. Anuina,  have    the  habit  of
teaching  children  in  their  childhood  ear  moums  and  inserting  them into

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The holes are made with large wooden drills. Over time, the drills
become larger and larger, reaching a diameter of 3–4 inches. The
practice of stretching ear lobes is very widespread. In addition to various
American tribes, including the ancient Peruvians, it has been found in
Polynesia: on Easter Island, the Fiji Islands, the Marquesas Islands, the
Tovari Islands, etc., in Asia: in Assam, Aramane, Burma, Naos, India,
on the Seychelles, on the islands of the Magai Archipelago, Nimobar,
Admiralty, Solomon, New Hebrides, and others, in Australia and among
ancient peoples. This custom apparently has some connection with
religion. On Easter Island, where the ears of the Tusi are artificially stretched
to the point of being elongated, they resemble ancient Mocha statues, which also
have elongated ears. Many sculptural images of Buddha depict him with
long, hanging ears and pierced earlobes. The same is true of Indian idols
of various names. In ancient Peru, the wearing of a moustache was a
sign of noble birth and was accompanied by special ceremonies in the
temple of the sun.
This explains why our women wear earrings. It is also clear why
some people wear earrings not only in their ears but also in their noses,
as it is well known that the lower races are distinguished by their flat and
upturned noses.
It is known that the lower races are distinguished by the absence of
teeth on their feet and the underdevelopment of their muscles, and
therefore there is a need to laxate and stretch them. Artificial
impoverishment is practised, among others, by the American Indians.
With this, they wear tight clothes and headbands that are lower than normal, so
that they fit into the body. Alrimans, in order to hide the thinness of their
arms, wear a series of metal rings on them, covering the entire arm. Abyssinians
use the same clothes and sheepskin coats and wind them around their
legs in 3-4 rows. Namely, our ancestors, the Kasans of the Ubernia region,
the Magopossians of the Rovensko region, women of the Horde peoples
in the Himalayas and Yamut achieve the same thing by winding large
pieces of cloth around their legs, which then become like logs.
In a similar way, some peoples try to soften their muscles, so they
stretch and massage them with sticks and stones in order to relieve tension
and prevent illness. This is probably where the bracelets worn by our
ladies originate.to soften their muscles, so they
stretch and massage them with sticks and stones in order to relieve tension
and prevent illness. This is probably where the bracelets worn by our
ladies originate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cles, so they
stretch and massage them with sticks and stones in order to relieve tension
and prevent illness. This is probably where the bracelets worn by our
ladies originate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There, small feet are considered a sign of belonging to a higher race,
in contrast to lower races, whose feet are large, but in Italy we find the
usual deformity of feet, in order to make them smaller. Similar practices
are also common among ladies of the upper classes.
In fact, the same desire to imitate the beautiful race is probably also
quite widespread among women who are artificially obese, as they are
often pressured to lose weight before their wedding and are discouraged
from eating by their mothers-in-law. This custom is observed in North
America, India, Poland and America. In our Russian regions, in the
Orenburg region, among Swedish women, the common people, the removal
of the veil is replaced by the wearing of a large headscarf.
Probably, the tuuost of cuitaɤa mо7da-to is one of the most important
attributes of the race, judging by the ancient beliefs of the Mitaiɤev,
which placed the mind in the heart and considered thinness to be a sign of a
healthy mind. The Chinese image of Buddha Shakyamuni is a
manifestation of this idea: a protruding belly, a shapeless body, and a face
swollen with fat. Not openly indulging in gluttony, the monks are completely
self-sufficient, and people say of them: "They are wise." In the Thai tradition,
the abdomen is considered the seat of life and spirit. On the islands of
Tonga, the seat of courage, strength and spirit is considered to be the
stomach, which, according to the Tongan people, is especially important
for brave men. Plato also considered the stomach to be the seat of the soul.
Below we will see why obesity is characteristic of the higher races,
and not the lower ones.
We have listed here the seven most common forms of disfigurement with
the aim of improvement, and primarily those in which imitation of the
beautiful race is evident. But there are others, such as tattoos, hanging
weights from the teeth, shaving the head in the shape of a cross, etc., in
which no such imitation is evident. In this regard, it should be noted that
mutilations are not always based on the images of the white race, but
also on those that were given by the higher races, which appeared to be
inferior.
In the second volume of our work, we will focus specifically on the
reasons and conditions that led to the migration of the higher races. Here
we should recall that these migrations were not always peaceful; they could
also be violent. Therefore, even if they sometimes have certain shortcomings,
certain characteristics of lower races, they are still equal to the former.rations were not always peaceful; they could
also be violent. Therefore, even if they sometimes have certain shortcomings,
certain characteristics of lower races, they are still equal to the former.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

an object of imitation for Tusemuev. In this way, if we take this example,
we can see that it is not possible to escape with seven teeth (lower teeth) are
visible, then the latter, imitating their noble predecessors, try to lengthen
their teeth by hanging weights from them. In fact, there are very few
such cases of disfigurement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---visible, then the latter, imitating their noble predecessors, try to lengthen
their teeth by hanging weights from them. In fact, there are very few
such cases of disfigurement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17. THE ORIGIN OF THE VARIOUS
FORMS OF MARRIAGE
The origin of various forms of marriage. Monogamy. Polygamy.
Traces of monogamy in polygamy. Polyandry. Unequal distribution of
the sexes.
Among different peoples, there are, as far as we know, three main
forms of marriage: 1) Monogamy and monogamy, 2) Polygamy and
polyandry, and 3) Polyandry and polyandry.
When examining these three forms, the first question that arises is:
which of them is the oldest? To explain this, let us turn to the animal
kingdom. Darwin, examining the forms of brachial glands in various
animals, did not find polygyny in lower species, but in other species he
found both monogamy and polygyny. but rather the connection between
multiplicity and secondary sexual characteristics. Namely, polygyny
prevails in dimorphic animals, i.e. those that have secondary sexual
characteristics, while in other animals that do not have such
characteristics, monogamy prevails. There, among animals with clear
sexual dimorphism, the author mentions birds: tuenes, gvov, dimi
goshades from the Fomgend Islands, mabana, antigopa, sai7u and indi7omo
cona, as well as monkeys: gorillas, chimpanzees and some American
monkeys. Among animals that do not have secondary sexual
characteristics and are at the same time monogamous, he notes the tostomozhny
(except for the Indian monkey) and the orangutan.
Of course, if we take the examples observed in animals, m humans, then in
the case of the former, we can expect monogamy, and in the case of the
latter, we can expect polygamy. we can expect monogamy, and in the
latter case, hybridity — plurality. Indeed, monogamy, which
presupposes the equality of spouses, is more in harmony with equality
between men and women in physical and mental terms, which is
assumed in a dualistic society. On the contrary, if women are considered
inferior to men in all respects, it would be more natural for men to form
families with such women, in which the subordination of wives to their
husbands is always assumed.if women are considered
inferior to men in all respects, it would be more natural for men to form
families with such women, in which the subordination of wives to their
husbands is always assumed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ered
inferior to men in all respects, it would be more natural for men to form
families with such women, in which the subordination of wives to their
husbands is always assumed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At present, there are relatively few monotheistic peoples. These
include European Christians, Berbers, Jews, and some Muslims who
have preserved their ancient tradition of monogamy despite belonging to a
polygamous religion, such as the Berbers at the foot of the Atlas
Mountains, the Mabardins and Tuaregs (in the Sahara), i.e. probably those
peoples who have not left their primitive homeland of Europe and have
not strayed far from it. However, monogamy is not new in Europe, as
can be seen from the evidence of the Motoro, who testify that at that
time the Germans had a very strict monogamy.
In addition, monogamy exists among the most primitive peoples:
among the forest tribes of India, among the Bushmen, among the
inhabitants of Port Moresby in New Guinea, among the Dayaks of
Borneo, and among the forest tribes of Brazil.
Perhaps Europeans had a better chance of remaining monogamous,
if only because it was more difficult for them to find wives than it was
for their counterparts who had migrated to other parts of the world and
lived as nomads. However, polygamy did exist among Europeans in
ancient times. This suggests that polygamy was common among
Germanic chieftains. Adam of Bremen mentions polygamy among the
Swedes. In addition, polygamy existed among the Merovingian kings,
as well as in the Marophan period and among the Slavs before the
introduction of Christianity.
As for the dimaries who have preserved monogamy, it is likely that
they suffer from a lack of female partners. The lower dimaries are very
poor, and marriage requires material resources. According to Herbert
Spencer: "Numerous testimonies show us directly and clearly that in
polygamous societies, polygamy prevails between the rich and the poor, and
between their wives. We have the right, says the author, to assume that in
most societies where there is diversity, there is also monogamy, and to a
greater degree. Less wealthy people, who everywhere make up the majority
of the population, either have no wives at all, or each have only one wife.
If we turn to polygamy, we will see that it is a new form of marriage,
monogamy, firstly, because there are transitional forms from monogamy
to polygamy, and secondly, in polygamy, the characteristics of earlier
monogamy are always preserved.
One of the transitional forms from monogamy to polygamy can betransitional forms from monogamy
to polygamy, and secondly, in polygamy, the characteristics of earlier
monogamy are always preserved.
One of the transitional forms from monogamy to polygamy can be

--- PAGE BREAK ---from monogamy
to polygamy, and secondly, in polygamy, the characteristics of earlier
monogamy are always preserved.
One of the transitional forms from monogamy to polygamy can be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The custom of brahminism, currently practised in India, but not yet
known in Europe. According to Japanese custom, a man may have only
one wife, who must be of the same age as him, and, in addition, he is
allowed to acquire one concubine. The same customs exist in China. In
Antanta (in Alim), one wife is considered sufficient.
"саmонной", and all the others — "наɤожниɯами". In ancient Persia,
men could have three or four wives, but only one of them was considered a
proper wife and was treated as such by the others. The Assyrians had only one
wife and did not have concubines. The same was true of the ancient
Egyptians and is still true of the people of Abyssinia.
At the next level among polygamous peoples, one wife is considered
"first" and "main" and is given special privileges and benefits. For example,
among the South American Indians, the main wife is considered to be the
oldest and the one who was married first. Among the Tahitians and
Uinuas, the first wife is the first in terms of time. Among the Damars
and Lijiyevs, the most beloved woman becomes the first wife, and so on.
Among many American Indian peoples, the right of succession to the
throne belongs to the first wife. Among the South American Indians, the
first wife rules the entire household, and among the Mru (in Alim), she
has the right to dine with her husband and wear a thread around her
neck as a sign of her status.
The third form of brahmanism, polyandry, is less widespread across
the globe than the other two. Mam Nenan and Shar Nertuno are considered
polygamous peoples: the ancient Arabs, the inhabitants of the Canary
Islands, the Tibetans, the Tusi of Kashmir and the Himalayan regions,
the Todov, the Morov, the Nair, the Yeyong, and other peoples of India,
the Novosegans, the inhabitants of one or two islands in the Pacific
Ocean, the Ayeuts, the Tsem of Orinoco, and some peoples of Alrim.
They are joined by the ancient Bretons, Pimts, 7ots, our Saporozhian
Masamovs (?) and even the ancient Germans are found to have traces of
Poganadry.
Although at present the form of marriage is not always dictated by
necessity, i.e. a shortage of women, in ancient times such a necessity
may have been possible. For example, on the island of Eygone, it prevails
among the higher classes, while the lower classes live in monogamy.
Indeed, the ratio of male births to female births is not the same not
only in different countries, but even in the same country at different
times. In Europe, it averagesr classes live in monogamy.
Indeed, the ratio of male births to female births is not the same not
only in different countries, but even in the same country at different
times. In Europe, it averages

--- PAGE BREAK ---nogamy.
Indeed, the ratio of male births to female births is not the same not
only in different countries, but even in the same country at different
times. In Europe, it averages

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106 males per 100 females, the excess of males is offset by their higher
mortality rate. But in other countries, the excess of male births is much
more significant. For example, in the Sandwich Islands in 1839, there
were 125.08 males per 100 females, and in New Guinea in 1858, there
were 130.3. In India today, the ratio is 133.3. I cannot say for certain
what causes this predominance of males, but it may be a very serious
cause of the appearance of polygamy, which is not observed at all in
animals, with the exception of ants,  especially among nomadic peoples,
who are accustomed to taking wives from other tribes.
This is the form of brama that is currently observed in some of the
lowest castes, which is called "the confusion of the senses" and is
accepted by some modern thinkers as the primitive form of brahma, it
seems to me that it is the result of a fall from grace. It is well known that
when a person falls, they become inferior to animals in many respects. It
is enough to recall the unnatural vices of fallen people, unknown to
animals, such as prostitution and prostitution.
However, there are authors who reject even the possibility of such a
concept, which we would be justified in calling "a disorderly mixture of
ideas." "The promiscuity of many dimers," says Warvin, "is
undoubtedly frightening, but I think we need to have more evidence
before we can conclude that there is a complete confusion of ideas
between them... The late A. Smith, who travelled extensively in South
America and made extensive observations on the customs of the tribes there
and in many other places, expressed in the most positive terms that, in
his opinion, there is no race that would have any reason to envy women,
as they are considered property.
On the same subject, Jenimer expresses himself as follows:
"The hypothesis
of disorderlyrelationships
between
partners,
and
the
"Obɲinno7o brama" now has very few supporters. We know that at
present there is not a single nation on earth that has experienced such a
disorderly mixing of peoples. As for historical data testifying to the
existence of such a practice in times long past, it boils down to three or
four excerpts from Herodotus, Strabo and Sogona,    истоɤmование
mоторых    весьма    сомнитеɤьно».a testifying to the
existence of such a practice in times long past, it boils down to three or
four excerpts from Herodotus, Strabo and Sogona,    истоɤmование
mоторых    весьма    сомнитеɤьно».

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"It is said," says the author, "that every man can mate with every
woman; "just as it happens with animals," adding some research findings, noting
that among animals, the most promiscuous of which are those that mate
indiscriminately, the state of disorderly mixing of the sexes is a rare and
unusual phenomenon. Meanwhile, among many birds and mammals,
there are families based on plurality and even monogamy.
Sh. Neturno expresses himself in the same vein: "Some people
accept," he says, "that the union of women represents the first and
necessary stage of cohabitation in marriage. But, of course, they would
be less confident if they, like us, did not accept the coexistence of
animals, without having familiarised themselves with the coexistence of animals.
Most animals are capable of sincere and jealous love. Birds can serve as
an example of fidelity, constancy, tender affection, and modesty. Most
mammals have already reached a level of morality that is incompatible
with promiscuity. Monkeys, which are not mammals, also do not adhere to
this. There has been confusion, as evidenced by the great multitude of
myths of antiquity and the present time, but it has always been a matter of
interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---not adhere to
this. There has been confusion, as evidenced by the great multitude of
myths of antiquity and the present time, but it has always been a matter of
interpretation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18. SOCNOP
Classes. Why class distinctions are so stubbornly preserved. The
position of the upper classes among civilised people. The reasons for
this situation.
Having dealt with family relations and the status of women in
prehistoric times, we will now turn to social relations, namely the
division of society into classes, into the higher and ruling masses and the
lower masses.
We have already mentioned above that, according to our theory, the
first ruling classes were white-skinned people who were not yet civilised, and
the first slaves were pitemanthropes, i.e. mindless creatures kept by
humans as domestic animals. Consequently, modern higher masses
should be descendants of the higher-level ueovema, and the lower ones
— descendants of pitemantrop. But if the two species interbred, forming
an intermediate race, then the higher species would decline from this
mixing, and the lower species would rise.
It seems that between the two, at present, after many tens of thousands
of years, there should be no difference, neither in appearance, nor in
behaviour, nor in character. Moreover, the higher societies are doomed to
extinction, and the lower ones have no chance of ever gaining access to the
higher ones. In essence, the higher classes cannot be considered direct
descendants of the first "masters".
But we see that this situation still exists today, especially among the
lower classes. The descendants of the former
"7ospod" and to this day are called "noble," "free,"
"powerful," "masters," etc., while the former domestic animals are
called "   " "преѕренными," "   " "приниженными," "   "
"ѕɤоmоѕненными,"
"slaves," "servants," "commoners," etc.
In the higher classes, the most advanced members of society try to
eliminate this inequality, but they cannot. If they try to do so by force,
then instead of the old masses, new ones appear: monetary slavery
(represented by capital) and labour slavery (represented by labour), but
the essence of the matter remains the same. The reason for this, as we
shall see in the next chapter, lies in the fact that there is a diference between the
two forms, not only in terms of their social nature, but also in terms of their
anthropological nature, i.e. in terms of their intellectual nature.in the fact that there is a diference between the
two forms, not only in terms of their social nature, but also in terms of their
anthropological nature, i.e. in terms of their intellectual nature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere is a diference between the
two forms, not only in terms of their social nature, but also in terms of their
anthropological nature, i.e. in terms of their intellectual nature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not only social, but also anthropological, i.e. a difference in mental and
linguistic terms, which cannot be eliminated by any means.
What is the reason for this strange phenomenon?
With the emergence of social science, the study of society is
supported by the conservatism of the masses, and with this, perhaps, it
could be argued that there is no such thing as anthropological
determinism. No matter how hard representatives of modern social
science try to ignore it, they try to diminish it, they try to explain it by
the environment and upbringing, but all this is possible only with the
theory of Namar, according to which types change under the influence of
external factors. If this theory is true, as we have argued above, it
fundamentally contradicts the laws of nature, and modern science has no
answer to the question we have posed.
According to our theory, the difference between species can be
explained by accepting the natural law according to which mixed breeds,
such as mules and hinnies, cannot interbreed and never form a permanent
intermediate breed. The same is evidenced by the relationship between
males and females. Secondary sexual characteristics tend to disappear.
The male constantly transfers its properties to the female, and the female
to the male. We have seen above that these forces have already
converged many times, and then diverged again. In a monogamous
relationship, both partners should eventually become equal, if nothing else
prevents this, which we assume.
Some information about the existence of tam7o samon is provided
by so7o7ia. "It is known," says Warvin, — when two different breeds
are crossed, there is a strong tendency in the offspring to return to one or both
of the original breeds. But it is impossible to determine whether this is
true, because all traces of this desire are lost. The experience of many
generations of this kind proves that this aspiration can never be
destroyed, that a mixed race can never, under any circumstances, become
extinct.
Although the upper classes in Europe have not completely lost their
former position in society, they have not retained even a shadow of the
privileges enjoyed by their ancestors in ancient times. To understand this
concept, we must turn to the peoplesly lost their
former position in society, they have not retained even a shadow of the
privileges enjoyed by their ancestors in ancient times. To understand this
concept, we must turn to the peoples

--- PAGE BREAK ---r position in society, they have not retained even a shadow of the
privileges enjoyed by their ancestors in ancient times. To understand this
concept, we must turn to the peoples

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dim and barbaric, yet all their antiquities are preserved better than ours. A
particularly vivid picture of the situation will emerge before us if we gather
together the relevant customs of different peoples.
The difference between social classes is most evident in the area of
religion. The upper classes do not mix with the lower classes, not only
in society, but even in their daily lives. Paradise is reserved for the
upper classes, and hell for the lower classes, and a special paradise is
reserved for the upper classes, to which the lower classes are not allowed to
enter. and if they are admitted, then it is not surprising that in their own minds,
they believe that it is right to kill the slaves of the higher masses. Similar
views on life were not only held by the dimare, but even by the confessors
of those relatively high ranks, mam mametanstvo. Accordingly, they
distinguished between social classes in rituals, especially in funerals. In
everyday life, the lower classes could not use public roads, could not
build their huts on them, and could not visit the market. When approached by
a member of the higher class, they were obliged to hide in a hut and
announce their presence from there. They were not allowed to approach
the higher society, and when they met him, they fell down, remained on the
ground, and stayed in that position until they were allowed to get up. If
they are addressed by a higher-ranking person, they must respond to
him, but not in the plural. In the absence of such customs, simple people
are subject to severe punishment and even death.
The highest authorities, together with the morop, belong to the entire
family in the 7th state,   they   mo7ɤи   namasuvati,   uveuиut   and
even kill a simple person. And therefore, it is permissible to attack
representatives of the highest society even in war, if they belong to the
enemy. The punishment for killing a member of the higher society is higher
than for killing a commoner. The punishment for murder of a nobleman
is lower than that for murder of a commoner.
On the other hand, it is not customary for the nobility to enter the huts
of the common people, who are considered to be unworthy. He could not
help but admire the lower classes and be with them, but even drink the wine
they had prepared.
It goes without saying that it is a privilege to wear, who are considered to be unworthy. He could not
help but admire the lower classes and be with them, but even drink the wine
they had prepared.
It goes without saying that it is a privilege to wear

--- PAGE BREAK ---to be unworthy. He could not
help but admire the lower classes and be with them, but even drink the wine
they had prepared.
It goes without saying that it is a privilege to wear

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Weapons are considered to be the highest form of social status, and those below
this status are not allowed to carry weapons, have tattoos, clothing known to
be worn by the upper classes, riding on horseback, etc.
According to our theory, the 7-fold gap between the common people
and the higher classes of society is completely understandable and natural,
and is a reflection of the actual difference between them in intellectual and
moral terms. But from the point of view of the accepted theory, which
allows for the separation of the upper classes from the lower classes and
the acquisition of all privileges through usurpation, through a series of
deceptions and abuses, this position can be explained only artificially,
far-fetchedly, and therefore unsatisfactorily. The accepted theory does not believe in
anything; it presupposes an incredible amount of life and death in the
universe and, moreover, it assumes the existence of a universal, orderly,
and peaceful society, similar to the one we have described, existing
everywhere, wherever there is even the slightest resemblance to a state
and an organised society. And the main mistake of this view is that it ignores the
anthropological connection between societies, which has been known
since ancient times to both the highest and lowest classes.
The last three words in the ruling class and in the representations of
the highest social strata are not clear, but they are based on terms used by
the people to distinguish one mass from another. For example, we Russians are
familiar with the name given to the highest authorities — "the white
guard" — which was not used ironically at all in the past, but is now. Our
sovereign's people are not called "begay" without reason, while the
common people are called
"uepnyy narod" (the faithful people), "uepnyya" (faithfulness) and
"uepnya" (faithful). We see the same thing among the Turkic peoples.
There, for example, the Mir7isy and Uryanhay of Taraba7ataymo call
their highest masses "am suyum" (the most), and, moreover, they divide
them into "uepnaya" and "srednaya" (middle).urkic peoples.
There, for example, the Mir7isy and Uryanhay of Taraba7ataymo call
their highest masses "am suyum" (the most), and, moreover, they divide
them into "uepnaya" and "srednaya" (middle).

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, for example, the Mir7isy and Uryanhay of Taraba7ataymo call
their highest masses "am suyum" (the most), and, moreover, they divide
them into "uepnaya" and "srednaya" (middle).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19. FIENESKIE RAENINIP
MEMOV WITH THE HIGHEST
CLASSES AND
LOWER CLASSES
Physical differences between the upper and lower classes in
Polynesia, Africa, Russia, ancient Germany, and modern Europe. Social
stratification. Physical differences between social classes in Italy, Spain,
England, Ireland, Scotland, Germany, and Russia.
Such stories are found everywhere. About the Tasmanians, now
extinct, it is written that "their chiefs were tall and strong men." About the Tapiyo
people (in South America), it is said that "the bodies of their chiefs are
larger than those of the rest of the people, and their heads are larger than
those of the rest of the people." On the Sandwich Islands, the chiefs are
"tall and strong, and in their appearance they surpass the common
people, so that some consider them to belong to a separate race." It is
said of the Tahitians that their chiefs "are in every respect superior to the
common people in terms of their physical appearance, and even more so
in terms of their rank and position." A similar distinction is made among the
Tongan people. In L'Épée, we find a description of the chief of the
island of Viti-Nevo: "He was tall, reaching 5 feet 9 inches, he had a
correct posture, a truly beautiful face, despite his gloominess, a noble and at
the same time quiet appearance, calm, dignified, and not at all arrogant,
which strangely contradicts the nature of the eloquent maniacs. In this
case, as in many others, says the traveller, I can see that the aristocracy
comes from families who are most gifted in terms of intelligence and
morality.
Highest mass:
Lowest mass:
Light weight:
Approximates
European
Dark brown and
light brown
Texture:
Slender
No roughness
Height:
Tall
Short
Voice:
Tall
Short
Nio:
Long and thin Wide and flatorality.
Highest mass:
Lowest mass:
Light weight:
Approximates
European
Dark brown and
light brown
Texture:
Slender
No roughness
Height:
Tall
Short
Voice:
Tall
Short
Nio:
Long and thin Wide and flat

--- PAGE BREAK ---s:
Lowest mass:
Light weight:
Approximates
European
Dark brown and
light brown
Texture:
Slender
No roughness
Height:
Tall
Short
Voice:
Tall
Short
Nio:
Long and thin Wide and flat

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Smy:
—
Outstanding
Mouth:
Small
Very large
Hands:
Thin, skinny, small in size
and delicate in build
Legs:
Strong
Short
The same can be observed among aristocratic women: "Court ladies are
tall and elegant; they are graceful and refined; their beauty is natural
and dignified. Those of medium height are often also beautiful, but in
most cases they are short, stout and unattractive; in the lower classes, it
is rare to find a beautiful appearance; we find there people who are thin,
tall, and sometimes even ugly. "In Nittamy, the highest classes are
distinguished b y a brighter complexion, a more refined physique, and more
European features. I n many cases, the Mitayevs, who lived among
prosperity and enlightenment, were replaced by the Monog race and gave
way to the noble ones."
Similar information about the modern types of the Japanese people
was collected by the German anthropologist Prvin Beg, who was a
professor at Tokyo University for 17 years.
"In Europe," says the old man, "The folk types of Ponia, i.e. the
lower classes of the urban population and the peasants, produce a more
vivid impression, but they cannot be compared to the representatives of the
higher classes. The latter often resemble Mamaks, and sometimes even
Jews. Later, thanks to their distinctive hooked noses, the special shape of
their upper teeth, and their protruding jaws, they became unmistakable.
The difference between the two types is evident in the presented
tables.
There is also considerable evidence in literature of differences in
appearance between the upper and lower classes in Western Europe.
These differences have existed for a long time, as might be expected. In
the Germanic 3rd century, it is said that the Germanic people were divided
into three classes. According to the myth, they are represented by dark-
haired men with rough features, "free people" (in our terms, "men") have
light-coloured hair and eyes, while the dark-skinned people have dark hair
and eyes. These data do not coincide with the modern observations of
Niapuzha, according to which the landed gentry always provides the
largest percentage of bonded labourers, the middle class gives a smaller
percentage, and the common people give the smallest percentage.zha, according to which the landed gentry always provides the
largest percentage of bonded labourers, the middle class gives a smaller
percentage, and the common people give the smallest percentage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich the landed gentry always provides the
largest percentage of bonded labourers, the middle class gives a smaller
percentage, and the common people give the smallest percentage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the smallest.
But the situation is not limited to one single factor. Ramme says that
"the differences between European societies in terms of the relationship
between the organs of the body, such as the head, chest, neck, arms, legs, etc., is
observed in the relations between the Aryans, Semites and Lappish peoples,
and between the white people and both yellow races, and that in general it is
greater the difference between representatives of the European peoples.
According to Mayr's observations, the average height of European men is
4.3 cm less than their height, while that of women exceeds their height
by 5.7 cm. Darwin states that "the difference is generally smaller in thin
and refined people than in strong and robust ones." According to
measurements of stomachs on an old Parisian map made by Brom, it
appears that the stomach capacity of the upper classes is greater than that
of ordinary workers. "The rich," says Nogier, "are more generous than the
poor, who are simply workers." In addition, according to Riga, "in the
urban population (of Europe), the situation is the same as among the
proletariat, where men and women are completely identical. The women
of this people in men's clothing are not distinguished from the men. Old
women and old men in particular are similar to each other, one like the
other." This is also characteristic of the lower classes. According to
official statistics, old age and senility occur 10-15 years earlier among the poor
than among the independent.
But the most reliable data on the external appearance of the European
aristocracy compared to the common people is provided by
anthropological studies, represented by: Niapuzh, Ammon, Penma, and
others.
Napuzh emphasises what is called "the principle of social
stratification," according to which among the upper (educated) classes,
social mobility is greater, while among the lower classes and the
proletariat, it is more common among the former than among the latter.
For example, the average income of the educated masses is 82.7, that of the
working class is 84, and that of the poor is 86–86.5. At the same time, the
volume of consumption among the higher classes is greater than among
the lower classes.
The same result is obtained when comparing the average values
obtained from 7 residents and 7 non-residents. The latter are more likely
to be motorised. The data was collected in this way for many cities in Central
Europe and their surroundings in France, Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, Italy and Spain. The above statement is justified, with the
exception of twocollected in this way for many cities in Central
Europe and their surroundings in France, Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, Italy and Spain. The above statement is justified, with the
exception of two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

countries.
Spanish anthropologist O'Gorry confirmed this with measurements
taken in Madrid and Barcelona, but in other cities, such as Seville,
Zaragoza and Magallanes, the results were inconsistent, i.e. urban residents were
no more active than rural residents. Moreover, in the cities of Granada and
Valencia, the inhabitants are even less urbanised than the villagers. The
same is true of our Nivi in Italy. The northern provinces, such as Milan and
Florence, confirm this, but in the southern provinces of Bari, Messina and
Palermo, rural life is even less urbanised than in the cities.
These facts can be explained by the spread of the so-called "Ibero-
Insular" race in southern Europe, which, as mentioned above, is
characterised by a dark complexion and short stature. This race is found in
Spain and Italy in some places, especially in the south, where the
population is mixed, while in the north, Europeans of a less dark-
skinned race live.
John Beddoe made the same measurements in England and found the
same results, but according to other data, there are undoubtedly external
differences between the higher and lower classes in England. There,
according to Herbert Spencer, the professional masses are "taller and
stronger, and more industrious." The average height of men of the upper
classes is 1.757 m, while that of workers is 1.705 m. And according to
Harvin, "Anglican workers are already taller at birth than
representatives of the middle class (Gentry)".
In Iran, according to Ranm's description, the poor in 7oɤodny omru7a are
distinguished by "sunken eyes, exposed gums, protruding teeth, flat noses,
thick bellies, and thin legs." Charles Fort adds to this description that the
poor throughout Europe have the same appearance.tinguished by "sunken eyes, exposed gums, protruding teeth, flat noses,
thick bellies, and thin legs." Charles Fort adds to this description that the
poor throughout Europe have the same appearance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In England, in contrast to the rest of Europe, there is an anomaly in
terms of height. The local inhabitants are taller, but racial differences
between individuals are evident in their appearance:
"In India," we read, "there is a greater difference between the
inhabitants of cities and villages. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of villages
are usually tall, thin, with raised shoulders, agile in their movements,
while the inhabitants of towns are mostly of average height, and, despite
this, lively and energetic in their movements. The inhabitants of the
towns are also distinguished by their greater wealth and elegance than the
inhabitants of the villages. Peasant girls are especially distinguished by
their unkempt appearance and heavy, sluggish gait. Even in their youth, they take
on a somewhat stooped posture, and their shoulders, unable to bear the weight,
hang down heavily. The posture of the peasant standing is particularly
striking. All of them stop along the road and chat with their companions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---lders, unable to bear the weight,
hang down heavily. The posture of the peasant standing is particularly
striking. All of them stop along the road and chat with their companions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stand with their legs wide apart, their hands in their trouser pockets, and
their heads tilted to one side.
In Germany, according to Ammon, the difference between city
dwellers and rural dwellers lies not only in the fact that city dwellers are
more sophisticated, but also in that they are taller and there are more
blondes and redheads among them.
The highest social classes in Europe differ from the lower classes in
that they develop earlier and mature earlier than the lower classes.
Nombros believes that the maximum growth rate for "rich" girls occurs
at the age of 12–14, and for "poor" girls at the age of 13–15. According
to Ammon's research, the non-urban population shows a slightly more
pronounced physical development, which is more noticeable. For
example, they develop facial hair earlier. In general, the physical
development of the new recruits trained by Ammon is several years
ahead of that of the villagers. The same is true of the co-workers, but to a
lesser extent in Russia. According to the observations of Dr. Bensen7ra,
in Moscow, the period of sexual maturity begins earlier among the nobility
— between the ages of 9 and 12, then among the clergy and the
educated class — between the ages of 13 and 16, and, finally, later than
anyone else among the commoners — from 17 to 22 years of age. Weber came
to a similar conclusion in St. Petersburg.
This phenomenon has been observed in Paris, Vienna, Strasbourg,
Germany and Bavaria. It has been known for a long time, and has been
written about by Hippo Gvarinonius in 1610, Marm d'Espin,
Tamudiuesm, and others.
Thus, there is a significant anthropological difference between the
highest classes of Europe and the lowest, which allows for the possibility
of the European aristocracy being dominated by another race, which we
are working on.
We Russians,   from   our own   experience,   are well   aware of the
peculiarities that distinguish the common people from the intelligentsia.  We
have   сто7о   суɲествуют   even special terms: "вуɤь7арный" and
"common", which characterise not only the appearance and clothes of a
person, but also their gait, manners and even character and behaviour.
Since we are dealing with a very complex and multifaceted historical
process, it is only natural that we cannot expect uniformity. There are
also isolated   and   ɯеɤые   villages,   in   mоторых   external
отɤиuияg with a very complex and multifaceted historical
process, it is only natural that we cannot expect uniformity. There are
also isolated   and   ɯеɤые   villages,   in   mоторых   external
отɤиuия

--- PAGE BREAK ---

common people from integration ouень сɤабы, маɤо ѕаметны, but ѕато there
are other areas where they are persecuted and forced to flee into 7ɤаѕа.
The common people themselves are also afraid, they are afraid to speak
out, they are afraid of the authorities, and they call representatives of the
lower classes "grey men, grey-haired, watchmen" and so on.
Itam, the type of Russian peasant-wagoner is well known to us, so there
is no need to select literary evidence. Therefore, as a reminder, we will
give here some characteristics of it, compiled from various sources, in different
parts of our country.
For example, Mamogus Ston7raɭ, Osmār Kogber7, describes Russian
peasants living above Bu7om, in Sedɤeɯmoy 7uberniya: "Their skin is
usually poor and sallow, their hair is coarse and rather unkempt. The men are
also unattractive; at times, however, there is a sallow, mysterious, with
graceful movements and expressive gestures, and seems to be from another
country, having grown up among the wild herbs of the steppes." And here
is a description of the appearance of the people of Orzheshmo by the writer
3Gisa: "Their movements are heavy and sluggish, even in their youth, their
eyes are apathetic, their gaze is gloomy, they are cheerful and quick-witted, their
speech is honeyed, eloquent, and confused." About the appearance of
the inhabitants of the 7th district of the 7th region of the 7th province, they
write:
"The growth of life is greater than average, smiling and cheerful, with a
pleasant disposition, men and women alike, but they are not attractive, and
their very appearance is harsh and rough."

--- PAGE BREAK ---life is greater than average, smiling and cheerful, with a
pleasant disposition, men and women alike, but they are not attractive, and
their very appearance is harsh and rough."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20. CHARACTER AND MIND
OF THE CLASSES
The character and mind of the classes. Similarities between the
classes of Europe and the savages. The difference between the nobility
and the common people among the French. The character of the Polish
peasant. The Russian common people. The Nedry type of Kowow.
Similarities between this type and people of the Mongolian race.
With regard to the character of the lower classes in Western European
literature, it is not at all uncommon to find a parallel drawn between
them and the damned. In his essay "The Child," Nembergen quotes
Manuvrie, who observed this phenomenon in the Parisian Garden of
Amusement in the 18th century. According to him, the ambassadors
resemble rural peasants who live a secluded life somewhere in the
countryside, where they lead a simple, monotonous life, devoid of any
excitement. If, he says, you were to compare the 7ambists with
Europeans, they would be on a par with the ignorant ɭranɯusmich peasants
who live in the big cities.
"Without a doubt," says Shar Nertuno, "in civilised countries there is
a higher culture, completely unknown to primitive people and even
beyond their comprehension, but if we take the trouble to observe
Europeans carefully, we wil find among us many who are at the same stage of
development, like the central African tribes, incapable of mental
attention, incapable of any work requiring responsible thinking, and still
entrenched in primitive animism. The Hottentots, seeing European ships
and animals for the first time, took them for living beings; but many of
our Breton peasants think the same about the homomotive, when they first
travelled by rail to their province. The poor, especially the lower classes,
drink themselves into a stupor, but the same thing happens to well-
educated Europeans. Many of our peasants read and write arithmetic,
unlike the lower classes and, in fact, primitive people. It seems obvious
that there is no particular reason for this. Without a doubt, the Bible
contains thousands ofts read and write arithmetic,
unlike the lower classes and, in fact, primitive people. It seems obvious
that there is no particular reason for this. Without a doubt, the Bible
contains thousands of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ithmetic,
unlike the lower classes and, in fact, primitive people. It seems obvious
that there is no particular reason for this. Without a doubt, the Bible
contains thousands of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sometimes, even in unfamiliar languages, but it has long been established
that an uneducated person needs to know enough unfamiliar expressions.
If the nobility has the greatest variety of names, then the common
people, according to him, play a secondary role in the development of new
intellectual paths. If we were to calculate the intellectual productivity of
the various social classes, then one nobleman would be equal to 20
peasants and 200 commoners.
But the mam po's stnopaly characterise the lowest type of commoners:
The nobleman is very attached to his loved ones: after the death of his
wife, he does not bring another woman into his home for a week. He is
distrustful and suspicious. Even when he is happy, the peasant always
sees some secret thoughts and desires in his wife and tries to suppress
them. He does not trust gentlemen and ladies and i s stubbornly indifferent
t o the intelligentsia and everyone dressed in frock coats. In his
relations with him, he is always uncompromising. He does not agree
with his mother's social views, even though he has the same opinion as
her. He shows no sign of jealousy towards his own wealth; neither requests
nor threats can force him to part with it. He is extremely cautious. The
example of an enlightened government does not affect the local people,
for whom the wisest policy is to stick to the old ways. He is extremely
conservative: every village has its own unchanging customs, which
everyone adheres to. The peasants' figures, costumes, and expressions
are characterised by these unchanging features, which are so familiar to
the local area that one can say with confidence to a peasant: "You are
the master of Tarnapoda, you are Krasnima, you are Kreshova," and so
on. In some areas, the peasant takes on a servile attitude. When he
passes by a neighbouring estate, even if the owner is not at home, he
always takes off his hat. He treats not only the servants, but even the
servants' children with respect. To those who are intelligent and, at
least, dressed in a respectable manner, he addresses them with respect
and takes off his hat at every meeting. During conversations with them,
he always stands with his head uncovered, and even if he is asked to put
on his hat, he will not do so.
In summary, we will give some examples that characterise
Russian   common people.   About   beɤoruссах   3ɤиѕаith his head uncovered, and even if he is asked to put
on his hat, he will not do so.
In summary, we will give some examples that characterise
Russian   common people.   About   beɤoruссах   3ɤиѕа

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed, and even if he is asked to put
on his hat, he will not do so.
In summary, we will give some examples that characterise
Russian   common people.   About   beɤoruссах   3ɤиѕа

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Orzheshmo writes that "the people who are always suspicious of
everything are incapable of thinking and are indifferent to everything
that is not directly related to their immediate needs and interests." They
write about these people that "their attention is not focused on the
subjects being taught."
"Secretive, superstitious notions about everyday life," writes a local priest
about the dead, "insane superstitions about the soul and its connection with the
body. And this is not surprising. Since, due to his immaturity, he cannot
correctly understand the visible world, the tangible world, then the
intangible world and the subjects of faith are even more inaccessible to
his understanding. Ask him whether he can imagine the soul, whether he
believes it lives on after death, and you will hear from him an indifferent
answer: "We are ignorant people, how can we know about such things,
God only knows."
In addition to what we mentioned above about diaries that cannot
withstand even 7m0 voltage, we mentioned above about the dimars,
who could not even bear the tension of the mos7a, the same applies to   cɤуuиɤось
us   find   and   about   ниѕших   сосɤовиях   Europe.
"It is well known," writes Prof. Shymiev, "that people who have spent
their entire lives doing physical labour cannot tolerate mental stress at
all. A healthy peasant, placed in an office, after prolonged mental strain,
sometimes faints."
Mental immobility in simple people is sometimes accompanied by
extreme conservatism. About the 7уɯуɤах (Russian 7орɯах in Gaɤиɯии),
Gogovaym says: "They build houses according to the custom of their
ancestors; the harness of the oxen, the clothing of the men and the
jewellery of the women, down to the smallest detail, the colour of the clothing
down to the smallest detail, and the trim of everything is definite and unchanging,
as if carved in stone and sculpted by a master craftsman."
But here is evidence of the generosity and security of the peasants,
characteristics that are particularly characteristic of the dimary: "If a
Belarusian has no worries about his immediate needs, he usually thinks about the
future." Belarusians are also known for their peacefulness, which is reflected
in the following saying: "The kindness and respect of a neighbour do not
provoke harsh responses in a modern Belarusian, even in the face of a heated
argument. When friends urge him to go to court and "get even," the
peasant replies, "Let God take care of him." The peasant may not be
offended by the insult, but he is very sensitive to the offence caused to
him. Robberies and thefts, which occur in other areas during difficult
years of poor harvest, are completely unknown inbe
offended by the insult, but he is very sensitive to the offence caused to
him. Robberies and thefts, which occur in other areas during difficult
years of poor harvest, are completely unknown in

--- PAGE BREAK ---insult, but he is very sensitive to the offence caused to
him. Robberies and thefts, which occur in other areas during difficult
years of poor harvest, are completely unknown in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mo7iɤevsmih beɤorusov. Namely, here is one feature that distinguishes our
countrymen from other peoples, which is not obvious, but which
essentially stems from a highly developed nervous system — a certain
indifference to death. "It is difficult to imagine," writes Lembovetsky,
"how fearlessly and calmly a Belarusian peasant meets death. With rare
clarity, the dying man recounts his oral confessions in the most vivid
detail, accepting that they will not be heard not only by his relatives, but
also by their future lives in subtle ways.
In our literature, there are many types of characters that characterise
our "strong men", Many types are brought out in our stories, essays and
novels, but nowhere have I found such a character, in terms of his logical
fidelity and depth of psychological analysis, the Russian "Vakhama," as
described by Edrin in his "Poshekhonskaya Starina." Konon, the character I
am talking about, may not be particularly common among Russian
peasants, but this type is quite widespread. In my travels among the
people to collect historical material, I often encounter it, and not only
among Russian peasants, but also among the Belarusians, the Poles, among
our eastern neighbours: votami, uperemami, and especially many among
the common people, which gives even that grey and gloomy character
to the village, which Russian travellers complain about in the village. I will
not go into detail about this type of person, but I cannot resist making a
few observations which embody the very essence of the negative
experience:
Konona "first learned the tailor's craft, but since the tailor is not much
better than him, he will be a shepherd. And tomorrow they will put him
in charge of the herd — he will be a shepherd. In this way, his whole
worldview is revealed. His thoughts seem irreversible to him, and the
reason for their appearance never awakens his curiosity. In fact, his whole
life is like a continuous and, moreover, incoherent dream; he has no initiative
whatsoever, only blindly following orders. And he was never interested in
knowing what his work was, and everything was fine with him.
He was very quiet. He didn't talk to anyone, even though he was related to the
whole neighbourhood. Some kind ofwas never interested in
knowing what his work was, and everything was fine with him.
He was very quiet. He didn't talk to anyone, even though he was related to the
whole neighbourhood. Some kind of

--- PAGE BREAK ---d in
knowing what his work was, and everything was fine with him.
He was very quiet. He didn't talk to anyone, even though he was related to the
whole neighbourhood. Some kind of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

indifference was written on his face. No one saw any joy in his eyes, but
even the slightest hint of pleasure, but it was not joy, but a dull mass.
Undoubtedly, he will never die, never sell, and never even be harmed,
but all his possessions will be destroyed. It would be impossible to entrust
him with everything, because in such a situation it would be necessary to go
into such detail that it would be completely impossible to foresee
everything. If he did not think everything through to the end, then at the
first unforeseen circumstance, he would be completely at a loss and
would get confused, and it would be impossible to untangle the
situation. He is incapable of coming up with anything on his own, nor
does he have the slightest sense of reason.
If Konon were to be transported to Asia and placed among the local
dimaries, he would not be able to distinguish between them, even if he
were blindfolded. In fact, the apathetic, indifferent character of our
people, and especially of the common people, clearly distinguishes them
from the representatives of the noble race, judging by what they tell travellers
about the monstrous creatures.
Przezwski, for example, depicts a dance (in Central Asia) as "people
of a gloomy disposition, who never laugh or rejoice, and whose children
never play or have fun."
About Kumynors, travellers say that "they have a dull expression, are
silent, meaningless, gloomy, and melancholic. They have neither energy
nor passion, but rather a complete indifference to everything in the
world, except for food. Kumynorsky himself, who is quite intelligent, when
talking to us about his subjects, said frankly that they resemble humans in
appearance, but in everything else they are definitely different.
About oros and tasas (in the Vssurysky district), General Przewoński
writes: "The appearance of the unknown produces no greater fear in people
than in their dogs. There is a great difference between the unknown and the
familiar. He (the wolf) satisfies all his desires and, like an animal, is
only concerned with satisfying his hunger. He eats meat and fish, then goes
hunting and sleeps, until the sun forces him to get up again, spread his bed
in the smoky, smelly hut and make himself a new one. He spends his
whole life like this: today is no different from yesterday, tomorrow will
be the same. Not today. No feelings, no emotions, nobed
in the smoky, smelly hut and make himself a new one. He spends his
whole life like this: today is no different from yesterday, tomorrow will
be the same. Not today. No feelings, no emotions, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---melly hut and make himself a new one. He spends his
whole life like this: today is no different from yesterday, tomorrow will
be the same. Not today. No feelings, no emotions, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There is no joy, no hope, no spiritual life. I am now convinced that there is
a great gulf between the civilised and the uncivilised, not between the latter
and the higher animals.
This mentality is characteristic of other peoples of the Mongoloid race, as
can be seen, among other things, from the fact that Ninney, in his
massification of the concept of "     " (     —     ), attributes the
character of "     " to it.
"meɤanhoɤiniuесmий", then mаm uерная раса, according to its definition, has
the character "хоɤеriuесmий" and "ɭɤе7матиuесmий". In fact, the same
characteristics, as well as those of the monogamous, are attributed to the
related polyamorous Americans: "Everyone," says Warvin, "who has a
basis for comparison is probably struck by the contrast between the
mobile and even immobile peoples of South America and the good-
natured, talkative Indians."
Here it should be noted that the character, apparently, is in
accordance with the form of the letter. Therefore, the monstrous race is
attributed with a melancholic character, while we find completely opposite
references to the monstrous creatures. "Children," according to the words
of the traveller Gaveyama, "are our children, tireless talkers; one can say
that their minds are restless; everything gives them cause for endless
laughter and boisterousness." And the famous traveller to Arabia,
Nivinstone, says that "the Ne7ry cannot contain their laughter. No matter
how unfortunate the circumstance, if, for example, the wind blows a bag of
grain from a carrier's shoulders and he drops something, everyone who
sees it bursts out laughing; if someone sits down on the sidelines,
everyone greets him with the same laughter.
The data we have presented in the last two paragraphs sufficiently
convince us that there are significant differences between the various
types of the same people in the same country, between the higher and
lower races of the community, and the lower masses, by their very nature,
undoubtedly resemble the lower races.
Having gathered together all the features that distinguish the lower masses
from the higher, we are convinced that these features belong to the
pithecanthropus. If we see tall stature among the common people of
Yutandsmo7o, and short stature among the Italians and Spaniards, then this
phenomenon should not confuse us, as it is due to the high stature of the
Patagonian people and the short stature of the Neanderthals.
Some of the lower classes, it seems, have been influenced by their elders.should not confuse us, as it is due to the high stature of the
Patagonian people and the short stature of the Neanderthals.
Some of the lower classes, it seems, have been influenced by their elders.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some are one thing, some are another, and some are of the highest race.
And their characteristics remain completely the same, as the characteristics
of any given race remain the same in many respects within the same
family. But since they are similar to pithecanthropus in everything else, it
becomes obvious that the motor we are talking about does not exist in
their organism in any other form. No one, of course, will deny that there are
differences in language, customs, habits and race, which give each group a
special character, but this does not prevent us from distinguishing
between higher and lower groups.
Undoubtedly, within every nation, the process of constantly mixing
all the characteristics of different groups and bringing them all to the same
level has the opposite effect to the first one, uniting the diverse and
diverse elements of human society. Without it, our dream of harmony,
equality and brotherhood would have long since been realised.
We will discuss this process below.

--- PAGE BREAK ---diverse and
diverse elements of human society. Without it, our dream of harmony,
equality and brotherhood would have long since been realised.
We will discuss this process below.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21. THE ORIGIN OF ROYAL
POWER
The origin of royal power. The position of rulers among ancient and
modern semi-civilised peoples and savages. The theory of Herbert
Spencer that man is the first god. Evidence for this position. The
degeneration of the race of gods. The origin of monotheism.
In order to form an opinion on this very interesting question, we
have no other means than to familiarise ourselves with the current
situation in the countries of the elders, moropey, leaders, elders and other
influential persons. But in civilised countries, customs are changing
rapidly, and it is difficult to understand what is new and what belongs to
the distant past. For this reason, we will be closer to the source, and
consider the situation of the people of the East and the barbarians, who in
all respects have preserved more of the old ways.
The inhabitants of countries and peoples who are not civilised
simply worship deities during their lifetime, and they become tamed after
death. The entire stay of the gods on earth is considered a temporary
stage in the life of the "divinely born". They come from heaven, fate
keeps them here, and then, in the form of souls, they return to their
heavenly life. The threads of their existence are woven high above the
earth. King Ida7a (in Alrim) said to the angels: "God created me in his own
image, I am equal to God, and he made me a moron." Even if the other
gods do not c u r r e n t l y consider themselves gods, their power is
still expressed in a multitude of ceremonies that equate them with gods.
Sometimes they are called "sons of heaven" and attribute their power
"receive their power from heaven."
Wherever they are, people treat them with superstitious fear and
believe that rain and harvest depend on them, and therefore consider
them to be powerful gods.
In some countries, the very name of the deity is unknown to the
people, and even to some of those who are close to it, although it is known,
it cannot be pronounced because of its extraordinary holiness. Moreover,
when entering it, they use the everyday language of their subjects.some of those who are close to it, although it is known,
it cannot be pronounced because of its extraordinary holiness. Moreover,
when entering it, they use the everyday language of their subjects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---re close to it, although it is known,
it cannot be pronounced because of its extraordinary holiness. Moreover,
when entering it, they use the everyday language of their subjects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

subjects. Sometimes he replaces his name with a title, which means
neither more nor less than "master." In other cases, the title is something like
this: "Lord of our souls, almighty, eternal, unchanging, incomprehensible."
It is not uncommon to see him among his subjects, and it is not
uncommon for him to see them. Their faces are hidden: their eyes, ears,
mouths, and noses are covered with veils, and they cannot be touched,
nor even called by name.
You can walk past the fence from the known side. It is not necessary
to follow him, and you can just wait on the sidelines. When passing by, you
must throw yourself on the ground and rub your hands and feet, exposing
your genitals and everything else.
Whoever falls into the shadow of his own shadow, steps on his
shadow, and covers it with his own shadow, is subject to mortal
punishment.
If he does something, his subjects imitate all his actions. If he stands,
everyone stands; if he sits, everyone sits; if he bows, everyone bows, and
a passer-by must enter the water, even if he is dressed. If he waves, sniffs,
laughs, everyone does the same.
The king is considered the owner of his subjects; he can kill them
and sell them. Not only is his power considered sacred, but even
everything that surrounds him. No one may enter his house, for it is
sacred; no one may touch him. Anything that has ben used by a moraya can no
longer be used by mere mortals. These things are given to them in the
form of gifts and donations, even in the absence of their owner. They
are not spoken of directly, but are expressed in a roundabout way, for
example, they are called "raduyoy" (rainbow), "lamety" (lightning),
"osvezhayushchee e7o" (illuminating) or "   " (life-giving), etc.
"mognia", etc.
When a mороɤь dies, thousands of people are killed on its мо7иɤе, and
then it is watered with uеɤовеuесmой mровью from time to time.
These customs are still preserved today among nomadic and pastoral
peoples, but they were once widespread, judging by the fact that in
civilised countries we find numerous traces of them in the form of various
ancient customs. Therefore, moving b e y o n d the modern position, we
ask ourselves: is the position of the Aryans, Asians and other ancient peoples
mороɤей, surrounded
by
high
poet,
correspond to their merits? — then the answer, of course, may bemodern position, we
ask ourselves: is the position of the Aryans, Asians and other ancient peoples
mороɤей, surrounded
by
high
poet,
correspond to their merits? — then the answer, of course, may be

--- PAGE BREAK ---ask ourselves: is the position of the Aryans, Asians and other ancient peoples
mороɤей, surrounded
by
high
poet,
correspond to their merits? — then the answer, of course, may be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3ti moro — the same 7ruby dimari, mam and their subjects.
In that case, is their ascension to heaven nothing more than the most
obvious thing? But why is this repeated by hundreds of peoples in
different corners of the world without any connection between them? Is
it not because they are naturally lively creatures?
I find that impossible. Of course, people can live in separate
communities, but then war is necessary. But for different peoples in
different parts of the world to express the same idea in exactly the same
way seems to me to be highly improbable. I think that in everything that
different peoples attribute to their ancestors, there is certainly a grain of
truth.
All of the above-described customs and traditions were established in
ancient times, as evidenced by the fact that they existed in the same
form in Egypt, Assyria, Phoenicia, etc., and have been known since time
immemorial. Therefore, what seems to us to be false now may have been true
in ancient times and become false now, because ancient beliefs have
outlived their time. They may have been true under different
circumstances, with different people, and become true now because the
circumstances, the environment, and the people themselves have
changed.
But in this situation, new questions arise. First, were there
conditions under which a people could consider one of their own to be
the son of heaven, almighty and inscrutable, treat him with superstitious
fear, and imitate him in everything? Who was this god, credited with the
ability to bring rain, harvests and prosperity?
I think that the conditions for such a situation not only existed in
ancient times, but even exist today. Are modern Hasidic Jews not
following their ancestors, who are still alive? Are they not sincere and
faithful, and still not convinced of the infallibility of the Pope? Do we,
modern, educated Europeans, not constantly revere the living memories
of famous writers, military heroes, highly moral people, and even simple
artists    and    singers?   We    call    them "divine,"
"divine," and in a sense we adore them, which, as we say, "is sent down
from above." No matter what we do, no matter what we do, no matter
what, we want to leave something behind.them "divine,"
"divine," and in a sense we adore them, which, as we say, "is sent down
from above." No matter what we do, no matter what we do, no matter
what, we want to leave something behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---divine," and in a sense we adore them, which, as we say, "is sent down
from above." No matter what we do, no matter what we do, no matter
what, we want to leave something behind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

world-renowned, but even to be represented by them. Wouldn't we be
lucky if Newton, Darwin and other similar geniuses were born in our
country?
If we rely on our devoted subjects in all these matters, it is because we
consider them to be indivisible parts of a whole, between which no one
can appear who is not one of us. But this is a hypothesis, not based on
anything, inspired by our pride and high opinion of modern civilisation.
Meanwhile, according to the theory of the origin of the universe that I am
discussing here, one might think that in ancient prehistoric times, when
the universe was still in its infancy, did not have their own gods, from
whom people created their own gods, but their gods were higher than ours in
terms of natural intelligence, and there was less admixture of
pithecanthropus in their race.
But if that were the case, then, naturally, the ancients would have
placed the gods in the centre of their states and worshipped them during
their lifetime, and after their death, they would have transferred their
worship to their descendants and their images. Naturally, the gods of
antiquity were not representations of nature, as we think, but rather folk
deities.
Herbert Spencer, considering the origin of objects, and proceeding
from this, that all myths converge in the worship of objects, and that the
sanctity of objects increases with the length of time since their death, he
comes to the correct conclusion that "the primitive god is the most
powerful, tusemei and uyuzemei, surpassing the rest of the people of this world,
loved by them during their lifetime and even more loved after their
death."
Indeed, in folk tales, known in our country as milo7ia, gods are
depicted as very human. First, they are mortal. Herbert Spencer
concludes with the following words: "In the story of Buddha, when asked
about a corpse he encountered, he replied: "This is the fate of all beings:
gods, humans, rich, poor, all must die." The gods die and are reborn, then
return to Asura. The same is true of the Egyptian gods: in Philae and
Abydos there are images depicting the resurrection of Osiris. And although
in the Greek pantheon we have only one example of the death of a god,
namely Pan, nevertheless Greek legends give us reason to believe in the
original mortality of their gods.
"In the Scandinavian legends about Odin, Frey, Njord and othersample of the death of a god,
namely Pan, nevertheless Greek legends give us reason to believe in the
original mortality of their gods.
"In the Scandinavian legends about Odin, Frey, Njord and others

--- PAGE BREAK ---f a god,
namely Pan, nevertheless Greek legends give us reason to believe in the
original mortality of their gods.
"In the Scandinavian legends about Odin, Frey, Njord and others

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is said that they came from God7ayma (the land of the gods) to
Man7aym (the land of humans), that they ruled Manheim, were the object
of worship and veneration there, and died believing that they would return
to Godheim.
From the materials collected by Herbert Spencer, it is clear that
"they were understood to be a special kind of people, wearing special
clothes. Their names      ѕнаuиɤи   буmваɤьно   " сиɤьный",
"раѕрушитеɤь",
"moral" and so on. They love and hate, are proud and vengeful, fight
among themselves, kill and eat each other. There are constant quarrels
between them. They fight, feast, drink and revel all day long, and at night
they go to bed. They can be wounded and need healing; they die and are
buried. "There is no doubt," Spencer concludes, "that they are born
through the reincarnation of souls."
However, depicting their gods as ordinary people, the ancients
constantly attributed to them power over the elements and the ability to
perform miracles. They controlled the sun, winds, rains, harvests, and so
on. It is not difficult to explain the origin of such beliefs. Observing
nature, the ancients were familiar with many of its phenomena, which
we now understand with the help of science, and knowing these
phenomena, they could predict many events, especially meteorological
ones. In 7ɤаѕах, however, such predictions are equivalent to the behaviour of
the forces of nature. For example, if rain and thunder are predicted for a
certain time and the prediction comes true, then, naturally, the prediction
is considered to be a phenomenon: it rains, and the moon shines according
to its nature and according to its desire. The same is true of the
predictions and experiments that we can carry out, observing the laws of
nature, and we are convinced by the evidence.
It is quite natural and true to say that their inventions were the result
of their imagination and creativity, fishing gear, metal tools, writing,
letters, paintings, etc., and that they passed on these skills to their
people.
Although, according to folk legends, the gods are strictly separated
from humans and do not mix with them, they are sometimes attributed
with romantic relationships with representatives of the human race. "According to
traditional mythology," says Spencer, "the gods, the heroes, and
sometimes even humans are descended from the gods in a supernatural
way. Meanwhile, in the East, we hear about the sons of God who were
enraptured by the beauty of mortal women — the Teutons discusssometimes even humans are descended from the gods in a supernatural
way. Meanwhile, in the East, we hear about the sons of God who were
enraptured by the beauty of mortal women — the Teutons discuss

--- PAGE BREAK ---s are descended from the gods in a supernatural
way. Meanwhile, in the East, we hear about the sons of God who were
enraptured by the beauty of mortal women — the Teutons discuss

--- PAGE BREAK ---

about the unions of the sons of God with the daughters of men.
There are also milder interpretations of the fact that these unions
bring about the fall of gods. "If we recall," — says Spencer, — that,
according to the beliefs of the Greeks, it was a crime for the race of gods to
fall in love with the representatives of the human race, then it is not
particularly difficult for us to imagine how the story unfolded." So, it is
clear that the Milojiya are not a gathering, as we think, but simply a biography
of white people who are called "gods." something like our
"Mitya of the Saints". There is a confusion between "gods" and ordinary
"people" should be considered beings of medium rank, lower than gods, but
higher than people, but in folk tales, besides gods, we find
"sons of gods" and "sons of men". "In the primitive history of their
country," says Spencer, "the Egyptians assumed the existence of three
periods, following one another without interruption. In the first period,
there was the 'dynasty of gods', followed by the period of the gods and, finally,
the dynasty of the mysterious Manus."
"All the most ancient sovereigns," says Herbert Spencer, "are said to
have descended from gods. In Assyria, Egypt, among the Jews, the
Lynians, and the ancient Britons, the names of sovereigns are always
derived from the names of gods.
Later, kings lost their supernatural attributes and became rulers of
divine origin, appointed by God, viceroys of heaven, moropoms in the
divine right. The old theory, however, continues to live on in the minds of
the people, although in name it no longer exists... Even now, many
people, seeing a monarch for the first time, feel a secret awe, as if he
were not a god, but a common mortal.
In seven countries, they are valued for their good breed and their
steadiness, as can be seen from the fact that they are preferred by other
peoples for breeding worthy offspring. In other places, such as
Madagascar, the Sandwich Islands, Cape Horn, Gabuana (in Alim), Peru
and other countries, rulers, unlike us, allowed and even required their sons to
marry their sisters and closest relatives. In other countries, as in the old days
in Russia, and as is currently the case in China, they are given the right
to choose their bride from among all the girls of the people, etc.
This is simply and naturally the origin of the gods and theirussia, and as is currently the case in China, they are given the right
to choose their bride from among all the girls of the people, etc.
This is simply and naturally the origin of the gods and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---rently the case in China, they are given the right
to choose their bride from among all the girls of the people, etc.
This is simply and naturally the origin of the gods and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The first thing to understand in life is that it is not difficult to understand
that the very term "god" was not always what we understand it to be now. In
ancient times, it was the name of a high-ranking class of people, something
like our modern concept of "nobility". It was necessary to distinguish this
race from ordinary people, if it really existed. Of course, what we now
know about the supernatural nature of gods has dissolved with the
passage of time, and the race we are talking about will disappear,
degenerate and die out, but in the memories of people, it will remain in
the form of souls and spirits inhabiting the heavens.
Those who, during their earthly life, passed on to their descendants
stories about their minds, characters and deeds, without paying any
attention to the details of their earthly existence, and thus in the minds
of their descendants they appear as immortal deities. There, the abilities,
strength and power attributed to these beings no longer existed, their
lineage had been lost, they were considered supernatural, incredible and
difficult to believe.
And so, perhaps the stories about gods and heroes are sufficiently
outdated, perhaps they are sufficiently distorted by the imperfections of
oral transmission, and perhaps they have been embellished, then in my mind
there is terrible chaos, in which truth would be completely confused with
falsehood, and reality with fantasy, and only science, with its rigorous
methods and broad horizons, could make sense of it all, not mere
mortals. Moreover, in this way, new gods are constantly appearing
alongside the most ancient ones.
And therefore, doubt arose in the existence of gods, and then they were
completely rejected, declared demons, and in their place was put the
concept of one true God, postponing for the future the creation of new
myths.
Thus, the universe was divided into those who adhered to the old
polytheism and those who followed the new faith in one God, between
whom there was a fierce struggle that continues to this day. But now we
can calmly discuss the beliefs of both sides and restore what was truly
in the community.d the new faith in one God, between
whom there was a fierce struggle that continues to this day. But now we
can calmly discuss the beliefs of both sides and restore what was truly
in the community.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ne God, between
whom there was a fierce struggle that continues to this day. But now we
can calmly discuss the beliefs of both sides and restore what was truly
in the community.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22. OUR THEORY IS
SUPPORTED BY FACTS
ATAVISM
Our theory is confirmed by the facts of atavism. The monsters
produced by atavism partially restore the diluvial man and
pithecanthropus. The Great Ones. The Giants. The Hairy People.
Premature maturity and its causes. Albinism and melanism.
No matter how diverse deformities may be, they can be divided into
two types. Some, such as doubling of the body, multiplication of limbs,
absence of certain limbs, etc., can be considered pathological in the
strict sense of the word, as they are very diverse and rarely resemble each
other. Animals, insects, aquatic creatures, plants, minerals, etc., reproduce
individuals that are similar to each other, belonging to the same species.
The latter are particularly important to us because they represent the
most significant phenomena that were normal many thousands of years
ago. "The appearance of monstrous formations," says Warvin, "and less
serious anomalies are attributed by all to the preservation of the original
state, i.e., the preservation of the embryonic state. Many deformities,
however, are hardly noticeable, as they are the result of arrested
development, where parts appear that are not found in the embryo, but
which exist in other representatives of the same species of animals and
plants, we can most likely attribute this to reversion (atavism). "It is
clear," says the same writer, "that the appearance of traits that have
disappeared is, in all likelihood, due to hundreds of mutations."
If the opinion about the hybrid nature of modern society is correct,
then we should expect a particularly high number of atavisms. We have
already cited above the example of Larpin, that "when two different
breeds are crossed, there is a tendency in the offspring to return to one or
both of the parental forms during the course of successive generations. But it is
impossible to determine whether this is true, because all traces of this desire
are lost." That is why amongone or
both of the parental forms during the course of successive generations. But it is
impossible to determine whether this is true, because all traces of this desire
are lost." That is why among

--- PAGE BREAK ---parental forms during the course of successive generations. But it is
impossible to determine whether this is true, because all traces of this desire
are lost." That is why among

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the monsters of society, we must seek the reincarnations of our distant
ancestors: the beasts and pitemanthropes.
And, indeed, this theoretical argument is justified by the data already
obtained by science. All deformities, in the appearance of which there is
reason to suspect the results of atavism, can be divided into two
categories. The first restores the higher parental type, which is undoubtedly
ueovema, and the second
the lower, pithecanthropus.
The first category includes vegans, 7enians (who, due to the rarity of
their appearance, can also be considered freaks), upresmerno-vogotatye
gyudi, children with premature mental, physical and sexual
development, and agibinos.
The second category includes: marpini, idiots, morons, and
imbeciles. Let us consider each of these types of deformities
separately.
Giants.
Real giants are people who are over 2 metres tall. The tallest person ever
recorded was 253 cm. To date, between 50 and 70 giants have been
described with scientific accuracy. Their weight reaches up to 160 kg.
Excessive growth occurs mainly in the upper limbs. There are two types
of giants: one is slender, with a long torso, and the other is stocky, with
a short torso and normal proportions. But the new men, according to
Ranma,
"There are no such things as perfect people." In most cases, the width of
the neck, shoulders and chest is excessive. In most cases, the height and
weight of the men are reduced, but there are exceptions, such as the
"Swedish veteran" who served in Frederick II's guard, who was
"sufficiently strong and agile," the Roman emperor Maximinus and the
lieutenant of the American army, Lon Busrim, who was known for his
bravery and endured the hardships of the campaign no worse than men
of normal height. The mental abilities of many of them were well
developed.
In addition to their above-average height, some of them had a
"proportional" build, with certain parts of the body, especially the limbs,
growing to above-average proportions. Sometimes the entire body is
affected, sometimes only oneeight, some of them had a
"proportional" build, with certain parts of the body, especially the limbs,
growing to above-average proportions. Sometimes the entire body is
affected, sometimes only one

--- PAGE BREAK ---had a
"proportional" build, with certain parts of the body, especially the limbs,
growing to above-average proportions. Sometimes the entire body is
affected, sometimes only one

--- PAGE BREAK ---

monument and one city, one foot, or even one page.
Congenital thinness contributes to 7i7ant growth, and sometimes
excessive development of the body is observed. V Ranm describes a
case in which, along with normal fat development at average body
weight, there is a significant thinning of the bones and joints, as well as the
development of musculature. His weight is 216.5 kg, and his height is 170
cm.
Geniuses.
When it comes to genius people, we are, of course, most interested
in anthropological data about them, based on their belonging to a
particular race. This includes, first of all, the indisputable fact that all
the people who developed European civilisation were white, and we do not
know of any other civilisations. Moreover, it is clear that the people who
developed European civilisation were white, and we do not know of any
exceptions.
"many of the people in the study are significantly more anxious." This
idea is perfectly illustrated by the following table:
The capacity of the reservoir:
V Voty
1865 mub. cm.
V Kant
1740 mуб. cm.
8 Italian. Veni. Gudey
1611 m above sea level.
V. Itagiev
1553 m. See
To this we must add the fact that Karaga Focht was very popular with
Cuvier, Shigera and Napoleon 1-7.
According to Veger, greater capacity is associated with greater weight,
so it follows that tall people should be characterised by high growth. Indeed,
Nombroso cites data collected in Italy during the recruitment of soldiers,
which shows that the highest percentage of tall people and the lowest
percentage of short people is found in those regions of Italy where there
have always been many talented people. Conversely, in those provinces
where the percentage of tall people is lower, the number of talented
people is significantly lower. In addition, according to Nombroso,
talented people come from families that are not considered to be of high
social standing in Europe. "It has long been known," says the author,
"that among the common people, both rich and poor, in poor countries
especiallyfamilies that are not considered to be of high
social standing in Europe. "It has long been known," says the author,
"that among the common people, both rich and poor, in poor countries
especially

--- PAGE BREAK ---ot considered to be of high
social standing in Europe. "It has long been known," says the author,
"that among the common people, both rich and poor, in poor countries
especially

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Many people. A popular Tuscan saying goes: "The mountains are tough,
but the people are gentle." In the mountains of Tuscany, there are many
poets and improvisers among the shepherds. In the mountainous areas
of Nombardia and in the coastal areas of Beramo, Brescia and Como,
there are more gentle people than in the lowlands. In all lowland countries,
according to Nombroso, these people are extremely rare.
Hairy people.
Approximately hairy creatures, sometimes called "dog-like and
bear-like," have been observed both in the past and in recent times.
They are found among both men and women, but, according to Fenix
Pater, more commonly among men. All of them, without exception, are
covered with thick, bushy hair, always soft, They are found in people of
the white race, unlike the non-white and monochromatic races, which have
coarse hair. The composition is famous in the 1960s by O. Paetrana.
Previously, these people were known only in Europe, but recently they
have been found in Asia and America. According to Ranman, excessive
hairiness is an abnormal preservation of the hair follicle, Lanugo, which
is sometimes called vellus hair, and which normally falls out in
adults. It is not an atavism from those times, when it may have been
useful to m o n keys, but rather a remnant of later times, which has
survived in the form of hairiness. In apes, the tail remains intact. In
addition to the hairiness, there is also a tendency for the hair to break
off, especially in certain areas, such as the armpits and pubic area.
Premature ageing.
Reviewing a number of anomalies in the modern human organism, Dr.
Munimov draws attention to menstruation in modern women, a
phenomenon is considered by all peoples of the world to be a sign of
immorality, and among Iranians it is even considered a sin, that
menstruation is primarily a manifestation of the spirit of decay. This
gives the author reason to suggest that menstruation, as we know it today,
i.e. in the form of regular bleeding, consists oft
menstruation is primarily a manifestation of the spirit of decay. This
gives the author reason to suggest that menstruation, as we know it today,
i.e. in the form of regular bleeding, consists of

--- PAGE BREAK ---rimarily a manifestation of the spirit of decay. This
gives the author reason to suggest that menstruation, as we know it today,
i.e. in the form of regular bleeding, consists of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The latest acquisition of the uеɤовеuесmо7о family. We have, he says,
every right to assume that in primitive times, marriages with immature girls
(before the onset of menstruation) were more common and even
permanent, as they are now, and under such conditions menstruation may
not occur at all, or it may occur only in exceptional cases. In fact, we
currently have   many remnants of ancient traditions in folk customs,
which indicate that early marriages were very widespread in ancient
times. On the island of Leyte, men still marry at the age of 7–8, and
girls at the age of 4–5. In Vvedd, men marry at 15–16 years of age, and
in Madagascan, in the 17th century, they married at 10–12 years of age.
In Angola, there is an ancient custom that allows men to marry at the
age of 14. The same is true for other tribes. Observations of immature
European women who gave birth very early, contrary to expectations,
show that childbirth under normal conditions is very rare and the
postpartum period is normal. It is also known that in some children,
internal and external signs of puberty occur very early. The author cites
44 cases of early puberty in girls. They show an unusually early onset of
menstruation: at 2 weeks after birth, at 2 months, at 3, 4, 6, 9, etc. Some
girls appear older than their peers; for example, at 2 years old, they appear
to be 10–12 years old, at 3 years old, they appear to be 20, and so on.
Their breasts grow earlier than usual, their weight and height are greater
than normal, and their character and manners are more serious than
those of normal children. E x t e r n a l genital organs are sometimes
deformed at birth. When they are born, the internal genital organs are
developed correctly, but in the opposite sex. Most cases are observed in
Europeans, but there is one case in non-Europeans. Dr. Poss adds t h a t in
some children the condition was pathological, associated with physical
ailments, but in others, on the contrary, there were no significant
pathological changes. "We still do not know," says the author, "the
conditions under which such strange phenomena are possible."
"Already in the 18th century," continues Professor Meunimov,
"Ramdor noted that men could discover feelings of love in women. At
the same time, they display intense jealousy and a desire to be the only
ones to enjoy the favours of their beloved women.   Fam   sтот
оuень   распространен   и   встреuается   вve in women. At
the same time, they display intense jealousy and a desire to be the only
ones to enjoy the favours of their beloved women.   Fam   sтот
оuень   распространен   и   встреuается   в

--- PAGE BREAK ---same time, they display intense jealousy and a desire to be the only
ones to enjoy the favours of their beloved women.   Fam   sтот
оuень   распространен   и   встреuается   в

--- PAGE BREAK ---

features between famous people. There, Ƚанте at 9 ɤет вɤюбиɤся in
Беатриuе, Каѕаmова быɤ вɤюбɤен, едва дости7нув 5-ɤетне7о
воѕраста, а Байрон в 7 ɤет поɤюбиɤ Мери Ƚеɭ. Some children of a
certain age already show signs of jealousy. Well-known paediatricians,
such as Kurshman and Fürbramer, also confirm the existence of this feeling
in children under the age of five. As a result of this phenomenon, Dr.
Meunier notes a significant increase in the prevalence of male
masturbation among our youth. And in Dr. Possa's work, we find
examples of secret debauchery among very young children, sometimes
taking the form of rape, which probably has to be explained by the same
cause.
Three scientists have concluded that Meunimov's theory demonstrates "a
clear distinction between the physical speed of light and the speed of sound in
a vacuum." But perhaps there was no such thing in ancient times, and early
sexual development can be attributed to the early development of the
child's
organism,
known
to
anthropologists
as
"premature
development," where children already show excessive physical
development at birth. These children develop with unusual speed and, at
7–8 months of age, are already walking. Their weight at birth reaches 7-
10 kg, while the average weight of normal children is 3.2 kg. In one such
case, a 4-year-old boy was 117 cm tall, while the average height of German boys
is 93 cm. He was very voracious and ate a lot, so he could carry a sack of
grain and weigh 65 kg. Sometimes this is due to premature maturation
of the reproductive organs without the appearance of obvious signs of
puberty. But sometimes, both of these things are observed at the same
time; the weight, height and strength of such children at birth
significantly exceed the weight, height and strength of normal children.
Mamsiimyan Perta, describing the early stages of development in five
girls and four boys, adds that "in all cases, a child's organs develop early and
all of them are related to each other, appearing earlier."
The same "premature development" can also be observed in the area of mental
development. For example, Tasso began to speak when he was six months
old, and by the age of seven he was already fluent in Russian. Nenau, будуuи
ребенmом,   импровиѕироваɤ   потрясавшие   сɤушатеɤейlopment. For example, Tasso began to speak when he was six months
old, and by the age of seven he was already fluent in Russian. Nenau, будуuи
ребенmом,   импровиѕироваɤ   потрясавшие   сɤушатеɤей

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Tasso began to speak when he was six months
old, and by the age of seven he was already fluent in Russian. Nenau, будуuи
ребенmом,   импровиѕироваɤ   потрясавшие   сɤушатеɤей

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sermons and beautiful and7raɤ on ɭɤейте and сmрипmе. At the age of
eight, Cardan appeared to be a genius and inspired e7o. At the age of 13,
Ampere was already a good mathematician. At the age of 10, he came up with the
theory of amustim, based on the sums produced by taretems, and at the
age of 15 he wrote a famous treatise on monistic phenomena. At the age
of four, Gagher was already preaching, and at the age of five he was
passionately debating.
This is completely incomprehensible from the point of view of
modern scientific theory, but it becomes quite natural if we accept our
theory of the origin of the human race.
Obviously, if during the last period of time, the state had gone through
such a terrible struggle for existence, children would have suffered the
same fate, and now they would inevitably become prey to predators, and the
race would be wiped out. Of course, in the interests of the survival of the
species, there would be natural selection, and with the motorisation of
childbirth, it would be possible to start earlier, so that from the very first
year of its existence, it could, if it could not actively defend itself, save
itself by fleeing, and in the third or fourth year of its life, or perhaps
even earlier, it could reproduce. This is what we observe today in wild and
domestic animals.
It is considered modern7o pasvitiya ueɤovemа, with a motor it is
more besanitnoye than all animals, then it appears to be a toɤьmо
pesyɤуtat e7o mixing. Among prouim, sto is confirmed by ɯиɭrami, given
in Pɤossa, which show that in lower species, the appearance of sexual
dimorphism occurs later than in Europeans, and in European lower species
later than in higher species. Some of the statistics are given by me in
7gava 18, and here I will mention those that characterise the
nationalities. The lyrics describe a girl with premature (before the age of 12)
sexual experiences. I will take from them the most interesting ones:
V Jews
— 12.5%
V non-Jews
— 11.7%
V Russians
— 10.6%
V ɭинɤяндоm
— 2.7%
In Japanese
— 0.29%
Of course, they cannot be sure of their conclusions, but they are mistaken in
assuming that all members of the same nation are completely equal to
each other.V ɭинɤяндоm
— 2.7%
In Japanese
— 0.29%
Of course, they cannot be sure of their conclusions, but they are mistaken in
assuming that all members of the same nation are completely equal to
each other.

--- PAGE BREAK ---In Japanese
— 0.29%
Of course, they cannot be sure of their conclusions, but they are mistaken in
assuming that all members of the same nation are completely equal to
each other.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to mprovi, but over time they promise to give very
interesting insights into the differences between nationalities. It should
also be added that the dormitory in Kenimber7e, after studying 3,000
women, found that girls of "tall stature" reach sexual maturity earlier than
girls of "short stature" and "blondes" earlier than brunettes. Nomros also
cites Paganini, that girls who start menstruating at the age of 13, i.e. who
reach puberty early, have light hair, the fifth part have dark hair, and the
rest
are fair-haired. "In this way," says the writer, "blondes mature earlier
than others in terms of sexual development."
Agrarianism.
Abinos are found in all races, dark-skinned, light-skinned, and
everything in between. They are found not only in Europe, but also in Africa
among the Negroes and on the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Albinos are
distinguished by their unusual light colouring, and their hair is light from birth.
However, there is another type of albinism. It manifests itself i n people
and other living creatures in the form of white spots. The existence of
spotted people was known even in ancient times. In Europe, vitiligo is
observed in the form of completely white strands of hair and beard in
children and young people. In older people, partial and complete
albinism takes the form of grey hair.
The opposite of agoutism is called "meganism" and manifests itself, on
the contrary, in dark spots on light skin. The natural mechanism manifests
itself in the form of freckles, birthmarks, increased pigmentation in
pregnant women, etc., and the opposite, in the case of Addison's
disease, the skin may turn bronze.
If we assume that both phenomena are atavistic in nature, then the
colour of the skin in children may be attributed to the colour of the skin
of their ancestors, while the mechanism in the case of the latter
reproduces the colour of the pithmantropus. If we consider the mechanism
and the mechanism separately, they correspond to the phenomenon of
spotted fur in domestic animals, their offspring have spots, with white
animals having black spots and black animals having white spots.
Thus, through atavism, we see a reproduction ofphenomenon of
spotted fur in domestic animals, their offspring have spots, with white
animals having black spots and black animals having white spots.
Thus, through atavism, we see a reproduction of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

our white diguvian predator, but not completely, only in parts.
If we are to be together, I have the following: tall stature (up to 235
cm), considerable weight (up to 160 kg), long limbs in comparison with the
torso, a large chest, shoulders and hips, well-developed muscles, a large
head (up to 1855 mm), a sharp mind, strong bones throughout the body, a
bright mind, early physical and mental development, then we have
before us a vivid portrait of a truly extraordinary person. This is precisely
the portrait we have painted above, considering the theoretical conditions
under which ueɤoвеuество developed from pitemanthrope in the late
Pleistocene period.

--- PAGE BREAK ---his is precisely
the portrait we have painted above, considering the theoretical conditions
under which ueɤoвеuество developed from pitemanthrope in the late
Pleistocene period.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23. ATAVISM IN THE
DIRECT DESCENDANTS
OF PITEKANTHROPUS
Human atavism in the direction of pithecanthropus. Dwarfs and
cretins.
Microcephals. Parallels from the animal world.
It is necessary to mention the following types of atavism: marpimov,
idiots, mretinov, mimroelaov, and mimsedemov. We will not consider the
latter separately, because they are relatively rare and therefore have been
studied very little.
Karnim.
They are called Karima, and their height is slightly over 1 metre, but,
as a rule, they are even shorter than that. The famous dwarf "General
Mait" is 82.4 cm tall, and his 12-year-old bride "Princess Pauina" is 72
cm tall. The hair on the beard, head and body of marmosets is always
smooth. Their voice is squeaky. Although there are some marines who
are perfectly fit, this is relatively rare, as they are usually overweight and unfit.
In them, according to Ranke, the most important factor is the development of
the abdominal and, in particular, the digestive organs. Research by
Ranme and Karfa Fokht shows that this circumstance is related to the
greater need for nutrients in the stomach. The researchers compiled the
following table comparing the relative amounts of food consumed by
mice and rats per 1 mg of their body weight:
Begom
Besasotistye venestva
Work
1.7
8.9
Car
2.9
20.9
The table shows that: 1) the map eats three times more than the pig, uem
obymnovennyy raboi, uto svedetestvuje o 7romadnom obyme e7o
zhegudma i 2) uto on bogche, uem raboi poedat rastitel'noy, besasotistoy
pini.
B u t we have seen before that a large volume of stomach and
digestive tract is observed only in European children and in lower
species, while in the animal world it

--- PAGE BREAK ---istoy
pini.
B u t we have seen before that a large volume of stomach and
digestive tract is observed only in European children and in lower
species, while in the animal world it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is characteristic of herbivorous animals.
Thus, in humans, the digestive tract is similar to that of the supposed
pithecanthropus: a larger stomach (relative to the small intestine), a long
small intestine, motorised legs, a voluminous stomach adapted to plant-based
nutrition, high water content and a high body weight.
Idiots and morons.
Idiots and morons should also be included in the category of
morons. "In cases of retardedness," writes Ranme, "along with
retardation, retards also experience stunted growth, while idiots have
significantly stunted growth."
The nature of retardedness remains controversial to this day. Some
equate it with idiocy, while others consider it to be a special, specific
condition. It is more accurate to assume that idiocy and moronism are
degrees of the same disorder. Gono divides morons into two groups: 1)
morons who are idiots and 2) morons proper.
In contrast to the deformities discussed in the previous chapter,
which are observed in higher races, retentism is characteristic of the
entire human race. It is found throughout the world, in all latitudes and
longitudes. There are retines in the fertile Rhone Valley, in the vast
Rhine Valley, in the mountains and valleys of Switzerland, in Piedmont, in
the Caucasus, in the tropics of Australia, in Asia on the grassy plains of
the Gimae, on the dry plateaus of the Cordilleras (at an altitude of 2000
metres) and, of course, on the warm, humid and low-lying islands of
Oceania. This circumstance refutes all hypotheses that attribute retentism
to local conditions, such as winds, temperature changes, soil, lack of
sunlight, poor nutrition, the rights and customs of the population, etc.
On one hand, the origin of marasmus is attributed to the lack of
drinking water. But even here, there is no consensus among them. as
some attribute it to the absence of essential substances in the water, while
others, on the contrary, attribute it to the presence of certain substances in
abnormally high concentrations.
With regard to the past, it can be said thatf essential substances in the water, while
others, on the contrary, attribute it to the presence of certain substances in
abnormally high concentrations.
With regard to the past, it can be said that

--- PAGE BREAK ---es in the water, while
others, on the contrary, attribute it to the presence of certain substances in
abnormally high concentrations.
With regard to the past, it can be said that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it is lost in the depths of time, but folk legends have preserved it throughout
the ages. In ancient Rome, it was well known, and historians and poets
wrote about it (Pliny, Ovid, Vitruvius). In the 16th century, the German
scholar Simper wrote about mermaids, but it was Sosur (1786) who began
their scientific study.
In the middle of the 19th century, the Mretins remained a
particularly prominent family. "It cannot be denied," says Ranme, "that
there is something in their appearance that is indeed unpleasant, which at
first glance is not conducive to a favourable impression."
On this subject, the author quotes Virchow: "Anyone who has seen a
known specimen of these creatures will easily form a clear picture of their
appearance, which makes it possible to distinguish them with some
certainty from the rest of the population. The cretin in the Apennines
resembles the cretin on the Rhine, Main and in the Hemmara region. One
might think that all these individuals are closely related to each other,
that they belong to one family and, at least, to one clan. It is impossible to
avoid the conclusion that we are dealing here with the remains of a
well-organised clan. There, at least in some areas, such as Ramon-des-
Carboniers, Stag and Niens, attempts are being made to preserve them.
Ammerman even calls them a special kind of ueɤoвеmа, but modern
science considers mretinov to be a special form of deformity. However,
the typical nature of these deformities suggests their atavistic origin.
Along with his height, he is distinguished by certain other
characteristics that are unusual for him, such as his large, relatively thin,
7оɤовой, mоротmими оmонеuностями, and vѕдутым животом.
A cretin is a creature that has degenerated physically and mentally.
He is short, stocky, often thin and bloated. His skin is sometimes pale, bluish,
sometimes dark and brown, sometimes reddish and spotted. His skin is
wrinkled, dry and rough, resembling that of Bushmen and Hottentots. He
has been wrinkled since early age, and therefore always looks old, even
before reaching old age. According to Virchow,
mожа
mretinov
live
with utongeniami,which
change relatively little on the same basic skeletal structure. It does not find
enough space on the motor bed and therefore creates deformations, which
are mostly located in the transverse direction and correspond to the places
of main movement. In a special form of idiots, mimics, composing the
middlebed and therefore creates deformations, which
are mostly located in the transverse direction and correspond to the places
of main movement. In a special form of idiots, mimics, composing the
middle

--- PAGE BREAK ---eates deformations, which
are mostly located in the transverse direction and correspond to the places
of main movement. In a special form of idiots, mimics, composing the
middle

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Between idiots and morons, it can be hard, tense and tense; it is
compared to "a man's face". Cretins are unable to walk, and even the
most intelligent among them walk with a limp and stagger from side to
side.
The forehead is sloping, broad at the bottom and narrow at the top.
The nose is flat and hooked. Their hair is thick, oily, matted and tangled. It is
light brown and never turns grey. Cretins are beardless. Their chins are
completely smooth, like a child's. Their eyes are large and wide-set. Their
ears are prominent. Their noses are flat, with a large, wide, and
prominent bridge. Their nostrils are flared.
The lips are thick, turned outwards, pursed, and the lower lip is
drooping. A thick, sticky saliva constantly flows from them. The tongue is
thick and unusually large, protruding from the mouth. It resembles a snake,
according to Burmeister's description, "more like a European snake." The
lower jaw protrudes more than the upper jaw. It is thick and gives the face an
animal-like appearance. The ears are small and drooping. The eyes are
widely spaced, protruding and expressionless. The lips are thin and
inflamed. The eyelashes and eyebrows are sparse. The nose is blunt.
The chin is pointed. The neck is short and thick. The head is covered
with hair and is not bald. The ears are small and completely undeveloped.
The chest is flat and asymmetrical, often indented on one side. The
breasts are small, flaccid, and their nipples are rudimentary. The navel is
protruding and prominent. The tail is often atrophied. The legs of the
lower races are in a rudimentary position. The hands of the lower races are
broad with short fingers. The feet are voluminous and flat.
The character of the mortins is in many ways reminiscent of the
lower races and our children.
The lower races lack imagination, memory, willpower, and the
ability to reason. They do not express joyful excitement or painful
feelings. Even a well-behaved child, encountering obstacles on his way,
becomes stuck due to a complete lack of initiative. At the highest levels,
they are distinguished by their ability to express themselves with more or less
expressive words and gestures, and even with motor movements. At the
highest levels, idiots can even be taught to read and write, but the
concepts are still foreign to them: when faced with something unfamiliar,
theyd gestures, and even with motor movements. At the
highest levels, idiots can even be taught to read and write, but the
concepts are still foreign to them: when faced with something unfamiliar,
they

--- PAGE BREAK ---with motor movements. At the
highest levels, idiots can even be taught to read and write, but the
concepts are still foreign to them: when faced with something unfamiliar,
they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are lost. However, like dimari, idiots and morons have a tendency to lie
and deceive.
Cretins are solitary creatures, they avoid and do not love each other.
They are mute: their speech is a mere babble, and when they do learn to speak,
they pronounce words monotonously and indistinctly. Cretins are slow-
witted and stupid, but always good-natured. Fortunately, there is one
thing that distinguishes them from lower races, namely, their excellent
memory.
Mortality among cretins is very high at all ages, especially in the
first years of childhood. Very few of them reach adolescence. Cretins
are more susceptible to childhood diseases: scrofula, rickets, dysentery,
mononucleosis and spina bifida. In later childhood, they suffer from rickets,
bone apophyses, tuberculosis and inflammation of the gums.
Their agony before death is slow, they suffer, immersed in deep
apathy, and in a state of motor paralysis they slowly die.
It has been established that the epidemic of melancholia never
occurs without the epidemic of mania; it is believed that these two
seemingly opposite phenomena are to some extent manifestations of the
same disease. Eobatosity is a natural degree, while metritis is an
omonuategic one.
The particularly rapid development of mretinism is currently being
observed in France, where the motor is falling in many other respects.
There are up to 120,000 idiots in this country. Among the provinces
affected by idiocy, the following stand out in particular: Lower Alpes,
Savoie, Isère, Ardèche, Rhône, Alpes-Maritimes, Hautes-Pyrénées,
Ariège and Haute-Garonne.
Savoy is particularly affected by mental illness, with one mentally ill
person and one idiot per 139 inhabitants. Per 1,000 inhabitants, there are:
Disabled
50.55
Cretins
16.2
Idiots
5.30
Maguimov-kretinovs are generally born more often, especially girls, and
there are usually 6 kretinovs for every 7 kretinovs.
Mimroɯeɭaɤы.
Bism
m retinols
cost
there named
mimroɯeɭaɤы,6.2
Idiots
5.30
Maguimov-kretinovs are generally born more often, especially girls, and
there are usually 6 kretinovs for every 7 kretinovs.
Mimroɯeɭaɤы.
Bism
m retinols
cost
there named
mimroɯeɭaɤы,

--- PAGE BREAK ---imov-kretinovs are generally born more often, especially girls, and
there are usually 6 kretinovs for every 7 kretinovs.
Mimroɯeɭaɤы.
Bism
m retinols
cost
there named
mimroɯeɭaɤы,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

maɤo7oɤo. 3to are also ugly and, tamzhe mарɤиmоvy, but they, mаm we
will see below, differ in many ways from mretins. Here mаm describes
their appearance Karɤ Focht and K. Remam.
Mimroɯeɯ have an elongated nose. Their eyes are completely absent,
their nose is covered with 7-pointed, sharp horns, and their mouth is not
visible. the nose is wide, the lower part of the face is elongated forward in
the form of a snout, the ears are erect, the eyes are disproportionately
large. Puffy, thin lips, small, sharp teeth with protruding upper teeth. The
chest is broad, the limbs are disproportionately long, but the legs are strong
and sturdy. Brownish eyes. The head, tilted forward with the ears pressed
back, gives them a striking resemblance to a monkey walking on its
hind legs.
Their volume is smaller, and their muscles are less developed than
those of normal people. Virchow studied the microelements and found in them "an
undeniable similarity to the microelements of monkeys," which other
scientists agree with. However, according to Ramé, we cannot claim
that there is a species of monkey with exactly the same morphology as
that found in the microelephant. Karl Focht, who has studied primates
extensively, seeks to prove that they not only bear a strong resemblance
to monkeys, but are in fact a species of monkey-like creatures. I n his
opinion, this is the lowest species, which reproduces the lowest type,
long since passed by evolution in the sense of Darwin's theory of
development. "I have no difficulty," says Voigt, "in imagining that these
creatures represent a complete transitional series from humans to apes,
as far as one can imagine."
Mimroɯeɯ — good-natured, obedient creatures, unbearable in their
passion to break, tear and destroy everything that comes their way. They
greet strangers with surprise, but not at all with timidity. They resemble
merlins: the same outwardly curved back, inwardly curved wings,
curved and inwardly turned legs, etc., but they also have differences.
First of all, they are well developed and do not present the disproportion
in development that is striking in mretins. The mouth of the mretins is large and
formless, while that of the mimroels is small. They do not suffer from the
same problems as the mretins. But there is a particularly large
difference between them and others in character. The retinas are slow and
all their movements are sluggish and heavy. They are terribly dull even at
those stages when they learn to speak;rly large
difference between them and others in character. The retinas are slow and
all their movements are sluggish and heavy. They are terribly dull even at
those stages when they learn to speak;

--- PAGE BREAK ---e between them and others in character. The retinas are slow and
all their movements are sluggish and heavy. They are terribly dull even at
those stages when they learn to speak;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They behave like madmen, having fallen into despair from their
previous sufferings. And the microelements are sinful and self-centred,
constantly complaining, jumping and running around, often climbing on
guests' clothes and jumping on furniture and trees. With monkey-like
agility, they constantly change their position, move quickly, often with
the speed of lightning, constantly pay attention to their surroundings,
quickly understand everything, remember and repeat, and are always in
a good mood. Maria Solya Vis strikes terror into all the dogs in the
neighbourhood. If she saw them with something in their mouths, she would
run after them, jump on their backs and bite them until the dogs let go of their
prey, which she would greedily devour.
V Ranm has given a very interesting description of one micro-
organism, Mar7arita, which he managed to observe.    , she had a very broad
smile, which could be attributed to her age. She seems to have stopped at a
very low stage of development. She knows only one word, "mama," which
she utters in moments of excitement. According to her father, it was an
unforgettable moment when she finally managed to say her first word,
but it was short-lived. In any case, it was impossible to push her beyond
her limits. Nevertheless, she explained herself with the help of many
words.
These mummies represent a mixture of those pitemantropes with whom
the white diyuviag ueove mixed, so the mummies reproduce before us the
type of European pitemantrop, from the motor7o passed on by the white
ueov. It is precisely this lively character, which we find in the mimetic,
that a European pitemantrop would need to have in order not to lose in
the struggle with the animals of the animal kingdom. He was like that
before the Neolithic period and in the N e olithic itself. But even more
striking is t h e similarity between the Neanderthal and the Neanderthal, not to
mention that the micro-morphology is the same, but the latter is distinguished by
"unusually prominent brow ridges". It is also known that Virchow,
having seen a Neanderthal skull, called it "the skull of an idiot."
Thus, the deformities we have described are reproduced in the
following ways: venomous snakes,    ,   ,   ,   ,   , and   children with
premature   ,   , and   pitemantropov reproduce mарɤиmи, idiots,
mретины, and миmроɯеɭаɤы. Esribed are reproduced in the
following ways: venomous snakes,    ,   ,   ,   ,   , and   children with
premature   ,   , and   pitemantropov reproduce mарɤиmи, idiots,
mретины, and миmроɯеɭаɤы. Es

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the
following ways: venomous snakes,    ,   ,   ,   ,   , and   children with
premature   ,   , and   pitemantropov reproduce mарɤиmи, idiots,
mретины, and миmроɯеɭаɤы. Es

--- PAGE BREAK ---

live together, characterising both groups, then there is no need to describe
our ancestors.
However, it is important to remember that we are not dealing with a
real hierarchy of higher and lower types of beings, but rather with monsters.
Firstly, they are all useless, with the exception of the wise, the brave
and the albinos.
In addition, they are fragile and fragile, and each deformity is
accompanied by specific fragilities. For example, excessive weight is
associated with abnormal development of the limbs. Agrobiosis suffer
from daytime sleepiness. Giants sufer from a pathological discrepancy between
the normal development of the nervous system and the increased mass of
the body; most of them are physically fragile. Children with premature
development at 13 weeks and 44 days have passive bones, rickets,
tuberculosis, hydrocephalus, etc. They write about them as "old children
with no chance of survival, sometimes with rickets and angina." It is
impossible to talk about retards, they are completely insensitive to the
surrounding world, their feelings are paralyzed: a retard sits and stares in
one position, unless it is changed by an outside hand. You have to hold
them like a newborn baby, otherwise they will die in a moment. In my
opinion, the most expensive deformity for us is the deformity of the
Nombros people, which, as we know, is similar to that of the insane.
"Among the insane," he says, "there are madmen, and among the
madmen there are insane people."
It should be noted that in the phenomena described above, as wel as in all
other aspects of their lives, they are by no means alone among other
representatives of the animal kingdom. Parallel phenomena in the
animal world have long been known to European science.
Bülön noted that species change, that they, in his words, "improve
and degenerate." The return of objects (which, according to many
scientists, are always inferior to their descendants), i.e. those in which
animals   degenerate   into   a lower   type,   are commonly
called
"atavism", and their opposites, progressive conditions, degeneration
into   the highest   type,   Kunin7am   proposes   to call
"pro7onism".
The concepts of "atavism" and "pro7onism" are not new or rare in
scientific practice. Darwin, in his work "The Origin ofion
into   the highest   type,   Kunin7am   proposes   to call
"pro7onism".
The concepts of "atavism" and "pro7onism" are not new or rare in
scientific practice. Darwin, in his work "The Origin of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Species," although he refers to the life of domestic animals, he does
not mention similar observations about wild animals.
When reversing and atavism, the hair becomes longer and thicker, and on
the exposed parts of the body, especially on the legs, curly hairs appear.
Domestic pigs acquire a dark colour with longitudinal stripes, thick
skin, a thick neck and large ears. All colours degenerate into white.
They have a silvery-grey colour. Domestic chickens degenerate into the
wild species Gallus bankiva with brown feathers. They approach the
dimy mryamve and lose the ability to fly, while the 7ogubi   degenerate
into   in size with all the characteristics of the dimy poevo7o 7ogubi.
M a n y domestic animals, according to Larpin, lose their old habits and
instincts and acquire new ones, and in terms of character, they become
significantly different.
When it comes to proactivity, Warvin also gives a few examples:
pets grow in height, weight and courage, become more sociable,
resilient, tolerant and obedient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cantly different.
When it comes to proactivity, Warvin also gives a few examples:
pets grow in height, weight and courage, become more sociable,
resilient, tolerant and obedient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24. THEORY
CONFIRMED BY FACTS
3MBRIOLOGICAL RAEVITR
The theory is confirmed by facts of morphological development.
Autogenesis and phylogenesis. From what moment does human
autogenesis begin? The law of simultaneous inheritance. Autogenesis of
living beings. The ancestors of the Caucasian race repeat the diluvial
man. After birth, the peewok repeats the pithecanthropus.
The embryonic development of animals occurs according to the
well-known law of Hemmings, according to which a series of stages
passed through in the life of an individual of a given species is a
necessary repetition of those stages which are passed through during the
course of long developmental periods. In scientific terms, this is
expressed as follows: "Ontogenesis (the development of an individual)
is a rapid repetition of phylogeny (the history of the development of a
species)." For example, a tadpole repeats the life history of its fish-like
ancestor, with gills instead of legs. During this period, her ancestors
were aquatic animals. She grows legs, her gills are replaced by legs, and
the genus of salamanders and newts appears. Then the tail falls off and
the animal reaches maturity. We can see a similar story in the
metamorphosis of insects, butterflies, and other creatures.
In the history of the development of vertebrates, there are also
references to the distant past of the species. We can observe the following:
the remains of gills from that time, perhaps it was an aquatic animal, a
tail, perhaps it was a quadruped, similarities with the ancestors of other,
lower animals, etc. The reasons for these transformations are unknown
to us, but we know that they are internal, not external.
Changes during intrauterine life are considered to be a complex
history of the distant past, but I have not come across any works that would
be comparable to the same view of intrauterine life. This is probably
because in our minds everythinged to be a complex
history of the distant past, but I have not come across any works that would
be comparable to the same view of intrauterine life. This is probably
because in our minds everything

--- PAGE BREAK ---history of the distant past, but I have not come across any works that would
be comparable to the same view of intrauterine life. This is probably
because in our minds everything

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are based on the principles of Nombarso. We cannot escape the
influence of external factors on the developing organism. But, even if we
accept intrauterine life is a direct continuation of uterine life, i.e. if it is
also controlled by internal factors, then there would be no room for
external factors to act on it.
Meanwhile, can we say that from the moment of birth, the organism
ceases to be governed by the Gemmic force?
Of course not. Ontogenesis is a series of successive changes that
occur in an animal in a specific order and are caused by internal factors,
while the birth of an organism is an external factor. Ontogenesis should
be considered from the moment of the organism's birth, and not from
the moment of the first change that occurs in the organism. If we take the
definition of the life of a butterfly, then its ontogenesis begins at the
moment when it is born as an egg in its mother's womb, and ends when
when the butterfly completes its final transformation, i.e. emerges from
the cocoon. After that, no further changes occur: it eats eggs and then
dies. Thus, ontogenesis continues throughout the entire life of a woman.
And now the question arises: when does ontogenesis begin in birds
and in humans? It is commonly believed that in birds it begins with the
laying of eggs, and in humans it begins at birth. But is that really the case?
Obviously
not,
because
their
transformations
do
not
occur
simultaneously. In birds, the first plumage in the form of down and
feathers changes with age. In humans, starting with adolescence and
continuing into old age, a series of changes occur that are completely
incomprehensible to us.
Of course, the current understanding of ontogenesis should be based not
on the moment of birth, but on the most recent changes in old age. One
might think that these changes, which occur with the birth of a child in
the womb, repeat the ancient history of the human race, then the rest of
life reproduces new and more recent history. From this point of view, the
changes that occur with the human being are of great interest.
The question arises: do these changes follow each other with the same
regularity as in life?
It seems to me that there can be no doubt about this. No one can
deny that the inner life of the womb has been changing since the
moment of conception.