New Challenges, Old Playbook: The U.S.-Mexico Drug War Partnership

Published: Apr 29, 2026 | Briefing Book # 921 | Edited by Claire Dorfman

CIA Deaths in Mexico Expose Persistent Challenges in U.S.-Mexico Security Ties
Documents Highlight Mexican “Sensitivities” About U.S. Involvement in 1990s Drug Ops; U.S. Concerns Over Military Corruption

[In a cable from February 1990, the U.S. Embassy detailed resource allotments for the NBRF. The cable reveals the central role played by the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City, not only in contributing logistical and diplomatic support for the counternarcotics program, but also in providing intelligence for security operatives on the ground in northern border states. The document makes clear that embassy officials in Mexico City were the primary liaisons with the Mexican government during the creation of the program. Support issues at the time included the need to loan U.S. military helicopters to the PGR to aid interdiction operations. The embassy had recently offered to provide a Tactical Analysis Team (TAT), along with equipment and personnel, to support the NBRF.]

Presidents Bush and Salinas increased bilateral counternarcotics cooperation during their administrations. Credit: El Universal

A Mexican soldier stands guard over one ton of Colombian cocaine set on fire in the southern Mexican state of Quintana Roo, February 27, 1997. Credit: Reuters

Washington, D.C., April 29, 2026 - The reported deaths last week of two CIA officials in northern Mexico after an operation to dismantle a clandestine drug lab have heightened tensions between the two countries over the extent of U.S. government involvement in Mexican security operations. First identified as U.S. Embassy personnel , media reports have since revealed that the Americans who died alongside two Mexican officials in a car crash in the state of Chihuahua on April 19 worked for the Central Intelligence Agency. President Claudia Sheinbaum said that her security cabinet was not aware of any “direct work or coordination” between the state of Chihuahua and U.S. Embassy personnel and that she had demanded an explanation from the Trump administration and the government of Chihuahua. As of now, there are conflicting reports about the role of the U.S. officials in the operation and what exactly Mexico’s federal government knew.

As the story continues to develop, the National Security Archive today publishes a set of declassified U.S. records on the Northern Border Response Force (NBRF), a joint U.S.-Mexico program initiated in 1990 that was one of the first major commitments of U.S. personnel and intelligence to combat narcotics trafficking in northern Mexico and that established a model for cooperation (the sharing of U.S. intelligence with U.S.-trained Mexican security forces) that has endured for more than 35 years.

These documents offer a window into an era of rapidly increasing U.S.personnel and intelligence to combat narcotics trafficking in northern Mexico and that established a model for cooperation (the sharing of U.S. intelligence with U.S.-trained Mexican security forces) that has endured for more than 35 years.

These documents offer a window into an era of rapidly increasing U.S. involvement in counternarcotics operations at a time when Mexico had become one of the most important transit zones for illegal drugs entering the United States. They also provide insight into several persistent themes and obstacles in U.S.-Mexico security cooperation, spotlighting issues that continue to complicate the bigger and more ambitious anti-narcotics programs that define U.S.-Mexico security cooperation today. These include Mexico’s sensitivity to perceived infringements of its sovereignty; the apparent ease with which criminal groups have been able to adapt to new enforcement strategies; U.S. concerns about high-level corruption in Mexico, especially in the army; and the inherent difficulties in defining and measuring success in a militarized counternarcotics strategy.

Designed to “eliminate the use of northern Mexico as a staging area for cocaine shipments,” NBRF relied on U.S. training and radar installations to help Mexico “detect drug-laden smuggling aircraft, interdict the aircraft as they land in Mexico, arrest traffickers, seize aircraft and narcotics, and conduct follow-up investigations to collect evidence that can be used to dismantle trafficking groups.” The program was one of a several major new international counternarcotics interdiction programs that took shape as the Cold War wound down during the administration of President George H. W. Bush.

U.S. support to NBRF was coordinated through the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City and involved personnel from the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and the U.S.support to NBRF was coordinated through the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City and involved personnel from the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and the U.S. Customs Service, which tracked suspected drug trafficking aircraft while in the air. DEA was the only agency that was authorized to accompany their Mexican counterparts on the ground in NBRF field operations, a practice that “was ended early in the program due to DEA safety concerns.”

On the Mexican side, the Attorney General’s Office ( Procuraduría General de la República , PGR) was the lead agency on the task force, while interdiction was the exclusive responsibility of the Federal Judicial Police ( Policía Judicial Federal , PJF). The Mexican Air Force and the Mexican Navy also participated in the program.

The Mexican government conducted a pilot program for the Northern Border Response Force between April and July 1990. Agents initially seized a significant amount of cocaine and trafficking assets, largely due to the novelty of interdicting aircraft transiting Mexico. However, a joint U.S. interagency assessment of the NBRF produced the following year acknowledged that “the flow of cocaine to the United States has continued at high levels” due to traffickers quickly changing tactics and smuggling routes. (Document 8) Despite the program’s documented inefficiencies, U.S. officials continued to herald the NBRF as an “important national security endeavor” and considered the Mexican government to be a “dependable partner in the anti-drug effort.” (Document 7)

As the two countries ramped up counternarcotics efforts through the NBRF, an event at the end of the year would throw this close collaboration into jeopardy.(Document 8) Despite the program’s documented inefficiencies, U.S. officials continued to herald the NBRF as an “important national security endeavor” and considered the Mexican government to be a “dependable partner in the anti-drug effort.” (Document 7)

As the two countries ramped up counternarcotics efforts through the NBRF, an event at the end of the year would throw this close collaboration into jeopardy. On November 7, 1991, Mexican army troops attacked and killed seven Federal Judicial Police agents who formed part of a NBRF unit during a counterdrug mission in Veracruz. The incident led to the firing of a top army general and the launch of a corruption probe into the Mexican military’s protection of drug traffickers. DEA Administrator Robert Bonner called the Veracruz killings a “critical watershed event” for the Mexican government “regarding its commitment to the counter-narcotics effort and its resolve to root out corrupt officials, even Army Generals, that collude with traffickers.” (Document 9) Months later, the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City assessed the deteriorating security relationship, acknowledging that the presence of U.S. Customs aircraft on the scene during the army’s attack on the NBRF agents had renewed “Mexican sensitivities about U.S. involvement in anti-narcotics activities” in the country. The Embassy clarified that the “nationalist reactions” provoked by the deployment of the Customs planes in Mexican territory did not consider that this action was authorized and “carefully and closely coordinated” with the Mexican government. (Document 10)

Despite the challenges that faced the program, lawmakers determined the NBRF’s methodology to be sound and pushed for further cooperation efforts that followed the same model of sharing U.S. intelligence while training and equipping the Mexican security agencies that would act on it. (Document 10)

Despite the challenges that faced the program, lawmakers determined the NBRF’s methodology to be sound and pushed for further cooperation efforts that followed the same model of sharing U.S. intelligence while training and equipping the Mexican security agencies that would act on it. By the late 1990s, Mexico’s federal government had increased its budget for purchasing counternarcotics and law enforcement equipment and had enhanced coordination efforts with the U.S. A senior Mexican government official termed the new initiative “a total war against the scourge of drugs.”

Reports of increased CIA involvement in Mexico are evidence of a much more aggressive counternarcotics policy during the second Trump administration, but the history of NBRF is a reminder that the Trump counternarcotics surge follows a playbook written years before. While the stakes appear higher than ever, much can be learned from looking back at past cooperation. It may be a new era of policy, posturing, and challenges, but the historical record suggests little has changed.

The records featured below, including several documents from the recently published Digital National Security Archive collection, Mexico-United States Counternarcotics Policy, 1969-2013 , were obtained by the National Security Archive under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).

Documents

Resources for Mexican Northern Border Response Force U.S. Embassy in Mexico, Confidential cable
Feb 21, 1990 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request

Exchange of Counternarcotics Tactical Data Joint Chiefs of Staff, Secret cable
Mar 9, 1990 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request/Mexico-United States Counternarcotics Policy, 1969-2013 DNSA (excised)
In March, the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington established the framework for cooperation between the U.S. and Mexican governments for the Northern Border Response Force. The Joint Chiefs recommended direct coordination with DIA, DEA, the U.S. Customs Service (National Aviation Center), and the El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC). The document stressed that “no direct military-to-military relationship is envisioned” for the initial stages of the NBRF program. Intelligence would be passed to the U.S. Embassy in Mexico for dissemination to Mexican partners.

JVIDS Installation Support at AMEmbassy Mexico Joint Chiefs of Staff, Secret Action Processing Form
May 15, 1990 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request
In order to establish a means for transmitting intelligence, a team of army personnel were ordered to deploy to Mexico in May to install a secure communications system inside the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City. The aim was to develop a system for “passing near real-time, two-way military counternarcotics tactical information” to embassy officials working on the NBRF program in Mexico.

Deployment Order – JVIDS Installation Support at AMEmbassy Mexico Joint Chiefs of Staff, Secret Deployment Order
May 20, 1990 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request
An order from the Joint Chiefs details the planned deployment of U.S. military personnel to install the JVIDS secure communications network and train Embassy staff in support of the Northern Border Response Force program. The document specifically orders that “no public announcement of the deployment is authorized,” and that the installation team is prohibited from participating “in any activity in which hostilities are imminent.” The order notes that DEA elements are actively conducting field operations with Mexican government forces in support of the NBRF.

US Counternarcotics Strategy for Mexico Joint Chiefs of Staff, Confidential memorandum
May 23, 1990 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request
The Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs relays progress on the NBRF program to the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs at the Department of State. The Vice Chairman determined that allocating resources for the Northern Border Response Force should be prioritized over support for interdiction operations in other countries in the region, stating that the focus on Mexico would have the “highest pay-off.” He recommended President George H.W. Bush declare that the situation in Mexico “threatens the national security interests of the United States” in order to justify the immediate provision of helicopters to Mexico for the NBRF program.

[Letter from the Commissioner of Customs to the Assistant Secretary for International Narcotics Matter, Department of State] Department of the Treasury, U.S. Customs Service
Oct 29, 1990 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request
Customs Commissioner Carol Hallett requests assistance from the Assistant Secretary for International Narcotics Matters at the Department of State, Melvyn Levitsky, regarding U.S. Customs Service participation in the NBRF program. Hallett reports that recent operations involving Customs sensor aircraft deployment in Mexico have been “highly successful” in cocaine seizures. She asks Levitsky for help in convincing the Mexican government to allow U.S. detection aircraft to enter Mexican airspace, asserting that interdictions would increase if this request was admitted by the GOM. She noted that given Mexico’s sensitivity to its sovereignty, “it is doubtful that this permission would be forthcoming.”

[Letter from the Assistant Secretary for International Narcotics Matter, Department of State to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Drug Enforcement Policy] Department of State, Unclassified letter
Oct 1, 1990 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request
The Assistant Secretary for International Narcotics Matters at the Department of State, Melvyn Levitsky, provides a progress report on the NBRF program to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Drug Enforcement Policy at the Pentagon. Levitsky praised the GOM as a “dependable partner in the anti-drug effort” and classified the NBRF as an “important national security endeavor.”

Interagency Assessment of Mexican Northern Border Response Force (NBRF)--After Action Report [Includes Attachments; Heavily Excised; Differently Excised Version Appended] Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Staff, Directorate for Operations, Secret report
Jun 3, 1991 | Source Mexico-United States Counternarcotics Policy, 1969-2013 DNSA
In June 1991, a joint interagency assessment of the Northern Border Response Force declared the program a success, despite the fact that “the flow of cocaine to the United States has continued at high levels.” The document also notes that Central America, and particularly Guatemala, has increased its role in smuggling drugs north to the United States through Mexico.

TL Ambassador Negroponte on 11/22/91 Drug Enforcement Administration, Confidential memorandum
Nov 25, 1991 | Source Freedom of Information Act Request
On November 7, 1991, seven federal agents who formed part of the NBRF were attacked and killed by Mexican army troops in Veracruz during an aborted drug raid. Later that month, DEA Administrator Robert C. Bonner expressed his concerns over the Veracruz incident in a memorandum, citing the event as a “critical watershed event” for the Mexican government “regarding its commitment to the counter-narcotics effort and its resolve to root out corrupt officials, even Army Generals, that collude with traffickers.” Bonner specifically noted that the effectiveness of the Northern Border Response Force would be hampered until “decisive action” was taken by the Mexican government.

Assessment of November 7 Veracruz Incident [Best Available Copy] U.S. Embassy in Mexico, Confidential cable
Jan 8, 1992 | Source Mexico-United States Counternarcotics Policy, 1969-2013 DNSA
In January of 1992, the U.S. Embassy wrote a cable assessing the aftermath of the Veracruz incident. The presence of U.S. Customs aircraft on the scene during the army’s attack on the PJF agents in Veracruz had renewed “Mexican sensitivities about U.S. involvement in anti-narcotics activities” in the country. The cable notes that “nationalist reactions” regarding U.S. aircraft conducting independent surveillance in Mexican territory, “despite the fact that these operations were carefully and closely coordinated” with the Mexican government, were not evident or understood by the public.
