—»wm AWI
,i
l
6/8/77
Dear JeV/.Burku, Jr.t
_ft+. If i/i*?* *° tha wiQhful thinking in your insulting and wrong-headed
note ox 6/6 I could waste more than a page*
.. . r°uwishfully all you want. That altera nothing. This committee is utterly
uiahonest, utterly irresponaible, is totally without concern for anyone's rights and
haa not bothered to learn tha basic evidenoe in either assassination.
it is the nonnonse and tho fabrications in which is was swamped by an odd bag of
nuts and elf-seekera, some of good intent some the scum of the earth that contributes to
the deplorable present situation#
,, V** lm^ea 419 aot t0 chan«® this. The record of this bunch of assassins
of truth is so outrageous there is no possihlity of it p.iMng any credibility.
If you want to approve for yourself what you cpndemn about tha Warren ^om.,iad.on
than 1 leave you with a remarkable flexible conscience.
You have no capability of being factual or facing fact if you can tell me that
it fains ms to see your name used in the continuing move—up."
Neither you not the committee nor anyone else haa had a single factual error to
attribute to me. The same goes for the public as well as tho secret record of this
committee and its ham-handed and ham-headed prosecutor types, those with long and successful
careers ol rigging oasos.
Whether you nre uninformed or are on?, of those who cannot bo informed what you say
is seif-oondcanation. I have had dealings with this gang. I began by offering them unlimited *
help. They beg-n by refusing the address the ossential fact In either case, a position
maintained ever since. To this they added total untrustworhtineas, contempt for decent
or ethical behavior and were that not enough added tho same flaw, prc-concpotiona of guilt.
You live with this. I will not.
You think this is not the worst kind of cover-up? Live with that, too.
1 know of no story that quoted me with any meaningful error in it, none that is not
a considerable understatement.
If you prefer like a child to cling to illusions, you do have that right.
3ut where the hell do the dlllotantes like you get off sitting back secure in your
personal lives saying that on© who has lived an I have 11bed, deno as I have done, in part
of a cover—up? Where the covor-up comes from is the heavy smothering spread by people
like you of a substance that whan uncontaainated by humas at least has varluo as
fertiliser.
Shame on you!