DL89--43
On Novomber 22, 1963, U. 8. Attorney H. BAREr00T SANDKR8,
Northern District of Teras, Dallas, Texas, and his staff did con-
siderable reaearch ln an eflort to locato a Fedoral statute that
would cover the aaBassination of Preaident JOHN F.【xNNEDY with
negntivereeults.
Contactg by representatives of the FBI in this
connoctign were confirmed by letter to U. S. Attorney BANDERs on
Novomber'26,1963.
No local dissemination of this report is being made to U. S.
Attorney or to the local U. S. Becret Service 1n Dallas.1
Ixtra copies
of this report have beon made for the Dallas Office in the ovent the
Bureau directs that a'copy of this report should be disseminated to
both the local Secret Bervico and the U. S. Attorney's Office at
Dallas.It is felt that dissemination at a national level might be
mprenppropriate.
By toletypo dated November 23,1963,the Bureau 1nstructed
all offices to furnish all information of intorest to the U.8.
Secret Service to the Bureau and follow with a lettarhead memorandum
fordissemination..
Throughout tho 1nitial stages of this investigation,
tho Dallas Orfice hag recsived a mass of allegations with respect to
peoplo who 1n the past have mnde remnrks constituting thrents against
the late President KENNkDr.Investigation in connection with such
remarks.has been conducted and the results will be set forth in a
subsoquent report which it is felt mhould be disseminated to the U.8.
Becret Service, but lotterhead memoranda were not prepared in each.
Buch instance.
Where 1nformation was received indicating alleged threats
against President LYNDON B. JOHNSON, such·information has been
1mmediately furnished local U. 8. Secret Service and letterhead
momoranda submitted to the Bureau.
Resulta of negative contacts with all informants, security.
racial and criminal, as well as other sources, for information benring
on the assassination of Pregident KENNEDY are being retained in the
Dallas file.
The contents of communications frpm other offices reflecting
their investigation in ogtablishing the whereabouts of bombing Bus-
pects, known Klan and hate group members, are not being set forth
herein but are being rotained in, the Dullas file.
C
COVER PAGE
Secteon2/Saniul505
/05- 8255)blishing the whereabouts of bombing Bus-
pects, known Klan and hate group members, are not being set forth
herein but are being rotained in, the Dullas file.
C
COVER PAGE
Secteon2/Saniul505
/05- 8255)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DL89-43
In some instances there are contained in this report'PD-so2s
reflocting interview with cortain individuals by different agents on
differont dnys.It 1s pointed out that many people who appearod to
posspsu information of value'were in a state of mind when interviewed
which could have caused them to fail to mention wome pertinont detail
and thoy were reinterviewed a day or mo later during the investigntion.
In connection ith the interview of Mre.Lois BIrz at Fort Wooth,
Texas, on November 22, 1963, an unknown subject - Impersonation.case
has been oponed in the Dallas Office.
A separate caae was opened in connection with the shooting of
LRE HARvEY OswALD captioned "JACK L. RUBY, aka. Jack Rubenstein,
Jack Loon Ruby, "Sparky"; LKE HARVEY OSwALD, aka. - VICTIM. CR"
Dallas file 44-l639, and the results of such investigation will be
contained in a separate report in that case.
D
COVERPAGE

--- PAGE BREAK ---on Ruby, "Sparky"; LKE HARVEY OSwALD, aka. - VICTIM. CR"
Dallas file 44-l639, and the results of such investigation will be
contained in a separate report in that case.
D
COVERPAGE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DL89-43
It ie to be noted that this report contains information
in the details which ordinarily would be reported in the administrative
section and the identityof theourceoftheinformation not
revealed.Due to'the fact that the FBI Laboratory reports Bet
forth in the details of this report containcertain information
based on such confidentinl records, and further because of the
glavity"of thia matter and the fact that President LyNDoN B.
JOHNsoN had requeated the FBI conduct investigation, it was
felt best to reflect the source of such information..It should
be noted further that in connection withinformation from the
Selective Service Records there is afalse'Selective Service Card
in which lngtance it would not be necessary to conceal the
identity of the sourca of information from such records:
The information from the records of the U.S.Poat
Office,Dallas,Texas, was made available on ll/23/63 by Mr。
HARry HOLMkS, U. S. Pogtal Inspector, Terminal Annex, Dallas, Texas.
The information from the records of the Southwestern
Bell Telephone Company, Ft. worth, Texas, on ll/23/63, was made
available to SA B. TOM CARTrR by JOHN B. MOoRK, District Manager,
Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, Ft. Worth, Texas.
The information from the records of the Southwestern
Bell Telephone Company, Dallas, Texas, Was made available on
ANTON PAVRLKA, JR.
The information obtained from the records of the
Southweatern States Telephone Company, Irving, Texas, was made
available on ll/26/63 by w. P. BSSLINGER, Division Manager。
The information from the records of the Irving Bank
Trust Company, Irving, Texas, was made available on 1l/26/63 by
GENE GLAZIER,Cashier.
E
COVER PAGE