Gary Mack
10/20/84
KXAS-TV
P.0.Box 1780
FortWorth,TX 76101
Dear Gary,
The FBI's 8/17 and 10/4 letters appear to be normal. There is a questionable
sentence but I doubt it has significance.his is the ststement that all the DL
Mour letter to the former Mary Moorman is quite good.I look forward to the
restofwhatwediscussed onthis。
for filing by subject, with a copy of this, the Jean Hill stuff with Moorman.I
read it some hours ago but recall nothing new in the *oorman records.
nmbers in previous correspondence。 When we spoke you thjought they'd excised
what relates toItem 13 because of the white space。I think not，that it would have
been bacKed out if excised, and that they started on the next page because they
wereclosetothebottomofthatpage。
I find it interesting that DL did not in any of these records disclose to
FBIHQ that it had made any copy, even after HQ raised the question. I do not
believe that once the question was raised it kept any secrets from FBIHQ, so
After going over these records I see no explanation for the selection of
irrelevant records included in what was sent you. I presume it was some kind of
accident,perhaps parts of several other requests。
When you told me about the 1965 Philip Geraci records I wondered about the
FBI'sinterestasoftheM butthe recordsare self-explanatory andalsoaccurate。
Albeit incomplete.An explanation is in order.
is correct and they were properly reported to the FBI by Jeff Parish and to others
by theFBI.Iconducted a fairly conplete investigation of Geraci for other
reasonsinterviewed his father,his mother twice and him the second time I spoke
to the mother,in the presence(indeed,home）of thefamily lawyer t my arranging。
That the FBI carried its work no farthur, or its interest, appears to be a little
unusual and I'm inclined to believe that it did,whether or not those additional
who was both a source-anformer for me and a narcfink。 She is not mentioned。 It is
she who met Ceraci when he returned to N.O., and then something out of the ordinary
happened.He_went to see Bringuier, who instead of informing his parents or the
police,arranged for him to stay ata dive known as he Silver Dollar,and there he
was the victim of a gangbang. (I think the boy was gay and that he was honest with me.)
This and another Bringuier factor may account for the incompleteness of what was
alibi for sonething else.Bringuier placed the date of Oswald's visit to him at
8/5/63 (also in other records 8/2) and thus, because of the raid on Ricardo Davis
so-called camp on the other side of Lake Pontchartrain Bringuier was suspiciouse
The initial FBI reports quote min Garaci as placing the date as perhaps in July.
(The raid was 7/31。) They also quote Geraci as saying this was his first visit to
Boxofsuchstuff。guier was suspiciouse
The initial FBI reports quote min Garaci as placing the date as perhaps in July.
(The raid was 7/31。) They also quote Geraci as saying this was his first visit to
Boxofsuchstuff。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
Philip was in Vietnam when I saw the parents, and both were cooperative。 I
The mother's recollection was quite clear. Philip and Vance Blalock were both
in the CAP and wanted t:ings for their uniform, perhaps overseas caps.The mother
fairly often afterward。)So the actual time was not long after LHO got to NO and

With regard to the older gay "Mario," the father told me more, where he picked
boys up, of complaining to school authorities, and the other descriptions, from him,
the girl and I'm not now sure, Fhilip, it may have been Mario Bermudez, a Shaw crony.
I empaasize may because it also may not have been and there is no certainty.
NO put two different file numbers on its copies of the first two records, 105-
2467 on the 5/5/65 teletype and 100-2467 on the 5/6/65 airtel。 105 = Foreign
Gounterintelligence and 10O= Subversive Matter.The airtel also is on a printed
form, with boxes to be checked。 "Bombing Matters" is checked, "Racial Matters" isn't。
But "Bombing Matters" is not ordinarily filed in 100 or 105. Ordinarily 174,and the
original at FBIHQ was filed in 174-1-133?7.(Somehow the 2467 seems familiar but I
cannot place it。)
is not correcting the contradiction in N.O.file numbers.Either N.O., FBIHQ or
bothwould have done this
u 0 4T tr1 I se pue 4 9 trg r o 1o rdoo e  1ehow the 2467 seems familiar but I
cannot place it。)
is not correcting the contradiction in N.O.file numbers.Either N.O., FBIHQ or
bothwould have done this
u 0 4T tr1 I se pue 4 9 trg r o 1o rdoo e  1

Philip Qmental hospitalization） to the FBI。Not included in what you got。
Also odd is the fact that lone of the 1965 records bears a visible FBIHQ file。
It is both Not Recorded and serialized on the TT of 5/5, not normal,and only the
serial nunbers appear on the others。 Most likely Oswald, 106-82555, but cauld be JFK,
62-109060。
follow in alphabetical serialization of 5414,Geraci ending with and Brandle
beginnipg with C.(This might be fron later insertion into a file or from a purpose
other than filing serialization.) A new FBIHQ file # is given these records. Veo of
the FBIHQ #s at the end of F are kmwon to me, 1O44O1 has John Birch Society records
and 107261Minutemen records。62Miscellaneous,non-subversive。This story,of
(I can(t make out the San Antonio record, also F, and I'm placing this in-my
Kleinsfile.*(eb·3)

scalp went more or less up is not new。 No FBI followup on this indicated here。
   1
Walthers, picking souething up not far from where Hi1l had been. 105-82555--3464, that
no exhibit numbers were assigmed by DL tothe fourolaroids of Tip.it's wounds

general field ofrice knowledge that the FBI waa not giving everything to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---en. 105-82555--3464, that
no exhibit numbers were assigmed by DL tothe fourolaroids of Tip.it's wounds

general field ofrice knowledge that the FBI waa not giving everything to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Commission and if unusual in that the FBI required its own identification numbers
for its own purposes and investigation. It kmeu the Tippit killing was included in
the Commission's mandate,too。
But in notgiving these to the Commission,if in the end it didn't,the
FBI was exercising a kind of control over the Commission。(My file,FBI Commission
relations.Also Tipvit killing。)
Please excuse my haste in this. I'Ve been away for two days, which is very
unusual and as tiring,and I'n trying tocatch up.
江
youhaveanyquestions，please
a8k。
Goodluckontherestoftheproject,
94="Research Matters"but is actuallyysed for,propaganda,lobbying,the media
才.
D