6 0ctober 1980
Board ofParoles
James E。Ray #65477
309State office bldg
Brushy Mountain Prison
Nashville,Tennessee。37219
Petros,Tennessee。37845。
Applicationforpardons
Dr。Martin LutherKing jr。,homicido.caso。.

Dear Sirs
Please consider this paper an application for a pardong in addition,I
would also requestthat theapplication be considoredfor any other type
consideration the Board of Pardon&Parolesmayhave jurisdiction inunder
T.C.A。40-3613,and guidelineB Bot forth by the Governor of the State of
Tennessee,Hon.Lomar Alexander。The reason for this type request in the
application is that under the criterionIamrelioing on fora pardon requires
thatIpresent “substantialevldence ofinnoconce"in the offense I am
incarcerated for in ordor to qualify for a pardon。In this reBpect,because
of the prosecutorial agenciespolicy of classifying&soquestoringmaterial
which 1s not supportive of the prosecution case in the,Martin Luther King Jr.

（MLK),matter，the Board may consider the "proof"offered by me in this
thesamesubstantialenoughttorecommendsomething lessthanapardon。
A_brief_histroy_of_the_case_reflects!Dear Sirs
Please consider this paper an application for a pardong in addition,I
would also requestthat theapplication be considoredfor any other type
consideration the Board of Pardon&Parolesmayhave jurisdiction inunder
T.C.A。40-3613,and guidelineB Bot forth by the Governor of the State of
Tennessee,Hon.Lomar Alexander。The reason for this type request in the
application is that under the criterionIamrelioing on fora pardon requires
thatIpresent “substantialevldence ofinnoconce"in the offense I am
incarcerated for in ordor to qualify for a pardon。In this reBpect,because
of the prosecutorial agenciespolicy of classifying&soquestoringmaterial
which 1s not supportive of the prosecution case in the,Martin Luther King Jr.

（MLK),matter，the Board may consider the "proof"offered by me in this
thesamesubstantialenoughttorecommendsomething lessthanapardon。
A_brief_histroy_of_the_case_reflects!

Ientered a guilty plea therein onMarch 10,1969。Thefolloving day I
postedaletter tothetrial Judgealleging the plea was obtained by coersiong
thatthere wasa conflict of interest between the Attorneyropresenting me
and a publishing Company（Delacorte Press NY),through a $165.oo0 contract
theAttorney had for publishing the resultsof the state's case,Andask the
Judge to set aside the ploa and grant a trial。The trial Judge(Hon。Preston
Battle),died before he could act on my request。The successor Judge de-
numerouspetitions tograntatrialin the case.The lastpetition for a trial
in the case wasdenied by the Tennessee Supreme court inan order dated
September 2,1980。
This_refusal_by_the_courts_to_grant_a_trial_in_the_case_apparently_has
limited to determiningwhether proceduralerrow of constitutional dimension
resulted during the plea proceedings。
In respects to the State's casei
It was with one exception circumstantial。The one exception,a state witness,
Charles Q.（MLK),matter，the Board may consider the "proof"offered by me in this
thesamesubstantialenoughttorecommendsomething lessthanapardon。
A_brief_histroy_of_the_case_reflects! Ientered a guilty plea therein onMarch 10,1969。Thefolloving day I
postedaletter tothetrial Judgealleging the plea was obtained by coersiong
thatthere wasa conflict of interest between the Attorneyropresenting me
and a publishing Company（Delacorte Press NY),through a $165.oo0 contract
theAttorney had for publishing the resultsof the state's case,Andask the
Judge to set aside the ploa and grant a trial。The trial Judge(Hon。Preston
Battle),died before he could act on my request。The successor Judge de-
numerouspetitions tograntatrialin the case.The lastpetition for a trial
in the case wasdenied by the Tennessee Supreme court inan order dated
September 2,1980。
This_refusal_by_the_courts_to_grant_a_trial_in_the_case_apparently_has
limited to determiningwhether proceduralerrow of constitutional dimension
resulted during the plea proceedings。
In respects to the State's casei
It was with one exception circumstantial。The one exception,a state witness,
Charles Q. Stephens.In a statement certified in the U.S.District court for
the W.D.of Tennessee dated June 13,1968,Mr。Stephens stated in effect that
hesaw someone with aprofile simular tomine leaving thescene of the aroa
wherein MLK allegedly was assaulted from。Subsequently however,a cab driver
James McGraw,testified in 1974 in the aforementioned District Court that when
he cAme to pick up Mr.Stephens as a fare shortly before MLK was assaulted he
found Mr。Stephens intoxicated to the point that he could not walk.See。attached
APPENDAGE #1。
In the nearest proceedings toa trial in the MLK case(and now apparently the
government's official findings).the United States House of Representatives in
1979,the Committee found thatIwas"probably guilty"in the assault on
KLK.This finding was predicated on the Committee further finding that 1)I
and a brother，Jerry W.Ray.in September 1967robbed the “Bank of Alton"（ILL.)。
for $27.000,and that I had used the proceeds therefrom to finance the MLK
assoult,or,in_tbg_alternatlye 2)Ihad anticipated collectinga $5o.o00offer
by two indlvicduals,John H.Sutherlnd & John R。Kauffmann--both are now deceased
but lived in the St.Louis,Mis ouri, area in 1967.Mr.Sutherland was apparent-
lya.respecterl member of the Missouri bar&a member of the“Southern States
Industrial Council"with headquarters in the Stahlman Building Nashville,Tonn-
essee;while Mr.Kaufmann was a business man with a minor criminal record。
P.1Missouri bar&a member of the“Southern States
Industrial Council"with headquarters in the Stahlman Building Nashville,Tonn-
essee;while Mr.Kaufmann was a business man with a minor criminal record。
P.1

--- PAGE BREAK ---In regard to the"Bank of Alton"robbery,after the Committee made the
public charge that by brother,Jerry Ray.was involved in the robbery he
turned himselfin to the Alton,Illinois,police departmont and offered to
waive the statute-of-limitations and stand trial。The Alton police informed
Jerry that he had neyar been a suspect in the robbery。APPENDAGE #2。
The Committee then inferred another brother,John Ray,and I had robbed the
"Bank of Alton":Subsequontly I posted a Freedom_of Information request to
the United States Department or Justice concorning tha robbory.

The Justice
Department in turn posted me a Document (APPENDAGE #3).evidencing I was_not
involvedintherobbory。
.In rogard to Messrs.Sutherland &Kauffmann。Until Iheard of the allogations
associating them with mo and read of the "association"1n tho New York "Times"
which wasworking with the Commlttoe--Ihad never heardof oitherindividual;nor
tothe best ofmy knowledge have Iever had anyassoclationwith oithor,directly
or indirectly。In addition,the Committee nover ask me ifIknow either of those
individuals,And refused to recall mo for public tostimony whorein the Commlttoe
could have interrogated meabout,Sutherland &Kauffmann。APPaNDAGE #4 &4-A。
I have written to the U.S.House of Ropresontatives asking for access to
but rather classified in the MLK investigation, In roply,the Clork of the
House of Representatives by lettar dated March 6,1980,stated ‘unpublished
of fifty （50）years。APPENDAGE #5。
In regard to persons I wasassociatedwith in connection withtheMLKassaults
Beginning shortly after my incarcerationin the case in 1968until recently
Ihave vlewedsomethinglike 250+photographsofvarious1ndivlduals thatI
ment of the"individuals"in the MLK homicide.Those pictures were provided
me by various sources including Attorneysrepresenting me,various investigators,
and staff members of the aforementioned "Select Committoe”of the U.S.House of
Representatives.In regard to the"Bank of Alton"robbery,after the Committee made the
public charge that by brother,Jerry Ray.was involved in the robbery he
turned himselfin to the Alton,Illinois,police departmont and offered to
waive the statute-of-limitations and stand trial。The Alton police informed
Jerry that he had neyar been a suspect in the robbery。APPENDAGE #2。
The Committee then inferred another brother,John Ray,and I had robbed the
"Bank of Alton":Subsequontly I posted a Freedom_of Information request to
the United States Department or Justice concorning tha robbory.

The Justice
Department in turn posted me a Document (APPENDAGE #3).evidencing I was_not
involvedintherobbory。
.In rogard to Messrs.Sutherland &Kauffmann。Until Iheard of the allogations
associating them with mo and read of the "association"1n tho New York "Times"
which wasworking with the Commlttoe--Ihad never heardof oitherindividual;nor
tothe best ofmy knowledge have Iever had anyassoclationwith oithor,directly
or indirectly。In addition,the Committee nover ask me ifIknow either of those
individuals,And refused to recall mo for public tostimony whorein the Commlttoe
could have interrogated meabout,Sutherland &Kauffmann。APPaNDAGE #4 &4-A。
I have written to the U.S.House of Ropresontatives asking for access to
but rather classified in the MLK investigation, In roply,the Clork of the
House of Representatives by lettar dated March 6,1980,stated ‘unpublished
of fifty （50）years。APPENDAGE #5。
In regard to persons I wasassociatedwith in connection withtheMLKassaults
Beginning shortly after my incarcerationin the case in 1968until recently
Ihave vlewedsomethinglike 250+photographsofvarious1ndivlduals thatI
ment of the"individuals"in the MLK homicide.Those pictures were provided
me by various sources including Attorneysrepresenting me,various investigators,
and staff members of the aforementioned "Select Committoe”of the U.S.House of
Representatives.

Because it was/1s my belief,based on associations during the 1967-68 period,
and other information,that elements associated with the illegal traffic in
narcotics financed the MLK assault,I have over the past three years vlewed
numerousphotographs ofindividualslinked directly or indirectlywith narcotic
trafficking.This hasassisted mein identifying:
1。Carlos_Mlgyel_Hernandez.I observed Mr。Hernandez thiced apparently
surveilling me in Memphis,Tennessee,on April 4,1968,near the area where
MLK was assaulted。Mr。Hernandez wa8 at one time an agent for the federal 'Drug
Enforcement Administration(DEA); later in 1971 he was convicted in Mobile,
Alabama,for a narcotic offense。APPENDAGE #6。
2。David Graiver。I observed Mr。Graiver,minus a beard,1n Neuvo
Laredo,Mexico, in October 1967,1n the company of a second indivldual; the
second person whom Iknew under the alias of“Roual"And was then associated
within trying to obtain a passport.APPENDAGE #7。
Aninvestigation of Mr.Graiverindictedhe was/isafugitive
and Trust Co.of New York city; that he and his "banking" associates including
the present secretary of commerce,Mr.PhillipKlutznik,had unethically
Sept。14,1976,p.53); and that he was an associate of organized crime leader,
MeyerLansky.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Justice
Department in turn posted me a Document (APPENDAGE #3).evidencing I was_not
involvedintherobbory。
.In rogard to Messrs.Sutherland &Kauffmann。Until Iheard of the allogations
associating them with mo and read of the "association"1n tho New York "Times"
which wasworking with the Commlttoe--Ihad never heardof oitherindividual;nor
tothe best ofmy knowledge have Iever had anyassoclationwith oithor,directly
or indirectly。In addition,the Committee nover ask me ifIknow either of those
individuals,And refused to recall mo for public tostimony whorein the Commlttoe
could have interrogated meabout,Sutherland &Kauffmann。APPaNDAGE #4 &4-A。
I have written to the U.S.House of Ropresontatives asking for access to
but rather classified in the MLK investigation, In roply,the Clork of the
House of Representatives by lettar dated March 6,1980,stated ‘unpublished
of fifty （50）years。APPENDAGE #5。
In regard to persons I wasassociatedwith in connection withtheMLKassaults
Beginning shortly after my incarcerationin the case in 1968until recently
Ihave vlewedsomethinglike 250+photographsofvarious1ndivlduals thatI
ment of the"individuals"in the MLK homicide.Those pictures were provided
me by various sources including Attorneysrepresenting me,various investigators,
and staff members of the aforementioned "Select Committoe”of the U.S.House of
Representatives. Because it was/1s my belief,based on associations during the 1967-68 period,
and other information,that elements associated with the illegal traffic in
narcotics financed the MLK assault,I have over the past three years vlewed
numerousphotographs ofindividualslinked directly or indirectlywith narcotic
trafficking.This hasassisted mein identifying:
1。Carlos_Mlgyel_Hernandez.I observed Mr。Hernandez thiced apparently
surveilling me in Memphis,Tennessee,on April 4,1968,near the area where
MLK was assaulted。Mr。Hernandez wa8 at one time an agent for the federal 'Drug
Enforcement Administration(DEA); later in 1971 he was convicted in Mobile,
Alabama,for a narcotic offense。APPENDAGE #6。
2。David Graiver。I observed Mr。Graiver,minus a beard,1n Neuvo
Laredo,Mexico, in October 1967,1n the company of a second indivldual; the
second person whom Iknew under the alias of“Roual"And was then associated
within trying to obtain a passport.APPENDAGE #7。
Aninvestigation of Mr.Graiverindictedhe was/isafugitive
and Trust Co.of New York city; that he and his "banking" associates including
the present secretary of commerce,Mr.PhillipKlutznik,had unethically
Sept。14,1976,p.53); and that he was an associate of organized crime leader,
MeyerLansky. 3.Randolph_Erwin_Rosenson.In November,1967, prior to entering
theUnited Statesfrom Mexico in a searchof theautomobileIwas drivingI
founda business card witha name written on theback whichlater was de-
termined.to be,Mr.Rosenson's。Subsequently an Attorney representing me,Mr。
Richard J.Ryan,of the Memphis bar made a trip to New Orleans,Louisinna,in
P。2witha name written on theback whichlater was de-
termined.to be,Mr.Rosenson's。Subsequently an Attorney representing me,Mr。
Richard J.Ryan,of the Memphis bar made a trip to New Orleans,Louisinna,in
P。2

--- PAGE BREAK ---n theback whichlater was de-
termined.to be,Mr.Rosenson's。Subsequently an Attorney representing me,Mr。
Richard J.Ryan,of the Memphis bar made a trip to New Orleans,Louisinna,in
P。2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1975,and obtained fromthe U.S。5th circuit court of appeals atrial
transcript evidencing Mr.Rosenson had been convicted inNewOrleans
for illegally smuggling narcotics from Mexico into the United States。
Subsequently Iprovided Mr.Rosenson's name to the aforementioned "Select
Committee"as a possible source in theMLK homicide。The Committee later--in
June 1977--sequestered Mr。Rosenson in the Andrew Johnson Hotel in Knoxville,
Tennessee。While Mr。Rosenson was sequestered in the Hotel a Hotel employee,
Mr。David Allen Boman,tape recorded several conversations between Committee
Staff members（unknowm to them),and Mr。Rosenson,and other conversations。
Thereafter Mr。Boman gave the tapes to,Mr。Gene A。Stanley.a member of the
Knoxville bar;after Ilearned of this transaction Iwrote Mr.Stanley a letter
requesting duplicate copies of the tapes; Mr.Stanley did notanswer the
Edward M。Ellis,also of the Knoxville bar,Mr.Stanley upon being quired
by Mr.Ellis as tothe disposition of the tapes replied"I_did_what_Richard
Nixon_should_have_done._burned_them...I_didn't_burn_them_I_recorded_over
them"。APPENDAGE#8&relatedtapeenclosed
Numerous individuals and organizations have publicly supporteda trial in
should be resolved in an equitable manner I think,theyares
1。The"Priest Council Diocese of Tennessee"APPENDAGE # 9。
2。The Rev。Ralph Abernathy。APPENDAGE # 10。
3。T
The Rev。Jesse Jackson,Director of "Operation Push"
located in Chicago,Illinois。APPENDAGE # 11。
4.Rev。 James M。Lawson jr., a Minister in Memphis, Tennessee,
in 1968,and presently Pastor of the'Holman United Methodist
Church of Los Angeles,California。APPENDAGE # 12。
In addition to the above,former United States Attorney General,
Griffin Bell,has expressed dissatisfaction with certain conclusions in
the MLK case arrived at by the Department of Justice。APPENDAGE #13。
U.S.Department of Justice has classifiedinvestigations intotheMLK case
andrelatedmatterasfollowss
1。The Memphis,Tennessee,police department's investigation
of the MLK homicide。
2.The Memphis,Tennessee,police department's“Intelligence
section"investigation ofMLK& related matter prior to
said homicide。
3。The Atlanta,Georgia,police department's1950's&60's
investigation of individuals whomade threats against MLK
&otherrelated investigative information。
4。In 1972 the Department of Justice had the President of the
United States classify material in the MLK case in order
to avoid compromising some type"nntional security"; the
material was classified under executive order no.11652,3
C.F。R。678（1972)。
2-is_evidenced_in,-Lesar-y-United_States Depta-of_Justice,
455F._supp._921(1978)。
P。3mising some type"nntional security"; the
material was classified under executive order no.11652,3
C.F。R。678（1972)。
2-is_evidenced_in,-Lesar-y-United_States Depta-of_Justice,
455F._supp._921(1978)。
P。3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ional security"; the
material was classified under executive order no.11652,3
C.F。R。678（1972)。
2-is_evidenced_in,-Lesar-y-United_States Depta-of_Justice,
455F._supp._921(1978)。
P。3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In addition to the above classified matorial,there are 58cubio
feet of records including 83tape recordings of F.B。I.investigative
materialrelating to MLK&other persons thathavebeen sequestered by
Court Order for fifty(5o)years in the National Archives&Records
ofColumbia。
In respect to the contents of this sequestored/classified matorial.
newspaper Columnist, Paul Scott,has quoated F。B。I.officiala as saying
APPENDAGE#14。
In conclusion,Mr。Robert Blakey。the Chief Counsel of the aforemontloned
"Select Ccnmittee"in roforring to one issue in the MIk case has commonted
"1t is always possible tomorroW now ovidonce will develope".APPENDAGE #2。
This roasoning may also hold true for other aspects of the casoy however,
Ihavenowbeen imprisoned--oxceptfora14month fugitivityporiod 1n1967-
68--for twentyone (21) yearB, since 1959. In oxcess of twelve of these years
have been in the Tennessee prison system wherein Ihave servedapproximately
six(6) years in solitary confinement,including three （3) years in solitary
（August i972until August 1975),apparontly because of efforts by me then
discern thatIamnot looking forward to continued oxistonce inprison for
possibly further years waiting for,to paraphrase Mr。Blakey."new evidence
thatmaypossibly developetomorrow"。
I would also respectfully suggest that unlike_in_Watergate the influential
promotingaclimate conducive toafactualresolution in theMLKcase,
especially,if the forces represented by the above,David Graiver,financed
the MLK homicide.There apparently would be no political or other benefits
to the large publishing Houses and thoes they represent,and influence,for
afactualresolutiontothecase。
Sincerely submitted:
Jamos E。Ray #65477
Brushy Mountain Prison
Petros,TN。37845。
Sworn toandsubscribedbeforeme
thisdayofOctober_1980
0c117.1982
My commission expires
Notarypublicllresolutiontothecase。
Sincerely submitted:
Jamos E。Ray #65477
Brushy Mountain Prison
Petros,TN。37845。
Sworn toandsubscribedbeforeme
thisdayofOctober_1980
0c117.1982
My commission expires
Notarypublicl

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NseWalden,Charles Stephens comman-law wife。
guiltyplea,
coholism.
GraceWaldenwasrele
oisservinga99-year prisonterm as aresult of his1969
beenconf
and
april1978
kingafull
receive
trialontheKingmurdercharge
MainStreethotelfromwhich
Mephisen,rdamin,te24,
MERCIALAPPEAL
Mrs
seena
p.m.on April 4,1968.
Stephenslater told police he heard a
driver,said hehadgone to therooming
ther King Jr.was killed.
James McGraw，
lying drunk
terd
A Memphis taxi driver testified yes-
Ray's Lawyers Attack
hotabout
By MICHAEL LOLLAR
Pretrial Investigations,
p.m.
State's Major Witness
and lookedoutto
aYellow
ing
Cab
state's360potentialwitnesses by the
had
fact
forts,
leading toa conviction in the MLK assault。
for $100.000 in reward money offered for inform>tion
Tennessee Courts denied Mr.Stephens application
'uoos
interviewed
.only
96Pages.
the
plead guilty.
when Morris told him Ray planned
former Sheriff william N. Morris Jr.
plead guilty.
he and his staff re
Sta
（Continued·on Page 17)
on said Foreman had not told
t.another
resumed their investi
Price 15Cents
and
andwa'
FINAL
APPENDAGE # 1。

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Morris Jr.
plead guilty.
he and his staff re
Sta
（Continued·on Page 17)
on said Foreman had not told
t.another
resumed their investi
Price 15Cents
and
andwa'
FINAL
APPENDAGE # 1。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

House Probe Can't Prove
THEATLANTACONSTITUTIONThrNov161978
7-A
Sources Of Ray's Money
WASHINGTON (UPI)-House Assassi-
nations Committee investigators.reported
Wednesday they have been unable to learn
where James EarlRaygot.$8300of the
Martin Luther King'smurder.
They called this“negative evidence”and
pot proof of a conspiracy but said that~be
financialhelpfromunknownacomplices.
Nonetheless,chief committeecounsel G.
f-
RobertBlakeyand chief investigator Edward
Evans told the panelit is their opinionRay
UNKNOWNFUNDS
solved bank robbery in Alton,I,hishome.
James Earl Ray
town,onJuly 13,1967.
qsde
That was three months after he escaped.
But whatwehave hereis
King was slain in Memphis.
Twogunmen in stocking masks netted
always possible tomorrow...
newevidence will
investigator saidauthoritiessuspected-but
develop...If there"
has been a conspiracy,
brothers pulled that job.
there is no evidence yet'
2
282
ST.LOUIS POST-DISPATCH
Fri.,August 18,1978
！
Jerry Ray Visits Alton Bank
To Deny He Robbed It In '67
ByROBERTJ.WEHLING
to the police station towaive any：
Of thePost-Dispatch Staff
statute of limitations andtobe
A brother of James Earl Ray
if police wanted.
At policeheadquarters，erry
today and told startled bank offi
Ray told Police Chief RudySod.
cershehadno part inrobbingit11
ers，Assistant Chief John Light,t
years ago.
WaiterConradandothersthathe
ThenJerryRaywent to theAlton
wouldtakealiedetectortestifthey
Police Department and repeated
desired,
thedenialforamused officers,
Police declined theoffer.
Bothvisitsapparently stermmed
"He wasinterviewed brieflby
from the appearanceofJamesEarl
Lt.Conrad and was told he isnot,
Ray before a congressional commit.
and wasnot then,a suspect.inthe
tee in Washington.The committee.
holdup,"Sowders said.
is investigating the assassination of
Twomaskedmenrifled two cash
the Rev.Dr.Martin Luther King，
drawers in the 1967holdup at the
forwhichJames Earl Ray is serv.
bankat 1520 Washington Ayerue
inga prison sentence.
and escaped without harming-any.
Inquestioning，Rep.FloydJ
one，Itwasthefirstbankrobberyin
Fithian,D.Ind,stronglyImlied
Alton's history, and remaing un-
that James Earl Ray and brother.
solved.
Jerry could have robbed the Bank
Conrad asked himif hewanted
of Alton on July 13,1967and used
to confess to thecrime,and hesaid
themoney to stalkKing before the
hecouldnotconfesstosomethinghe
assassination15monthslater.
did not do,”Sowders said.Then
Standingbeforealocal television
we took hisname and adress and
camera and a newspaper reporter,
toldhimwe'd callhimif wenebed
Jerry，inapowderblue sportcoat
him."
toldBankofAltonVicePresident
Conrad said Ray told himheis
Paul E.Utterback that he had no
now43unemployed，andlivingwith
part in therobbery in which$27,230
relatives in the Mehlville area of
wastaken.Raysaid he was enroute
southSt.Louis County.Thenheleft,
accompanledbycameramen
APPENDAGE#2。now43unemployed，andlivingwith
part in therobbery in which$27,230
relatives in the Mehlville area of
wastaken.Raysaid he was enroute
southSt.Louis County.Thenheleft,
accompanledbycameramen
APPENDAGE#2。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

y
2
rhilip B.lcyaann
kugust.25.1978
lssietcntAttorncy Ganeral
Cininal Diviaion
NLH.luc.jad..
1lfredL.Haritaan。Chlog
Gencral Crlmes Scctlon
CriminalDiviclon
Sclect Comalttco on Assaasinations -Unitcd Statos Bousp Qs
FcprebentatiyeayJohn RayyPeriury
This ls ln xesponse to your request for our vlews as to'
whether Joln Ray should be pronecuted for perjury. le U.s.C.
162l, us a result of Mr. Bay's allogod falee testimony to the
Houae Seloct Comnittoe on hssasainationn. We havo concludtd
that prosecutlon uhould be declined bocauso (l) the allogodly
false teutimony wag not matarial and (2) sll surrounding cix-
cumstanccu show thnt prosccutorial dlucretlon lo boat cxercleed
by declininy prosocutlon.
By lettar to the Attorney General dated June 15.1978
(Tab x). tha Comnittee specifically reforred John Ray's May 9。
1978testlmony
Prlor to foraally referring thle matter to tho Depertment
ot Justice.Mr.Blakey mot with Unlted btatos Attorney Earl
silbert and  rupreuentativo ot the Crininal Divlelon on May 24。
1978 concerning thia sllegealy &alse tostimony. At that cime
Hr. Blakey advised that the primary reason that ho wantcd John
Ray charged with perjury wag to convince James Barl Kay to
tuntlfy before tho Coumittee concorming hls knowledga or the
asuaisination of Dr.MartlnLuther King.
i
On May 9, 1978, John Roy oppoared before the Counittcu 1n
Exucutiva buaulun after having been granted Immunity pursuent
to18U.S.C.6005。
General Crimee
Cubbage(2)
woe...
88goao..
A：
.Ai.
APPENDAGE #3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

John Raywas convlctedofthol970 robboryof the Bankof
St.Petors,Missourl. Bo.xaaeived an lθ year Bentence from
which he was to be paroled ln late Juna.1978, Hin May 9,
1978 Executive 6esalon tentimony。however.contains
7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---ors,Missourl. Bo.xaaeived an lθ year Bentence from
which he was to be paroled ln late Juna.1978, Hin May 9,
1978 Executive 6esalon tentimony。however.contains
7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36-
Our recommcndatlon to dcclineprosecution in this case lg
baucd onthefollowingxoagonos
(1) If John Ray were lndicted for perjury. the charges
could be ofa"bootstrap"varloty:I.e..the chargeariees
from bworn tcstimony recently elicited about events which
cccurred cight or more yearg ago. Since we can no longer prose-
cute John Ray for the bank robbcries thcmgelves bccause of the
fivo ycar 6tatute.of limitatlons (see 18 U.s.C. 3282)。 we would
conccrning thoso same bank robberien。1/lthough logic indl-
27
catos that a prosecution for perjury about crimes that occurrod
bcyond the otatute of limitations will lie.there is little iaw
dircctly on the iasue. Judge Wyzanski atated in dicta in
United Stetea V.Worcester。190 F.Supp.548.569 (D,Muss。
196l); that a feaeral perjury prosccution may be based upon a
willfully false ctatcment eboutamatternotpunishable by the
fcderal criminal lew.In korcaster。 the defendants argued
unsucccsafully that it was fundamentally unfair to put thcm
under oath aswitnesses to testifyto mattersoccurringmany
ycars ago.nany of which [were! barred by the statute of
linitations.cf.United States V。Reyor, 204 P。Supp。486。
492(S.D。Ca1。1962),affd。323F。2d 519 (9th cir。1963)。ccrt。
dcn。375U.8。993(1964)。
1/See 6ttached copy of forner DAG Tyler'6 memorandum to former
Director Kelley in which the bootstrap principle was u6ed to
orclino prooecution of an PBl agent for obstruction of justicc
in conncction with perjurious statoments given during en FBI
intcrnalinvcstigation into the dcstruction ofa note fron
Lc licrvey Cswuld thct Mr。Oswala had lcft at the Dallc3 ficld
oflcc opproximately a weck before the Kcnnedy assassincticn
(TE)。

--- PAGE BREAK ---rnalinvcstigation into the dcstruction ofa note fron
Lc licrvey Cswuld thct Mr。Oswala had lcft at the Dallc3 ficld
oflcc opproximately a weck before the Kcnnedy assassincticn
(TE)。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(2）Cnly onc of the bcnk rcbberies。thc robbery of the
Lcnk ofAlton。1llinoio,on July 13。1967,was comaittcd auiing
tha period of JcnenEarl Ray'gfugitivity-fromAprll 23
1957 through Junc 8。1968。Thora i8 no existing or anticipated
tetimony or cther evidcnce to link John Ray or Jamcg Easl ay
to that robbery.It appcars that the real'lssue concurning the
reneining bankrcbberies le that of cstcblicbing thd nctcrielity
ct tho testimony.a nucessary elemont for a perjury prosccution。
Thetraditional'testotmaterialityota falae statemcnt Is
whether tho testimony has a natural effect or tcndency to
Influence,lmpede or dieauade the investigating body.United
ayes
ftctsv.Parker。 244F.2d943 (7th cix.).cert.dcn.355U.S。
836(1957)。
brcad (seo
purposeof
Tbo bank
robberics that occurred after Jnmos Earl Ray was arrestcd on
June 8.1968 could not hava beon asource of funds for Jameo
Larl Ray while ho was a fugitiye.Therefore.it could ba arguea
that thebroadauthorityoftheComnittae hadbeen linited by
thcConmittee'sown statemcnt in connectionwith tha gucstions
conccrning the bank robberles.Even if it could be argucd that
thc qucstione asked cbout the bank robberies thatoccuzred aftGr
the Alton bank robbery went to credibility and were thercfore
material。itwould seem that a ralationship or similarity in
thebcnkrobbericswouldbenecessary。
The Committoe bas takcn tho position thatbecause of the
robbcrieaas cet torth in achart supplicdbythe Comnittee

--- PAGE BREAK ---at a ralationship or similarity in
thebcnkrobbericswouldbenecessary。
The Committoe bas takcn tho position thatbecause of the
robbcrieaas cet torth in achart supplicdbythe Comnittee

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(3）Keturning an indictaent ujeinst John kay in oriet to
prrusura his brothur Jamcg Barl Rey lnto'coopcruting couic on4
cliould be vicwcd & ansbupe c&procces。It iocne thin touo
thio criminal laws to prcscure tn individual into cooperating
with the gcvcrnncnt。It is anothes thing touse the cric:inal
lawsagalnct oomconetoprtusure anothicr indivicual lato
coopcrating vith the governneat.Thig la paxticularly true
shic:n thoindividualsinvolved arecloso fanilyr6latiycu cuch
cobroth.rd.
The facts of thig caac have beon diacuoned with United
.tatc6xttorney Carl siibcrtwho concurs io our recomacnaticn。
cr your information。on two occaslons。Junc 23.1978an]
ugust 24.1978.xcprcacntativcs of tho Crininal Divisicn cct
with. Jamea Lusar.John Ray'g attorney. in an unsucccsetul cfiort
tocbtcin licy'B truthful cooperation with cheCocaittcc。Thio
cpproach ofattcating to aid tho Conaittco hag been ap:ransunt
cuiicline ln rcyicningthis entlre matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

urther,
r.Keuch's June l3,1978 letter to Parole Commissioner Robert
Vincentwasinstrumentalinhaving JohnRay'sparoleretarded
for approximately one month.(Tab J)A subsequenthearing
resulted in several months delay in Ray's parole(Ray is
scheduled tobe paroledonSeptember l8,l978).The Committee
hasbeenadvisedthatwestandreadyto assisttheminall
mattersofimportancetotheCommitteewhereverappropriate。
Attachnents
Aa..

--- PAGE BREAK ---is
scheduled tobe paroledonSeptember l8,l978).The Committee
hasbeenadvisedthatwestandreadyto assisttheminall
mattersofimportancetotheCommitteewhereverappropriate。
Attachnents
Aa..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GANNETT.WESTCHESTER·(NY),NOVEMBER,301978
King murder plot
0
remains in doubt
：WASHINGTON（AP)—The House Assassinations
Committee saysit can't provewhetherJamesEarl Ray
assassinated Dr.Martin Luther King Jr.for.a St.Louis
lawyer'salleged$50,000bounty.
The accused assassin's brother, Jerry Ray，was
Committee investigators saidWednesday they had
exhaustivelyprobedfourpossiblelinksbetweenRay and
thealleged$500obutcouldnotproveanyofthethem.
MurrayRandall testifiedhe thinksthe entire story of the
$50,000 assassination offer is a fake.
Randall said he believes Russell George Byers,a cli
ent of Randall's before he became a judge,fabricated
the story.
1-/
Byers，however,testified thatherejected a$50000
offerfrom thenow-dead lawyer,JohnSutherland,toei-
ther arrange.or kill Martin LutherKing."
Byers said'Sutherland,wearing a confederate-style
hat,made theoffer in ahouse decoratedwithconfeder
ate flags and military hardware,
He told mehe belonged toa secret southern organi-
zation that could raise themoney,Byerstestified
Byers said JohnKauffmann,a St.Louis businessman
whoalsoisnowdead，puthimintouchwithSutherland.
He said the offerwasmade in late1966orearly1967,
more thana yearbeforeKingwas assassinated in Mem-
phis April4,1968.
Randall called Byers“one of the most dangerous
criminals in the city”and said he thinks Byers planted
tofindout'if O'Harawas anFBI informant.
But committee investigator Edward M.Evans told
thepanelhedoesnotbelieveByerswould haveplanteda
false story thatwould have drawn theFBl's attention.
Mr.Byers was quite activein certain kinds ofactiv-
ity he wouldrather nothave theFBI.and localpolice
looking at,”Evans said,
11/30/78--WORLD/NATIONNEWSPAPER。
APPENDAGE#4。

--- PAGE BREAK ---ttention.
Mr.Byers was quite activein certain kinds ofactiv-
ity he wouldrather nothave theFBI.and localpolice
looking at,”Evans said,
11/30/78--WORLD/NATIONNEWSPAPER。
APPENDAGE#4。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LOUIS STOXES,OHIO, CHAIRMAN
RICHAAUSONPHEYER,N.C.
BAMUELL.DEVINE,OHIO
YVORINEBRATHWAITEURKE,CALIP.
.FAUHY,D.C
CHARLESTONE,EBR
CHRISTOPHENJ.DOSD,CONN.
HAROLDE.PURD,TENN.
HANOLD S. SAYYER, MICH.
FLOYDJ.FITIAN,IND.
SelectCommitteeonMssassinations
ROUEHT W, EOGAR, PA.
C..Wouse otBepresentatibes
(202) 225-4024
3369 HOUSE OFPICE BUILDINg, ANNEx 8
WASHINGTON,D.C.20518
November 10,1978
Mark Lane,Esquire
1177 Central Avenue
Memphis,Tennessee 38104
Dear Mark:
Inconnectionwiththeinvestigationof the
House Select CommitteeonAssassinations intothe
death of Dr.Martin Luther King,Jr.,as I informed
you in myletter of0ctober 17,1978，the Committee
scheduled ameetingon November 9,1978 to consider
whether to recall Mr.Ray to continue his testimony:
Atyesterday's meeting,the Committee carefully reviewed
and analyzed the opening statement Mr.Raypresented to
the Committee and his three daysofpublictestimony.
After analyzing Mr.Ray's testimony,the Committee decided
thatnousefulpurpose would be served in continuing to
question Mr.Ray.
Accordingly,Mr.Raywill not be called
toappearbeforetheCommitteeforanyfurthertestimony.
The Committee desires，of course，in accordance
with Committee Rule 3.6 to offer you and Mr.Ray the
opportunityto explainoramplifythe testimonygiven
by Mr.Ray.
The Committee，accordingly,will include
in therecord any statement submitted inwriting by
yourself or'Mr.Ray whichexplains or amplifies the
previous testimony of Mr:Ray.
Further，the Committee will consider for inclusion
in its record any statement on any subject that it
receives from Mr.Ray or yourself that is pertinent to
the Committee's inquiry.
Sincerely:
G.Robert Blakey
GRB:jWC
Chief Counseland Director
CC:
Mr.James Earl Ray
APPENDAGE # 4-A。

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
receives from Mr.Ray or yourself that is pertinent to
the Committee's inquiry.
Sincerely:
G.Robert Blakey
GRB:jWC
Chief Counseland Director
CC:
Mr.James Earl Ray
APPENDAGE # 4-A。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8.Bamon Callag
amdTi.ea,
lerh
ffice nf the lerk
H.%. Hmuse nf Representatiues
ashington,3.0.20515
March 6,1980
Mr.James E.Ray-65477
BrushyMountainPenitentiary
Petros，Tennessee37845
Dear Mr.Ray:
While your request lacks information concerning the specific
transcripts to which you refer,this office,for purposes of respond-
ing only,will regard your request as encompassing all transcripts
madeof committeeproceedingsor hearingsconductedduring thecourse
ofthe Select Committee'sinvestigation.
Under applicable rules and precedents of the House,the Clerk
ischarged with maintaining the custody and preservation of non-
current House records. Rule xxxVI and xxxviI,Rules of the House
of Representatives SS932and 933,reprinted in Constitution,
Jefferson's Manual,and Rules of the House of Representatives,
incumbent upon the Cierk tomaintain therecordsinaccordance
withapplicable regulationsandprecedents oftheHouseand he
its [the House's]expressed consent."3 Hinds'Precedents of the House
In this
connection, the Clerk is authorized to permit access only to records
of the House (l）which have been inexistence for at least 50years
iftheuse of such records isnot detrimentaltothe publicinterest;
or（2）whichhave alreadybeen made public.
See,forexample,H.R.
Res.288,83d Cong.,lstSess.(1953).
In any event，since the records whichyou request have neither
beenmadepublicaspart of thereportof the Select Committee's
work nor by the House subsequent tofiling of that report，theClerk
regards the materials you request as non-public and therefore,un-
availabletoanypersonorentityoutside thelegislativebranch.
APPENDAGE#5

--- PAGE BREAK ---subsequent tofiling of that report，theClerk
regards the materials you request as non-public and therefore,un-
availabletoanypersonorentityoutside thelegislativebranch.
APPENDAGE#5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GdnundQi.Henslafu,3r.
@lesh
Mr.Ray
PageTwo
Insofar as you rely on either Schwartz v. United States Depart-
(D.C. Cir.1979) or Brady V.Maryland, 373 U.S.83(1963),that re-
liance is totally misplaced.Schwartz merely stands for the proposi-
tion that "Congress is subject to the common lawrule which guarantees
the public a right to inspect and copy public records"，435 F.Supp.
at 1204,(emphasis added),a proposition irrelevant to your request
for non-publicrecords.In the context of a subpoena directed to
the Subcommittee on Intelligence of theHouse Armed Services Com-
mittee bya criminal defendant forprior testimony before that
subcommittee of witnesses,it was specifically held thatBradydoes
not apply to Subcommittee,since it was deemed to be "neither an
investigative or prosecutorial arm of the Executivenor an agency
oftheGovernment inanywayinvolved intheoffense orrelated trans-
actions."
United States v.Ehrlichman,389 F.Supp.95, 97（D.D.C.
1974), aff'd. on other grounds sub.nom。, United States v.Liddy 542
F.2d 76,83 (D.C. Cir.1976).Clearly,then,if under the foregoing
caselaw,a request premised on Bradywas denied even in the context
of arequest bya defendant for his forthcoming criminal trial，Brady
cannot be asserted to.support a generalized request for congressional
material.
Basedontheforegoing，we areunabletogrant your request.
Sircerely:
EDMUNDL.HENSHAW，JR.，CIerk
U.S.House of Representatives
By:
Zw.R
W.Raymod Colley,DeputyClerk

--- PAGE BREAK ---Around Tho World
NEWS FLASHES
LOCAL.

alAx-
Ki-t
$25,000BONDFORFEITPAID
The largest bondever forfeited In Mobile
Fla.,surety conpany wlth a check for8250o0
In thecaseof copvicted marijuana hauler Carlos
M.HernandezWhofirstmadeMobllelilstory
Xwhenhewasarrested June18,1969,witha
marijuana bricks.

Hernandez was convicted
Uct.28,1971,andsentenced to1syearsin
prison by Judge Hupert Rabertson.He was free
ona$25.000 appeal bond when hls appeal was
denled and he failed to turn hlmsolf In.The
Drugraqa
Qondjumper
held in
Spain
HERNANDEZCARRIEDOUT--CarlOsMI
Carlos M.Hernandez,who Lunped
guel Hernanez,27-year-qld Cuban exllo
pounds of marljuana.Judga Hubert
band fiveyearsagoarerbeingcun-
from Miani,Fla.,is carried from Mobile
Robertson declareduinistrial in the ca.

victed hereoflllegal possession of467
Circult Court Monday on a stretcher after
Mobile Pollce Detectivu Harry Sinnor
ppunda of marljuana,has been
repeated attacks ofvomiting and nausea.

one of the witnesses in the caae,stan
ayprehended In Spain, the Moblle
llefell unconscious In the hallway ending
by the door as alttendants carryHlernand
County Distrlct Attorney'soffice
his trlal for possession of close to 500
from the room.(Mobile Reglstor Photo1
learnel Friday.

Frank Chandler)
Mistrial Declared In Pot Trial
八
Don Valeska sald the U.S.State
Department informed him that
Spanish authoritles have arrested
Hernandez on the Mobile office's
Of Cuban Refugee Hernandez
APR13197
warrant.

The Cuban natlonal could be return.

ed'toMoblleodtartBervinghle18
year sentenceInan Alabamapeniten-
tlary In about a week,Valeska sald.

Mubile Circuit Judge Hubert|day that tests had failed to dis-|cause he was ill and that 1
The chlefprosecutor sald that the
Itoberlson declared a nistcial.

purault of Hernandozshould boa
Monday In the case ofCarlos
close anything wrong excep.

a
had contacted Dr.Jepu
whrning to other crlminals In tho
Miguel Hernandez,27,Cu-
high white blood count, possl.

Mobile areu.a
had contacted Dr.Jepu
whrning to other crlminals In tho
Miguel Hernandez,27,Cu-
high white blood count, possl.

Mobile areu.

bamrerugee chargedwith pos-
Cobb,who sent Hernandez
bly indicative of infectlon or
Ifthey deal in drugs in Moblle
session andtransporlingncar
soine problem resulting from
Mobile Generla Hospital.

ly 500pounds of high-grade
abdoninal surgery which Her-
Hernandez renained In ul
They can't hide becuuse we'ra going to
Inarijuana,and the defendant
nandez underwent in Miani
hospltal until Monday，wht
ggl them,Valeska ga!d.

was carrled out on a slrotcher.

last August.

tho court urdered him toa,
Hernandez made history In Mobile
Henendez,now of Maml,
Ile was released from Mo-
pear for trial.

State's atlo
Fla.,was carried unconsclous
bilo Infirmury Saturday，but
neys said Dr.Cobb told thel
toa small room near the
his attorney charged in court
ho di!not consider Horna
stashof marljuana ever conflscated In
courtroom In nld-aflernoon,
that tho Infirmary had
dez'ilness ol an energenc
Alabama.

and County Jail nurse Irene
"thrown him out"because he
nature,
He Jumped bond In March，1974.

Fail said his pulse was weak
lacked noney.

Stute's atlor-
Hernandez was sick In t!

while his case was on appeal.Hefall-
and irregular and efforts to
neys said， however， that phy.

courlroum
hallway andth
bring him to more partiacon
sicians had said they were un.

trial
was
Interruptedthre
sclousness were uusuccessful.

able to deterinine what should
Supreme Court upheld his convlctlon.

Hernandez then was taken
hu done in the case and tha
witness.

Douglas Nabb,wa
He again made hlstory as his.

toMobile General Huspital
Hernandez should continue to
testif,ng, due to further i!

bondingcornpanywasforced topay
offhis 825.000 bona.

whero he wasre-adnitted.

receive treatment from his
ness on the part qf Hernande
Miam: physician.--- PAGE BREAK ---

whero he wasre-adnitted. receive treatment from his
ness on the part qf Hernande
Miam: physician. lernandez renained at lil
last Wednesday.hutwhon
erly ncer $i5,000 bond，an
Hernanlezappcared ill hewas
tho court lernandez came to
Judge Ronerison indicated
taken toMohile Infirnary. his home Salurday night be|Jul . now trial date would be set1
Physiclans testified the next
APPENDAGE #6。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
David Graiver
APPENDAGE #7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHILD,O'CONNOR,ELLISAND PETTY
LAW QFFICE
POOY OFPICB Box 100g
OBORGE8.CHILD.8R.（1890-1908)
15TH FLOOR BANK QF KNOxYILLB BLDg,
RORT M.CHILD
KNOxVILB,T6NN00Bg37001
JOHNT.O'CONNOR,II
LMICHAELKLLIG
June13;
CHARLE8 H.CHILD
PAVIPQDAKE
Mr.Mark Lane
1177 Central Avenue
Memphis,Tennessee 38104
Dear Mr.Lane:
Iam in receipt of your.letter.of May 12.and.Tune3
mine.I was given initial permiasion to tell Mxa.Ray.Qf
the existenqeof the tape.She algo heard the tape.f..
In order forme to release a copy of the pertinent:
part of the tape,Imuat obtain.express permission from my
client..
Upon receipt of your letter in May.I made a'request
ebenbuet
ofmy clienttopermitmetomakeyouacopyof the
that mightproye helpful to you andyour client.
As of this date,my clients have not made a.final de-
cision,
Thereare someconsiderations thataregivingmy
clients difficulty that have nothing to do with yourcase Qr
your client.It is my feeling that'their decision will be
to not permit.me to make a copy of the tape,but they will
from the original.
Thatmay seem likea very unusual dis
tinction,but I assure you that there are valid'reasons for
the distinction.
I might suggest that you aBk Mrs,Rayto
call menear the end of'this week.and I feel that'Iwill
have the authorization at that time.
Sincerely yours,
CHILD,O'CONNOR，
ELLIS & PETTY
Edward MichaelEllis
EME:cl
APPENDAGE#8。

--- PAGE BREAK ---MMON-SENSE
Diocese
Memphiay
The CatholicWeekly
MAY,28.1978.

Priests Councilasks
a jury trial for Ray
The Priests'Councilofespecially in the City of，as wellas insuring justice
theDioceselastweekMemphiswherehewasforallcjtizens.

demandeda jury trialforassassinated.r.

"relieve.the doubts in thepriestsmaintained,Blantontodiscuss the
mindsof.manypeoplewouldshed some light onmatterurther.

victed killer played in the
possiblydemonstrate
assassination of the Rev,J
JamesEarlRay'sguilton:becausewe arenotcon
Dr.MartinLutherKingJr.nnocencevincedhatjusticehas
Ina resolution passed byFather Guthrie told thebeen,done in thismatter,
a17-1votewiththree
goyernorandtheFatherGuthrie said:We.

abstentions,the council
1legislature topetition thewanta ial by jury sothat
asked Gov.Blantonandcourtsto granta.newwe.cresolve.the
the Tennesseelegislaturetrial,maintainedthatitquestionthatarebeing
todoallthey canto answer
is incumbent upon all of.raised all the time about
Ray’s request for a jury
usto relieve the.doubtsin:this cas
trial.

Rtho minds of many peopla
tCodli
Raypleaded guilty inth
fallof1968 tothe slayin
Priests demand
more than10years ago
Dr.Kingas the blackciv
rights leader stood on the
balconyof.the Lorrain
Ray jury trial
MotelinMemphis.

siWantJusticee
TheRev.Milto
Guthrie,presidentof.the
（Continued fromPage1）
priest’scouncil, said.th
jThese questionscanbe answered and thematter canberesolved
matter:was.takenup
once andforall,he said.Sowe are askingthatthisbedone and then
'simply.because:we
we canallgoonlivingour lives.

priests are interested in
Askedwhy this issuewasfelt of suchimportance to theCatholic
seeing thatjustice is.done
priestsof thediocese,FatherGuthriesaid:
and we don't think it wasin
"Simply becauseweareinterested in justice."
this case."
70Priests.siWantJusticee
TheRev.Milto
Guthrie,presidentof.the
（Continued fromPage1）
priest’scouncil, said.th
jThese questionscanbe answered and thematter canberesolved
matter:was.takenup
once andforall,he said.Sowe are askingthatthisbedone and then
'simply.because:we
we canallgoonlivingour lives.

priests are interested in
Askedwhy this issuewasfelt of suchimportance to theCatholic
seeing thatjustice is.done
priestsof thediocese,FatherGuthriesaid:
and we don't think it wasin
"Simply becauseweareinterested in justice."
this case."
70Priests.

Foryearsmany people
Inalettertothemorethan70priestsof thediocese,allofwhomare
have argued thatRay'was
only part of a large con
eligible toparticipateincouncil business,Father Guthrienoted that
copies of the resolution“had been mailed out twice”for their con-
spiracy to eliminate the
sideration priortothemeetingatwhichitwasintroducedfora vote.

Nobel Peace prizewinner
He said it alsowas discussed attwo earliermeetings.

andthe priests in their
resolutionaturledtotha
Despite that,onlyabout25percentof themembershipshowedup
possibility innoting
forthemeetingatwhichtheresolution wasapproved.

.There are.many
新
"Wehave taken up more important business than this at other
strange,unusual.and
meetings andadvertised thebusiness in advance and still only had
possiblyconspiratorial
about16or18priestsshowup,"saidonemember.

circumstances associated
The council neverreallygetsmore than about 18 to20members at
with.the assassinationof
aregularmeeting,hesaid,notingthatthiswasconsideredafairly
Dr.King,on April4,1968
good attendance”wheri comparedwith other similargroups across.

In theresolution,it wa
the nation...

claimed that under Tens
"Most councils electsmallsenatesof about10or15priests and they
nesseelaw,Ray'sap
attend theregular-meetingsand acton behalf of the general mem-
bership,"hesaid.So,wedon'treally dobadinattendance,
ary
for a.new trial beforea
juryshould have:been
granted automatically.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In theresolution,it wa
the nation... claimed that under Tens
"Most councils electsmallsenatesof about10or15priests and they
nesseelaw,Ray'sap
attend theregular-meetingsand acton behalf of the general mem-
bership,"hesaid.So,wedon'treally dobadinattendance,
ary
for a.new trial beforea
juryshould have:been
granted automatically. Moral Persuasion
The priests askedthe
governortousethe"moral
persuasion”of his officeto
"develop a climatewhere
the judicial branchmight
more.readilypursue.a
positive action'to secure a
trialforJames Earl Ray."
The resolution,sent to
the governorandmem-
bersof
the'state. APPENDAGE
9。
members ofthe Congress
nqted that Dr.King wno
religious-leader.-who
ministryip
country.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rev.RalphAbernthy,centersayshenow.isconvincedfer
interyiewing.JamesEarlRay that the slayingofDr.Martin Luther
andMarkLane believe so too.

KNOXVILLE NEWS-SENTINEL,OCT.18,1978
King Successor Certain
Ray Deserves New Trial
ByWILLARDYARBROUGH
PETROSThechairmanofthe
Nowg-Seninp Stoftwriter
Southern ChristianLeadershipConfer-
ence today.began forming.a."people's
court to convince alegal court that the，
assassination of Dr.MartinLuther King,
was the.result of a.conspiracy sohe can
obtain a'new trial forJamesEarl Ray.

Rev.Ralph Abernathy,whosucceed-
ed Dr.King as head ofSCLC after the
Memphisassassination of the civil rights
leader10yearsagomadetheannounced
plansfor.thepeople’s.committeeat
nightfallyesterday after questiopingRay
for five hours behind Brushy'Mountain
StatePrison walls here,
The blackcivilrights-religious leader
vincedthere，wasconspiracy involving
was inyolved.hg.knew，nothingof the,
Anng SandhuRayndJerryRay
believe evidence wehave gathered
.-
discussaHouseAssassinations
illconvince thepublic and.the.courts
Committee letter branding Jerry
that Ray deserves a newtrial and that
justice.wil preyailRey.Abernathy
said."
camera-cayrying newsmen who sought
MarkLaneMmphisawyerwhha
representedRay since summer,said he
toqualify asmembersor themainparty
has'evidence that two,perhaps.three
Bernstein of Newsweek-andBen Fer-
individualsknown to him andothers,
nandez with Time magazine, both from
were involved’in the plot.Herefused to
NewYork
identify them,but said twoare'aliveand
Jerry Ray shawed aletterpostmark-
their whereaboutsare kuown,and that
edOctll from a Houso Assassinations
the.third.party is dead.

He.previously
Committee official andsaid his brothep
has accused the FBI.of involvement in
received a similarletterThefindings
the Kingassassination.

from.theWashington hearingwerefilled
Lane,anattorney for Abernathy,and
witherrors”Jerry Ray saidMy letter
apsychiatristalsointerviewedRay.He.previously
Committee official andsaid his brothep
has accused the FBI.of involvement in
received a similarletterThefindings
the Kingassassination.

from.theWashington hearingwerefilled
Lane,anattorney for Abernathy,and
witherrors”Jerry Ray saidMy letter
apsychiatristalsointerviewedRay.

saidI hadparticipatedin twobank rob-
Lane said he has'passed along names of
beries in the Midwest,(one a $30,000
the three"conspirators” to severalper-
robbery) to provide escape,money for
Earl before theassassination.I turned
House AssassinationsCommitteeand
myself in at.one city，butpolice said I
would make them public within'two or
wasno suspect.I didn't rob either bank."
three weeks.

He said he has heard the
He said the committee letters were
committee willrecall Ray to Washington
more complimentary to James Earl Ray
Nov.8.

Abernathy.counsel wiliamPepper of
rsr unp
New York told newsmen outside the
said.

prison that Ray had just undergone “the
Abernathy，inan:emotional.tone,
most intensive questioninghe hasyetre
praised Dr.King.

yet did not condemn.

ceived,” He described it as“a stressful
Ray:
interview,（with Ray)answeringall
 will preside over anationalcom-
"'suonsanb
mitteeofreligious,givil-rights,human
Lane saidnew insight was provided
rights and-moral leaders.to study the
"Ray answered questions he had never.

information we have gathered and to.

been asked before."
take it to theAmerican peoplehe said
The psychiatrist,Dr.Howard Berens
"Our committeewillpronounceamoral
ofBoston,said his examinationof Ray
judgment.".

convincedhim that Ray is competent.to
If theAssassinations Committee does
stand trial."
not requesta Ray retrial,he said,the
Arina SandhuRay,31-year-old Knox-
people's committee ofa half-dozen indi-
villesketch artistwhomarriedRayhere
viduals will go to court to seek anew
JastFriday，said she now is convinced
trial.

He said he expects to name the
thatRay will geta new trial and that
committeemembers within aweek.--- PAGE BREAK ---

convincedhim that Ray is competent.to
If theAssassinations Committee does
stand trial."
not requesta Ray retrial,he said,the
Arina SandhuRay,31-year-old Knox-
people's committee ofa half-dozen indi-
villesketch artistwhomarriedRayhere
viduals will go to court to seek anew
JastFriday，said she now is convinced
trial. He said he expects to name the
thatRay will geta new trial and that
committeemembers within aweek. “good will prevail over avi She said
Meanwhile，security guards and
Bloodhounds scoured the mountain ter-
from the conspiratorsor others and'be-
rain for a'minimum security inmate who
lievesherhusbandinnocent.In1969,Ray
leda grass crew outside the walls an
confessedbutlater denied,killingKing. hourbefore theAbernathy party arrived
Jerry Ray was closeted with his
Asnightapproached,Bloodhoundswere
brother for-more than an hour before the
returned to the prison as did.many of the
Abernathy partyarrivedfromKnoxville
where they had.gathered the night
Gamble,was brought here.a year ago
before,'
upon conviction of a chargeof concealing
Both the'brother and the bride were
barred from-the Abernathy-Ray inter-
believedheaded forBald Knob,within
view，however,andwaitedwith the
sightof theprison_compoundacross
press outsidethe guard
gate.Two
State.Hwy.52. APPENDAGE #10。

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chicago Sun-Times, Thursday, August 3, 1978
Ray talk
receivedthe99-year sentence.But since that pleaheoft
has contended that he is innocent and deserving of a trial.

Mr Jackson,in his wire to Carter,told of Ray'sletter and
observed that Ray“wants to have a public trial even if it
means that he may be electrocuted If he is found guilty.He
asked by
is that confident that his information is substantial.

Mr.Jackson also contended in the telegram that Ray is a
political prisoner,adding.“His'right to trlal Is a human
right."
THROUGHOUTTHEintervlewMr.Jackson expressed the
opinlon that the FederalBureau.ofInvestigation had failed to
disclose all it knows about Dr.

King's assassination or,
Jesse in
worse,had an actual role In it.

He sald the late J.

Edgar Hoover's personal animoslty
toward Dr,King was amatter ofpublicrecord.Hoover was.

FBI dlrector during Dr.King's era asa clvll rights leader.

Mr.

Jackson sald,“All the circumstantial evidence points
King case
tothese concluslons:The FBI knows more than It has told.

us,It could be reluctant to tell all becauseit was involved.

Or ft could be reluctant because of what it didn't do to，
prevent the assassination...

AskedwhyRaycouldn'tpubllclydisclosedetailsoftheso
calledconspiracy without a trlal,Mr.Jackson saida court
By Hugh Hough
pertinent to the case to prove a conspiracy.

IN HIS LETTER to Mr.

Jackson,Ray sald:
The Rev.Jesse L.Jackson，who stood only a few feet:
from Dr.Martin Luther King Jr.when Dr.

King was
assassinated, said Wednesday he'll
trlal wll lead to the real murderers.

seek permisslon for a prison inter-
trials of dissldents,saying,“Those trials In Moscow may be.

view of James Earl Ray, the man
servinga 99-year sentence for the
unfalr and completely poltlcal,but at least the defendants
murder.

there have a trlal.view of James Earl Ray, the man
servinga 99-year sentence for the
unfalr and completely poltlcal,but at least the defendants
murder.

there have a trlal.

Mr.Jackson said a letter herecent
Mr.Jackson slad that President Carter,as a supporter of
Turn to Page88
ly received from Ray-a letter in
which Ray professed his innocence
and spoke ofa conspiracytomurder
Dr.King-prompted his decision to
Continued,from Page 3
ask Tennessee Gov.Ray Blanton to
therights ofRussian dissidents,had an obligation to assume
aprovedaface-to-face meeting.

a“moral posturethat would pave the way for a trial for
Ray is an inmate at the Brushy
Ray.

Mountain Penitentiaryin Petros,
During theinterview,Mr.Jackson at one point arose from
Tenn.,an Institution from which he
his desk and recreated the assassination scene.

REV.JESSE L.

staged a spectacular.break lastyear.

Iwas standing at ground level talking to Martin,who
RAY'S LETTER to Mr.Jackson,
lyas standing.maybe 12feet away on the balcony of that
dated July 21,began:
Memphis motel.Wewere about to leave for dinner at the
"I did not kill Dr.Martin Luther King Jr.

home of the Rev.Billy Kyles(a Memphis civil rights leader).

Ibelieve the evidence that I can give you about howI
Martin madeajoke aboutme havingno tie onfor dinner and
was used，moved around the country，paid substantial sums
1told him,Doc,a tie isn't a requisite for dinner,but an
Memphis on April 4,1968,（the date of the assassination)
staggered back on the balcony.

will be helpful in establishing.the fact that there was a
MR.JACKSON's disclosure of his hopes to interviewRay
conspiracy tomurder Dr.King....--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ibelieve the evidence that I can give you about howI
Martin madeajoke aboutme havingno tie onfor dinner and
was used，moved around the country，paid substantial sums
1told him,Doc,a tie isn't a requisite for dinner,but an
Memphis on April 4,1968,（the date of the assassination)
staggered back on the balcony. will be helpful in establishing.the fact that there was a
MR.JACKSON's disclosure of his hopes to interviewRay
conspiracy tomurder Dr.King.... followedanother.development-in the 10-year-oldassassina-
Mr.Jackson,interviewed in his office at the headquarters
tiopciseLast-weok,lwas-disclsedzhala46-year-old
ofOperation PUSH,930 E.50th,said:
d like to hear from his ownmouth，beyond theletter，f
Missourlman had told the HouseAssassinations Committe
thatlatein 1966or early1967 he turned down a $50.000
Martin's death."
offer to arrange the death of Dr.King. That story came from Russell G.Byers of St.Louis.He
MR.JACKSON，national president of PUSH,disclosed in
said the offer came from twoImperial(Mo.）men on behalf
anABC-TV interview Tuesday night that hewas sending a
telegram toPresident Carterinan effort to gain a trlal for
.Ray. dead,but the House group Is striving to coroborate the
Ray,50,inltially pleaded guilty to Dr.King's murder and
story. The story is seen to have possible significance because，at
thetimeQf the allegedoffer,-Byersbrother-In-law was
serving amurder sentence,In theMissouri StatePenitentiary
The House Assassinatlons CommitteeIs expected to hear
testimony by Ray later this year. Mr.Jackson said.that,considering the committees sub. enapowerstwaspossibleItcouldelitmuhofthesame
reommiteehard-evidencefan-asassination conspiracy. tiet
..n"
rn-
APPENDAGE#11。

--- PAGE BREAK ---Knoxville
Noy
978
Abernathy
Charges
lemphis
Police, FBl, in.

King Death
ByTOMKING
about 300 that the power structure of
Nows-Sentinel Staff Writer
America is geared to keeping the black
The presidentemeritus and chairman
man at certain levels.

of.the Southern Christian Leadership
“Don't ever believe that the white
Conference saidhere
man intends to do the black man right,
Friday night that tha
the civilrightsleader said.The power
FBI, the Government
structure is against you andI tellyou to
and the Memphis'Po-
try and become a part of the power
liceDepartment “con-
structure of Knoxville.

spiredto cutdown
Mr.

Abernathy said all is not well
Martin Luther.King
with Knoxville,adding,“You made a
Jr."
mistake in inviting me to Knoxville.I
Rev.RalphDavid
willnot be bought.I will not sell myself
Abernathywasin
out.I'vebeen jailed42 times and1've
Knoxville as keynote
been calledeverything buta'childof
speaker atradio station
Abernathy
God."
WJBE's 10-year anni-
The civil rights leader urged'Presi-
versary banquet at the RamadaInn on
dentCarter tokeeptwo promises-tax
Kingston Pike.

reform "to force the wealthy corpora-
Mr.Abernathy said before the ban-
tions of America likeITT,Lockheed and
quet that he was greatly disappointed in
General Motors to shoulder their load,"
thework and findings ofthe House
and toimprove the qualityofeducation
Assassinations Committee investigating.

for all people.regardless ofrace.

theslayingof the latecivil rightsleader.

：Mr.Abernathy said he would.put
"This committee is wasting the.tax-
payers'money.Iam convinced that
there was a'conspiracy and that the
wouldstoopto anylevelitneeded toto
Memphis police had to be involved,”Mr.

destroy aman like Martin LutherKing."
The civil rights leader said the more
Abernathy said.“Whoever shot Martin
he talkedwith Rayat Brushy Mountain
LutherKingwas aided in his escape from
State Prisonin October,themorehe was
Memphis by the police."
Mr.

Abernathy，who has spurned a
convinced he wasnot the triggerman.destroy aman like Martin LutherKing."
The civil rights leader said the more
Abernathy said.“Whoever shot Martin
he talkedwith Rayat Brushy Mountain
LutherKingwas aided in his escape from
State Prisonin October,themorehe was
Memphis by the police."
Mr.

Abernathy，who has spurned a
convinced he wasnot the triggerman.

I think he might have been involved,
Thanksgiving eve invitation from Presi-
butI really dont think he knew what
dent Carter,said if the House committee
“was’really happening.”he said.When
does not“get to the truth of.the matter,”
he will form a citizens'committee“that
we wereon thebalconyof theLorraine
will dig for the truth.I'm not saying
Motel when Dr:King was murdered,it
was me,Andrew Young,Dr.King and，
James Earl Ray(convicted of killing Dr.

afterhewasshotafourthmanappeared
King)is innocent.But-if he was involved
I don't think he acted alone.There were
Iwas told.he could have been with the
people in high places of our Government
Community Relations Service outof
Washington.Ifear he was an infiltrator
involvedandIknowfaffidavitssigned
from theFBI."
and sworn that J.Edgar Hoover ordered
Dr.King's assassination"
Mr.Abernathy was presented.a small
Mr.Abernathy called former Presi-
keyto Knoxville by Mayor Randy
dent Richard Nixon and former Vice
Tyree.The visitor remarked，“Knoxville
has made history.I realize that times are
hard.and things are tough.Ihave gotten
notorious criminals in America."He'said
both belong in jails.

300or 400 keys from cities in the U.S.

Mr.Abernathy told thecrowdof
and abroad,butI have never received a
key so tiny before.The mayor made it
clear thatImight wear it around my
Smith ToLer Others
neck or on my wrist,but where the devil
'is the chain?"
dla lagielapive
Knoxville,Sentine1-March 30,1979
Tennessee Today
Group Urges Trial for Ray
MEMPHIS (UPI)-A group of na-women in Memphis to hearevidence will
tionallyknown religious andciviclead.--- PAGE BREAK ---

300or 400 keys from cities in the U.S. Mr.Abernathy told thecrowdof
and abroad,butI have never received a
key so tiny before.The mayor made it
clear thatImight wear it around my
Smith ToLer Others
neck or on my wrist,but where the devil
'is the chain?"
dla lagielapive
Knoxville,Sentine1-March 30,1979
Tennessee Today
Group Urges Trial for Ray
MEMPHIS (UPI)-A group of na-women in Memphis to hearevidence will
tionallyknown religious andciviclead. ers,including associatesof the late Dr.KingLane said duringaluncheon
MartinLutherKingJr.,hopetogainthespeech.Onlywhenthattakesplacewill
state attorney general'sassurance that
he wil not blockefforts toobtain a.trial:its obligation."
Rev..Ralph.AbernathyandRev. for James Earl Ray. JamesLawson,whoworked closelywith
Lawyer Mark Lane,who represents
King before he was assassinated,are
the convicted assassin， said yesterday
among thoseinthecoalition,Lane said
the coalitionhopesto meet withTennes-
Ray and Charles Galbreath,a former
see Atty.Gen.William Leech in Nash-
Courtof CriminalAppeals judgewho is
villebeforeApril4,the1lthanniversary
alsorepresentingRay，filedapetitionfor
ofKing's death in Memphis. a trial Jan.26,claiming Ray should be
He said thegroupwants to convince
Leech“not to oppose a motion fora trial. legal technicalities.Thatrequestispend-
Only through a trial with12men and
ingin Criminal Court at Memphis.. APPENDAGE # 12。

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts to convince
Leech“not to oppose a motion fora trial. legal technicalities.Thatrequestispend-
Only through a trial with12men and
ingin Criminal Court at Memphis.. APPENDAGE # 12。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8-A
The Aflanta Bournal
Monday,Feb.14,1977
CHANGESREPORT
Bell Has Doubts
In King Slaying
owqr
SEATTLE-Atty.Gen.GriffinBell says he wonders
whether there was a conspiracy in the assassination of Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
In a Sunday interview Bell saidhe hasordered changed
aJustice Department report which concluded there was no
fied.
Thereport thatcontained the conclusion was supposed to
deal with the FBIl's performance in the investigation·of.
elusion on the question of conspiracy
Furthermore, Bell made it clear he didn't think the
The original rough draft of.theJustice Department'sre-
port did contain the conclusionthatJames Earl Ray acted
aloneIntheApril-1968slaying ofKing
This aspect of the reportwasmadepublic-after former
Atty.Gen.Edward Levi providedthree copies.to congres-
sionaleaders.
Belldescribed hconlusionasagratutousone
ontain“gossip”about people,hesaid.
will berestricted to assessing the FBI's performance in the
investigation of King's slaying.
This has been questioned because of subsequent revela
FBI conducted a surveillance and harassment_campaign
tions-that for severalyears up until the time of his death the
against King.
Bell said the report was to focus on.twormaln points:
whether there wascausefor survelllance and“ifsowhen did
that terminate,as well as the actual assessment:of the
investigation.
The interviewwith Bell came after apappearance on
the CBS programFace theNation during which heexplained
ance of the FBI-and was not designed toreachaconclusion.
Ifyou read the report,you can lean to either sideYoucould
der,you know,if therewa ell said.
He clearly indicated that he wonders.
Bell saidhe has severalquestions,among them whether
ravelinghimself.（Ray used an extensiveand:complicated
travel plan to escape the United States afterKing's murder.)
lifeand hadminmal schling,Bell pointed out
That puzzles me.He'd been in the penetentiary most of his
wei
Bell said hehas had’materialabouRayIQinserted
odar
Py
into what will become thefinal report.
He indicated that report probably will bemade public
for
fad
makeup their own minds aboutit”
Asked specificallyif therewasaonspracyBellsaid
!
“Nobody was assigned that question，If I wantto'assign it
I'll do it later."
F.Kennedyassassinations will do onthpater beforeh
Representatives investigation of theKingandPresident Johni
actsfurther.
Bellisinettletatendteengft
American Bar Association.He was expeeted toask.the con-
recommendationthatattorneysbeallowedintheroomwhep
Bell said he would likean opportunitytostudy themat
APPENDAGE # 13。