THEINEW YOKK^TIMES, SATURDAY.rJANUARY, Z 0. 1979


Former RBI Agent Tell0n^tigst9rs


> * -i


Vli

05


By J OHN M. CREWDSON

Special (o 7>« New York Times

SAN FRANCISCO. Jan. 15 — For the
past 13 months, a career agent of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation —
piqued, he says, by the bureau's reluc-
tance to adopt meaningful internal re-
forms — has quietly been compiling from
memory, from conversations with other
agents and from a handful of bureau


the agent, M. Wesley Swearingen, range
from charges of misleading testimony by!.
bureau agents and previously- lindis— • v
closed illegal break-ins by agents to accu-
sations of broad, low-level corruption
among agents and untruthful public '
statements by F.B.I. officials. - i ’ - 7 -
About eight months ago Mr. Swear-in- '
gen, who retired in 1977 after!25 years - L
‘:e Some. of


*, v .! 4X

, j -x rtW“' .v

'‘U-k .*.‘-

•- • i •£•*.< -Ti«Nor.Yockr»ip-* , :1

; Mr. Swearingen said he gave class!*, t


^ l j f , v . uJ '1 organized crime connections,

documents- he had. taken -from the bu- . _ _ . H*

reau’s Los Angeles office were found by * qjhat many.pt tlie F.B.I /s 59 field qf-4
F.B.I. agents at the People's Temple set- fl ces i iave beorf plagued with financial iry
tlement in Jonestown, Guyana. m ,i regularities,- from the falsification of;


Discipline D eemed Likely ^ Rj
Mr. Swearingen has not yet communi-
cated some of what he knows dr suspects
to the Justice. Department, and most of
the allegations he has made thus far are
still unresolved,. but at least some of them


l

agents' expense accounts and the misuse
oi Government vehicles to the outright..


theft by agents- of funds that were in— •
tended as payments for information* i . .

In a series of recent-interviews here,'*
Mr. Swearingen, .a tall, soft-spoken man

are now.dTOmea jiksly.io result in admin-.

M brought corn.pt conduct anc


istmtive disciphne and, in some cases,; brought corrupt conduct and agents investiga

even criminal charges .against the agents . ^ther misdeeds to the attention of his sen tative Leo J.
involved. •* • ; V'’’? 1 F.B.I. superiors, only to be ignored or, in : fomia, whose n

Among Mr. Swearingen s principal al-. i on ,i n cf-inrp<i ouni^hed.


Among Mr. Swearingen's principal
legations are the following:

•IThat agents who recently testified* in
a Los Angeles criminal case covered up
illegal activities by the bureau, and that
in at least one other criminal case the bu-
reau fabricated evidence Xo obtain a con-*
fession. .. “ ' ' rr * ~

•IThat some three dozen agents in the
Los Angeles office* including William A. v


* a few instances, punished. ,

Took Information to Investigators
As a result, he said, he decided before
his scheduled retirement in May 1977 to
take some of the matters that most dis-
turbed him Jo Justice Department inves-
tigators then looking' into other question-
able activities of the bureau.

After I talked-to the Justice Depart-


Stillivan, then the Assistant Director, in - ment I felt relieved?* Mr. Swearingen re-
charge, accepted wristwatches,* radios-’ called the ouier dayz/Thencomes this
and other gifts from a wealthy industrial-* stuff in Guyana/*.!

* :r — “ ™ a year ago. he said, he gave copies of;


1st, rumored Whave organized crime con-
nections, whose missing child had been
the subject of an unsuccessful search by
the F.B.I. ; -,£<v v

♦rrhat paid informers working for the
Los Angeles office burglarized the head-
quarters oftwo extremist political groups
and that an F.B.I., official deliberately
withheld information hinting at the bur-
glaries from the General Accounting Of-
fice, an investigative arm of Congress.

qThat at least two agents arrested In
recent years' for violations of narcotics
and other laws have escaped prosecution,
and that one of them was allowed to re-
sign quietly while the other was not pun-
ished. “


F.B.I. documents he had uken when he
retired to Charles R. Garry, a San Fran-,
cisco lawyer who. was also representing
the Rev. Jim Jones and the People^s Tem-^
pie. »

Mr. Swearingen said he asked the law-
yer to send the documents and some other
materials to the Justice Department and
that Mr. Garry did so. A short time later,
lawyers from the department's Office of
Professional Responsibility, which inves-


FiJes Were Photocopied -.tj.

In a recent affidavit,. Torn Adams, a ‘
People’s Temple member, said that he
and Ten Buford, another member, while
seeking evidence of F.B.I. harassment of
extremist political organizations, had
photocopied Mr. Swearingen’s file and
sent the copies to Mr. Jones in Guyana.

Some of the documents bore Mr. Swea-
ringen’s name and were discovered at
Jonestown a few weeks ago by F.B.I.
agents investigating the death of Repre-
7. Ryan, Democrat of Cali-
murdcr on a fact-finding
visit precipitated the deaths of Mr. Jones
and more than SCO of his followers;—" 1 /** *
Although Mr. Swearingen is techni-
cally vulnerable to criminal charges for
taking the classified documents, he said
he had been assured by the Justice De-<
partment that he will not face prosecu-
tion in that regard. < v

Some of the agents- involved In the inci-
dents that Mr. Swearingen has reported
to the Justice Department will nut face
prosecution because the five-yaar statute
of limitations that applies to most
Federal crimes has expired. The possibil-
ity of disciplinary action by the Justice
Departmentrcmains, however. ~ ,

Some Knowledge Indirect
Another difficulty facing a Justice De-
partment inquiry is that Mr. Swearingen
was not directly involved in some of the
incidents he has recounted but only heard-
about them from agents who were in-
volved. For example, Mr. Swearingen
says an F.B.I. supervisor in Chicago told


tigates violations of internal department < him the bureau had “deliberately set up 1
regulations, began interviewing Mr. t ^ e situation in which Fred Hampton,
Swearingen about his knowledge of F.B.L chairman of the Illinois branch of the

misconduct. " ] Black Panther Party, was killed in

shootout with police nine years ago.


One o! the break-ins described by Mr. |

' Swearingen took place at a printing shop •
in Eugene. Ore., operated by Clayton Van I
l.ydegraff. Unexpected dividends were |
realised. Mr. Swearingen said, when
F.B.I. agents learned that Mr: Van Lyde-

graff, a rnan in his 50'3 who had long been
.a member of the Communist Party, was
discovered to be a member of the radical
and largely, youthful J;Weather Under-£
ground. *.»*>• i t- f *:-i . >*•’•

Mr. Van Lydegjdfris currently facing
criminal charges in Los Angeles in con r ,‘;
nection with an alleged conspiracy to.
bomb theoffice of a California state legis-
lator:' Mr. Swearing*#' said that the~
agents instrumental in Mr. Van Lyde-
graft's arrest had concealed, during presj
iiminary testimony in the case, the fact
that the bureau’s • initial information’,
stout his links with the!Weathermen had
been produced by a warrantless search. J

Rowan Klein, Mr. Van Lydegraff’s at-
torney. said that if Mr. Swearingen's alle-
gations were true, any information the*
Government had collected about Mr. Van
Lydegraff and the Weathermen, includ-
ing that relating*. to. the bombing charge, :
might be inadmissible incourt. * J

One source familiar with the Jtstice
Department's, . investigation of F.B X:
bre-^krinsleiit some support to Mr. Swea-
ringen’s assertions. . saying that the »
prosecutors had come across inform ation
indicating that "something happened" in
Eugene. The source said the information'
was likely to be made public at the up-
coming trial of L. Patrick Gray 3d, once
the bureau's acting director, and three
other former top bureau officials on
charges stemming from the Justice De-
partment’s allegation that they illegally
approved break-ins against Weathermen
in New York City.

On at least two occasions, Mr. Swearih-
gen said, be believed that F.B.I. inform-
ers had broken’ into’ the offices of the
American Indian Movement in search of
membership lists. Another time, he said,
an informer entered- the El Monte, Calif.,
office of the /American Nazi Party and
.stole what he took to be that organiza-
tion’s membership roster.

The A.I.M: : membership lists, Mr.
Swearingen said, were photocopied and
surreptitiously returned, but the Nazi
group's" 1 fist was not. He said this
prompted the-Tf.B.I. to induce the El
Monte Police Department to raid the
group’s office in an ostensible search fOr
illegal firearms, in hopes that once the
list was discovered missing the Nazis
would presume the police had taken it.

The F.B.I., he said, opened case files on
each of the personson the Nazi list, which
later proved to be not membership roster j
but a list of prospects for mail solicita-j
tions.

Resistance From Superiors i :

Mr. Swearingen said that he learned
some of those consequently identified in
F.D.I.' files as Nazi Party members had
never heard of the organization, but that
he met resistance from his superiors
when he tried to have the files corrected.
One supervisor, he said, dismissed his
concern by saying that the chances were
small that any of those incorrectly identi-
fied would ever apply for a Government
job.;

Mr. Swearingen said that he discov-
ered what he interpreted as evidence of


the three burglaries by F.B.I. intormers
in 1976. At that time, he said, he was as-
signed to review and prepare updated
summaries of specific F.B.I. cases that
had been examined jtwo years before by
auditors from the General Accounting Of-
fice in a study of how. the bureau alio-,
cated its resources. | . ,

Although thc.cases given to the G.A.O.
were supposed to have been selected by-
the F.B.I. at random, he said, he noticed j
that there were wide gaps between some j
of the files that had been made available. !

He said that he reported thisro the Jus- ■

fc tice Department after he tiaifretired, and.
thathe bad since learned that the
official in charge of the frandem scfecC
liicn" ; had deliberately 1 :; bypassed files
"that would really create’ problems fon
the F.B.I.'/. .

i The official .Jwha'Kas since retired,, is
nOwthe subject o Da -Justice Department -
investigation, ;

-* * m % v * - **■ * - v- Ur i V*/’ i •/'i-’; i ,

,***••’ -%•>.' * »*. * •

In at least one instance, Mr. Swearin-
gen said, evidence was! fabrlcated:by the
Jf.B.r. ln asuccessful effort to obtain con-j
Jessibns from a j'roupbf seven men sus-.i
i>ected of having bombed *a' railroad;
bridge in Kentucky during a coal dispute. *
'’"Pieces of metal collected at the scene!
by the F.B.I. were dusted with a powder
visible only under ultraviolet light, he.
said, then given to the suspects for "in-<
spection" during questioning. .

The men were told later, he said, that if
they had been at the scene of the. bombi ng
their hands would glow when placed
tinder an ultraviolet lamp. Such a lamp*
was produced'/ Mr.* Swea rihgen said, 'and
the suspects confessed to the crime on the
spot Other suspects jivho were not sub-'
jected to the ruse werejtried, he said, but
not convicted. , ;

;; la the recent interviews, Mrl'Swearin- 1
gen said he had al^p told the Justice De-
partment of Instances in which • F.B.I. :
agents, were aiTusted* by other law/eh-’
forcemeat agencies: but never prosecuted
and; in atr least one case, never disci-
plmedby thebureau.; / - -.T;*;. . ! •

' “Agent Arrested In Miami j \

He said he had told the department of 1
an instance • in -which an undercover
F.B.I Jagent who traveled to Miami in Au-
gust. 1972 to search for feather JJnder-.
ground fugitives among the denionstra-
torsatthe Republican' National Conven-
tion, was arrested by the Miami police onj
charges of fomenting violence . u , !

Although the agent, was severely *in-’


rjured by fhe police while fh custody, he
never disclosed his F.B.I. affiliation, Mr-
Swearingen said. He said, the agent was
eventually released and sent by the
F.B.I. to Canada, ostensibly on business
but in fact to give him an opportunity to
lecover.- rr m * : % * * 1 i ♦.* >•**• »•’ T - *


: While the agent was in Canada, hesaid,
he became involved with a woman who
used narcotics and was himself arrested
on a narcotics charge. Mr. Swearingen
said the man was never prosecuted for ei*-
ther.arrest.nor disciplined by the F.B.I.,
but was instead g ven a transfer he had
sought.

Mr. Swearingen also said a young
agent was* arresttxi two years ago by a
California police* department shortly
after he had purchased $12 worth of mari-
juana.- The agent, he said, at first tried to-


make his superiors believe that he hao
been attempting to break up a drug ring,
but later confessed that the marijuana
had been intended for his own use.

Agent Never Prosecuted -
~'The bureau’gnve the agent a choice of
resigning or being dismissed, Mr. Swea-
ringen said, and the agent quit and was
never prosea i ted. 1 ~ •

A little over two years ago. the Justice
Department began investigating corrup-
tion at F.B.I. headquarters. Although a
number of irregularities were eventually
found there was no large-scale prosec u- _
tion of the officials involved.

Mr. Swearingen said, however, that
fraud and corruption in the F.B.I.’s field t
offices had been as longstanding and per-
vasive as at headquarters, and had cen-
tered chiefly on the bureau's use of paid


One reason for this, he said, was a bu-
reau requirement until 1975 that agents
maintain relations with a minimum num-
ber of informers. Pressure from head-
quarters, he said, led many agents to fab-
ricate informers who .were purportedly
supplying the bureau with information
that might itself be either true or false.

Informer’s Pay Pocketed

In many instances, he said, the agents
simply filled a bogus informer’s file with
periodic "reports." But he said he had
known of a number ofC 3 seS in which
agents had requested and received, and
then pocketed, cash payments for such
informers. 1

It also was common, he said, for an
agent to "skim" part of the money giv-n
him to pay a genuine informer, with or
without the informer’s knowledge. .

In one embarrassing situation recalled
by Mr. Swearingen, the F.B.I. belatedly
discovered that for about a year an in-
former working for an agent in a Scmj th-
em city was being "paid" by an agent in
another city. ‘ w . .

Mr. Swearingen saidhc had also found
files in the bureau’s Los Angeles office
showing that an agent there had obtained
$C00 to pay an informer who had leTt town
the week before.

In a Lhird instance, he Said, an agent in
a small California city was found to have
been receiving thousands of. dollars in
kickbacks from reward money given to
his informer for help in recovering stolen
property. The agent. Mr. Swearingen
said, was dismissed from the bureau but
never prosecuted. . «v.~ .* T . -
