EZRA
POUND
SELECTED CANTOS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BERSERKER
BOOKS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Cantos of Ezra Pound
The Fourth Canto (1919)
A Draft of XVI Cantos(1925)
A Draft of the Cantos 17-27(1928)
A Draft of XXX Cantos (1930)
Eleven New Cantos XXXI-XLI(1934)
The Fifth Decad of Cantos (1937)
Cantos LII-LXXI (1940)
The Pisan Cantos (1948)
Section:Rock-Drilldelos Cantares 8s-9s (195s)
Thrones 96-106 de los Cantares (1959)
Drafts &Fragments of Cantos CX-CXVII (1968)
Cantos I-CXVII (1970)
Canto CXX (1972)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To OLGA RUDGE
'Tempus loquendi'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
FOREWORD
I
DRAFT OF XXX CANTOS
3
JEFFERSON——NUEVOMUNDO
37
SIENA—THE LEOPOLDINE REFORMS
43
CHINESE CANTOS—JOHN ADAMS
59
THEPISAN CANTOS
79
SECTION:ROCK-DRILL
96
THRONES
103
DRAFTS & FRAGMENTS OF CANTOS CX-CXVII
116

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FOREWORD
I have made these selections to indicate main elements in the Cantos.
To the specialist the task of explaining them. As Jung says: “Being
essentially the instrument for his work,he[the artist]is subordinate to
it and we have no reason for expecting him to interpret it for us. He
has done the best that is in him by giving it form and he must leave
interpretation to others and to the future."
The best introduction to the Cantos and to the present selection of
passages might be the following lines from the earlier draft of a
Canto (1912), reprinted in the fiftieth memorial issue of Poetry
(Chicago).
Hang it all, there can be but one“Sordello"!
But say I want to, say I take your whole bag of tricks,
Let in your quirks and tweeks, and say the thing's an art-form,
YourSordello,and that themodernworld
Needs such a rag-bag to stuff all its thoughts in;
Say that I dump my catch, shiny and silvery
As fresh sardines slapping and slipping on the marginal cobbles?
(I stand before the booth, the speech; but the truth
Is inside this discourse—-this booth is full of the marrow of wisdom.)
EZRA POUND
Venice，2oth October,1966

--- PAGE BREAK ---he marginal cobbles?
(I stand before the booth, the speech; but the truth
Is inside this discourse—-this booth is full of the marrow of wisdom.)
EZRA POUND
Venice，2oth October,1966

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CANTO I
And then went down to the ship,
Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sca, and
We set up mast and sail on that swart ship,
Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also
Heavy with weeping, so winds from sternward
Bore us out onward with bellying canvas,
Circe's this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.
Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller,
Thus with stretched sail, we went over sea till day's end.
Sun to his slumber, shadows o'er all the ocean,
Came we then to the bounds of deepest water,
To the Kimmerian lands,and peopled cities
Covered with close-webbed mist,unpierced ever
With glitter of sun-rays
Nor with stars stretched,nor looking back from heaven
Swartest night stretched over wretched men there.
The ocean fowing backward, came we then to the place
Aforesaid by Circe.
Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus,
And drawing sword from my hip
I dug the ell-square pitkin;
Poured we libations unto each the dead,
First mead and then sweet wine, water mixed with white four.
Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death's-heads;
As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best
For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods,
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ine, water mixed with white four.
Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death's-heads;
As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best
For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods,
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A sheep to Tiresias only, black and a bell-sheep.
Dark blood fowed in the fosse,
Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead, of brides
Of youths and of the old who had borne much;
Souls stained with recent tears, girls tender,
Men many, mauled with bronze lance heads,
Battle spoil, bearing yet dreory arms,
These many crowded about me; with shouting,
Pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts;
Slaughtered the herds, sheep slain of bronze;
Poured ointment, cried to the gods,
To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine;
Unsheathed the narrow sword,
I sat to keep off the impetuous impotent dead,
Till I should hear Tiresias.
But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor,
Unburied,cast on the wide earth,
Limbs that we left in the house of Circe,
Unwept, unwrapped in sepulchre, since toils urged other.
Pitiful spirit. And I cried in hurried speech:
"Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast?
Cam'st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?"
And he in heavy speech:
"Ill fate and abundant wine. I slept in Circe's ingle.
Going down the long ladder unguarded,
I fell against the buttress,
Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.
But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied,
Heap up mine arms, be tomb by sea-bord, and inscribed:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ainst the buttress,
Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.
But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied,
Heap up mine arms, be tomb by sea-bord, and inscribed:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A man of no fortune,and with a name to come.
And set my oar up, that I swung mid fellows."
And Anticlea came, whom I beat off, and then Tiresias Theban,
Holding his golden wand, knew me, and spoke first:
"A second time? why? man of ill star,
Facing the sunless dead and this joyless region?
Stand from the fosse, leave me my bloody bever
For soothsay."
And I stepped back,
And he strong with the blood, said then: “Odysseus
Shalt return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas,
Lose all companions."And then Anticlea came.
Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus,
In officina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.
And he sailed,by Sirens and thence outward and away
And unto Circe.
Venerandam,
In the Cretan's phrase, with the golden crown, Aphrodite,
Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, orichalchi, with golden
Girdles and breast bands, thou with dark eyelids
Bearing the golden bough of Argicida. So that:

--- PAGE BREAK ---den crown, Aphrodite,
Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, orichalchi, with golden
Girdles and breast bands, thou with dark eyelids
Bearing the golden bough of Argicida. So that:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CANTO IV
Palace in smoky light,
Troy but a heap of smouldering boundary stones,
ANAXIFORMINGEs!Aurunculeia!
Hear me. Cadmus of Golden Prows!
The silver mirrors catch the bright stones and fare,
Dawn, to our waking, drifts in the green cool light;
Dew-haze blurs, in the grass, pale ankles moving.
Beat,beat, whirr, thud, in the soft turf
under the apple trees,
Choros nympharum, goat-foot, with the pale foot alternate;
Crescent of blue-shot waters, green-gold in the shallows,
A black cock crows in the sea-foam;
And by the curved, carved foot of the couch,
claw-foot and lion head,an old man seated
Speaking in the low drone ...:
Ityn!
Et ter febiliter, Ityn, Ityn!
And she went toward the window and cast her down,
“All the while, the while, swallows crying:
Ityn!
It is Cabestan's heart in the dish."
“It is Cabestan's heart in the dish?
No other taste shall change this."
And she went toward the window,
the slim white stone bar
Making a double arch;
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---estan's heart in the dish."
“It is Cabestan's heart in the dish?
No other taste shall change this."
And she went toward the window,
the slim white stone bar
Making a double arch;
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Firm even fingers held to the firm pale stone;
Swung for a moment,
and the wind out of Rhodez
Caught in the full of her sleeve.
. . . the swallows crying:
'Tis. 'Tis. Ytis!
Actaon...
and a valley,
The valley is thick with leaves, with leaves, the trees,
The sunlight glitters, glitters a-top,
Like a fish-scale roof,
Like the church roof in Poictiers
If it were gold.
Beneath it, beneath it
Not a ray, not a sliver, not a spare disc of sunlight
Flaking the black, soft water;
Bathing the body of nymphs, of nymphs, and Diana,
Nymphs, white-gathered about her, and the air, air.
Shaking, air alight with the goddess,
fanning their hair in the dark,
Lifting, lifting and waffing:
Ivory dipping in silver,
Shadow'd, o'ershadow'd
Ivory dipping in silver,
Not a splotch, not a lost shatter of sunlight.
Then Actron: Vidal,
Vidal. It is old Vidal speaking,
stumbling along in the wood,
Not a patch, not a lost shimmer of sunlight,
the pale hair of the goddess.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---shatter of sunlight.
Then Actron: Vidal,
Vidal. It is old Vidal speaking,
stumbling along in the wood,
Not a patch, not a lost shimmer of sunlight,
the pale hair of the goddess.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The dogs leap on Actaon,
“Hither, hither, Actaon,”"
Spotted stag of the wood;
Gold, gold, a sheaf of hair,
Thick like a wheat swath,
Blaze, blaze in the sun,
The dogs leap on Actaon.
Stumbling, stumbling along in the wood,
Muttering, muttering Ovid:
"Pergusa ... pool ... pool ... Gargaphia,
"Pool .. . pool of Salmacis."
The empty armour shakes as the cygnet moves.
Thus the light rains, thus pours, e lo soleills plovil
The liquid and rushing crystal
beneath the knees of the gods.
Ply over ply, thin glitter of water;
Brook film bearing white petals.
The pine at Takasago
grows with the pine of Ise!
The water whirls up the bright pale sand in the spring's mouth
“Behold the Tree of the Visages!"
Forked branch-tips, faming as if with lotus.
Ply over ply
The shallow eddying fuid,
beneath the knees of the gods.
Torches melt in the glare
set fame of the corner cook-stall,
Blue agate casing the sky (as at Gourdon that time)
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---over ply
The shallow eddying fuid,
beneath the knees of the gods.
Torches melt in the glare
set fame of the corner cook-stall,
Blue agate casing the sky (as at Gourdon that time)
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the sputter of resin,
Saffron sandalsopetals the narrow foot:Hymenaus Io!
Hymen, Io Hymenee! Aurunculeia!
One scarlet fower is cast on the blanch-white stone.
And So-Gyoku, saying:
"This wind, sire, is the king's wind,
This wind is wind of the palace,
Shaking imperial water-jets."
And Hsiang, opening his collar:
"This wind roars in the earth's bag,
it lays the water with rushes."
No wind is the king's wind.
Let every cow keep her calf.
"This wind is held in gauze curtains ..."
No wind is the king's ..
The camel drivers sit in the turn of the stairs,
Look down on Ecbatan of plotted streets,
"Danae! Danae!
What wind is the king's?"
Smoke hangs on the stream,
The peach-trees shed bright leaves in the water,
Sound drifts in the evening haze,
The bark scrapes at the ford,
Gilt rafters above black water,
Three steps in an open field,
Gray stone-posts leading .. .
Pere Henri Jacques would speak with the Sennin, on Rokku,
Mount Rokku between the rock and the cedars,
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Polhonac,
As Gyges on Thracian platter set the feast,
Cabestan, Tereus,
It is Cabestan's heart in the dish,
Vidal, or Ecbatan, upon the gilded tower in Ecbatan
Lay the god's bride, lay ever, waiting the golden rain.
By Garonne. “Saave!"
The Garonne is thick like paint,
Procession, --“Et sa'ave, sa'ave, sa'ave Regina!"—
Moves like a worm, in the crowd.
Adige, thin film of images,
Across the Adige,by Stefano, Madonna in hortulo,
As Cavalcanti had seen her.
The Centaur's heel plants in the earth loam.
And we sit here ...
there in the arena ..
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---lm of images,
Across the Adige,by Stefano, Madonna in hortulo,
As Cavalcanti had seen her.
The Centaur's heel plants in the earth loam.
And we sit here ...
there in the arena ..
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CANTO IX
One year foods rose,
One year they fought in the snows,
One year hail fell, breaking the trees and walls.
Down here in the marsh they trapped him in one year,
And he stood in the water up to his neck
to keep the hounds off him,
And he foundered about in the marsh
and came in after three days,
That was Astorre Manfredi of Faenza
whoworked the ambush
and set the dogs off to find him,
In the marsh, down here under Mantua,
And he fought in Fano, in a street fight,
and that was nearly the end of him;
And the Emperor came down and knighted us,
And they had a wooden castle set up for fiesta,
And one year Basinio went out into the courtyard
Where the lists were, and the palisades
had been set for the tourneys,
And he talked down the anti-Hellene,
And there was an heir male to the seignor,
And Madame Ginevra died.
And he,Sigismundo, was Capitan for the Venetians.
And hehad sold off small castles
and built the great Rocca to his plan,
And he fought like ten devils at Monteluro
and got nothing but thevictory
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---was Capitan for the Venetians.
And hehad sold off small castles
and built the great Rocca to his plan,
And he fought like ten devils at Monteluro
and got nothing but thevictory
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And old Sforza bitched us at Pesaro;
(sic) March the 16th:
"that Messire Alessandro Sforza
is become lord of Pesaro
through the wangle of the Illus. Sgr. Mr. Fedricho d'Orbino
Who worked thewangle with Galeaz
through the wiggling of Messer Francesco,
Who waggled it so that Galeaz should sell Pesaro
to Alex and Fossembrone to Feddy;
and he hadn't the right to sell.
And this he did bestialmente;that is Sforza did bestialmente
as he had promised him, Sigismundo, per capitoli
to see that he,Malatesta, should have Pesaro"
And this cut us off from our south half
and finished our game, thus, in the beginning,
And he, Sigismundo,spoke his mind to Francesco
andwe drove them outof theMarches.
And the King o’ Ragona, Alphonse le roy d'Aragon,
was the next nail in our coffin,
And all you can say is, anyway,
that he Sigismundo called a town council
And Valturio said“as well for a sheep as a lamb"
and this change-over (haec traditio)
As old bladder said“rem eorum saluavit”
Saved the Florentine state; and that, maybe, was something.
And “Florence our natural ally" as they said in the meeting
for whatever that was worth afterward.
And he began building the TeMPIO,
and Polixena, his second wife, died.
I2

--- PAGE BREAK ---ething.
And “Florence our natural ally" as they said in the meeting
for whatever that was worth afterward.
And he began building the TeMPIO,
and Polixena, his second wife, died.
I2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And theVenetians sent down an ambassador
And said “speak humanely,
But tell him it's no time for raising his pay."
And the Venetians sent down an ambassador
with three pages of secret instructions
To the effect: Did he think the campaign was a joy-ride?
And oldWattle-wattle slipped into Milan
But he couldn't stand Sidg being so high with the Venetians
And he talked it over with Feddy; and Feddy said “Pesaro"
And old Foscari wrote “Caro mio
If we split with Francesco you can have it
And we'll help you in every way possible."
But Feddy offered it sooner.
And Sigismundo got up a few arches,
And stole that marble in Classe,“stole” that is,
Casus est talis:
Foscari doge,to the prefect of Ravenna
"Why, what, which, thunder, damnation????"
Casusesttalis:
Filippo, commendatary of the abbazia
Of Sant Apollinaire, Classe, Cardinal of Bologna
That he did one night (quadam nocte) sell to the
Illmo D°, D° Sigismund Malatesta
Lord of Ariminum, marble, porphyry, serpentine,
Whose men, Sigismundo's, came with more than an hundred
two-wheeled ox carts and deported, for the beautifying
of the tempio where was Santa Maria in Trivio
Where the same are now on the walls.Four hundred
ducats to be paid back to the abbazia by the said swindling
I3

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, for the beautifying
of the tempio where was Santa Maria in Trivio
Where the same are now on the walls.Four hundred
ducats to be paid back to the abbazia by the said swindling
I3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cardinal or his heirs.
grnnh! rrnnh, pthg.
Wheels,plaustra, oxen under night-shield,
And on the 13th of August: Aloysius Purtheo,
The next abbot, to Sigismundo,receipt for 2oo ducats
Corn-salve for the damage done in that scurry.
And there was the row about that German-Burgundian female
And it was his messianic year, Poliorcetes,
but he was being a bit too PoLUMETIS
And theVenetians wouldn't give him sixmonths vacation.
And he went down to the old brick heap ofPesaro
andwaitedforFeddy
And Feddy finally said “I am coming!..
... to help Alessandro."
He said:“Broglio, I'm the goat. This time
Mr. Feddy has done it (m'l'ha calata)."
And he'd lost his job with the Venetians,
Andthe stone didn'tcomeinfromIstria:
And we sent men to the Silk War;
And Wattle never paid up on the nail
Though we signed on with Milan and Florence;
And he set up the bombards in muck down byVada
where nobody else could have set’em
and he took the wood out of the bombs
and made 'em of two scoops of metal
And the jobs geting smaller and smaller,
Until he signed on with Siena;
I4

--- PAGE BREAK ---e nobody else could have set’em
and he took the wood out of the bombs
and made 'em of two scoops of metal
And the jobs geting smaller and smaller,
Until he signed on with Siena;
I4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And that time they grabbed his post-bag.
And what was it, anyhow?
Pitigliano, a man with a ten-acre lot,
Two lumps of tufa,
and they'd taken his pasture land from him,
And Sidg had got back their horses,
and he had two big lumps of tufa
with six hundred pigs in the basements.
And the poor devils were dying of cold.
And this is what they found in the post-bag:
Ex Arimino die xxiiDecembris
“Magnifice ac potens domine,mi singularissime
I advise yr. Lordship how
I have been with master Alwidge who
has shown me the design of the nave that goes in the middle,
of the church and the design for the roof and .. "
JHesus,
Magnificoexso.Signor mio
Sence to-day I am recommanded that I have to tel you my father's
opinium that he has shode to Mr. Genare about the valts of the
cherch...etc...
Giovane of Master alwise P. S. I think it advisabl that I shud go to
rome to talk to mister Albert so as I can no what he thinks about it
rite.
Sagramoro . .
"Illustre signor mio,Messire Battista...
"First: Ten slabs best red, seven by 15, by one third,
Eight ditto,good red, 15 by one,
I5

--- PAGE BREAK ---n no what he thinks about it
rite.
Sagramoro . .
"Illustre signor mio,Messire Battista...
"First: Ten slabs best red, seven by 15, by one third,
Eight ditto,good red, 15 by one,
I5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Six of same,Is by one by one.
Eight columns 1s by three and one third etc...
with carriage, danars I51 ..."
"MONSEIGNEUR:
Madame Isotta has had mewrite today about Sr.Galeazzo's daugh-
ter.The man who said young pullets make thin soup, knew what he
was talking about.Wewent to see thegirl the other day,for all the
good that did, and she denied the whole matter and kept her end up
without losing her temper. I think Madame Ixotta very nearly ex-
hausted the matter.Mi pare che avea decto hogni chossia.All the children
are well. Where you are everyone is pleased and happy because of
your taking the chateau here we are the reverse as you might say
drifting without a rudder.Madame Lucrezia has probably,or should
have, written to you, I suppose you have the letter by now. Everyone
wants to be remembered toyou.
21Dec.D.deM."
. sagramoro to put up the derricks. There is a supply of beams
at.
“MAGNIFICENTLORD WITH DUE REVERENCE:
Messire Malatesta is well and asks for you every day. He is so much
pleased with his pony, It wd. take me a month to write you all the fun
he gets out of that pony.I want to again remind you to write to Geor-
gioRambottom or to his boss to fix up that wall to thelittle garden
that madame Isotta uses, for it is all fat on the ground now as I have
already told him a lot of times, for all the good that does, so I am
writing to your lordship in the matter I have done all that I can,for
all the good that does as noboddy hear can do anything without you.
your faithful
LUNARDA DA PALLA.
20 Dec. 1454.
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---g to your lordship in the matter I have done all that I can,for
all the good that does as noboddy hear can do anything without you.
your faithful
LUNARDA DA PALLA.
20 Dec. 1454.
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

". .. gone over it with all the foremen and engineers. And about the
silver for the small medal..."
"Magnifice ac potens ...
because the walls of..."
“MalatestadeMalatestisadMagnificumDominumPatremquesuum.
"ExsoDnoet Dno sin Dno SigismundumPandolfi Filium
Malatestis Capitan General
Magnificent and Exalted Lord and Father in especial my lord with
due recommendation: your letter has been presented to me by Gen-
tilino da Gradara and with it the bay pony (ronzino baiectino) the
which you have sent me, and which appears in my eyes a fine capa-
rison'd charger, upon which I intend to learn all there is to know
about riding, in consideration of yr. paternal affection for which I
thank your excellency thus briefy and pray you continue to hold
me in this esteem notifying you by the bearer of this that we are all
in good health, as I hope and desire your Exet Lordship is also: with
continuedremembranceIremain
Your son and servant
MALATESTA DEMALATESTIS.
Given in Rimini,this the 22nd day of December
anno domini 1454"
(in the sixth year of his age)
"ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE:
Unfitting as it is that I should offer counsels to Hannibal..."
“Magnifce ac potens domine, domine mi singularissime, humili recomen-
datione premissa etc. This to advise your Mgt Ldshp how the second
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---I should offer counsels to Hannibal..."
“Magnifce ac potens domine, domine mi singularissime, humili recomen-
datione premissa etc. This to advise your Mgt Ldshp how the second
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

load of Veronese marble has finally got here, after being held up at
Ferrara with no end of fuss and botheration, the whole of it having
been there unloaded.
I learned how it happened, and it has cost a few forins to get back
the said load which had been seized for the skipper's debt and
defalcation; he having fed when the lighter was seized. But that
Y Mgt Ldshp may not lose the moneys paid out on his account I
have had the lighter brought here and am holding it, against his ar-
rival.If not we still have thelighter.
As soon as the Xmas fetes are overI will have the stone foor laid in
the sacristy,for which the stone is already cut.Thewall of thebuilding
is finished and I shall now get the roof on.
We have not begun putting new stone into the martyr chapel;
first because the heavy frosts wd. certainly spoil the job; secondly
because the aliofants aren't yet here and one can't get the measurements
for the cornice to the columns that are to rest on the aliofants.
They are doing the stairs to your room in the castle ... I have had
Messire Antonio degli Atti's court paved and the stone benches put
in it.
Ottavian is illuminating the bull. I mean the bull for the chapel. All
the stone-cutters are waiting for spring weather to start work again.
The tomb is all done except part of the lid, and as soon as Messire
Agostino gets back from Cesena I will see that he finishes it, ever
recommendingme toYrMgtLdshp
believe me y faithful
PETRUS GENARIIS."
That'swhat they found in thepost-bag
And somemoreofit to theeffectthat
he “lived and ruled"
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---finishes it, ever
recommendingme toYrMgtLdshp
believe me y faithful
PETRUS GENARIIS."
That'swhat they found in thepost-bag
And somemoreofit to theeffectthat
he “lived and ruled"
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“et amava perdutamenteIxotta degli Atti"
e“ne fu degna”
“constans in proposito
Placuit oculis principis
pulchraaspectu"
“populo grata(Italiaeque decus)"
"and built a temple so full of pagan works"
i. e. Sigismund
and in the style “Past ruin'd Latium"
The filigree hiding the gothic,
withatouchofrhetoricin thewhole
And the old sarcophagi,
such as lie, smothered in grass, by San Vitale.
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CANTO XIII
Kung walked
by the dynastic temple
And into the cedar grove,
and then out by the lower river,
And with him Khieu, Tchi
and Tian the low speaking
And “we are unknown,” said Kung,
"You will take up charioteering?
Then you will become known,
Or perhaps I should take up charioteering, or archery?
Or the practice of public speaking?"
And Tseu-lou said, “I would put the defences in order,”
And Khieu said, “If I were lord of a province
I would put it in better order than this is."
And Tchi said,“I would prefer a small mountain temple,
With order in the observances,
with a suitable performance of the ritual,"
And Tian said, with his hand on the strings of his lute
The low sounds continuing
after his hand left the strings,
And the sound went up like smoke,under the leaves,
And he looked after the sound:
"The old swimming hole,
And the boys fopping off the planks,
Or sitting in the underbrush playing mandolins."
And Kung smiled upon all of them equally.
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---e looked after the sound:
"The old swimming hole,
And the boys fopping off the planks,
Or sitting in the underbrush playing mandolins."
And Kung smiled upon all of them equally.
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And Thseng-sie desired to know:
"Which had answered corrcctly?"
And Kung said, “Thcy have all answered corrctly,
That is to say, each in his nature."
And Kung raised his cane against Yuan Jang,
Yuan Jang being his elder,
For Yuan Jang sat by the roadside prctending
to be receiving wisdom.
And Kung said
“You old fool, come out of it,
Get up and do something useful."
And Kung said
"Respect a child's faculties
From the moment it inhales the clear air,
But a man of fifty who knows nothing
Is worthy of no respect."
And “When the prince has gathered about him
All the savants and artists, his riches will be fully employed."
And Kung said, and wrote on the bo leaves:
If a man have not order within him
He can not spread order about him;
And if a manhave not order withinhim
His family will not act with due order;
And if the prince have not order within him
He can not put order in his dominions.
And Kung gave the words “order"
And“brotherly defcrence"
And said nothing of the “life after death."
And he said
"Anyone can run to excesses,
21