Jose  M  R  De^aite.  MJO.

Physical  Control
of  the  Mind


Wo'Ws*rep*ct,<w


Physical  Control  of  the  Mind:

Toward  a  Psychocivilized  Society,  1969


By  Jose  M.  Delgado
Part  I

Mental  Evolution

Chapter  One:

Natural  Fate  Versus  Human  Control:  The  Process  of  Ecological  Liberation  and  Domination

Part  II

The  Brain  and  Mind  as  Functional  Entities

Chapter  Seven:

Sensory  Dependence  of  the  Adult  Mind

Chapter  Eight:

Working  Hypothesis  for  the  Experimental  Study  of  the  Mind

Chapter  Nine:

Historical  Evolution  of  Physical  Control  of  the  Brain

Part  III

Experimental  Control  of  Brain  Functions  in  Behaving
Subjects

Chapter  Ten:

Physicochemical  Bases  of  Behavioral  Activity


Chapter  Eleven:

Methodology  for  Direct  Communication  with  the  Brain


Chapter  Twelve:

Electrical  Stimulation  of  the  Brain  (ESB)


Chapter  Thirteen:

Motor  Responses

Chapter  Fourteen:

Hell  and  Heaven  Within  the  Brain:

The  Systems  for  Punishment  and  Reward


Chapter  Fifteen:

Hallucinations.  Recollections,  and  Illusions  in  Man

Chapter  Sixteen:

Inhibitory  Effects  in  Animals  and  Man


Part  IV

Evaluation  of  Electrical  Control  of  the  Brain

Chapter  Seventeen:

Brain  Stimulation  Triggers  Physiological  Mechanisms

Chapter  Eighteen:

Electrical  Activation  of  the  "Will"


Chapter  Nineteen:

Characteristics  and  Limitations  of  Brain  Control


Chapter  Twenty:
Medical  Applications

Chapter  Twenty- One:
Ethical  Considerations


Bibliography
About  the  Author


Part  I

Mental  Evolution


Chapter  1

Natural  Fate  Versus  Human  Control:

The  Process  of  Ecological  Liberation  and  Domination

Manifestations  of  life  depend  on  a  continuous  interplay  of  natural  forces.  Worms  and  elephants,
mosquitoes  and  eagles,  plankton  and  whales  display  a  variety  of  activities  on  the  land,  in  the  air,
and  in  the  sea  with  a  purpose-or  lack  of  it-which  escapes  human  understanding,  obeying  sets  of
laws  which  antedate  the  appearance  of  human  intelligence.

In  the  animal  kingdom,  existence  of  the  genetic  code  represents  a  biological  determination  of
anatomical  and  functional  characteristics  in  the  newborn.  The  growth  and  development  of
organisms  after  birth  proceed  according  to  a  natural  fate  imposed  by  the  correlations  between
individual  structure  and  environmental  circumstances.  The  fact  that  about  300  million  years  ago
all  the  world's  creatures  lived  in  the  sea  did  not  depend  on  their  own  volition  but  on  biological
evolution  and  ecological  factors.  The  appearance  of  dinosaurs  i8o  million  years  ago  in  the
Triassic  period,  their  supremacy  on  earth,  and  their  peak  in  power  30  million  years  later  were
determined  not  by  the  will  of  these  animal&,  which  had  disproportionately  small  brains  and  were
probably  rather  stupid,  but  by  a  propitious  warm  and  sticky  climate  which  provided  a  soft  slosh
of  water  everywhere  and  land  covered  with  a  tangle  of  greenery,  juicy  palms,  and  huge  fern  like
trees  extending  almost  to  the  North  Pole,  The  catastrophic  end  of  the  age  of  gigantic  reptiles  was
simply  the  result  of  their  inability  to  adapt  themselves  to  a  change  in  weather  and  lack  of  food.

At  the  beginning  of  the  Cenozoic  era  70  million  years  ago,  the  air  was  drier  and  cooler  than
before.  High  plains  emerged  from  shallow  seas  and  ponds,  and  hard-  wood  forests  towered  in
place  of  ferns  and  palms.  This  changing  ecology  was  unsuitable  for  dinosaurs  and  because  they
lacked  the  intelligence  to  understand  their  situation,  to  improve  their  food  supply,  or  to  modify
their  diet,  natural  fate  forced  these  giants  into  extinction,  and  in  their  place  small,  warm-blooded,
furry  mammals  slowly  grew  in  size  and  number.

The  appearance  of  man  approximately  one  million  years  ago  meant  only  the  flourishing  of  one
more  kind  of  animal  which  shared  with  the  others  most  biological  laws  and  a  complete
dependence  on  natural  forces.  Men,  like  elephants  and  frogs,  possessed  lungs,  bones,  and  brains;
pumping  of  blood  by  the  heart  and  other  physiological  phenomena  were  -  and  still  are  -  very
similar  in  all  mammals,  and  proceeded  according  to  pre-established  mechanisms  beyond
awareness  or  voluntary  control.  Personal  destiny  was  determined  by  a  series  of  biological  and
environmental  circumstances  which  could  not  be  foreseen,  understood,  or  modified,  Natural  fate
meant  that  man,  along  with  all  animals,  suffered  the  inclemencies  of  the  weather,  being
decimated  by  cold  temperatures,  starvation,  and  all  kinds  of  parasites  and  illnesses.  He  did  not
know  how  to  make  a  fire  or  a  wheel,  and  he  was  not  yet  able  to  influence  the  functions  of  his
own  body  or  to  modify  his  environment.


A  decisive  step  in  the  evolution  of  man  and  in  the  establishment  of  his  superiority  over  other
living  creatures  was  his  gradual  achievement  of  ecological  liberation.  Why  should  man  accept
unnecessary  hardships?  Why  should  he  be  wet  because  the  rain  was  failing,  or  cold  because  the
sun  was  hidden,  or  be  at  killed  because  predators  were  hungry?  Why  should  he  not  cover  his
body  with  the  soft  skins  of  animals,  construct  tools  and  shelter,  collect  food  and  water?  Slowly
the  first  sparks  of  intelligence  began  to  challenge  natural  fate,  Herds  Of  cattle  Were  a  more
reliable  source  of  food  than  hunting  in  the  forest.  Some  fields  were  stripped  of  the  vegetation
which  was  growing  according  to  capricious  ecological  destiny,  and  were  placed  tinder
cultivation  by  man.

Attention  was  gradually  directed  toward  the  human  body,  and  skills  were  learned  for  the
treatment  of  injuries.  Broken  limbs  no  longer  meant  permanent  disfunctiozi  but  could  be  repaired
by  transitory  application  of  branches  tied  with  vegetable  fibers.  Personal  experience  was  not  lost,
but  could  be  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation;  the  accumulating  culture  preserved
through  a  gradually  elaborated  spoken  and  written  language  represented  a  continuous  advance  of
civilization.  Men  learned  to  ivork  together,  to  exchange  skills  and  knowledge,  and  to  join  their
efforts  to  improve  their  circumstances.  Curiosity  grew  continuously,  and  endless  questions  were
formulated  about  the  observed  reality.  Ecological  liberation  could  progress  not  by  hiding  inside
caves  but  by  facing  danger,  and  man  challenged  the  immense  power  of  natural  forces,  using  a
lever  to  lift  weights  heavier  than  muscular  power  could  manage,  tricking  the  wind  to  push  sailing
ships  through  the  ocean,  and  taming  the  rivers  to  turn  the  grinding  stones  of  the  mills.  Thus
began  the  process  of  man's  ecological  domination,  the  victory  of  human  intelligence  over  the  fate
of  a  mindless  nature  -a  victory  without  precedent  in  the  history  of  other  animal  species.
Biological  adaptation  enabled  man  to  survive  under  extreme  climatic  conditions  including  arctic
areas,  dry  deserts,  high  altitudes,  and  hot  tropics,  but  it  was  the  intellectual  and  material
development  of  civilization  that  really  brought  about  the  present  degree  of  ecological  liberation
and  domination.  The  winning  of  a  considerable  degree  of  independence  from  natural  elements
permitted  human  beings  to  direct  their  intelligence  and  energy  toward  endeavors  more  interesting
than  mere  survival.  The  signs  of  man's  power  slowly  extended  throughout  the  world,
transforming  the  earth's  surface  with  cultivated  fields,  with  cities,  and  with  roads;  joining  oceans;
tunneling  through  mountains;  harnessing  atomic  power;  and  reaching  for  the  stars.  In  spite  of  the
problems  associated  with  the  development  of  civilization,  the  fact  is  that  today  the  charting  of
our  lives  depends  more  on  intelligent  decisions  than  on  ecological  circumstances.  The
surrounding  medium  of  modern  societies  is  not  nature,  as  in  the  past,  but  buildings,  machines,
and  culture,  which  are  man-made  products.  Modem  medicine  has  created  a  healthier
environment  by  reducing  infant  mortality,  diminishing  the  number  and  gravity  of  illnesses,  and
consider-  ably  increasing  the  span  of  life.  According  to  the  biological  law  of  only  a  few  centuries
ago,  pestilence  desolated  mankind  from  time  to  time,  insects  spread  infections,  more  than  half  of
the  newborn  died  before  the  age  of  three,  old  age  began  at  thirty  or  forty,  and  only  a  minority
survived  to  the  age  of  fifty.  Scientific  knowledge  has  modified  our  own  biology,  providing  better
diet,  hygienic  practices,  and  pharmacological  and  surgical  treatment.

Viewing  evolution  in  terms  of  the  opposition  of  human  intelligence  to  natural  fate  has  a  dramatic
appeal  which  emphasizes  the  relative  importance  of  each  factor  in  the  determination  of  events.  In
reality,  however,  we  should  accept  the  fact  that  the  existence  of  man,  together  with  all  of  his
attributes  and  crea-  tions,  including  his  own  ecological  liberation  and  domination,  is  actually  and


inescapably  the  result  of  natural  fate.  Man  did  not  invent  man.  No  conscious  efforts  were  ever
made  to  design-  or  modify-the  anatomical  structure  of  his  brain.  Because  the  development  of
wings  was  a  result  of  biological  evolution,  we  cannot  claim  that  birds  have  liberated  themselves
from  the  pull  of  gravity  by  flying  in  the  air  in  defiance  of  natural  laws.  The  fact  that  birds  fly
means  that  they  have  achieved  one  step  of  ecological  liberation,  escape  from  gravity  by  using  the
lifting  support  of  the  wind,  Birds  can  live  and  play  in  the  air  above  all  other  earthbound
creatures.  Their  wings  were  a  gracious  gift  of  evolution  which  did  not  require  knowledge  of
physics,  mathematical  calculations,  or  even  the  desire  to  own  wings.  Nature  seems  to  be  highly
imaginative  but  excessively  slow;  many  millions  of  years  passed  from  the  beginning  of  life  on
earth  to  the  appearance  of  flying  animals.  The  period  from  the  emergence  of  the  human  mind  to
the  invention  of  the  airplane  was  much  shorter.  The  tremendous  acceleration  in  accomplishments
was  determined  by  the  development  of  the  unique  powers  of  imagination  and  reason;  and  it  may
be  expected  that  human  inventions  will  have  an  increasing  role  in  the  control  of  activities  on
earth.  Birds  fly,  and  man  thinks.  Liberation  from  and  domination  of  many  natural  elements  have
changed  ecology,  and  are  also  influencing  the  needs,  purpose,  and  general  organization  of  human
life,  especially  in  the  following  aspects.

Freedom  of  Choice

In  contrast  with  the  limitations  felt  by  our  ancestors  and  by  members  of  still  primitive  societies,
we  enjoy  nearly  endless  possibilities  to  pursue  interests  and  activities  of  our  own  choice.  Modern
life  is  not  bound  by  the  physical  restrictions  of  geography;  our  voices  can  be  transmitted  with  the
speed  of  light  to  anyone  around  the  world;  on  television  we  can  see  events  in  any  co  unity  as
they  actually  occur;  and  we  can  travel  to  distant  lands  at  supersonic  speeds.  We  are  not  limited  in
food  intake  by  our  hunting  skills.  Instead,  we  may  have  available  a  variety  of  supermarkets
which  display  the  culinary  products  of  many  countries.  In  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  we  are
no  longer  limited  to  verbal  contact,  but  have  access  to  many  centers  of  learning  equipped  with
increasingly  effective  teaching  aids,  where  the  different  aspects  of  man's  recorded  history  are
collected  and  preserved..  We  can  select  from  a  wide  variety  of  entertainment,  careers,  ideas,  and
religions.  Even  parenthood  can  be  planned,  and  the  birth  of  children  controlled,  by  the  use  of
medical  knowledge  and  contraceptive  devices.

Today  our  activities  are  less  determined  by  adaptation  to  nature  than  by  the  ingenuity  and
foresight  of  the  human  mind  which  recently  has  added  another  dimension  to  its  spectrum  of
choices  -  the  possibility  of  investigating  its  own  physical  and  chemical  substratum.  Limitation
and  regimentation  of  our  activities  are  imposed  mainly  by  education,  legislation,  social  pressure,
and  finances  -  which  are  creations  of  civilization  rather  than  by  environmental  determination,  as
was  formerly  the  case.  Civilized  man  has  surrounded  himself  with  a  multitude  of  instruments
which  magnify  his  senses,  skills,  strengths,  and  the  speed  with  which  he  can  travel,  without
realizing,  perhaps,  that  in  his  drive  to  be  free  from  natural  elements,  he  was  creating  a  new  kind
of  servitude  dominated  by  levers,  engines,  currency,  and  computers.  The  concerns  of  earlier
times  for  crops  and  predators  were  supplanted  by  economic  worries,  industrial  problems,  and  the
threat  of  atomic  overkill.  Despite  the  tremendous  increase  in  possible  courses  of  action,  the
freedom  an  individual  enjoys  is  becoming  more  tied  to  mechanization  which  is  replacing  the
natural  environment  as  a  determinant  of  behavior.  Liberation  from  ecology  is  paralleled  by  a
mechanized  dependence  which  absorbs  considerable  manpower  for  the  invention,  construction,


and  maintenance  of  machines.  The  possibility  of  independent  behavior  is  certainly  contingent  on
the  availability  of  different  paths  of  conduct.  But  the  element  most  essential  to  its  achievement  is
awareness  of  the  many  factors  influencing  our  actions  in  order  to  assure  us  that  our  responses
will  not  be  automatic,  but  deliberate  and  personal.  As  Rene  Dubos  has  said,  "The  need  to  choose
is  perhaps  the  most  constant  aspect  of  conscious  human  life;  it  constitutes  both  its  greatest  asset
and  its  heaviest  burden"  (69).*


Awareness

The  qualities  which  most  distinctly  separate  man  from  other  animals  are  the  awareness  of  his
own  existence  and  the  capacity  and  to  resist  and  even  change  what  appears  to  be  his  natural  fate.
The  degree  of  individual  awareness  differs  according  to  per-

*  Numbers  in  parentheses  refer  to  sources  listed  in  the  bibliography  at  the  back  of  this  book.


sonal  circumstances.  Consciousness  is  a  rather  expensive  luxury  in  terms  of  time  and  effort,  and
we  use  it  sparingly  while  performing  many  daily  tasks  based  on  complex  series  of  automatic
responses.  Walking,  for  example,  requires  a  tedious  process  of  motor  learning  in  early  life,  but
once  the  necessary  cerebral  formulas  for  controlling  movements  have  been  established,  we  pay
no  attention  to  the  onset,  strength,  speed,  timing,  and  sequences  of  muscular  performance;  we
simply  stand  up  and  walk  while  our  minds  are  occupied  with  other  thoughts.  All  these  processes
are  automatic  and,  to  a  considerable  extent,  are  characteristic  of  each  individual.  We  can,
however,  refocus  our  attention  on  any  motor  aspect  of  walking  and  re-educate  and  modify  the
motor  formulas  to  improve  the  elegance  and  gracefulness  of  movement,  or  to  mimick  the  gait  of
sailors,  tramps,  or  cowboys,  as  actors  do.

Stopping  at  a  red  light  does  not  require  a  decision  because  we  are  highly  trained  and  conditioned
to  perform  this  action.  If  we  pause  to  analyze  our  behavior,  we  may  be  aware  of  the  motor
activity  involved  in  stepping  on  the  brakes  and  of  the  reasons  that  we  are  stopping  and  obeying
the  traffic  rules  which  only  then  may  be  questioned  or  even  ignored.  Choice  is  not  involved  in
automatic  responses,  but  if  we  appraise  the  reasons  and  circumstances  surrounding  our  actions,
new  avenues  of  response  are  created.  This  applies  to  emotional  reactions  and  social  behavior  as
well  as  to  motor  activity.

Awareness  is  increased  by  knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  of  the  considered  phenomenon.  For
instance,  an  expert  is  likely  to  notice  any  peculiar  car  engine  noises,  perceiving  auditory  signals
which  may  not  be  detected  by  untrained  drivers.  Knowledge  of  the  structure  and  mechanisms  of
the  motor  improves  the  probability  of  foreseeing  and  preventing  possible  breakdowns  and  also  of
correcting  malfunctioning  parts.


To  a  considerable  degree,  our  behavior  is  composed  of  automatic  responses  to  sensory  inputs,
but  if  we  knew  the  genetic  determinants,  cultural  elements,  and  intracerebral  mechanisms


involved  in  various  kinds  of  behavioral  performance,  we  could  come  closer  to  understanding  the
motivations  underlying  our  actions.  If  we  were  cognizant  of  the  factors  influencing  our  behavior,
we  could  accept  or  reject  many  of  them  and  minimize  their  effects  upon  us.  The  result  would  be
a  decrease  in  automatism  and  an  increase  in  the  deliberate  quality  of  our  responses  to  the
environment.  Awareness  introduces  greater  individual  responsibility  in  behavioral  activities.


Responsibility

Primitive  man  did  not  have  the  choice  of  going  to  the  movies,  reading  a  book,  or  watching
television.  He  was  fully  occupied  searching  for  food  and  fighting  for  survival.  Today's  many
behavioral  alternatives  require  that  we  make  a  conscious  effort  to  understand  and  evaluate  the
different  possibilities,  perhaps  to  modify  or  repress  emotional  reactions  to  them,  and  finally,  to
select  a  course  of  action.  In  many  cases,  these  processes  are  performed  at  the  subconscious  level,
and  responses  flow  effortlessly;  at  other  times  we  are  aware  of  an  impending  act  an  impending
act  and  its  possible  alternatives,  and  arriving  at  a  decision  may  be  difficult  and  tiring.  The
conscious  selection  of  one  path  among  many  places  greater  responsibility  on  the  individual
because  his  activities  are  not  determined  by  automatic  mechanisms  or  external  factors  beyond  his
control.  Intelligent  judgment  is  based  on  an  individual's  personal  qualities  and  especially  on  his
ability  to  evaluate  possible  solutions.  Individual  choice  entails  assuming  accountability  for  the
direction  of  personal  destiny,  and  the  greater  one's  awareness  and  freedom,  the  greater  the
responsibility.  In  a  small  social  group  such  as  a  tribe,  the  consequences  of  the  leader's  choice  are
rather  limited,  while  in  highly  organized  contemporary  societies,  the  decisions  of  governmental
co  elites  will  affect  large  numbers  of  people.  The  political  actions  of  these  powerful  officials
concerning  foreign  aid,  cultural  ex-change,  and  peace  and  war  will  affect  life  in  most  parts  of  the
world.  We  should  remember  that  decision-making  always  involves  the  activity  of  intra-cerebral
mechanisms  which,  as  yet,  are  little  known.


Accumulation  of  Power

Industrial  and  technological  developments  have  created  unparalleled  resources  with  immense
constructive  and  destructive  potentials.  Already  we  have  conquered  the  natural  obstacles  of
rivers,  seas,  and  mountains,  and  they  are  no  longer  insurmountable  barriers  to  the  activities  of
man.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  accumulated  megatons  of  atomic  energy  capable  of  obliterating
all  forms  of  life  in  the  world.

Instruments  have  been  invented  to  increase  a  rnillionfold  the  perceptivity  of  our  senses,  the
power  of  our  muscles,  and  our  ability  to  process  information.  In  addition  to  increasing  our
material  power,  we  have  greatly  improved  our  capacity  to  organize  and  use  available  resources.
Plans  for  the  development  of  cities,  industries,  research,  education,  and  the  economy  in  general
are  carefully  formulated  by  experts,  and  these  plans  are  essential  for  the  organization  and
evolution  of  our  society.  These  developments  again  introduce  the  question  of  responsibility  in
the  choice  of  objectives  to  be  reached.  Because  of  the  magnitude  of  our  material  and  intellectual


powers,  the  directive  resolutions  made  by  elite  groups  may  be  decisive  for  the  development  of
scientific  and  economic  fields  of  endeavor,  for  the  evolution  of  civilization  in  general,  and  for
the  very  existence  of  man.

Major  nations  are  constantly  faced  with  the  choice  of  how  to  use  power,  and  conscious  efforts
are  made  to  reach  intelligent  decisions  which  are  expressed  as  national  goals  such  as  overcoming
poverty,  landing  a  man  on  the  moon,  or  meeting  timetables  for  industrial,  agricultural,  and
scientific  development.  Because  our  resources  are  not  unlimited,  a  major  effort  in  one  field,  such
as  armaments  or  outer  space  exploration,  restricts  the  development  of  other  less-favored  areas.
The  application  of  human  energy  to  the  control  of  natural  forces  is  continually  increasing,  and
perhaps  it  is  time  to  ask  if  the  present  orientation  of  our  civilization  is  desirable  and  sound,  or
whether  we  should  re-examine  the  universal  goals  of  mankind  and  pay  more  attention  to  the
primary  objective,  which  should  not  be  the  development  of  machines,  but  of  man  himself.


Part  II

The  Brain  and  Mind  as  Functional  Entities


Chapter  7

Sensory  Dependence  of  the  Adult  Mind

Even  if  reception  of  sensory  information  is  accepted  as  totally  essential  for  the  onset  and
development  of  mental  functions,  it  is  more  or  less  explicitly  assumed  that  an  adult  has  a  well
established  mental  capacity  which  functions  with  relative  independence  of  the  environment.
Individuality,  initiative,  and  free  will  are  expressed  in  the  ability  to  accept  or  reject  ideas  and
select  behavioral  responses.  A  man  can  isolate  himself,  meditate,  and  explore  the  depths  of  his
own  thoughts.  To  a  great  extent  education,  especially  in  Occidental  cultures,  is  based  on  the
belief  that  individual  personality  is  a  self-contained  and  relatively  independent  entity  with  its
own  destiny,  well  differentiated  from  the  surroundings,  and  able  to  function  by  itself  even  when
isolated  from  earth  and  traveling  in  an  orbiting  capsule.

A  more  detailed  analysis  of  reality,  however,  shows  that  cerebral  activity  is  essentially  dependent
on  sensory  inputs  from  the  environment  not  only  at  birth  but  also  throughout  life.  Normal  mental
functions  cannot  be  preserved  in  the  absence  of  a  stream  of  information  coming  from  the  outside
world.  The  mature  brain,  with  all  its  wealth  of  past  experience  and  acquired  skills,  is  not  capable
of  maintaining  the  thinking  process  or  even  normal  awareness  and  reactivity  in  a  vacuum  of
sensory  deprivation:  The  individual  mind  is  not  self-sufficient.


Support  for  this  statement  derives  from  neuro-physiological  and  psychological  experimentation.
In  mammals,  the  central  organization  of  motor  activity  is  localized  in  special  regions  of  the
cerebral  cortex  where  muscles  and  ideokinetic  formulas  are  represented.  The  motor  pathways
descend  through  the  spinal  cord  and  emerge  through  the  ventral  roots  to  form  plexus  and  motor
nerves.  As  should  be  expected,  experimental  destruction  in  animals  or  pathological  damage  in
man  of  the  ventral  roots  produces  complete  motor  paralysis  because  the  cerebral  impulses  cannot
reach  the  muscle  target.  Considering  the  input  side,  we  know  that  all  sensory  information  from
the  periphery,  including  proprioceptive  impulses  from  the  muscles,  is  carried  by  the  dorsal  roots
of  the  spinal  cord.  As  anticipated,  destruction  of  all  dorsal  roots  produces  a  loss  of  sensation,  but
in  addition,  there  is  also  a  paralysis  of  the  musculature  as  pronounced  as  when  the  motor-  roots
are  interrupted.  These  experiments  show  that  in  the  absence  of  sensory  information,  motor
activity  is  totally  disrupted.  The  brain  and  motor  pathways  are  not  sufficient  in  themselves,  and
for  proper  motor  behavior,  sensory  inputs  are  absolutely  necessary.

The  studies  of  Sprague  et  al.  (217)  in  the  cat  confirmed  the  importance  of  incoming  information
for  normal  functioning  of  the  brain.  These  authors  destroyed  the  lateral  portion  of  the  upper
midbrain,  including  the  main  sensory  pathways,  and  they  observed  that,  in  addition  to  the
expected  marked  sensory  deficit,  the  cats  exhibited  a  lack  of  affect,  aggression,  and  pleasurable
responses,  and  did  not  solicit  petting.  The  animals  remained  mute,  expressionless,  and  showed
minimal  autonomic  responses  but  in  spite  of  this  passivity,  they  showed  hyperexploratory
activity  with  incessant  stereotyped  wandering,  sniffing,  and  searching  as  if  hallucinating.
"Without  a  patterned  afferent  input  to  the  forebrain  via  the  lemnisci,  the  remaining  portions  of
the  central  nervous  system  .  .  .  seem  incapable  of  elaborating  a  large  part  of  the  animal's
repertoire  of  adaptive  behavior"  (217).

Psychological  data  also  confirm  the  essential  importance  of  continuous  reception  of  inputs,
Experiments  on  sensory  deprivation  in  animals  and  man  have  shown  that  maintenance  of  normal
mental  activity  is  difficult  or  impossible  when  sensory  information  is  reduced  and,  moreover,
that  monotonous  sensation  is  aversive.  Animals  and  humans  require  novelty  and  continual  and
varied  stimulation  from  their  surroundings.

Perception  of  the  environment  has  positive  reinforcing  properties,  and  when  monkeys  were
confined  in  a  cage,  they  would  press  levers  and  perform  other  instrumental  responses  for  the
reward  of  opening  a  little  window  and  looking  at  the  outside  world.  Curiosity  derives  from
expectancy  of  novel  sensory  stimulation  and  motivates  exploratory  behavior  in  both  animals  and
man,  while  boredom  has  negative  reinforcing  properties  and  is  related  to  the  absence  of  novel
sensory  inputs  (16,  95).  To  be  entertained  means  to  be  provided  with  new  and  changing
sensations,  mainly  visual  and  auditory.  Primitive  man  probably  derived  pleasure  from  looking  at
the  changing  beauty  of  nature,  which  retains  its  fascination  to  the  present  day.  Civilization  has
provided  the  technical  means  for  a  far  greater  choice  of  inputs,  and  a  major  portion  of  our  time,
effort,  mental  activity,  and  economic  resources  are  now  devoted  to  entertainment  through  books,
theaters,  radio,  television,  museums,  and  other  cultural  media.

Symbolically  we  may  speak  about  "psychic  energy"  as  the  level  of  intracerebral  activity  which
could  perhaps  be  identified  in  neurophysiological  terms  by  electrical  and  chemical  processes
located  at  specific  neuronal  fields.  This  psychic  energy  may  be  considered  a  main  determinant  of


the  quantity  of  intellectual  and  behavioral  manifestations.  While  this  energy  obviously  depends
on  cerebral  physiology  (and  indirectly  on  the  health  of  the  whole  body),  its  actual  source  is
extracerebral  because  mental  activity  is  not  a  property  of  neurons,  but  is  contingent  on  the
received  information  which  activates  stored  information  and  past  experiences,  creating  emotions
and  ideas.

To  be  alone  with  our  own  mind  is  not  enough.  Even  if  all  past  experiences  are  included,  the
exclusion  of  new  perceptions  creates  serious  functional  difficulties.  This  has  been  shown  for
instance  in  the  studies  of  Hebb  and  his  group  (18,  103)  in  which  college  students  were  asked  to
lie  comfortably  on  beds  in  soundproof,  lighted  cubicles,  wearing  translucent  goggles  to  minimize
optic  sensation  and  gloves  with  cardboard  cuffs  to  limit  tactual  perception.  The  purpose  of  this
isolation  experiment  was  not  to  cut  out  all  sensory  stimulation,  but  only  to  remove  patterns  and
symbolic  information.  Most  of  the  subjects  expected  to  spend  their  idle  time  alone  reviewing
their  studies,  planning  term  papers,  or  organizing  ideas  for  lectures.  The  surprising  result-for  the
investigators  as  well  as  for  the  participants  was  that  the  students  "were  unable  to  think  clearly
about  anything  for  any  length  of  time,  and  their  thought  process  seemed  to  be  affected  in  other
ways."  After  several  hours  of  isolation,  many  of  them  began  to  see  images,  such  as  "a  rock
shaded  by  a  tree,  "  "a  procession  of  squirrels,"  or  "prehistoric  animals  walking  about  in  a  jungle."
Initially  the  subjects  were  surprised  and  amused  but  after  a  while  their  hallucinations  became
disturbing  and  vivid  enough  to  interfere  with  sleep.  The  students  had  little  control  over  these
phenomena  which,  in  some  cases,  included  acoustic  as  well  as  optic  perceptions  such  as  people
talking,  a  music  box  playing,  or  a  choir  singing  in  full  stereophonic  sound.  Some  subjects
reported  sensations  of  movement  or  touch,  or  feelings  of  "otherness,"  or  that  another  body  was
lying  beside  them  on  the  bed.  Isolation  also  tended  to  increase  the  belief  in  supernatural
phenomena  and  several  of  the  students  reported  that  for  a  few  days  after  their  isolation
experiment,  they  were  afraid  that  they  were  going  to  see  ghosts.  The  conclusion  was  that  "a
changing  sensory  environment  seems  essential  for  human  beings.  Without  it,  the  brain  ceases  to
function  in  an  adequate  way  and  abnormalities  of  behavior  develop"  (103).

In  patients  with  long-term  hospital  confinement  in  bed  or  in  an  iron  lung  or  body  cast,  psychotic-
like  symptoms  have  appeared  including  anxiety,  delusions,  and  hallucinations  which  did  not
respond  to  standard  medical  or  psychiatric  treatment  but  were  easily  alleviated  by  social  contact
or  by  sensory  stimulation  from  a  radio  or  television  set  (141).


In  our  century  the  classic  punishment  of  solitary  confinement  has  been  combined  with  sleep
deprivation  and  used  in  psychological  warfare.  Exhaustion  and  decreased  sensory  inputs  are
known  to  cause  mental  disturbances  and  reduce  defense  mechanisms,  and  they  have  been
effectively  manipulated  during  "brainwashing"  or  "thought  reform"  procedures  to  indoctrinate
prisoners  (141,  244).

The  literature  on  sensory  deprivation  is  voluminous  (197)  and  shows  conclusively  that  the
cerebral  cortex  requires  a  stream  of  stimulation  for  the  preservation  of  behavioral  and  mental
normality.  We  should  realize,  therefore,  that  our  cerebral  and  mental  functions  rely  on  the
umbilical  cord  of  sensory  inputs  and  become  disrupted  if  isolated  from  the  environment.  This


fact  has  been  recognized  by  philosophers  and  is  reflected  in  the  words  of  Ortega  y  Gasset  (167)
who  wrote:  "Man  has  no  nature;  what  he  has  is  a  history,"  and  "I  am  I  and  my  circumstance."

The  recognition  of  environmental  inputs  as  a  part  of  personal  identity  is  one  of  the  important
contributions  of  Ortega,  and  this  idea  is  presented  in  Meditations  on  Quixote  (i66),  when  one  of
the  characters  states  that  "circumstantial  reality  forms  the  other  half  of  my  person,"  and  "re¬
absorption  of  circumstances  is  the  specific  destiny  of  man."  A  similar  thought  is  expressed  in
Tennyson's  poem  "Ulysses"  when  Ulysses  says,  "I  am  a  part  of  all  that  I  have  met."

Ortega's  position  is  important  to  philosophical  thinking,  but  we  should  probably  go  further  and
question  the  existence  of  that  half  of  personal  identity  thought  not  to  originate  in  the
environment.  If  we  could  erase  all  individual  history,  all  circumstances  and  experiences,  would
there  be  anything  left  of  our  personality?  The  brain  would  remain  and  neuronal  nets  would
perhaps  continue  their  spiking  activity,  but  devoid  of  history  of  past  experiences  and  knowledge
there  could  be  no  mental  activity  and  the  mind  would,  in  fact,  be  an  Aristotelian  tabula  rasa.  Let
us  remember  with  Dobzhansky  (64)  that  "genes  determine  not  'characters'  or  'traits'  but  reactions
or  response."  The  frame  of  reference  and  the  building  blocks  of  our  personality  are  the  materials
received  from  the  outside.  The  role  of  cerebral  mechanisms,  which  to  a  great  extent  are  also
determined  by  previous  experience,  is  to  receive,  bias,  combine,  and  store  the  received
information,  but  not  to  create  it.  Originality  is  the  discovery  of  novel  associations  between
previously  received  information.  We  must  realize  that  the  anatomical  structure  of  the  brain  has
not  evolved  perceptibly  in  the  past  several  millenniums  of  man's  history;  what  has  changed  is  the
amount  of  information  received  by  the  brain  and  the  training  to  deal  with  it.  The  major
differences  between  a  cave  man  and  a  modem  scientist  are  not  genetic  but  environmental  and
cultural.

For  centuries  philosophical  tradition  has  accepted  the  existence  of  the  "I,"  "soul,"  or  "ego"  as  an
entity,  more  or  less  metaphysical,  relatively  independent  of  the  environment  (and  perhaps  even
of  the  genes),  which  is  the  "essence"  that  endows  individual  man  with  his  unique  personal
identity  and  characteristics,  and  may  later  be  threatened  or  disallowed  by  the  social  medium.

The  concept  of  this  mythical  "I"  is  so  strong  that  it  has  permeated  the  thinking  of  authors  as
original  and  revolutionary  as  Marcuse.  In  One-dimensional  Man  (151),  he  distinguishes  between
true  and  false  needs,  declaring:

False  are  those  which  are  superimposed  upon  the  individual  by  particular  social  interest  in  his
repression....  Most  of  the  prevailing  needs  to  relax,  to  have  fun,  to  behave  and  consume  in  accordance
with  the  advertisements,  to  love  and  hate  what  others  love  and  hate,  belong  to  the  category  of  false
needs  ...  which  are  determined  by  external  forces  over  which  the  individual  has  no  control....  The  only
needs  that  have  an  unqualified  claim  for  satisfaction  are  the  vital  one  -  nourishment,  clothing,  lodging.

According  to  Marcuse,  inner  freedom  "designates  the  private  space  in  which  man  may  become
and  remain  'himself.'...  Today  the  private  space  has  been  invaded  and  whittled  down  by
technological  reality."  The  basic  questions  are  obviously,  who  is  this  "himself,"  and  what  is  the
origin  of  its  structural  elements?  Is  there  any  way  to  provide  the  experience  which  will  form  a
baby's  mind  except  by  means  of  the  "external  powers"  of  parents,  teachers,  and  culture  over


which  the  baby  has  no  control?  Are  we  then  going  to  classify  a  child's  needs  as  false  because
they  were  inculcated?  Where  is  the  inner  man?

Marcuse's  pleas  for  "intellectual  freedom"  and  his  criticism  of  "material  and  intellectual  needs
that  perpetuate  obsolete  forms  of  the  struggle  for  existence"  are  certainly  valid,  but  the  state  of
unqualified  liberty  cannot  be  supposed  to  exist  for  the  infant  who  is  totally  dependent  physically
and  psychologically  on  his  surroundings.  Freedom  must  be  taught  and  created.

The  mutual  dependence  of  the  individual  and  the  "psychic  environment"  or  "noosphere"  has  been
elaborated  by  Teilhard  de  Chardin  (223),  who  wrote  that  the  Universal  and  Personal  "grow  in  the
same  direction  and  culminate  simultaneously  in  each  other  ..."  the  "Hyper-Personal"
consciousness  at  the  "Omega  point."  While  it  is  true  that  each  of  us  personally  receives,
interprets,  and  feels  the  world  around  us,  why  should  our  individual  half  be  opposed  to  the
noospheric  half?  Teilhard  de  Chardin,  like  Ortega  y  Gasser  and  most  other  philosophers,  accepts
the  existence  of  the  quasi-mystical,  inviolable  self,  an  entity  somehow  identified  with  the
individual  mind,  ego,  or  personality,  which  is  related  to  the  environment  but  has  a  relatively
independent  existence.

Recent  neuro-physiological  and  psychological  studies  discussed  here  reveal  that  this  is  not  the
case.  The  origin  of  memories,  emotional  reactivity,  motor  skills,  words,  ideas,  and  behavioral
patterns  which  constitute  our  personal  self  can  be  traced  to  outside  of  the  individual.  Each  person
is  a  transitory  composite  of  materials  borrowed  from  the  environment,  and  his  mind  is  the  intra¬
cerebral  elaboration  of  extra-cerebral  information.  The  "personal  half"  is  a  regrouping  of
elements  of  the  environment.  For  the  final  result,  which  is  manifested  as  individual  reactivity  and
behavioral  responses,  the  building  blocks  from  culture  are  more  decisive  than  the  individual
substratum  within  which  the  regrouping  is  performed.

It  is  impressive  that  this  is  actually  the  philosophy,  as  described  by  Levi-Strauss  (142),  of  the
Bororo  Indians,  a  very  primitive  tribe  living  by  the  Vermelho  River  in  the  Amazon  jungles  of
Brazil.  For  the  Bororo,  a  man  is  not  an  individual  but  a  part  of  a  sociological  universe.  Their
villages  exist  "for  all  eternity,"  forming  part  of  the  physical  universe  along  with  other  animate
beings,  celestial  bodies,  and  meteorological  phenomena.  Human  shape  is  transitory,  midway
between  that  of  the  fish  and  the  arara.  Human  life  is  merely  a  department  of  culture.  Death  is
both  natural  and  anticultural,  and  whenever  a  native  dies,  damage  is  inflicted  not  only  on  his
relatives  but  on  society  as  a  whole.  Nature  is  blamed  and  Nature  must  pay  the  debt;  therefore,  a
collective  hunt  is  organized  to  kill  some  sizable  animal '  if  possible  a  jaguar,  in  order  to  bring
home  its  skin,  teeth,  and  nails  which  will  constitute  the  dead  man's  mori,  his  everlasting  personal
value.

The  conclusion  that  human  beings  are  part  of  culture  does  not  deny  the  fact  that  "individuals"
have  "individual"  reactions  and  that  their  brains  are  unique  combinations  of  elements,  but  simply
points  to  the  source  and  quality  of  the  factors  of  personal  identity.  The  cerebral  mechanisms
which  allow  us  to  receive,  interpret,  feel,  and  react,  as  well  as  the  extra-cerebral  sources  of
stimuli,  can  and  should  be  investigated  experimentally.  Then  we  shall  gain  a  new  awareness  of
the  structure  of  the  individual  and  its  relations  with  the  surrounding  noosphere.


Chapter  8

Working  Hypothesis  for  the  Experimental  Study  of  the  Mind

One  of  the  most  important  consequences  of  recent  scientific  discoveries  is  the  new  attitude
toward  the  course  of  human  life.  This  attitude  has  modified  our  traditional  acceptance  of
fatalistic  determination  by  unknown  factors  related  to  heredity,  body  functions,  and  environment,
and  has  intensified  the  search  for  knowledge  and  technology  to  direct  our  lives  more
intelligently.  The  genetic  code  is  being  unraveled,  introducing  the  possibility  that  some  time  in
the  future,  we  may  be  able  to  influence  heredity  in  order  to  avoid  illnesses  like  Mongolism  or  in
order  to  promote  transmission  of  specific  anatomical  and  functional  characteristics.  Neuro¬
physiological  investigation  has  established  correlations  between  mental  phenomena  and
physicochemical  changes  in  the  central  nervous  system,  and  specific  electrical  responses  of
different  areas  of  the  brain  can  be  identified  following  sensory  stimulation  of  the  eye  with
patterns,  shapes,  or  movements.  Advances  in  other  scientific  areas  have  proved  that  mental
functions  and  human  behavior  can  be  modified  by  surgery  (frontal  lobotomy),  by  electronics
(brain  stimulation),  and  by  chemistry  (drug  administration),  thus  placing  the  mind  within
experimental  reach.

The  ability  to  influence  mental  activity  by  direct  manipulation  of  cerebral  structures  is  certainly
novel  in  the  history  of  man,  and  present  objectives  are  not  only  to  increase  our  understanding  of
the  neuro-physiological  basis  of  mind  but  also  to  influence  cerebral  mechanisms  by  means  of
instrumental  manipulation.

The  working  hypotheses  may  be  summariarized  as  follows:  (1)  There  are  basic  mechanisms  in
the  brain  responsible  for  all  mental  activities,  including  perceptions,  emotions,  abstract  thought,
social  relations,  and  the  most  refined  artistic  creations.  (2)  These  mechanisms  may  be  detected,
analyzed,  influenced,  and  sometimes  substituted  for  by  means  of  physical  and  chemical
technology.  This  approach  does  not  claim  that  love  or  thoughts  are  exclusively
neurophysiological  phenomena,  but  accepts  the  obvious  fact  that  the  central  nervous  system  is
absolutely  necessary  for  any  behavioral  manifestation.  It  plans  to  study  the  mechanisms
involved.  (3)  Predictable  behavioral  and  mental  responses  may  be  induced  by  direct
manipulation  of  the  brain.  (4)  We  can  substitute  intelligent  and  purposeful  determination  of
neuronal  functions  for  blind,  automatic  responses.

In  any  evaluation  of  experimental  results,  we  should  remember  that  there  is  always  a  congruence
between  the  methodological  approach  and  findings  obtained,  in  the  sense  that  if  we  study  the
brain  with  an  oscilloscope,  we  can  expect  information  about  spike  potentials  and  other  electrical
data  but  not  about  the  chemical  composition  of  the  neurons.  Psychological  reactions  and
behavioral  performance  often  escape  neuro-physiological  methodology,  and  a  coordinated
interdisciplinary  approach  is  needed.  Music  does  not  exist  in  a  single  note  but  is  the  product  of  a


spatiotemporal  sequence  of  many  sounds.  Mental  activity  does  not  emanate  from  the  activity  of
single  neurons  but  from  the  interaction  of  many  neuronal  fields.  Rage,  for  example,  is
characterized  by  changes  in  electrochemical,  autonomic,  sensory,  and  motor  functions  which  are
overtly  expressed  in  social  relations.  Some  electrical  manifestations  of  rage  have  been  recorded
as  discharges  at  the  single  neuronal  level,  but  the  phenomenon  involves  multilevel  responses,
and  for  its  proper  investigation  the  whole  organism  should  be  observed  in  a  social  setting.

The  development  of  new  methodology  to  explore  and  communicate  with  the  depth  of  the  brain
while  the  experimental  subject  engages  in  spontaneous  or  evoked  activities  now  enables  the
scientist  to  analyze  and  control  basic  neurological  mechanisms  of  the  mind  and  represents  a
unique  means  of  understanding  the  material  and  functional  bases  of  individual  structure.  The
future  should  see  collaboration  between  those  investigators  who  formerly  studied  neuronal
physiology  while  disregarding  behavior  and  other  scientists  who  have  been  interested  in  behavior
while  ignoring  the  brain.


Chapter  9:  Historical  Evolution  of  Physical  Control  of  the  Brain


EXPERIMENTAL  FACTS

IMPLICATIONS

Frog  muscle  contracted  when  stimulated  by
electricity.  Volta,  1800;  Galvani,  1791;
DuBoisReymond,  1848.

"Vital  spirits"  are  not  essential  for
biological  activities.  Electrical  stimuli  under
man's  control  can  initiate  and  modify  vital
processes.

Electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  in
anesthetized  dog  evoked  localized  body  and
limb  movements.  Fritsch  and  Hitzig,  1870

The  brain  is  excitable.  Electrical  stimulation
of  the  cerebral  cortex  can  produce
movements.

Stimulation  of  the  diencephalon  in
unanesthetized  cats  evoked  well-organized
motor  effects  and  emotional  reactions.  Hess,
1932.

Motor  and  emotional  manifestations  may  be
evoked  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain
in  awake  animals.

In  single  animals,  learning,  conditioning,
instrumental  responses,  pain,  and  pleasure
have  been  evoked  or  inhibited  by  electrical
stimulation  of  the  brain  in  rats,  cats,  and
monkeys.  Delgado  et  al.  1954;  Olds  and
Milner,  1954;  see  bibliography  in  Sheer,

1961.

Psychological  phenomena  may  be
controlled  by  electrical  stimulation  of
specific  areas  of  the  brain.

In  colonies  of  cats  and  monkeys,
aggression,  dominance,  mounting,  and  other
social  interactions  have  been  evoked,
modified,  or  inhibited  by  radio  stimulation
of  specific  cerebral  areas.  Delgado,  1955,
1964.

Social  behavior  may  be  controlled  by  radio
stimulation  of  specific  areas  of  the  brain.

In  patients,  brain  stimulation  during  surgical
interventions  or  with  electrodes  implanted
for  days  or  months  has  blocked  the  thinking
process,  inhibited  speech  and  movement,  or
in  other  cases  has  evoked  pleasure,  laughter,
friendliness,  verbal  output,  hostility,  fear,
hallucinations,  and  memories.  Delgado  et  al.
1952,  1968;  Penfield  and  jasper,  1954;  see
bibliography  in  Ramey  and  O'Doherty,

1960.

Human  mental  functions  may  be  influenced
by  electrical  stimulation  of  specific  areas  of
the  brain.

Summary

Autonomic  and  somatic  functions,  individual  and  social  behavior,  emotional  and  mental
reactions  may  be  evoked,  maintained,  modified,  or  inhibited,  both  in  animals  and  in  man,  by
electrical  stimulation  of  specific  cerebral  structures.  Physical  control  of  many  brain  functions  is  a
demonstrated  fact,  but  the  possibilities  and  limits  of  this  control  are  still  little  known.


Part  III

Experimental  Control  of  Brain  Functions  in  Behaving
Subjects


Chapter  10

Experimental  Control  of  Brain  Functions  in  Behaving  Subjects

In  our  present  technological  environment,  we  are  used  to  the  idea  that  machines  can  be
controlled  from  a  distance  by  means  of  radio  signals.  The  doors  of  a  garage  can  be  opened  or
closed  by  pushing  a  button  in  our  car;  the  channels  and  volume  of  a  television  set  can  be  adjusted
by  pressing  the  corresponding  knobs  of  a  small  telecollimand  instrument  without  moving  from  a
comfortable  armchair;  and  even  orbiting  calmules  can  now  be  directed  from  tracking  stations  on
earth.  These  accomplishments  should  familiarize  us  with  the  idea  that  we  may  also  control  the
biological  functions  of  living  organisms  from  a  distance.  Cats,  monkeys,  or  human  beings  can  be
induced  to  flex  a  limb,  to  reject  food,  or  to  feel  emotional  excitement  under  the  influence  of
electrical  impulses  reaching  the  depths  of  their  brains  through  radio  waves  purposefully  sent  by
an  investigator.

This  reality  has  introduced  a  variety  of  scientific  and  philosophical  questions,  and  to  understand
the  significance,  potentials,  and  limitations  of  brain  control,  it  is  convenient  to  review  briefly  the
basis  for  normal  behavioral  activity  and  the  methodology  for  its  possible  artificial  modification,
and  then  to  consider  some  representative  examples  of  electrical  control  of  behavior  in  both
animals  and  man.


Physicochemical  Bases  of  Behavioral  Activity

In  the  vegetable  as  well  as  in  the  animal  kingdom,  the  dynamics  of  biological  processes  are
related  to  ionic  movements  and  electrical  changes  across  the  membranes  which  separate  cells
from  the  surrounding  medium.  For  example,  during  the  process  of  photosynthesis,  the  leaf  of  a
tree  captures  energy  from  the  sun  and  a  negative  potential  is  created  on  its  receptive  surface.  In  a
similar  manner,  activation  of  a  squid  axon,  a  frog  muscle,  or  the  human  brain  is  accompanied  by
a  negative  wave  which  invades  cellular  membranes  and  then  disappears.  This  transmembrane
change  of  potential  induces  a  flow  of  electrical  currents  into  the  cellular  cytoplasm  and
surrounding  conducting  fluids.  Cellular  activity  may  therefore  be  investigated  by  recording  the
electrical  potentials  appearing  across  the  membranes  or  by  detecting  differences  in  potential
which  appear  in  the  extracellular  fluid,  even  if  the  recording  electrodes  are  placed  at  a
considerable  distance  from  the  electromotive  source.  This  is  the  basic  principle  of  recording
electrical  activity  of  the  heart  (electrocardiogram  =  EKG)  through  electrodes  placed  on  the
extremities,  or  of  studying  electrical  potentials  of  the  brain  (electroencephalogram  =  EEG)  by
means  of  leads  attached  to  the  scalp.  If  electrodes  are  placed  closer  to  the  source  of  negativity,
for  example  in  the  depth  of  the  brain,  recordings  will  be  more  accurate  and  may  reveal  the
location  of  generators  of  electrical  activity.  Conversely,  by  using  an  external  potential,  an
electrical  field  may  be  established  through  the  extracellular  fluid,  and  some  of  this  current  flows
through  the  cellular  membranes,  modifying  their  charge  and  permeability  and  producing  the  self-
propagating  process  called  "stimulation."


In  order  to  stimulate,  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  quickly  the  positive  charge  which  normally  exists
on  the  surface  of  a  resting  cell  until  it  reaches  a  critical  point  of  local  depolarization.  Then  the
ionic  permeability  of  the  membrane  is  modified,  triggering  a  pre-established  sequence  of
electrical  and  chemical  phenomena.  Excitation  takes  place  in  the  vicinity  of  the  iterative
electrode  (cathode)  because  the  application  of  negative  charges  will  neutralize  the  normally
existing  positivity  at  the  external  part  of  the  cellular  membrane.  When  stimulation  is  over,  the
positive  polarity  is  re-established  on  the  membrane  surface  with  the  aid  of  energy  provided  by
specific  chemical  reactions,  and  the  cell  is  ready  for  a  new  stimulation.  The  relatively  simple
processes  of  depolarization  and  repolarization  of  cell  membranes  are  the  essential  elements  of
neuronal  excitation,  and  they  are  responsible  for  the  extraordinary  complexity  of  all  behavioral
performance.

Our  knowledge  gap  between  understanding  electrical  events  at  the  cellular  level  and  deciphering
the  chain  of  phenomena  taking  place  during  the  response  of  a  whole  organism  is  certainly
formidable.  How  can  we  explain  activities  such  as  walking,  problem  solving,  or  ideation  in  terms
of  polarization  and  repolarization  of  membranes?  Behavior  certainly  cannot  occur  without
concomitant  spike  potentials  and  ionic  exchanges,  but  the  same  statement  holds  true  for  oxygen
and  sugar  consumption,  and  we  must  differentiate  the  mechanisms  supporting  basic  nonspecific
cellular  activities,  such  as  metabolic  requirements,  from  the  mechanisms  more  specifically
related  to  behavioral  responses.  Electrical  activity  of  the  neurons  seems  to  have  the  dual  role  of
indicating  nonspecific  activity  and  transmitting  coded  information.  This  ability  to  transmit  coded
information  is  the  most  important  and  least  understood  property  of  the  nerve  cell,  and  it
represents  the  functional  unit  for  nervous  communication.  In  architecture,  given  a  number  of
brick  units  an  infinite  number  of  different  houses  can  be  constructed.  We  need  to  know  both  the
properties  of  the  individual  bricks  and  the  pattern  of  their  organization  in  order  to  ascertain  the
properties  and  qualities  of  the  final  building.  The  characteristics  of  behavioral  responses  are
determined  by  the  combination  of  many  depolarization  phenomena,  organized  in  space  and
repeated  sequentially  in  time.  Their  arrangement  is  often  so  complex  that  it  defies  experimental
analysis,  and  we  must  begin  by  examining  very  simple  phenomena.  The  squid  axon  was  for
years  a  popular  object  of  investigation  in  neurophysiology,  Great  caution  should  be  observed,
however,  when  applying  experimental  results  with  that  preparation  to  the  understanding  of  motor
responses  or  mental  activity.  We  should  remember  that  knowledge  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet
will  not  explain  the  meaning  of  a  phrase  or  reveal  the  beauty  of  a  poem.

In  addition  to  investigating  the  spontaneous  changes  in  membrane  potentials,  we  can  artificially
depolarize  membranes  by  electrical  stimulation  of  cerebral  neuronal  pools  in  order  to  investigate
their  functional  organization  and  behavioral  consequences  for  the  whole  organism.  Both  of  these
experimental  approaches  should  be  used  simultaneously  in  order  to  correlate  cellular  functions
with  behavioral  results.  Our  present  knowledge  of  the  physical/chemical  bases  of  biological
activity,  which  has  an  extensive  bibliography  (23,  182,  203),  permits  statement  of  the  following
principles:  (1)  All  behavioral  manifestations  including  their  mental  aspects  require  the  existence
of  waves  of  negativity  accompanied  by  electrical  and  chemical  changes  at  the  cellular  level.  (2)
Membrane  depolarization,  artificially  induced  by  electrical  or  chemical  means,  may  be  followed
by  observable  behavioral  manifestations.  (3)  While  the  complexity  of  these  responses  is
extraordinary  and  many  of  their  aspects  are  unknown,  explanations  of  motor  behavior  and


psychic  activity  do  not  require  "vital  spirits"  or  any  other  metaphysical  principle  because  they  are
related  to  physical  and  chemical  laws  which  can  be  investigated  experimentally.


The  classical  experiments  of  Galvani,  showing  that  the  legs  of  a  decapitated  frog  contract  in
response  to  electrical  stimulation,  are  repeated  many  times  every  year  in  high  school  and  college
laboratories.  These  simple  experiments  demonstrate  that  a  process  of  life,  muscle  contraction,
can  be  elicited  at  the  will  of  the  investigator  as  many  times  as  electricity  is  applied  to  the  tissue.
In  the  absence  of  stimulation,  the  legs  do  not  contract.  If  the  cells  of  the  muscle  are  dead,
excitability  and  contractability  are  lost  and  the  preparation  does  not  respond.  The  contraction  of
the  frog's  legs  is  similar  regardless  of  whether  the  muscle  is  stimulated  directly  through  its  motor
nerve  or  through  the  brain,  and  this  muscle  action  is  also  comparable  to  its  activation  during
voluntary  movements  of  the  intact  frog.  The  applied  electricity  does  not  create  the  limb
movement  but  acts  only  as  a  depolarizing  agent,  starting  a  chain  of  events  which  depends  on  the
properties  of  the  stimulated  organ.


The  reliability  and  apparent  simplicity  of  the  muscle  contraction  may  be  misleading  because  in
reality  the  contraction  depends  on  tremendously  complex  processes  which  include:
depolarization  of  the  testing  membrane,  changes  in  its  permeability,  precipitous  exchange  of
potassium,  sodium,  and  other  ions,  creation  of  electrical  fields,  reorientation  of  protein  molecules
within  the  muscle  fiber  with  a  shortening  in  the  length  of  its  chain,  decomposition  and  synthesis
of  adenosin  triphosphate,  exchange  of  phosphoric  acids,  degradation  of  hexosapliospliate  into
lactic  acid,  and  many  other  enzymatic  and  biochemical  reactions  which  follow  each  other
according  to  a  genetically  determined  plan  within  the  muscle  fiber  and  independent  from  the
agent  which  initiates  them.  The  mechanisms  for  contraction  and  relaxation  of  the  muscle  fiber
are  pre-established  in  the  biological  structure  of  the  cells.  Electricity,  like  the  nervous  system
itself  acts  as  a  trigger  for  these  processes.  This  principle  is  fundamental  for  an  understanding  of
the  electrical  control  of  biological  functions.  Organisms  are  composed  of  a  large  number  of
biological  sequences,  some  of  them  inherited  and  others  learned  through  experience.  When  a
chain  reaction  has  started,  it  proceeds  according  to  an  intrinsic  plan  which  can  be  modified  by
feedback  or  by  the  arrival  of  new  stimulations.  In  some  cases  the  trigger  may  be  nonspecific  and,
for  example,  muscular  contraction  can  be  initiated  by  mechanical,  thermal,  osmotic,  chemical,
electrical,  or  neuronal  stimulation.  In  investigations  of  the  brain  as  well  as  the  muscle,  electrical
activation  is  preferable  because  it  is  not  harmful  for  the  cells  and  permits  repeated  studies  of  the
same  biological  processes.  By  applying  electricity  we  can  activate  pre-established  functional
mechanisms  of  a  structure  and  discover  its  possible  role  in  spontaneous  behavior.  By  means  of
electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  (ESB),  it  is  possible  to  control  a  variety  of  functions  -  a
movement,  a  glandular  secretion,  or  a  specific  mental  manifestation,  depending  on  the  chosen
target.  Necessary  methodology  and  examples  of  selected  results  are  discussed  in  the  following
chapters.


Chapter  11

Methodology  for  Direct  Communication  with  the  Brain

The  depth  of  the  central  nervous  system  can  be  reached  very  easily  through  the  natural  windows
of  sensory  receptors.  Stimuli  such  as  patterns  of  light  travel  fast  from  the  eye's  retina  through
optic  pathways  to  the  visual  cortex  located  in  the  occipital  lobe.  Would  it  be  possible  to  explore
the  local  activity  of  cortical  neurons  during  the  process  of  symbolic  perception?  Could  we  evoke
similar  sensations  by  direct  stimulation  of  specific  neurons?  Can  we  reach  the  mind  of  an
individual  without  using  the  normal  ports  of  sensory  entry?  Can  we  direct  the  functions  of  the
brain  artificially?  These  and  similar  problems  have  attracted  the  interest  of  many  investigators,
but  the  brain  is  well  protected  by  layers  of  membranes,  spinal  fluid,  bone,  and  ligaments,  a
formidable  shield  which  for  a  long  time  has  kept  the  secrets  of  mental  functions  away  from
scientific  curiosity.

Implantation  of  Electrodes  in  Animals

Starting  in  the  last  century,  many  investigators  have  explored  the  brain,  first  in  animals  and
recently  in  human  patients  as  part  of  diagnosis  and  therapy.  In  these  studies  it  was  necessary  to
open  both  skin  and  skull,  and  because  the  procedure  was  painful  it  was  mandatory  to  use
anesthesia.  It  blocked  pain  perception,  but  it  also  inhibited  some  of  the  most  important  functions
of  the  nervous  system.  Emotions,  consciousness,  and  free  behavior  were  certainly  absent  under
heavy  sedation,  and  for  many  years  scientists  directed  their  attention  to  sleeping  subjects  and
overlooked  the  complexity  of  awake  brains.  Textbooks  of  cerebral  physiology  were  concerned
with  pathways,  connections,  reflexes,  posture,  and  movement;  mental  functions  and  behavior
were  considered  to  belong  to  a  different  discipline.

The  methodological  breakthrough  which  made  it  possible  to  study  the  brain  of  behaving  animals
came  in  the  1930s  when  W.R.  Hess  (106)  devised  a  procedure  to  implant  very  fine  wires  within
the  brain  of  anesthetized  cats.  After  the  effects  of  anesthesia  had  disappeared,  the  relatively  free
and  normal  animal  could  be  electrically  stimulated  by  connecting  long  leads  to  the  terminals  of
the  implanted  electrodes.  This  procedure  was  refined  in  the  early  1950s  (47,  49)  by  reducing  the
size  of  the  electrodes  while  increasing  the  number  of  intra-cerebral  contacts  and  using  aseptic
precautions  during  implantation.  Surgical  accuracy  in  reaching  chosen  cerebral  targets  was  also
improved  by  means  of  micromanipulators  and  a  precise  system  of  anatomical  coordinates  which
made  it  possible  to  reach  similar  structures  in  different  subjects.  Using  biologically  inert
materials  such  as  gold,  platinum,  or  stainless  steel  wires  insulated  with  teflon  allows  the
electrodes  to  be  left  inside  of  the  brain  indefinitely.  A  diagram  of  the  cerebral  implantation  of
one  assembly  of  seven  contacts  is  shown  in  Figure  I  and  the  X  ray  of  the  head  of  a  monkey  after
implantation  is  seen  in  Figure  2.  Through  a  small  opening  in  the  skull,  the  shaft  is  introduced
down  to  a  predetermined  depth  and  is  secured  with  dental  cement  at  the  point  where  it  passes
through  the  skull.  Then  the  upper  portion  of  the  shaft  is  bent  over  the  bone  surface  and  secured
again  a  short  distance  away,  and  the  terminal  socket  is  exteriorized  on  the  head.  Each  contact  of
the  socket  corresponds  to  a  determined  point  in  the  depth  of  the  brain  which  is  accessible  merely
by  plugging  in  a  connector,  a  procedure  as  simple  as  connecting  any  electrical  appliance  to  a
wall  outlet.  This  technique  has  been  used  for  ESB  in  thousands  of  animals  in


Figure  2

X  rays  of  a  monkey's  head  showing  two  assemblies  of  electrodes  implanted  in  the  frontal  lobes  and  in
the  thalamus  (49).

many  laboratories  around  the  world,  and  there  is  ample  experience  of  its  efficiency,  accuracy,
and  safety,  resolving  the  initial  skepticism  that  introduction  of  wires  into  the  brain  would  be
technically  difficult,  dangerous  for  the  subject,  and  grossly  disruptive  of  normal  functions.  It  is
true  that  implantation  of  electrodes  destroys  neurons  along  the  path  of  penetration,  breaking
capillary  vessels  and  later  producing  a  local  reaction  involving  the  formation  of  a  thin  fibrotic
capsule  along  the  implantation  tract.  It  has  been  proven,  however,  that  local  hemorrhage  is
neglible  and  that  because  of  the  well-known  functional  redundancy  of  neural  tissue  with
abundance  of  duplication  in  its  circuits,  the  destruction  of  a  relatively  small  group  of  neurons


Figure  3

Chimpanzees  Paddy  (left)  and  Carlos,  each  with  two  intracerebral  electrodes  and  boxes  for
instrumentation,  in  spite  of  this  massive  implantation,  no  detectable  behavioral  deficits  have  been
found,  and  the  animals  are  still  alive  and  in  excellent  health  two  years  after  surgery.

does  not  produce  any  detectable  deficit.  The  thin  reactive  encapsulation  is  electrically  conductive
and  is  not  an  obstacle  to  stimulation  or  recording.  Beyond  this  0.1 -0.2  millimeter  capsule,  the
brain  appears  histologically  normal,  judged  by  the  absence  of  abnormal  electrical  activity,  the
reliability  of  effects  evoked  by  ESB,  and  the  consistency  of  thresholds  of  excitability  through
months  of  experimentation,  the  electrodes  seem  to  be  well  tolerated.  Some  of  our  monkeys  have
had  electrodes  in  their  heads  for  more  than  four  years.  The  anchorage  is  very


solid,  and  after  some  initial  pulling  and  scratching  of  the  terminal  sockets,  the  monkeys  seem  to
ignore  their  presence.

As  shown  in  Figure  3,  as  many  as  100  contacts  have  been  implanted  in  the  brain  of  some
chimpanzees  without  any  noticeable  neurophysiological  or  behavioral  disturbance,  and  in  several
monkeys,  contacts  have  been  placed  in  areas  as  critical  and  delicate  as  the  respiratory  centers  of
the  medulla  without  any  surgical  problems.  Electrodes  have  been  used  in  laboratory  animals  such
as  rats,  cats,  and  monkeys,  and  also  in  less  frequently  studied  species  including  crickets,  roosters,
dolphins,  and  brave  bulls.

Electrodes  in  the  Human  Brain


Our  present  knowledge  of  the  central  nervous  system  is  based  principally  on  investigations  in
animals.  Experience  has  shown  that  many  questions  about  implantation  in  humans,  such  as


biological  tolerance  of  electrodes  by  the  neural  tissue,  can  be  successfully  answered  in  cats  or  in
lower  species.  Some  of  the  electrochemical  events  of  neural  conduction  can  be  analyzed  just  as
adequately  in  squids  as  in  mammals,  and  for  certain  studies  of  memory,  the  octopus  has  proven
an  excellent  subject.  The  rat  has  been  -  and  still  is  -  the  animal  preferred  by  experimental
psychologists  because  it  is  a  small  and  inexpensive  mammal  which  can  be  used  in  large
quantities  to  provide  behavioral  results  suitable  for  statistical  evaluation.  The  limited  behavioral
repertory  of  lower  animals,  however,  cannot  be  compared  with  the  complex  activities  of
monkeys  and  apes.  These  species,  being  closer  relatives  of  man,  are  more  appropriate  subjects
for  the  neurophysiological  study  of  intelligent  behavior,  and  when  we  want  to  investigate  the
highest  psychological  functions  of  the  brain  which  involve  verbal  communication,  there  is  no
possible  substitute  for  man  himself.

The  human  brain,  like  any  other  part  of  the  body,  may  suffer  traumatic  accidents,  rumors,  or
illnesses,  and  it  has  often  been  necessary  to  explore  the  affected  areas  in  order  to  identify
structures,  assess  abnormality  of  the  tissues,  test  excitability,  and  leam  the  location  of  important
functions  which  should  not  be  disrupted  during  surgical  procedures.  Conscious  participation  of
the  patient  was  required  in  some  of  these  explorations,  for  example,  to  ascertain  whether  the  aura
of  epileptic  attacks  could  be  triggered  by  electrical  stimulation  of  a  specific  cortical  point  @  thus
providing  information  about  the  possible  source  of  epileptic  discharges  which  could  be  removed
by  surgery.  For  this  kind  of  investigation  the  brain  was  exposed  under  local  anesthesia,
presenting  an  exceptional  opportunity  to  study  behavioral  and  psychological  responses  evoked
by  ESB  in  fully  awake  subjects.  The  most  extensive  work  in  this  area  has  been  carried  out  by
Penfield  and  his  associates  in  Montreal  (174),  and  a  considerable  number  of  similar  studies  have
been  performed  by  other  neurosurgeons  as  well  (2,  8,  97,  124,  163,  215).

Exploration  of  the  exposed  brain  has,  however,  some  obvious  limitations.  It  has  to  be  brief  to
avoid  prolongation  of  surgery;  electrodes  are  usually  held  in  place  by  hand,  causing  variability  in
the  applied  mechanical  pressure;  the  exposed  brain  is  subject  to  possible  thermal,  mechanical,
and  chemical  trauma;  the  cortical  areas  are  identified  only  by  visual  inspection;  and  the  physical
and  psychological  stress  of  the  patient  undergoing  operation  introduces  factors  difficult  to
control.  Most  of  these  handicaps  can  be  avoided  with  the  use  of  implanted  electrodes,  and  given
the  experience  of  animal  experimentation  it  was  natural  that  some  investigators  should
contemplate  the  application  of  this  methodology  to  patients  for  diagnostic  and  therapeutic
purposes  (19,  59,  98).  Neurosurgeons  had  already  proved  that  the  central  nervous  system  is  not
as  delicate  as  most  people  believe,  and  during  therapeutic  surgery  parts  of  the  cerebral  tissue
have  been  cut,  frozen,  cauterized,  or  ablated  with  negligible  adverse  effects  on  the  patients.
Exploratory  introduction  of  needles  into  the  cerebral  ventricles  is  a  well-known  and  relatively
safe  clinical  procedure,  and  since  electrodes  are  smaller  in  diameter  than  these  needles,  their
introduction  into  the  brain  should  be  even  less  traumatic.  Experience  has  confirmed  the  safety
and  usefulness  of  long-term  implantation  of  electrodes  in  man,  and  the  procedure  has  been  used
in  specialized  medical  centers  around  the  world  to  help  thousands  of  patients  suffering  from
epilepsy,  involuntary  movements,  intractable  pain,  anxiety  neurosis,  and  other  cerebral
disturbances.  In  general  several  assemblies  of  fine  electrodes  with  a  total  of  twenty  to  forty
contacts  are  placed  on  the  surface  and/or  in  the  depth  of  the  brain,  with  the  terminal  connectors
exteriorized  through  the  scalp  and  protected  by  a  small  head  bandage  (see  Figure  4).  In  some
cases  the  electrodes  have  remained  for  nearly  two  years  with  excellent  tolerance.


Leaving  wires  inside  of  a  thinking  brain  may  appear  unpleasant  or  dangerous,  but  actually  the
many  patients  who  have  undergone  this  experience  have  not  been  concerned  about  the  fact  of
being  wired,  nor  have  they  felt  any  discomfort  due  to  the  presence  of  conductors  in  their  heads.
Some  women  have  shown  their  feminine  adaptability  to  circumstances  by  wearing  attractive  hats
or  wigs  to  conceal  their  electrical  headgear,  and  many  people  have  been  able  to  enjoy  a  normal
life  as  outpatients,  returning  to  the  clinic  periodically  for  examination  and  stimulation.  In  a  few
cases  in  which  contacts  were  located  in  pleasurable  areas,  patients  have  had  the  opportunity  to
stimulate  their  own  brains  by  pressing  the  button  of  a  portable  instrument,  and  this  procedure  is
reported  to  have  therapeutic  benefits.

Chronically  implanted  electrodes  enable  careful  diagnostic  explorations  to  be  performed  without
time  limit,  and  repeated  electrical  excitations  or  well-controlled  coagulations  can  be  graded
according  to  the  reactions  of  the  patient.  As  a  bonus,  important  information  about
psychophysiological  correlations,  providing  direct  knowledge  about  the  cerebral  basis  of  human
behavior,  is  being  acquired.  In  our  studies  (60,  109,  150),  an  interview  situation  was  selected  as
the  method  most  likely  to  offer  a  continuous  supply  of  verbal  and  behavioral  data.  While  the
electrical  activity  of  eight  pairs  of  cerebral  points  was  being  recorded,  we  taped  about  one  hour
of  conversation  between  therapist  and  patient.  Notes  of  the  observable  behavior  were  also  taken,
During  the  interview,  electrical  stimulations  of  the  brain  were  applied  for  5  seconds  with
intervals  of  three  or  more  minutes,  and  each  significant  point  was  explored  several  times.


Figure  4

Two  girls  who  were  suffering  from  epileptic  seizures  and  behavioral  disturbances  requiring  implantation
of  electrodes  in  the  brain  for  diagnostic  and  therapeutic  purposes.  Under  the  cap,  each  patient  wears  a
"stimoceiver,"  used  to  stimulate  the  brain  by  radio  and  to  send  electrical  signals  of  brain  activity  by


telemetry  while  the  patients  are  completely  free  within  the  hospital  ward  (60).  One  example  of  electrical
recordings  is  shown  in  Figure  17.


Two-way  Radio  Communication  with  the  Brain

Electronic  technology  has  reached  a  high  level  of  sophistication,  and  two-way  radio
communication  with  automobiles,  airplanes,  and  outer  space  vehicles  is  commonplace  today.
The  notable  lag  in  development  of  similar  instrumentation  for


Figure  5

A  monkey  instrumented  with  28  implanted  electrodes,  a  two-channel  telemetric  unit  on  top  of  the  head,
and  a  three-channel  radio  stimulator  around  the  neck.  The  animal  has  learned  to  press  a  lever  to  obtain
food.  With  this  methodology,  brain  functions  can  be  explored  by  remote  control  without  disturbing  the
behavior  under  observation.

communication  with  the  depth  of  the  brain  reflects  the  already  mentioned  unbalanced  evolution
of  our  technological  civilization,  which  seems  more  interested  in  accumulating  power  than  in
understanding  and  influencing  the  basic  mechanisms  of  the  human  mind.

This  gap  is  now  being  filled,  and  as  Figures  4  and  5  show,  it  is  already  possible  to  equip  animals
or  human  beings  with  minute  instruments  called  "stimoceivers"  for  radio  transmission  and
reception  of  electrical  messages  to  and  from  the  brain  in  completely  unrestrained  subjects.
Microminiaturization  of  the  instrument's  electronic  components  permits  control  of  all  parameters
of  excitation  for  radio  stimulation  of  three  different  points  within  the  brain  and  also  telemetric
recording  of  three  channels  of  intracerebral  electrical  activity.  In  animals,  the  stimoceiver  may  be
anchored  to  the  skull,  and  different  members  of  a  colony  can  be  studied  without  disturbing  their
spontaneous  relations  within  a  group.  Behavior  such  as  aggression  can  be  evoked  or  inhibited.  In
patients,  the  stimoceiver  may  be  strapped  to  the  head  bandage,  permitting  electrical  stimulation
and  monitoring  of  intracerebral  activity  without  disturbing  spontaneous  activities.


Stimoceivers  offers  great  promise  in  the  investigation,  diagnosis,  and  therapy  of  cerebral
disturbances  in  man.  Preliminary  information  about  use  in  patients  with  temporal  lobe  seizures
(see  Figure  4)  has  demonstrated  the  following  advantages  over  other  methods  of  intracerebral
exploration  (60):  (1)  The  patient  is  instrumented  simply  by  plugging  the  stimoceiver  to  the  head
sockets.  (2)  There  is  no  disturbance  of  the  spontaneous  individual  or  social  behavior  of  the
patient.  (3)  The  subject  is  under  continuous  medical  supervision,  and  stimulations  and  recordings
may  be  made  day  and  night.  (4)  Studies  are  carried  out  during  spontaneous  social  interactions  in
the  hospital  environment  without  introducing  factors  of  anxiety  or  stress.  (5)  The  brain  in
severely  disturbed  patients  may  be  explored  without  confinement  to  a  recording  room.  (6)  As
connecting  wires  are  not  necessary  there  is  no  risk  of  dislodgment  of  electrodes  during  abnormal
behavior.  (7)  Therapeutic  programmed  stimulation  of  the  brain  can  be  prolonged  for  any
necessary  amount  of  time.

It  is  reasonable  to  speculate  that  in  the  near  future  the  stimoceiver  may  provide  the  essential  link
from  man  to  computer  to  man,  with  a  reciprocal  feedback  between  neurons  and  instruments
which  represents  a  new  orientation  for  the  medical  control  of  neurophysiological  functions.  For
example,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  localized  abnormal  electrical  activity  which  announces  the
imminence  of  an  epileptic  attack  could  be  picked  up  by  implanted  electrodes,  telemetered  to  a
distant  instrument  room,  tape-recorded,  and  analyzed  by  a  computer  capable  of  recognizing
abnormal  electrical  patterns.  Identification  of  the  specific  electrical  disturbance  could  trigger  the
emission  of  radio  signals  to  activate  the  patient's  stimoceiver  and  apply  an  electrical  stimulation
to  a  determined  inhibitory  area  of  the  brain,  thus  blocking  the  onset  of  the  convulsive  episode.

This  speculation  is  supported  by  the  following  experiments  completed  in  June,  1969,  in
collaboration  with  Drs.  Johnston,  Wallace,  and  Bradley.  Chimpanzee  Paddy  (Figure  3),  while
free  in  her  cage,  was  equipped  with  a  stimoceiver  to  telemeter  the  brain  activity  of  her  right  and
left  amygdaloid  nuclei  to  an  adjacent  room,  where  these  waves  were  received,  tape-recorded,  and
automatically  analyzed  by  an  on-line  analog  computer.  This  instrument  was  instructed  to
recognize  a  specific  pattern  of  waves,  a  burst  of  spindles,  which  was  normally  present  in  both
amygdaloid  nuclei  for  about  one  second  several  times  per  minutes  The  computer  was  also
instructed  to  activate  a  stimulator,  and  each  time  the  spindles  appeared,  radio  signals  were  sent
back  to  Paddy's  brain  to  stimulate  a  point  in  her  reticular  formation  known  to  have  negative
reinforcing  properties.  In  this  way  electrical  stimulation  of  one  cerebral  structure  was  contingent
on  the  production  of  a  specific  EEG  pattern  by  another  area  of  the  brain,  and  the  whole  process
of  identification  of  information  and  command  of  action  was  decided  by  the  on-line  computer.

Results  showed  that  about  two  hours  after  the  brain-to-computer-to  brain  feedback  was
established,  spindling  activity  of  the  amygdaloid  nucleus  was  reduced  to  50  per  cent;  and  six
days  later,  with  daily  two-hour  periods  of  feedback,  spindles  were  drastically  reduced  to  only  1
per  cent  of  normal  occurrence,  and  the  Chimpanzee  was  quieter,  less  attentive,  and  less
motivated  during  behavioral  testing,  although  able  to  perform  olfactory  and  visual  tasks  without
errors.

The  computer  was  then  disconnected,  and  two  weeks  later  the  EEG  and  Paddy's  behavior
returned  to  normal.  The  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  with  similar  results,  sup-


porting  the  conclusions  that  direct  communication  can  be  established  between  brain  and
computer,  circumventing  normal  sensory  organs,  and  also  that  automatic  learning  is  possible  by
feeding  signals  directly  into  specific  neuronal  structures  without  conscious  participation.

One  of  the  limiting  factors  in  these  studies  was  the  existence  of  wires  leading  from  the  brain  to
the  stimoceiver  outside  of  the  scalp.  The  wires  represented  a  possible  portal  of  entry  for  infection
and  could  be  a  hindrance  to  hair  grooming  in  spite  of  their  small  size.  It  would  obviously  be  far
more  desirable  to  employ  minute  instruments  which  could  be  implanted  completely  beneath  the
skin.  For  this  purpose  we  have  developed  in  our  laboratory  a  small  three-channel  stimulator
which  can  be  placed  subcutaneously  and  which  has  terminal  leads  to  be  implanted  within  the
brain  (Figure  6).  The  instrument  is  solid  state,  has  no  batteries,  and  can  work  indefinitely.
Necessary  electrical  energy,  remote  control  of  parameters  of  stimulation,  and  choice  of  channels
are  provided  by  transdermal  coupling,  using  a  small  coil  which  is  activated  by  frequency-
modulated  radio  signals.  In  February,  1969,  an  experiment  was  begun  in  monkey  Nona  and  in
chimpanzee  Suzi  who  were  equipped  with  subcutaneous  stimulators  to  activate  their  brains  from
time  to  time  for  the  rest  of  their  lives.  Terminal  contacts  were  located  in  motor  pathways  in  order
to  evoke  flexion  of  the  contralateral  leg,  an  effect  simple  enough  to  be  observed  and  quantified
without  difficulty.  Study  of  Nona  and  Suzi  and  preliminary  investigations  in  other  animals  have
demonstrated  that  subcutaneous  instrumentation  is  efficient,  reliable,  and  well  tolerated.
Behavioral  responses  were  consistent,  and  local  motor  excitability  was  not  modified  by  repeated
experimentation.  Thus  the  technical  problems  of  stimulating  any  desired  area  of  the  brain  for  as
long  as  necessary  in  the  absence  of  conductors  passing  through  the  skin  have  been  solved,
therapeutic  and  scientific  possibilities  have  been  multiplied,  and  the  comfort  of  subjects  has  been
considerably  increased.

The  next  technical  step  will  be  to  combine  transdermal


Figure  6

Both  sides  of  a  three-channel  transdermal  stimulator.  This  instrument  has  no  batteries,  is  activated  by
radio,  and  can  be  used  for  life,  so  that  the  brain  can  be  stimulated  indefinitely.  Chimpanzee  Suzi  (right)
has  two  units  (six  channels)  implanted  on  her  back  underneath  the  skin.


stimulation  of  the  brain  with  transdermal  telemetry  of  EEG.  In  this  case  the  stimoceiver  will  not
be  outside  the  skin  as  it  was  in  Paddy  (Figure  3),  nor  will  it  be  limited  to  only  transdermal
stimulation  (Figure  6)  as  in  Nona  and  Suzi:  the  whole  instrument  will  be  totally  subcutaneous.
The  technology  for  nonsensory  communication  between  brains  and  computers  through  the  intact
skin  is  already  at  our  fingertips,  and  its  consequences  are  difficult  to  predict.  In  the  past  the


progress  of  civilization  has  tremendously  magnified  the  power  of  our  senses,  muscles,  and  skills.
Now  we  are  adding  a  new  dimension:  the  direct  interface  between  brains  and  machines.

Although  true,  this  statement  is  perhaps  too  spectacular  and  it  requires  cautious  clarification.  Our
present  knowledge  regarding  the  coding  of  information,  mechanisms  of  perception,  and  neuronal
bases  of  behavior  is  so  elemental  that  it  is  highly  improbable  that  electrical  correlates  of  thoughts
or  emotions  could  be  picked  up,  transmitted,  and  electrically  applied  to  the  suitable  structure  of  a
different  subject  in  order  to  be  recognized  and  to  trigger  related  thoughts  or  emotions.  It  is,
however,  already  possible  to  induce  a  large  variety  of  responses,  from  motor  effects  to  emotional
reactions  and  intellectual  manifestations,  by  direct  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain.  Also,
several  investigators  have  learned  to  identify  patterns  of  electrical  activity  (which  a  computer
could  also  recognize)  localized  in  specific  areas  of  the  brain  and  related  to  determined
phenomena  such  as  perception  of  smells  or  visual  perception  of  edges  and  movements.  We  are
advancing  rapidly  in  the  pattern  recognition  of  electrical  correlates  of  behavior  and  in  the
methodology  for  two-way  radio  communication  between  brain  and  computers.

Fears  have  been  expressed  that  this  new  technologies  with  it  the  threat  of  possible  unwanted  and
unethical  remote  control  of  the  cerebral  activities  of  man  by  other  men,  but  as  will  be  discussed
later,  this  danger  is  quite  improbable  and  is  outweighed  by  the  expected  clinical  and  scientific
benefits.  Electronic  knowledge  and  microminiaturization  have  progressed  so  much  that  the  limits
appear  biological  rather  than  technological.  Our  greatest  need  is  for  more  experimental
information  about  the  neuronal  mechanisms  related  to  behavioral  and  mental  processes,  and
research  in  unrestricted  subjects  promises  to  reveal  new  understanding  of  normal  minds  and
more  efficient  therapy  of  disturbed  brains.


Chapter  12

Electrical  Stimulation  of  the  Brain  (ESB)


The  master  control  for  the  whole  body  resides  in  the  brain,  and  the  new  methodology  of
implanted  electrodes  has  provided  direct  access  to  the  centers  which  regulate  most  of  the  body's
activities.  The  brain  also  constitutes  the  material  substratum  of  mental  functions,  and  by
exploring  its  working  neurons  we  have  the  possibility  of  investigating  experimentally  some  of
the  classical  problems  of  mind-brain  correlations.  In  addition  to  new  answers,  implantation  of
electrodes  has  introduced  new  problems:  Is  it  feasible  to  induce  a  robotlike  performance  in
animals  and  men  by  pushing  the  buttons  of  a  cerebral  radio  stimulator?  Could  drives,  desires,
and  thoughts  be  placed  under  the  artificial  command  of  electronics?  Can  personality  be
influenced  by  ESB?  Can  the  mind  be  physically  controlled?

In  scientific  literature  there  is  already  a  substantial  amount  of  information  demonstrating  the
remarkable  effects  induced  by  ESB.  The  heart,  for  instance,  can  be  stopped  for  a  few  beats,
slowed  down,  or  accelerated  by  suitable  stimulation  of  determined  cortical  and  subcortical
structures,  illustrating  the  physiological  reality  that  it  is  the  brain  which  controls  the  heart,  and
not  vice  versa.  Respiratory  rate  and  amplitude  have  been  driven  by  ESB;  gastric  secretion  and
motility  have  also  been  modified  by  brain  stimulation;  the  diameter  of  the  pupil  can  be  adjusted


at  will  (Figure  7)  from  maximum  constriction  to  maximum  dilation,  as  if  it  were  a  photographic
camera,  simply  by  changing  the  intensity  knob  of  an  electric  stimulator


Figure  Seven


connected  with  the  hypothalamic  region  of  the  brain  (61).  Most  visceral  functions  have  been
influenced  by  ESB,  as  have  sensory  perceptions,  motor  activities,  and  mental  functions.  Rather


than  examine  each  type  of  finding  in  detail,  we  have  selected  a  few  typical  examples  to  illustrate
the  main  aspects  of  electrical  control  of  the  brain  and  its  behavioral  consequences.


Chapter  13

Motor  Responses

Behavior  is  the  result  of  motor  activities  which  range  from  a  simple  muscular  twitch  tc,  the
creation  of  a  work  of  art.  If  we  consider  the  skill  involved  in  nest  building,  the  strategies  of
fighting  animals,  or  the  precision  of  piano  playing,  it  is  obvious  that  these  activities  are  not  solely
the  result  of  physical  and  chemical  processes  of  muscular  contraction  but  depend  on  conscious
direction-on  the  refined  complexity  of  their  cerebral  command.

Very  little  is  known  about  the  automatic  aspects  of  voluntary  acts,  how  purpose  is  related  to
performance,  or  how  contractions  are  organized  in  time  and  space.  Present  methodology,
however,  has  placed  some  of  these  questions  within  experimental  reach.  The  fact  that  ESB  can
induce  simple  movements  was  discovered  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and  today  we  know  that  the
cerebral  organization  of  motility  is  located  mainly  in  the  cortex  of  the  parietal  lobe.  Stimulation
of  this  area  induces  movements  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  body,  while  its  destruction  results  in
paralysis.  These  findings  have  been  expressed  in  attractive  diagrams  showing  the  motor  areas  of


the  brain  as  an  "homunculus"  lying  upside  down  in  the  parietal  cortex,  with  a  big  face  and  a  big
thumb,  like  a  caricature  of  a  little  man  in  charge  of  motility.  This  image  was  partly  responsible
for  consideration  of  the  cortex  as  the  supreme  and  intelligent  organizer  of  behavior.

However,  further  research  demonstrated  that  motor  responses  obtained  from  this  cortex  are
rather  crude  and  that  other  areas  in  the  depth  of  the  brain  have  a  decisive  role  in  the  organization
of  skilled  motility.  Modern  concepts  suggest  that  the  cortex  should  not  be  considered  the  highest
hierarchical  structure  of  the  motor  system  or  even  the  starting  point  of  motor  impulses,  but  rather
a  way  station,  one  more  link  in  the  loops  of  sensory  motor  correlations.  The  multiplicity  and
complexity  of  motor  representation  is  logical  when  we  consider  the  tremendous  variety  of
behavioral  manifestations  which  constitute  the  only  means  of  communication  between  the
individual  and  his  surroundings.  This  relation  requires  a  motor  performance  with  precise
temporal  and  spatial  coordination  among  many  functional  units  and  the  processing  of  a  great  deal
of  information  for  the  adjustment  and  guidance  of  movements  and  for  instantaneous  adaptation
to  changes  in  circumstances.  Because  of  the  complexity  of  these  mechanisms,  it  has  been
assumed  that  the  artificial  ESB  could  never  induce  refined  and  purposeful  motor  performance.
The  surprising  fact  is  that,  depending  on  its  location,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  is  able  to
evoke  not  only  simple  responses  but  also  complex  and  well-organized  behavior  which  may  be
indistinguishable  from  spontaneous  activity.

Motor  Activation  in  Animals

A  classical  experiment  for  medical  students  is  to  anesthetize  a  rabbit  or  other  small  mammal  and
to  expose  its  brain  in  order  to  stimulate  the  motor  cortex.  In  this  way  simple  responses,  such  as
contraction  or  extension  of  the  limbs,  may  be  demonstrated.  These  responses  usually  involve  a
small  group  of  muscles,  are  stereotyped,  and  lack  adaptability,  but  in  spite  of  these  limitations
students  are  generally  impressed  by  seeing  the  movements  of  an  animal  placed  under  the
command  of  a  human  being.  The  demonstration  is  far  more  elegant  if  the  experimental  animal  is
completely  awake  and  equipped  with  electrodes  implanted  in  the  brain.  Then  the  responses
appear  more  physiological,  and  we  can  investigate  the  mutual  influence  of  spontaneous  and
evoked  motility.


Figure  8

Electrical  stimulation  of  the  right-side  motor  cortex  produced  flexion  of  the  left  hind  limb  proportional  in
amplitude  to  the  electrical  intensity  used.  Observe  the  animal's  harmonious  postural  adaptation  to  the
evoked  movement  and  lack  of  emotional  disturbance.  During  these  experiments  cats  were  alert  and
friendly  as  usual,  purring  and  seeking  to  be  petted.


Electrical  Stimulation  of  the  right-side  motor  cortex  of  a  cat  may  produce  flexion  of  the  left  hind
leg  with  an  amplitude  of  movement  proportional  to  the  applied  intensity.  For  example,  in  one
experiment  when  the  animal  was  standing  on  all  fours,  the  intensity  of  1.2  milliamperes  evoked
flexion  of  the  leg  barely  off  the  ground.  At  1.5  milliamperes,  the  hind  leg  rose  about  4
centimeters,  and  when  1  .8  milliamperes  were  applied,  leg  flexion  was  complete  (Figure  8).  The
evoked  movement  began  slowly,  developed  smoothly,  reached  its  peak  in  about  two  seconds,
and  lasted  until  the  end  of  the  stimulation.  This  motor  performance  could  be  repeated  as  many
times  as  desired,  and  it  was  accompanied  by  a  postural  adjustment  of  the  whole  body  which
included  lowering  of  the  head,  raising  of  the  pelvis,  and  a  slight  weight  shift  to  the  left  in  order  to
maintain  equilibrium  on  only  three  legs,  The  electrical  stimulation  did  not  produce  any  emotional
disturbance,  and  the  cat  was  as  alert  and  friendly  as  usual,  rubbing  its  head  against  the
experimenter,  seeking  to  be  petted,  and  purring.

If,  however,  we  tried  to  prevent  the  evoked  effect  by  holding  the  left  hind  leg  with  our  hands,  the
cat  stopped  purring,  struggled  to  get  free,  and  shook  its  leg.  Apparently  the  evoked  motility  was
not  unpleasant,  but  attempts  to  prevent  it  were  disturbing  for  the  animal,  suggesting  that
stimulation  produced  not  a  blind  motor  movement  but  also  a  desire  to  move,  and  the  cat
cooperated  spontaneously  with  the  electrical  command,  adjusting  its  posture  before  performing
the  leg  flexion.  It  was  evident  that  the  animal  was  not  in  a  hurry  and  took  its  time  in  preparing
for  the  induced  movement.  Preliminary  adjustments  were  not  seen  if  the  cat's  posture  was
already  adequate  for  the  leg  flexion.  In  cases  of  conflict  between  the  spontaneous  movements  of
the  animal  and  those  elicited  by  the  experimenter,  the  final  result  depended  on  the  relative
strength  of  the  opposing  signals.  For  example,  if  the  cat  was  walking,  threshold  stimulations  of
1.2  milliamperes  for  slight  leg  flexion  were  ineffective.  If  the  cat  was  stimulated  while  jumping
off  a  table  to  reach  food,  stronger  intensities  of  up  to  1.5  milliamperes,  which  usually  evoked  a
clear  motor  response,  were  also  ineffective;  physiological  activity  seemed  to  override  the
artificial  excitation  and  the  cat  landed  with  perfectly  coordinated  movements.  If  the  intensity  was
increased  to  2  milliamperes,  stimulation  effects  were  prepotent  over  voluntary  activities;  leg
flexion  started  during  the  jump,  coordination  was  disrupted,  and  the  cat  landed  badly.  A  similar
experiment  is  described  on


In  monkeys,  electrical  stimulation  of  motor  areas  has  evoked  contralateral  movements  similar  to
those  described  for  the  cat.  The  stimulated  animal  showed  no  signs  of  fear  or  hostility  (Figure  9),
nor  did  he  interrupt  his  spontaneous  behavior,  such  as  walking,  climbing,  or  eating.  Evoked  and
spontaneous  movements  influenced  each  other,  and  the  final  response  was  a  combination  of
both.

Simultaneous  stimulation  of  two  cerebral  points  with  opposite  effects  could  establish  a  dynamic
balance  without  any  visible  effect.  For  example,  if  excitation  of  one  point  produced  turning  of
the  head  to  the  right  and  another  one  produced  turning  to  the


Figure  9

Stimulation  of  the  temporal,  lobe  (rhinal  fissure)  induced  opening  of  the  mouth  and  movement  of  tire
arm  without  signs  of  fear  or  hostility  (49).

left,  the  monkey  did  not  move  his  head  at  all  when  both  points  were  stimulated.  This  equilibrium
could  be  maintained  at  different  intensity  levels  of  simultaneous  stimulation.

Brain  stimulation  of  different  areas  has  elicited  most  of  the  simple  movements  observed  in
spontaneous  behavior,  including  frowning,  opening  and  closing  the  eyes,  opening,  closing,  and
deviation  of  the  mouth,  movements  of  the  tongue,  chewing,  contraction  of  the  face,  movements
of  the  ears,  turns,  twists,  flexions,  and  extensions  of  the  head  and  body,  and  movements  of  the
arms,  legs,  and  fingers.  We  must  conclude  that  most  if  not  all  of  the  possible  simple  movements
can  be  evoked  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain.  Abnormal  responses,  disorganized


movements,  loss  of  equilibrium  (as  shown  in  Figure  10),  and  epileptiform  convulsions  have  also
been  produced,  depending  on  the  cerebral  area  and  parameters  of  stimulation  investigated.

Turning  now  to  more  complex  responses,  we  must  realize  that  normal  activities  in  animals  and
man  involve  a  succession  of  different  acts  well  coordinated  in  space  and  in  time.  Walking,  for
example,  is  a  displacement  of  the  body  with  alternate  flexion  and  extension  of  the  extremities
requiring  refined  control  of  strength,  amplitude,  and  speed  for  the  contraction  of  different  groups
of  muscles  with  precise  timing  and  mutual  correlation  aimed  toward  a  common  goal.  In  addition,
postural  adaptation  and  corrective  movements  of  the  head  and  body  are  necessary.  To  induce
walking  in  an  animal  by  programmed  electrical  stimulation  of  individual  muscles  would  be  a
formidable  task  requiring  the  wiring  of  perhaps  too  muscles,  the  use  of  a  complex  computer,
sophisticated  timing  mechanisms,  large  numbers  of  stimulators  with  instantaneously  adjustable
intensities,  many  sensors,  and  the  help  of  a  team  of  scientists  and  technicians,  in  addition  to  a
cooperative  animal  and  a  measure  of  good  luck.  The  surprising  fact  is  that  electrical  pulses
applied  directly  to  the  brain  activate  cerebral  structures  which  possess  the  necessary  functional
complexity  to  induce  walking  with  apparently  normal  characteristics.

In  one  of  our  experiments,  monkey  Korn  was  sitting  in  the  colony  cage  picking  some  food  when
radio  stimulation  of  his  thalamus,  located  in  the  center  of  the  brain,  began.  The  animal  slowly  got
up  and  started  walking  around  the  cage  on  all  fours  at  a  speed  of  about  1  meter  per  second,
without  bumping  against  the  walls  or  against  other  animals,  in  a  normal  manner  without  any
signs  of  anxiety,  fear,  or  discomfort.  At  the  end  of  5  to  10  seconds  of  stimulation,  the  monkey
calmly  sat  down  and  resumed  picking  food.  As  soon  as  stimulation  was  reapplied,  Kuru  re¬
sumed  walking  around  the  cage.  In  some  studies  this  effect  was  repeated  as  often  as  sixty  times
in  one  hour.

The  speed  and  pattern  of  a  motor  response  vary  according  to  the  cerebral  structure  stimulated.
The  effect  most  often  observed


Figure  10

Progressive  clockwise  rotation  of  the  body  along  the  longitudinal  axis  with  complete  loss  of  equilibrium
produced  by  radio  stimulation  of  specific  areas  of  the  brain  (in  this  case,  the  tectum).


in  cats  and  monkeys,  obtained  by  stimulation  of  limbic  structures  and  extrapyramidal  pathways,
is  walking  in  circles.  Usually  the  response  begins  with  slow  head  turning,  followed  by  body
turning,  getting  up,  and  walking  around  the  cage.  In  other  studies,  during  stimulation  of  the
fimbria  of  the  fornix,  a  monkey  ran  around  the  cage  at  a  speed  of  2.4  meters  per  second,  showing
excellent  coordination  and  orientation,  avoiding  obstacles  or  other  animals  in  its  path.  In  this
experiment,  as  shown  in  Figure  11,  one  monkey  in  the  colony  learned  to  press  a  lever  in  the  cage
which  triggered  radio  stimulation  of  the  test  animal.  Repetition  of  these  excitations  produced
conditioning  in  the  stimulated  monkey.

Another  type  of  complex  motor  response  induced  by  ESB  has  been  described  as  sequential
behavior  (54)  in  which  different  patterns  of  behavior  follow  each  other  in  a  precise  order,  as
indicated  in  the  following  typical  example.  Monkey  Ludy  had  one  contact  implanted  in  the  red


nucleus,  and  when  it  was  stimulated  for  5  seconds,  the  following  effects  appeared  (see  Figure
12):  (1)  immediate  interruption  of  spontaneous  activity;  2)  change  in  facial  expression;  (3)
turning  of  the  head  to  the  right;  (4)  standing  on  two  feet;  (5)  circling  to  the  right;  (6)  walking  on
two  feet  with  perfect  balance,  using  both  arms  to  maintain  equilibrium  during  bipedestation;  (7)
climbing  a  pole;  (8)  descending  to  the  floor;  (9)  uttering  a  growl;  (10)  threatening  and  often
attacking  and  biting  a  subordinate  monkey;  (11)  changing  aggressive  attitude  and  approaching
the  rest  of  the  group  in  a  friendly  manner;  (12)  resuming  peaceful  spontaneous  behavior.  This
complex  sequence  of  events  took  place  during  ten  to  fourteen  seconds  always  in  the  same  order
but  with  considerable  flexibility  in  the  details  of  performance.  Ludy  avoided  obstacles  in  her
path,  walked  with  excellent  coordination,  and  used  normal  strategies  in  her  fights.  The  sequential
response  was  so  reliable  that  it  persisted  after  2o,ooo  stimulations  repeated  once  every  minute.
Demonstrating  the  specificity  of  evoked  effects,  Figure  13  shows  Ludy's  very  different  response
evoked  by  radio  stimulation  of  another  red  nucleus  point  located  three  millimeters  away.


Figure  10

The  monkey  at  left  has  learned  to  press  the  lever  inside  the  cage  which  The  monkey  at  left  has  learned
to  press  the  lever  inside  the  cage  which  triggers  radio  stimulation  of  another  monkey  in  the  fimbria  of
the  fornix,  inducing  fast  running  with  excellent  coordination.  After  repetition  of  these  excitations,
conditioning  is  established  in  the  stimulated  animal  who  shows  restlessness  and  stands  in  a  cage  corner
ready  to  start  the  running  response  as  soon  as  another  monkey  approaches  the  lever.


Figure  10

Stimulation  of  the  red  nucleus  in  monkey  Ludy  produced  a  response  which  included  turning  of  the  head,
walking  on  two  feet,  turning  around,  and  other  sequential  effects.  The  experiment  was  repeated  more
than  20,000  times  with  reliable  performance  (54).


Many  questions  were  aroused  by  these  experiments.  Why  was  Ludy  walking  on  two  feet?  Why
the  chain  of  behavioral  events?  Why  was  she  aggressive  a  few  seconds  after  the  end  of
stimulation?  More  studies  are  needed  in  order  to  understand  these  problems,  but  the  fact  that
similar  sequences  have  been  evoked  in  other  monkeys  indicates  that  we  are  dealing  with  rather
specific  mechanisms  of  intracerebral  organization.

When  reviewing  the  entire  motor  responses  that  can  be  induced  by  electrical  stimulation  several
important  limitations  should  be  considered:  (i)  Lack  of  predictability:  When  a  point  of  the  brain
is  stimulated  for  the  first  time,  we  cannot  predict  the  effects  which  may  be  evoked.  When  the
upper  part  of  the  motor  cortex  is  stimulated,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  contralateral  hindlimb
will  contract,  but  we  cannot  foresee  the  quality  of  this  movement  or  the  participation  of  other
body  muscles,  or  know  whether  this  response  will  affect  the  whole  leg  or  only  the  foot.  Once  the
evoked  effect  is  known,  repeated  stimulations  gives  predictable  results  provided  that  the
experimental  situation  is  constant.  (2)  Lack  of  purpose:  In  some  cases  the  evoked  response  is
directed  by  the  animal  in  a  purposeful  way,  but  the  movements  and  sequential  responses  are
usually  out  of  context,  and  there  is  no  reason  or  purpose  for  yawning,  flexing  a  hand,  or  walking
around,  apart  from  ESB.  It  is  important  to  differentiate  these  aimless  motor  responses  from  other
types  of  behavior  described  later  in  which  the  aim  is  of  primary  importance  and  the  motor
performance  secondary.  (3)  No  robot  performance:  Brain  stimulation  activates  cerebral
mechanisms  which  are  organized  for  motor  performance,  but  it  cannot  replace  them.  With  the
present  state  of  the  art,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  we  could  electrically  direct  an  animal  to  carry  out
predetermined  activities  such  as  opening  a  gate  or  performing  an  instrumental  response.  We  can
induce  pleasure  or  punishment  and  therefore  the  motivation  to  press  a  lever,  but  we  cannot
control  the  sequence  of  movements  necessary  for  this  act  in  the  absence  of  the  animal's  own
desire  to  do  so.  As  will  be  discussed  later,  we  can  evoke  emotional  states  which  may  motivate  an
animal  to  attack  another


or  to  escape,  but  we  cannot  electrically  synthesize  the  complex  motor  performance  of  these  acts.

Motor  Effects  in  Man


parietal  lobe


occipital

lobe


lobe

prefrontal  lobe


cerebellum

medulla


sylvian
fissure

temporal  lobe


The  most  common  effect  obtained  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  human  brain  is  a  simple  motor
response  such  as  the  contraction  of  an  extremity.  This  effect  is  often  accompanied  by  lack  of
voluntary  control  of  the  muscles  involved,  and  occasionally  it  is  limited  to  a  local  paralysis
without  any  other  observable  symptoms.  In  general,  the  evoked  contractions  are  simple  in
performance,  artificial  in  character,  lacking  purpose,  and  without  the  elegance  of  spontaneous
motility.  For  example,  in  one  of  our  patients,  stimulation  of  the  left  parietal  cortex  through
implanted  electrodes  evoked  a  flexion  of  the  right  hand  starting  with  contraction  of  the  first  two
fingers  and  continuing  with  flexion  of  the  other  fingers.  The  closed  fist  was  then  maintained  for
the  rest  of  the  5-second  stimulation.  This  effect  was  not  unpleasant  or  disturbing,  and  it
developed  without  interrupting  ongoing,  behavior  or  spontaneous  conversation.  The  patient  was
aware  that  his  hand  had  moved  involuntarily  but  he  was  not  afraid  and  only  under  questioning
did  he  comment  that  his  arm  felt  "weak  and  dizzy."  When  the  patient  was  warned  of  the
oncoming  stimulation  and  was  asked  to  try  to  keep  his  fingers  extended,  he  could  not  prevent  the
evoked  movement  and  commented,  "I  guess,  Doctor,  that  your  electricity  is  stronger  than  my
will."  If  this  stimulation  was  applied  while  the  subject  was  voluntarily  using  his  hand,  for
instance  to  turn  the

Excitation  of  the  supplementary  motor  area,  located  near  the  main  motor  cortex,  may  induce
three  types  of  effects  (174):  (1)


There  can  be  postural  changes,  in  which  the  movement  starts  slowly  and  attains  a  determined  end
point  with  more  or  less  general  involvement  of  the  body.  (2)  The  movements  can  have  a  phasic
character  such  as  pawing  with  the  hand,  stepping  with  the  foot,  or  flexing  and  extending  the
fingers  or  wrist.  (3)  The  response  can  consist  of  uncoordinated  movements.  Of  special  interest  is
the  possibility  of  activating  paralyzed  limbs  by  means  of  ESB.  For  example,  one  patient  was


suffering  from  sudden  paralysis  of  the  left  arm  and  leg  probably  caused  by  an  embolus,  and  after
four  years  he  had  begun  to  experience  burning  pain  in  the  left  side  of  his  body  which  was
exacerbated  by  touching  his  left  thorax  or  arm.  After  other  treatments  failed,  two  surgical
interventions  were  performed  to  ablate  parts  of  the  sensorimotor  cortex,  and  it  was  observed  that
electrical  stimulation  in  the  supplementary  motor  area  produced  vocalization,  raising  of  the
paralyzed  arm,  and  other  motor  responses.  These  effects  were  similar  to  those  evoked  in  other
patients  without  paralysis.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  the  supplementary  cortex  has  pathways
independent  from  the  classical  motor  pathways  and  that  evoked  movements  may  be  independent
from  the  integrity  of  the  main  motor  representation  in  the  cortex.


1


B  apparently  produces  similar  results  whether  applied  to  the  motor  area  of  a  child  or  an  adult.


f  a  manual  laborer  or  of  an  accomplished  artist.  Skills  and  refined  movements  not  seem  to  be
represented  in  the  cortex,  or  at  least  they  have  not  been  aroused  by  its  electrical  stimulation.  The
motor  cortex  is  probably  like  a  large  keyboard  located  on  the  efferent  side,  dealing  with  the
output  of  activity,  able  to  play  the  strings  of  muscular  contraction  and  to  produce  movements,
but  requiring  the  direction  of  other  cerebral  structures  which  as  yet  are  little  known.


In  contrast  to  these  effects,  ESB  may  evoke  more  elaborate  responses.  For  example,  in  one  of  our
patients,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  rostral  part  of  the  internal  capsule  produced  head  turning
and  slow  displacement  of  the  body  to  either  side  with  a  well-oriented  and  apparently  normal
sequence,  as  if  the  patient  were  looking  for  something.  This  stimulation  was  repeated  six  times
on  two  different  days  with  comparable  results.  The  interesting  fact  was  that  the  patient
considered  the  evoked  activity  spontaneous  and  always  offered  a  reasonable  explanation  for  it.
When  asked  "What  are  you  doing?"  the  answers  were,  "I  am  looking  for  my  slippers,"  "I  heard  a
noise,"  "I  am  restless,"  and  "I  was  looking  under  the  bed."  In  this  case  it  was  difficult  to  ascertain
whether  the  stimulation  had  evoked  a  movement  which  the  patient  tried  to  justify,  or  if  an
hallucination  had  been  elicited  which  subsequently  induced  the  patient  to  move  and  to  explore
the  surroundings.


There  are  very  few  clinical  reports  of  complex  movements  evoked  by  ESB  which  are  comparable
to  the  sequential  responses  observed  in  monkeys,  and  this  may  indicate  that  cerebral  organization
is  less  stereotyped  in  man  than  in  animals.  Temporal  lobe  stimulation  in  man  has  induced
automatisms,  including  fumbling  with  surgical  drapes  or  with  the  patient's  own  hands,  and  well-
organized  movements  aimed  at  getting  off  the  operating  table.  Usually  these  evoked  automatisms
have  not  been  remembered.  Vocalizations  and  more  or  less  intelligible  speech  may  also  be
included  among  complex  motor  responses,  although)  they  represent  the  activation  of  motor  and
ideational  mechanisms.  Vocalizations  have  been  obtained  by  stimulation  of  the  motor  area  in  the
precentral  gyros  and  also  of  the  supplementary  motor  area  in  both  hemispheres.  The  response
usually  consists  of  a  sustained  or  interrupted  cry  with  a  vowel  sound  which  occasionally  has  a
consonant  component  (174).


Chapter  14


Hell  and  Heaven  Within  the  Brain:

The  Systems  for  Punishment  and  Reward

When  man  evolved  above  other  powerful  animals,  the  size  and  complexity  of  his  brain  increased,
giving  him  superior  intelligence  along  with  more  anguish,  deeper  sorrow,  and  greater  sensitivity
than  any  other  living  creature.  Man  also  learned  to  enjoy  beauty,  to  dream  and  to  create,  to  love
and  to  hate.  In  the  education  of  children  as  well  as  in  the  training  of  animals,  Punishment  and
reward  constitute  the  most  powerful  motivations  for  learning.  In  our  hedonistic  orientation  of  life
to  minimize  pain  and  seek  pleasure,  we  often  attribute  these  qualities  to  the  environment  without
realizing  that  sensations  depend  on  a  chain  of  events  which  culminates  in  the  activation  of
determined  intracerebral  mechanisms.  Physical  damage,  the  loss  of  a  beloved  child,  or
apocalyptic  disaster  cannot  make  us  suffer  if  some  of  our  cerebral  structures  have  been  blocked
by  anesthesia.  Pleasure  is  not  in  the  skin  being  caressed  or  in  a  full  stomach,  but  somewhere
inside  the  cranial  vault.

At  the  same  time  pain  and  pleasure  have  important  psychic  and  cultural  components  related  to
individual  history.  Men  inhibited  by  sortie  extraordinary  tribal  or  religious  training  to  endure
discomfort  have  been  tortured  to  death  without  showing  signs  of  suffering.  It  is  also  known  that
in  the  absence  of  physical  injury,  mental  elaboration  of  information  may  produce  the  worst  kind
of  suffering.  Social  rejection,  guilt  feelings,  and  other  personal  tragedies  may  produce  greater
autonomic,  somatic,  and  psychological  manifestations  than  actual  physical  pain.

There  is  strong  reluctance  to  accept  that  such  personal  and  refined  interpretations  of  reality  as
being  afraid  and  being  in  love  are  contingent  on  the  membrane  depolarization  of  determined
clusters  of  neurons,  but  this  is  one  aspect  of  emotional  phenomena  which  should  not  be  ignored.
After  frontal  lobotomy,  cancer  patients  have  reported  that  the  pain  persisted  undiminished,  but
that  their  subjective  suffering  was  radically  reduced,  and  they  did  not  complain  or  request  as
much  medication  as  before  surgery.  Lobotomized  patients  reacted  to  noxious  stimuli  as  much,  if
not  more,  than  before  their  operations,  jumping  at  pinpricks  and  responding  quickly  to  objective
tests  of  excessive  heat,  but  they  showed  decreased  concern.  It  seems  that  in  the  frontal  lobes
there  is  a  potentiating  mechanism  for  the  evaluation  of  personal  suffering,  and  after  lobotomy  the
initial  sensation  of  pain  is  unmodified,  while  the  reactive  component  to  that  feeling  is  greatly
diminished.  This  mechanism  is  rather  specific  of  the  frontal  lobes;  bilateral  destruction  of  the
temporal  lobes  fails  to  modify  personal  suffering.

Important  questions  to  resolve  are:  Do  some  cerebral  structures  have  the  specific  role  of
analyzing  determined  types  of  sensations?  Is  the  coding  of  information  at  the  receptor  level


essential  for  the  activation  of  these  structures  Not  too  long  ago,  many  scientists  would  have
dismissed  as  naive  the  already  demonstrated  fact  that  punishment  and  reward  can  be  induced  at
will  by  manipulating  the  controls  of  an  electrical  instrument  connected  to  the  brain.

Perception  of  Suffering

In  textbooks  and  scientific  papers,  terms  such  as  "pain  receptors,"  "pain  fibers,"  and  "pain
pathways"  are  frequently  used,  but  it  should  be  clarified  that  peripheral  nerves  do  not  carry
sensations.  Neuronal  pathways  transmit  only  patterns  of  electrical  activity  with  a  message  that
must  be  deciphered  by  the  central  nervous  system,  and  in  the  absence  of  brain  there  is  no  pain,
even  if  some  reflex  motor  reactions  may  still  be  present.  A  decapitated  frog  cannot  feel  but  will
jump  away  with  fairly  good  motor  coordination  when  pinched  in  the  hind  legs.  During
competitive  sports  or  on  the  battlefield,  emotion  and  stress  may  temporarily  block  the  feeling  of
pain  in  man,  and  often  injuries  are  not  immediately  noticed.  The  cerebral  interpretation  of
sensory  signals  is  so  decisive  that  the  same  stimulus  may  be  considered  pleasant  or  unpleasant
depending  on  circumstances.  A  strong  electrical  shock  on  the  feet  scares  a  dog  and  inhibits  its
secretion  of  saliva.  If,  however,  the  same  "painful"  excitation  is  followed  for  several  days  by
administration  of  food,  the  animal  accepts  the  shock,  wagging  its  tail  happily  and  salivating  in
anticipation  of  the  food  reward.  Some  of  these  dogs  have  been  trained  to  press  a  lever  to  trigger
the  electric  shock  which  preceded  food.  During  sexual  relations  in  man,  bites,  scratches,  and
other  potentially  painful  sensations  are  often  interpreted  as  enjoyable,  and  some  sexual  deviates
seek  physical  punishment  as  a  source  of  pleasure.

The  paradox  is  that  while  skin  and  viscera  have  plentiful  nerve  endings  for  sensory  reception,  the
brain  does  not  possess  this  type  of  innervation.  In  patients  under  local  anesthesia,  the  cerebral
tissue  may  be  cut,  burned,  pulled  apart,  or  frozen  without  causing  any  discomfort.  This  organ  so
insensitive  to  its  own  destruction  is,  however,  the  exquisite  sensor  of  information  received  from
the  periphery.  In  higher  animal  species  there  is  sensory  differentiation  involving  specialized
peripheral  receptors  which  code  external  information  into  electrical  impulses  and  internal
analyzers  which  decode  the  circulating  inputs  in  order  to  give  rise  to  the  perception  of  sensations.

Most  sensory  messages  travel  through  peripheral  nerves,  dorsal  roots,  spinal  cord,  and  medulla  to
the  thalamic  nuclei  in  the  brain,  but  from  there  we  lose  their  trail  and  do  not  know  where  the
information  is  interpreted  as  painful  or  pleasurable,  or  how  affective  components  are  attributed  to
a  sensation  (212,  220).


Although  anatomical  investigations  indicate  that  thalamic  fibers  project  to  the  parietal  "sensory"
cortex,  stimulation  of  this  area  does  not  produce  pain  in  animals  or  man.  No  discomfort  has  been
reported  following  electrical  excitation  of  the  surface  or  depth  of  the  motor  areas,  frontal  lobes,
occipital  lobes,  cingulate  gyros,  and  many  other  structures,  while  pain,  rage,  and  fear  have  been
evoked  by  excitation  of  the  central  gray  tegmentum,  and  a  few  other  regions.


Animals  share  with  man  the  expressive  aspect  of  emotional  manifestations.  When  a  dog  wags  its
tail,  we  suppose  it  is  happy,  and  when  a  cat  hisses  and  spits  we  assume  that  it  is  enraged,  but


these  interpretations  are  anthropomorphic  and  in  reality  we  do  not  know  the  feelings  of  any
animal.  Several  authors  have  tried  to  correlate  objective  manifestations  with  sensations;  for
example,  stimulation  of  the  cornea  of  the  eye  provokes  struggling,  pupillary  dilatation,  and  rise
of  blood  pressure  (87),  but  these  responses  are  not  necessarily  related  to  awareness  of  feelings,  as
is  clearly  demonstrated  by  the  defensive  ability  of  the  decapitated  frog.  Experimental
investigation  of  the  mechanisms  of  pain  and  pleasure  is  handicapped  in  animals  by  their  lack  of
verbal  communication,  but  fortunately  we  can  investigate  whether  an  animal  likes  or  dislikes  the
perceived  sensations  by  analyzing  its  instrumental  responses.  Rats,  monkeys,  and  other  species
can  leam  to  press  a  lever  in  order  to  receive  a  reward  such  as  a  food  pellet  or  to  avoid  something
unpleasant  such  as  an  electric  shock  to  the  skin.  By  the  voluntary  act  of  instrumental
manipulation,  an  animal  expresses  whether  or  not  the  food,  shock,  or  brain  stimulation  is
desirable,  allowing  for  the  objective  qualification  of  the  sensation.  In  this  way,  many  cerebral
strictures  have  been  explored  to  identify  their  positive  or  negative  reinforcing  properties.

At  present  it  is  generally  accepted  that  specific  areas  of  the  brain  participate  in  the  integration  of
pain  sensations,  but  the  mechanism  is  far  from  clear,  and  in  our  animal  experiments  we  do  not
know  if  we  are  stimulating  pathways  or  higher  centers  of  integration.  The  concept  of  a  straight
conduction  of  pain  messages  from  the  periphery  up  to  the  central  nervous  system  was  too
elemental.  Incoming  messages  are  probably  processed  at  many  levels  with  feedbacks  which
modify  the  sensitivity  and  the  filtering  of  information  at  many  stages  including  the  peripheral
receptor  level.  Brain  excitation,  therefore,  may  affect  transmission  as  well  is  the  elaboration  of
inputs  and  feedback  modulation.  Electrical  stimuli  do  not  carry  any  specific  message  because
they  are  a  monotonous  repetition  of  similar  pulses,  and  the  fact  that  they  constitute  a  suitable
trigger  for  central  perception  of  pain  means  that  the  reception  of  a  patterned  code  is  not  required,
but  only  the  nonspecific  activation  of  neuronal  pools  which  are  accessible  to  investigation.  In
addition  to  the  importance  of  these  studies  for  finding  better  therapies  for  the  alleviation  of  pain,
there  is  another  aspect  which  has  great  social  interest:  the  possible  relations  between  pain
perception  and  violence.

Violence  Within  the  Brain

The  chronicle  of  human  civilization  is  the  story  of  a  cooperative  venture  consistently  marred  by
self-destruction,  and  every  advance  has  been  accompanied  by  increased  efficiency  of  violent
behavior.  Early  man  needed  considerable  physical  strength  and  skill  to  defend  himself  or  attack
other  men  or  beasts  with  stones,  arrows,  or  swords,  but  the  invention  of  explosives  and
subsequent  development  of  firearms  have  made  unskilled  individuals  more  powerful  than
mythical  warriors  of  the  past.  The  technology  for  destruction  has  now  placed  at  the  disposal  of
man  a  vast  arsenal  of  ingenious  weapons  which  facilitate  all  forms  of  violence  including  crimes
against  property,  assassinations,  riots,  and  wars,  threatening  not  only  individual  life  and  national
stability  but  the  very  existence  of  civilization.

Ours  is  a  tragically  unbalanced  industrial  society  which  devotes  most  of  its  resources  to  the
acquisition  of  destructive  power  and  invests  insignificant  effort  in  the  search  which  could
provide  the  true  weapons  of  self-defense:  knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  responsible  for  violent
behavior.  They  are  necessarily  related  with  intracerebral  processes  of  neuronal  activity,  even  if
the  triggering  causality  may  reside  in  environmental  circumstances.  Violence  is  a  product  of


cultural  environment  and  is  an  extreme  form  of  aggression,  distinct  from  modes  of  self-
expression  required  for  survival  and  development  under  normal  conditions.  Man  may  react  to
unpleasant  or  painful  stimuli  with  violence-he  may  retaliate  even  more  vigorously  than  he  is
attacked-but  only  if  he  has  been  taught  by  his  culture  to  react  in  this  manner.  A  major  role  of
education  is  to  "build  internal  controls  in  human  beings  so  that  they  can  withstand  external
pressures  and  maintain  internal  equilibrium"  (157).  We  should  remember  that  it  is  normal  for  an
animal  to  urinate  when  the  bladder  is  full  and  to  mount  any  available  female  during  the  mating
season,  but  that  these  behaviors  may  be  controlled  in  man  through  training.  The  distinctly  human
quality  of  cerebralization  of  behavior  is  possible  through  education.

Human  aggression  may  be  considered  a  behavioral  response  characterized  by  the  exercise  of
force  with  the  intent  to  inflict  damage  on  persons  or  objects.  The  phenomenon  may  be  analyzed
in  three  components:  inputs,  determined  by  environmental  circumstances  perceived  through
sensory  receptors  and  acting  upon  the  individual;  throughputs,  which  are  the  personal  processing
of  these  circumstances  through  the  intracerebral  mechanisms  established  by  genetic  endowment
and  previous  experiences;  and  outputs,  represented  by  the  expressions  of  individual  and  social
behavior  which  constitute  the  observable  manifestations  of  aggression.  Increasing  awareness  of
the  need  to  investigate  these  subjects  has  already  resulted  in  the  creation  of  specialized  institutes,
but  surprisingly  enough  the  most  essential  element  in  the  whole  process  of  violence  is  usually
neglected.  Attention  is  directed  to  economic,  ideological,  social,  and  political  factors  and  to  then-
consequences,  which  are  expressed  as  individual  and  mass  behavior,  while  the  essential  link  in
the  central  nervous  system  is  often  forgotten.  It  is,  however.an  incontrovertible  fact  that  the
environment  is  only  the  provider  of  sensory  inputs  which  must  be  interpreted  by  the  brain,  and
that  any  kind  of  behavior  is  the  result  of  intracerebral  activity.

It  would  be  naive  to  investigate  the  reasons  for  a  riot  by  recording  the  intracerebral  electrical
activity  of  the  participants,  but  it  would  be  equally  wrong  to  ignore  the  fact  that  each  participant
has  a  brain  and  that  determined  neuronal  groups  are  reacting  to  sensory  inputs  and  are
subsequently  producing  the  behavioral  expression  of  violence.  Both  neurophysiological  and
environmental  factors  must  be  evaluated,  and  today  methodology  is  available  for  their  combined
study.  Humanity  behaves  in  general  no  more  intelligently  than  animals  would  under  the  same
circumstances,  and  this  alarming  reality  is  due  largely  to  that  spiritual  pride  which  prevents  men
from  regarding  themselves  and  their  behavior  as  parts  of  nature  and  as  subject  to  its  universal
laws"  (148).  Experimental  investigation  of  the  cerebral  structures  responsible  for  aggressive
behavior  is  an  essential  counterpart  of  social  studies,  and  this  should  be  recognized  by
sociologists  as  well  as  biologists.

In  animals,  the  first  demonstration  that  offensive  activity  could  be  evoked  by  ESB  was  provided
by  Hess  (I  05),  and  it  has  subsequently  been  confirmed  by  numerous  investigators.  Cats  under
electrical  stimulation  of  the  periventricular  gray  matter  acted  "as  if  threatened  by  a  dog,"
responding  with  unsheathed  claws  and  well-aimed  blows.  "The  animal  spits,  snorts  or  growls.  At
the  same  time  the  hair  on  its  back  stands  on  end,  and  its  tail  becomes  bushy.  Its  pupils  widen
sometimes  to  their  maximum,  and  its  ears  lie  back  or  move  back  and  forth  to  frighten  the  non¬
existing  enemy"  (106).  In  these  experiments  it  is  important  to  know  how  the  cat  really  feels.  Is  it
aware  of  its  own  responses?  Is  the  hostility  purposefully  oriented  to  do  harm?  Or  is  the  entire
phenomenon  a  pseudo  affective  reaction,  a  false  or  sham  rage  containing  the  motor  components


of  offensive  display  without  actual  emotional  participation?  These  issues  have  been  debated  over
the  years,  but  today  it  is  clear  that  both  sham  and  true  rage


Figure  14

At  upper  left,  the  control,  two  friendly  cats.  At  lower  left,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  anterior
hypothalamus  evoked  an  aggressive  expression  not  directed  against  the  other  cat  which,  however,
reacts  with  a  defensive  attitude.  Above,  the  normal  cat  attacks  the  stimulated  animal  which  lowers  its
head,  flattens  its  ears,  and  does  not  retaliate.  This  experiment  is  an  example  of  false  rage  (53).

can  be  elicited  by  ESB  depending  on  the  location  of  stimulation.  Excitation  of  the  anterior
hypothalamus  may  induce  a  threatening  display  with  hissing  and  growling  which  should  be
interpreted  as  false  rage  because,  as  shown  in  Figure  14,  the  display  was  not  directed  against
other  animals.  When  other  cats  reacted  by  hissing  and  attacking  the  stimulated  animal,  it  did  not
retaliate  or  escape  and  simply  lowered  its  head  and  flattened  its  ears,  and  these  brain  stimulations
could  not  be  conditioned  to  sensory  cues.


In  contrast,  true  rage  has  been  demonstrated  in  other  experiments.  As  shown  in  Figure  15,
stimulation  of  the  lateral  hypothalamus  produced  an  aggressive  display  clearly  directed  toward


Figure  15

Electrical  stimulation  of  the  lateral  hypothalamus  evoked  true  rage  which  is  characterized  by  aggressive
display  oriented  toward  another  cat  (above);  attack  with  well-oriented  claws  directed  against  other  cats
(below);


attack  against  investigators  with  whom  relations  had  previously  been  friendly  (above);  learning  of
instrumental  responses,  such  a  rotating  a  paddle  wheel,  in  order  to  stop  the  brain  stimulation  (below).
In  this  way  the  cat  expresses  its  dislike  of  being  stimulated  in  a  particular  area  (53).


a  control  animal  which  reacted  properly  in  facing  the  threat.  The  stimulated  animal  started
prowling  around  looking  for  fights  with  other  subordinate  animals,  but  avoided  the  most
powerful  cat  in  the  group.  It  was  evident  that  brain  stimulation  had  created  a  state  of  increased
aggressiveness,  but  it  was  also  clear  that  the  cat  directed  its  hostility  intelligently,  choosing  the
enemy  and  the  moment  of  attack,  changing  tactics,  and  adapting  its  movements  to  the  motor
reaction  of  its  opponents  Brain  stimulation  determined  the  affective  state  of  hostility,  but
behavioral  performance  depended  on  the  individual  characteristics  of  the  stimulated  animal,
including  learned  skills  and  previous  experiences.  Stimulations  were  usually  tested  for  5  to  10
seconds,  but  since  it  was  important  to  know  the  fatigability  of  the  effect,  a  longer  experiment  was
performed,  reducing  the  applied  intensity  to  a  level  which  did  not  evoke  overt  rage.  The


experimental  subject  was  an  affectionate  cat  which  usually  sought  petting  and  ported  while  it
was  held  in  the  experimenter's  arms.  Then  it  was  introduced  into  the  colony  with  five  other  cats
and  was  radi4p  stimulated  continuously  for  two  hours.  During  this  period  the  animal  sat
motionless  in  a  comer  of  the  cage,  uttering  barely  audible  growls  from  time  to  time.  If  any  other
cat  approached,  the  stimulated  animal  started  hissing  and  threatening,  and  if  the  experimenter
tried  to  pet  it,  the  growls  increased  in  intensity  and  the  animal  often  spat  and  hissed.  This  hostile
attitude  disappeared  as  soon  as  the  stimulation  was  over,  and  the  cat  became  as  friendly  as
before.  These  experiments  demonstrated  that  brain  excitation  could  modify  reactions  toward
normal  sensory  stimuli  and  could  modulate  the  quality  of  the  responses  in  a  way  similar  to
modulation  during  spontaneous  emotional  states.

Monkeys  usually  express  their  submissiveness  by  grimacing,  crouching,  and  offering  sexual
play.  In  several  colonies  we  have  observed  that  radio  stimulation  of  specific  points  in  the
thalamus  or  central  gray  in  the  boss  monkey  increased  his  aggressiveness  and  induced  well-
directed  attacks  against  other  members  of  the  group,  whom  he  chased  around  and  occasionally
bit,  as  shown  in  Figure  16  (56).  It  was  evident  that  his  hostility  was  oriented  purposefully  and
according  to  his  previous  experience  because  he  usually  attacked  the  other  male  who  represented
a  challenge  to  his  authority,  and  he  always  spared  the  little  female  who  was  his  favorite  partner.

A  high-ranking  monkey  expresses  rage  by  attacking  submissive  members  of  the  colony,  but  what
would  he  the  consequences  of  stimulating  the  brain  of  lower-ranking  animals?  Could  they  be
induced  to  challenge  the  authority  of  other  monkeys,  including  perhaps  even  the  boss,  or  would
their  social  inhibitions  block  the  electrically  induced  hostility?  These  questions  were  investigated
in  one  colony  by  changing  its  composition  to  increase  progressively  the  social  rank  of  one
member,  a  female  named  Lina,  who  in  the  first  grouping  of  four  animals  ranked  lowest,
progressing  to  third  rank  in  the  second  group  and  to  second  rank  in  the  third  group.  Social
dominance  was  evaluated  during  extended  control  periods  using  the  criteria  of  number  of
spontaneous  agonistic  and  sexual  interactions,  priority  in  food  getting,  and  territoriality.  On  two
successive  mornings  in  each  colony  Lina  was  radio  stimulated  for  5  seconds  once  a  minute  for
one  hour  in  the  nucleus  posterolateralis  of  the  thalamus.  In  all  three  colonies,  these  stimulations
induced  Lina  to  run  across  the  cage,  climb  to  the  ceiling,  lick,  vocalize,  and  according  to  her
social  status,  to  attack  other  animals.  In  group  I,  where  l,ina  was  submissive,  she  tried  to  attack
another  monkey  only  once,  and  she  was  threatened  or  attacked  24  times.  In  group  2  she  became
more  aggressive  (24  occurrences)  and  was  attacked  only  3  times,  while  in  group  3  Lina  attacked
other  monkeys  79  times  and  was  not  threatened  at  all.  No  changes  in  the  number  of  agonistic  acts
were  observed  in  any  group  before  or  after  the  stimulation


<br<  Figure  16

Examples  of  threatening  attitude  and  aggressive  behavior  produced  by  brain  stimulation.  Observe  that
the  stimulated  monkey  chooses  another


one  as  a  specific  target,  and  this  animal  usually  expresses  submissiveness  by  grimacing,  crouching,  or
escaping.  A  toy  tiger  is  also  a  suitable  target  for  aggressive  display.


hour,  showing  that  alterations  in  Lina's  aggressive  behavior  were  determined  by  ESB.


In  summary,  intraspecies  aggression  has  been  evoked  in  cats  and  monkeys  by  electrical
stimulation  of  several  cerebral  structures,  and  its  expression  is  dependent  on  the  social  setting.
Unlike  purely  motor  effects  including  complex  sequences  which  have  no  social  significance,  an
artificially  evoked  aggressive  act  may  be  directed  against  a  specific  group  member  or  may  be
entirely  suppressed,  according  to  the  stimulated  subject's  socicd  rank.

Many  questions  remain  to  be  answered.  Which  cerebral  areas  are  responsible  for  spontaneous
aggressive  behavior?  By  what  mechanisms  are  environmental  inputs  interpreted  as  undesirable?
How  does  cultured  training  influence  the  reactivity  of  specific  cerebral  areas?  Can
neurophysiological  mechanisms  of  violence  be  re-educated,  or  are  individual  responses  set  for
life  after  early  imprinting?  It  is  interesting  that  application  ofESB  modified  the  interpretation  of
the  environment,  changing  the  peaceful  relations  of  a  group  of  animals  into  sudden  overt
hostility.  The  same  sensory  inputs  provided  by  the  presence  of  other  animals,  which  were  neutral
during  control  periods,  were  under  ESB  the  cue  for  a  ferocious  and  well-directed  attack.
Apparently  brain  stimulation  introduced  an  emotioned  bias  which  altered  interpretation  of  the
surroundings.

While  neurophysiological  activity  may  be  influenced  or  perhaps  even  set  by  genetic  factors  and
past  experience,  the  brain  is  the  direct  interpreter  of  environmental  inputs  and  the  determinant
of  behavioral  responses.  To  understand  the  causes  and  plan  remedies  for  intraspecific
aggression  in  animals  and  man  require  knowledge  of  both  sociology  and  neurophysiology.
Electricity  cannot  determine  the  target  for  hostility  or  direct  the  sequences  of  aggressive
behavior,  which  are  both  related  to  the  past  history  of  the  stimulated  subject  and  to  his
immediate  adaptation  to  changing  circumstances.  Artificially  triggered  and  spontaneously
provoked  aggression  have  many  elements  in  common,  suggesting  that  in  both  cases  similar  areas
of  the  brain  have  been  activated.

While  individual  and  collective  acts  of  violence  may  seem  rather  distant  from  the  electrical
discharges  of  neurons,  we  should  remember  that  personality  is  not  in  the  environment  but  in  the
nerx’ous  tissue.  Possible  solutions  to  undesirable  aggression  obviously  will  not  be  found  in  the
use  ofESB.  This  is  only  a  methodology  for  investigation  of  the  problem  and  acquisition  of
necessary  information  about  the  brain  mechanisms  involved.  It  is  well  known  that  medical
treatment  of  cardiac  patients  is  based  on  anatomical  and  physiological  studies  of  the  heart,  and
that  without  this  information  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  discover  new  drugs  or  to  give
effective  medical  advice.  Similarly,  without  knowledge  of  the  brain  it  will  be  difficult  to  correlate
social  causality  with  individued  reactivity.

Anxiety,  Fear,  and  Violence  Evoked  by  ESB  in  Man

Anxiety  has  been  considered  the  alpha  and  omega  of  psychiatry.  It  is  one  of  the  central  themes  of
existential  philosophy,  and  it  shades  the  normal  -  and  abnormal  -  life  of  most  human  beings.
Several  emotioned  states  may  be  classified  under  the  heading  of  anxiety,  including  fear,  fright,
panic,  and  terror,  which  are  variations  of  the  same  basic  experience.  One  of  the  most  complex
mental  disturbances,  unreasonable  or  excessive  anxiety,  including  phobias  and  compulsive
obsessions,  often  does  not  respond  to  standard  therapies,  and  in  some  instances  it  has  been
improved  by  electrocoagulation  of  discrete  areas  of  the  frontal  pole.  Grey  Walter  (234)  has


claimed  an  85  per  cent  total  social  recovery  in  a  group  of  sixty  patients  with  anxiety  and
obsessions  treated  with  carefully  dosified  coagulations  made  through  electrodes  implanted  in  the
fronted  lobes.

Without  entering  into  semantic  discussions,  we  may  consider  anxiety  an  emotioned  state  of
conscious  or  subconscious  tension  related  to  reed  or  imaginary  threats  to  psychological  or
physical  inelividued  integrity.  A  mild  degree  of  anxiety  may  mobilize,  while  excessive  degrees
may  paralyze  somatic  anel  mental  activity.  Beyond  a  certain  limit,  anxiety  has  unpleasant
characteristics.  In  normal  circumstances,  it  is  produced,  as  is  any  other  emotion,

by  sensory  inputs  from  the  environment  and  by  recollections,  both  of  which  require  mental
elaboration  of  messages  which  may  be  influenced  by  humored  and  neuronal  factors.  In  addition,
there  is  abundant  evidence  that  anxiety  and  fear  may  be  induced  as  either  a  primary  or  a
secondary  category  of  response  by  direct  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain.  The  perception  or
expectancy  of  pain  can  be  frightening,  and  in  some  cases  when  ESB  produced  localized  or
generalized  discomfort,  patients  have  expressed  concern  about  continuation  of  the  exploratory
procedures.  In  addition  to  the  natural  fear  of  possible  further  discomfort,  there  may  have  been  a
component  of  primary  anxiety  which  would  be  difficult  to  evaluate.

Destruction  of  discrete  parts  of  the  thalamus  produces  relief  from  anxiety  neurosis  and
obsessive-compulsive  neurosis  which  is  probably  related  to  the  interruption  of  tonic  pathways  to
the  fronted  lobes.  Stimulation  of  the  thalamic  nucleus,  however,  very  seldom  produces  anxiety,
and  the  reports  of  patients  are  limited  to  feelings  of  weakness,  being  different,  dizziness,  floating,
and  something  like  alcoholic  intoxication  (214).

Clearer  demonstrations  of  direct  induction  of  fear  without  any  other  accompanying  sensations
have  been  reported  by  severed  investigators.  Lesions  in  the  medial  thalamus  give  effective  pain
relief  with  a  minimal  amount  of  sensory  loss,  and  for  this  reason  this  area  has  often  been
explored  electrically  in  cancer  patients.  In  some  cases  it  has  produced  acute  anxiety  attacks,
which  one  patient  vividly  described  as:  "It's  rather  like  the  feeling  of  having  just  been  missed  by
a  car  and  leaped  back  to  the  curb  and  went  B-r-r-r. "  Something  in  his  guts  felt  very  unpleasant,
very  unusual,  and  he  certainly  did  not  want  to  feel  like  that  again  (73).  The  surprising  fact  is  that
the  unpleasant  sensation  of  fear  was  felt  in  one  side  of  the  body,  contralateral  to  the  brain
stimulation,  Sweet  (221)  has  reported  the  case  of  a  very  intelligent  patient,  the  dean  of  a
graduate  school,  who  after  a  unilateral  sympathectomy  to  treat  his  upper  limb  hyperhydrosis,
found  that  his  previous  and  customary  sensation  of  shivering  while  listening  to  a  stirring  passage
of  music  occurred  in  only  one  side  and  he  could  not  be  thrilled  in  the  sympathectomized  half  of
his  body.  These  cases  were  interesting  because  emotions  are  usually  experienced  in  a  rather
diffuse  and  bilateral  fashion  unless  innervation  has  been  specifically  interrupted.

The  role  of  the  thalamus  in  the  integration  of  fear  is  cdso  suggested  by  the  study  of  a  female
patient  whose  spontaneous  crippling  attacks  of  anxiety  of  ovem’helming  intensity  had  led  to
severed  suicide  attempts  and  a  chronic  state  of  depression  and  agitation  quite  refractory  to  drugs
and  psychotherapy.  Stimulation  of  the  dorsolateral  nucleus  of  the  thalamus  evoked  precisely  the
same  type  of  attack  at  a  level  of  symptomatology  directly  proportioned  to  the  applied  intensity.  It
weis  possible  to  find  the  electrical  threshold  for  a  mild  anxiety  or  to  increase  it  to  higher  levels


simply  by  turning  the  dial  of  the  stimulator.  "One  could  sit  with  one's  hand  on  the  knob  and
control  the  level  of  her  anxiety"  (73 ).

In  one  of  our  female  patients,  stimulation  of  a  similar  area  in  the  thalamus  induced  a  typical
fearful  expression  and  she  turned  to  either  side,  visually  exploring  the  room  behind  her.  When
asked  what  she  was  doing,  she  replied  that  she  felt  a  threat  and  thought  that  something  horrible
was  going  to  happen.  This  fearful  sensation  was  perceived  as  real,  and  she  had  a  premonition  of
imminent  disaster  of  unknown  cause.  The  effect  was  reliable  on  different  days  and  was  not
altered  by  the  use  of  lights  and  a  movie  camera  to  document  the  finding.  Her  motor  activity  and
choice  of  words  varied  according  to  the  environmental  setting,  but  her  facial  expression  and
acute  sensation  of  nonspecific,  unexplainable,  but  real  fear  were  similar  following  different
stimulations.  The  response  started  with  a  delay  of  less  than  one  second,  lasted  for  as  long  as  the
stimulation,  and  did  not  leave  obserx’able  aftereffects.  The  patient  remembered  her  fear  but  was
not  upset  by  the  memory.

Some  patients  have  displayed  anxiety  and  restlessness  when  the  pallidum  was  stimulated  at
frequencies  above  8  cycles  per  second,  and  they  also  perceived  a  constriction  or  warmth  in  the
chest  (123).  A  few  reported  a  " vital  anxiety  in  the  left  chest, "  and  screamed  anxiously  if  the
stimulation  was  repeated.  Intense  emotional  reactions  have  been  evoked  by  stimulation  of  the
amygdaloid  nucleus,  but  responses  varied  in  the  same  patient  even  with  the  same  parameters  of
stimulation.  The  effect  was  sometimes  rage,  sometimes  fear.  One  patient  explained,  "I  don't  know
what  came  over  me.  lfelt  like  an  animal"  (100).


The  sensation  of  fear  without  any  concomitant  pain  has  also  been  observed  as  a  result  ofESB  of
the  temporal  lobe  (230).  This  effect  may  be  classified  as  "illusion  of  fear"  (174)  because  there
was  obviously  no  real  reason  to  be  afraid  apart  from  the  artificial  electrical  activation  of  some
cerebrcd  structures.  In  every  case,  however,  fear  is  a  cerebrcd  interpretation  of  reality  which
depends  on  a  variety  of  cultured  and  experiential  factors  with  logical  or  illogiccd  reasons.  The
fact  that  it  can  be  aroused  by  stimulation  of  a  few  areas  of  the  brain  allows  the  exploration  of  the
neuronal  mechanisms  of  anxiety,  and  as  a  working  hypothesis  we  may  suppose  that  the
emotional  qualities  of  fear  depend  on  the  activation  of  determined  structures  located  probably  in
the  thalamus,  amygdala,  and  a  few  other  as  yet  unidentified  nuclei.  This  activation  usucdly
depends  on  the  symbolic  evaluation  of  coded  sensory  inputs,  but  the  threshold  for  this  activation
may  be  modified-and  also  reached-by  direct  application  ofESB.  Knowledge  of  intracerebral
mechanisms  of  anxiety  and  fear  will  permit  the  establishment  of  a  more  rational
pharmacological  and  psychiatric  treatment  of  many  suffering  patients,  and  may  also  help  us  to
understand  and  ameliorate  the  increasing  level  of  anxiety  in  our  civilization.

It  is  also  known  that  in  some  tragic  cases,  abnormal  neurological  processes  may  be  the  causal
factor  for  unreasonable  and  uncontrollable  violence.  Those  afflicted  may  often  hurt  or  even  kill
either  strangers  or  close  family  members  usucdly  treated  with  affection.  A  typical  example  was  J.
P.,  a  charming  and  attractive  20-year-old  girl  with  a  history  of  encephalitis  since  the  age  of
eighteen  months  and  many  crises  of  temporal  lobe  seizures  and  grand  mal  attacks  for  the  last  ten
years  (6o).  Her  main  social  problem  was  the  frequent  and  unpredictable  occurrence  of  rage


which  on  more  than  a  dozen  occasions  resulted  in  an  assault  on  another  person  such  as  inserting
a  knife  into  a  stranger's  myocardium, or  a  pair  of  scissors  into  the  pleurcd  cavity  of  a  nurse.  The
patient  was  committed  to  a  ward  for  the  criminally  insane,  and  electrodes  Were  implanted  in  her
amygdala  and  hippocampus  for  exploration  of  possible  neurological  abnormalities.  As  she  was
rather  impulsive,  confinement  in  the  EEG  recording  room  was  impractical,  and  she  became  one
of  the  first  clinical  cases  instrumented  with  a  stimoceiver,  which  made  it  possible  to  study
intracerebral  activity  without  restraint  (see  Figure  4).  Depth  recordings  taken  while  the  patient
moved  freely  around  the  ward  demonstrated  marked  electrical  abnormalities  in  both  amygdala
and  hippocampus.  Spontaneous  periods  of  aimless  walking  coincided  with  an  increase  in  the
number  of  high-voltage  sharp  waves.  At  other  times,  the  patient's  speech  was  spontaneously
inhibited  for  severed  minutes  during  which  she  could  not  answer  any  questions  although  she
retained  partied  comprehension  and  awareness.  These  periods  coincided  with  bursts  of  spike
activity  localized  to  the  optic  radiation  (Figure  17).  Transitory  emotioned  excitement  was  related
with  an  increase  in  the  number  emel  duration  of  16-cycles-per-seconel  bursts;  but  the  patient  read
papers,  conversed  with  other  people,  emel  wedkeel  eiround  without  causing  any  noticeable
alterations  in  the  telemetered  intracerebral  electrical  activity.

During  depth  explorations,  it  was  demonstrated  that  crises  of  assaultive  behavior  similar  to  the
patient's  spontaneous  bursts  of  anger  could  be  elicited  by  radio  stimulation  of  contact  3  in  the
right  amygdala.  A  1.2  milliampere  excitation  of  this  point  was  applied  while  she  was  playing  the
guitar  and  singing  with  enthusiasm  and  skill.  At  the  seventh  second  of  stimulation,  she  threw
away  the  guitar  and  in  a  fit  of  rage  launched  an  attack  against  the  wall  and  then  paced  around
the  floor  for  severed,  minutes,  after  which  she  graducdly  quieted  down  and  resumed  her  usued
cheerful  behavior.  This  effect  was  repeated  on  two  different  days.  The  fact  that  only  the  contact
located  in  the  amygdala  induced  rage  suggested  that  the  neuronal  field  around


j  p  m -68


A


2


3

1  s»c  — * — 4 — * — till — i— j


- * - _l _


B


2  'V^iw»  >rii'<niw*»*^f»Mvy<*AW-i»v<tyv,><t


•V*^****^"  **>»  •^.'V- <!»»•*« >-.'^«»«-»w»»v».»»<


2


Figure  17

Telemetric  recording  of  electrical  activity  of  the  brain  in  one  of  the  patients  shown  in  Figure  4.  The
location  of  the  contacts  was  as  follows:  Channel  i:  amygdaloid  nucleus;  Channel  2:  anterior  optic
radiation;  Channel  3:  posterior  optic  radiation.  A:  spontaneous  bursts  appearing  in  Channel  i  were  more
prominent  when  the  patient  was  psychologically  excited.  B:  sudden  spontaneous  arrest  of  speech
coincided  with  bursts  of  spikes  in  Channel  3.  C:  control  recordings  were  unmodified  by  friendly  behavior
or  by  different  types  of  motor  activity  such  as  walking  and  reading  (60).


contact  3  was  involved  in  the  patient's  behavior  problem,  and  this  finding  was  of  great  clinical
significance  in  the  orientation  of  subsequent  treatment  by  loccd  coagulation.

The  demonstration  that  amygdaloid  stimulation  may  induce  violent  behavior  has  also  been
provided  by  other  investigators.  King  (128)  has  described  the  case  of  a  woman  with  feelings  of
depression  and  alienation,  with  an  extremely  flat  tone  of  voice  and  a  faded  expression  which  was
blank  and  unchanging  during  interviews,  who  upon  stimulation  of  the  amygdala  with  5
milliamperes  had  greatly  altered  vocal  inflections  and  an  angry  expression.  During  this  time  she


said,  "I  feel  like  I  want  to  get  up  from  this  chair!  Please  don 't  let  me  do  it!  Don  7  do  this  to  me,  I
don't  want  to  be  mean!"  When  the  interviewer  asked  if  she  would  like  to  hit  him,  the  patient
answered,  "Yeah,  I  want  to  hit  something.  I  want  to  act  something  and  just  tear  it  up.  Take  it  so  I
won't!  "  She  then  handed  her  scarf  to  the  interviewer  who  gave  her  a  stack  of  paper,  and  without
any  other  verbal  exchange,  she  tore  it  into  shreds  saying,  "I  don't  like  to  feel  like  this. "  When  the
level  of  stimulation  was  reduced  to  4  milliamperes,  her  attitude  changed  to  a  broad  smile,  and
she  explained,  "I  know  it's  silly,  what  I'm  doing.  I  wanted  to  get  up  from  this  chair  and  run.  I
wanted  to  hit  something,  tear  up  something -anything.  Not  you,  just  anything.  I  just  wanted  to  get
up  and  tear.  1  had  no  control  of  myself. "  An  increase  in  intensity  up  to  5  milliamperes  again
resulted  in  similar  aggressive  manifestations,  and  she  raised  her  arm  as  if  to  strike.

It  is  notable  that  although  the  patients  seemed  to  be  out  of  control  in  these  two  instances  of
electrically  induced  aggression,  they  did  not  attack  the  interviewer,  indicating  that  they  were
aware  of  their  social  situation.  This  finding  is  reminiscent  of  the  behavior  of  stimulated  monkeys
who  directed  their  aggressiveness  according  to  previous  experience  and  social  rank  and  did  not
dare  to  challenge  the  authority  of  well-established  bosses,  Apparently  ESB  can  induce  a  state  of
increased  violent  reactivity  which  is  expressed  in  accordance  with  individual  structure  and
environmental  circumstances.  We  may  conclude  therefore  that  artificially  evoked  emotional
change  is  only  one  more  factor  in  the  constellation  of  behavioral  determinants.

Pleasurable  Excitation  of  the  Animal  Brain

It  is  surprising  that  in  science  as  well  as  in  literature  more  attention  has  been  paid  to  suffering
than  to  happiness.  The  central  theme  of  most  novels  is  tragedy,  while  happy  books  are  hard  to
find;  excellent  monographs  have  been  published  about  pain,  but  similar  studies  of  pleasure  are
nonexistent.  Typically,  in  the  monumental  Handbook  of  the  American  Physiological  Society  (75),
a  full  chapter  is  devoted  to  pain,  and  pleasure  is  not  even  listed  in  the  general  subject  index.
Evidently  the  pursuit  of  happiness  has  not  aroused  as  much  -scientific  interest  as  the  fear  of
pain.

In  Psychological  literature  the  study  of  reward  is  well  represented,  but  even  there  it  has  been
considered  a  second-rate  sensation  and  perhaps  an  artifact  of  a  diminution  of  pain.  It  has  been
postulated  that  a  truly  "pleasant"  sensation  could  not  exist  because  organisms  have  a  continuous
tendency  to  minimize  incoming  stimuli.  Pleasure  was  thus  considered  a  subjective  name  for  the
diminution  of  drive,  the  withdrawal  of  a  strong  stimulation,  or  the  reduction  of  pain.  This  "pain
reduction"  theory  (154)  has  been  fruitful  as  a  basis  for  psychological  investigations,  but  it  is
gloomy  to  think  that  we  live  in  a  'world  of  punishment  in  which  the  only  reality  is  suffering  and
that  our  brain  can  perceive  different  degrees  of  pain  but  no  real  pleasure.  Interest  in  the  earlier
ideas  of  hedonism  has  been  renewed  by  recent  experimental  studies.  According  to  this  theory,
pain  and  pleasure  are  relatively  independent  sensations  and  can  be  evoked  by  different  types  of
stimuli  which  are  recognized  by  separate  cerebral  mechanisms.  Behavior  is  considered  to  be
motivated  by  stimuli  which  the  organism,  tries  to  minimize  (pain)  or  by  stimuli  which  the
organism  tries  to  maximize  (pleasure).  The  brain  is  thought  to  have  different  systems  for


the  reception  of  these  two  kinds  of  inputs,  and  the  psychology  of  pleasure  or  reward  can  be
determined  not  only  by  the  stated  termination  of  pain  but  also  by  the  onset  of  primary  pleasure.
The  discovery  of  two  anatomically  distinct  mechanisms  in  the  brain,  one  for  punishment,  as
mentioned  earlier,  and  one  for  reward,  provides  a  physiological  basis  for  the  ducdistic
motivation  postulated  in  hedonism  (62,  165).

The  surprising  fact  is  that  animals  of  different  species,  including  rats,  cats,  and  monkeys,  have
voluntarily  chosen  to  press  a  lever  which  provides  electrical  stimulation  of  specific  cerebral
areas.  The  demonstrations  are  highly  convincing  because  animals  which  initially  pressed  a  lever
to  obtain  the  reward  of  sugar  pellets  later  pressed  at  similar  or  higher  rates  when  electrical
stimulation  was  substituted  for  food.  These  experiments  showed  conclusively  that  the  animals
enjoyed  the  electrical  impulses  which  were  delivered  only  at  their  own  demand.  Watching  a  rat
or  monkey  stimulate  its  own  brain  is  a  fascinating  spectacle.  Usually  each  lever  pressing
triggers  a  brief  0.5 -to- 1.0  second  brain  stimulation  which  can  be  more  rewarding  than  food.  In  a
choice  situation,  hungry  rats  ran  faster  to  reach  the  self- stimulation  lever  than  to  obtain  pellets,
and  they  persistently  pressed  this  lever,  ignoring  food  within  easy  reach.  Rats  have  removed
obstacles,  run  mazes,  and  even  crossed  electrified  floors  to  reach  the  lever  that  provided
cerebral  stimulation.

Not  all  areas  of  the  brain  involved  in  pleasurable  effects  appear  equally  responsive.  The  highest
lever-pressing  rates  (of  up  to  a  remarkable  5,000  times  per  hour)  were  recorded  by  animals  self-
stimulating  in  the  posterior  hypothalamus;  excitation  of  rhinencephalic  structures  (of  only  about
200  times  per  hour)  was  considered  moderately  rewarding;  and  in  sensory  or  motor  areas,
animals  self- stimulated  at  merely  a  chance  level  (of  10  to  25  times  per  hour),  and  these  areas
were  classified  as  neutral.  As  should  be  expected,  when  stimulation  was  shifted  from  rewarding
areas  to  nuclei  in  the  punishment  system  in  the  same  animals,  they  pressed  the  lever  once  and
never  went  back,  showing  that  in  the  brain  of  the  same  animal  there  were  two  different  groups  of
structures,  one  rewarding  and  the  other  aversive.

A  systematic  analysis  of  the  neuroanatomical  distribution  of  pleasurable  areas  in  the  rat  (164)
shows  that  6o  per  cent  of  the  brain  is  neutral,  35  per  cent  is  rewarding,  and  only  5  per  cent  may
elicit  punishing  effects.  The  idea  that  far  more  brain  is  involved  in  pleasure  than  in  suffering  is
rather  optimistic  and  gives  hope  that  this  predominance  of  the  potential  for  pleasurable
sensations  can  be  developed  into  a  more  effective  behavioral  reality.

Because  of  the  lack  of  verbal  communication  with  animals,  any  ideas  about  what  kind  of
pleasure,  if  any,  may  be  experienced  during  ESB  is  a  matter  of  speculation.  There  are  some
indications,  however,  that  the  perceived  sensations  could  be  related  to  anatomical  differentiation
of  primary  rewards  of  food  and  sex,  because  hungry  animals  self-stimulated  at  a  higher  rate  in
the  middle  hypothalamus,  while  administration  of  sexual  hormones  to  castrated  rats  increased
their  lever  pressing  of  more  lateral  hypothalamic  points.

The  controversial  issue  of  how  these  findings  in  animals  may  relate  to  human  behavior  and  the
possible  existence  of  areas  involved  in  pleasure  in  the  human  brain  has  been  resolved  by  the
information  obtained  in  patients  with  implanted  electrodes.


Human  Pleasure  Evoked  by  ESB


On  the  basis  of  many  studies  during  cerebral  surgery,  Penfield  (174)  has  said  of  anger,  joy,
pleasure,  and  sexual  excitement  in  the  human  brain  that  "so  far  as  our  experience  goes,  neither
localized  epileptic  discharge  nor  electrical  stimulation  is  capable  of  awakening  any  such
emotion.  One  is  tempted  to  believe  that  there  are  no  specific  cortical  mechanisms  associated
with  these  emotions. "  This  statement  still  holds  true  for  the  cerebral  cortex,  but  studies  in  human
subjects  with  implanted  electrodes  have  demonstrated  that  electrical  stimulation  of  the  depth  of
the  brain  can  induce  pleasurable  manifestations,  as  evidenced  by  the  spontaneous  verbal  reports
of  patients,  their  facial  expression  and  general  behavior,  and  their  desire  to  repeat  the
experience.  In  a  group  of  twenty-three  patients  suffering  from  schizophrenia  (98),  electrical
stimulation  of  the  septal  region,  located  deep  in  the  frontal  lobes,  produced  an  enhancement  of
alertness  sometimes  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  verbal  output,  euphoria,  or  pleasure.  In  a
more  systematic  study  in  another  group  of  patients,  further  evidence  was  presented  the
rewarding  effects  of  septal  stimulation  (20,  99).  One  man  suffering  from  narcolepsia  was
provided  with  a  small  stimulator  and  a  built-in  counter  which  recorded  the  number  of  times  that
he  voluntarily  stimulated  each  of  several  selected  points  in  his  brain  during  a  period  of
seventeen  weeks.  The  highest  score  was  recorded  front  one  point  in  the  septal  region,  and  the
patient  declared  that  pushing  this  particular  button  made  him  feel  "good"  as  if  he  were  building
up  to  a  sexual  orgasm,  although  he  was  not  able  to  reach  the  end  point  and  often  felt  impatient
and  anxious.  His  narcolepsia  was  greatly  relieved  by  pressing  this  '  septal  button. "  Another
patient  with  psychomotor  epilepsy  also  enjoyed  septal  self-stimulation,  which  again  had  the
highest  rate  ofbuttton  pressing  and  often  induced  sexual  thoughts,  Activation  of  the  septal
region  by  direct  injection  of  acetylcholine  produced  local  electrical  changes  in  two  epileptic
patients  and  a  shift  in  mood  from  disphoria  to  contentment  and  euphoria,  usually  with
concomitant  sexual  motivation  and  some  "orgastic  sensations. "

Further  information  was  provided  by  another  group  of  sixty -five  patients  suffering  from
schizophrenia  or  Parkinson's  disease,  in  whom  a  total  of 643  contacts  were  implanted,  mainly  in
the  anterior  part  of  the  brain  (201 ).  Results  of  ESB  were  grouped  as  follows:  360  points  were
"Positive  I, "  and  with  stimulation  "the  patients  became  relaxed,  at  ease,  had  a  feeling  of  well¬
being,  and/or  were  a  little  sleepy.  "Another  31  points  were  "Positive  II, "  and  "the  patients  were
definitely  changed  .  .  .  in  a  good  mood,  felt  good.  They  were  relaxed,  at  ease,  and  enjoyed
themselves,  frequently  smiling.  There  was  a  slight  euphoria,  but  the  behavior  was  adequate. "
They  sometimes  wanted  more  stimulations.  Excitation  of  another  eight  points  evoked  behavior
classified  as  "Positive  III, "  when  "the  euphoria  was  definitely  beyond  normal  limits.  The  patients
laughed  out  loud,  enjoyed  themselves,  and  positively  liked  the  stimulation,  and  wanted  more. "
ESB  of  another  38  points  gave  ambivalent  results,  and  the  patients  expressed  occasional
pleasure  or  displeasure  following  excitation  of  the  same  area.  From  three  other  points,
responses  were  termed  "orgasm"  because  the  patients  initially  expressed  enjoyment  and  then
suddenly  were  completely  satisfied  and  did  not  want  any  more  stimulation  for  a  variable  period
of  time.  Finally,  from  about  two  hundred  other  points,  ESB  produced  unpleasant  reactions
including  anxiety,  sadness,  depression,  fear,  and  emotional  outbursts.  One  of  the  moving
pictures  taken  in  this  study  was  very  demonstrative,  showing  a  patient  with  a  sad  expression  and
slightly  depressed  mood  who  smiled  when  a  brief  stimulation  was  applied  to  the  rostral  part  of
the  brain,  returning  quickly  to  his  usual  depressed  state,  to  smile  again  as  soon  as  stimulation


was  reapplied.  Then  a  ten- second  stimulation  completely  changed  his  behavior  and  facial
expression  into  a  lasting  pleasant  and  happy  mood.  Some  mental  patients  have  been  provided
with  portable  stimulators  which  they  have  used  in  self-treatment  of  depressive  states  with
apparent  clinical  success.


These  results  indicate  the  need  for  careful  functional  exploration  during  brain  surgery  in  order
to  avoid  excessive  euphoria  or  depression  when  positive  or  negative  reinforcing  areas  are
damaged.  Emotional  instability,  in  which  the  subject  bursts  suddenly  into  tears  or  laughter
without  any  apparent  reason,  has  been  ob sen’ ed  following  some  neurosurgical  interventions.
These  major  behavior  problems  might  have  been  avoided  by  sparing  the  region  involved  in
emotional  regulation.

In  our  own  experience,  pleasurable  sensations  were  observed  in  three  patients  with  psychomotor
epilepsy  (50,  58,  109).  The  first  case  was  V.P.,  a  36-year-old  female  with  a  long  history  of
epileptic  attacks  which  could  not  be  controlled  by  medication.

Electrodes  were  implanted  in  her  right  temporal  lobe  and  upon  stimulation  of  a  contact  located
in  the  superior  part  about  thirty  millimeters  below  the  surface,  the  patient  reported  a  pleasant
tingling  sensation  in  the  left,  side  of  her  body  "from  my  face  down  to  the  bottom  of  my  legs. "  She
started  giggling  and  making  funny  comments,  stating  that  she  enjoyed  the  sensation  "very  much. "
Repetition  of  these  stimulations  made  the  patient  more  communicative  and  flirtatious,  and  she
ended  by  openly  expressing  her  desire  to  marry  the  therapist.  Stimulation  of  other  cerebral
points  failed  to  modify  her  mood  and  indicated  the  specificity  of  the  evoked  effect.  During  control
interx’iews  before  and  after  ESB,  her  behavior  was  quite  proper,  without  familiarity  or  excessive
friendliness.

The  second  patient  was  J.M.,  an  attractive,  cooperative,  and  intelligent  30-year-old  female  who
had  suffered  for  eleven  years  from  psychomotor  and  grand  trial  attacks  which  resisted  medical
therapy.  Electrodes  were  implanted  in  her  right  temporal  lobe,  and  stimulation  of  one  of  the
points  in  the  amygdala  induced  a  pleasant  sensation  of  relaxation  and  considerably  increased
her  verbal  output,  which  took  on  a  more  intimate  character.  This  patient  openly  expressed  her
fondness  for  the  therapist  (who  was  new  to  her),  kissed  his  hands,  and  talked  about  her  immense
gratitude  for  what  was  being  done  for  her.  A  similar  increase  in  verbal  and  emotional  expression
was  repeated  when  the  same  point  was  stimulated  on  a  different  day,  but  it  did  not  appear  when
other  areas  of  the  brain  were  explored.  During  control  situations  the  patient  was  rather  reserved
and  poised.

The  third  case  was  A.F.,  an  11 -year-old  boy  with  severe  psychomotor  epilepsy.  Six  days  after
electrode  implantation  in  both  temporal  lobes,  his  fourth  tape-recorded  interview  was  carried
out  while  electrical  activity  of  the  brain  was  continuously  recorded  and  5 -second  stimulations
were  applied  in  a  prearranged  sequence  at  intervals  of  about  four  minutes.  The  interx’iewer
maintained  an  air  of  friendly  interest  throughout,  usually  without  initiating  conversation.  After
six  other  excitations,  point  LP  located  on  the  surface  of  the  left  temporal  lobe  was  stim-


ulatedfor  the  first  time,  and  there  was  an  open  and  precipitous  declaration  of  pleasure.  The
patient  had  been  silent  for  the  previous  five-minute  interx’cd,  but  immediately  after  this
stimulation  lie  exclaimed,  "Hey!  You  can  keep  me  here  longer  when  you  give  me  these;  l  like
those. "  He  went  on  to  insist  that  the  ongoing  brain  tests  made  him  feel  good.  Similar  statements
with  an  emphatic  expression  of  "feeling  good"  followed  eight  of  a  total  sixteen  stimulations  of
this  point  during  the  ninety-minute  interview.  Severed  of  these  manifestations  were  accompanied
by  a  statement  of  fondness  for  the  nude  interx’iewer,  and  the  last  one  was  accompanied  by  a
voluptuous  stretch.  None  of  these  manifestations  appeared  during  the  control  pre stimulation
period  of  twenty -six  minutes  or  during  the  twenty-two  minutes  when  other  points  were  excited.
Statistical  analysis  of  the  difference  between  the  frequency  of  pleasurable  expressions  before  and
after  onset  of  stimulations  proved  that  results  were  highly  significant  (P  <  0.00  1 ).

The  open  expressions  of  pleasure  in  this  interview  and  the  general  passivity  of  behavior  could  be
linked,  more  or  less  intuitively,  to  feminine  strivings.  It  was  therefore  remarkable  that  in  the  next
interview,  performed  in  a  similar  manner,  the  patient  's  expressions  of  confusion  about  his  own
sexual  identity  again  appeared  following  stimulation  of  point  LP.  He  suddenly  began  to  discuss
his  desire  to  get  married,  but  when  asked,  "To  whom?"  he  did  not  immediately  reply.  Following
stimulation  of  another  point  and  a  one-minute,  twenty-second  silence,  the  patient  said,  "I  was
thinking-there's-I  was  saying  this  to  you.  How  to  spell  'yes'-y-e-s.  I  mean  y-o-s.  No!  'You'  ain't  y-
e-o.  It's  this.  Y-o-u. "  The  topic  was  then  completely  dropped.  The  monitor  who  was  listening  from
the  next  room  interpreted  this  as  a  thinly  veiled  wish  to  marry  the  interviewer,  and  it  was  decided
to  stimulate  the  same  site  again  after  the  prearranged  schedule  had  been  completed,  During  the
following  forty  minutes,  seven  other  points  were  stimulated,  and  the  patient  spoke  about  severed
topics  of  a  completely  different  and  unrelated  content.  Then  LP  was  stimulated  again,  and  the
patient  started  making  references  to  the  facial  hear  of  the  interviewer  and  continued  by
mentioning  pubic  hear  and  his  having  been  the  object  of  genital  sex  play  in  the  past.  He  then
expressed  doubt  about  his  sexual  identity,  saying,  "I  was  thinkin'  if  I  was  a  boy  or  a  girl-which
one  I'd  like  to  be. "  Following  another  excitation  he  remarked  with  evident  pleasure:  "You're
doin '  it  now, "  and  then  he  said,  "I'd  like  to  be  a  girl. "

In  the  interpretation  of  these  results  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  psychological  context  in
which  electrical  stimulation  occurs,  because  the  personality  configuration  of  the  subject,
including  both  current  psychodynamic  and  psychogenetic  aspects,  may  be  an  essential
determinant  of  the  results  of  stimulation.  Expression  of  feminine  strivings  in  our  patient  probably
was  not  the  exclusive  effect  ofESB  but  the  expression  of  already  present  personality  factors
which  were  activated  by  the  stimulation.  The  bcdance  between  drive  and  defense  may  be
modified  by  ESB,  as  suggested  by  the  fact  that  after  one  stimulation  the  patient  said  without
apparent  anxiety,  "I'd  like  to  be  a  girl, "  but  when  this  idea  was  presented  to  him  by  the  therapist
in  a  later  interview  without  stimulation,  the  patient  became  markedly  anxious  and  defensive.
Minute-to-minute  changes  in  personality  function,  influenced  by  the  environment  and  by  patient-
interviewer  relations,  may  modify  the  nature  of  specific  responses,  and  these  variables,  which
are  difficult  to  assess,  must  be  kept  in  mind.


Friendliness  and  Increased  Conversation  Under  Electrical  Control


Human  relations  evolve  between  the  two  opposite  poles  of  love  and  hate  which  are  determined
by  a  highly  complex  and  little  understood  combination  of  elements  including  basic  drives,
cultural  imprinting,  and  refined  emotioned  and  intellectual  characteristics.  This  subject  has  so
many  semantic  and  conceptual  problems  that  few  investigators  have  dared  to  approach  it
experimentally,  and  in  spite  of  its  essential  importance,  most  textbooks  of  psychology  evade  its
discussion.  To  define  friendliness  is  difficult  although  its  identification  in  typical  cases  is  easy,
and  in  our  daily  life  we  are  continuously  evaluating  and  classifying  personed  contacts  as  friendly
or  hostile.  A  smiling  face,  attentive  eyes,  a  receptive  hand,  related  body  posture,  intellectual
interest,  ideological  agreement,  kind  words,  sympathetic  comments,  and  expressions  of  personed
acceptance  are  among  the  common  indicators  of  cordial  interpersonal  relations.  The  expression
of  friendship  is  a  part  of  socicd  behavior  which  obviously  requires  contact  between  two  or  more
individuals.  A  mutually  pleasurable  relation  creates  a  history  and  provides  each  individual  with
a  variety  of  optic,  acoustic,  tactile,  and  other  stimuli  which  are  received  and  interpreted  with  a
"friendly  bias. "  The  main  characteristic  of  love  and  friendship  is  precisely  that  stimuli  coming
from  a  favored  person  are  interpreted  as  more  agreeable  than  similar  stimuli  originating  from
other  sources,  and  this  evaluation  is  necessarily  related  to  neuronal  activity.

Little  is  known  about  the  cerebral  mechanisms  of  friendliness,  but  as  is  the  case  for  any
behavioral  manifestation,  no  emotioned  state  is  possible  without  a  functioning  bredn,  and  it  may
be  postulated  that  some  cerebral  structures  are  dispensable  and  others  indispensable  both  for
the  interpretation  of  sensory  inputs  as  amicable  and  for  the  expression  of  friendship.  Strong
support  for  this  idea  derives  from  the  fact,  repeatedly  proved  in  neurosurgery,  that  destruction  of
some  parts  of  the  brain,  such  as  the  motor  and  sensory  cortices,  produces  motor  deficits  without
modifying  affective  behavior,  while  ablation  of  the  frontal  lobes  may  induce  considerable
alteration  of  emotional  personality.  Further  support  has  been  provided  by  electrical  stimulation
of  the  frontal  lobes,  which  may  induce  friendly  manifestations.

In  patient  A.  F.,  mentioned  earlier  in  connection  with  pleasurable  manifestations,  the  third  inter¬
view  was  characterized  by  changes  in  the  character  and  a  degree  of  verbal  output  following
stimulation  of  one  point  in  the  temporal  cortex.  Fourteen  stimulations  were  applied,  seven  of
them  through  point  RP  located  in  the  inferolateral  part  of  the  right  frontal  lobe  cortex,  and  the
other  seven  through  contacts  located  on  the  cortex  of  the  right  temporal  lobe  and  depth  of  the
left  and  right  temporal  lobes.  The  interview  started  with  about  five  minutes  of  lively
conversation,  and  during  the  next  ten  minutes  the  patient  gradually  quieted  down  until  he  spoke
only  about  five  seconds  during  every  subsequent  two-minute  period.  Throughout  the  interview
the  therapist  encouraged  spontaneous  expression  by  reacting  compassionately,  by  joking  with,
urging,  and  reassuring  the  patient,  and  by  responding  to  any  information  offered.  The  attitude
never  produced  more  than  a  simple  reply  and  often  not  even  that.

In  contrast  to  this  basic  situation,  there  were  six  instances  of  sharp  increase  in  verbal
communication  and  its  friendly  content.  Each  of  these  instances  followed  within  forty  seconds
after  stimulation  of  point  RP.  The  only  exception  was  the  last  excitation  of  this  point  when  the
voltage  had  been  changed.  The  increases  in  verbal  activity  were  rapid  but  brief  and  without  any
consistency  in  subject  material,  which  was  typical  for  the  patient.  Qualification  and


quantification  of  the  patient  's  conversation  was  made  by  analyzing  the  recorded  typescript  which
was  divided  into  two-minute  periods  and  judged  independently  by  two  investigators  who  had  no
knowledge  of  the  timing  or  location  of  stimulations.  Comparison  of  the  two-minute  periods
before  and  after  these  stimulations  revealed  a  verbal  increase  from  seventeen  to  eighty-eight
words  -and  a  greater  number  of  friendly  remarks,  from  six  to  fifty-three.  These  results  were
highly  significant  and  their  specificity  was  clear  because  no  changes  in  verbalization  were
produced  by  stimulation  of  any  of  the  other  cerebral  points.  It  was  also  evident  that  the  evoked
changes  were  not  related  to  the  interviewer's  rather  constant  verbal  activity.  It  was  therefore
concluded  that  the  impressive  increase  in  verbal  expression  and  friendly  remarks  was  the  result
of  electrical  stimulation  of  a  specific  point  on  the  cortex  of  the  temporal  lobe.


Chapter  15

Hallucinations,  Recollections,  and  Illusions  in  Man

Hallucinations  may  be  defined  as  false  perceptions  in  the  absence  of  peripheral  sensory
stimulation,  and  they  probably  depend  on  two  processes:  (1)  the  recollection  of  stored
information  and  (2)  its  false  interpretation  as  an  extrinsic  experience  entering  through  sensory
inputs.  Very  little  is  known  about  the  cerebral  mechanisms  responsible  for  these  phenomena,  but
apparently  the  frontotemporal  region  of  the  brain  is  somehow  involved  because  its  electrical
stimulation  may  evoke  hallucinations.

In  some  patients  electrical  stimulation  of  the  exposed  temporal  lobe  has  produced  the  perception
of  music.  Occasionally  it  was  a  determined  tune  which  could  be  recognized  and  hummed  by  the
subject,  and  in  some  cases  it  was  as  if  a  radio  or  record  were  being  played  in  the  operating  room.
The  sound  did  not  seem  to  be  a  recollection  but  resembled  an  actual  experience  in  which
instruments  of  an  orchestra  or  words  of  a  song  were  heard  (174).  These  artificially  induced
hallucinations  were  not  static  but  unfolded  slowly  while  the  electrode  was  held  in  place.  A  song
was  heard  from  beginning  to  end  and  not  all  at  once;  in  a  dream,  familiar  places  were  seen  and
well-known  people  spoke  and  acted.

Like  spontaneous  memories,  the  recollections  induced  by  ESB  could  bring  back  the  emotions  felt
at  the  time  of  the  original  experience,  suggesting  that  neuronal  mechanisms  keep  an  integrated
record  of  the  past,  including  all  the  sensory  inputs  (visual,  auditory,  proprioceptive,  etc.)  and  also
the  emotional  significance  of  events.  Electrical  stimulation  activated  only  one  memory  without
reawakening  any  of  the  other  records  which  must  be  stored  in  close  proximity.  This  fact  suggests
the  existence  of  cerebral  mechanisms  of  reciprocal  inhibition  which  allow  the  orderly  recall  of
specific  patterns  of  memory  without  a  flood  of  unmanageable  amounts  of  stored  information.  In
no  case  has  brain  stimulation  produced  two  psychical  experiences  at  the  same  time,  and  the
responses  have  been  on  an  all-or-nothing  basis.

In  one  of  our  patients,  complex  sensory  hallucinations  were  evoked  on  different  days  when  the
depth  of  the  tip  of  the  left  temporal  lobe  was  electrically  stimulated.  The  patient  said,  "You
know,  I  just  felt  funny,  just  now.  .  .  .  Right  then  all  of  a  sudden  somethin'  else  came  to  me  -  these
people  -the  way  this  person  talked.  This  married  couple-as  though  the  fellow  came  into  my


mind-as  though  like  he  was  saying  somethin'  like  oh  my  mind  drifted  for  a  minute-to  somethin'
foolish...  It  seemed  like  he  was  coming  out  with  some  word  -  sayin'  some  word  silly."


The  fact  that  stimulation  of  the  temporal  lobe  can  induce  complex  hallucinations  may  be
considered  well  established,  and  this  type  of  research  represents  a  significant  interaction  between
neurophysiology  and  psychoanalysis  (133).  The  mechanism  of  the  evoked  hallucinations,
however,  is  far  from  clear,  and  it  is  difficult  to  know  whether  the  experiences  are  new  creations
based  on  the  recombination  of  items  from  memory  storage  and  thus  equivalent  to  psychotic
hallucinations,  or  if  the  experiences  are  simply  an  exact  playback  of  the  past.  In  either  case,  the
applied  electricity  is  not  "creating"  a  new  phenomenon  but  is  triggering  the  orderly  appearance  at
the  conscious  level  of  materials  from  the  past,  mixed  in  some  cases  with  present  perceptions.  The
order  in  the  stream  of  perceived  information  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  interesting  qualities  of
this  behavior  because  it  indicates  something  about  the  mechanisms  for  storage  of  information  in
the  brain.  Memory  does  not  seem  to  be  preserved  as  single  items  but  as  inter-related  collections
of  events,  like  the  pearls  on  a  string,  and  by  pulling  any  pearl  we  have  access  to  the  whole  series
in  perfect  order.  If  memory  were  organized  in  this  way,  it  would  be  similar  to  the  strings  of
amino  acids  forming  molecules  of  proteins  and  carrying  genetic  messages.  Electrical  stimulation
may  increase  general  neuronal  excitability;  and  the  memory  traces  which  at  this  moment  have  a
lower  threshold  may  consequently  be  reactivated,  reaching  the  perceptual  level  and  forming  the
content  of  the  hallucinatory  experience  while  exerting  a  reciprocal  inhibitory  influence  upon
other  traces.  The  excitability  of  individual  traces  may  be  modified  by  environmental  factors  and
especially  by  the  ideological  content  of  the  patient's  thoughts  prior  to  stimulation.  Thus  electrical
excitation  of  the  same  point  may  produce  a  series  of  thematically  related  hallucinatory
experiences  with  different  specific  details,  as  was  the  case  in  the  patients  that  we  have
investigated.

All  sensory  inputs  suffer  distortion  during  the  normal  process  of  personal  interpretation,  which  is
determined  to  a  great  extent  by  past  experience  and  depends  heavily  on  cultural  factors.  A  baby
looking  at  the  moon  may  extend  his  arms  in  an  attempt  to  catch  it  without  realizing  the
remoteness  of  celestial  bodies.  By  comparing  past  and  present  experiences,  we  learn  to  evaluate
distance,  size,  intensity,  and  other  qualities  of  inputs.  The  mechanisms  for  these  evaluations  do
not  seem  to  be  genetically  determined  and  are  related  to  neuronal  activity  which  may  be
influenced  by  direct  stimulation  of  the  brain.  We  must  remember  that  our  only  way  to  be  in  touch
with  external  reality  is  by  transducing  physical  and  chemical  events  of  the  surroundings  into
electrical  and  chemical  sequences  at  the  sensory  receptor  level.  The  brain  is  not  in  touch  with  the
environmental  reality  but  with  its  symbolic  code  transmitted  by  neuronal  pathways.  Within  this
frame  of  personal  distortion,  our  lives  evolve  within  a  range  of  "normality."  Beyond  this  range,
the  distortion  of  perceptions  qualifies  as  illusion.  Illusions  occur  in  a  wide  variety  of  regressed
mental  states,  during  moments  of  keen  anticipation,  and  as  a  primary  manifestation  in  some
epileptic  discharges.  A  hallucination  is  a  false  perception  in  the  absence  of  sensory  inputs,  while
an  illusion  requires  an  external  sensory  source  which  is  misinterpreted  by  the  individual.  This
distinction  is  convenient,  and  it  will  be  observed  in  our  discussion,  although  in  practice  the  terms
often  overlap.


The  following  phenomena  have  been  observed  in  patients:  (1)  illusions  (visual,  auditory,
labyrinthine,  memory  or  deja  vu,  sensation  of  remoteness  or  unreality,  (2:)  emotions  (loneliness,
fear,  sadness),  (3)  psychical  hallucinations  (vivid  memory  or  a  dream  as  complex  as  life
experience  itself,  and  (4)  forced  thinking  (stereotyped  thoughts  crowding  into  the  mind).

The  first  three  groups  of  phenomena  have  been  induced  by  different  intracerebral  stimulations.
The  most  commonly  reported  effect  has  been  the  illusion  of  familiarity  or  deja  vu,  which  is
characterized  by  surprise,  interruption  of  conversation,  and  immediate  spontaneous  reporting  that
something  unusual  had  just  happened.  For  example,  after  a  stimulation  in  the  inferolateral  part  of
the  frontal  lobe,  one  patient  began  to  reply  to  the  interviewer's  question  but  suddenly  stopped  and
said,  "I  was  thinkin'  -  it  felt  like  someone  else  was  asking  me  that  before."  Occasionally  a
previously  initiated  statement  would  be  completed,  but  there  was  always  an  overt  desire  to
express  the  perceived  experience.  The  effect  was  clearly  felt  as  intrusive  although  not  disturbing.
After  several  of  these  experiences,  the  patient  recognized  the  special  quality  of  the  phenomena
and  said,  for  example,  "Hey  - 1  had  another  strike.  I  have  a  feeling  that  someone  once  told  me
that  before."  The  reliability  of  the  response  was  remarkable,  as  was  the  consistency  of  its
reporting,  which  was  spontaneous  and  in  most  cases  unsolicited.  Each  instance  consisted  usually
of  a  reference  to  a  remark  made  by  the  patient  or  the  observer  just  before  or  during  the  moment
of  stimulation.  The  ideational  content  of  the  deja  vu  was  therefore  dissimilar  following  each
stimulation,  but  it  always  referred  to  the  theme  of  the  ongoing  conversation.

The  common  feature  was  the  sensation,  expressed  by  the  patient,  that  the  words,  ideas,  or
situation  were  similar  to  a  previous  experience.  There  was  no  new  perception,  only  the
interpretation  of  a  novel  input  as  one  already  known  and  familiar.  There  was  no  anxiety  or  fear  in
the  perception  of  these  illusions,  and  the  apparent  effect  was  one  of  interested  surprise  with  a
rather  pleasant,  amusing  quality  which  made  the  patient  more  alert  and  communicative.  He  was
eager  to  report  that  something  similar  had  happened  before,  and  the  word  "before"  was  used  in
reporting  most  of  these  incidents.  No  lasting  traces  could  be  detected,  and  after  the  sensation  of
familiarity  had  been  expressed,  the  patient's  behavior  continued  in  the  same  vein  as  before
stimulation.

Knowledge  of  the  cerebral  mechanisms  of  psychic  activities  is  so  elemental  that  it  would  not  be
wise  to  speculate  about  the  neuronal  causality  of  illusions  of  familiarity.  However,  the  fact  that
they  may  be  elicited  with  reliability  indicates  the  probable  existence  of  interpretive  functions  in  a
determined  area  of  the  brain  and  opens  the  way  for  further  experiments  and  studies  of  how
sensory  inputs  are  processed  by  the  individual.  Penfield  supposes  that  the  cortex  of  the  temporal
lobe  has  a  ganglionic  mechanism  which  is  utilized  in  the  personal  assessment  of  experiential
reality  regarding  distance,  sound,  sight,  intensity,  strangeness,  or  familiarity  of  sensory  inputs.
This  mechanism  would  be  relatively  independent  from  the  mechanism  utilized  in  the  recording
of  contemporary  experience  and  could  be  affected  by  epileptic  abnormality  or  by  direct  brain
stimulation.  If  we  accept  this  hypothesis,  we  may  assume  that  artificial  influencing  of  electrical
and  chemical  neuronal  physiology  could  play  a  decisive  role  in  the  interpretation  of  reality  with
some  independence  from  past  experience  and  personal  structure.


Chapter  16

Inhibitory  Effects  in  Animals  and  Man

The  existence  of  inhibitory  functions  in  the  central  nervous  system  was  described  in  the  last
century  by  Sechenov  (198),  Pavlov  (171),  and  other  founders  of  Russian  psychology.  Inhibition
is  a  well-known  phenomenon,  and  it  has  been  the  main  theme  of  several  recent  symposiums  (14,
63,  77).  In  spite  of  its  importance,  information  about  inhibitory  mechanisms  has  not  yet  been
integrated  into  the  general  body  of  scientific  knowledge,  and  no  chapter  is  devoted  to  this  subject
in  most  neurophysiological,  psychological,  and  pharmacological  textbooks.  This  lack  of  interest
is  surprising  because  as  Morgan  (158)  wrote  eighty  years  ago,  "When  physiologists  have  solved
the  problem  of  inhibition  they  will  be  in  a  position  to  consider  that  of  volition,"  and  modern
investigators  maintain  that  inhibition  and  choice,  rather  than  expression  and  learning,  are  the
central  problems  of  psychology  (63).  A  shift  in  interest  among  scientists  seems  necessary  to  give
inhibition  its  deserved  importance,  and  the  layman  should  also  be  aware  of  the  decisive  role  of
inhibition  in  the  performance  of  most  of  our  daily  activities.

The  sound  of  a  theater  crowd  at  intermission  is  a  continuous  roar  without  intelligible  meaning.
During  the  performance,  however,  noises  and,  individual  conversations  must  be  inhibited  so  that
the  voices  of  the  actors  can  be  heard.  The  brain  is  like  a  monumental  theater  with  many  millions
of  neurons  capable  of  sending  messages  simultaneously  and  in  many  directions.  Most  of  these
neurons  are  firing  nearly  continuously,  and  their  sensitivity  is  like  that  of  an  enormous  synaptic
powder  barrel  which  would  explode  in  epileptic  convulsions  in  the  absence  of  inhibitory
elements  (122).  During  the  organized  performance  of  behavioral  responses,  most  neurons  and
pathways  must  remain  silent  to  allow  meaningful  orders  to  circulate  toward  specific  goals.
Inhibition  is  as  important  as  excitation  for  the  normal  physiology  of  the  brain,  and  some
structures  have  specialized  inhibitory  functions.  It  should  therefore  be  expected  that,  in  addition
to  inducing  the  many  types  of  activities  described  in  previous  sections,  ESB  can  also  block
performance  of  such  activities  by  exciting  pools  of  neurons  whose  role  is  to  inhibit  these  specific
responses.

To  behave  is  to  choose  one  pattern  among  many.  To  think  we  must  proceed  in  some  orderly
fashion  repressing  unrelated  ideas;  to  talk  we  must  select  a  sequence  of  appropriate  words;  and  to
listen  we  need  to  extract  certain  information  from  background  noise.  As  stated  by  Ashby,  we
must  "dispose  once  and  for  all  of  the  idea... that  the  more  communication  there  is  within  the  brain
the  better"  (6).  As  we  know  by  personal  experience,  one  of  the  problems  of  modern  civilization
is  the  confusion  produced  by  a  barrage  of  sensory  inputs.  We  are  optically  and  acoustically
assaulted  by  scientific  literature,  news  media,  propaganda,  and  advertisements.  The  defense  is  to
inhibit  the  processing  of  sensory  stimuli.  Conscious  and  unconscious  behavioral  inhibition
should  not  be  considered  passive  processes  but  active  restraints,  like  holding  the  reins  of  a
powerful  horse,  which  prevent  the  disorderly  display  of  existing  energies  and  potentialities.

Within  the  central  nervous  system,  the  reticular  formation  seems  to  be  especially  differentiated  to
modulate  or  inhibit  the  reception  of  sensory  impulses,  and  some  other  cerebral  structures
including  the  thalamus,  septum,  and  caudate  nucleus  also  possess  important  inhibitory  properties
which  can  be  activated  by  ESB.  Three  types  of  inhibitory  processes  may  be  induced  by  electrical
stimulation:  (1)  sleep,  which  usually  starts  slowly  and  can  easily  be  interrupted  by  sensory


stimuli;  (2)  general  inhibition,  which  affects  the  whole  body,  starts  as  soon  as  ESB  is  applied,
and  persists  in  spite  of  sensory  stimulation;  and  (3)  specific  inhibition,  which  appears
immediately,  affects  only  a  determined  pattern  of  behavior  such  as  aggression  or  food  intake,  and
may  or  may  not  be  modified  by  sensory  impulses.

One  example  of  sleep  induced  in  a  monkey  by  application  of  ESB  is  shown  in  Figure  18.  After
30  seconds  of  stimulation  in  the  septal  area,  the  animal's  eyes  started  closing,  his  head  lowered,
his  body  relaxed,  and  he  seemed  to  fall  into  a  natural  state  of  sleep.  In  response  to  noise  or  to
being  touched,  the  animal  would  slowly  open  his  eyes  and  look  around  with  a  dull  expression  for
a  few  seconds  before  falling  asleep  again.  Similar  results  have  been  obtained  in  free-ranging
monkeys  stimulated  by  radio.  In  this  situation  there  was  a  gradual  diminution  of  spontaneous
activity,  and  then  the  animals  began  to  doze,  closing  their  eyes  and  assuming  a  typical  sleeping
posture  with  heads  down  and  bodies  curved  over  the  knees.  Theoretically  it  should  be  possible  to
treat  chronic  insomnia  by  brain  stimulation,  or  to  establish  an  artificial  biological  clock  of  rest
and  activity  by  means  of  programmed  stimulation  of  inhibitory  and  excitatory  areas  of  the  brain,
but  these  challenging  possibilities  still  require  further  investigations.

Motor  arrest  is  an  impressive  effect  consisting  of  sudden  immobilization  of  the  experimental
animal  in  the  middle  of  ongoing  activities,  which  continue  as  soon  as  stimulation  is  over.  It  is  as
if  a  motion  picture  projector  had  been  stopped,  freezing  the  subjects  in  the  position  in  which  they
were  caught.  A  cat  lapping  milk  has  been  immobilized  with  its  tongue  out,  and  a  cat  climbing
stairs  has  been  stopped  between  two  steps.

Other  types  of  inhibitory  effects  are  more  specific  and  restricted  to  only  one  determined
behavioral  category.  Typical  examples  are  the  inhibition  of  food  intake,  aggressiveness,
territoriality,  and  maternal  behavior.  As  these  specific  inhibitions  influence  general  activities,
they  could  pass  unnoticed  if  the  experimental  situation  was  not  properly  arranged.  Obviously
inhibition  of  appetite  cannot  be  demonstrated  in  the


Figure  18

Sleep  induced  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  is  similar  to  spontaneous  sleep.  Above,  control.
Below,  the  monkey  falls  alseep  under  ESB.


absence  of  food,  nor  can  changes  in  maternal  behavior  be  investigated  when  no  babies  are
present.  One  example  of  how  a  hungry  monkey  loses  appetite  under  the  influence  of  brain
excitation  is  presented  in  Figure  19.  At  the  sight  of  a  banana,  the  animal  usually  shows  great
interest,  leaning  forward  to  take  the  fruit,  which  he  eats  voraciously  and  with  evident  pleasure.
However,  his  appetite  is  immediately  inhibited  as  soon  as  the  caudate  nucleus  is  electrically


stimulated.  Then  the  monkey  looks  with  some  interest  at  the  banana  without  reaching  for  it,  and
may  even  turn  his  face  away,  clearly  expressing  refusal.  During  stimulation  the  animal  is  well
aware  of  his  surroundings,  Reacting  normally  to  noises,  moving  objects,  and  threats,  but  he  is
just  not  interested  in  food.  If  a  monkey  is  stimulated  when  his  mouth  is  full  of  banana,  he
immediately  stops  chewing,  takes  the  banana  out  of  his  mouth,  and  throws  it  away.

Close  to  the  hunger  inhibitory  area  there  is  a  region  which  is  involved  in  inhibition  of  aggressive
behavior.  When  this  part  of  the  caudate  nucleus  is  stimulated  (Figure  2o),  the  normally  ferocious
macacus  rhesus  becomes  tranquil,  and  instead  of  grabbing,  scratching,  and  biting  any
approaching  object,  he  sits  peacefully  and  the  investigator  can  safely  touch  his  mouth  and  pet
him.  During  this  time  the  animal  is  aware  of  the  environment  but  has  simply  lost  his  usual
irritability,  showing  that  violence  can  be  inhibited  without  making  the  animal  sleepy  or
depressed.  Identification  of  the  cerebral  areas  responsible  for  ferocity  would  make  it  possible  to
block  their  function  and  diminish  undesirable  aggressiveness  without  disturbing  general
behavioral  reactivity.

Similar  results  have  been  obtained  in  chimpanzees,  and  one  example  is  presented  in  Figure  19.
Chimpanzee  Carlos  was  an  affectionate  animal  who  enjoyed  playing  with  the  investigators  and
had  learned  a  variety  of  tricks  including  throwing  and  catching  a  ball.  Enticed  by  an  expected
food  reward,  he  sat  voluntarily  in  the  restraining  chair  where  recordings  and  experiments  were
conducted.  Like  most  chimpanzees,  Carlos  was


Figure  19

The  normal  reaction  of  a  monkey  is  to  stretch  its  arms  and  body  to  take  an  offered  banana  (above  left).
Appetite  is  immediately  inhibited  by  stimulation  of  the  caudate  nucleus  (below  left).  The  monkey  is  not
interested  in  food  (above)  and  even  turns  away  from  the  fruit  (53).  Photo:  Erick  Schaal.


Figure  20

Rhesus  monkies  are  usually  ferocious  and  will  often  launch  attacks,  trying  to  catch  and  bite  the
observers  (above).  This  ferocity  is  inhibited  during  stimulation  of  the  claudate  nucleus,  and  then  (below)
it  is  safe  to  touch  the  animal,  which  extends  its  arms  to  meet  the  observer's  hands  without  making  any
threatening  gestures.  (53).


Figure  21

Chimpanzee  Carlos  reacts  with  offensive-defensive  manifestations  when  touched  by  a  stranger  (left).
During  claudate  stimulation,  the  chimpanzee  is  inhibited  and  can  be  teased  without  evoking  any
response.


rather  temperamental  and  was  easily  provoked  into  a  tantrum  by  being  punished,  frustrated,  or
merely  teased.  He  liked  to  be  touched  by  people  he  knew  but  not  by  strangers.  Figure  21  (left)
shows  his  defensive,  anxious  reaction  when  approached  by  an  unfamiliar  investigator.  His  fear
and  aggressive  manifestations  were,  however,  completely  inhibited  during  electrical  stimulation
of  the  caudate  nucleus,  as  shown  in  Figure  21  (right).  The  animal  displayed  no  emotion,
appeared  peaceful,  and  could  be  teased  without  any  resulting  disturbance.

Other  experiments  in  monkeys  have  also  confirmed  the  pacifying  possibilities  of  ESB.  In  the
autocratic  social  structure  of  a  monkey  colony  the  boss  enjoys  a  variety  of  privileges  such  as
choosing  female  partners,  feeding  first,  displacing  other  animals,  and  occupying  most  of  the  cage
while  the  other  monkeys  avoid  his  proximity  and  crowd  together  in  a  far  comer  (see  Figure  22).
This  hierarchical  position  is  maintained  by  subtle  communication  of  gestures  and  postures:  a
boss  may  look  directly  at  a  submissive  member  of  the  group  who  will  glance  only  furtively  at  his
superior,  and  the  boss  may  paw  the  floor  and  threaten  by  opening  his  mouth  or  uttering  a
warning  cry  if  any  low-ranking  animal  does  not  keep  a  suitable  distance.  This  social  dominance
has  been  abolished  by  stimulation  applied  for  5  seconds  once  a  minute  for  one  hour  to  the
caudate  nucleus  in  the  boss  monkey.  During  this  period  the  animal's  facial  expression  appeared
more  peaceful  both  to  the  investigator  and  to  the  other  animals,  who  started  to  circulate  freely
around  the  cage  without  observing  their  usual  respect.  They  actually  ignored  the  boss,  crowding
around  him  without  fear.  During  the  stimulation  hour,  the  boss's  territoriality  completely
disappeared,  his  walking  time  diminished,  and  he  performed  no  threatening  or  aggressive  acts
against  other  monkeys  in  the  colony.  It  was  evident  that  this  change  in  behavior  had  been
determined  by  brain  stimulation  because  about  ten  minutes  after  ESB  was  discontinued,  the  boss
had  reasserted  his  authority  and  the  other  animals  feared  him  as  before.  His  territoriality  was  as
well  established  as  during  control  periods,  and  he  enjoyed  his  customary  privileges.


Figure  22

Monkey  colonies  from  autocratic  societies  in  which  the  territorially  of  the  boss  is  clearly  shown.  He
occupies  more  than  half  of  the  cage  (above).  Radio  stimulation  of  an  inhibitory  area  of  the  brain  (below)


modifies  the  boss's  facial  expressions,  and  the  other  monkeys  crowd  fearlessly  around  the  former  boss
in  his  own  corner.


The  old  dream  of  an  individual  overpowering  the  strength  of  a  dictator  by  remote  control  has
been  fulfilled,  at  least  in  our  monkey  colonies,  by  a  combination  of  neurosurgery  and  electronics,
demonstrating  the  possibility  of  intraspecies  instrumental  manipulation  of  hierarchical
organization.  As  shown  in  Figure  23,  a  monkey  named  Ali,  who  was  the  powerful  and  ill-
tempered  chief  of  a  colony,  often  expressed  his  hostility  symbolically  by  biting  his  hand  or  by
threatening  other  members  of  the  group.  Radio  stimulation  in  Ali's  caudate  nucleus  blocked  his
usual  aggressiveness  so  effectively  that  the  animal  could  be  caught  inside  the  cage  without
danger  or  difficulty.  During  stimulation  he  might  walk  a  few  steps,  but  he  never  attempted  to
attack  another  animal.  Then  a  lever  was  attached  to  the  cage  wall,  and  if  it  was  pressed,  it
automatically  triggered  a  five  seconds'  radio  stimulation  of  Ali.  From  time  to  time  some  of  the
submissive  monkeys  touched  the  lever,  which  was  located  close  to  the  feeding  tray,  triggering
the  stimulation  of  Ali.  A  female  monkey  named  Elsa  soon  discovered  that  Ali's  aggressiveness
could  be  inhibited  by  pressing  the  lever,  and  when  Ali  threatened  her,  it  was  repeatedly  observed
that  Elsa  responded  by  lever  pressing.  Her  attitude  of  looking  straight  at  the  boss  was  highly
significant  because  a  submissive  monkey  would  not  dare  to  do  so,  for  fear  of  immediate
retaliation.  The  total  number  of  Ali's  aggressive  acts  diminished  on  the  days  when  the  lever  was
available,  and  although  Elsa  did  not  become  the  dominant  animal,  she  was  responsible  for
blocking  many  attacks  against  herself  and  for  maintaining  a  peaceful  coexistence  within  the
whole  colony.

Appeasement  of  instinctive  aggressiveness  has  also  been  demonstrated  in  an  animal  species
which  for  generations  has  been  bred  to  increase  its  ferocious  behavior:  the  brave  bull.  Some
races  of  bulls  have  been  genetically  selected  for  their  aggressive  behavior  just  as  others  have
been  bred  for  farm  work  or  meat  supply.  Brave  bulls  are  stronger  and  more  agile  than  their  tamer


relatives,  and  these  differences  in  appearance  and  behavior  must  be  supported  at  the
neurophysiological  level  by  different


Figure  23

Above,  Ali,  the  boss  of  the  colony,  expresses  his  ill  temper  by  biting  his  own  hand.

Below,  a  submissive  monkey,  Elsa,  has  learned  to  press  a  lever  which  triggers  radio  stimulation  of

Ali, inhibiting  his  aggressive  behavior  (51).


"You  are  gettin'  on  my  last  nerve!"


mechanisms  of  responses.  The  sight  of  a  person,  which  is  neutral  for  a  tame  bull,  will  trigger  a
deadly  attack  in  a  brave  one.  If  we  could  detect  functional  differences  in  the  brains  of  these  two


breeds  we  could  discover  some  clues  about  the  neurological  basis  of  aggression.  This  was  the
reason  for  implanting  electrodes  in  the  brains  of  several  bulls.  After  surgery,  different  cerebral
points  were  explored  by  radio  stimulation  while  the  animal  was  free  in  a  small  farm  ring.  Motor
effects  similar  to  those  observed  in  cats  and  monkeys  were  evoked,  including  head  turning,
lifting  of  one  leg,  and  circling.  Vocalizations  were  often  elicited,  and  in  one  experiment  to  test
the  reliability  of  results,  a  point  was  stimulated  two  times  and  two  consecutive  "moo's"  were
evoked.

It  was  also  repeatedly  demonstrated  that  cerebral  stimulation  produced  inhibition  of  aggressive
behavior,  and  a  bull  in  full  charge  could  be  abruptly  stopped,  as  shown  in  Figure  24.  The  result
seemed  to  be  a  combination  of  motor  effect,  forcing  the  bull  to  stop  and  to  turn  to  one  side,  plus
behavioral  inhibition  of  the  aggressive  drive.  Upon  repeated  stimulation,  these  animals  were
rendered  less  dangerous  than  usual,  and  for  a  period  of  several  minutes  would  tolerate  the
presence  of  investigators  in  the  ring  without  launching  any  attack.

Maternal  behavior  is  one  of  the  instincts  most  widely  shared  by  mammals,  and  a  baby  rhesus
monkey  enjoys  the  first  months  of  his  life  resting  in  the  arms  of  the  mother,  who  spends  most  of
her  time  hugging,  nursing,  grooming,  and  taking  care  of  him.  If  the  pair  are  forcibly  separated,
the  mother  becomes  very  disturbed  and  expresses  her  anxiety  by  prowling  about  restlessly,
threatening  observers,  and  calling  to  her  baby  with  a  special  cooing  sound.  It  is  promptly
reciprocated  by  the  little  one,  who  is  also  extremely  anxious  to  return  to  the  protective  maternal
embrace.  This  strong  bond  can  be  inhibited  by  ESB,  as  demonstrated  in  one  of  our  colonies,
consisting  of  Rose  and  Olga  with  their  respective  babies,  Roo  and  Ole,  plus  a  male  monkey.
Maternal  affection  was  expressed  as  usual  without  being  handicapped  by  the  presence  of
electrodes  implanted  in  both  females  (Figure  25).  Little  Roo  looked  rather  disoriented  and  sought
refuge  and  warmth  with  the  other  Several  simple  motor  effects  evoked  by  ESB  (such  as  head
turning  or  flexion  of  the  arm)  did  not  disrupt  mother- infant  relations,  but  when  a  10-second  radio
stimulation  was  applied  to  the  mesencephalon  of  Rose,  an  aggressive  attitude  was  evoked  with
rapid  circling  around  the  cage  and  self-biting  of  the  hand,  leg,  or  flank.  For  the  next  eight  to  ten
minutes,  maternal  instinct  was  disrupted,  and  Rose  completely  lost  interest  in  her  baby,  ignoring
his  tender  calls  and  rejecting  his  attempts  to  approach  her.  mother,  Olga,  who  accepted  both
babies  without  hesitation.  About  ten  minutes  after  ESB,  Rose  regained  her  natural  maternal
behavior  and  accepted  Roo  in  her  arms.  This  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  on  different
days  with  similar  disruptive  results  for  the  mother-infant  relation.  It  should  be  concluded,
therefore,  that  maternal  behavior  is  somehow  dependent  on  the  proper  functioning  of
mesencephalic  structures  and  that  short  ESB  applied  in  this  area  is  able  to  block  the  maternal
instinct  for  a  period  of  several  minutes.

Information  about  inhibitory  effects  induced  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  human  brain  is  more
limited  than  our  knowledge  about  inhibition  in  animals.  The  subject  has  great  importance,
however,  because  one  of  the  primary  aims  of  human  therapy  is  to  inhibit  undesirable  sensations
or  excessive  neuronal  activities.  Some  patients  experience  a  type  of  "intractable  pain"  which
cannot  be  alleviated  by  the  usual  analgesic  drugs,  and  their  unbearable  suffering  could  be
blocked  by  direct  intervention  in  brain  structures  where  sensations  reach  the  perceptual  level  of
consciousness.  Illnesses  such  as  Parkinson's  disease  and  chorea  are  characterized  by  continuous
involuntary  movements  maintained  by  neuronal  discharges  originating  in  specific  cerebral


structures  which  could  be  inhibited  by  suitable  therapy.  Assaultive  behavior  constitutes  one  of
the  most  disturbing  symptoms  of  a  group  of  mental  illnesses  and  is  probably  related  to  the
abnormal  reactivity  of  limbic  and  reticular  areas  of  the  brain.  Epilepsy  is  caused  by  explosive
bursts  of  electrical  dis-


Figure  24

Brave  bulls  are  dangerous  animals  which  will  attack  any  intruder  into  the  arena.  The  animal  in  full  charge
can  be  abruptly  stopped  (above)  by  radio  stimulation  of  the  brain.  After  several  stimulations,  there  is  a
lasting  inhibition  of  aggressive  behavior.


Figure  25

Above,  maternal  behavior  is  tenderly  expressed  by  both  mother  monkeys,  Rose  and  Olga,  who  hug,
groom,  and  nurse  their  babies,  Roo  and  Ole.  Below,  radio  stimulation  of  Rose  for  ten  seconds  in  the
mesencephalon


evoked  a  rage  response  expressed  by  self-biting  and  abandoning  her  baby,  Roo.  For  the  next  ten
minutes  Rose  has  lost  all  her  maternal  interest  (above),  ignoring  the  appealing  calls  of  Roo  who  seeks


refuge  with  the  other  mother.

Below,  Rose  is  sucking  her  foot  and  still  ignoring  her  baby.


charges  which  might  be  inhibited  at  their  original  source.  Anxiety  poses  very  difficult  therapeutic
problems,  and  its  basic  mechanism  might  be  traced  to  the  increased  reactivity  of  specific  areas  of
the  brain.  All  these  disturbances  could  be  cured,  or  at  least  diminished,  if  we  had  a  better
knowledge  of  their  anatomical  and  functional  bases  and  could  inhibit  the  activity  of  neurons
responsible  for  the  phenomena.

In  the  near  future,  important  advances  may  be  expected  in  this  field,  and  already  we  have  some
initial  clinical  information  demonstrating  that  ESB  can  induce  inhibitory  effects  in  man.  For
example,  ESB  applied  to  the  supplementary  motor  cortex  has  slowed  down  or  completely
arrested  voluntary  motor  activity  without  producing  pain  or  any  concomitant  loss  of
consciousness  (174).  In  other  cases,  stimulation  of  the  frontotemporal  region  has  caused  an
"arrest  response  characterized  by  sudden  cessation  of  voluntary  movements  which  may  be
followed  by  confusion,  inappropriate  or  garbled  speech,  and  overt  changes  of  mood  (128,  186).
More  interesting  from  the  therapeutic  point  of  view  is  the  fact  that  abnormal  hyperkinetic
movements  have  been  inhibited  for  the  duration  of  the  applied  ESB,  allowing  patients  to  perform
skilled  acts  which  were  otherwise  impossible.  In  these  cases,  a  small  portable  instrument  could
perhaps  be  used  by  the  patient  to  stimulate  his  own  brain  in  order  to  inhibit  abnormal  motility
temporarily  and  restore  useful  skills  (160).

Somnolence  with  inexpressive  faces,  tendency  to  lower  the  eyelids,  and  spontaneous  complaint
of  sleepiness,  but  without  impairment  of  consciousness,  has  been  produced  in  some  patients  by
stimulation  of  the  fornix  and  thalamus  (7,  199).  In  some  cases,  sleep  with  pleasant  dreams  has
been  induced,  and  occasionally  sleep  or  awakening  could  be  obtained  from  the  same  cerebral
point  by  using  a  slow  or  high  frequency  of  stimulation  (96,  229).  Diminished  awareness,  lack  of
normal  insight,  and  impairment  of  ability  to  think  have  been  observed  by  several  investigators


during  excitation  of  different  points  of  the  limbic  system  (74,  120).  Often  the  patients  performed
automatisms  such  .  as  undressing  or  fumbling,  without  remembering  the  incidents  afterward.

Some  of  our  patients  said  they  felt  as  if  their  minds  were  blank  or  as  if  they  had  been  drinking  a
lot  of  beer.  These  results  indicate  that  Consciousness  may  be  related  to  specific  mechanisms
located  in  determined  areas  of  the  brain.  They  contrast  with  the  full  awareness  preserved  when
other  areas  of  the  brain  were  stimulated.

Arrest  of  speech  has  been  most  common  of  all  inhibitory  effects  observed  during  electrical
stimulation  of  the  human  brain  (8),  and  this  fact  is  probably  due  to  the  extensive  representation
of  the  speech  areas  in  the  temporal  lobe,  and  also  to  the  facility  of  exploring  verbal  expression
just  by  conversing  with  the  patients.  The  most  typical  effect  is  cessation  of  counting.  For
example,  one  of  our  female  patients  was  asked  to  count  numbers,  starting  from  one.  When  she
had  counted  to  fourteen,  ESB  was  applied,  and  speech  was  immediately  interrupted,  without
changes  in  respiration  or  in  facial  expression,  and  without  producing  fear  or  anxiety.  When
stimulation  ceased  seconds  later,  the  patient  immediately  resumed  counting.  She  said  that  she  did
not  know  why  she  had  stopped;  although  she  had  heard  the  interviewer  encouraging  her  to
continue,  she  had  been  unable  to  speak,  If  the  same  stimulation  was  applied  while  the  patient  was
silent,  no  effect  could  be  detected  by  the  observer  or  by  the  patient  herself.  In  other  cases,
patients  have  been  able  to  read  and  comprehend  or  to  write  messages  that  they  were  temporarily
unable  to  verbalize  (200).

It  is  known  that  ESB  activation  of  pleasurable  areas  of  the  brain  can  inhibit  pain  Perception  in
animals  (42,  146),  and  similar  results  have  also  been  reported  in  man,  with  an  immediate  relief  of
pain  following  septal  stimulation  (98).  Because  of  the  multiplicity  of  pathways  in  the  nervous
system  which  can  transmit  disagreeable  sensations,  it  is  often  not  possible  to  block  all  of  them,
and  to  alleviate  unbearable  suffering  it  may  be  easier  to  inhibit  the  cerebral  structures  involved  in
the  psychological  evaluation  of  pain,  blocking  the  components  of  anxiety  and  diminishing  the
subjective  sensation  of  unpleasantness.

There  are  also  a  few  reports  indicating  that  abnormal  violence  may  be  reduced  by  ESB:  Heath
has  a  movie  showing  a  patient  who  self-stimulated  his  own  brain  in  order  to  suppress  an
aggressive  mood  as  it  developed,  and  we  have  described  a  case  in  whom  crises  of  antisocial
conduct  during  which  the  patient  attacked  members  of  his  own  family  were  considerably
diminished  by  repeated  stimulations  of  the  amygdaloid  nucleus  (60).

We  are  only  at  the  beginning  of  our  experimental  understanding  of  the  inhibitory  mechanisms  of
behavior  in  animals  and  man,  but  their  existence  has  already  been  well  substantiated.  It  is  clear
that  manifestations  as  important  as  aggressive  responses  depend  not  only  on  environmental
circumstances  but  also  on  their  interpretation  by  the  central  nervous  system  where  they  can  be
enhanced  or  totally  inhibited  by  manipulating  the  reactivity  of  specific  intracerebral  structures.

Violence,  including  its  extreme  manifestation  of  war,  is  determined  by  a  variety  of  economic  and
ideological  factors;  but  we  must  realize  that  the  elite  who  make  the  decisions,  and  even  the
individual  who  obeys  orders  and  holds  a  rifle,  require  for  their  behavioral  performance  the
existence  of  a  series  of  intracerebral  electrical  signals  which  could  be  inhibited  by  other
conflicting  signals  generating  in  areas  such  as  the  caudate  nucleus.  Inhibitory  areas  of  the  central


nervous  system  can  be  activated  by  electrical  stimulation  as  well  as  by  the  physiological  impact
of  sensory  inputs  which  carry  messages,  ideas,  and  patterned  behavior.  Reception  of  information
from  the  environment  causes  electrical  and  chemical  changes  in  the  brain  substance,  and  the
stimuli  shape  the  functional  characteristics  of  individual  interpretation  and  integration,
determining  the  degree  and  quality  of  his  reactions.  Human  relations  are  not  going  to  be
governed  by  electrodes,  but  they  could  be  better  understood  if  we  considered  not  only
environmental  factors  but  also  the  intracerebral  mechanisms  responsible  for  their  reception  and
elaboration.


Part  IV

Evaluation  of  Electrical  Control  of  the  Brain


Chapter  17

Evaluation  of  Electrical  Control  of  the  Brain

Because  the  brain  controls  the  whole  body  and  all  mental  activities,  ESB  could  possibly  become
a  master  control  of  human  behavior  by  means  of  man-made  plans  and  instruments.  In  previous
sections  we  have  described  methodology  for  brain  stimulation  and  many  effects  evoked  by  ESB.
This  section  will  discuss  the  meaning  of  these  results,  the  mechanisms  involved,  the  expected
limitations,  and  the  problems  facing  investigators.  How  physiological  or  artificial  is  the  electrical
activation  of  neurons?  How  predictable?  Who  is  responsible  for  acts  performed  under  ESB -the
stimulated  subject  or  the  scientist?  Which  benefits  or  risks  may  be  expected  in  the  future?  Can
we  modulate  perception  and  expression  by  electrical  means?  Can  we  expect  that  brain
investigation  will  provide  a  new  conception  of  the  human  mind?  These  and  other  questions
confront  the  investigator  while  he  is  sending  radio  messages  to  induce  a  muscle  to  contract,  a
heart  to  beat  faster,  or  a  sensation  to  be  felt.  Evaluation  of  these  experiments  requires  the
formulation  of  appropriate  theoretical  concepts  and  the  design  of  working  hypotheses.


Brain  Stimulation  Triggers  Physiological  Mechanisms

Electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  is  in  reality  a  rather  crude  technique  based  on  the  delivery  of  a
monotonous  train  of  pulses  without  modulation,  without  code,  without  specific  meaning  and
without  feedback  to  the  pool  of  neurons  which  by  chance  is  located  within  the  artificial  electrical
field  created  by  stimulation.  Temporal  and  spatial  characteristics  and  the  complexity  of
multisynaptic  relays,  delays,  and  convergent  and  divergent  correlations  are  also  absent.  The
intensity  of  several  volts  usually  employed  in  ESB  is  hundreds  of  times  higher  than  spontaneous
neuronal  potentials,  which  are  measured  in  millivolts.


It  is  reasonable,  therefore,  that  doubts  have  been  expressed  about  the  normality  of  responses
obtained  by  brain  stimulation.  It  is  difficult  to  compare  normal  behavior  with  electrically-evoked
effects,  considering  the  complications  of  operative  trauma,  artificiality  of  experimental
conditions,  and  lack  of  specificity  of  ESB  (4).  "Electrical  stimulus,  unlike  physiological
excitation,  unselectively  affects  all  elements  of  a  similar  threshold  that  lie  within  the  radius  of
action  of  the  electrodes"  (107),  and  in  the  majority  of  cases  cortical  stimulation  "has  failed  to
elicit  anything  but  fragments  of  skilled  Movements"  (224).  Cobb  (33)  considers  the  greatest
oversimplification  the  belief  "among  those  not  educated  in  physiology,  that  the  electrical
stimulation  of  a  nerve  or  brain  center  closely  resembles  normal  neuronal  stimulation.  Electrical
stimulation,  however,  produces  little  that  resembles  the  normal."

It  is  certainly  true  that  many  responses  evoked  by  ESB  are  simple  contractions  of  a  small  group
of  muscles  without  coordination,  skill,  or  apparent  purpose,  and  that  many  effects  have  abnormal
characteristics  far  removed  from  the  harmonious  elegance  of  voluntary  activities.  It  is  also  true,
however,  that  with  the  development  of  technology  to  stimulate  the  brain  in  free  subjects,  many  of
the  responses  obtained  in  both  animals  and  man  are  indistinguishable  from  spontaneous
behavior.  Sequential  behavior,  sexual  activity,  alimentary  responses,  walking,  yawning,  fighting,
and  many  other  effects  documented  in  previous  sections  demonstrate  conclusively  that  ESB  can
evoke  purposeful,  well-coordinated,  skillful  activities  of  great  refinement  and  complexity.
Patients  have  accepted  evoked  psychological  changes,  such  as  an  increase  in  friendliness,  as
natural  manifestations  of  their  own  personality  and  not  as  artificial  results  of  the  tests.  The
question  to  answer  is  not  whether  but  how  the  application  of  a  crude  train  of  messageless
electricity  may  result  in  the  performance  of  a  highly  refined  and  complicated  response.

To  explain  this  apparent  contradiction  we  must  consider  the  normal  mechanisms  of  physiological
performance.  In  a  simple  act  such  as  the  flexion  of  a  limb,  the  nerve  impulse  initiates  a  very
complex  process  which  includes  well-organized,  sequential,  metabolic  activities  and  structural
changes  in  the  myoproteins  resulting  in  the  shortening  of  muscle  fibers.  These  processes  do  not
depend  on  neural  impulses  and  have  been  established  by  genetic  determination  as  intrinsic
properties  of  muscular  tissue  unfolding  in  a  similar  way  under  nervous  command  or  direct
electrical  excitation.  Electricity  does  not  create  muscle  contraction;  it  simply  activates  a  pre-
established  pattern  of  response.  At  the  neurological  level,  flexion  of  a  limb  requires  the
propagation  of  many  well-organized  impulses  from  the  brain  to  the  different  groups  of  muscles,
the  processing  of  proprioceptive  information  from  many  regions,  the  adjustments  of
servomechanisms,  visceral  adaptations,  and  many  other  electrical,  thermal,  chemical,
mechanical,  and  physiological  established  phenomena  and  correlations.  The  applied  electricity  is
only  the  depolarizing  trigger  of  a  group  of  neurons;  it  starts  processes  which  once  activated  are
relatively  independent  of  the  initial  cause.  Evoked  behavior  is  like  a  chain  reaction  in  which  the
final  result  depends  more  on  the  structure  and  organization  of  the  components  than  on  the
trigger.  To  understand  the  role  of  electrical  stimulation,  we  may  ask  whether  the  finger  of  the
person  pushing  a  button  to  launch  a  man  into  orbit  is  responsible  for  the  performance  of  the
complicated  machinery  or  for  the  sequence  of  events.  Obviously  the  finger,  like  a  simple
electrical  stimulus,  is  only  the  trigger  of  a  programmed  series  of  interdependent  events  and
cannot  be  accepted  as  the  real  cause  of  capsules  orbiting  around  the  earth.


A  tentative  explanation  of  some  of  the  mechanisms  involved  in  motor  activities  has  been
proposed  in  the  theory  of  fragmental  representation  of  behavior  (53)  which  postulates  that
behavior  is  organized  as  fragments  which  have  anatomical  and  functional  reality  within  the
brain,  where  they  can  be  the  subject  of  experimental  analysis.  The  different  fragments  may  be
combined  in  different  sequences  like  the  notes  of  a  melody,  resulting  in  a  succession  of  motor
acts  which  constitute  specific  behavioral  categories  such  as  licking,  climbing,  or  walking.  The
theory  may  perhaps  be  clarified  with  one  example.  If  I  wish  to  take  a  cookie  from  the  table,  this
wish  may  be  considered  a  force  called  "the  starter"  because  it  will  determine  the  initiation  of  a
series  of  motor  acts.  The  starter  includes  drives,  motivations,  emotional  perceptions,  memories,
and  other  processes.  To  take  the  cookie  it  is  necessary  to  organize  a  motor  plan,  a  mechanical
strategy,  and  to  decide  among  several  motor  choices,  because  the  cookie  may  be  taken  with  the
left  or  right  hand,  directly  with  the  mouth,  or  even  by  using  the  feet  if  one  has  simian  skills.
Choice,  strategies,  motor  planning,  and  adjustments  depend  on  a  set  of  cerebral  structures,  "the
organizer,"  which  is  different  from  the  set  employed  by  the  starter,  because  the  desire  for  cookies
may  exist  in  hungry  people  or  in  completely  paralyzed  patients,  and  the  hands  can  move  and
reach  the  table  for  many  different  reasons  even  if  there  are  no  cookies.  Finally,  the  actual
contraction  of  muscles  for  the  performance  of  the  selected  movement  to  reach  the  cookie-for
example,  rising  the  right  hand-depends  on  a  cerebral  set,  "the  performer,"  different  from  the
previous  two,  because  motor  representation  of  hands,  mouth,  and  feet  is  situated  in  different
areas  of  the  brain,  and  the  choice  of  muscle  group  to  be  activated  is  under  the  supervision  of  a
given  organizer.  Naturally,  there  is  a  close  correlation  among  these  three  basic  mechanisms,  and
also  between  them  and  other  cerebral  functions.  The  concept  of  a  brain  center  as  a  visible
anatomical  locus  is  unacceptable  in  modern  physiology,  but  the  participation  of  a  constellation  of
neuronal  groups  (a  functional  set)  in  a  specific  act  is  more  in  agreement  with  our  present
knowledge.  The  functional  set  may  be  formed  by  the  neurons  of  nuclei  far  from  one  another,  for
instance,  in  the  cerebellum,  motor  cortex,  pallidum,  thalamus,  and  red  nucleus,  forming  a  circuit
in  close  mutual  dependence,  and  responsible  for  a  determined  act  such  as  picking  up  a  cookie
with  the  right  hand.


If  we  accept  the  existence  of  anatomical  representation  of  the  three  functional  sets  -  starter,


nizer,  and  performeij  is  logical  that  they  can  be  activated  by  different  types  of  triggers,  and


that  the  evoked  results  will  be  related  to  the  previous  experiences  linked  to  the  set.  The  same  set,
evoking  a  similar  behavioral  response,  may  be  activated  by  physiological  stimuli,  such  as
sensory  perceptions  and  ideations,  or  by  artificial  stimuli,  such  as  electrical  impulses.  When  we
stimulate  the  brain  through  implanted  electrodes  we  can,  depending  on  the  location  of  contacts,
activate  the  starter,  the  organizer,  or-the  performer  of  different  behavioral  reactions,  so  that
natural  and  artificial  stimuli  may  interplay  with  one  another,  as  has  been  experimentally
demonstrated.


Chapter  18

Electrical  Activation  of  the  "Will"

The  theoretical  considerations  of  the  previous  section  may  facilitate  the  understanding  of  so-
called  willful,  free,  or  spontaneous  behavior  which  to  a  great  extent  depends  on  pre-established
mechanisms,  some  of  them  inborn  and  others  acquired  through  learning.  When  a  child  takes  his
first  steps  or  when  an  adult  learns  a  new  skill  like  tennis  or  typing,  the  initial  movements  are
clumsy  and  require  considerable  attention  and  effort  in  every  detail.  Coordination  progressively
improves,  unnecessary  muscular  tension  diminishes,  and  the  movements  proceed  with  speed,
economy,  and  elegance  without  being  thought  about.  Acquisition  of  a  skill  means  the  automation
of  patterns  of  response  with  the  establishment  of  spatial  and  temporal  sequences.  The  voluntary
aspects  of  willful  activity  are  the  purpose  for  it  and  the  initiation  of  performance,  while  most  of
the  details  of  complex  movements  and  adaptation  to  changing  circumstances  are  performed
automatically.  We  may  consider  that  the  role  of  the  will  is  mainly  to  trigger  previously
established  mechanisms.  Obviously  the  will  is  not  responsible  for  the  chemistry  of  muscular
contraction,  the  electrical  processes  of  neural  transmission,  or  the  intimate  organization  of
responses.  These  phenomena  depend  on  spindle  discharges,  cerebellar  activation,  synaptic
junctions,  reciprocal  inhibitions,  and  many  other  mechanisms  which  are  not  only  beyond
consciousness  but  may  be  beyond  our  present  knowledge  and  comprehension.  The  uniqueness  of
voluntary  behavior  lies  in  its  initial  dependence  on  the  integration  of  a  vast  number  of  personal
past  experiences  and  present  receptions.

Volition  itself  must  be  related  to  neuronal  activities,  and  it  may  be  asked  whether  either
appropriate  sensory  perceptions  or  artificial  electrical  stimulation  could  induce  neuronal  pools
involved  in  decision-making  to  discharge  in  a  like  manner.  I  shall  not  enter  into  the  controversial
issues  of  causality  and  determination  of  free  behavior,  but  on  the  basis  of  experimental  findings
it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  voluntary  and  electrical  triggering  can  activate  existing  cerebral
mechanisms  in  a  similar  way.  If  spontaneous  and  electrically  evoked  behavior  involve
participation  of  the  same  set  of  cerebral  areas,  then  both  types  of  behavior  should  be  able  to
interact  by  modifying  each  others'  inhibitory  and  excitatory  influences.  This  possibility  has  been
proved  experimentally.

As  described  by  Hess  (107)  and  as  observed  also  in  our  experiments,  excitation  of  some  points  in
the  subthalamus  of  the  cat  induces  a  clockwise  rotation  of  the  head,  and  the  effect  of  low
intensity  and  low  frequency  (8  cycles  per  second)  stimulation  can  be  counteracted  by  the  animal.
The  head  starts  rotating  slowly  and  then  is  brought  back  to  normal  position  by  a  quick  voluntary
jerk,  the  process  repeating  several  times  until  stimulation  ceases.  If  the  intensity  of  stimulation  is
increased,  the  corrective  movements  disappear  and  rotation  of  the  head  progresses  slowly  but
continuously,  followed  by  rotation  of  the  body  on  its  longitudinal  axis  until  the  cat  lies  on  its
back.  Then  with  a  sudden  jerk  the  animal  abruptly  completes  the  turn  and  springs  to  its  feet.  The
explanation  of  these  results  may  be  as  follows:  During  the  initial  part  of  the  evoked  head
rotation,  its  abnormal  position  should  produce  normal  proprioceptive  and  vestibular  stimuli,
starting  a  reflex  reaction  to  slow  down  and  counteract  the  electrically  evoked  effect.  As  soon  as
the  cat  is  on  its  back,  however,  artificial  and  natural  stimuli  work  together,  the  first  to  continue
the  turning,  and  the  second  to  bring  the  animal  to  its  usual  horizontal  position;  the  summation  of
these  two  actions  would  explain  the  sudden  jerk.


Interaction  between  evoked  and  spontaneous  activity  has  also  been  observed  during  conditioning
experiments  with  cats  in  which  the  animals  often  tried  to  suppress  motor  movements  induced  by
ESB  (89).

A  clear  example  of  algebraic  summation  between  voluntary  and  evoked  motility  was  observed  in
one  of  our  cats  with  electrodes  implanted  in  the  left  hidden  motor  cortex  (48),  Electrical
stimulation  induced  an  extension  and  raising  of  the  right  forepaw  with  proper  postural
adaptation.  Offering  of  fish  to  the  animal  resulted  in  a  similar  extension  and  raising  of  the  limb  in
order  to  seize  the  food.  Simultaneous  presentation  of  the  fish  and  stimulation  of  the  cortex
produced  a  motor  response  of  greater  amplitude  than  usual;  the  cat  miscalculated  the  necessary
movement  and  overshot  his  target.  He  was  unable  to  catch  the  food  until  he  made  a  series  of
corrective  adjustments,  and  then  the  fish  was  successfully  captured  and  eaten.  In  addition  to
demonstrating  the  interrelation  between  evoked  and  spontaneous  responses,  this  experiment  also
proved  that  the  animal  was  aware  of  an  artificial  disturbance,  and  after  a  brief  period  of  trial  and
error  was  able  to  correct  its  performance  accordingly.

In  the  play  of  forces  between  spontaneous  and  evoked  responses,  which  one  is  more  powerful?
Will  one  of  them  be  prepotent  over  the  other?  Experimental  results  demonstrate  that  when  there
is  a  conflict  in  the  response,  the  stronger  stimulus  dominates.  For  example,  stimulation  of  the  left
sulcus  presylvius  with  0.6  milliamperes  in  a  cat  named  Nero  caused  a  small  flexion  of  the  right
foreleg.  When  Nero  was  jumping  from  a  table  to  the  floor,  the  same  excitation  did  not  produce
any  visible  effect,  and  the  animal  landed  with  perfect  coordination,  showing  good  voluntary
control  of  all  his  limbs.  Electrical  flexion  of  the  foreleg  had  therefore  been  completely  inhibited
by  the  peremptory  need  to  use  the  musculature  in  the  jump,  If  stimulation  intensity  was  increased
up  to  1.8  milliamperes,  flexion  of  the  limb  appeared  even  when  Nero  was  air-borne  in  the  middle
of  a  jump,  and  landing  was  disrupted  by  the  inability  to  use  the  right  foreleg.  In  general,
electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  was  dominant  over  voluntary  behavior,  provided  that  its
intensity  was  sufficiently  increased.

It  is  known  that  reflexes  are  predictable  responses,  rigidly  patterned  and  blindly  performed.
Similarly,  electrical  excitation  of  a  peripheral  motor  nerve  induces  a  stereotyped  movement  with
little  adaptation  to  external  circumstances.  In  contrast,  willful  activity  generally  has  a  purpose,
and  its  performance  is  adapted  for  the  attainment  of  a  determined  aim,  with  a  continuous
processing  of  proprioceptive  and  exteroceptive  sensory  information,  with  the  use  of  feedback
mechanisms,  with  capacity  for  instantaneous  readjustment  of  the  central  command  to  adapt  to
changes  in  the  environment,  and  with  prediction  of  the  future  which  requires  spatiotemporal
calculation  of  speed,  direction,  and  strategies  of  moving  targets.  Depending  on  the  location  of
cerebral  stimulation,  the  responses  obtained  by  ESB  may  either  be  similar  to  a  blind  reflex  or
have  all  the  above-mentioned  characteristics  of  voluntary  activity.

Stimulation  of  some  points  in  the  motor  cortex  and  motor  pathways  in  the  cat,  monkey,  and  other
animals  may  produce  simple  movements,  such  as  the  flexion  of  a  limb,  which  are  completely
stereotyped  and  lack  adaptation.  These  effects  may  be  interpreted  as  the  activation  of  efferent
structures  where  the  pattern  of  response  has  already  been  decided.  At  this  level,  the  neural
functions  are  of  conduction  rather  than  of  integration  and  organization,  and  only  minor  variations
are  possible  in  the  circulating  impulses,  regardless  of  whether  their  origin  was  spontaneous  or


artificial.  To  the  contrary,  there  is  plenty  of  evidence  that  many  of  the  effects  evoked  by  ESB  are
oriented  toward  the  accomplishment  of  a  specific  aim  with  adaptation  of  the  motor  performance
to  unexpected  changes  in  environmental  circumstances.  The  following  examples  substantiate  this
statement.

In  the  cat,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  inferior  part  of  the  sulcus  presylvius  consistently  induced
licking  movements  with  well-organized  opening  and  closing  of  the  mouth  and  phasic  protrusion
of  the  tongue.  Under  anesthesia,  the  licking  was  automatic  and  purposeless;  but  in  the  awake,
free-moving  animal  the  response  was  directed  toward  some  useful  purpose,  and  the  cat  searched
for  a  target  to  lick-food,  the  hands  of  the  experimenter,  the  floor,  or  its  own  fur.  In  this  case,
motor  performance  and  posture  of  the  whole  body  adapted  to  the  experimental  setting,  and  in
order  to  lick  the  investigator's  hand,  for  example,  the  cat  advanced  a  few  steps  and  approached
the  hand  even  if  it  moved  slowly  away.  Another  example  of  adaptation  to  the  environment  is  the
"avoidance  of  obstacles"  (48).  Stimulation  of  the  middle  part  of  the  presylvian  sulcus  in  the  cat
induced  a  contralateral  turning  of  the  head  in  the  horizontal  plane.  The  effect  was  reliable,  but
when  the  movement  was  interrupted  by  placing  an  obstacle  such  as  a  book  in  its  path,  the  animal
modified  its  performance  and  raised  its  head  to  avoid  the  interposed  obstacle  before  continuing
the  evoked  head  turning.

The  adaptability  of  artificially  induced  cerebral  responses  to  changes  in  the  environment  has
been  clearly  demonstrated  by  rhesus  monkeys'  aggressive  behavior  which  was  selectively
directed  by  the  animals  against  their  natural  enemies  within  the  group  with  a  motor  pattern  of
chasing  and  fighting  which  continuously  changed  according  to  the  unpredictable  strategies  of
those  under  attack.  In  this  case,  ESB  evidently  did  not  evoke  a  predetermined  motor  effect  but  an
emotional  state  of  increased  aggressiveness  which  was  served  by  pre-established  motor  skills  and
directed  according  to  the  previous  history  of  social  relations  (53).


Similar  experiments  have  been  performed  in  roosters  (111).  If  the  bird  was  alone,  motor
restlessness  was  the  only  observable  effect  of  ESB,  while  the  same  stimulation  of  a  rooster  in  a
group  produced  a  state  of  increased  aggressiveness  and  attacks  on  other  birds.  Sharp  fighting
ensued  with  perfectly  coordinated,  typical  patterns  of  attack  and  defense  in  the  group.


We

involved  in  willful  behavior.  In  this  way  we  are  able  to  investigate  the  neuronal  functions  re¬
lated  to  the  so-called  will,  and  in  the  near  future  this  experimental  approach  should  permit
clarification  of  such  highly  controversial  subjects  as  "freedom,"  "individuality,"  and
"spontaneity"  in  factual  terms  rather  than  in  elusive  semantic  discussions.  The  possibility  of
influencing  willful  activities  by  electrical  means  has  obvious  ethical  implications,  which  will  be
discussed  later.


It  may  conclude  that  ESB  can  activate  and  influence  some  of  the  cerebral  mechanisms


Chapter  19

Characteristics  and  Limitations  of  Brain  Control

The  possibility  of  man's  controlling  the  thoughts  of  other  men  has  ranked  as  high  in  human
fantasy  as  the  control  over  transmutation  of  metals,  the  possession  of  wings,  or  the  power  to  take
a  trip  to  the  moon.  Our  generation  has  witnessed  the  accomplishment  of  so  many  nearly
impossible  tasks  that  today  we  are  ready  to  accept  almost  anything.  In  the  world  of  science,
however,  speculation  and  fantasy  cannot  replace  truth.


There  is  already  abundant  evidence  that  ESB  can  control  a  wide  range  of  functions,  including
motor  activities  and  mental  manifestations,  in  animals  and  in  man.  We  know  that  by  electrical
stimulation  of  specific  cerebral  structures  we  can  make  a  person  friendlier  or  influence  his  train
of  thought.  In  spite  of  its  spectacular  potential,  ESB  has  practical  and  theoretical  limitations
which  should  be  delineated.

Predictability

When  we  get  into  a  car  and  press  the  starter,  the  motor  will  almost  certainly  begin  to  run  in  a  few
seconds.  The  brain,  however,  does  not  have  the  simplicity  of  a  machine.  When  electrodes  are
introduced  into  a  cerebral  structure  and  stimulation  is  applied  for  the  first  time,  we  really  cannot
predict  the  quality,  localization,  or  intensity  of  the  evoked  effects.  We  do  not  even  know  that  a
response  will  appear.  This  is  especially  true  for  complex  structures,  like  the  amygdaloid  region,
which  have  great  functional  multiplicity;  but  it  is  also  the  case  in  relatively  simple  areas  like  the
motor  cortex.  The  anatomical  and  functional  variability  of  the  brain  are  factors  which  hinder
prediction  of  ESB  results  (53).  The  importance  of  these  limiting  factors  is  compounded  by
alterations  in  regional  activity  related  to  changes  in  local,  general,  and  environmental
circumstances.  We  know  that  certain  functions  are  represented  in  specific  cerebral  structures,  but
the  precise  location  of  a  desired  target  requires  careful  exploration,  and  implantation  of  only  a
few  contacts  may  be  rather  disappointing.  After  repeated  explorations  of  a  selected  area  in
several  subjects,  predictability  of  the  observed  responses  in  that  area  for  that  species  can  be
assessed  with  a  higher  degree  of  confidence.  Present  information  about  functional  mapping  in
most  cerebral  areas  is  still  rather  incomplete.

Functional  Monotony

Electrical  stimulation  is  a  nonspecific  stimulus  which  always  activates  a  group  of  neurons  in  a
similar  way  because  there  is  no  coded  neural  message  or  feedback  carried  to  the  stimulating
source.  The  responses,  therefore,  are  repeated  in  a  monotonous  way,  and  any  variability  is  related
to  changes  in  the  stimulated  subject.  This  functional  monotony  rules  out  the  possibility  that  an
investigator  could  direct  a  subject  toward  a  target  or  induce  him,  like  a  robot,  to  perform  any
complex  task  under  remote-controlled  orders.

Science  fiction  has  already  imagined  men  with  intracerebral  electrodes  engaged  in  all  kinds  of
mischief  under  the  perverse  guidance  of  radio  waves  sent  by  some  evil  scientist.  The  inherent
limitations  of  ESB  make  realization  of  this  fantasy  very  remote.  The  flexion  of  a  limb  can  be


radio  controlled  and  an  emotional  state  could  also  be  set  remotely,  but  the  sequences  of
responses  and  adaptation  to  the  environment  depend  on  established  intra-cerebral  mechanisms
whose  complexity  cannot  be  duplicated  by  ESB.  Even  if  we  could  stimulate  different  points  of
the  brain  through  twenty  or  thirty  channels,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  sensory  feedback  and
computerized  calculations  for  the  programing  of  simple  spatiotemporal  sequences.  Induced
performance  of  more  complex  acts  would  be  far  beyond  available  methodology.  It  should  be
clarified  that  I  am  talking  about  directing  each  phase  of  a  response,  and  not  about  complex
behavior  such  as  lever  pressing  or  fighting,  which  may  be  triggered  by  ESB  but  develops
according  to  individual  experiential  circumstances  which  are  beyond  electrical  control.

Skillful  Performance

Many  of  the  activities  elicited  by  ESB  certainly  can  be  categorized  as  skillful.  Pressing  a  lever,
climbing  a  cage  wall,  and  looking  for  a  fight  require  good  motor  coordination  and  suitable
processing  of  information.  Walking  on  two  feet,  which  has  been  repeatedly  elicited  in  monkeys
or  stimulation  of  the  red  nucleus  (Figure  12),  is  another  example  of  refined  coordination  and
equilibrium  seldom  observed  in  spontaneous  behavior.

These  facts  demonstrate  that  ESB  may  result  in  different  types  of  skillful  performance,  but  it
must  be  understood  that  these  responses  represent  the  manifestation  of  skills  already  familiar  to
the  subject.  Motor  learning  requires  the  reception  of  sensory  inputs  not  only  from  the
environment  but  also  from  the  performing  muscles,  and  a  relatively  lengthy  process  of  motor
training  is  required  to  perfect  reactions  related  to  each  type  of  performance  and  to  store  the
appropriate  ideokinetic  formulas  in  the  brain  for  future  reference  and  use.  Much  of  the  brain
participates  in  learning,  and  a  monotonous  train  of  pulses  applied  to  a  limited  pool  of  neurons
cannot  be  expected  to  mimic  its  complexity.  The  acquisition  of  a  new  skill  is  theoretically  and
practically  beyond  the  possibilities  of  electrical  stimulation,  but  ESB  can  create  the  desire  to
perform  certain  acts  which  may  be  skillful.

Individual  Stability

Personal  identity  and  reactivity  depend  on  a  large  number  of  factors  accumulated  through  many
years  of  experience  interacting  with  genetic  trends  within  the  complexity  of  neuronal  networks.
Language  and  culture  are  among  the  essential  elements  of  individual  structure.  All  these
elements  cannot  be  substituted  for  by  the  delivery  of  electricity  to  the  brain.  Memories  can  be
recalled,  emotions  awakened,  and  conversations  speeded  up  by  ESB,  but  the  patients  always
express  themselves  according  to  their  background  and  experience.  It  is  possible  to  disturb
consciousness,  to  confuse  sensory  interpretations,  or  to  elicit  hallucinations  during  excitation  of
the  brain.  It  is  also  possible  to  induce  fear,  pleasure,  and  chances  in  aggressive  behavior,  but
these  responses  do  not  represent  the  creation  of  a  new  personality  -  only  a  change  in  emotionality
or  reactivity  with  the  appearance  of  manifestations  closely  related  to  the  previous  history  of  the
subject.

ESB  cannot  substitute  one  personality  for  another  because  electricity  cannot  replicate  or
influence  all  the  innumerable  factors  which  integrate  individual  identity.  Contrary  to  the  stories
of  science  fiction  writers,  we  cannot  modify  political  ideology,  past  history,  or  national  loyalties


by  electrical  tickling  of  some  secret  areas  of  the  brain.  A  complete  change  in  personality  is
beyond  the  theoretical  and  practical  potential  of  ESB,  although  limited  modification  of  a
determined  aspect  of  personal  reactions  is  possible.  In  spite  of  important  limitations,  we  are
certainly  facing  basic  ethical  problems  about  when,  why,  and  how  some  of  these  changes  are
acceptable,  and  especially  about  who  will  have  the  responsibility  of  influencing  the  cerebral
activities  of  other  human  beings.


Technical  Complexity

Electrical  stimulation  of  the  central  nervous  system  requires  careful  planning,  complex
methodology,  and  the  skillful  collaboration  of  specialists  with  knowledge  and  experience  in
anatomy,  neurophysiology,  and  psychology.  Several  prerequisites,  including  construction  of  the
delicate  multilead  electrodes  and  refined  facilities  for  stereotaxic  neurosurgery,  are  necessary.
The  selection  of  neuronal  targets  and  appropriate  parameters  of  stimulation  require  further
sophistication  and  knowledge  of  functional  brain  mapping  as  well  as  electronic  technology.  In
addition,  medical  and  psychiatric  experience  is  necessary  in  order  to  take  care  of  the  patient,  to
interpret  the  results  obtained,  and  to  plan  the  delivery  of  stimulations.  These  elaborate
requirements  limit  the  clinical  application  of  intracerebral  electrodes  which  like  other  modem
medical  interventions  depends  on  team  work,  equipment,  and  facilities  available  in  only  a  few
medical  centers.  At  the  same  time,  the  procedure's  complexity  acts  as  a  safeguard  against  the
possible  improper  use  of  ESB  by  untrained  or  unethical  persons.

Functions  Beyond  the  Control  of  ESB

We  are  in  the  initial  steps  of  a  new  technology,  and  while  it  is  difficult  to  predict  the  limits  of
unknown  territory,  we  may  suppose  that  cerebral  manifestations  which  depend  on  the  elaboration
of  complex  information  will  elude  electrical  control.  For  example,  reading  a  book  or  listening  to
a  conversation  involves  reception  of  many  messages  which  cannot  be  mimicked  by  ESB.  A
pattern  of  behavior  which  is  not  in  the  brain  cannot  be  organized  or  invented  under  electrical
control.  ESB  cannot  be  used  as  a  teaching  tool  because  skills  such  as  playing  the  piano,  speaking
a  language,  or  solving  a  problem  require  complex  sensory  inputs.  Sequential  behavior  or  even
elemental  motor  responses  cannot  be  synthesized  by  cerebral  stimulation,  although  they  are
easily  evoked  if  they  have  already  been  established  in  the  excited  area  as  ideokinetic  formulas.
Since  electrical  stimulation  does  not  carry  specific  thoughts  it  is  not  feasible  as  a  technique  to
implant  ideas  or  direct  behavioral  performance  in  a  specific  context.  Because  of  its  lack  of
symbolic  meaning,  electricity  could  not  induce  effects  comparable  to  some  posthypnotic
performances.


Chapter  20
Medical  Applications

The  discovery  of  new  therapies  has  been  -  and  still  is  -  a  more  pressing  need  in  cerebral  disorders
than  in  other  fields  of  medicine  because  of  their  greater  consequences  for  the  mental  and  somatic
well-being  of  patients.  Unfortunately,  advances  in  this  area  have  been  relatively  slow,  partly
because  of  the  intrinsic  complexity  of  the  problems  involved,  and  partly  because  of  a  traditional
fear  and  reluctance  to  disturb  or  deal  directly  with  the  material  substratum  of  mental  activities.

At  the  beginning  of  the  century,  the  public  was  generally  hostile  to  surgery  and  considered  it
almost  obscene  for  a  surgeon  to  look  into  the  most  intimate  depths  of  the  body  (185).  With
cultural  and  scientific  advances  this  prejudice  has  slowly  receded,  and  the  study  of  the  human
body  is  now  recognized  as  essential  for  the  advance  of  medicine.  Sexual  taboos  have  diminished,
and  even  the  scientific  investigation  of  the  phases  and  details  of  human  intercourse  has  at  last
been  undertaken.  All  of  the  organs  of  the  body,  including  the  heart,  genitals,  and  brain,  have
been  accepted  as  suitable  subjects  for  research.

Implantation  of  electrodes  inside  the  human  brain  is  like  installing  a  magic  window  to  reveal  the
bursts  of  cellular  discharges  during  functional  activation  of  specific  structures.  The  meaning  of
these  bursts  is  often  difficult  to  decipher,  but  some  correlations  between  electrical  patterns  and
behavioral  effects  have  already  been  firmly  established.  The  electrical  line  of  communication  has
also  been  used  to  send  simple  messages  to  the  depth  of  the  brain  in  order  to  arouse  dormant
functions  or  to  appease  excessive  neuronal  firing.  A  new  method  was  thus  found  to  impose
therapeutic  order  upon  disorderly  activity.

In  spite  of  the  tremendous  potential  offered  by  the  direct  access  to  the  brain,  medical  applications
were  received  with  suspicion  and  strong  criticism  and  have  progressed  rather  slowly.  The
growing  acceptance  of  even  experimental  surgical  interventions  in  most  organs  including  the
human  heart  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  generally  cold  reception  to  the  implantation  of  wires  in
the  human  brain,  even  though  this  procedure  has  been  used  in  animals  for  forty  years  and  has
proved  to  be  safe.  The  reasons  are  to  a  great  extent  related  to  the  persistence  of  old  taboos,  in
scientists  as  well  as  in  laymen,  and  to  the  more  logical  fear  of  opening  some  Pandora's  box.

As  experience  overcomes  opposition,  cerebral  explorations  are  being  extended  to  different
hospitals  around  the  world,  as  shown  by  several  recent  symposia  (159,  182,  216).

Diagnosis

The  spontaneous  electrical  activity  of  the  brain  (electroencephalogram  or  EEG)  can  be  recorded
by  means  of  surface  electrodes  attached  by  conductive  paste  to  the  outside  of  the  scalp.  This  is  a
standard  procedure  used  for  diagnostic  purposes  in  several  cerebral  illnesses,  such  as  epilepsy,
which  is  characterized  by  episodes  of  increased  amplitude  and  synchronization  of  neuronal
activity  which  can  be  recorded  and  identified.  Strong  electrical  disturbances  may,  however,  be
present  in  structures  located  in  the  depth  of  the  brain  which  cannot  be  detected  by  scalp  EEG
(57),  and  in  this  case  the  use  of  intracerebral  electrodes  may  provide  essential  diagnostic
information.  For  example,  psychomotor  epilepsy  has  been  alleviated  by  surgical  removal  of  the


tip  of  the  temporal  lobe  where  seizure  activity  originated,  and  in  these  cases  it  is  imperative  to
identify  the  source  of  the  fits  and  especially  to  decide  whether  they  are  unilateral  or  present  on
both  sides  of  the  brain.  In  spite  of  some  controversial  problems  about  the  location,  multiplicity,
and  migration  of  epileptic  foci,  there  is  general  agreement  that  depth  recordings  through
implanted  electrodes  can  give  valuable  data  unobtainable  by  any  other  means.

The  expected  correlations  between  scalp  EEG  and  mental  disturbances  have  failed  to  materialize
in  experimental  studies,  although  some  mentally  ill  patients  have  exhibited  electrical
abnormalities.  Depth  recordings  have  also  failed  to  provide  decisive  information  about  these
patients,  and  for  example,  the  suggestion  that  septal  spikes  might  be  typical  of  schizophrenia  (98)
has  not  been  confirmed  (57).  The  absence  of  significant  data  must  be  attributed  to  the  lack  of
refinement  of  present  methodology.  Disturbed  functions  must  have  a  background  of  altered
neuronal  physiology  which  should  be  detectable  if  more  knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  involved
and  more  sophisticated  techniques  were  available.  One  step  in  this  direction  is  the  analysis  of
electrical  activity  by  means  of  auto-correlation  and  cross-correlation  (23)  in  order  to  recognize
periodicity  of  patterns  among  the  noise  of  other  signals.  Computer  analysis  of  power  and  spectral
analysis  of  frequencies  are  also  new  tools  which  will  increase  the  future  scientific  and  diagnostic
usefulness  of  electrical  recordings.  Depth  recordings  may  also  be  used  for  localization  of  tumors
inside  the  unopened  skull  to  detect  abnormally  slow  potential  shifts  from  the  tissue  surrounding
the  neoplasm  and  the  lack  of  spontaneous  waves  within  the  mass  of  tumoral  cells.

In  addition  to  knowledge  derived  from  the  study  of  spontaneous  brain  waves,  other  valuable
information  may  be  obtained  by  recording  the  alterations  evoked  in  intracerebral  electrical
activity  following  application  of  sensory  stimulation  or  ESB.  Presentation  of  flashes  of  light  with
a  stroboscope,  or  of  auditory  clicks,  activates  the  corresponding  cerebral  analyzers  and  may
unveil  areas  of  excessive  reactivity.  Epileptic  patients  are  especially  sensitive  to  repeated  flashes
and  may  respond  with  an  activation  of  dormant  electrical  abnormalities  or  even  with  a
convulsive  seizure.  Administration  of  single  or  repeated  electrical  shocks  may  also  help  in  the
localization  of  malfunctioning  neuronal  fields.  Systemic  administration  of  drugs  which  increase
or  decrease  brain  excitability  (such  as  metrazol  or  phenobarbital)  can  be  used  in  conjunction  with
evoked  potentials  in  order  to  test  the  specific  pharmacological  sensitivity  of  a  patient,  thus
orienting  his  medical  or  postsurgical  therapy.

Electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  during  surgical  interventions,  or  during  therapeutical
destruction  of  limited  cerebral  areas,  is  necessary  in  order  to  test  local  excitability  and  determine
the  functional  localization  of  areas  which  must  be  spared.  This  is  particularly  important  during
the  surgical  treatment  of  Parkinson's  disease,  which  requires  freezing  of  cerebral  tissue  around
the  pallidum  or  thalamus,  close  to  motor  pathways  in  the  internal  capsule.  Identification  of  these
pathways  is  imperative  in  order  to  avoid  their  accidental  destruction  and  the  subsequent
permanent  motor  paralysis  of  the  patient.

Therapy

The  cerebral  tissue  around  the  electrode  contact  may  be  destroyed  by  electrocoagulation,  passing
a  suitable  amount  of  direct  current.  The  main  advantages  of  using  implanted  electrodes  for  this
purpose,  instead  of  open  brain  surgery,  are  that  careful  functional  explorations  are  possible


before  and  after  the  brain  lesion  is  placed  and,  more  importantly,  that  coagulation  can  be
controlled  and  repeated  if  necessary  over  a  period  of  days  or  weeks,  according  to  the  therapeutic
results  obtained.  The  procedure  has  been  used  for  therapy  of  involuntary  movements,  intractable
pain,  focal  epilepsy,  and  several  mental  disturbances  including  anxiety,  fear,  compulsive
obsessions,  and  aggressive  behavior.  Some  investigators  report  a  remarkable  therapeutic  success
in  obsessive  patients;  others  are  more  skeptical  about  the  usefulness  of  depth  electrodes  and
electrocoagulations  in  treating  mental  illness.

Electrical  stimulation  of  specific  structures  has  been  used  as  a  therapeutic  procedure,  and
beneficial  effects  have  been  obtained  in  schizophrenic  patients  by  repeated  excitation  of  the
septum  and  other  areas  which  produce  pleasurable  sensations  (99,  201,  233).  In  other  cases  of
intractable  pain,  considerable  improvement  has  also  been  reported,  and  some  patients  have  been
allowed  to  stimulate  their  own  brains  repeatedly  by  means  of  portable  stimulators.  In  one  patient,
spontaneous  bursts  of  aggressive  behavior  were  diminished  by  brief  periods  of  repeated
stimulation  of  the  amygdaloid  nucleus  (60).

One  of  the  promising  medical  applications  of  ESB  is  the  programming  of  long-term  stimulations.
Animal  studies  have  shown  that  repeated  excitations  of  determined  cerebral  structures  produced
lasting  effects  and  that  intermittent  stimulations  could  be  continued  indefinitely.  Some  results  in
man  have  also  been  confirmatory.  It  should  be  emphasized  that  brain  lesions  represent  an
irreversible  destruction  while  brain  stimulations  are  far  more  physiological  and  conservative  and
do  not  rule  out  placing  of  lesions  if  necessary.  One  example  may  clarify  the  potential  of  this
procedure.  Nashold  (160)  has  described  the  case  of  one  patient,  suffering  from  very  severe
intention  tremor  associated  with  multiple  sclerosis,  in  whom  stimulation  of  the  dentate  nucleus  of
the  cerebellum  produced  an  inhibition  of  the  tremor  with  marked  ipsilateral  improvement  of
voluntary  motility.  The  speculation  was  that  a  cerebral  pacemaker  could  be  activated  by  the
patient  himself  when  he  desired  to  perform  voluntary  movements.

Many  other  possible  applications  could  be  explored  including  the  treatment  of  anorexia  nervosa
by  stimulation  of  the  feeding  centers  of  the  lateral  hypothalamus,  the  induction  of  sleep  in  cases
of  insomnia  by  excitation  of  the  center  median  or  of  the  caudate  nucleus,  the  regulation  of
circulating  ACEH  by  activation  of  the  posterior  hypothalamus,  and  the  increase  of  patients'
communication  for  psychotherapeutic  purposes  by  excitation  of  the  temporal  lobe.

A  two-way  radio  communication  system  could  be  established  between  the  brain  of  a  subject  and
a  computer.  Certain  types  of  neuronal  activity  related  to  behavioral  disturbances  such  as  anxiety,
depression,  or  rage  could  be  recognized  in  order  to  trigger  stimulation  of  specific  inhibitory
structures.  The  delivery  of  brain  stimulation  on  demand  to  correct  cerebral  dysfunctions
represents  a  new  approach  to  therapeutic  feedback.  While  it  is  speculative,  it  is  within  the  realm
of  possibility  according  to  present  knowledge  and  projected  methodology.

Circumvention  of  Damaged  Sensory  Inputs

The  miracle  of  giving  light  to  the  blind  and  sound  to  the  deaf  has  been  made  possible  by
implantation  of  electrodes,  demonstrating  the  technical  possibility  of  circumventing  damaged
sensory  receptors  by  direct  electrical  stimulation  of  the  nervous  system.


Brindley  and  I.ewin  (24)  have  described  the  case  of  a  52-year  old  woman,  totally  blind  after
suffering  bilateral  glaucoma,  in  whom  an  array  of  eighty  small  receiving  coils  were  implanted
subcutaneously  above  the  skull,  terminating  in  eighty  platinum  electrodes  encased  in  a  sheet  of
silicone  rubber  placed  in  direct  contact  with  the  visual  cortex  of  the  right  occipital  lobe.  Each
receiving  coil  was  tuned  to  a  frequency  of  6  or  9-5  megahertz  and  could  be  activated  by  pressing
a  transmitting  coil  against  the  scalp.  With  this  type  of  transdermal  stimulation,  a  visual  sensation
was  perceived  by  the  patient  in  the  left  half  of  her  visual  field  as  a  very  small  spot  of  white  light
or  sometimes  as  a  duplet  or  a  cluster  of  points.  The  effects  produced  by  stimulation  of  contacts
2.4  millimeters  apart  were  easily  distinguished,  and  simultaneous  excitation  of  several  electrodes
evoked  the  perception  of  predictable  simple  visual  patterns.  The  investigators  suppose  that  by
implanting  six  hundred  tiny  electrodes  it  would  be  possible  for  blind  patients  to  discriminate
visual  patterns;  they  could  also  achieve  a  normal  reading  speed  by  using  electrical  signals  from
an  automatic...

Using  a  different  approach,  the  Mexican  investigator  del  Campo  (26)  has  designed  an  air
instrument  called  an  "amaroscope,"  consisting  of  photoelectric  cells,  to  transform  luminous
images  into  electrical  impulses  which  are  modulated  and  fed  through  electrodes  placed  over  the
skin  above  the  eyes  to  stimulate  the  supraorbital  branches  of  the  trigeminal  nerve.  Impulses  are
thus  carried  to  the  reticular  system  and  the  cerebral  cortex.  The  instrument  is  not  too
sophisticated  and  its  neurophysiological  principles  are  controversial,  but  its  experimental  testing
in  more  than  two  persons  has  proved  that  visual  perceptions  may  be  electrically  produced  in
blind  patients,  even  in  some  who  have  no  eyes  at  all.

Auditory  sensations  have  also  been  produced  in  a  deaf  person  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the
auditory  nerve  through  permanently  implanted  electrodes.  Simmons  et  al.  (208)  studied  a  60-
year-old  male  who  had  been  totally  deaf  in  his  right  ear  for  several  years  and  nearly  deaf  in  the
left  for  several  months.  Under  local  anesthesia,  a  cluster  of  six  electrodes  was  implanted  on  the
right  auditory  nerve  with  a  connector  anchored  to  the  skull  just  beneath  the  right  ear.  Two  weeks
after  surgery,  electrical  stimuli  were  able  to  produce  perception  of  different  kinds  of  auditory
sensations.  Pitch  varied  with  the  point  stimulated  and  also  depended  on  the  electrical  parameters
used.  For  example,  3  to  4  pulses  per  second  were  heard  as  "clicks,"  to  per  second  as  "telephone
ringing,"  30  per  second  as  "bee  buzz,"  and  100  to  300  per  second  could  not  be  discriminated.
Loudness  was  related  to  amplitude  of  stimulation  and  to  pulse  duration,  and  was  less  affected  by
its  frequency.

To  evaluate  these  studies  we  must  understand  that  the  refinement  of  the  senses  cannot  be
duplicated  by  electronic  means  because  receptors  are  not  passive  transducers  of  energy  but  active
modulators  and  discriminators  of  impulses.  The  reciprocal  feedback  between  peripheral  and
central  neurons  and  the  processes  of  filtering  and  cross-correlation  of  information  which  takes
place  during  afferent  transmission  of  impulses  are  absent  in  the  instrumental  reception  of  inputs.
It  is  doubtful  that  refined  perceptions  comparable  to  physiological  ones  can  be  provided  by
electronic  means,  but  the  perception  of  sensations  -  even  if  crude  -  when  hope  had  been  lost  is
certainly  encouraging  and  demands  the  continuation  of  research  efforts,


Brain  Viability


The  clinical  distinction  between  life  and  death  was  not  too  difficult  to  establish  in  the  past.  When
respiration  and  palpitations  of  the  heart  had  ceased,  a  person  was  pronounced  dead,  and  there
was  little  that  a  doctor  could  do.  It  is  true  that  in  some  extraordinary  cases  the  signs  of  death
were  only  apparent,  and  a  few  patients  have  revived  spontaneously,  creating  quite  a  shock  for
their  doctors,  relatives,  and  for  themselves,  but  these  fantastic  stories  are  the  very  rare
exceptions.

A  new  situation  has  been  created  in  recent  years  because  medical  technology  has  often  taken  the
determination  of  human  death  away  from  natural  causality.  Respiratory  arrest  is  no  longer  fatal,
and  many  poliomyelitic  victims  have  survived  with  the  help  of  iron  lungs;  cardiac  block  does  not
necessarily  signal  the  end  of  life  because  heart  beats  may  be  artificially  controlled  by
pacemakers;  kidney  failure  will  not  poison  the  patient  if  dialysis  machines  are  available  to  clean
his  blood.  To  the  growing  collection  of  ingenious  electromechanical  instruments  a  new
methodology  has  recently  been  added:  the  cross-circulation  between  a  sick  human  being  and  a
healthy  baboon  in  order  to  clear  the  human  blood.  This  procedure  was  first  tested  in  December,
1967,  by  Dr.  Hume  at  the  Virginia  Medical  College  Hospital  to  treat  a  woman  patient  in  deep
hepatic  coma  with  jaundice  and  edema.  A  35-pound  baboon  was  anesthetized,  cooled,  and  its
blood  completely  washed  out  with  Ringer  solution  and  replaced  with  human  blood  matched  to
the  patient's.  Then  a  cross-circulation  was  established  from  the  ape's  leg  to  the  patient's  arm,  In
twelve  hours  the  patient  had  excreted  about  5  liters  of  fluid  through  the  baboon's  kidney  and
regained  consciousness.  Twenty-two  days  later  the  patient  went  home,  and  the  baboon  was  alive
and  healthy.  A  similar  procedure  was  successfully  used  later  in  other  cases  (21).

Today  the  lives  of  many  patients  do  not  depend  completely  on  the  well-being  of  their  own
organic  functions  but  on  the  availability  of  apes,  organ  donors,  the  voltage  of  a  battery,

integrity  of  electronic  circuits,  proper  management  of  pumps,  and  teamwork  of  doctors  and
technicians.  In  certain  cases  death  can  be  delayed  for  weeks  or  months,  and  current  technology
has  placed  upon  doctors  the  tremendous  responsibility,  the  nearly  deific  power,  of  deciding  the
duration  of  patients'  survival.  A  heated  controversy,  reaching  the  public  and  the  British
Parliament,  was  created  by  the  recent  disclosure  that  in  London's  Neasden  Hospital  the  records
of  patients  over  sixty-five  years  of  age  and  suffering  from  malignant  tumors  or  other  serious
chronic  diseases  were  marked  "NTBR"  ("not  to  be  resuscitated")  in  case  of  cardiac  arrest.
Artificial  prolongation  of  human  life  is  time  consuming  and  expensive  in  terms  of
instrumentation  and  personnel,  and  it  imposes  added  stress  on  the  patients  and  their  families.
Because  resources  are  limited,  it  is  materially  impossible  to  attempt  to  resuscitate  all  the  patients
who  die  every  day,  and  it  is  necessary  to  select  those  who  have  the  best  chance  of  prolonged  and
useful  survival.  Why  should  life  be  maintained  in  unconscious  patients  with  irreversible  brain
damage  and  no  hope  of  recovery?

This  dramatic  decision  between  individual  life  and  death  illustrates  both  man's  recently  acquired
power  and  the  necessity  to  use  it  with  intelligence  and  compassion.  To  make  the  situation  even
more  complex,  the  recent  development  of  organ  transplantation  is  creating  a  literally  "vital"


conflict  of  interests  because  a  person  kept  alive  artificially  owns  many  good  working  organs-
including  kidneys,  pancreas,  heart,  and  bones  -that  are  needed  by  other  dying  patients.

Death,  personality,  and  biological  human  rights  must  be  redefined  in  view  of  these  new  scientific
advances.  Possessions  to  be  disposed  of  after  death  include  not  only  real  estate,  stocks,  and
furniture,  but  teeth,  corneas,  and  hearts  as  well.  This  prospect  involves  many  ethical  and  legal
questions  and  sounds  altogether  gruesome  and  uncomfortable,  but  that  is  only  because  it  is
unfamiliar.  Giving  blood  to  be  transfused,  skin  to  be  grafted,  spermatozoas  for  artificial
insemination,  and  kidneys  to  be  transplanted  are  more  acceptable  practices  because  they  do  not
depend  on  the  death  of  the  donor;  but  when  death  cannot  be  avoided,  the  idea  of  the  transfer  and
survival  of  some  organs  should  be  considered  reasonable.

The  possibility  of  piecemeal  survival  of  functions  and  organs  introduces  the  basic  question  of
what  part  of  the  organism  to  identify  with  human  personality.  There  is  general  agreement  that  the
organ  most  fundamental  to  individual  identity  is  not  the  stomach,  the  liver,  or  even  the  heart,  but
the  brain.  In  the  necessary  redefinition  of  death  it  has  been  proposed  that  in  difficult  cases  when
circulation,  digestion,  metabolic  exchange,  and  other  functions  are  still  active,  the  decisive
information  about  whether  a  person  should  be  considered  alive-entailing  the  decision  to  continue
or  to  withdraw  artificial  support  for  survival-must  come  from  the  viability  of  the  brain.  In  some
hospitals  the  ultimate  arbiter  of  death  is  the  EEG  machine,  and  at  the  Massachussetts  General
Hospital,  Dr.  Robert  Schwab  has  proposed  that  death  should  be  determined  by  flat  lines  on  all
EEG  leads  for  twenty  minutes  of  continuous  recordings  and  lack  of  response  to  sensory  and
mechanical  stimuli.  In  the  absence  of  EEG  activity  tested  twenty-four  and  forty-eight  hours  later,
death  is  presumed  to  have  occurred  even  if  (as  happens  in  rare  cases)  the  heart  is  still  beating
normally.

In  the  near  future  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine  this  question  in  greater  detail  in  order  to
determine  the  parts  of  the  brain  considered  essential  for  the  survival  of  human  personality.  We
already  know  that  portions  of  the  brain  may  be  destroyed  or  taken  away  with  negligible  or  only
moderate  psychic  changes.  Destruction  of  the  motor  cortex  produces  paralysis;  ablation  of  the
temporal  lobe  may  affect  recent  memory;  and  destruction  of  the  frontal  lobes  may  modify
foresight  and  affective  reactions,  but  in  all  these  cases  the  patient's  behavior  is  recognized  as
human.  Destruction  of  the  hypothalamus  or  reticular  formation,  however,  may  induce  permanent
loss  of  consciousness,  and  in  this  case  it  is  questionable  whether  personal  identity  persists.  The
possible  piecemeal  survival  of  psychological  functions  will  make  the  definition  of  man  more
difficult  and  will  perhaps  increase  the  present  problem  of  deciding  what  human  life  is.  From  the
examination  of  these  questions,  however,  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  essential  qualities  of  a
human  being  -  and  of  the  direction  of  their  evolution  with  intelligent  purpose  will  emerge.


Chapter  21

Ethical  Considerations

Placing  electrodes  inside  of  the  brain,  exploring  the  neuronal  depth  of  personality,  and
influencing  behavior  by  electrical  stimulation  have  created  a  variety  of  problems,  some  of  them
shared  with  general  medical  ethics  and  others  more  specifically  related  to  moral  and
philosophical  issues  of  mental  activity.

Clinical  Use  of  New  Procedures

One  of  the  main  objectives  of  animal  research  is  the  discovery  of  new  principles  and  methods
which  can  be  applied  for  the  benefit  of  man.  Their  potential  advantages  and  risks  cannot  be
ascertained  until  they  have  been  extensively  tested  in  human  subjects,  and  preliminary  trials  must
always  be  considered  experimental.  Evidence  that  penicillin  or  any  other  new  drug  may  be
therapeutically  effective  is  obtained  initially  in  vitro  and  then  in  different  species  of  mammals,
but  the  conclusive  demonstration  of  its  clinical  safety  and  efficacy  requires  application  to  man.

In  spite  of  established  safeguards,  there  is  an  inherent  possibility  that  unforeseen,  slowly
developing  side  effects  may  have  serious  consequences.  A  thorium  product  used  in  the  early
thirties  as  a  contrast  medium  for  X-ray  analysis  of  the  liver  was  found  to  be  radioactive  and
caused  the  slow  death  of  hundreds  of  patients.  A  supposedly  innocuous  drug,  the  ill-famed
thalidomide  given  as  a  sedative,  had  damaging  effects  on  fetal  development,  creating  the  tragedy
of  children  bom  with  severe  physical  deformities.  Accidents  like  these  have  promoted  more
stringent  regulations,  but  the  gap  between  animal  and  human  biology  is  difficult  to  fill  and  in
each  case  a  compromise  must  be  reached  between  reasonable  precautions  and  possible  risks.

The  historical  demonstration  by  Fulton  and  Jacobsen  (81)  that  frustration  and  neurotic  behavior
in  the  chimpanzee  could  be  abolished  by  destruction  of  the  frontal  lobes  was  the  starting  point  of
lobotomy,  which  was  widely  used  for  treatment  of  several  types  of  mental  illness  in  human
patients.  This  operation  consisted  of  surgical  disruption  of  the  frontal  lobe  connections  and
demonstrated  the  important  fact  that  psychic  manifestations  can  be  influenced  by  physical  means
as  bold  as  the  surgeon's  knife.  The  Nobel  Prize  bestowed  on  the  first  neurosurgeon  to  perform
human  lobotomies,  Egas  Moniz,  recognized  the  significance  of  the  principle  that  the  mind  was
not  so  unreachable  as  formerly  believed,  and  that  it  could  be  the  object  of  experimental
investigation.

In  spite  of  initial  acclaim,  lobotomy  was  soon  severely  criticized  as  a  therapeutic  procedure
because  it  often  produced  concomitant  undesirable  alterations  of  personality,  and  more
conservative  treatments  were  actively  sought  in  order  to  provide  a  "less  damaging,  less  sacrificial
means  of  dealing  with  mental  disorders  than  are  lobotomy,  leucotomy,  gyrectomy,  thalamotomy,
and  other  intentional  destructions  of  nervous  structures"  (145).  Among  these  efforts,
implantation  of  electrodes  in  the  brain  offered  promising  possibilities.  In  monkeys,  stimulation  or
limited  destruction  of  the  caudate  nucleus  produced  several  of  the  symptoms  of  frontal  lobotomy
with  more  discrete  behavioral  changes  (191).  Implantation  of  electrodes  in  man  permitted  access
to  any  cerebral  structure  for  recording,  stimulation,  or  destruction.  Their  potential  clinical
application  raised  controversial  issues  about  risks,  rationale,  and  medical  efficacy,  but  there  is
general  agreement  that  depth  recordings  may  provide  significant  information  which  cannot  be


obtained  by  other  means  and  is  essential  for  the  proper  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  patients  with
some  cerebral  disturbances.  Therapeutic  use  of  electrodes  in  cases  of  mental  illness  has  been
more  doubtful  and  must  still  be  considered  in  an  experimental  phase.

Recordings  and  stimulations  in  a  patient  equipped  with  intracerebral  leads  provide  basic
information  about  neurophysiological  mechanisms  in  man  which  may  be  of  great  value  for  the
patient  himself,  for  the  welfare  of  other  patients,  and  for  the  advance  of  science.  In  addition,  they
provide  a  unique  opportunity  to  obtain  important  data  about  neuronal  functions  which  may  not
be  directly  related  to  the  patient's  illness.  In  this  case  we  are  facing  ethical  issues  of  human
research  which  must  be  carefully  considered.

Human  Experimentation

While  medical  practice  has  generally  accepted  guidelines  based  on  the  Hippocratic  oath  -  to  do
what  "I  consider  best  for  my  patients,  and  abstain  from  whatever  is  injurious"  -  research  with
human  subjects  has  lacked  traditional  codes  and  has  followed  the  investigator's  personal  criteria-
which  have  not  always  been  correct.  According  to  Beecher  (12),  leading  medical  schools  and
renowned  doctors  have  sometimes  conducted  unethical  research.  Extremely  high  doses  of  a  drug
have  been  administered,  with  resulting  behavioral  disturbances,  in  order  to  evaluate  the  toxicity
of  the  product;  placebos  have  been  given  instead  of  a  well-known  beneficial  drug,  with  a
resulting  increase  in  the  incidence  and  severity  of  illness;  live  cancer  cells  have  been  injected
under  the  skin  of  twenty-two  elderly  patients  without  telling  them  what  the  shots  were,  at  New
York's  well-respected  Sloan-Kettering  Institute.  Beecher  does  not  believe  that  these  studies
demonstrate  a  willful  disregard  of  the  patient's  rights,  but  a  thoughtlessness  in  experimental
design.

Although  no  formal  ethical  code  has  been  universally  accepted  for  the  performance  of  research
in  man,  basic  guidelines  have  been  formulated  by  the  American  Psychological  Association  (43);
by  the  judges  of  the  Nuremberg  war  crime  trials  (218);  by  the  World  Medical  Association  (246);
and  by  the  Medical  Research  Council  of  Britain  (153).  A  1966  editorial  in  the  New  England
Journal  of  Medicine  (161)  states  that  in  medicine  and  in  human  investigations  the  welfare  of  the
sick  patient  or  the  experimental  subject  has  traditionally  been  of  prime  importance.  "This  implies
clearly  that  therapeutic  or  theoretical  experiments  with  significant  risk  of  morbidity  or  mortality
are  undertaken  only  with  a  view  to  the  immediate  benefit  of  the  patient;  for  the  experimental
subject  to  whom  no  benefit  may  accrue,  the  most  meaningful  possible  informed  and  unforced
consent  must  be  secured."  In  the  summer  of  1966,  the  United  States  Public  Health  Service  issued
regulations  for  their  sponsored  research  involving  humans,  specifying  the  need  for  full  consent
by  the  participating  subjects  and  careful  review  of  the  projects  by  an  ad  hoc  committee.  In  a
detailed  discussion,  Wolfensberger  (245)  clarified  the  meaning  of  informed  consent:  The
experimental  subject  understands  all  the  essential  aspects  of  the  study,  the  types  and  degrees  of
risks,  the  detrimental  or  beneficial  consequences,  if  any,  and  the  purpose  of  the  research.

One  of  the  main  ethical  issues  is  the  conflict  of  interest  between  science,  progress,  and  society,
and  the  rights  of  the  individual.  The  principles  of  personal  dignity,  privacy,  and  freedom  are
often  waived  -  voluntarily  or  forcefully  -  in  favor  of  the  group.  Firemen,  policemen,  and  soldiers
may  risk  or  lose  their  lives  for  the  benefit  of  the  community.  Civilized  activities  are  full  of


regulations  which  limit  behavioral  freedom.  We  are  obliged  to  reveal  our  income,  to  pay  taxes,
and  to  serve  in  the  army.  We  cannot  walk  around  naked,  take  flowers  from  public  gardens,  or
leave  our  cars  where  we  please.  We  are  searched  when  crossing  borders  and  put  in  jail  if  our
conduct  is  considered  antisocial  by  the  law.  Although  respect  for  the  individual  is  highly  prized
and  accepted  in  theory,  in  practice  it  is  often  challenged  and  curtailed.  The  balance  between
social  duties  and  individual  rights  is  decided  not  by  the  individual  but  by  customs  and  laws
established  by  the  group.

In  the  case  of  medical  research,  it  is  difficult  to  write  an  ethical  code.  As  the  Panel  Of  Privacy
and  Behavioral  Research  concluded  in  1967,  "legislation  to  assure  appropriate  recognition  of  the
rights  of  human  subjects  is  neither  necessary  nor  desirable,"  and  "because  of  its  relative
inflexibility,  legislation  cannot  meet  the  challenge  of  the  subtle  and  sensitive  conflict  of  values
under  consideration."  Ethical  decisions  in  science  require  not  only  moral  judgment  but  also
factual  information,  technical  knowledge,  and  experience,  especially  in  the  evaluation  of  risks
and  benefits.  In  order  to  decide  to  undergo  open  heart  surgery,  a  patient  must  have  a  medical
evaluation  of  his  condition  and  of  the  state  of  the  surgical  art,  a  judgment  which  the  doctor,  but
rarely  the  patient,  is  prepared  to  make.  In  medical  research,  consent  is  certainly  essential,  but  the
main  responsibility  still  lies  with  the  investigator  and  his  institution.  The  request  for  consent
from  a  patient-or  from  a  student  participating  in  a  research  project  carries  a  heavy  weight  of
moral  authority  and  a  degree  of  coercion,  and  granting  of  it  does  not  relieve  the  director  of  full
responsibility  in  the  experimental  design  and  consequences.  The  simple  request  to  perform  a
dubious  procedure  must  be  considered  unethical  because  it  represents  psychological  stress  for  the
patient.  Children  and  adults  with  mental  disturbances  cannot  give  proper  consent,  and  relatives
must  be  consulted.  Their  decisions,  however,  are  easily  influenced  by  the  picture  presented  by
the  attending  physician,  thus  increasing  his  responsibility  which  preferably  should  be  shared  by  a
group  of  three  or  more  professional  consultants.

There  is  one  aspect  of  human  research  which  is  usually  overlooked:  the  existence  of  a  moral  and
social  duty  to  advance  scientific  knowledge  and  to  improve  the  welfare  of  man.  When  important
medical  information  can  be  obtained  with  negligible  risk  and  without  infringing  on  individual
rights,  the  investigator  has  the  duty  to  use  his  intelligence  and  skills  for  this  purpose.  Failure  to
do  so  represents  the  neglect  of  professional  duties  in  some  way  similar  to  the  negligence  of  a
medical  doctor  who  does  not  apply  his  full  effort  to  the  care  of  a  patient.  Subjects  with  implanted
electrodes  provide  a  good  example,  because  the  use  of  telemetry,  and  video  tape  recordings  in
them  makes  possible  many  studies  concerning  the  sources  of  normal  and  abnormal  activities,
spectral  analysis  of  electrical  waves,  conduction  time,  evoked  potentials,  and  electrobehavioral
correlations.  This  type  of  research  may  provide  data  of  exceptional  value-available  only  from
man- without  any  risks  or  even  demands  on  a  patient's  time  or  attention.  Information  can  be
obtained  while  the  subject  is  engaged  in  spontaneous  normal  activities  like  reading  a  paper,
watching  television,  or  sleeping.  Only  the  recording  equipment  and  research  team  need  to  be
alert  and  working.  Methodology  for  the  telemetric  study  of  the  brain  is  very  new,  and  it  will  take
some  time  before  its  potential  and  practicality  are  recognized  and  its  use  spread  to  different
hospitals.  In  my  opinion  this  research  is  both  ethical  and  desirable.

However,  procedures  which  represent  risk  or  discomfort  for  the  patient  should  be  ruled  out.  The
implantation  time  of  electrodes  cannot  be  prolonged  unnecessarily,  and- administration  of  drugs,


injections,  or  catheterizations  for  research  purposes  are  not  acceptable.  Any  contemplated
exception  to  this  rule  should  be  very  carefully  evaluated  and  clearly  explained  to  the
experimental  subject.


When  a  patient  needs  to  have  electrodes  in  his  brain  for  a  period  of  weeks  or  months,  the  medical
doctors  in  charge  face  a  dual  responsibility,  first  not  to  do  anything  harmful  or  unpleasant  for  the
sake  of  science,  and  second  to  do  as  much  research  as  possible  provided  it  is  safe  and
comfortable  for  the  patient.


The  use  of  healthy  volunteers  in  medical  research  is  controversial,  partly  because  they
usually  recruited  from  prisons,  the  military  services,  universities,  or  other  groups  which  are  more
or  less  bound  to  authority  and  therefore  have  a  diminished  capacity  for  free  choice.  One  of  the
most  famous  experiments  was  a  study  of  antimalarial  drugs  which  had  to  be  performed  in  man.

In  a  well-planned  research  project  1,000  army  volunteers  in  Australia  were  deliberately  infected
with  malaria.  This  study  was  later  continued  in  several  federal  penitentiaries  in  the  United  States.
A  most  dramatic  and  successful  mass  experiment  was  the  application  of  poliomyelitis  vaccine  to
thousands  of  school  children  a  few  years  ago,  statistically  demonstrating  the  effectiveness  of  a
new  vaccine.  Decisions  about  experiments  like  these  must  be  reached  by  careful  consideration  of
the  factors  involved,  with  the  basic  ethical  guidelines  clearly  in  mind.


Individual  volunteers  have  greater  freedom  of  choice,  and  I  have  received  letters  from  many
people  offering  themselves  as  "human  guinea  pigs"  for  implantation  of  electrodes  in  their  brains.
For  both  ethical  and  practical  reasons  their  offers  cannot  be  accepted,  but  it  is  interesting  to  note
the  varied  motivations  behind  these  proposals.  They  included  pure  scientific  interest,  hopes  for
monetary  reward  or  fame,  manifestations  of  psychotic  disturbances,  and  also  a  most  generous
intent:  Some  people  wished  to  donate  their  brains  for  study  in  the  hope  that  information  could  be
obtained  leading  to  the  cure  of  loved  ones  whose  brain  dysfunctions  could  not  be  cured  by
standard  therapies.  The  most  articulate  expression  of  this  wish  to  contribute  one's  own  brain  for
scientific  research  was  that  of  a  most  distinguished  investigator,  Dr.  David  Rioch,  who  at  the
close  of  a  conference  about  the  unanesthetized  brain,  held  in  Washington,  D.C.,  in  1957,
declared:


When  I  come  to  retire  ...  I  might  quite  reasonably  approach  an  experimental  neurosurgeon  in  whose
work  and  scientific  orientation  I  had  confidence  and  say  "Let  us  do  an  experiment  together,  as  there  are
a  number  of  things  both  you  and  I  would  like  to  find  out."  I  would  be  considerably  intrigued  to  know
what  "attitudes"  and  "sensations"  a  good  experimenter  could  evoke  electrically  from  my  amygdala  and
even  more  intrigued  to  check  personally  on  the  sense  of  euphoria  and  the  sense  of  disphoria  (185).


Electrical  Manipulation  of  the  Psyche

The  most  alarming  aspect  of  ESB  is  that  psychological  reactivity  can  be  influenced  by  applying  a
few  volts  to  a  determined  area  of  the  brain.  This  fact  has  been  interpreted  by  many  people  as  a
disturbing  threat  to  human  integrity.  In  the  past,  the  individual  could  face  risks  and  pressures
with  preservation  of  his  own  identity.  His  body  could  be  tortured,  his  thoughts  and  desires  could
be  challenged  by  bribes,  by  emotions,  and  by  public  opinion,  and  his  behavior  could  be
influenced  by  environmental  circumstances,  but  he  always  had  the  privilege  of  deciding  his  own


fate,  of  dying  for  an  ideal  without  changing  his  mind.  Fidelity  to  our  emotional  and  intellectual
past  gives  each  of  us  a  feeling  of  transcendental  stability-and  perhaps  of  immortality- which  is
more  precious  than  life  itself.

New  neurological  technology,  however,  has  a  refined  efficiency.  The  individual  is  defenseless
against  direct  manipulation  of  the  brain  because  he  is  deprived  of  his  most  intimate  mechanisms
of  biological  reactivity.  In  experiments,  electrical  stimulation  of  appropriate  intensity  always
prevailed  over  free  will;  and,  for  example,  flexion  of  the  hand  evoked  by  stimulation  of  the
motor  cortex  cannot  be  voluntarily  avoided.  Destruction  of  the  frontal  lobes  produced  changes  in
effectiveness  which  are  beyond  any  personal  control.

The  possibility  of  scientific  annihilation  of  personal  identity,  or  even  worse,  its  purposeful
control,  has  sometimes  been  considered  a  future  threat  more  awful  than  atomic  holocaust.  Even
physicians  have  expressed  doubts  about  the  propriety  of  physical  tampering  with  the  psyche,
maintaining  that  personal  identity  should  be  inviolable,  that  any  attempt  to  modify  individual
behavior  is  unethical,  and  that  method  and  related  research  -which  can  influence  the  human  brain
should  be  banned.  The  prospect  of  any  degree  of  physical  control  of  the  mind  provokes  a  variety
of  objections:  theological  objections  because  it  affects  free  will,  moral  objections  because  it
affects  individual  responsibility,  ethical  objections  because  it  may  block  self-defense
mechanisms,  philosophical  objections  because  it  threatens  personal  identity.

These  objections,  however,  are  debatable.  A  prohibition  of  scientific  advance  is  obviously  naive
and  unrealistic.  It  could  not  be  universally  imposed,  and,  more  important,  it  is  not  knowledge
itself  but  its  improper  use  which  should  be  regulated.  A  knife  is  neither  good  nor  bad;  but  it  may
be  used  by  either  a  surgeon  or  an  assassin.  Science  should  be  neutral,  but  scientists  should  take
sides  (242).  The  mind  is  not  a  static,  inborn  entity  owned  by  the  individual  and  self-sufficient,
but  the  dynamic  organization  of  sensory  perceptions  of  the  external  world,  correlated  and
reshaped  through  the  internal  anatomical  and  functional  structure  of  the  brain.  Personality  is  not
an  intangible,  immutable  way  of  reacting,  but  a  flexible  process  in  continuous  evolution,  affected
by  its  medium.  Culture  and  education  are  meant  to  shape  patterns  of  reaction  which  are  not
innate  in  the  human  organism;  they  are  meant  to  impose  limits  on  freedom  of  choice.  Moral
codes  may  vary  completely  from  civilization  to  civilization.  Polygamy  was  acceptable  in  biblical
times,  and  it  is  still  practiced  among  Moslems,  but  it  is  rejected  by  many  other  civilizations  with
strong  social,  legal,  religious,  and  educational  pressures  to  make  behavior  monogamous.  Of
course  there  is  no  physical  impediment  to  the  acquisition  of  half  a  dozen  wives  -  at  least  until  the
law  or  the  ladies  catch  up  -  but  then  we  enter  into  a  play  of  forces,  into  the  dynamic  equilibrium
among  all  of  the  elements  which  determine  behavioral  choice.  If  there  are  very  strong  reasons  to
react  in  a  particular  way  (for  example,  to  have  only  one  wife),  the  chance  of  living  by  a  different
custom  is  so  slim  as  to  be  negligible.

This  is  precisely  the  role  of  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain:  to  add  a  new  factor  to  the
constellation  of  behavioral  determinants.  The  result  as  shown  experimentally  in  animals  is  an
algebraic  summation,  with  cerebral  stimulation  usually  prepotent  over  spontaneous  react  ions.  It
is  accepted  medical  practice  to  try  and  modify  the  antisocial  or  abnormal  reactions  of  mental
patients.  Psychoanalysis,  the  use  of  drugs  such  as  energizers  and  tranquilizers,  the  application  of
insulin  or  electroshock,  and  other  varieties  of  psychiatric  treatment  are  all  aimed  at  influencing


the  abnormal  personality  of  the  patient  in  order  to  change  his  undesirable  mental  characteristics.
The  possible  use,  therefore,  of  implanted  electrodes  in  mental  patients  should  not  pose  unusual
ethical  complications  if  the  accepted  medical  rules  are  followed.  Perhaps  the  limited  efficiency
of  standard  psychiatric  procedures  is  one  reason  that  they  have  not  caused  alarm  among  scientists
or  laymen.  Psychoanalysis  requires  a  long  time,  and  a  person  can  easily  withdraw  his
cooperation  and  refuse  to  express  intimate  thoughts.  Electroshock  is  a  crude  method  of  doubtful
efficacy  in  normal  people.  Although  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  is  still  in  the  initial  stage
of  Its  development,  it  is  in  contrast  far  more  selective  and  powerful;  it  may  delay  a  heart  beat,
move  a  finger,  bring  a  word  to  memory,  or  set  a  determined  behavioral  tone.

When  medical  indications  are  clear  and  the  standard  therapeutic  procedures  have  failed,  most
patients  and  doctors  are  willing  to  test  a  new  method,  provided  that  the  possibility  of  success
outweighs  the  risk  of  worsening  the  situation.  The  crucial  decision  to  start  applying  a  new
therapeutic  method  to  human  patients  requires  a  combination  of  intelligent  evaluation  of  data,
knowledge  of  comparative  neurophysiology,  foresight,  moral  integrity,  and  Courage.  Excessive
aggressiveness  in  a  doctor  may  cause  irreparable  damage,  but  too  much  caution  may  deprive
patients  of  needed  help.  The  surgical  procedure  of  lobotomy  was  perhaps  applied  to  many  mental
patients  too  quickly,  before  its  dangers  and  limitations  were  understood;  but  pallidectomy  and
thalamotomy  in  the  treatment  of  Parkinson's  disease  encountered  formidable  initial  opposition
before  attaining  their  present  recognition  and  respected  status.

While  pharmacological  and  surgical  treatment  of  sufferers  of  mental  illness  is  accepted  as
proper,  people  with  other  behavioral  deviations  pose  a  different  type  of  ethical  problem.  They
may  be  potentially  dangerous  to  themselves  and  to  society  when  their  mental  functions  are
maintained  within  normal  limits  and  only  one  aspect  of  their  personal  conduct  is  socially
unacceptable.  The  rights  of  an  individual  to  obtain  appropriate  treatment  must  be  weighed  with  a
professional  evaluation  of  his  behavioral  problems  and  their  possible  neurological  basis-which
necessitates  a  value  judgment  of  the  person's  behavior  in  comparison  with  accepted  norms.  One
example  will  illustrate  these  considerations.

In  the  early  1950s,  a  patient  in  a  state  mental  hospital  approached  Dr.  Hannibal  Hamlin  and  me
requesting  help.  She  was  an  attractive  24-year-old  woman  of  average  intelligence  and  education
who  had  a  long  record  of  arrests  for  disorderly  conduct,  She  had  been  repeatedly  involved  in  bar
brawls  in  which  she  incited  men  to  fight  over  her  and  had  spent  most  of  the  preceding  few  years
either  in  jail  or  in  mental  institutions.  The  patient  expressed  a  strong  desire  as  well  as  an  inability
to  alter  her  conduct,  and  because  psychiatric  treatment  had  failed,  she  and  her  mother  urgently
requested  that  some  kind  of  brain  surgery  be  performed  in  order  to  control  her  disreputable,
impulsive  behavior.  They  asked  specifically  that  electrodes  be  implanted  to  orient  possible
electrocoagulation  of  a  limited  cerebral  area;  and  if  that  wasn't  possible,  they  wanted  lobotomy.

Medical  knowledge  and  experience  at  that  time  could  not  ascertain  whether  ESB  or  the
application  of  cerebral  lesions  could  help  to  solve  this  patient's  problem,  and  surgical
intervention  was  therefore  rejected.  When  this  decision  was  explained,  both  the  patient  and  her
mother  reacted  with  similar  anxious  comments,  asking,  "What  is  the  future?  Only  jail  or  the
hospital?  Is  there  no  hope?"  This  case  revealed  the  limitations  of  therapy  and  the  dilemma  of
possible  behavioral  control.  Supposing  that  long-term  stimulation  of  a  determined  brain  structure


could  influence  the  tendencies  of  a  patient  to  drink,  flirt,  and  induce  fights;  would  it  be  ethical  to
change  her  personal  characteristics?  People  are  changing  their  character  by  self-medication
through  hallucinogenic  drugs,  but  do  they  have  the  right  to  demand  that  doctors  administer
treatment  that  will  radically  alter  their  behavior?  What  are  the  limits  of  individual  rights  and
doctors'  obligations?

As  science  seems  to  be  approaching  the  possibility  of  controlling  many  aspects  of  behavior
electronically  and  chemically,  these  questions  must  be  answered.  If,  as  in  the  case  of  this  patient,
the  deviation  of  behavior  conflicts  with  society  so  seriously  as  to  deprive  her  of  her  personal
freedom,  medical  intervention  could  be  justified.  The  case  of  habitual  criminal  conduct  is
another  example  of  this  type  of  problem.  Therapeutic  decisions  related  to  psychic  manipulation
require  moral  integrity  and  ethical  education.  Scientific  training  concentrates  mainly  in  natural
sciences  and  often  neglects  the  study  and  assimilation  of  ethical  codes,  considering  them  beyond
the  realm  of  science.  Perhaps  it  is  often  forgotten  that  the  investigator  needs  a  set  of  convictions
and  principles,  not  only  to  administrate  grant  money,  to  give  proper  credit  to  the  work  of  others,
and  to  be  civilized  with  his  colleagues,  but  especially  to  direct  his  life  and  his  research,  and  to
foresee  the  implications  of  his  own  discoveries.


About  the  Author

Jose  M.  R.  Delgado  was  born  in  Ronda,  Spain,  and  received  his  medical  training  at  Madrid
University,  where  he  was  Associate  Professor  of  Physiology  until  1950  when  he  came  to  Yale
University  to  work  with  Dr.  John  Fulton.  He  is  now  Professor  of  Physiology  at  Yale,  where  he
has  developed  techniques  for  electrical  and  chemical  stimulation  of  the  brain  and  has  applied
them  to  the  study  of  primate  and  human  behavior.  He  has  published  more  than  200  scientific
papers  and  is  a  well-known  authority  in  neurobehavioral  research.


DELGADO,
holding  two
of  his  brain
implants  in
a

photograph
taken  in
August
2005,  once
wrote  that
humanity
should  shift
its  mission
from  the
ancient
dictum
“Know
thyself’ to
“Construct
thyself.”


Notable  Quotes


p.  16  .  These  accomplishments  should  familiarize  us  with  the  idea  that  we  may  also  control  the
biological  functions  of  living  organisms  from  a  distance.  Cats,  monkeys,  or  human  beings  can  be
induced  to  flex  a  limb,  to  reject  food,  or  to  feel  emotional  excitement  under  the  influence  of
electrical  impulses  reaching  the  depths  of  their  brains  through  radio  waves  purposefully  sent  by
an  investigator.

p.  18  By  means  of  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  (ESB),  it  is  possible  to  control  a  variety  of  functions  -
a  movement,  a  glandular  secretion,  or  a  specific  mental  manifestation,  depending  on  the  chosen  target.

p.  18  muscular  contraction  can  be  initiated  by  mechanical,  thermal,  osmotic,  chemical,  electrical,  or
neuronal  stimulation.

p.29-30  In  scientific  literature  there  is  already  a  substantial  amount  of  information  demonstrating  the
remarkable  effects  induced  by  ESB.  The  heart,  for  instance,  can  be  stopped  for  a  few  beats,  slowed
down,  or  accelerated  by  suitable  stimulation  of  determined  cortical  and  subcortical  structures,
illustrating  the  physiological  reality  that  it  is  the  brain  which  controls  the  heart,  and  not  vice  versa.
Respiratory  rate  and  amplitude  have  been  driven  by  ESB;  gastric  secretion  and  motility  have  also  been
modified  by  brain  stimulation;  the  diameter  of  the  pupil  can  be  adjusted  at  will  (Figure  7)  from
maximum  constriction  to  maximum  dilation,  as  if  it  were  a  photographic  camera,  simply  by  changing  the
intensity  knob  of  an  electric  stimulator  The  diameter  of  the  pupil  can  be  electrically  controlled  as  if  it


were  a  photographic  camera,  simply  by  changing  the  intensity  knob  of  an  electric  stimulator
connected  with  the  hypothalamic  region  of  the  brain  (61).  Most  visceral  functions  have  been
influenced  by  ESB,  as  have  sensory  perceptions,  motor  activities,  and  mental  functions.

The  diameter  of  the  pupil  can  be  electrically  controlled  as  if  it  were  the  diaphragm  of  a  photographic
camera.  Above,  the  normal  eyes,  and  below,  constriction  of  the  right  pupil  evoked  by  stimulation  of  the
hypothalamus.  Some  effects  of  ESB  such  as  this  are  indefatigable  and  can  be  maintained  for  days  as  long
stimulation  is  applied  (61).

p.31  .  The  fact  that  ESB  can  induce  simple  movements  was  discovered  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and
today  we  know  that  the  cerebral  organization  of  motility  is  located  mainly  in  the  cortex  of  the  parietal
lobe.  Stimulation  of  this  area  induces  movements  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  body,  while  its  destruction
results  in  paralysis.

p.35  Brain  stimulation  of  different  areas  has  elicited  most  of  the  simple  movements  observed  in
spontaneous  behavior,  including  frowning,  opening  and  closing  the  eyes,  opening,  closing,  and  deviation
of  the  mouth,  movements  of  the  tongue,  chewing,  contraction  of  the  face,  movements  of  the  ears,
turns,  twists,  flexions,  and  extensions  of  the  head  and  body,  and  movements  of  the  arms,  legs,  and
fingers.  We  must  conclude  that  most  if  not  all  of  the  possible  simple  movements  can  be  evoked  by
electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain.

p.  36  The  surprising  fact  is  that  electrical  pulses  applied  directly  to  the  brain  activate  cerebral
structures  which  possess  the  necessary  functional  complexity  to  induce  walking  with  apparently
normal  characteristics.

In  one  of  our  experiments,  monkey  Korn  was  sitting  in  the  colony  cage  picking  some  food  when
radio  stimulation  of  his  thalamus,  located  in  the  center  of  the  brain,  began.  The  animal  slowly  got
up  and  started  walking  around  the  cage  on  all  fours  at  a  speed  of  about  1  meter  per  second,
without  bumping  against  the  walls  or  against  other  animals,  in  a  normal  manner  without  any
signs  of  anxiety,  fear,  or  discomfort.  At  the  end  of  5  to  10  seconds  of  stimulation,  the  monkey
calmly  sat  down  and  resumed  picking  food.  As  soon  as  stimulation  was  reapplied,  Kuru  re¬
sumed  walking  around  the  cage.  In  some  studies  this  effect  was  repeated  as  often  as  sixty  times
in  one  hour.

p.  42  When  reviewing  the  entire  motor  responses  that  can  be  induced  by  electrical  stimulation
several  important  limitations  should  be  considered:  (i)  Lack  of  predictability.  When  a  point  of  the
brain  is  stimulated  for  the  first  time,  we  cannot  predict  the  effects  which  may  be  evoked.  When
the  upper  part  of  the  motor  cortex  is  stimulated,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  contralateral
hindlimb  will  contract,  but  we  cannot  foresee  the  quality  of  this  movement  or  the  participation  of
other  body  muscles,  or  know  whether  this  response  will  affect  the  whole  leg  or  only  the  foot.
Once  the  evoked  effect  is  known,  repeated  stimulations  gives  predictable  results  provided  that
the  experimental  situation  is  constant.  (2)  Lack  of  purpose:  In  some  cases  the  evoked  response  is
directed  by  the  animal  in  a  purposeful  way,  but  the  movements  and  sequential  responses  are
usually  out  of  context,  and  there  is  no  reason  or  purpose  for  yawning,  flexing  a  hand,  or  walking
around,  apart  from  ESB.  It  is  important  to  differentiate  these  aimless  motor  responses  from  other


types  of  behavior  described  later  in  which  the  aim  is  of  primary  importance  and  the  motor
performance  secondary.  (3)  No  robot  performance :  Brain  stimulation  activates  cerebral
mechanisms  which  are  organized  for  motor  performance,  but  it  cannot  replace  them.  With  the
present  state  of  the  art,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  we  could  electrically  direct  an  animal  to  carry  out
predetermined  activities  such  as  opening  a  gate  or  performing  an  instrumental  response.  We  can
induce  pleasure  or  punishment  and  therefore  the  motivation  to  press  a  lever,  but  we  cannot
control  the  sequence  of  movements  necessary  for  this  act  in  the  absence  of  the  animal's  own
desire  to  do  so.  As  will  be  discussed  later,  we  can  evoke  emotional  states  which  may  motivate  an
animal  to  attack  another  or  to  escape,  but  we  cannot  electrically  synthesize  the  complex  motor
performance  of  these  acts.

p.43  The  most  common  effect  obtained  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  human  brain  is  a  simple
motor  response  such  as  the  contraction  of  an  extremity.  This  effect  is  often  accompanied  by  lack
of  voluntary  control  of  the  muscles  involved,  and  occasionally  it  is  limited  to  a  local  paralysis
without  any  other  observable  symptoms.

p.44  There  are  very  few  clinical  reports  of  complex  movements  evoked  by  ESB  which  are
comparable  to  the  sequential  responses  observed  in  monkeys,  and  this  may  indicate  that  cerebral
organization  is  less  stereotyped  in  man  than  in  animals

p.59  In  one  of  our  female  patients,  stimulation  of  a  similar  area  in  the  thalamus  induced  a
typical  fearful  expression  and  she  turned  to  either  side,  visually  exploring  the  room  behind  her.
When  asked  what  she  was  doing,  she  replied  that  she  felt  a  threat  and  thought  that  something
horrible  was  going  to  happen.  This  fearful  sensation  was  perceived  as  reed,  and  she  had  a
premonition  of  imminent  disaster  of  unknown  cause.  The  effect  was  reliable  on  different  days
and  was  not  altered  by  the  use  of  lights  and  a  movie  camera  to  document  the  finding.  Her  motor
activity  and  choice  of  words  varied  according  to  the  environmental  setting,  but  her  faded
expression  and  acute  sensation  of  nonspecific,  unexplainable,  but  real  fear  were  similar
following  different  stimulations.  The  response  started  with  a  delay  of  less  than  one  second,  lasted
for  as  long  as  the  stimulation,  and  did  not  leave  obserx’able  aftereffects.  The  patient  remembered
her  fear  but  was  not  upset  by  the  memory.

p.  62  The  demonstration  that  amygdaloid  stimulation  may  induce  violent  behavior  has  cdso  been
provided  by  other  investigators.  King  (128)  has  described  the  case  of  a  woman  with  feelings  of
depression  and  alienation,  with  an  extremely  flat  tone  of  voice  and  a  faded  expression  which  was
blank  and  unchanging  during  interviews,  who  upon  stimulation  of  the  amygdala  with  5
milliamperes  had  greatly  altered  vocal  inflections  and  an  angry  expression.  During  this  time  she
scud,  "I  feel  like  I  want  to  get  up  from  this  chair !  Please  don 't  let  me  do  it!  Don  7  do  this  to  me,  1
don 't  want  to  be  mean!''  When  the  interviewer  asked  if  she  would  like  to  hit  him,  the  patient
answered,  "Yeah,  I  want  to  hit  something.  I  want  to  act  something  and  just  tear  it  up.  Take  it  so  1
won’t!  "  She  then  handed  her  scarf  to  the  interviewer  who  gave  her  a  stack  of  paper,  and  without
any  other  verbed  exchange,  she  tore  it  into  shreds  saying,  "I  don ’t  like  to  feel  like  this. "  When  the
level  of  stimulation  was  reduced  to  4  milliamperes,  her  attitude  changed  to  a  broad  smile,  and
she  explained,  "I  know  it  's  silly,  what  I'm  doing.  I  wanted  to  get  up  from  this  chair  and  run.  I
wanted  to  hit  something,  tear  up  something -anything.  Not  you,  just  anything.  I  just  wanted  to  get


up  and  tear.  I  had  no  control  of  myself.  "An  increase  in  intensity  up  to  5  milliamperes  again
resulted  in  similar  aggressive  manifestations,  and  she  raised  her  arm  as  if  to  strike.


p.63  A  systematic  ancdysis  of  the  neuroanatomical  distribution  of  pleasurable  areas  in  the  rat
(164)  shows  that  60  per  cent  of  the  brain  is  neutral,  35  per  cent  is  rewarding,  and  only  5  per  cent
may  elicit  punishing  effects.  The  idea  that  far  more  brain  is  involved  in  pleasure  than  in  suffering
is  rather  optimistic  and  gives  hope  that  this  predominance  of  the  potential  for  pleasurable
sensations  can  be  developed  into  a  more  effective  behavioral  reality.

p.64  ...studies  in  human  subjects  with  implanted  electrodes  have  demonstrated  that  electrical
stimulation  of  the  depth  of  the  brain  can  induce  pleasurable  manifestations,  as  evidenced  by  the
spontaneous  verbcd  reports  of  patients,  their  facial  expression  and  general  behavior,  and  their
desire  to  repeat  the  experience.  In  a  group  of  twenty-three  patients  suffering  from  schizophrenia
(98),  electrical  stimulation  of  the  septcd  region,  located  deep  in  the  frontal  lobes,  produced  an
enhancement  of  alertness  sometimes  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  verbcd  output,  euphoria,  or
pleasure.  In  a  more  systematic  study  in  another  group  of  patients,  further  evidence  was
presented  the  rewarding  effects  of  septcd  stimulation  (20,  99).  One  man  suffering  from
narcolepsia  was  provided  with  a  small  stimulator  and  a  built-in  counter  which  recorded  the
number  of  times  that  he  voluntarily  stimulated  each  of  severed  selected  points  in  his  brain  during
a  period  of  seventeen  weeks.  The  highest  score  was  recorded  from  one  point  in  the  septal  region,
and  the  patient  declared  that  pushing  this  particular  button  made  him  feel  "good"  as  if  he  were
building  up  to  a  sexual  orgasm,  although  he  was  not  able  to  reach  the  end  point  and  often  felt
impatient  and  anxious.  His  narcolepsia  was  greatly  relieved  by  pressing  this  '  septcd  button. "
Another  patient  with  psychomotor  epilepsy  also  enjoyed  septal  self-stimulation,  which  agedn  had
the  highest  rate  of  button  pressing  and  often  induced  sexual  thoughts,  Activation  of  the  septcd
region  by  direct  injection  of  acetylcholine  produced  local  electrical  changes  in  two  epileptic
patients  and  a  shift  in  mood  from  disphoria  to  contentment  and  euphoria,  usucdly  with
concomitant  sexual  motivation  and  some  "orgastic  sensations. "

Further  information  was  provided  by  another  group  of  sixty -five  patients  suffering  from
schizophrenia  or  Parkinson's  disease,  in  whom  a  toted  of 643  contacts  were  implanted,  mainly  in
the  anterior  part  of  the  brain  (201 ).  Results  ofESB  were  grouped  as  follows:  360  points  were
"Positive  I, "  and  with  stimulation  "the  patients  became  relaxed,  at  ease,  had  a  feeling  of  well¬
being,  and/or  were  a  little  sleepy. "  Another  31  points  were  "Positive  II, "  and  "the  patients  were
definitely  changed ...  in  a  good  mood,  felt  good.  They  were  relaxed,  at  ease,  and  enjoyed
themselves,  frequently  smiling.  There  was  a  slight  euphoria,  but  the  behavior  was  adequate. "
They  sometimes  wanted  more  stimulations.  Excitation  of  another  eight  points  evoked  behavior
classified  as  "Positive  III, "  when  "the  euphoria  was  definitely  beyond  normal  limits.  The  patients
laughed  out  loud,  enjoyed  themselves,  and  positively  liked  the  stimulation,  and  wanted  more. "
ESB  of  another  38  points  gave  ambivalent  results,  and  the  patients  expressed  occasioned
pleasure  or  displeasure  following  excitation  of  the  same  area.  From  three  other  points,
responses  were  termed  "orgasm"  because  the  patients  initially  expressed  enjoyment  and  then
suddenly  were  completely  satisfied  and  did  not  want  any  more  stimulation  for  a  variable  period
of  time.  Finally,  from  about  two  hundred  other  points,  ESB  produced  unpleasant  reactions
including  anxiety,  sadness,  depression,  fear,  and  emotioned  outbursts.  One  of  the  moving
pictures  taken  in  this  study  was  very  demonstrative,  showing  a  patient  with  a  sad  expression  and


slightly  depressed  mood  who  smiled  when  a  brief  stimulation  was  applied  to  the  rostral  part  of
the  brain,  returning  quickly  to  his  usual  depressed  state,  to  smile  again  as  soon  as  stimulation
was  reapplied.  Then  a  ten-second  stimulation  completely  changed  his  behavior  and  faded
expression  into  a  lasting  pleasant  and  happy  mood.  Some  mental  patients  have  been  provided
with  portable  stimulators  which  they  have  used  in  self -treatment  of  depressive  states  with
apparent  clinical  success.

These  results  indicate  the  need  for  careful  functioned  exploration  during  brain  surgery  in  order
to  avoid  excessive  euphoria  or  depression  when  positive  or  negative  reinforcing  areas  are
damaged.

p.  68  Like  spontaneous  memories,  the  recollections  induced  by  ESB  could  bring  back  the
emotions  felt  at  the  time  of  the  original  experience,  suggesting  that  neuronal  mechanisms  keep
an  integrated  record  of  the  past,  including  all  the  sensory  inputs  (visual,  auditory,  proprioceptive,
etc.)  and  also  the  emotional  significance  of  events.  Electrical  stimulation  activated  only  one
memory  without  reawakening  any  of  the  other  records  which  must  be  stored  in  close  proximity.
This  fact  suggests  the  existence  of  cerebral  mechanisms  of  reciprocal  inhibition  which  allow  the
orderly  recall  of  specific  patterns  of  memory  without  a  flood  of  unmanageable  amounts  of  stored
information.  In  no  case  has  brain  stimulation  produced  two  psychical  experiences  at  the  same
time,  and  the  responses  have  been  on  an  all-or-nothing  basis.

p.  70  The  following  phenomena  have  been  observed  in  patients:  (1)  illusions  (visual,  auditory,
labyrinthine,  memory  or  deja  vu,  sensation  of  remoteness  or  unreality,  (2:)  emotions  (loneliness,
fear,  sadness),  (3)  psychical  hallucinations  (vivid  memory  or  a  dream  as  complex  as  life
experience  itself,  and  (4)  forced  thinking  (stereotyped  thoughts  crowding  into  the  mind).

The  first  three  groups  of  phenomena  have  been  induced  by  different  intracerebral  stimulations.
The  most  commonly  reported  effect  has  been  the  illusion  of  familiarity  or  deja  vu,  which  is
characterized  by  surprise,  interruption  of  conversation,  and  immediate  spontaneous  reporting  that
something  unusual  had  just  happened.  For  example,  after  a  stimulation  in  the  inferolateral  part  of
the  frontal  lobe,  one  patient  began  to  reply  to  the  interviewer's  question  but  suddenly  stopped  and
said,  "I  was  thinkin'  -  it  felt  like  someone  else  was  asking  me  that  before."

p.  80  A  female  monkey  named  Elsa  soon  discovered  that  Ali's  aggressiveness  could  be  inhibited
by  pressing  the  lever,  and  when  Ali  threatened  her,  it  was  repeatedly  observed  that  Elsa
responded  by  lever  pressing.  Her  attitude  of  looking  straight  at  the  boss  was  highly  significant
because  a  submissive  monkey  would  not  dare  to  do  so,  for  fear  of  immediate  retaliation.  The
total  number  of  Ali's  aggressive  acts  diminished  on  the  days  when  the  lever  was  available,  and
although  Elsa  did  not  become  the  dominant  animal,  she  was  responsible  for  blocking  many
attacks  against  herself  and  for  maintaining  a  peaceful  coexistence  within  the  whole  colony.

p.82  After  surgery,  different  cerebral  points  were  explored  by  radio  stimulation  while  the  animal
was  free  in  a  small  farm  ring.  Motor  effects  similar  to  those  observed  in  cats  and  monkeys  were
evoked,  including  head  turning,  lifting  of  one  leg,  and  circling.  Vocalizations  were  often  elicited,
and  in  one  experiment  to  test  the  reliability  of  results,  a  point  was  stimulated  two  times  and  two
consecutive  "moo's"  were  evoked.


It  was  also  repeatedly  demonstrated  that  cerebral  stimulation  produced  inhibition  of  aggressive
behavior,  and  a  bull  in  full  charge  could  be  abruptly  stopped,  as  shown  in  Figure  24.  The  result
seemed  to  be  a  combination  of  motor  effect,  forcing  the  bull  to  stop  and  to  turn  to  one  side,  plus
behavioral  inhibition  of  the  aggressive  drive.  Upon  repeated  stimulation,  these  animals  were
rendered  less  dangerous  than  usual,  and  for  a  period  of  several  minutes  would  tolerate  the
presence  of  investigators  in  the  ring  without  launching  any  attack.


p.  87  In  the  near  future,  important  advances  may  be  expected  in  this  field,  and  already  we  have
some  initial  clinical  information  demonstrating  that  ESB  can  induce  inhibitory  effects  in  man.
For  example,  ESB  applied  to  the  supplementary  motor  cortex  has  slowed  down  or  completely
arrested  voluntary  motor  activity  without  producing  pain  or  any  concomitant  loss  of
consciousness  (174).  In  other  cases,  stimulation  of  the  frontotemporal  region  has  caused  an
"arrest  response  characterized  by  sudden  cessation  of  voluntary  movements  which  may  be
followed  by  confusion,  inappropriate  or  garbled  speech,  and  overt  changes  of  mood  (128,  186).
More  interesting  from  the  therapeutic  point  of  view  is  the  fact  that  abnormal  hyperkinetic
movements  have  been  inhibited  for  the  duration  of  the  applied  ESB,  allowing  patients  to  perform
skilled  acts  which  were  otherwise  impossible.  In  these  cases,  a  small  portable  instrument  could
perhaps  be  used  by  the  patient  to  stimulate  his  own  brain  in  order  to  inhibit  abnormal  motility
temporarily  and  restore  useful  skills  (160).

Somnolence  with  inexpressive  faces,  tendency  to  lower  the  eyelids,  and  spontaneous  complaint
of  sleepiness,  but  without  impairment  of  consciousness,  has  been  produced  in  some  patients  by
stimulation  of  the  fornix  and  thalamus  (7,  199).  In  some  cases,  sleep  with  pleasant  dreams  has
been  induced,  and  occasionally  sleep  or  awakening  could  be  obtained  from  the  same  cerebral
point  by  using  a  slow  or  high  frequency  of  stimulation  (96,  229).  Diminished  awareness,  lack  of
normal  insight,  and  impairment  of  ability  to  think  have  been  observed  by  several  investigators
during  excitation  of  different  points  of  the  limbic  system  (74,  120).  Often  the  patients  performed
automatisms  such  .  as  undressing  or  fumbling,  without  remembering  the  incidents  afterward.
Some  of  our  patients  said  they  felt  as  if  their  minds  were  blank  or  as  if  they  had  been  drinking  a
lot  of  beer.  These  results  indicate  that  Consciousness  may  be  related  to  specific  mechanisms
located  in  determined  areas  of  the  brain.  They  contrast  with  the  full  awareness  preserved  when
other  areas  of  the  brain  were  stimulated.


p.87  It  is  known  that  ESB  activation  of  pleasurable  areas  of  the  brain  can  inhibit  pain  perception
in  animals  (42,  146),  and  similar  results  have  also  been  reported  in  man,  with  an  immediate  relief
of  pain  following  septal  stimulation  (98).  Because  of  the  multiplicity  of  pathways  in  the  nervous
system  which  can  transmit  disagreeable  sensations,  it  is  often  not  possible  to  block  all  of  them,
and  to  alleviate  unbearable  suffering  it  may  be  easier  to  inhibit  the  cerebral  structures  involved  in
the  psychological  evaluation  of  pain,  blocking  the  components  of  anxiety  and  diminishing  the
subjective  sensation  of  unpleasantness.


Violence,  including  its  extreme  manifestation  of  war,  is  determined  by  a  variety  of  economic  and
ideological  factors;  but  we  must  realize  that  the  elite  who  make  the  decisions,  and  even  the
individual  who  obeys  orders  and  holds  a  rifle,  require  for  their  behavioral  performance  the
existence  of  a  series  of  intracerebral  electrical  signals  which  could  be  inhibited  by  other
conflicting  signals  generating  in  areas  such  as  the  caudate  nucleus.


p.  88  Because  the  brain  controls  the  whole  body  and  all  mental  activities,  ESB  could  possibly
become  a  master  control  of  human  behavior  by  means  of  man-made  plans  and  instruments.


p.  90  -  A  tentative  explanation  of  some  of  the  mechanisms  involved  in  motor  activities  has  been
proposed  in  the  theory  of  fragmental  representation  of  behavior  (53)  which  postulates  that
behavior  is  organized  as  fragments  which  have  anatomical  and  functional  reality  within  the
brain,  where  they  can  be  the  subject  of  experimental  analysis.  The  different  fragments  may  be
combined  in  different  sequences  like  the  notes  of  a  melody,  resulting  in  a  succession  of  motor
acts  which  constitute  specific  behavioral  categories  such  as  licking,  climbing,  or  walking.  The
theory  may  perhaps  be  clarified  with  one  example.  If  I  wish  to  take  a  cookie  from  the  table,  this
wish  may  be  considered  a  force  called  "the  starter"  because  it  will  determine  the  initiation  of  a
series  of  motor  acts.  The  starter  includes  drives,  motivations,  emotional  perceptions,  memories,
and  other  processes.  To  take  the  cookie  it  is  necessary  to  organize  a  motor  plan,  a  mechanical
strategy,  and  to  decide  among  several  motor  choices,  because  the  cookie  may  be  taken  with  the
left  or  right  hand,  directly  with  the  mouth,  or  even  by  using  the  feet  if  one  has  simian  skills.
Choice,  strategies,  motor  planning,  and  adjustments  depend  on  a  set  of  cerebral  structures,  "the
organizer,"  which  is  different  from  the  set  employed  by  the  starter,  because  the  desire  for  cookies
may  exist  in  hungry  people  or  in  completely  paralyzed  patients,  and  the  hands  can  move  and
reach  the  table  for  many  different  reasons  even  if  there  are  no  cookies.  Finally,  the  actual
contraction  of  muscles  for  the  performance  of  the  selected  movement  to  reach  the  cookie-for
example,  raising  the  right  hand-depends  on  a  cerebral  set,  "the  performer,"  different  from  the
previous  two,  because  motor  representation  of  hands,  mouth,  and  feet  is  situated  in  different
areas  of  the  brain,  and  the  choice  of  muscle  group  to  be  activated  is  under  the  supervision  of  a
given  organizer.  Naturally,  there  is  a  close  correlation  among  these  three  basic  mechanisms,  and
also  between  them  and  other  cerebral  functions.  The  concept  of  a  brain  center  as  a  visible
anatomical  locus  is  unacceptable  in  modem  physiology,  but  the  participation  of  a  constellation  of
neuronal  groups  (a  functional  set)  in  a  specific  act  is  more  in  agreement  with  our  present
knowledge.  The  functional  set  may  be  formed  by  the  neurons  of  nuclei  far  from  one  another,  for
instance,  in  the  cerebellum,  motor  cortex,  pallidium,  thalamus,  and  red  nucleus,  forming  a  circuit
in  close  mutual  dependence,  and  responsible  for  a  determined  act  such  as  picking  up  a  cookie
with  the  right  hand.


If  we  accept  the  existence  of  anatomical  representation  of  the  three  functional  sets  -  starter,
organizer,  and  performer,  it  is  logical  that  they  can  be  activated  by  different  types  of  triggers,
and  that  the  evoked  results  will  be  related  to  the  previous  experiences  linked  to  the  set.  The  same
set,  evoking  a  similar  behavioral  response,  may  be  activated  by  physiological  stimuli,  such  as
sensory  perceptions  and  ideations,  or  by  artificial  stimuli,  such  as  electrical  impulses.  When  we
stimulate  the  brain  through  implanted  electrodes  we  can,  depending  on  the  location  of  contacts,
activate  the  starter,  the  organizer,  or  the  performer  of  different  behavioral  reactions,  so  that
natural  and  artificial  stimuli  may  interplay  with  one  another,  as  has  been  experimentally
demonstrated.


p.  92  .  In  general,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  brain  was  dominant  over  voluntary  behavior,
provided  that  its  intensity  was  sufficiently  increased.


p.93  In  the  cat,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  inferior  part  of  the  sulcus  presylvius  consistently
induced  licking  movements  with  well-organized  opening  and  closing  of  the  mouth  and  phasic
protrusion  of  the  tongue.  Under  anesthesia,  the  licking  was  automatic  and  purposeless;  but  in  the
awake,  free-moving  animal  the  response  was  directed  toward  some  useful  purpose,  and  the  cat
searched  for  a  target  to  lick-food,  the  hands  of  the  experimenter,  the  floor,  or  its  own  fur.  In  this
case,  motor  performance  and  posture  of  the  whole  body  adapted  to  the  experimental  setting,  and
in  order  to  lick  the  investigator's  hand,  for  example,  the  cat  advanced  a  few  steps  and  approached
the  hand  even  if  it  moved  slowly  away.

p.  94  There  is  already  abundant  evidence  that  ESB  can  control  a  wide  range  of  functions,
including  motor  activities  and  mental  manifestations,  in  animals  and  in  man.  We  know  that  by
electrical  stimulation  of  specific  cerebral  structures  we  can  make  a  person  friendlier  or  influence
his  train  of  thought.

p.  95  The  flexion  of  a  limb  can  be  radio  controlled  and  an  emotional  state  could  also  be  set
remotely,  but  the  sequences  of  responses  and  adaptation  to  the  environment  depend  on
established  intra-cerebral  mechanisms  whose  complexity  cannot  be  duplicated  by  ESB. ..Induced
performance  of  more  complex  acts  would  be  far  beyond  available  methodology.  It  should  be
clarified  that  I  am  talking  about  directing  each  phase  of  a  response,  and  not  about  complex
behavior  such  as  lever  pressing  or  fighting,  which  may  be  triggered  by  ESB  but  develops
according  to  individual  experiential  circumstances  which  are  beyond  electrical  control.

p.  96  Personal  identity  and  reactivity  depend  on  a  large  number  of  factors  accumulated  through
many  years  of  experience  interacting  with  genetic  trends  within  the  complexity  of  neuronal
networks.  Language  and  culture  are  among  the  essential  elements  of  individual  structure.  All
these  elements  cannot  be  substituted  for  by  the  delivery  of  electricity  to  the  brain.  Memories  can
be  recalled,  emotions  awakened,  and  conversations  speeded  up  by  ESB,  but  the  patients  always
express  themselves  according  to  their  background  and  experience.  It  is  possible  to  disturb
consciousness,  to  confuse  sensory  interpretations,  or  to  elicit  hallucinations  during  excitation  of
the  brain.  It  is  also  possible  to  induce  fear,  pleasure,  and  chances  in  aggressive  behavior,  but
these  responses  do  not  represent  the  creation  of  a  new  personality  -  only  a  change  in  emotionality
or  reactivity  with  the  appearance  of  manifestations  closely  related  to  the  previous  history  of  the
subject.

ESB  cannot  substitute  one  personality  for  another  because  electricity  cannot  replicate  or
influence  all  the  innumerable  factors  which  integrate  individual  identity.  Contrary  to  the  stories
of  science  fiction  writers,  we  cannot  modify  political  ideology,  past  history,  or  national  loyalties
by  electrical  tickling  of  some  secret  areas  of  the  brain.  A  complete  change  in  personality  is
beyond  the  theoretical  and  practical  potential  of  ESB,  although  limited  modification  of  a
determined  aspect  of  personal  reactions  is  possible.  In  spite  of  important  limitations,  we  are
certainly  facing  basic  ethical  problems  about  when,  why,  and  how  some  of  these  changes  are
acceptable,  and  especially  about  who  will  have  the  responsibility  of  influencing  the  cerebral
activities  of  other  human  beings.


p.  96  .  For  example,  reading  a  book  or  listening  to  a  conversation  involves  reception  of  many
messages  which  cannot  be  mimicked  by  ESB.  A  pattern  of  behavior  which  is  not  in  the  brain
cannot  be  organized  or  invented  under  electrical  control.  ESB  cannot  be  used  as  a  teaching  tool
because  skills  such  as  playing  the  piano,  speaking  a  language,  or  solving  a  problem  require
complex  sensory  inputs.  Sequential  behavior  or  even  elemental  motor  responses  cannot  be
synthesized  by  cerebral  stimulation,  although  they  are  easily  evoked  if  they  have  already  been
established  in  the  excited  area  as  ideokinetic  formulas.  Since  electrical  stimulation  does  not  carry
specific  thoughts  it  is  not  feasible  as  a  technique  to  implant  ideas  or  direct  behavioral
performance  in  a  specific  context.  Because  of  its  lack  of  symbolic  meaning,  electricity  could  not
induce  effects  comparable  to  some  posthypnotic  performances.


p.  107  New  neurological  technology,  however,  has  a  refined  efficiency.  The  individual  is
defenseless  against  direct  manipulation  of  the  brain  because  he  is  deprived  of  his  most  intimate
mechanisms  of  biological  reactivity.  In  experiments,  electrical  stimulation  of  appropriate
intensity  always  prevailed  over  free  will;  and,  for  example,  flexion  of  the  hand  evoked  by
stimulation  of  the  motor  cortex  cannot  be  voluntarily  avoided.
