Ju1y8,1974
DearEd,
Thanks for your most recent.I agree that a fair exchange
of informationbetweenthe critics is valuable as I have
learned much from the literature on the assassination.
Weisberg excepted。
I am incorrespondence with perhaps half a dozen peoplewho
besides having regular type work also study the case.We
exchange information and help one another as much as we can.
anything,but look at the case quite level headed
thing I came up with in one of my weak-headed moments。
I regret that verymuch simply because it proves nothing.
I was greatly surprised when William Turner printed it in
Ramparts and claimed he had discovered the.comparison,（I
Sent the photos to him),which only goes to show you that
even ex-FBI men are capable of plagiarizing worthless leads
and giving them currency.
Dallas police shook down those railroad cars parked back in
theyardsbehindtheTSBD andcameupwith3trampssome
hours after the shooting.What would you expect them to
find in a railroad yard -- stockbrokers? Is this significent?
Did the tramps have anything to do with the assassination?
What?
clear.I think he isabig (6'6") bagof windwho would do
anything, make that anything,to build his case -- whatever
it was.Here again we are talking about a lawyer andmy
Garrison was,as one critic put it,a "warren Report critic
on company time." He rode the crest of the public clammor
for a new review of the Commission's findings like a carnival
barker."Step right up folks and see who really killed your
the case has been incalculable.I have a tape of Mark Lane
phoning Mort Saul （on the air)from newOrleans that tells
thewhole story。
Lane says he has just seen Garrison's
"evidence" and he knows the.earth will shake and the govern-
ment will fall when Jim walks into that courtroom. Garrison
is a much bigger con man that Bernie Cornfield,P.T. Barnum
or Richard Nixon rolled into one.I love to hear him talk,
butISwould hate to live in New Orleansand crosshim。

--- PAGE BREAK ---m. Garrison
is a much bigger con man that Bernie Cornfield,P.T. Barnum
or Richard Nixon rolled into one.I love to hear him talk,
butISwould hate to live in New Orleansand crosshim。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PAGETWO
ET:FTN:&7/8/74
As for Weisberg, well,let me relate one thing. Harold
addressed a letter to me on D.A.stationery asking if I
would retouchaphotoof KerryThornleytoo look like
Oswald.(no kidding)I was impressed with Harold then and
did the job--thankgodI dida sloppyjob--and sent it
back to him in N.O.
Harold was,apparently, going to show the retouched photo
around to get the reaction of various witnesses。Thornley
got wind of this and had his attorney contact me,so I
cooperated and sent him a copy of Harold's letter and the
retouch,whereupon Harold ran for cover。Hzve you ever
heard of an investigator showing a doctoredphoto around
town to implicate a suspect? That's Happy Harold。 Anything
wierd associations,forged guest books,trumped up arrest
cards,phoney oodes -- all the things they accuse the CIA
ofdoing。
Iwish New Orleans would stick with Mardi Gras in the street
andkeepthemoutof thecourts。
A photo of Shaw and Ferrie taken in 1947? Now all they have
to do is prove that this has some connection with events in
Dallas.I.would suspect Garrison was just having a little
fun in a photo darkroom --a little fun that would enhance
his case and ruin Clay.Shaw...What does Garrison care about
the rights of citizens?
That claim that J.A. Milteer was that old tramp is probably
just another "slip of the Penn."
How could Ford,Warren and.Belin really believe that "single
bullet bullshit?"Because they are lawyers and lawyersr:
believe some really far-out things.
What witness thought he (she) saw Brading with a rifle?
Thompson's bookdoes now show a figure behind.the fence in
the Moprman photo. I can't see anything there.Marcus sees
a figure （first spotted by David L.Lifton) in the west
shelter of the knoll pergola and so what? What was he doing?
Did anyone see him fire a gun? I have sat for hours with Ray
Marcuslooking athughblowupsof sections of poor quality
photographs to no avail。Ray even goes so far in his ink
blot test to disern an object (maybe a gun) in the blurry
figure's hand.You can play the same game by laying on your
back and picking shapes out of cloud formations-the
possibilities are endless.It's'insane.st to disern an object (maybe a gun) in the blurry
figure's hand.You can play the same game by laying on your
back and picking shapes out of cloud formations-the
possibilities are endless.It's'insane.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ct (maybe a gun) in the blurry
figure's hand.You can play the same game by laying on your
back and picking shapes out of cloud formations-the
possibilities are endless.It's'insane.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PAGE THREE
ET:FTN:7/8/74
The sewer theory belongs right down therewith the rest of
the stuff that goes down sewers。 Officer Haygood was no
where near the limousine during the shooting and parked his
bike some4or5feetawayfronthat sewer ventanddidnot
get off his bike and look in that sewer,as I can follow him
during this time. He did miss- park his bike and had it
almost topple over in the excitment.Then he ran up to the
topof the knoll probably to get a viewof the Stemmonsfree-
way to getaglimpseof the Presidentialmotorcade.
Why do you believe Oswald's,rifle was used in the assassination
Because matching slugs were.found in the limousine? Was his
gun fired that day? Why no finger prints on it? Did he have
take?Did hehave time to do this and then get down to the
2nd floor? Could those elugs have been fired from "his gun"
at some other time to implicate him?Was CE399 also planted?
Who would have had control over the crime scene (the car,
Parkland)?
Why is it that.witnesses on the street in front of the TSBD
donot look up at the source of the shots?Photos show them
looking at themotorcade。
That chart by lawyer Copeland is a beaut。What has he been
smoking? I take that back,I forgot he's and lawyer and they
don't have to smoke anything to see things like this。
I see you are pressing me for evidence （fair enough) to back
my allegation that Oswald was "placed" on the route. That's
part of some research I am doing and when I'm ready to
present it I'll send it along for your reading.What evidence
going to begoff sending it until I can complete thework。
I don't see LBJ and Youngblood on the floor in the Altgen's
photo-I see them starting to react （duck) and Iconsider
it quite significent.
As for the list of suspects you sent （p.ll)I don't have
anything sinister here.I know of no significence in Howard's
No Name·Key photos.
I don'tconsider'itimportant if Ruby were to wander down to
Dealey Plaza after the shooting。That Willis #8 - taken
much later in the day,does contain a subject that resembles
Ruby.I don't think photo was cropped for a purpose。What
if Ruby was there?I would expect him to be where the action
was".I tend to dismiss Victoria Adams,Hill and Wise on this
point. Seth Kanter's seeing Ruby at Parkland seems pretty
good,but again,So what? Was Ruby asked about Kanter in
histestimony?Iforget:ction
was".I tend to dismiss Victoria Adams,Hill and Wise on this
point. Seth Kanter's seeing Ruby at Parkland seems pretty
good,but again,So what? Was Ruby asked about Kanter in
histestimony?Iforget:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PAGE FOUR
ET:FTN:7/8/74
I have the Hughes movie which I cannot copy and distribute。
40 bucks for the DcA is a rip-off, you should pay approx。
$10.00.
Tho
The other night I saw the movie The Paralax View,,amovie
that raises textbook paranoia to a high art.Inview of
the authors of this script,nothing ever happens by chance;
to fit into a master plan,hugh conspiracies build and build
until everything can be explained in terms of a shadow of
evidforceG that surround us everywhere.Wxs Witnesses
never die a natural death and even friends of relatives of
witnesses run into foul play even though they know nothing.
I sometimes think the country is loosing it's collective
mind--a mind numbed trying to make Sense out of the chain
of murders and misfortunes that have assulted us these last
tenyears。
It's nice to feel that all these"seemingly
unrelated"events are"somehow" connected in a giant plan
a neat scenario,that exists,if only we could make the
connection.If we try hard enough and long enough we can
even begin to see the sinister shape of this hugh conspiracy,
because we want tosee it and we letour minds fit things
into classifications that make the cabal come alive。
Then
JFK's,Kings',RxKKX RFK's,Malcolm X's,Rockwell's death
makesenBe.
Otherwise the whole thing is nutty and the
mind rejects it.I do think JFK's life was taken by a
Small conspiracy。I do think some of the others were killed
by genuine kooks who were alone.See enclosed column by
Mike Royko'for discussion of the insanity abroad in this
land.
Peace,your xxx friend,
Fredl