7/12.68


?roA*’Saioli^$ei3berg
La Casa

I apent a large partt of last night with Frank ValdeZf brother of owner Felix,
at La Casa, introduced by David Hobinson, who had tended bar there several years ago.
Frank Valdez strikes me as a level-headed, well-informed Cuban vdthout illusions who
may, from time to time, be helpful to you.

He came to this country in October I960 after a career in government service.

He is anti-Batista, served Prio Soccarres and Grau SanMartin in responsible govem-
ment positions, and knows the uban community well. He refused to make an^r contrmbu-
tions to any of the collections on the grounds that they were futile and saved his
charities to help Cubans who had come here and were in need.

He says that Bringuier*s brother-in-law, Pelaes, is an honest mn who as
defense secretary under Batista took no graft. He says Bringuier*s father was a
^^atiptiana and assumes Carlos was. To iiim Carlos is ridiculous, a nut. He tells the
story of Carloate visit to say he would "report" Frank if Frank did not get rid of an
anti-Batista record. Frank did not get rid of it#

He says Arcacha, who he knew well, hung out at the Habana and American bars,
wasx at La Casa but a couple of times.

He knows Shaw was there but knowns nothing else. Hario Bcimidez's face is
familiar but he thinks he may have seen it in the papers.

I showed him some of the Dalleis arrest pictures (and all the others I have).

He immediately said the face of the man in the raincoat is familiar. 1 showed him
the pictures I got from Larry Howard and he said the similar-looking man in the
fatigue hat is the same familiar man. He also thinks this man is Mexican, with Indian
blood. For some reason, the picture reminds him of baseball.

In the No Name arrest picture, the man toward the center, in the E***senhower
jacket and glasses la familiar to him.

BoB Lavendar also looks familiar to him. He said the same about Bill
Dalzell. Two Lavendar boys lived with Marge Kiiicpa trick.

Of James Wade he said, "He came euround with some fruits. He used to l±ve with a
fruit." He also walled him a "bully".

He immediately recognized Gk)dfrey Kirkpatrick and gave me a run-down beginning
with Identification of his wife and ending with the statement she had transferred
her business to the Acropolis, whichrLs correct. When Godfrey got out of Jackson about
six months ago he there also.

Frank Valdez is not fond of Carlos Bringuier, who he holds in low esteem. He
regards Bringuier *s activities as not helpful to Cubans.

He heard stories of the camp(s), is willing to believe the men came there, but
has no knowledge of the camp(s) or them. He once worked in Miami for the customs service.
When I left he said he had found the visit "interesting" and expressed the hope I*d
be back.
