requests for Soviet military assistance.
What Really
But Lumumba quickly came into con-
flict with the UN for its failure to expel
Happened in
the Belgian troops and end Katanga's
secession. After issuing a series of shift-
Congo
ing ultimatums to the UN, he turned to
Moscow for help, which responded by
The CIA, the Murder of
sending transport planes to fly Lumumba's
troops into Katanga.
Lumumba, and the Rise
That's when the Eisenhower admin-
of Mobutu
istration sent in the cIA. In the decades
that followed, the dominant narrative in
Stephen R. Weissman
U.S. foreign policy circles portrayed the
U.S. covert action in Congo as a surgical,
low-cost success. Even the 1975 U.S.
t didn't take long for Congo's
Senate investigation by the Church
transition from Belgian colony to
Committee, which was heavily critical
 sovereign state to turn ugly. Both
of the CIA, concluded that of the five
the Soviet Union and the United States
covert paramilitary campaigns it studied,
werekeeping a close eye on the mineral-
the operation in Congo was the only
rich country at the heart of Africa when,
one that “achieved its objectives." Those
onJune30,1960,it gained independence
who hold this view credit the U.S. gov-
under a democratically elected govern-
ernment with avoiding a direct military
ment headed by Prime Minister Patrice
confrontation with theSoviet Union
Lumumba. A charismatic nationalist,
and China while foiling the communists
Lumumba led the only party in parlia-
attempts to gain influence over a key
ment with a nationwide, rather than
African country. They acknowledge
ethnic or regional, base. Within days,
that the cIA contributed to the fall of
however, Congo's troops mutinied
Lumumba, who lost a power struggle
against their all-white officer corps (a
with Joseph Mobutu, the pro-Western
holdover from the colonial era) and
head of Congo's army, in September
started terrorizing the European popu-
1960.But theymaintainthateven
lation. Belgium responded
ysending
though the CIA plotted to assassinate
forces to reoccupy the country and helping
Lumumba——once even trying to get
Congo's richest province, Katanga, secede.
a recruit to poison his toothpaste or
The United States, declining the appeals
food—-it never did so, and had no hand
for help from the new Congolese govern-
in his eventual murder, in January
ment, instead threw its support behind
1961. They also recognize the agency's
a UN peacekeeping mission, which it
contribution to the military defeat of
hoped would obviate any Congolese
Lumumba's followers. As for Mobutu,
who would go on to become one of
STEPHEN R.WEISSMAN is the author of
Africa's most enduring and venal
AmericanForeignPolicy in theCongo,1960-1964
leaders, proponents of the orthodox
and a formerStaffDirectorof the U.S.Houseof
Representatives'SubcommitteeonAfrica.
account argue that his faults became
14
FOREIGN AFFAIRSlicy in theCongo,1960-1964
leaders, proponents of the orthodox
and a formerStaffDirectorof the U.S.Houseof
Representatives'SubcommitteeonAfrica.
account argue that his faults became
14
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What Really Happened in Congo
Hands tied: Lumumba's capture in Leopoldville, December 1960
clear only later, many years after CIA
decision-making. The new volume, on
involvement had run its course.
Congo, contains the most extensive set of
Over the years, many scholars and
CIA operational documents ever published.
journalists have challenged parts of
We now know that even though the
this orthodoxy, and
ublic perception
threat of communism in Congo was quite
has begun to catcl
Buttheircase
weak at the time of Congo's
ndepen-
has been hampered
the shortage of
dence, the CIA engaged in pervasive
byt
official documentary evidence. Recently
political meddling and paramilitary action
however, new evidence has become
between1960 and1968toensure that
available, and it paints a far darker
the country retained a pro-Western
picture than even the critics imagined.
government and to help its pathetic
The key sources include files from the
military on the battlefield. So exten-
Church Committee, which have been
sive were these efforts that at the time,
slowly declassified over the last 20 years;
they ranked as the largest covert opera-
a 2001 Belgian parliamentary investiga-
tion in the agency's history, costing an
BETTMANN
tion into Lumumba's murder;and a new
estimated $90-$150 millionin current
volume, released last year, of Foreign
dollars, not counting the aircraft, weap-
Relations of the United States, the State
ons, and transportation and maintenance
/CORBIS
Department series that presents a
services provided by the Defense Depart-
document-by-document record of U.S.
ment. The cIA had a hand in every one
July/August 2014
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stephen R.Weissman
of Congo's major political turning
with Belgian intelligence officials,
points during the period and maintained
subsidized two opposition senators who
a financial andpoliticalrelationship
attempted to organize a vote of no
with every head of its government.

confidence against Lumumba's gov-
And contrary to the conclusion of the
ernment.

The plan was for Joseph
Church Committee, Lawrence Devlin,
Kasavubu, Congo's
president and
the CIA station chief in Congo for most
Lumumba's rival, to dissolve the gov-
of the period, had direct influence over
ernment after the vote and nominate
the events that led to Lumumba's death.

one of the senators as the new prime
Not only was U.S.

involvement exten-
minister.

The CIA also funded anti-
sive; it was also malignant.

The CIA's
Lumumba street demonstrations,
use of bribery and
d paramilitary force
labor movements, and propaganda.

succeeded in keeping a narrow, politi-
But Kasavubu, encouraged by the
cally weak clique in power for most of
Belgians, jumped the gun and publicly
Congo's first decade of independence.

fired Lumumba two days before the vote
And the very nature of the cIA's aid
was to be held.

Lumumba responded by
discouraged Congolese politicians from
refusing to withdraw and continuing
building genuine bases of support and
to dominate parliament, which would
adopting responsible policies.

The agen-
have to approve a new government.

cy's legacy of clients and techniques
Devlin quickly found a solution to the
contributed to a long-running spiral
stalemate in Mobutu, the 29-year-old
of decline, which was characterized by
army chief of staff.

In two meetings,
corruption, political turmoil, and depen-
Mobutu told Devlin that he was moving
dence on Western military intervention.

troops to the capital and pleaded for
So dysfunctional was the state that in
U.S.

help in acting against Lumumba.--- PAGE BREAK ---

troops to the capital and pleaded for
So dysfunctional was the state that in
U.S. help in acting against Lumumba. 1997 it outright collapsed--leaving
Devlin agreed to finance his efforts,
behind instability that continues to
subsequently telling CIA debriefers
this day. that, as the new Foreign Relations of
the United States volume puts it, “this
PLAYINGPOLITICS
was the beginning of the plan for Mobutu
In the beginning, U.S. covert action in
to take over the government." On
Congo was exclusively political in nature. September 14,Mobutu announced that
Washington worried that Lumumba was
he was suspending parliament and the
too erratic and too close to the Soviets
constitution. He sacked Lumumba and
and that if he stayed in power, Congo
kept on Kasavubu, but now Mobutu
could fall into further chaos and turn
was the power behind the throne. communist. Allen Dulles, the director
The CIA rushed to his side with
of the CIA, cabled the CIA station in
more money, warnings about assassina-
Léopoldville, the capital, in August
tion plots, and recommendations for
1960: “We conclude that his removal
ministerial appointments. It counseled
must be an urgent and prime objective
Mobutu to reject reconciliation with
and that under existing conditions this
Lumumba and instead arrest him and
should be a high priority of our .covert
his key associates, advice Mobutu
action." So the CIA station, in tandem
readily accepted. Devlin became not
16
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---What Really Happened in Congo
just the paymaster but also an influential
relationship with Congo's rulers and his
de facto member of the government
previous successful interventions with
he had helped install.

His principal
them concerning Lumumba, Devlin's
vehicle was the so-called Binza Group,
 permissive stance was undoubtedly a
a caucus of Mobutu's political allies that
major factor in the government's decision
got its name from the Léopoldville
to move Lumumba.

suburb where most of them lived.

It
But Devlin did more than give a
included Mobutu's security chief and
green light to the transfer.

He also
his foreign and finance ministers.

In
deliberately kept Washington out of
the months after the coup, t
the group
the loop-an exception for a covert
consulted Devlin on major political
program that was being closely man-
and military matters, especially those
aged by the CIA, the State Department,
dealing with Lumumba, who was now
and the National Security Council.

On
under house arrest but protected by
the same day that he was informed of
UN troops.

Lumumba's prospective transfer, Devlin
The group almost always heeded
learned that the State Department had
Devlin's advice.

In October, for exam-
denied his and ciA headquarters' urgent
ple, Mobutu threatened to expand his
request for funds to pay c
a key Con-
power by firing President Kasavubu--
golese garrison on the verge of a mutiny
which would have deprived the govern-
that threatened to restore Lumumba
ment of its last shred of political legiti-
to power.

John F.

Kennedy was to take
macy.

So Devlin persuaded him to
office in six days, and the State Depart-
accept a compromise instead, under
ment considered the request “one of
which Mobutu would work with a
high policy" that should wait for the
council of associates--all paid by the
new administration to decide.

CIA--that would choose cabinet minis-
Seeing his preferred method for
ters for Kasavubu and control parlia-
preventing
g Lumumba's comeback blocked,
ment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So Devlin persuaded him to
office in six days, and the State Depart-
accept a compromise instead, under
ment considered the request “one of
which Mobutu would work with a
high policy" that should wait for the
council of associates--all paid by the
new administration to decide. CIA--that would choose cabinet minis-
Seeing his preferred method for
ters for Kasavubu and control parlia-
preventing
g Lumumba's comeback blocked,
ment. Devlin also convinced the Binza
Devlin may
have viewed the impending
Group to drop a risky plan to attack
transfer as a promising Plan B. But he
Lumumba's UN security detail and
alsoknew that if he told headquarters
arrest Lumumba. about the plan, it would consult the State
On January 14, 1961, Devlin was
Department, which, given its response
informed by a government leader that
to his last request, would almost certainly
Lumumba, who had escaped from UN
have considered the U.S. position.on
protection and been captured by
the transfer a matter for the incoming
Mobutu's troops, was about to be
administration. All of that meant that
transferred to the Belgian-backed
if Washington had been fully informed
secessionist province of South Kasai,
about the plot, it might well have tried
whose leaderhadvowed to murder
to put the brakes on it through Devlin,
him. In his subsequent, January 17
the Binza Group, and their Belgian
cable reporting this critical contact to
advisers. Moreover, Devlin knew that the
CIA headquarters, Devlin gave no indica-
Kennedy transition team was reconsid-
tion that he had voiced any opposition
ering the Eisenhower administration's
to the plan. Given his intimate working
hard-line policy toward Lumumba. So
July/August 2014
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stephen R.Weissman
even as he communicated with head-
canvas political leaders in order to
quarters about other matters, Devlin
gauge his own parliamentary support.

withheld information about the planned
In November 1961, after only a year
transfer for three days, until the move
and a half on the job, Devlin cabled
was already under way.

In a last-minute
CIA headquarters that the agency could
switch, Lumumba was sent to Katanga,
"take major credit for the fall of the
the other Belgian-supported secessionist
Lumumba [government], the success
province, whose powerful interior minis-
of the Mobutu coup and considerable
terhad repeatedly calledforhis scalp.

credit for Adoula's nomination as
By the time Devlin's January 17 cable
premier."
arrived in Washington, Lumumba had
been shot dead in Katanga.

UPIN THE AIR
Rather than end the struggle for
Adoula's government didn't perform as
control of Congo, Lumumba's assassi-
well as Washington had hoped: soldiers
nation only intensified it.

In August
were forced to live off the land, avaricious
1961, the United States, under pressure
officials looted the Treasury, and infla-
from the UN and a pro-Lumumba state
tion sapped theincomes of everyone
in eastern Congo, agreed that the
else.

After Adoula removed nearly all
Congolese parliament should reconvene
his Lumumbist ministers and dissolved
to select a new national government.

parliament in 1963, the Lumumbists
But the CIA used bribes to ensure that
returned to their home provinces and
the new government was led by its ally
took to arms.

By early 1964, their rebel-
Cyrille Adoula.

While the resulting
lion had swept across almost half the
power-sharing deal did include some
country.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By early 1964, their rebel-
Cyrille Adoula. While the resulting
lion had swept across almost half the
power-sharing deal did include some
country. Alarmed by the insurgency,
Lumumbists, as Lumumba's supporters
the Binza Group and Kasavubu decided
were called, the most important posi-
to replace Adoula with someone they
tions went to members of the Binza
thought would deal with it more effec-
Group (with Mobutu himself remaining
tively: Moise Tshombe, the former
head of the army). secessionist leader of Katanga,whose
Once Adoula was in office, the CIA
breakaway government had murdered
provided him with a public relations
Lumumba in 1961. The CIA acquiesced
firm to help him bolster his image abroad
to the change, adding tribal supporters
and an adviser who wrote speeches for
of Tshombe and other key politicians
him. The cIA also bribed parliament,
to its existing payroll. It also added a
the Binza Group, a labor union, and an
major paramilitary thrust to its political
organization of tribal chiefs to back the
program in Congo. new leader. Meanwhile, Devlin continued
The agency endowed Tshombe's new
to behave like a member of the govern-
government with an“instant air force" to
ment.At the Binza Group's behest,he
defeat the rebels, who were then receiving
persuaded Adoula not to make conces-
modest advisory and financial assistance
sions to his Lumumbist deputy prime
from the Chinese. The unit, composed
minister.When Adoula decided to fire
mainly of American planes piloted by
Mobutu, Devlin convinced him to drop
Cuban exiles, enabled the advance of
the idea. Adoula even asked Devlin to
white mercenaries (predominantly South
18
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---piloted by
Mobutu, Devlin convinced him to drop
Cuban exiles, enabled the advance of
the idea. Adoula even asked Devlin to
white mercenaries (predominantly South
18
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What Really Happened in Congo
Partner in crime: Mobutu in Leopoldville, September 1960
Africans and Rhodesians) who were
no systematic counting of the casualties,
leading the Congolese government forces.  it is estimated that at least 100,000
In August 1964, a National Security
Congolese perished during this phase
Council committee had signed off on a:
of the war. The insurgents killed about
plan for 41 combat and transport aircraft
300 Americans and Europeans whom
and almost 200 personnel (Cuban air
they had taken hostage following the
crews and European ground maintenance
fall of Stanleyville, the rebel capital.
workers). In early 1965, the CIA added a
By the fall of 1965, the Congolese.
small navy, also staffed by Cubans, to the
army and its foreign helpers had largely
mix to hamper shipments of military
succeeded in regaining control of the
supplies to the rebels from neighboring
country, but another threat loomed:
Tanzania across Lake Tanganyika.
increasing political competition between
Washington was joining a particularly
GETTYIMAGES
PresidentKasavubu and PrimeMinister
bloody conflict. When they seized rebel-
Tshombe. Both the U.S. government
held areas, the white mercenaries and
and the Binza Group feared that the
government forces indiscriminately
conflict between the two men could
slaughtered the rebels and civilians
cause one of the contenders to look for
they found there. Although there was
support from the more radical African
July/August 2014
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stephen R.Weissman
regimes.

As the crisis reached its
partly obscured.

Concerned about
apogee, Mobutu told Devlin that he was.

protecting its sources and methods, the
considering launching another coup, to
agency managed to delay the publication
replace both Kasavubu and Tshombe, or
of the new volume of Foreign Relations
finding some other unidentified solution.

of the United States for.over a decade.

On November 22, the United States
And the version that was finally released
responded by increasing CIA financing
takes an overly
y cautious approach to
for Mobutu's officers and
giving Mobutu
redactions, withholding four documents
carte blanche to act as he saw fit.

in their entirety, cutting
22 by more than
Within three days, Mobutu blood-
a paragraph, omitting the financial costs
lessly seized power, a result that Devlin
of specific activities, and attempting to
called “the best possible solution." The
guard the identities of the CIA's key
CIA responded with still more money,
Congolese clients besides Mobutu.

Five
which Mobutu used to pay off key
decades after the events in question, most
officers, political leaders, and tribal
of these excisions seem hard to justify,
chiefs.Throughout 1966 and 1967, the
especially given that historians, journal-
agency forwarded Mobutu intelligence
ists, and even Devlin himself have already
about threats to his regime, uncovering
exposed the main actors' identities.

a number of major plots (one of which
Still, it is clear that the CIA pro-
ended with the public hanging of the
grams of the 1960s distorted Congolese
alleged conspirators).

And the CIA's covert politics for decades to come.

This is
air force, along
with overttransportation
not to argue that in the absence of
help from the Pentagon, helped Mobutu
U.S.

meddling, Congo would have
fend off two mercenary-led mutinies.

established a Western-style
erepresenta-
In October 1966, Mobutu threw out
tive government.--- PAGE BREAK ---

meddling, Congo would have
fend off two mercenary-led mutinies. established a Western-style
erepresenta-
In October 1966, Mobutu threw out
tive government. But even in a region
theU.S.ambassadorforfailingtoshow
with plenty of autocracies, the country
enough respectforhis newly elevated
has stood out for its extreme dysfunc-
statusandstopped
drequestinghismonthly
tion. Ever since the cIA's intervention,
CIA stipend. Two years later, Mobutu
Congo's leaders have been distinguished
changed his mind and asked the CiA for
by a unique combination of qualities:
more money—which he got. By then,
scant political legitimacy, 1
littlecapacity
the CIA had wrapped u
up its paramilitary
for governing, and corruption so extensive
program and limited its political funding
that it devours institutions and norms. to four key people other than Mobutu. In the years following U.S. covert action,
From the U.S. perspective, with no more
these qualities led to economic disaster,
legal opposition to control and no more
recurrent political instability, and
Lumumbist rebels or pro-Tshombe
Western military intervention. Finally. mercenaries to fight, Congo could be
in 1997, rebels headed by a former
transitioned to purely overt U.S. mili-
Lumumbist and backed by military
tary and economic assistance. forces from Rwanda, Uganda, and
Angola sent Mobutu packing, leading
THEDAMAGEDONE
to a regional war that would kill more
Unfortunately, the full picture of the
than three and a half million people
CIA's involvement in Congo remains
over the next decade. 20
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---Of course, the main author of all of
this misrule was Mobutu.But given
COUNCILon
that he would never have been able to
consolidate control were it not for the
FOREIGN
CIA cash he distributed to his allies, as
RELATIONS
he himself admitted to the agency, the
United States must bear some responsi-
bility for what Mobutu wrought.

Further-
more, the CiA's predominant techniques--
The Internship
corruption and external force—-constituted
Program
a tutorial on irresponsible governance.

Weaned on the agency's bribery, Mobutu
The Council onForeign Relations is seek-
and his associates never had to compete
ing talented individualswho areconsider-
ing a career in international relations.

for the affection of the broader public
Interns arerecruited year-round on a semester
and develop a real political base and had
basis toworkinboth theNewYork City and
no incentive to put the state's resources
Washington,D.C.,offices.An intern’sduties
to good use.

And because Mobutu could
generally consist of administrative work,
depend on the CiA's paramilitary support,
editing andwriting,and eventcoordination.

he felt no pressure to develop even a
The Councilconsidersbothundergraduate
military.

In fact,
andgraduate studentswith majorsinInterna-
minimally capable
tional Relations,Political Science,Economics,
even though he manage
1in the chaos
or a related field for its internship program.

ofindependence tobe
appointed army
A regional specialization and language skills
chief of staff, he was an incompetent
may also be required for some positions.

In
military leader.

By 1964, his army had,
addition to meeting the intellectual require-
according to Averell Harriman, the
ments,applicantsshouldhave excellent
skills in administration, writing, and re-
U.S.

undersecretary of state for political
search, and a command of word processing,
affairs, proved its “worthlessness," b
being
spreadsheet applications, and the Internet.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By 1964, his army had,
addition to meeting the intellectual require-
according to Averell Harriman, the
ments,applicantsshouldhave excellent
skills in administration, writing, and re-
U.S. undersecretary of state for political
search, and a command of word processing,
affairs, proved its “worthlessness," b
being
spreadsheet applications, and the Internet. incapable of securing
territorywith
To apply for an internship, please send a
out help from foreign mercenaries. resume and coverletterincluding the se-
What Mobutu was immensely talented
mester,days,and times available towork
at, of course, was the skill that the
to the Internship Coordinator in the Hu-
Americans had taught him: wheedling
man Resources Office at the address listed
below.Please referto the Council'sWeb
bribes. Twice, he even persuaded Devlin
site for specific opportunities. The Coun-
to reimburse him for army funds that
cil is an equal opportunity employer. he claimed to have used for unauthor-
ized expenses or cIA objectives, arguing
that if rivals discovered the misuse, they
might charge him with corruption. U.S. officials outside the CIA learned
of Mobutu's flaws early on. Following the
Council onForeign Relations
1965 coup, a State Department memo-
Human Resources Office
58East68thStreet,NewYork,NY10065
randum cautioned, “It is too early to
TEL:212.434·9400 FAX:212.434-9893
discern whereMobutu will draw the
humanresources@cfr.org http://www.cfr.org
line between corruption and the 'normal'
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stephen R.Weissman
use of payments and patronage to
OURMAN
facilitate government operations."
WhatMcBride seemed not to realize
During the white mercenary mutinies
was that eight years of covert action had
of 1966 and 1967, U.S.

cables and mem0-
done much to rule out any alternative
randums were scathing.

A National
U.S.

policy, then or ever.

The CIA had
Security Council memo to theWhite
not only fostered a regime; it had stamped
House chief of staff described Mobutu
it “made in America" for future policy-
as “somewhat inept and his chances of
makers in Washington.

As Mobutu's
pulling the Congo up by its bootstraps
government lurched from crisis to crisis,
are indeed remote." The U.S.

ambassa-
it continued to enjoy U.S.

and Western
dor to Congo, Robert McBride, labeled
financial and military help.

Over the years,
Mobutu “irrational" and “highly un-
manyin Congress and some dissidents
stable." President Lyndon Johnson's
in the State Department did urge the
national security adviser at the time,
U.S.

government to push for economic
Walt Rostow, called him “an irritating
and political reforms in the country that
and often stupid" man who“can be
Mobutu had renamed Zaire in 1971.

cruel to the point of inhumanity." In
Failingthat,theysaid,it should dis
1968,McBride sent a cable to the State
tance itself from Mobutu and cultivate
Department that took note of the
political ties with the opposition.

When
president's new luxury airplane, plan
the Cold War ended, Congress finally
for parks modeled on Versailles, thoughts
cut off military and nonhumanitarian
of building a replica of Saint Peter's
assistance.

Yet even afterward, as the
Basilica in each of Congo's three largest
regime entered its death throes, U.S.

cities, and acquisition of a Swiss villa.

officials could not bring themselves to
McBride concluded,
abandon it and support the peaceful
democratic transition proposed by the
I believe there is nothing which can
rising opposition.--- PAGE BREAK ---

cities, and acquisition of a Swiss villa. officials could not bring themselves to
McBride concluded,
abandon it and support the peaceful
democratic transition proposed by the
I believe there is nothing which can
rising opposition. be done to restrain these frivolous
Clinging to a longtime friendly
Presidential expenditures because
dictator, even as his flaws become more
Mobutu has apparently risen in
risky for U.S. interests, is a well-known
soufle-like grandiloquence. I feel
thatto call his attention to the
pathology of U.S. foreign policy. In the
dangers of this type of thing . . . case of Congo, the relationship had been
would be to incur instant wrath. created and nurtured by CIA covert action. However, I felt a brief report
This endowed it with a special aura of
should be made on [this] regrettable
intimacy, visible in the possessive language
phenomenonbecauseIbelieveit is
that U.S. officials used when referring
the most serious problem facing
to Mobutu. For Devlin, Mobutu became
Congo at present time and the fault
"almost our only anchor to the windward."
is that of the President and the uncon-
During the escalating battle between
trollable spending is emanating
Kasavubu and Tshombe, Harold Saunders,
directly from him. Furthermore, it
a member of the National Security
occurred to me this might have an
Council staff, wrote that Mobutu should
effect on US policies towards the
be the one to resolve the conflict—-by
present regime in the Congo. military means if necessarybecause
22
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

--- PAGE BREAK ---What Really Happened in Congo
"he is already our man." Ten years after
Tshombe's white mercenaries angered
the subsequent coup, Edward Mulcahy,
African nationalists and soured U.S.

the deputy assistant secretary of state
relations with manyk
key countries,
for African affairs, testified in Congress,
including Algeria, Ghana, Kenya, and
"We do have .

.

.

a warm spot in our
Tanzania; these actions also antago-
hearts for President Mobutu.At a time
nized liberation movements in Angola
when our aid and advice were critical for
Mozambique, South Africa, and Zim-
the development of Zaire, he was good
babwe.The resentment and suspicion that
enough—and I might say wise enough-
the CIA's program in Congo engendered
to accept our suggestions and our
subsided slightly as the agency's involve-
counsel to the great profit of the state."
ment there declined, but they never
Like other such questionable commit-
disappeared, and they would resurface
ments, the United States' long support
throughout the 1970s and 1980s when-
for Mobutu was rationalized as necessary
ever the West (and in particular the
because there was no alternative but
CIA) intervened in the region.

chaos.

In reality, Washington squandered
opportunities to push for major reforms.

ACOMMUNISTCONGO?

After Congolese exiles from Angola
The root of the ciA's intervention in
unsuccessfully invaded Zaire twice in
Congo was an overhyped analysis of the
the late 1970s, the United States failed
communist threat.

Congo scholars have
to use the leverage provided by the
long been skeptical of the notion that had
resulting Western military intervention
Lumumba stayed in power, his govern-
to seek a more inclusive government.

ment would have fallen under the sway
During the opposition ferment that
of the Soviet Union or China.At the
swept Zaire in the 1980s, it refused to
time, even some U.S.

officials had doubts.

support the popular demand for a second
In 1962, shortly after he retired as direc-
party.--- PAGE BREAK ---

officials had doubts. support the popular demand for a second
In 1962, shortly after he retired as direc-
party. Even when a strong democracy
tor of the CIA, Dulles admitted, “I think
movement compelled Mobutu to make
that we overrated the Soviet danger, let's
political concessions in the early 1990s,
say, in the Congo." The Kennedy admin-
the George H. W. Bush administration
istration's initial policy paper, soon modi-
prevented Herman Cohen, its assistant
fied, advocated a broad-based government
secretary of state for African affairs,
of “all principal political elements in the
from calling for Mobutu's resignation
Congo," to be followed by the release
after Mobutu reneged on his commit-
of Lumumba. Even at the height of the
ments. And although the Clinton
rebellion, in 1964, National Security
administration banned visas for Mobutu's
AdviserMcGeorgeBundywroteJohn-
associates, it also endorsed his laugh-
son, “What is very unclear is how deep
able plan for “free elections."
the Chinese hand is in the rebel efforts. Covert action produced a Congolese
Harriman thinks it is pretty deep; most
government that largely supported
of the intelligence community thinks it
U.S. foreign policy, but it burdened
is more marginal." In November 1964,
U.S. diplomacy in Africa for decades. Michael Hoyt--the U.S. consul in
In particular, the overthrow and murder
rebel-held Stanleyville, who had just
of Lumumba and the support for
beenreleased from over three months
July/August 2014
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---U.S. consul in
In particular, the overthrow and murder
rebel-held Stanleyville, who had just
of Lumumba and the support for
beenreleased from over three months
July/August 2014
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

StephenR.Weissman
of captivity—- informed policymakers
white mercenaries outraged the rest of
that theleaders of theLumumbist
Africa. Even then, the Soviet Union
insurgency were “within the Congolese
dispatched arms but no advisers to teach
political spectrum" and that they were
the recipients how to use them. Soviet
'essentially pragmatic and followed
and Chinese military assistance were
their own interests."
also constrained by the need to secure
The skeptics were right: Lumumba
transport rights through neighboring
was never a communist, and he would
African states, which was not always
not have yielded to foreign control. He
forthcoming.
and his supporters had cut their political
In retrospect, it is clear that the
teeth in the struggl
against colonialism,
U.S. officials directing Congo policy
andtheyfoundany
 form of external
inappropriately projected their Cold
domination anathema. They were far
War experiences in Europe, Asia, and
more interested in nonalignment, and
Latin America onto Africa,where the
the foreigners they identified with were
conditions were completely different.
other Africanindependenceleaders,
In Congo, there had been no Soviet
not Khrushchev or Mao. Lumumba and
military occupation and no significant
hisfollowers also understood thatthe
Marxist or communist party or cadres.
communistworldcould neverreplace
Tragically, Washington spurned an
the massive European investment and
alternative
licy: engaging diplomati-
10,000 Belgian technicians that served
cally with Lumumba and his successors
as the foundation for Congo's Western-
as part of a broad effort to keep the
oriented economy. Even when they
Cold War out of Congo. Instead, it
accepted Soviet military assistance to
annointed Mobutu and other members
help reunify their country or contest
of the Binza Group as Belgium's heirs.
their political exclusion, they continued
Impatient and inexperienced as he was,
to appeal for support from the United
Lumumba represented his country's
States,the rest of theWest,and other
best hope for a successful postcolonial 
African countries. Yet Washington
era. There is every reason to believe
refused to help.
that working with him and other
Archives from the former Soviet
incipient democratic forces would
bloc confirm that although Moscow
have better served both the United
States and Congo.
advantage it could from theWest's
difficulties in Congo, it understood that
Lumumba and his followers were no
Marxists, and it hedged its support for
them accordingly. Following Mobutu's
1960 coup, Moscow meekly withdrew
its airplanes and military advisers from
the country and did nothing to help
Lumumba. It provided little aid to his
successors until Lumumba's assassina-
tion and the capture of Stanleyville by
24
FOREIGN.AFFAIRS