«?? 
*.»V'f;.‘i»* ,* ,*//?■ 
«4stiSg&S& 
’ i;^ 
%'t $&• 
~ lass 
£«$* 
;.3?#§4#i 
SSwwfes 
g$@?p 
5^.- 
* • . . <•• v 7 - ’.x,>wr< L.£ 
ifc ray%>'rf~'ii^i^fcr 
,&&&£&&

--- PAGE BREAK ---Founder and Contributing Editor: 
Lyndon H.

LuRouche, Jr.

Editor-in-chief.

Chian Zoakos 
Editors; Mora Hamerman.

Robyn Quijano 
Managing Editor Susan Johnson 
Art Director: Martha Zoller 
Contributing Editorr.

Vwe Parpart.

.

Christopher White.

Money Span nous 
Special Services: Peter Ennis 
INTELLIGENCE DIRECTORS: 
• Africa: Douglas DeGroot 
Agriculture: Susan B Cohen 
' Asia: Daniel Sneider 
Counterintelligence: Jeffrey Steinberg 
Economics: David Goldman 
European Economics: Laurent 
" Mura wire 
Energy: William Engdah!

Europe: Vivian Frevre Zoakos 
Latin America: Dennis Small 
Lavs: Eduard Spannous 
Middle East: Robert Dreyfuss 
Military Strategy: Steven Bar dwell 
Science and Technology: 
Marsha Freeman 
Soviet Sector: Rachel Douglas 
United States: Graham Lowry 
INTERNATIONAL BUREAUS: 
Bogota.

Carlos Cota Meza 
Bonn: George Gregory.

Rainer Apt!

Chicago: Paul Greenberg 
Copenhagen: Vincent Robson 
Houston: Harley Schlanger.

Nicholas F.

Benton 
Los Angeles: Theodore Andromidas 
Mexico City: Josejina Sfencndez 
Milan: Muriel Mirak 
Monterrey: St.

Luisade Castro 
New Delhi: Paul ZykoJsky 
Paris: Katherine Ranter.

Sophie Tanapura 
Rome: Leonardo Semadio 
Stockholm: Clifford Gaddy 
United Nations: Nancy Coker 
Washington D.C.: Richard Cohen.

Laura Chosen, Susan Kokinda 
Wiesbaden: Philip Golub.

Mary La/evJe.

Thierry Lalevte.

Barbara Spahn.

Executive Intelligence Review 
(ISSN0:7.1-6J14> 
tjpuhtisheduerklvf iObtues I except for the second 
week of July and first n eek of January by 
Ren Snlidantj International Press Service 
304 W 58thStreet.

\n> York.

.V.

Y 10019.

In Europe: Executive Intelligence Review, 
Nochrichtcn Agentur GmbH.

Postfach 2308.

D 6200 Wiesbaden Tel: 30-70-35 
Executive Directors: Anno HeUcnbrotch, 
Michael Liebig 
fa Mexico: EiR.

Francisco Dfu Covarrubias 54 A-3 
Colonia San Rafael.

Mexico DF.

Teh 5924W24.

Japan subscription sales: 
O.T.O.

Research Corporation 
Takcuchi Bldg.Japan subscription sales: 
O.T.O.

Research Corporation 
Takcuchi Bldg.

1-34-12 Takatanobaba 
Shinjuku-Ku, Tokjo 160 
Tel: (03) 20*-7*21 
Copyright *1981 New Solidarity 
International Press Service 
All rights reserved.

Reproduction in whole or 
in part without permission strictly prohibited.

Second-JJ»S postage paid at New York.

New York and at additional mailing olTicca.

Subscription by mail for the U.S.: 
3 months—-512?, 6 months—-5225.

I year—5396.

Single issue—S10 
Academic library rate: $245 per year 
November 14,1981 
From the Managing Editor 
In this Special Report, the EIR presents an exclusive survey of the 
international assassination bureau, Permindcx (Permanent Industrial 
Expositions).

As we enter 1982, it might justly be stated that unless 
the assassination capability represented by Permindex and the forces 
represented on its original board of directors is not exposed and its 
capability dismantled, the lives of the world's most important political 
leaders will remain under the constant threat of assassination.

Our report on Permindex here is taken from the chapter on the 
British-Canadian corporation taken from the second edition of the 
best-selling book Dope, Inc., written by two leading contributors to 
the Executive Intelligence Review, David Goldman and Jeffrey Stein- 
berg.

The report you are about to read represents the culmination of 
ye**rs of work by both Goldman and Steinberg and a team of invest- 
gators and contributors to the EIR's Investigative Leads twice-month- 
ly newsletter.

The reports of intelligence agencies—primarily in the 
United States and France—have been cross-checked to produce the 
first exhaustive report on the Permindex apparatus.

That apparatus 
was first brought to light by the French intelligence agency SDECE 
in its investigation on the more than 30 attempts on the life of former 
French President Charles de Gaulle.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The reports of intelligence agencies—primarily in the 
United States and France—have been cross-checked to produce the 
first exhaustive report on the Permindex apparatus. That apparatus 
was first brought to light by the French intelligence agency SDECE 
in its investigation on the more than 30 attempts on the life of former 
French President Charles de Gaulle. Permindex was then named in the investigation by New Orleans 
District Attorney Jim Garrison on the assassination of President John 
Kennedy—an investigation that was brought to an abrupt halt 
through the U.S. Justice Department, then under the control of 
Ramsey Clark, recently documented to be a terrorist protector. Yet 
18 years later, the Permindex apparatus remains the starting point for 
identifying the origin of the assassination danger to President Reagan 
and the Pope John Paul II. The second edition of Dope, Inc., from which the Permindex report 
is taken, will be published by The New Benjamin Franklin House 
Publishing Company, New York, this spring.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Permindex: 
Britain’s International 
Assassination Bureau 
by Jeffrey Steinberg and David Goldman 
During the spring, summer, and autumn months of 
1963, a series of top secret conspiratorial meetings took 
place behind well-guarded closed doors at an exclusive 
resort spot at Montego Bay on the Caribbean island of 
Jamaica.

The location for those meetings was the Tryall 
Compound, nominally a retirement colony built at the 
close of World War 11 by Britain’s highest ranking 
secret espionage agent.

Sir William Stephenson.

# 
In the spring of 1963, an only somewhat different 
sort of conspiratorial gathering was occupying the 
facilities at Tryall.

Present at various times for the 
planning sessions were: Major Louis Mortimer Bloom- 
field, in 1963 still a top ofTicer in Sir William Stephen- 
son’s British Special Operations Executive (SOE); Fer- 
enc Nagy, a wartime cabinet minister in the pro-Hitler 
Horthy government 'of Hungary and later its prime 
minister; Georgio Mantello, a Rumanian-born Jew who 
had served as a trade minister under Mussolini; Colonel 
Clay Shaw, a former officer in the U.S.

Office of 
Strategic Services (OSS) who in 1963 was the director of 
the New Orleans International Trade Mart; Jean dc 
Menil, a White Russian emigr6 who at that moment 
was the president of the Houston-based Schlumbcrgcr 
Corporation, a heavy equipment manufacturer fre- 
quently used as a covert conduit for weapons; Paul 
Raigorodsky, another White Russian active in the right- 
wing Solidarist movement.

Other individuals figured in the plot; however, the 
above group constituted the witting operational core.

The purpose of the meetings was to plot the assassina- 
tion of President John F.

Kennedy in Dallas, Texas on 
November 22, 1963.

What sort of glue held these individuals together?

What vast capability stood behind these relatively un- 
known individuals and enabled them to both execute 
and cover up their crimes for nearly two decades?What sort of glue held these individuals together?

What vast capability stood behind these relatively un- 
known individuals and enabled them to both execute 
and cover up their crimes for nearly two decades?

The answer to all of these questions begins with an 
obscure international trading exposition company, in- 
corporated in Switzerland and housed in Montreal.

The 
name of the company is Permindex (“Permanent Indus- 
trial Expositions”).

Its president and chairman of the 
board since its inception in 1958 has been Major Louis 
Mortimer Bloomfield.

All of the individuals present at 
the Tryall Compound for the Kennedy assassination 
plotting were, at the time, board members, officers, and 
investors in Permindex.

Each of these individuals was also a longstanding 
trusted asset of the British SOE.

Unlike any other trade 
expositions company in the world, the employees and 
investors in Permindex had all been selected for specific 
operational capabilities that they represented; capabili- 
ties that would be indispensable to the conducting of 
high-level political assassinations.

As we delve into the Permindex international assas- 
sination bureau and discover the suppressed facts be- 
hind the assassination of President John F.

Kennedy, 
we shall encounter an international web of dirty money 
outfits, responsible for channeling millions of dollars in 
black market revenues into the hands of the professional 
killers deployed on behalf of Permindex and its SOE 
control.

We shall also discover an international band of 
protected killers, drawn from the ranks of the Nazi and 
fascist gestapos of World War II, from the street level 
crime syndicate responsible for the retail distribution of 
narcotics; and from a secret capability established by 
the Stephenson organization at the outset of World War 
II, operating under the cover of missionary activity in 
Latin America and the East Bloc.

Their missions?--- PAGE BREAK ---

We shall also discover an international band of 
protected killers, drawn from the ranks of the Nazi and 
fascist gestapos of World War II, from the street level 
crime syndicate responsible for the retail distribution of 
narcotics; and from a secret capability established by 
the Stephenson organization at the outset of World War 
II, operating under the cover of missionary activity in 
Latin America and the East Bloc. Their missions? Political assassinations employing high-powered rifles 
at a distance of 1,000 yards. Third, we shall encounter a British SOE fifth column 
embedded deeply into the American official intelligence 
community. This fifth column, linked directly to Per- 
mindex and its chairman Major Bloomfield, represents 
Special Report 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---perhaps the single most crucial component of the inter- 
national assassination bureau: its coverup capability.

Eighteen years after the assassination of John F.

Ken- 
nedy.

Pcrmindex remains one of the best kept secrets in 
the world—despite the fact that it has been exposed on 
more than one occasion as the agency behind high-level 
political exterminations touching on top political offi- 
cials of no fewer than three sovereign nations.

Louis Mortimer Bloomfield 
At the time of the Kennedy assassination.

Major 
Louis Mortimer Bloomfield was acting on behalf of his 
superiors in the British Special Operations Executive, 
including “retired*’ chief Sir William Stephenson, at 
that time a permanent resident of the Tryall Compound 
on Montego Bay, Jamaica.

As president and chairman of the board of Permin- 
dex, Bloomfield was the designated chief operations 
officer for the Kennedy hit.

Who is Louis Mortimer Bloomfield and what had 
brought him to the point of becoming, by 1963, the 
unofficial successor to Stephenson as Her Majesty’s top 
secret agent in North America; the man entrusted to 
carry out the execution of John F.

Kennedy, an Ameri- 
can President who dared to violate the “special relation- 
ship” with the British Crown?

Louis Mortimer Bloomfield was recruited into the 
SOE in 1938, the year that Stephenson, acting as 
personal emmissary of Winston Churchill, negotiated 
an agreement with U.S.

President Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt allowing British Intelligence to set up shop in 
the United States and to effectively merge its operations 
with those of the FBI and military intelligence.

Under 
SOE commission, Bloomfield was given an officer’s 
rank in the U.S.

Army and assigned to the newly 
created Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the wartime 
predecessor to the Central Intelligence Agency.Under 
SOE commission, Bloomfield was given an officer’s 
rank in the U.S.

Army and assigned to the newly 
created Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the wartime 
predecessor to the Central Intelligence Agency.

As a major in the OSS, Bloomfield was detailed into 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation as the contracting 
(recruitment) agent for its counterespionage Division 
Five.

Bloomfield, described by numerous authors and 
associates as a practicing homosexual, developed a 
deeply personal friendship with FBI Director J.

Edgar 
Hoover.

Through that relationship, Bloomfield was 
able to retain his powerful position within Division Five 
long after the end of the war.

As late as 1963, when 
Bloomfield was case officer for the assassination plot 
against John F.

Kennedy, he was still a top official in 
Division Five.

When the SOE “formally” dissolved its U.S.

opera- 
tions at the close of World War II, Bloomfield returned 
to Montreal, Canada to resume his career as a promi- 
nent attorney.

He had been a founding partner in the 
prestigious law firm of Phillips, Vineberg, Bloomfield 
and Goodman, the firm that represents and controls the 
Bronfman family’s holdings.

Bloomfield’s name was 
only removed from the firm’s letterhead in 1968 after 
French President Charles dc Gaulle publicly exposed 
the role of Bloomfield’s Pcrmindex in acting as a 
conduit for funds into the Secret Army Organization 
(OAS) to finanoe the 1962 assassination attempt against 
him.

From the outset, the British SOE had made a point 
of operating through commercial fronts.

Thus, for ex- 
ample, Stephenson set up the SOE command center in 
the United States in the Radio Corporation of America 
building in New York City’s Rockefeller Center under 
the sign of an importing and exporting company.

Montreal attorney and SOE operative Bloomfield 
created a nest of corporate entities following his return 
to Canada, all of which served as vehicles for ongoing 
SOE activity.Thus, for ex- 
ample, Stephenson set up the SOE command center in 
the United States in the Radio Corporation of America 
building in New York City’s Rockefeller Center under 
the sign of an importing and exporting company.

Montreal attorney and SOE operative Bloomfield 
created a nest of corporate entities following his return 
to Canada, all of which served as vehicles for ongoing 
SOE activity.

Among Bloomfield’s corporate holdings 
were the Israeli Continental Corporation; the Canadian 
subsidiary of the Dutch Heinekens Breweries; and Credit 
Suisse of Canada, a correspondent bank to the Credit 
Suisse of Geneva that was among the holding compa- 
nies exposed by General de Gaulle’s intelligence bureau 
SDECE as a laundering point for hit money into the 
OAS.

All of these companies would later be documented 
as investors in Perm index.

Like his law partner Lazarus Phillips and his former 
"clients” the Bronfmans.

Biopmfield also established 
himself at the top of the Zionist movement in Canada.

Among his numerous honorary positions, Bloomfield is 
the annual chairman of the Histadiut campaign of 
Canada.

No ordinary charity, the Histadrut owns over 
one-third of the gross national product of Israel; con- 
trols the second largest bank in Israel, the Bank Ha- 
poalim; and has been caught on more than one occasion 
laundering money into overseas operations of the Israeli 
secret service, the Mossad.

Some of those funds, passed 
directly back into Major Bloomfield’s Pcrmindex, were 
also used to bankroll unsuccessful hit attempts against 
de Gaulle.

Among Bloomfield’s other “charitable” activities is 
his chairmanship of the Canadian Red Cross Ambul- 
ance Service, a position traditionally held by a top- 
ranking knight in the Queen’s official chivalric order, 
the Most Venerable Military and Hospitaler Order of 
St.

John of Jerusalem.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Among Bloomfield’s other “charitable” activities is 
his chairmanship of the Canadian Red Cross Ambul- 
ance Service, a position traditionally held by a top- 
ranking knight in the Queen’s official chivalric order, 
the Most Venerable Military and Hospitaler Order of 
St. John of Jerusalem. As an operating arm of the 
Sovereign Order, the Red Cross ambulance service is an 
official intelligence arm of the British Monarchy, fre- 
quently called upon to carry out espionage and terrorist 
activities. In addition to his corporate and “charitable” activi- 
ties within his native Canada and his continuing post 
within Hoover’s FBI Division Five, Major Bloomfield 
was given special responsibility following the war to 
develop the international network of clandestine ship- 
ping routes that would be essential to the planned 
6 Special Report

--- PAGE BREAK ---skyrocketing of narcotics traffic, dirty money, and 
related blackmarketccring.

First, Bloomfield assumed the directorship of the 
Israeli-Canadian Maritime League, a trade association 
whose significance will become clear shortly.

Simulta-, 
neously, he became the consul-general in charge of the 
Western Hemisphere of the African state of Liberia.

Liberia is a notorious tax shelter and smugglers’ port of 
call.

With no shipping regulations, Liberia—under 
Bloomfield’s consularship—became the flag of conven- 
ience under which a sizeable portion of the ships bearing 
bulk cargos of Far East narcotics are registered.

Liberia 
is also secondary offshore banking center.

The unregu- 
lated ’’banks" of Liberia account for $7 billion in 
average daily transfers—the vast majority of which are 
related to black market transfers.

The only other foreign-stationed consul-general for 
Liberia is Bloomfield-Permindex associate and former 
Israeli Mossad official Dr.

Tibor Rosenbaum, whom we 
shall meet shortly.

One final deployment in the immediate postwar 
period by the SOE’s Major Bloomfield would set the 
stage for the future emergence of the assassination 
bureau, Permindex.

In 1952, Bloomfield became a rank- 
ing official of the United Nations Organization, one of 
its leading advisers on international law.

Bloomfield 
accomplished this by assuming a position as overseas 
representative of the International Executive Board of 
the International Law Association.

Established in 1873, 
the International Law Association had from its incep- 
tion been an arm of Lord Milner’s Roundtable group 
responsible for developing a code of law compatible 
with the “one world" designs of Britain’s leading oli- 
garchical families.

After World War II, the ILA became 
an officially recognized Non-Goverrimental Organiza- 
tion of the UNO and its principal advisory body on all 
matters of international law.Established in 1873, 
the International Law Association had from its incep- 
tion been an arm of Lord Milner’s Roundtable group 
responsible for developing a code of law compatible 
with the “one world" designs of Britain’s leading oli- 
garchical families.

After World War II, the ILA became 
an officially recognized Non-Goverrimental Organiza- 
tion of the UNO and its principal advisory body on all 
matters of international law.

Major Bloomfield’s particular area of “expertise" 
on behalf of the UNO was, naturally: international 
terrorism, piracy, and civil aviation.

To this day, the 
United Nations’ International Civil Aviation Commis- 
sion is housed in Montreal where it is presided over by 
one of Major Bloomfield’s closest collaborators, Gerald 
Fitzgerald.

Fitzgerald, on advisement from Bloomfield, 
has drafted every United Nations convention on hijack- 
ing, piracy, and terrorism.

In 1962, on the eve of 
Permindex’s first major political assassination, Fitzger- 
ald and Major Bloomfield co-authored a history of 
political assassinations in the 20th century, focusing 
particularly on the activities of the Zionist clandestine 
army, the Irgun, and its 1940s murder plots against 
Britain's Count Bernadotte and Lord Moyne.

1958: Better than ten years have passed since Major 
Bloomfield’s “official" retirement from the SOE-OSS 
and his return to his native Canada.

Sufficient distance 
has been created from his past activities as a master spy 
within Her Majesty’s most secret spy army to warrant 
Major Bloomfield a place on the list of “citizens above 
suspicion." And so, in 1958, on orders from his supe- 
riors at Montego Bay, Bloomfield created Permindex 
and its international subsidiaries Centro Mondiale 
Commerciale and the Italo-American Hotel Corpora- 
tion to house an international assassination bureau.1958: Better than ten years have passed since Major 
Bloomfield’s “official" retirement from the SOE-OSS 
and his return to his native Canada.

Sufficient distance 
has been created from his past activities as a master spy 
within Her Majesty’s most secret spy army to warrant 
Major Bloomfield a place on the list of “citizens above 
suspicion." And so, in 1958, on orders from his supe- 
riors at Montego Bay, Bloomfield created Permindex 
and its international subsidiaries Centro Mondiale 
Commerciale and the Italo-American Hotel Corpora- 
tion to house an international assassination bureau.

The Permindex board of directors 
According to corporate records on file in Berne, 
Switzerland, the following individuals were officially 
listed as officers and board members of Permindex at 
the time of its incorporation by Major Bloomfield.

• Louis Mortimer Bloomfield, president and chair- 
man of the board of Permindex; 
• Ferenc Nagy; 
« Georgio Mantello; 
• Roy Marcus Cohn, attorney.

New York City, 
former general counsel to Senator Joseph McCarthy, 
chairman, American Jewish League Against Commu- 
nism, president, Lionel Corporation; 
• Joseph Bonnano, syndicate boss of Montreal and 
Phoenix; chairman of the board, Lionel ^Corporation; 
• Major General John Bruce Medaris, former direc- 
tor Defense Industrial Security Command; board of 
directors, Lionel Corporation; 
•r Jean DcMenil; 
• Paul Raigorodsky; 
• Prince Gutiercz di Spadafora, former undersecre- 
tary of agriculture to Mussolini; sponsor of the Sicilian 
Separatist Movement; .--- PAGE BREAK ---

• Louis Mortimer Bloomfield, president and chair- 
man of the board of Permindex; 
• Ferenc Nagy; 
« Georgio Mantello; 
• Roy Marcus Cohn, attorney. New York City, 
former general counsel to Senator Joseph McCarthy, 
chairman, American Jewish League Against Commu- 
nism, president, Lionel Corporation; 
• Joseph Bonnano, syndicate boss of Montreal and 
Phoenix; chairman of the board, Lionel ^Corporation; 
• Major General John Bruce Medaris, former direc- 
tor Defense Industrial Security Command; board of 
directors, Lionel Corporation; 
•r Jean DcMenil; 
• Paul Raigorodsky; 
• Prince Gutiercz di Spadafora, former undersecre- 
tary of agriculture to Mussolini; sponsor of the Sicilian 
Separatist Movement; . • ‘ 
• Hans Seligman, banker, Basel, Switzerland; 
• Carlo d’Amelio, attorney, Rome, representing the 
financial holdings of the House of Savoy and the House 
of Pallavicini; attorney for “Circolo Rex," general 
counsel Centro Mondiale Commerciale; 
• Max Hageman, editor, Munich National Zeitung 
(neo-Nazi publication); 
• Munir Chourbagi, uncle of King Farouk of 
Egypt; 
• Giuseppe Zigiotti, head of the Italian political 
party Fascist National Association for Militia Arms; , 
• Ferenc H. Simonfay, former Nazi collaborator in 
Hungary, leader of the Solidarist movement; 
• Colonel Clay Shaw. Every one of these individuals represented a decade- 
long asset of the British SOE, called into active service 
for a very specific role in a very specific scries of 
operations. Bankrolling an assassination 
fit 1967, the French Intelligence Bureau SDECE 
released the results of a five-year investigation into the 
1962 aborted assassination attempt against General de 
Special Report 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---I 
: !

f 
i fj 
I i i 
: !

I - 
Gaulle, carried out by the far right-wing Secret Army 
Organization (OAS).

While the SDECE report traced 
the origins of the assassination plot to the Brussels 
headquarters of NATO and to a specific group of 
disgruntled French and British generals as well as the 
remnant of the old Nazi intelligence apparatus, it also 
singled out Major Bloomfield's Permindex trading com- 
pany as the agency responsible for conducing $200,000 
into the OAS to bankroll the attempt.

The source of the 
funds was FBI Division Five, the secret counterespion- 
age branch of Hoover’s agency that was run out of the 
Montreal, Canada law offices of Major Bloomfield.

As a result of the de Gaulle exposure of Permindex’s 
role in the OAS hit squads, Permindex was forced to 
shut down its public operations in Western Europe and 
relocate its headquarters to Johannesburg, South Afri- 
ca.

As a related feature of the de Gaulle crackdown, 
Israel’s overseas intelligence branch, the Mossad, was 
kicked out of France.

We have already noted that 
Permindex s Major Bloomfield established himself as 
one of the leading Zionists in Canada and had extended 
that charitable” activity to a prosperous business 
relationship extending into international shipping and 
banking.

We shall now see that Bloomfield’s efforts "on 
behalf of Israel” represented an extension of Briti: 
SOE penetration and control over sections of the impo 
tant capabilities that were consolidated with the 19* 
creation of Permindex.

In the course of unraveling tb 
piece of the Permindex web, we shall encounter tho 
operatives within the international assassination burea 
designated with the responsibility of providing th 
laundered millions of dollars for the financing of polit 
cal violence.

We begin with Basel banker Hans Seligman.

At 
cording to a suppressed manuscript on the Perminde 
assassination cabal (detailing information provided b 
U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We begin with Basel banker Hans Seligman. At 
cording to a suppressed manuscript on the Perminde 
assassination cabal (detailing information provided b 
U.S. and French intelligence), the Seligman Bank c 
Basel, Switzerland was a subsidiary of Permindex re 
sponsible for laundering funds into Major Bloomfield’ 
various operations; one of a dozen such subsidiaries o 
the Montreal trade expositions company, 
Hans Seligman is the last remaining European-base 
member of the Seligman family that had made its vas 
fortune in the United States during the 19th century, firs 
indry goods and later in banking. The Seligman fa’mil 
of New York was one of the “Our Crowd” group tha 
turned its experience in retailing dry goods into a lucra 
live black, market in booze following the passage of th< 
EightMnth A m^n 
pability is still alive. iVf'f' 
The widow of Jean de Menil, the ndw deceased 
member of the board of directors of Permindex, Mad- 
ame Dominique Schlumberger-de Menil,; was among 
a handfbl of guests at the dinner hosted by President 
, 7T.-7 V ‘ uaiiMiig 
families, particularly Genevan-Protestant banking. through the De'.Netiflizi:, Schlumbergcr &. Mallet 
bank. The Mallet family has branches in France, 
Great Britain and Geneva. The Mallet family has had "-r 
unbroken control over the “Comite des Deux Cents,” 
ilia    ..L i . . ‘ 
D(.1Mn u n y “ ■ y rreslaent unhroken control over the “Comite des Deux Cents,” 
s,’ honor of French Presideiit Francois Miuet- the elite group that represents real uower in Gen^-i ' 
, lon. Texas. The^Oct. 21-25 meeting brought together Back iit th&UJ0tfie IchlimbcrKe/groua reties % 
Z™hefhoa/'°*i * ead'"8 !nem5cre ot 'he.Muslim on the Bank of the Southwest to Leonard it?Inter-1 
'i st^^^LZTh " °*6h*T ** which, irt many locations overlap with UniSrf 
8 Special Report

--- PAGE BREAK ---Like the de Hirsh family, the Seligmans originated in 
Bavaria as part of the Hofjuden entourage built up 
around the Wittelsbach and Hapsburg courts.

It was in 
fact the joint efforts of the de Hirsh and Seligman families 
that led to the founding of the de Hirsh Foundation and 
the Jewish Colonization Association, the agencies re- 
sponsible for transplanting the likes of Yechiel Bronfman 
to Canada as an indentured servant.

At the time of the 
Bronfman migration, the de Hirsh Foundation was being 
coordinated out of New York City by Jesse Seligman.

By the 1890s, the Seligman, de Hirsh, and Gunzberg 
interests merged with the Louis-Dreyfus family interests.

Today all four families share control over the Bank 
Louis-Dreyfus.

Bank Louis-Dreyfus maintains financial 
control over the Bronfman family holdings.

Hans Sclig- 
man’s placement on the board of Permindex, headed by 
“former” Bronfman family attorney and financial advis- 
er Bloomfield, constitutes one closed circle through 
which drug revenues can be passed to finance the activi- 
ties of Pennindex.

' 
In addition to the Seligman Bank of Basel, the sup- 
pressed Permindex document, authored by “William 
Torbitt” (an apparent pseudonym), lists a number of 
additional banking entities wholly owned by Permindex.

These include: Aslaldo Vaduz of Miami, De Famaco 
Vaduz of Liechtenstein, and De Famaco Astaldo Vaduz 
of Geneva.

• v ^- f* 
These entities appear to have amounted to little more 
than post office boxes serving as money drops in loca- 
tions where virtually non-existent banking laws facilitat- 
ed such blind passes.

V •’ 
As noted above, Bloomfield ran the Canadian subsid- 
iary of Credit Suisse, a far more formidable banking 
institution with deep ties into the financial circuitry of 
the world’s illegal drug trade.

But the largest and most formidable banking entity 
in the Permindex family was the Banque de Credit Inter- 
national (BCI) of Basel, Switzerland, which remained in 
business until 1974.V •’ 
As noted above, Bloomfield ran the Canadian subsid- 
iary of Credit Suisse, a far more formidable banking 
institution with deep ties into the financial circuitry of 
the world’s illegal drug trade.

But the largest and most formidable banking entity 
in the Permindex family was the Banque de Credit Inter- 
national (BCI) of Basel, Switzerland, which remained in 
business until 1974.

• 
Dr.

Tibor Rosenbaum, BCI and Permindex 
BCI was the creation of Dr.

Tibor Rosenbaum, a 
Hungarian-born Jew who migrated to Palestine under 
the sponsorship of the Jewish Agency.

Back in Hunga- 
ry, Rosenbaum had been associated with Dr.

Rudolph 
Kastner, whose activities as a personal collaborator of 
Adolph Eichmann in sending an estimated 800,000 Jews 
of Eastern Europe to the gas chambers at Auschwitz 
created a major scandal in Israel in the early 1950s and 
served as the basis for Ben Hecht’s famous suppressed 
book Perfidy.

Following Israel's statehood, Tibor Rosenbaum was 
appointed the first minister of supply and finance for 
the foreign intelligence branch, the Mossad.

In 1951, 
Rosenbaum was deployed to Geneva, ostensibly as the 
director of Israeli migration, holding full diplomatic 
papers.

In as much as there was no migration from 
Switzerland to Israel during this period, speculation 
that Rosenbaum was already involved in setting up 
funds-Iaundering operations on behalf of the Mossad is 
well-founded.

According to a 1980 book-length expos6 
of the Israeli mafia, by L'Express journalist Jacques 
Dcrogy, Rosenbaum traded his Israeli diplomatic pa- 
pers for Liberian documents in the mid-1950s on the eve 
of his launching the Banque de la Credit Internationale.

Rosenbaum incorporated the BCI in 1958, the same 
year that his fellow “Liberian diplomat” Major Louis 
Mortimer Bloomfield established Permindex.

According to Dcrogy, Dr.Rosenbaum incorporated the BCI in 1958, the same 
year that his fellow “Liberian diplomat” Major Louis 
Mortimer Bloomfield established Permindex.

According to Dcrogy, Dr.

Rosenbaum was desig- 
nated as the “Swiss connection" in an international 
money laundering apparatus created to facilitate the 
diamond-for-dope trade that was to make up an increas- 
ingly large share of the foreign trade of Israel.

Despite 
the cosmetic cover provided to Rosenbaum’s operations 
by his Liberian papers, his Banque de la Credit Inter- 
nationale was so deeply meshed with Israeli high finance 
and big-time politics that when the scandal broke in 
Israel in the early 1970s over Rosenbaum’s dirty money 
operations, Israeli Finance Minister Pinchas Sapir im- 
mediately resigned, creating a government crisis.

What can be said about Rosenbaum’s Swiss launder- 
ing operations and how did his BCI intersect the 
operations of Major Bloomfield’s Permindex?

According to a 1967 Life magazine expose, Rosen- 
baum’s Banque de Credit International was on the 
receiving end of S10 million in illegal funds, laundered 
through the World Commerce Bank of Nassau, Grand 
Bahamas.

The Nassau bank was a joint venture of 
North American syndicate kingpin Meyer Lansky and 
several of his closest associates in the gambling, smug- 
gling, extortion, and dirty money rackets.

The World 
Commerce Bank was managed by Lansky accountant 
Alvin Malnick.

Another official of the Nassau launder- 
ing hole was a Swiss national and well-known Lansky 
bagman, Sylvain Ferdman.

According to the Life mag- 
azine investigators, Ferdman was simultaneously listed 
as the chief operations officer of Rosenbaum’s BCI.

The picture of BCI, however, remains incomplete 
without the inclusion of yet another board member of 
Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to the Life mag- 
azine investigators, Ferdman was simultaneously listed 
as the chief operations officer of Rosenbaum’s BCI. The picture of BCI, however, remains incomplete 
without the inclusion of yet another board member of 
Dr. Rosenbaum’s Swiss establishment: Ernest Israel 
Japhet Japhet is the chairman and president of the 
Bank Leumi, the largest bank in Israel; a bank that 
serves as a critical component of the diamond-for-dope 
traffic into Hong Kong. The current heir of a German 
Hofjuden banking family that traces its roots back 
centuries, Japhet recently sold the family’s trading- 
company to the Quaker Barclays Bank of London, 
which in turn placed him on the board of directors of its 
thus-created subsidiary Charterhouse-Japhet Charter- 
house-Japhet, like the Japhet Company before it, deals 
Special Report 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---exclusively in the diamond trade between Israel and 
Hong Kong—trading those precious stones for the 
same Golden Triangle opium that launched the Japhet 
family s career in international finance 150 years ago.

Joining Japhet as a trustee of the Bank Leumi is 
Baron Stormont Bancroft, a member of the Samuel 
family, a former lord-in-waiting to the Queen of Eng- 
land and the deputy chairman of Cunard Lines, a 
shipping company strongly suspected of shipping large 
volumes of Far East heroin over its Asian and Mediter- 
ranean routes.

Bank Leumi further keeps its bands in the drug 
trade through its 100 percent-owned subsidiary Union 
Bank.

Ernest Israel Japhet is the chairman of Union 
Bank, which handles over one-third of the world’s 
financing in diamonds.

Bank Leumi is not the only Israeli bank to heavily 
interface its operations with the Geneva laundering hole 
Ro,enbaum.

Even more heavily involved in the 
BCI is the Bank Hapoalitn.

The second largest bank in 
Israel, Bank Hapoalim was founded as an offshoot of 
the Jewish Agency.

Its founder and present board 
director, British High Commissioner Viscount Erwin 
Herbert Samuel, belongs to the same Samuel family 
behind the Bank Leumi and the Cunard Lines.

Viscount 
Samuel presides as head of the Israel Red Cross, an 
official branch of the Most Venerable Military and 
Hospitaler Order of St.

John of Jerusalem—the same 
order by Major Louis Mortimer Bloomfield of Permin- 
dex.

• : .

According to the already cited Derogy expos* of the 
Israeli mafia, the Bank Hapoalim figured prominently 
in the same diamonds-for-dopc apparatus.

Illegal reve- 
nues from the diamond-for-dope exchange between 
Israel and the Golden Triangle banks of Thailand 
would be initially deposited in an escrow account in 
London, for transfer to protected accounts in Johannes- 
burg, South Africa.

From South Africa, the same funds 
would be laundered through the Bank Hapoalim into 
Dr.

Rosenbaum's BCI.From South Africa, the same funds 
would be laundered through the Bank Hapoalim into 
Dr.

Rosenbaum's BCI.

The “South African connection" for this diamonds- 
for-dope operation, according to author Derogy, was 
Zwy Peer—the Israeli director of the Investors Overseas 
Service (IOS).

, 
IOS, until its demise in 1975, was indistinguishable 
from the Banque de Credit International.

Nominally 
an international mutual fund founded by Bernie Com- 
feld, and eventually taken over by Robert Vesco, IOS in 
reality was a laundering service deploying a virtual 
army of “salesmen" in every corner of the globe, often 
carrying phenomenal volumes of cash which the IOS 
directors claimed were the investment deposits of thou- 
sands of small investors.

These investors for the most 
part remained anonymous.

According to author Hank 
Messick, a significant number of the so-called small 
10 Special Report * 
investors were local operatives of the Meyer Lansky- 
Israeli mafia apparatus.

’ 
The convergence of the drug syndicate and the 
-Intelligence services of Great Britain and Israel in the 
pereon of Dr.

Tibor Rosenbaum is further amplified by 
a brief ook at the Swiss-based banker’s other major 
financial holding, the Swiss-Israel Trade Bank of Ge- 
neva.

Among its principal holdings, the Swiss-Israel Trade 
Bank owns one-third interest in the Paz conglomerate.

Owned until the early 1950s by the Rothschild family.

c az group of corporations maintains close to a 
monopoly ovfcr the Israeli oil and petrochemical indus- 
ry, including the vital shipping lines transporting oil 
and petrochemicals in and out of the Middle East In 
1978, police authorities in New York City siezed a Paz 
ship as tt attempted entry into New York Harbor.

Police found its hold to be loaded with liquid hashish 
• Sharing the Paz ownership with Dr.c az group of corporations maintains close to a 
monopoly ovfcr the Israeli oil and petrochemical indus- 
ry, including the vital shipping lines transporting oil 
and petrochemicals in and out of the Middle East In 
1978, police authorities in New York City siezed a Paz 
ship as tt attempted entry into New York Harbor.

Police found its hold to be loaded with liquid hashish 
• Sharing the Paz ownership with Dr.

Rosenbaum’s 
Swiss-Israel entity are Max Fisher, the Detroit, Michi- 
gan-based “businessman-philanthropist,” and Sir Isaac 
o son, a London department store magnate whose 
family traces its lineage back to the 13th century.

It was 
wolfson whose family mantle provided prestige for the 
Paz group following its sale by the Rothschild interests.

Sir Isaac was the chairman of the British Board of 
Jewish Deputies, the most prestigious and powerful 
Zionist organization in the British Empire.

His son 
today is a.

policy adviser to British Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher.

1^ 
The Swiss-Israel Trade Bank, the third owner of 
Paz.

is a who’s who of the combined British-Israeli 
Mossad apparatus, beginning with the already identi- 
fied Dr.

Tibor Rosenbaum.

The manager of the Swiss- 
srael Trade Bank up until his recent semi-retirement 
was General Julius Klein.

We shall encounter General 
K.lem_on several occasions as we unravel the complex 
web of front companies, offshore banks and official 
government services that together comprised the Per- 
mmdex international assassination bureau.

As early as 1922, following his service as a U.S.

Army counterintelligence officer during World War I 
r-le'n "a* P'cked UP by Sir William Wiseman, then 
head of all British intelligence operations in the United 
States and later a neighbor of Sir William Stephenson 
?!

!fc Compound on Montego Bay, Jamaica 
Under Wiseman’s instructions, Klein was brought onto • 
the staff of Colonel House, the special adviser to ' 
President Woodrow Wilson who led the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Army counterintelligence officer during World War I 
r-le'n "a* P'cked UP by Sir William Wiseman, then 
head of all British intelligence operations in the United 
States and later a neighbor of Sir William Stephenson 
?! !fc Compound on Montego Bay, Jamaica 
Under Wiseman’s instructions, Klein was brought onto • 
the staff of Colonel House, the special adviser to ' 
President Woodrow Wilson who led the U.S. negotiat- 
ing team for the Versatile Treaty. The presidential 
adviser was a neighbor of the British spook, and House 
rarely made a serious political decision without first 
consulting Wiseman. ; . ,. *?32*the you«* Klein was on the inside track of 
the Anglo-American intelligence establishment. In that

--- PAGE BREAK ---year he was appointed director of the first antisubversive 
section established in the U.S.

Department of Justice.

This appointment brought Klein into close working 
relationship with FBI Director J.

Edgar Hoover and 
particularly with the Division Five section.

In 1938, 
Klein’s operations, for all intents and purposes, became 
a subordinate feature of the British Special Operations 
Executive.

In addition to his Justice Department anti- 
subversive role, Klein that year founded the Jewish War 
Veterans, the first of several private organizations that 
he would create as recruiting grounds and intelligence 
fronts for Stephenson's SOE.

Sir William Stephenson’s access to the intelligence 
facilities of the Zionist movement in the United States 
and Canada was greatly facilitated by the fact that from 
1922, he had employed Chaim Weitzman as his princi- 
pal adviser on scientific and technical espionage activi- 
ties.

The fact that Stephenson’s own mentor.

Sir William 
Wiseman, was a leading figure in the Anglo-Zionist 
movement also provided the future SOE head with an 
inside track to the resources and talents of the Zionist 
networks.

According to Richard Deacon, a semi-official 
historian of British and Israeli intelligence, Stephenson 
was the single most important figure in establishing the 
Israeli intelligence services following Israel’s indepen- 
dence.

As we have already seen in the case of Permindex 
chief Major Louis Mortimer Bloomfield, many of the 
postwar commercial fronts through which the SOE 
operated were joint ventures with the Mossad.

In-the effort to create an Israeli intelligence appara- 
tus married to the British SOE, Julius Klein would play 
a major role on behalf of Sir William Stephenson.

From 
his position at the close of World War II as head of the 
U.S.In-the effort to create an Israeli intelligence appara- 
tus married to the British SOE, Julius Klein would play 
a major role on behalf of Sir William Stephenson.

From 
his position at the close of World War II as head of the 
U.S.

Army Counterintelligence Corps responsible for 
Western Europe, Klein—by his own admission—illegal- 
ly rerouted whole shiploads of medical supplies, trucks, 
construction equipment, and so forth from earmarked 
destinations in Germany and Austria into the Haganah 
in Palestine.

Throughout the early 1950s, Klein made 
frequent trips to Israel to aid in the training and 
structuring of the Mossad.

We shall turn our attention 
once again to General Klein at a later point in our 
inquiry when he emerges as a principal, background 
figure in recruiting of the board of directors for Permin- 
dex.

• • ' v- 
Another Rosenbaum associate in the Swiss-Israel 
operation was Shaul Eisenberg, the top weapons pro- 
curer and scientific spy for Israeli intelligence during 
the 1950s and 1960s.

According to the Washington Post, 
Eisenberg was officially the Mossad station chief in 
Vienna during much of this period.

Born in Shanghai, 
Eisenberg was the unofficial trade representative for the 
Israelis in the Far East.

Official statistics show that 90 
percent of the Israeli business in that region involved 
sales of diamonds.

Shaul Eisenberg also ran a string of scientific con- 
sulting firms in New York City that maintained con- 
tracts with the major Canadian firms engaged in the 
exporting of nuclear technology.

These companies have 
been publicly identified as part of the nest of high- 
technology firms created by the Stephenson SOE fol- 
lowing, the war.

Completing the board of directors of Dr.These companies have 
been publicly identified as part of the nest of high- 
technology firms created by the Stephenson SOE fol- 
lowing, the war.

Completing the board of directors of Dr.

Tibor 
Rosenbaum’s Swiss-Israel Trade Bank were: 
• Abe Feinberg, the head of the Americans for 
Haganah, a thinly-veiled front for SOE-Z!ionist espio- 
nage and laundering operations during the pre-indepen- 
dence period; ' ^ 
• Phillip Klutznick, self-described protege of Julius 
Klein and secretary of commerce in the Carter admin- 
istration; 
• David Gravier, the enigmatic Argentinian Zionist 
banker who was indicted in the early 1970s in New 
York on charges of bribery and extortion and subse- 
quently disappeared in a mysterious plane crash over 
Mexico that to this day has federal court officials and 
investigators debating whether or not he is still alive.

Indictments were handed down against Gravier after ’ 
considerable evidence surfaced that he was serving as a 
“financial consultant” to a number of Latin American 
terrorist organizations kidnapping American executives 
and government officials for fantastic ransoms.

How did this enormous international network of 
black market banking ventures service the operations of 
Major Bloomfield’s “trading company”?

According to the findings of the SDECE, S200,000 
in black market revenues were channeled into the 
Banque de la Credit Internationale accounts maintained 
by Permindex.

Among the sources of those funds was 
the Bank Hapoalim, the Israeli banking institution 
owned by the Histadrut, for which Major Bloomfield 
was the chief Canadian fundraiser.

Those funds were passed onto the New Orleans 
station chief of the FBI’s Division Five, Guy Bannister.

From New Orleans, Bannister deployed one of his 
agents, Jerry Brooks Gatlin, directly to Paris with a 
suitcase full of cash for hand delivery to the OAS 
generals.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those funds were passed onto the New Orleans 
station chief of the FBI’s Division Five, Guy Bannister. From New Orleans, Bannister deployed one of his 
agents, Jerry Brooks Gatlin, directly to Paris with a 
suitcase full of cash for hand delivery to the OAS 
generals. In 1966, at the very outset of the Garrison 
investigation into the assassination of President Kenne- 
dy, Gatlin—who operated a Permindex-Division Five 
front called the Anti-Communist League of the Cam- 
bean—died when he was thrown out of a sixth floor r 
window in a San Juan, Puerto Rico hotel. By this time, 
FBI Division Five spook Bannister had already died 
under equally mysterious ‘circumstances. Sources in 
New Orleans reported at the time of Bannister’s death 
that within hours of his demise, agents of Division Five 
had invaded his office and his home and carted off all 
of his files. Those documents never materialized again. There was no coincidence to the fact that the Pcr- 
Special Report 11

--- PAGE BREAK ---mindex funds for the 1962 aborted assassination attempt 
against Charles de Gaulle were laundered through a 
New Orleans-stationed agent of Division Five.

By 1962, 
New Orleans had already assumed the role of field 
operations center for the assassination cabal headquar- 
tered offshore on the island retreat at Tryall.

Colonel Clay Shaw 
The reason that New Orleans assumed a special role 
in the cabal is that it headquartered the major U.S.

subsidiary of Permindcx, the International Trade Mart, 
directed by Colonel Clay Shaw.

Within the overall organizational chart of Permin- 
dex.

Colonel Shaw maintained two principal roles.

Through his International Trade Mart, Shaw retained a 
secondary capability for washing large volumes of 
money bn an international scale.

But first and foremost, 
Shaw was responsible for "handling” the nest of agents 
deployed through Permindex’s various fronts to carry 
out the assassination of John F.

Kennedy.

By the time that the Kennedy conspiracy was placed 
on a .fully operational footing in the spring of 1963, 
Colonel Clay Shaw had already put in over twenty years 
of duty under the direction of Stephenson’s SOE.

In order to situate the special role of the New 
Orleans Colonel and the International Trade Mart that 
he presided over in the Permindex assassination cabal, 
it is first necessary to return briefly to the Montego Bay 
outpost of SOE chief Sir William Stephenson and to 
retrace the process through which the Special Opera- 
tions Executive turned its wartime capabilities into a 
postwar fifth column devoted to destroying and captur- 
ing the American republic.

As we have already noted, both during and after 
World War II, it was the modus operands of the SOE to 
operate principally through commercial fronts.In order to situate the special role of the New 
Orleans Colonel and the International Trade Mart that 
he presided over in the Permindex assassination cabal, 
it is first necessary to return briefly to the Montego Bay 
outpost of SOE chief Sir William Stephenson and to 
retrace the process through which the Special Opera- 
tions Executive turned its wartime capabilities into a 
postwar fifth column devoted to destroying and captur- 
ing the American republic.

As we have already noted, both during and after 
World War II, it was the modus operands of the SOE to 
operate principally through commercial fronts.

In 1945, 
immediately following the "official" curtailment of SOE 
operations within the territorial United States, Sir Wil- 
liam Stephenson founded the Newfoundland Develop- 
ment Corporation in partnership with Jerry Smallwood, 
then premier of the offshore colony (it was not until 
1948 that Newfoundland was admitted as a province to 
Canada).

The following year, Stephenson set up Brinco, 
an energy exploration company also located on New- 
foundland, with financing from Rio Tinto Zinc and 
staffing by leading figures from wartime British intelli- 
gence.

These Newfoundland ventures were the proto- 
types for the vast "offshore" ventures that the Stephen- 
son apparatus would create over the next decades.

The very same-year that Brinco was launched, Ste- 
phenson relocated to Jamaica where he founded the 
"retirement colony" at Montego Bay.

Simultaneous to 
the SOE’s invasion of Jamaica’s Montego Bay, the Ste- 
phenson-centered group created the British-American- 
Canadian Corporation.

According to David Ogilvie, 
another SOE executive who drafted the corporate pro- 
spectus, BAC was to be "a profitable company of mer- 
chant adventurers." Ogilvie himself became the vice 
president of the company, with John Pepper, the chief of 
Stephenson’s wartime Washington.

D.C.

bureau becom- 
ing president.D.C.

bureau becom- 
ing president.

Ogilvie subsequently founded the New 
York City blue-ribbon advertising agency Ogilvie & 
Mather, drawing upon his wartime black propaganda 
experience as well as his pre-war stint with the Gallup 
Polls organization.

BAC was financed through the Hambros financial 
group in London, through Stephenson’s top U.S.

pro- 
tege William Donovan (wartime head of the OSS), Sir 
Rex Benson, and U.S.

Steel magnate Edward Stettinius.

British-American-Canadian Corporation, was soon 
renamed the World Commerce Corporation.

By the late 
1940s, WCC was doing such a large share of the U.S.

and British trade activity into Latin America that one 
contemporary source commented that if there were “sev- 
eral World Commerce Corporations, there would be no .

need for the Marshall Plan." Stephenson and company 
were quietly and systematically building up the infra- 
structure of trading companies, banks, and shipping 
lines, through which to conduct their multibillion-dollar 
opium war against the United States.

By 1946, Colonel Clay Shaw was already a part of 
that covert command structure.

Shaw's association with ’ 
the Stephenson circle dates back to at least the onset of 
World War JI.

At that time, Shaw served as an OSS 
officer stationed in.

London.

According to Shaw's own 
testimony, published in The Kennedy Conspiracy by New 
Orleans District Attorney CJarrison's investigator Paris 
Flammonde, Shaw served as an OSS liaison officer to the 
headquarters of British Prime Minister Winston Church- 
ill.

Through that experience, Shaw developed such a 
feeling of attachment to the British Empire that he 
seriously considered expatriating to England at the close 
of the war.

It is not difficult to imagine the raving 
anglophile Shaw (another practicing homosexual in the 
mold of his Permindex superior Major Bloomfield) 
choosing instead to assume the role of agent of Her 
Majesty’s government "behind enemy lines” in the 
United States.

.

...--- PAGE BREAK ---

. ... Shaw did return to the United States, to his birthplace 
New Orleans to assume the directorship in 1945 of the.: 
International House/World Trade Center, a "nonprofit ‘i 
association fostering the development of international 
trade, tourism and cultural exchange." 
Almost immediately, Shaw left the World Trade Cen- 
ter to found the International Trade Mart, also in New 
Orleans. Very much a profit-making venture,’the Inter- 
national Trade Mart sponsored permanent industrial!' 
expositions, focused particularly on theCarribean region 
then being "colonized" by the Stephenson World Com- J 
merce Corporation. 12 Special Report

--- PAGE BREAK ---OAS leaders in the event of an aborted attempt.

Gehlen 
did, in fact, provide safehousing in Munich for OAS 
agents, including Jacques Soustelle, Georges Bidault, 
and General Challe.

Gehlen’s efforts against de Gaulle continued well 
after the OAS had been driven into the underground 
and Permindex formally expelled from Western Europe.

In early 1968, de Gaulle’s intelligence service discovered 
that Maurice Picard, a former head of the secret security 
department of the French Interior Ministry and subse- 
quently the director of the French civil defense depart- 
ment, was a spy for Gehlen.

Picard was tried and 
convicted in October 1968 of espionage and sentenced 
to seven years in prison.

The So Li da lists represented the core of the Gehlen 
spy apparatus who managed to escape from Eastern 
Europe in the closing moments of World War II.

Among the leading components of the Solidarist move- 
ment was a highly professional espionage, sabotage, 
and assassination network called Narodnyi Trudovoy 
Soyuz (“National Alliance of Solidarists”).

Founded in 
the late 1920s out of the old Menshevik circles in 
Russia, NTS functioned as one of British secret intellx- 
gcnce's premier spy rings inside the Soviet Union.

NTS 
was bankrolled by Royal Dutch Shell chairman Sir 
Henry Dieterding and by Vickers Arms president Sir 
Basil ZaharofT.

' 
At the close of World War II* NTS established 
offices in Munich and New York City.

From 1939, the 
principal financial backing to the NTS and all of the 
other “Solidarist” groupings was provided through the 
Tolstoy Foundation, a self-described refugee relief and 
cultural fund.

The current office of the Tolstoy Foun- 
dation in New York City is located in a West 57th 
Street building that has been the property of the British 
SOE since the middle of World War II, when it housed 
the offices of a dozen front companies all involved in 
smuggling arms and other military equipment to the 
Haganah in Palestine.From 1939, the 
principal financial backing to the NTS and all of the 
other “Solidarist” groupings was provided through the 
Tolstoy Foundation, a self-described refugee relief and 
cultural fund.

The current office of the Tolstoy Foun- 
dation in New York City is located in a West 57th 
Street building that has been the property of the British 
SOE since the middle of World War II, when it housed 
the offices of a dozen front companies all involved in 
smuggling arms and other military equipment to the 
Haganah in Palestine.

At the time of this writing, one 
of the Tolstoy Foundation's neighbors in the West 57th 
Street office building is Julius Klein Associates, the 
public relations company owned by the same General 
Julius Klein we have already encountered in our inves- 
tigation into the dirty money branch of the Permindex 
organizational tree.

•».

- r.' - 
^ Among the officially listed board members of the 
Tolstoy Foundation since the.early 1960s height of 
Permindex activity were Paul Raigorodsky and Jean 
DeMenil, both of whom were in attendance at the 
Tryall Compound on Montego Bay for the sessions that 
plotted the assassination of John Kennedy.

Raigorodsky was the owner of Claiborne Oil Com- 
pany of Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

He later became an 
pfficial United States government liaison officer to 
NATO.

• ^ 
Jean de Menil, the millionaire owner of the Schlum- 
berger Company of Houston, was one of the principal 
financial “angels” behind the cultural activities of the 
Tolstoy Foundation and its allied Solidarist movement 
Following the Russian Revolution, the French de Men- 
d’s family fled their adopted country returning to France.

There, Jean de Menil married into the powerful 
Schlumberger family of the Neuflize, Schlumberger, 
Mallet banking empire.

In the 1950s, Schlumberger 
diversified into the oil diagnostic equipment industry.There, Jean de Menil married into the powerful 
Schlumberger family of the Neuflize, Schlumberger, 
Mallet banking empire.

In the 1950s, Schlumberger 
diversified into the oil diagnostic equipment industry.

The company that they created for that purpose is now 
the largest company in the field worlclwide, accounting 
for the production and sale of 50 percent of all of the 
equipment in existence.

Iq 1958, son-in-law Jean de 
Menil became president of the company, headquartered 
in Houston, Texas.

That company, as we noted earlier, 
served as a weapons conduit for the CIA and FBI 
Division Five throughout the efforts against Fidel Cas- 
tro.

Those smuggling operations were conducted in 
conjunction with the Doublc-Chck Company of Miami, 
Florida.

« • .

; 
.

During the mid-1960s, dc Gaulle’s inteliigencc services 
established that the Neuflize, Schlumberger, Mallet 
Bank was channeling funds into Jacques Soustelle for the 
purpose of bankrolling OAS terrorist activities.

-• £s 
The American Council of Christian Churches 
One of the principal agencies through which the 
Solidarist movement maintained contact with its opera- 
tives worldwide was the Old Orthodox Catholic Church 
of North America and its affiliated Synod of Bishops of 
the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia.

This 
splinter church out of the Russian Orthodox Church 
had been established originally as a front for British 
intelligence espionage activities inside Russia following 
the Bolshevik Revolution and retained that function in 
North America after many of its operatives had relocat- 
ed to the West following World War II.

The Old Orthodox Catholic Church of North Amer- 
ica was an affiliated Church of the American Council of 
Christian Churches <ACCC), an umbrella organization 
nominally representing those traditionalist churches of 
all denominations that opposed the ultra-liberal outlook 
of the World Council of Churches and its U.S.

subsidi- 
ary National Council of Churches.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Old Orthodox Catholic Church of North Amer- 
ica was an affiliated Church of the American Council of 
Christian Churches <ACCC), an umbrella organization 
nominally representing those traditionalist churches of 
all denominations that opposed the ultra-liberal outlook 
of the World Council of Churches and its U.S. subsidi- 
ary National Council of Churches. > It is the case that many “conservative” churches are 
to this day affiliated with the ACCC for precisely the 
reason stated above. However, there is another side to 
the ACCC that prompted District Attorney Jim Garri- 
son to identify it as one of the agencies deeply involved 
in the Kennedy assassination conspiracy; and to issue 
an indictment against the ACCC’s west coast director 
E. E. Bradley, on charges that he aided Colonel Clay 
Shaw In assassinating the President. In 1941, J. Edgar Hoover, in consultation with 
Special Report 15

--- PAGE BREAK ---I • 
I 
i 
British SOE head Sir William Stephenson and Division 
Five recruiter Louis M.

Bloomfield, arranged for his 
close friend Reverend Carl Mclntire to found the Amer- 
ican Council of Christian Churches.

Mclntire was al- 
ready a contract agent of Hoover’s FBI Division Five.

The purpose of the ACCC was to conceal an extensive 
espionage and intelligence unit to be deployed though- 
out the United States, Canada, Mexico, and Latin 
America.

The spies and saboteurs were to operate under 
the cover of Christian missionaries.

As part of the ACCC espionage net.

Hoover, Ste- 
phenson, and Bloomfield created a secret assassination 
unit in 1943 under the direction of ACCC minister 
Albert Osborne.

The unit consisted of twenty-five to 
thirty of the world's most skilled riflemen.

It was housed 
in a missionary school for orphans in Puebla, Mexico.

Up through at least 1969, the special “kill unit" re- 
mained intact under the personal supervision of J.

Edgar Hoover, operating through his trusted agent of 
thirty years, Albert Osborne.

,t« 4 
According to author “Torbitt," it was Osborne and 
a team of seven expert riflemen from the Pueblo “kill 
unit" who carried out the assassination of John F.

Kennedy in Dallas on November 22, 1963.

The records of the Warren Commission establish 
that Albert Osborne had been a charter member of the 
ACCC.

In 1942 (while working for the Hoover-Bloom- 
field Division Five) Osborne had directed a Nazi black- 
shirt group called the Campfire Council in the rural 
area around Knoxville, Tennessee.

At that time he had 
nearly been arrested following an incident in which he 
burned an American flag in protest against the U.S.

entry into the war against Nazi Germany.

He shortly 
thereafter left Tennessee to relocate to Puebla, Mexico.

Garrison documented that on October 10, 1963, 
Osborne had visited New Orleans, making three stops 
in town.

First he visited the offices of Clay Shaw at the 
International Trade Mart building.Garrison documented that on October 10, 1963, 
Osborne had visited New Orleans, making three stops 
in town.

First he visited the offices of Clay Shaw at the 
International Trade Mart building.

Later the same day 
he visited the offices of FBI Division Five courier Jerry 
Brooks Gatlin, an individual we encountered earlier in 
probing the 1962 assassination attempt against French 
President Charles de Gaulle.

Osborne's final stop in 
New Orleans was at the office of FBI Division Five 
Southern chief Guy Bannister, at 544 Camp Street.

From New Orleans, Osborne traveled directly to 
Mexico City, where, according to the records of both 
the Garrison investigation and the Warren Commission, 
he was seen repeatedly in the company of the “Leon 
Oswald" whom we met earlier in New Orleans with 
Clay Shaw and David Ferric.

This circle of assassins closes a bit further as we 
return to the case of yet another Division Five operative 
who maintained a cover as a priest in the employ of the 
American Council of Christian Churches: David Ferrie.

In 1946, Ferrie dropped out of a Roman Catholic 
seminary in Ohio and joined the Byelorussian Libera- 
tion Front, simultaneously being ordained as a priest in 
the Old Orthodox Catholic Church of North America, 
an agency we have already identified as a front for the 
Solidarist movement and FBI Division Five.

Ferrie was 
subsequently redeployed to the southern region of the 
FBI where he operated as a Division Five recruitment, 
officer (placing him under the direct jurisdiction of 
Major Bloomfield).

According to testimony before both the Warren 
Commission and the Garrison grand jury, given by FBI 
operative Jack Martin, Lee Harvey Oswald was recruit- 
ed into the FBI Division Five in 1956 by none other 
than David Ferrie.

While nominally in the Marine 
Corps, Oswald received special training in covert espio- 
nage activities at the Naval Intelligence School on the 
Memphis Naval Base.According to testimony before both the Warren 
Commission and the Garrison grand jury, given by FBI 
operative Jack Martin, Lee Harvey Oswald was recruit- 
ed into the FBI Division Five in 1956 by none other 
than David Ferrie.

While nominally in the Marine 
Corps, Oswald received special training in covert espio- 
nage activities at the Naval Intelligence School on the 
Memphis Naval Base.

One aspect of this training in- 
cluded special instruction in the Russian language, 
provided by an agent of the Solidarist movement oper- 
ating in San Francisco under the cover of the Federation 
of Russian Charitable Organizations, a west coast 
branch of the Tolstoy Foundation.

- 
From 1956 up until his untimely death in the base- 
ment of the Dallas Police headquarters in November 
1963, Lee Harvey Oswald had been on a secret Division 
Five payroll* maintained through the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, a unit within the Department of 
Justice.

During, the six^month period- leading up to his 
murder in Dallas, the real Lee Harvey Oswald had been 
operating oiit of New Orleans-and Dallas under the 
immediate supervision of Division Five regional direc- 
tor Guy Bannister.

In fact, the New Orleans headquar- 
ters of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee, a 
group that Oswald actively participated in during 1963, 
was located in the same Camp Street office building 
that housed Bannister.

Unbeknownst to Oswald* his 
“infiltration" into the pro-Castro grouping on behalf of 
Division Five had a far different purpose than he 
imagined; a purpose that would become clear only after 
he assumed the role of the “patsy" that David Ferrie 
had discussed with Clay Shaw and William Seymour, i 
The Lionel Corporation connection 
We have now seen two components of the network 
of protected killers who carried out the assassination of 
John Kennedy on behalf of Permindcx.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In fact, the New Orleans headquar- 
ters of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee, a 
group that Oswald actively participated in during 1963, 
was located in the same Camp Street office building 
that housed Bannister. Unbeknownst to Oswald* his 
“infiltration" into the pro-Castro grouping on behalf of 
Division Five had a far different purpose than he 
imagined; a purpose that would become clear only after 
he assumed the role of the “patsy" that David Ferrie 
had discussed with Clay Shaw and William Seymour, i 
The Lionel Corporation connection 
We have now seen two components of the network 
of protected killers who carried out the assassination of 
John Kennedy on behalf of Permindcx. In the case of 
both the Solidarists and the American Council of Chris- 
tian Churches, we have seen the fruit of Sir William 
Stephenson's wartime penetration of the national secu- 
rity apparatus of the United States. One further note must be made here concerning 
Stephenson’s wartime activities as they would later 
surface in the Permindex assassination plot against 
Kennedy. Stephenson oversaw the recruitment of U.S. r 
16 Special Report

--- PAGE BREAK ---organized crime figures into the SOE-OSS during 
World War II.

The best-known case in point was the 
“rehabilitation” of convicted drug-runner, pimp and 
suspected murderer Charles “Lucky” Luciano.

Luciano • 
was dispatched to Sicily under joint SOE-OSS direction 
to reconstitute old networks that had been dispersed or 
expatriated during the Mussolini period.

In this effort, 
Luciano would actively collaborate with Count Gutierez 
di Spadafora, a board member of Permindex.

According to a four-part series of articles by Julian 
Semyonov, published in October, 1978 in the Soviet 
youth magazine Ogonyok.

the Stephenson-Bloomfield- 
Luciano collaboration was still operational in 1962 
when Luciano was the case officer on the scene in Sicily 
for the assassination of Italian oil minister and close de 
Gaulle collaborator Enrico Mattei.

Mattei died when his plane went down over the 
Mediterranean after having been tampered with during 
a brief, unscheduled stopover at an obscure airport in 
Sicily.

According to Semyonov, the decision to go with 
the plane sabotage was made by Luciano only after the 
options of hiring an OAS hit team or an American 
“leftist” controlled by & Texas oil company had been 
rejected because they would have been too politically * 
explosive.

The Texas oil company in question was an 
investor in Major Bloomfield’s international trade ex- 
positions firm.

Luciano was by no means the only syndicate figure 
coopted into the employ of Permindex.

According to official incorporation papers on file in 
New York City and Berne, Switzerland, mob attorney 
Roy Marcus Cohn and Montreal crime boss Joseph 
Bonanno were both personal stockholders in Permindex 
through their ownership of the Lionel Corporation of 
Hillside, New Jersey.

At the time of Permindex’s initial incorporation, 50 
percent of the corporate stock was purchased by Major 
Bloomfield.

A significant minority position was pur- 
chased by Lionel Corporation.At the time of Permindex’s initial incorporation, 50 
percent of the corporate stock was purchased by Major 
Bloomfield.

A significant minority position was pur- 
chased by Lionel Corporation.

Several years before the 
Permindex investment, Lionel had been bought up by 
Cohn and Bonanno.

Sources indicate that the Lionel 
buy into Permindex was financed through a S600.000 
“loan” that Cohn arranged through contacts in Hong 
Kong.

New York City corporate records show that as 
of 1958, Joseph Bonanoo was the chairman of the board 
of Lionel and attorney Roy Cohn was the president.

In 1960, shortly after the Lionel-Permindex arrange- 
ment had been sealed, Joe Bonanno was formally 
removed from the chairmanship of the New York-New 
Jersey-headquartered defense contractor.

His replace- 
ment—at the personal recommendation of Major Louis 
M.

Bloomfield—was recently retired General John 
Bruce Medaris.

•' •' 
What chain of events brought Cohn, Bonanno, and 
Medaris together as investors in Permindex?

Let us 
begin by establishing some background information on 
two of the three individuals in question.

To appreciate the circumstances under which Gen- 
eral John Bruce Medaris became a collaborator of 
Bloomfield and Permindex, it is necessary to first return 
to the New Orleans colonel who was indicted by District 
Attorney Garrison for the assassination of John Ken- 
nedy.

• * J / 
Just prior to his retirement from the U.S.

military, 
Clay Shaw spent 1945 in the capacity of aide-de-camp 
to General Charles O.

Thrasher, deputy chief of the 
European Theatre of Operations in the U.S.

High 
Command.

Shaw’s assignment was to recruit Nazi 
scientists over to postwar U.S.

intelligence.

Shaw apparently concentrated his recruitment af- 
forts at the Peememucnde research station on the Baltic 
Sea, the laboratory where Nazi rocket scientists concen- 
trated their efforts on the development of the V-2 
rocket.intelligence.

Shaw apparently concentrated his recruitment af- 
forts at the Peememucnde research station on the Baltic 
Sea, the laboratory where Nazi rocket scientists concen- 
trated their efforts on the development of the V-2 
rocket.

All told, 127 Nazi scientists were brought over 
to the United Slates through the efforts of Shaw and his 
associates.

At least two of those individua!s,Wcmher 
von Braun and Walter Domberger, have been identified 
by author “Torbitt” as principal figures in the Permin- 
dex cabal that plotted the assassination of John Kenner 
dy- Von Braun was given a prominent position within 
the U S: rocket program and headquartered at the 
Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville and Mussel Shoals, 
Alabama.

Mussel Shoals was also the operations center 
for the Defense Industrial Security Command, an offi- 
cial secret police agency established at the initiative of 
J.

Edgar Hoover to provide security for defense instal- 
lations during World War II and beyond.

It had origi- 
nally been chartered as the security division of the 
Tennessee Valley Authority.

Given its heavy concentra- 
tion on counterespionage operations against Nazi and, 
later, Soviet spies and saboteurs, DISC was from its 
inception interfaced with the FBI’s Division Five.

By the early 1950s, DISC was under the direction of 
General John Bruce Medaris, an individual described 
by fellow senior grade officers in the U.S.

Army as an 
anti-Semite and Nazi sympathizer.

Wernher von Braun 
was appointed as Mcdaris’s second-in-command* Shar- 
ing a common rabid anti-Soviet outlook, Medaris and 
von Braun rapidly emerged as the two leading propo- 
nents within the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Army as an 
anti-Semite and Nazi sympathizer. Wernher von Braun 
was appointed as Mcdaris’s second-in-command* Shar- 
ing a common rabid anti-Soviet outlook, Medaris and 
von Braun rapidly emerged as the two leading propo- 
nents within the U.S. military-scientific establishment;: 
for aiv all-out military buildup in preparation for an 
early strategic nuclear showdown - with the Soviet 
Union.- ‘ 
At December 1957 Senate hearings of the Armed 
Services Committee, both Medaris and von Braun de- 
nounced President Eisenhower for “permitting” the 
Soviets to carry out their successful Sputnik satellite 
launch. They demanded that the entire U.S. space and 
rocket program—including its civilian-related compo- 
Special Report 17

--- PAGE BREAK ---7 
Was Shaw's New Orleans International Trade Marl 
a front for SOE activities from the beginning in 1946?

It 
is a fact that in 1958, as soon as Major Bloomfield 
established his own “permanent industrial expositions” 
firm.

Clay Shaw became a board member and with that, 
his New Orleans Mart became a subsidiary of Permin- 
dex's international arm, Centro Mondiale Commerciale.

What sort of evil design did Shaw and Stephenson 
share back in 1946 when they launched their internation- 
al commerce ventures?

Today, there are over fifty “world trade marts*’ locat- 
ed in thirty countries around the world.

Each of these 
world trade marts is made up of over 1,000 corporate 
subscribers.

;• 
Since 1968, all of the world trade marts have been 
hooked together through a massive computerized data’ 
bank.

That data bank now functions through an intelli- 
gence-transmitting satellite system, one of the largest 
privately owned satellite systems in existence.

The satel- 
lite-computer control point is maintained by the World 
Trade Center Association—the offspring of the very 
New Orleans World Trade Center that Clay Shaw as- 
sumed the directorship of at the close of World War II 
on behalf of the Stephenson SOE apparatus.

The computer-satellite system maintains a tracking 
of all international trade routes, carriers and rate scales; 
.

a virtual inventory and tracking map of every air-land- 
sea shipping medium and bulk cargo in the world.

Among the fifty-plus world trade marts hooked into 
the WTCA satellite-computer complex is the Hong Kong 
World Trade Center—a joint venture of the Hongkong 
and Shanghai Bank and the Jardine and Mathieson 
Company.

HKWTC is the single largest and highest- 
priced chunk of real estate in Hong Kong.Among the fifty-plus world trade marts hooked into 
the WTCA satellite-computer complex is the Hong Kong 
World Trade Center—a joint venture of the Hongkong 
and Shanghai Bank and the Jardine and Mathieson 
Company.

HKWTC is the single largest and highest- 
priced chunk of real estate in Hong Kong.

The interna- 
tional drug cartel, through this Hong Kong center, thus 
maintains a transnational tracking system that is more 
sophisticated and technologically advanced than the ca- 
pabilities at the disposal of any government attempting 
to combat its deadly traffic.

In 1958, however, Permindex had not yet emerged as 
an international octopus of trading fronts hooked up 
through satellite-based computers, possessing the re- 
sources for global money laundering at the push of a 
button on a computer console.

Yet, as court records in 
New Orleans.

Montreal, and Paris document, millions of 
dollars in “hit money” passed through the Permindex 
organization to bankroll the most deadly assassination 
plots of the century.

> •» * 
We have already met the black market bankers, many 
of them linked to the financial, political, and intelligence 
.establishment of the state of Israel, whose special role in 
the Permindex cabal involved the laundering of the “hit 
money” into the hands of FBI Division Five couriers for 
delivery to the designated assassin teams.

We shall now investigate the second major compo- 
nent of the Permindex assassination bureau, the network 
of protected killers whose actions have irreversibly 
shaped the course of history for the last two decades.

Garrison hands down an indictment 
In February of 1969 proceedings began in the New 
Orleans Parish Court in the case of The State of 
Louisiana v.

Clay M.

Shaw.

New Orleans District At- 
torney Jim Garrison, flouting the findings of the War- 
ren Commission, had gone before^ a grand jury and 
successfully petitioned for a murder conspiracy indict- 
ment against Permindex board member Clay Shaw.Shaw.

New Orleans District At- 
torney Jim Garrison, flouting the findings of the War- 
ren Commission, had gone before^ a grand jury and 
successfully petitioned for a murder conspiracy indict- 
ment against Permindex board member Clay Shaw.

It would take the mysterious deaths of seventeen key 
prosecution witnesses and the launching of a nationwide 
media witch-hunt against the New Orleans DA to defeat 
Garrison’s effort to get to the bottom of the assassina- 
tion of President John F.

Kennedy in Dallas on Novem- 
ber 22, 1963.

*, M'* 
What evidence had Garrison compiled against the 
New Orleans colonel and his co-conspirators on the 
board of directors of Permindex?

* 
At minimum.

Garrison had “cracked” the Kennedy 
assassination plot at the operational level; at the level 
directed by New Orleans case officer Shaw.

On March 
14, 1967, Garrison brought Perry Raymond Russo, an 
insurance salesman from Baton Rouge, Louisiana be- 
fore a three-judge criminal district court panel.

Russo 
testified that during the middle of September 1963, he 
had been witness to a conversation between Clay Shaw, 
David Ferric, and an individual he identified as “Leon 
Oswald.” The topic of the conversation was the assassi- 
nation of President John Kennedy.

In that conversation, 
Ferrie, an agent of Division Five, empnasized the 
importance of using at least three marksmen in order to 
create a “triangulation of fire.” He added, according to 
witness Russo, that a scapegoat would be required to 
secure the escape of the actual assassins.

According to the Garrison investigation, the indi- 
vidual introduced to Russo as “Leon Oswald” at the 
September 1963 meeting, was in all likelihood not the 
Lee Harvey Oswald charged by the Warren Commission 
with having conducted the “lone assassination” of 
President Kennedy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In that conversation, 
Ferrie, an agent of Division Five, empnasized the 
importance of using at least three marksmen in order to 
create a “triangulation of fire.” He added, according to 
witness Russo, that a scapegoat would be required to 
secure the escape of the actual assassins. According to the Garrison investigation, the indi- 
vidual introduced to Russo as “Leon Oswald” at the 
September 1963 meeting, was in all likelihood not the 
Lee Harvey Oswald charged by the Warren Commission 
with having conducted the “lone assassination” of 
President Kennedy. According to the unpublished man- 
uscript by “William Torbitt,” the individual (bearing a 
striking resemblance to the actual Lee Harvey Oswald) 
was William Seymour, an agent for a Miami-based 
private detective agency called Double-Chek. Double- 
Click, according to “Torbitt,” was a U.S. subsidiary of 
the Rome Centro Mondiale Commerciale, and func- 
tioned as a frequently used front for Division Five and 
CIA activities. Double-Chek was reported to be the 
CIA channel for weapons into the Bay of Pigs invasion- 
ary force. Those weapons Were provided through the 
Schlumberger Company of Houston, Texas, the 
Schlumberger Company whose President Jean deMenil 
Special Report 13

--- PAGE BREAK ---was present at the Tryall Compound on Montego Bay 
for the meetings at which the Kennedy “hit” was 
planned.

Seymour, according to the "Torbitt” manuscript, 
was one of several individuals responsible for imperson- 
ating Lee Harvey Oswald in the several months leading 
up to November 22.

Seymour traveled throughout 
Texas, into Mexico under the name “Lee Oswald." He 
left a trail of witnesses who would testify that they had 
spoken with ‘Oswald," that “Oswald" was an avowed 
Cuban communist sympathizer, and that "Oswald" had 
made statements that in retrospect pointed strongly 
toward his intention to kill the President of the United 
States.

Seymour and the other "Lee Oswalds" were de- 
ployed under the direction of FBI Division Five south- 
ern chief Guy Bannister, the same Bannister who over- 
saw the laundering of $200,000 in Permindcx money 
into the hands of the OAS generals in France.

According to evidence presented in the course of the 
Garrison inquiry intovlhe Kennedy assassination.

Clay 
Shaw, Gcorgio Mantello, and Ferenc Nagy, all of them 
board of directors of Permindcx and its subsidiary 
Centro Mondiale Commerciale, were in place in New 
Orleans, Dallas, and Los Angeles on November 22*, 
1963 handling aspects of the assassination and coverup.

That deployment had been set by Major Bloomfield 
several months earlier.

Evidence gathered during the 
Garrison grand jury and published by Garrison investi- 
gator Flammondc, established that several members of 
the Permindex cabal were present at the airport restau- 
rant in Winnipeg weeks before the assassination in 
Dallas to review the final details of the plan.

Witnesses 
identified one of the individuals at the Winnipeg airport 
as Major Louis M.

Bloomfield.

Who were the assassins deployed to carry out the 
"triangulated firing" on President Kennedy in Dallas 
on November 22?Bloomfield.

Who were the assassins deployed to carry out the 
"triangulated firing" on President Kennedy in Dallas 
on November 22?

According to the "Torbitt" papers, 
the assassins—seven expert riflemen in all—were part of 
a special team of the most expert killers in the world 
that had been put together in 1943 at the combined 
initiative of FBI Director i.

Edgar Hoover and SOE 
Commander Sir William Stephenson.

Members of that 
team would be implicated in the assassinations of f 
Reverend Martin Luther King and Senator Robert 
Kennedy.

The Solidarists ' “ ’-.'X 
We have identified a number of the specific individ- 
uals implicated in the actual execution of John Kenne- 
dy.

We have traced their personal chain of command 
into the FBI’s Division Five and into the board of 
directors of Permindex.

To fill out the picture, however, 
it is now necessary to delve further into what particular 
operational capabilities these individuals represented.

Three of the principals in the Permindex assassina- 
tion of John F.

Kennedy were Eastern European and 
White Russian emigres.

Each of these individuals, Jean 
DcMenil, Ferenc Nagy, and Paul Raigorodsky, was a 
leading figure in the Solidarist movement of fascists.

As we have already noted, Ferenc Nagy was a 
minister in the wartime Horthy government that ruled 
Hungary on behalf of Adolf Hitler.

After the war, Nagy 
was himself briefly installed as prime minister during 
1946-47.

Nagy resigned from that post through an 
infamous telephone call placed from the lobby of a 
Swiss bank where Nagy had just opened up a sealed 
account with the government funds he had looted on 
his way out of Hungary.

On his departure from Hungary, Nagy immediately 
became involved in the Solidarist movement 
What are the Solidarists?Nagy resigned from that post through an 
infamous telephone call placed from the lobby of a 
Swiss bank where Nagy had just opened up a sealed 
account with the government funds he had looted on 
his way out of Hungary.

On his departure from Hungary, Nagy immediately 
became involved in the Solidarist movement 
What are the Solidarists?

The Solidarists were Eastern European and White 
Russian feudalists and fascists, predominantly former 
officials of the wartime "Quisling" governments of 
Eastern Europe and veterans of the Nazi eastern front 
intelligence apparatus known as the "Gehlen Organi- 
zation" after its commander Nazi General Reinhard 
Gehlen.

When at the close of World War II, British Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill launched the "cold war" 
with his Fulton, Missouri speech, the Eastern European 
espionage and sabotage networks created by Gehlen 
became highly valuable property.

Even before the war 
had come to a close, Gehlen was in negotiations with 
the British fcnd American intelligence services, including 
the Stephenson SOE apparatus.

The Gehlen Organiza- 
tion was absorbed virtually intact into the Allied post- 
war intelligence services that were already preparing for 
the cold war showdowns with the Soviet Union.

By the mid-1950s, Gehlen’s organization, previously 
U.S.

and British property housed in West Germany, 
was formally incorporated into the government of the 
Federal Republic of Germany as its intelligence service, 
the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND).

Gehlen continued to use his position as head of the 
BND on behalf of the Anglo-American intelligence 
networks, including Permindcx.

Thus, for example, 
Gehlen was personally deeply involved in the 1962 OAS 
assassination attempt against General Charles de 
Gaulle, the assassination attempt bankrolled through - 
Major Bloomfield’s international trading company.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gehlen continued to use his position as head of the 
BND on behalf of the Anglo-American intelligence 
networks, including Permindcx. Thus, for example, 
Gehlen was personally deeply involved in the 1962 OAS 
assassination attempt against General Charles de 
Gaulle, the assassination attempt bankrolled through - 
Major Bloomfield’s international trading company. On June 15, 1961, according to documents obtained 
by the French SDECE, Gehlen met with OAS head 
General Raoul Salan and OAS "hit team" director 
General Maurice Challe at the BND’s safehouse in 
Schwabing, West Germany. At that meeting and other 
discussions between the BND head and the OAS gen- 
erals, Gehlen promised his support in the assassination 
plot and arranged escape and safehouse plans for the 
14 Special Report

--- PAGE BREAK ---J • 
ncnts—be placed under tight national security cover— 
that is* under the control of the DISC security\com- 
mand—and proceed into an all-out crash program to 
narrow the so-called “missile gap".

For approximately one year.

President Eisenhower 
s capitulated to the demands of Medaris and von Braun 
representing the DISC establishment at Mussel Shoals.

For reasons never fully documented* President Ei- 
senhower dramatically reversed himself in October 
1959.

Summoning all concerned with the Army-con- 
trolled space program to an emergency session at the 
White House, the President stripped Medaris and von 
Braun of their control over the space program and 
handed control over to a civilian agency, the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).

Cir- 
cumstantial evidence suggests that Eisenhower had 
caught wind of a virtual palace coup in the works.

Shortly before his move against Medaris and von 
Braun.

Eisenhower ordered his Attorney General, Her- 
bert Brownell* to prepare legal papers ordering the 
breaking up of two of the most powerful cartels oper- 
ating under U.S.

incorporation: the Radio Corporation 
of America (RCA) and the United Fruit Company.

Both of these companies were, from their founding, 
proprietaries of the British SOE networks.

Although Eisenhower's efforts against RCA and 
United Fruit were ultimately blocked, his continuing 
concern over the spreading influence of the cabal was 
present even in his farewell speech on his retirement 
from office.

In that speech, Eisenhower cautioned the 
American people that the growth of the “military- 
industrial complex'* represented by far the greatest 
threat to the continued existence of the American 
republic.

How effective were Eisenhower's efforts In blocking 
the power grab by General Medaris, Wcrnher von Braun 
and the military-industrial complex?

Despite his formal, forced retirement from the U.S.

Army, official records show that General Medaris re- 
mained an adviser to the U.S.Despite his formal, forced retirement from the U.S.

Army, official records show that General Medaris re- 
mained an adviser to the U.S.

Army and the Depart- 
ment of Defense through at least 1963.

Von Braun 
retained his position with the rocket program and with 
the secret police arm of the “military-industrial com- 
plex,*'DISC.

* 
• ' .

.

• • - • , 
Roy Cohn and Joe McCarthy \ 
While General Medaris and his ex-Nazi cohort von 
Braun were preparing their holy war against President 
Eisenhower and those more sane elements in the country 
who favored a commercial development of nuclear 
technology in tacit collaboration with Western Europe 
and the Soviet Union (Eisenhower's “Atoms for Peace" 
program), parallel Red Scare efforts were being run out 
of the Washington, D.C.

Senate chambers of Joseph 
McCarthy.

McCarthy’s legal counsel and on-the-scenes 
18 Special Report 
controller in the witch-hunt was Roy Marcus Cohn* 
soon to be a prominent figure in the Permindex assassi- 
nation bureau.

Roy Cohn was born in 1927, the only son of Albert 
and Dora Marcus Cohn.

His father was a Bronx 
Democratic Party boss and eventually was appointed to 
a New York State Supreme Court judgeship-.

The 
Marcus family gained a significant amount of wealth in 
the garment industry (the family fortune later evolved 
into the Van Heusen Shirt Company).

Through his father's political connections, Roy 
Cohn was appointed to a post in the U.S.

Attorney's 
Office in New York City in 1947* at the age of 20 when 
he graduated from Columbia University Law School.

Cohn's first cases under then Assistant U.S.

Attorney 
Irving Saypol involved the prosecution of a dozen 
secondary leaders of the Communist Party USA for 
violation of the Smith Act and related antisubversion 
“Red Scare" measures.

t .

• 
Cohn then wrangled a position on the prosecution 
staff in the spy trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg—a 
case that established his credentials as the “infant, 
terrible" of the witch hunters.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

• 
Cohn then wrangled a position on the prosecution 
staff in the spy trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg—a 
case that established his credentials as the “infant, 
terrible" of the witch hunters. . r By this point, Roy Cohn had already acquired the 
backing of a group of prominent individuals who would 
steer his career through the next decade. Some of these 
individuals have already been presented to us in our 
tour of Major Bloomfield's SOE assassination bureau. In 1948, a group of right-wing American Jews, led 
by Major General Julius Klein, founded the American 
Jewish League Against Communism. Strong circum- 
stantial evidence suggests that the League was, from the 
outset, a front for the continued activities of the British 
SOE and its “partners” in FBr Division Five. The fact 
that J. Edgar Hoover's long-time crony, famous boot- 
legger Lewis Rosenstiel, was one of two principal 
financial backers of the League* lends credence to this 
proposition, as does the presence of SOE “Palestine 
Bureau" man Julius Klein. In fact, Hoover's relation- 
ship to Rosenstiel was so close that in 1957, through the 
mediation of Roy Cohn, Hoover's right hand man 
Louis Nichols was hired by Rosenstiel's Schenley Liq- 
uor Company as senior vice-president, commanding a 
hefty salary of SI00,000 per year. We have already seen ■; 
in the case of Reverend Carl McIntyre that Hoover 
made a regular habit of bringing his closest friends into 
the clandestine operations of Division Five, often 
through their creating of front organizations through 
which Division Five could conceal its activities. . Joining Klein and Rosenstiel on the board of the 
American Jewish League Against Communism 
(AJLAC) were a collection of right-wing journalists, 
businessmen and rabbis all of whom shared a common 
close friendship with FBI chief Hoover. They included 
George Sokolsky* a Hearst columnist known for his

--- PAGE BREAK ---later enthusiastic support for the McCarthy witch-hunt; 
Alfred Kohlbcrg, the other financial angel of the 
League; Rabbi Benjamin Schultz; Eugene Lyons; Louis 
Waldman; Lawrence Fertig; and Isaac Don Levine.

In 1949, the League was handed over a confidential 
hundred-page FBI Division Five document on commu- 
nist influence in the government.

The report was turned 
over to a Pentagon intelligence officer by Hoover's 
public relations man Louis Nichols with specific instruc- 
tions to turn the document over to Julius Klein and the 
AJLAC.

L ■ , w" L 
According to Roy Cohn, who had already been 
picked up as a bright young star in the League's orbit, 
a series of private conferences were held in New York 
City and Washington, D.C.

at which a list of four 
senators was drawn up.

Those senators would each be 
approached with the secret FBI report and offered the 
backing of the AJLAC and Hoover in "getting the 
story across to America.’!

Of the four senators, all of 
whom were Republicans, Joseph McCarthy of Wiscon- 
sin bit the hardest.

*-• > 
Quoting from Roy Cohn: “Joe McCarthy bought 
communism in much the same way as other people 
purchase a new automobile.

The salesman showed him 
the model; he looked at it with interest, examined it 
more closely, kicked the tires, sat at the wheel, squiggled 
in the seat, asked some questions, and bought.

It was 
just as cold as that.” > 
Written into the contract signed between McCarthy 
and the League was the appointment of Roy Cohn as 
the general counsel of the McCarthy committee.

Cohn 
would be the recipient of the leaked FBI file material 
that would be used by the Wisconsin senator in running 
his witch-hunt.

;*":•- : •* 
It should be noted that strong support for Mc- 
Carthy's launching of the communist witch-hunt was 
provided by Father Edmund Walsh, the Jesuit director 
of the Georgetown University School of Foreign Ser- 
vice.Cohn 
would be the recipient of the leaked FBI file material 
that would be used by the Wisconsin senator in running 
his witch-hunt.

;*":•- : •* 
It should be noted that strong support for Mc- 
Carthy's launching of the communist witch-hunt was 
provided by Father Edmund Walsh, the Jesuit director 
of the Georgetown University School of Foreign Ser- 
vice.

On January 7, 1950, just one month before Mc- 
Carthy's infamous Wheeling, West Virginia speech, the 
senator met with Father Walsh at the Colony Restau- 
rant in Washington, D.C.

and received strong urging to 
adopt the “Red Menace” theme.

Walsh had recently 
returned from Bavaria where he had maintained long- 
time associations with the Wittelsbach House and with 
Nazi "geopolitical theoretician'’ Major General Profes- 
sor Karl Haushofer, Julius Klein, during this same 
period was establishing his life-long friendship with 
Otto von Hapsburg.

To this day, Klein hosts the 
Hapsburg heir during his annual trip to Chicago.

When the Army-McCarthy hearings blew up in the 
collective faces of Cohn and the senator from Wiscon- 
sin.

Cohn returned to New York City to enter private 
law practice in the firm of Saxe, Bacon and O’Shea.

While McCarthy's career and life both ended in a bout 
with alcoholism and mental collapse, Cohn consolidated 
the connections he had forged during the years in 
Washington, D.C.—particularly with Hoover and Ro- 
sensticl—and moved on to even more outrageous activ- 
ities than he had engaged in while in the Senate.

Cohn’s first major commercial venture—which 
brought him in league with one of the leading organized 
crime figures in North America—was his 1958 takeover 
and reorganization of the Lionel Corporation.

At the time of the Cohn-Bonanno takeover, Lionel 
had spent several years in the red.Cohn’s first major commercial venture—which 
brought him in league with one of the leading organized 
crime figures in North America—was his 1958 takeover 
and reorganization of the Lionel Corporation.

At the time of the Cohn-Bonanno takeover, Lionel 
had spent several years in the red.

Cohn, a distant 
relative of the Lionel Corporation’s founder Joshua 
Lionel Cowcn, bought out the company, which was 
then manufacturing toys, and began buying up small 
companies involved in the production of electronics 
components, all related to the defense industry and 
specifically the space program.

Cohn's next move was 
to bring General Medaris onto the directorate of Lionel.

The Cohn-Medaris-Bonanno combination—with spe- 
cial support from FBI chief Hoover—spent the next half 
dozen years pairing up the subsidiary companies with 
lucrative defense contracts.

At the same time the nest of 
corporatejronts was used to carry out other "business” 
on behalf of Major Bloomfield’s trade expositions com- 
pany in which, as we noted, Lionel had been an enthu- 
siastic investor.

At the end of 1963, Cohn, et al.

sold off Lionel and all 
of its subsidiaries.

One of the most lucrative pieces of the 
Lionel "empire,” the Intercontinental Corporation of 
Garland, Texas, was sold to Robert Vesco.

It became one 
of Vcsco’s earliest financial scores.

It was the same Intercontinental Corporation that 
author "Torbitt” identified as the front through which a 
group of Cuban exiles, all veterans of the Caribbean 
gambling and narcotics syndicate and the Bay of Pigs 
paramilitary operation, were assigned to Permindex 
board member Ferenc Nagy to play supporting roles in 
the assassination of John Kennedy.

Cohn’s partnership with Joe Bonanno, as weli as his 
access to hundreds of thousands of dollars in Hong 
Kong black market money brings us to an even more 
essential point about Roy Cohn's post-McCarthy career.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was the same Intercontinental Corporation that 
author "Torbitt” identified as the front through which a 
group of Cuban exiles, all veterans of the Caribbean 
gambling and narcotics syndicate and the Bay of Pigs 
paramilitary operation, were assigned to Permindex 
board member Ferenc Nagy to play supporting roles in 
the assassination of John Kennedy. Cohn’s partnership with Joe Bonanno, as weli as his 
access to hundreds of thousands of dollars in Hong 
Kong black market money brings us to an even more 
essential point about Roy Cohn's post-McCarthy career. Far from being an "attorney” in any conventional sense 
of the word, Cohn functioned as the "Mr. Fix-It” for a 
cabal of diversified criminal elements ranging from Lio 
ncl president Joe Bonanno, to FBI boss Hoover, to some 
of the most chic princes of the continental jet set. * 
The common denominator of all of Cohn’s ventures 
has been dope and dirty money. The starting point for unraveling the "Cohn connec- 
tions” is the Pacific resort spot in the sun, Acapulco. The Montego Bay Tryall Compound is not the only 
jet set retreat where the elite of the British SOE, the 
international black nobility, and their chosen operatives 
gather to plan out their political activities—including 
Special Report 19

--- PAGE BREAK ---I 
ijl 
i it 
• i' 
.

I* 
W 
•.

■ 3 1 
murder.

On more than one occasion in the^past several 
decades, similar sessions have been convened in the 
Mexican resort city.

Among the attendees at such recent 
sessions have been the Baron and Baroness di Portanova; 
Howard Stein of the Bank Louis-Dreyfus; Serge Seme- 
neko, the White Russian president of the Hilton Inter- 
national Hotel Corporation and the Tolstoy Foundation; 
John Samuel Schlcsinger, formerly of the South African 
Eagle Insurance group, and a collection of New York 
City real estate barons and garment center bigwigs.

The 
“host" for the gatherings in question has been Rov 
Cohn.

.

1 
We have already seen how Sir William Stephenson 
and a coterie of SOE spooks moved in on Montego Bay 
at the very close of World War II and built that spot up 
into a cross between paradise and Fort Knox.

In the case 
of Acapulco, the guiding figure behind its postwar emer- 
gence as a watering hole for the super-rich and the super- 
secretive was former Mexican president Miguel Alcmdn, 
himself a central figure in the international narcotics and 
assassination cartel..

.

.v.

; , > • V 
It was during Alemdn’s tenure as interior minister 
(1940-46) and president of Mexico (1946-52) that J.

Edgar Hoover's Division Five was given a carte blanche 
to set up shop in that country.

Combined SOE-Division 
Five operations were set up all over Mexico and very few 
were shut down at the end of the war.

The case of 
Reverend Osborne’s Christian boys school has already 
been identified as one such case in which a “hundred- 
year lease” was signed between Aleman and SOE-Divi- 
sion Five.

*J; ^\.

.

: v * 
When President Aleman formally retired from poli- 
tics in the 1950s, he built up a vast real estate empire in 
Mexico that today includes numbers of resort hotels, 
among them one of the largest resort spots in Acapulco..

: v * 
When President Aleman formally retired from poli- 
tics in the 1950s, he built up a vast real estate empire in 
Mexico that today includes numbers of resort hotels, 
among them one of the largest resort spots in Acapulco.

Not coincidentally, all of Aleman’s hotel acquisitions 
are managed by the Canadian Pacific Corporation—the 
biggest covert importer of Golden Triangle narcotics 
into North America and a heavy investor in the Carib- 
bean islands.

'•<.» -•*.

Among Alem£n’s other major holdings is a lion’s 
share of the stock in the fifth largest company in Mexico, 
Tavos de Accro dc Mejico (TAMSA).

The director of 
TAMSA, Bruno Pagliai, is the cousin of Princess Beatriz 
of Savoy, herself a resident of Mexico and a frequent 
.

guest at Alemdn’s own Acapulco jet set parties, i 
Aleman’s personal banker and one of his most inti- 
mate friends' is Max Schcin, president of the- Banco 
Mercantil dc Mejico.

Schein’s bank is the correspondent 
bank to Bank Leumi, the Israeli banking giant that we 
have already encountered as a major laundering vehicle 
for the revenues of international dope traffic.

Schein is 
additionally the unofficial head of the Zionist Lobby in 
Mexico as the chairman of the Sociedad Technidn de 
M6jico, the local branch of the Israel Technion Society— 
the Mossad’s overseas scientific espionage front.

Among 
20 Special Report 
the board members of the Technion International is 
Major Louis Mortimer Bloomfield of Permindex.

Alemdn’s other, far more exposed flank into this 
nexus is Gonzalo N.

Santos, a former aide and well- 
publicized personal friend of the ex-president.

Santos 
was a business partner of a Guadalajara-based Cuban 
exile named Alberto Sicilia Falcdn.

Falc6n, once an asset 
of the Division Five apparatus in Miami and later Mexi- 
co City, was arrested in 1975 as the head of a major 
heroin importing ring that stretched from Thailand to ’ 
Turkey to Marseille.Santos 
was a business partner of a Guadalajara-based Cuban 
exile named Alberto Sicilia Falcdn.

Falc6n, once an asset 
of the Division Five apparatus in Miami and later Mexi- 
co City, was arrested in 1975 as the head of a major 
heroin importing ring that stretched from Thailand to ’ 
Turkey to Marseille.

The Fa!c6n ring had an entire fleet 
of private planes that ran drug pickup and dropoff routes : 
throughout Latin America into the United States.

That , 
ring also ran a string of heroin laboratories.

While Falcdn’s associate and Alemdn staff officer ' 
Santos survived the 1975 bust unscathed, he was the 
subject of a 1977 Mexican Senate inquiry into theguns- 
for-dope traffic across the United States-Mexican bor- 
der.

Santos was labeled as the major conduit of illegal 
weapons procured in the United States and smuggled 
into the hands of some of the leading oligarchical families 
in Mexico.

Many of these weapons were believed to have ; 
been subsequently passed into the hands of the Liga 23 
de Septiembre, Mexico’s equivalent to the Italian Red 
Brigades, 
Where does the New York City attorney and former 
mouthpiece for Joe McCarthy fit into this picture?

As we 
have already noted, Cohn has frequently been the host 
for secret get-togethers in sunny Acapulco.

Sources have 
reported to the authors of this book that Cohn is the go- 
between for the delivery of high grade drugs to the 
jetsetters who frequent Acapulco but spend much of their 
time in such more mundane locales as New York City.

Among Cohn’s most intimate Acapulco associates 
are the Baron and Baroness di Portanova.

The Portano- 
vas are among the closest associates of the Princess 
Beatriz of Savoy and Miguel Alemanr Baron Enrico di 
Portanova is the heir to a minor Genoese noble family.

His personal contacts, however, cut directly into the 
heart of Italy s oldest Black Guelph houses, the House of 
Savoy and the House of Pallavicini.

Both houses are fully 
represented on the board of Permindex.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His personal contacts, however, cut directly into the 
heart of Italy s oldest Black Guelph houses, the House of 
Savoy and the House of Pallavicini. Both houses are fully 
represented on the board of Permindex. The Baroness di 
Portanova is the former Sandra Cullen of Houston, 
Texas. The Cullen family owns one of the largest private 
banks and family-held, oil companies in Texas. Hugh l] 
Roy Cullen, the family scion, is one of the “Big Four” 1 
Texas right-wing moneymen who bankrolled Senator v 
Joseph McCarthy in 1948. A review of the clientele serviced by Roy Cohn’s law * 
firm reveals two striking patterns. First, Cohn is the 
personal attorney, to New York’s most “in crowd.” We 
have already seen this in the case of the Portanovas. Among his other prize clients are Bianca Jagger, Aristo- 
tle Onassis (since deceased) and Christina Onassis. the 
Ford Model Agency, and Conde Nast Magazines. Cohn s second block of clients is made up of some of

--- PAGE BREAK ---New York City’s most powerful real estate barons.

This 
particular cast of real estate speculators and landlords— 
led by Donald Trump and Joseph Slifka and by such 
impressive names as Cadillac-Fairview and Olympia and 
York—represent a branch of the Dope, Inc.

table of 
organization.

Their function is to take that portion of the 
international dope revenues designated for investment 
into “legitimate business” and wash it through the big 
city real estate market As we shall see, best estimates 
indicate that the phenomenal profits of this “washing” 
propel New York real estate investment values above- 
in total—the entire U.S.

investment in industrial capaci- 
ty!

Through this process* the $200 billion in annual 
revenues from the wholesale-to-rctail cycle of interna- • 
tional drug traffic leaps into trillion-dollar range 
In his capacity as “Mr.

Fix-ltM for the New York 
City-based branch office of Dope, Inc.t ftoy Cohn has 
been involved in more murders than just the Permindex- 
run assassination of President John Kennedy, in extor- 
tion and blackmail operations, and in virtually every 
other form of political and financial corruption imagi- 
nable—all without a conviction.

' • 
In June 1973, for example, Cohn was involved in the 
sinking of a luxury yacht, the Defiance, off the coast of 
Florida.

One crew member died in the sinking which 
several sources have identified as an act'of sabotage 
designed to yield a $200,000 insurance claim for Cohn 
and his clients, the Pied Piper Yacht Charters Corpora- 
tion.

Evidence was presented to the Department of Jus- 
tice substantiating the claim that the dead crewman had 
been shot before the boat was sunk.

The Justice Depart- 
ment and the FBI refused to salvage the boat, leaving the 
insurance company and the family of the dead sailor 
holding the bag and Roy Cohn holding at least $20,000 
of the insurance loot.

-•*: • ; o .

% 
• ^ y • .-•*: • ; o .

% 
• ^ y • .

/ 
The coverup v - 
On October 13, 1967, just days after his confirmation 
as attorney general of the United States, Ramsey Clark 
delivered a speech at th© University of Virginia Law 
School.

In that speech he stated, “Much as I hate to do 
it, I just might have to prosecute Jim Garrison *..

[who] took a perfectly fine man.

Clay Shaw, and ruined 
him just for personal aggrandizement.” Twenty-four 
hours later, the public relations office at the Justice 
Department was forced to issue a full retraction of the 
Clark statements, which,amounted to little more than.a 
grandstand public relations intervention to discredit the 
Garrison investigation into the assassination of John F.

' Kennedy;- - :i H* *-v • / * ' "im 
If Clark's remarks were a monstrous blunder, they 
did betray the fact that a massive scramble was under- 
way during the spring, summer, and autumn months of 
1967 to kill the Garrison investigation before it succeed- 
ed in breaking the Permindcx story open in a way that 
could not be put to rest.

As we unravel the web of government agencies, 
media channels and private spook armies that were set 
loose both immediately after the Kennedy assassination 
and once again when New Orleans DA Garrison 
launched his own independent/probe into the Clay Shaw 
cabal, we shall discover that the coverup of the Kennedy 
plot is perhaps the single most damning piece of evi- 
dence that a high level conspiracy was behind the death 
of the President.

Attorney General Clark’s flagrant interference fol- 
lowed more than six months’ active disruption efforts on 
the part of a very special secret agent of the national 
security establishment.

The agent was Walter Sheridan, 
the man that Attorney General Robert F.

Kennedy had 
earlier entrusted to head up the highly irregular “Get 
Hoffa” unit of the Department of Justice.The agent was Walter Sheridan, 
the man that Attorney General Robert F.

Kennedy had 
earlier entrusted to head up the highly irregular “Get 
Hoffa” unit of the Department of Justice.

Despite such 
appearances of closeness to the Kennedy family machine, 
strong evidence suggests that Walter Sheridan had al- 
ready been a longtime asset of the British SOE circuitry 
inside the O.S.

intelligence establishment at the time of 
his “recruitment” into the Kennedy camp in the late 
• 1950s.

* Walter Sheridan, after graduating from the Jesuit- 
run Fordham University and briefly attending Albany 
Law School, was recruited into the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation^ where he worked for four years.

From the 
FBI, Sheridan moved over to the newly established Na- 
tional Security Agency.

The NSA was established in the 
early 1950s as the most secretive, high technology-orient- 
ed snooping agency in the U.S.

government.

To this day, ^ 
for example, the NSA is the one intelligence service that { 
operates under a total Official Secrets Act screen.

Neither >• 
the Congress nor any other federal agency has oversight 
or even access to information concerning the NSA.

Waiter Sheridan evidently already had heavy back- 
ing.

He was appointed chief of the Counterintelligence 
Section, Special Operations Division, Office of Security, 
of the NSA.

He was subsequently appointed assistant 
chief of the NSA Clearance Division.

The NSA had been an outgrowth of the sophisticated 
telecommunications and coding operations developed by 
the Allies during World War II.

In this effort the U.S.

had been thoroughly trained by the British Special Op- 
erations Executive.

Early in the war.

Sir William Ste- 
phenson.

had established a special “code breaking unit 
at Bleehley, England, which served as a training center 
as well as an encoding unit employing a select group of 
Americans and Englishmen.

Among the Americans 
trained at the Blechley center were Robert Sarnoff and 
William Bundy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

had established a special “code breaking unit 
at Bleehley, England, which served as a training center 
as well as an encoding unit employing a select group of 
Americans and Englishmen. Among the Americans 
trained at the Blechley center were Robert Sarnoff and 
William Bundy. Sarnoff was the‘son of General David 
Sarnoff,. the founder and president of the Radio Corpo- 
ration of America (Robert Sarnoff would replace his 
father as president upon the latter’s retirement during 
the early 1950s) and a wartime member of the SOE elite 
in the United States. Bundy would later become the 
editor of the Council on Foreign Relations* quarterly 
Special Report 21

--- PAGE BREAK ---*':r 
i 
» 
.

r 
ill 
i 
i ' 
i h 
I 
journal Foreign Affairs.

while his brother assumed the 
National Security directorship under John Kennedy.

After the war, SarnofTs RCA became the technology * 
ical core of the capability that later was brought under 
top secret government control as the NSA.

In that sense, 
the NSA is perhaps the branch of the U.S.

intelligence 
establishment most directly run by the Stephenson SOE 
apparatus.

_ 
Sheridan’s high-level placement in the NSA Counter- 
intelligence Division—the unit most closely interfaced 
with the FBI Division Five—belies the popular idea that 
Sheridan was first and foremost a Kennedy family loyal- 
In 1958, a “church friend” introduced Sheridan to 
Robert Kennedy, who immediately hired the NSA vet- 
eran as the special investigator for the Senate Racketeer- 
ing Committee, the “McClellan Committee” that RFK 
was then serving a* general counsel.

When John Kenne- 
dy was elected President, Sheridan was appointed “con- 
fidential assistant” to Attorney General Robert Kenne- 
dy—a position that placed him in the inner circle of both 
the Justice Department and the White House (where he 
maintained a secret office adjacent to the Oval Office)* * 
As “confidential assistant” to RJFK, Sheridan created 
the “Get Hoffa” unit of the Justice Department.

Accord- 
ing to sources who served dose to Robert Kennedy at 
that time, the “Get Hoffa” unit rapidly became a private 
fiefdom of Sheridan that even the Attorney General 
could not penetrate after a pointi' 
Kennedy J ustice Department historian Victor Na vas- 
ky described the Sheridan unit in the following way: “Its 
modus operand was pure cloak and dagger.

t...

Sheri* 
dan’s relations with the FBI were highly irregular, in that 
it received little or no cooperation from the top, ycl 
Sheridan, an ex-FBI man, had a degree of line coopera- 
tion in the field that was, in some respects, unparalleled.t...

Sheri* 
dan’s relations with the FBI were highly irregular, in that 
it received little or no cooperation from the top, ycl 
Sheridan, an ex-FBI man, had a degree of line coopera- 
tion in the field that was, in some respects, unparalleled.

He actually coordinated FBI agents with his own men— 
told theni where to go and when, and they went.’ Sheri- 
: dan had similar access to the resources of the Internal " 
Revenue Service, the Secret Service, the U.S.

Marshalls, 
and.tile Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Division of 
Treasury.

In effect, Sheridan replicated the operational; 
capabilities and the targeting methods of the wartime 
SOE.

Sheridan’s private army replicated the methods oT 
%SOE in another significant area.

In addition to thev* 
Tidal” channels that Sheridan was able to navigate-,; • 
lithrough every federal agency even remotely involved in^ 
/intelligence and enforcement, he apparently created *>.

nest of clandestine agencies—under corporate cover—; % 
that were deployed to cany out those spedal operations > 
that were so flagrandy illegal that they could not even be * 
remotely assoriated with the government.

-rr .

According to author Jim Hougan, Sheridan created 
a private investigative agency known as “Five Ey**":.v 
International Investigators Incorporated of Indianapo- 
lis, Indiana.

Although the firm was offidally incorporate.

/ .

.

' *' " .

v ■ •£* 
22 Special Report ^ 
j + 
ed on October 3, 1966 (two years after Sheridan left the 
Justice Department), Five Eyes maintained offices in 
Indianapolis, Chicago, Detroit, Louisville, Nashville, 
Memphis, and Minneapolis by no later than fall, 1961.

For its first five y Jars of existence, no corporate records 
existed anywhere in the United States even suggesting its 
existence.

- .For its first five y Jars of existence, no corporate records 
existed anywhere in the United States even suggesting its 
existence.

- .

Sheridan’s Five Eyes (also frequently referred to as 
Three Eyes, for International Investigators, Inc.) went 
out of business in the late 1960s at the same time that 
another Three Eyes was being founded by some of 
Sheridan’s top operatives in the “Get Hoffa” unit.

This * 
Three Eyes, International Intelligence, Incorporated, is 
more commonly known as Intertcl, the private security 
arm of Meyer Lansky's Carribean gambling and dope 
center known as Resorts International.

In February 1967, Walter Sheridan was hired by the r 
National Broadcasting Corporation (NBC) as an “inves- 
tigative journalist” attached to the NBC White Paper 
television documentary scries.

Sheridan’s assignment for / 
NBC?

To do a special television report on the investiga- ra- 
tion into the assassination of President John F.

Kennedy < 
that had just been launched by New Orleans District 
Attorney Jim Garrison.

By July of that year, Sheridan 
would be indicted by Garrison on four separate charges 
of public bribery—all revolving around Sheridan efforts V 
to wreck the Garrison probe.

♦ ■.

According to evidence submitted by Garrison, Sher- ,£ 
idan had engaged in flagrant witness tampering aimed at • 
both publicly discrediting the Garrison probe and pre- ..i 
venting key witnesses from appearing before the New 
Orleans Grand Jury.

y y-., • 
One of the witnesses targeted by Sheridan was the v?* 
Baton Rouge insurance salesman Perry Raymond Rus- 
so, the fourth man” in the assassination planning ses- .v 
sion convened by Clay Shaw.

* .« vt § , ..

., ‘,y 
On June 19-, 1967, Assistant New Orleans District if 
Attorney Andrew J.--- PAGE BREAK ---

* .« vt § , .. ., ‘,y 
On June 19-, 1967, Assistant New Orleans District if 
Attorney Andrew J. Sciambra delivered a memo to Gar-' 
rison proving that Sheridan had used his NBC team to 
harass Russo on a round-the-clock basis, had pressured i 
Russo's employers at Equitable Life Insurance to relo- 
cate Russo outside of the Louisiana jurisdiction of Gar- 
rison, and had succeeded in smuggling Russo out of the 
state for a “vacation” in California. Once out of Garri- V 
son’s hands, Russo was to be put on nationwide televir • ji 
sion to denounitt Garrison for having “doctored” his 
,ir- 
testimony to create a phony conspiracy case against Clay - 
Shaw. pie Sciambra memo further reported that the NBC~f 
White Paper crew was working clotely with a research^ if- 
team from the Saturday Evening Post on the “Get Garri- v: 
son” operation. The Saturday Evening Post bad just been 
purchased by Bert SerVaas of Indianapolis. SerVaas’k 
name appeared in October 1966 on the incorporation- 
papers of International Investigators, Incorporated as its 
president. r , t . *• 
, .

--- PAGE BREAK ---A second bombshell explodod in the face of the 
Sheridan operation on August 19, 1967 in a Chicago 
courtroom.

There, an official of the International Broth- 
erhood of Teamsters, Zachary Strate, testified that he 
had been ofTered a deal by Sheridan.

In return for his 
joining Sheridan in the propaganda blitz against Garri- 
son, Strate would be provided with classified government 
documents proving that his conviction on extortion in a - 
case involving Teamster president and Sheridan target 
Jimmy Hoffa, had been obtained through the use of 
illegal wiretaps.

Extortion, blackmail, kidnapping, bribery; these/; 
were not the only weapons unleashed in the war against 
Garrison.

By the time of the 1967 Garrison probe, over a 
dozen key witnesses had died under mysterious circum-;' 
stances.

Guy Bannister, the FBI Division Five chief in 
New Orleans, was dead.

Lee Harvey Oswald was dead, - 
shot at point blank range before a nationwide television 
audience in the basement of the Dallas Police headquar-'Vo- 
ters.

His assassin*.

Jack Ruby, far from being the‘.\ib* : 
traught good Samaritan/ had been a business partner of 
- Guy Bannister and David Feme in a series of Cuban,; ; 
casino ventures before the fall of Batista; and had been 
involved in the Schlumbcrgcr-Doublc-Chek gun-run- 
ning adventures, first into Fidel Castro’s forces and later 
into the anti-Castro army put together by the CIA after 
the Cuban president's turn to the Soviet Union.

David Feme was also dead, the victim of a “suicide* 
overdose of narcotics on the very eve of his appearance 
before District Attorney Garrison’i probe.

According to 
Julea Rocco Kimble; a witness before the Garrison 
.

probe, he and Jack Helms had entered the Ferrie apart- 
ment just hours after the former Division Five contract 
employee had died and removed a file cabinet full of 
documents; Kimble and Helms, both admitted members 
of the Ku Klux Klan, then fled to Canada.According to 
Julea Rocco Kimble; a witness before the Garrison 
.

probe, he and Jack Helms had entered the Ferrie apart- 
ment just hours after the former Division Five contract 
employee had died and removed a file cabinet full of 
documents; Kimble and Helms, both admitted members 
of the Ku Klux Klan, then fled to Canada.

Their flight, 
and their future lodgings and safety, had been guaran- 
teed by Walter Sheridan of N BC.

Sheridan’s blast at Garrison did eventually air on 
NBC national television and did serve as the trigger 
mechanism for a barrage of attacks on the New Orleans 
DA from the national media.

It should be noted here that NBC was from its 
founding a wholly owned subsidiary of the Radio Cor- 
poration of America.

At the time of the airing of the 
NBC White Paper on Garrison, the President of NBC 
was Robert Sarnoff, the wartime veteran of Sir William 
Stephenson’s SOE retreat at Blechley, England.

In ret- 
rospect, President Dwight Eisenhower s efforts to break 
up the RCA monopoly and his subsequent farewell 
warnings about the danger of the military-industrial 
complex were among the clearest, most important and 
unheeded—legacies of his presidency.

What apparatus within the government stood behind 
Walter Sheridan and his “Get Garrison” apparatus?

We 
have already identified the NSA and FBI Division Five 
pedigree of this Jesuit-trained spook.

Evidence further 
exists that another secret police agency—one that we 
have already encountered in our probe of Permindex— 
was instrumental in the effort to cover up the cabal 
behind the Kennedy assassination.

.

According to author “Torbitt,” a New Orleans em- 
ployeeof the Double-Chek agency namcdGordon Novel 
had infiltrated the Garrison investigation staff in spring, 
1967, and determined that Double-Chek and the FBI's • • - 
Division Five were being actively investigated for their / ; 
parts in the Kennedy assassination.

Novel was put in , ; 7 ‘ 
contact with Walter Sheridan.According to author “Torbitt,” a New Orleans em- 
ployeeof the Double-Chek agency namcdGordon Novel 
had infiltrated the Garrison investigation staff in spring, 
1967, and determined that Double-Chek and the FBI's • • - 
Division Five were being actively investigated for their / ; 
parts in the Kennedy assassination.

Novel was put in , ; 7 ‘ 
contact with Walter Sheridan.

When Garrison discov- ' : | • 
cred the double-agent role* being played by Novel, he * ; r 
subpoenaed the former “staff investigator” to appear ■' ■; 
before his grand jury probe.

Novel IcA Louisiana under \ .

theprotection of Sheridan and was delivered to a Virgin- - : ; 
ia safehouse where the results of a doctored lie-detector 
test were released to the press by Sheridan claiming that 
Novel had provided proof that the Garrison probe was a >y; 
pure publicity stunt with no substantive evidence.

/ 
'• From Virginia, Novel was reportedly safehoused ire; 
Columbus, Ohio for a period of time.

Hia protectors in 
Columbus were deployed out of the headquarters of the Y;.

Defense Industrial Security Command.

In addition to its • 
operations center at the Redstone Arsenal at Mussel 
Shoals, Alabama, DISC maintained headquarters in an * 
office building on East Broad Street in Columbus.

At the: .

■ 
time of this safehousing, DISC was under the direction •.y 
of General Joseph Carroll, formerly deputy director of :.-.y 
the FBI under J.

Edgar Hoover.

Carroll was the head of.- *;^ 
the Defense Intelligence Agency.

According to author — ; 
“JorhitL” it was actually the DISC secret police appa- .

^ v 
ratus that coordinated the activities of Walter Sheridan, A..

even during the secret sleuth’s official tenure at the White .

.

House and the Department of Justice, v ; * ;.

* c\ 
DISC was directly linked to the coverup against 
Garrison as well.--- PAGE BREAK ---

House and the Department of Justice, v ; * ;. * c\ 
DISC was directly linked to the coverup against 
Garrison as well. According to the records of the New r 
Orleans Grand Jury, nearly a dozen individuals who had 
worked with Lee Harvey Oswald during his residence in\ 
New Orleans and who represented potential crucial 
sources of evidence in the probe, had been hired by 
defense contractors immediately following the Kennedy 
killing, given lucrative positions, and placed under the 
constant screen of DISC, which maintained security 
responsibilities for all of the facilities and personnel of 
the nation’s defense contractors. > > vC < / ; ' 
DISC, the NSA, FBI Division Five, the Radio Got-; 
poration of America, N BC Television. All agencies ben- * . ,: 
efidng from the highest classifications of national secu- 
rity clearance, they all carried out a string of murders, 
kidnappings, character assassinations, and black propa- 
ganda efforts on behalf of Permindex. Seventeen years 
have passed since the assassination of John Kennedy ia 
Dallas; and at this very moment, Permindex and the 
British command that ordered the cold coup by assassi- 
nation remains one of the best-kept secrets in the world.