Executive  Intelligence  Review

June    1996   •   Special  Offprint  $10.00


The  Sun  never  sets  on
the  new  BritisliJ^mpire


1 1,  li.f  -  i


FIDELIO

Journal  of  Poetry,  Science,  and  Statecraft
Publisher  of  LaRouche's  major  theoretical  writings


FEATURED  in  the  Spring  1996  issue:

How  Hobbes^  Mathematics
Misshaped  Modern  History

by  Lyndon  H.  LaRouche,  Jr.

"There  is  no  area  of  prcyailijijg  opiiiidn
in  the  fmc  arts,  the  so  called  ^social
sciences,'  in  political-cconomv,  in  rhc
teaching  of  theology,  in  doctrines  ot"
historiography,  within  the  depArmicnts
of  philosophy,  and  so  on.  which  is  fw>i
premised  upon  the  same,  false,
axiomatic  assumptions  which  are
derived  froni  the  mathematical-physics
presumptions  of  the  mathematicians
Sarpi,  Galileo,  Hobbes,  et  al.".

Thomas  Hobbes:  Fascist  Exponent  of
Enlightenment  Sciencey  by  Brian  Lantz

The  Mandeville  Model,  by  H.  Graham  Lowry

Christian  Economics — Or  the  ^Structures
of  Sin'"?  by  William  F.  Wertz,  Jr.


FIDELIO


■'  "^"vf    ,  i»ieine.  jii't  Mi'eMV


Sign  me  up  for  FIDELIO  $20  for  4  issues


NAME

ADDRESS
CITY


TEL  (day)


STATE


ZIP


(eve)


Make  checks  or  money  orders  payable  to:

Schiller,  Institute,  Inc.

Dept.  E     P.O.  Box  20244     Washington,  D.C.  20041-0244


Foander  and  Contributing  Editor:

Lyndon  H.  LaRouche,  Jr.
Editorial  Board:  Melvin  Klenetsky,  Antony
Papert,  Gerald  Rose,  Dennis  Small,  Edward
Spannaus,  Nancy  Spannaus,  Jeffrey  Steinberg,
Webster  Tarpley,  Carol  White,  Christopher
White

Senior  Editor:  Nora  Hamerman
Associate  Editor:  Susan  Welsh
Managing  Editors:  John  Stgerson,
Ronald  Kokinda

Science  and  Technology:  Carol  White
Special  Projects:  Mark  Burdman
Book  Editor:  Katherine  Notky
Advertising  Director:  Marsha  Freeman
Circulation  Manager:  Stanley  Ezrol

INTELLIGENCE  DIRECTORS:
Agriculture:  Marcia  Merry
Asia  and  Africa:  Linda  de  Hoyos
Counterintelligence:  Jeffrey  Steinberg,
Paul  Goldstein

Economics:  Christopher  White
European  Economics:  William  Engdahl
Ibero-America:  Robyn  Quijano,  Dennis  Small
Law:  Edward  Spannaus
Russia  and  Eastern  Europe:
Rachel  Douglas,  Konstanlin  George
United  States:  Kathleen  Klenetsky

INTERNATIONAL  BUREAUS:

BogotI:  Jose  Restrepo

Bonn:  George  Gregory,  Rainer  Apel

Buenos  Aires:  Gerardo  Terdn

Caracas:  David  Ramonet

Copenhagen:  Paul  Rasmussen

Houston:  Hartey  Schlanger

Lima:  Sara  Madueno

Mexico  City:  Hugo  Lopez  Ochoa

Milan:  Leonardo  Servadio

New  DeUii:  Susan  Maitra

Paris:  Christine  Bierre

Rio  de  Janeiro:  Silvia  Palacios

Stockholm:  Michael  Ericson

Washington,  D.C.:  William  Jones

Wiesbaden:  Goran  Haglund


EIR  {ISSN  0273-6314)  is  published  weekly  (50  issues)
except  for  the  second  week  of  July,  and  the  last  week  of
December  by  EIR  Nevs  Service  Inc.,  317  Pennsylvania
Ave.,  S.E..  2nd  Floor.  Washington,  DC  20003.  (202)
544-7010.  For  subscriptions:  (703)  777-9451.

European  Headquarters:  Executive  Intelligence  Review

Nachrichiena^entur  GmbH,  Posrfach  2308,

D-65013  Wiesbaden.  Otio  von  Guericke  Ring  3,  D-65205

Wiesbaden,  Federal  Republic  of  Germany

Tel:  (6122)  9160.  Execuiive  Directors:  Anno  Hellenbroich,

Michael  Liebig

la  Denmark:  EIR.  Post  Box  2613,  2100  Copenhagen  0E,
Tel.  35-43  60  40

In  Mexico:  EIR.  Rio  Tiber  No.  87,  5o  piso.  Coloria
Cuauhi^moc.  Mexico.  DF,  CP  06500.  Tel:  208-3016  y  533-
2fr43.

Japan  subscription  sales:  O.T.O.  Research.  Corporation.
Takeuchi  Bldg.,  1-34-12  Takatanobaba,  Shinjuku-Ku.  Tokyo
.160.  Tel;  t03)  3208-7821.

Copyright  ©  1996  EIR  News  Service.  All  rights  reserved.
Reproduction  in  whole  or  in  pail  without  permission  strictly
prohibited.  Second-class  postage  paid  ai  Washington  D.C.,
and  at  an  additional  mailing  offices.
I>omestic  subscriptions:  3  months— S125,  6  months — S225,
1  year— S396.  Single  issue— $10

.Pofltmaster:  Send  all  address  changes  lo  EIR.  P.O.  Box
'17390,  Washington.  D.C.  20041-0390.

.EIR%-002


mmi


From  the  Associate  E)dltor


1  his  special  EIR  offprint  of  our  issue  of  May  24,  1996  (Vol.  23,
No.  22)  is  devoted  entirely  to  the  subject  of  the  "new"  British  Empire:
what  it  is,  how  it  developed  historically,  what  and  whom  it  controls,
and  what  its  strategic  gameplan  is.

Many  people  suffer  from  the  delusion  that  the  British  monarchy
is  no  longer  of  any  importance  these  days;  that  the  views  of  EIR  and
Lyndon  LaRouche  on  this  matter  are  perhaps  "exaggerated."  This
delusion  is  particularly  common  in  Russia,  where  people  are  accus-
tomed to  blame  the  United  States,  and  not  the  British  oligarchy,  for
the  suffering  their  nation  is  cunently  undergoiiig.  After  all,  isn't  the
United  States  the  world's  only  remaining  superpower?  The  British
are  a  bit  down-at-heel,  are  they  not?  Hasn't  the  Empire  been  dis-
banded, replaced  with  a  Commonwealth  of  independent  nations?  As
for  the  House  of  Windsor,  isn't  it  pretty  much  of  a  joke  these  days?

Beginning  with  our  Special  Report  of  Oct.  28, 1994,  "The  Com-
ing Fall  of  the  House  of  Windsor,"  EIR  has  presented  extensive  docu-
mentation of  how  the  British  control  apparatus  really  works.  We
have  exposed  the  British  monarchy's  role  in  creating  the  "green"
movement  (issue  of  Jan.  13,  1995)  and  the  terrorist  international
(Oct.  13, 1995,  Nov.  10, 1995,  and  Nov.  17, 1995).  Through  selected
historical  case  studies,  we  have  shown  how  the  British  imperial  mo-
dus operandi  continues  to  the  present  day  (a  new  "Triple  Entente" —
March  24,  1995;  the  Pacific  Theater— May  12,  1995;  the  case  of
Sudan— June  9, 1995;  the  Transcaucasus— April  12, 1996).

This  Special  Report  develops  new  dimensions  of  the  picture:  the
role  of  the  Commonwealth  itself,  the  Queen's  Privy  Council,  and  the
interlocking  directorates  of  the  titled  nobility  and  the  corporations
that  have  a  stranglehold  on  key  commodities  and  raw  materials  world-
wide, as  well  as  on  the  communications  media.


-'^^^='=<^<«'^^       ^^^C-^-^C^


discontents


Errata:  The  article  on  p.  21,  "The
Queen's  'Honorary  Knights'  in
America,"  contains  errors
respecting  British  honorary  titles,  of
putative  U.S.  citizens,  which  had
been  supplied  by  British  official
sources.  Continuing  inquiry  has
developed  information  from  higher
authorities.  Gen.  Colin  Powell  is
actually  a  Knight  Commander  of
the  Order  of  the  Bath,  makingihim
the  third-highest  knight  in  the
United  States,  just  below  Presidents
Re^an  and  Bush  (and  above  Henry
Kissigner).  Caspar  W.  Weinberger
is  a  Knight  Grand  Cross  of  the
British  Empire.

On  p.  25,  footnotes  2  and  3  are
reversed.


Special  Report


Queen  Elizabeth  II  and  Royal  Consort  Piince  Philip
viitii  the  Common  weallli  tu^  of  goye^iifen|^  in  N^w
Zealand,  Oct^il, '1995.   '        .       '  .

4  The  Sun  never  sets  on  the
new  Bi;itish  Empire

The  idea  that  the  British  Empire  is  a
relic  of  the  past,  of  little
consequence  in  modem  affairs,  is  a
dangerous  myth.  Jeffrey  Steinberg
analyzes  the  policy  shift  currently
under  way.


Photo  and  graphic  credits:  Cover,
John  Stillwell/PA  News  Photo
Library.  Pages  5,  30,  London  Press
Service.  Pages  7,  23, 45-52,  EIRNS/
John  Sigerson.  Pages  15, 16,
EIRNS/Lenore  Sanders.


I.  The  Monarchy


10  The  Nazi  roots  of  the  House
of  Windsor

One  of  the  biggest  public  relations
hoaxes  ever  perpetrated  by  the
British  Crown,  is  that  King  Edward
Vin,  who  abdicated  the  throne  in
1936,  due  to  his  support  for  the
Nazis,  was  a  "black  sheep."

12  The  ultimate  insider  trader
is  the  Queen

One  of  the  secrets  to  Elizabeth  II's
fabulous  wealth  is  that  she  amassed
it  tax  free  until  1992.  The  other
secret  is  th^  she  not  only  gets  tips
fi-ohi  British  financiers,  but  also  has
access  to  all  the  state  secrets,
through  the  "boxes."

14  Her  Majesty's  ^Prerogative
Powers'

The  "constitutional  monarchy"  is  a
myth.

19  Sir  Paul  Mellon,  lord  of
Loudoun

21  The  Queen's  'honorary
knights'  in  America

No  American  official  shall  hold  a
title  of  nobility  without  approval  of
Congress — but  the  British
monarchy  has  found  a  way  to
reward  prominent  Americans  for
their  lifetime  service  to  the  British
Empire.

22  British  Empire  buys  the

U.SA.

In  the  last  two  years,  the  British
Empire  has  replaced  Japan  as
America's  number  one  creditor.


Volume  23,  Number  1%  May  24,  1996


n,  ^Empire  of  the  Mind*

24  Tavistock- s  imperial
brainwasliing  project

Colonialism  still  exists  in  its  most
powerfiil  form,  as  a  state  of  mind  of
the  subject  peoples,  even  after
nominal  independence.  -

29  The  invisible  empire  of
NGOs

The  Cdmmonwealth  FbundaUbn  of'
Britain  defines  them  as  "voluntary,
independent,  not-for-profit
organizations,"  seeking  to  "improve
the  circumstances  and  prospects  of
disadvantaged  people"  and  "to  act
.  on  concerns  and  issues  which  are
detrimental  to  society  asa  whole."
The  NGOs'  real  business:  coups,
subversion,  civil  wars,  discrediting
of  governments,  and  revolution.

31  MartiB  Palmer:  Prince
Philip's  guru

33  The  new  Empire's
propaganda  machine

Not  only  does  Britain  not  have  a
free  press,  but  most  Americans  get
their  international  news  from  a
cartel  run  top-down  by  British
intelligence.


in.  The  Empire  Restored

38  Chatham  House  issues  the
marching  orders

Out  of  the.  Royal  Institute  of
Intematioi^ai  Affairs,  comes  a
manual  by  Katharine  West  for
reestabli^ng  the  Empire  in  the
wake  of  the  fall  of  the  Bo-lin  Wall.

41  RHA  conference:^Britain
in  the  World'

Privatization  is  the  watchword
.  when  British  elites  gather  to  map
their  assault  on  the  nation-state.


IV.  The  Club  of  the  Isles

43  Raw  materials  cartels  lock
lip  world  economy

Introducing  the  Club  of  the  Isles:
three  to  five  thousand  fabulously
rich  oligarchs  clustered  around  the
British  Crown.

53  The  Anglo-Dutch  corporate
empire  '  ■

A  road  map  of  the  interlocking
corpor^e  apparatus  diat  dominates
"choke  points"  within  the  global
economy,  especially  finance,
insurance,  raw  materials,
transportation,  and  consumer  goods.


Special  Report


i.


The  Sun  never
sets  on  the  new
British  Empire

by  Jeffrey  Steinberg


"Before  she  set  out  on  her  Diamond  Jubilee  procession,  on  the  morning  of  22
June  1897,  Queen  Victoria  of  England  went  to  the  telegraph-room  at  Buckingham
Palace..  .  .Itwasafewminutesaftereleveno'clock.  She  pressedan  electric  button,
an  impulse  was  transmitted  to  the  Central  Telegraph  Office  in  St.  Martin' s  le  Grand;
in  a  matter  of  seconds,  her  Jubilee  message  was  on  its  way  to  every  comer  of  her
Empire.  It  was  the  largest  Empire  in  the  history  of  the  world,  comprising  nearly  a
quarter  of  the  land  mass  of  the  earth,  and  a  quarter  of  its  population.  Victoria  herself
was  a  Queen-Empress  of  such  aged  majesty  that  some  of  her  simpler  subjects
considered  her  divine,  and  slaughtered  propitiatory  goats  before  her  image."
— James  Morris,  in  Pax  Britannica  (London:  The  Folio  Society:  1992)

"What  are  the  powers  we  deal  with?  Well,  first  of  all,  the  largest  power  we  have
to  deal  with,  is  called  the  British  Empire.  Don't  let  anybody  tell  you  it's  the  United
Kingdom.  The  United  Kingdom  is  not  a  nation,  it' s  a  plantation,  occupied  by  about
5,000  people,  who  are  among  the  wealthiest,  and  dirtiest,  and  meanest  people  on
this  planet,  who  form  an  oligarchy

"Now,  that  empire,  which  the  British  effectively  control,  except  for  a  few
dissident  nations  that  don't  like  it,  that  empire  represents  about  one-fifth  of  the
world' s  land  area;  it  represents  about  30%  of  the  world' s  population.  It  controls  48-
50%  of  the  world's  financial  turnover,  including  the  $3.5  trillion  a  day  derivatives
turnover.  It  controls  the  majority  of  the  world's  international  trade  in  what  are
called  strategic  metals,  such  as  the  metals  that  are  required  for  most  industry.  It
controls  the  majority  of  the  international  trade  in  petroleum.  . . .  These  interests,
the  Anglo-Dutch-is  wiss,  Cargill  et  al.,  complex,  control  the  majority  of  the  interna-
tional food  trade,  in  a  time  of  grave  food  crisis  worldwide."

— Lyndon  LaRouche,  March  16, 1996

In  the  minds  of  the  political,  industrial,  and  intellectual  elites  of  the  overwhelming
4     Special  Report  EIR     May  24,  1996


Queen  Elizabeth  II
during  a  visit  to
Jamaica.  The  Queen  is
one  of  the  most  wealthy
people  in  the  world,  and,
contrary  to  popular
mythology,  she  is  also
one  of  the  most
powerful.


majority  of  nations  of  the  world  today,  there  exists  a  deadly
dangerous  myth:  that  the  British  Einpire  has  disappeared  from
the  face  of  the  Earth;  and  that  Great  Britain,  the  United  King-
dom, is  of  little  consequence  in  world  affairs.

According  to  this  legend,  Britain's  royal  family  is  a  pow-
erless relic  of  days  gone  bye,  collecting  its  modest  pension,
fulfilling  its  ceremonial  obligations,  and,  perhaps,  drawing  in
a  few  tourist  dollars,  to  justify  its  upkeep.  In  the  extreme
version  of  this  Big  Lie,  today's  Britain  is  cast  in  the  role  of  a
benign  force  in  world  affairs,  a  "friend  of  the  downtrodden,"
and  "diligent  defender  of  human  rights."

Even  the  recent,  shameless  public  displays  of  sexual  gym-
nastics by  Queen  Elizabeth  II's  "Baby  Boomer"  offspring,
and  the  voluminous  "soap  opera"  news  coverage  that  they
have  generated,  have  only  added  to  this  mis-evaluation.
(When  dealing  with  hereditary  monarchies,  decadence  can
never  be  reliably  used  as  an  indicator  of  decline.  Rather,  it
must  be  understood  as  a  way  of  life.  See,  for  example,  eigh-
teenth-century British  intelligence  figure  Jeremy  Bentham's
"In  Defense  of  Pederasty,"  the  companion  piece  to  his  more
widely  known  "In  Defense  of  Usury."  These  two  documents
convey  an  efficient  definition  of  the  monarchical-oligarchi-
cal outlook.)

In  the  minds  of  many  leading  world  figures,  including  in
Russia,  the  "enemy  image"  of  the  British  Empire  of  old,  has
been  replaced  by  that  of  a  modem  "imperial  power,"  the
United  States  of  America.

The  authorship  of  both  of  these  complementary  hoaxes —


the  demise  of  the  British  Empire,  and  its  replacement  by  the
U.S.A.  as  the  new  "Great  Satan" — is  traceable  to  Britain's
own  vast  propaganda  and  intelligence  apparatus,  associated
with  such  institutions  as  British  Broadcasting  Corp.,  Reuters
News  Service,  the  Hollinger  Corp.,  the  Tavistock  Institute,
the  Mont  Pelerin  Society,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  universi-
ties, the  British  Commonwealth,  and  His  Royal  Highness
Prince  Phifip'  s  World  Wildlife  Fund.  With  the  recent  enthusi-
astic revival  of  the  century -old  Anglo-French  Entente  Cordi-
ale,  French  intelligence  agents  and  propagandists  have  joined
in  the  America-trashing  campaign,  especially  inside  Russia.

From  Khartoum,  to  Moscow,  to  Buenos  Aires,  among
policymakers  and  cullure-shapers,  this  British-orchestrated
game  of  historical  revisionism  has  taken  deep  root.  Its  disori-
enting effect  has  opened  the  door  to  possibly  grave  and  irre-
versible policy  blunders.

Hence,  this  EIR  strategic  study.

Strategic  importance  of  debunking  the  myth

If  the  human  race  is  to  survive  the  coming  global  financial
and  monetary  blowout,  without  going  through  a  protracted
New  Dark  Age,  in  which  billions  needlessly  die,  it  will  be
necessary  for  the  United  States,  Russia,  and  China — as  the
three  great  world  powers  today — to  revive  the  World  War  II
alliance  against  the  British  Empire,  which  was  the  comer-
stone  of  the  late  U.S.  President  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt's
post-colonial  strategic  vision.  ,

The  first  order  of  business  of  such  a  revived  "FDR  Coali-


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     5


tion,"  is  to  dump  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  sys-
tem and  organize  a  new  set  of  global  financial  and  monetary
agreements,  based  on  sound  principles  of  national  banking
and  scientific  and  technological  progress.  These  principles
formed  the  basis  for  the  U.S.  Constitution  and  what  came  to
be  known,  during  the  nineteenth  century,  as  the  American
System  of  Political  Economy.

Although  neither  Russia  nor  China  ever  achieved  the  fuU
status  of  nation-statehood,  there  are  powerful  forces  inside
both  countries  today,  that  aspire  to  such  a  circumstance.  They
are  potential  natural  allies  of  the  United  States  in  an  anti-
world  government,  anti-British  Empire,  anti-IMF  concert.

To  achieve  that  goal,  the  circumstances  of  the  collapse  of
that  Roosevelt  policy  must  be  grasped.

Witii  the  untimely  death  ofFDR  on  April  12, 1945,agfeat
moment  found  a  little  man,  FDR's  successor  and  Winston
Churchill's  willing  dupe,  Harry  S  Tniman.  Truman  suc-
cumbed to  Sir  Winston's  vision  of  a  postwar  Anglo-American
strategic  partnership — the  proverbial  "British  brains,  merged
with  American  brawn."  He  approved  the  dropping  of  the
atomic  bombs  on  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki,  even  though  the
Japanese  emperor  had  sent  clear  signals  (via  the  Vatican  and
■  certain  reliable  U.S.  Office  of  Strategic  Services  personnel)
that  Japan  was  prepared  to  surrender,  and  even  though  Ameri-
:  can  military  strategists  were  aware  that  Japan  had  already
.been  effectively  defeated,  largely  through  the  effects. of  a,
successful  U.S.  naval  embargo.

With  Churchill's  1947  "Iron  Curtain"  speech  in  Fulton,
Missouri,  the  last  prospects  of  Russian- American  and  Sino-
American  cooperation  were  scotched,  and  the  Cold  War
was  on.

Under  Cold  War  conditions,  and,  as  the  result  of  the  hor-
rors of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki,  Lord  Bertrand  Russell's
scheme  for  using  thermonuclear  terror  ("Mutually  Assured
Destruction,"  or  MAD)  as  a  battering  ram  against  the  nation-
state,  and  as  a  weapon  for  forging  a  one-world  government,
under  United  Nations  rubric,  proceeded  apace.

At  only  one  point  during  the  Cold  War  era,  during  the
John  F.  Kennedy  Presidency,  was  there  a  glimmer  of  hope
of  the  United  States  breaking  from  the  Russellite  paradigm.
Twenty  years  before  Ronald  Reagan,  President  Kennedy  in-
voked the  idea  of  "peace  through  strength"  and  strategic  de-
fense, launched  the  Apollo  program  to  put  a  man  on  the  Moon,
and  revived  facets  of  the  American  System  of  Political  Econ-
omy, through  investment  tax  credits,  and  the  printing  of  U.S.
Treasury  bills,  the  first  step  in  a  move  that,  had  he  lived,  would
have  Ukely  led  to  a  severe  curtailment  of  the  independent
power  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Kennedy  paid  with  his
life  for  this  break  with  Britain  and  with  the  Russellite  one-
world  empire.  Lord  Russell  and  British  intelligence  figure
Sir  Hugh  Trevor-Roper,  in  1964,  launched  the  "British  Who  .
Killed  Kennedy  Committee,"  the  first  "critique"  of  the  War-
ren Commission  report,  to  ensure  that  London's  hand  in  the
JFK  murder  and  coverup  was  never  exposed.

With  a  very  few  exceptions,  the  United  States,  and  the


world,  have  been  in  an  accelerated  economic  and  cultural
decline  ever  since  the  Kennedy  assassination.      '  '  ^  -'

The  fall  of  the  Berlm  Wall  in  1989,  and  die  collapse  of
the  Soviet  Union  in  1991,  bringing  to  an  end  the  Cold  Wai;,
defined  a  moment  of  great  opportunity.  British  Prime  Minister
Margaret  Thatcher,  and  her  obedient  lap-dog,  U.S.  President
George  Bush,  instead  accelerated  the  drive  to  implement  Lord
Russell's  "world  government,"  calling  it  "the  new  world  or-
der." They  set  about  imposing,  upon  the  states  of  the  former
Warsaw  Pact,  IMF  conditionalities,  as  harsh  as  those  which
spread  genocide  in  Africa,  Asia,  and  Ibero- America  over  the
previous  15  years.  With  the  1991  "coafition"  war  against  Iraq,
the  precedent  was  set  for  the  final  implementation  of  the
new  empire.

These  plans  were  disrupted,  however,  with  the  1992  elec-
tion of  William  Jefferson  Clinton  as  President  of  the  United
States.  President  Clinton,  with  some  institutional  backing,
has  broken  the  Anglo-American  "special  relationship,"  and
gotten  into  what  Lyndon  LaRouche  has  described  as  "a  war
and  a  half  with  the  British.

The  most  noteworthy  conflicts  between  Washington  and
London  have  taken  place  over:  the  British-instigated  and  abet-
ted Serbian  genocide  in  the  former  Yugoslavia;  the  U.S.-
sponsored  Middle  East  peace  process;  and  Northern  Ireland.
When  President  Clinton  travelled  to  Bonn  and  Berlin  in  July
1994  to  hold  a  summit  with  Chancellor  Helmut  Kohl,  he
stunned  the  British  establishment  by  declaring  a  new  "strate-
gic partnership"  with  Germany.  Every  major  London  press
ouflet  immediately  pronounced  the  "Anglo-American  special
relationship"  defunct.

Months  earlier,  senior  officials  of  the  Clinton  administra-
tion had  hinted  at  a  break  with  the  IMF,  suggesting  that  Russia
needed  "less  shock  and  more  therapy."  Even  those  mild  re-
bukes, of  the  most  draconian  of  the  British-IMF  austerity
policies,  provoked  a  wave  of  British-mandated  press  slanders,
and  nearly  a  score  of  assassination  threats  and  attempts
against  the  U.S.  President.

President  Clinton  must  now  throw  His  support  behind  a
Russian  institutional  break  with  the  IMF.  An  American-Rus-
sian agreement  to  scrap  the  already  hopelessly  bankrupt  IMF
system  is  the  most  efficient  form  of  warfare  against  the  British
Empire  that  can  be  undertaken  today.  China  would  readily
join  in  such  an  alliance,  as  would  many  other  important  re-
gional powers.  Failure  by  President  Clinton  to  take  such  an
initiative  at  this  time,  could  produce  incalculable,  tragic  con-
sequences.

The  first  step  is  to  bust  up  the  prevailing  mythology  that
the  British  Empire  is  a  thing  of  the  past.

Alive  and  prospering

The  British  Empire  is  very  much  alive  and  well  today.
Behind  closed  doors  at  such  locations  as  Chatham  House,  the
London  headquarters  of  the  Royal  Institute  for  International
Affairs  (RIIA),  blueprints  for  the  consolidation  of  one- world
empire,  drawing  upon  the  resources  of  the  British  Common-


6     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


The  British  Commonwealth


Land-area

L^and-area  -

Land-area

Country

Population

(Hrrf)

Country

Population

(knT")

Country

Ripulation

(knf)

Where  Queen  Ellzabetti  II  Is  Sovereign:

29.  Lesotho

1,900,000

30,355

57.  British  Virgin

1 .  Antigua  and

30.  Malawi

9,500,000

118,484

Islands

.     16,108

153

'  Barbuda

65,000

442

31.  Malaysia

19,500,000

332,370

58.  Cayman  IslEtnds

29,700

259

2.  Australia

17,800,000

7,682,300

32.  Maldives

200,000

298

59.  Channel  islands

142,975

311

3.  Bahamas

-300,000

13,939

33.  Malta

400,000

316

60.  Falkland  Islands  and

4.  Barbados

300,000

431

34.  Mauritius

1,100,000

2,040

Dependencies

1,900

12,173

5.  Belize

200,000

22,965

35.  Mozambique

15,800,000

799,380

61 .  Gibraltar

28,848

6

6.  United  Kingdom

57,649,000

244,100

36.  Namibia

1,600,000

824^96

62.  Hong  Kong

5,800,000

1,077

7.  Canada

29,100,000

9,976,186

37.  Naunj

9,882

21

63.  Isle  of  Man

69,788

572

8.  Grenada

100,000

344

38.  Nigeria

98,100,000

923,853

64.  Montsenat

12,617

98

9.  Jamaica

2,500,000

11,424

39.  Pakistan

126,400,000

803,936

65.  Pitcaim  Island

65

5

10.  New  Zealand

3,524,800

270,534

40.  Seycheltes

100,000

453

66.  St.  Helena  and

1 1 .  Papua  New  Guinea

4,000,000

462,840

41.  SienB  Leone

4,600,000

71 ,740

Dependencies  ^

6.698

310

12.  St.  Krtts  and  Nevis

40,000

262

42.  Singapore

2,792,000

639

67.  Turi<s  ar»d

13.  St.  Lucia

100,000

616

43.  South  Africa

47,966,000

1,317,365

Cakx)s  Islands

12,697

500

14,  St.  Vincent  and

44.  Sri  Unka

17,900,000

65,610

the  Grenadines

100,000

389

45.  Swaziland

800,000

17.363

Australian:

15.  Solomon  Isiands

400,000

29,785

46.  Tanzania

29,800,000

945.037

68.  Coral  Sea  Islands

16.  Tuvalu

9,668

26

47,  Tonga

103,949

751

Territory

0

5

48.  Trinidad  and  Tobago  1 ,300,000

5,128

69.  Cocps  Islands

597

50

Where  Elizabeth  II  Is  not  formally  sovereign:

49.  Uganda

19,800,000

236,880

70.  Christmas  Island

929

135

17.  Bangladesh

116,600,000

143,998

50.  Vanuatu

200,000

14,763

71 .  Heard  Island  and

18.  Botswana

1,400,000

600,360

51.  Western  Samoa

200,000

2,831

McDonald  Islands

0

409

19.  Brunei  Darussalam

300,000

5,765

52.  Zambia

9,100,000

752,618

72.  Norfolk  Island

2,620

36

20.  Cameroon

13,100,000

475,442

53.  Zimbabwe

11,200,000

390,308

73.  Ashmore  and

21.  Cyprus

725,000

9,251

Cartier  Islands

0

1

22.  Dominica

100,000

751

Dependent  territories  of  Britain,  Australia,

23.  The  Gambia

1,100,000

10,600

New  Zealand:

New  Zealand:

24.  Ghana

16,900,000

238,537

British:

74.  Tokelau

1,600

10

25.  Guyana

800,000

214,969

54.  Anguilla

8,800

91

75.  Cook  Islands

17,977

241

26.  India

911,600,000

3,185,019

55.  Bermuda

60,686

52

76.  Niue

1,751

259

27.  Kenya

27,000,000

582,646

56.  British  Indian

28.  Kiribati

76,320

726

Ocean  Territory

0

220

Total                          1.632,477,973

31,S58,45S

EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Rqwit     7


wealth  and  the  United  Nations  Organization  (UNO),  have
already  been  drawn  up,  and  construction  is  under  way.

The  fact  that  the  most  powerful  nations  on  Earth  (not
including  the  British  Empire,  which  is  not  a  nation) — the
United  States;  a  temporarily  impaired,  but  thermonuclear-
armed  Russia;  and  China — have,  so  far,  stood  impotent  in
the  face  of  IMF  diktats,  and  made  no  effort  to  prevent  the
formation  of  the  World  Trade  Organization,  the  "third  leg"
of  the  United  Nations  world  financial  dictatorship,  illustrates
the  extent  to  which  supranational  world  government  is  al-
ready a  reality.

As  LaRouche  noted  above,  the  United  Kingdom  itself
has  very  Httle  to  do  with  the  new  British  Empire.  England,
Scotland,  Wales,  and,  especially.  Northern  Ireland,  are  today
little  more  than  slave  plantations  and  social  engineering
laboratories,  serving  the  needs  of  a  collection  of  families,
numbering  no  more  than  3,000-5,{XX)  people,  who  live  and
work  in  and  around  the  City  of  London,  a  one-mile-square
financial  and  corporate  district,  which  represents  the  greatest
concentration  of  financial  power  ever  assembled  in  one  lo-
cation.

These  families  constitute  a  financier  oligarchy;  they  are
the  power  behiiid  the  Windsor  throne.  They  view  themselves
as  the  heirs  to  the  Venetian  oligarchy,  which  infiltrated  and
subverted  England  from  the  period  1509-1715,  and  estab-
lished a  new,  more  virulent,  Anglo-Dutch-Swiss  strain  of  the
oligarchic  system  of  imperial  Babylon,  Persia,  Rome,  andBy-
zantium.

Among  their  own  ranks,  these  financier  oligarchs  refer  to
themselves  as  the  Club  of  the  Isles,  after  the  original  "Prince
of  the  Isles,"  Edward  Albert  (King  Edward  VII),  the  son  of
Queen  Victoria,  who  orchestrated  the  Crimean  War,  the
Opium  Wars,  the  Russo-Japanese  War,  and  World  War  I,  to
consolidate  Britain  as  the  primus  inter  pares  of  the  European
monarchies  and  feudal  families.  The  Club  of  the  Isles,  under
the  direction  of  the  British  monarchy,  draws  in  resources  and
personalities  from  the  Netherlands,  Switzerland,  France,  Ger-
many, and  Italy,  and  orchestrates  the  actions  of  a  caste  of
terminally  Anglophilic  Americans,  typified  by  Henry  Kis-
singer and  former  President  George  Bush.

To  begin  to  understand  the  breadth  and  scope  of  the  Brit-
ish Empire  today,  it  is  necessary  to  look  first  at  the  British
Commonwealth,  as  the  Club  of  the  Isles  is  itself  looking  at  it.

In  1995,  the  RIIA  published  Discussion  Paper  60,  by
Katharine  West,  titled  "Economic  Opportunities  for  Britain
and  the  Conmionwealth."  West,  an  Australian  professor  and
business  Consultant,  on  retainer  with  Chatham  House,  made
a  compelling  case,  that  the  52  nations  that  comprise  the  British
Commonwealth  have  the  potential  to  dominate  every  regional
economic  bloc  in  the  world,  from  the  Group  of  77,  to  the
Organization  of  Petroleum  Exporting  Countries,  to  the  Orga-
nization of  African  Unity,  to  the  Association  of  Southeast
Asian  Nations,  to  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization,
and,  even  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement.  The


Commonwealth,  which  includes  one  out  of  every  three  na-
tions on  this  planet,  comprises  the  largest  single  voting  bloc
in  the  UN  General  Assembly,  making  the  Warsaw  Pact  at  the
,  height  of  Soviet  Russian  power,  pale  by  comparison  (see
map).

llie  City  of  London  dominates  the  world's  speculative
markets  (see  Table  1).  A  tightly  interlocking  group  of  corpo-
rations, involved  in  raw  materials  extraction,  finance,  insur-
ance, transportation,  and  food  production,  controls  the  Ron's
share  of  the  world  market,  and  exerts  virtual  "choke  point"
control  over  world  industry.

In  a  recent  column  in  the  Club  of  the  Isles'  flagship  publi-
cation, the  London  Times,  Washington,  D.C.  Sunday  Times
bureau  chief  James  Adams  candidly  admitted  that  the  banking
houses  in  the  City  of  London  are  now  laundering  $400  billion
per  annum  in  illegal  narcotics  profits.  The  British  Common-
wealth subsumes  many  of  the  world's  most  notorious  flight-
capital  and  hot-money  havens.  The  Mont  Pelerin  Society,  the
radical-free  market  secret  organization  founded  in  1947  by
Friedrich  von  Hayek,  and  patronized  today  by  Prince  Philip,
maintains  the  most  accurate  accounting  ledgers  on  the  world' s
underground  economy.  How  is  that  possible?  Because  the
Club  of  the  Isles,  since  the  era  of  the  Opium  Wars  against
China,  and  the  escapades  of  Lord  Palmerston's  personal  agent
Giuseppi  Mazziiu  in  the  last  centuiy,  has  been  the  leading
sponsor  and  controller  of  global  organized  crime.

'A  concentration  camp  of  the  mind'

The  importance  of  Club  of  the  Isles  control  over  organized
crime  cannot  be  understated.  Lord  William  Rees-Mogg,  a  life
peer  in  the  House  of  Lords,  a  former  editor-in-chief  of  the
London  Times,  and  British  intelligence's  current  chief  case
officer  for  the  propaganda  war  against  U.S .  President  Clinton,
has  written  recently  that  the  world  is  moving  into  a  post-
industrial  "Third  Wave"  paradigm,  which  will  see  the  erosion
of  nation-states,  and  their  replacement  by  a  form  of  one-world
"electronic  feudahsm."  In  Rees-Mogg' s  Brave  New  World,
only  5%  of  the  population,  the  "cognitive  elite"  or  "Brain
Lords,"  will  prosper  and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  modem  technol-
ogy. The  vast  majority  of  peoples  of  the  world  are  doomed  to
a  life  of  misery.

To  prevent  social  unrest  under  these  brutal  conditions,  the
British  financier  oligarchy  has  gone  to  great  lengths,  since  the
Kennedy  assassination,  to  foster  a  drug-rock-sex  countercul-
ture, that  serves,  in  the  words  of  Aldous  Huxley,  as  "a  concen-
tration camp  of  the  mind."  From  the  ranks  of  that  countercul-
ture. Prince  Philip,  his  World  Wildlife  Fund,  and  its  "1,001
Club"  adjunct,  have  recruited  a  radical  environmentalist
movement,  a  neo-pagan  gang  like  the  Hitler  Youth  of  the
1920s.

To  achieve  world  empire,  as  Prince  Philip  has  admitted,
80%  of  the  world  population  must  be  eliminated  within  two
generations.  Over  4  billion  people  are  to  die  tcrealize  tiie
Windsor/Club  of  the  Isles  New  Dark  Age!


8     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


This  strategic  study

The  documentary  report  that  follows  is  broken  down  into
four  principal  sections.

The  first  section  deals  with  the  British  monarchy  itself.
Contrary  to  all  popular  myths,  Queen  Elizabeth  n  is  one  of
the  most  powerful  and  wealthy  figures  in  the  world,  wielding
absolute  power  over  the  lives  of  1 .5  billion  people.  You  will
learn  about  the  formal  powers  of  the  monarchy,  and  leam  the
identities  of  some  of  America's  most  famous  politicians  and
military  officers,  who  have  been  sworn  to  allegiance  to  the
Queen,  in  violation  of  the  U.S.  Constitution.

The  second  provides  a  picture  of  Britain's  vast  propa-
ganda and  psychological  warfare  machinery,  which  main-
tains control  over  the  flow  of  information  throughout  the
Commonwealth  and  beyond,  and  is  the  principal  apparatus
through  which  anew  form  of  mental-slavery,  an  "imperialism
of  the  mind,"  has  been  fostered.  You  will  leam  that  the  thou-


sands of  non-governmental  organizations  that  are  working  in
every  country  to  undermine  the  nation-state,  are  dominated
by  English  lords  and  ladies,  all  reporting  to  the  Queen's
Privy  Council.

The  third  section  lakes  the  reader  into  the  corridors  of
Chatham  House,  and  other  centers  of  British  intelligence,
where  the  future  structure  of  the  new  British  Empire  has
been  charted.

•  Finally,  we  provide  you  with  profilesof  the  corporations
that  make  up  the  interlocking  board  of  directors  of  the  Club
of  the  Isles,  and  provide  a  picture  of  how  they  wield  this
concentration  of  wealth  as  a  weapon  of  economic  warfare
against  every  nation  on  Earth.

Treat  this  report  as  a  combat  manual  for  a  war  against  the
British  Empire.  The  survival  of  all  nations,  and  billions  of
human  beings,  depends  on  victory  over  this  new  empire,  and
that  victory  begins  with  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  enemy.


TABLE  1


The  City  of  London's  share  of  world  financial  turnover,  1993


£  billions
(miliionsof
contracts)


Equity  (stocit)  marltets  trading

Trading  in  domestic  equity  securities — SEAQ
Trading  in  equities  in  markets  foreign  to  those

equities'  domicile  (e.g.,  IBM  traded  in

London) — SEAQ-lntemattonal

Corporate  debt  securities  (bonds)  trading

Trading  in  domestic  corporate  debt

Trading  in  debt  borrowed  in  markets  foreign  to
borrowers'  domicile  (i.e.,  IBM  bonds  issued  in
London)
Eurobond  (secondary)  trading


Government  debt  securities  (bonds)  trading         No  data

available


£282
£290


No  data

available

£2,866


Foreign  exchange  trading

Spot  and  derivatives  (including  futures)

Exchange  traded  futures  and  options


£44,559


London  as

percent  of

world


6.0%
64.0%


75.0%


27.0%


interest  rate  futures  and  options

(90.55)

11.0%

Commodity  futures  and  options

(52.764)

15.0%

Equity  options

(8.206)

4.7%

Over  the  counter  swaps,  forwards,  and  options

Swaps

£1.23

35.0%

Mortgage  derivatives

No  data
available

other  measures  of  financial  turnover

International  bank  lending

£884

15.8%

Internationa!  insurance  premiums  for  non-life

£8,645

7.5%

direct  business  and  reinsurarwe

International  cross-border  mergers  and

£17.1

45.0%

acquistions

Shipbroking  commissions

£0.275

50.0%

It  is  clear  that  the  City  of  London  dominates  the  world's
financial  turnover,  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  United
Kingdom's  relative  weight  in  the  world  economy.  As
measured,  rather  poorly,  by  Gross  Domestic  Product,
Britain's  economy  accounts  for  just  over  3%  of  the
world's  GDP.  However,  these  figures  report  only  on  the
financial  turnover  of  the  City  of  London  itself,  and  not  of
the  many  institutions  and  countries  around  the  world  that
are  directed,  to  some  degree  or  another,  by  the  British
Empire.  For  example,  if  foreign-exchange  trading  in
Canada,  Australia,  Singapore,  Hongkong,  and  a  few
other  British  Commonwealth  countries  is  added  to  the
27.0%  reported  here,  the  British  Empire's  share  becomes
45.0%,  If  the  foreign-exchange  trading  of  many  other
institutions  were  added,  such  as  J.P.  Morgan  and  Co.,
nominally  a  U.S.  bank,  but  historically  a  key  agent  of
British  influence  within  the  United  States,  then  the  share
attributable  to  the  Empire  becomes  even  greater.

In  other  words,  as  large  as  these  figures  are  for  just
the  United  Kingdom,  they  do  not  reflect  the  fact  that
many  of  these  financial  markets  are  almost  completely
denominated  by,  and,  in  fact,  were  brought  into
existence  by,  the  British  Empire.  The  Eurobond  market,
for  example,  began  with  S.G.  Warburg's  floating  of  a
bond  for  the  Italian  firm  Autostrade  in  1963.  Another
example;  The  present  monstrous  size  of  the  foreign-
exchange  markets  was  ensured  by  a  series  of  British
actions  beginning  in  the  late  1940s,  not  the  least  of
which  was  the  threat  of  the  British  ambassador  to  the
United  States,  in  spring  1 97 1 ,  to  redeem  all  British
government  holdings  of  U.S.  dollars  for  gold.  It  was  this
action  by  the  British  ambassador  that  precipitated
President  Richard  Nixon's  August  1971  decision —
guided  by  British  agent  of  influence,  later  chairman  of
the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve,  Paul  Volclcer — to  shatter  the
world  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  by  letting  the
dollar  fioat  relative  to  gold.


Source:  The  Competitive  Position  Of  London's  Financial  Services,  The  City  Research  Prcject,  London  Business  School,  March  1 995.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     9


I.  The  Monarchy


The  Nazi  roots  of
the  House  of  Windsor

by  Scott  Thompson


One  of  the  biggest  public  relations  hoaxes  ever  perpetrated
by  the  British  Crown,  is  that  King  Edward  VIII,  who  attdi-
cated  the  throne  in  1 936,  due  to  his  support  for  the  Nazis,  was
a  "black  sheep,"  an  aberration  in  an  otiierwise  unblemished
Windsor  line.  Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  truth.  The
British  monarchy,  and  the  City  of  London's  leading  Crown
bankers,  enthusiastically  backed  Hitler  and  the  Nazis,  bank-
rolled the  Fuhrer's  election,  and  did  everything  possible  to
build  the  Nazi  war  machine,  for  Britain's  planned  geopoliti-
cal war  between  Germany  and  Russia.

,  Support  for  Nazi-style  genocide  has  always  been  at  the
heart  of  House  of  Windsor  policy,  and  long  after  the  abdica-
tion of  Edward  VIII,  the  Merry  Windsors  maintained  their
direct  Nazi  links.

,  , :  So,  when  Prince  Philip,  co-founder  with  Prince  Bemhard
of  the  Netherlands  of  the  World  Wildlife  Fund  (WWF),  teUs
an  interviewer  that  he  hopes  to  be  "reincarnated  as  a  deadly
virus"  to  help  solve  the  "population  problem,"  he  is  just
"doin'  what  comes  naturally"  for  any  scion  of  the  Anglo-
Dutch  oligarchy.

To  get  beyond  the  soap  opera  stuff  and  truly  understand
the  Windsors  today,  it  is  useful  to  start  with  Prince  Philip.
Not  only  was  he  trained  in  the  Hitler  Youth  curriculum,  but
his  German  brothers-in-law,  with  whom  he  lived,  all  became
high-ranking  figures  in  the  Nazi  Party.

Before  his  family  was  forced  into  exile.  Prince  Philip
had  been  in  line  of  succession  to  the  Greek  throne,  estab-
lished after  a  British-run  coup  against  the  son  of  King  Lud-
wig  of  Bavaria,  who  became  King  Otto  I  of  the  Hellenes.
Having  dispatched  King  Otto  in  1862,  London  ran  a  talent
search  for  a  successor,  which  resulted  in  the  selection  of
Prince  William,  the  son  of  the  designated  heir  and  nephew
to  the  Danish  king,  Crown  Prince  Christian.  In  1 862,  Prince
William  of  the  Danes  was  installed  as  King  George  I  of
Greece,  and  married  a  granddaughter  of  Czar  Nicholas  I  in
1866.  Prince  Philip  is  a  grandson  of  Queen  Victoria,  and  he
is  related  to  most  of  thecurrent  and  former  crowned  heads
of  Europe,  including  seven  czars.

The  marriages  of  Prince  Philip's  sisters  definitely
strengthened  the  German  aristocratic  ties.  During  the  years
from  1931  to  1932,  Philip's  four  older  sisters. married  as


follows:  Margarita  to  a  Czech-Austrian  prince  named  Gott-
fried von  Hohenlohe-Langenburg,  a  great-grandson  of  En-
gland's Queen  Victoria;  Theodora  to  Berthold,  the  margrave
of  Baden;  Cecilia  to  Georg  Donatus,  grand  duke  of  Hesse-
by-Rhine,  also  a  great-grandson  of  Queen  Victoria;  and,
Sophie  to  Prince  Christoph  of  Hesse.

Three  of  Philip's  brothers-in-law  were  part  of  a  group
of  German  aristocrats  who  were  Anglophile  and  pro-Nazi
at  the  same  time,  and  who  remain  a  subversive  force  in
Germany  to  this  day.

Enter  Prince  Bemhard

His  Royal  Highness  Prince  Bemhard,  royal  consort  to
Queen  Juliana  of  the  Netherlands  and  father  of  the  current
Queen  Beatrix,  co-founded  and  became  the  firet  head  of  the
World  Wildlife  Fund  (now  the  World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature)
in  October  1961.  When  the  Lockheed  scandal  forced  Prince
Bemhard  to  resign  from  his  most  important  public  functions
in  1971,  he  was  replaced  by  Prince  Philip.  Prince  Bemhard,
like  Prince  Philip,  whom  he  recmited  to  the  eco-fascist  cause,
had  strong  roots  in  the  Nazi  movement.

In  fact,  the  whole  House  of  Orange  did:  Queen  Wilhel-
mina,  mother  of  the  future  Queen  Juliana,  married  a  right-
wing  playboy  who  begged  for  money  for  Hitler;  Juliana
married  an  SS  man  (Prince  Bemhard);  and,  Queen  Juliana's
daughter  Beatrix  married  a  former  member  of  Hitler  Youth.

Prince  Bemhard  first  became  interested  in  the  Nazis  in
1934,  during  his  last  year  of  study  at  the  University  of  Berlin.
He  was  recruited  by  a  member  of  the  Nazi  intelligence
services,  but  first  worked  openly  in  the  motorized  SS.  Bem-
hard went  to  Paris  to  work  for  the  firm  IG  Farben,  which
pioneered  Nazi  Economics  Minister  Hjalmar  Schacht'  s  slave
labor  camp  system  by  building  concentration  camps  to  con-
vert coal  into  synthefic  gasoline  and  rubber.  Bemhard' s  role
was  to  conduct  espionage  on  behalf  of  the  SS.  According
to  the  April  5,  1976  issue  of  Newsweek,  this  role,  as  part  of
a  special  SS  intelligence  unit  in  IG  Farbenindustrie,  had
been  revealed  in  testimony  at  the  Nuremberg  trials.

When  Bemhard  left  the  SS  to  marry  the  future  Queen
Juliana,  he  signed  his  letter  of  resignation  to  Adolf  Hitler,
"Heil  Hitler!"  William  Hoffman  writes  in  his  book  Queen
Juliana:  "Tensions  [over  the  marriage]  were  not  cooled
when  . . .  Adolf  Hitler  forwarded  his  own  congratulatory
message.  The  newspaper  Het  Volk  editorialized  that  'it  would
be  better  if  the  future  Queen  had  found  a  consort  in  some
democratic  country  rather  than  in  the  Third  Reich.'  "

This  is  the  man  who  recruited  Prince  Philip  to  eco-
facism,  but  Prince  Philip's  Nazi  roots  had  been  laid  much
earlier.

Hitler  Youth  and  universal  fascism

Through  the  influence  of  his  sister  Theodora,  young  Philip
was  sent  to  the  German  school  near  Lake  Constantine  that  had


10     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


been  founded  by  Berthold's  father,  Max  von  Baden,  working
through  his  longtime  personal  secretary,  Kurt  Hahn.  During
World  War  I,  Prince  Max  von  Baden  had  been  chancellor,
while  the  Oxford-trained  Hahn  first  served  as  head  of  the
Berlin  Foreign  Ministry's  intelligence  desk,  then  as  special
adviser  to  Prince  Max  in  the  Versailles  Treaty  negotiations.
Von  Baden  and  Hahn  set  up  a  school  in  a  wing  of  Schloss
Salem,  employing  a  combination  of  monasticism  and  the  Na-
zis' "strength-through-joy"  system.  At  first  a  supporter  of  the
Nazis,  Hahn,  who  was  part  Jewish,  soon  got  into  trouble  with
the  SS,  and  came  to  support  the  more  centrist  elements  of  the
Nazi  Party.  What  Hahn  really  had  become  is  what  Michael
Ledeen  has  termed  a  "universal  fascist,"  in  the  sense  of  Vladi-
mir Jabotinsky,  Count  Coudenhove-Kalergi,  the  Strasser
brothers,  and  other  fascists  whom  the  hard-core  Nazis  would
have  no  dealings  with.

Although  Halm's  powerful  connections  permitted  him  to
escape  the  concentration  camps,  he  was  forced  to  leave  the
school  he  founded  in  Germany  before  Philip's  arrival  there,
and  established  a  new  school  in  Scotland,  called  Gordons-
toun.  It  would  play  a  major  role  in  rearing  all  the  male  children
of  Queen  Elizabeth  II  andPhihp.  When  Philip  arrived  at
Hahn's  school  in  Schloss  Salem,  it  was  in  control  of  the  Hitler
Youth  and  the  Nazi  Party,  and  the  curriculum  had  become
Nazi  "race  science."  Hahn  became  an  adviser  to  the  Foreign
Office.in  London,  urging  policies  of  appeasement  based  upon
appeals  to  the  "centrist"  Nazis.

Philip's  relatives  work  for  the  SS

The  husband  of  Philip's  sister  Sophie,  Prince  Christoph,
was  embraced  by  the  Nazis,  who  saw  him  as  a  channel
to  the  appeasement  faction  in  Britain  epitomized  by  King
Edward  VIII.  Joining  the  Nazi  Party  in  1933,  by  1935  Prince
Christoph  was  chief  of  the  Forschungsamt  (directorate  of
scientific  research),  a  special  intelligence  operation  run  by
Hermann  Goering,  and  he  was  also  Standartenfuhrer  (colo-
nel) of  the  SS  on  Heinrich  Himmler's  personal  staff.  The
Forschungsamt  used  electronic  intelligence-gathering  meth-
ods to  police  the  Nazi  Party,  while  working  with  the  Gestapo
against  the  Catholic  Church,  the  Jews,  and  labor  organiza-
tions.

When  rumors  of  homosexuality  spread  against  Capt.
Ernst  Roehm  of  the  Stormtroopers,  Himmler  turned  to  the
Forschungsamt' s  eavesdroppers,  and  ordered  the  Night  of
the  Long  Knives  as  a  result.  The  eldest  of  Prince  Christoph
and  Sophie's  children  was  named  Karl  Adolf,  after  Hitler.
Later,  Prince  Philip  would  promote  his  education.

Prince  Christoph's  brother,  Philip  of  Hesse,  married  a
daughter  of  the  king  of  Italy,  and  became  the  official  liaison
between  the  Nazi  and  Fascist  regimes.

Four  years  after  Prince  Philip  left  Schloss  Salem  to  attend
Gordonstoun  Academy  in  Scotland,  on  Nov.  16, 1937,  Philip
learned  that  his  sister  Ceciha  and  her  husband  Georg  Dona-


tus,  hereditary  grand  duke  of  Hesse-by-Rhine,  had  crashed
in  one  of  Goering's  Junker  aircraft  on  a  trip  to  London
for  Georg's  brother's  wedding.  According  to  the  British
magazine  Private  Eye,  the  funeral  became  a  gathering  point
for  leading  Nazis  and  their  appeasers.  Prince  Philip  himself
developed  secretive  ties  with  King  Edward  VIII,  continuing
af^er  Edward  was  deposed  in  1936.

In  fact,  one  of  the  central  figures  in  the  1930s  Nazi-
British  back  channel  was  Philip's  uncle  and  sponsor.  Lord
Louis  Mountbatten  (originally,  Battenbergj  a  branch  of  the
House  of  Hesse).  Until  he  was  forced  to  abdicate, '  King
Edward  VIII  enjoyed  the  full  backing  of  "Dickie"  Mountbat-
ten. Through  much  of  World  War  II,  secret  channels  of
communication  were  maintained  between  the  British  royal
family  and  their  pro-Hitler  cousins  in  Germany,  by  Lord
Mountbatten,  through  his  sister  Louise,  who  was  crown  prin-
cess of  pro-Nazi  Sweden.  Louise  was  Prince  Philip's  aunt.

Although  Buckingham  Palace's  rumor  mill  has  tried  to
depict  this  wartime  collaboration  with  the  enemy  as  mere
family  correspondence,  the  channel  apparently  included
messages  from  Prince  Philip' s  secret  ally,  the  duke  of  Wind-
sor (the  former  Edward  VIII).

On  Nov.  20, 1995,  the  Washington  Times  reported,  based
on  recently  discovered  Portuguese  Secret  Service  files  first
pubhshed  in  the  London  Observer,  that  the  duke  of  Windsor
had  been  in'close  collaboration  with  the  Nazis  in  Spain  and
Portugal  to  foment  a  revolution  in  wartime  Britain,  that
would  topple  the  Churchill  government,  depose  his  brother
King  George  VI,  and  allow  him  to  regain  the  throne,  with
Queen  Wallis  at  his  side.  Portuguese  surveillance  revealed
that  Walter  Schellenberg,  head  of  Gestapo  counterintelli-
gence, was  one  point  of  contact  in  this  plot.  After  Schellen-
berg met  with  the  Spanish  ambassador  to  Portugal,  Nicolas
Franco,  brother  of  fascist  Gen.  Francisco  Franco,  Ambassa-
dor Franco  told  a  Portuguese  diplomat:  'The  duke  of  Wind-
sor, free  from  the  responsibilities  of  the  war,  in  disagreement
with  English  politicians,  could  be  the  man  to  put  at  the  head
of  the  Empire."

Whatever  correspondence  was  hidden  in  Sophie  and
Prince  Christoph's  Kronberg  Castle,  King  George  VI,  in
June  1 945,  felt  compelled  to  dispatch  the  former  MI-5  officer
turned  "Surveyor  of  the  King' s  Pictures,"  Anthony  Blunt,  to
gather  up  the  correspondence.  Queen  ElizabetJi  II  reportedly
insisted  that  there  be  no  interrogation  of  Blunt  about  his
secret  trip  to  the  castle.  Otherwise,  it  is  notable  that  starting
with  an  exchange  between  King  George  VI  and  President
Eisenhower,  the  Hbuse  of  Windsor  has  been  desperate  to
keep  classified  those  documents  from  Kronberg  Castle  that
fell  into  American  Army  hands,  long  beyond  the  nOTmal
length  of  time.  Clearly,  Prince  Philip's  patron  Lord  Dickie
Mountbatten,  Mountbatten' s  sister  Crown  Princess  Louise,
and  Philip's  brother-in-law  Prince  Christoph  of  Hesse  were
not  just  exchanging  Christmas  greetings.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report      1 1


The  ultimate  insider
trader  is  the  Queen

by  Scott  Thompson


Her  Majesty  Queen  Elizabeth  II  is  the  wealthiest  crone  in  the
world,  who  gives  new  meaning  to  the  phrase,  "stinking  rich."
Her  total  wealth  is  divided  into  two  parts.  One  is  a  Venetian-
stylc  fondo,  that  is,  it  is  inalienable  and  must  be  passed  on  to
her  heir,  free  from  inheritance  tax.  The  second  part  of  her
wealth  consists  of  her  private  collection  of  castles,  jewelry,
and  art,  and  a  portfolio  of  blue  chip  stocks  and  bonds  and  real
estate  investments  around  the  world.  Her  investment  portfolio
is  estimated  to  be  worth  £3  billion.

One  of  the  secrets  to  her  disposable  wealth  is  that  she
amassed  it  tax  free  until  1992 — the  Annus  Horribilis,  which
started  with  the  separation  of  Charles  and  Diana  and  ended
with  the  burning  of  Windsor  Castle — when  she  entered  a
memorandum  of  understanding  to  pay  income,  capital  gains,
and  inheritance  taxes  on  this  portfolio;  although,  the  Queen
can  break  this  agreement  at  any  time  she  desires.

A  Second,  most  important  secret  is  that  the  Queen  is  the
world's  ultimate  "insider  trader."  She  not  only  gets  tips  from
British  financiers,  but  also  has  access  to  all  the  state  secrets,
through  the  "boxes."  Thus,  if  the  Queen  learns  from  among  all
public  and  private  British  Empire  intelligence  and  economic
warfare  entities  reporting  to  her,  for  example,  that  Nigeria  is
about  to  be  destabilized,  she  can  immediately  call  her  broker.
Under  the  secrecy  laws  of  the  British  Empire,  it  would  be
unthinkable  for  anyone  to  consider  pressing  charges  of  insider
trading  and  conflict  of  interest  against  die  sovereign:  In  fact,
only  a  handful  of  trusted  advisers  would  ever  know.

The  Queen  thus  follows  the  Venetian  system  of  being
Doge  of  a  financier-oligarchy.  One  key  point  in  this  shift  of
the  sovereign  as  the  largest  landholder,  to  the  sovereign  as  a
financier,  took  place  under  George  III,  who  turned  over  most
of  the  Crown-Lands  to  Parliament  in  exchange  for  a  Civil  List
of  payments  to  fund  the  monarchy  and  its  retainers,  which
has  expanded  ever  since  (when  all  the  perquisites  are  taken
into  account).  The  Civil  List,  especially  since  the  reign  of
Queen  Victoria's  heir,  Edward  VII,  represented  a  vast  pool
for  financial  speculation.

Incestuous  relationship

Since  at  least  King  Edward  VII  (1901-10),  there  has  been
an  incestuous  relationship  between  the  monarch  of  the  British
Empire  and  the  financier  oligarchy,  especially  with  Barings
Bank,  dating  fi^m  before  the  Opium  Wars,  and  with  Moirgan
Grenfell  (see  corporate  profiles,  p.  67).  Edward  VII  was  said


to  be  "philo-Semitic,"  but  in  reality  he  was  "philo-banker."
Edward  had  a  geopolitical  vision  in  the  Venetian  tradition,
and  it  was  one  of  brutal  simplicity:  the  encirclement  of  Ger-
many with  a  hostile  coalition,  and  the  destruction  of  the  na-
tion-states of  Europe.  With  this  ambition  driving  him,  Edward
VII  set  up  the  Anglo-Franco-Russian  alliance  that  became
known  as  the  Triple  Entente.  His  policies  led  directly  to  explo-
sion of  world  war  in  1914.

One  of  Edward  VII's  leading  financial  advisers  was  Hun-
garian Jewish  banker  Baron  Hirsch,  who  purchased  an  intro-
duction to  Edward  in  1890  from  Crown  Prince  Rudolf  of
Austria.  When  Baron  Hirsch  died  in  1896,  his  position  as
leading  adviser  passed  on  to  his  executor,  another  Jewish
banker,  Ernest  Cassel,  whose  daughter  and  heiress,  Edwina,
would  ultimately  marry  Lord  Louis  Mountbatten,  a  chief  in-
fluence on  Prince  Philip  and  Prince  Charles.

The  Rothschilds  and  the  Sassoons,  also  Jewish  bankers,
were  friendly  with  Edward  VII,  as  were  the  American  finan-
ciers J.P.  Morgan  and  E.H.  Harriman.

Within  a  span  of  less  than  ten  years,  Edward  VII  amassed
a  fortuneof  £100  milHon  (at  1991  prices),  which  would  place
him  among  the  world's  wealthiest.  This  was  the  start  of  the
modem-era  financial  wealth  of  the  British  monarchy;

Edward  VII's  heir,  George  V  (1910-36),  tended  to  be
more  plodding  in  his  investments.  Nonetheless,  he  continued
tiie  "philo-bankerism"  of  his  father.  Geor^  V's  private  fi-
nancial adviser  from  1929  onward  was  ^a  Canadian,  Sir  Ed-
ward Peacock,  of  Barings  merchant  bank  and  a  director  of
the  Bank  of  England.  Sir  Edward  had  been  prepared  for  this
position  by  his  predecessor.  Lord  Revelstoke,  who  had  also
been  with  Barings.  In  1934,  for  services  rendered  the  Crown,
Peacock  was  knighted  a  Grand  Cross  of  the  Royal  Victorian
Order,  which  is  part  of  the  "Sovereign's  Gift"  that  does  not
require  advice  of  the  prime  minister.  George  V  liked  the  inces-
tuous relationship  with  "the  City";  for  example,  he  selected
Lord  Cromer  as  his  Lord  Chamberlain  (which  is  the  highest
household  rank),  who  was  briefly  managing  director  of  Bar-
ings and  a  director  of  several  other  companies.

When  George  V  died  in  1936 — the  year  of  the  three
kings— he  left  £100  million  (at  1991  prices).

George  VI  (1936-52),  who  ascended  the  throne  when  his
brother  Edward  VIII  abdicated  in  1936,  inherited  about  half
their  father's  fortune.  He  also  inherited  the  advice  of  Barings'
head,  Sir  Edward  Peacock,  who  would  continue  to  advise  the
monarch  until  his  death,  well  into  Queen  Elizabeth  II's  reign.
Queen  Elizabeth  II  is  believed  to  have  inherited  the  bulk  of
George  VI's  fortune,  some  £50  million,  to  invest  and  reinvest
tax  free  from  1952,  when  she  became  Queen.  Conservative
estimates  are  that  her  portfolio  grew  to  £3  billion  (present
value).

Apart  from  Barings,  which,  going  back  300  years,  had
worked  with  the  British  East  India  Company  and  which,  after
its  bankruptcy  last  year,  was  taken  over  by  the  "hot-money-
laundering"  Dutch  firm  ING,  the  Queen  had  relied  upon  Mor-


12     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


^.!!■.!-.^l||!pp|P(lllill^^,,-k


gan  Grenfell,  which  was  taken  ow  by  Deutsche  Bank,  trans-
forming that  German  bank  into  ^ut  of  the  British  Empire's
financial  network  in  the  process  Morgan  Grenfell  senior  ex-
ecutive WilUam  Hill-Wood,  fiiiadcial  adviser  to  King  George
VI,  continued  his  services  to  George's  daughter  Elizabeth,
who  gave  him  a  knighthood  of  the  Royal  Victorian  Order.
Undoubtedly,  the  Queen  was  not  pleased  by  ING's  takeover
of  Barings  and  by  Deutsche  Bai&*s  takeover  of  Morgan
Grenfell.

The  Queen's  'fondo'  and  her  private  property

The  Queen  has  some  310  residences.  Almost  all  are  part
of  the  inalienable/omio  to:  be  passed  on  to  her  heir,  and  most
are  "grace  and  favor"  houses  forfemily  members  and  retain-
ers, ranging  from  the  humble  to  the  magnificent.  Included
in  the/omio  are  five  castles:: Buckingham  Palace,  Windsor
Castle,  Holyroodhouse  in  Edinbiiigh;jKensington  Palace  (oc-
cupied by  Princess  Diana),  and  Sfc'James  Palace  (occupied
by  Prince  Charles).  Two  other  castles,  Balmoral  and  San-
dringham,  are  private  property,  (M^gipally  purchases  of  Queen
Victoria.  All  these  properties  are-inaintained  by  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Environment,(presuniably!  because  they  are  the
habitat  of  an  endangered  species)^;' :  i.  ■ .

Queen  Elizabeth  recently,  created  the  Royal  Collection
Trust — which  she  heads,  as  williheri  heir — to  which  were
transferred  all  the  7,(KX)  paintings;  20,000  Old  Master  draw-
ings, and  various  antiques acqiiiied  before  Queen  Victoria's
reign,  all  part  of  the/o/w/o.  At  the  instigation  of  Prince  Philip,
duke  of  Edinburgh,  a  chapel-owi^'by.the  royal  family  was
converted  to  a  museum  for  the-display  of  this  art,  a  fraction  at
a  time.  As  part  of  her  private  ^foitoiDe,  the  Queen  has  a  large
collection  of  art  works  ranging-frpm  the  Renaissance  to  the
craziest  of  modem  art.  ■:.:.,

The  Duchy  of  Lancaster  is  idso  part  of  her  fondo:  The
duchy  is  comprised  of  properties  stolen  in  the  thirteenth  cen-
mry  from  the  rebel  Simon  de  Monfort,  who  tried  to  create  a
powerful  Parliament  and  failed  in  1265,  only  to  have  his  land
and  life  taken  by  Edmund  Crouchback,  youngest  son  of  Henry
HI.  In  1 987,  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster  was  36,456  acres,  mainly
agricultural  land;  within  the  duchy,the  freehold  of  2.25  acres
in  the  Strand  area  of  London  (lying  between  the  Savoy  Hotel
and  Somerset  House)  is  so  valuable,  that  the  Queen  had  The
Duchy  of  Lancaster  Act  of  1988  steered  through  Parhament
allowing  her  to  develop  and  sell  this  area.

The  Prince  of  Wales,  the  Heir  Presumptive,  Charles,  came
into  the  income  of  the  second  royal  family  duchy,  the  Duchy
of  Cornwall,  which  has  44,000  acres,  including  another  posh
section  of  London.  Prince  Charles  agreed  to  return  50%  of
Cornwall's  earnings  to  the  state,  which  was  reduced  to  25%
upon  his  marriage  to  Lady  Diana.  As  for  the  Queen,  she  uses
part  of  the  income  from  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster  to  supplement
the  Civil  List  in  giving  an  income  to  her  close  relatives.

The  famous  Crown  Jewels,  which  are  kept  in  the  Tower
of  London,  except  for  major  events  such  as  coronations,  are


part  of  the  fondo.  Apart  from  those,  the  Queen  has  inherited
or  bought  the  largest  private  collections  of  jewels  in  the  world.
At  auction,  it  might  bring  £350  million  ( 1 991  currency).  There
is  no  complete  listing  of  the  Queen's  private  collection,  but
the  monarchist  Lesfie  Field  estimates  that  it  includes:  "14
tiaras,  34  pairs  of  earrings,  98  brooches,  46  necklaces,  37
bracelets,  5  pendants,  14  watches,  and  15  rings."

The  history  of  the  collection  again  shows  the  incesmous
relationship  between  the  Crown  and  the  City  of  London.
When  the  British  East  India  Company  defeated  the  maharajah
of  the  Punjab,  in  1 85 1 ,  the  company  presented  to  Queen  Vic-
toria what  was  then  the  world's  largest  diamond,  the  Koh-
in~noor  diamond.  Queen  Victoria  took  sadistic  pleasure  in
displaying  the  Koh-in-noor  to  the  defeated  maharajah  on  his
visit  to  Buckingham  Palace,  and  he  left  muttering,  "Mrs.
Fagin."  At  the  conclusion  of  the  Boer  War,  the  peace  offering
to  the  sovereign  included  the  largest  uncut  diamond  in  the
world,  the  Cullinen  Diamond,  weighing  3,106  carats.  Two  cut
stones  from  the  Cullinen  Diamond  went  to  adom  the  Crown
Jewels,  and  the  Queen  today  possesses  a  brooch  that  consists
of  the  third  and  fourth  largest  stones  (94.4  and  63.6  carats)
cut  from  the  Cullinen  Diamond.  The  British  sovereigns  were
regularly  showered  with  jewels  by  propitiatory  princes  of
India,  and,  as  that  largesse  ran  out,  they  received  special  trea-
sures from  Anglo-American  diamond  finds  in  South  Africa.
For  example,  shortly  after  World  War  II,  Mary  Oppenheimer
presented  Princess  Elizabeth  with  a  6-carat,  blue-white  dia-
mond for  helping  advertise  Anglo-American's  diamond  mo-
nopoly at  a  time  when  diamond  prices  were  depressed.  Later,
Princess  Anne,  the  Queen's  oldest  daughter,  on'her  21st  birth-
day, received  a  necklace  of  colored  diamonds.  Today,  an  adu-
latory group  of  oil-rich  sheikhs  and  emirs  adds  to  the  Queen' s
private  collection.

Her  Majesty's  portfolio

It  is  forbidden  for  Parliament  to  discuss  the  fact  that  the
Queen  has  kept  her  private  wealth  a  secret.  But,  in  1977,  it
was  discovered  through  a  Parliamentary  question,  that  the
Bank  of  England  had  established  a  special  nominee  company,
the  Bank  of  England  Nominees  Ltd.  (BOEN),  to  hide  invest-
ments of  the  Queen's  portfolio,  as  well  as  those  of  others
whom  she  recommends,  such  as  King  Fahd  of  Saudi  Arabia,
the  Sultan  of  Brunei,  King  Bhumibhol  Adulayadej  of  Thai-
land, and  the-Kuwaiti  Investment  Office.  But,  BOEN  is  only
one  of  the  means  apparently  employed  by  the  Queen's  royal
insider  trader  to  hide  her  wealth.

Philip  Beresford,  author  of  The  Book  of  the  British  Rich,
written  in  conjunction  with  the  Sunday  Times  of  London,  has
said  that  the  Queen  tends  to  invest  in  "blue  chip"  stocks,
including  Rio  Tinto  Zinc,  General  Electric  Company  of  Great
Britain,  Imperial  Chemical  Industries,  Royal  Dutch  Shell,  and
British  Petroleum.  Among  the  firms  through  which  she  has
invested  are  Barings,  S.G.  Warburg's  subsidiary  Rowe  &  Pit-
man, and  Cazanove.  The  Queen's  holding  in  Rio  Tinto  Zinc


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report      13


m


(RTZ)  was  first  discovered  through  a  leak  from  a  source  at
the  Bank  of  England  to  Andrew  Morton,  who  wrote  the  au-
thorized biography  of  Diana,  Princess  of  Wales.

According  to  Charles  Higham,  co-author  of  Elizabeth  and
Philip,  the  Queen  is  a  major  stockholder  in  RTZ,  which,  with
her  old  friends  at  Anglo-American,  controls  12%  of  the
world' s  precious,  strategic,  and  base  metals  and  minerals  (see
corporate  profiles).  Forbes,  magazine  also  reported  that  she
was  a  major  RTZ  shareholder,  as  was  the  Bank  of  England.
Higham  quotes  Sir  Mark  Turner,  then  chairman  of  RTZ:
"You're  running  into  problems  of  what  the  government  is
going  to  say  about  the  Queen's  involvement.  RTZ  is  one  of
the  great  assets  of  the  country."

RTZ  was  in  on  developing  North  Sea  oil  from  the  begin-
ning. Writes  Higham:  "The  Queen  undoubtedly  approved  the
heavy  investment,  which  would  enrich  her  in  the  immediate
fixture."  Starting  in  June  1975,  RTZ  and  Texaco  were  spear-
heading shipments  fi-om  the  North  Sea  Argyll  Field,  to  the
refineries  of  British  Petroleum,  in  which  firm  Queen  Elizabeth
is  also  believed  to  hold  an  interest.

In  1976,  the  U.S.  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,
in  hearings  chaired  by  Frank  Church  (D-Idaho),  and  attended
by  Attorney  General  Edward  H.  Levi,  found  that  an  interna-
tional cartel,  of  which  RTZ  was  a  major  partner,  had  been
formed  in  1971  to  fix  the  world's  uranium  prices.  A  federal
grand  jury  found  corroborating  evidence  of  RTZ'S  role.  Also
discovered  to  be  part  of  the  cartel  was  Mary  Kathleen  Ura-
nium of  Australia,  which  has  been  encouraging  indigenous,
Aborigine  agitation  to  occupy  large  uranium-bearing  lands,
taking  them  out  of  production.  ■

•When,  in  May  1976,  power  companies  brought  charges-
against  the  U.S.  Westinghouse  Electric  Corp.  claiming  that  it
failed  to  supply  uranium  according  to  contract,  Westinghouse
responded  with  the  allegation  that  RTZ  and  other  corporations
had  formed  a  cartel  that  was  forcing  up  world  prices,  prevent-
ing Westinghouse  fi*om  meeting  its  contracts.  Lord  Denning
and  the  Law  Lords  quashed  Westinghouse' s  ability  to  take
depositions  in  the  United  Kingdom,  even  under  grant  of  im-
munity from  self-incrimination,  in  order  to  protect  RTZ's
directors  and  their  shareholder,  the  Queen,  from  exposure.
But,onJune  16, 1976,inhearings  in  theU.S. House  Interstate
and  Foreign  Commerce  Subcommittee  on  Oversight  and  In-
vestigations, Jeny  McAfee,  chairman  of  the  Gulf  Oil  Corp.,
admitted  that  the  cartel  in  which  RTZ  was  his  partner  had,  in
fact,  increased  the  world  price  of  uranium.

When  the  Tennesee  Valley  Authority  tried  to  sue  RTZ,
Gulf  released  new  documents  inculpating  RTZ  and  its  Rio
Algom  subsidiary  in  Canada,  at  which  point,  the  U.S.  Attor-
ney General  demanded  immunized  testimony.  However,  the
directors  of  RTZ  and  the  Queen  were  once  again  protected  by
the  Law  Lords,  who  claimed  that  the  RTZ  directors  did  not
have  to  appear  before  an  American  court,  as  this  was  "an
unacceptable  invasion  of  British  sovereignty."  So,  despite
the  fact  that  a  cartel  involving  HM  Queen  Elizabeth  II  was
hampering  nuclear  energy  development  in  the  United  States,


the  "free-trader"  Queen  was  protected  by  her  appointees
among  the  Law  Lords.

Dixie  queen

According  to  the  statements  of  Sen.  Thomas  J.  Mclntyre
(D-N.H.)  and  Rep.  SilvioO.  Conte  (R-Mass.)  in  1971,  Queen
Elizabeth  held  a  major  share  in  Courtaulds  Textile.  Cour-
taulds  came  to  their  attention  when  the  Queen  had  used  it  to
hide  her  ownership  in  the  largest  plantation  in  Mississippi.
The  Queen  apparentiy  has  used  Courtaulds  as  a  nominee  for
the  purchase  of  other  stocks,  but  what  bothered  the  congress-
men was  that  the  wealthiest  woman  in  the  world  was  getting
agricultural  subsidies  to  run  a  plantation  in  the  United  States.
In  1968,  these  two  congressmen  had  described  in  the  Con-
gressional Recordhow  the  Queen  obtained  one  of  the  world's
largest  plantations  from  Courtaulds,  complete  with  share-
croppers, in  Scott,  Mississippi,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the
Mississippi  River  near  the  bwder  with  Arkansas.  It  was
known  as  the  Delta  and  Pine  Land  Company,  or  "the  Queen' s
Farm,"  and  it  consisted  of  38,000  acres  with  rich  soil,  a  fac-
tory, and  a  mill.  At  the  time,  it  was  worth  $44.5  milfion.  It
employed  hundreds  of  African- American  laborers  at  minimal
wages.  Since  1 968,  it  had  been  subadized  by  the  UiS.  Depart-
ment of  Agriculture  to  the  tune  of  S1.5million.  On  April  16,
1970,  Senator  McMtyre,  while  introducing  a  bill  relating  to
limitations:  on  farm  payments,  sjlid:  "We  paid  the  Queen
$120,000  for  not  planting  cotton  bn  thefarml'^nd'she  owns  in
Mississif)pi;"  Fbllowing  the  publicity,  the;  Queen  seems  to
have  sold  the  plantation  back  to  Courtaulds,  but  some  believe
Courtaulds  merely  exerted  nominee  ownership.  In  any  event,
the  Queen's  friend.  Lord  Rab  Butler,  was  aditector  of  Cour-
taulds kt  this  time,  and  the  Queen  was  said  by  Conte  to  be  a
major  stockholder  in  Courtaulds.

New  Yorker  magazine  reported  that  the  Queen  is  the
largest  owner  of  slum  property  in  New  York  City,  including
the  pornography-  and  drug-riddled  42nd  Street.  Perhaps  these
are  additional  "grace  and  favor"  spots  for  her  loyal  subjects.


Her  Majesty's
'Prerogative  Powers'

by  Scott  Thompson


During  the  Persian  Gulf  war.  Her  Majesty  Queen  Elizabeth
II,  as  the  only  person  in  the  British  Empire  who  can  declare
war  and  as  coimnander-in-chief  of  the  empire's  armed  forces,
received  daily  briefings  from  and  issued  orders  to  Prime  Min-
ister Margaret  Thatcher.  Ironically,  Thatcher,  the  "Iron
Lady,"  was  known  as  the  woman  who  had  given  "spine"  to  the
Reagan-Bush  administrations.  Yet,  behind  the  prime  minister
stood  the  Queen,  who  could  sack  Thatcher  at  a  moment's


14     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


notice  over  any  major  disagreement.

Immediately  after  the  Gulf  war.  Queen  Elizabeth  paid  an
official  visit  to  the  United  States,  where  she  addressed  a  joint
session  of  Congress.  She  gave  President  Bush  the  Churchill
Award,  and,  by  her  special  order,  she  dubbed  Operation  Des-
ert Storm  field  commander  Gen.  Norman  Schwarzkopf,  an
Honorary  Knight  of  the  British  Empire,  while  he  was  still  in
office.  Gen.  Colin  Powell,  chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff,  was  also  made  an  Honorary  Knight  of  the  British  Em-
pire, after  he  left  office.  Later,  the  Queen  made  former  Presi-
dent George  Bush  an  Honorary  Knight  Grand  Cross  of  the
Order  of  the  Bath,  which  is  the  highest  award  that  can  be
given  a  non-subject  of  her  realm — because  he  had  been  the
most  amenable  President  to  British  policy  since  President
Truman.

Queen  Elizabe±  is  not  some  combination  of  tourist  at-
traction and  soap-opera  star  in  an  ill-fated  melodrama.  Leav-
ing aside  those  misguided  individuals  in  the  British  Empire
who  believe  she  still  rules  by  the  seventeenth-century  "divine
right  of  kings,"  Queen  Elizabeth  has  more  concentrated  power
than  any  elected  head  of  state  in  the  world  today.  And,  in  a
distant  sense,  she  was  elected  monarch,  because  her  dynasty
was  chosen  fix)m  among  others  to  be  the  hereditary.poiiveyor
of  powers  akin  to  the.Doge  of  Venice,  whose  dynasty  niight
at  any  moment  be  replaced  by  the  Veneti^. oligarchy  with'
another  Doge:  Stiil,'her  raw  power  is  stajtlijng,  especially  to
someone  from  the  American  nation^state„  where  we  have  a
written  Constitution,  complete  \vith.  Gonstitulronal  checks-
and  balances.  ,       ..  ,  ,  -^        ^  .      ;;  ,

'-.-,.,       '    .         ■  ■     .    ■       '.■  •'      ^  '1        -■  ■■■:'■'  ■ ''   ■  V

^Oaths  of  allegiance'

The  idea  of  a  "constitutional  monarchy"  is  a  myth;  AH
that  exists  are  "oaths  of  allegiance"  to  the  monarch-  Without
tiie.  need  for  parlianientary  authority,  Queen  Elizabeth  has
royal  Prerogative  Powers.  The  following  partial  list  of  those
powers  is  from  the  authoritative  Burke 's  Peerage  and  Baron-
etage:

•  the  Queen  alone  may  declare  war  at  her  pleasure;

•  as  commander-in-chief,  the  Queen  may  choose  and  ap-
point all  commandei^  and  officers  by  land,  sea,  and  air;

•  the  Queen  may  convoke,  adjourn,  remove,  and  dis-
solve Parliament;

•  the  Queen  may  dismiss  the  prim^  minister  and  choose
whom  she  will  as  the  replacement;

•  the  Queen  can  choose  and  appoint  all  judges,  council-
lors, officers  of  state,  magistrates;

•  the  Queen  can  choose  and  appoint  all  archbishops  (in-
cluding the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  is  primus  inter
pares  in  the  Anglican  Communion),  bishops,  and  high  eccle-
siastical dignitaries;

•  as  "the  Sovereign  is. first  in  honor,  dignity  and  in
power — and  the  seat  and  fountain  of  all  three,"  the  Queen
may  bestow  all  public  honors,  including  creating  a  peerage
for  membership  in  the  House  of  Lords  or  bestowing  an  order
of  chivalry;


The  Queen  is  a  very  Privy  person.


■•  the  Queen  alone  may  conclude  treaties;

•  the  Queen  may  initiate,  criminal  proceedings,  and  she
alone  can  bestow  a  pardon.  ^  :■  r  ■.

Some  of  diese.powers  are  exercis.edo;i  the  advice  of  cabi-:
net  ministers,  or  others,  ^nd  the;  principal  vehicle  through,
which  the  Queen  receives  such  advice— :-apart  from  weekly  or
more  frequent  meetings  with  the  prime  minister— ris  through  a
body  known  as.the  Priyy  Council.

The  Privy  Council  .

According  to  the  Privy  Council's  own  public  documents,
there  are  390  members  of  the  Council,  who  are  appointed  for
life.  The  Privy  Council  serves  as  a  vehicle  for  the  Queen' s  use
of  her  Prerogative  Powers,  because  it  is  aconsensor  with  repre-
sentatives from  all  branches  of  the  Venetian  oligarchy,  includ-
ing: peers  from  the  House  of  Lords,  the  prime  minister,  the  Law
Lords,  all  cabinet  officers,  leaders  of  the  Loyal  Opposition  in
Parliament,  prominent  individuals  in  the  City  of  London,  and
leading  members  of  the  established  Anglican  Communion.

The  Privy  Council  is  above  Parliament,  including  the
House  of  Lords,  because  of  the  Queen's  Prerogative  Powers.
However,  the  Privy  Council  not  only  serves  as  a  vehicle  for
exercise  of  the  Queen' s  Prerogative  Powers,  but  its  offices  also
enact  statutory  powers  delegated  by  various  Acts  of  Parlia-
ment. It  has  its  own  Order  of  Precedence,  which  begins  with
HRH  Prince  Philip,  Duke  of  Edinburgh,  KG,  KT,  OM,  GBE;
then,  HRH  Prince  Charles,  Prince  of  Wales,  KG,  KT  GCB;
nextcome  George  Leonard  Carey,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,
and  Lord  High  Chancellor  Lord  Mackey  of  Clashfem;  and  fi-
nally arriving  at  Prime  Minister  and  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury
John  Major,  and,  very  f^  down  the  list.  Labour  Party  leader


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     15


The  royal  son  and  heir.


Anthony  Charles  Lynton  Blair.  The  fact  that  Tony  Blair,  who
will  probably  be  the  next  prime  minister,  was  made  a  member
of  the  Privy  Council  on  July  27, 1994,  helps  explain  why  there
is  not  a  dime's  worth  of  difference  between  his  poHcies  and
those  of  Tory  Prime  Minister  Major  or  his  predecessor,  Lady
Margaret  Thatcher.  As  Blair's  factional  opponent  in  Labour,
Anthony  Wedgwood  Benn,  revealed,  based  upon  personal  ex-
perience:

All  members  of  the  Privy  Council  must  take  an  oath  of  alle-
giance to  uphold  the  Queen  and  her  actions.  Such  oaths  are  the
basis  of  the  myth  that  the  BritishEmpire  represents  a"constitu-
tional  monarchy."

As  readers  of  the  French  Renaissance  author  Francois
Rabelais  would  appreciate,  the  term  "Privy  Council"  comes
from  the  earlier  days,  when  only  the  sovereign's  most  trusted
advisers  could  approach,  while  said  sovereign  was  engaged
upon  the  commode.

The  Privy  Council  takes  on  special  importance  in  terms
of  the  Prerogative  Powers  during  times  of  the  sovereign's
marriage  or  demise,  which  are  the  only  times  the  Privy  Coun-
cil meets  as  a  whole  body-.  Likewise,  the  Privy  Council  takes
on  added  authority  in  the  event  of  the  sovereign's  illness  or
absence  abroad.  On  a  change  of  government,  which  is  one  of
the  Queen's  more  notorious  powers  to  exercise,  or  a  recon-
struction involving  ministerial  changes,  the  Privy  Council


makes  the  necessary  arrangements.  Other  special  duties  in-
clude the  preparation  of  proclamations  for  such  events  as  the
dissolution  and  summoning  of  Parliament  and  the  declaration
of  national  emergency.  And,  Prerogative  Powers  include  the
consideration  of  applications  for  the  grant  (or  amendment)  of
Royal  Charters  of  Incorporation  to  bodies  covering  a  wide
field,  such  as  the  original  charter  for  the  British  East  India
Company.  Crown  or  Privy  Council  nominees  are  often  ap-
pointed to  governing  boards.

The  Privy  Council  also  has  statutory  powers  that  have
been  conferred  by  a  variety  of  enactments,  and  they  are  exer-
cised either  by  "Orders  in  Council"  (i.e.,  by  the  sovereign  in
Council)  or  by  "Orders  of  Council"  (i.e.,  by  the  Lords  of  the
Privy  Council).  For  example,  under  the  Local  Government
Act  of  1 972,  borough  status  and  other  rights  and  privileges  of
district  councils  are  submitted  through  the  Privy  Council.  The
Privy  Council  Office  is  also  responsible  for  the  annual  nomi-
nation and  appointment  of  High  Sheriffs  of  the  counties  of
England  and  Wales,  pursuant  to  the  Sheriffs  Act  1887.  One
of  the  Queen's  Prerogative  Powers  is  to  instigate  criminal
investigations,  and  the  Privy  Council  assists  in  the  preparation
and  issuance  of  warrants.

There  are  often  junior  Privy  Councils  in  the  17  nations  of
the  British  Empire  where  the  Queen  is  sovereign.  There  used
to  be  a  separate  Privy  Council  for  Northern  Ireland,  but  this
no  longer  meets  and  no  further  appointments  can  be  made  to
it:  Its  ftinctions  have  been  transferred  to  the  secretary  of  state
for  Northern  Ireland.  AH  the  most  important  laws  for  NorUiem
Ireland  today  are  made  by  the  Queen's  Privy  Council  through
"Orders  in  Council,"  which  is  simply  one  type  of  secondary
legislation  authorized  by  statute  (in  this  case  the  Northern
Ireland  Act  of  1974).

Run  on  the  Committee  System

The  powers  of  the  Privy  Council,  as  distinct  from  when
the  sovereign  is  in  Council,  are  normally  exercised  by  various
standing  and  special  committees  in  which  the  cabinet  officers
have  an  important  role.  The  standing  committees  include:  the
Judicial  Committee;  the  Universities  Committee;  the  Scottish  *
Universities  Committee;  the  Committee  for  the  Purposes  of
the  Crown  Office  Act  1877;  the  Committees  for  the  Affairs
of  Jersey  and  Guernsey;  the  Baronetage  Committee;  and  the
Honours  Committee.  Ad  hoc  committees  can  be  constituted,
for  example,  to  consider  and  report  on  petitions  for  Royal
Charters  of  Incorporation,  and  special  committees  are  ap-
pointed to  deal  with  some  particular  inquiry  or  reference.
For  instance,  an  ad  hoc  committee  was  formed  to  investigate
matters  leading  up  to  Argentina's  attempt  to  retake  the  Malvi-
nas  Islands  (which  the  British  claim,  referring  to  them  as
the  Falklands)  in  1982.  Similarly,  under  the  Northern  Ireland
Constitution  Act  1973,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Northem
Ireland  retains  the  power  to  ask  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the
Privy  Council  whether  provisions  in  an  Act  of  the  Stormount
Parliament  is  void.  The  latter  power,  however,  has  never
been  exercised.


16     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


The  ministerial  head  of  the  Privy  Council  is  die  Lord
President  of  the  Council;  Prime  Minister  John  Major,  leader
of  the  House  of  Commons,  had  been  president  of  the  Council,
a  post  now  held  by  Antony  Harold  Newton,  OBE.  By  Order  of
Precedence,  both  are  under  the  Lord  High  Chancellor,  James
Peter  Hymners,  Lord  Mackey  of  Clashfem,  and  they  are  im-
mediately above  the  Lord  Privy  Seal,  Robert  Michael  James,
Viscount  Cranbome.

The  Judicial  Committee

The  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy  Council  was  consti-
tuted by  the  Judicial  Committee  Act  of  1833,  and  it  is,  in
effect,  a  secret  Supreme  Court  for  the  British  Empire,  except
for  that  handful  of  Commonwealth  countries  that  have  abol-
ished appeals  to  it.  The  Judicial  Committee  is  the  ultimate
court  of  appeals  insofar  as  all  subjects  have  the  right  of  appeal
to  the  Crown  for  redress  to  the  sovereign  in  Council,  if  they
believe  that  the  courts  of  law  have  failed  to  do  them  justice.
It  also  handles  certain  ecclesiastical  cases  that  do  not  involve
faith  and  dogma,  but  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  British
Empire  has  an  established  church,  in  which  the  Queen  ap-
points the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  is  primus  inter
pares  within  the  Anglican  Communion.  And,  moreover,  un-
der Section  4  of  the  act,  the  Queen  may  refer  any  matter  of
her  choosing  to  the  Judicial  Committee.  She,  in  turn,  is  given


a  secret  report  by  the  Judicial  Committee,  from  which  she
may  issue  "Orders  in  Council."

The  members  of  the  Judicial  Committee  are  Privy  Coun-
cillors holding,  or  having  held  the  office  of  Lord  President  of
the  Privy  Council ,  or  Lord  Chancellor  of  the  House  of  Lords,
or  certain  other  high  judicial  offices,  including  Lord  of  Appeal
in  Ordinary,  Judge  of  the  High  Court  or  Court  of  Appeal  in
England,  or  the  Court  of  Session  in  Scodand.  In  most  cases,
these  are  the  Law  Lords,  who  served  on  the  lesser  court  main-
tained by  the  House  of  Lords.  Certain  members  are  also  ap-
pointed from  Commonwealth  countries.  Five  judges  usually
sit  in  each  case,  not  wearing  robes,  and  using  a  room  at  1
Downing  Street  in  London.  Although  dissenting  opinions
have  been  allowed  since  1966,  their  decisions  take  the  form
of  secret  "advice  to  Her  Majesty."

Interestingly,  many  of  the  territories  that  are  covered  by
this  secret  Supreme  Court  system  include  precisely  those  off-
shore, hot-money-laundering  havens  that  were  the  targets  of
President  Clinton's  Presidential  Decision  Directive  42  in  Au-
tumn 1995,  including  Antigua  and  Barbuda,  Bahamas,  Barba-
dos, Jamaica,  Bermuda,  Hongkong,  Singapore,  Cayman  Is-
lands, and  the  Turks  and  Caicos  Islands.  As  James  Adams  of
the  Sunday  Times  of  London  pointed  out,  the  City  of  London,
akeady  a  haven  for  drug  money,  had  an  additional  $400  bil-
lion influx  in  hot  money,  after  the  pressure  from  Clinton's


The  Queen's  powers:
They're  real!

The  vast  Prerogative  Powers  of  the  Queen  are  portrayed
as  purely  nominal,  a  relic  of  days  gone  by,  when  monarchs
had  real  power.  Naturally,  the  oligarchy  prefers  to  "arrange
things,"  such  that  the  Crown  does  not  have  to  swing  its
mailed  fist.  But,  when  there  is  no  alternative,  the  fist  will
come  down.  Such  was  the  case  when  the  Queen  sacked
Australia'spopularly  elected  Laborprime  minister,  Gough
Whitlam,  in  1975.

First  elected  in  1 972,  Whitiam  and  his  key  associates,
such  as  Minerals  and  Energy  Minister  R.F.X.  "Rex"  Con-
nor, developed  sweeping  plans  to  industrialize  Australia's
nearly  barren  continent.  Central  to  this,  was  Whitlam's
plan  to  "buy  back  the  farm" — to  buy  out  the  raw  materials
cartels  such  as  RTZ  and  Anglo-American,  which  were
looting  Australia's  mineral  riches,  without  creating  any
development  in  return.  Whitlam  looked  to  sources  of  fi-
nance outside  the  usual  New  York  and  London  markets,
to  accomplish  this.  Through  the  British-dominated  press,
a  series  of  scandals  were  cooked  up  about  his  efforts.  Fi-
nally, under  cover  of  a  nominal  deadlock  in  Parliament —
one  in  the  process  of  being  solved — the  Queen '  s  personal


representative  in  Austfalia,  Governor-General  Sir  John
Kerr,  sacked  Whitlam.  Australians  were  astounded,  and
tens  of  thousands  poured  into  the  streets  to  protest.  But  the
deed  was  done.

Kerr  had  worked- with  high  levels  of  British  inteUi-
gence  during  World  War  II;  more  importantly,  he  was
obsessed  with  the  feudal  "honors"  bestowed  by  the  monar-
chy, such  as  his  position  as  a  Knight  Commander  of  St.
Michael  and  St.  George  (KCMG).  Before  Kerr  sacked
Whitlam,  he  consulted  with  his  superior  in  that  order,  Sir
Garfield  Barwick,  Chief  Justice  of  the  High  Court  of  Aus-
tralia, the  head  of  the  Australian  Conservation  Foundation
(founded  by  Prince  Philip  in  1963),  and  a  member  of  Her
Majesty's  Privy  Council.  Barwick  gave  the  green  light,
and  Kerr  dumped  Whitlam.

Shortly  after  the  dismissal.  Sir  John  was  rewarded  by
the  Queen  herself:  As  he  records  in  his  autobiography,  "In
Canberra  I  was  sworn  in  as  a  member  of  Her  Majesty's
Privy  Council  at  a  meeting  presided  over  by  the  Queen."
She  also  dubbed  him  a  member  of  the  Royal  Victorian
Order  (RVO) — not  bad  for  a  country  boy  from  Australia,
since  this  honor  ranks  below  only  two  others:  the  Order
of  the  Garter,  and  the  Order  of  the  Thistle.  All  three  are
bestowed  only  at  the  discretion  of  the  Queen  herself,  with-
out the  recommendations  of  any  of  her  governments,  as  is
normally  the  case. — Allen  Douglas


EIR     May  24,  199.6


Special  Report     17


DEMOCRATIC  PRESIDENTIAL  CANDIDATE


LYNDON

LAROUCHE


REPORTS  ON  HIS  POLICY

DISCUSSIONS
RUSSIA


FOX  NETWORK     SUNDAY,  JUNE  2


Q.QApu   EASTERN  AND

y.ov  r,in,  p4j,f,j


O.AUr.m.    MOUNTAIN


Nd  hr  br  CnniitH  n  li>m  Ik  takuing  GUd  tvnk  inJ  Sln^^  0<a£  A  y!oid«  EiplDraK^


stepped-up  war  on  drugs  dried  up  other  Empire  offshore
money-laundering  operations.

The  Privy  Council  can  also  take  cases  from  the  trouble
spot  of  Northern  Ireland,  where  it  writes  most  of  the  major
laws.  And,  while  its  ruUngs  do  not  bind  judges  in  subsequent
cases  in  Northem  Ireland,  they  effectively  alter  the  content  of
the  law.

The  House  of  Lords

The  House  of  Lords  is  the  upper  chamber  of  Parliament.
Unlike  the  House  of  Commons,  most  members  of  the  House
of  Lords  have  a  vote  by  hereditary,  rather  than  elected,  princi-
ple; the  exception  is  the  one-fifth  of  the  House  of  Lords  mem-
bers who  are  appointed  Peers  for  Life.  Generally  sfieaking,
no  bill  may  receive  Royal  Assent  unless  it  has  been  passed  by
the  Lords,  except  for  money  bills  and  bills  on  aids  and  supplies
under  the  Salisbury  Convention.  The  House  of  Lords  is  also
a  Court  of  Appeal  for  the  United  Kingdom,  through  the  pres-
ence in  its  body  of  the  Law  Lords.

As  of  Oct.  21,  1995,  there  were  technically  1,191  Lords
in  Parliament.  However,  the  average  daily  attendance  in
1994-95  was  376.  Of  these,  some  300  were  members  of  the
ruling  Conservative  Party,  while  24  were  in  the  Labour  Party
and  12  in  the  Liberal  Party  Loyal  Opposition,  leaving  aside
those  who  chose  to  be  "cross-benchers,"  voting  as  they  saw


fit  on  an  issue.  If  the  entire  peerage  eligible  to  sit  in  Parliament
did  so,  the  percentage  who  voted  with  the  Conservative  gov-
ernment would  likely  be  even  larger.

The  Lord  High  Chancellor  or  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great
Seal  is  also  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Lords,  and  he  rates  above
the  prime  minister  in  Order  of  Precedence.  It  is  his  duty  ordi-
narily to  attend  as  Speaker,  although  there  are  30  Deputy
Speakers,  to  sit  on  the  Woolsack  and  to  preside  over  the  delib-
erations of  the  House,  except  when  it  is  in  Committee.  The
current  Lord  Chancellor,  who  is  an  appointee  of  the  sovereign,
is  Lord  Mackey  of  Clashfem,  who  is  a  Life  Peer,  created  in
1979.  He  was  also  appointed  to  the  Privy  Council  in  the  same
year.  He  served  as  Lord  Advocate  in  1979-84.  He  was  Gov-
ernment Spokesman  on  Legal  Affairs  in  Scotland  in  1983-84.
He  was  Lord  of  Appeal  in  Ordinary  in  1985-87,  when  he  was
made  Lord  High  Chancellor.  The  Lord  Chancellor  usually
stands  to  the  right  of  the  throne  and  hands  the  monarch  the
Speech  from  the  Throne,  in  which  the  government  policies
and  program  for  the  session  are  announced;  (if  the  sovereign
is  incapacitated,  the  Lord  Chancellor  reads  the  Speech  from
the  Throne  to  open  Parhament).  Lord  Mackey  of  Clashfem  is
a  member  of  the  Conservative  Party  government.

There  are  numerous  positions  of  authority  within  the
House  of  Lords,  from  the  leader  of  the  three  parties  to  the
chief  whips  and  whips  for  the  various  parties  to  the  chairman
of  committees,  his  deputies,  and  the  committee  chairmen.
Briefly,  the  three  leaders  of  the  parties  are:  1)  Leader  of  the
House  (Conservative  Party  Leader),  Viscount  Cranbome  and
Baron  James  Gascoyne-Cecil  (created  1603),  who  became
Lord  Privy  Seal,  Leader  of  the  House  of  Lords,  and  Privy
Councillor  in  1 994  after  he  was  summoned  to  the  upper  house
in. his  father's  barony  of  Cecil;  2)  the  Labour  Party  Loyal
Opposition  Leader  is  the  Life  Baron  of  the  United  Kingdom
(created  1990),  Ivor  Seward  Richard,  who  was  made  a  mem-
ber of  the  Privy  Council  in  1993;  and,  3)  the  Liberal  Party
Loyal  Opposition  Leader  is  the  Life  Baron  (created  1987),
Roy  Harris  Jenkins  of  Hillhead.

As  the  accompanying  profile  on  the  "non-governmental
organizations"  shows,  perhaps  the  worst  "enforcers"  of  Brit-
ish imperialism  are  the  Life  Peers.  Among  them  are:

House  of  Lords  Deputy  Speaker,  Life  Baroness  (created
1983)  Caroline  Cox;  and,  Life  Baroness  (created  1992)  and
Privy  Councillor  (created  1987)  Lynda  Chalker  of  Wallasey,
who  is  one  of  four  Conservative  Party  spokesmen  on  foreign
policy.  Minister  of  Overseas  Development  (formerly  the  im-
perial Colonial  Office),  and  Minister  for  Africa  in  the  Foreign
and  Commonwealth  Office.  However,  the  occasional  Heredi-
tary Peer,  like  Baron  Cecil,  manages  to  leave  off  hunting  and
fly  fishing  to  do  something  nastier  in  the  world.  Thus,  the  4th
Baron  (preated  1900)  Eric  Reginald  Lubbock  Avebury,  who
is  also  the  7th  Baronet  of  Lammas  (created  1806),  gives  pro-
tection to  every  imaginable  type  of  terrorist  in  the  British
Empire  as  chairman  of  the  Parliamentary  Human  Rights
Group  since  1976.


18     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


Sir  Paul  Mellon,
lord  of  Loudoun

by  Scott  Thompson


The  Dec.  15,  1995  issue  of  EIR  exposed  one  of  the  gravest
threats  toU.S.  internal  security:  atreasonous  nest  of  oligarchi-
cal famihes,  allied  with  and  controlled  by  British  policy  inter-
ests, located  some  40  miles  from  the  nation' s  capital,  in  North-
em  Virginia's  Hunt  Country.  The  report,  headlined  "The
Lords  of  Loudoun,"  explained:  "This  group  of  families  shares
a  common  outlook  with,  and  are,  in  effect,  extensions  of,  the
British  oligarchy,  headed  by  the  royal  family;  together  with
allied  networks  in  New  York,  Boston,  and  other  locations,
they  form  a  single,  transoceanic  oligarchy.  . . .  They  have
spun  off  a  web  of  deployable  operational  assets,  capable  of
manipulating  government  policy  and  combatting  their  ene-
mies. This  is  the  pack  of  rascals  who  were  behind  the  fraudu-
lent prosecution  and  fraudulent  conviction  of  Lyndon
LaRouche,  et  al.  They  are  the  same  forces  behind  the  attack

on  U.S.  President  Wiltiam  Chnton "

There  is  a  pecking  order  within  this  Anglophile  society.
At  the  top  is  the  personal  representative  of  the  royal  family,
Sir  Paul  Mellon,  Honorary  Knight  of  the  British  Empire  and
Knight  of  the  Order  of  Orange  Nassau.  Sir  Paul's  mother  was
an  heir  to  the  Guinness  family  fortune;  his  father,  Andrew,
was  a  loyal  servant  of  British  policy  interests,  manipulating
U.S.  policy  as  Treasury  secretary  for  Presidents  Harding,
Coolidge,  and  Hoover.  There  are  many  rich  Anglophiles  in
the  Hunt  Country,  including  some  with  fortunes  in  excess  of
Mellon' s  estimated  $800  million,  but  none  with  the  access
and  privileges  conferred  by  the  Queen  herself  upon  her  loyal
squire,  Sir  Paul  Mellon.

Friend  of  the  Queen

It  is  rare  that  the  Queen  pays  personal  visits  to  Ameri-
cans; rarer  still,  that  she  visits  a  person  frequently.  A  letter
from  the  staff  of  Buckingham  Palace  to  this  author  states:
"I  am  commanded  by  The  Queen  to  thank  you  for  your
letter . . .  concerning  Mr.  Paul  Mellon.  The  Queen  has  known
Mr.  Mellon  for  many  years  and  visited  his  estate  at  Upper-
ville,  Virginia,  probably  for  the  first  time  in  the  1950s."  In
fact,  on  her  first  official  visit  to  the  United  States  in  1957,  HM
Queen  Elizabeth  II  and  her  consort,  the  duke  of  Edinburgh,
visited  the  Middleburg  Training  Center,  created  by  Paul
Mellon  in  1956,  to  improve  the  stock  of  thoroughbred  horses.

According  to  the  eighth  earl  of  Camavon,  in  an  interview


with  this  author,  the  Queen  had  helped  establish  a  new
bloodline  of  horses  by  inter-breeding  Paul  Mellon' s  stallion
Mill  Reef,  which  had  won  every  major  race  in  Europe,  with
strains  from  Northerii  Dancer  (another  famous  Virginia-bred
horse).  The  earl  of  Camavon  ("Porchy"  to  the  Queen,  for
whom  he  is  Racing  Manager),  has  been  a  frequent  visitor
to  Sir  Paul  Mellon' s  Rokeby  estate  in  Upperville.  Moreover,
the  earl  said  that  it  was  Sir  Paul  who  first  introduced  the
Queen  to  William  Parish  III,  at  whose  Lane's  End  Farm,
near  Versailles,  Kentucky,  the  Queen  keeps  several  breeding
mares.  On  her  numerous  private  visits  to  Parish's  farm,  the
Queen  has  been  joined  by  Sir  Paul,  who  flies  in  secretly  on
his  private  jet.

Parish  gained  public  attention  when  he  was  made  the
keeper  of  a  "blind  tiiist"  for  George  Bush,  who  in  turn
honored  Mellon  in  a  ceremony  at  the  Mellon  family-founded
National  Gallery  of  Art.  William  Parish,  Sr.  began  the  fami-
ly's fortune  as  president  of  Standard  Oil  of  New  Jersey,  and
he  pleaded  nolo  contendere  that  Standard  had  supplied  the
Germany  company  IG  Farben  with  the  patents  to  produce
synthetic  gasoline  and  rubber  out  of  coal,  at  Nazi  slave-
labor  concentration  camps  like  Auschwitz.  A  second  fortune
was  earned  by  William  Parish  11,  who  built  up  and  then  sold
Humble  Oil  Co.  Paul  Mellon's  own  father,  Andrew,  had
been  the  chief  financial  interest  behind  the  emergence  of
Gulf  Oil,  which  made  common  cause  with  its  "rivals'  in  the
Middle  East,  British  Petroleum  and  Anglo-Persian,  including
being  one  of  the  instruments  in  British  plans  for  the  over-
throw of  the  Mossadegh  regime  in  Iran  in  1953.

Sir  Paul's  sister  Ailsa  Bruce,  who  had  married  and  di-
vorced David  A.K.E.  Bruce,  known  in  Hunt  Country  circles
as  the  "uncrowned  king  of  Virginia,"  was  part  of  the  intimate
circle  of  friends  of  the  duke  and  duchess  of  Windsor.  The
duke  of  Windsor,  who  is  the  Queen's  uncle  and  served
briefly  as  King  Edward  VIII,  had  been  forced  to  abdicate,
because  he  advocated  an  open  alliance  between  the  British
Empire  and  Hitler.  The  duke  and  duchess  of  Windsor  were
an  integral  part  of  Virginia  Hunt  Country,  as  Wallis  Warfield,
the  duchess,  had  attended  the  exclusive  Foxcroft  School  in
Middleburg,  as  well  as  spending  a  year  in  nearby  Warrenton.

Anne,  the  princess  royal,  has  visited  Mellon's  Rokeby
estate,  attending,  among  other  things,  the  Virginia  Gold
Cup  race,  whose  expensive  relocation  had  been  paid  for  by
Mellon.  She  was  photographed  there  in  1989  with  "Little
Lord"  Nicky  Arundel,  the  propaganda  minister  for  the  Hunt
Country  and  a  covert  operations  specialist  who  has  helped
orchestrate  operations  against  LaRouche  and  his  political
movement.  Prince  Charles  has  visited  Mellon  at  least  twice.
On  one  occasion,  the  two  studied  the  Jungian  significance
of  WiUiam  Blake's  poetry  and  drawings,  both  having  under-
gone Jungian  analysis.

Arundel  and  some  of  the  other  lords  of  Loudoun  are
forever  trying  to  trace  their  lineage  to  titled  British  nobility.
Sir  Paul  doesn't  have  to  bother;  he  is  involved  with  the  royal


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     19


family  in  their  most  highly  guarded  operations.  For  example,
when  Prince  Philip,  at  the  instigation  of  former  SS  officer
Prince  Bemhard  of  the  Netherlands,  co-founded  an  intema-
tiotiai  environmentalist  gestapo,  the  World  Wildlife  Fund,
in  1961,  Prince  PhiUp  turned  to  Mellon,  among  a  select
group  of  1,001  hand-picked  personalities,  the  so-caJled  1001
Club.  The  initiating  fee  of  at  least  $10,000  is  only  part  of
the  tens  of  millions  that  Mellon  has  spent  to  advance  the
British  Empire's  cause  of  eco-fascism.  For  such  "good
works,"  and  for  his  family's  connections,  Paul  Mellon  was
made  an  Honorary  KBE  in  1971,  and  was  also  made  a
Knight  of  the  Dutch  Order  of  Orange-Nassau.

Origins  of  'a  galloping  Anglophile'

hi  his  autobiography,  Reflections  on  a  Silver  Spoon,  Mel-
lon describes  himself  as  "a  galloping  Anglophile."  Just  as  the
British  oligarchy  went  from  a  landed  rentier  oligarchy  to  a
financieroligarchy,  so  the  Anglophiles  of  the  American  estab-
lishment like  Andrew  Mellon,  after  destroying  American  in-
dustrial capitalism,  became  financial  parasites.

For  example,  Andrew  Mellon  was  part  of  British  Crown
banker  J.P.  Morgan's  successful  campaign  to  crush  steel  in-
dustrialist Andrew  Carnegie,  in  the  years  before  World  War
I.  Andrew  Mellon  also  financed  the  building  of  a  global  alumi-
num cartel,  which  not  only  controlled  production  of  alumi-
num ingot,  but  sequestered  all  easily  available  sources  of  the
raw  materials  bearing  alumina.

As  three-time  secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Andrew  Mellon,
at  the  urging  of  British  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  Winston
Churchill,  rescheduled  the  British  war  debt  to  60  years,  and
jawboned  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  to  lend  the  British  Empire
credit  at  low  interest  rates.  At  the  same  time,  when  Germany
was  nearly  prostrate  from  the  reparations  it  was  forced  to  pay
under  the  Versailles  Treaty,  Andrew  Mellon  worked  with
Bank  of  England  Chairman  Montagu  Norman,  German
Reichsbank  Chairman  Hjalmar  Schacht  (later  Nazi  econom-
ics minister  and  the  designer  of  the  slave  labor  concentration
camps),  and  Eleanor  Dulles  (sister  of  Allen  and  John  Foster
Dulles)  to  design  the  Young  and  Dawes  Plans  that  would  loot
the  last  penny  from  Germany.  This  process  led,  during  the
late  1 920s,  to  the  creation  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settle-
ments, and  was  a  great  step  fwward  on  behalf  of  British  Em-
pire plans  to  impose  genocidal  austerity  upon  Germany.

As  ambassador  to  the  Court  of  St.  James  from  1932  to
early  1933,  Andrew  Mellon  became  a  confidant  of  the  British
royal  family.

His  mother's  son

Through  introductions  from  the  art  dealer  Duveen  (Lord
Millbank),  and  Henry  Clay  Frick,  Andrew  Mellon  married
Nora  McMullen,  whose  family  were  leaseholders  of  a  castle
that  had  been  part  of  the  Crown  Lands.  Nora  McMullen  was
the  granddaughter  of  Peter  Guinness,  and  was  among  the
heiresses  of  the  Guinness  PLC  fortune.


According  to  the  book  Mellon' s  Millions,  by  Harvey
O'Connor  (1933),  Paul  Mellon  was  mostly  raised  by  his
mother,  who  brought  him  to  England  for  his  early  rearing.
The  book  states  that  Paul  never  really  liked  his  aloof  father,
and  was  his  mother's  child.  Ultimately  the  marriage  broke
apart,  according  to  O'Connor,  because  of  Andrew  Mellon's
inability  to  live  the  life  of  a  socialite.  Paul  took  the  side  of
his  mother  in  the  messy  separation  and  divorce  proceedings,
which  culminated  in  a  scandalous  trial  in  191 1 .  While  Andrew
Mellon  was  considering  secretive  criminal  divorce  charges
on  grounds  of  adultery,  to  gain  custody  of  his  children  through
machinations  with  Pittsburgh  local  magistrates  and  the  Penn-
sylvania legislature,  Nora  Mellon  was  leaking  real  and  imagi-
nary scandals  to  papers  outside  the  region  and  then  importing
copies  in  bulk  to  Pittsburgh  society.  By  the  time  the  divorce
was  over,  young  Paul  was  clearly  "more  of  a  McMullen  than
a  Mellon."  Nora  inculcated  her  son  with  the  idea  that,  as  a
British  oligarch,  he  need  not  "do"  anything  with  his  life,  ex-
cept what  he  chose  to  do.

When  Paul  went  to  Yale,  he  turned  down  membership  in
the  Skull  and  Bones  secret  society  to  spite  his  father,  choosing
Scroll  and  Key  instead.  Later,  when  Paul  went  on  to  study  at
Cambridge  University,  during  the  same  period  that  his  father
was  ambassador  to  the  Court  of  St.  James,  his  mother  helped
to  make  introductions  for  him  to  British  society.  Paul  Mellon
spent  most  of  his  time  at  Cambridge  riding  with  the  duke  of
Beaufort's  hounds.

This  followed  a  showdown  in  the  sunnmer  of  1930,  in
which  Andrew  Mellon  had  called  Paul  home  and  confronted
him  with  the  fact  that  he  must  work  in  the  family  bank  or
else  face  being  cut  off  from  his  inheritance.  Nora  McMullen
negotiated  a  deal ,  whereby  if  Paul  Mellon  would  put  in  some
time  in  the  bank,  he  would  be  allowed  to  follow  his  country
squire  pursuits;  Nora  demanded,  and  Andrew  agreed,  that  he
would  bankroll  the  purchase  of  the  Rokeby  Farm  in  Upper-
ville,  Virginia,  and  also  bankroll  a  horsebreeding  operation.
Nora  McMullen  would  join  her  son  there,  and  Andrew  Mellon
could  only  visit  with  permission.  Paul  agreed  to  the  arrange-
ment, and  was  thus  ensconced  in  the  heart  of  the  Hunt-
Country.  -

The  area  chosen  by  Paul  Mellon  and  his  mother  had,  for
more-than  two  generations,  been  the  seatof  freasonous  activi-
ties by  the  British  agents  within  the  American  eastern  estab-
lishment. The  first  to  bring  would-be  squires  into  this  area
was  British  Rothschild  agent  August  Belmont  and  his  relative
Raymond,  at  the  turn  of  the  century.  A  second  phase  came  in
1919  with  the  arrival  of  E.H.  Harriman,  one  of  the  bankers  to
King  Edward  VII,  who  attracted  dozens  of  membei^  of  the
New  York  Anglophile  establishment  to  buy  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of  acres  of  real  estate  in  Loudoun,  Fauquier,  Clarke,
and  Orange  counties.  Sir  Paul  and  his  mother  presided  over
the  expansion  of  these  operations  during  World  War  11  and
afterwards,  and  he  now  rules  over  this  domain  as  the  "Queen's
lord  of  Loudoun."


20     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


The  Queen's  'honorary
knights' in  America

by  Scott  Thompson


Queen  Elizabeth  II  has  sought  to  gain  influence  in  the  United
States  by  handing  out  as  a  rare  currency  "Honorary  Knight-
hoods," which  narrowly  squeak  by  constitutional  provisions
that  no  American  official  shall  hold  a  title  without  approval
of  Congress.  In  all,  about  two  dozen  such  knighthoods  have
been  granted  thus  far,  most  recently  to  the  Bush  Babies,
in  recognition  of  thek  service  in  the  1991  British-directed
Persian  Gulf  war.

Here  are  hsted,  by  order  of  rank  and  seniority,  some  of
these  knighthoods:

President  "Sir"  Ronald  Reagan;  Honorary  Knight
Grand  Cross  of  the  Order  of  Bath  (GCB).

IVesident  "Sir"  George  Bush;  Honorary  Knight  Grand
Cross  of  the  Order  of  Bath  (GCB).

"Sir"  Henry  Kissinger,  former  secretary  of  state.  Presi-
dential adviser  for  national  security,  and  former  member  of
the  President's  Foreign  Intelligence  Advisory  Board;  Honor-
ary Knight  Commander  of  the  Order  of  St.  Michael  and
St.  George  (KCMG).  This  rank  is  normally  given  to  top
British  diplomats.

"Sir"  Hugh  Bullock,  retired  investment  banker,  aged
98,  and  raving  Anglophile;  Honorary  Knight  Grand  Cross
of  the  Order  of  the  British  Empire  (GBE)  and  Honorary
Knight  of  Grace  of  the  Order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.

"Sir"  Douglas  Fairbanks,  actor  and  military  man,  who
served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Lord  Mountbatten,  as  well  as
performing  tasks  for  NATO,  SEATO,  and  the  U.S.  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff;  Honorary  Knight  of  the  British  Empire
(KBE)  and  member  of  a  dozen  o±er  orders  of  chivalry.

"Sir"  Grayson  L.  Kirk,  former  president,  now  president
emeritus,  of  Columbia  University;  chancellor  emeritus  of
the  American  Society  of  the  Order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.

"Sir"  Paul  Mellon,  "Lord  of  Loudoun  County";  Honor-
ary Knight  of  the  British  Empire  (KBE)  and  Knight  of  the
Order  of  Orange  Nassau.

Gen.  "Sir"  Norman  Schwarzkopf,  Field  Commander
of  Operation  Desert  Storm;  Honorary  Knight  of  the  British
Empire  (KBE).

Gen.  "Sir"  Colin  Powell,  former  chairman  of  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff;  Honorary  Knight  of  the  British  Empire
(KBE).

Gen.  "Sir"  Brent  Scowcroft,  former  Presidential  adviser
for  national  security  and  now  George  Bush's  top  adviser;


Honorary  Knight  of  the  British  Empire  (KBE).

"Sir"  Caspar  Weinberger,  former  secretary  of  defense;
Honorary  Knight  of  die  British  Empire  (KBE).

A  lifetime  of  service

There  are  fewer  than  two  dozen  "Honorary  Knights"  in
the  United  States.  As  the  director  of  the  Honours  Department
of  the  British  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  put  it:
"One  must  not  debase  the  currency.  An  Honorary  Knight-
hood means  either  a  lifetime  of  service  to  the  British  Empire,
or  to  the  furtherance  of  U.S.  relations  with  the  British
Empire."

President  Bush  was  awarded  the  highest  level  of  "Honor-
ary Knighthood"  that  can  be  given  someone  who  is  not  a
subject  of  HM  Queen  Elizabeth  II  in  one  of  the  17  countries
of  the  British  Empire  in  which  she  is  queen;  this  is  because
Bush  has  been  the  most  amenable  of  all  Presidents  to  British
policy  since  Harry  Truman,  as  the  Gulf  war  demonstrated.

The  Queen  issued  special  orders  so  that  General
Schwarzkopf  could  receive  his  "Honorary  Knighthood"
while  still  in  office,  because  of  his  role  in  Desert  Storm.
The  Queen,  as  the  only  figure  in  the  British  Empire  who
can  declare  war  and  as  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Armed
Forces,  had  demanded  daily  briefings  from  and  issued  orders
to  Prime  Minister  Margaret  Thatcher,  the  "Iron  Lady"  who
is  credited  with  giving  President  Bush  spine  during  the  Gulf
war.  Immediately  after  the  war,  Elizabeth  paid  an  official
visit  to  the  United  States  to  distribute  awards  to  Bush,
Schwarzkopf,  and  Powell.

Violation  of  the  Constitution

These  "Honorary  Knighthoods"  try  to  circumvent  the
U.S.  Constitution,  whose  Article  I,  Section  7,  states:  "No  Title
of  Nobility  shall  be  granted  by  the  United  States:  And  no
Person  holding  any  Office  of  Profit  or  Trust  under  them,  shall,
without  the  Consent  of  the  Congress,  accept  any  present.
Emolument,  Office,  or  Title,  of  any  kind  whatsoever,  from
any  King,  Prince,  or  foreign  State."

Not  only  are  the  knighthoods  called  "honorary,"  but  the
recipient  is  not  supposed  to  use  the  title  of  "Sir,"  either  in  the
United  States  or  in  the  British  Empire.  Moreover,  since  these
are  not  the  Queen' s  "subjects,"  but  have  only  given  extraordi-
nary service  over  their  lifetime  to  advance  the  goals  of  the
British  Empire,  they  are  not  "dubbed"  by  the  (Jueen.  And,
usually,  the  British  Empire  waits  until  after  a  person  has  left
office  to  grant  them  an  "Honorary  Knighthood."

Still,  especially  in  the  case  of  General  Schwarzkopf,
where  this  provision  was  waived,  the  U.S.  Constitution  is
clear  that  a  holder  of  "any  Office"  may  not  "accept  any  pres-
ent, Emolument,  Office,  of  Title  of  any  kind  whatsoevet^^
wiftiout  the  permission  of  Congress.  Presumably,  the  receipt
of  "Honorary  Knighthoods"  by  the  above-mentioned  crowd
should  keep  them  from  holding  office  in  the  future  without  a
specific  waiver  by  Congress.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     21


m&L


British  Empire
buys  the  U.S  A.

by  Scott  Thompson


Contrary  to  the  widespread  propaganda  portraying  Japan  as
the  unfair  exotic  assailant  of  tiie  American  economy,  it  is  the
British  Empire  that  has,  for  at  least  the  last  ten  years,  been
buying  out  more  U.S .  companies  than  any  country.  Moreover,
in  the  last  two  years,  the  British  Empire  has  replaced  Japan
as  America's  number  one  creditor.

The  British  Empire,  and  particularly  Canada,  invested
considerably  more  than  did  Japan  in  mergers  and  acquisitions
in  1989,  1993,  and  1994.  In  1989,  the  British  Empire  sur-
passed Japanese  levels  of  investment,  despite  a  $7  bilUon
Japanese  investment  in  Hollywood  movie  studios.  Japan's
investment  would  have  been  only  half  that  of  the  British  Em-
pire in  1990,  except  for  a  $10.5  billion  Japanese  investment
in  the  service  sector  operations  of  Hollywood  movie  studios.
In  1993,  British  Empire  investments  were  four  times  those  of
Japan;  and  in  1 994,  British  Empire  investments  were  six  times
those  of  Japan,  whose  investments  were  equaled  by  Canada
alone,  according  to  the  U.S.  Departmentof  Commerce'spub-
lication  Foreign  Direct  Investment  in  the  United  States.

The  British  Empire  has  not  simply  siirpassed  Japanese
investment  in  many  years  in  mining  (raw  materials  extraction)
and  financial  services,  as  one  might  expect.  But,  British  Em-
pire mergers  and  acquisitions  have  exceeded  Japanese  ones
in  several  years,  in  such  sectors  as  manufacturing,  telecom-
munications, and  infrastructure,  according  to  Commerce  De-
partment statistics.  The  British  Empire  surpassed  Japanese
investment  in  the  U.S.  manufacturing  sector  by  three  times  in


1989,  three  times  in  1993,  and  two  times  in  1994.

In  the  Department  of  Commerce  infrastructure  cate-
gory— transportation,  communication,  and  utilities — the
British  Empire  frequently  surpassed  Japan,  especially  in  tele-
communications. For  example,  in  1990,British  telecommuni-
cations invested  $1 .5  billion  for  acquisition  of  20%  share  of
McCaw  Cellular  Communications  Inc.  Again  in  1994,  the
privatized  firm  of  British  telecommunications  made  a  $4.3
billion  investment,  for  a  20%  share  of  MCI.

Large  investments  have  also  been  made  by  the  British
Empire  in  the  printing  and  publishing  industry.  For  example,
the  largest  foreign  investment  in  this  area  was  Uie  acquisition
of  The  New  York  Daily  News  for  $150  million  by  the  Mirror
Group  Newspapers  Ltd  of  London,  controlled  by  Robert  Max-
well and  his  family.  In  1 993 ,  the  Bronfman  family  of  Canada,
through  Seagram  Ltd,  acquired  Time  Warner  for  $  1 .5  billion.
The  Toronto,  Canada-based  Hollinger  Corp.  of  Conrad  Black,
which  owns  The  Telegraph  Corp.  PLC  and  the  Jerusalem
Post,  has  purchased  hundreds  of  smaller  weeklies  and  daiUes
in  the  United  States,  inclding  the  Chicago  Sun-Times.  The
sun  never  sets  on  the  British  pubhshing  empire  in  America.

One  example  of  a  major  British  Empire  takeover  of  U.S.
manufacturing  was  in  1993,  when  Hanson  PLC  acquired
Quantum  Chemical  Corp.  for  $3.2  bilUon.  In  the  same  year.
Royal  Dutch  Shell  Group  made  multibillion-doUar  deals  in
the  related  petrochemical  industry  in  the  United  States,  as  it
also  did  in  1994.

Table  1  shows  that  whatever  relative  dollar  amounts  were
invested  in  the  United  States,  the  British  Empire  always  sur-
passed Japan  and  all  other  countries  in  the  number  of  compa-
nies obtained  by  merger  and  acquisition.  Figure  1  compares
the  British  Empire — especially  the  United  Kingdom  and  Can-
ada— with  Japan  in  eight  sectors  of  economic  activity  from
1992  through  1994.  The  last  graph  gives  the  totals  of  the
British  Empire  versus  Japan  for  1989  through  1994,  in  terms
of  total  dollar  investment  by  year.


TABLE  1

Acquisitions  of  U.S.  companies,  by  nationaiity  of  buyer

(billions  $)


Britain

Canada

British  Empire  total*
Number         $  value

Japan

Year

Number

S  value

Number

$  value

Number

$  value

1988

188

$23.6

46

$9.7

258

$33.3

45

$11.9

,1989

158

23.7

76

2.8

234

26.6

81

9.4

1990

141

9.7

61

1.7

220

12.9

85

6.5

1991

58

1.2

30

0.9

103

3.2

35

8.6

1992

80

1.5

68

0.6

166

3.5

34

3.3

1993

89

9.9

67

2.3

170

12.9

18

0.9

*  British  Empire  is  total  of  Britain,  Canada,  Hongkong,  Australia,  and/or  New  Zealand  (not  all  years  include  ali  ttiese  countries).
Source:  Mergers  S  Acquisitions  (quarterly  periodical).


22     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


FIGURE  1

British,  Canadian,  and  Japanese  foreign  investment  compared


United  Kingdom


Canada


Japan


Mining  ■  Manufacturing       Tran^Kirtation,  Wholesale  Retail

communications,  trade  trade

utilities


Finance,  insurance,
and  real  estate


Services


1993


Mining


Manufacturing       Transportation,  Wholesale  Retail

communications,  trade  trade

utilities


Finance,  insurance,
and  real  estate


Services


1994


Mining  Manufacturing       Transportation,         Wfiolesale

communications,  trade

utilities


Retail
trade


Finance,  insurance,
and  real  estate


Services


$25-1

20-

(billions  $)

15-
10-

5-

*  ■

r'

0-

1989


Annual  totals,  ail  categories,  1989-94


1990


1991


1992


1993


1994


Source:  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce,  Foreign  Direct  Investment  in  the  United  States.

EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report  '.'23


II.  'Empire  of  the  Mind'


Tavistock's  imperial
brainwashing  project

by  L.Wolfe


Various  types  of  belief  can  be  implanted  in  many  peo-
ple, after  brain  function  has  been  sufficiently  disturbed
by  accidentally  or  deliberately  induced  fear,  Mger  or
excitement.  Of  the  results  caused  by  such  disturbances,
the  most  common  one  is  temporarily  impaired  judg-
ment and  heightened  suggestibility.  Its  various  group
manifestations  are  sometimes  classed  under  the  head-
ing of  "herd  instinct,"  and  appear  most  spectacularly  in
wartime,  during  severe  epidemics,  and  in  all  similar
periods  of  common  danger,  which  increaseanxiety  and
so  individual  and  mass  suggestibility.

— from  Tavistock  Institute  psychiatrist  Dr.  Wilham
Sargant's  1957  book.  Battle  for  the  Mind

I  think  the  subject  that  will  be  of  most  importance  politi-
cally is  mass  psychology The  social  psychologists

of  the  future  will  have  a  number  of  classes  of  school
children  on  whom  they  will  try  different  methods  of
producing  an  unshakable  conviction  that  snow  is  black.
Various  results  will  soon  be  arrived  at:  first,  that  influ-
ences of  the  home  are  obstructive.  Second,  that  not
much  can  be  done  unless  indoctrination  begins  before
the  age  of  ten. ...  It  is  for  the  future  scientist  to  make
these  maxims  precise  and  discover  exactly  how  much
it  costs  per  head  to  make  children  believe  that  snow  is
black.  When  the  technique  has  been  perfected,  every
government  that  has  been  in  charge  of  education  for
more  than  one  generation  will  be  able  to  control  its
subjects  securely  without  the  need  of  armies  or  po-
licemen.

-^Lord  Bertrand  Russell,  in  his  1951  book.  The
Impact  of  Science  Upon  Society

The  late  former  foreign  minister  of  Guyana,  Dr.  Fred
Wills,  once  said  that  most  of  the  diplomatic  corps  of  the  for-
mer colonies  of  Great  Britain  spent  too  much  time  trying  to
perfect  their  "Oxbridge"  accents;  the  rest  of  the  time,  he
stated,  they  spent  searching  "for  a  British  rump  to  kiss."  Try-
ing to  explain  this  behavior  to  his  American  friends,  Wills
said  that  colonialism  still  exists  in  its  most  powerful  form,  "as
a  state  of  mind  of  the  subject  peoples,"  even  if  the  former


colonies  have  been  given  their  nominal  freedom.

Wills  was  commenting  on  the  success  of  a  long-term  pro-
ject of  the  British  imperial  elite,  effectively  keynoted  in  re-
marks by  Winston  Churchill  to  an  audience  of  Anglophiles  at
Harvard  University  on  Sept.  6,  1943.  Churchill  was  then
locked  in  battle  with  U.S.  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,
who  had,  on  several  occasions,  made  clear  his  intent  to  dis-
mantle the  British  and  all  other  empires  at  the  conclusion  of
the  war.  While  refusing  to  concede  American  authority  to
impose  a  "post-colonial  solution"  on  the  Empire,  a  consensus
emerged  in  the  imperial  elite,  among  the  families  closest  to
the  royal  family,  that  the  old  imperial  structures  could  not  be
continued.  To  maintain  control,  it  was  proposed  to  shift  the
battlefield,  away  from  control  of  territory,  to  control  of  the
minds,  not  merely  of  the  colonial  peoples,  but  of  United  States
and  the  rest  of  the  Western  world.

In  his  remarks,  which  were  broadcast  internationally,
Churchill  proposed  that  his  Anglophile  allies  within  the
United  States  join  with  their  Mother  England  in  a  new  enter-
prise. It  is  our  two  countries,  he  said  with  his  typical  pompous-
ness,  that  control  the  destiny  of  the  world;  who  control  science
and  technology;  who  control  culture.  These  are  weapons  far
more  potent  than  military  power,  Churchill  declared.  To  con-
trol what  men  think  "offers  far  better  prizes  than  taking  away
other  people's  lands  or  provinces  or  grinding  them  down  in
exploitation.  The  empires  of  the  future  will  be  the  empires  of
the  mind."

Churchill's  "secret  weapon"  in  this  battle  for  the  mind
was  an  elite  group  of  brainwashers  and  psychiatrists,  then
operating  in  the  Army' s  Directorate  of  Psychological  Warfare
under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  JohnRawlings  Rees.'  These
were  the  cadre  of  the  Tavistock  Clinic,  based  in  London's
suburbs;  they  had  already  built  a  network  of  co-thinkers  in
the  United  States  in  various  university  locations,  including
Harvard,  and  wartime  operational  bases  within  the  Office  of
War  Information  and  the  Office  of  Strategic  Services  (OSS).
In  addition,  Britain's  psychological  warriors  had  established
a  beachhead  in  Hollywood,  in  the  emerging  radio,  television,
and  motion  picture  industries.

At  the  end  of  the  war,  the  Tavistock  network,  which  num-
bered several  hundred  individuals,  reentered  civilian  life,  but
remained  under  the  central  command  of  British  policy  circles.
They  proceeded  to  spawn  numbers  of  think-tanks,  institutes,
and  other  "nodes"  (Tavistock's  term  for  its  various  allied
centers  of  activity)  in  every  part  of  the  globe,  dominating
every  key  aspect  of  social  policy;  today,  the  Tavistock  core
group  numbers  in  the  several  score  thousand.  That  core  group,
in  turn,  has  trained  close  to  1  million  cadre,  by  their  own


1 .  The  LaRouche  movement  did  groundbreaking  work  on  Rees  and  the  Tavi-
stock network  in  1973-74,  publishing  the  results  of  its  investigations  in  the
Campaigner  (Winter  1973,  Spring  1974  issues).  Additional  work  has  been
published  in  EIR  over  the  last  20  years.


24     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


estimates,  who  serve  as  teachers  and  advisers  to  nearly  all
business,  military,  political,  and  educational  elites.  In  ways
subtle,  and  some  not  so  subtle,  operating  as  a  conspiracy  inter-
vening on  individual  human  consciousness,  they  have  at-
tempted to  not  only  shape  what  people  think,  but  to  establish
the  parameters  and  limits  of  thought  itself.

What  is  Tavistock?

The  Tavistock  Center,  located  in  buildings  in  the  London
suburb  for  which  it  is  named,  is  composed  of  the  Tavistock
Clinic  and  the  Tavistock  Institute  for  Human  Relations,  which
in  turn  has  five  component  institutions.  Over  the  last  five
decades,  it  has  founded  a  network  of  "international  nodes,"
which  function  as  mini-Tavistocks,  and  are  involved  in  joint
projects  (see  box).  Its  quarterly  journal.  Human  Relations,
published  since  1947,  serves  as  an  effective  briefing  for  the
network  on  its  more  public  work.

The  Tavistock  network  owes  its  origins  to  the  1 920  found-
ing of  the  Tavistock  Clinic,  under  the  direct  patronage  of  the
royal  family,  through  HRH,  Duke  George  of  Kent  ( 1 902-42).
Thie  Clinic  soon  earned  the  nickname  "the  Freud  Hilton,"
for  its  promotion  of  the  pseudo-science  of  psychoanalysis;
however,  it  quickly  broadened  its  horizons  to  include  various
other  psychological  theories.  Unifying  all  of  its  theoretical
studies,  was  the  oligarchical  view  of  man  as  a  beast,  whose
impulses  and  urges  could  be  controlled  and  tamed,  as  one
does  with  animals.^

Tavistock's  usefulness  to  its  imperial  masters  can  be
gleaned  from  the  work  of  its  leader,  John  Rawling  Rees.  A
virulent  race  patriot  and  believer  in  eugenical  theories,  Rees
had  studied  "war  neuroses"  in  France  during  World  War  1.  His
conclusion:  Under  controlled  conditions,  neurotic  behavior
eould  be  induced,  and,  through  these  methods,  individual  be-
havior could  be  absolutely  controlled.  In  later  years,  Tavis-
tock operatives,  such  as  Dr.  Kurt  Lewin,  would  elaborate  on
Rees's  "discovery"  and  develop  methods  for  inducing  con-
trolled, irrational  behavior  by  groups  of  people.

Tavistock,  through  Rees  and  others,  proposed  that  its  the-
ories be  put  in  service  as  a  means  of  social  control  during
times  of  peace.  In  his  1945  book.  The  Shaping  of  Psychiatry
by  War,  Rees  reported  that  the  work  of  the  Tavistock  group
during  the  war  demonstrated  conclusively  that  there  was  a
"psychopathological  tenth"  of  the  population  who  were  ge-
netically dullards.  These  dullards,  should  their  numbers  not
be  controlled,  would  soon  dominate  civil  society.  It  were
therefore  necessary  to  devise  methods,  using  psychiatry,  to
control  such  people  and  prevent  their  increase  in  numbers,  and
to  control  their  even  larger  populations  in  backward  colonial


lands  that  threatened  the  civilized  world.  Of  the  remainder  of
the  population,  there  were  some  people  who,  if  their  neuroses
could  be  controlled,  might  be  useful  to  the  .very  small  group
of  people  whose  genetic  breeding  and  psychological  training
allegedly  suited  them  for  leadership.  For  Rees  and  Tavistock,
the  job  of  psychiatry  was  to  conduct  the  "selection"  process,
by  which  society  was  .divided  and  responsibility  doled  out
among  the  dullards,  the  "useful"  neurotics,  and  a  genetically
determined,  superior  10%  at  the  top.

Psychiatrists,  Rees  said,  must  be  involved  in  all  levels  of
society,  prepared  to  intervene  at  any  place — the  home,  the
job,  the  schools — at  any  time.  "If  we  propose  to  come  out  into
the  open,"  wrote  Rees,  "and  to  attack  the  social  and  national
problems  of  our  day,  then  we  must  have  shock  troops,  and
these  cannot  be  provided  by  psychiatry  based  wholly  on  insti-
tutions. We  must  have  teams  of  well-selected,  well-trained
psychiatrists,  who  are  free  to  move  around  and  make  contacts
with  the  local  situation  in  their  particular  area."

Rees's  book  was  based  on  a  series  of  lectures  that  he  gave
to  his  networks  in  the  United  States.  Within  two  years  of  the
book's  publication,  Tavistock  had  expanded  its  operations  in
Britain  and  the  Empire,  and  enlarged  its  beachhead  in  the
United  States.  To  the  Tavistock  Clinic  was  added  the  Tavis-
tock Institute  of  Human  Relations,  to  train  and  deploy  the
teams  of  "mobile  psychiatric  shock  troops."  In  the  United
States,  Lewin's  Research  Center  for  Group  Dynamics,  the
spin-off  National  Training  Laboratories,  and  the  Institute  for
Social  Research  at  the  University  of  Michigan  were  all  estab-
lished. Money  poured  into  this  effort  from  royal  family-spon-
sored charitable  trusts,  as  well  as  from  the  Rockefellers,  the
Mellons,  and  the  Morgans,  to  name  a  few.  of  the  U.S.  oligar-
chical families  whose  pockets  opened  to  the  Tavistock  brain-
washers.

Restructuring  the  Empire

The  British  elites  tabbed  their  Tavistock  network  to  play
a  critical  role  in  the  postwar  restructuring  of  their  empire  and
its  transition  into  the  "Commonwealth."

In  1 947,  as  the  Tavistock  Institute  was  being  created,  Rees
was  moved  into  the  United  Nations  apparatus,  creating  the
World  Federation  of  Mental  Health,  along  with  Montagu  Nor-
man, the  leading  banker  of  the  British  Crown  and  the  man
who  had  maneuvered  Hitler  and  the  Nazis  into  power.  Rees
helped  create  more  than  three  dozen  affiliated  organizations
around  the  globe,  with  each  promoting  his  neo-Freudian  ra-
cial selection  theories,  in  targeting  and  selecting  local  elites
for  British  patronage.^  Meanwhile,  he  collaborated  with  Sir


2.  They  also  conducted  extensive  profiling  of  national  ideologies,  seeking
weaknesses  thatcould  be  manipulated  by  the  British.  Under  Rees's  direction,
someof  these  were  compiled  in  a  1950  book.  World  Tension.  Others  remain
classified  to  this  day.


3.  In  its  voluminous  output,  Tavistock  expresses  its  rejection  and  hatred  of
the  Judeo-Christian  view  that  man  is  created  in  the  image  of  God,  not  in  an
anthropomorphic  sense,  but  in  that  man,  and  man  alone,  is  endowed  by  his
Maker  with  human  creativity.  As  with  the  cabalist  Freud,  Tavistock  rejects
the  notion  of  human  creativity,  attempting  Eo  prove  that  it  derives  solely  from
subliminated  erotic  or  neurotic  impulses.  For  example,  the  Tavistock-trained


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     25


Julian  Huxley,  then  heading  the  UN  Economic,  Social  and
Cultural  Organization  (Unesco),  in  devising  programs  to  as-
sist the  selection  of  leadership  cadre  within  the  colonial  sec-
tor, for  special  training.  The  UN  bureaucracy  itself  was  simi-
larly infested  with  Tavistock-type  group  training  programs  to
indoctrinate  and  control  whatever  cadre  were  sent  through  its
mind  mills.  (Fred  Wills  described  the  UN  bureaucracy  as  "the
world's  longest,  continuously  run,  brainwashing  program"
for  developing  sector  leaders.  Those  who  entered  it,  if  they
indeed  ever  came  out,  had  lost  all  touch  with  reality.)  At  the
same  time,  Unesco  set  up  educational  and  cultural  programs
in  the  colonial  sector,  which  quickly  became  mechanisms  for
Tavistock-designed  brainwashing.

When  these  methods  of  control  failed,  as  they  often  did,
the  British  Crown  mmed  to  the  same  Tavistock  psychological
warriors  to  devise  methods  for  creating  controlled  terrorist
"movements."  Tavistock  operatives  assisted  army  units  in  the
creation  of  what  were  called  "gangs"  and  "countergangs"  in
the  colonial  sector.  The  technique  was  laboratory-tested  by
Brig.  Gen.  Frank  Kitson  in  the  1950s  in  Kenya,  where  brain-
washing and  torture  were  used  on  prisoners  in  British  POW
camps  to  create  phony,  British  intelligence-controlled  units
of  the  Mau  Mau  insurgency.  Legitimate  national  liberation
movements,  fighting  to  win  freedom  from  the  British  yoke,
were  penetrated  and  broken,  their  leaders  killed,  ostensibly
by  "rival"  factions.

hi  1 970,  Kitson  was  sent  to  Northern  Ireland,  where  he —
not  the  Irish  Republican  Army — launched  an  urban  murder
and  bombing  spree  that  triggered  a  quarter  century  of  violence
and  psychological  terror.

Following  Rees's  departure  from  Tavistock,  the  man  who
ultimately  took  charge  of  the  network  was  a  Rees  protege,  Eric
Trist.  Trist's  primary  assignment  was  to  expand  Tavistock's
operations  in  the  United  States.  But  firet,  he  launched  a  major
Tavistock's  project:  management  training.  In  "Tavis-talk";
"Operational  Research."  With  the  approval  of  the  highest  cir-
cles of  the  British  elite,  Tavistock's  brainwashers  were  con-
tracted by  the  Empire's  corporate  entities  to  "restructure"
their  management  and  workforces  from  within.  One  section
of  this  was  targeted  at  breaking  the  power  of  trade  unions,  by
inducing  them  to  become  part  of  management  teams  (co-
participation);  but  by  far  the  largest  component  of  these  opera-
tions placed  management  itself  through  group-profiling  and
therapy-like  sessions  to  force  higher  "productivity."  Among
the  corporations  put  through  this  brainwashing  were  Shell,
Unilever,  the  British  government-run  coal  industry,  and  sev-
eral major  financial  institutions.  Today,  most  major  corpora-
tions have  staff  psychologists,  or  contracts  with  them,  while
corporate  meetings  are  often  run  by  a  group  leader,  called  a
"facilitator,"  hired  for  the  task.


psychopath  R.D.  Laingclaims  Ihat  there  is  no  distinction  between  the  creative
act  and  insanity,  purporting  to  "prove"  that  the  most  creative  individuals
generally  reside  in  mental  institutions.


Post-industrialism  as  neo-coionialism

Writing  in  a  1990  Tavistock  anthology  tijlled  TheSocial
Engagement  of  Social  Science,  Trist  laid  out  Tavistock' s  cur-
rent mission  statement:  "All  nodes  express  the  philosophy  of
the  social  engagement  of  social  science.  The  engagement  is
with  meta-problems  that  are  generic  and  field-determined
rather  than  with  issue-specific  single  problems."  Translated
from  Tavistockian  psychobabble  into  Enghsh,  Trist  is  stating
that  Tavistock  does  not  merely  study  a  large  social  problem,
but  intervenes  ("social  engagement")  to  bring  about  a  desired
result.  He  continues:  'The  work  is  future  oriented  and  con-
cerned with  the  transition  to  the  post-industrial  social  order
and  the  paradigm  shift  which  this  entails."*

Tavistock's  work  in  this  area  dates  back  to  the  1950s  when
it  conducted  studies  on  the  impact  of  "cybernetics"  on  the
workforce  of  industrial  countries,  and  on  the  emergence  of
the  "service-oriented  economy."  In  the  1960s,  Tavistock  op-
eratives conducted  studies  on  the  effects  of  the  Kennedy  space
program  on  Americans,  and  found  that  they  were  contributing
to  inhibiting  the  post-industrial  shift;  British-controlled  pol-
icy interests  moved  to  shut  down  the  space  program.

During  the  1 960s,  TavistQck  produced  a  series  of  reports
and  papers,  spelling  out  how  to  effect  the  "post-industrial
shift."  The  seminal  work  was  done  by  Trist  himself,  who  was
at  the  time  based  in, the  United  States,  and  his  protege,  Fred
Emery,  working  out  of  Tavistock  and  Australia.  Their  work
is  summarized  in  a  1 973  volume.  Towards  a  Social  Ecology —
Contextual  Appreciation  of  the  Future  in  the  Present.

The  "problem"  confronted  by  Trist  and  Emery,  on  behalf
of  theh  imperial  masters,  was  as  follows.  For  the  last  100
years,  the  world  had  been  governed  by  the  "industrial  para-
digm," in  which  people  saw  that  application  of  new  tech-
nologies has  produced  a  better  life  for  increasing  numbers,
over  successive  generations.  Now,  however,  we  have  the
emergence  from  backwardness  of  the  former  colonial  world;
the  emerging  nations,  if  they  are  assimilated  into  this  indus-
trial paradigm,  will  desire  the  same  route  to  progress  and  a
better  life.  Industrial  progress,  thus,  expUcitly  threatens  the
power  of  the  British  oligarchy,  creating  the  basis  for  the  estab-
hshment  of  nation-states  that  oppose  continued  oligarchical
rule.


4.  The  Tavistock  brainwashers  use  the  term  "paradigm"  lo  describe  a  set  of
beliefs  and  institutional  structures  that  govern  a  given  social  or  historical
period.  It  is  arbitrarily  applied  and  not  precise  in  the  delineation  of  such
periods.  Thus,  the  "post-industrial  paradigm"  overlaps  the  "New  Age  para-
digm" and  both  co-exist  at  the  boundary  of  the  old  "industrial  paradigm."
When  discussing  the  "shift"  from  oiie  paradigm  to  another,  Tavistock's  writ-
ings tend  toward  Hegelian  metaphysics.  Left  out  deliberately,  is  the  role  that
Tavistock  and  its  sponsors  play  in  bringing  about  these  attempted  "shifts,"
including  the  test-tube  creation  of  mass  popular  movements.  For  example,
Tavistock  played  a  crucial  role  in  fomenting  and  designing  the  rock-dnig-
sex  counterculture  of  die  1960s.  Similarly,  their  methods  were  used  in  the
recruitment  of  members  of  the  "New  Ixft"  from  ttiat  period.  These  etements
were  crucial  to  their  so-called  New  Age  and  post-industrial  paradigms.


26     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


Tavistock  Center's
'international  nodes'


TheTavistock  Center,  which  is  comprised  of  theTavistock
Clinic  and  the  Tavistock  Institute  for  Human  Relations,
has  five  sub-units  in  London,  the  Human  Resources  Cen-
ter, the  Center  for  Apphed  Social  Research,  the  School  of
Family  Psychiatry  and  Community  Health,  the  Institute  for
Marital  Studies,  and  the  Institute  for  Operational  Research.
The  following  list  of  the  center' s  "international  nodes"  is
drawn  from  Eric  Trist  and  Hugh  Murray,  eds..  The  Social
Engagement  of  Social  Science:  A  Tavistock  Anthology
(Philadelphia:  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  Press,
1990).  The  names  given  are  "initiating  individuals."  The
commentary  is  EIR  's.

United  Kingdom

Scottish  Institute  of  Human  Relations:  Jock  Suther-
land; created  in  the  1960s  by  Sutherland,  a  former  director
of  the  Tavistock  Clinic.

Center  for  Family  and  Environmental  Research:  Rob-
ert ^d  Rhona  Rapoport;  Robert  Rapoport  had  been  in-
volved in  the  Tavistock  study  that  led  to  the  dismanthng
of  the  U.S.  space  program.

Department  of  Continuing  Management  Education,
Loughborough  University:  Garth  Higgin;  promotes  sensi-
tivity training  among  management  elites.

Foundation  for  Adaptation  in  Changing  Environ-
ments: Tony  Ambrose,  Harold  Bridger;  promotes  the-
"post-industrial"  paradigm  shift;  it  is  now  based  in  Geneva
because  of  its  close  affiliation  with  the  UN's  World
Health  Organization.

Organization  for  Promoting  Understanding  in  Society
(OPUS):  Eric  Miller;  established  by  Sir  Charles  Goodeve,
the  dean  of  British  "Operational  Research"  and  a  Tavis-
tock board  member.

Europe

Work  Research  Institute,  Oslo,  Norway:  Einar  Thors-
nid,  Eric  Trist,  Fred  Emery;  works  worldwide,  including
through  UN  programs,  on  control  of  technology  and  socio-
ecological  brainwashing.

School  of  Business  Administration,  Erasmus  Univer-


sity, the  Netherlands:  Hans  van  Beinum;  funded  by  the
Dutch  monarchy  to  push  malthusianism.

Institute  for  Transitional  Dynamics,  Lucerne,  Switzer-
land: Harold  Bridger;  specializes  in  "organizational  transi-
tions."

Australia

Center  for  Continuing  Education,  Australian  National
University:  Fred  and  Marilyn  Emery;  responsible  for  much
of  Tavistock' s  work  in  Asia.

Canada

Action  Learning  Group,  Faculty  of  Environmental
Studies,  York  University,  Toronto:  Eric  Trist;  coordinates
much  of  Tavistock' s  work  in  the  developing  sector,  as  well
as  serving  as  the  Canadian  Tavistock.

Quality  of  Working  Life  Center,  Ontario:  Hans  van
Bienum;  specializes  in  employee-worker  relations.

India

BM  Institute,  Ahmedabad:  Jock  Sutherland;  Kamalini
Sarabhai;  a  center  for  child  and  family  psychiatry.

National  Labor  Institute  and  Punjab  Institute  for  Public
Administration:  Nitish  De,  Fred  Emery;  pushes  the  control
of  technology  and  ecological  concerns;  maintains  strong
ties  with  the  Australian  node.

United  States

Wright  Institute,  Berkeley,  CaUfomia:  Eric  Trist;
Nevitt  Sanford;  Sanford  was  one  of  the  principal  authors
of  Tavistock' s  "Authoritarian  Personality"  project;  the  in-
stitute functions  as  "the  U.S.  Tavistock,  West),  training
psychiatrists.

A.K.  Rice  Institute:  Margaret  Rioch,  A.K.  Rice;  spe-
cializes in  the  application  of  group  dynamics  brainwashing
to  community  situations;  based  in  Washington,  D.C.,  it
has  dozens  of  U.S.  chapters.

Center  for  the  Quality  of  Working  Life,  UCLA:  Louis
Davis,  Eric  Trist;  coordinating  point  for  profiling  the  U.S.
population,  and  mass  brainwashing  to  promote  the  post-
industrial  paradigm  shift.

Department  of  Social  Systen^  Sciences,  Wharton
School,  University  of  Pennsylvania:  Eric  Trist,  Russell
Ackoff;  the  "U.S.  Tavistock,  East,"  and  for  years,  Trist' s
main  base  of  operations.


Trist  and  Emery  came  up  with  the  following  answer:  If  a
post-industrial  paradigm  is  imposed  on  the  advanced  sector,
then  it  will  also  define  the  limits  of  growth  for  the  "developing
sector."  Since  such  nations  as  those  in  Africa  are  several  de-
cades from  being  assimilated  into  the  post-industrial  paradise.


there  will  be  a  mixed  system  of  post-industrial  advanced
countries  and  semi-industrial  and  mineral-extractive  lands  in
the  "developing  sector,"  they  indicate.  This  imbalance  defines
the  basis  for  continued  exploitation  and  control  of  these  areas
by  the  British-dominated  world  oligarchy.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     27


The  question  is  then  posed:  How  to  get  society  to  make
what  are  called  in  the  Tavistock  circles  "Reesian,"  or  "criti-
cal" choices,  in  which  all  of  the  possible  choices  are  "bad"
and  lead  to  a  degraded  condition?  Tavistock  had  clinically
proven  that  an  individual  will  make  such  choices  when  placed
under  extreme  stress,  and,  most  importantly,  will  fail  to  see
the  rejection  of  the  parameters  of  the  choice  itself  as  an  option.
Emery  and  Trist  reported  that  if  society  were  put  through
extreme  stress — what  they  termed  social  turbulence — the  ap-
propriate degenerated  and  psychotic  mental  states  could  be
induced  in  the  mass  of  western  population  to  make  a  "choice"
for  a  post-industrial  future.

The  Tavistock  brainwashers  spoke  of  a  period  of  succes-
sive social,  economic,  political,  and  cultural  shocks  beginning
in  the  1960s,  that  would  create  a  vortex-like  push  of  mental
states  to  successively  more  degenerate  levels  of  defensive
adaptation.  All  of  these  maladaptive  responses,  as  they  call
them,  are  present  in  the  society  at  the  same  time,  interacting
with  each  other,  to  produce  neurotic  behaviors  on  a  grand
scale.  To  a  world  put  through  terror  and  stress,  a  post-indus-
trial future  looks  bright,  they  offer.  The  role  of  the  Tavistock
shock  troops,  say  Trist  and  Emery,  is  to  "assist  the  weary"
and  to  bring  them  over  the  threshold  into  the  new  post-indus-
trial age.

Drug-rock-sex  counterculture

Thus,  it  should  come  as  no  surprise,  that  the  British  Em-
pire, working  largely  through  Tavistock,  was  the  driving  force
behind  launching  the  dnig-rock-sex  counterculture.  Tavis-
tock "shock  troops,"  such  as  Dr.  William  Sargant  and  Dr.
Ewin  Cameron,  were  brought  in  to  lead  the  Pentagon  and
the  Central  Intelhgence  Agency's  1950s  and  1960s  secret
experiments  with  psychotropic  drugs  and  mind  control,
known  as  MK-Ultra.

Tavistock  fellow-traveler  Aldous  Huxley,  the  guru  of  the
1 960s  New  Age  movement,  was  hving  in  Hollywood,  work-
ing in  the  motion  picture  industry,  and  cranking  out  such
works  as  Brave  New  World,  which,  decades  before  the  first
doses  of  LSD-25  hit  the  streets,  already  advocated  societal
drugging  as  the  ultimate  form  of  social  control.

Huxley  was  even  more  explicit  about  his  and  Tavistock's
agenda,  in  a  1961  lecture  at  the  California  Medical  School
in  San  Francisco,  sponsored  by  the  U.S.  State  Department's
Voice  of  America.  Huxley  told  the  crowd  of  doctors,  psychia-
trists, and  government  bureaucrats:  "There  will  be  in  the  next
generation  or  so  a  pharmacological  method  of  making  people
love  their  servitude  and  producing  dictatorship  without  tears,
so  to  speak.  Producing  a  kind  of  painless  concentration  camp
for  entire  societies  so  that  people  will  in  fact  have  their  libert-
ies taken  away  from  them  but  will  rather  enjoy  it,  because  they
will  be  distracted  from  any  desire  to  rebel — by  propaganda,  or
brainwashing,  or  brainwashing  enhanced  by  pharmacological
methods.  And  this  seems  to  be  the  final  revolution."

Tavistock  oversaw  the  mass  drugging  of  America's  col-


lege students  in  the  late-1960s,  helped  launch  "gangs  and
countergangs"  which  the  zombified  youth  joined.  Meanwhile,
Tavistock's  in-place  network  of  institutes  and  clinics,  s^ch  as
Esalen  in  California,  put  hundreds  of  thousands  of  youths
and  others  through  brainwashing  "sensitivity  sessions,"  as
Tavistock-created  and  -trained  gurus  such  as  Timothy  Leary,
helped  lead  the  drug-infested  masses  into  "the  New  Age."  In
1967,  Tavistock  even  sponsored  a  summer-long  brainwash-
ing session  in  London,  dubbed  "Conference  on  the  Dialectics
of  Liberation."  American  radicals  Angela  Davis  and  Stokely
Carmichael  were  among  the  participant-victims  in  this  ses-
sion, A  generation,  once  slated  to  lead  the  United  States  and
the  world  into  an  era  of  unprecedented  progress  and  prosper-
ity, was  thus  transformed  into  a  collection  of  doped-up  zom-
bies, "change  agents,"  and  shock-troops  for  Tavistock's
Brave  New  World.

The  new  order:  stateless  world  fascism

In  1991,  Tavistock  devoted  significanl  space  in  its  journal
Human  Relations  to  the  publication  of  results  of  a  multi-year
project  on  world  governance  and  social  change,  that  had  been
initiated  by  Trist  in  the  1980s  and  involved  participants  from
many  Tavistock  nodes  and  its  international  network.

The  results  of  the  study  must  be  viewed  as  a  policy  recom-
mendation to  the  imperial  elite  whom  Tavistock  serves.  Its
results  can  be  summarized  as  follows.  The  collapse  of  the
Soviet  Union  as  a  superpower  created  new  possibilities  for
world  governance  and  for  the  full  entrance  of  the  world  into
the  post-industrial  era.  The  greatest  impediment  to  that
change  was  the  continued  existence  of  the  nation-state.  As
long  as  the  Soviet  Union  existed,  the  continuance  of  the  na-
tion-based world  system,  in  some  form,  was  necessary  to
maintain  a  balance  of  power.  It  were  now  finally  possible  to
look  beyond  that  form,  to  a  new  system  of  world  relations.
That  system,  as  described  in  the  introductory  paper  for  the
series  by  David  Cooperrider  and  William  Pasmore,  the  study
coordinators  from  Case  Western  Reserve  University,  is  based
on  "the  current  transnationalization  of  world  affairs  whereby
international  relations  of  the  nation-state  system  have  been
superseded  or  supplanted  by  non-territorial  relations  among
private  individuals,  groups,  and  organizations."

What  is  described,  and  proposed,  is  the  reformation  of  the
United  Nations  along  lines  already  well  in  progress,  to  turn
over  all  operations  and  key  relations  to  an  international  net-
work of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  non-governmental  organi-
zations (NGOs)  and  other  groups,  of  varying  size,  shape,  and
form.  As  the  study  reveals,  virtually  every  one  of  these  groups
either  traces  its  origin  to  the  Tavistock  network's  operatives,
or  is  influenced  by  such  operatives.  Nearly  all  such  key  groups
have  funding  connections  to  either  the  British  oligarchy  and
its  American  spores;  in  many  cases,  they  have  direct  connec-
tions to  the  House  of  Lords,  and  its  members  (see  p.  29).

The  nation-state,  says  Tavistock,  made  the  industrial  age
possible.  Remove  it,  and  the  industrial  age  will  die,  replaced


28     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


by  what  is  called  the  "axial  age,"  to  be  defined  by  "informal
relations,"  with  the  main  medium  of  communication  between
peoples  and  groups,  being  through  computer  interface.  Such
interface,  now  more  commonly  known  as  the  "Internet,"  can
link  these  disparate  groups,  which  Tavistock  calls  "global
social  change  organizations,"  and  vastly  enhance  their  activi-
ties and  ease  of  deployment.

There  will  be  resistance  to  such  ideas,  say  the  rapporteurs,
coming  from  the  entrenched  bureaucracies  of  the  industrial
age  and  the  transitional  period.  For  example,  the  huge  multi-
national corporations  which  had  helped  usher  in  this  "global-
ization" process,  must  eventually  give  way  to  new  forms  of
organization,  based  on  more  informal  structures;  the  corpo-
rate form,  they  say,  is  a  relic  oif  the  industrial  age.  Government
must  become  based  more  on  smaller  planning  groups,  in  local
communities,  tied  together  by  telecommunications.  Even  the
UN,  with  its  cumbersome  bureaucracy,  must  serve  more  as  a
forum  for  such  local  groups,  and  less  as  a  service  to  national
governments.  As  for  questions  of  sovereignty,  they  are  soon
to  become  even  more  meaningless,  since  the  telecommunica-
tions Internet  pan  pass  through  any  defense,  any  border.

The  trimsition  to  this  new  world  will  not  be  easy  or  without
suffering,  Tavistock  indicates.  It  expects  an  economic  cata-
clysm, as  the  old  system  crashes  down.  But,  not  to  worry:  The
Reesian  shock  troops  will  be  there  to  ease  the  pain  and  help
us  into  this  Brave  New  World  of  universal  fascism.

The  typical  member  of  one  of  these  NGOs  described  in
these  reports  is  a  zealot,  not  so  unlike  a  member  of  a  cult  or
Nazi  Party  official.  But,  one  also  notices  a  sickly  smile  across
their  faces,  even  as  they  are  in  heated  argument.  That  smile,  it
has  been  noted,  is  the  same  seen  on  the  victims  of  Tavistock' s
brainwashers  in  their  various  mind-destroying  "experi-
ments." The  'Tavistock  Grin,"  as  it  became  known,  is  the  true
face  of  the  new  world  order.


The  invisible
empire  of  NGOs

by  Joseph  Brewda

One  of  the  weapons  that  the  British  Empire  has  deployed
against  the  nation-state  in  recent  years  is  the  "NGOs,"  the  non-
governmental organizations.  Under  the  cover  of  defending
"human  rights"  and  the  "environment,"  or  organizing  "hu-
manitarian relief,"  NGOs  are  routinely  used  to  target  states
for  discreditation,  subversion,  civil  war,  democratic  coups,
and  revolution.  The  Commonwealth  Foundation  of  Britain,
which  coined  the  term  in  the  1960s,  defines  NGOs  as  "volun-
tary, independent,  not-for-profit  organizations,"  seeking  to
"improve  the  "circumstances  and  prospects  of  disadvantaged


people"  and  "to  act  on  concerns  and  issues  which  are  detrir
mental  to  society  as  a  whole."  The  foundation  was  created  in
1966  to  help  manage  the  nominal  transition  from  the  Empire
to  the  Commonwealth.

According  to  the  foundation,  the  NGOs  are  a  new  phe-
nomenon; however,  the  network  is  quite  ancient,  and  spans
everything  from  the  privately  owned  foundations  of  Britain' s
ruling  families,  to  their  single-issue  conduits,  with  which  the
term  is  usually  associated.  This  network,  which  elevates  and
topples  politicians,  manipulates  public  opinion,  spawns  new
religious  movements,  plots  revolutions,  and  assassinates
heads  of  state,  is  in  many  respects  as  powerful  as  government
bodies  whose  power  flows  from  the  Crown.  TTiere  are  now
over  500,000  NGOs  in  Britain  alone,  according  to  the  founda-
tion, with  an  annual  turnover  of  $30  billion.  Of  these,  a  hard
core  of  several  hundred,  run  by  the  ruling  families,  guides  the
whole  herd.

House  of  Lords  wage  war  and  insurrection

The  House  of  Lords,  which  is  a  meeting  ground  used  by
the  families  to  announce  previously  agreed-upon  poticies  and
to  define  targets,  has  a  special  role  in  coordinating  this  army.
Media  propaganda  campaigns  and  clandestine  operations,  are
often  decided  here,  and  then  assigned  to  subordinate  agencies
in  government  and  to  NGOs.

Some  of  the  more  important  of  these  NGOs  are  led  by
members  of  the  House  of  Lords  directly.  Lord  Judd  (Frank
Judd),  the  former  foreign  secretary,  for  example,  runs  Oxfam
(Oxford  Famine),  the  arms-running  famine  relief  agency.
Similarly,  the  recently  deceased  Lord  Ennals  (David  Ennals),
also  a  former  foreign  secretary,  ran  Amnesty  International,
the  terrorist  support  network  and  propaganda  arm,  as  a  family
proprietary.  Baroness  Chalker  of  Wallasey  (Lynda  Chalker),
the  Minister  Of  Overseas  Development  Administration  (the
new  name  for  the  old  Colonial  Office),  meanwhile,  directs  all
foreign  grant-making  by  the  British  government,  including  to
the  NGOs.

The  activities  of  Viscount  Cranbome,  Lord  Avebury,  and
Baroness  Cox  of  Queensbury,  typify  the  way  in  which  the
families  use  NGOs  to  run  international  terrorism,  and  related
measures,  to  destroy  nation-states.

NGO  puppet-masters

Viscount  Cranbome  (Robert  Cecil):  Lord  Privy  Seal
(chief  of  the  Queen' s  Privy  Council)  and  Leader  of  the  House
of  Lords.  Viscount  Cranbome  operates  at  the  highest  rank  of
the  British  nobifity;  his  family,  the  Cecils,  is  one  of  Britain's
oldest  and  most  powerful  oligarchical  families.  His  great-
grandfather, the  Third  Marquess  of  Salisbury,  was  the  prime
minister  at  the  Cum  of  the  century,  who  played  a  key  role  in
setting  up  World  War  I;  his  grandfather,  was  a  World  War  11
Colonial  Secretary.

Viscount  Cranbome  was  a  primary  organizer  and  over-
seer of  the  first  phase  of  the  Afghanistan  war  (1979-88),  dur-


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     29


Queen  Elizabeth  in  New
Zealand,  visiting  the
Maori  Arts  and  Crafts
Institute's  wood-carving
school  atRotorua.  She  is
wearing  a  traditional
Maori  cape  made  of  kiwi
feathers.  The  non-
governmental
organizations  are  one  of
the  most  important
mechanisms  whereby  the
power  of  the  British
oligarchy  is  extended
internationally.


ing  the  Soviet  occupation.  His  own  NGO,  Afghan  Aid  U.K.,
helped  create  the  Afghan  mujahideen  terrorist  network  now
deployed  throughout  the  world.  One  of  his  top  aides  in  that
operation,  the  late  Lord  Bethel!  (Nicholas  Bethell),  Lord-in-
Waiting  to  the  Queen,  was  a  top  British  Middle  East  intelli-
gence officer,  running  his  own  NGO,  Radio  Free  Kabul.

Lord  Avebury  (Eric  Lubbock):  chairman  of  Parliamen-
tary Human  Rights  Group.  As  the  capo  di  tutti  capi  of  the
international  human  rights  mafia,  Lord  Avebury  plays  a  cen-
tral role  in  deploying  NGOs  internationally.  The  first  Lord
Avebury  was  a  banker  to  the  British  royal  family  in  the  mid-
nineteenth  century;  his  maternal  fine,  the  Stanleys,  have  dom-
inated the  British  Foreign  Office  for  the  last  two  centuries.
His  cousin,  Lord  Stanley,  was  also  a  World  War  II  Colonial
Secretary.

Lord  Avebury  typically  supports  all  sides  of  all  conflicts
to  ensure  continuing  conflict.  The  following  fist  of  struggles
is  exemplary.  Avebury  is:

•  the  top  lobbyist  for  the  Chechen  terrorist  war  against
Russia,  working  closely  with  Amnesty  International,  Quaker
Peace  and  Service,  and  Pax  Christi;

•  the  top  lobbyist  for  an  independent  Kurdistan,  carved
out  of  Turkey,  Iraq,  and  Iran,  working  closely  with  the  Inter-
national Forum  for  Islamic  Dialogue,  and  the  Unrepresented
Nations  and  Peoples  Organization;

•  the  top  international  lobbyist  for  the  Kashmir  separatist
movements  destabilizing  both  India  and  Pakistan,  working
closely  with  International  Alert,  and  the  Kashmiri  American
Council.

Lord  Avebury's  sidekicks  in  his  Human  Rights  Group


include  Lord  Archer  of  Sandwell  (Peter  Kingsley  Archer),
president  of  the  Fabian  Society  and  former  chairman  of  Am-
nesty International;  and  Lord  Braine  of  Wheatley  (Bernard
Richard  Braine),  chairman  of  the  Tibet  parliamentary  group,
which  is  targetting  China  for  breakup.

Baroness  Cox  of  Queensbury  (Caroline  Cox):  Deputy
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Lords.  Baroness  Cox  works  closely
with  Lord  Avebury  in  pushing  civil  wars.  Her  Christian  Sofi-
darity  International,  which  coordinates  religious-formatted
assaults  throughout  the  world,  is  the  top  promoter  of  the  Ar-
menian claims  to  Nagorno-Karabakh,  which  provoked  the
Armenian- Azerbaijan  war.  It  also  is  a  primary  coordinator  of
the  rebellion  in  southern  Sudan.  Her  Jagiellonian  Trust  is  a
main  conduit  for  British  operations  in  Poland.

The  NGOs  at  work

The  way  NGOs  can  overwhelm  a  targetted  state  is  indi-
cated by  their  numbers  alone:  for  example,  the  impoverished
former  British  colony  of  Bangladesh.

There  are  currentiy  16,000  NGOs  operating  in  Bangla-
desh, according  to  a  1 995  report  of  the  Commonwealth  Foun-
dation, almost  all  of  which  are  administered  or  funded  by
foreigners.  That  works  out  to  0.3  NGOs  per  square  mile.  The
reach  of  these  organizations  is  impressive.  One  of  them  oper-
ates in  85,000  villages,  on  behalf  of  an  immunization  pro-
gram, the  foundation  reports,  while  another,  which  offers
credit  to  poor  people,  has  900  branches  and  works  in  23,000
villages.  There  are  no  accurate  figures  available  on  the  total
funds  that  these  NGOs  conduit  into  the  country,  because  in
Bangladesh,  as  elsewhere,  the  NGOs  routinely  evade  what


30     Special  Report


EIR      May  24,  1996


few  financial  reporting  requirements  exist.

What  are  they  up  to?  Well,  for  one  thing,  the  explosive
growth  of  the  NGOs  in  Bangadesh  arid  other  targetted  nations
has  created  a  private  army  outside  the  control  of  the  govern-
ments. This  private  army  is  often,  in  effect,  a  privatized  form
of  what  used  to  be  directly  run  by  the  Foreign  Office.

In  the  former  British  colony  of  Sri  Lanka,  for  example,
the  Commonwealth  Foundation  reports  that  one  rural  devel-
opment NGO  has  9,000  paid  field  workers  and  41,000  local
field  workers,  working  in  10,000  villages  throughout  the
country.  In  a  country  gripped  by  civil  war,  and  where  the
average  income  is  less  than  $50  a  month,  it  does  not  take
much  to  buy  people.

It  may  not  be  the  case  that  every  one  of  these  organizations
is  dedicated  to  subversion  in  Bangladesh,  Sri  Lanka,  or  else-
where. But  the  leading  NGOs  operating  there,  and  the  network
as  a  whole,  are.

Oxfam  (Oxford  Famine),  established  by  a  group  of  Ox-
ford dons  opposed  to  starvation,  is  a  case  in  point.  In  Bangla-
desh, Oxfam' s  effort  against  famine  takes  the  form  of  funding
the  Gana  Sahajya  Sangsta,  a  professedly  "revolutionary"
NGO,  which  openly  calls  for  class  struggle.  Its  role  in  Sri
Lanka  is  even  worse.  In  the  1970s,  it  provided  the  funding
and  base-camps  in  southern  India  used  to  train  and  equip  the
terrorist  Tamil  Tigers,  who  plunged  Sri  Lanka  into  a  continu-
ing civil  war  which  has  claimed  tens  of  thousands  of  lives.

The  Geneva-based  Lutheran  World  Federation  is  also  typ-
ical of  the  subversive  character  of  the  NGOs.  In  1987,  and
then  in  1995,  it  was  caught  supplying  arms  and  ammunition .
to  the  rebel  Sudanese  People's  Liberation  Army  in  southern
Sudan,  in  the  guise  of  famine  relief  for  the  victin^  of  the  civil
war.  Since  its  independence  from  Britain  in  1956,  Sudan  has
been  largely  wracked  by  civil  war  directed  by  the  Royal  Afri-
can Society.

Then  there  is  the  International  Red  Cross.  Operating  un-
der the  claim  that  terrorist  and  separatist  movements  should
be  accorded  the  same  legal  status  as  states,  IRC  routinely
supplies  materiel  to  British-run  insurgencies  throughout  the
world.  In  1 995,  it  was  caught  supplying  the  Zapatista  rebels  in
Chiapas,  Mexico.  That  same  year,  the  Sri  Lankan  government
banned  Red  Cross  as  a  "terrorist  support  organization,"  after
it  was  caught  supplying  the  Tamil  Tigers.

To  make  matters  worse,  European  governments,  the
United  States,  and  international  funding  organizations  such
as  the  World  Bank,  are  increasingly  channelling  their  aid  to
various  nations  through  NGOs.  As  a  result,  impoverished
nations  are  faced  with  either  giving  free  rein  to  organizations
out  to  overthrow  them,  or  cutting  ties  to  lending  institutions.
Thirty  percent  of  foreign  assistance  given  by  the  Swedish
government  in  1994,  for  example,  was  channelled  through
NGOs,  according  to  Britain's  Overseas  Development  Insti-
tute. The  United  States,  the  world's  largest  donor,  channeled
9%  of  its  funds  through  such  organizations  that  year,  and  has
announced  plans  to  increase  that  percentage  to  50%  by  the
end  of  the  decade.  In  1994,  NGOs  were  directly  involved


in  over  half  of  aU  World  Bank  projects,  not  only  in  their
implementation,  but  in  their  plaiming  and  design.

As  a  result  of  this  policy,  there  are  probably  250  million
people  worldwide,  according  to  the  United  Nations  Develop-
ment Program,  who  are  "touched"  by  NGOs,  and  this  "will
rise  considerably  in  the  years  ahead."  According  to  the  Com-
monwealth Foundation,  "the  NGO  explosion  can  be  seen  as
one  of  the  manifestations  of  new  thinking  about  the  role  of
government — that  it  should  be  more  that  of  policy  maker  and
less  that  of  provider.  Thus  governments  have  turned  to  NGOs
to  do  more  of  providing.  Privatization,  decentralization,  and
localization  are  parallel  manifestations  of  the  same  general
trend."


Martin  Palmer:
Prince  Philip's  guru

by  Mark  Burdman

"The  WWF  is  a  missionary  organization."
— Martin  Palmer,  Dancing  to  Armageddon

Prince  Philip,  the  British  Royal  Consort  and  international
president  of  the  Worid  Wide  Fund  for  Nature  (WWF,  for-
merly World  Wildlife  Fund),  may  be  evil,  but  he  is  certainly
not  intelligent.  For  what  passes  for  his  ideas,  he  must  turn  to
others.  Of  special  importance  in  this  respect,  is  the  man  often
referred  to  as  his  "gum"  on  religious  and  ecological  rhatters,
Martin  Palmer,  head  of  the  Manchester,  England-based  Inter-
national Consultancy  on  Religion,  Education,  and  Culture
(Icorec).

It  was  Palmer  who  organized  the  25th  anniversary  of  the
World  Wildlife  Fund,  in  Assisi,  Italy,  on  Sept.  22-29,  1986,
specifically  around  the  orientation  that  the  Renaissance  "im-
age of  man,"  associated  with  Leonardo  da  Vinci  and  collabo-
rators, had  to  be  eliminated.  Palmer's  view,  then,  was  that
"non-western,  alternative  ways  of  looking  at  namre"  had  to
be  fostered  to  create  "a  new  way  of  looking  at  the  world"
(see  EIR,  Sept.  5,  1986,  "Prince  Philip  to  Set  New  'Satanist
Covenant'  in  Assisi,"  and  "Why  the  WWF  Hates  Leonardo
da  Vinci") -

In  Assisi,  was  launched  the  WWF's  Network  on  Religion
and  Conservation,  managed  out  of  Palmer's  Manchester  of-
fices. It  was  under  the  guidance  of  the  notions  propagated
by  this  network,  that  Prince  Philip  made  his  declaration  in
Washington,  D.C.,  in  May  1990,  praising  the  "ecological
pragmatism  of  the  so-called  pagan  religions"  as  being  "a  great
deal  more  realistic,  in  terms  of  conservation  ethics,  than  the
more  intellectual  monotheistic  philosophies  of  the  revealed
religions."

Later,  the  Network  on  Religion  and  Conservation  was


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     31


superseded  by  the  Alliance  of  Religion  and  Conservation
(ARC),  the  which  will,  in  coming  years,  take  over  much  of
the  project  work  formerly  carried  out  under  WWF  auspices.
The  ARC  was  launched  at  a  World  Summit  on  Religion  and
Conservation,  which  took  place  at  the  Royal  Family's  Wind-
sor Castle  on  April  29-May  3  of  last  year.  It  brought  together
representatives  of  "the  nine  major  religions  of  the  world,"  into
which  designation  were  lumped  together  the  monotheistic
religions  of  Christianity,  Judaism,  and  Islam,  with  Buddhism,
Hinduism,  Sikhism,  Taoism,  Jainism,  and  the  Bahais.  All  rep-
resentatives (with  only  that  of  Judaism  dissenting)  issued
statements,  presuming  to  draw  a  coherence  between  that
faith's  beliefs  and  the  "conservationist/ecologist"  views  of
the  WWF.  Among  highlighted  projects  of  ARC,  are  close
collaboration  with  the  unwashed  monks  of  Mount  Athos,  to
foster  an  "ecological"  pilot  project  on  that  island,  and  work
with  the  Taoists  of  China  to  preserve  the  'Taoist  sacred  moun-
tains."

Transforming  our  'mental  archaeology'

Palmer's  viewpoint,  expressed  in  numerous  published  lo-
cations and  private  communications,  is  that  the  crude  propa-
gandist "doomsday-ism"  of  the  Green/ecology  movement,  is
not  the  right  approach,  if  one  wants  to  accompHsh  the  agreed-
upon  goals  of  the  WWF  and  its  co-thinker  organizations.  In
fact,  that  crude  approach  is  self-defeating.  Rather,  what  must
be  done,  is  to  attack  the  underlying  axioms,  beliefs,  and  defin-
ing paradigms  that  underpin  the  belief  in  progress,  especially
in  those  parts  of  the  world  most  affected  by  Western,  Judeo-
Christian  civilization.

That  is  why  his  strategy  fundamentally  revolves  around
systematic  cultivation  of  allies  within  religions  and  faiths,
since  religion  is  the  intellectual  and  emotional  medium,
through  which  vast  numbers  of  humans  express  their  under-
standing of  the  relations  among  man,  God,  and  nature.  Palmer
is  clever  enough  to  understand,  that  it  was  the  understanding
of  that  relationship  by  the  great  thinkers  and  artists  of  the
fifteenth-century  Golden  Renaissance,  encapsulated  in  the
notion  of  imago  viva  Dei  ("in  the  living  image  of  God")  that
allowed  mankind  to  make  giant  strides,  toward  higher  levels
of  scientific  and  technological  capabilities,  and  to  bring  about
a  vastly  increased  potential  population  density  globally.  It  is
this  notion  of  imago  viva  Dei  that  Palmer  seeks  to  reverse,
through  the  "missionary"  work  of  the  WWF.

In  his  1992  book  Dancing  to  Annageddon,  Palmer  elabo-
rates his  method.  He  claims  that  what  defines  the  sense  of
reality  for  people  are  "stories."  By  "stories,"  he  means  unspo-
ken and  unchallenged  cultural  axioms  mediated  through
myths.  According  to  Palmer:  "We  all  inhabit  worlds  shaped
by  stories,  but  most  of  us  have  never  stepped  back  to  look  at
those  stories.  .  .  .  We  are  profoundly  shaped  and  influenced
by  the  stories  we  tell,  by  the  stories  that  are  told  around  us,  by
the  stories  we  think  are  actually  fact,  and  by  the  stories  that
have  shaped  the  very  language,  imagery,  and  terms  we  use
today."  His  task  is  to  "undertake  a  mental  archaeology  of  the

;32     Special  Report


substructures,  the  hidden  stories,  upon  which  we  continually
build  as  we  erect  our  models  of  what  and  who  we  are  and
where  we  are  going."  He  attacks  "one  of  the  fondest  illusions
of  our  age,"  namely  that  "we  are  'realistic'  or  'factual'  in  our
approach  to  life.  We  are  not."

Palmer  presumes  to  show  that,  in  our  modem  American
and  European  societies,  we  have  come  to  take  for  granted,  the
view  that  "human  beings  are  the  pinnacle  of  evolution^  the
raison  d'etre  of  life,  and  that  the  American  (and  with  it,  the
European)  way  of  life — conquest,  colonization,  and  exploita-
tion— is  nothing  less  than  the  way  life  and  always  has  been."

This  is  not  true,  in  Palmer's  view.  What  be  fostered  are
"stories,"  or  myths  and  metaphors  that  demonstrate  that  *'the
impact  of  human  beings  on  this  planet  is  now  so  disastrous
that  we  have  already  destroyed  countless  species  and  habitats
and  others  are  in  grave  danger."

A  war  against  'anthropocentrism'

A  professed  Christian,  Palmer  removes  from  Christianity
all  of  that  which  has  made  its  contribution  to  humanity 's  his-
tory essential,  namely,  its  commitment  to  "anthropocen-
trism."  In  his  1993  book  Coming  of  Age:  An  Exploration  of
Christianity  and  the  New  Age,  Palmer  excoriates  the  "anthro-
pocentric  gospel."  He  rails  against  Christianity's  "deification
of  humanity  and  its  products,  science  and  industry,  culminat-
ing in  the  revival  of  that  most  arrogant  of  statements,  'Man  is
the  measure  of  all  things.'  "

The  entire  edifice  of  Christianity,  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God
and  as  the  Savior  of  Mankind,  is  built  upon  anthropocentrism;
without  it,  Christianity  is  turned  into  a  gnostic  heresy.  That  is
precisely  Palmer's  aim.  It  is  only  because  of  "anthropocen-
trism," and  its  consequence  of  bringing  about  higher  levels
of  development  of  the  human  species,  that  we  have  reached
a  point  beyond  ape-like  existence,  such  that  Martin  Palmer
himself  could  be  bom  and  propagate  his  ideas.  (Some  might
be  tempted  to  cite  that  as  an  argument  against  anthropocen-
trism.)

One  of  Palmer's  leading  bogeymen  is  the  biblical  Book
of  Genesis,  and  its  injunction  that  mankind  should  "replenish
the  earth,  and  subdue  it,"  and  have  "dominion  over  nature."
His  theology  replaces  this  with  what  he  calls  "the  stewardship
model"  of  man' s  relationship  to  nature.  This  will  bring  about
an  "integration"  with  "elements  of  nature"  of  the  type  that
"shamanism  and  certain  forms  of  the  'pagan'  religions  incul-
cated through  their  practices  and  beliefs."  "Shamanism"  is  a
form  of  "healing,"  largely  dependent  on  witchcraft  and  magic,
that  is  practiced,  today,  only  in  the  most  backward  areas  of
the  globe.

Palmer  lauds  those  variants  of  Christianity  that,  he  asserts,
reject  the  traditional  Judeo-Christian  commitment  to  science,
technological  development,  and  the  dominion  over  nature.
For  example,  in  his  view,  the  superiority  of  Eastern  Orthodox
Christianity,  relative  to  the  predominant  strands  of  Roman
Catholicism  and  Protestantism,  is  precisely  that  it  did  not  go
through  the  processes  associated  with  the  Renaissance.  In

EIR     May  24,  1996


^t


-•^'""'■'~^"''"- '


the  CDrthodox  world,  "humanity  was  always  seen  as  having  a
special  role  not  just  before  God,  but  before  all  creation.  For  the
Orthodox,  from  whom  no  industrial  revolution  or  scientific
upsurge  ever  came,  humanity  is  called  to  be  a  poet,  one  who
tells  the  story  of  all  life  and  in  telling,  creates  the  fullness  of
all  life:f'  For  Martin  Palmer,  poverty  is  glorified  as  poetry.

Similarly,  he  glorifies  the  Nestorian  heresy.  This  was
laundied  in  the  midst  of  bitter  feuds  within  the  Catholic
Church  in  the  fifth  century,  and  is  founded  on  the  insistence
that  Christ  did  not  have  a  divine  nature,  but  was  only  a  good
man.  Nestorianism  grew,  as  a  key  channel  between  oligarchi-
cal centers  such  as  Venice  in  the  West,  and  the  vast  area
comprising  Central  Asia  and  China;  it  was  used,  by  Venice,
as  one  key  instrument  for  communicating  with,  and  manipu-
lating,' the  rampaging  Mongols.  Why  does  Palmer  like  the
Nestorians  so  much?  Because,  in  his  wordSj  they  "were  un-
bound by  the  later  theological  developments  of  the  West;
Augustine  and  Aquinas,  for  example,  were  simply  unknown
to  them."

Going  one  step  further,  he  supports  the  "new  vision  of
creation"  associated  with  such  current-day  New  Age  gnostics
as  Matthew  Fox,  the  founder  of  "Creation  Spirituality."  Fox
and'  co-thinkers  are  praised  by.  Palmer  for  opposing  "the
Christian  tradition  that  has  always  taught  that  humanity  has  a
special  role  in  creation."  Two  years  after  the  publication  of
Palmer's  1993  work  praising  him;  Fox  became  the  center
of  heated  controversy  in  the  United  Kingdom,  when  it  was
revealed  that  he  was  the  chief  spiritual  adviser  to  one  Rev.
Chris  Brain.  The  latter  caused  what  one  British  commentator,
Madeleine  Bunting,  described  as  the  Church  of  England's
"most  damaging  crisis  for  decades,"  when  he  used  his  so-
called  "rave"  religious  services  to  sexually  abuse  women.  His
activities  were  sanctioned  by  the  Anglican  Church,  "up  to  the
highest  levels,"  she  wrote.  Queen  Elizabeth  11  is  the  Supreme
Governor  of  the  Church.

'If  this  means  shrugging  off  humanity,  so  be  it'

But  Palmer  doesn't  restrict  himself  to  subverting  Chris-
tianity from  within.  He  also  promotes  those  religions  and
belief-structures  outside  of  a  nominally  Christian  context,  the
which,  he  asserts,  are  most  hostile  to  the  future  progress  of
humanity.  He  lauds  Taoism  (yin/yang,  cyclical  theories  of
nature),  and  those  variants  of  Buddhism  and  Hinduism  that,
he  claims,  are  coherent  with  the  so-called  "Gaia  hypothesis"
of  British  science-faker  James  Lovelock.  The  "Gaia  hypothe-
sis" is  a  modem-day  variant  of  traditional  gnostic  worship  of
the  Mother  Earth  goddess.  And  how  does  Palmer  see  the
implications  of  the  Gaia  hypothesis?:  "What  the  earth  cares
about  is  its  own  continued  survival,  and  if  this  means  shrug-
ging off  humanity,  then  so  be  it.  One  of  the  most  challenging
ideas  emerging  from  the  environmental  crisis  and  from  con-
cepts such  as  Gaia,  is  the  notion  that  humanity  really  isn't
that  important.  This  poses  major  problems  to  Christianity,
Judaism,  and  Islam. . .  ."

The  Unabomber  could  not  have  said  it  better.


The  new  Empire's
propaganda  machine

by  Charles  Tuttle

The  British  Empire  does  not  have  a  free  press,  contrary  to
whatever  appearances  have  been  fostered.  Rather,  it  has  a
tightly  regulated  propaganda  machine,  which  is  run,  top
down,  by  the  British  monarchy,  through  its  vast  intelligence
apparatus.  In  recent  decades,  this  propaganda  cartel  has  tar-
getted  the  United  States,  buying  up  hundreds  of  American
newspapers,  taking  over  major  book-publishing  houses,  and
virtually  locking  up  control  of  such  vital  areas  as  scientific
publications  and  specialty  legal  and  economic  journals.  The
following  are  thumbnail  sketches  of  just  some  of  the  larger
components  of  the  cartel.


nrjn


Britisli  Broadcasting  Corporation

Broadcasting  Hou^ie  Portland  Plare  London

W1A1AA  United  Kingdom

19d5  group  sales«£l  8?9  billion

Wortd  Service  financed  through  Government  Treasury

Qnrtt-in  Aid

21  945  employees

Key  personnel:

Marmaduke  Hussey:  chairman  1986  (executive  board
Thomson  Organisation  197 1- ;  CEO  Times  Newspapers  Ltd.,
1971-80,  director  1982-86;  membership  board,  British  Coun-
cil 1983-  ;  trustee,  Rhodes  Trust,  1972-91;  trustee.  Royal
Academy  Trust  1988- ).

William  Jordan,  CBE:  governor  1988  (council  Royal  In-
stitute of  International  Affairs  1987;  governor  London  School
of  Economics  1987- ;  general  secretary,  International  Con-
federation of  Free  Trade  Unions  1995-  ;  president  European
Metal-Workers  Confederation.  1 986-95).

The  Rt.  Hon.  Lord  Cocks  of  Hartcliffe,  PC:  vice  chair
1 993  (parliamentary  secretary  to  the  Treasury  and  Chief  Gov-
ernment Whip  1976-79;  Opposition  Chief  Whip  1979-85).

At  the  top  of  the  propaganda  pyramid  is  the  British  Broad-
casting Corp.  Wherever  the  British  Crown  has  moved  toover-
throw  a  government,  foment  a  tribal  or  civil  war,  or  ruin  an
economy,  BBC  has  been  there,  to  fuel  the  process,  and,  often,
to  provide  marching  orders  to  British-steered  factions,  and


^EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     33


even  logistical  data.

In  1985,  it  was  admitted  that  Britain's  domestic  security
service,  MI-5,  has  responsibihty  for  all  BBC  personnel  deci-
sions. No  one  works  for  BBC  who  has  not  been  "vetted"  by
MI-5.

At  the  end  of  World  War  I,  Adm.  Reginald  Hall  was
placed  in  charge  of  expanding  and  reorganizing  British  intelh-
gence.  Hall  immediately  lapped  the  Canadian,  William  Ste-
phenson, to  develop  a  strategy  for  using  the  British  media  as
an  integral  part  of  Britain's  secret  intelligence.  Stephenson,
joined  by  Minister  of  Information  Lord  Beaverbrook,  Royal
Air  Force  figure  Gladstone  Murray,  and  War  Propaganda  Bu-
reau operative  H.G.  Wells,  pushed  for  the  creation  of  a  British
Broadcasting  Corp.,  to  get  in  on  the  ground  floor  Of  the  emerg-
ing technologies  of  broadcast  radio  and  television.

In  1927,  BBC  was  formally  absorbed  into  the  British
Crown  structure  via  Royal  Charter.  By  1936,  BBC  was  crank-
ing out  foreign  language  broadcasts  around  the  globe.  With
the  declaration  of  war  with  Germany,  in  1939,  BBC  estab-
lished the  BBC  Monitoring  Service,  to  recruit  an  army  of
"stringers"  to  gather  intelligence  around  the  world.  To  insure
tight  control  over  BBC's  foreign  intelligence  and  propaganda
efforts,  BBC  executive  Malcolm  Frost  was  appointed  to
Prime  Minister  Churchill's  Security  Executive,  the  oversight
committee  responsible  for  MI-5.

Today,  BBC  World  Service  broadcasts  24  hours  a  day
overseas,  in  English  and  40  other  languages.  BBC  is  overseen
by  a  Board  of  Governors  appointed  by  the  Queen  in  Council,
and  is  responsible  to  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
of  the  British  Department  of  State,  run  by  Baroness  Lynda
Chalker.


Key  personnel:

SirChristopherHogg:  non-executive  chairman  1985- (di-
rector of  the  Bank  of  England;  former  chairman  Coutaulds
PLC;  director  SmithKline  Beecham  PLC;  member  interna-
tional council  J.P.  Morgan;  trustee  Ford  Foundation).

Sir  David  Walker:  du^ctor  1994-  (director  the  Bank  of
England;  chairman  British  Securities  and  Investments  Board;
chairman  Morgan  Stanley  Group-Europe  PLC;  deputy  chair-
man Lloyd's  Bank  PLC).

Pehr  Gyllenhammer:  director  1984  (member,  Trilateral
Commission;  director  Kissinger  Associates;  chairman  Volvo
1983-93;  advisory  board  member.  Chase  Manhattan  Bank
1962- ).

Charles  Sinclair:  director  1994-  (group  chief  executive
Daily  Mail  and  General  Trust  PLC;  director  Euromoney  Pub-


lications PLC;  director  Schroders  PLC).

The  Rt.  Hon.  The  Lord  Browne-Wilkinson :  trustee  (called
to  Queen's  Council  1972;  vice  chancellor  Supreme  Court
1985-91).

David  Cole,  CBE:  trustee  (former  deputy  managing  direc-
tor International  Thomson  Organisation  PLC;  chair  Thomson
Foundation  1986-  ).

The  Hon.  Alan  Hare,  MC:  trustee  (deputy  chairman  The
Economist  1985-89;  Foreign  Office  1947-61;  Financial
Times  1963-84,  chairman  1978-84;  member.  Press  Council
1975-78).

Arthur  Ochs  Sulzburger:  trustee  (former  chairman,  pub-
lisher the  New  York  Times).

Reuters  operates  the  largest  news-wire  service  in  the
world,  with  the  world's  most  extensive  international  private
satellite  and  cable  communications  network.  Their  news  ser-
vices produce  in  19  languages,  and  have  198  branch  offices
within  86  countries.  Over  4,000  intelligence  operators  are
currentiy  employed  in  149  countries.  Reuters  Television  is
the  world's  largest  international  television  news  agency,
reaching  some  half-billion  households  in  over  80  countries.

Reuters  was  founded  in  1 850  by  German-bom  Julius  Reu-
ter,  who  moved  to  England  from  France,  following  the  com-
pletion of  the  English  Channel  telegraph  cables.  He  estab-
lished a  telegraph  service  for  transmission  of  international
news  to  British  newspapers.  Reuters  was  accused  during
World  War  I  of  being  a  British  Crown  front,  a  charge  difficult
to  deny,  as  managing  director  Roderick  Jones  was  head  of  the
Department  of  Propaganda.

In  1925,  the  British  Press  Association  (PA)  took  majority
shareholding  in  Reuters.  In  1941,  Reuters  Trust  was  estab-
lished as  financial  holding  company,  jointly  owned  by  the  PA
and  the  Newspaper  Proprietors  Association  (NPA).  Austra-
lian Associated  Press  and  New  Zealand  Press  Association
joined  Reuters  Trust  in  1947.

Reuters  moved  into  computerized  financial  data  in  the
mid-1960s,  and  now  dominates  the  field  worldwide.


Key  personnel:

The  Hon.  Conrad  Black:  chairman  and  CEO  (Canadian
EMvy  Council;  Trilateral  Commission;  director  Canadian  Im-
perial Bankof  Connmerce;  International  Institute  for  Strategic
Studies;  advisory  board  Bilderburg  Society  meetings).

Richard  Perle:  (fellow,  American  Enterprise  Institute
1 987- ;  assistance  secretary  of  defense  for  international  secu-
rity policy  1981-87;  director  Jerusalem  Post  Pubfications
Ltd.).

Richard  Hambro:  (Hambros  Bank  1964- ,  group  manage-


34     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


ment  director  1986-94;  chairman  J.O.  Hambro  &  Co.  1994-  ;
director  Anglo  American  Corp.  of  South  Africa  1 98 1  - ;  mem-
ber international  counciUJ.S.  Information  Agency  1988- ).

Baroness  Margaret  Thatcher  of  Kesteven;  (British  prime
minister  1979-90;  Thatcher  Foundation).

Giovanni  Agnelli:  (Trilateral  Commission;  chairman  Fiat
1966- ;  international  advisory  committee,  Chase  Manhattan
Bank;  advisory  board  Bilderburg  meetings;  World  Wide
Fund  for  Nature;  1001  Club).

Sir  James  Goldsmith:  (CEO  Goldsmith  Foundation
1991- ;  World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature;  1001  Club).

Dwayne  Andreas:  (chairman  Archer  Daniels  Midland).

Zbigniew  Brzezinski:  (chairman  Trilateral  Commission
1974-77;  U.S.  national  security  adviser  1977-81).

Paul  Volcker:  (chairman  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  1979-89).

Baron  Weidenfeld:  (chairman  Weidenfeld  &  Nicholson
Ltd.  1948- ;  governor  Jerusalem  Foundation).

Sir  Henry  Kissinger,  KCMG:  (U.S.  secretary  of  state
1973-77;  U.S.  national  security  adviser  1969-75;  President's
Foreign  Intelligence  Advisory  Board  1983-89).

Lord  Peter  Carrington:  (director  Kissinger  Associates
1982-84;  Secretary  General  NATO  1984-88).

William  F.  Buckley:  (publishQi  National  Review;  Mont
Pelerin  Society).

Baron  King  of  Wartnaby:  (chairman  British  Airways
PLC).

Henry  Keswick:  (chairman  Matheson  &  Co.  Ltd.  1975- ;
chairman  Jardine-Matheson  Holdings  (Hongkong)  1972-75;
director  Rothmans  International  1988-94;  London  advisory
committee,  Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Banking  Corp.).

Baron  Rawlinson  of  Ewell:  (London  advisory  committee
Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Banking  Corp.).

Sir  Frank  Rogers:  (deputy  chairman  The  Telegraph  PLC
1986- ;  director  Reuters  Founders  Share  Co.  Ltd.).

Sir  Evelyn  de  Rothschild:  (chairman  N.M.  Rothschilds  &
Sons  Ltd.;  chairman  1972-89  The  Economist).

Baron  Swaythling:  (chairman  Rothmans  International
PLC  1988- ;  chairman  Samuel  Montagu  &  Co.  Ltd.  1970-
73;  director  J.  Rothschild  Holdings  PLC  1983-89;  Board  of
Banking  Supervision,  Bank  of  England  1990- ;  director  The
Telegraph  PLC  1985- ).

HoUinger  Corp.  (renamed  Hollinger  Inc.  last  year),  for-
merly Argus  Corp.,  was  founded  during  World  War  II  as  War
Supplies,  Ltd.,  a  front  for  British  Ministry  of  Munitions  and
Supplies,  based  in  Canada,  and  was  charged  with  procuring
military  equipment  from  the  United  States.  Wartime  profits
were  "privatized"  under  E.P.  Taylor  and  George  Black,  and
Argus  became  major  owner  of  mining  and  manufacturing
firms.  Beginning  in  1985,  after  founder  George  Black's  son,
Conrad  Black  took  over  and  changed  the  company  name  to
Hollinger,  its  portfolio  shifted  into  media.

With  British  Rothschild  financing,  Hollinger  bought  83%
ownership  of  The  Telegraph  PLC.  Soon  after  acquiring  the


Telegraph,  Hollinger  took  over  the  Spectator,  the  1828-
founded  British  establishment  joumal.

Hollinger  took  98.9%  interest  in  the  Jerusalem  Post  in
early  1989,  purging  die  Post  editorial  department  in  favor  of
"hawks"  aligned  with  Ariel  Sharon  and  Margaret  Thatcher.
Hollinger  purchased  the  Chicago  Sun-Times  from  Rupert
Murdoch  in  early  1994.  The  buying  spree  continued  with
purchases  of  American  Publishing  Co.  with  the  Canadian  tele-
vision Unimedia,  Sterling  Newspapers  Ltd.,  Saturday  Night
Magazine,  and  the  Financial  Post.  Hollinger  went  on  to  pur-
chase 17%  of  the  Australian  John  Fairfax  Holdings,  publish-
ers of  the  country's  largest  daily,  The  Age.

The  company  now  owns  80  daily  and  over  300  weekly
newspapers  in  the  United  States,  with  a  combined  readership
of  5  million.  Money  for  the  recent  purchases  reportedly  came
from  Li  Kai  Shi,  until  recently  a  director  of  Hongkong  and
Shanghai  Banking  Corp.


Thomson  Corporation

Suite  ?706  Toronto  Dominion  Bank
Tower  Toronto  Ontano  Canada
M5K  1A1

19S5  assets  Can  $9  989  billion
60  000  employees


Key  personnel:

The  R!t.  Hon.  Lord  Kenneth  Thomson:  (director  Hudson' s
Bay  Company).

Richard  Thomson:  (chairman  Toronto  Dominion  Bank
1978- ;  director  Eaton's  of  Canada;  director  Inco  Ltd.).

John  Tory:  (deputy  chairman  Markborough  Properties
Inc.;  director  Royal  Bank  of  Canada;  director  Hudson's  Bay
Company).

Charles  Medland:  (president  Beauwood  Investments  Inc.
1989- ;  director  the  Seagram  Co.  Ltd.).

John  Fraser  (chairman  Federal  Industries  Ltd.  1992- ;  di-
rector Bank  of  Montreal;  director  Coca-Cola  Beverages  Ltd.;
director  Ford  Motor  of  Canada  Ltd.;  director  Shell  Canada
Ltd.;  president  Empire  Freightways  Ltd.  1953-62).

Ron  Barbaro  (president  Prudential  of  America  Life  Insur-
ance Co.  of  Canada).

The  Thomson  communications  empire  began  with  the
1932  establishment  of  a  rural  radio  station.  Thomson  moved
into  newspapers  in  Canada  in  the  1940s,  and  began' taking
over  American  publications  in  1952.  Thomson  moved  to
Great  Britain  in  1953,  buying  Scottish  newspapers  and  televi-
sion concerns.  It  bought  the  London  Sunday  Times  in  1959,
along  with  17  regional  newspapers.  In  1964,  Prime  Minister
Harold  Macmillan  sponsored  Thomson  to  the  House  of  Lords,
as  Lord  Thomson  of  Fleet.  Thomson  bought  the  London
Times  and  Times  Literary  Supplement  from  the  Astors  in
1966.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     35


Using  profits  from  North  Sea  oil.  International  Thomson
Organisation  Ltd.  was  setup  in  1978,  moving  its  headquarters
back  to  Toronto.

Thompson  now  owns  American  Banker,  Bond  Buyer,  Fi-
nancial Times  of  Canada,  and  Securities  Industry  Daily.  The
company  is  also  America's  largest  legal  research  pubhshers,
through  their  Lawyers  Cooperative  Publishing,  and  owns
Janes  Information  Group,  defense  specialty  publisher.  Thom-
son's  Institute  for  Science  Information  is  the  world's  largest
commercialprovider  of  scientific  data.  Thomson  became  the
second  biggest  college  textbook  publisher,  with  the  1 986  pur-
chase of  South-Westem.


Key  persomiel:

Rupert  Murdoch:  owner;  publisher,  chairman  The  News
Corp.  Ltd.  (Australia)  1991-  (group  CEO  1979- ;  director
News IntemationalPLC  1969-  .chairman  1969-87; chairman
News  America  Publishing  Inc.,  director  1981-;  chairman
Times  Newspaper  Holdings  Ltd.  1982-90,  1994- ;  chairman
and  CEO  Twentieth  Century  Fox,  Fox  Inc.  1992- ).

Andrew  S.B.  Knight:  chairman  News  International  PLC
1990-94;  chairman  1990-94  Times  Newspaper  Holdings  Ltd.
(editor  1974-86  The  Economist;  CEO  Daily  Telegraph  PLC
1986-89,  chief  editor  1987-89;  steering  committee  Bilder-
burg  meetings  1980- ;  governor  Ditchley  Foundation
1982- ).

Lord  Catto  of  Caimcatto:  director  Times  Newspapers
Holdings  PLC  1981- ;  president  1987- ,  chairman  News  Inter-
national PLC  1969-  (Morgan  Grenfell  Group  PLC  1980-87;
director  Morgan  Grenfell  &  Co.  Ltd.  1957,  CEO  1973-74,
chairman  1974-79;  director  General  Electric  Co.  PLC  1959-
93;  London  advisory  committee  Hongkong  and  Shanghai
Banking  Corp.  1966-80).

Lord  Harris  of  High  Cross:  director  Times  Newspaper
Holdings  PLC  1988-  (founder  Institute  of  Economic  Affairs,
president  1990,  director  1957-87,  chairman  1987-89;  Mont
Pelerin  Society).

Sir  F.  Patrick  Neill,  QC:  director  Times  Newspapers
Holdings  Ltd.  (served  Rifie  Brigade  1944-47,  Training  Gen-
eral Staff  Officer  1947,  Egypt;  Recorder  of  the  Crown  Court
1975-78;  vice  chancellor  Oxford  University  1985-89;  chair-
man Press  Council  1978-83;  chairman  Council  for  Securities
Industry  1978-85,  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry  Com-
mittee of  Inquiry  into  Regulatory  Arrangements  at  Lloyds).

Lord  Griffiths  of  Fforestfach:  director  Times  Newspapers
Holdings  Ltd.  (lecturer  London  School  of  Economics  1965-
76;  govemorof  the  Bank  of  England  1983-85;  head  of  Prime


Minister's  Policy  Unit  and  special  adviser  to  Margaret
Thatcher  1985-90;  international  adviser  Goldman  Sachs
1990- ;  director  Thom-EMI  1990-91).

Lord  Marlsford:  director  Times  Newspapers  Holdings
Ltd.  (Conservative  Research  Department  1963-70;  special
adviser  to  HM  Government  1970-74;  special  adviser  to
Leader  of  the  Opposition  1974-75;  consultant  The  Economist
1974-91).

The  News  Corp.  is  the  largest  publisher  of  English-lan-
guage newspapers  in  the  world.  Subsidiary  HarperCollins
Publishers  is  the  world's  largest  publisher  of  English-lan-
guage, books.  The  company  is  owned  by  Rupert  Murdoch,
the  son  of  Australian  newspaper  mogul  Sir  Keith  Murdoch.
Rupert  Murdoch  started  in  Australia,  founding  the  first  na-
tionwide daily  newspaper  in  mid-1960s.  By  1968  Murdoch
was  in  London,  taking  over  News  of  the  World,  biggest  tabloid
newspaper  in  the  world.  Murdoch  bought  Britain's  current
largest  selling  daily  tabloid  the  Sun  in  1 969.  American  acqui-
sitions began  in  1973  with  formation  of  News  America  Pub-
lishing, Inc.,  purchasing  the  San  Antonio  News  andNew  York
Post,  changing  it  into  a  tabloid.  In  1 977,  the  New  York  Maga-
zine Company,  publishers  of  New  York  magazine  and  die
Village  Voice,  was  acquired.

Murdoch's  British  arm,  formed  as  News  International,  in
1981  purchased  42%  of  William  Collins  &  Sons  and  bought
the  London  Times,  Sunday  Times,  and  Times  Literary  Supple-
ment from  Thomson.

Buying  into  Twentieth  Century  Fox  Film  Corp.  in  1983,
Murdoch  quickly  ventured  into  satellite  television,  acquiring
holdings  in  the  British  Satellite  Television  PLC  and  American
Inter-American  Satellite  Television  Network  (renamed  Sky
Channel).

News  International  bought  the  Today  newspaper  from
Lomho  in  1987,  then  bought  Harper  &  Row  and  the  South
China  Morning  Post,  Hongkong's  most  important  English-
language  newspaper;  then  Triangle  Publications,  printers  of
TV  Guide  and  the  Daily  Racing  Form.  Fox  Broadcasting  Co.
was  launched  in  1988.

By  1990,  Murdoch  was  $8  billion  in  debt  to  146  banks.


Key  personnel:

Viscount  Blakenham:  (Lazard  Brothers  1961,  partner
1984- ,  director  1975- ;  director  Sotheby's  Holdings  Inc.
1987- ;  director  U.K.-Japan  2000  Group  1990- ;  House  of
Lords  Select  Committee  on  Science  and  Technology  1983-
86;  Nature  Conservancy  Council  1986-90).


36     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


Pehr  GylJenhammer;  (see  Reuters).

Frank  Barlow,  CBE:  (director  Elsevier,  U.K.  1991- ).

Michel  David- Weill:  (senior  partner  Lazard  Freres,  N.Y.
1977- ;  deputy  chairman  Lazard  Brothers  &  Co.,  London
1991- ;  partner  Lazard  Freres  et  Cie.,  Paris  1965- ;  Brown
Brothers  Harriman,  1954-55;  Lehman  Brothers  1955-56).

Sir  Simon  Hornby:  (director  W.H.  Smith  Group  1974-
94;  chairman  1 982-94;  director  Lloyds  Bank  1 988- ,  Lloyds
Abbey  Life  PLC  1991- ).

Dennis  Stevenson,  CBE:  (director  J.  Rothschild  Assur-
ance PLC  1991- ).

Begun  in  the  nineteenth  century  as  an  oil  company,  Pear-
son was  a  key  World  War  I  provider  of  fuel  oil  to  the  British
govemment,  via  Viscount  Cowdray's  Anglo-Mexican  Petro-
leum Company.  In  1919,  Whitehall  Trust  Ltd.  was  set  up  as
a  finance  and  issuing  house,  acquiring  a  substantial  interest
in  London  merchant  bankers  Lazard  Brothers  &  Co.

Currently  20%  of  Pearsons  is  owned  by  Cowdray  family
members,  with  descendant  Viscount  Blakenham  as  its  head.
Ruperi  Murdoch  is  next  leading  shareholder.

Pearson  owns  the  Financial  Times,  and  holds  half  owner-
ship of  The  Economist.  Still  carrying  half-interest  in  Lazard' s
U.K.  operations,  Pearson  also  holds  9%  ownership  of  Lazard
Freres  in  New  York  and  Paris.  Capital  PubUcatioiis  (U.S.)
prints  41  business  newsletters  nationally,  with  their  Federal
Publications  specializing  in  U.S.  government  procurement
and  immigration  law.  Roll  Call,  which  covers  Capitol  Hill  in
Washington,  is  also  run  by  Economist  Group.  The  Journal  of
Commerce  was  purchased  in  1995,  which  operates  the  Pier
Import/Export  Reporting  Service,  providing  cargo  data  of  all
vessels  calling  at  U.S.  ports.  Financial  Izvestia  was  initiated
for  Russia  in  1992.  Penguin  Books  is  owned  by  Pearsons.
Major  U.S .  textbook  suppliers  Addison- Wesley  Longman  has
since  1987  also  been  an  asset.  Broadcasters  Pearson  Televi-
sion is  wholly -owned,  providing  programming  for  BBCl  and
BBC2,  as  well  as  cable  and  satellite  channels.


Key  personnel:

Anthony  Greener:  director  Reed  International  1990- ;
CEO  1992-  (director  Guinness  PLC  1986- ;  former  managing
director  Dunhill  Holdings  PLC;  managing  director  United
Distillers  1987-92;  director  Louis  Vuitton  Moet  Hennessey
1989- ).

Roelof  Nelissen:  director,  supervisory  board  Elsevier
1990-  (Netherlands  Parliament  States-General  1963-70,  min-
ister of  economic  affairs  1970-71,  first  deputy  prime  minister


and  minister  of  finance  1971-73;  board  manaiging  directors
Amsterdam-Rotterdam  Bank  N.V.  1974- ,  vice  chair  1979-
82,  chairman  1983-92;  chairman  of  the  board  of  managing
directors  ABN-AMRO  Holding  N.V.  1990-92).

With  the  merging  of  British  Reed  International  PLC  and
Dutch  Elsevier  NV  a  few  years  ago,  Reed-Elsevier  today
dominates  scientific  publishing  through  ownership  of  some
1 , 1  (X)  academic  journals  printed  worldwide.

Reed  began  as  papers  manufacturers  for  Lord  NorthcUffe
of  Daily  Mail.  Northcliffe's  nephew  Cecil  King  became
Reed's  chairman  in  the  early  1950s,  moving  to  build  a  broad-
ranging  publishing  group.  In  the  1980s  Reed  moved  into  elec-
tronic information  services,  also  becoming  the  world' s  largest
organizer  of  exhibitions.

Elsevier  has  always  been  in  scientific  publishing,  its  suc-
cess based  on  its  steady  expansion  in  the  English  language.
Elsevier  Information  Systems  Inc.  in  1979  acquired  the  U.S.-.
based  Congressional  Information  Systems.  Greenwood  Pub-
hshers,  which  publishes  intelligence-related  books,  includes
the  Praeger  imprint.  In  1991  Elsevier  purchased  Pergamon
Press  from  Robert  Maxwell.  Reed-Elsevier  in  1994  bought
Lexis-Nexis,  the  largest  information  retrieval  data  base  ser-
vice, and  second  largest  legal  publisher,  via  the  Marlindale-
Hubble  standard  U.S.  legal  services  directory.


LaRouche


Campaign
Is  On  the


Internet!


Lyndon  LaRouche's  Democratic  presidential  pri-
mary campaign  has  established  a  World  Wide
Web  site  on  the  Internet.  The  "home  page"  brings
you  recent  policy  statements  by  the  candidate  as
well  as  a  brief  biographical  resume.

imInmBI  the  LaRouche  page  on  the  Internet

httpVAwww.clark.net/larouche/welcome.html

"Wa^Wn  the  campaign  by  electronic  mail:

Iarouche@clark.net


Paid  for  by  Committee  to  Reverse  the  Accelerating  Global  Economic
and  Strategic  Crisis:  A  LaRouche  Exploratory  Committee.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report  ,  37


III.  The  Empire  Restored

Chatham  House  issues
the  marching  orders

by  Allen  Douglas

U.S.  President  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt  planned  to  elimi-
nate the  British  Empire  from  world  history,  as  the  memoirs
of  his  son  and  wartime  aide,  EUiott  Roosevelt,  document.  But,
upon  his  death  in  April  1945,  FDR's  plans  were  interred  with
him.  The  British  instead  pitted  the  former  allies,  the  United
States  and  Soviet  Russia,  against  each  other,  as  immortahzed
in  Churchill's  "Iron  Curtain"  speech  of  1947,  and  so  contin-
ued to  flourish  from  1945  until  the  disintegration  of  the  Soviet
Union  during  1989-91.

As  the  Berlin  Wall  fell,  the  British  saw,  on  the  one  side,  a
crumbling  Soviet  Union;  on  the  other,  a  United  States  rotted
out  by  30  years  of  the  rock-drug-sex  counterculture  and  post-
industrial  decay.  Thetime  was  ripe,  tfiey  decided,  to  reestab-
lish their  empire;  but  this  time,  it  would  rule  the  entire  world.
,  From  die  early  .19Ws  through  1995,  a  series  of  studies
and  conferences,  on  how  to  do  this,,  were  conducted  under  the
auspices  of  the  Royal  Institute  of  International  Affairs  (RIIA)
in  London.  The  year  1995  alone  saw  the  following:  a  one-day
RIIA  conferencev,"Britain  in  the  .World,"  attended  by  virtually
the  entire  foreign  policy  ehte.of  Britain;-an  RIIA  report,  "Dis-
cussion Paperj60:  Economic  Opportunities  for  Britain  and  the
Commonwealth,"  by  Australian  academic  Katharine  West;
and  a  soon-to-be-released  study  of  the  House  of  Commons'
Foreign  Relations  Committee,  whose  chairman,  David
Howell,  was  a  prominent  conference  participant.

To  understand  the  RIIA's  plan  to  use  the  Commonwealth
as  the  vehicle  to  formally  reestablish  the  Empire  (the  theme
of  West's  report),  one  must  look  at  the  history  of  the  RIIA
itself.  After  all,  this  body,  officially  established  during  the
Versailles  peace  negotiations  which  ended  World  War  I,  cre-
ated the  Commonwealth  in  the  first  place.

The  RIIA  grew  out  of  the  "Round  Table"  group  estab-
lished in  the  1 890s  by  South  African  gold  and  diamonds  mag-
nate Cecil  John  Rhodes.  Rhodes  preached,  as  stated  in  the
first  draft  of  his  will,  "the  extension  of  British  rule  throughout
the  world,"  which  would  include  all  of  Africa,  all  of  Asia,  and
"the  ultimate  recovery  of  the  United  States  of  America  as  an
integral  part  of  the  British  Empu^."

The  ideology  for  the  project  was  provided  by  Rhodes's
teacher  at  Oxford  in  the  1 870s,  the  homosexual  art  critic  John
Ruskin.  Ruskin  had  spent  most  of  the  middle  decades  of  the


century  in  Venice,  studying  the  art,  culture,  and  methods  by
which  that  tiny  city-state  had  dominated  much  of  the  world  for
over  half  a  millennium.  Ruskin  called  for  the  establishment  of
a  world-ruling  British  empire  on  its  model,  and  a  return  to  the
"pre-Raphaelite"  (pre-Renaissance)  pre- nation-slate  era —
that  is,  to  feudalism.

But  the  tubercular,  bombastic  Rhodes  was  merely  a  front
man  for  much  deeper  power — that  of  the  British  Crown.  One
of  the  three  founders  of  Rhodes'  s  group,  together  with  Rhodes
and  journalist  W.T.  Stead,  was  Reginald  Balliol  Brett  (Lord
Esher),  the  chief  adviser  to  King  Edward  VII  from  1901  until
Edward's  death  in  1910.  From  1905  until  he  died  in  1930,
Esher  was  the  de  facto  chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Imperial
Defence,  which  had  reorganized  the  forces  of  the  Empire  for
World  War  I,  and  which  shaped  the  contours  of  the  postwar
world.

The  Commonwealth  was  the  old  Empire,  in  the  altered
form  dictated  by  Britain's  changed  circumstances  following
World  War  I.  Round  Table  theoretician  and  RIIA  founder
Lionel  Curtis  expressed  that  reality  in  his.  1917  book  The
Problem  of  the  Commonwealth.  In  it,  he  proposed  "to  trans-
form.the  Empire  of  a  State  in  which  the  main  responsibihties
and  burden  of  its  common  affairs  are  sustained  and  controlled
by  the  United  Kingdom  into  a  commonwealth  of  equal  nations
conducting  its  foreign  policy  and  common  affairs  by  some
method  of  continuous  consultation  and  concerted  action."

The  RIIA,  established  in  1920  and  granted  its  royal  charter
in  1926,  embodied  the  "method  of  continuous  consultation
and  concerted  action"  that  Curtis  called  for;  it  spun  off  pro-
geny all  over- the  world,  such  as  the  New  York  Council  on
Foreign  Relations  and  related  "institutes  for  international  af-
fairs." So,  by  1989,  when  the  Beriin  Wall  fell,  this  group
moved  to  reestablish  the  empire  in  all  its  glory,  the  subject  of
the  RIIA's  "Discussion  Paper  60,"  put  out  by  West.

The  West  report

West  wrote  her  paper  while  based  at  the  University  of
London's  Institute  of  Commonwealth  Studies  during  1994.
That  institute  is  a  cornerstone  of  the  RIIA;  in  recent  years,  it
has  sponsored  an  endless  stream  of  studies,  doctoral  disserta-
tions, and  books  which  laud  the  "grandeur  of  Britain's  colo-
nial era,"  whether  in  the  Raj,  on  the  gold-  and  diamond-bear-
ing reefs  of  Africa,  or  in  the  deserts  of  Arabia.  These  studies
have  in  turn  spawned  popular  movies  on  the  colonial  period —
all  propaganda  for  the  return  of  the  empire.

West' s  paper,  however,  is  not  a  publicity  piece,  but  rather,
as  she  describes  it,  an  insider's  "policy-  and  action-oriented"
manual,  in  which  she  establishes  several  themes:

1 .  Britain  must  not  fixate  on  Europe,  whether  in  the  form
of  "Euro-skepticism"  or  "Euro-integration,"  but  must  extend
the  power  of  the  City  of  London,  whose  enormous  financial
and  corporate  power  she  catalogues,  worldwide.

2.  The  natural  vehicle  for  this  expansion  is  the  Common-
wealth, whose  52  countries — one-third  of  all  those  in  the


38     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


world — should  be  used  as  a  "foot  in  the  door"  to  take  over
non-Commonwealth  countries.

3.  Most  crucial  in  this  process,  is  the  power  of  "the  peo-
ple's Commonwealth,"  the  enormous  non-governmental  or-
ganization (NGO)  apparatus  which  girdles  the  globe,  and
which  already  dominates  many  nations.

4.  The  greatest  source  of  remaining  loot  in  the  world  is
not  in  the  financially  exhausted  Europe,  but  in  the  Asia-Pacific
region,  where  Britain  must  concentrate  its  efforts.

5.  The  continent  of  Australia  is  a  perfect  case-study  of  the
sort  of  "mutual  exploitation"  (as  she  disingenuously  terms  it)
between  Britain  and  the  Commonwealth,  and  is  the  base  from
which  the  empire  must  launch  its  conquest  of  Asia.

To  begin.  West  reviews  the  reach  of  the  Commonwealth,
that  "cross-section  of  the  international  community,  with  its
nearly  1.5  billion  people  inhabiting  all  the  continents,  living
in  one-third  of  the  world's  nations  and  constituting  one-quar-
ter of  the  human  race."  In  particular,  she  says,  look  at  the
Commonwealth's  "web  of  relationships  with  a  wide  range
of  multilateral  organizations,"  such  as  the  Organization  for
Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD),  the  Asia-
Pacific  Economic  Cooperation  (APEC)  forum,  the  Associa-
tion of  Southeast  Asian  Nations  (ASEAN),  the  Group  of  15,
the  Group  of  77,  and  so  forth.  It  must  coordinateite  numerous
members  in  these  bodies.  West  stresses,  in  order  to  dominate
them,  and  thus  every  part  of  the  world  (see  box).  In  many
ways,  she  says,  the  Commonwealth  is  already  more  powerful
than  the  United  Nations — another  organization  which  its  52
members  effectively  control.

Crucial  to  the  Commonwealth's  power,  is  the  vast  NGO
structure:  "Those  who  have  wrongly  forecast  the  demise  of
the  Commonwealth  have  been  ignoring  the  breadth  and  depth
of  the  'people's'  Commonwealth  and  of  the  links  which  bind
it  outside  the  deliberations  of  member  governments  and  their
officials.  The  'unofficial '  Commonwealth  is  widely  known  to
contain  an  impressive  and  ever-enlarging  pool  of  knowledge
and  expertise,  whose  extent  and  quality  have  implicitly  been
undervalued  in  the  inappropriately  hierarchical  'two-tier'
concept."  West  here  protests  the  idea  that  nation-states  have
a  higher  order  of  juridical  and  moral  existence  than  NGOs.

What  is  most  needed,  she  says,  is  a  "strategy  which  would
allocate  responsibilities  and  resources  between  'official'  and
'unofficial'  parts  of  the  structure  strictly  on  the  basis  of  who
would  be  best  able  to  formulate  and  implement  specific  poli-
cies and  programs.  If  the  whole  of  the  future  Commonwealth
would  amount  to  very,  much  more  than  the  sum  of  its  present
two  parts."

The  'informal  financial  empire'

But  what  is  the  strategy  to  which  all  must  be  subordinated?
It  is  that  which  it  has  always  been,  for  any  empire — finance
and  trade.  In  this  new  "post-Cold  War  environment,"  in  which
"much  more  emphasis  is  now  being  placed  on  the  economy
than  on  security,"  she  intones,  all  must  be  deployed,  as  in


Venice,  or  in  the  British  Empire  in  its  hey-day,  in  their  service.
The  drive  for  a  reestablished  British  Empire  stems  from  "the
experience  of  empire  and  the  dynamics  of  an  informal  finan-
cial empire  that  maintained  its  vibrancy  long  after  the  formal
empire  went  into  decline  "  (emphasis  added).

The  cornerstone  of  the  British  Empire,  West  says,  was
always  fi^ee  trade,  and  that  must  now  be  expanded:  "For  maxi-
mum freedom  and  flexibility,  the  ideal  environment  is  one
where  the  structures  of  international  economic  and  financial
relations  have  been  established  on  a  global  free  trade  basis."
With  the  disappearance  of  national  boundaries  through  dereg-
ulation, privatization,  the  establishment  of  the  World  Trade
■Organization,  the  spread  of  NGOs,  etc.,  there  is  nothing  which
can  stop  tills  empire,  and  all  of  its  manifold  assets  must  be
deployed  tOiserve  this  end.

One  such  asset  is  "human  rights."  "Since  it  was  launched
in  1987,"  she  says,  "the  non-govemmenta!  Commonwealth
Human  Rights  Initiative  (CHRI)  has  always  been  most  em-
phatic that  effective  human  rights  performance  is  a  major
determinant  of  economic  progress,  significant  for  individual
Commonwealth  member  states  and  for  commerce  between
them"  (emphasis  added).

And  it  was  to  facilitate  looting,  she  makes  clear,  that  the
entire  gamut  of  "good  govemance"  prescriptions  and  enforce-
ment mechahisnw  set  up  by  the  Commonwealth  in  its  1991
summit  in  Harare,  Zimbabwe  (which  was  presided  over  by
the  Queen),  was  estabUshed.

Any  government  which  stands  in  the  way,  will  be  crushed.
Such  a  recalcitiant  government,  she  emphasizes  in  one  of  only
three  recommendations  with  which  she  concludes  her  report,
is  that  of  Nigeria.  Here  she  steps  out  of  the  apparently  benign,
"Aesopian"  posture  of  her  report  as  a  whole,  to  stick  in  tiie
knife  and  twist  it.  Her  ''Recommendation  2"  bemoans  the
"credibility  gap"  between  what  the  Commonwealth  says,  and
what  it  does!  She  is  talking  about  Nigeria:  "In  the  lead-up  to
the  1995  Commonwealth  Heads  of  Government  Meeting,  the
most  highly  publicized  credibility  gap  has  related  to  the  lack
of  a  decisive  Commonwealth  response  to  the  arbitrary  in-
fringement of  human  and  democratic  rights  in  the  West  Afri-
can military  regime  of  Nigeria,  which, has  unambiguously
failed  to  govern  within  the  norms  of  Conomon  wealth  member-
ship as  set  out  in  the  Commonwealth  Heads  of  Government
Harare  Declaration  of  1991.  At  the  1995  summit  meeting  in
Auckland,  the  Nigerian  issue  will  provide  a  key  test  of
whether  the  Commonwealth  is  that  rare  kind  of  international
association:  one  which  really  means  what  it  says  and  is  pre-
pared to  act  on  if  (emphasis  added).

She  notes,  with  satisfaction,  that  the  CHRI  Advisory
Commission  recommended  sanctions,  in  order  to  bring  down
the  Nigerian  government.

While  West  was  writing,  others  were  working.  The  RIIA
had  planned,  in  its  March  1995  conference  "Britain  in  the
World,"  to  showcase  a  new  raler  of  Nigeria,  Gen.  Olesegun
Obasanjo,  who  was  to  take  power  as  the  result  of  a  coup  under


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     39


way  in  late  1994  and  early  1995.  In  the  event,  scheduled
speaker  Obasanjo  couldn't  make  it — he  was  arrested  in  Nige-
ria for  his  role  in  the  plot.

Target:  the  Asia-Pacific  region

Beyond  Nigeria,  where  else  should  this  vast  apparatus,
with  its  "now  dominant  economic  focus,"  turn  its  energy?
Continue  to  loot  the  Commonwealth,  of  course,  West  speci-
fies, but  turn  toward  the  last  major  untapped  economies
worldwide — those  of  the  Asia-Pacific  region:

"This  new  distribution  of  global  economic  power  in-
volves an  unambiguous  and  dramatic  shift  away  from  OECD
countries  toward  Asia-Pacific  growth  economies,  some  of
them  part  of  the  Commonwealth."  "East  beats  West"  was  the  -
conclusion  of  one  "global  strategy  team,"  she  says,  so  that  by
the  year  2010,  "five  of  the  top  ten  economies ...  in  the  world
will  come  from  Asia  compared  to  only  two  today."  Already,
she  notes,  Britain's  trade  and  investment  overseas  are  grow-
ing much  faster  in  Southeast  Asia  and  the  Pacific  Rim,  such
that  Britain' s  trade  outside  the  European  Community  is  50%
greater  than  within  it,  and  soaring  annually,  as  in  1993-94,
when  the  U.K.'s  trade  with  Malaysia  was  up  35%,  and  that
with  China  up  14%.  In  1994, -Britain's  exports  to  ASEAN


Commonwealth
'networking'

Katharine  West  emphasizes  in  her  report,  that  virtually
any  organization  in  the  world,  such  as  those  she  lists
here,  could  be  dominated  through  concerted  action  by
the  members  of  the  Commonwealth  within  it.  Since
there  are  52  Commonwealth  members  around  the
globe,  there  is  no  organization  they  could  not  control.

UN  Security  Council;  OECD;  G-7;  G-15;  G-77;  Asia-
Pacific  Economic  Cooperation  Group;  Association  of
Southeast  Asian  Nations;  South  Asian  Association  for
Regional  Cooperation;  South  Pacific  Forum;  South  Pa-
cific Commission;  North  American  Free  Trade  Agree-
ment; Organization  of  American  States;  Caribbean
Community;  Organization  of  East  Caribbean  States;
Organization  otAfrican  Unity;  Economic  Community
of  West  African  States;  Preferential  Trade  Area  for
Eastern  and  Southern  African  States;  South  African  De-
velopment Coordination  Conference;  European  Union;
Council  of  Europe;  OPEC;  Non-AUgned  Movement;
Islamic  Conference  Organization;  African,  Caribbean
and  Pacific  Countries  parties  to  the  Lomd  Convention;
NATO;  Conference  on  Security  and  Coordination  in
Europe;  South  African  Development  Community.


grewby25%.,i,  i;;>.,  "  ■-'■

British-desigiusd  policies  of  deregulation  and  privatiza-
tion have  paved  the  w^y  for  this  shift,  such  that  "British  port-
folio and  corporalC'dlrKt  investment  has  swung  toward  them
away  from  the  high^^^  highly  regulated  European  econo-
mies," into  looting^^ideveloping  economies.  She  compiles  ta-
bles of  British  forcigi^investment  by  areas  of  the  globe,.noting
that  "Britain's  external  corporate  direct  investment  is  now
growing  faster  than  diat  of  any  other  big  industrialized  coun-
try, making  Britaid'the  world' s  second  largest  overseas  inves-
tor." In  country  after  country,  Britain's  investment  rivals,  or
supersedes,  that  of  the  United  Slates,  an  astounding  fact  when
one  compares  Britaiii'spopulationof  60  million  to  the  United
States'  240  million.    :

More  striking^^an  the  mere  investment  amount,  again,
is  its  rate  of  expiansion.  Britain's  total  invisible  earnings,
she  documents,  rose  ah  astonishing  23%  between  1992  and
1993.

Australia:  thebaise  from  which  to  loot  Asia

The  RIIA  perfai^  clbose  West  to  write  its  "Discussion
Paper  60"  because  she  is  an  Australian;  certainly,  Australia
in  the  last  few  years  has  been  established  as  the  base  from
which  the  British  will  loot  Asia,  a  model.  West  says,  of  how
a  Commonwealth  country  can  be  so  used.  Australia  is  now
theAsia-PacificbasefDTl20intemational  corporations,  many
of  them  British  or  Ahglo-Duteh.  Sixty  of  these  corporations
were  estabUshed  in  1993-94  alone,  and  24  of  these  60  relo-
cated from  other  parts  of  Asia.

West  quotes  a  1994  report  by  a  Melbourne  consulting
group,  to  demonstrate.the  extent  to  which  the  Australian  and
British  economies  are  intertwined:  "Australia  sends  about
35%  of  its  offshoredirect  investment  to  Britain,  which  is  eight
times  more  than  could  be  expected  from  the  size  of  the  U.K.
economy.  The  U.K.  sends  about  7%  of  its  offshore  direct
investment  to  Australia;  which  . . .  is_^ve  times  more, than
could  be  expectedfrom  the  size  of  the  Australian  economy.
. . .  Australia  was  the  third  largest  direct  investor  in  Britain  at
the  end  of  1 993,"  "investments"  which  represent  the  activities
of  such  Club  of  the  Isles  members  as  press  magnates  Rupert
Murdoch  and  Kerry  Packer  (emphases  in  original).

Again,  what  is  stunning  is  not  merely  the  mnount  of  in-
vestment, but  the  rate  at  which  it  is  accelerating.  From  1982
to  1992,  British  investment  in  Australia  rose  sixfold,  while
Australian  direct  investment  in  Britain  rose  tenfold.  Over
1 987-92,  when  Australian  direct  investment  in  the  U.K.  more
than  quadrupled,  Australia  sent  44%  of  its  entire  overseas
direct  investment  to  Britain.  From  1991-92  to  1992-93,  Brit-
ish investment  in  Australia  more  than  doubled,  and  repre-
sented almost  one-quarter  of  the  total  foreign  direct  invest-
ment in  Australia.  In  1993-94,  the  U.K.  more  than  doubled
its  investment  in  Australia  again,  from  $Aus  3.6  billion  to
$Aus  8.8  billion.

Given  the  British  stakes  in  AustraUa,  both  in  its  own  right,
and  as  a  base  to  loot  Asia,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they


40     Special  Report


EIR     May  24, 1996


launched,  in  late  January  of  this  year,  a  campaign  to  destroy
Lyndon  LaRouche's  co^thinkers  downunder,  the  Citizens
Electoral  Councils.  British  intelligence's  Conrad  Black,
through  his  Age  newspaper  in  Melbourne,  launched  the  on-
slaught, which  set  the  stage  for  anglophile  assets  in  the  federal
parliament  and  local  Anti-Defamation  League  of  B '  nai-B  'nth
circles  to  call  for  an  investigation  of  the  CEC.  The  "charges"
were  so  ill-defined  and  vague  that,  as  of  this  writing,  no  such
investigation  has  eventuated.


RIIA  conference:
'Britain  in  the  World'

by  Allen  Douglas

On  March  29, 1995,  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  gatherings
of  the  British  elite  in  the  postwar  period  convened  at  the
Queen  Elizabeth  II  Conference  House  for  a  conference  enti-
tled, "Britain  in  the  World."  The  affair  was  co-sponsored  by
the  Royal  Institute  of  International  Affairs  (RIIA)  and  Her
Majesty's  government.

In  his  opening  remarks.  Prof.  Sir  Laurence  Martin,  the
RIIA' s  director,  noted  the  cahber  of  the  700  persons  present  at
what  he  called  this  "genuinely  unique  conference."  "I  cannot
think  of  another  occasion,"  he  burbled,  "on  which  the  foreign
policy  estabhshment  of  a  country  has  put  itself  before  such  a
group  for  interrogation.  You  could  grab  any  1 2  of  the  partici-
pants— I  do  not  say  'audience' — and  they  would  grace  the
platform  of  any  important  conference:  The  standard  is  ex-
tremely high."

Indeed,  observed  Sir  Laurence,  many  of  those  present
were  far  more  important,  as  is  the  RIIA,  than  Her  Majesty's
government  itself:  "We  see  more  clearly  every  day  that  the
foreign  relations  of  Great  Britain  are  only  partly,  perhaps  not
even  primarily,  in  the  hands  of  HM  government.  Many  of  the
people  in  the  body  of  this  hall  have  great  influence  over  British
foreign  relations."

The  conference  was  organized  into  four  "break-out  ses-
sions": "Britain's  Diplomatic  and  Security  Role";  Britain's
Place  in  the  World  Economy";  "Democracy  and  Develop-
ment"; and  "Projecting  British  Values,  Education  and  Cul-
ture." The  purpose  of  the  sessions  was  to  take  stock  of  Brit-
ain's far-flung  assets,  and  to  coordin^e  their  deployment  in
an  attack  on  what  remains  of  nation-states  around  the  globe.
The  attack  on  the  nation-state  was  emphasized,  in  a  typically
British  understated  way,  by  Sir  Crispin  Tickell,  a  former  Brit-
ish ambassador  to  the  UN  and  a  scion  of  the  Huxley  clan,  one
of  the  most  influential  people  in  British  culture  for  the  past
century  and  a  half.

Sir  Crispin  exulted  that  "the  power  of  the  state  is  diminish-
ing  It  is  moving  upwards  to  the  big  global  organizations,"


on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other,  "You  have  a  downward
movement,  which  you  can  see  all  over  the  world  toward  local
communities,  states,  minorities,  pressure  groups,  and  others."
A  third  movement,  he  said,  was  "sideways" — the  cross-bor-
der "information  revolution."

The  tenor  of  the  affair  was  perhaps  best  conveyed  by  Dr.
John  Ashworth,  one  of  the  participants  in  session  four:  "I  am
afraid  the  British  are  getting  more  assertive  because  the  30-
or  40- year  political  program  which  followed  1945,  in  which
the  British  establishment,  the  political  elite,  set  themselves
the  task  of  the  orderly  management  of  decUne,  has  ended.  We
have  had  enough  of  that."

The  four  sessions  familiarized  those  present  with  the  latest
in  the  British  Empire's  armamentarium  of  irregular  warfare,
in  three  aspects:  1)  finance/trade,  2)  military,  and  3)  cultural.
The  British  Empire,  like  its  predecessor  Venice,  was  urban-
maritime  in  nature,  based  upon  finance  and  trade.  Finance  and
trade  are  the  guts  of  the  empire;  military  and  cultural  warfare
aspects,  the  means  to  enforcing  them.

London's  unique  position

One  after  the  other,  members  of  the  elite  outlined  their
part  of  the  picture.  One  highlight  was  a  sketch  of  the  City  of
London,  the  "engine"  of  the  whole  business,  by  John  Bond,
Group  Chief  Executive  of  HSBC  Holdings  PLC.  Bond
stressed  that,  though  "the  City  of  London  is  but  one  square
mile  in  the  United  Kingdom's  94,000  square  miles,  it  has  a
unique  position  in  the  world's  financial  system."  He  gave  a
few  indications  of  its  power:

•  "The  City  currently  accounts  for  over  a  quarter  of  the
world's  foreign  exchange  turnover  and  it  contributes  an  esti-
mated £1.8  bilhon  to  the  U:K.  economy.  The  London  Stock
Exchange  lists  the  shares  of  more  foreign  companies  than  any
other  bourse,  processing  around  60%  of  all  shares  trading
outside  their  home  country.  It  handles  90%  of  cross-exchange
trading  in  Europe  and  one-tenth  of  the  total  world  equity
turnover.

•  "London  is . . .  the  world's  largest  issuer  of  Eurobonds.

•  "The  City  is  also  home  to  LIFFE,  the  London  Interna-
tional Financial  Futures  Exchange,  which  is  the  world' s  third-
largest  futures  market.

•  "Europe's  top  commodity  futures  exchanges  are  all
here — the  London  Metal  Exchange,  the  International  Petro-
leum Exchange,  and  the  London  Commodity  Exchange.  They
account  for  three-quarters  of  Europe's  turnover  in  exchange-
tied  commodity  derivatives  and  15%  of  the  world's  turnover.

•  "Historically,  London  has  been  a  focal  point  for  inter-
national marine,  aviation,  and  commercial  insurance  and  rein-
surance. During  the  1980s,  50-60%  of  world  ship-broking
commissions  and  about  half  of  the  world's  sales  and  pur-
chases of  ships  were  generated  here.

•  "In  ftind  management,  London  dominates  the  man-
agement of  foreign  institutional  funds,  most  not^ly  foreign
government  and  pension  funds.  And  London's  share  of  assets
managed  in  Europe  for  foreign  institutional  clients  ex-


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     41


ceeds  81%.

•  "With  more  than  500  foreign  banks  in  the  City,  London
is  also  one  of  the  largest  centers  for  international  lending.
U.K. -based  banks  accounted  for  nearly  16%  of  worldwide
lending  in  1993. . . .

•  "Financial  and  business  services  account  for  around
one-fifth  of  all  London  jobs — a  higher  share  than  Tokyo,  New
York,  or  Paris.  If  you  include  professional  and  other  business
services,  more  than  600,000  London  jobs  are  now  finance
related — a  figure  that  is  greater  than  the  entire  population
of  Frankfurt."

Tlie  City,  as  those  present  well  knew,  uses  Her  Majesty's
government  as  its  advance  scouts,  a  fact  admitted  by  Prime
Minister  John  Major  in  his  opening  address:  "The  Foreign
Office  now  devotes  more  of  its  overseas  resources  to  commer-
cial work  than  to  any  other  front-line  activity,  and  rightly  so."

After  the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall,  the  pace  expanded  rap-
idly, as  summarized  by  Sir  John  Coles,  Permanent  Undersec-
retary of  State  for  die  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office:
"This  year  we  are  opening  up  14  new  posts,  primarily  for
commercial  reasons,  and  deploying  well  over  100  new  com-
mercial offices — mainly  in  Asia,  some  in  Latin  America,  and
the  former  Soviet  Union."  Sir  Derek  Hornby,  chairman  of  the
British  Overseas  Trade  Board,  noted  that  his  organization
deployed  over  300  major  trade  missions  a  year,  and,  as  he
reviewed  the  map  of  the  world,  continent  by  continent,  said,
"I  do  not  know  any  of  those  markets  where  we  have  not
increased  from  something  between  15  to  30%  our  efforts  year
on  year  over  the  last  three  years."

Privatization  key  to  expansion

The  key  to  this  expansion,  numerous  speakers  empha-
sized, was  the  privatization  of  formerly  State-owned  assets,
a  scam  invented  by  an  elite  division  of  Her  Majesty' s  intelli-
gence services,  the  Mont  Pelerin  Society.  Ian  Taylor,  Parlia-
mentary Under-Secretary  of  State  for  Trade  and  Technology,
said  that  privatization  "has  been  a  huge  success  with  falling
prices."  Taylor  was  not  so  crass  as  to  indicate  how  that  works:
assets  worth  $100  are  picked  up  for  $5,  or  less.  The  chairman
of  Standard  Chartered  (bank)  PLC,  Patrick  Gillam,  noted  that
he  had  just  been  giving  a  seminar  in  Indonesia  on  privatiza-
tion, and  told  the  audience  that  "it  may  not  strike  many  of
you  here  like  this  but  the  world  outside  this  country  regards
privatization  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable  things  that  Britain
has  given  them  probably  in  the  last  50  years."

Perhaps  nowhere  did  privatization  have  more  of  an  impact
than  in  the  former  Soviet  Union  and  East  bloc.  Several  speak-
ers emphasized  that  the  British  had  helped  design  and  propa-
gate the  "Gorbachev  reforms."  As  Prime  Minister  Major  put
it,  "One  revolution  we  did  back — and  before  it  became  fash-
ionable to  do  so — was  Gorbachov's  in  Russia."  And  no  matter
what  happened.  Major  intoned,  "we  are  not  going  to  change
direction  now."

Privatization  is  just  one  aspect  of  the  doctrine  upon  which


the  original  British  Empue  was  built — free  trade.  Numerous
speakers  emphasized  this,  invariably  stressing,  as  did  Taylor,
the  importance  of  the  World  Trade  Organization,  which
Taylor  described  as  "crucial  to  us."

Military  operations

Finance  and  trade  are  key,  but  frequently,  as  was  the  norm
in  the  old  British  Empire,  their  advance  had  to  be  prepared
with  the  mailed  fist.  Things  have  not  changed  much.  Major
made  clear,  in  his  survey  of  British  troop  deployments:  "The
U.K.  now  has  troops  deployed  or  stationed  in  over  40  coun-
tries around  the  world,  in  a  wider  variety  of  roles  than  ever
before"  (emphasis  added).  Rosemary  HoUis,  head  of  the  Mid-
dle East  Program  of  the  RII A  and  rapporteur  for  session  one
("Britain's  Diplomatic  and  Security  Role"),  summarized  the
private  discussions  during  her  panel:  "In  the  afternoon  we
were  given  an  account  of  Britain's  military  capabilities,  which
range . . .  from  nuclear  deterrents  to  war  fighting  capabilities
to  a  whole  range  of  new  or  more  recently  carefully  developed
peacekeeping,  peace-enforcement,  advising,  training,  and
support  capabilities."

She  concluded,  "I  take  one  message  from  the;rnilitary:
Britain  is  at  the  front  in  the  task  of  developing  peacekeeping
and  peace-enforcement  doctrines  and  experiences  in  these
fields.  It  is  up  front,  with  the  players  at  the  front."  The  United
States,  she  noted,  was  nowhere  near  as  advanced  in  these
matters.

The  content  of  these  "peacekeeping  and  peace-enforce-
ment doctrines"  was  personified  at  the  conference  by  one  of
their  inventors,  Lt.  Gen.  Michael  Rose.  Rose's  work,  as  the
UN  Protection  Forces  commander  in  Bosnia,  rips  the  veil
from  Hollis's  "peacenik"  jargon:  Rose  had  been  caught  red-
handed,  including  by  U.S.  intelligence  communications  inter-
cepts, in  frustrating  NATO  air  strikes  against  Serbians  in  the
process  of  committing  genocide,  and  in  fomenting  warfare
between  the  Bosnians  and  the  Croats.

Rose,  after  calling  for  the  establishment  of  a  United  Na-
tions intelligence  agency,  described  how  British  power  is  be-
ing leveraged,  through  the  spread  of  these  "peacekeeping"
doctrines  into  British  assets  in  other  countries:  "All  I  would
say  in  conclusion  is  that  I  think  the  wider  forms  of  peacekeep-
ing that  we  are  embarked  upon  in  the  United  Nations  is  some-
±ing  which  has  been  thought  about  considerably — and  I  will
now  change  my  hat  to  my  old  hat  as  Commandant  of  the
Staff  College  [Sandhurst,  Britain's  elite  military  school] —
we  thought  about  it  enormously  long  and  hard  in  the  various
Staff  colleges  around  Europe  and  in  America;  we  have  run
seminars  for  the  last  five  years  between  the  Frunze  Academy,
the  Air  Ecole  de  Guerre,  Leavenworth,  and  Camberley,  and
there  is  a  new  form  of  doctrine  developing  and  Britain  has
taken  quite  a  lead  in  this  field."

Part  of  this  "new  doctrine,"  involves  the  military  working,
as  Rose  stressed,  with  "aid  organizations,  both  the  UNACR
and  the  non-governmental  organizations."  These,  as  docu-


42     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


mented  elsewhere  in  this  report,  are  leading  the  attack  against
nation-states.  Prince  Charles  spoke  in  glowing  terms,  in  his
luncheon  address,  about  how  "Britain  is  indeed  a  remarkable
country,  not  least  for  the  way  in  which  it  has  given  birth  to  a
host  of  non-governmental  organizations."

Besides  Bosnia,  the  other  place  where  British  peacekeep-
ing has  been  most  heavily  applied,  is  in  Africa.  Baroness
Chalker,  Minister  of  State  for  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
Affairs  and  Minister  for  Overseas  Development,  emphasized
that,  here,  too,  Britain  led  the  way:  "May  I  say  also,  as  far  as
conflict  prevention  and  resolution  is  concerned,  it  was  Britain
rather  more  than  any  other  nation  that  took  the  battle  to  help
African  nations  particularly  come  together  and  receive  train-
ing for  conflict  prevention  and  resolution."

Baroness  Chalker,  as  EIRhas  demonstrated,  personally
oversaw  the:  application  of  these  methods  in  Rwanda,  result-
ing in  the  slaughter  of  millions.

Cultural  warfare

The  third  arm  of  Britain's  irregular  warfare  is  cultural.
Two  of  the  chief  vehicles  for  this,  are  the  British  Broadcasting
Corp.  (BBC)  and"  the  British  Council.  As  Sir  John  Burgh,
former  director-general  of  the  British  Council,  put  it,  "The
British  Council  and  the  BBC  World  Service  are  an  unbeatable
combination."  The  BBC  runs  a  wider  array  of  programs
around  the  world  than  any  country  or  other  service,  and  is  for
many  countries  the  sole  source  of  news.  It  is  also  notorious
for  its  lying.  The  British  Council,  though  little  known,  is,  in
the  words  of  its  chairman,  Sir  Martin  Jacomb,  Britain' s  "main
agency  for  international  cultural  relations."  So  much  so,  that
the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  "sees  it  as  an  integral
part  of  the  U.K.'s  overall  diplomatic  and  overseas  aid  effort."

The  Council  operates  228  offices  in  108  countries,  teach-
ing the  English  language  and  liberal  philosophy.  It  "talent
scouts"  future  British  agents-of-influence,  by  arranging  their
education  in  the  U.K.,  where  107,000  foreign  smdents  study
every  year.  Its  importance  is  hard  to  overstate.  As  Jacomb
summarized  it,  "Wherever  you  go  in  any  of  those  countries
overseas,  the  British  Council  is  a  very  well  known  thing,  and
is  highly  respected  and  much  admired.  Overwhelmingly,  our
ambassadors  and  their  staffs  find  it  a  big  help  toward  our
political  and  commercial  effort.  I  may  say  in  parentheses  that
while  most  rich  countries  have  cultural  diplomatic  agencies
of  one  kind  or  another,  some  have  deliberately  copied  the
structure  and  mode  of  operation  of  the  British  Council."

But  perhaps  the  Council's  importance  can  be  best  under-
stood by  appreciating  the  importance  of  the  man  chosen  to
head  it:  Sir  Martin  Wakefield  Jacomb.  Jacomb  is  a  director  of
the  Bank  of  England;  a  longtime  board  member  of  Barclays
Bank;  the  deputy  chairman  of  the  Rio  Tinto  Zinc  corporation,
the  Queen's  premier  raw  materials  conglomerate;  and  amem-
ber  of  the  board  of  The  Telegraph  PLC,  the  company  which
controls  much  of  Britain's  world  media  empire.  He  is,  in
shorty  one  of  the  most  important  men  in  the  British  Empire.


IV.  The  Club  of  the  Isles


Raw  materials  cartels
lock  up  world  economy

by  Richard  Freeman

The  speculative  jump  of  wheat  and  com  futures  prices  on  the
Chicago  commodity  exchanges  this  year,  in  parallel  with  a
speculative  run-up  in  the  price  of  gasoline,  demonstrates  with
what  swiftness  the  British  Empire's  raw  materials  cartel  can
move.  The  cartel  represents  the  interests  of  3-5,000  super-
wealthy  oligarchs,  grouped  around  the  British  monarchy,  and
around  an  interlocking  network  of  multinational  raw  material
corporations.  This  is  the  Club  of  the  Isles.

The  London-centered  cartel's  organized  price  speculation
is  economic  warfare  with  three  interrelated  purposes.  First,  to
kick  off  a  spiral  of  hyperinflation,  triggering  increased  interest
rates,  a  drastic  reduction  in  production  and  consumption,  es-
pecially hitting  the  U.S.  economy.  Second,  to  paralyze  Presi-
dent Clinton  in  the  face  of  financialdisintegration,  especially
when  Lyndon  LaRouche'  s  influence  in  the  Democratic  Party
is  growing.  Third,  to  give  the  Club  of  the  Isles  the  chance  to
loot  the  world  economy  to  a  greater  extent  than  ever  before.;
In  real  terms,  this  means  a  drastic  increase  in  the  death  rate:
mass  murder  on  an  unparalleled  scale.

The  Club-engineered  commodity  price  increases  are
spectacular.  On  May  10,  1996,  the  price  of  a  wheat  futures
contract  for  next-month  delivery,  trading  on  the  Chicagocom-
modity  exchanges,  reached  $7.32  per  bushel,  an  all-time  re-
cord. On  April  5,  1995,  the  price  for  a  similar  contract  was
$3.29.  Most  of  the  122%  increase  has  been  registered  since
the  start  of  1996.  The  food  cartel,  led  by  Cargill,  Continental,
and  Archer  Daniels  Midland,  in  cahoots  with  the  International
Monetary  Fund,  has  intentionally  collapsed  world  wheat  pro-
duction. World  wheat  stocks  will  close  at  the  end  of  the  1996
harvest  at  only  94  million  tons.  At  the  current,  already-re-
duced levels  of  world  consumption,  this  is  the  lowest  stock
level  in  50  years.

Meanwhile,  on  the  Chicago  Board  of  Trade,  com  futures
recentiy  traded  at  $5.06  per  bushel,  more  than  double  April
1995  levels.  Soybean  futures  traded  at  a  stiatospheric  $8.04
per  bushel.

The  motive  behind  the  food  cartel's  attack  on  production
levels  is  best  seen  in  the  shortage  of  com,  which  is  a  prime
animal  feed  stock.  Gregg  Hunt,  commodity  broker  and  ana-
lyst at  Rand  Financial  Services,  told  a  reporter  on  April  15:


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     43


"TTie  only  way  to  have  a  reasonable  amount  of  com  left  over,
come  Sept.  1,  is  to  change  the  current  price  structure  and
force  liquidation"  of  the  cattle  herds.  Hunt  and  the  oligarchic
financiers  he  was  speaking  for,  intend  to  spread  the  grain
shortage  into  a  beef  and  pork  shortage,  by  forcing  ranchers  to
slaughter  their  herds.  It's  a  pincer  attack.  The  grain  cartels
have  driven  up  prices,  while  the  allied  beef  cartel  has  drasti-
cally cut  the  prices  it  is  paying  to  ranchers.

This  food  crisis  is  all  too  real,  created  by  the  food  cartels
and  speculators  over  more  than  a  decade  of  calculated  warfare
against  fanners  and  ranchers  worldwide.  But  in  the  case  of
oil,  there  is  no  shortage  whatsoever.

The  oil  hoax

For  months,-  Lx)ndon-contrblled  media  have  been  spread-
ing bogus  stories,-  claiming  that  there  is  a  "shortage"  of  gaso-
line, and  blaming  the  shortage  on  the  cold  winter,  which  alleg-
edly caused  crude  oil  supplies,  that  would  normally  be  refined
into  gasoline,  to  be  refined  instead  into  home  heating  oil;  on
the  fact  that  Iraqi's  oil  did  not  come  onto  market;  and  on  other,
equally  ludicrous  factors.

In  reality,  the  oil  cartels,  including  the  nominally  "Ameri-
can" companies  that  almost  always  play  by  London  rules,
have  manufactured  the  crisis  whole  cloth,  by  drawing  down
inventories  and  refusing  to  import  oil.  The  leading  energy
companies  in  the  Anglo-Dutch  raw  materials  cartel  are  the
Six  Sisters:  Royal  Dutch  Shell,  British  Petroleum,  Exxon,
Mobil,  Texaco,  and  Chevron  (Chevron  and  Gulf  merged  in
1984).

February  was  a  cold  month.  However,  oil  imports  into
the  United  States  in  February  in  physical-volume  terms  were
slashed  10%  from  their  January  levels  by  the  Six  Sister-led
oil  refiners;  that  is,  7,26  million  barrels  of  oil  per  day  (mbd)
were  imported  in  January,  versus  6.55  mbd  imported  in  Febru-
ary. Were  there  a  real  oil  shortage,  because  crude  had  been
diverted  to  produce  home  heating  oil  rather  than  gasoline,  the
appropriate  response  would  hardly  have  been  to  slash  imports.

Moreover,  even  if  the  United  States  needed  to  increase
its  refining  levels,  it  couldn't  now,  because  the  Six  Sisters,
abetted  by  the  World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature  and  other  environ-
mentalist gangs,  downsized  the  industry:  In  1981,  average
operable  oil-refining  capacity  in  the  United  States  was  18-6
mbd;  by  1 994,  it  had  been  slashed  to  15.2  mbd,  a  cut  of  nearly
one-fifth.

Simultaneously,  the  Six  Sisters  and  their  allies  speculated,
principally  on  the  New  York  Mercantile  Exchange  (NY-
MEX),  the  leading  oil  trading  market.  The  price  for  bench-
mark West  Texas  Intermediate  Crude  was  bid  up  in  successive
speculative  waves.  The  spillover  into  higher  motor  gasoline
prices  was  swift,  and  exceeded  even  the  rate  of  increase  for
crude  on  the  NYMEX.

In  December  1995,  the  nationwide  average  prices  for  reg-
ular and  premium  gasohne  were,  respectively,  $1.10  and
$1.29  per  gallon.  By  the  end  of  April,  the  price  of  regular


gasoline  shot  nptvaft^i^  as  $1  77  per  gallon  at  some  gas
stations  in  New^YddtOty*,  While  premium  gasoline  topped
out  at  $2.23  per  gtfoB  at  gas  stations  in  Santa  Barbara,  Cali-
fornia. '

In  1973-75,  a  similar  oil  pnce  hoax,  organized  out  of
London,  brou^  aflmift  ttWHger  world  economy  to  its  knees.
The  higher  pnces  go'«h»lflhr  to  the  Six  Sisters.  Royal  Dutch
Shell  Oil,  for  exampto,  recently  announced  first-quarter
profits  of  $2  33  billioa,  wA  annual  profit  rate  of  nearly  $9.3
biUion!

On  Apnl  30,  the  CUn^  admmi  stration  announced  that  it
would  sell  12  million  baeiels  of  oil  from  the  Strategic  Petro-
leum Reserve  to  ease  {]nc4tB*ftnd  that  the  Justice  Pepartment
has  appoj  nted  a  tive-nuu^JAKhD  to  investigate  potential  price-
rigging  by  the  oil  multiQJiiioiials  Immediatety,  ^e.price  of
oil  futures  contracts  fell  VSSk  on  the  NYMEX.

lagging  the  markets

The  rigg]  ng  of  grain  and  gasohne  prices,  which  have  been
paralleled  by  sharp  increases  in  the  price  of  aluminum,  cop-
per, and  other  metals,  is  a  sharp  warning  to  the  nations  of  the
world,  of  what  is  iasbwtfmey  don't  crush  the  Windsor-led
Club  of  file  Isles.  ;^^^

Over  the  last  18-24  ihontbs,'the  inembers  of  the  Club  have
stampeded  out  of  bloated  financial  instruments — one  step
ahead  of  the  looming.  crashri=?and  further  built  up  their  control
of  raw  materials.  ,         .-■;,'  V

The  Club  controls  fevfiaycdnunodity  that  is  essential  to
supporting  human  life  ohMsplahet.  Nothing  significant  can
be  produced,  from  consumer  to  producer  goods,  nothing  can
be  eaten,  without  British  Empire  approval.  Nor  can  the  Third
World  sell  its  goods,  for  the  most  part,  without  releasing  them
into  the  markets  controlled  by  this  network.  This  represents
perhaps  the  greatest  concentration  of  oligarchic  power  ever.

Metals  and  minerals    ^

The  British.Empire's  control  of  metals  and  minerals  is
vast,  ranging  from  20  to  90%.  In  Figures  1  through  6,  the
percentage  of  control  of  world  production  of  commodities  is
broken  down  into  five  basic  groups  of  nations  or  firms:  1)
London-  and  British  Commonwealth-based  nations  and  com-
panies; 2)  non-British  industrialized  nations,  such  as  the
United  States;  3)  the  nations  of  the  former  Soviet  Union;  4)
Third  World  and  other  developing  nations,  including  China;
and  5)  all  other  nations  for  which  individual  figures  are  not
available.

We  look  at  the  Anglo-Dutch  cartel '  s  control  of  three  basic
types  of  commodity:  1)  metals  and  minerals  (see  Table  1),
which  is  further  broken  down.into  precious,  base,  and  strate-
gic metals;  2)  energy  supplies,  covering  oil,  gas,  and  coal;
and  3)  food.

Start  with  the  precious  metals  group:  gold,  silver,  and
platinum  (Figure  1).  They  are  called  precious  metals  because,
even  though  silver  is  used  in  film  processing  and  platinum  in


44     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


FJGUR^I

Cbntifol  of  gold,  silver,  and
platinum  markets

{percent  of  total  market)


Gold


Silver


Platinum


FIGURE  2

Control  of  nickel,  copper,
zinc,  and  lead  markets

(percent  of  total  market)


FIGURE  3

Control  of  tin,  iron  ore,  and
bauxite  markets

(percent  of  total  market)


London-  and  British  Commonwealth-based


Nidiel      Copper
Non-British  industrialized


Iron  ore


Bauxite


Former  Soviet  Union       Q  Third  World,  other


Other  countries


Sources:  Who  Owns  Who  in  Mining,  1994  and  1994  editions,  London;  Rositiii  Information  Ltd.;  Mineral  Commodity  Summaries,  1995,  Bureau  of  Mines  of  the
lil.S.  Depanifient  of  Interior.


TABLE  1

Anglo-American  and  Rio  TInto  Zinc  combined
share  of  Western  world  mining  production

(percent  of  total)


Commodity

Share

Commodity

Share

Antimony

20%

Nickel

8%

Bauxite

10

.    Niobium

8

Chromite

15

Palladium

39    ■

Cobalt

10

Platinum

45

Copper

12

Rfiodium

41

Diamond

48

Silver

6

Gold

25

Titanium

31

Iron  ore

10

Tungsten

18

Lead

7

Uranium

8

Lithium

5

Vanadium

36

Manganese

6

Zinc

6

Molybdenum

11

Zirconium

23

Source:  Mineral  Commodity  Summaries,  1995,  Bureau  of  Mines  of  the  U.S.
Department  of  Interior.

Anglo-American  and  Rio  Tinto  Zinc  figure  prominently  in  the
British  Empire's  raw  materials  cartel.  Between  them,  these  two
companies  alone  produce  one-eighth  of  the  Western  world's
mining  output  (this  excludes  countries  from  the  former  Soviet
Union,  principally  Russia).  For  16  of  the  24  crucial  minerals  and
metals  listed  above,  the  combined  output  of  Anglo-American  and
Rio  Tinto  Zinc  accounts  for  10%  or  more  of  Western  world
output,  and  in  the  case  of  seven  of  the  materials,  this  combine
produces  one-quarter  or  more  of  Western  world  output.


catalytic  converters,  all  three  are  often  hoarded  for  their  non-
industrial  value  in  the  form  of  bullion,  and  sometimes  in  the
form  of  jeweliy.

In  the  case  of  gold,  London-  and  British  Commonwealth-
based  firms  and  nations  control  59.5%  of  world  production.
The  top  three  gold-mining  companies  of  the  world — Anglo
American  Corp.  and  Consolidated  Goldfields,  both  of  South
Africa,  and  Barrick  Gold  of  Canada,  all  British-controlled —
control  20%  of  gold  production.  Total  annual  gold  production
is  2.3  kilotons  (2,300  tons).  By  the  time  it  reaches  the  market,
it  is  worth  $29.4  billion.  The  British  have  60%  of  the  take.

The  London-  and  British  Commonwealth-based  group
controls  29%  of  silver  production,  and  78%  of  world  plati-
num production.

Next,  look  at  the  Anglo-Dutch  cartel's  control  of  base
metals:  copper,  zinc,  lead,  nickel,  alumina-bauxite,  iron  ore,
and  tin.  These  metals  are  not  glamorous,  but  without  them  it  is
impossible  to  conceive  of  a  modem  economy.  If  one  excludes
crushed  stone,  and  wood-  and  carbon-based  materials,  70%
of  the  weight  of  every  manufactured  good  in  the  world  is
made  up  of  just  these  seven  metals.  They  are  the  mainstay  of
the  finished  goods  that  make  up  economic  life,  ranging  from
machine  tools  and  tractors,  to  electric  generators  and  refriger-
ators.

Figure  2  shows  that  the  London-  and  British  Common-
wealth-based group  controls  40%  of  the  world's  annual
nickel  production,  which  is  90  metric  tons.  Three  of  the  four
biggest  riickel  miners  are  British  controlled:  Inco  Ltd.  of
Canada,  which  is  allied  to  the  Anti-Defamation  League's
Bronfman  family;  the  ubiquitous  Anglo  American  Corp.;


E:IR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     45


FIGURE4

Control  of  cobalt,  manganese,
and  titanium  maricets

(percent  of  total  market)


10.8  million
tons

wm


3,000
kilotons


Cobalt        Manganese      Titanium
London-  and  British  Comrnonwealth-based


FIGURE  S

Control  of  vanadium  and
chromium  markets

(percent  of  total  market)


32
kilotons


9,300
kilotons


FIGURES

Control  of  oil,  gas,  and  coal
distribution

(percent  of  total  market)


3.43  billion
tons


1.87  billion
tons


Non-Britisti  industrialized


Fornier  Soviet  Union       □  Ttiird  Worid,  other


Other  countries


Sources:  Figures  4  and  5:  Who  Owns  Who  in  Mining,  1994  and  1994  editions,  l.ondon:  Roskill  Information  Ltd.;  Mineral  Commodity  Summaries,  1995,  Bureau
of  Mines  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Interior.  Figure  6:  Ranicing  ffie  Worid's  Top  Oil  Companies,  1996  edition,  publistied  t>y  Booz  Allen  Hamilton  and  Petroleum
Weekly,  National  Mining  Association;  Mineral  Commodity  Summaries,  1996,  Bureau  of  Mines  of  ttie  U.S.  Department  of  Interior.


and  Western  Mining  Corp.  of  Australia.  Canadian,  Austra-
lian, and  South  African  mining  companies  are  used  as  for-
ward bases  for  the  British  to  control  a  good  part  of  world
mining  production.  Britain  also  exploits  the  gigantic  mineral
and  metal  reserve  deposits  in  these  three  Commonwealth
countries.  Outside  of  coal,  Britain  has  no  significant  mining
capability  of  its  own.

The  British  control  25%  of  the  world's  annual  copper
mining  of  9.4  million  metric  tons,  and  17%  of  zinc  mining
(17%  is  the  lowest  percentage  that  British  control  of  the
metals  ever  reaches).  The  Anglo-Dutch  cartel  controls  30%
of  the  world's  annual  lead  output  of  2,980  kilotons.

Figure  3  shows  that  the  British  control  58%  of  alumina-
bauxite  mine  production,  from  which  aluminum  is  made.
The  British  control  21%  of  iron  ore  mining,  and  24%  of
tin  mining.

Next,  look  at  strategic  metals  (F^re  4),  so-called  be-
cause they  are  often  used  in  defense  and  high-technology
goods.  For  the  most  part,  they  form  crucial  alloys,  and  are
useful  for  their  light  weight,  high  tensile  strength,  or  heat
resistance.  Without  them  die  modem  electronics,  aerospace,
nuclear,  and  high-speed  rail  industries,  to  name  a  few,  cannot
function.  For  example,  40%  of  cobalt's  use  is  in  aircraft  gas
turbine  engines,  and  10%  is  in  magnetic  alloys.

TTie  Anglo-Dutch  cartel  monopolizes  64%  of  cobalt  mine
output,  42%  of  manganese  output,  and  47%  of  titanium
output.  The  British  control  32%  and  39%  of  the  output  of
vanadium  and  chromium,  respectively  (Figure  5).  In  the


case  of  these  two  metals  (as  with  many  other  metals  and
minerals),  the  Russians  also  have  a  high  degree  of  control.
This  is  one  of  the  reasons  that  the  British  are  so  keen  to
steal  Russia  blind,  using  the  argument  that  the  Russians
should  privatize  their  state-owned  companies.

Oil  and  energy

Of  the  energy  resources  which  power  the  economy
(Figure  6),  the  British  control  15%  of  coal  production  and
12%  of  oil  distribution,  according  to  the  criteria  employed  in
this  study.  This  is  considerable  in  itself,  but  the  degree  of
control  is  actually  much  higher.  The  major  oil  producers  in
the  world  are  state-run  oil  companies  of  countries  such  as
Saudi  Arabia,  Iran,  Mexico,  and  Nigeria.  But  they  must  export
their  oil  through  British-linked  companies,  which  dominate
the  market,  in  which  7 1 .4  million  barrels  of  oil  are  sold  each
day.  Heading  the  list,  with  5.7  million  barrels  mariceted  per
day,  is  Royal  Dutch  Shell  Most  of  the  oil  Royal  Dutch  Shell
sells,  it  does  not  produce.  The  number-four  marketer  is  British
Petroleum  Corp.  Our  stiidy  classified  the  oil  output  of  Exxon,
Chevron,  Mobil,  and  Texaco,  which  are  the  U.S.  components
of  the  Six  Sisters,  as  Non-British  Industrialized.  But  as  the
1973-74,  1978-79,  and  current  oil  hoaxes  have  shown,  the
actions  of  Exxon  et  al.  are,  on  many  points,  very  British.  If
the  four  U.S.  sisters  are  considered  with  the  British,  then  the
British  control  4 1  %  of  world  petroleum  distribution.

Figure  7  shows  the  cartel's  control  apparatus.  At  the  top
is  the  House  of  Windsor  and  the  Club  of  the  Isles,  representing


46     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


FIGURE  1

Control  of  gold,  silver,  and
platinum  markets

(percent  of  total  market)


100%


Gold


Silver  Platinum


FIGURE  2

Control  of  niclcel,  copper,
zinc,  and  lead  markets

(percent  of  total  market)


100%-!

90%-
80%-
70%-
60%-
50%-


0.09  9,400         6,900         2,980

kilotons     kilotbns     kilotons     kilotons


40%-
30%-


20%-

10%-


Nickel      Copper       Zinc         Lead


FIGURE  3

Control  of  tin,  iron  ore,  and
bauxite  markets

(percent  of  total  market)


100%-!


0.18
kilotons


Iron  ore


Bauxite


London-  and  British  Commonwealth-based


Non-British  industrialized


Former  Soviet  Union       Q  Third  Worid,  other


Other  countries


Sources:  Who  Owns  Wk  in  Mining,  1994  and  1994  €iditions,  London:  Roskill  Infonnation  Ltd.;  M/nera/ Commod/iy  Suffima/fes,  1995,  Bureau  of  Mines  of  the
U.S.  Department  of  Interior.


the  collective  oligarchies  of  Britain  and,  principally,  conti-
nental Europe,  with  a  select  few  eager,  but  junior,  American
partners.  Right  below  are  two  of  the  principal  appurtenances
of  the  House  of  Windsor:  the  World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature,
headed  by  Prince  Philip,  which  leads  the  world  in  fostering
ethnic  conflict  and  terrorism,  such  as  the  WWF-supervised
destruction  of  the  nation  of  Rwanda,  and  British  intelligence' s
Hollinger  Corp.  of  Conrad  Black,  which  is  leading  the  assault
to  destroy  William  Clinton  and  the  U.S.  Presidency.

The  food  weapon

The  employment  of  food  as  a  weapon  is  as  old  as  Babylon.
Imperial  Rome  used  this  tactic,  as  did  Venice  and  various
Venetian  offshoots,  especially  the  Dutch  and  British  Levant,
East  India,  and  West  India  companies.  Today,  food  warfare
is  run  by  London,  with  the  help  of  subordinate  partners  in
especially  Switzerland  and  Amsterdam.  Ten  to  twelve  com-
panies, assisted  by  another  three  dozen,  control  the  world's
food  supply.  ■

The  leading  grain  companies  in  the  Windsor-led  food  car-
tel— Cargill,  Continental,  Louis  Dreyfus,  Bunge  and  Bom,
Andre,  and  Archer  Daniels  Midland-Topfer — has  domina-
tion over  world  cereals  and  grains  supplies,  from  wheat  to
com  and  oats,  from  barley  to  sorghum  and  rye.  But  it  also
controls  meat,  dairy,  edible  oils  and  fats,  fmits  and  vegetables,
sugar,  and  all  forms  of  spices.

The  oligarchy  has  developed  four  regions  to  be  the  prin-
cipal exporters  of  almost  every  type  of  food,  and  historically
has  acquired  top-down  control  over  the  food  chain  in  these


regions.  These  four  regions  are:  1)  the  Uiiited  States;  2)  the
European  Union,  particularly  France  and  Germany;  3)  the
British  Commonwealth  nations  of  Australia,  Canada,  South
Africa,  and  New  Zealand;  and  4)  Argentina  and  Brazil  in
Ibero- America.  These  regions  have  a  population  of,  at  most,
900  million  people,  or  15%  of  the  world's  population.  The
rest  of  the  world,  with  85%  of  the  population  (4.7  billion
people),  is  dependent  on  the  food  exports  of  those  regions.

It  is  proper  for  countries  with  food  surpluses  to  export
them.  But  the  cartel's  four  exporting  regions  were  given
preeminence  in  a  bmtal  manner:  Much  of  the  rest  of  the
world  was  thrust  into  enforced  backwardness.  The  oligarchy
denied  the  importing  nations  seed,  fertilizer,  water  manage-
ment, electricity,  rail  transportation — all  the  infrastmcture
and  capital  goods  inputs  needed  to  turn  them  into  self-suffi-
cient food  producers.  These  nations  were  reduced  to  the
status  of  vassals:  They  must  either  import  from  the  cartel's
export  regions,  or  starve.

Meanwhile,  the  Anglo-Dutch-Swiss  food  cartel  reduced
the  four  export  regions  to  a  state  of  servitude  as  well.  During
the  last  two  decades,  milUons  of  fanners  in  the  United  States,
Europe,  Canada,  Australia,  and  Argentina  have  been  wiped
out.  In  1982,  for  example,  the  United  States  still  had  600,000
independent  hog  farmers.  Today,  ^ere  are  less  than  225,000.
The  food  cartel  companies  have  cartelized  hog  production
into  their  hands.  During  the  past  two  decades,  farmers  were
paid  far  below  the  parity  price  (that  covers  costs  of  agricul-
tural production  plus  a  fair  profit  for  investment  in  future  pro-
duction).


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     47


s'"ii^:


F=IGURE  8

Control  of  international  wheat
exports

(percent  of  total)

97,2  million
tons

P5


FIGURE  9


Exports  Production

Canada  and  Australia  ^  Other

European  Union  Q  Argentina
United  States


Control  of  international
coarse  grain  exports

(percent  of  total)


1007o-
90%-


807o-

70%-


60%-


69.9  million     14.8  million
tons  tons


50%-
40%-
30%-
20%-
10%-


Com


Bariey  Sorgtium


Canada  and  Australia     0  Other
European  Union  Q  Argentina

United  States


FIGURE  10  .    ';        :,

Control  of  U.J5.  grain  exports
by  largest  cartel  companies

(percent  of  total  U.S.  grain  exports)


Wtieat


Com         Oats      Sorghum


Largest  cartel  companies


Other


Sources:  Figures  8  and  9:  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Economic  Research  Service,  Trade  Analysis  Branch,  1 994/5  crt^  production  figures,  fiigure  10:  EIR
inten/iews;  The  Grain  Traders.


Five  of  the  six  leading  grain  cartel  companies — Minne-
apolis- and  Geneva-based  Cargill;  New  York-based  Conti-
nental; Paris-based  Louis  Dreyfus;  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil-  and
Netherlands,  Antilles-based  Bunge  and  Bom;  and  the  Lau-
sanne, Switzerland-based  Andre — are  privately  owned  and
run  by  billionaire  families.  They  issue  no  public  stock  and  no
annual  report.  They  are  more  secretive  than  any  oil  corhpany,
bank,  or  government  intelligence  service.  Just  two  of  these
companies,  Cargill  and  Continental,  run  45-50%  of  the
world's  grain  trade.  While  the  Illinois-  and  Hamburg-based
Archer  Daniel  Midland- Topfer  is  publicly  traded,  it,  too,  is
run  top-down  as  the  fiefdom  of  Dwayne  Andreas.

The  four  dominant  food  groups

Grains  and  grain  products,  milk  and  dairy  products,  edible
oils  and  fats,  and  meat  provide  the  majority  of  the  human
species'  intake  of  calories,  proteins,  and  vitamins.  Grain  and
grain  products  can  be  consumed  as  animal  feed  (especially
com  and  oats),  and  as  human  food,  sometimes  directly  in  the
grain  form,  in  the  case  of  rice  or  barley,  but  often  in  a  milled
form,  such  as  bread  or  tortillas.  We  look  at  the  food  cartel's
control  over  each  of  the  four  dominant  food  groups.

Grains:  Grains,  or  cereals  as  they  are  often  called,  consist
of  wheat;  the  coarse  grains — com,  barley,  oats,  sorghum,  and
rye;  and  rice.

The  most  abundantly  used  grain  is  wheat.  Figure  8  shows
food  cartel  control  over  wheat  exports.  For  the  1994-95  crop
year,  the  cartel's  foxu-  food-export  regions  were  the  origin


of  88%  of  the  world's  wheat  exports  of  97.2  million  metric
tons.  But,  they  accounted,  for  only  39%  of  all  the  world's
wheat  production  of  522.4  million  metric  tons.  That  is,  their
share  of  world  wheat  exports  was  more  than  double  their
share  of  world  wheat  output.  The  cartel  built  up  the  four
regions  as  the  choke  points  oyer  the  .world's  food  supply,
even  though  these  regions,  collectively,  are  often  not  the
largest  producers.

Figure  9  shows,  for  the  1994-95  crop  year,  that  the
cartel's  four  food-export  regions  control  95%  of  annual
world  com  exports,  of  69.9  million  metric  tons;  76%  of  the
world's  barley  exports,  of  14.8  million  metric  tons;  and
97%  of  total  world  sorghum  (milo)  exports,  of  6  million
metric  tons.

Thus,  the  evidence  shows  that  the  four  identified  export
regions  exercise  76-97%  domination  over  the  export  of  the
world's  leading  grains.

Grain  cartels'  extended  control

But  do  the  Big  Six  grain  cartel  companies  run  ^e  affairs
of  these  regions?  The  answer  is  a  resounding  yes.  Let  us  start
with  the  United  States.  The  importance  of  U.S.  agriculture  is
that  in  the  1994-95  crop  year,  the  United  Staties  exported  102
of  the  world's  2 15  million  metric  tons  of  grain  exports,  nearly
half  the  total.  It  accounted  for  33%  of  world  wheat  exports,
83%  of  world  com  exports,  and  89%  of  world  sorghum  ex-
ports, making  it  the  leading  exporter  in  each  of  these  three
markets.


48     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


FIGURfe  11

Nine  members  of  the  grain  cartel  control
two-thirds  of  Argentina's  grain  exports

(percent  of  total  Argentina  grain  exports)


Other  (32%)


Glencor  (Marc  Rich)  (1 1%)


Carg)a(10%)


Continental  (7%)

Bunge  &  Bom  (7%)


NIDERA(11%)


(NDO  (7%>


ACA  (8%)
Louis  Dreyfus  (7%)


Source:  AmMo  Financiero  (Argentina),  Sept  28, 1993.


Figure  10  shows  that  the  cartel's  Big  Six  grain-trading
companies  own  and  control  95%  of  America's  wheat  exports,
95%  of  its  com  exports,  90%  of  its  oats  exports,  and  80%  of
its  sorghum  exports.  A  few  smaller  companies,  almost  all  in
the  grain  cartel's  orbit,  control  the  remaining  market  share.
The  grain  companies'  control  over  the  U.S.  grain  market  is  ab-
solute.

The  Big  Six  grain  companies,  led  by  Louis  Dreyfus,  Con-
tinental, and  Cargill,  control  60-70%  of  France's  grain  ex-
ports. France  is  tiie  biggest  grain  exporter  in  Europe  (the
world's  second  largest  grain-exporting  region),  exporting
more  grain  than  the  next  three  European  grain-exporting  na-
tions combined.

A  similar  degree  of  control  is  exercised  over  the  grain
markets  of  the  British  Commonwealth  countries,  Canada  and
Australia,  and  of  Argentina.  Figure  11  shows  that  the  Big  Six
and  some  Argentine  companies  affiliated  with  them,  such  as
Nidera  and  ACA,  control  67.8%  of  Argentina's  grain  exports.
Argentina  is  the  fourth  largest  grain  exporter  in  the  world.

hi  sum,  the  Anglo-Dutch-Swiss  food  cartel  dominates  80-
90%  of  the  world  grain  trade.  In  fact,  the  control  is  far  greater
than  the  sum  of  its  parts:  The  Big  Six  grain  companies  are
organized  as  a  cartel;  they  move  grain  back  and  forth  from
any  one  of  the  major,  or  minor,  exporting  nations.  Cargill,
Continental,  Louis  Dreyftis,  et  al.  own  world  shipping  fleets,
and  have  long-established  sales  relationships,  financial  mar-
kets, and  commodity  trading  exchanges  (such  as  the  London-
based  Baltic  Mercantile  and  Shipping  Exchange)  on  which
grain  is  traded,  which  completes  their  domination.  No  other
forces  in  the  world,  including  governments,  are  as  well  orga-
nized as  the  cartel,  and  therefore,  London' s  power  in  this  area


remains  unchallenged.

Milk  and  milk  products:  The  big  exporters  of  inilk  and
milk  products  are  three  out  of  the  cartel's  foin-  basic  export
regions:  the  United  States,  the  European  Union  plus  Switzer-
land (which  is  not  an  EU  member),  and  the  British  Conmnon-
wealth  countries  of  New  Zealand,  in  particular,  and  Australia.

F^re  12  shows  the  cartel's  domination  of  dairy  and
dairy  products  in  1 994.  The  cartel '  s  basic  food  export  regions
controlled  89%  of  the  world's  export  of  whole  milk  powder
of  1.08  billion  metric  tons;  94%  of  the  world's  export  trade
of  653  million  metric  tons  of  butter;  and  86%  of  the  world's
expprttradeofl.il  billion  metric  tons  of  cheese.  It  also  con-
trolled a  huge  portion  of  the  export  of  condensed  milk.  These
figures  were  supplied  by  the  Commodity  Review  and  Outlook,
1994-95  of  the  UN  Food  and  Agricultural  Organization.

The  case  of  whole  milk  powder  exempUfies  the  cartel's
domination.  Milk  is  not  usually  exported  in  liquid  form,  ex-
cept over  short  distances;  it  is  usually  exported  in  the  form  of
powdered  milk,  either  as  whole  or  skim  milk  powder,  or  as
condensed  milk.  When  it  is  exported  as  whole  milk  powder,
it  is  reconstituted  upon  delivery,  usually  at  the  ratio  of  10
parts  water  to  1  part  whole  milk  powder.  Of  the  world' s  export
of  1 .08  billion  metric  tons  of  whole  milk  powder  in  1 994,  the
developing  world  imported  885  million  metric  tons,  or  82%
of  the  total.  Thus,  the  developing  world  is  the  primary  recipi-
ent of  this  critical  form  of  milk.

Nestle  Corporation,  S.A.,  based  in  Vevey  and  Cham,
Switzerland,  near  Geneva,  and  Borden,  Inc.,  based  in  Colum-
bus, Ohio,  are  the  two  largest  exporters  of  whole  milk  powder
in  the  world.  Founded  in  1867,  Nestle  grew  significantly  in
1905,  when  it  merged  with  the  Anglo-Swiss  Condensed  Milk
Company,  also  of  Switzerland.  Nestle  S.  A.  illustrates  the  food
cjutel's'  global  reach:  It  is  the  number-one  world  trader  in
whole  milk  powder  and  condensed  milk;  the  number-one
seller  of  chocolate,  confectionery  products,  and  mineral  water
(it  owns  Perrier);  and  the  number-three  U.S.  coffee  firm.

Nestle's  connection  to  oligarchical  finance  includes  its
chairman,  Helmut  Maucher,  who  is  on  the  board  of  J.P.  Mor-
gan, British  intelligence's  leading  bank  in  the  United  States.
Its  board  of  directors  serves  as  a  retirement  home  for  the
world' s  central  bankers:  Fritz  Leutwiller,  former  chairman  of
the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  central  bank  of
central  banks,  is  on  the  Nestle  board,  as  is  Paul  Volcker,  who,
as  chairman  of  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  Board,  in  1979  and
the  early  1980s,  put  the  world  economy  through  "controlled
disintegration."

Meat:  The  cartel' s  four  major  export  source  regions  exert
enormous  dominance  over  meat  exports:  the  United  States;
the  European  Union;  the  British  Commonwealth  countries
of  New  Zealand,  Australia,  and  Canada;  and  Argentina  and
Brazil  in  Ibero-America.  An  Asian  bloc  of  China,  Taiwan,
and  Hongkong  (the  last  nation  a  rc-exporter)  is  also  important
in  the  area  of  pork  and  poultry  exports.

Figure  13  shows  that  for  1994,  the  cartel's  basic  food


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     49


FIGURE  12

Contrdr  of  international  millc
and  miik  products

(percent  of  total)

1.08  million    0.65  million     1.02  million
Ions  tons  tons


Milk
powder

□  Ofter

H  Australia  and  New  Zealand

^  European  Union  and  SwitzerEand

■  United  Stales


FIGURE  13

Controi  of  internationai  meat
exports

(percent  of  total)


100%  n


FIGURE  14


Poultry


^  China,  Taiwan,  and  Hongkong

n  Argentina  and  Brazil  ^  Otiier

B  Australia,  Canada,  New  Zealand

B  United  States        0  European  Union


Control  of  international
soybean  and  soybean  t
product  exports

(percent  of  total  U.S.  grain  exports)


32.1  million    31.1  million


Soyt)eans


Soybean

meal


Soybean
oil


I    I  Argentina  and  Brazil        ^  Other

B  India

■  United  States        0  Eurc^ean  Union


Sources:  Figure  12:  Food  and  Agricultural  Organization  of  the  United  Nations,  "Commodity  Review  and  Outlook,  1 994-95,"  1 994  production  figures,  figure  13:
U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Economic  Research  Service,  Commercial  Agricultural  Diviskin,  1995  production  figures.  Figure  14:  U.S.  Department  of
Agriculture,  Economic  Research  Service,  Trade  Analysis  Branch,  1994/5  crop  production  figures.


exportregions  commanded  85%  of  the  world's  export  of  beef
and  veal  of  4.95  million  metric  tons;  when  the  Chinese  bloc
market  is  added  in,  these  regions  commanded  92%  of  the
world's  export  trade  of  2.1  million  tons  of  pork;  and  93%  of
the  world's  export  trade  of  4.84  million  metric  totis  of  poultry.
The  export  of  pork  and  poultry  in  China  and  Taiwan  is  increas-
ingly run  by  the  food  cartel.

Four  of  the  food  cartel' s  biggest  companies  in  beef  export
are  Cargill,  ADM,  ConAgra/Peavey,  and  Iowa  Beef  Proces-
sors, now  called  IBP.  The  Dakota  City,  Nebraska-based  IBP
exemplifies  how  the  oligarchy  employs  its  corporate  off-
shoots .  Once  owned  by  Armand  Hammer' s  Occidental  Petro-
leum Co.,  today,  13%  of  the  stock  of  IBP  is  owned  by  a
division  of  the  Boston  Brahmin  drug  syndicate' s  Fidelity  Mu-
tual Funds.

Edible  oils  and  fats:  The  United  States,  the  European
Union,  and  Argentina  and  Brazil  thoroughly  dominate  the
export  market  in  the  most  basic  source  of  edible  oils  and  fats;
the  soybean  and  its  by-products.  The  food  cartel  export  source
sectors  are  the  masters  of  93%  of  the  international  trade  in
soybeans  of  32.1  million  metric  tons  per  year;  90%  of  the
international  trade  in  soybean  meal,  of  31.1  million  metric
tons;  and,  along  with  British  Commonwealth  member  India,
are  masters  of  92%  of  the  3 1 . 1  million  metric  tons  of  soybean
oil  exports  (Figure  14).

According  to  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  spokesmen.


as  well  as  private  industry,  the  same  six  companies  that  domi-
nate the  international  grain  trade  also  dominate  international
trade  in  the  soybean  and  its  by-products.  The  one  additional
cartel  company  member  which  is  influential  in  the  soybean
trade,  which  is  smaller  than  the  leading  six  companies,  is  S.I.
Joseph  Co.  of  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.  Burton  Joseph,  its
chairman,  is  a  leading  member  and  former  national  chairman
of  the  Anti-Defamation  League  of  B^nai  B'rith.  He  is  a  long-
time enemy  of  Lyndon  LaRouche.

Feed  and  seed:  The  cartel  also  controls  feed  for  animals
and  seed  for  planting.  British  Petroleum  Co.,  through  its
Nutrition  division,  is  the  largest  feed  producer  in  Europe.
One  of  the  House  of  Windsor' s  key  energy  companies,  hav-
ing bought  Purina  Mills  from  Ralston  Purina  Company,
British  Petroleum  is  now  the  second  largest  feed  producer
in  America.  Cargill,  the  world's  largest  grain  exporter,  is
also  the  biggest  producer  of  animal  feed  and  hybrid  seed  in
the  world,  through  its  Nutrena  Feed  division,  while  Conti-
nental Grain,  through  .its  Wayne  Feed  division,  is  one  of
the  biggest  producers  of  feed  and  a  major  force  in  hybrid
seed  production.

Domestic  markets

The  cartel  also  exercises  an  iron  hand  over  the  domestic
agricultural  economies  of  nations  and  regions,  especially
those  that  comprise  the  four  export  source  regions,  through


50     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


FIGUHE15

Four  members  of  the  grain  cartel  control  71%
of  America's  flour  miiling

(percent  of  total  U.S.  flour  milling  capacity)


Other

(29%


ConAgra
(24%;


General  Mills
(6%


ADM  Milling
(23%)


Cargill
(18%)


Dally  milling  capacity  =  1 ,259,296  hundredweight  of  wheat


Sources:  1994  Grain  and  Milling  Annual;  Milling  and  Baking  News  magazine;
research  of  William  Heffeman  and  Douglas  Constance,  Department  of  Rural
Sociology,  University  of  Missouri.


FIGURE  16

Five  members  of  the  grain  cartei  control
almost  60%  of  America's  dry  corn  milling

(percent  of  total  iJ.S.  dry  corn  milling  capacity)


Bunge

(Lauhoff  Grain)
(18%)


Other
(43%)


Illinois  Cereal
Mills  (14%)


ADM

(Krause  Milling)

(10%)


Quaker  Oats  (7%)

Daily  grind  =  670,000  bushels  of  corn


ConAgra

(Lincoln  Grain)  (8%)


Sources:  Com:  Chemistry  and  Technology,  research  of  hieffeman  and
Constance.


FIGURE  17

Four  grain  cartel  members  dominate  74%  of
U.S.  wet  corn  milling

(percent  of  total  U.S.  wet  com  milling  capacity)


other  (26%)


Top  4  (74%):

ADM

Cargill

Tate  &  Lyie

CPC  int'l.


Sources:  Milling  and  Baiting  News;  Milling  Directory,  1990,  research  ot
Heffeman  and  Constance.


the  processing  industries.  If  one  controls  the  processing  in-
dustries, one  controls  the  domestic  trade:  Except  when  it  is
used  for  animal  feed,  com,  wheat,  or  soybean  cannot  be  eaten
in  its  unrefined  stage  (except  for  sweet  com,  which  is  a  minus-
cule percentage  of  the  annual  com  harvest).  The  grain  or
soybean  (which  is  a  legume)  must  be  processed.  The  same  is
true  for  meat:  It  must  be  slaughtered  and  cut  before  it  is  fit  for


FIGURE  18

Five  grain  cartei  members  control  76%  of
U.S.  soybean  crushing

(percent  of  total  U.S.  soytwan  crushing  capacity)


other  (24%)


Top  S  (76%):

ADM

Cargill

Bunge

Ag  Processing

Central  Soya


Sources:  Feedstuffs  magazine;  Bruce  W.  Marion  and  Donghwan  Kim,
"Concentration  Change  in  Hie  Selected  Food  Manufacturing  Industries:  The
Influence  of  Mergers  versus  Internal  Growtti,"  Food  System  Organization,
Performance  and  Public  Policies,  Wori<ing  Paper  No.  95,  Octotier  1990,
Madison,  Wisconsin:  University  of  Wisconsin,  i^eparlment  of  Agricultural
Economics,  Food  System  Fiesearcti  Group.


human  consumption  or  any  further  step  in  the  food  chain.
This  is  where  the  processing-milling  industry,  in  the  case  of
grains  and  soybean,  and  the  packing-slaughtering  industries,
in  the  case  of  meat,  come  in.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     51


FIGURE  19

Three  food  cartel  members  control  64%  of
U.S.  beef  packing

(percent  of  total  U.S.  twef  backing  capacity)

National  Beef  (4%)
Beef  America  (4%)


CargillMeat(18%)


ConAgra

(Annour,  Montfort)

(20%)


Other  (28%)


IBP  (26%)
Daily  capacity  =  138,000  head  of  cattle


Sources:  Meat  and  Pouff/y  magazine;  research  of  Heffeman  and  Constance.


Using  the  Unites  States  to  make  the  case  for  all  food-
export  as  well  as  food-import  nations  around  the  world,  one
can  see  the  cartel's  domination.  For  example.  Figures  15-18
demonstrate  that  the  main  grain  companies  of  the  oligarchy's
food  cartel  control  71%  of  the  milling  of  America's  flour;
60%  of  the  dry  milling  of  America's  com;  75%  of  the  wet
milling  of  America's  com;  and  three-quarters  of  the  crashing


of  America's  soybeans.

(In  the  dry  milling  of  com,  the  com  is  turned  into  com
meal,  muffins,  com  flakes,  etc.  In  the  wet  milling  of  com,  the
com  is  turned  into  sweetener,  starch,  alcohol,  ethanol,  etc.  Of
America's  com  crop  of  7.4  billion  bushels,  5.6  billion  b|shels
will  be  consumed  as  animal  feed,  1 .5  billion  bushels  will  be
wet  milled,  and  0.3  billion  bushels  will  be  dry  milled.)'    ]

Figures  19-21  conflrm  that  the  largest  meat  companies
in  the  food  cartel  (IBP,  ConAgra,  Cargill)  control  73%  of
America's  slaughtering-packing  of  beef,  45%  of  pork,  and
70%  of  sheep.  The  meat-packing  industry  demonstrates  the
accelerated  rate  at  which  the  cartel  is  building  its  concentra-
tion. In  1979,  the  top  four  packers  controlled  41%  of  the
industry.  Today's  level  of  control  is  72%.

Finally,  as  Figure  22  shows,  four  of  the  six  leading  grain
cartel  compiuiies  own  one-quarter  of  America's  grain  elevator
storage  capacity.  However,  many  of  the  grain  elevators  in
America  are  in  local  areas  where  there  is  a  substantial  degree
of  co-op  or  individual  ownership.  When  one  gets  to  regional
grain  elevators,  the  grain  cartel's  ownerehip  percentage  is
higher.  At  ports,  which  is  where  grain  is  transshipped,  the
four  grain  cartel  companies  own  59%  of  alVU.S.  grain  eleva-
tor facilities.

If  a  fanner  wants  to  sell  his  grain,  he  sells  it  either  to  a
grain  elevator,  or,  in  the  rarer  case  where  he  can  afford  to
transport  it,  to  a  grain  miller.  In  either  case,  it  is  a  grain  cartel
company  to  which  he  must  sell.  Through  this  process,  the
grain  cartel  sets  the  price — at  the  lowest  level  possible.

This  raw  materials  and  food  control  makes  the  current
British  Empire  the  most  powerful  in  history;  to  ensure  that
people  eat  and  national  economies  aren't  strangled,  it  must
be  dismantled.


FIGURE  20


Four  food  cartel  members
control  45%  of  U.S.  pork
slaughtering

(percent  of  total  U.S.  pork  slaughtering)


FIGURE  21

Four  sheep  slaughtering
firms  control  70%  of  U.S.
capacity

(percent  of  total  U.S.  sheep  slaughtering)


FIGURE  22

Four  grain  cartel  members
own  24%  of  U.S.  grain
elevators

(percent  of  U.S.  grain  elevator  capacity)


Top  4  (45%):

IBP:

ConAgra

(Moiilfort):

Cargill  (Excel):

Sam  Lee


Top  4  1/0-'-):

ConAgr^i

iSipco  &  Montforlj.

Superioi'  PcTcking.

High  Couiitry:

Denver  Lamb


Top  4
(24%)
Cargill    ADM:
Continonlal
Grain,  Bunge


Sources:  Successful  Famiing;  Faedstuffs.
research  of  Heffeman  and  Constance.


Sources:  American  Sheep  Industry  Association;
research  of  Heffeman  and  Constance.


Sources:  1994  Grain  and  Milting  Annuat
research  of  HeHeman  and  Constance.


52     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


The  Anglo-Dutch
corporate  empire

by  Anthony  K.  Wikrent


The  3,000  to  5,000 financier-oligarchs  who  comprise  the  rul-
ing council  of  the  new  British  Empire,  own  and  manage  the
affairs  of  an  interlocking  corporate  apparatus  that  dominates
"choke  points"  within  the  global  economy,  especially  fi-
nance, insurance,  raw  materials,  transportation,  and  con-
sumer goods.  This  cartel  is  known  as  the  Club  of  the  Isles;  its
center  of  policy  making  and  power  is  the  one  square  mile
known  as  the  City  of  London.

The  Club  of  the  Isles  has  expanded  its  control  over  the
financial  and  corporate  affairs  of  Germany,  France,  and
other  continental  European  slates.  Switzerland  and  the  Neth-
erlands have  historically  been  integrated  into  the  London-
centered  imperium.  Although  there  are  occasional  disputes
and  rivalries  within  the  ranks  of  the  Club,  for  the  most  part,
this  vast,  global  structure  of  corporations,  banks,  etc.  func-
tions as  a  single  geopolitical  entity,  at  war  with  the  nation-
state  system.  As  Katharine  West  wrote  in  a  report  for  the
Royallnstitiite  of  International  Affairs  (see  p.  37),  "To  under-
stand the  reality  as  opposed  to  the  rhetoric  of  British  involve-
ment in  European  and  non-European  economies,  it  is  better
to  study  what  companies  do  rather  than  what  politicians  say. "

What  follows  are  profiles  of  the  most  important  corpora-
tions within  the  Windsor/Club  of  the  Isles  apparatus  today.


Key  personnel:

Edward  Alan  John  George:  governor  1993-  (joined  BOE
1962;  seconded  to  Bank  for  International  Settlements  1966-
69;  seconded  to  International  Monetary  Fund  as  Assistant
to  Chairman  of  Deputies  of  the  Committee  of  Twenty  on
International  Monetary  Reform,  1972-74).

Sir  George  Adrian  Hayfaurst  Cadbury:  director,  1970-94
(Cadbury  Schweppes,  deputy  chairman  and  managing  direc-
tor 1969-74,  chairman  1975-89;  ffiM  U.K.  Ltd.,  director
1975- ;  Panel  on  Takeovers  and  Mergers,  1990- ;  Committee
on  Financial  Aspects  of  Corporate  Governance,  chairman
1991- ).

Sir  Colin  Ross  Comess:  director  1987-95  (RedlandPLC,


director  1967- ,  chairman  1977-  ;  Courtaulds  PLC,  director,
1986- ;  S.G.  Warburg  1987- ;  Union  Camp  Corp.,  director
1991- ;  U.K.  Advisory  Board,  British-American  Chamber  erf
Commerce,  1987- ).

Frances  Anne  Heaton:  director  1993-  (HM  Treasury
1970-80;  Lazard  Brothers  and  Co.  1980- ,  director  1987- ;
Panel  on  Takeovers  and  Mergers,  director  general  1992- ).

Sir  Christopher  Anthony  Hogg:  1992-  (Hill  Samuel  Ltd.
1963-66;  Courtaulds  PLC  1968- ,  chairman  1980-94;  Reuters
Holdings  1984- ,  chairman  1985-^ ;  SmithKline  Beecham
1993- ;  International  Council  of  J.P.  Morgan  1988- ;  Ford
Foundation,  trustee  1987- ).

Sir  Martin  Wakefield  Jacomb:  director  1986-95  (prac-
ticed at  the  bar.  Inner  Temple  1955-68;  Kleinwort  Benson,
director  1968-95;  Hudson's  Bay  Co.,  director  1971-86;  Bar-
clays de  Zoete  Wedd,  chairman  1986-91;  Barclays  Bank  PLC,
deputy  chairman  1985- ;  The  Telegraph  PLC,  director  1986- ;
Commercial  Union  Assurance  Co.,  director  1988- ;  RTZ
Corp.  PLC,  director  1988-  ;  PosTel  Investment  Management
Ltd.,  director  1991- ;  British  Council,  chairman  1992- ).

Sir  John  Chippepdale  Keswick:  director  1993-  (married
daughter  of  16th  earl  of  Dalhousie  1 966;  Hambros  Bank  Ltd. ,
chairman  1986- ;  Charter  Consolidated  PLC,  director;- De-
Beers,  director  1994- ;  Edinburgh  Investment  Trust  Ltd.,  di-
rector; Queen's  Body  Guard  for  Scotland;  Royal  Company
of  Archers).

Sir  Christopher  Jeremy  Morse,  KCMG:  director  1993-
(Glyn  Mills  and  Co.,  director  1964;  Bank  of  England,  director
1 965-72;  Alternate  Governor  of  United  Kingdom  for  Interna-
tional Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  1966-72;  Chairman  of  Deputies
of  Committee  of  Twenty,  IMF,  1 972-74;  Lloyds  Bank,  deputy
chairman  1975-77,  chairman  1977-93;  London  Forex  Associ-
ation, president  1978-91;  ZenecaPLC,  director  1993- ).

Ian  Plenderleith:  director  1990.-  (joined  BOE.  in  1965;
seconded  to  IMF  1972-74;  private  secretary  to  governor,  of
BOE  1976-79;  senior  broker  to  Commissioner  for  Reduction
of  National  Debt  1989- ;  London  Stock  Exchange,  director
1989- ;  Stock  Borrowing  and  Lending  Committee,  chairman
1990- ;  OECD  Study  on  Debt  Management,  Editorial  Com-
mittee 1990-  ;  Government  Borrowers  Forum,  co-chairman
1991- ;  Financial  Law  Panel  1992- ).

Sir  David  Gerald  Scholey:  director  1981-94  (S.G.  War-
burg Group  1964-  ,  director  1967-  ,  chairman  1984- ;  British
Telecom  PLC,  director  1985- ;  Chubb  Corp.,  director  1992- ;
The  General  Electric  Co.  PLC,  director  1 992- ;  British  Broad-
casting Corp.,  director  1995- ).

Sir  David  Simon,  CBE:  director  1995-  (British  Petroleum
1961- ,.  director  1986- ,  deputy  chairman  1990- ,  chairman
1995;  Deutsche  Bank,  International  Advisory  Council;  Alli-
anz  AG,  director;  Grand  Metropolitan  PLC,  director  1989- ;
RTZ  Corp.  PLC,  director  1995- ).

When  an  American  thinks  of  the  City  of  London,  he  or
she  probably  thinks  of  a  sprawling  metropoUtan  area.  But  an


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     53


English  aristocrat  would  sneer  at  such  a  misconception.  For,
the  City  of  London  refers  to  just  under  one  square  mile  of
land,  on  the  north  bank  of  the  River  Thames,  within  which
is  concentrated  the  financial  and  monetary  apparatus  of  the
Empire.  And  within  the  City  of  London,  the  Bank  of  England
occupies  a  central  position,  supervising  the  flow  of  credit  and
money;  carefully  guiding  the  major  world  financial  institu-
tions, such  as  the  IMF,  by  "seconding"  key  employees;  and
propagating  around  the  world,  through  an  "old  boys"  net-
work, the  cherished  City  ideals  of  monetarism,  deregulation,
privatizafion,  and  free  markets — the  essential  theoretical  in-
gredients for  creating  an  environment  in  which  the  Empire
can  maintain  its  domination,  while  its  agents  wear  the  publicly
acceptable  cloak  of  "free  enterprise."

The  Bank  of  England  is  supposedly  the  major  financial
regulator  of  the  United  Kingdom,  but  very  rarely  does  the
bank  launch  punitive  actions;  it  much  prefers  to  make  its
concerns  known  through  private  discussions  with  the  City's
bankers.  Usually,  a  summons  to  lunch  with  a  member  of  the
Court  of  Directors  is  quite  enough  for  a  banker  to  know  that
he  has  gone  too  far,  and  had  best  get  back  in  line,  else  find  he
is  unwelcome  at  his  own  clubs,  and  his  social  life  ruined.  It
would  never  do  for  usury  to  drop  the  cloak  of  "competitive-
ness" to  reveal  the  framework  of  pin^  thuggery  underneath.

Established  in  1694,  ostensibly  to  help  finance  King  Wil-
liam Ill's  war  against  France,  the  creation  of  the  Bank  of
England  was  a  major  step  by  London's  Venetian  faction,  led
by  the  Earl  of  Marlborough  and  Baron  Charles  Montagu,  later
earl  of  Halifax,  in  establishing  a  new  oligarchgy  based  on
financiers  and  speculators,  at  the  expense  of  the  old  landed
aristocracy.  Within  11  days,  1,268  people,  most  desiring  to
prevent  the  restoration  of  the  Catholic  Stuart  monarchy,  had
subscribed  £1.2  million.

There  were  fears  at  first  that  the  bank  would  be  a  "republi-
can" institution  that  would  "entrust  the  Fund  of  the  Nation  in
the  Hands  of  Subjects,"  who  would  be  "of  the  popular  side"
and  thus  "insensibly  influence  the  Church  and  State."  But,  far
from  being  an  engine  of  republicanism,  the  bank  proved  itself
a  key  instrument  in  the  Venetian  faction' s  creation  of  a  perma-
nent national  debt,  which,  by  171 1,  had  multiplied  25-fold,
to  over  £50  million.  Interest  payments  alone  were  more  than
total  government  revenues  that  year.

Despite  the  rapidly  accreting  evidence  of  financial  and
economic  rain,  in  1 708  Parliament  gave  the  bank — a  privately
owned  institution,  not  a  government  entity — a  monopoly  over
the  issuance  of  bank  notes.  Counterfeiting  the  notes  of  the
private  Bank  of  England  was  made  a  capital  offense,  and
more  than  300  people  were  hanged;  the  Court  of  Directors
was  denounced  in  pamphlets  as  being  "grand  purveyors  to
the  gibbet."  The  chief  enforcement  officer  for  the  bank,  the
Warden  of  the  Mint  since  1695,  was  the  scientific  charlatan
Sir  Isaac  Newton,  who  had  curried  favor  with  Lord  Halifax
by  "purveying"  his  own  niece  and  adopted  daughter.  Newton
supervised  the  "Great  Recoinage"  of  1696,  which  had  with-
drawn some  £2.7  million  in  coins  from  circulation,  thus  forc-


ing popular  acceptance  of  the  bank's  notes;  Newton  also  per-
sonafly  supervised  many  of  the  executions.

In  17 1 1 ,  the  bank  assisted  Marlborough' s  preparations  for
unleashing  a  mob  to  depose  Queen  Anne,  who  was  attempting
to  negotiate  an  end  to  the  war  with  France,  and  find  a  way  to
save  England  from  its  crushing  debt.  Marlborough  and  the
bank's  plot  was  stymied  by  Jonathan  Swift's  devastating  ex-
pose, The  Conduct  of  the  Allies,  in  which  he  observed  that  the
past  two  decades  of  carnage  in  Flanders,  had  been  perpetrated
by  "that  set  of  people,  who  are  called  monied  men;  such  as
had  raised  vast  sums  by  trading  with  stocks  and  funds,  and
lending  upon  great  interest  and  premiums;  whose  perpetual
harvestis  war,  and  whose  beneficial  way  of  traffick must  very
much  decline  by  a  peace."

Attacking  the  "free  enterprise"  thinking  that  would  be
propounded  50  years  later  by  Adam  Smith,  Swift  warned:  "It
is  the  folly  of  too  many  to  mistake  the  echo  of  a  London
coffeehouse,  for  the  voice  of  the  kingdom.  The  city  coffee-
houses have  been  for  some  years  filled  with  people,  whose
fortunes  depend  upon  the  Bank  [of  England],  East-India
[Company],  or  some  other  stock.  Every  new  fund  to  these,  is
like  a  new  mortgage  to  a  usurer. . . ."

In  1825,  a  financial  collapse  threatened  the  bank,  which
was  saved  at  the  last  minute  by  an  infusion  of  gold  coin  ex-
ported from  continental  Europe  by  the  Rothschilds.  In  1890,
the  Bank  of  England  switched  roles,  leading  the  City  in  pre-
venting the  complete  collapse  of  Barings  Brothers.

In  1920,  Montagu  Norman  became  the  governor  of  the
bank,  ultimately  serving  for  24  years,  longer  than  anyone
before  or  since.  Norman  was  one  of  the  key  figures  in  promot-
ing the  rise  to  power  in  Germany  of  Adolf  Hitler  and  Hitler' s
economics  minister,  Hjalmar  Schacht.  It  was  not  until  two
years  after  Norman's  departure,  that  the  Bank  of  England
was  nationalized  and  made  a  government  entity  by  a  Labour
government,  in  1946.

The  Bank  of  England  has  been  a  persistent  puveyor  of
privatization,  deregulation,  and  "free  markets."  In  late  1994,
for  example,  it  was  revealed  that  the  Bank  of  England  had
pressured  regulators  in  other  countries  not  to  interfere  with
the  $1.5  trillion  a  day  derivatives  markets:  About  half  the
world's  $1.3  trillion  a  day  in  foreign  exchange  (half  of  which
is  derivatives)  is  controlled  by  banks  in  the  City  of  London.
In  November  1 993,  the  Bank  of  England' s  executive  director,
Andrew  Crockett,  was  made  general  manager  of  the  Bank  for
International  Settlements,  and  the  BIS  ceased  to  issue  quiet
warnings  about  the  dangere  of  derivatives.

The  worldwide  shift  away  from  a  government  focus  on
full  employment,  to  a  focus  on  fighting  inflation,  was  initiated
by  the  Bank  of  England  in  the  early  1970s,  with  foreknowl-
edge of  the  disastrous  effects  on  employment,  and  the  condi-
tion of  industry.

Under  the  Companies  Bill,  the  governor  of  the  Bank  of
England  may  exempt  certain  individuals  from  publicly  dis-
closing their  share  holdings — a  critical  loophole  for  hiding
the  vast  wealth  of  the  House  of  Windsor.  In  October  1992,


54     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


Reuters  news  wires  revealed  that  there  is  a  separate  freema-
sonic  lodge  for  the  Bank  of  England.


lsHl*j   AagloA0iericanCorp.of
South  Africa,  Ltd.

44  Mam  Street  Johannesburg  2001
Republic  of  South  Atnca
1994pPofiN1  681  bifllon  rahd
1 994  a6setsa22  71 B  bilhon  rand
Over  200  000  ernployees  (ostimated)


Key  personnel:

Julian  Ogilvie  Thompson:  chairman  (son  of  the  chief  jus-
tice of  South  Africa,  married  the  daughter  of  the  4th  viscount
Hampden,  CMG,  1956;  De  Beers;  Minorco).

Nicholas  Oppenheimer:  deputy  chairman  (De  Beers).

Sir  Phillip  J.  Oppenheimer:  director  (De  Beers).

P.J.R.  Leyden:  director  (De  Beers).

Gavin  Walter  Hamilton  Relly:  director  (De  Beers;  Mi-
norco; chairman  South  Africa  Nature  Foundation).

Rupert  Nicholas  Hambro:  director  (The  Telegraph).

Sir  John  Chippendale  Keswick:  director  (see  Bank  of  En-
gland profile).

Anglo  American  dominates  the  economy  of  South  Africa,
holding  an  interest  in  an  estimated  1,300  South  African  com-
panies. It  is  the  second  largest  mining  firm  in  the  world,  min-
ing almost  every  mineral  and  ore  in  the  world.  In  addition,  it
conducts  banking,  insurance,  heavy  engineering,  and  manu-
facturing of  steel,  paper,  pulp,  packaging,  timber,  and  chemi-
cals, paints,  explosives,  fertilizers,  electronics,  and  motor  ve-
hicles, and  has  retail  operations  selling  clothing,  furniture,
household  appliances,  and  building  materials,  and  is  the  South
African  distributor  for  Komatsu  and  Dresser  construction  and
other  heavy  equipment.

Anglo  American  cross-owns  the  two  De  Beers  compa-
nies. The  three  firms  today  are  the  core  of  the  Oppenheimer
empire;  all  three  companies  have  the  same  chairman,  deputy
chairman,  and  share  most  directors.  Anglo  American' s  opera-
tions outside  of  Africa  are  managed  by  Minorco  S.A.

The  Rothschilds  and  Morgans  provided  Sir  Ernest  Oppen-
heimer, adescendant  of  the  German  family  that  two  centuries
earlier  had  employed  Mayer  Amschel  Rothschild,  with  the
financing  to  cartelize  diamond  and  gold  production  in  South
Africa  between  1 902  and  1 929,  beginning  with  the  1 905  pur-
chase of  Consohdated  Mines  Selection  Co.,  which  owned
most  of  the  East  Rand  gold  field.  Oppenheimer  formed  Anglo
American  in  1917,  and  began  moving  in  on  diamond  mining,
with  help  from  Gen.  Jan  Smuts,  then  prime  minister  of  South
Africa,  and  a  leading  member  of  the  Milner  group.  By  1929,
Oppenheimer  had  taken  control  of  De  Beers.

In  April  1996,  Anglo  American  bought  5.9%  of  Lonrho,
with  options  to  buy  another  18.4%,  from  Lonrho  CEO  Die-
ter Bock.


Key  personnel:

E.  Coppola  di  Canzano:  chairman  and  joint  managing  di-
rector.

Antoine  Bemheim:  joint  vice  chairman  1995-  (Lazard
Freres  et  Cie.).

C.  della  Torre  e  Tasso:  deputy  chairman.

Assicurazioni  Generali  SpA  is  a  direct  descendant  of  one
of  the  largest  fondi  of  ancient  Venice,  and  was  traditionally
the  insurance  company  for  the  area  controlled  by  the  Austro-
Hungarian  Empire.  Today,  its  connection  to  the  City  of  Lon-
don is  quietly  maintained  through  the  Lazard  complex  of  Eu-
ropean holdings.  The  Generali  was  formally  established  in
Trieste,  in  December  1831,  but  the  ink  on  the  papers  was  not
even  dry  before  founder  Giuseppe  Morpurgo  estabfished  the
firm's  Italian  headquarters  in  Venice.  Another  founder  was  a
business  partner  of  the  Vienna  Rothschilds.

The  Generali  is  quite  conscious  of  its  Venetian  lineage,
acquiring  the  Procuratie  Vecchie  on  the  Piazza  San  Marco  in
Venice  in  the  1 880s,  building  its  Rome  office  on  the  Piazza
Venezia  about  the  same  time,  and,  in  1918,  adopting  as  its
symbol  the  winged  Lion  of  St.  Mark,  the  traditional  symbol  of
Venice's  power  and  long-reaching  intelligence  capabilities.

During  World  War  II,  the  chairman  was  Count  Giuseppe
Volpi  di  Misurata,  a  central  figure  in  bringing  the  Bolsheviks
to  power  in  Russia.

The  Torre  e  Tasso  (Thum  und  Taxis)  family  ran  the  Euro-
pean postal  service  for  Europe's  oligarchs  since  the  six-
teenth century.


Key  personnel:

Andrew  Robert  Fowell  Buxton:  1963- ,  director  1978- ,
chairman  1990  (SmithKhne  Beecham,  director).

Sir  Peter  Middleton,  GCB,  director  (permanent  secretary
ofthe  Treasury  1983-91).


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     55


Sir  John  Derek  Birkin  TD:  director  1990-  (RTZ  Corp.
PLC,  director  1982- ,  CEO  and  deputy  chairman  1985-91,
chairman  1991- ;  CRA  Ltd.,  director  1985- ;  The  Merchants
Tmst  PLC,  director  1986- ;  Merck  and  Co.  Inc.,  director
1992- ;  Unilever,  director  1993- ;  Royal  Opera  House,  direc-
tor 1993- ).

Sir  Denys  Hartley  Henderson:  director  (Imperial  Chemi-
cal Induslries,  director  1980-87,  chairman  1987-95;  Zeneca
Group,  chairman  1992-95;  The  Rank  Organization,  chair-
man; RTZ  Corp.  PLC,  1990- ).

Lord  Wright  of  Richmond,  KCMG.CMG:  director  1991-
(entered  Diplomatic  Service  1955,  first  secretary  of  Embassy
to  United  States  1960-65;  Head  of  Middle  East  Department
Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  1972-74;  private  secre-
tary for  overseas  affairs  to  prime  minister  1974-77;  ambassa-
dor to:  Luxembourg  1977-79,  Syria  1979-81,  Saudi  Arabia
1 984-86;  permanent  undersecretary  of  state  and  head  of  diplo-
matic service  1986-91;BritshPetroleum,  director  1991-  ;De
La  Rue,  director  1991- ;  Unilever,  director  1991- ;  Royal  In-
stitute of  International  Affairs,  Council  1992-95,  chairman
1995-  ;DitchleyFoundation,govemorl986- ;  Royal  College
of  Music,  Fellow  1994).

Largest  of  the  Big  4  London  Clearing  Banks,  Barclays
has  historically  been  a  major  banking  power  in  Africa  and  the
Caribbean.  Established  in  1736  by  James  Barclay,  the  bank
has  always  been  tightly  controlled  by  the  Barclay,  Freame,
Bevan,  and  Buxton  famihes,  the  last  of  which  co-founded  the
World  Wildlife  Fund.  Among  the  banks  acquired  since  its
founding  were  the  Colonial  Bank,  chartered  to  operate  in  the
West  Indies  and  British  Guyana;  the  National  Bank  of  South
Africa  Ltd. ;  and  the  Anglo-Egyptian  Dominion,  Colonial,  and
Overseas  Bank.  By  1925,  Barclays  had  become  the  first,  and,
for  decades,  remmned  the  only  British  bank  to  combine  opera-
tions in  Britain  with  those  in  the  rest  of  the  Empire.  In  1968,
Barclays  merged  with  Martin's  Bank  of  London,  which  had
been  founded  by  Sir  Thomas  Gresham,  chief  financial  adviser
to  Elizabeth  I,  and  founder  of  the  Royal  Exchange.


Key  personnel:

Peter  Baring:  chairman  (great-grandson  of  the  First  Lord
Revelstoke;  Inchcape  1978- ).

Nicholas  Hugo  Baring;  deputy  chairman  1986-89  (chair-
man Commercial  Union  PLC;  The  National  Trust  1979- ).

Robert  Malpas:  director  (ICI;  British  Petroleum  1983-89;
chairman  Cookson  Group  1991- ).


Henry  Michael  Pearson  Miles:  deputy  chairman  (John
Swire  and  Sons  Ltd.  1988- ;  Johnson  Matthey).

Andrew  Marmaduke  Lane  Tuckey :  deputy  chairman  (Dil-
lon Read  Holding,  Inc.  director  1991- ;  International  Capital
Markets  Advisory  Committee  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank
ofNew  York  1992- ).

Miles  James  Rivett-Gamac:  chairman  Baring  Securities
Ltd.  (London  Stock  Exchange  1991- ;  Allied-Lyons  PLC
1992- ).

Tlie  series  of  financial  institutions  founded  by  the  Barings
family  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  the  British  Empire  for  over
2(X)  years.  Barings  PLC  traces  itself  to  the  partnership  of  John
and  Francis  Baring  and  Co.,  founded  in  London  in  1762.  In
1767,  Francis  (1740-1810)  married'Harriet  Herring,  cousin
to  the  former  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  signalling  acceptance
of  the  family  within  the  EngHsh  oligarchy.  By  the  1770s,
Francis  had  become  a  confidant  and  adviser  of  the  earl  of
Shelbume  (later  Lord  Lansdowne),  and  by  1 783  was  accepted
as  a  member  of  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  British  East  India
Company.  Barings  ;noney  thus  financed  much  of  the  world's
opium  trade.

Francis's  second  son,  Alexander  (1774-1848),  emerged
as  the  foremost  "America  handler"  of  the  British,  having
bought  control  of  the  "Boston  Brahmin"  opium-  and  slave-
running  families.  Alexander  was  given  a  baronetcy  in  the
second  creation  of  the  Lord  Ashburton  in  1835.  Over  time,
another  four  baronetcies  were  awarded  the  Barings:  North-
brook  in  1866;  Revelstoke  in  1885;  Cromer  in  1901;  and
Howick  of  Glendaie  in  1960.  The  third  earl  of  Cromei,  Lord
Errington,  was  made  minister  to  the  United  States  in  1953.
From  1962  to  1967,  he  was  governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,
then  chairman  of  Barings,  until  197 1 ,  when  he  was  dispatched
to  Washington  as  ambassador  a  second  time.

Top  dog  in  the  Barings  pack  today  is  Lord  Ashburton,
chainnan  of  British  PeO^leum  (BP)  from  1992  to  1995,  and
a  member  of  Prince  Philip's  1001  Club  Nature  Trust.  Lord
Ashburton  has  been  a  director  of  Baring  Brothers  and  Co.
Ltd.  since  1955.  Lord  Ashburton's  second  wife  was  the
daughter  of  J.G.  Spencer  Churchill.  Lord  Ashburton  was  also
a  director  of  the  Bank  of  England  from  1983  to  1991,  and  has
been  a  trustee  of  the  Rhodes  Trust  since  1970,  and  chairman
since  1987.  The  embarrassment  of  the  sudden  collapse  of
Barings  on  iFeb.  24-26,  1995,  probably  is  the  reason  he  left
the  boards  of  Barings,  BP,  and  other  firms.  Internationale
Nederlanden  Groupe  bought  Barings  PLC  for  £1,  assuming
Barings*  liabilities.

At  the  time  Barings  collapsed,  the  firm  was  half-owned
by  the  Barings  Foundation,  through  60  million  shares  of  non-
voting stock.  The  entirety  of  voting  stock  was  owned  by  the
directors,  who  also  dominated  the  board  of  trustees  of  the
foundation.  A  notable  trustee  is  Sir  Crispin  Tickell,  one  of  the
top  diplomats  of  the  British  Empire  since  Worid  War  II,  an
expert  in  creating  and  manipulating  "indigenous  peoples


56     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


movements,"  and.aprincipal  promoter  of  the  global  warming
hoax  in  the  1980s.  Tickell  is  atrustee  of  the  World  Wide
Fund  for  Nature  (formerly  World  WildUfe  Fund),  and  a  vice
president  of  the  Royal  Geographic  Society,  of  which  he  was
president  Irom  1990  to  1991


>10tMat  afrVlctona  Stroot,
London  SWIHWL
UrflM  Kingdom  r
19M9Btes««(tfiWbfUion
173,475  «mpl^|j|i^

Key  personnel:

Sir  Patrick  Sheehy:  chairman  (British  Petroleum).

Lord  Cairns:  vice  chairman  1985-95,  chairman  1995-
(succeeded  his  father  1989;  S.G:  Warburg,  director  1985-95;
deputy  chairman  and  CEO  1991:95,  chairman  1995- ).

Lord  Armstrong  of  Ilminster,  GCB,  CVO:  director  1988-
(Treasury  1950-64,  assistant  secretary  of  the  Treasury  1967-
68;  private  secretary  to  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  1954-
55,  1968;  principal  private  secretary  to  prime  minister  1970-
75;  permanent  undersecretary  of  state  1977-79;  secretary  of
the  cabinet  1979-87;  head  of  Home  Civil  Service  1981-87;
Rhodes  Trust  1975-, ;  Ihchcape,  director  1988- ;  N.M.  Roth-
schild, director  1988-  ;RTZ,  director  1988- ;  Shell  Transport
and  Trading,  director  1988- ;  Royal  Opera  House,  Coveht
Garden,  director  1988- ).

Clayton  Yeutter:  director  (former  U.S.  Trade  Representa-
tive; Caterpillar,  director).

BAT  is  the  largest  seller  of  cigarettes  outside  the  United
States,  with  300  brands  sold  in  160  countries.  British  Ameri-
can Tobacco  is  the  result  of  the  cigarette  cartel  formed  in
1902,  after  a  brief  price  war  in  Britain  between  Imperial  To-
bacco Co.  and  James  Buchanan  Duke's  American  Tobacco.
In  1927,  BAT  bought  Brown  and  Williamson  Tobacco  Co.,
which  it  still  owns.  In  1984,  BAT  acquired  Eagle  Star,  the
British  insurance  company  that  figured  prominently  in  dirty-
money  operations.


^■^     "■HMfclii.MoiMMfc^f  rf'^bufy  OreM

M0fi»ftfKia|«tiniOtr  lion  |

Key  personnel:

Sir  David  Simon,  CBE:  chairman  (see  Bank  of  England
profile).

Peter  Sutherland:  (former  director  general  of  the  General


Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade).

H.  Michael  Miles,  OBE:  (Johnson  Matthey,  John  Swire,
ING  Barings  Holdings).

Sir  Patrick  Sheehy:  (BAT,  Swiss  Bank).

Lord  Wright  of  Richmond:  (see  Barclays  profile).

The  largest  non-financial  company  in  Britain,  and  the
fourth  largest  of  the  worid'  s  oil  multinationals,  more  than  half
of  BP'  s  worid  output  comes  from  die  North  Slope  of  Alaska;
another  third  comes  from  the  North  Sea.

BP  began  with  the  joint  project  of  William  Knox  D'Arcy
and  Burmah  Oil,  which  struck  the  first  oil.in  the  Middle  East
in  1908 .  D'  Arcy  was  then  duped  by  British  intelligence  opera-
tive Sidney  Reilly,  known  as  the  "ace  of  spies,"  into  turning
over  the  find  to  Anglo-Persian  Oil  Co.,  run  by  Loid  Strath-
cona.  Winston  Churchill  convinced  HM  government  in  1914
to  buy  5 1  %  of  Anglo-Persian.  The  firm  was  in  on  the  first  oil
strikes  in  Iraq  (1927)  and  Kuwait  (1938).  In  1928,  Anglo-
Persian  and  its  major  competitors  made  a  secret  "As  Is"  agree-
ment, which  fixed  world  production  and  prices  for  the  next
20  years.  Anglo-Persian  changed  its  name  to  British  Petro-
leum in  1954.

Morgan  Guaranty  Trust  Co.,  of  J. P.  Morgan,  holds
16.67%  of  BP.  FMR  Corp.,  parent  of  the  Fidelity  mutual
fiinds,  owns  5.54%.  The  Kuwaiti  Investment  Office  holds
■9.42%.


Key  personnel:

N.  Dominic  Cadbury:  chairman  (The  Economist  Newspa-
per Ltd.,  chairman).

Sir  John  Whitehead,  GCMG,  CVO:  (Morgan  Grenfell,
senior  adviser).

Dr.  F.B.  Humer:  (Glaxo  Holdings).

One  of  the  oldest  family-controlled  firms  in  the  world,
Cadbury  Schweppes  has  been  under  the  direction  of  the  Cad-
bnry  family  ever  since  John  Cadbury  began  making  cocoa
in  Birmingham  in  1831.  The  Cadbury  firm  merged  with  the
Schweppes  carbonated  water  firm  in  1969.  In  1994,  Cadbury
Schweppes  was  part  of  the  Camelot  Group,  which  won  the
bidding  to  run  Britain's  national  lottery;  which  is  overseen  by
Lord  Jacob  Rothschild,  and  which  funds  many  of  his  preserva-
tion projects.  Among  the  brand  names  Cadbury  Schweppes
owns  in  the  United  Stales  are  A&W,  Canada  Dry,  Cmsh,  Dr.
Pepper,  Hires,  Mott's,  Seven-Up,  and  Sunkist.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     57


Casencnre  and  Co.

ISTokanhouseYard  London
EC2N7AN  United  Kingdom
770  emptoyees  plus  61  partnars


Kt}  pel  bUIUlLl.

Anthony  David  Arnold  William  Forbes:  joint  senior  part-
ner (his  mother  is  the  marchioness  of  Exeter;  Royal  Insurance
Holdings  PLC  1994-  ;  RTZ  Pension  Investment  Ltd.  1994- ).

Founded  in  1823  as  Menet  and  Cazenove  by  a  French
Huguenot,  Philip  Cazenove,  and  John  Francis  Menet,  Cazen-
ove is  a  private  partnership  that  engages  in  only  stock  broker-
age services  (helping  to  place  new  issues  on  the  market).
About  half  the  largest  companies  in  Britain  are  clients  of
Cazenove,  a  very  stodgy  firm,  which  prides  itself  on  not  being
a  "meritocracy."

In  April  1993,  the  duumvirate  which  ran  Cazenove  for  14
years,  John  Kemp- Welch  and  Sir  Anthony  Forbes,  retired.
Kemp- Welch  became  chairman  of  the  London  Stock  Ex-
change. They  were  replaced  by  a  triumvirate  of  Mark  Love-
day,  David  Mayhew,  and  David  Bamett.Loveday's  fa,ther,
George  Loveday,  was  formerly  a  chairman  of  the, London'
Stock  Exchange,  and  his,  godfather  is  Sir  Antony  Hornby,
who  ran  Cazenove  for  two  decades.  Mayhew  is  a  cousin  of  Sir.
Michael  Richardson,  a  close  friend  of  former  Prime  Ministen
Margaret  Thatcher,  and  a  leading  Freemason,  who  was  head
of  corporate  finance  at  Cazenove  from  1971  to  1981,  then
managing  director  of  N.M.  Rothschild  and  Sons  until  1993,
when  he  "retired,"  embarrassed  by  his  relationship  with  bank-
rupts Robert  Maxwell  and  Asil  Nadir.


ComtanldsPLC

IB  Hanover  Square  London  W1 A  2BB
Unttad  Kingdom
Sales  $3  57biBion
22  700  employeas


Key  personnel:

Sir  Christopher  Hogg:  director  (see  Bank  of  England
profile).

Sir  David  Lees:  director  (see  Bank  of  England  profile).

Courtaulds  and  Courtaulds  Textiles  were  once  one  firm,
which  began  as  a  silk  manufacturer  in  1816,  and  achieved
prominence  after  buying  the  rights  to  the  patents  for  making
rayon  in  1 904,  and  had  over  100,000  employees  in  1 975 .  Hogg
oversaw  the  dismantling  and  shrinking  of  the  firm,  apparently
being  rewarded  with  a  knighthood.  It  now  makes  paints,  coat-
ings, specialty  chemicals,  and  packaging  materials.


CouttaandCo.

1 5  LombanJ  street  London
EC3V  9AU  United  Kingdom
1994  assetsa^  284  billion
1 994  after  tax  prof  rts«£26  762  mHion
1  753  employees


Key  personnel:

Denis  Marsden  Child,  CBE:  director  (National  West-
minster).

Dr.  Reto  F.  Domeniconi:  chairman,  Coutts  and  Co.  A.G.

(Nestle).

Coutts  is  the  private  bank  used  by  the  Queen.  Wholly
owned  by  National  Westminster  Bank  PLC,  Coutts  functions
as  the  private  banking  arm  of  NatWest  Group,  providing  pri-
vate banking  and  financial  services  to  wealthy  individuals  in
17  "jurisdictions"  worldwide.


Key  personnel:

same  as  Anglo  American,  excluding  Hambro.


De  Been  Consolidated
Mines  Ud.

36  Stockdale  Street,  Kimberiey  8301
Republic  of  South  Af  nca
1 493  a&eetasf 2  350  bifhon
1993rev«nueeK$l  413brtlion
1993  pr(«tanertax«»«$750  mUlon
9  21 6  emptoyees


Key  personnel:

same  as  Anglo  American,  excluding  Hambro,  but  adding:
Sir  Harry  Oppenheimer.
Sir  Evelyn  de  Rothschild.
Baron  Edmund  de  Rothschild.

Established  by  white  supremacist  Cecil  Rhodes  in  1880,
De  Beers  controlled  around  90%  of  the  world's  diamond  pro-
duction by  1888,  following  a  series  of  mergers  that  were  fi-
nancially backed  by  the  Rothschilds.  Diamonds  are  the  one
commodity  in  the  world  that  most  closely  approximates  the
sale-to- weight  ratio  of  pure  heroin  (even  more  so  than  gold).


58     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


and  have  therefore  been  a  significant  factor  in  the  develop-
ment of  the  world's  illegal  narcotics  trade  by  the  British  Em-
pire. In  1925,  Sir  Ernest  Oppenheimer  of  Anglo  American,
with  backing  from  Herbert  Hoover,  N.M.  Rothschild  and
Sons,  and  J.P.  Morgan  and  Co.,  began  reorganizing  the  Lon-
don-based world  diamond  cartel,  and  by  1929  had  seized
complete  control  of  De  Beers.

During  World  War  II,  the  U.S.  government  accused  De
Beers  of  hoarding  diamonds  needed  for  the  war  effort;  in  the
1940s,  1950s,  and  1970s,  the  U.S.  government  pursued  De
Beers  and  its  diamond  cartel,  the  Central  Selling  Organization,
on  anti-trust  grounds.  De  Beers  did  not  deign  to  defend  itself:
In  strictly  legal  terms,  it  has  no  operations  in  the  United  States.
In  April  1 992,  the  U.S .  Justice  Department  accused  De  Beers
of  conspiring  wit^  General  Electric  Co.  to  fix  the  price  of  in-
dustrial diamonds;  the  case  was  later  dismissed.  The  company
was  split  in  1 990  so  that  the  Swiss  branch  could  run  De  Beers' s
operations  outside  South  Africa.  Oneof  its  majorproblems  has
been  to  maintain  control  over  world  diamond  supply:  South
Africanow  supplies  only  10%,  and  the  Soviet  Union,  now  Rus-
sia, has  repeatedly  dumped  diamonds  to  raise  cash.


Key  personnel:

LordCatto:  director  1959-93  (Morgan  Grenfell,  president
1987-;  News  International  Ltd.,  director  19.69-;  Times
Newspaper  Holdings  Ltd.,  director;  London  Advisory  Com-
mittee of  Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Bank  1966-80;  Westmin-
ster Abbey  Trust,  chairman  Executive  Committee).

Lord  William  Rees-Mogg:  director  1981-  (Financial
Times  1952-60;  Sunday  Times,  assistant  editor  1960-67,  edi-
tor 1967-81,  The  TimesUd.,  director  1968-81;  British  Broad-
casting Co.,  vice  chairman  1981-86;  Sidgwick  and  Jackson
Ltd.,  chairman  1985-88;  Arts  Council  of  Great  Britain,  chair-
man 1982-89;  Broadcasting  Standards  Council,  chairman
1988-93;  American  Trading  Co.  Ltd.,  chairman  1992- ;  Inter-
national Business  Communications  PLC,  chairman  1993- ;  J.
Rothschild  Investment  Management  Ltd.,  director  1987- ;  St.
James'  Place  Capital  PLC,  director  1991- ;  The  Telegraph
PLC,  director).

Sir  David  Scholey:  director  (see  Bank  of  England  profile).

GEC  is  the  largest  manufacturing  firm  in  Britain,  and  is
related  to  General  Electric  Corp.  of  the  United  States  only
through  the  creation  in  1989  of  a  joint  venture  between  the
two  companies  linking  their  appliance,  medical  equipment,


and  electrical  products  distribution  operations.  The  same
year,  GEC  created  a  joint  venture  with  Alcatel  Alsthom  of
France,  combining  the  two  companies'  power  generation  and
distribution  equipment,  and  railroad  equipment,  manufactur-
ing operations.  GEC  executives  were  major  contributors  to
Margaret  Thatcher  and  the  Conservative  Party. ,


Key  personnel:

TTie  Rt.  Hon.  The  LordHowe  of  Aberavon,  PC,  QC:  direc-
tor 1991-  (Privy  Council;  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  1979-
83;  secretary  of  state  for  foreign  and  commonwealth  affairs
1983-89;  Lord  President  of  the  Council;  deputy  prime  minis-
ter 1089-90;  Sun  Alliance  and  Insurance  Group,  director
1974-79;  BICC  PLC,  director  1991- ;  Framlington  Russian
Investment  Fund,  chairman  1994;  International  Council  of
J.P.  Morgan).

Anne  Legendere  Armstrong:  director  1991-  (U.S.  ambas-
sador to  Britain  1976-77;  co-chairman  Reagan/Bush  cam-
paign 1980;  chairman.  President' s  Foreign  Intelligence  Advi-
sory Board  1981-90;  trustee.  Center  for  Strategic  and
International .  Studies  at  Georgetown  University  1987- ;
Council  on  Foreign  Relations  1977- ;  Ditchley  Foundation
1977-87).

The  Rt.  Hon.  The  Lord  Kingsdowne,  KG,  PC:  director
(Privy  Council;  National  Westminster  Bank,  director  1972-
83;  Bank  of  England,  governor  1983-93;  Hambros  PLC,  di-
rector 1993- ;  Redland  PLC,  director  1993- ;  Foreign  and  Co-
lonial Investment  Trust,  director  1993- ;  National  Economic
Development  Council  1982-93;  Ditchley  Foundation,  gover-
nor 1987- ).

The  result  of  a  1995  merger  between  two  British  compa-
nies that  were  already  among  the  largest  pharmaceutical  com-
panies in  the  world,  Glaxo  Wellcome  is  now  the  largest.  Glaxo
was  begun  by  Englishman  Joseph  Nathan  in  1 873  as  an  im-
port-export business  based  in  New  Zealand,  but  became
known  for  its  baby  food,  based  on  powdered  milk.  World
War  n  saw  the  firm's  production  capacity  used  to  produce
pharmaceuticals.  In  the  1970s,  Glaxo  developed  Zantac,  an
anti-ulcer  medication  that  became  the  largest-selling  pre-
scription drug  in  the  world  by  the  end  of  the  1980s.

Wellcome  was  established  in  London  in  1879  by  Ameri-
cans Silas  M.  Burroughs  and  Henry  S.  Wellcome,  as  the  mar-
keting representative  for  U.S.  pharmaceutical  houses.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report ,   59


'mm^.


Grand  Metropolitan  PLC

20  St  James  Squa'e  London  SW1Y4RR  United

Kingdom

1994  revenu6s-£1J  292  b  llion

64  30C  employees

Key  personnel:

Lord  Sheppard  of  Didgemore:  1975- ,  director  1982-87,
chairman  1987-  (Prince  ofWales  Trusts,  chairman  of  Advi-
sory Council  1995- ;  London  School  of  Economics,  gover-
nor 1989- ).

Richard  V.  Giordano,  KBE:  direcloi  (BOC  Group,  RTZ
Corp.).

Peter  J.D.  Job:  director  (Reuters,  CEO).

Sir  Colin  Marshall".  (British  Airways,  chairman;  HSBC
Holdings;  New  York  Stock  Exchange).

Sir  David  Simon,  CBE:  director  (see  Bank  of  England
profile).

Among  Grand  Met's  brand  names  in  the  United  States
are,  in  food.  Aunt  Nellie's,  Green  Giant,  Haagen-Dazs,  Hiin-
grj' Jack,  Jeno's,Pillsbury,  Totino's;in  liquor,  Black  Velvet,
Christian  Brothers,  Gilbey's,  Glen  Ellen,  Inglenook,  Jack
Daniel's,  Lancer's,  Sniimoff,  Wild  Turkey;  in  retailing.
Burger  King  andPearle  Vision.  Grand  Met  also  owns  Farmers
Group,  Inc.,  the  fourth  largest  property,  casualty,  auto,  and
homeowner  insurer  in  the  United  States.

Grand  Met  was  begun  by  young  London  real  estate  hot-
shot Maxwell  Joseph  in  1910.  After  World  War  II,  he  began
buying  war-damaged  hotels,  developing  a  worldwide  chain
of  luxury  hotels  fey  the  1960s,  when  he  began  to  acquire  entire
companies  in  other  areas.  In  1988,  Grand  Met  bought  the  U.S.
food  conglomerate  Pillsbury  in  a  hostile  takeover.


HambrosPLC

41  Tower  Hill  London  EC3N  4HA  UnHed

Krgdom

1 39S  Asset&^CS  662  bril  on

1995  profits=P37  1  nn  lion


Key  personnel:

Lord  Hambro:  1952- ,  director  1957- ,  chairman  1972-
(son  of  Sir  Charles  Hambro;  Guardian  Royal  Exchange  As-
surance, director  1968,  chairman  1988- ;  Peninsular  and  Ori-
ental Steam  Navigation  Co.,  director  1987- ;  San  Paolo  Bank
Holdings,  director  1989-  ;  Conservative  Party,  senior  honor-
ar>'  treasurer  1993- ).

Sir  Chippendale  Keswick;  CEO  1985- ,  deputy  chairman
1986-  (see  Bank  of  England  profile).

The  Rt.  Hon.  The  Lord  Kingsdowne:  (see  Glaxo- Well-


come profile).

Sir  Adam  Nicholas  Ridley,  director  (adviser  to  chancellor
of  the  exchequer  1979-85).  ■

Lord  Halifax  (third  earl  of):  Hambros  Bank,  director,
1978-94.

John  Clay:  director  (The  Guardian  Media  Group  PLC).

Carl  Joachim  Hambro  moved  to  London  in  1839,  from
Copenhagen,  where  his  father,  Joseph,  had  been  banker  to  the
kings  of  Denmark,  Sweden,  and  Norway,  and  the  Rothschilds.
By  1843,  Parliament  passed  a  bill  making  Hambro  a  British
subject.  In  1 848,  he  floated  a  huge  bond  issue  to  finance  Den-
mark's war  against  Prussia,  partly  to  upstage  the  Rothschilds.
In  1 85 1 ,  Hambro  underwrote  bonds  for  Count  Camillo  Benso
di  Cavour,  finance  minister  of  the  Kingdom  of  Sardinia.  Four
years  later,  Cavour  sent  15,000  troops  to  ai(^  the  British  in  the
Crimean  War.

In  1933,  J.H.  "Jack"  Hambrobecame  head  of  the  firm.  He
had  run  the  British  inteUigence  service's  United  Kingdom
Corp. ,  which  conducted  economic  warfare  operations  against
Germany  in  the  Balkans,  Tuikey,  and  other  European  occu-
pied countries.during  World  War  I.  In  World  War  II,  his  son.
Sir  Charles  Hambro,  was  director  of  the  Special  Operations
Executive,  which  included  Sir  William  "Intrepid"  Stephen-
son. Hambros  provided  financial  backing  for  relocating  the
world  diamond  trade  from  Amsterdam  to  London  during  the
war.  '  : '        ■

A  cousin,  Jocelyn  O;  Hambro,  established  the  firm  in  the
United  States  after  the  war,  and  also  sat  on  the  board  of  the
Assicurazioni  Generali,  the  Venetian  insurance  fondo.  Dur-
ing this  time,  Hambros  owned  Mocatta  and  Goldsmid  Ltd.,
(estabfished  in  1684,  one  of , the  five  firms  in  the  London  gold
pool),  which  was  later  sold  to  Standard  Chartered.  In  the
1970s,  Lord  Peter  Carrington  was  a  director.


Han»onPtC

One  GrOBvenor  Place,  London
SW1X7JH  United  Kingdom
1 9M  saie»»S7  655  tulbon
74  OCX)  employees


Key  personnel:

Lord  Hanson:  chairman  1965- .

Martin  G.  Taylor,  CBE,  MA:  vice  chairman  (Vickers;
National  Westminster;  Panel  on  Takeovers  and  Mergers).

The  Rt.  Hon.  Kenneth  Baker,  CH,  MP:  director  (secretary
of  state  for  the  environment  1 985-86;  secretary  of  state  for
education  and  science  1986-90;  Conservative  Party,  chair-
man 1989-90;  home  secretary  1990-92).

Simon  L.  Keswick:  director  (chairman,  Trafalgar  House;
Jardine  Matheson).

The  Hon.  Charles  H.  Price  II;  director  (U.S.  ambassador
to  Britain  1983-89;  British  Airways;  New  York  Times).


60     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


James  Edward  Hanson  married  into  the  Meinertzhagen
banking  family,  the  patriarch  of  which,  Sir  Richard  Meinertz-
hagen, was  the  first  of  His  Majesty' s  professional  spies  in  this
century,  and  one  of  the  first  English  aristocrats  to  elaborate
the  concept  of  a  nature  reserve.  Richard's  cousin,  Daniel
Meinertzhagen,  joined  Lazard  Brothers  in  1936,  and  served
as  Lazard  Brothers  chairman  from  1973  to  1980,  and  was  also
a  director  of  Peareon  and  Son  Ltd.

Hanson's  partner,  Vincent  Gordon  White,  commanded
Special  Operations  Executive  Force  1 36  in  the  Far  East  in  the
1940s.  White's  brother  shared  an  apartment  with  Hanson  at
the  time.

Hanson  and  White  reaped  huge  profits  from  the  1946  na-
tionalization of  Britain's  worn-out  coal  mines,  and  by  the
1 970s  had  assembled  a  collection  of  a  dozen  under-perform-
ing companies  with  rich  asset  bases  in  mature  industries,  such
as  construction  materials.  In  1973 ,  White  moved  to  the  United
States,  and  established  Hanson  Industries,  buying  in  1976
Hygrade  Foods,  the  second  largest  seller  of  hotdogs  at  U.S.
sports  events,  placing  Hanson  firmly  in  the  dirty  money  world
of  the  organized  crime  Jacobs  family's  Emprise,  Inc.  and
Sportservice  Corp.  The  same  year,  James  Hanson,  a  favorite
of  Margaret  Thatcher,  was  knighted.  He  was  made  a  peer
in  1984.

Also  in  1984,  Hanson  became  tfie  largest  brick-maker  in
the  world  by  buying  London  Brick  Co.  At  the  same  time,
Hanson's  $535  million  buyout  of  U.S.  Industries  put  Hanson
among  the  150  largest  U.S.  companies.  Other  companies  ac-
quired: SCM  Corp.  (1986),  the  world's  second  largest  maker
of  titanium  dioxide,  a  key  element  in  paint,  and  maker  of
Smith  Corona  typewriters;  Kidde  (1987),  maker  of  Jacuzzi
whirlpool  baths,  and  Farberware  cookware;  Peabody  (1989),
largest  U.S.  coal  producer;  Beazer  USA  (1992),  largest  U.S.
producer  of  sand  and  gravel.

In  1 989  Hanson  was  able  to  beat  Minorco  in  buying  Con-
solidated Goldfields  PLC,  giving  Hanson  49%  of  Newmont
Mining.  Newmont  was  traded  to  Sir  Jimmy  Goldsmith  in
1991  for  Cavenham  Industries.  Lord  White  died  in  1994,  and
Lord  Hanson  began  to  dismantle  his  empire  a  year  later.


Key  persomiel:

Sir  WiUiam  Purves,  CBE,  DSO:  chairman  (Midland
Bank,  Shell).

Baroness  Dunn,  DBE:  deputy  chairman  (Hongkong  Ex-
ecutive Council  1982- ;  John  Swire  and  Sons  Ltd.,  director;
World  Wildlife  Fund  Hongkong  1982-85).


Charles  D.  Mackay:  director  (CEO  Inchcape,  British
Airways).

Sir  Colin  Marshall;  director  (see  Grand  Metropolitan
profile).

Sir  Adrian  Swire:  director  (chairman  John  Swire  and  Sons
Ltd.,  Swire  Pacific  Ltd.).

Sir  Peter  Ingram  Walters:  deputy  chairman  1992-  (British
Petroleum  1954- ,  director  1973-90,  chairman  BP  Chemicals
1976-81;  Lloyds  Register  of  Shipping,  1976-90;  National
Westminster,  director  198 1-89;  Midland  Bank,  director  1991-
94;  Blue  Circle  Industries,  chairman  1990- ;  London  Business
School,  governor  1981-91;  Nafional  Institute  of  Economic
and  Social  Affairs,  governor  1 98 1  -90;  SnnithKline  Beecham,
director  1989- ;  Thorn  EMI,  director  1989,  deputy  chairman
1990- ).

Originally  named  the  Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Bank,  the
firm  was  organized  by  Peninsular  and  Orient  Steam  Naviga-
tion Co.  Hongkong  superintendent  Thomas  Sutherland  in
1 865,  to  preempt  a  group  of  financiers  in  Bombay.  The  Hong-
Shang's  major  business  was  the  financing  and  promotion  of
the  British  imperial  trade  in  tea,  silk,  and,  especially,  opium,
even  though  some  of  the  most  important  firms  in  the  opium
trade,  such  as  Jardine  Matheson,  or  the  U.S.  firm  Russell  and
Co.,  were  not  represented  on  the  HongShang  board.  By  the
1 870s,  the  HongShang  had  achieved  such  dominance  in  the
colony,  that  it  was  functioning  as  the  de  facto  central  bank
of  Hongkong,  issuing  the  colony's  currency — a  role  which
HSBC  continues  today,  along  with  its  handling  of  dirty
money.

In  the  1980s,  the  HongShang  began  to  move  into  the
United  States,  buying  control  of  Marine  Midland  Bank  in
1980,  and  51%  of  Carroll  McEntee  and  McGinley,  a  primary
U.S.  Treasury  securities  dealer,  in  1983.  In  1986,  major  Lon-
don stockbroker  James  Capel  and  Co.  was  acquired,  and
14.9%  of  Midland  Bank  PLC  was  purchased  in  late  1987.

With  the  British  Empire's  lease  on  Hongkong  due  to  ex-
pire in  1997,  the  HongShang  decided  it  was  time  to  move  on.
In  1992,  the  bank  acquired  the  remaining  shares  of  Midland
Bank  PLC,  doubling  its  assets.  The  next  year,  the  HongShang
changed  its  name  to  HSBC  Holdings,  and  moved  its  headquar-
ters to  London.


Imperial  Chemical

bidustxles  PLC

Impdnaf  Chemical  House  Millbank
London  SW1P3JF  United  Kingdom
1 996  rw»nuefra£l  D  268  billion
64  8OO«mpk)y0«s


Key  personnel:

Sir  Denys  Hartley  Henderson:  chairman  1987-94  (see
Barclays  profile).


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     61


Charles  Miller  Smith:  CEO  (Midland  Bank).

Ellen  R.  Schneider-Lenne,  director  (Morgan  Grenfell).

ICI  is  the  fourth  largest  chemical  firm  in  the  world,  pro-
ducing industrial,  agricultural,  and  specialty  chemicals;
paints;  pharmaceuticals;  and  explosives.  ICI  was  formed  in
1926  by  the  merger  of  the  four  lai^est  British  chemical
firms — Nobel  Industries  Ltd.,  United  Alkali,  British  Dye-
stuffs,  and  Brunner  Mond  and  Co. — by  Lord  Melchett,  in
order  "to  rationalize  the  chemical  manufacture  of  the  world."
ICI  has  been  one  of  the  most  important  firms  of  the  Empire,
often  sharing  directors  with  the  major  clearing  banks,  RTZ,
Shell,  and  other  companies.  During  World  War  II,  it  was  ICI
that  attempted  to  manufacture  an  atomic  bomb  for  HM  gov-
ernment. ,


a  series  of  such  acquisitions  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  Inchcape
grew  to  150  times  its  original  size.


Key  personnel:

Sir  David  Plastow:  chairman  (Vickers,  former  chairman
and  CEO).

Charles  Mackay:  CEO  (HSBC,  Britsh  Airways).

Peter  Baring:  director  (Barings,  former  chairman).

Lord  Armstrong  of  Ilminsteir:  director  (see  BAT  profile).

Paul  Cheng:  director  (chairman  of  N.M.  Rothschilds  ami
Sons  Hongkong).

Hugh  Norton:  director  (British  Petroleum).

Among  its  most  lucrative  businesses,  Inchcape  is  sole
distributor  of  Toyota  motor  vehicles  in  ten  countries.  Inch-
cape's  origins  can  be  traced  back  to  the  establishment  in  1 856
of  the  Calcutta  and  Burma  Steamship  Co.,  with  the  contract
from  the  British  East  India  Company  to  carry  the  Empire's
mail  from  Calcutta  to  Rangoon.  In  1893,  the  business  came
under  the  control  of  James  Lyle  Mackay,  who  had  been  with
the  firm  for  19  years,  and  was  a  close  friend  of  Lord  Lans-
downe,  viceroy  of  India.  Created  Lord  Inchcape  in  1911,
Mackay  became  chairman  of  British  India  Steam  two  years
later,  and  in  1914  combined  his  firm  with  the  Peninsular  and
Orient  Steamship  Navigation  Co.  His  son,  the  second  Lord
Inchcape,  chaired  the  India  Commission  which,  in  the  1920s,
advocated  the  continuation  of  the  opium  trade  as  the  best
means  to  secure  royal  revenues.

The  third  Lord  Inchcape  reorganized  the  various  firms  as
Inchcape  PLC  in  1958.  Business  operations  in  India  were
reorganized  as  the  Assam  Co.,  one  of  the  largest  tea  traders
in  the  world.  In  1967,  Inchcape  doubled  in  size  by  taking  over
the  Borneo  Co,  Two  years  later,  Inchcape  acquired  Oilman
and  Co.,  one  of  the  major  Hongkong  trading  firms.  Through


Key  personnel:

Richard  M.  Thomson:  director  (chairman  and  CEO,  To-
ronto Dominion  Bank,  Thomson  Corp.),

In  1902,  Charles  Schwab  of  U.S.  Steel,  backed  by  Mor-
gan, combined  seven  companies  into  the  International  Nickel
Co.  (IN),  which,  by  1913,  controlled  over  70%  of  the  U.S.
market  for  nickel  (rapidly  becoming  one  of  the  most  important
ingredients  in  making  steel  alloys).  In  1 922,  Mond  Nickel  Co.
of  Ludwig  Mond  (who  had  help  create  Imperial  Chemical
Industries),  was  merged  with  IN,  and  the  firm  was  registered
in  Canada,  to  avoid  the  first  of  a  series  of  investigations  of  IN
for  monopolistic  practices  by  the  U.S.  Justice  Department.
By  the  1930s,  IN  controlled  90%  of  the  western  world' s  nickel
supply,  with  return  on  sales  consistently  over  20%  until  the
1970s.  In  the  mid- 1930s,  IN  signed  a  long-term  contractwith
IG  Farben;  during  World.  War  II;  IN  repeatedly  refused  U.S.
government  recfuests  to  stockpile  nickel.

In  1 974,  IN  initiated  a  radical  transformation  of  U.S.  eq-
uity markets,  by  hiring  blueblood  U.S .  investment  bank  Mor-
gan Stanley  to  direct  IN's  hostile  bid  for  ESB,  Inc.,  a  leading
manufacmrer  of  lead  stOTage  batteries.  The  ESB  takeover  ush-
ered in  the  era  of  hostile  takeovers,  corporate  raiders,  and
opened  the  door  to  junk  bonds — all  of  which  allowed  the
British  Empire's  dirty  money  to  be  laundered  by  taking  over
legitimate  U.S.  businesses^  In  early  1996,  Inco  was  able  to
take.control  of  the  huge  new  nickel  deposit  found  at  Voisey
Bay  in  Canada.


ING  Group  is  the  largest  financial  firm  in  the  Netherlands,
and,  according  to  Fortune  magazine  in  August  1994,  the  third
largest  diversified  financial  services  firm  in  the  world.  ING
Group  was  established  in  March  1991,  with  the  merger  of
NMB  Postbank  Group,  and  Nationale  Nederlanden.  These
firms,  in  turn,  are  traced  back  to  The  Netherlands  Insurance


62     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


Co.,  established  in  1 845;  The  Nationale  Life  Insurance  Bank,
1 863 ;  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank  1881;  Postal  Giro  Service,
1918;  and  Nederlandsche  Middenstandbank  NV,  1927.

In  1995,  ING  Group  bought  the  smoking  hulk  of  Barings
PLC  for  £1.


Key  personnel:

Simon  L.  Keswick:  director  (chairman  Trafalgar  House;
Hanson).

Henry  N.L.  Keswick:  director  (The  Telegraph).

Sir  Charles  Powell,  KCMG:  director  (National  Westmin-
ster Bank,  director;  private  secretary  to  prime  minister
1984-91).

Jardine  Matheson  is  the  most  notorious  of  the  British
Hongkong  ttadingicompanies.  The  firm  began  in  1832,  when
William.  Jardine,  then  a^  ship's  surgeon  in  the  British  East
India  Company,  established  a  small  trading  concern  in  Canton
with  James  Matheson,  son  of  a  Scottish  baronet,  and  the  Dmi-
ish  consul  in  China.  They  soon  gave  up  attempting  tO;  trade
manufactured  ,  goods,  and  began  smuggUng  shiploads  of
Opium  into  closed  ports,  bribing  harbor  masters  and  watch-
mentogainentry  and  avoid  notice  of  higher  authorities.  When
the  Qtng  dynasty  began  enforcing  a  ban  on  sales  of  opium  in
Canton  in  early  1840,  it  was  William  Jardine  who  persuaded
British  Foreign  Minister  Lord  Palmerston  to  initiate  the  first
Opium  War  against  China,  providing  detailed  descriptions  of
the  types  of  ships  that  would  be  required  to  compel  the  Chi-
nese to  accept  "free  trade."  For  its  efforts,  HM  government
extracted  the  island  of  Hongkong  as  a  new  Crown  Colony,  in
which  Jardine  Matheson  was  the  first  purchaser  of  real  estate.

During  World  War  II,  John  Keswick,  grandson  of  William
Keswick,  managed  to  escape  the  island  colony,  and  served  on
Admiral  Earl  Mountbatten '  s  staff.  After  the  war,  he  attempted
to  cooperate  with  the  Communists,  urging  British  recognition
of  the  Communist  government,  and  ordering  his  ships  to  run
the  Nationalist  blockade.  But  in  1954,  Jardine  Matheson  fi-
nally wrote  off  $20  million  in  lost  property  in  China.

In  the  1960s  and  1970s,  the  Keswick  family  battled  to
maintain  control  of  the  firm,  and  it  was  not  until  June  1983
that  another  family  member,  Simon  Keswick,  was  able  to
head  the  firm.  Since  the  early  1 984  announcement  that  Hong-
kong would  be  returned  to  Chinese  control ,  Jardine  Matheson
has  repeatedly  angered  Chinese  authorities  by  being  the  first
to  re-register  elsewhere,  and  the  first  to  move  its  stock  listing
off  the  Hongkong  Stock  Exchange.


Key  personnel:

David  John  Davies:  chairman  1990-,  CEO  1994-  (Hill
Samuel  Group,  CEO,  joint  chairman  1987-88,  director  since
1973;  Jardine  Matheson  1983-86;  American  Barrick  Re-
sources Corp.  1986-94;  Charter  Consolidated  [Anglo  Ameri-
can], deputy  chairman  1988-89;  The  Wharf  Holdings  1992- ).

Henry  Michael  Pearson  Miles,  OBE:  director  1 990-  (Brit-
ish Petroleum,  John  Swire,  ING  Barings  Holdings).

The  Hon.  Geoffrey  Hazlitt  Wilson  CVO:  deputy  chairman
1994-  (National  Westminster  Bank,  chairman  1990-92;  Lon-
don Metal  Exchange  1982- ).

JM  has  been  processing  and  marketing  precious  metals
since  it  was  established  in  IS  1,7,  apd  is  a  member  of  the  Lon-
don Gold  Pool,  which  sets  the  world  price  of  gold  each  morn-
ing in  the  office  of  N.M.  Rothschild.  The  founder,  Percival
Johnson,  originally  began  by  offering  his  services  to  deter-
mine the  exact  purity  of  gold  in  a  bar.  In  1 838,  George  Matthey
was  apprenticed  to  the  firm,  and  guided  the  firm  in  establish-
ing a  lock  on  the  platinum  supplies  of  Russia.  When  Johnson
retired  in  1 860,  the  firm  came  under  the  control  of  Matthey,
his^ypunger  brother  Edward,  and  Percival  Johnson's  nephew,
John  Sellon.

By  the  1 880s,  they  had  established  themselves  as  the  final
arbiter  of  precious  metal  assaying,  including,  most  importan-
tly, the  gold  flowing  from  the  new  mines  of  the  South  Afri-
can Rand.

Upon  John  Sellon' s  death  in  1918,  his  share  of  ownership
was  sold  to  Consolidated  Gold  Fields  of  South  Africa  Ltd.,
and  the  Johannesburg  Consolidated  Investment  Co.,  both  part
of  the  Oppenheimer  Anglo  American  empire.  Oppenheimer'  s
major  interest  in  JM  has  been  maintained  to  the  present  day.

After  World  War  II,  the  Bank  of  England  placed  severe
restrictions  on  the  gold  trade,  and  JM  moved  into  banking  in
the  1950s  by  establishing  Johnson  Matthey  Bankers  Ltd.
From  1981  to  1984,  JMB  increased  its  loan  book  tenfold,
from  £50  million  to  £500  million.

Such  rapid  expansion  included  a  large  number  of  ques-
tionable loans,  and  by  September  1984  the  Bank  of  England
was  forced  to  organize  a  major  bailout  of  JMB.  The  bailout
left  Charter  Consolidated  holding  a  greatly  increased  stake  in
JM  of  38%,  and  the  Oppenheimers  designated  Neil  Clarke  as
chairman  of  JM.  In  June  1985,  Clarke  in  tum  selected  Gene
Anderson  to  serve  as  chief  executive.

By  this  time,  JM's  lock  on  world  platinum  had  become
very  lucrative,  since  the  metal  was  the  principal  agent  in  cata-


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     63


lytic  converters  required  on  motor  vehicles  to  reduce  pol-
lution.


Consolidated  Gold  Fields.  In  October  1995,  KB  was  bought
by  Germany's  Dresdner  Bank.


Key  personnel:

Lord  Rockley:  vice  chairman  1986-93,  chairman  1993-
(Christie's  International  PLC,  director  1989- ;  Abbey  Na-
tional PLC,  director  1990- ;  Foreign  and  Colonial  Trust,  di-
rector 1991- ).

David  H.  Benson:  director.

Sir  Philip  Haddon-Cave,  KBE,  CMG:  director  (former
Financial  Secretary,  then  Chief  Secretary,  of  the  Crown  Col-
ony of  Hongkong).

Sir  Michael  Jenkins,  KCMG:  director  (in  HM  Diplomatic
Service  since  1 959,  including  as  HM  Ambassador  to  the  Neth-
erlands).

Kleinwort  Benson  is  part  and  parcel  of  Her  Majesty's
intelligence  services.  Sir  Ernest  Kleinwort  and  Sir  Rex  Ben-
son were  founders  and  trustees  of  the  World  Wildlife  Fund-
UK,  and  Sir  Ernest  was  the  moneybags  behind  the  Wildfowl
Trust,  which  was  run  by  veterans  of  the  London  Cpntrolling
Section  of  the  Forward  Operational  Planning  Section.  Sir  Rex
joined  MI-6  in  1916,  and  financed  William  Stephenson's
World  Commerce  Corp.,  which  was  directed  by  Sir  Charles
Hambro  and  "Wild"  Bill  Donovan.  Benson  also  served  as,
military  attache  to  Lord  Halifax,  ambassador  to  the  United
States.  It  was  Sir  Rex  who  promoted  his  good  friend,  Stewart
Menzies,  to  become  president  of  "Pop,"  the  most  exclusive
club  at  Eton;  Menzies  would  head  HM  intelligence  as  "C,"
from  the  1930s  until  the  1970s.

KB  wholly  owns  Sharps  Pixley,  one  of  the  five  London
Gold  Pool  firms.  In  the  1950s,  KB  co-chauman  Sir  Mark
Turner  also  served  as  chairman  of  RTZ,  one  of  the  most  im-
portant nodal  points  of  the  Empire;  during  World  War  II,  he
had  served  in  HM  Ministry  of  Economic  Warfare.

Kleinwort  Benson  was  formed  by  the  1961  merger  of
Kleinwort  Sons  and  Co.,  and  Robert  Benson  Lonsdale  and
Co,  Ltd.  Kleinwort  was  founded  in  1838,  and  survived  the
1920s-30s  Depression  because  of  its  massive  operations  in
foreign  currency  and  precious  metals  trading.  Benson  Lons-
dale is  traced  back  to  the  Benson  family's  1780s  cotton-trad-
ing operations  in  Liverpool.

In  1984,  KB  bought  ACLI  Government  Securities  of  New
York  City,  making  KB  the  first  foreign  bank  to  own  a  U.S.
government  securities  primary  dealer  (primary  dealers  deal
directly  with  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York).  In
1987,  half  the  interest  in  KB's  energy  arm  was  bought  by


Key  persoimel:

Michel  David- Weill:  senior  partaer.

Antoine  Bemheim:  senior  partner  (Assicurazioni  Gen-
eral!).

Viscount  Michael  Blakenham:  partner  1984-  (Pearson
PLC,  CEO  1978-83,  chairman  1983- ;  Financial  Times,
chairman  1984-93;  Sothby's  Holdings  Inc.,  director  1987- ;
Royal  Society  for  the  Protection  of  Birds,  chairman  1981-86;
Sussex  Wildlife  Trust,  president  1983- ;  Member  of  House  of
Lords  Select  Committees  on  Science  and  Technology  1984-
88,  and  on  Sustainable  Development  1994-95;  The  Nature
Conservancy,  Council  1986-90).

The  David- Weill  family  is  reportedly  one  of  the  oldest
oligarchical  families  in  Europe.  Nonetheless,  the  Bank  of  En-
gland forced  the  London  branch  to  be  sold  to  the  Cowdray
family  (see  Pearson  profile)  in  1919.  In  the  1980s,  David-
Weill  has  striven  to  recombine  the  three  firms  in  a  holding
company  called  Lazard  Partners,  of  which  he  is  believed  to
own  half,  and  his  sister  Eliane  another  10%.

Despite  their  relatively  small  size,  the  Lazard  branches
have  always  been  leaders  in  mergers  and  acquisitions,  the
U.S.  branch,  for  example,  playing  key  roles  in  General  Elec-
tric's  purchase  of  RCA;  the  merger  of  Time  and  Warner;  the
$25  billion  leveraged  buyout  of  RJR  Nabisco;  AT&T' s  $  1 2.6
billion  acquisition  of  McCaw  Cellular  Communications.  Se-
nior partner  Antoine  Bemheim  is  reportedly  the  mastermind
behind  the  intricate  links' that  allow  Lazard  to  have  a  hand  in
most  of  French  finance,  and  also  Italian  finance,  through  a
2%  stake  in  Mediobanca.  The  Paris  house  is  believed  to  be
involved  in  two-thirds  of  all  mergers  and  acquisitions  in
France.

In  the  1980s  and  1990s,  Lazard  Freres  was  tied  to  the
George  Bush  networks  through  Lazard  partners  on  the  boards
of  Zapata  Petroleum  and  Schlumberger.  Lazard  partners  have
also  always  been  present  on  the  board  of  Minorco,  the  holding
company  for  Anglo  American.

Lazard  Brothers  is  cross-owned  and  cross-directed  with
Pearson  PLC,  which  owns,  among  other  things,  the  Financial
Times  and  the  Economist.


64     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


-^'-"  1  I  uMfiim


UrtH*1KT*crp

^^ <^  'iin.

Key  personnel:

John  David  Rowland:  chairman  1993-95  (S.G.  Warburg
1992- ).

Peter  James  Middleton:  CEO  1992-95  (HM  Diplomatic
Service  1969-85;  Head  of  Banking  Operations  at  Midland
Bank  1986-87;  CEO,  Thomas  Cook  Group  1987-92).

Sir  Alan  Hardcastle:  deputy  chairman,  and  chairman  of
Regulatory  Board  1993-  (Chief  Accountancy  Adviser  to  HM
Treasury,  and  Head  of  Government  Accountancy  Service
1989-93;  Board  of  Banking  Supervision  1986- ).

Lloyd's  traces  its  roots  back  to  1688,  when  shipping  mer-
chants andmasters  gathered  at  Lloyd' s.Coffee  House.  Lloyd's
itself  does  not  sell  insurance;  rather,  it  is  the  central  market
where  insurance  may  be  purchased  from  syndicates  of  what
are  called  "Names."  Traditionally  drawn  from  the  wealthiest
upper  crust  of  the  Empire,  a  Name  collected  his  share  of
premiums,  and  in  return  pledged  unlimited  liability  to  meet
claims.  Historically,  Lloyd's  has  been  self-regulating.

Beginning  with  Hurricane  Betsy  in  1965,  Lloyd's  Names
began  losing  large  amounts  of  money,  much  of  it  on  business
that  was  poorly  supervised.  TheLioyd|s  Act  of  1982,  estab-
lished for  the  first  time  a  formal  executive  at  Lloyd' s  to  be  se-
lected by  the  governor  of  the  Bank  of  ^gland,  who  is  a  statu-
tory member  of  Lloyd's  governing  board  under  the  act.
Lloyd' s  also  began  searching  for  new  blood,  signing  upparve-
nus,  who  pledged  assets  at  the  wildly  inflated  prices  of  the
1980s  boom  years.  Lloyd's  was  especially  keen  to  bring  in
American  Anglophiles,  whojumped  at thechancetobe  associ-
ated with  an  institution  so  redolent  of  the  English  aristocracy.
When  the  bubble  burst  in  the  late  1980s,  thousands  of  new
Names  were  completely  destroyed.  In  1996,  a  number  of  U.S.
state  insurance  regulators  filed  suit  against  Lloyd' s  for  securi-
ties fraud,  alleging  that  U.S.  Names  had  been  misled  about  the
risks,  and  the  extent  of  their  personal  liability.  By  this  time,
Lloyd'sNames  had  reportedly  lostover$17biUion  since  1985.


viser  to  prime  minister  on  Efficiency  and  Effectiveness  in
Government  1983-88;  Council,  Royal  Institute  on  Interna-
tional Affairs  1983-89;  deputy  chairman  Issac  Newton  Trust
1988' ).

Sir  David  Alan  Walker;  deputy  chairman  1992-  (chair-
man Johnson  Matthey  Bankers  Ltd.  1985-88;  Securities  and
Investment  Board  1988-92;  Bank  of  England  1982-93;  Brit-
ish Invisibles  1993- ;  Reuters  Holdings  1994- ;  The  Group  of
Thirty  1993- ;  Council  of  Lloyd's  of  London  1988-92).

Lord  Selbome,  KBE,  FRS,  DL:  director  1994-  (Agricul-
tural and  Food  Research  Council,  chairman  1982-89;  Joint
Nature  Conservation  Committee,  chairman  1991-  ;RoyalIn-
stitute  of  Public  Health  and  Hygiene,  president  1 99 1  - ;  Royal
Commission  on  Environmental  Pollution  1993- ).

Sir  Michael  Edward  Quinlan,  GCB,  KCB,  CB:  director
(Ditchley  Foundation;  Pilkington;  Ministry  of  Defense  1974-
81,  Under  Secretary  of  State  Ministry  of  Defense  1988-92;
Permanent  Secretary  Department  of  Employment  1983-88).

Fourth  largest  of  the  four  British  clearing  banks,  with
2,700  branches  in  Britain,  and  500  offices  in  47  countries.  A
member  of  the  Lloyd  family  has  been  on  the  board  of  directors
almost  continuously  since  the  bank  was  founded  in  Bir-
mingham in  1765  as  Taylor  and  Lloyds  Bank.  One  of  the  few
chairmen  not  a  member  of  the  family,  Sir  Richard  Vassar-
Smith,  was  deeply  involved  in  British  preparations  for  World
War  I,  and  served  as  chairman  of  the  1917  Treasury  Commit-
tee on  Financial  Facilities.  Lloyds  Bank  helped  control  the
1923  banking  crisis  by  taking  over  Cox  and  Co.,  the  major
bank  used  by  the  British  Army,  with  operations  in  India,
Burma,  and  Egypt.  From  1946  to  1954,  Lloyds  Bank  was
headed  by  Lord  Balfour  of  Burleigh.

In  1977,  Sir  Christopher  Jeremy  Morse,  who  had  been
chairman  of  the  deputies  of  the  IMF's  Committee  of  Twenty,
which  oversaw  the  world's  transition  to  floating  exchange
rates,  became  Lloyds  Bank  chairman.  After  the  debacle  of
developing  country  loans,  Morse  steered  the  bank  away  from
lending  to  nations  and  corporations,  into  "more  profitable"
ventures,  such  as  foreign  exchange  and  investment  man-
agement.


,t38Cheapstde,
,rUnM  Kingdom
&j064tlHlon


?M


'T^'


j        Key  personnel:

Sir  Robin  Ibbs:  chairman  (ICI 1976-80  and  1982-


{;  ad-


Key  personnel:

Sir  John  Henry  Gladstone  Leahy,  KCMG,  CMG:  chair-
man 1994-  (HM  Diplomatic  Service,  retired;  ambassador  to
South  Africa  1979-82;  High  Commissioner  to  Australia
19S4'S%;  the  Observer,  1989-94).


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     65


With  640  subsidiaries  operating  in  48  countries,  Lonrho
is  the  largest  commercial  food  producer  on  the  continent  of
Africa,  the  largest  distributor  of  motor  vehicles  in  Africa,  and
the  largest  textile  producer.  In  Britain,  Lonrho  prints  90%  of
Her  Majesty's  postage  stamps.

The  London  and  Rhodesia  Land  and  Mining  Co.  was  orig-
inally a  subsidiary  of  Cecil  Rhodes' s  British  South  Africa
Company.  Beginning  1961 ,  Lonrho  was  massively  upgraded,
using  Tiny  Rowland  as  a  ffontman,  by  Harley  Drayton,  per-
sonal financial  manager  of  the  British  Crown,  to  serve  as  a
"new  British  East  India  Company"  in  Africa  during  the  period
of  decolonization.  The  major  objective  was  to  ensure  that,
although  the  emerging  African  countries  might  have  nominal
political  independence,  they  would  be  wracked  by  repeated
social  convulsions,  and  their  economies  would  be  entirely
directed  from  London.  From  1961  on,  Rowland  was  the  chief
bankroUer  for  the  gangs  whose  genocidal  wars  have  devas-
tated Africa.  Rowland  often  financed  both  sides  of  a  struggle
at  the  same  time.

Drayton's  personal  assistant,  Angus  Ogilvy,  husband  of
Princess  Alexandra,  the  Queen's  first  cousin,  recruited  Row-
land to  head  Lonrho,  and  himself  served  on  the  board  for
many  years.  Princess  Alexandra  is  the  head  of  WWF-UK.

From  1981  to  1993,  Lonrho  owned  the  London  Observer
newspaper.  In  1992,  Lonrho  sparked  intense  confroversy
when  it  sold  one-third  of  its  Metropole  hotel  chain  to  the
Libyan  government.  The  stock  price  plumiheted,  allowing
Geraian  developer  Dieter  Bock  to  acquire  18%  of  the  com-
pany. In  1995,  Bock  forced  Rowland  out  of  Rowland's  most
important  positions  in  the  firm,  and  in  April  1996  begm  sell-
ing control  of  Lonrho  to  Anglo  American.


Key  personnel:

Sir  William  Purves,  CBE,  DSO:  chairman  (HSBC,  Shell).

Sir  Archibold  Forster:  director  (Lloyd' s  Register  of  Ship-
ping, United  Newspapers,  Trafalgar  House).

H.H.  Jacobi:  director  (North  Rhine-Westphalia  Stock  Ex-
change, president;  Deutsche  Borse  AG).

Charles  Miller  Smith:  director  (CEO  ICI,  Unilever)..

Now  a  subsidiary  of  HSBC  Holdings  PLC.  In  the  first  half
of  the  1 900s,  Midland  was  the  largest  bank  in  the  world.  First
estabhshed  in  1 836  as  the  Birmingham  and  Midland  Bank,  the
firm  remained  a  regional  bank  until  1891,  when  new  general
manager  Edward  Holden  began  a  series  of  acquisitions,  and
pushed  into  foreign  exchange  in  1906,  provoking  great  criti-
cism at  first.  But  as  Midland  hauled  in  rich  profits  from  its


foreign  exchange  operations,  the  other  British  deposit  banks
followed  suit.  In  1909,  Holden  was  made  a  baronetl

Upon  Holden's  death  in  1919,  theRt.  Hon.  Regiriald  Mc-
Kenna  was  made  chainnan.  Besides  being  on  the  Privy  Coun-
cil, he  had  served  as  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  Home  Secre-
tary, imd  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  Under  McKenna,
Midland  became  the  largest  deposit  (commercial)  bank  in  the
world,  with  £457  tniUion  in  assets  by  1934.  In  1963,  Midland
joined  with  Commercial  Bank  of  Australia,  Standard  Bank
of  Canada,  and  Toronto  Domiiuon  Bank  to  form  Midland
International  Bank.  In  1992,  HSBC  Holdings  bought  die  en-
tirety of  Midland  for  $6  billion.


Key  personnel:

Julian  Ogilvie  Thompson:  chairman  (Anglo  American;
De  Beers).       '  ^

Henry  R.  Slack:  president  and  CEO;

Viscount  Etienne  Davignon:  director  (chairinan  Societe
Generale  de  Belgique;  Kissinger  Associates;  Royal  Institute
of  International  Affairs).

E.    Peter    Gush:    director    (deputy    chairman    Anglo
American).
'  William  R.  Loomis  Jr.:  director  (Lazard  Freres  and  Co.).

Nicholas  F.  Oppenheimer:  director  (deputy  chairman  An-
glo American;  deputy  chairman  De  Beers).

Gavin  Walter  Hamilton  Relly:  director  (De  Beers;  Mi-
norco;  South  Africa  Nature  Foundation,  chairman).

Cedric  E.  Ritchie:  director  (Bank  of  Nova  Scotia).

Peter  S.  Wilmot-Sitwell:  director  (S.G.  Warburg,  Gen-
eral Motors).

Minorco  is  the  international  holding  company  of  the  Op-
penheimer empire;  thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that  six  of  Minor-
co's  20  directors  are  also  directors  of  Anglo  American  Corp.
of  South  Africa  Ltd.,  which  directly  owns  45.8%  of  the  firm.
De  Beers  Centenary  AG  owns  another  23%.  Morgan  Guar-
anty Trust  Co.  holds  about  another  6%  indirectly,  through
a  nominee.

Di  turn,  Minorco  owns  32.2%  of  Engelhard  Corp.,  the
U.S.  precious  metals  firm.  The  relationship  goes  back  half  a
century,  to  the  close  friendship  between  Charles  Engelhard
and  Sir  Harry  Oppenheimer.  Minorco  also  owns  9.9%  of
Johnson  Matthey,  through  a  joint  venture  with  Johannesburg
Consolidated  Investment  Co.,  which  itself  is  owned  by  An-
glo American.


66     Special  Report


Em     May  24,  1996


■'iiH^l-lw-il.ifWBR^.'iramW'.!'' '  "■'■'


Minprco  can  be  traced  back  to  the  1928  establishment  of
Rhodesian  Anglo  American  Ltd.  as  yet  another  front  for  the
Oppenheimer  empire.  In  1.954,  RhoAnglo"  moved  from  Lon-
don to  Zambia,  and  in  1964  was  renamed  Zambian  Anglo
American.  When  the  Zambian  government  seized  51  %  of  the
firm's  operations,  in  1970,  it  was  transferred  to  Bermuda,  so
as  to  avoid  having  to  pay  taxes  on  the  bonds  given  by  the
Zambian  government  as  compensation.  In  1 974,  the  firm  was
renamed  Minerals  and  Resources  Corp.  Ltd.,  or  Minorco  for
short.  By  198 1 ,  Minorco  had  become  the  single  largest  foreign
investor  in  the  United  States.  The  U.S.  Lazard  house  has  been
continuously  represented  on  Minorco's  board  since  1971,
with  Felix  Rohatyn  serving  as  director  until  November  1986,
when  he  was  replaced  by  another  Lazard  partner.  Rohatyn
was  also  on  the  board  of  Engelhard  Corp.  at  this  time.


i-


Key  personnel:

Sir  Dennis  Weatherstone:  director;  chairman  1989-95;
International  Council  (Bank  of  England's,  Bo^d  of  Banking
Supervision).

Sir  Christopher  Hogg;  International  Council  (see  Bank  of
England  profile).

The  Rt.  Hon.  The  Lord  Howe  of  Aberavon,  PC,  QC;  Inter-
national Council  (see  Glaxo-Wellcome  profile).

Helmut  O.  Maucher:  International  Council  (Nestle  SA,
chmrriian  and  CEO).

Karl  Otto  Pohl:  International  Council  (president,  Bundes-
bank, Federal  Republic  of  Germany  1980-91;  Sal.  Oppen-
heim  Bank  1992- ;  Unilever  1992- ).

In  1862,  John,Pierpont  Morgan,  the  son  of  George  Pea-
body's  partner,  Junius  Si  Morgan  (see  description  of  Morgan
Grenfell,  below)  was  sent  to  New  York  City  to  establish  a
U.S.  branch.  After  Junius  died  in  1890,  the  firm  was  renamed
J.P.  Morgan  and  Co.  By  this  time,  the  firm  had  already  restruc-
tured most  of  the  U.S.  railroad  industry,  which  was  the  bed-
rock of  the  U.S.  industrial  economy  at  the  time.  Over  the
next  few  decades,  J.P.  Morgan  would  buy  hundreds  of  U.S.
companies,  seizing  control  and  restructuring  almost  every
branchof  U.S.  industry.  Thus  were  such  massive  "trusts"  as
General  Motors,  U.S.  Steel,  General  Electric,  and  Interna-
tional Harvester  created.  By  1912,  a  congressional  investiga-
tion found  that  J.P.  Morgan  and  Co.  partners  held  72  director-
ships of  47  different  companies,  with  combined  resources  of
$10  billion.  The  total  value  of  producers'  durable  equipment
in  the  United  States  at  the  time  was  $13.8  billion.  The  1933
Glass-Steagall  Act  required  a  separation  of  commercial  bank-


ing from  investment  banking;  J.P.  Morgan  and  Co.  continued
in  commercial  banking,  while  Morgan  Stanley  Co.  was  cre-
ated to  underwrite  and  deal  in  corporate  equities.  In  1959,J.P.
Morgan  merged  with  Guaranty  Trust  Co.  of  New  York,  and
within  a  few  years  became  the  largest  trader  of  U.S.  govern-
ment securities.


Key  personnel:

Lord  Catto:  president  1987-  (see  General  Electric  Co.
profile).

The  Hon.  David  Alexander  Cospatrick  Douglas-Home,
CBE:  director  1974- ;  (son  of  Baron  Homeof  Hirsel  [chancel-
lor of  the  Order  of  the  Thistle  1 973-92,  and  former  Secretary
of  State  for  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Affairs];  Ditchley
Foundation,  governor  1977- ).

Ellen  R.  Schneider-Lenne;  director  (ICI,  director).

John  Anthony  Craven:  chairman  1989-  (Deutsche  Bank
1 990- ;  S  .G.  Warburg  1 969-73;  Group  Chief  Executive  White
Weld  and  Co.  Ltd.  1973-78;  founder  and  chairman  Phoenix
Securities  Ltd.  1981-89;  Societe  Generale  de  Surveillance
1989- ).

This  is  the  descendant  of  the  London  branch  of  the  House
of  Morgan,  originally  established  by  George  Peabody  in
1838,  and  which  was  joined  by  Junius  S.  Morgan  in  1854.
Upon  Peabody's  retirement  in  1864,  the  firm  was  renamed
J.S.  Morgan  (as  compared  to  J.P.  Morgan,  the  U.S.  branch
named  after  Junius' s  son  John  Pierpont).  The  firm  was  re-
named Morgan  Grenfell  after  manager  Edward  Grenfell  be-
came senior  resident  partner  in  1910.  During  World  War  I,
Morgan  Grenfell  was  the  key  link  between  HM  government,
and  the  firm  J.P.  Morgan,  which  lent  more  money  to  Britain
and  its  allies  than  any  other  institution.

In  1989,  Morgan  Grenfell  was  completely  bought  by  Ger-
many's Deutsche  Bank.


Key  personnel:

Lord  Alexander  of  Weedon;  chairman  1 989-  (called  to  the
Bar,  Middle  Temple  1961;  Panel  on  Takeovers  and  Mergers,


Em     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     67


chairman  1987-89;  Securities  and  Investments  Board,  deputy
chairman  1994- ;  member  ofthe  Government's  Panel  on  Sus-
tainable Development  1994- ;  RTZ  Corp.  PLC,  director
1991- ;  the  Economist).

Denis  Marsden  Child,  CBE:  director  (Coutts).

Sir  Charles  Powell,  KCMG;  (see  Jardine  Matheson
profile).

Martin  G.  Taylor,  CBE:  (see  Hanson  profile).

The  Rt.  Hon.  The  Baroness  Young,  PC,  DL:  director
1987-  (Privy  Council;  Lord  Privy  Seal  1982-83;  Minister  of
Civil  Service  1982-83;  Minister  of  State  Foreign  and  Com-
monwealth Office  1983-87;  vice  chairman  of  Conservative
Party  Organization  1975-83;  Leader  of  the  House  of  Lords
1981-82;  vice  presidentofThe  West  India  Committee;  Ditch-
ley  Foundation).

NatWest,  as  the  bank  is  known,  was  created  in  1 968  with
the  merger  of  three  major  British  banks,  one  of  which  (Na-
tional Provincial)  owned  Coutts  and  Co.,  the  private  bank
used  by  the  royal  family.  The  two  other  banks  were  District
Bank,  organized  in  1 829,  and  Westminster  Bank,  organized
in  1 834.  After  the  merger,  Coutts  was  continued  as  a  separate
operation,  and  continues  to  serve  the  royals,  and  other
wealthy  clients.

Lord  Kingsdowne  was  chairman  of  National  Westminster
for  six  years,  before  he  became  governor  of  the  Bank  of  En-
gland in  1983.  In  1989,  it  emerged  that  NatWest  had  con-
cealed the  failure  of  a  pubHc  stock  issue  of  the  firm  Blue
Arrow,  in  order  to  preserve  the  reputation  of  NatWest' s
fledgling  investment  banking  arm.  The  scandal  eventually
forced  Lord  Boardman  to  resign  as  chairman.    •


Inchcape  Ltd.  P&O  remains  a  major  force  in  world,  especially
containerized,  shipping.


Key  personnel:

Sir  Antony  Richard  Pilkington:  chairman  (NatWest  1 990-
94;  ICI).

Sir  Robin  Nicholson,  FRS:  director  (British  Petroleum;
HM  Council  for  Science  and  Technology).

Sir  Michael  Edward  Quinlan,  GCB,  KCB,  CB:  director
(Ditchley  Foundation;  Ministry  of  Defense  1974-81,  Under
Secretary  of  State  Ministry  of  Defense  1988-92;  Permanent
Secretary  Department  of  Employment  1983-88).

Originally  established  as  the  St.  Helens  Crown  Glass
Company  in  1826.  In  the  1920s,  Pilkington  was  saved  by  its
collaboration  with  Ford  Motor  Co.  in  developing  a  continu-
ously cast  ribbon  of  sheet  glass.  During  World  War  II,  com-
pany executive  Ronald  Weeks  served  as  deputy  chief  of  the
Imperial  General  Staff,  and  afterward  was  chairman  of  Vick-
ers,  and  was  made  a  lord  in  1956.  In  1966,  Pilkington  began
collaborating  with  the  U.S.  firm  Perkin-Elmer  Corp.  in  the
manufacture  of  optical  and  electro-optical  systems,  which
gives  Pilkington  access  to  U.S.  defense  secrets.


Key  personnel:

Lord  Hambro:  director  (see  Hambros  profile).

The  establishment  ofthe  P&O  is  traced  back  to  an  August
1837  contract  to  carry  the  Empire's  mail  between  England
and  the  Iberian  peninsula.  In  the  1 840s,  the  greater  speed  and
reliability  of  P&O  vessels  made  the  P&O  a  serious  rival  to
the  British  East  India  Co.,  and  by  1845  P&O  was  one  ofthe
largest  shippers  of  opium  to  China.  In  1914,  Thomas  Suther-
land, who  had  organized  the  Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Bank  in
1865,  secretly  negotiated  the  merger  of  P&O  with  the  British
India  Steam  Navigation  Co.,  then  retired,  allowing  Lord  Inch-
cape  to  assume  control.  The  two  companies  shared  the  same
board  of  directors  until  1958,  when  B&I  was  reorganized  as


Key  personnel:

Sir  Christopher  Hogg:  chairman  1985-  (see  Bank  of  En-
gland profile).

Pehr  Gyllenhammer:  director  (Pearson,  Kissinger  Asso-
ciates).

Charles  Sinclair:  director  1994-  (Daily  Mail  and  General
TrustPLC,  1975-,CEO  1988-;Euromoney  Publications  PLC,
director  1985-;  Schroders  PLC,  director  1990- ).

Peter  Job:  director  (Grand  Metropolitan).

Sir  David  Alan  Walker:  director  1994-  (see  Lloyds  Bank
profile).

Reuters  provides  the  basic  infrastructure  for  the  financial
markets,  now  estimated  at  over  $3  trillion  a  day.  Only  6%  of
Reuters'  revenues  come  from  its  news  wires  service.  Almost


68     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


ppwiw-


all  off-exchange  transactionsjn  the  wotW's  financial  mariiets
are  conducted  using  a  computer  teirrainal  leased  from  Reuters,
tying  together  the  iworld's  traders  into  one  system.  The  vast
intelligence  capatnlity  this  gives  Reuters  can  only  be  guessed
at.  See  further  discussion  in:the  profiles  of  British  news  me-
dia, p.  33).   '^.v  .  ■"-  ■


Key  personnel:

Sir  Evelyn  de  Rothschild:  chairman.       ■

Baron  David  de  Rothschild:  deputy  chairman.

Leopold  de  Rothschild;  (owns  parent  Rothschilds  Contin-
uation Ltd.).

Edmund  de  Rothschild:  (owns  parent  Rothschilds  Contin-
uationLtd:):  '   -■^'■-'}.     ■-  --^'j  ■.-.•f-'''-  .■J':J--  {u;-..>':i

Lord  Armstrong  of  Ilniinstea":  directed  (seeBAT  profile).

Sir  Derek  Thomas:  'director  (Ambassador  to  Italy  1987,
Council  of  the  Royal  Ins^tute  of  tntCTiiatiohal'Affairs).

The  Rt.  Hon.  The  Lord  Wakehaini  di^tOT  1995-  (Privy
Council;  Lord  Privy  Seal  1987-88;'Leader  of  the  House  of
Commons  1987-89;  Leaderof  the  House  of  Ijjrds  1992-94,
Secretary  of  State  for  Energy  1989-92,  Enron  Corp.).     '

Mayer  Amschel  Rothschild  began  as  aclfeik  for  the  Ger-
man Oppenheimers,  and  in  the  early  1700s  founded  his  own
firm,  with  help  from  the  Thum  und  Taxis  (Torre  e  Tasso)
family,  which  operated  the  postal  service  of  the  European
monarchies  since  the  1500s.  The  German  branch  of  the  Roth-
schilds leased  Hessian  soldiers  to  King  George  III  for  combat
against  the  Continental  Army  during  the  American  Revolu-
tion, hi  1 803,  N.M.  Rothschild  was  estabUshed  as  the  London
branch  of  the  family,  and  ran  the  official  smuggling  operations
of  the  House  of  Hanover.  N.M.  Rothschild  has  financed  the
expansion  of  the  Venetian-modeledBritish  Empire,  including
the  purchase  of  the  Suez  Canal.  Among  the  major  Empire
firms  the  Rothschild  fortunes  have  helped  establish  are  Anglo
American,  De  Beers,  and  Royal  Dutch  Petroleum.  Rothschild
gold  helped  save  the  Bank  of  England  in  1825.

During  the  twentieth  century,  N.M.  Rothschild,  along
with  Swiss  and  French  relatives,  has  financed  and  controlled
Bemie  Comfeld,  Robert  Vesco,  Drexel  Bumham  Lambert,
and  George  Soros.  '


The  RTZ  Cotporation  PLC.

6  St  Jamns's  Square
London  SW1Y4LD  Umted  K  ngdom
ig93«Rlrs  S7  137  billion
j9'j/5enployt  •&


r  irf-i


Key  personnel:

Sir  John  Derek  Birkin:  chairman  (see  Barclays  profile).

Sir  Denys  Hartley  Henderson:  director  (see  Barclays
profile).

Lord  Armstrong  of  Ilminster:  director  (see  BAT  profile).

Lord  Alexander  of  Weedon:  director  (See  NatWest
profile).

Sir  Martin  Wakefield  Jacomb:  deputy  chairman  (see  Bank
of  England  profile).

Sir  David  Simon,  CBE:  director  (see  Bank  of  England
profile).

RTZ's  1995  re-amalgamation  with  CRA  Ltd.  of  Australia
makes  RTZ  the  largest  mining  firm  in  the  world.  RTZ  is  traced
back  to  a  firm  originally  established  in  1873  by  Hugh  Mathe-
son  of  Jardine  Matheson.  CRA  was  originally  Conzinc  Rio
of  Australia,  part  of  the  Rio  Tinto  Zinc  complex,  from  1962
to  1987.

Lord  Alfred  Milner  was  a  Rio  Tinto  director  in  the  1920s.
RTZ's  third  chairman.  Sir  Auckland  Geddes,  worked  closely
with  Sir  Ernest  Oppenheimer  in  reorganizing  control  of  raw
materials  production  in  Africa  in  the  1920s  and  1930s  to  pre-
vent inroads  by  U.S.  firms.  Under  Sir  Mark  Turner  (co-chair-
man of  Kleinwort  Benson  in  the  1970s)  and  Sir  Vai  Duncan
(director  of  the  Bank  of  England  in  the  1960s),  RTZ  moved
to  control  world  uranium  production.  An  RTZ  subsidiary  had
been  supplying  Britain's  military  with  uranium  from  the  large
deposits  of  Rum  Jungle  south  of  Darwin,  Australia  since
1954,  and  in  1958  acquired  the  Mary  Kathleen  Mine  in
Queensland.  Within  a  year,  the  Mary  Kathleen  was  closed,
ostensibly  because  of  a  decline  in  the  price  of  uranium,  caus-
ing a  major  shortage  of  uranium  for  the  fledgling  nuclear
power  industry.  Unable  to  meet  its  commitments  to  supply
fuel  rods  to  customers,  Westinghouse  brought  legal  action
against  CRA  and  RTZ.  After  a  U.S.  court  ordered  that  officials
of  RTZ  and  CRA  appear  to  answer  questions,  RTZ  directors
appealed  to  the  House  of  Lords,  and  shortly  thereafter  British
magistrates  ruled  that  the  U.S.  subpoena  was  "an  unaccept-
able invasion  of  British  sovereignty."  At  the  same  time,  CRA
appealed  to  the  Australian  government,  which  responded  by
passing  unique  legislation  prohibiting  CRA  from  obeying  the
U.S.  court.

In  1975,  the  governor  general  of  Australia,  who  answers
only  to  the  British  throne,  dismissed  Gough  Whitlam  as  prime
minister  because  his  action  threatened  RTZ' s  control  of  Aus-
tralian resources.  In  1988,  CRA  discovered  a  massive  ore
field  in  Horsham,  Victoria,  which  observers  believed  would
allow  CRA  to  dominate  the  world  markets  for  titanium  and


EIR     May  24,  19%


Special  Report     69


zircon  for  decades.  Queen  Elizabeth  reportedly  holds  a  major
stake  in  RTZ  (over  half  the  company  is  controlled  by  126
"accounts");  it  was  actually  RTZ  that  owned  most  of  the  Ar-
gyll Field  oil  and  gas  field  in  the  North  Sea.  ■


Key  personnel:

Georg  Wilhelm  von  Mallinckrodt:  president  (married  into
Schroder  family  1958;  Kleinwort  Sons  and  Co.  1953-54;  J.
Henry  Schroder  Banking  1957- ,  director  1967;  Siemens
PLC,  director  1987- ;  German-British  Chamber  of  Industry
and  Commerce,  vice  president  1971-92,  president  1992-95;
British  North  American  Committee  1988- ).

Sir  Ralph  Robbins:  director  (Standard  Chartered).

Charles  Sinclair:  du^ctor  (see  Reuters  profile).

Estabhshed  in  1804,  Schroders  PLC  is  an  international
merchant  and  investment  banking  firm,  concentrating  on  cor-
porate finance;  trading  in  government  securities,  foreign- ex-
change, and  arbitrage;  investment  management-^the^  firm
represents  itself  as  the  largest  foreign  pension  manager  in  the
U.S.;  commercial  banking,  leasing  and  project  finance;  and
venture  capital  and  mergers  and  acquistions.  The  Schroder
family  still  owns  an  estimated  40%  of  the  firm.


representative  to  the  UN  Security  Council  1 977-79;  U.S .  Am-
bassador to  UN  1979-81;  International  Paper  Co.,  director
1981- ;  Bank  of  Boston  Corp.,  director  1981- ;  Coca  Cola
Corp.,  director  1982- ;  AT&T,  director  1987- ;  Institute  for
International  Economics;  American  Ditchley  Foundation;
Africare,  chairman;  Brookings  Institution;  Council  on  For-
eign Relations;  United  Nations  Association  of  U.S.A.,  board
of  governors;  Professor  of  Diplomacy  and  International  Af-
fairs, Georgetown  University  1981- ).

Sir  Peter  Ingram  Walters:  director  1989-,  chairman  1994-
(see  HSBC  profile).

The  fifth  largest  pharmaceutical  firm  in  the  world,  with
the  third  largest  over-the-counter  sales,  SmithKline  Beecham
is  traced  back  to  an  apothecary  established  by  Thomas
Beecham  in  England  in  1847.

In  the  1 930s,  the  firm  acquired  Macleans  (toothpaste)  and
Brylcreem  (men's  hair  cream).  In  the  1970s,  it  acquired  Mas-
sengili;  Calgon;  Jovan;  J.B.  Williams  (Aqua  Velva,  Sominex,
Geritol);  Germaine  Monteil  (Yardley),  sold  in  1 990;  and  Nor-
cUff  Thayer  (Turns).

In  1989,  Beecham  merged  with  SmithKline,  a  U.S.  firm
which  had  begun  in  Philadelphia  in  1830,  and  which  had
developed  the  amphetamines  Benzedrine  and  Dexedrine,
Contac  (cold  medicine),  and  ulcer  medication  Tagamet.

In  the  1980s  and  1990s,  SmithKline  Beecham  has  been
one  of  the  largest  funders  of  neo-conservative  think-tanks  in
the  United  States,  such  as  the  Heritage  Foundation.


Key  personnel:

Paul  Arthur  Allaire:  director  (Xerox,  director  1966  - ,
chairman  1991- ;  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  director;  Coun-
cil on  Competitiveness;  Council  on  Foreign  Relations).

Andrew  Robert  Foweil  Buxton:  director  (Barclays  Bank).

Sir  Robert  Anthony  Clark:  director  1987-  (Hill  Samuel
Bank,  director  1961-91, chairman  1974-88;  Bank  of  England,
dnector  1976-85;  Eagle  Star  Holdings,  director  1976-87;
Shell  Transport  and  Trading,  director  1982-94;  Mirror  Group
Newspapers  PLC,  dhector  1991,  chainnan  1992- ).

Sir  Christopher  Hogg:  (see  Bank  of  England  profile).

Donald  F.  McHenry:  director  1982-  (U.S.  State  Depart-
ment 1963-77;  Carter  transition  team  1976-77;  deputy  U.S.


Key  personnel:

Sir  Peter  Fen  wick  Holmes :  MC,  director,  chairman  1 985-
93  (WWF-UK,  president).

Lord  Armstrong  of  Ilminster:  director  1988-  (see  BAT
profile).

Sir  Peter  Brian  Baxendell,  CBE:  director  1973-  (Inchcape
PLC  1986-93).

■  Sir  John  Anthony  Swire  CBE:  director.

Sir  Antony  Acland,  GCMG,  GCVO:  (Permanent  Under-
Secretary  of  State,  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office;  Head
of  HM  Diplomatic  Service  1982-86;  Ambassador  to  U.S.


70     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


■t"  -.'i-f'jm


1986-91).

Sir  William  Purves,  QBE,  DSO:  director  (HSBC).

Shell  Transport  and  Trading  is  the  British  holding  com-
pany that  owns  40%  of  the  Royal  Dutch  Shell  group  of  over
2,000  companies  worldwide.  The  other  60%  is  owned  by
Royal  Dutch  Petroleum  Co.  Together,  the  combined  Royal
Dutch/Shell  complex  is  the  largest  producer  of  petrochemi-
cals in  the  world,  and  one  of  the  largest  producers  of  agricul-
tural chemicals,  such  as  pesticides  and  insecticides.

Its  origins  are  in  the  1880s  distribution  of  Rothschild-
owned  petroleum  produced  in  Russia  by  London  merchant
Marcus  Samuel.  Royal  Dutch  Petroleum  was  formed  in  the
1 890s  by  Sir  Henri  Deterding,  who  in  1 903  created  the  Asiatic
Petroleum  Co.,  owned  jointly  by  Royal  Dutch,  Shell,  and  the
French  branch  of  the  Rothschilds.  Royal  Dutch  and  Shell
were  formally  linked  in  1907,  and  Deterding  soon  ascended
to  the  highest  levels  of  British  intelligence.

It  is  renowned  for  its  sophisticated  geopolitical  planning,
which  results  from  the  "revolving  door"  between  Shell  Trans-
port, and  British  intelligence  and  foreign  policy  establishment
throughout  this  century.  Both  the  British  and  Dutch  royal
families  are  reported  to  own  sizable  chunks  of  the  two  par-
ent companies.


precious: metals  by  acquiring  Mocatta  and  Goldsmid  Ltd.,  a
memberxif jthe  LondfKi  gold  pool,  from  Hambrbs.


Itie  Toronto  ftOttUilott

Bftnk

^^^^^ '  To«wito  Dominion  Centre.  Wng  Suwot
'IPflHIS^.  *•?*  ^"**  ^y  StreflU,  Torwrio  Ontario
^'^^^*  MSfclA2  Canada

^  *'  '       1 996  assets=CanS  1 08  5  bilfion
"     1  r      1995  profit>Can$  756  0  million


Key  personnel:

Richard  Murray  Thomson:  chairman  1976-  (Thomson
Corp.;  Inco  Ltd.).

The  Toronto  Dominion  Bank,  the  fifth  largest  Canadian
bank,  is  the  result  of  the  1955  merger  of  the  Bank  of  Toronto
(estabhshed  1855),  and  the  Dominion  Bank  (established
1871).


Key  personnel:

Patrick  Gillam:  chairman.

The  Rt.  Hon.  The  Lord  Stewartby:  deputy  chairman  1993-
(Privy  Council;  Brown  Shipley  and  Co.  1960-83,  director
1971-83;  principal  private  secretary  to  Chancellor  of  the  Ex-
chequer 1979-83;  economic  secretary  to  Treasury  1983-87;
The  Throgmorton  Trust  PLC,  chairman  1 990- ;  life  governor
ofHaileybury  1977).

Keith  Mackrell:  director.

Sir  Ralph  Robbins:  director.

One  of  the  four  London  clearing  banks.  Standard  Char-
tered is  the  result  of  the  merger  two  of  the  Empire's  major
colonial  banks:  The  Chartered  Bank  of  India,  Australia,  and
China,  orginally  chartered  by  Queen  Victoriia  in  1 853  to  de-
velop colonial  trade  in  Asia,  and  in  1 957  had  also  acquired
the  Eastern  Bank,  which  operates  in  the  Middle  East;  and
Standard  Bank  of  British  South  Africa,  chartered  for  Cecil
Rhodes  in  1862.

The  process  of  merging  the  two  banks  was  begun  in  1 969,
under  Sir  Cyril  Hawker,  who  had  served  at  the  Bank  of  En-
gland since  1920 — the  same  year  Monatgu  Norman  became
governor.  In  1973,  Standard  Chartered  established  itself  in


Key  personnel:

Lord  Wright  of  Richmond,  GCMG:  (see  Barclay's
profile).

Sir  Derek  Birkin,  director:  (see  Barclays  profile).

Viscount  Leverhulme,  KGTD:  (grandson  of  William
Lever,  largest  stockholder  in  Unilever,  and  funder  and  builder
of  Prince  Philip's  World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature  [WWF],  the
coordinating  arm  for  British  intelligence).

Karl  Otto  POhl:  director  (see  J. P.  Morgan  profile).

Unilever  is  the  world's  largest  producer  of:  ice  cream  and
margarine;  one  of  the  top  five  world  exporters  of  milk  powder;
second  largest  producer  of  soaps  and  detergents;  and  one  of
the  top  five  world  processors  of  edible  fats  and  oils.  Brand
names  in  the  U.S.  include  Calvin  Klein,  Faberge,  Birds  Eye,
Good  Humor,  Lipton,  Ragij,  Aim,  Close-Up,  Cutex,  Pepso-
denti  Pond's,  Q-Tips,  Vaseline,  Dove,  Lifebuoy,  Lux,  and
Surf.

Unilever  owns  vast  plantations  in  Africa  and  is  also  Afri-
ca's  largest  trading  company,  through  subsidiary  United  Af-
rica Co.  The  corporate  structure  includes  over  500  companies
operating  in  75  countries.


EIR     May  24,  1996


Special  Report     71


In  1885,  Englishman  William  Lever  and  his  brother  James'
formed  Lever  Brothers,  to  produce  and  mass  market  soaps.
During  World  War  I,  HM  government  requested  that  Lever
produce  margarine  to  reduce  reliance  on  butter  supplies  from
Europe,  and  was  made  Lord  Leverhulme  for  his  efforts.  By
1929,  Lever  Brothers  owned  the  Niger  Co.,  and  used  it  to
acquire  its  larger  rival,  the  African  and  Eastern  Trading  Co.
The  two  companies  were  merged  to  become  Lever's  United
Africa  Company,  which  was  the  largest  enterprise  operating
in  Africa  for  the  next  two  decades.

In  the  Netherlands,  rival  butter  makers  Jurgens  and  Van
den  Berghs,  pioneers  in  margarine  production,  merged  in
1927  to  create  the  Margarine  Union,  a  cartel  that  owned  the
European  market.  In  1930,  the  Margarine  Union  and  Lever
Brothers  merged,  forming  Unilever.


Key  personnel:

HRH  The  Duke  of  Kent,  KG,  GCMG,  GCVO,  ADC:  di-
rector.

Martin  Taylor:  director  (see  Hanson  profile).

Known  historically  as  the  "armorer  to  the  nation,"  Vickers
was  first  established  in  1828  as  steelmaker  Naylor,  Hutchin-
son, Vickers  and  Co.  in  Sheffield.  It  became  Vickers  Sons
and  Co.  in  1867,  and  Vickers  Sons  and  Maxim  Ltd.  in  1897,
after  developing  the  Maxim  machine  gun.  Vickers  developed
the  first  tank  during  World  War  I.  In  1980,  Vickers  acquired
Rolls  Royce,  a  long-time  collaborator  of  the  firm.


Key  personnel:

Lord  Cairns:  chairman  (see  BAT  profile).

Lord  Roll  of  Ipsden,  KCMG,  CB:  chairman  1974-86,
president  1986-95,  senior  adviser  1995-  (professor  of  eco-
nomics University  College,  Hull  1935-46;  U.K.  Executive
Director  IMF  and  World  Bank  1963-64;  Times  Newspapers
Holdings  Ltd.,  director  1967-83;  Bank  of  England,  director
1968-77).


Sir  David  Scholey:  chairman  (see  Bank  of  England
profile).

Sir  Colin  Comess:  director  (see  Bank  of  England  profile).

F.R.  Hum:  director  (ICl,  Pilkington).

Peter  S.  Wilmot-Sitwell:  director  (Minorco,  GM).

John  David  Rowland:  director  (Lloyd' s  of  London  chair-
man 1993-95).

Established  in  Britain  in  1934  by  Siegmund  Warburg,  a
Jewish  refugee  from  Hitler's  Germany.  The  Warburgs  may
be  the  oldest  continuously  active  banking  family  in  the  world,
tracing  their  history  back  to  a  money  changer  named  Simon
von  Cassel  who  settled  in  the  town  of  Warburg,  in  Westphalia,
Germany,  in  1559.  Other  members  of  the  Warburg  family
were  located  in  Altona,  oneof  whom,  Marcus  Gumprich  War-
burg, moved  to  Hamburg  in  1773.  It  was  Marcus's  two  sons,
Moses  and  Gerson,  who  established  M.M.  Warburg  and  Co.
in  1798.  By  1814,  the  firm  was  dealing  in  gold  with  N.M.
Rothschilds  and  Sons  in  London.  In  the  1850s,  a  daughter  of
the  family  married  Paul  Schiff,  director  of  the  Kreditanstalt
in  Vienna.  When  the  Free  Hanseatic  City  of  Hamburg  needed
a  massive  loan  of  silver  to  forestall  a  financial  panic  in  1857,
and  was  turned  down  by  Prussia,  the  Wariiurgs  offered  to
obtain  the  loan,  using  their  influence  in  the  Schiff  family.  This
was  the  beginning  of  the  Warburgs'  close  connections  with
the  Hapsburg  Empire,  which  were  cemented  by  a  series  of
intermarriages.

Marcus  Warburg's  grandson  Moritz's  five  sons  became
known  as  the  "five  Hamburgers."  Two  sons,  Paul  and  Felix,
married  into  the  U.S.  firm  of  Kuhn  Loeb  and  Co.,  by  that
time  dominated  by  Jacob  H.  Schiff.  Felix  married  Schiff  s
daughter,  and  Paul  married  Loeb's  daughter.  Paul  Warburg
was  one  of  the  major  forces  in  establishing  the  U.S.  Federal
Reserve  System  in  1913;  and  served  as  one  of  the  first  Fed
governors.  Another  son.  Max,  had  repeated  discussions  with
Lord  Milner  and  Lord  Grey  about  financial  and  other  opera-
tions in  Morocco,  Nyasaland,  and  other  parts  of  Africa.

In  1958-59,  Warburg  masterminded  the  carve-up  of  Brit-
ish Aluminium  between  Reynolds  Metal  of  the  United  States
and  what  is  now  TI  Group  PLC,  in  Britain's  first-ever  hostile
takeover,  and  setting  the  stage  for  the  complete  wrecking  of
the  Western  industrial  economies  under  the  guise  of  "Anglo-
Saxon"  banking  and  "shareholder  rights."  The  present  group
was  forged  by  chairman  Sir  David  Scholey,  who  merged
Rowe  and  Pitman  (stockbrokers  to  the  Queen);  gilts  firm  Mul-
len and  Co.  and  jobbers  Ackroyd  and  Smithers  with  War-
burg's merchant  bank  and  fund  manager  Mercury  Asset  Man-
agement in  the  mid-1980s.  The  chairman  of  Warburg,  Lord
Cairns,  also  serves  as  the  personal  financial  investment  ad-
viser to  Prince  Charles.

In  early  1995,  the  Bank  of  England  attempted  to  secretly
have  Morgan  Stanley  bail  out  Warburg,  which  had  sustained
devastating  losses  in  1994  on  its  bond  portfolio  trades,  but
was  unsuccessful.


72     Special  Report


EIR     May  24,  1996


SEE       LAROUCHE       ON       CABLE       TV

All  programs  are  The  LaRouche  Connection  unless  otherwise  noted.


ALASKA

■  ANCHORAGE— ACTV  Ch.  44
Wednesdays — 9  p.m.

ARIZONA

■  PHOENIX— Dimension  Ch.  22
Thursdays — 3  p.m.

■  SCOTTSDALE— TC!  Ch.  28
Mondavs — 6  p.m.

■  TUCSON— Access  Ch.  61
Mon.,  May  27 — 5  p.m.

CALIFORNIA

■  E.  SAN  FERNANDO— Ch.  25
Saturdays — 8:30  p.m.

■  LANC./PALMDALE— Ch.  3
Sundays — 1 :30  p.m.

■  MARIN  COUNTY— Ch.  31
Tuesdays — 5  p.m.

■  MODESTO— Access  Ch.  5
Fridays — 3  p.m.

■  ORANGE  COUNTY— Ch.  3
Fridays — evening

■  PASADENA— Ch.  56
Tuesdays — 2  &  6  p.m.

■  SACRAMENTO— Ch.  18
2nd  &  4th  Weds.— 10  p.m.

■  SAN  DIEGO—
Cox  Cable  Ch.  24
Saturdays— 12  Noon

■  SAN  FRANCISCO— Ch.  53
Fridays — 6:30  p.m.

■  SANTA  ANA— Ch.  53
Tuesdays — 6:30  p.m.

■  STA,  CLARITATUJUNGA
King  VideoCable— Ch.  20
Wednesdays — 7:30  p.m.

■  W.  SAN  FERNANDO— Ch.  27
Wednesdays — 6:30  p.m.

COLORADO

■  DENVER— DCTV  Ch.  57
Sat. — 4  p.m.;  Mon. — 6  p.m.

CONNECnCUT

■  BETHEiyDANBURY/RIDGEFlELD
Comcast — Ch.  23
Wednesdays — 10  p.m.

■  NEWTOWN/NEW  MILFORD
Charter— Ch.  21
Thursdays — 9:30  p.m.

DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA

■  WASHINGTON— DCTV  Ch.  25
Sundays — 12  Noon

IDAHO

■  MOSCOW— Ch.  37
(Checic  Readerboard)


ILLINOIS

■  CHICAGO— CAIN  Ch.  21
Schiller  Hotline-21
Fridays — 6  p.m.

The  LaRouche  Connection
(call  station  for  times)
INDIANA

■  INDIANAPOLIS- p.a.  Ch.
American  Cablevision
Mondays — 5:30  p.m
Fridays — 11  p.m.

■  SOUTH  BEND— Ch.  31
Thursdays — 10  p.m.

KENTUCKY

■  LOUISVILLE— TKRCh.  18
Wednesdays — 5  p.m.

LOUISIANA

■  NEW  ORLEANS— Cox  Ch,  8
Mondays— 11  p.m.

MARYLAND

■  BALTIMORE— BCAC  Ch.  42
Mondays— 9  p.m.

■  MONTGOMERY— MCTV  Ch.  49
Weds.— 1  pm;  Fri.- 8:30  pm

■  PRINCE  GEORGES  COUNTY—
PGCTVCh.  15

Thursdays — 9:30  p.m.

■  WEST  HOWARD  COUNTY—
Comcast  Cablevision — Ch.  6
Daily— 10:30  a.m.  &  4:30  p.m.

MICHIGAN

■  TRENTON— TCI  Ch.  44
Wednesdays — 2:30  p.m.

MINNESOTA

■  EDEN  PRAIRIE— Ch.  33
Wed.— 5:30  pm;  Sun.— 3:30  pm

■  MINNEAPOLIS— MTN  Ch.  32
Fridays— 7:30  p.m.

■  MINNEAPOLIS  (NW  Suburbs)
Northwest  Comm.  TV— Ch.  33
Mon. — 7  pm;  Tue. — 7  am  &  2  pm

■  ST.  LOUIS  PARK— Ch.  33
Friday  through  Monday
3  p.m.,  11  p.m.,  7  a.m.

■  ST.  PAUL— Ch.  33
Mondays— 8  p.m.

MISSOURI

■  ST.  LOUIS— Ch.  22
Wednesdays — 5  p.m.

NEW  YORK

■  ALBANY— Ch.  18
Tuesdays— 5  p.m.


I  BRONX— BronxNet  Ch.  70

Saturdays — 6  p.m.
I  BROOKHAVEN  (E.  Suffolk)

TCI— Ch.  1  or  Ch.  99

Wednesdays — 5  p.m.
I  BROOKLYN

Cablevision  (SCAT)— Ch.  67

Time-Warner  B/Q— Ch.  34

(call  station  for  times)
I  BUFFALO— BCAM  Ch.  18

Tuesdays — 11  p.m.
iHUDSONVALLEY— Ch.  6

2nd  Sunday  monthly— 1:30  p.m.
ilLION— T/WCh.  10

Fridays— 3  p.m.  &  10  p.m.
I  ITHACA— Pegasys—Ch.  57

Mon.  &  Weds.— 8:05  p.m.

Saturdays — 4:35  p.m.  Ch.  57

■  MANHATTAN- MNN  Ch.  34
Sun.,  May  26—9  a.m.
Sun.,  Jun.  6  &  23-9  a.m.

iMONTVALE/MAHWAH— Ch.  14
Wedsnesdays — 5:30  p.m.

■  NASSAU- Ch.  25

Last  Fri.,  monthly — 4:00  p.m.
I OSSINING— Continental

Southern  Westchester  Ch.  19

Rockland  County  Ch.  26

1st  &  3rd  Sundays — 4  p.m.
rPOUGHKEEPSIE— Ch.  28

1st  &  2nd  Fridays — 4:30  p.m.
I  QUEENS— QPTV  Ch.  56

(call  station  for  times)
I  RIVERHEAD

Peconic  Bay  TV— Ch.  27

Thursdays — 12  Midnight

1st  &  2nd  Fridays — 4  p.m.
iROCHESTER— GRCCh.  15

Fri.— 11  p.m.;  Sun.— 11  a.m.
iROCKLAND— P.A.  Ch.  27

Wednesdays — 5:30  p.m.

■  SCHENECTADY— P.A.  Ch.  11

Mondays — 10  p.m.
iSTATEN  ISL— CTV  Ch.  24

Wednesdays — 11  p.m.

Saturdays — 8  a.m.
•  SUFFOLK,  LI.— Ch.  25

2nd  &  4th  Mondays— 10  p.m.
I  SYRACUSE— Adelphia  Ch.  3

Fridays — 4  p.m.
I  SYRACUSE  (Suburbs)

Time-Warner  Cable— Ch.  12

Saturdays — 9  p.m.
I  UTICA— Harron  Ch.  3

Thursdays — 6:30  p.m.


■  WEBSTER— GRCCh.  12
Wednesdays — 9:30  p.m.

■  VONKERS— Ch.  37
Fridays — 4  p.m,

■  YORKTOWN— Ch,  34
Thursdays — 3  p.m.

OREGON

■  PORTLAND— Access
Tuesdays — 6  p.m.  (Ch.  27)
Thursdays— 3  p.m.  (Ch.  33}

TEXAS

•  AUSTIN— ACTV  Ch.  10  &  16
(call  station  for  times)

■  DALLAS— Access  Ch.  23-B
Sun.— 8  p.m.;  Thurs. — 9  p.m.

■  EL  PASO— Paragon  Ch.  15
Thursdays — 10:30  p.m.

•  HOUSTON— PAC

Mon.— 5  p.m.;  Fri.- 12  Noon
VIRGINIA

■  ARLINGTON— ACT  Ch.  33
Sun. — 1  pm;  Mon. — 6:30  pm
Tuesdays— 12  Midnight
Wednesdays — 12  Noon

■  CHESTERFIELD  COUNTY—
Comcast — Ch.  6
Tuesdays— 5  p.m.

■  FAIRFAX— FCACCh.  10
Tuesdays — 12  Noon
Thurs. — 7  pm;  Sat.— 10  am

■  LOUDOUN  COUNTY— Ch.  3
Saturdays — 9  p.m.

■  MANASSAS— Jones  Ch.  64
Saturdays — 12  Noon

■  RICHMOND— Conti  Ch,  38
(call  station  for  times)

■  ROANOKE— Cox  Ch.  9
Wednesdays — 2  p.m.

■  YORKTOWN— Conti  Ch.  38
Mondays — 4  p.m

WASHINGTON

■  KING  COUNTY— TCI  Ch.  29
Thursdays — 10:30  a.m.

■  SNOHOMISH  COUNTY
Viacom  Cable— Ch.  29
(call  station  for  times)

■  SPOKANE— Cox  Ch.  25
Tuesdays — 6  p.m.

■  TRt-CITIES— TCICh.  13
Mon.- 1 1 :30  am;  Thu. — 8:30  pm

WISCONSIN

■  WAUSAU— Ch.  10
(call  station  for  times)


If  you  are  interested  in  getting  these  programs  on  your  local  cable  TV  station,  please  call  Charles  Notley  at  (703)  777-9451,  Ext.  322.


Eaueciithrie


tJ.S.,  Canada  and  Wi^^^ms^


I  would  like  to  subscribe  to
Executive  Intelligence  Review  for

G  lyear    G  6  months    G  3  months

I  enclose  $ check  or  money  order

Please  charge  my  Q  MasterCard  Q  Visa

Card  No. E^.  date


Did

Prince  Philip

have  reason  to

be  upset  at  the

release  of

EIR's  report,

"The  Coming  Fall

of  the  House  of

Windsor?"


Judge  for  yom^self.


For  your  copy,  send  $10.00  plus  $1 .50  shipping  and  J

handling  to:  |


MNews  Service,  Inc.
